18871 99848862 13979
THE NINTH part of the Mirrour of Knight-hood, Being the fourth Booke of the third part thereof: Wherein is declared, the high and noble actes of the sonnes and nephewes of the Noble Emperour Trebacius, and of the rest of the renoumed Princes and Knights, and of the high cheualrie of the gallant Ladyes: wherein also is treated of the most cruell warre that euer was in Greece, with the amorous euents, and the end thereof. AT LONDON Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Royall Exchange 1601.
The fourth Booke of the third part of the Mirrour of Knight-hood, wherein is de∣clared, the high and noble actes of the sonnes and nephewes of the Noble Emperour Trebacius, and of the rest of the renoumed Princes and Knights, and of the high cheualrie of the gallant Ladyes: wherein is treated of the most cruell warre that euer was in Greece, with the amou∣rous euents, and the end thereof. The first Chapter. How the Princesse Rosselia of Rome, being deliuered from the Inchantment, desired her father to bee reuenged on Don Heleno, Prince of Dacia; and of that which fol∣lowed thereof. SO many were the harmes receiued of the princes of the Gréekes, (most Noble Lord) that in all the Pagans countreys there was no spéech of any thing, but of reuenge, and that, the most cruell that might be: for those which were grieued, were so great Monarches, that each of them determined to inuade Greece apart; particularly, Bembo, who drue his pedegree from Iupiter, and felt him∣selfe most toucht, séeing the Gréeke louer to beare away the spoyles, which were due to his worth and valour.
Well had the Pagan some body else, who likewise was grieued for him. For Proserpina below in her darke king∣dom, through the malice which she bare against the Gréeks, entreated her beloued Pluto, for aid in the behalf of Bembo, against the Greciās. The infernall prince was so subiect to his wiues request, that he commanded Discord to be called, whom, with the greatest company that possibly might bée, he commanded presently to depart, & to leaue neither armes nor lance on end, which should not bee bent against the Gréekes: for the Grecians bold attempts were not to bée endured. Discord felt it selfe some thing grieued, euer since the time of the venturous Octauius Augustus; for her arme being vnable to resist the valor of that yong man, he peace∣ably possessed the whole world; wherefore it was an easie matter to make her leaue that infernall habitation: shée was well accompaned; for with her went Ambition, and Ielousy, friend to the blind god, and there went Auarice and the rest of the infernall Furies. Discord sallied, armed at all pieces, in russet armour, with a sword in each hand, & vpon her shoulders a bright shining Mirrour; a signe, that as she pardoned none, so would she go in safetie from her enemies, accounting all for such Couetousnes marched with her spe∣ctacles, which made all she saw séeme greater, with a mon∣strous aspect. The first place attempted, was in Morea, a∣gainst the braue Epirabio, to the ende yt in seruice of his Li∣ciana he should repaire into Grecia, there nowe to recouer that, which before, by his late comming he had lost. They knew how to take so good order, that although the Prince went with his confederates, al the kingdom was in an vp∣rore, to attend the seruice of their soueraigne Lord. The king of Lituania was already summoned, to the ende that, with the greatest forces that he was able to make, he should draw nere vnto Niquea. Couetousnesse encountred this man, and in such sort ouercame him, that at the instant hée beganne to order his people, wich were many and well armed.
The faire Lisiana would not stay frō going into Greece; for not a little succéeded for her there: Good friends had they ray3sed against Grecia, but their chiefest trust remayned in the braue Romanes. Discord, Couetousnesse and Suspiti∣on tooke charge of the Conuest: For the very soule of Re∣silia was possessed, séeing her faith so ill rewarded, and that the Dacian had made a scoffe of her. There is no Uiper, which sheweth it selfe so cruel, as a faire Ladie doth against him, whem shee hath once loued as her soule. Iealousie crossed in the middest, vntill she was wholy ouercome, for∣cing her to aske cruell vengeance of her father, for that which the Dacian had committed. They made herto adde thereunto, which was, that the Emperour asking her, whether there past any promise of Mariage? Shée (beeing blinded with passion) answered her Father, Yea. Wrath approched in so good a time, that a Basiliska returneth not more wrathfull, then the Romane Empe∣rour Constantius shewed himselfe to bee against the Gréekes: he presently commanded a Councell to be assem∣bled in this case: there entred thereinto Arsiano, the braue Prince of Almany, whom Dishonour had already ouer∣come, bringing to his minde, the disgrace whereinto Don Heleno the Prince of Dacia had brought him: and as his voyce was the first, and he well disposed thereto, hee gaue his opinion, that by fire and sword, vengeance should be ta∣ken. No man gainesaid this passionate yong man. The alarme was spéedily giuen in Rome, and in all the Townes subiect thereto. Thither came the Kings of Zerssa, of Carthage and of Argier, all which were friends to the Romanes. The king of Rodes failed not in this warre. As for the furious Almaine, he thought with his owne people alone to giue battell to the whole world: for he left not in all Al∣many, neyther high nor low, one man that was able for the warres. The King of Scotland came with a mightie Hosse, in
fauour of the Romane Empire, for the friendship he had a∣mongst the Daughters. Discord was yet of greater pow∣er; for it passed into Gibia, leading Reuenge by the hand, where she published the death of their Princes, by the hands of the Dacian Lord in Rome: their death was there alrea∣dy vnderstood, and mourned for. But those infernall furies knew how to take so good or∣der, that all that whole populous Kingdome was at an in∣stant in an vprore: who had a yonger brother, and the most valiant man in all those kingdomes, called Brundusio the strong, who although that hee were not a Gyant of his bo∣die, yet there was no man (how strong soeuer) that was able to resist his force, which yet was not knowne to be borrow∣ed. He spéedily began to leuie people, gathering together the Borderers, which were braue Knights, with many proud Gyants, which excéeded two thousand: of other peo∣ple, the strong Brundusio raysed an hundred thousand figh∣ting men, and with them hee went to ioyne himselfe with the Romanes, carrying sufficient prouision for many daies, perceyuing that the warre would be of long conti∣nuance. The Emperour of his ariuall receyued him with great ioy, séeming vnto him, that with that people, and the rest which he would leuie, it were a small matter to subdue the whole world: they would not inuade the Gréekes, with∣out aduertising them of their departure, déeming that it would bee attributed to their small valour, although it fol∣lowed a most cruell nauall warre, as that which passed be∣twéene them and the Soldan of Egypt, which would giue them notice, that they were daily to expect them. Herewith was there made a most proud defyance, signed by xii kings, which were ioyned in that confederacie with the mightie Romane, who of himselfe and of his adherents, had leuied aboue foure hundred thousand most ready and expert Soul∣diers: for amongst them went the fierce Almaines, a people through all the world held for valiant. Commandement was giuē for the making of many engines for the wares,
and prouiding of munitions, because they would not euery day lend for prouisions. In such sort was the Romane fur∣nished, that not of Grecia, but of all the world, he made smal reckoning, promising his daughter to crown her Epresse of Constantinople, in despite of all the Grecians. And with this preparation they spéedily sent fore Gyants, in com∣pany with a cousin germane of Brundusio, called Coriando, a most valiant Knight, & held in the second degrée after his strong cousin, with a Damsell called Sabina, which knew Don Heleno, for that she had invited him to the Iusts, who caried the defyance signed and sealed, knowing what she had to say, as shee which was one of the most discrat women of the world. The messengers were about to depart, when in the great Palace entred those, which were sent by the Soldan of Niquea, aduertised by Lupercio, of that which the infernall Furies had gayned vpon the Romane Prince. There came the brother of the Prince of the Garamants, subiect to the Soldan, and two other Prin∣ces, which were of Media and of Armenia, who, al∣though they had beene in disgrace with the Soldan, about the stealing of Lriana, as is said in the first booke, the trueth being knowne, that they had not ben the cause, nor ac∣quainted therewith, he receyued them into his friendship, binding them by new fauours, which was, to send them for his Ambassadours to the Court of Rome: They went with such company as was fit for so great Princes, as they were. The King knowing of their comming, with the most principal that were with him, went forth to receyue them, taking the King of the Garamants by the hand, to do him the greater honour: they al let them down to heare the Am∣bassade of so mightie a Monarch as the Soldan of Ni∣quea. As they all expected the Ambassade of the Soldan, the valiant King of the Garamants, making a little reuerence, drew out a sealed Letter of credence, and giuing it to the great Emperour of Rome, Constantius looke it, and with a loude voyce a king of Armes read it, which said thus:
was therein. The valorous Coriandro, who went in com∣pany with the foure Gyants & the Damsell, answered him, that therein went certaine Knights of Rome, into Grecia, to defie the Gréekes. Much were they pleased with the an∣swere of those Princes, and séeing they held that course, ha∣uing so good occasion, they said they would accompany them: for no lesser displeasures had they also receiued of ye Gréeks. It appeared what they were, by their Armes: and so those of Rome also reioyced in their soules, to haue so valiant Knights (as they séemed to be) in their company, not seeing the houre to méet thē in Grecia: where we wil leaue them vntill their time, for they will bring in matter inough to talke of. CHAP. II. Of that which happened vnto the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria, with the Damsell which caried him into the king∣dome of Samogacia. ALl those which haue weighed the great trauell of Imagination, with such sound considerati∣on, and so aduisedly, as is requisite, (most noble Prince) haue iudged it very great; and not without much reason: for he who will please many, must seeke out matter different: for that which to one is loathsome, another holdeth for pleasant and swéet; and to hit right to please many, is impossible: for euen be∣twéene thrée that are inuited, there is great difference in tasts: as he said, who had wel experimented the same, Ho∣race. I say so, because it is not possible in so large an histo∣rie as this, which I now haue in hand, but to bee tedious, with the diuersitie of Chapters: although that if men im∣passionate should be Iudges therein, this is the most cer∣taine meane to entertaine that can be. But of force, séeing I take this way, I must haue recourse
to pardon, and to treat somewhat (leauing so many defian∣ces) of the noble Tinacrian, who with some amorous griefe tooke his leaue of Rosabel, both woondring at what they saw the one in the other: but it made it the lighter, to sée the valorous kinsemen which he had, and what it behooued him to doe, to be called brother to so great Princes, and Unkle to such a Knight; for yet to Claridiano he was vnknowne. With this conceit he retyred to embarke him, where his Damsel attended his comming, feareful that his long stay∣ing might be the occasion, that he should not come in time with his succours; for the most accomplished Lady in all Samogacia, had grounded her hopes vpon him. At his cō∣ming, she told him, what paine she endured, and the cause thereof. Great griefe would it be to me, faire Damsel, (said the resolute yong man) if my staying should giue occasion of any defect, and I should be very glad if you would shew me your necessitie; for since our comming out of Gréece, we haue had no place for it: and séeing that now the Seas and fortune haue giuen it, I should bee very glad thereof. All shall be perfourmed, valorous Prince of Tinacria, séeing the life of her which sent me to séeke, resteth in your hands: and because you shall be the more willing to procure her re∣medie, harken, and you shall heare the greatest and most vn∣reasonable, that euer was vsed to Lady; for if you be sworne to the lawes of loue, you shall vnderstand how vniustly my Lady is condemned to an infamous death: and vnderstand, that in the great and populous kingdome of Samogacia, there is a King, who for his valour and person is worthie to be King of the vniuersall world; it pleased the Heauens to giue him sonnes and daughters, which is the greatest plea∣sure in the world, and fortune willing to try his valour, with taking them all away from him, leauing him one onely daughter, of whom it is said, that the summe and ful perfection of beautie, and accomplishment of qualities, is included in her shape and goodly proportion: for in her, beautie is no hinderance to her discretion, with both which
graces she is adorned in the highest degrée that may be, and so haue they giuen her a name conformable to her constitu∣tion, (calling her Celibella:) for her beautie séemeth rather heauenly, then of the earth; where, if ought be excellent, yet it bringeth with it some ill-fauoured abatement. With this Lady, the Princes of Podolia fell in loue, Knights to whom nature had shewed her selfe very bountifull, endow∣ing them with what is most desired: she made them equals, to the end that as brothers, and so like in proportion, but that by their names, no man could haue knowne them: the elder was called Daristeo of Podolia, and the yonger Rosa∣ner: Both at their comming affected the Kinges fair Daughter, wooing her with many Tiltings and Turneyes, which they caused for her sake, wherein they were both cō∣mended in equall degrée. As to subiect the mind in these lo∣uers cases, is reserued to loue onely, it ordained for the grea∣ter euill, that Celibella most affected the younger, not for that he had more then the other, but that fortune thought it an honourable trophe to triumph of these two louers: with her eies did this faire Dame giue her beloued gallant to vn∣derstand, to what estate fortune had brought her: but they had so small hope of béeing beloued, that notwithstanding that she shewed it with a thousand good countenances, yet he could neuer be perswaded, that she loued him: for as that Lady is the Phoenix of beautie, hee held a fauour from her hand, to be such a thing, as loue it selfe could not deserue, and so they procéeded in their loues a-vie, without acquain∣ting the one the other with the secret of their mindes. It was no small griefe to the Ladie, that Rosaner could not perceiue how well she loued him; and for the Lady to make shew thereof by any signes or other meanes, she would not for any thing in the world, well knowing, how much she should therein preiudice her honour: with the often fauours and publike prayse, which she gaue to whatsoeuer this gal∣lant did, he was partly perswaded that she loued him: but yet he could hardly beléeue, yt fortune would be so fauorable.
At this instant, wherein Celibella shewed her selfe most af∣fected vnto him, accepting of the endeuours and exployts which Rosaner performed in her seruice, there was brought to the Court a kinsewoman of this Ladies, who was the beginning and ending of all these mishaps: She truly was fayre; for somewhat being of kinne to the Kings daughter, claue to her. As my Lady was young, and a nouice in loue, she was of opinion, that it was much ease to disclose it: some others are of the same opinion: but for my part, I vtterly condemne it: for there is no greater griefe, then to reueyle the secrets of the heart, whereby the renowne may be tou∣ched, and from whence nothing is drawne, but the Lady to subiect her selfe to the party to whome shee reueyleth her se∣cret, who also (peraduture) will hold her for more light in discouering it, then for being in loue. This hapned some∣times. The vnwary Lady trode these reasons vnder foot, & told all to Felina, for so was her kinswoman called. The discouery of this secret serued not to yeeld any ease to the Lady, but to incite her kinsewoman to fall in loue with the Prince Daristeo, and that in so good earnest, that shée spée∣dily made it appeare. But as hee was so engoulfed in the loue of Celibella, he tooke no notice with what affection Felina shewed her selfe to be his. The Lady Princesse per∣ceyued it well, and receyued no small pleasure therein, ima∣gining that therewith Daristeo would leaue to bee so ena∣mored of her, for the beauty of her kinsewoman was ell worthy to be beloued. There were often meetings in the hall betwéene these foure louers: but I know not who is a∣ble to agrée them, for with my tongue I am not able; for neyther partie left to loue, though it were not accepted. It appeared in their eyes: for the two brothers fixed theirs vpon the Princesse, and she with new spoyles beholdeth her Rosaner, making her eyes fat with beholding him. But her cousin being touched to the quick, with apparant signes giueth testimony of her loue, in beholding her Daristeo, in whom she onely delighteh, and from whom she draweth
her life; and although she were but a nouice in that occupa∣tion, the carelesnes wherewith the prince answered her, put her in such care, as I thinke no body hath béene more care∣full: for from that time forward, her griefe was such, as her cousin was very sory for. This amorous passion did so much pinch her, that shée knew no meanes how to remedie it, neither saw any possibilitie; for the prince neuer tooke a∣ny regard of the fauours which shee shewed him: which was worse then death to this afflicted Lady, who grow∣ing desperate, would haue taken any course for remedy, al∣though somewhat dishonourable. As the king loued these Princes, holding them in place of sonnes, although he had not yet determined vpon whom be would bestow his daughter Celibella: so had they oppor∣tunitie to discourse with the lady, who seeing that her father was well pleased therewith, forbare it not, making shewe that to be the cause, concealing the trueth. Rosaner being the man who wore the palme, his brother could neuer ima∣gine it, thinking with himselfe, that if the Ladyes affection were guided by reason, he was rather to be beloued thē his brother: but loue led it another way, without respect of the large kingdō whereof he was prince; for to him which per∣fectly loueth, it neuer representeth the qualities of the thing beloued: but only what is in self, which otherwise were but a fayned loue: and so the Lady loued the fortunate yong man, not with a litle enuy of loue, séeing what was enioyed. The passionate cousin was shée, who sped worst in this businesse; for although that the Princesse loued not Dari∣steo, yet he was neuer perswaded that shee loathed him: for the discreet Lady bestowed some fauours vpon him, which were a meane to entertaine the Prince, and hée held himselfe happy, to obtaine so much at her handes. But poore Felina neither perceiued any shew that she was belo∣ued, neither was there any end in vnderstanding her ill hap in being not regarded by him, whom shee loued better then her selfe. In this meane while, the braue Furiandro, bastard
sonne to the king of Podolia (which hée gat in his yong yéeres, vpō a most strong woman in the mountaines Rifei) came to ye court to séeke these 2. brothers: he proued so fierce and valiant, (that they say) that in valour he doeth exceede the great god Mars; for there is no knight, no, although they be ten, nay twenty, that are able to kéep ye field against him, neither any Gyant, how fierce so euer he be: he is beloued of the common people; for hee is not of that condition, which such men commonly are of, which excéede all other in force and strength of body: but he is rather courteous and a great friend & fauourer of Ladies, although that in this occasion (I maruaile not) he haue shewed himselfe cruell to Celibel∣la. Much did the princesse reioyce at his comming, & all the whole court; for the feastes were renewed, wherein it is in∣credible & not to be beléeued, what that furious knight did: for he was séene at one blow, to strike downe both horse and man; all men gaue him the prize for valiant. The king re∣spected him according as was reason, for his valour & good gouernment; for that was it, which most aduanced him a∣boue all others. All this was nothing, neither the assurance which shée saw of her paine, to cause Felina to giue ouer her determination, but rather increase it, attempting one of the boldest & most presumptuous enterprises of the world, from whence could ensue no other thing, but that which followed: for vnable to endure to sée her self so little respected, she aduē∣tured to say vnto the prince Daristeo, yt the princesse would expect him yt night in the garden, to confer with him of mat∣ter of importāce. There could nothing happē more pleasing to ye infortunate prince, then such a message; for as it was a thing vnlooked for, now holding him selfe assured thereof, he held himself ye most happy mā in the world: he held ye day for as lōg as a mans life: he thought the night fled frō him: eue∣ry minute he held for a yere, such was his desire to meet ye la∣dy princesse. The subtil Felina, séeing her plot to take effect▪ took a sute of Celibellas, which did best set out her beauty, & clad her self therwith: & as y• heauens would not frustrate
what she had exployted, so could not the gallant sée, whether it were the Princesse, or shée. But hee comming into the garden, lesse armed thē was néedfull, went to the window, so passionate, that he knew her not. The cruell damsell coū∣terfeyted her speach, and sayd, I haue hitherto, Oh prince of Podolia, dissembled how much I haue loued you, for some respects which haue forced me thereto: but seeing your great deserts, I could not forbeare (holding it vniust) but to impart my faith vnto you, and to say, that you are more beloued, then all the men in the world. As he should haue made an answere, in an alley among ose trées, (priuily armed) came Rosaner: for as hee was wise, so would hee not come into so suspicious a place, carelesly and in danger of his person: he had beforetime there spokē with the Prin∣cesse, and séeing a Knight there, and that shée stood talking with him, well may a man iudge what he felt, who held him selfe beloued, and with so great affection: hee was come somewhat néere, when the vnlucky Daristeo said; My deare Lady, I could neuer imagine, that the loue which I haue euer borne you, could haue bene so highly rewarded, neither can it yet sinke into my head, that I could euer deserue so great a good, as thus to sée you to bestow such and so particu∣lar fauours, which wholy is to be attributed to your gene∣rositie, more then to my loue or desert, although ye I might hope much: for I beléeue, that no man euer loued with grea∣ter affection then I. The cause hereof is the little confidēce which I repose in my owne deserts and worthinesse, to at∣tayne to so great a good, as to bee beloued by your beauty, neyther can I leaue to cōsider the high estate you hold, with∣out vnderstanding who he was, or imagining any thing of his brother: for now Fortune would néeds shewe her mu∣tability against these two Louers: with the greatest sud∣dennesse of the world, the beloued Rosaner ranne vpon his deare brother, not knowing who hee was. Neuer Eagle turned with greater liuelynesse, then did Daristeo against his brother; and as they were very valiant, so began there
betwéene them a most cruell battaile, but the elder had the worser, not through want of force, but of armes & fortune. Although the other had receiued some hurts, yet they were but small. The furious louer would néeds close with Dari∣steo; but therein he sought his owne death: for the desperate yong man being deadly wounde, before hee gaue vp the ghost, reuenged himselfe, by bereauing life from his mt deare brother Rosaner: for stumbling forwardes by reason of his wounds, he thrust out his sword arme, and by chance hit him right in the face. The elder brother had not yet so much lost his memorie, but that he followed the blow, vntil the point of the sword pierced through his brothers braines. These faithfull louers came to fall iust together, losing with one onely blow, their liues, ielousies, and loue, and the greatest good of the world, which was the fayre Lady. The vnhappy Felina stood beholding this battaile, vntill that she sawe them fall: then sorrowing their death, with her out∣cryes shée disqueted all the Palace, and falling downe in the euill which shee had done, without dissembling it, neither had she strength to auoid the punishment, she her selfe being her owne executioner; for euen in the same attyre as shee stood, she cast her selfe headlong out at the window, falling vpon her head betwéene the, and in their death kept them company. The greatest part of the people in the Palace, ran into the garden, and the king with the furious Furan∣der; who when he saw the cruell happe of his two brothers, was likely to haue lost his wits, which was the cause of al∣tering his condition, imagining with himselfe, that they were dead through Celibellas occasion. Some others did suspect it, to sée the brotherly death betweene two louers. It caused extréeme sorrow in all the court: for the king shewed himselfe very sorrowfull (as was reason) to sée so pitifull a chance. What the Princesse did in her chāber, I would rather that some other body would report it, then I which saw it. A thousand times would she haue ended with one death, y• many deaths which she should endure through
he absence of her Rosaner, which shée beganne presently to shew: for the company of her damsels was displeasing vn∣to her, wherein she was woont chiefly to delight: the fight of knights and gallants was loathsome, and their discour∣ses yrksome; so as her whole delight was to be solitarie, re∣ceiuing some pleasure in me, discoursing of ye cruelty which fortune had shewed her. There was nothing but did put her in minde of her knight; and to remember him, it was death to her: and hauing no more comfort but what shee reaped from her teares, which were so many which shee shed, for that lamentable mischance, that it bereaued her of a great part of her beauty. All the Court was in an vproare; the king in making search for ye murderers, could take no rest, so as in the citie there was nothing but suspition and mour∣ning. The most valiant Furiander disturbed all, forgetting what he had promised when he took the order of knighthood, that hee should neuer take part against any Lady; for as ech of his brothers had discouered vnto him part of his loue, and séeing how much they were tormented, and how care∣lesse she was thereof, which was not for want of affection, but rather of discretion, he fully perswaded himselfe, that to be rid of their importunities, she had procured their deaths; he conceiued it with such apprehension, that nothing could disswade him, neither to see the sorrowfull signes which the princesse gaue for the death of the two brothers: for this fu∣rious yong man had determined what he would do, & would draw his comfort for the lesse of the two princes brothers, from the death of a lady, whom to be hold, I know not who but would haue vētured his life for her. It hapned (most va∣liant prince) that one day the king being despised, for that he could not be certified concerning ye death of these princes, as he had newly dined, ye fierce Furander, armed at al pieces in blacke, of bright and shining stéele armour, without any deuice, sauing onely in the midst of his shielde hee bare re∣uenge most liuely painted. Being thus furnished, his com∣ming into the Hall, made al those which beheld him, change
countenances, who with the fiercenesse wherewith nature had endowed him, making a little reuerence, and a litle lif∣ting vp his visor, said with a hoarse voyce, (for yet I haue not forgotten, what feare I was in to heare him) Mightie king of Samogacia, not withstanding that I am of opinion that my comming, & in this maner, will not a little offend you, the great griefe which I endure to sée the most dearely beloued princes of the world slaine in ye palace, doth enforce me a thing, euen the heauens should lament for so vniust a death: yt gods doe know how much it grieueth me to come in this maner, considering howe much my deare brothers were boundē vnto thée: but the feare that I am in to returne again to Pdolia to ye king my father, who sent me to séeke thē, hath forced me, séeing that nothing can be done against that which the heauens haue decréed: and to the end that the common people shall not say, that they dyed, and that no man would reuenge their death; and séeing the many cer∣taine signes which in their life, and since I haue perceiued, I say, that I will maintaine against any one, two, thrée, or foure knights together, with my horse and armes, that they were slaine by order from your daughter the princesse Celi∣bella: which from this day, to the end of 4. moneths, I will maintaine, because the princesse shall vnderstand, that I de∣sire not to preuaile by reason of the shortnes of the time; but that she may haue time to send whither & for whom she wil, to defend her honour, so as shee may not be accounted mur∣theresse of princes. The diuilish knight held his peace, and there was no man so valiant, that durst so much as moue. The king stood some what in a doubt, pondering on the waight of the case, and at length resolued, and I beléeue hee was forced (eeing how much Furiander was feared) to admit the chal∣lenge, and so he caused the princesse to be called, which God knowes, was sorowfull ynough for their deaths; shée ima∣gined straight what the matter was; and so halfe amazed, foorth she came.
The king propounded vnto her the Pagans occasion: she could not answere (for I thinke no body could) vntill the qualme was past, which had almost bereaued her of her life, and then she answered with so great stomake, as made mee wonder; it was the equitie of the cause and the great wrong that was done her, did thus animate her thereto, saying, that it was a lye, & that she would take such order as should be requisite, to recouer the honor whereof she was thus rob∣bed with so great trechery, she being innocent of the death of those Princes, but séeing the one failed, she was to séeke who might giue account of her honour. Her father the king commanded her presently to be committed to prison, because he would shew himself a Iuicer, notwithstanding it was against his owne daughter whom he so dearely loued, and of whose life depēded his own: for it was y• kings law, held in∣uiolably▪ (although very rigorous) that whatsoeuer person were accused of an offence cōmitted within the palace, that doeth not either of himself, or some knight for him answere the challenge, within the time lymitted in the challenge, shall be condemned to be burnt; the most cruell thing that euer was heard. Then came your fame (valorous prince) flying through Samogacia, with the highest pitch that euer knight enioy∣ed. The poore distressed Lady was of opinion (as in deed it is true) that she could not repaire with more reason and as∣surance vnto any then to you, and so shee sent mee to seeke you. I came from the citie with that care, which a matier of such importance as this is, doeth require, and vnderstan∣ding of the great feasts which were in Grecia, I was of o∣pinion to finde you there among your brothers; for by the way I vnderstood, that you are sonne to ye great Emperour Trebatius, with whose fame ye whole world is replenished, & seing it was my hap to méet you in so good cōpany, I am ye gladdest womā in ye world, assuring my self, yt bringing you, I bring life to ye princesse, & although yt we haue bin hindred in our sayling, with tempests, yet ye wind being fauourable,
wee shall (I doubt not) come in time to Samogatia, (for there yet remaine twentie daies, before the challenge bée expired:) and this is (Sir Knight) the cause that hath moo∣ued me to take the paines to seeke you, and I beléeue it shal not bee in vaine; for seeing the wrong that is done to the Princes, you will not suffer it to proceede; for the fame of your valour importeth no lesse, but that you imploy it in fauour of those which are distressed, as is this Ladie. The lady hauing ended her story with some teares which fell from her eyes, remembring how much it would grieue the Princesse seeing her long stay, yt valorous Tinacria was verie pittifull, especially in the behalfe of women, holding it for no honour which was gotten against them; and so he answered, I would that the heauens had giuen me farre greater force (faire damsell) to the end that your businesse might be the better assured, although hauing so much equi∣tie on her behalfe, I hope that it shall suffice to yéeld that contentment, as such an excellent Ladie as shée is, doth de∣serue, against any that without reason shall procure her griefe, and I refuse not the houre, to méete that Knight of so little discretion. Great comfort did those couragious spéeches yéeld to the Damsell which the Prince vsed: the weather was fauoura∣ble vnto them; for foure daies before the time was expired, they landed néere the Citie of Adibia, (for so is it called) with great pleasure to them both, to sée themselues so neere; shée to her soueraigne Ladie bringing so good a returne; and he, which much desired to shew all his valour in defence of the Princesse: and but that it was onely his, it had neuer béene accomplished with that good hap; for the Pagan was one of the most strong men in the world. One day and a halfe did they spend in comming to the Citie, which was full of strangers, although neuer a one so valorous, as to answere the challenge, notwithstanding that Furiander came daily to the lists. They passed the night in a groue of poplar trées, where, what happened vnto them, you shal heare in the next Chapter.
CHAP. III. Of that which hapned to the Prince of Tinacria, with a Knight much affected to Celibella, and how he ended the battell for her. IT should bee past midnight, (most Noble Lord) when a Knight with his lamentati∣ons did awakē the valiant Poliphebus, who a little from him had laid him down to sléep. The sonne of the cruel Garriofilea, sae vpon the gréene grasse, and being frée from loue, he harkned, and gessing which way the complaint came, fully armed, not knowing what might follow, for he would not goe vnprouided: he saw by the Moone light, which shined ve∣ry cléere, at the foote of a great Oake, a great Knight stret∣ched all along vpon the ground, richly armed in blew ar∣mour, wrought all ouer with many knots of gold, bee sée∣med to the Tinacrian to be some Knight of good account. In his shield, which he had fastened to his necke, was pain∣ted loue with a merry countenance, and fortune in the skirt, with ye most piercing aspect, that euer was séene, with these letters vnderwritten. Fortune being so contrary, With angrie valour taking part, Though constant loue be on my side, Yet nothing can assure my heart. The Knight séemed to be in a trance, séeing he moued not, as indéed he was: for the griefe to lose the faire Celibella, had put him out of his wits. But when he came againe to himselfe, with a sigh, being out of breath, he began to say, O Fortune, with how many trials doest thou shew thy muta∣bilitie, tyring my heart with so many troubles! If I did i∣magine (blind Goddesse) that I had euer béene rebellious against thée, that I had not respected thée, that I had not put my trust in thée, that I had doubted of thy power, and of what thou art; I should haue taken this rigorous touch for a reward for my patience. But séeing that without any
occasion thou wilt shew thy selfe my greatest enemy, I ha∣uing giuen thée no iust cause thereof, I cannot forbeare to complaine, and onely of thy mutabilitie, séeing that with what, or for what, thou hast brought me to the point, that nothing but death onely can yéeld mee ease. O wardly heart, séeing that for being so, thou suffrest her to die, which might giue thée life, & in distresse succour thée! Pardon mee, worthy Princesse; for now I sée the iniurie, which with my cowardise I haue done thée, in not daring to oppose my life in thy behalfe: and séeing that so many wayes I sée it lost, and that now fayling with thée, the remainder wil be worse then death it selfe: the Gods defend that I sée thy vniust death: but rather yt I with iustice bereaue my soule thereof: for in so long staying, I wrong the loue I beare thée: and herewith, in a diuellish furie, hee snatcht vp his sword, and lifting vp his bresplate, hee would haue thrust it into his owne bodie, saying, Herewith, soueraigne Ladie, I make amende, for not vndertaking the battell, although that I had seene my death before mine eyes; by how much more then, beeing for thée, it might haue béene accounted life. The Tinacrian tooke hold of him, and before that hee could effect his diuellish intent, he seized vpon his sword, which he pluckt out of his hands, saying, Oh desperate Knight▪ and with committing so vilde an act, wilt thou soader vp that which thou hast done against the Ladie, whom thus much louest? The Moore came to himselfe, who was Prince of Prussia, a countrey very néere adioyning to that of the most faire Celibella, and beholding that Knight so tall and so wel armed, being perswaded yt he saw his remedy, he said vnto him, Do me not, Sir Knight, so great displeasure, but suffer me to satisfie with my life, that which I haue com∣mitted against the most faire Lady, that the world contai∣neth, séeing that vndertaking the battell for her, although with the losse of my life, I might haue done her particular seruice; but being against so furious a knight, with very co∣wardise, I lost yt which I might haue gottē, although I had
remained without life and séeing that now to hold it, it will be to my further hurt, giue me leaue to procéede according to my determination, if you will not that I make a larger payment for the error which I haue committed which was the greatest that eur Knight committed, against her whom he so loued. Leaue off your so much sorrow (said the war∣like Tinacrian) for men are not bound to vndertake mat∣ters aboue their force; for in such case you of your part are excused. That cannot bee, said the Pagan, who owing his life, and would not venture it for her, in any daunger how doubtfull so euer the successe thereof were, cannot be excu∣sed, & therefore you cannot denie me the wrong that I haue done my Ladie. Notwithstanding all this, I will not yéeld that any such crueltie bee committed in my presence, nei∣ther is it weldone, but ill (you see the end of this aduenture) to torment your selfe in such sort, as may put you in such despaire as this, which dooth so much disgrace the valour which appeareth in your person. And because I came from farre about this businesse, and to fight for this Ladie, I pray you be satisfied, and hold me companie to the Citie, where I will trie my lot with Furiander. Who can presume, Sir Knight, (said the Moore) to come into that Citie where hee hath committed so great a fault, such as the like hath not beene séene? I haue not the power, neither can any thing make me thereto able. It hath not beene so great (said the Tinacrian) but it may be amended, if fortune fauour vs. The Prince told him so many things, that in the end hee offred to hold him companie to the end that he might see the forces wherewith hee should fight for Celibella. By this time it was day, and so they tooke their horses, and with the damsell and the Tinacrian his squire, they tooke the way towards the Citie, and by the way hee knew that this Knight was the Lord and King of Prussia, where he fel in loue with the Princesse Celibella, although he neuer knew the necessitie wherein shee was, vntill hee came with his armes onely disguised to the Court, to see
her, which for her beautie was extolled through his whole Dominion: and comming thither, he vnderstood of Furian∣der his challenge: But the fame of his valour was such, that hee durst not vndertake the battell for the Princesse, notwithstanding that hee loued her, much more then his owne soule: and falling into consideration of what hee had done, going forth of the Citie, he meant to haue slayne him∣selfe. The Tinacrian recomforted him the best that hee could, and he did not a little preuaile, being the most feare∣full yong man in the world. They ariued, when the King was newly risen from the table, and had that day inuited the famous Furiander, purposing with some good reasons to haue disswaded him from that attempt, being very sor∣rowfull, for that he perseuered in his determination, he saw néere at hand the certaine death of his déerely beloued daughter: for hee continued so obstinate in his vniust chal∣lenge, that nothing could withdraw him from his damned resolution. The two Princes came in, whose presence gaue no small ioy to all that were in the hall, principally the Tinacrian: for no man had a greater grace in his counte∣nance. In ouer-looking the hall with iudiciall eyes, the sonne of great Trebatius doing some reuerence, said, God saue the great King of Samogacia, and graunt thée that peace which thy personage deserueth; this Knight and I come from farre countries, onely to defend the wrong, as we haue vnderstood, which is done by a certaine Knight vn∣to thy Daughter; and casting lots, whether of vs should first enter into battell for her, it fell to me, which gaue mee no small content, to doe thy daughter this seruice, and per∣forme that, whereto by the law of Knighthood I am boun∣den; and therefore you may commaund her to be called, and wee shall sée, whether shee will commit the equitie of her cause into my hands. The Gods requite thée the band, (Sir Knight) wherein you haue bound me, with offring your person to such danger as this present, which is one of ye grea∣test that you haue séene, which might be ended by some other
meanes, if this Knight would, who is the defendnt to the challenge: but séeing it must goe as fortune will appoint, there is no more to be done, but to come to the battell, which the Gods graunt may end, according to the equitie of the cause. To be of the Princesses part, (mightie King) hath compelled me to come, answered the Tinacrian. The fierce Pagan being somewhat moued, rose vp, saying, I would not, Sir Knight, that you should haue so great confidence in the Ladies innocencie, but that you should come so well fur∣nished with forces, as are needfull for the battel, and so you may take this Knight to helpe you; for my challenge doth extend to foure. It shall not néed, said the sonne of Treba∣cius, to haue any more companie, thē the equity of my cause doth giue me: for if I be in the right, my person will sufice for a greater matter; if in the wrong, little will great for∣ces preuaile against iustice; and I much desire, that such a Knight, which is so famous as you are, before so many peo∣ple, should not make shew, to trust more in the strength of your arme, then in the equitie of your cause; which most commonly fayling, valour is of little effect. The furious Pagan beeing there with ffended, answered, saying, I thought not, Knight, that my curtesie had animated thee to be so proud: but because thou maist know, that I will not passe the time in words, being more fit to vse deeds, we wil no longer deferre the battell. As he had ended his answere, came the most faire Celibella, all clad in mourning attire, which did greatly encrease her beautie. The Tinacrian had neuer séene greater beautie; for there were few in the world that did excell her. Her father told her at her comming, how that Knight vndertooke the battell for her. The faire Prin∣cesse knew him straight, by his deuice of a bough which he bare in his shield, & that hee was the man for whom she had sent. She presently gaue him authoritie, with greater con∣tentment, then can be spokē, although yt when she remēbred the infortunate Princes, her most pleasing thoughts were watred with teares. These two valiant Warriours made
no delay, for ye fierce Tinacriā taking his leaue of the King, went into the lists, taking with him the Prince of Prussia, who stood to looke on. On the other side of the lists, presently came in the valorous Furiander, much people accompany∣ing him although there was no bodie that would he should winne the palme, or weare those armes, wherein hee had accused the Princesse, who was set vpon a scaffold with a sufficient gard; where she prayed to her false Gods, that her Knight might obtaine the victorie, séeing ye in so iust a cause he vndertooke the battell. Face to face stood these two war∣riours, whose lookes and gestures were such▪ that he which stood farthest off, did scarcely account himselfe in safetie, at the giuing of the fearefull signe; they drew with more swift∣nesse, then an arrow flieth: In the middest of the place, was appointed the course of their Carriere, making a grea∣ter sound in their meeting, then if two hils had runne toge∣ther: they bowed not in their addles, with the force of the lances, which brake like Kxes, whose splinters flew so high, that they were out of sight. These two rare men in valour, turned their horses with their swords in their hands, & ap∣proching the one iust to the other, they gaue so fearefull blowes, as would haue beaten a rocke in pieces; eche of them could testifie his aduersaries force, they redoubled the second with greater courage then dexteritie: either of them féeling his owne blood in his mouth, they began to make be∣nefite of the nymblenesse, wherewith they were endued, closing, and beating by the blowes, in such exquisite maner, that Mars himselfe could not haue done the like. The vali∣ant Moore spurring his horse, thinking by swiftnesse to get aduantage, charged, carrying his sword firme, with the point forwardes: The great Tinacrian was well a∣ware thereof; there was neuer seene any Eagle more swift then hee in giuing blowes, and making his horse to giue a bound, hée passed before the Moore, and tur∣ned him so sodainly, that hee wondred at the Sonne of Trebacio: they came to ioyne, and the Moore would giue
the first blow; hee did it, which was more swift then the wind, and strake him vpon the rich Helmet, whose finenesse warranted his life, for otherwise hee had clouen him to the saddle; it sounded like a bell, and therein the Tinacrian saw a thousand starres in the skies, he fell vpon his horse necke, and the Moore doubled his blow; but if hee had giuen the third, the battell had béen ended: for it came with such force, that he was quite senselesse: he had closed with him, if he had not séene, that more furious then a Basiliske hee returned with his sword aloft. There was no man in that place, that yeelded not the victorie for the Pagan; the Ladies fain∣ting confirmed the same: for losing her Rosiall colour, it became like snow, séeing the blowes which her Knight had receyued, who was nothing discouraged therewith, but ca∣sting his shielde at his backe, grinding his téeth against the other, he assayled the Moore, giuing him so mightie a blow vpon his helme, that he left him al that part vnarmed, char∣ging him so vehemently, that there mist but little to haue laid him in the dust: hee tooke hold of his horse necke. The Tinacrian ioyned with him, accounting the victorie for his owne, and with both his handes gaue him another blow, which imprinted his sword in his flesh, wounding him in the shoulder: as the Moore setled him selfe, (losing no occasi∣on) he gaue him two thrusts, one after another, which set him on the arson of his Saddle, griping him so, that it see∣med, he had striken him quite out of breath. The Pagan aduanced himselfe, & closing with the Tinacrian, he thought to preuaile by grasping with him; but he found the sonne of Garofilia as fast in his saddle, as if he had béene a rock: they tugged so hard together, yt they both were out of breath; their horses stood more fixt in ye groūd, with uing in their wre∣stling, then the most moored roots. With one turne, they fell both to the earth. The Pagan had a mishap, because one of his feet hung in the stirrp: which if the Tinacriā had percei∣ued in time, he had slaine him: yet notwithstāding, before he could get it out, with his dagger he gaue him 2. cruel stabs, &
left the marks in the flesh, which the Pagan held for mortal; and so turning to his enemy, who as he was higher then he, he lifted him from ground, carying him in such sort, that the Batchelour had lieffer haue bene deadly wounded; hee did his best to encounter his aduersary, and so recouer footing, whence twise whéeling about, they hurled together with greater force then a Coluerine shot, they ga to their wea∣pons with such speed, that al those which were present, won∣dred thereat. I beléeue, quoth the king, turning himselfe to∣wards the principall of those which were with him, that in these two warriours, is disciphered the flower of cheualrie. No pleasure can be compared to that which Celibella receiued, séeing how well her knight had acquitted himself; for on foot none of her brothers could do better: and yet often∣times fighting with them, hee made them to doubt of the battaile. Some aduantage was perceiued in him: for stri∣king with great rage, the Tinacrian happily crossing in∣wards and standing very firme on his right foote, he ioyned hitting right on the side of the vaunt-brace, the trenchant sword rebounded to the hollow, entring a third part in at the brest. The Pagan féeling the wound, & thinking it had bene to the death, gaue a signe thereof: for with the very paine of the wound he went crosse-leg'd, and was readie to fall: the furious yong man holpe him, doubling another blow vpon his helme, with so great might, that hee made him set his knées to the ground. There is no serpent so wrathfull, which can turne so, as Furiander returned a∣gainst the sonne of Garofilea, and with the raging smart which he felt of his woūd, throwing his shield to the groūd, he went with such fury, with his sword in both hands, that he made more then foure lose all their colour in their faces; the blowe was with lesse héed then wisedome required to beare; for it had beene the last that euer the Tinacrian had receiued, he hit him so right vpon the gilded crest, that hee made him to sée a thousand starres in his helme, and he char∣ged his furious sword with such force, that he made him to
both his handes and knées to ground. The impatient Moore drew néere with another, no lesse then the first, hée had stretched him out for a pray: according as he was strōg, so he suddenly pinck't from him his vn-brace: and Lir∣gando saith, that he also tooke his shield from him. Gualte∣nor sayeh no, but that hee did cut the greatest part of his Polarons. If hee had béene able to haue giuen the third, I knowe not how this Batchelour had escaped from the bat∣taile: but as the wound fell vpon that side where his heart was, it made him breathlesse so as hee could not thence∣foorth procéed in his furie, giuing the Bachelour place to rise, there was no helpe for the armour against the blowe which he gaue, for hee cleane carryed away the crowne of the helme, and a piece of the head withall. Well might the sonne of the great Trebacio haue o∣uercome him but hée was a Knight, who in déed did more affect the woorth which the Pagan had shewen, saying thus vnto him: I doe much desire, Sir Knight, that this battaile may rest in that estate, wherein it is, for I see you are dangerously and sore wounded, very néere vnto death, and in going further, any your euill fortune whatsoeuer, would much grieue mee; for I doe neither desire your death nor ouerthrowe, but perpetuall amitie and friend∣ship, which from hencefoorth I offer vnto you, swearing and protesting vnto you, that you most inuriously vp∣hold and maintaine the wrong against a Ladie, who in apparant shewe hath much sorowed and lamented the death of your brothers. When the generositie (most noble Prince) is so discoue∣red, & procéedeth from a gallant brest, there is no Aspicque so fierce and cruell, but will bee therewith appeased: hée had not beene Prince of Tinacria, neither could that haue bene the country of your most noble Lordship, if therein had not bene bred so rare a good, as was this.
And so this valiant oore sound himselfe bound, with the reasons which the Prince vttered, aying, Fthug could happen to me so well as this, my life and reputation being in such danger. I would (valorous man at Armes) gladly in exchange, to purchase the friendshippe of such a knight as you are, and seeing it behoueth , and that of my obinate contending there can nothing grow vnto  but perpetuall infamy and discredite, I doe from hence∣foorth vtterly giue ouer the battaile, and freely se at er∣tie the Princesse, condemning my euersight and bline, séeing i was not possible in so perfec a subiect, to  any thing which should so much disgrace it. When the prince of Prussia lawe the  league and bond of friendship concluded bei ue the , he put spres to his horse, and tooke his way towardes his countrey with all the spéede that might be, where hee passed his time in great heauinesse and sorrow, hauing atchiued no aduenture. The Iudges were néere at hand, hearing what the Pagan said, which yéelded such contentment to the whole Court, that no man is able to expresse it: but  may be bet∣ter imagined, then any way described. The hidden fire in the scattered powder (my Soue∣raigne Lady) hath not so much power, neither is it of such effectuall force, as is settled loue, to shewe what it is, and what it is able to doe. What man in the world could haue confirmed a peace betwéene Princes so much at variance, and with so great reason? Who could haue brought it to passe, that Celibella, the beauty of the world, should haue béene any whit sorow∣full or grieued, for the spitefull Pagan hurs (though ne∣uer so deadly) bee receiuing them, in fighting so disgrace and confound her? It cannot be imagined, that so great an alteratiō as this, can be attributed vnto any other thing but to loue. Fortune
was more fauourable vnto him, then he was well aware of: for they were not yet gone forth of the field, when twenty Knights clad in mourning attyre, came into the Campe, which seeing him come foorth of the lists afoote, came to him to kisse his hands, and to acknowledge him for their Prince and soueraigne Lord; for the king had so heauily taken the death of his two sonnes▪ that the sorrow thereof bereaued him of his life; and he left no heire but this mightie Furian∣der. Al the principal of the Realme were of opinion, to giue the crowne vnto him, and to accept him for their king, se∣ing his valour deserued no lesse, but was much more wor∣thy. The valorous Pagan did not a little sorrow the death of his father▪ and the sonne of the most cruell Garofilea kept him company, mourning with him for the one, and reioy∣ing with him for the other. A newe life and a long, answered the Pagan, I would the heauens would grant me (noble man at Armes) to the ende, to acknowledge howe great a good it is to bee your friend; but such as it shall please the gods to bestow vpon me, assure your selfe it shall be to doe you seruice, as he who is no lesse endebted vnto you, then for his life and honour. It yéeldeth me not that ioy and solace (said the Tinacrian) Soueragine prince, to sée how gentle fortune hath shewed her selfe vnto me, to gette such a friend (as I hope in the gods you will bée,) as to sée with what affection, and in how good earnest you haue estéemed my offer, so as if I shall be able to equall my déedes with my desire, none shall shew himselfe a more faithfull friend then I. By this time, the king with the whole court, was descen∣ded to receiue and entertaine the Tinacrian, who had al∣ready determined in himselfe, to entreat the king to receiue Furiander for his sonne. In approching, with his Armes displayed, he came to the faire yong man, saying▪ Although t were for nothing else, most valiant knight, but to say that in my armes I imbrace the flowre of cheualry, I hold the troubles well imployed, whereunto this Prince hath
brought vs. The faire Poliphebus wel discharged the part of the Moore, saying. It was a worthy matter, mighty king, to to considered, in how manifest a dāger your daughter was; but herein appeareth the noblenesse of your generous brest, that you not onely pardon what is done, with the passion to sée such princes to fayle, but you are now to receiue him for a friend, séeing his valour deserueth, that all the princes of the world should hold him for such: greater errours then these which may be pardoned, so venturous a knight vnder∣taking the same. By this time was come the Kings daughter, so fayre, that I know not any man of reasonable vnderstanding, but would haue giuen, rather then to haue lost the sight of her, two thousand soules, if he had them. She drew néere, giuing the prince great thanks for that which hée had done for her, saying, I was well assured (valorous knight of the Bough) that committing my affayres into your victorious hands, it should haue such issue as is this. While as the fayre Tina∣crian made answere vnto Celibella, loue began to sturre in the brest of the Pagan, who regarded the beautie where∣with the Infanta was adorned, whom in his conceit he had much offended: but loue playing his part, had obtained his pardon; for sometimes she cast her eye aside, to behold the wounds which this new-come prince had receiued: and in∣déed the Pagan did not so much feele it, as the Lady did, for it did ease his paine, to behold her beautie: But to her, who had already yéelded her selfe tributarie to loue, euery drop of his blood, was worse then a cruell death: so farre doeth his power extend, who is called the blind god of loue. Within the Palace, were these Princes cured of their wounds; and fifteene dayes the Tinacrian there remay∣ned, in which time he behaued himselfe so well, that hee ob∣tained of the king all that he desired; setting before his eyes the valour of Furiander, and the state which hee held: loue had so well disposed of the fayre princesse▪ that it was no hard matter to winne her. The valorous Furiander knew
not how to value this good; for all the Court feasted him, holding it well content to receiue such a knight, for prince and Lord thereof. Much did the princesse desire that the Ti∣nacrian should haue remained a longer time, but being vna∣ble to end other matters, he tooke his leaue of the Lady, and committed himselfe to the déepe sea, with Ruuo his squire alone. The fift day of his nauigation, with a prosperous wind he ariued in the kingdome of Hilepsia, where hapned vnto him, that which in the next Chapter shallbe declared. CHAP. IIII. How the Prince of Tinacria neere the Fountaine of three spoutes, met with the braue Eufronisa, and of the bat∣taile which hee fought with two Giants which would haue robbed him. SO much did absence (most noble prince) af∣flict the fayre Eufronila, for the loue of Ro∣sabel, that shee tooke no pleasure but in comming to the fountaine where shée first saw him. It fared with her, as with one which hath lost a precious iewel, who not finding it, a thousand times returneth with great care, to the place where he thinketh he lost it. Euē so did this fayre princesse, beeing not so much afflicted for the losse of the sonnes, as for the absence of the Father. In company of her discreet gentlewoman, she passed a heauy & solitarie life, although it were som case vnto her, to think yt her father had promised to carry her with him into Grecia; for there came certaine messengers to him, from the Souldan of Niquea, to entreat his auour, which hee throughly purposed to grant, as he which was very mightie, and of great power. And imagining with her selfe that there she should see her  made her to prolong some what the
rest of her dayes, it was a world to sée, and to heare, what she did, and said, beholding her selfe in the cléere fountaine. Loue is not such (most noble prince) as that hee who is possessed ther with, can haue any regard of reason, neither is reason of force to detaine him who is enamored, from going to any place, whither his cruell destinyes shall lead him. In the Schole of my mishappes, I learned to discourse of the successe of Loue, and how it dealeth with those which are subiect thereto; this enamored princesse yéeldeth vs suf∣ficient experience thereof, whom loue so many wayes (af∣ter she was subiect thereto) tired with a thousand desastres, and being set in the place where she first became enamored, she made a thousand complaints of loue. Oh, fierce and cruell resolution, (said the fayre Lady, and the pleasing content wherein I liue, before I saw that ven∣turous prince the robber of my libertie! I know not of whō to complaine me; not of loue; for it shewed it selfe fauoura∣ble in my behalfe. I complaine me of his crueltie, séeing that he, séeing the sincere faith wherewith I loued him, neuer vouchsafed to giue me one sparkle of hope, but reioyced to sée me for him in so sweet annoy. Oh, my sonnes, if the hea∣uens grant you life, and by them it be determined that you become loue vassls, flye crueltie, which is that which doth most blemish and dishonour those that dene therein: In the rest I would haue you resemble your warlike father, but not in crueltie, who doeth tyrannize ouer her who bare in her wombe. Oh, my Selia, I am of opinion, (séeing the strangenesse which this prince sheweth vnto mée) that to sée me in his countrey, will yeelde him new cause of loth∣ing; which to imagine, there is no death comparable to it. Soueraigne Lady, (answered the Damsell) you liuing so assured, whereof would you more, then to loue him with your soule, which maketh shew to abhorre you? But I am of opinion, that your going into Grecia should ease you of your sorow and yéeld you much content. I shall neuer be so happy (my Selia) as to attaine to the
ight of a thing so pleasing, as that might be, and the grea∣test yt fortune could giue me, to sée him acknowledging how much I haue loued him. This shall bee some ease to my paine, séeing the heauens haue made all other impossible, that he is husband of the Infanta of Niquea. Herein did this Lady passe her wearisome dayes, taking no other pleasure (as I haue said) but to walke abroad in the fresh shadow, in a groue of poplar trées. It hapned one day, that walking abroad somewhat ear∣ly, euen when the sunne from the highest heauens sent his heate into the world, being somewhat annoyed there with, they came to the fountaine to refresh them, where they saw the valorous Tinacrian, who to passe the afternoones heat, was come to this fountaine. This frée yong Batchelour was washing his fayre face, when they approched, beeing somewhat out of countenance, for that they had left their company behind them, and also to finde him so alone; hand in hand they came thither, at the instant when the sonne of Garrofilea lifted vp his head to behold them. The Tinacriā did some what resemble Rosabel, and so the new and sudden sight caused so great alteration in the enamoured Princesse, that she certainely beléeued that he was her beloued prince: Ioy so much suprized her amourous heart, that shee there∣with fell breathlesse, into a swoone, giuing an amourous scritch, saying, Oh my Rosabel. This could not so be colou∣red, but that the frée Tinacrian might well vnderstand, that his deare cousin-germane had trauailed into those coun∣tries, & that this Lady much loued him; he spéedily came to the place, where Selia held her in her lap with so great hea∣uinesse, that it caused the prince to accompany her therein. What sudden mishap is happened to this Lady (said the sonne of Trebacius?) If it be anything, wherein I, with the hazard of my life, may procure her remedy, I will performe it so farre foorth, as it to me shall be possible. The cause of this disease is so inueterate (answered Se∣lia,) maruayling to sée a man so fayre, & assuring herself also
that it was not Rosabel, (for that he was more strongly set) that notwithstanding that many haue attempted to reme∣dy it, being men of much worth, yet all that they could doe, hath béen but to remoue the humours. The faire Ladie gi∣uing a déepe sigh, came againe to her selfe, sheadding many bitter teares, which vpon her faire chéekes, shewed like O∣rientall pearles; she fixed her deceiued eyes vpon the faire yong man, vntill that at y• last she was assured that he was not Rosabel. It grieued her very soule, that shee had giuen so manifest a signe of her being another mans, and not her owne, in presence of that gentle Knight, who although that he had no experience in loue, yet he might neuerthelesse wel perceiue, that shee was in loue. Hee againe reiterated the offer of his life to be employed in her seruice, for the recoue∣rie of her delight. The Gods requite you, gentle Knight, answered the Lady, for your noble offer, which is correspon∣dent to the great valour, which your personage doth repre∣sent: My annoy is so rooted in my soule, that any remedie whatsoeuer to be applied, will but double my sorrow: onely sometime, as now, it yéeldeth me some ease, to make shew of the euil which I endure, and it hath not béen to any smal purpose, séeing I find, that it hath moued those to pitie mée, which neuer knew me. The dutie, (faire Ladie) which I ac∣knowlege to owe to al those which please to vse my seruice, is so generall that it forced me (séeing the great extremitie, whereunto this euill as you say, had brought you) to offer my life in quest of some meanes, to bréed your rest. It may be well perceiued, valorous Knight (said the Ladie) that if we should entreat you to shew your valour to purchase our contentment, you would doe it, as he which best might. The amorous reasons of the faire Ladie could no further procéed, for that they heard a most terrible great noise. This yong gallant betooke him to his weapons, because that to be found without them, it should not put in doubt that which his valour did assure: he had hardly laced his Helmet, and embraced his strong shield, when through the thickest of the
wood, he saw approch two most erce Gyants, and with them a Knight of a gallant resemblance, richly armed; hée would not remayne on ft, but getting to his gallant cour∣ser, skipt into the Saddle, and with his lance in his hand, stayed to sée what they would, willing the Ladies to draw néere to the fountaine; for the maner of their comming seemed not to bee to doe them any pleasure. By this, they were all thrée ariued, and the Knight putting vp his beuer, somewhat more discouering his face, said, Many dayes, so∣ueraigne Princesse Silepsia, with costly experience to my heart, I haue made shewe of my sacrificed faith to your beautie, procuring (to my cost) by all possible meanes your content, and yet could neuer obtaine any the least hope; not that I would be beloued; for that were to renue my life: but you would not so much as once regard my paine, not with∣stāding yt you were ye cause thereof: The heuens haue now permitted me to come so in the nick, to vnderstād how little you shal lose, to answere to my payne: & knowing this, mar∣uell not, though I procure that by force, which I deserue should be fréely bestowed on me; and so you are to haue pa∣tience, for you shall be mine in despite of all the world. Well haue I vnderstood, Prince of Libonia, (answered the Lady) the affection which you haue euer showed me, and to be such as deserued worthy correspondence: but neuer faithfull louer, which delighted in the renowme of a worthy Knight, tooke pleasure to winne affection, which was al∣ready setled; for therein he should rather resemble a rigo∣rous louer, then a man of that faith, which you say you haue borne vnto me; and so séeing the impossibility in my behalfe, I haue procured by all possible meanes to let you vnder∣stand, how small meanes I had to yéeld you remedie. Such affection as is mine (said the Barbarian) accepteth no such fained excuses as these, which you make vnto me. And sée∣ing the heauens beare record how much I desire your con∣tent, there is no prolonging of time, séeing my fortune hath ordained it. Hee had scarcely ended his spéeches, when one
of the Giant drawing néere, stretched out his arme to seize on her; which being dismaied, giuing a great , cast her selfe to the ground, which  the cause that the Giant could take no hold of her. But he had no néd to doe it, for the fierce young gallant, sonne of Garrofilea, brandishing his reuengeful Launce, raing himselfe vpon his Stirps, hurled it with such fore, that Mars himselfe did malice to sée how great a  he gaue for hitting him right ( vna∣wares) in the midde of his spacious brest, the well stée∣led Trenchant made so great a ud-gate, that the hrd plates of Stéele were not sufficient to say it from appea∣ring out at his backe, coloured with his fresh bloud. There néedeth not any great question to bee made, whether the Ladie were glad thereat, or no, séeing it gaue her courage to raise vp her selfe, to sée with what force the frée Tinacri∣an urned heat against his two enemies, the which little remembred what to Knight did appertaine; both at once charged their aunces in the midest of his rée brest: they made him vilely to bend in his Saddle, striking his head against his horse buttocke: and it was no maruaile, for these two valiant men charged him in great furie, to sée their friend slaine. The valorous Tinacrian recouering againe his seate, and ward, returned vpon them, the Giant he found alone, who with a waightie Mae of stéele came towards him, giuing place and time to the Prince to seize on the Ladie, who lifting her voice to heauen, cried to the Tinacrian for helpe. The Giant gaue him so much to doe, that the Prince had time to depart in safetie with his praie; which so much despited the sonne of Trebacius, that he was readie to burst with anger, calling himself coward, that one Knight should bee able to withhold him from helping that faire Ladie, so vniustly taken; hee doubled herewith o thicke and furious blowes, as would haue rent the most hard rock. But he had before him, one, who held himselfe to haue no equall in the world: the faire Poliphebus desired to hazard ye fortune of the
battell at one blow: and so approching to the Pagan, made shew to stay for him; he lifted vp his fearefull Mace, and had not fully done it, when the Youth flew within him, and with a blow strake it out of his hands, and helde the victorie for his: and séeing that delayes might bréed danger, redoubling his force, hee strake him on the head, the blow was so ter∣rible, that it made him sencelesse. The Tinacrian was not a yong man, which would let slippe oportunitie, particular∣ly in a matter of such importance, which concerned no lesse then the Ladies libertie: and so the Moore beeing in this trance, hee with the greatest care of the worlde, with his sword in both his hands, with all his power strake him vp∣on the crowne of the head; the helmet could yéeld no defence, for he claue it so, as it fell at his horse féete, and dispatched him suddenly. He turned about as swift as thought, follow∣ing the trace of the bold aduenturous Prince, and fortune was fauourable vnto him; for without any let, within one mile where the battell began, hee saw the Prince with his pray, flying swifter then the winde; the Falcon neuer slew so swift after the fearefull Hearon, as this valorous Tina∣crian, who giuing the spurres to his horse, made him to run swifter then the stéeds of golden Apollo. And thus riding, he called to the Prince to stay, whose voyce caused this gal∣lant louer, whose haste to himselfe séemed slow, still to spur his horse; for it sufficed him not, to sée and hold his Ladie in his armes, but with her to escape the armes of that yong man, who as a furious Lyon (his sword died in bloud) ap∣proached, and in his flight strooke him vpon the rich Hel∣met; and if it had hit right, it had ended the warre with that blow: But it was not to any small purpose, séeing it made him (for his owne defence) to set her to the ground, being wholly sencelesse. The sonne of Trebacius returned, saying, Ill it besée∣meth him, who reckoneth himselfe a worthie Knight, to doe o vile a thing, as that which you haue committed, and a∣gainst such a Lady, as is this; he came not so little offended,
as to stay for an answere; but that with the well stéeled point hee smote him in the brest with such force, that hee made him to féele his sword within his flesh. The Moore was most nymble and skilfull; and if hee had gone away with this blow, he might haue prolonged his life, but to his greater harme, he would néeds close with the valorous Ti∣nacrian, where al happened acrosse vnto him; and the Moore well perceiuing his strength, gathered new forces from his most mortal wounds, considering with himselfe, how much he lost in losing that battell, and so he suffered him to enter, and with his sword in both his handes, hee smote him vpon the rich helmet, and had reuenged the death of his two com∣panions, and recouered the Ladie, had not the well tempe∣red fine mettall béene betweene; the which, although it gaue the yong man his life, yet it could not defend him, but that it brought his head as low as the pommell of the saddle, ca∣sting out blood, both at his nose and mouth: he reached him yet another, which made him almost forget himselfe. Ne∣uer was Eagle more furious in defending her nest, then the Tinacrian shewed himselfe, turning towards the furious Pagan, and hitting him vpon the helme; it sounded like a bell, and made him tremble like an Aspen leafe, being sha∣ken with the fresh winde in Autumne: he smote off his crest, leauing him mortally wounded, and séeing him stagger, he claspt him in his well brawned armes, whose betters the world contained not; and pulling him from his saddle, hée bare him in his armes, to the place where the Ladie was, being perfectly come to her selfe, who ioyed to sée how well he had reuenged her quarrell. Hee leapt with him from his horse, and with his ponyard ended his life and loue, in the sight of the Ladie, whom hee best loued in the world: the which ioyfull and secure, rose from the place where she sate, and with a countenance, which would haue made loue it selfe in loue, shee went to the frée young man, casting her armes about his necke, which I know not who would haue refused, and with a cloth wiping his armour sparkled
with blood, said, Well hath my friendly fortune ordayned, (valorous man at armes) that although that your first offer serued not for a medicine to cure the wounds of my soule, yet with the second, restoring my life and honour, you haue wholy bound me vnto you; and so I entreat you in the name and behalfe of those things which you loue best in ye world, to tell me your name, and of what countrey you are: for I am of opinion, that I shall yet loue you better, for some o∣ther reason▪ then for all that you haue now done for mee. Well did this yong gallant vnderstand her; and so desiring throughly to satisfie her, hee said, Worthy Lady, the Gods do beare me record, how great ioy I conceiue for my com∣ming into your Kingdome, in time to do you some seruice: and know, that my Countrey is Tinacria, and I am sonne to the Emperour Trebacius, and hee, among all my whole kindred, whom I loue best, is the Prince of the great Bri∣tany. Afresh returned the most faire Eufronisa to embrace him, saying. Now valorous Prince, I say, that I wil not rest beholding vnto you, séeing that in giuing me life, it hath béen to the ende I should encrease my loue towards that cruell Prince, whom you say you loue so much. And as we let speaking, streames of teares flowed frō her faire eies, & she considered her ouersight, saying, Maruell not, (noble Prince) to sée the many shewes of my indiscretion: for the eruent affection wherewith Rosabel is beloued in this Countrey, is such, and the crueltie which hee sheweth to∣wards me, is so rigorous, that it forceth me to complaine of him, séeing I haue so déerely loued him. I would not for a∣ny thing in the world, most worthy Lady, (answered the Prince) that I should giue you any cause of discontent, for I receyue so much herein, that I know not ought, that may frée me thereof, although that if it may be held for an excuse, that he haue not equalled your affection, his being elsewhere deuoted, yet a sufficient reason it yéeldeth, to cause you to shew your selfe lesse passionate. I neuer desired (most va∣liant Knight) that he should wholy requite my loue, séeing it
impossible for him to doe: I onely desired that he should con∣sider that I loued him, and how swéet a life I held it, and how much I ioyed to bee his. But (Oh extreme dolor!) it appeareth that if I did liue, but to loue him, he in good ear∣nest tooke pleasure to abhorre me. Here did I furnish him with horse and armes: and here did I shew him the most faithfull sincere affection, that euer was contained in any humane brest. In my Palace did I cure him of his wounds, hoping that that would haue moued him to haue cured those which he had giuen me: but to my greater griefe, I sent him hence whole and sound, and he left me here, so, as you sée me. Let it not (noble Prince) offend you to heare my passionate complaint; for I would not haue spoken it to any man in the world, but to such a one, as were so néere a kinseman, and deare friend as are you, to that cruell Knight; and know, that my constancie shall serue for an example to ye world: for first shall my soule forsake my body, before I leaue to be his. Behold and sée vnto what estate af∣fection hath brought me: for in hope to sée him, it doth not grieue me to sée my father, in the behalfe of the Souldan of Niquea to goe against him. And I beseech you, valorous Prince, séeing you meane to serue in those famous wars, to remember, some day to tell him, that Eufronisa is in the Campe, not in shew of an enemy, but as a tributarie. Much did the crueltie of his kinseman grieue the Prince of Tina∣cria; wherefore to comfort this noble Ladie, he said, Be not dismaide (noble Lady) for I promise you on my faith, and as I am a Knight, that I will so bring it to passe, that in Gre∣cia, the prince Rosabel shall visit you, and acknowledge the fauor which in this countrie he hath receiued at your hands. I desire no greater ioy for my whole life time, answered the Ladie, but only to sée him, and that, that with some acknow∣ledgement he may vnderstād, how much I haue loued him; and herewith let vs go, for that Ladie staieth for vs, who is a witnesse of what I endure. Upon the dead Princesse horse, the Tinacrian set the Ladie, and himselfe mounted vpon his own; they returne
so pleasant and merry, that, but for the remembrance of the losse of her sonnes, nothing could yéeld her so great ioy; of loue was all their discourse, although this Youth had small skill therein: But fortune determined to prepare him with those shewes of loue, meaning shortly to subiect him there∣to; holding it for base, séeing he was not yet subdued. Some horsemen they met vpon the way, of her gard, which in a great troope came galloping, fearing that they had lost the Kings daughter. Here would the Prince haue taken his leaue, without comming to the Citie of Goltuerg, where the King made preparation for his departure; but at the in∣stant request of the Princesse and the discreet Silia, he could not refuse to goe with them, vpon condition, that by no meanes they should discouer who he was. Being ariued at the Citie, it nothing amazed him to sée it in armes, and the great number of Knights, which hourely ariued there, among which were many most fierce Gyants; neither the great abundance of warlike instruments, which were prepared in that Citie: for well hee knew in what rea∣dinesse his father would be. Eight dayes remained hee there, with the greatest entertainement in the world: for the king knowing in what maner he had rescued his daughter, knew not how to requite it him. At the end of which time, (with a determination to goe into Tinacria, and there to leuie the mighttest Armie, that possibly he should be able, in the behalfe of his father) hee tooke his leaue of that gal∣lant Ladie, with such a farewell, as made him sorrowfull. She likewise within foure dayes after, tooke her way to∣wards Grecia, with her fathers Armie, with so great a de∣sire to bee there, that she imagined that the heauens could yéeld her no greater content. The words of the Tinacrian did much hearten her, who in a well rigd Galley directed his course towards his Countrey, with his aforesaid deter∣mination. But the third day after his being at sea, the sea began to worke in such sort, that he lost his voyage, casting him by diuine prouidence, into a streight of the Mediterra∣nean
sea, where he wandred 3. daies, & the fourth tooke land in the most swéet and pleasant countrey that euer he had séene in his life. Hée leapt ashore, desirous to know in what countrey he was ariued, commanding the Marriners there to attend him; and with his Squire onely, he began to enter a most pleasant shadow of Poplar trées, where hee tooke pleasure in the fresh ayre thereof, séeming vnto him, that there, industrious nature had taken great care to excéed all humane arte. When hee had trauailed about a mile therein, busying his eyes in beholding the stately Poplars and lofty Cedars, at the end of this wood, in the midst of a fayre field, he beheld the stateliest Palace that could be imagined; ye height there∣of séemed to touch the clouds, with such varietie of stone, that it seemed a worke of the high heauens, or that it was the habitation of some rulers thereof. This fayre Castell was compassed with a brad ditch, crosse the which did run a mayne riuer; there were certaine bridges which led to the Castell; the principall hee wondred at: for notwithstanding that it had but one Ach, yet the workemanship was very curious, for all the battlements were of most pure white Alablaster. There entred the sonne of Garriofilea, beholding the sore front of the Castel, the richnes whereof he could not valew; it was shut with most strong gates, wherein were engrauen many Histories, with most rich checker-worke of golde. This Tinacrian dismounted from his horse, the better to behold the work; & giuing his horse to his Squire, with a very spéedy pace, hee marched towards the gates, where, of force I must leaue him; for there is so much else to be sayd, that there is no other remedie.
CHAP. V. Of that which happened to the Prince Claridiano, and to Florisiano of Apulia, in their returne from Lucania. IT behoueth mee, (most noble Prince) the better to giue delight in so long an History, to follow the rule of well consorted musicke, sometimes striking the sharpe and loude strings of Cupid, treating of his sundry ef∣fects, and of his power in a mynd subiect to a thousand passions; sometimes following the sound and churlish buzzing of angry Mars, to the end, in ye end to make a pleasing conclusion of all together: and where I finde a louer, to conclude his constancie, séeing how much many haue held, not dismaying at any their beloued Ladyes dis∣daine; but euen when they haue shewed themselues most froward, haue continued most kind and constant, purifying in the extremest of their tormēts, the forces of their hearts. And to him which will follow his libertie, and therewith furious Mars his drumme, it may appeare howe earnestly many haue followed it, and with how great content they haue past the gates of the hard Diamond, so as to giue con∣tent to all, it behoueth mee to treat sometimes of loue, and sometimes of Mars his furious and horrible blowes, and hauing left the sonne of Garrifilea, so pleasant & victorious, setting Eufrosina at libertie, it shall not bee amisse, to pro∣secute the loue of the Lord of Apulia, which to those which delight in a swéete Historie, is the most principall, who most faithfully loued & was least regarded, fortune shew∣ing in him her power, what she is able to doe when she wil. The Gréek much desired, that his affayres might attaine to a happy ende; for in his soule he much affected the prince Florisiano, who séemed to him one of the most discréet that ouer dealed therein: and passing the seas, they discoursed of a thousand things, and all of loue: the wind being fauou∣rable, they made a pleasing voyage; and being both enamo∣red, with discourses of loue, they passed the loathsome tyle
of the seas, vntill the tenth day, at what time the fayre Au∣rora began to shew her selfe in the East, foreshewing her brothers comming. On the shores-side of Italy they disco∣uered a very fayre Galley, which came with sayle & cares more swift then thought. The Gréeke betooke him to his weapons, to the end yt retchlesnesse should yéeld no ill successe; and so they stayed, vntill drawing néere, they heard them, bid them amayne, except they would all be dead. Hee did not therefore com∣maund to strike their mayne sayle, but onely to aye for them, and to sée who it was, that with such pride so threat∣ned them, and is lying by the see, they stayed, vntill they might sée aloft vpon the poope a deformed Gyant, and about some twelue Knights, and the two Galleyes aboording, they might within, heare the complayning voyce of certaine wronged women. The valiant Prince of Gréece was very suspicious, and any matter that might concerne women (to whome in for∣mer time hée had vowed his ayde) did much trouble him. Hee turned himself to the Prince of Apulia, saying, Neuer trust me, valorous Prince, but there are in this Galley, some Ladyes prisoners; for their lamenting doth manifest as much, and therefore I would not for any thing in ye world, being able to succour them, leaue them, for any hap, though neuer so dangerous Doe as you thinke good (valorous Knight) sayd the gentle Florisiano, for I, to lose my life  your seruice, shall but equite the generositie wherewith you haue offred yours to yeeld me contēt. I agree not here∣in (said the Gréeke loner) but yt you remaine aoord this gal∣ley, & suffer no man to enter: as for ye rest let me alone. And herewith hoysed all the sayles, & with sayles & dares made after yt enemy, which staied for thē, accounting them very ill aduised, hauing as it séemed within boord, but armed mā. And drawing neere, Trebacius his nephew lifting a little vp his beuer, with a loud voice said, I desire, sir knight, yt you should tell me whither you are bound: for if you sayle to∣wards Niquea we may the more safely make our voyage
together incompany from the danger on the seas, by reason of these alterations and warres which sound ouer all the world. The fierce Giant answered, saying, Our Galley, sir knight, goeth so safe from any ill successe that may hap∣pen vnto her, with those that are within bord, that wee haue no néed of cōpany, except you desire ours to make your voyage with such safetie as you desire; and therefore it suffi∣seth that your Galley may goe with ours. This is superfluous fauor (sayd the Gréeke) fading feare, and to the ende we may go the more at pleasure, I pray you take aboord you a Squire, who is in great feare, for that hée heareth that certaine Gréekes scoure this coast. Let it bée as you will (sayd the Gyant) and if he will, he shall sée, how little I esteeme those proud knights of whom he is so much afraid; and so commanded to strike sayle, and to lay his Galley so néere to the princes, that he might easily (lying néere together) leape aboord where the Gyant was, and did it with such dexteritie, that when they betooke them to their defence, he was already aboord, with his sword in his hand, saying, It is requisite, you traytors, that you leaue your praye and your liues, for payment for your presumption. Hee stayed for no answere, neither strained any curtsie; for before they could fit themselues, he had slaine two of thē. It was wonderfull to behold, how hee cast himselfe amidst the thickest of the throng, and it is not a thing to bee writ∣ten in so true an History as this which I prosecute, what this valiant youth performed. Lirgandeo saith, that at thrée blowes he smote downe sixe knights at the Gyants feet, who blaspheming heauen and earth, lifting vp his ter∣rible axe, came towards the louer, making the Knights to giue place. They neuer better performed their Masters commandement then now: for no lesse then their liues de∣pended thereon. The fierce Gyant gaue so vehement a blow, which made such noyse, that it séemed to thunder in the ayre. It séemed not to the louer of Arquisilora any wise∣dom to stay the lighting of so rude a blow: and so winding
himselfe on one side, séeing the blow come from aloft, he let it slip, which came as it were thundring in the ayre: he smote it an hand déepe in the hatches of the ship, which was a ve∣ry great good hap for the Gréeke: for by that meanes, being vnable to pull it out, so soone as hee would, he ioyned with him, and with both his hands gaue him a blow on the thicke helme. It little profited him that it was thrée fingers thick; for he smote the greater part thereof from his head, and left him sore wounded, and withall made him to reele, hee payde him the second time better then at the first: for hitting him right vpon the huge great armes, hee made him let goe his battaile-axe, which put him to such paine, that he had much to doe, to put his hād to his side, to draw a broad crooked fau∣chion, wherewith flourishing, he assayled the prince. There was no roome in the Galley to shun ye swift comming therof, neither was it possible to ward the terrible blow with his most strong shield, which (for the finenesse thereof) although that he could not cleaue, yet hee beat it to his helmet with so great force, that he made him set both his knées to ye ground. Neuer did Knight better beare himselfe in a particular fight, then this prince did: for oftentimes, with his agi∣litie and discretion hee knew how to make his benefite of his ill happes, against his enemy, as nowe, without loosing his warde, by reason of this great blow: for hée gaue him a great slash ouer the legs. This was it which assured him of the battaile, for hitting him a little beneath the gartering place, hée cut it almost halfe off, hée would not so giue ouer without giuing him one more, which was a very feare∣full stroke, which wholly bereaued him of his right foote: he made him goe backewards with lesse stedfastnesse then in battailes is required. The valorous Batchelour rose againe on his féete, at∣tending the fierce Pagan, who came vpon him, casting a thicke smoake out at his beuer, but wanting the assistance of his legge, hée was to strike him with his eyes; hee was constrained to set him on his knée, and in that maner to at∣tempt
the doutful victorie, it cannot be imagined how great contentment the Prince of Apulia receiued, in séeing the marueiles in armes, which that Knight performed, e∣stéeming himselfe happy to haue such a companion. By reason of the great noyse which was made in this battaile, out of a cabin of the Galley came one of the most fayre Ladyes that euer was séene, all clad in gréene Sa∣tin cut vpon most fine cloth of Gold, and her yellowish haires hanging loose about her shoulders, pouring streames of teares downe her fayre cheekes, which resembled the most rich Orientall Pearles, who seeing howe victori∣ously this Knight had borne himselfe, to giue him the greater courage, sayd, Let these cruell and accursed caitiffes dye, and assure your selfe, I will not leaue your trauaile vnrewarded. The Gréeke néeded no new fauours, for hée had alrea∣dy ranged the Gyant so well to his will, that hee would not giue him so much space as to drawe his breath, and desiring to make an end of the war, making amends with a mighty blow vpon ye Moore, he closing, came to handy gripes and cast him on his backe on the floore, bereauing him at the very instant of his life, in the despite of all those knights which would haue hindered it; with which hee returned a∣gaine into a deadly battaile, but it lasted not long; for hée lost all patience. The cruell Lyon is not more furious in the middest of the sheepe-flocke, nor a shée Beare that is robbed of her whelpes, then was hée among those which remayned; he ouerthrew three with mortall wounds, which gaue oc∣casion to the rest (who before with much hate did resist him) to throw away their swordes, and to fall downe and humbly entreat him to pardon them their liues. The noble minded Knight easily graunted it; for cho∣ler did neuer so much blinde him, as to make him tread that compassion vnder féete, which ought to bee held with those which yeeld.
By this time the faire Prince of Apulia was come a∣boord the Galley, who embracing the Grecian, saide, For∣tune will not now (most puissant Knight) shew herselfe so cruell vnto me, séeing it hath together giuen me satisfaction for so many troubles, bringing me in due time to ioy at the view of your worthie actes. It is sufficient glorie for mee (noble Prince) answered the Gréeke, to haue deserued so generous a commendation, as what I heare from your mouth, which hath giuen me oc∣casion to estéeme better of my selfe, then my valour hath deserued. The gallant Ladie ended their discourse, who like a cha∣sed Lionesse, taking notice of whom she had held for a cap∣tiue, who was also Lord of her soule, wherewith shee loued him, without giuing the Gréeke any thankes for the liber∣tie which hee had giuen her, clasping her armes about his necke, shée saide, I neuer thought, neither Iaroe, with such satisfaction, as this, to enioy thy presence, or that Fortune should haue ended my disgrace in this maner: but the heauēs haue so decréed, that she who is borne to be thine, shall be no mans else. Now I will not complaine of Iaroe, for I am perswa∣ded, hee would not haue so forgotten me, as the Prince of Apulia. With this, the gentle young man presently knew her to bee the faire Troyla, daughter to the King of Argel, where he had béene a captiue. The gallant Ladie had made this Prince so much be∣holding to her, for the many signes of good will which shée shewed him, being in prison, that at the instant bowing his knées to the ground, desiring to kisse her hands, he said, My troubles, noble Princesse of Argel, haue béen such, since the destinies ordayned my departure from thy presence, that I know not how they haue giuen mee leaue to liue, neither to thinke vpon Iaroe, but the Prince of Apulia, as he who at the last yéelded himselfe more beholding, acknowledgeth the much and many fauours, which he hath receyued at your
hands, offering you now anew, his life to be at your seruice, and speake I pray you, to this venturous Knight: for both ours to him is due, according to the much which hée hath performed. The Lady acknowledged the error where∣into shée was fallen; but séeing it was for loue, it was to be excused. Then began shée to discourse of this valorous Gréeke, and to enquire who he might bée, and what aduentures hée had past? And hearing what the prince of Apulia said of him, shée said, Pardon (most worthy Knight) my retchlesnesse, in that I haue not all this while giuen you thankes, for that which you haue done for my libertie, which onely may be estéemed a thing whereof there resteth for mée no hope to make any requitall, which the heauens reward you in your greatest necessitie. The great displeasure which I conceyued against this Knight, for departing out of my prison without my leaue, was the occasion of my ouer∣sight. For many errors, (worthy Lady) this onely were a sufficient excuse, if there had beene any such: how much more then, where there was none committed? Much time they spent in entertaining with these swéete discour∣ses. To entertaine in such maner (worthy Ladyes,) is no error, which I leaue to your discréete considerations, o∣mitting therewith the tediousnesse wherewith I should procéed. The long absence of the Prince of Apulia, had giuen no occasion to lose any part of the affection which shée bare vn∣to him when hee was present; her stedfast beholding him did manifest as much. All this did but encrease the Gréeke louers paine, to see himselfe so infortunate, and absent from his Lady, and with such disgrace banished, and not to returne into Grecia without licence, bearing the name of Claridiano. It did somewhat grieue the Prince of Apulia, to sée the discontentment of the knight of Crueltie: he was generally
so called of al men; for that was his deuice in his shield. The gentle conuersation of the Princesse, did much comfort him, whom these princes entreated to declare the cause of her im∣prisonment. I can tel you none, valorous Knights, but that being one day in a gardē, vpon the Stronds side, to recreate my selfe, in company of these foure Damsels, this accursed Gyant, by chance, with the furie of the winde, came to a∣riue at the gardens bancke side, he with those Knights en∣tred, and comming through the thickest, they ariued at cer∣taine fountaines, where we were solacing our selues. To small purpose serued the callings and outcries which wee made, calling for helpe, that they should not carrie vs away to their Galley. It was yesterday twelue dayes, he told me by the way, that he was of the squadron of Ocho, vassal to the Prince of Almayne, in whose seruice hee went to the warres against the Gréekes, in company of the Emperour of the Romanes, and to the same effect my Father is vpon parting with the king of Carthage, which are to ioyne with the Souldan of Niquea, whom (as they say) this warre doth principally concerne, for the theft, which a Prince of the Gréekes committed, in stealing one of his Daughters; they purpose to ruinate the whole Empire, according to the great numbers of men which they leuie. This is all that I can say, concerning my imprisonment. And séeing I shal not finde the King my Father at Argel, (for by this time hee is gone) I should be very glad, if you would take me with you: for being in company with such Knights, for the pre∣sent, nothing in the world could yeeld mee the like content. You shall doe vs (answered Florisiano) great fauour, to take vs with you, for Knights of your gard. Whereto the Gréek agréed, dissembling the griefe hee conceiued, to heare how great troopes of men were leuied to warre against his pa∣rents; hee determined with himselfe to take his way to∣wards Grecia, disguised with new armes secretly, without acquainting any man therewith, except the Knight of the Lions, who was the gentle Claramant. The Princes often
times discoursed concerning the successe of the Prince of A∣plia, and sware that it should be kept secret, without dis∣couering to any man who he was. With faire weather they sayled sixe dayes, and on the seuenth they discouered the land of Lucania, with such alteration of the Prince of A∣plia, that standing aloft to beholde it, the Ladie said vnto him, You shall do ill, to goe ashore in this land, which wee haue discouered, (valorous Prince) séeing that you wil land therein, with so sad and heauie countenance. Some things haue happened vnto me to my liking, answered the Prince; but the most ordinary and that which maketh me to absent my selfe from my Countrey and friends, is that which cari∣eth me after the currant of my hard happes. (Loue most noble Prince, is not so swéet to bee endured, nor so easie to be concealed, but that howsoeuer a man will goe about to dissemble the matter, hiding the griefe of his soule, yet hée will giue signes and certaine notice thereof.) The Prince of Gréece was of opinion▪ plainely to discouer it, for in his soule hee was grieued; for it was a matter to touch a man: for her beautie did deserue, that the Prince of Apulia should loue her: but he dissembled, offering himselfe to any danger that might yéeld content to Florisiano. They attributed it to the great generositie of his minde, desiring much, that oc∣casion might be offered to requite the same. They leapt to shore, and he of Aplia tooke the Armes of one of the Gy∣ants Knights, which best fitted him, and a mightie horse, which was the dead Gyants: other foure they tooke for the Ladies, which were with the Princesse. They gaue com∣mandement to the Mariners of the Galley, to attend them there: and licensing the Gyants galley to depart, they tooke the most direct and beaten way that they saw: all the La∣dies ware skarfes, which they cast ouer their faces, to goe the more vnknowne. There was neuer séene a fairer com∣pany: for the Ladies were all yong maides, and the others enamoured, so as there was no discourse of any thing be∣twéene thē, but of loue. From the one side to the other rode thse valiant warriours, managing their horses with so
great a grace, as Mars himselfe: the Ladie taking great pleasure therein, accounting it a pleasure, to trauell all the world ouer in company of such Knights, their valour assu∣ring her from al danger. By the same way that they went, they saw eight Knights comming towards them, very rich∣ly armed, to whom at their méeting, the Gréeke in their owne language said (for he could speake any in the world) We shall take it for fauour, Sir Knights, to know of you, what Countrey this is, and how farre it is to any Towne. Well pleased with his good spéeches and behauiour, The Countrey, Sir Knights, wherein you are, (answered one, who séemed to be Captaine of all the rest,) is the populous Lucania, very néere vnto the famous Citie of Troba; it would yéelde you great delight, to sée the maruellous state∣ly buildings thereof: but now all the Countrey is so trou∣bled with these warres, which are a beginning, that there is no pleasure or contentment, especially now, by reason of the importunacie of Asternio Prince of Calabria, who hath declared himselfe for a great louer & suiter vnto the Prin∣cesse Polinarda, although it is imagined, that she admitteth none of his seruices: But the King hath so effectually dealt in the matter, that she is promised vnto him for his wife, in stead of his brother, whom they put to death through her occasion. Greatly was the Prince of Apulia moued with the words of these knights, although he past it ouer, holding the matter as concerning himselfe, and holding such compa∣ny as the Gréeke Prince, who desirous to returne into Gre∣cia, to the aid of his parents, taking leaue of these Knights, thanking them for the newes which they had told them, he said, Ualorous Princes, the best & most certaine meane yt I know to deale in this busines, is, to remit it to the fortune of my valor, & so to bereaue this Prince (which procureth your spoiles) of the meane therto, here fréeing vs frō any successe that may happē, to send a messenger to ye King of Lucania, that I wil maintaine the beauty of this Lady, against any Knight that shal say the contrary, at al assaies, to be the fai∣rest that is in this kingdō: which shall giue occasion to this
Knight (if he loue and be valiant, as he is reported to be) to take it in ill part, that any should bee preferred before his Ladie, and comming to blowes with him, for nothing in the world will I giue ouer the battell: and if the heauens grant vs victorie (as I hope they will) it shall bee an easie matter for you to carie the Ladie away, shee bearing you such good will, as you say she doth, and being in your Countrey, you may defend her against all the world, or otherwise make your returne into Grecia, in company with this Ladie, wherein you shall do the king of Argel great seruice, deli∣uering her into his hands. They all agréed to this, which the Knight of Cruelty had deuised, and so in conclusion, they dispatcht a Damsell in company with Polisandro, to deli∣uer the message to the King, they remayning in a wood, ex∣pecting answere, which shal be declared in the next Chapter. CHAP. VI. How the Damsell deliuered the ambassade to the King of Lucania, in the behalfe of the Knight of Crueltie, who admitting the same, the matter came to triall. AS Polisandro and the Damsell (as saith Gal∣tenor) were departed from the Princes, with the Gréeke Princes message, and were come within two miles of the great Citie of Tro∣ba, at what time as the King was newly ri∣sen frō dinner, accompanied with many principal knights, among which was the most strong Astrenio, which was now respected of euery body as the Kings sonne: they de∣sired leaue to enter, which was granted, in the presence of many Ladies, & the faire Polinarda, with Solesia the Prin∣cesse of Campania, and her valorous louer Lisander. The Damsell doing such reuerence, as in such cases is accusto∣med, the King willing her to deliuer her ambassade, shee
began in this maner: Thou shalt vnderstand (mighty King of Lucania) that in the confines of the red Sea▪ in that part which boundeth vpon Media, there lyeth a most populous and rich Iland, called the Ile of plate, for the great abun∣dance, which the earth there bringeth forth: of which I∣land is Quéene, one of the most accomplished Ladies of the world, called Troyla, with whom the mightie Prince of Cumagena, (trauelling through the world to seeke his aduentures, seeing her rare beautie) fell in loue, and that with such feruencie, that according to the shew which hee hath made thereof, nothing but death onely may suffice to di∣uert him from his amorous conceit: hee hath perfourmed (most Soueraigne King) so many and so great matters in the seruice of this Ladie, that of very dutie, (and conside∣ring with her selfe, that it was no disgrace to her to accept him for her Knight) thee resolued to admit his seruice, and him for her seruant. With the fauours which she bestowed on him, he beganne againe anew to make triumphs for ioy, in such maner, that she consented and promised to be wholy his: She (valorous King) standeth so assured on her selfe and her beautie, that she requested him, in requitall of the faith which she vowed vnto him, to carie her to the Courts of the most famous Kings, for the space of two yéeres, to maintaine her beautie. A small request seemed vnto her lo∣uer, that which she required, and to all others that knew him, seeing by experience the great valour which the hea∣uens had infused into him. And now they goe, accomplish∣ing the two yeeres quest, performing such aduentures ther∣in, with so much honour to them both, that hee is held for one of the most valorous Knights of the world, and hearing the fame of this Court & of the gallantrie of the Ladies of the same, he would not passe by into Grecia, before he had here made proofe of what power his aduenture might bee, he yéeldeth to the battell at all perils: for some hauing pro∣céeded to the Iusts onely, haue remained throughly grie∣ued, bringing the battell to no perfection; wherefore he hate
sent to entreat thée, (if it shall so please thée) to send him safe conduct, to the ende he may maintaine the cause for which he commeth. Here ended the Damsell her Oration, lea∣uing not one in all the hall, which did not wonder at her bold demaund. Some rumour beganne among the young Knights, making a scoffe thereof, auouching that the Ladies whom they serued, had attained to the highest of all beautie. Wel did the King vnderstand it, and dissembling the same, answered the Damsell, (which comming in the name of an Ambassadour, was to be honourably entertained) I doe thankefully accept (faire Damsell) of the pleasure, which this Knight with his presence will doe vnto this court, al∣though (as I am perswaded) he shall here purchase more e∣nemies then friends: for here being Princes, which delight in Ladies seruice, they will neuer yeeld to so generall an of∣fence, as is this. The most strong Astermo could not dis∣semble his discontentment, déeming, that therein was great disgrace done to his Polinarda, who said thus, I doe rather wih (faire Damsell) that this Knight had first séene the Ladies of this Palace, that he might haue perceiued the errour which he maintaineth, before he had with such ouer∣boldnesse, defyed their gallants. I am of opinion, Sir Knight, (answered the disreet Damsell) that you haue not yet made proofe of the power of loue, seeing that you know not, that hee which admireth the beautie of his beloued, speaketh according to his affection: I am of opinion, that both of the one and the other, the Prince will put you out of doubt, if it shall please the King to giue him leaue thereto. I graunt it, quoth the King, if he will; to the end wee may see the effect of your hopes. The Lady would haue kist the Kings hand for the sauour which he granted, & returning, she said, As these Princes (mightie King) haue trauelled a long iourney, so come they vnfurnished of prouision ne∣cessary; wherefore they pray thee to commaund a Tent to be lent thē, seeing that the challenger is to make his abode therein. Whatsoeuer shall please him (answered the King) I will cōmand to be carefully prouided. In this maner (said
the Ladie with a high voice) begin you that are enamoured, to set vp your armes; for betwéene this and to morrow, wil come to the Lists, the Prince of Comagena, with costly ex∣perience to make shew of his great valour. And so taking her leaue of all, Polisander and shée mounted on horsebacke, and with a swift pace they returned to the wood, where they had left the Princes, to whome (for by little and little they drew néere to the Citie) shée deliuered the message which she brought. Much did Claridiano reioyce, to vnderstand how well the Damsell had dispatched her businesse. It might bee about two of the clocke in the afternoone, when these valo∣rous Princes came into the great Market place of the Citie of Troba, leading betweene them the venturous Troia, so well pleased to see the good which shée hoped for, that shée was as it were, ouerioyed. There were none but did verie attentiuely behold the Princes, the Ladie séeming to them no lesse faire, then the Knights to be of a good constitution, particularly he in the yellew, whome by his deuice in his Shield they held to be the challenger, and whome they dée∣med to bee the most gentle Knight that was in that place. They ware their visors perced, and bare their Launces in their hands. All the place by this time was full of people, by reason of the report of their comming; and so they ap∣proached to the beholders, where the King and all his daughters were, the one doing that reuerence to the others, as their estates did require. The Gréeke a little lifting vp his Beuer, said, Ualo∣rous King of Lucania, notwithstanding that my comming to thy Court hath béene to doe thée pleasure, yet my chal∣lenge I addresse to those, which professe themselues not to be their owne. Your comming (Sir Knight) is much estée∣med (aunswered the King,) and so at your pleasure you may begin to maintaine the beautie of this Ladie. When they all intreated to come vp to the beholders, in compa∣nie of Polinarda, the two Princes desired no other thing,
accordingly as they had agréed: and so alighting into the armes of him in the yellow, they led her vp to the place, wher Polinarda was, who was very doubtfull that Aster∣mo should not lose that, which the other held for certaine. All the courtly Ladyes iudged the fayre Troyla, to be ve∣ry beautifull, Polinarda saying vnto her, I now say, gallant Lady, that I maruaile not, though your Knight beare the prize in all hard aduentures, iustice beeing apparant on his side; wherefore all good successe is due vnto him. This (noble Lady) answered Troila, will be through the reflection frō your beautie, mine being very little. O prince of Apulia, who could helpe thee in the perplexitie wherein thou wat? It was so much (most noble Prince) as who so had noted him, might well haue perceiued it. They spent not long time in discourses: for the Gréeke yet saw not the end of his businesse, pricked forward with the necessitie wherein his parents were, and so doing a short reuerence to the Ladyes▪ giuing his hand to the carefull lo∣uer, they came downe the aes, and mounting on their horses, they rode to a most fayre tent, which was in the middest of the place I would not, valorous prince, (said the prince of Apulia) that any euill successe should happen vnto Lisander my friend, and brother to my Soueraigne La∣dy. There shall not (sayd the Greeke) for I will so handle the matter in the battaile, that he shall lose nothing, but that he shall not ouercome. By this time many were come into the place, who with their Armes would yeld testimony of what they felt in their soules. The first that tried their fortunes, were two of the Kings nephewes, yong knights, and both much enamored, but losing their saddles, there rested no more action for battaile; for at two encounters hee put them & all the whole company out of doubt, that he wanne the flower of cheual∣rie. Right before him past the prince of Campania, who was but newly come to the Court, so enamored, that hée made account (trusting therein, to beare ye palme from the
battaile; his Armes were of the colour of the Lyon, wrought ouer with gold; and in his shield, a skie, wherein was a La∣dy: and beneath, Faith painted, only with this Inscription. That in heauen which is reserued, Will try the due by loue reserued Heere below on earth. His good gesture gaue contentment to all. The sea bea∣ting against ye rocks, doth not make o great noyse, as these two did at their encounter. The Prince of Campania ell not, although in déed he made an ill fauoured bending back∣wards in his saddle: he returned towards the Greeke with his sword in his hand; but the battaile was vnequall, for he seconded not his blow: and the valiant Greke, with his sword & shield making amends, first ioyned with him, and with both his hands smote vpon the top o his shield; there was no defence, but hee cast the one halfe thereof to the ground, the sword fighting on his helmet with such rce, that it set him sencelesse on the arson of the saddle. The Gréeke was very desirous to end the battaile, and so spur∣ring his furious horse, he ran against him with his brest, which cast them both to ground: and the prince was so cra∣zed with the fall, that he could not get from his horse. The Ladyes were much grieued that the prince of Cam∣pania should be ouercome; and most of all his sister the gen∣tle Solersia, whose brauerie had encouraged the prince Li∣sander to come into the Lists, so well armed & disposed, that the common people through affection, openly gaue him the victorie. He came armed in a reddish armour, wrought all ouer with knots of gold, and in the midst of his shield, Con∣tentmēt, described after the maner as they depaint the Ara∣bia Foelix, set vpon a Globe ruling the world, encompassed with this Mott, Where hope is well assured, And ioyn'd with stedfast constancie, Fortunes mutabilitie Is nothing to be feared.
Great pleasure did his mistresse receiue in his deuice, hol∣ding it done for her sake, The prince of Apulia had giuen notice, that that was his deare friend: wherefore the Gréek with a soft pace went to him and said: Ualorous prince of Lucania, there resteth so little time to end so many battels as yet remaine, that I thought good to demand battaile of you vpon condition, that whether of vs that within two houres shall loose his Saddle, through a stroke of his aduersarie, shall remaine for ouercome. Be it, Sir Knight, (answered the prince) as you shall thinke good, presuming to haue the better of the battaile. They managed their horses with so good a grace, that Mars himselfe from his high throne tooke pleasure to behold it. At what time as they should encounter, in sight of the whole troupe, the valorous Gréeke bare vp his lance. There were few in that land, that could so well behaue themselues, and so gallantly, as he which was before him, who smote him with such force, that it made him bend his body farther backwards then he would: he past forwardes, much estée∣ming of that Knight for his valour, and hurled his lance with greater force, then if a man had discharged a culue∣rine, striking the one halfe thereof into the hard ground, lea∣uing the rest shaking in the fresh winde, which did so much amaze all those that were present, as the ouercomming of the prince of Campania: with a soft pace hée came to the Knight. There was no body there, but did note the honour which the Gréeke did vnto him; he was very neere vnto the prince, whē he put his hand vnto his sword, more to defend himself thē to offend ye other, as he made it to be plainely séene: for the Prince of Lucania assailing him with his whole force, smote him so great a blow vpon ye top of ye helmet, yt it made him bēd downe his head so low as his brest; he came againe with another, which the Gréeke tooke so ill, that had not Flo∣risiano bene present, he had forgottē his generous determi∣nation. With all this, not with the valour yt he could, but to
put him frō him, he smote him euery where where he could. This is (gallant noble Ladyes,) no ill will, said the sayre Troyla, that my Knight hath shewed to his enemy, seeing how carelesly he procéedeth in a matter that so much cōcer∣neth him; but I beléeue that ye iustice of his cause detaineth him which he seeth in ye behalfe of his aduersary. They could not answere her, for the great noise which was in the place: which was for that that ye Greeke imagining that the time was now expired, had closed with ye prince, clasping his body within his brawny armes, he did not plucke him so soone frō his horse, as he would; for that that the valiancy of ye louer, séeing what he had lost, did animaie him so, as he did some∣what detaine him; but it was but for a small time: for with a strong pluck he dismounted him, desiring him yt he would not be ouercome, but that he might hold him for his friend. I desire no more, answered the prince, then mine eyes haue séene, that by so many wayes you haue won the palme of the battaile: but séeing the heauens wil haue it so, all is yours, & so wil I be as long as I liue. Many thanks did the Gréeke giue him for his offer, & so he mounted on horsebacke, the va∣lour of the knight of Crueltie being admired. There was none in that place, (notwithstāding yt it was against their prince) but did extell with high praises ye knight in ye yellow. The cōming of the most valiant Asternio, stayed their pro∣céedings, whom shew more mightie thē Mars himself came moūted vpō a most urious flea-bittē coloured horse, al his furnitures being of rich greene cloth of gold, sowē ouer with hearts, which made a very faire shew; for the defence of his horse, vnder this furniture, there was excellent fine mayle: in his crest hee wae a most faire plume, all spangled with gold, his armor was of ye colour of his furniture, sauing that in the midst of his shield, in a field azure, he bare a Lady so fayre and well made, as it gaue delight to al the beholders: before her was a Knight knéeling, shewing her a burning heart enflamed with a strange fire, & in ye border this Mot. Well may this Sacrifice Giue hope assurance Of great confidence.
Much did the fayre Laydes extoll the deuice of this gal∣lant louer: But to the fayre Polinarda, who remembred her Florisiano, all this was a death; for shée had yéelded her self to loue, & who loueth faithfully is not forgetull; but ab∣sence rather reuiueth the memorie of those which loue per∣fectly, preseruing the touch of their faith. The gentle disposition of this Moore did well please the Greeke: but séeing that without his death hee could not accomplish his promise made to the prince of Apulia, without further pausing on the matter, he turned about, and went to the place where the lances were, where, with his owne hands he made choise of one of the greatest and most stiffe and tough among them. I am of opinion (sayd the fayre Troila, séeing what hee did) that the affection is not alike, which my Knight shewed to the prince of Lucania, to that which hee beareth to him which is now before him. The occasion should not be smal (sayd the fayre Solersia) who in her soule was grieued that Asternio should by so many meanes procure Polinarda to be his wife. Let vs see (quoth shée) what will become of this enmitie; I am perswaded this battaile will bee worth the seeing. Now were these 2. famous warrious, confronting ye one the other, when the Gréeke with a soft pace came towards him, saying, You already know (Sir Knight,) the conditi∣ons of my demaund, which are, that you tel me your name, and the name of the Lady whom you serue; for to be assured that her beautie doth excell hers which is Lady of my life, without any battayle I will yéeld the prize. I would not that wee should haue made so long delay (sayd the furious yong man) to make so long a discourse: for I am perswaded to resolue you sooner with the battaile, then to shew you in fight the Lady whom I serue: Yet vn∣derstand, that I am called Asternio, prince of Calabria, and the Lady whom the heauens haue ordeined for my Soue∣raigne, is the kings daughter of this land. To haue a good
foundation (said the valorous Gréeke) for you, to haue pre∣sumed to lift your affection to so high degrée, it were without question no great matter to giue you the palme of this bat∣taile, and so I will haue it, not in regard of the beauty which the heauens haue adorned the Lady withall, but to let you know how presumptuous you haue beene, to make shew to loue her. These discourteous spéeches (said the warlike Moore) deserue the fury of the braue Asternio, being as red in the face as a burning coale, without regard of what to a knight did appertaine, séeing him so neere vnto him, stung with that which he had sayd, with more force then discretion, hee hurled his well pointed lance; onely the excellence of Cla∣ridiano his shield saued his life: for beeing vnable to pierce it, the lance flew backe againe whole, but not in such sort, but that it was likely to haue made the Gréeke to haue lost his Saddle; for it made him strike his head vpon his horse buttocks, which stood him in no lesse stead, then the earth did Anteus; for redoubling his courage, hee setled himselfe with such wrath, that nothing could be more cruell; there was neuer séene so angry countenance in any Knights, it made aboue foure of the most valiant to lose all the colour in their faces, to sée their furious encounters, a good palme, he raised himselfe vpon his stirrops, & whorling his lance a∣bout his head, with greater agilitie then Mars himselfe, hée hurled it at the Pagan, who was about to draw his sword. The thunder maketh not so great noyse in renting the clouds, as the Gréeke made, hitting in the middest of the Pagans shield. It preuailed not, that it had more folds of well tempered stéele in it, then Aiax his shield had, to resist the force of this louer; for it passed thorow, and smote on his brest-plate, but found no defence therein, (for as the shield was broken, and his fortune prolonging his life to a worse ende) the head of the lance turned aside vnder his arme, so as it came forth at his shoulders, an armes length and more.
The Moore fell not, for he had his legges fastened to his horse, but he made him so much forget himselfe, that all the company held him for dead. O mighty Iupiter (quoth the King) of what strength is this Knight! without all doubt it is not matchable in the world; for hée hath at one blowe ouerthrowen one, whome we held for one of the most valiant in the world. Few of the Ladyes were sorry for the Moores disgrace; for Mars his fury did more raigne in him, then any amorous re∣gard: hée at the first dash pretended to purchase Poli∣narda, which with great ioy sayd: Now, I say, fayre Lady, that your businesse is in bet∣ter assurance then was imagined, not through want of the beauty wherewith the high heauens haue enriched you, but for the great accompt which was held of this Knight. I rather attribute it to the loue (answered the Ladie) which my Knight beareth vnto mée, then for that where∣in (wholly to binde mée) you would attribute to my beautie; and truely I am sorry for this Knight, onely, for that hee resembled one whom in my Countrey I knew; (an example for those which are louers to ad∣mire:) for mée thought, as it appeared by him, that if loue it selfe should bée enamoured, it should not pos∣sibly atteyne to that degrée which his faith held, which was the most rare that euer was séene: for I neuer sawe heart so tryed with the crosses of Fortune, which so persi∣sted as his did, onely for that hee would not lose a iote of his louely affection. I would fayne know (sayd the fayre Solersia) what hée might bée, if it may bée spoken, to the ende that ha∣uing those partes which you report, wée may estéeme of him accordingly, and as is reason: for here hath béene to the cost of many, another affection without comparison, and tryed with the rarest experience that can be imagined. He whom I saw in my Countrey (answered the dis∣creete Troyla) was called Florisiano, who for his faith,
in my conceite, deserued any good hope: (shée had scarce∣ly mande an ende of naming him, when the two La∣dyes imagined, that it was hée whom they loued, and whose absence they so much sorowed, especially the gen∣tle Polinarda, who béeing much troubled, gaue occasion to Troyla to say: It séemeth to mée (worthy Ladyes,) that this is not the Knight whome I know, yet neuerthelesse, I perceiue that his name is not a little estéemed in this Countrey, séeing that the remembrance thereof is so acceptable. It is true, answered the fayre▪ Solersia, that in time past there was a Knight in this Citie, as rich in constancie, as poore in fortune, whose absence hath béene no small griefe to the chiefest in this king∣dome. The discreete Moore Ladie, séeing the way so plainely open for that which shée pretended, drue out of them all that she would. There is nothing more easie (most noble prince) then to discouer the passion of the soule, when it is grieued; for by a sigh, or by asking one name, two or thrée times, it maketh shew of a life in loue. The kings daughter of Lu∣cania plainely confessed all. And as the two Ladyes discoursed of the Prince of A∣pulia, at an instant the discréete Troyla set before her fayre eyes the plot of all the businesse, declaring vnto her with such perswasion, that hee which had beene her captiue, was Prince of Apulia, vntill at last, séeing all was in safetie, shee playnely told her, that his com∣panion, who fought these battailes, was the same Florisi∣ano, and that if shee so much loued him, she should dispose of herselfe to depart with him. The fayre Solersia did so well discharge the part of the Prince of Apulia, that Polinarda vsed these speeches: It séemeth to mée, worthy Dames, that the fates haue disposed of this businesse, according to the desire of the Lady Princesse of Campania; and séeing it is so, al that which the
heauens and shée will, shall be accomplished in this maner (sayd the fayre Troyla) with greater passion, then at the beginning we may behold the battaile, whose successe is worthy of another Chapter. CHAP. VII. Of the ende of the cruell battaile betweene the Greeke Prince, and the braue Asternio, and of that which more succeeded. THe power which blinde passion beareth in an amorous brest (most noble Prince) is plainely set forth vnto vs in the rigo∣rous behauiour of Asternio, for wrath did so predominate in him, that it made him to tread the Lawes of Armes and Knight-hood vnder foote, and therewith rason: for, for not to deferre (for a small space, his reuenge, he committed a thing neuer vsed, for which he was iustly re∣quited: for the Gréeke drew new forces from his ill beha∣uiour, to put him in the case which we left him, with opi∣nion of all, that hée was dead: for although that the blow past smoothly by, renting his armour onely, yet to sée the head out at the other side and his shield pierced, euery man accounted him dead; for so hée séemed to be. The furious Claridiano drew néere. Gualtenor re∣porteth, that hée neuer fought battell with so great malice as hee did this, (as hée plainely gaue notice) for with all the might that hee was able, hée smote him on the top of the helmet, and hit him on the bare, because that the Pa∣gan could not lift vp his arme with his shield, there was no defence against the Gréekes force: for he hurled all his fea∣thers to the ground, & part of ye crowne of his head: with the payne of the blow ye valorous Moore came again to himself,
and breaking his launce, as if it had béene a réed, he threw the trunchion a great way off from him, setting hand to his sword, and was so angrie, and ashamed to be séene in such e∣state, that before the Gréeke could make benefite of his agi∣litie, he had reacht him two sound blowes, the one after the other, with eyther of which, hee had ended the ware, had not his armour béen good▪ he made him bow downe his head to the pommel of his saddle, casting blood out at his mouth. The Gréeke (out of his fathers battell) neuer met with a more couragious aduersarie, and therefore it was a thing worth the sight, to sée him fight, hastening such mightie blowes and so thicke, as made the Moore stand in doubt of his safetie, and made him with his eyes to sée his errour, no lesse to his cost, then the losse of his life and honour: but for all this, he left not sometimes to giue such blowes, that the people should not account the battell for calme or ended. Foure houres were past since they beganne: and as at the first, they whéeled about, drawing forces out of great blowes, the Gréeke gaue the Pagan such a blow on the shield, that he cut the one halfe cleane away, so tormenting his arme, that hee could not lift vp the little which remai∣ned: and so he flung it to the ground, pursuing the Gréeks more fiercely, then the hungrie Lyon doth the fearefull shéepe-flocke, he reacht him vpon the toppe of the rich hel∣met, a blow with such furie, that although that he cut it not, by reason of the good temper thereof, yet for all that, it made him to sée the twinckling starres of the skies, within the helmet, making him for a space to forget himselfe, and ta∣king benefite of the time, he gaue him such a stabbe in his louing brest, that it much grieued him; they were come so close and so néere together, that béeing vnable to strike, and seeing him so néere, he claspt him in his strong armes: The Pagan refused not to wrestle, neither would he, if hee had béen Anteus. There was neuer battell so fought; for they were so lockt together, that they stood more firmely fixed in the ground, then the roots of a great and wel growne Oke.
All men wondred at this rigorous combat, thinking with themselues, that there neuer was the like séene in the world: and so was the King saying to the Prince his sonne, that hee was much beholding to the Knight of Cruelty, sée∣ing how he had dealt with him, and the like to the Prince of Campania, who maruelling much thereat, said, I doe certainely beléeue, that this battell will be perpetually me∣morable, and much it would grieue me, that eyther of them should die, séeing how great losse their death would bring to the world. The sorrow would bee generall, (saide the gentle Lisander of Lucania) who was of opinion, that hee in the yellow would obtaine the victorie. They turned to behold the battell, which at that instant was maintained with much obstinacie, but in the end they were of flesh, and fell to the ground, they gaue ouer their hold, betaking them∣selues to their armes, where with they afresh renewed the battell, which was worth the séeing, although with some aduantage to the Gréeke; for as he was more nymble, hee charged and retyred with agilitie both of body and minde. The Pagan would haue relied himselfe, who, as hee was heauily armed, and corpulent of body, and the battell had lasted so long, he was out of breath, & said thus, If it please you, Sir Knight, let vs rest vs a little; for there remaineth time inough to ende the battell. I will take none (answe∣red the cruell yong man) neither shall there be any thing to giue it me, but to sée thy head in my hands, for the ill ma∣ners, which thou didst vse towards me. There is no veni∣mous Uiper, but was to be accounted méeke and gentle, in respect of the Moore, who being perswaded that his spéeches had encouraged ye enemie, assailed him as fiercely as a Ty∣ger, & said, Stay, and thou shalt sée to thy cost, what the assurance of that good which I requested, might haue done thée. It had so stung him in minde, to sée himselfe lightly regarded, that with greater force then at the beginning, he againe assailed the Gréeke, giuing him with both his hands  great a blow, on the toppe of his Crest, that it made him
to set both his hands to the ground. He hasted to him with another, wherewith hee had wholy ouerthrowne him, but that he holpe himselfe with his knées, which were so strong∣ly fastened in the earth, that hee could not stretch him∣selfe out at length, to giue further place to the Pagans furie. Without all doubt, the Gréeke had béene in great dan∣ger, and the batell to him would haue beene much more costly, but that rigorous furie béeing past, at an instant appeared the aduantage on his side, which was in the yel∣low. There is no doubt to be made of yt pleasure, which ye gentle Sir Florisiano of Apulia, would haue receiued therin, séeing how wel the Prince had perfourmed his promise: if he had there with knowne, how well the faire Troyla had negotia∣ted for him, no man would haue béene more glad then hee: there was no reason, but hee which had loued, and did so effectually loue, as he did, but he should be so, and so hee set himselfe, to see the end of the warre, which lasted not long: for the Gréeke being exremely angry for the blowes which hee had receiued, arose more fierce then a Basiliske, often giuing him such cruell blowes, as put him cleane out of breath, making him sometimes to set his hands, and some∣times his knées to the ground; which did much moue him, séeing before his eyes, the death, wherewith the cruell Knight had threatned him, who being desirous to end the warre, defending himselfe with his shield, closed with him, and gaue him such an encounter, that it made him giue backwards; making shew of falling, hee holpe him there∣to, with a strong stabbe, which was the last that hee recei∣ued: for hee had not throughly vpon the ground spread his broad shoulders, when through his visor he cut from him all hope of enioying Polinarda, ending his life and his loue, both at an instant, with so much contentment to the louers, that it shall bee fitter to bee left to consideration, then any thing cōcerning the matter, here to be set down in
writing. The Gréeke entred into his tent to repose him, embracing the Prince of Apulia, who knew not what to do for ioy. By this time the faire Titan had ended his iour∣ney, and the Ladie Lucina was to begin hers, when the friendes of the dead Prince caried him from the place, gi∣uing, according as to him did appertaine, honourable buri∣all. The Prince of Apulia went to the faire Troyla, who with some shewe (although fayned) of sorrow for the dead man, said▪ From this time forward, I will take the word from my Knight, if he please, because he shall leaue so cru∣ell a deuice, as that which he beareth for my sake. It was a∣gréed betwéene them, that on that side of the Ladies garden which Florisiano knew, they should come, where she would warrant his life, and receiue him for her husband. The young man went downe so troubled, to sée himselfe in her presence, and not to lead her by the hand, which loued him as her selfe, as it were impossible, but that his alteration would be noted. To auoid tediousnes, I do not set downe how he felt himselfe, when he knew what the Ladie deter∣mined. Happie loue (said the Prince) séeing such hands haue dealth therein, bringing it to that ende which the louer deserueth, and happie Florisiano, which shal enioy the same. The contentment which I receyue with my mistresse fa∣uour, (noble Princesse) is no greater, then that, which to sée the effect of yours, doth yéeld me, and how carefully you haue procured it: it is a fauour which I haue receiued, which cannot yet bee requited, for that bringeth the payment therewith, séeing you haue accomplished it with your va∣lour and my necessitie. Those few houres which they past, seemed a thousand, to goe to the place appointed, where, hauing taken order for all that was to be caried, the Ladie leauing a letter for her father, contayning a thousand amorous excuses, reci∣ting to him all the whole course of their loue past, she stay∣ed in company of the faire Solersia, who would not part without speaking to the valiant Florisiano.
Without the inclosure remained the faire Troyla and the rest of the Ladies, with Palisander, and the two Prin∣ces, he of Apulia helping the Gréeke, who in a moment gat vp to the top of the wall, and giuing his hand to Florisiano, they leapt into the garden, where ye louers could not speake the one to the other (a common thing in the law of loue.) But the pleasant Solersia, imbracing the Prince of Apulia, said, I would not valiant Prince, that that Ladie had told vs the discouerie of Iaroe, for it had beene to put vs in new griefe, to loue you, not as the Carthagonian, but as the Lord of Apulia. I was assured, worthie Princesse, (an∣swered the Prince) that shée who then did me fauour, would now worthily accomplish it with that generositie where∣with you are endued. Your sight and new acquaintance (quoth shée) is for so small a time, that I cannot suffer this Ladie to enioy the same, to whome your absence hath béene so grieuous, that shée could hardly bee comforted: But see∣ing that the heauens will that you come together, there is nothing to bee done but to giue thankes therefore; and wee are all glad thereof. Those true louers imbraced each other with so much ioy as cannot bee imagined; it sufficeth to beléeue, that it was the greatest in the world, being purchased with so much troubles, which doe season the good when it commeth to bee enioyed. About an houre they stoode talking, giuing many thankes to the Greeke for that which hee had done for them, admiring his beautie and few yeeres. Much it grieued the Ladies to depart; but séeing that it was requi∣site, giuing in charge to Solersia, to procure her Fathers good will, and excuse the Prince of Apulia, with his beloued Lisander, giuing strickt imbracemēts they tooke their leaue, the Ladie returned to her lodging without being perceiued. The Princes in their armes receiued the Kings daughter, which went away very feareful of her Fathers displeasure; it was good hap that shée lost not her sences for sorrow; but Lisander and his beloued Solersia tooke so good order, that
they did not onely satisfie him, but also procured him to par∣don them, séeing shee was so well maried, as with the Prince of Apulia, who, with his beloued Polinarda, with the rest of the Princes, tooke the way towardes Apulia, with determination to leuie the greatest forces, that hee should be able, and goe to the succour of Grecia, for the much that he was bounden vnto the Prince thereof. And so in a short space, he armed twentie thousand Knights, en∣treating the Prince Claridiano, to goe into Gréece with him: who yéelded thereto, but vpon condition, that he should neuer speake to any man of him; for no lesse then his life depended thereon. And so they tooke their course towards the great port of Grecia, where they arriued in happie time, not without many great suddaine passions of the Gréeke louer, to know himselfe so néere to her whome he carried in his soule; they tooke land, the Emperour receiuing them with such graui∣tie as appertained. But the Gréeke louer would neuer disco∣uer his name, neither would hee see her which was Ladie of his life; and therefore tooke his leaue of the Ladies, promi∣sing the Emperour, that he would not depart out of Grecia before the warres were ended, which was then euen at their doores, the enemies comming being most certaine; with his Squire Palisander alone, accompanied with a thousand pas∣sions of loue, hee tooke his way into a wood, which was cal∣led, The wood of Willowes, purposing to change his armes, and so vnknowne to giue aide to his Grand-father. Hee greatly reioyced, to sée the great good preparation in a readi∣nesse, being of opinion, that with so great armies and so well armed, the land might be defended against all the rest of the world. Foure daies he wandred in that wood, with∣out any aduenture worthie of memorie, vntill the fifth in the euening he heard a great noyse, as though it had béene of Knights fighting, he mended his pace, making towards the place where he heard the noyse: but he had ridden but a little way, when an old man leaning vpon a great Rush,
tooke his horse by the Reines, saying, Hold thée, Prince of Greece, for it behoueth thée not in any case to goe any fur∣ther forwards; for to goe, to say the truth, it is to goe to the house of death. What art thou, honourable auncient old man (answe∣red the Prince, beeing much abashed therewith) which knowing me, hast bound me vnto thee, for the aduertising of me of the danger wherein I went? He, valorous Prince, which many yéeres hath procured your good, as hee which most dearely loueth you; and therefore alight; for without my helpe, you shall not come to the battell, whereof you haue heard so much, neither shall you serue in the warres in the field, without being knowne to your parents, and friends, which will bee little for your ease, and somewhat hard for you to endure. The valorous young man with a skip was on foote, verie desirous to know who this olde man was, which knew so much of his life. Hee had hardly set his féete to the ground, when the olde man with his armes dis∣played, in his owne likenesse of Gualtenor, came to im∣brace him, saying, Doe not thinke, my beloued sonne, that I take so little care for your contentment, but that I procure it more effectually, then if it were for my selfe; and séeing I perceiue your desire to returne into Gre∣cia, and the disgrace wherein you are with your Mis∣tresse, and the néede that there is of your helpe, I haue enforced my selfe to come to yéeld remedie to all, aduer∣tising you first (to the end that you may with content∣ment endure this long warre) that if you loue, you are be∣loued in good earnest, and with the soule; but the high heauens haue so ordained, that you shall not liue assured from this, vntill that these warlike hands haue shed the bloud of that person whome you best loue in the world, your sorrowes being then grown to the highest, which you shall not be able to passe, and then will come the ioy which you desire, which your destinies haue prepared for you, the
most acceptable in the world: and because you shall goe vn∣knowne, I haue brought you here certaine armours, which I began to forge long before you were borne, and onely a∣gainst this warre; they are such, as no other Master is wor∣thie thereof, but the Prince of the two Empires; there are onely three which equall them in value, for that that the temper of them all was giuen vnder one planet; with these and this Iewell you may goe in safetie; for you shall bee knowne by no man (except such as you will.) At an instant the Armes were present, and were such as the old man had reported, all set with Pearles and blacke Checker-worke and some spots of Russet. The prince had neuer seene a fai∣rer thing, neither did the world containe any; for it séemed to excéede all humane workmanship. The young man put them on, remaining the same that he was before, and so wel disposed, that Gualtenor could not forbeare to say, O luc∣kie Planet, vnder which so gracious a Knight was begot∣ten, and happie Armours, seeing that it may well bee said, that within them is incompassed the flower of cheualrie. He gaue him a rich Iewell, which was of most fine Rubies, of no lesse worth, then faire in shew. In putting it about his necke, he séemed to bee of greater age, and his colour was not so white, his haire curled, and turned vp in his fore∣head, Lirgandeo saith, that hee resembled the god Mars, when by force of armes vpon the earth hee wonne Venus. Hee gaue him a shield of the colour of his Armour: and in middest of the field he set Crueltie, as hee bore it before, al∣though with a different writing, for on the side appeared manie Ladies which tooke compassion of him, and vnder this Mot. If to be grieued for your loue, Were a meane to ease your paine, Who would deferre the same, If he knew what t'were to loue. In the whole campe, for this deuice hée was called, The Knight with the Ladyes, and he was rightly called so: for
the most of them did affect him. With these (valorous prince, and my sonne) you are to defend your Countrey, which according to the perillous combates wherein you shal be, they are those which shall assure my weary old age, and your good successe: that which I request, is, that you procéed not in the warre in such sort, that your doings be correspōdent with your deuice; for there is nothing that doth so much dishonour a man▪ as crueltie. I can stay no longer, for the much that I haue to doe else∣where; but you may goe in safetie: for if you be in neede, I will come to your ayd, as he which most leueth you. He em∣braced him with as much tendernesse, as if he had béene his owne carnall sonne: hee tooke his leaue of Palisander, to whom he gaue a girdle which altered his complexion. The valiant Gréeke saw himselfe so plaine in the stones of his shield, that he needed no loking glasse, hee could not chuse but laugh, and say to the olde man at his departure, Assuredly, deare father, if you could as wel change my lady Mystresse conditions, as the colour of my face, wholly in your hands would be reserued my contentment. The old man presently vanished away, and the Gréeke returned to his begun carriere, where let vs leaue him, to take our way towards Greece. CHAP. VIII. Howe the aduenture of the hatefull Tower, with the libertie of the fayre Linda brides was ended; with the co∣ming of the Ambassadours from Rome; and of that which therewith happened to the Ladyes. THe Armes of the famous Athenian beeing lost, with his dagger onely in his hand (most noble prince) wee left him in the end of the third Booke to the noble Claramante, in the top of the hatefull tower, in viewe of all the Gréeke Court, who stood there, with great
desire from thence to behold the most beautifull Lindabri∣des, hee which most shewed himselfe, was the great Empe∣rour Alphebus, who could not put out of his mind, howe much he was indebted to that Lady, & how ingratefully hée had euer shewed himselfe, treading vnder foote that which she desired, worthy to be more estéemed of the world, then she was by him. All those which had knowen her, desired no lesse, her rare beautie leauing them affected vnto her, and the faith and loyalty which she euer bare to her prince. They were quickly in better and more certeine hopes; for to sée the couragious Knight without Armes, had sha∣dowed it, as with a cloud: but not to sée him so, with great fury hee strake the sayle, with greater courage then before he had shewen, when his person was furnished, putting himselfe in point, not onely to defend himself, but also to of∣fend & recouer his lost Armes▪ Contrary to his desire stood those of the towre, saying, There requireth more care to be taken in ye comming in, sir Knight, then you haue yet shew∣en; which is a matter, which onely to haue it, will put it in your hands. There hath not bene so great want thereof (sayd the furious yong man) as of your part there doeth wicked∣nesse abound, wherewith you haue procéeded; and to the ende that you may sée that I am not without Armes, stay, and you shall see, how costly your cousinage will proue vnto you. And here with like a royall Eagle, with a iumpe hée set himselfe in the midst of the Hall, where, O Apollo, that thou hadst the describing of this battaile, to set it out in par∣ticular, the acts of this yong Gréeke, according as they did deserue, which were worthy of no lesse then thy wisedome, and not of his that is bare and vnfurnished of grace, and method, who yet hath not had knowledge and experience of the deceites in loue, what it is to be beloued, & what to liue secure from the paine which the soule féeleth! Wanting this (worthy Dames) what courage can my wearie penne haue, séeing the teares blot the letters I write, and drowne the conceites framed in my soule? Yet notwithstanding tru∣sting
in your fauour, I will begin to describe the doings of this Gréek, to set at libertie the Lady, whom hee best loued euer in his life. In the midst of the Hall, he stood expecting these 2. which more swift thē a Sacre flying after her praie, came, the one with a battaile-axe aloft, & the other with the well sharpened sword of Theseus. The first was more spéedy in deliuering his blow, (which stood ye prince in no little stead) for making him to lose it, with a ship he closed with him: and as for his dagger, there was neither Armor nor enchantment yt could resist it: and finding himselfe néere ye Knight of the towre, he strake him on ye top of his left shoulder, & drew it out againe dyed in his blood. By this time the other was come, with more discretion thē the first: for hauing noted the quicknes & agilitie of the enemy, he came well in breath, with his sword in his hand, ye point forwards. The yong man had good hap, yt he ran him not thorow; for he tooke it vnder his arme. He of the towre thought yt he had sped him; & so drawing backe his sword, which making way to ye flesh, came foorth, with∣out any dangerous hurt, hee marked his fortune, & conside∣red that it was no fearefull hurt; he would not lose occasion in a matter where it was so necessary, to sée himself destitute of Armes, & so with the strength that he recouered aboue all others of his time, he gaue him a perillous stab in ye midst of his brest, & had slaine him, if he had not giuen back, drawing out his bloody dagger, at what time as he with the battaile axe came, wel strengthned on ye left shoulder, he would haue run him in with ye point: the Gréeke could do no more, but with his force and his dagger, shun ye fearefull halbard; but not so, but that he first wounded him shrewdly, going foorth in the arme: he feared ill successe, because the battell was ve∣ry vnequall, with so apparant disaduantage: yet for all this, although he saw himself hurt in some places, & the hal sprin∣kled with his blood, hee made no shew of want of courage, but rather with greater thē he had held in former battailes, he charged and retyred vpon his enemies, and ranged them, couered all ouer with their owne bloud.
Those which sawe the battaile, did wonder, assuring themselues that they had neuer seene the like in their liues; and it was so indeed, for fewe had there past like this, for those of the towre liue onely to fight, and our Claramant, to be feared, so as the heauens had the more enabled them both, to the end to yéeld the battaile the more cruell. I beleeue (sayd the mighty Trebacius) that the heauens doe take compassion on this Lady, séeing that to relieue her they haue sent sch a Knight. We are no lesse bounden (said the fayre Litiana) for this, thē for the enchanted towre, that I not hauing the Knight of the Lyons, could not be called your Maiesties daughter, neither sée the maruailes which it performeth: God spéed him, and grant him well to ende this present battaile, (said the gallant Archisilora) for there wil not want Ladyes to loue him. O fortunate Knight (said the gentle Clarintea of Celandia) séeing that before it is knowen who he is, the Ladyes dispose of themselues who shall best loue him. This followeth valour well employed, said the gallant Venus, who drew néere, although I haue knowen another Knight no lesse worthie to be beloued, then he of the Lyons; and heerein the Lady Laysa will take my part. For this which is so well knowen, who would but drawe néere, al∣though with hazard of life, answered the Lady? for there would want no Knights to helpe me. I would not bee the last (sayd the venturous Dacian) for me thinketh, that with those of the towre al runneth at euen hand. It is no small matter to come to so doubtfull bat∣taile, with this apparant disaduantage (said Claridiana) and in requital of what these Ladyes haue shewed, the Prince of Dacia shall tell vs who this Knight is. He hath héere so much kindred (sayd Don Heleno) that whereas he might fight for iustice, here he might doe it for affection. He presently shewed them in what maner he met with the Prince of Grecia, and Trapisonda, in Sclauonia, and what had happened vnto him concerning the fayre
Venus. I now say, (said the gentle Rosamundi) that I mar∣ueile not, though a Lady so much beholding, returne for him, which set her in so happy estate as it is to be beloued. They could procéed no further, for the great noyse which the people made, which were in the Court: and beholding the cause thereof, they saw yt the Knight of the Lyons, after two houres space, in a most bloody battaile, defending him∣selfe from him with the halberd ioyned with him, and clas∣ping the same néere where he held it, with a sudden touch hee pluckt it out of his hands, thrusting him a good way off from him: he gat it not so scot-frée, but that hee receiued a greater wound then he had of all yt day giuen him, in one of his thighes, so as without great paine he could not stir it; he felt-it not for ioy that he had gotten this wished for halberd, wherewith hee was a Phoenix in Armes: With this peri∣lous weapon he made roome in the Hall. There can no sorrow be compared to theirs which were in the towre, especially his which had lost it. For al this they would grant him no entrance: but with two poinyards with a soft pace he made towards the Gréeke, and in comming néere him, making shew with the greatest force & quicknes in the world to come within him, he hurled one at him; the Lord defended him, for the great good which for his sake he should accomplish. In throwing this cruell poinyard, hee mist his brest, but strake him thorow the arme, from side to side; the payne pierced him to the very soule, but before they parted, he gaue him his deserued payment, welding his hal∣berd so wel as he could, hee reatch him such a knocke on the pte, that if it had béene of Diamond he had broken it, & fel∣led him dead at his feet. His companyon seeking reuenge, would néeds close with him, but knowing his meaning, hée held out his halberd before him, and the other was so blind, that he ran vpon the point thereof, and as the yong Gréeke holpe him with his due, he threw him on his back in ye midst of the Hal, where in a moment winning the entrance to the fast lockt Chamber, hee bereaued him of his life with the
greatest ioy of the world, making account that all had bene ended. The Greeke tooke vp the good sword, and without staying for the rest of the furnitures, he went, thinking to enter into the lodging, very desirous to sée the end of this aduenture: he had but one foote within the doore, when hee heard a new al-arme giuen, so hideously, that the Gréekes were in great doubt of their Knight, séeing him so shrewdly hurt: but he who feared nothing, without any mistrust, with the battell-axe in his hand, would enter: but without being able to auoide it, a fierce wild sauage man, couered all ouer with okē leaues, clasping him in his armes, said, Didst thou thinke (prince of Grecia) that there was nothing els to be done? Know thou, that for thy presuming to come into my lodging, thou shalt neither see nor know thy parents, which then seest here present. It shalbe as it shall please the hea∣uens to appoint it, (said the furious yong man) closing with him; where you might haue seene one of the most gallan wrestlings in the world; for notwithstanding yt the Greeke was so sorely hurt, that which this monster had sayd vnto him, gaue him such courage, that he would that the monster had bene stronger then he was, to the end that he might the better haue bene able to shew his own, although that that was such, that lifting him from ground, he drew him out of the lodging, & carried him so farre as the Hall, getting groūd of him in wrestling. The youth tooke footing, holding him∣selfe disgraced to be so handled▪ and raysing himselfe against his enemie, recouered what he had lost, and on a sudden en∣tred with him into the lodging, where they strugled a long space, vntil at length (fortune shewing her selfe fauorable in the behalfe of the Greeke) with a strong whéeling about he threw him downe néere vnto a great bowle, wherevpon he set his hand, thinking to kneele vpō the Sauage: but before he could doet, there was heard the greatest noyse that euer was heard in the world; a thousand visions comming out of the Towre, appeared to those which were in the court; the skyes were dakened, and there was such lightning,
that made the most couragious hartily afrayd, and much more the Ladies, which being from their gallants, gaue a thousand seriches for feare, after this earthquake which sée∣med as though heauen and earth should haue come together. In the towre was heard the most swéet and best tuned mu∣sicke in the world: it séemed to thē a thing come from hea∣uen; none were discomforted, but such as were wounded with loue, for to those onely comfort may be giuen by those which bereaue it. And but that the great Lirgandeo did re∣comfort the Quéene of Lira, assuring her of the Princes health and safetie, telling her that it was not conueni∣ent that they should so soone meet, without doubt this heauenly musicke had bene lothsome; and but for that ad∣uertisement, shée had gone to seeke him; for shée could not forbeare to lament his absence. This swéete harmony did no lesse recomfort the warlike yong man; for therewith he thought as in déed it was true) that he was whole and cu∣red of his hurts, and beholding with whom he had wrest∣led, wondring to sée himselfe armed and sound, he perceyued that he was in the armes of a very fayre Lady, with a Quéenes crowne vpon her head: euery body knew that it was Quéene Iulia; who taking the yong man by the hand, sayd vnto him, Come with me, valorous Prince, and thou shalt sée a reward worthy thy great valour, as well kept as you haue séene. He could giue her no answere, imagining that it was some enchantmēt, but followed her, and entring into a rich square roome, two statues which stood at ye doore, casting flowers vpō the Gréekes head, at his entring bowed downe, saying, The long wished for Claramante of Gréece is welcome: for with his cōming are ended ye troubles and anguishes of her whō he most dearely loued, who although she were ill requited, yet seing her liberty gotten by so great valour, the iniury which she hath endured, may be accoūted happines. As ye Gréeke came into the hall, he was rauished of his wits, to sée ye strange pictures, & curious workmāship: he staied a while to cōsider of ye loue which that Princesse
had borne the Gréeke prince, and the faith which shée had sacrificed vnto him; and seeing how desolate he had left her, it extreemely grued him; he being a man (as Gualter sayth) who tooke excéeding compassion of adyes, would fayne know that Knight which was so ingratefull, and challenge him for it. But the Quéene put him from it, be∣cause that the gallant Lindabrides was come, whom ary∣led to see that Knight in her walke, where uer any bodie had bene. The Queene sept forwardes and sae, Soue∣raigne princesse of the Scythians, receiue here the Knight whom the heauens haue prouided for you, in place of the in∣gratefull Alphebo. It was long since that Lindabride had seene him, yet she presently knew him to be the youth Cla∣ramante, whom she dearely loued, for the great resemblance betwéene him and Alphebo; and her loue being now well cooled, she presently affected him, being of opinion, that hee onely was the man, who next after his brother did worthily deserue her beautie. The free young man escaped no better; for neither his valiant heart, neither Theus armes which had preserued him from so many dangers, could defend him from the wounds and fyre wherewith loue tormenteth his vassals; for beholding the rare beautie of the Scythyan princesse, and her gracious countenance, with the grauitie of her most fayre face, he thought that there was nothing els to be desired in the world, nor other contentment but to loue her: for he was ready to giue vp his Ghost, when hée left to looke vpon her. The gracious Princesse answered Quéene Iulia, say∣ing, I will not receiue this Knight (deee Iulia) so much be∣cause that the heauens haue sent him for my comfort, as for the generositie wherewith (with the hazard of his life, put∣ting it into infinite dangers) he hath procured my libertie, making me so much beholding vnto him, so as except I shal employ the same in that which may yéeld him content, all o∣ther requitall is vnworthy of the name; for what I receiue, admitteth no comparison.
This (most worthie Princesse) sufficeth, answered the amorous yong man, although, had aduentured farre grea∣ter dangers, for I was bounden to doe it for your beauties sake, withut eipe ing the deeds, but the desire erthe soule; wherefore I pray you, (kneeling downe before her) giue me your faire hands, to pay the  which all the world oweth them, and withall, receiue mee for a knight, so doe you seruice, which shall aduance e to the higheir degree, that fortune is able to giue me. He could y no more, for beholding her, neither could she make any answere: for loue had so wounded them, that they were speechlesse, leauing to the eies, the imaginations of the heart. But hauing reco∣uered her speech, beholding the Princes goodly proportion, considering his valour, and what hee had  for her, shee tooke him vp by the armes, saying, here is no reason, va∣lorous Prince, to giue my hand to him, who hath so good of his owne, which haue set at libertie, the most sorrowfull Damsell of the world: as for the rest, I would not shew a∣ny token of ingratitude, but to my soule, I haue had so cost∣ly experience for you so much resembling the Knight, which was went to bee called Alphebo, that I am afraid (and not without reason) you will resemble him in all; and being so, I should but doe you wrong, to giue you occasion to shew your selfe inconstant. I would, Soueraigne Prin∣cesse, (answered the tender-hearted Prince) that I were not so neere of kinne, as I thinke I am to that Knight, to make him know his vnthankefulnesse; for it is a sufficient defect in mee, not to know what I sée, and nothing in the world can assure mee to hope for any good, but from this hand. Herewith, (answered Quéene Iulia) I will be shee, (noble Prince) which shal inbute this orthy Princesse to accept you for hers, and I will be tie to you for her, and to her, that you shall bee thankefull. The gallant  a∣brides graunted what the Gréeke required, and  she could not doe, for anything to be wished; for Loue had made her wholy tributary to the Greekes beautie: hee kist
her hands with so great contentment to them both, that if hee thought that he spedde well, she accounted her selfe hap∣py, to be beloued by him. There was neuer heard sweeter musicke vpon the earth, neither better consorted, then they heard, when shee made an ende of entertaining him. Al∣though that those, which stood thereby in the Tower, did sée what past▪ yet they heard not what the Princes said, but seeing them to come, hand in hand out of the hall, they well knew, that the aduenture was ended. Let vs goe, (most no∣ble Emperour, said Lirgandeo) to receiue these Princes; for you and my Lady the Empresse, are those which get most therein; séeing that you holding Claramante for lost, who was stolne away in the Forest, the Heauens haue pleased to bring him againe to your sight, with the extremities which you haue séene. This is he, whose name in the most remote and strange Countries shall be feared, and he, who among the greatest Monarchs shall be (and that with great reason) renowmed. The Emperour was surprised with this new and sudden ioy, being hardly able to beleeue it; for so great a good as this, with much reason may be suspected. There was no Knight nor Lord, which came not downe, ac∣companying the Ladies, who by any meanes would bee ab∣sent at this entertainement. At the descending downe the Tower staires, at the top thereof, were foure Nymphes, farre more faire then the God Apollo, which with their Instruments, made the most heauenly harmony that euer was heard, and with their voyces extolled the praises of the two Louers, saying in this maner: Content and pleased may you be, Sih Ioue so much your friend you see, Your wish effecting in euery thing, And constant loue without wauering. All griefe from heart you may remoue, Sith Claramante is your loue.
What greater good can be desired, Then herein plainely is deciphred? Valorous Fortune seek'th your ease, And with delights your minde to please, Linking you in loue most constant, With the valiant louely Claramant. The Heauens you grant in blessed state, Long to enioy your louing Mate, Without suspect or ielousie, Caus'd by the angrie Deitie. Nothing can disliking moue, Claramant being your loue. Valorous Prince, whose fame doth flie From heere beneath, euen to the skie, Enoying beautie, and the comeliest feature, That euer Nature wrought on creature: Confirme this good, and wauer not, Let faithfull loue ne're be forgot. This swéete harmonie of the Nimphes did so amaze the hearers, that they thought themselues taken vp into the quires of the inhabitants of the heauens: only the aire Ar∣chisilora was in greatest care, seeing the whole companie reioycing, and her selfe wanting the cause thereof, yet with the hopes which the wizard had giuen her, shée shewed a most faire pleasant countenance, which serued to no small effect to maintaine the opinion which was held of her beau∣tie. And the Tower (giuing a great cracke) vanished away, the Princes remaining hand in hand in the place, the com∣mon people beganne to extoll her beautie, aboue all the Ladies in Grecia, and I marueile not, for according as shee came, Venus would haue seemed ougly. The valorous Greeke led her by the left arme without his
Helmet, which one of the Ladies caried, and another, The∣seus his battel-axe: the Ladies traine bore the discreete Quéene Iulia. Gualtenor doth not describe the Princes countenance, but he saith enough, in saying, that he resem∣bled his brother, when in Gréece he ouercame the great Me∣ridian. This most faire Ladie came clad all in white, in a gowne with foure sleeues, cut vpon cloth of gold, set with Gold-smithes worke, which shewed like Carbuncles, in∣terlaced with certaine knots: her yellow haires were suffi∣cient to darken the Sun-beames, which she ware after the Egyptian fashion, made vp in tresses, whereon hang many precious stones, of sundrie colours, neuer was Phoebus so curious in guiding his chariot, as at that time; for seeing her beautie, it was feared, that faster then with a good pace, he would haue come downe to the earth: but for all that, he kept his course, beholding the beautie of the Princesse of the Scythians. I know not, (worthie Ladies) how I am entred into this déepe sea, which here presenteth it selfe to me: for if I should describe all those Ladies which came to salute the faire Lindabrides, there would be no end thereof. They did all malice her, (not somuch for her beautie) as to sée her matched with Claramant. Some receiue the prince, glad to renew their old acquaintance, others reioycing at the happie estate, whereo Loue had brought him. Those which hee knew, hee entertained with the grace, where∣with the heauens had endued him, and as for the rest, with such countenance as was requisite, hee not knowing what they were. Who is able to set downe, what these two felt, béeing competitours in all, when they came to embrace one ano∣ther, Clandiana being secure, holding her selfe assured of Al∣phebo, and shee with her new Loue, contented with her change? This is a passage, (worthy Ladies) which without your fauour, I know not how I shall get out of it. Worthy Empresse, (said the frée Princesse) I would the
heauens would haue graunted vnto me in time past, to doe that with as little care as now I doe, séeing how little this Knight hath had of me. Mine was neuer so much (answe∣red the Emperour Alphebus) supreme Princesse of the Scithes, as the care which your comelinesse put mee to, so as to defend my selfe from the force thereof, I was enforced to shield me with the beautie of my Ladie the Em∣presse. The rest of the Ladies left not to come forwards, which came to entertaine her, some to know her, and others to behold her brauerie. They wholly (valorous Prince) ca∣ried away both my wit and penne after them, and it is no great maruaile: for where Ladies are, there Knights are not to be spoken of, for that were to doe them wrong, and were it not for Claramante, I would not returne; to whom his mother holding him in her armes, vttered a thousand pittifull spéeches. But leauing at last, most glad to sée him before her, dissembling the ioy of her heart, there came his seuere Father, who embracing him, said, No man vpon earth hath more reason to be glad then I, séeing that when I thought least thereof, it hath pleased the high heauens to cherish our old age with your faire presence. The Princes and Knights which were there, tooke him out of the Empe∣rours armes, saying, Let vs in part enioy this Knight, sée∣ing hee hath béene as much desired and wished for by vs as you which are his parents. These were those which tolde him, what all those Knights were which came to speake with him: he receiued al with so great grace and discretion, that they al loued him. I should spend more time then were reasonable, if I should particularly set down the whole en∣tertainment, onely this I say, that with such contentment as is requisite in such a case, they went into the Emperours hall, where each Ladie called to her, her gallant, entertai∣ning with them the rest of the time which remained, with great desire to know Don Heleno and the Princesse Rosa∣mundi, and no lesse to know Rosabel and his beloued Liri∣ana. In the middest were the gallant Claramante, Linda∣brides,
in all things, answered him, I would not, Knight, that thy comming as an Ambassadour, should haue emboldned thee to speake without any good maners; and faine I would, without offending your office, make you know how ill in∣formed you come. But men haue patience with those which bring a message. The Duke of Thebes tooke the defiance, and with a high voyce read it, that all might vnderstand it, which was thus: The defiance. Constantius, Emperour of Rome, Lord of all the Me∣diterraneā; and Brunduso Prince of Gibia, and of the confines of the Indian sea, with the mightie Arsiano Prince of Almaine, & the rest of the Kings, Friends, and Vassals to the prince of Dacia, greeting, For that in feare thou maist see the cruell vengeance which I meane to take of thee, and of those which haue declared themselues for thy partakers in requitall of the breach of thy word, not as a Knight giuen to my deare daughter to be her husband; a thing although thou hadst entreated it, had bene very well for thee, and hauing done so, guiding thy selfe, not with reason as was requisite, but with passion, it is told me that thou art married; whereat I am nothing sory, but should haue bene, to haue had so faithlesse a sonne: This shall serue for a warning to thee, seeing the reuenge which the heauens will giue me vpon thee, which graunt thee life. AS all Gréece daily expected the comming of so mighty a Prince as the Soldan of Niquea, so was there no man troubled with this defiance, except the Prince of Dacia, whose colour waxing as red as a liue coale, said, Well did I imagine, Knight, that with your prowd ambassade there should come some Knight which should not weigh whether iustice were on his side or not; for although that now there be no time to make excuses, admitting the defiance, I say,
that all that wherewith thou doest charge mee is false, for although that I tried the aduēture of Bruto in the name of that Princesse; yet there was neuer any speach of her part that I should be hers; and in prouoking such Princes against me, they haue done it disloyally, séeing in persō they might haue come and requested mée this: that without a∣ny other occasion they will trouble the world led by their blind passion: as for the rest, I hope that the life which they wish me, to sée their reuenge, but I beléeue I shall sée it first on them; and to the end it shall not happen, I with my pa∣rents and friends will séeke them at home in their owne countryes. He said no more, for he well remembred yt he had bene more cholericke then is vsuall with Embassadours. But the faire Rosamundi could not dissemble her griefe, séeing her louer defied, of whom she had vnderstood all that which had passed at Rome, and taking occasion of what Coriander had said, she said, Me thinketh (Knight) you haue offended many, with your presumptuous maner of procée∣ding, in scoffing in disdaine at the Gréeke Ladies, for to va∣lue the Dacian Prince to be of lesse worth, for being in our company. Hereby the iustnesse of the cause, for which you come, is the more plainely to be perceiued: and because you shall vnderstand, that the comming from Kings, doth not warrant you, when you haue receyued your answere, I wil make you know, that there are Ladies in Gréece, whose cōpanie yéeldeth honour to Knights which frequent ye same. There will not wāt those which will maintaine ye challenge (quoth the faire Archisilora burning with anger) for such a disgrace as this shall not passe vnpunished. For a mediator (answered ye gallāt Empresse Claridiana) here is mine arme which in fauour of ye Ladies, shall shew their equitie. In so iust a cause (sayd the faire Sarmatia) there is none that will refuse the combate against any of the fiue. I would I had Mars his strength (quoth the faire Liriana) to let these Knights know, that it had bene better for them to haue ta∣ken some other course. Let not that offend you, (sayd the
faire Rosamundi) for I, (as most iniuried) doe in challenge defie this Knight, and one of his companions, to the ende they may sée how little they are estéemed. All which was done with such a sudden, that the Emperour, although hee would, yet he could not haue enter medled therein. Some∣what milder than before, (the furious Coriandro answered) Faire Ladies, where the victorie is so apparantly due to your beauties, the Knights of Gibea do not vse to enter in∣to battels, but against sterne Knights, where the valour of the persons may appeare, & I am very sorie, ye whereas so many Knights are, they haue yéelded to the Ladies to main∣taine the honour of Grecia. This did somewhat nettle the Greeke Princes, that together arose thrée, which well shew∣ed what they were. They were no lesse then Rosabel, the warlike Claramante, and the furious Dacian, who being ar∣med, without all doubt, would haue had them by the eares. But to auoid the hurly burly, the old King of Macedonia a∣rose, willing the Ambassadours to goe with him, while the Greekes gaue answere: a thousand times was Bembo a∣bout to dee Rosabel, in his Mistresse quarrel, and had done it, but that he saw, it would cause him to stay longer then Lupercio had appointed. All was left to the field battell, where wanted no occasion, and euery man had his handes full, as you shall heare. The defiance being accepted, they dispatched the Messengers, which did not a little wonder at the Ladies, and much more at the great Nauie, which they saw at sea, and the innumerable armie, which they saw on land: and (because that in the Citie there was not roome e∣nough) the Captaine generall had commanded many tents to be erected, compassed about with deepe trenches, which seemed another Citie. Some dayes they stayed, because that thither came the wise Lord of Achaia who, before he would goe forth of Gréece, desired to be informed of the state of his enemies; but finding many contrarieties, he much doubted of the good successe, according to most mens opinion, seeing the great and mightie armies leuied against the Gréekes.
The foure Ladies were so displeased with the Pagans answere, that in the night, with their Armes, they went to séeke them. They were quickly mist, and for feare that any disgrace should happen vnto them, armed at all pieces with most assured Armes, there went after them, Don Heleno, and Rosabel, with Captaine Artoldo, and the mightie Bransiniano; the valorous Brandafidel was none of the last, and the gentle Tefeo, with his Uncle Bramidoo, in company of the noble Alphebo, onely Rosacler stayed be∣hind: for that euening he felt himselfe not well, and the tra∣uaile of the faire Oliuia did much trouble him, which that night was deliuered of a daughter, no lesse faire then her mother, neither did she cost lesse blood, as with the fauour of the Muses, I will declare, in the fourth part of this Histo∣rie, where her loues shal be described, the beginning where∣of shall be declared in this fourth booke. The new enamored Claramante, with his most rich and assured armes would goe alone, and notwithstanding that he knew not the country, yet the next day he met with thē, but first the Ladies; which gréedie to let them know their valour, tooke such order, that the next day by nine of the clocke, they saw them descending towards the sea-shore: for Bembo desirous to know the nomber of his enemies, had taken that way, wherea the Ladies greatly reioyced, espe∣cially Rosamundi, who spurring her horse, say, Follow me, valorous Ladies, for I know the country, for I haue bene a hunting heere, and I will be first with them▪ which will make them beléeue that we are but newly landed. They all consented, which no lsse desired it then she, although their horses were tyred; yet within an houre they came to the sea side: the fayre Rosamundi came mounted vpon her be∣loued Don Helenoes horse, and Archisilora vpon Cornei∣no, which was Rosabels: the gallant Sarmacia did not chuse the worst, for the light vpon Aristoldoes, a better no man had in the world: the Princes were nothing grieued with∣all, but were rather glad, séeing they should be in the more
safetie, there they stayed some what to repose them, and to put their horses in breath, all the Ladies gaue Rosamundi the hand, not for that they did acknowledge any preemi∣nence, (for they would not haue yéelded any to Mars him∣selfe) but for that they held her most wronged, for her swéet hearts defiance, pulling downe their beauers, and brandi∣shing their great lances, they went into a pleasant gréene medow, where they tried what was in their horses, char∣ging on the one side, & then on the other, with a better grace, then Mars himselfe could haue done. Claridiana heartily laughing, said, I say, (considering well, gallant Ladies, wherefore wee come,) wee shall doe these Barbarians too much fauour, notwithstanding that they die through our hands. Well, said Sarmatia, though wee shew them this fauour, I am of opinion, our gallants will not be offended withal: rather to giue them so honourable a death, is to an∣ger them that shall know it, said Archisilora: let eche of vs apart shew what our Armes are able to doe, said the faire Rosamundi, that if hereafter, those which shall heare there∣of, be desirous to make triall, they may come into Grecia; for they which now can giue it, may hereafter procure it. In this maner, the foure pillars of strength and beautie rode discoursing, when euen hard at hand they discouered the seuen Knights, who séeing them, as they were in their enemies Countrey, presently armed thēselues, not know∣ing what they would, they chanced to méet in the middest of a great beaten way, where Rosamundi being somewhat be∣fore the rest, said as you shall heare in the other Chapter.
CHAP. X. Of the bloody cruell Iusts, betweene the Ladies and the Romane Ambassadours; and of the comming of Claridia∣no and the gentle Claramante, and what followed. IT is a common opinion among wise and discréet men (most noble Lord) that cour∣tesie is the most commendable part of a man, and which doth most adorne his person, aduance his valour, and which doth most auoid dangers & fruitlesse con∣tentions, whereof we haue an example in hand: which béeing wanting in Coriandro, in the presence of so many & so worthy Princes, it was the occasiō of al the strife which followed, all happening athwart vnto him; for the Ladies beeing stung therewith, determined to pursue them, & before they should returne to Rome, to teach them, how to behaue themselues before Princes: and so the faire Ladie thinking with her selfe, that she stayed too long, set her selfe in the middest of the way, and said, Sir Knights, the commandement giuen vs, by the Dames which re∣maine vpon the Stronds side, to iust with all thse which we shal méet, for their beauties, to be the greatest and most rare in the world, doth hold vs blamelesse for presuming to desire it of such Knights as you, whome Mars would not dare to encounter. Shée did so dissemble, and that with such courtesie, that it tooke away all occasion from them to sus∣pect them, although that without it, the fiue did assure them selues, nothing imagining that there had béene any women in Grecia which bare armes, and that that which they heard at the Court was but a iest: and so the braue Corian∣dro gently answered, holding himselfe sufficient to haue ouercome all the foure: Because, Sir Knights, you shall ac∣complish the commaund of the Ladies, we accept thereof
(vpon condition, that whosoeuer shal lose ye Saddle at the encounter, shall not desire to come to fight with the sword: you (requiring this condition) shall not thinke it much, that we desire another in our behalfe, which is, that whosoeuer shall fall, shall lose his shield; for there is nothing where∣with the Ladies are better pleased, then to see their beauties so well defended, bringing for testimonie thereof the ad∣uersaries armes. All (quoth one of the Giants) shall bee as you will haue it, for remaining without the shields, it shall bee no great matter, to make you beholding to vs for our good déeds. Without making any answere, the gallant Ro∣samundi turned the furious Tirian, who came more swift then the Sunne beames betwéene the clouds. I would to God, worthy Ladies, séeing this matter con∣cerneth you, that you would assist my slow hand with some new fauours, which would furnish meanes to make the matter the more easie, to recount the best iusts that euer were in the world: for comming to encounter with a full carreere, (with greater noyse, then the swelling Seas make beating the miserable Ships against the high Rockes) they brake their Launces as if they had beene little Réedes; but before it was done, the Pagan, who assured himselfe of the victorie, smote the Ladie in the middest of the white brest, with so great force, that hee strake her sencelesse out of the Saddle: but fortune was much her friend, and durst doe no other, for shée set her hand on the pummell of the Saddle; where shée held fast till shée recouered breath, and therewith the Saddle, wondering at the strong encounter. Hers was no lesse to be noted, for shée smiting the braue Pagan with such force, that before that her Launce brake, shee laide him on the greene field, falling with such disgrace vpon his head, that he remained sencelesse with the blow. Well may you imagine (gallant Dames) whether the thrée faire Ladies were well pleased, with the good beginning which the Princesse had made: shée stoode with a better grace behol∣ding the fierce Pagan, then can bee spoken, making her ad∣uersaries
to make more accompt of her, then of Mars him∣selfe: for being mounted vpon so good a horse, and so gal∣lantly armed, neuer had any a better presence then she; shee commanded the Squire (for they all foure had but one) to take away the Moores shield. Presently commeth forth the gallant Archisilora, giuing no lesse hope of her valour, then Rosamundi had done: one of the foure Gyants confronted her; it did nothing moue her to sée him so great, as a well growne Pine trée, but rather praying the Heauens to fa∣uour her in this encounter, she ran with her Courser more swift then a starre falling betwéene the cloudes; there were those which bare record of this encounter, for ye gods of the woods leauing their habitation, with their Nimphes and Tritons, came into the gréene field at the very instant, that that famous Quéene made the brauest encounter that euer was séene in Gréece: for hitting the Pagan in the mid∣dest of the strong shield, it auailed him not that it was of stéele, neither the doubles which it had, for through it and the brest-plate (being a handfull thicke) it past cléere, yeel∣ding an armes length of the launce thorough his beastly shoulders, the swiftnesse wherewith her Courser came made him to misse the shocke: shée past forwards with so good a grace, as would haue intangled Mars, the countenāce of Archisilora onely was sufficient to haue made him to yéeld his soule captiu, and to make the god of Loue him∣selfe in loue to behold her. Shée returned, and with a soft pace came to the Ladies, which were very glad of the good encounter which shée had made; onely she wished that her Gréeke louer had bene there. The valorous Empresse of Trapisonda would stay no longer, but mounting vpon Cornerino her horse, came sorth as swift as an arrowe which is shot by a nimble Sorian at a certaine marke: she did nothing enuie the last encounters, for although that in that which she receyued, she lost one of her stirrops; yet that which she gaue was so rigorous, that shée therewith sent the Giant to the ground, wounded in his brest; and
but that her launce brake not, striking somewhat acrosse, it had cost him his life. The two famous warriours, Bembo and the great Brauorante, séeing the valour which the thrée had shewen, and the signes that the fourth had giuen, to be no lesse then the rest, it was euen so as they imagined: for the faire Sarmatia, with her furious horse, charged the third Gyant with such force and doxteritie, that shee laid him, (though it much grieued him) in the gréene field: forth shee rode, and recouered both her stirrops, which in the encoun∣ter she had lost: forwards went the gallant Rosamundi, ha∣uing taken vp the dead Gyants launce, and said vnto those which remained on horsebacke, I would very gladly, Sir Knights, that wee were in number equall vnto you, to the end, that with equalitie, the Iusts might haue béene ended. But now me thinketh, that you séeking reuenge, for that which is done to your companions, we beeing but foure, of force you must beginne againe with me. The last Gyant, which was the most valiant of al, made no longer delay, but whorling a ships mast (which he bare in stead of a launce) about his head, tooke his carriere against the Ladie: she gaue spurres to her horse, as & swift as thought, encountred the Pagan, and did better this time then the last; for his strong plancks of stéele could nothing profite him, but that shee smote him cleane thorow from side to side: the horses came to the shocke, and made greater noise, then if two rocks had met: but as the Ladies horse had not his like in that land, so he ouerthrew the Gyant, horse and man, spreading them vpon the gréene field: and her horse set him on his buttocks, being vnable to goe any further. The valorous Dame, fea∣ring some ill successe, (as light as an Eagle) leapt to the ground, & séeing her good horse recouer, with another iumpe shee leapt into her saddle. The most strong Pagan Brauo∣rante, blaspheming against heauen, would haue taken his course, when the Ladie said vnto him, Hold, Sir Knight, for there is time enough for our encounter; for I would speake with this Knight in the gréene skarfe, pointing to Corian∣dro, which was the man whom she had ouerthrowne, who
hauing recouered breath, was mounted on horsebacke, but without speare or shield. The like had the other two Giants done, to whom the Ladie said, I am very sory, Sir Knight, for your ill hap; but I was more sory to sée the few maners which you shewed in Grecia, for you should haue had more respect to the great princes which were in the hall, wherein you grieued many Ladies, being in your prowd behauiour farre more arrogant then valiant: if that might not haue moued you, it had bene sufficient for you to haue noted the courtesie and good carriage of these Knights in the blacke, who made shew to be hartily sory for your prowd demea∣nour, which deserued that reuenge which you now haue ex∣perimented: and because you may sée the hands which haue wrought it, and may say ye in Grecia as Knights vse Iusts and Tournaments; so like wise Ladies also séeke reuenge, which peraduenture may serue for a warning for you Ro∣manes, that they come with lesse pride then their Ambassa∣dours haue done: and so, although your pride deserue it not, yet we will do you this fauour, to tell you who we are, to the end yt being well assured, you may be glad to haue left your armes in ye kéeping of such ladies, together with your honor: & at yt instant they tooke off their caskes, appearing by reasō of ye heate of their encoūters, sare more faire thē Apollo in ye midst of his iourny: & because you may vnderstād, Knights (said the Lady) yt in Gréece there is no misse of gallants to serue Ladies, & yet there is not so great néed of their Armes, but ye the heauens haue imparted some valour among ye La∣dies, so as they may make some chalēge thereto: and as for you, valorous Knights, (hauing no occasion but what these Knights haue giuē) we refuse to iust with you; doubting to lose therin, what we herein haue gottē. Neuer a one of those which were ouercome, could answere, thei were so asham'd, holding it the greatest disgrace that could happē, to be ouer∣thrown by ye hands of tēder & delicate Ladies. Bembo steps forth with a grace, & being in a maze, said, Ualorous dames, this Knight and I were very sorry for the displeasure which is taken, through that which these Knights sayd,
although being sent, they might be somewhat excused (if ex∣cuse may be admitted for errour committed against such beautie.) But it séemeth, as it doth appeare, that who can so well take offence, can as well take reuenge, without néed of any offer to be made by any your gallants: against whom rather then against your daintinesse, the challenge was made. But it is past in such sort, that you rest reuenged, making vs, beeing bounden vnto you for your courtesie, to giue ouer the right, which we had to the Iusts, for your cha∣lenge was to all. That which you do, valorous Knight, is not of so small account, but may deserue requitall at our hands, which shall be, to leaue vs in greater doubt then be∣fore. The famous Prince would haue answered, when as not farre from them, there came along by a woods side, the lower of all humane valour, Claridiano and Claramante: who as I haue said before, hauing receyued the rich armes of his master Gualtenor, and hauing takē his leaue of him, by reason of the noise which he heard, hastened forwards, till crossing a groue of high Pine trées, hee saw his valorous Uncle Claramante cōming, mounted vpon a mightie horse, with his speare and shield, and at his saddle Bow, a battel∣axe, he knew him by his gate, and the richnes of his armes, and determined to discouer himselfe vnto him, to the end to goe to the warres together: they mette, Claramante won∣dring to sée his goodly constitution, thinking with himselfe, that it was the same man, which indéed it was. The Knight with the Dames, according to ye deuice which he bare vpon his shield, approching néere vnto him, said, (Sir Knight) you are without all doubt, hee which is called the Knight of the Lions, to whom I bring a message from farre hence, from a Knight which is called the Knight of Crueltie, who knowing that I came for Gréece, requested mee to visit you in his behalfe, & to tell you, that he would be here with all spéed possible, and told me farther, that I should bee a gayner hereby, for I should sée the gallantest Knight of the world: hee told me so many things in praise of you, that hée
made mee much to affect you, with a desire to trie my small, with your much valour, and although that I bee sure to be ouercome, I shall take it with the more patience, but our fight shall be without swords or Helmes, with our daggers onely; and if you so please, we will deferre no lon∣ger time, if you will not, I haue performed what I pro∣mised to that Knight, and as I desired. For the newes (Sir Knight) which you bring me, of that warlike young man, in requitall thereof, I would ra∣ther imploy mee to doe you any seruice, then by battell to offend you. But séeing you haue challenged me, there is no reason but to yéeld to your demaund, accepting the battell, and ye presently, séeing you so please. I assured my self before my comming, that I should receiue so generous an answere, said the other, so as weighing and considering the fame and valour, which is bruted euerie where of you, I know not who would not refuse it, and if I had not demaunded it, I would leaue it, for these reasons haue put me in more feare, then if I had séene the daunger and my certaine ouerthrow before mine eyes: but yet let it be, notwithstanding, that without it I will remaine your prisoner so long as I liue. The Prince of Trapisonda had vnlaced his Helmet, and séeing the valorous young man busied in taking off of his, vpon a suddaine hee was transformed into the likenesse of god Mars. By this time had Claramante fully taken off his Hel∣met, and being about to assaile his nephew, séeing him without a helmet, he said vnto him, Stay, valorous knight, for with my death you will offend your louing friend Cla∣ridiano. He put off his inchaunted Iewel, remaining in his perfect shape, saying, Why, how now, valorous Knight, so highly hath the Prince of Gréece offended you, that you should prepare your self to grieue him? I reposemore trust in your arme. This new louer was so surprised with ioy, sée∣ing him before him whom he most dearely loued, yt he could make him no answere; but casting his arms about his neck,
he said: O gentle gods, how fauorable haue you shewn your selues in my behalfe, hauing reserued so great a good for me as is this, which is the greatest that could happen vnto me! O desired Prince! and is it possible that fortune should bee pleased, to bring mee to so happie estate? I beséech the hea∣uens, that they season this but with some meane ill hap. I will not stand now to repeate what passed betwéene these two, but of that onely which hee told, had happened vnto him in Gréece, and how hee knew that he was his vnkle. There shall néede no great perswasion to make you be∣léeue, how great ioy he conceiued of so pleasing newes: hee told him all that had happened, and of the remedie which his Master the wizard had giuen him, to the end that he should come into Gréece, to the reliefe of his Grand-father, with∣out being knowne to any body, which it behoued him to con∣ceale, vntill such time as he should further aduise him. The noyse which was in the Iusts with the Ladies, did interrupt their discourse, and so putting on their Helmets, and the Prince his rich Iewel, as hard as their horses could driue, they tooke their way directly towards ye place where the noyse was, arriuing iust at the instant when the Ladie Rosamundi had made an end of giuing thankes to Bembo, for leauing the battell: but as these two approached, who did most faithfully loue in the world, O, who had a refined wit to describe what the one & the other felt in themselues, onely in beholding the one the other? Claramante reioyced for that hee was the first which came to the rescue of these dames, if there had béene any néede thereof; he maruailed to ée them without Helmets, and the two Giants, cruelly thrust through with Launces, and the Squire with fiue shields, being the spoyles of warre, vnderstanding that all this was performed by the Ladies: they knowing him, were verie glad to sée him in that place, not for any néede they had of his helpe; the goodly proportion, good grace and rich Armes of his cōpanion did much please them: but they could not imagine who it should be. I cannot tell how it
came to my minde, to describe the suspition which that Quéene conceyued in her heart, that that should be her be∣loued Claridiano: for as hee had the best grace of any mor∣tall man, if she saw any man to excell, she presently imagi∣ned it was he. O mightie power of loue! but the houre is not yet come, to know who he was. Bembo and the great Brauorante knowing the gentle Claramante by his armes, prepared themselues to fight, being netled with that which past at Sea. All this is nothing (gallant Dames) to that which the disguised yong man felt, séeing himselfe disguised in the presence of her, (who ruled the helme of his life,) o faire, & so surpassing excellent, that he held the griefe which he endured, well employed, séeing it was for hersake. But comming néere her, hee became more timorous, then if hee should haue attempted the most doubtfull aduenture of the world. There was not in all that land a Gallant, yt more déerely loued, and therewith that liued more iealous of his honour. Hee knew not whereupon to resolue, whether hée should speake to her, or make himselfe knowne, desiring her to pardon what was past. A thousand doubts came into his minde: in the end he determined, to the end not to offend her, to passe his discontented life as well as he could, in this shape of god Mars, and to sée if hee could perceiue by her lookes, whether his absence were grieuous vnto her or no, and whether she had so cruelly vanished him from her sight. The valorous Claramante drew néere, and séeing the Gréek Dames, hee suddenly put off his caske, and discouered his faire face, saying, I know not, how I could haue come, without great errour (valorous Dames) but to sée the work of your hands vpon these Gyants: but séeing this battell is fought in the behalfe of the gallants, I in their name doe come to giue thanks, and yéeld acknowledgement for the much which they owe, for such a matter as this, which ad∣mitteth no other requitall, but what procéedeth from your valour. We would not, Sir Prince, said Archisilora, (who loued
him extremely, for hauing so long accompanied her louer) that you should discharge your selfe of the debt, wherein these Ladies haue set you. That should be too much want of ac∣knowledgement (quoth he.) Who would not be thankefull, and to liue onely thereof? for, what greater good can come to the Gallants of Gréece, then to acknowledge, what they owe to such Soueraigne Princesses? In this maner wee may then in safetie returne, with the spoiles gotten on the Romane Knights, who reposing such confidence in their pride, little regarded our valour, and (as I thinke) as little our beautie. The furious Bembo could forbeare no longer, but like a Uiper, (although with mild spéeches) aduanced himselfe forwards, before these Dames should returne in∣to Gréece, saying, Wee would not, Knight of the Lyons, that you should haue come so assured, and with such confi∣dence in your owne valour, that before whom you haue so much displeased, as this Knight and me, you should be dis∣armed: and were it not, that the order of Knighthood doth detaine vs, we would with small cost take reuenge of our wrongs. The confidence, Sir Knight, is not so much of my selfe, answered the Gréeke, as of these valorous Dames, who with their presence, are able to encourage and giue new va∣lour to the arrantest coward that liueth: and moreouer, be∣hauing your selues as to Knights appertaineth, you should first tell me the cause of your displeasure, because I doe not remember that I haue offended any man. That is the con∣dition of those which doe wrongs; for they write it in the sands: but those that receiue them, imprint them in their hearts, quoth the bold Bembo. Well, let it not grieue you, quoth Claramante, for there is time, and now the best that can be wished, hauing such witnesses, for your satisfaction, which as you say, you pro∣secute with such vehemencie. Why then, quoth the Pagan, there is nothing that gi∣ueth vs any cause, why wee should deferre the battell any
longer, so as there may rest time for our companions. In stead of this Knight, quoth the proud Claridiano, sée∣ing with what pride they had defied his Uncle, hee may fight with me, for my death will bee no lesse lamented then his, and it will ill befit vs to stand by, dallying, and sée our friends maintaine fight with manifest perill. Let it be as you wil, said the furious Pagan Brauorante, furning about his swift running horse; the like did all the thrée, and that so suddenly, that notwithstanding that the Ladies would haue hindred it, séeing the matter so farre past, they durst not, for offending the Gréeke, assuring them∣selues of his valour, and that hee would end that fight with victorie. And Archisilora, rather to kéepe them company, said, turning towards Coriandro, I am of opinion, that you are desirous to haue occasion to helpe your friends; and because you shall not say when you come to Rome, that you could not come to all kinde of battels, wee giue you leaue thereto, and to that ende returne you your shield againe. The Pagan was so proud, that without giuing thanks for what was offred, hee said, Why then, by and by you shall sée, how oundly the Iusts shal be reuenged. The two Gyants made no longer delay, but drawing out their huge Cemitars, they made towards the Ladies, which had already put on their Helmets: they left, although against their will, the gentle Sarmacia for Iudge, and so with their swords in their hands, & their shields on their armes, they attended their comming. Face to face stood the foure most famous in armes in the whole world, whose rigorous contention I will not describe in this Chapter, for it de∣serueth a new.
CHAP. XI. Of the cruell and bloodie battell, fought by the foure Knights. IF the Heauens should giue mee so long a life, as to bring to light all the bookes of this long Historie, there would (valorous Dames) be the like occasion as this, to craue your assi∣stance, without the which, I shall but stumble at a matter, worthy to be written by no lesse personage, then Mantuan, or that Orpheus should sing it, to particula∣rize the mightie blowes which were giuen, with the discreet and aduised retreats and cunning assaultes: Heere might the god Mars haue learned to fight: for leauing his fifth Throne, accompanied with those which whilo did most flourish and were most famous in armes, hee descended to behold the battell, worthie to be recorded. Venus beauti∣fied her selfe, accompanying Mars, to behold the Ladies, which made her seeme to be vgly, and Mars enuious: for hur∣ling ouer the field (with a most fearefull noise) came these pillars of valour and fortitude, vntill the cariere being en∣ded, they encountred in the middest of the field: neither of them mist in the encounter; for they would not haue done it for their liues: But they mette Claramante, and the feare∣full Achaian, with such a noyse, as if two shippes had en∣countred, so as the splinters of their launces flew quite out of sight; there was no mouing out of their saddles, for they were fast lkt into them: they returned with their drawne swords, where at Bembo was well pleased, for hee stood in some feare of the battel-axe, which he left when he saw him therewith; and as he was most exercised in armes, so hee gaue the first blow, which he reacht him vpon the toppe of the crest, but the good temper kept it from breaking, but not him from féeling the blow, so as it made him to bow downe
his head to the Saddle pummel: it was not possible it should doe lesse: he seconded it with another of no lesse force, so that the skies containe not so many stars, as he saw within his rich Helmet. This serued but to vrge him to take reuenge; for setling himselfe in his Saddle, (considering what had passed) as fierce as a Basiliske, hee charged Bembo, who warded it with his shield, whereon hee receiued so great a blow, which was such, that it beat it to his Helmet, and made him almost sencelesse: hee holpe him with a thrust in the brest, which set him on the arson of his Saddle, and rea∣ching at him with another, nothing doubting to ouerthrow him, but his sword winding in his hand, so as he smote him on one side of the Helmet, which holpe to bring the Pagan againe to his remembrance. There was neuer Lion which so fiercely assailed a heard, as this young man did his aduersarie: they were close toge∣ther, and at one time they smote each the other vpon the top of their Helmets, and bowed downe their heads downe to their brests. The Moore was most nimble, and knowing that therein he had some aduantage, spurring his horse, hee ioyned with the Gréeke, who stoode not at his defence, when the Moore gaue him two such thrusts, the one after the o∣ther, that if they had not lighted on Theseus his armes, ei∣ther of them had parted the soule from the bodie, and made him (sore against his will) to fall backe on the arson of his Saddle. The Achaian knight was not a man which would lose the benefit of any occasion: for before that he could come vpon him againe, with all his whole power hee smote him on the middest of the visor, and made him starke blind, and yet Lirgandeo saith, that he made him readie to fall. All these blowes gaue occasion to put the young man in choler: there was no defence in the Moores armes, against the strong arme and good temper of his sword, but that hee hurled the one halfe of his Helmet to the ground: hee had scarcely done this, when with another blow no lesse furious then the last, with his sword hee smote a great péece of his shield to the
ground, and the sword lighting on his shoulder, smote away the one halfe of his Poldron. All this was nothing to that which passed betwéene his nephew and the valorous Bra∣uorante, which encountring with a greater noyse then the thunder maketh betwéene the cloudes, they smote their Launces into little splinters, which flying in the ayre, gaue signe of the fortitude of these warriours. The Pagan lost one of his Stirrops, but he recouered it so soone againe, that no body perceiued ye fault. That serued but to enflame him like a Uiper against the Christian; they both together encountred with their swordes aloft: there were no better Armes in the world then those which they two did weare, but they were not of force sufficient to kéepe their Masters, being tormented with blowes, from bowing downe their heads to their angrie brests, they seconded them with such force as set them on their Saddles pummels; the Greeke was better in breath, and therefore he first recouered, & with such quicknesse as is requisite in such a case, hee gaue him on the side of the Helmet, such a terrible blow, that made him make a foule bending backwards in his Saddle: hee was so gréedie to giue him another, that hee came more néere vnto him then was requisite, and for that cause being vnable to strike, they were constrained to make shew of friendship▪ be∣ing brought to this streight, as to claspe one the other with their armes; there was neuer séene a more dreadfull strug∣ling: for although that they could not help themselues with their féete, yet they did so tug with their hands, yt they were quite out of breath, & their horses knéeling on ye ground, gaue two furious cries. They both came on foote, where the one to shew the other ye valor of his person, with a suddaine hur∣led the one at the other with greater force then is in a bul∣let, when it flieth the fire out of the mouth of ye Cannon. All the battels were renewed séeing these two on fte for ye va∣lorous Ladies, whose battel was cause sufficient to make all the battels in the world to be forgotten: for as there was no defence against their weapons, so were their enemies coue∣red
all ouer with their owne bloud, especially Coriandro, who fought with Rosamundi, who séeing the Knight in the yellow in the ground, much affected to the valour which he had shewne, and assuring her selfe of the strength of her Ti∣rian, shée assailed Coriandro, doing him greater fauour then he deserued; for shée clasped her faire armes about his necks with such force, that shée haled him out of his Saddle; he fell on his féete, where againe began the battell, but with ap∣parant aduantage, for shée gaue him neuer a blow, but that did cut his armour and his fesh withall. Shée which had the worst happe in this furious affray, was the Empresse Claridiano; for the great Bembo, and Brauorante, beeing come on ooe, thinking that they had faine with some ad∣uantage to the Moore, shée tooke her course with her horse against Bembo, who slipping aside, let her passe, whose horse flumbled so on the trunchions of the Launces, that com∣ming to the ground, hee gaue her a shrewd fall. After her came a Giant, who was the cause that Claramante, shifting Bembo from him with a thrust, at two skips he was with the Pagan, making him lose his Saddle, and then he char∣ged Bembo, who with a great pace went towards Claridia∣na, who being sore brused with her fal, was now risen. The valorous Ladie had gottē nothing by dealing with Bembo, but the new louer approached, doing wonders incredible to any mans iudgement. The fierce Giant which had a fall on the ground, seeing his sword broken with the fall, ranne to Claramante his horse to get the Battel-axe. But hee could not do it: for the Quéen of Lira, as fierce as a Serpent, met him with her horse brest, so as she tumbled him to ye ground. By that time was the braue Claridiano come, and thinking that he should doe good with his Axe on foote, he tooke it from the Saddle bow; hee was not so nimble with this terrible weapon as his vnkle was: for euery blow yt hee gaue, was mortall; he put it in practise against the Giant, which remai∣ned on horseback, who with his monstrous sword had giuen the Quéen such a blow vpō her rich helmet, yt being vnable to
breake it, (the buckles thereof being loose) hee smote it from her head, leauing her amazed at the strangenesse of the blow. The Pagan would haue seconded it, and without all doubt had slaine her, but that Claridiano came couered al ouer with a cold sweate, to sée the mistresse of his soule in so notable a daunger, he aduanced his Battel-axe with grea∣ter furie, then discretion, fortune was his good friend, for hitting him vpon the top of the shoulder, the edge of the Axe turning inwards, it smote off his head so easily, that Mars was amazed thereat: hee came to the Quéene, who yet had not put on her Helmet, who presenting himselfe vnto her, said, Kéepe you aloofe, valorous Ladie, for although that you bee cruell to him which dooth most adore you, yet it is not lawfull for me so long as I liue, to permit any crueltie to be done against your worthinesse. These words were so im∣printed in the middest of the Quéenes heart, that shée was of opinion that without any doubt, that was hée whom shée best loued: shée had taken him by the arme and asked him a thousand questions, but that they were otherwise so much busied: that notwithstanding, yet shée said vnto him with a tendernesse of heart, Follow, worthie warriour, the fortune which the heauens haue ordained for thy greater fame, such a seruice as this is not requited with thankes, but you haue made mee bounden vnto you in any thing that shall please you. Ah, Claridiano, said the gallant young man to himselfe, if the Ladie knowing thée had said this, what paine could there be which should not bee pleasing? what displeasure could the heauens doe me which here with might not bee made tolerable? And herewith, faining that shée said so, brandishing his cruell weapon, hee assaulted his enemie. It was in good time: for he found (in an ill taking) her who had borne him in the middest of her intrailes: for the furious Brauorante at the verie instant of his arriuall, with a blow had made her set her hands to the ground, and was about to haue giuen her another, when the braue Gréeke stopt his passage, reaching him a far off such a knocke with Theseus
battel-axe, that made him runne faster backwards then he came forwards. Let your Soueraigne greatnesse hold your selfe aloofe off, valorous Empresse of Trabisonda, said her dearely beloued sonne, for it is not reasonable that to hands so generous should happen any disgrace. The Ladie wondered to sée that shée was knowne by that Knight, and imagining that it was some of her kindred, shée assailed the Giant which had falne to the ground, with whome shée returned to a most cruell battell, but it lasted not long, quen∣ching the same with the death of the Giant. Alone remained Claridiano, Claramante, and the gallant Rosamundi, a∣gainst Bembo, Brauorante, and the furious Coriandro, whose fight, O Muses of Pernassus, that a man might dip his pen in the fountain of your sacred liquor! for much more doe these fixe most rare in valour deserue: they fell out of order, for against Rosamundi, the Achaian addressed him∣selfe, and Brauorante against the braue sonne of Trebatius: with Claridiano happened the wounded Coriandro, which yet with mortall wounds prolonged his fortune. There was no fight to be séene like to Rosamundies; for although that she were not equall in force to the fierce Pa∣gan; yet her rich and faire Armes in all supplied that want; for against the edge of her rich sword, no armour nor en∣chauntment could auaile; for shee neuer gaue Bembo any blow, which did not pare away his harnesse, together with his brawny flesh. The Moore was wonderfully amazed to sée his armour so torne, knowing that shée which fought with him, was but a gallant Ladie: a thousand times would he haue with∣drawne himselfe from her, accompting it a base thing to wage battell against her, but shée did so anger him with the often blowes which shée gaue him, that treading all vnder foote, he began to defend himselfe and to offend the Ladie, giuing her such sound knockes, that, but that shée tooke them vpon Semiramis armour, without doubt he had dealt but hardly with her: but if she took any blowes, it was to the
greater dammage of the Pagan which gaue them: for shée charging and retiring, as nymble and quicke as an Eagle, made the victorie very doubtfull, and oftentimes brought it to that passe, that it plainely appeared to be hers, shee was so furious. The battell betwéene Brauorante and Clara∣mante deserueth a Romane Theater; for eche of them knowing his enemies force, they began to make benefite of their agilitie, which was such, and employed in so good sea∣son, that neither of them could fasten a full blow: but hee which tooke any vpon his armour, it made his flesh blacke and blew, and brought him to the ground vpon his knées. Unequall was the battell betwéene Claridiano and Corian∣dro: for as he wanted both breath and blood, his ouerthrow did plainely appeare, or his certaine death, at the instant that Archisiloraes Louer ended the battell, hitting him so hard vpon his shield, that it nothing auailed him to be of fine and well tempered stéele, but that he smote it in two pieces, sorely wounding him in the head, comming to the ground vpon all foure, and yet he was ashamed, being in choler and before his Ladie, holding it but for a small blow, who ha∣uing a thousand amorous suspicions in her head, she stood re∣ioycing in his valour, vnable to perswade her selfe that it should be any other, then he whom she loued with her soule: but comming to shew him any fauour, her grauitie was such, that she resolued rather to die, then to shew any such lightnesse; this cost her so deare, that it made her to shedde bloody teares. The thrée pillars of humane fortitude arri∣ued, when the Gréeke drew néere vnto the place where Ro∣samundi with Bembo were together by the eares, if néede required to ayd her. They were no lesse then Don Heleno of Dacia, the faire Rosabel, and his friend, the Captaine Generall Aristoldo; who hearing the noyse of the battell, came as hard as their horses could runne. The Dacian pre∣sently alighted, and with his sword drawne, went directly to Bembo, thinking that his Lady was ouermatched, & for∣bare not, séeing the Gréeke Prince to do the like, but rather
ouercome with furie, thinking yt he had meant to haue strikē her, as he made great haste, he cried vnto him, saying, Hold thée, vncourteous Knight, for this villany shall cost thée thy life. The Gréeke would scarsely haue taken these words at his owne fathers hands: he gaue no answere, but florishing his axe about his head, with such courage, that he made thē al to wōder, he was so quick in deliuering his blow that Archisilora knowing that it was the Dacian, could not put her selfe betwéene them, before that the furious young man had striken him with the axe, on the toppe of the Hel∣met. Brutus his Armes stood him in good stead, for other∣wise, from the head to the foot, his axe had split him: and not∣withstanding he made him to goe thrée or foure steps backe∣wards, being ready to fall, he followed him with a thrust; there was neuer a better giuen in all these battels: for hit∣ting him on the one side of the brest, he brake all ye buckles, and within a little disarmed him, making him set one knée to the ground, to stay him vp. Hee againe lifted vp his ter∣rible axe, but not with such dexteritie, as his Uncle would haue done, for being long in bringing the blow about his head, he gaue place to the Dacian to close with him, with such force, that he lifted him from ground, and with a little more had ouerthrowne him. The Gréeke was constrained to let goe his axe, the better to vse his hands. O you Princes, which delight in armes, I would haue béene glad to haue séene you at this wrestling; for neither wearinesse did any way cause ye Gréeke, to shew himself to be any other then he was wont to be: and the Dacian was so blinded with choler, that he dealt not herein with such discretiō as was requisite. The maner how they gyrded one another, the gronings they made, their sometimes clasping their bodies, some∣times parting asunder, then crossing their legges, was such as no tongue is able to declare; for if the Dacian be strong, the Gréeke is no lesse. Giue eare, Ladies, for there is no reason that this wrestling should passe in obliuion without witnesses; and these which came, were no lesse thē the most
mighty Alphebus, the two pillers of fortitude brought him betwéene them, Bramidoro and Brandafidel with the gen∣tle Tirifeo: of the other part came Torismundo, the braue Lord of Spaine, with his sonne and his valiant brother in law: they mist not the venturous Zoilo, with the beloued Lisart, and the Prince of Argentaria, so as a man may well say, there was at that méeting the best and most tryed com∣pany that was in the vniuersall world. All this comming could not cause them to giue ouer the battell: for the Dacian séeing his Ladie in danger, it made him draw new forces euen out of his wearines, and to giue the aduersarie worke inough to doe, who condemned himselfe of cowardise, to suffer one Knight to vse him so, in the presence of his father and other friends. They were both out of breath, and they could not continue and maintaine their obstinate fight: but the one thrust the other a great way off from him; the Gréeke fell downe hard by, where Rosamundi stood: and where hee had left his battell axe, he tooke it vp, and with a wonderfull readinesse hee made towardes the Dacian, but before that he was come néere him, Archisilora stept be∣twéene them, saying, Hold you out, Knight in the yellow, for the Prince of Dacia is not a Knight, with whō this bat∣tel may be suffred to be ended. The Greeke stayed vpon his Ladies words, and then knew the valorous Dacian; for he had no desire to do ought, but what might please his Queen. But the noise of a most fierce blow which Bembo gaue the Lady, suffred him neither to giue any answere, neither to procéed forwards. The fierce Claridiano turned about, as malicious as a serpent, to see his faire Ladie on the ground, vpon her knées, and had somewhat lost her senses, and that the Pagan, forgetting from whom hee came, would haue closed with her. There is no Pard, that more lightly ram∣peth after his pray, thē the Gréeke did to defend her: he came in good time, for before yt his sword alighted on her, he reacht him a blow on one side of the helmet with his axe, and made him fall on his hands, and his axe pierce his target, smiting
him with both his hands, standing on his left foot, & againe smote him a full blow on the brest, and made him (with greater haste then he would) withdraw himselfe three or foure paces from the Ladie, the which free from danger, ha∣uing bene busied with him, had not perceyued the people which shee there beheld, vntill shee was about to as∣saile her aduersary, her husband slept before her, saying, Shall I neuer, deare Lady, leaue to haue cause to complaine of your crueltie; sith comming to so apparant danger, you would not bée defēded by him which was borne to loue youe These Ladies (good Sir) are in the fault, which alone de∣sired to take vengeance on the Romanes; which is done in such sort, that those which remaine, shall haue whereof to talke of the Gréeke Ladies. In fewe words shée told him what had past, and how they had ouercome thē in the Iuss, and of the death of the two Giants, and of the comming of Claramante, with the other Knight more furious then a Li∣on, and how they had waged battaile with those in yt black, to whose ayd came ye rest which there remayned: roūd about had that famous company compassed those famous warri∣ours, whole battaile seemed to Mars to be but new begun, according to the dexterity wherewith they charged, and the quicke retiring of them all foure. The battaile-axe seemed somewhat trouble some to the Gréeke in a priuate battell; & chiefly, because he had neuer bene vsed thereto: wherefore pitching the blunt end thereof into the ground, he left it for a testimony of the owners valour: and so drawing out his good sword with his shield in his hand, he assayled the migh∣ty Bembo. O Apollo, I would thou wouldest recite this battaile, which made all men to wonder! for the dexteritie of them both was without comparison; they were both wel breathed, by reason of their long exercise in armes, and for that cause hastening their mighty blowes so thicke, that it séemed to them which saw them not, that Vulcans Forge was thereabouts; for according to the noyse, it was to bee thought, there had bene a great many of Knights: to the
close came these two most rare men at armes with their swords aloft: But that warre lasted but little, for both fell, which was a meane much to prolong the battell in that maner, and so againe entring with their left féete for∣wards, and their swords in both hands, they made hard An∣uils of their Helmets. There was neuer particular battaile in the world better fought; for eche of them both was the flower of his Nation, and exercised in the Arte as well of Loue, as in this, where∣in no man excelled them, no not loue it selfe, nor Mars. The Moore had the worse, by reason of the Christians good Armes, but supplied that with his strength, giuing and ta∣king blowes which would haue beatē a rock to péeces. The Gréeke would play the fencer, thinking with a thrust, to haue striken his aduersarie in the face, but hee had not well fastned his blow, when ye Moore soundly gaue him a knocke on the top of the Helmet; he tooke him at vnawares, and so the blow lighted so much the heauier, & made him set one of his knées to the ground, and in that warde he stood to sée if he would second his blow, which had lifted vp his sword, but the young man would not attend the weight, where∣with it came, but with a iumpe standing on his féete, he let slip the blow on one side, leauing the Moore deceiued, who gaue so fierce a blow, yt it turned him round about, & smote the one halfe of his sword into the hard floore. Upon the armes, the nephew of the great Trebatius gaue him a great blow, he was much distressed, being assured that hee should lose his sword; breaking the little chaine, with a skippe hee turned about, for in agilitie no man excelled him, and if the Gréeke had not the better looked vnto it, the like had happened vnto himselfe. But seeing the Pagan giue way, he let slippe one hand to weaken the blow▪ hee stayed but little herein, but it was enough for the nimble Pagan, who like an Eagle, séeing his sword was lost, he suddenly tooke vp the Axe wherewith he was a second Mars. In many dayes before he had not receiued the like contentment, as
in séeing that in his hands, assuring himselfe now of the victorie, he now made roome in the spacious gréene field. All men knew him to bee verie expert with that kind of wea∣pon: many were sorie for it, but hee, whome it touched e∣uen at the verie soule, was Archisiloraes louer, who framed a thousand complaints against himselfe, calling himselfe co∣ward, séeing that so retchlesly he had committed so great a fault. I doe not deserue (said that grieued Prince) to loue such a Ladie as this, who is iudge of my basenesse: I haue iustly lost her fauour, séeing that in her presence, I was not able to defend those weapons which were none of mine. Gual∣tenor could not end this battell without a new Chapter, pre∣supposing that he should wel ease them both of their paine, with forbearing a little. CHAP. XII. Of the end of this cruell battell, and how the Greekes re∣turned to their Citie, and of what happened vnto them vp∣on the way. HEctor was not so much grieued with the cruell wound giuen him by the Greeke Prince, for that it was by his hands a∣lone, as Claridiano was to sée himselfe vnfurnished of one of his weapons; & not onely for losing it, but that it happened in the presence of his parents, when it had béene requisite to haue shewed all his valour, rather then in any other part. The sight of the faire Quéene was to him as sauce for his choler, tempering the same in such sorte, that it made him to fall into conceite with himselfe, how he might recouer the lost Battel-axe, and so like a cruel Pard, he would haue closed with the Moore, but hee met with the point of ye axe: his shield was no sufficiēt defence to ward the
blow, but that it passed cleane thorow. This did more grieue the Gréeke, then if hee had in a maner felt the fine temper thereof in his flesh: he remembred, that there was no enchantment, that could resist the edge thereof: the Pa∣gan doubled his blow, but before that he could fasten it, hee was gotten so néere vnto him, that he seized his armes vp∣on him, and finding no resisting, within a little he had ouer∣throwne him, and lifted him aloft from ground. The Lord of Achaia was in some doubt, and thought with him, that it were better againe to lose the gotten battell-axe, then the victorie; and so letting it goe, hee did vse such force vpon the yong mans shoulders, that he made him in despite of him, to stay with his burthen, and gaue him place to take footing on the ground: he resembled the Sunne of the earth, in reco∣uering againe his strength, againe getting that, which hee before had lost, the Gréeke being vnable to hinder the same, notwithstanding that he sweat droppes of blood. This bat∣tell made them that were present, so much to wonder, that they tooke no héede to that which passed betwéene Clara∣mante and the Scythian Moore, who were so fierce, that they séemed to beginne the battell anew. Claramante was sory, that he had not begun with the axe, imagining that by this time he had made an end thereof: yet notwithstanding, when he hit him a fall blow, he made him to shake like an Aspin leafe vpon the trée, when the Southwest wind blow∣eth. They were both very desirous to end the battell, for it was aboue sixe houres, since it beganne, and both toge∣ther gaue so mightie blowes, that they both set their hands to the ground; there was little difference in their skill. But as occasion serued, the Gréeke was more nimble in assayling, then the other: and so raysing him with a thought, before that the Pagan could recouer his ward, he gaue him so cruell a blowe vpon his great crest, that hee made him to goe crosselegd and ready to fall: hee set his right foote forward, and with a strong thrust hee hit him on the brest, striking him almost out of breath. Through the
noyse which they made which beheld this battaile, hee tur∣ned about his head, and séeing that those which had wrest∣led, were come to that ground where they were, he suddenly drew neere, and would not strike the Pagan, which all men thought much of. By this time was the valiant Brauorante come, blasphe∣ming against the heauens, seeing that he neuer proued Knight in Gréece that did not put him in doubt of the bat∣taile: in approching, he suddenly gaue him a knocke crosse the helme, which made him goe on one side; not with the good grace which the place required, where were so many beholders: hee turned against the Pagan; and being so néere that they could not strike, they closed, Claridiano was so néere to the battell-are, that strugling with Bembo, hee might haue layd hands thereon; and taking footing, hee rose, finding himselfe hard by his Uncle, for these warri∣ours were sometime aloft, sometime vnder. The Achaian gaue him not so much leasure; who hauing recouered his sword, came towards the Gréeke: he went to encounter him, beginning the battell anew. Those which stood by, had no time to talke, fearing that in shutting their eyes, they might lose the sight of some notable action, worthy eternall memory. By this time would the carefull Louer impart his light vnto the Antipodes, hiding it from our world, lea∣uing to vs that which his sister gaue, when the foure war∣riours (being the flowre of Armes and brauery) were most earnest: sometime the Gréeke seemed to haue the aduan∣tage, but it was so little and lated so small a time, that no man could say to whether party it would incline. In like maner was it betwéene Brauorante & Lindabrides her new louer. But they all stood expecting the issue, when the hea∣uens began to lighten, & to giue such terrible thunderclaps, that no man there present could deny that he was afeard▪ all was darkened, and nothing to be séene but flashes of light∣ning, which put great feare in those valiant Knights which beheld the battell: no man was able to stirre from the place
where the Earthquake had brought him, for any thing that hee was able to doe. Some visions appeared to them which fought the battell: and as those clouds were past, the skies remained cleare, the Sun yet shewing some fayre streames, as a certaine token of his departure. All alone remained they which had fought the battell, onely excepting Bembo and Brauorante, with the wounded Coriandro, which Lu∣pertius had carried away, because that the Romane shippes being arriued at Niquea, had great néede of their presence. Gualtenor saith, that being fearefull of some ill successe, he made that enchantment to carie away his Bembo, and sought by all meanes to haue done the like by the Battel-axe, had not Claridiano seized vppon it, out of whose hande he could not get it, by reason of the vertue of the rich Iewell, which was of the greatest antiquitie of any that he knew. No griefe can bee compared to that which Bembo and Brauorance conceiued, seeing themselues set in Niquea (for it seemed to them that they had farre the better of the bat∣tell,) which was the cause of their sorrow: they made a thou∣sand complaints of the wizard, who by all meanes sought to appease them, telling them the truth of the cause, for which hee brought them away, which did somewhat ap∣pease them, and promising them that he would set them in Gréece, in a place where no body should part the battell. This is verie little, in respect of that which Brundusio felt, when hee vnderstoode what had happened in the Iuste a∣gainst the Ladies; for he would not of all that day speake to his Cousin, but the next day hee came to him, saying, I know not, Knight, who would presume to returne againe into my presence, cōming ouercome by a woman, I know no reason why you should call your selfe my nephew, seeing thou hast so much shamed the royall bloud of Gibia. Oh co∣wardly knight, is it possible that I should haue the pacience to forbeare to put thee to death? But I leaue it to her to doe, which hath bereaued thée so much of thy fame, and were it
not for that, I would teare thée in a thousand péeces with my owne hands, for ye spot wherewith thou hast stained our worthie linage. At the loud spéeches which he vsed, in came the Emperour of Rome, and the Prince of Almaine, who sought to appease the furious Pagan, whose eyes séemed burning coles: they had much adoe to get him from thence, leauing the proud Coriandro so ashamed, that a thousand times he would haue killed himselfe, and but that hee was in hope to be reuenged at his pleasure, no man could haue sa∣ued his life: But that vaine hope did serue but to prolong his life, comming againe to lose, in the same place where he had béene before ouercome. The wizard with all possible care cured them, making them whole and sound the fourth day, because that on the fifth, they were to marshall their tropes to take the way towards Grecia. There were sundrie opi∣nions among the Romanes, about the admitting of Bembo for Captaine generall, for Brūdusio being a chiefe dealer in the mater, would not yéeld thereto: But séeing that all the high Soldanes, and the Califa, with the great Assirian were contented, he was the man. They chose for Captaine generall, the braue King of Fenicia, and for his companion the expert King of Zarssa, with the King of Armenia, who vndertooke a heauie burthen. They began to dispose of the Nauie, which was so great, that they had néede of Bemboes helpe, who diuided it into three squadrons: neither of the wizards doth set downe the certaine number, but Lupertio saith, that it was nothing to couer the Greeke sea. There was no disagréement among them, although it be seldome séen among so many strange nations as there were assemb∣led: for Bembo prouided for all with so good gouernment, that euerie man knew to what Colours to repaire, and what captaine to obey of the Almaines: séeing them so proud and well armed, their Captaine had a great opinion, purpo∣sing with them and the Achaians to make the greatest part of the warre. And comming to bee of the mind, that it may bee possible to cure the wounds of the soule, there is
little néed of our presence, except to ioy at the sight of so high Cheualy: for when this valorous Prince and I arriued, in my conceit, the victorie was certaine, as all others will be in the world, which shall be purchased by so victorious hands as these, which haue ended this, whereto all owe dutie, as of right. All came, warlike Knight, said the faire Archisilo∣ra, (which without offence to Claridiano, was much affe∣cted for his valour to this vnknowne gallant, séeing what he had done) through the hope that we were in, to haue you for Iudges of our battell, a thing which might haue assured the greatest difficultie in the victorie which wee attempted: And I & these Ladies do much desire to know your name, and of what countrey you are, if it bee no offence to you. Greater would it be to me, to fall into your disgrace, by not discouering it, said Claridiano, then that, which I should re∣ceiue, by vttering it. In this maner, it will be to your ad∣uantage, (quoth the Quéene) in stead of not offending vs, and at the point to demaund it of you by battell, to make vs beholding vnto you for your courtesie. It is so long since, answered the Gréeke, (glad to sée himselfe so sought vnto by such Princesses, which were so and the same in beautie) that I haue béene without any will, for that I sacrificed it to Ladies, that it is not meritorious to yéeld new obedience, seeing that so long since I haue giuen my selfe in sacrifice. My Countrey is in the confines of Scithia Liuia, for it were not conuenient that a Knight of any other countrey should be entertained with such crueltie; sometimes I haue béene called the Knight of Crueltie, but now (wherein they haue hit right) the Ladies Knight, for the pictures which I beare in the middest of my shield, enduring onely the cruel∣tie, which so much tormenteth my soule, which hath béene of such power, that the Ladies haue had a desire onely to helpe me, and my heart herewith endureth new torments. You haue plainely told vs (Sir Knight) quoth the beauti∣ful Quéene, that which these Ladies did desire to know; and making shew of your obedience, you haue told vs more
then wee did aske. Let not your beautie wonder hereat, quoth Rosamundi, for no man is wounded by Cupids hand, which doth not presently publish it, to qualifie their faith, which the Gallants now adayes take for a cusione, when their Mistresses vse them a little vnkindly: there is no rea∣son, why they should complaine of them, for if they be ado∣red, their disfauour were lie to the Gallant, to whom she yéeldeth: but in their complaints, they shw themselues ex∣cessiuely grieued, yt of all the world they desire ease of their wounds. But because this Knight shall not say, that in Greece such crueltie is vsed, as in his Countrey, I here offer my person, to vse all meanes to take away that sorrowfull deuice: for it is not expedient to beare it in Greece; for it is here offensiue to the Ladies, which delight in pitie, and so would they, that those should be, whome they loue. And in hope to see him well, said the faire Achisilra, euery eche on of vs that haue mette him, shall do her best to comfort him. It is very reasonable, said Claridiana, that hee comming to our succours, should be by vs eased of his griefe, in requitall of his good will His griefe from henceforth, said the faire Sarmatia, shall be very little, if it please you to remoue it: for if you be of power to cause it, you may farre better ease it. It is so conioyned with my life, sai the excellen Prince, that the taking away of the one, would bereaue me of the other: and iustly to estéeme such a fauour as this is, with lesse then my life, it cannot be requited. So as, (excellent Ladies) in my griefe remaineth my life; for the faithfull lo∣uer, in middest thereof, is encouraged, making his torment easie, with the onely naming of the cause thereof. I would not for any thing in the world, said the faire Archisilora, that you should so lightly regard so great good will, as that, which these Ladies and I haue offred you. Faire Queene▪ said the secure Louer, I confesse my errour, and to haue de∣serued your disgrace, but I came to these warres with such desire to doe you seruice, yt I determined not to be cured: for I am banished in most strāge maner, being to accōplish my
banishment in Grecia; and but for her sake which ruleth my life, I would take it for a fauour, séeing the graces which the heauens haue imparted vnto all the Gréeke Dames, which kindleth new fire in my sorrowfull heart, séeing it selfe absent from that which my soueraigne inioyeth, which in all respects is equall to her cruelty. Now I say, that he is worthy to be pardoned, and we are sorry for him (quoth Ro∣samundi) seeing that if he desire to liue, it is onely to doe vs seruice. If it were not for that, gallant dames, said ye Gréeke, I would rid my selfe thereof, but I haue therein setled this hope, that I should here find some bodie, which would bee sorie for my ill happe. About this matter those faire Ladies rode discoursing, well pleased with the Knight of Liuia his gentle conuersation, and no lesse were all those high Prin∣ces, for the valour which they had séene and experimented in him: the night they passed with swéete discourses, that al∣though the thrée Ladies, and their being in companie with their husbands, did restraine them from discoursing of loue matters, yet they delighted to refresh their memorie, with talking of ye most plesing time of their whole life. For neuer man loued wel which liued not in loue: for by louing, knights are purified, they become franke, liberall, valiant, and hee which was the most carelesse, becommeth most careful. In no part discretion holdeth so due proportion, as betwéene louers, and neuer was there any honourable end of warres, if loue were not the ground thereof. For loue, gallants at∣tempt doubtfull enterprises, making them easie with this saying, My Ladie will take pleasure therein: and to procure her contentment, in exchange of his owne soule, is to pur∣chase a new life, new Iewels of loue, sufficient to giue life to him that so loueth: and to conclude, Plato saith, that there is no good where is no loue. The valorous Claridiano entertained the faire Ladies, and gallant youthes, with discreete discourses, vntil the gol∣den louer shewed himselfe beautifying the earth, at whose comming, all on horsebacke tooke their way towards the
Citie, highly extolling the valiancie of the two Pagans: they all came to the place where they were which had the gard of the Towre in the sea, the after-noones heate they past in a groue of Poplars, & againe taking their short way, vntill about two of the clock in the night, vnder a high Pine trée, they saw a Knight laid all along on the ground, whose constitution was pleasing to them all, hee was armed with blew, set with many Starres of gold, with so many preci∣ous stones of such worth, that they could not bee valued, who séeing so many comming on horsebacke, rose vp, and buckling on a rich Helmet, he lightly leapt vpon his horse, being caparisoned of the same colour that his armour was, on his Caske he wore a most faire plume set with Spangles of gold, hee had one of the most rich shields of the world. In the middest whereof which was of blew, he bare god Mars, and close by him his Venus, with seuerall crownes in her hands, as though shée gaue them to a Knight which knéeled at her féete, with this Mot: For thy worth and beautie, Receiue this fauour, Worthie thy valour. They tooke great pleasure to behold his goodly personage, and much more, that with his Launce in his hand hee came towards them, they all imagined that he would iust. If it be no otherwise, said Rosamundi, it falleth to our lot to begin, seeing we haue giuen the occasion to séek vs. No body gain∣said it, séeing it was no great aduenture: and so by that time that this gallant was come, they had taken their weapons, who shewing courtesie lifting vp his Beuer, discouered the best fauoured face in all the Pagans countrie, and said, My lot, valorous Knights hath béene so good to méet you in this place, that I cannot complaine of fortune, séeing shée hath set before mine eyes what I most desired to see. I doe not tel you my Countrie, valorous companie, being so remote, neither my name, because there will be small notice of ei∣ther, for there are not two dayes, since I receiued the order
of Knighthood, from the hands of a most mightie warriour, who told me, that if I made haste, I should find here all the best of Greece. I desired him to tell me his name, in requi∣tall of which fauour, I would bee readie to doe him seruice all the dayes of my life, for his valour deserueth it. He told me that hee is called Bembo, and that I should tell the Knights, with whome hee here had fought the battell, that they should pardon him for not ending it, and that there should not want time nor place thereto. Hee told mee so much of your force, and made me so desirous, that I purpo∣sed, if it shall not be offensiue, to desire to iust with some of those which here come: I know it a great boldnesse, being the first time, yet is it a satisfaction, although I lose, to haue iusted with warriours of so great fame. The discrete behauiour of him in the blew, gaue great delight to all, and so the gallant Rosamundi answered him, thinking with her selfe, that shée had neuer in all her life séene a gallanter Knight, except the Gréeke Princes, for they were borne to bee the wonder of the world. I would that of your part some harder matter to be done, had béen re∣quired, to the end that you might haue séene of what power in Gréece, the controuersie is which you haue vsed, and séeing it is but to iust, and to prooue the strength of your arme, let be as it shall please you, estéeming (according to reason) her courteus answere. The young gallant turned with so good a gesture, that hee made the great Alphebus say, Neuer beléeue me, if these iusts be not worth the see∣ing, for me thinketh that this stranger is locked fast in his Saddle. Of the same opinion were all the rest, expecting what would follow. It is not to bee recounted, most excellent and worthie Dames, without hauing recourse for aide to your beau∣ties, for such a thing is not to bee solemnized, but by him, who hath twise borne the Lawrell: for the Eagle flyeth no swifter after her pray, then these two rare persons in va∣lour departed. The Ladie (most excellent Lord) had a bet∣ter
horse then any of those which compasse the heauens, and so they ioyned swifter then thought: neither of them mist in the incounter; the Ladies was such as would haue ouer∣throwne a rocke, but could not the young man; for on hors∣backe few excelled him, & none among ye Moores, yet some∣thing hee bent backwards. But the gallant Ladie losing both her stirrops and the reines, was driuen to take hold of her swift horses neck: they all doubted more then before, of the successe, séeing the faire Ladie in such case at the first en∣counter. In her place entred the faire Quéene of Lira, sen∣ding a new Launce to the young Gallant. The sage Lir∣gandeo passeth ouer all these encounters, saying, that in none of them hee had the worse: hee aduaunced himselfe farther, and ouerthrewe the Princes of Tharsis, both the father and the sonne, and the braue Captaine Aristoldo, he was likely to haue brought to the same predicament. Finally, notwithstanding that the braue Torismundo, & his warlike sōne vndertooke the charge; yet he lost no groūd, nor any part of his honour. Alone remained the Emperour Alphebus; who would not iust, because there should want no laūces for Don Heleno, Rosabel, Claramante, and Cla∣ridiano; foure of ye best Knights vpō the earth. The Prince of Hungarie had scarcely ended his course, whē, with an ex∣cellent swiftnesse the Dacian began ye carriere: he could not haue wōne much honor, although he had ouercome ye strāge Gallāt: for yt he had already run sixtéene courses against ye most mighty knights, who without any shew of wearines, came against ye Dacian. The raging sea maketh no greater noise, persecuting the shippes readie to wracke, then these two most famous warriours made at their encounter in the middest of their carriere: there was neuer seene any better encounter in Greece: for the greedie Dacian smote him some what lowe, and so the blowe was nothing sight∣ly, and withall, hee made him make the foulest bending backwards, that hee had made in all the rest of his cour∣ses before,  was faine to let go the reynes out of his hands,
and to kéepe the Saddle, hee seized on the horse necke, hee encountred Don Heleno in the midst of the shield, and be∣ing vnable to pierce it, by reason of the most fine temper thereof, he shorked with the Helme with such force, as made him forget himselfe, hee was so angrie for this encounter, that had not the straunger had equitie on his side, the bat∣tell had past a outraunce. You would not beléeue how those which stood by did wonder, séeing the great strength of the Knight with the Starres without staying, that Claraman∣te or Rosabel should doe it, the vnknowne Gréeke tooke the matter in hand, purifying his valour in his Ladies face. The sparkles flie not so thicke from Vulcans Anuile, as from these two famous warriours Helmets, either know∣ing the others courage. He in the blew encountred the va∣liant Claridiano, in the middest of the strong brest, but as in that place loue onely did predeminate, so it could not receiue any further wounds from any other hand, he smote him so furiously, shiuering his Launce into small splinters, as made him lose one of his Stirrops, and make such a back∣ward bending, as was strange to that young gallant: Ar∣chisiloraes louer got not much by his fierce encounter, which might haue set him on the greene field: and had hee met him in the beginning of the Iusts, hee had not escaped so good cheape, but being wearie, it was no great matter to ouer∣beare him, with the Saddle betweene his legges. In faire greater estimation from thencefoorth was the Knight held with the Ladies, then before, seeing that he had ended that, which all they could not doe, which were in all things so highly extolled: at an instant he againe fitted his lost Sad∣dle, and with a verie good countenance asking pardon of them all, (although somewhat ashamed) hee tooke his leaue of the Princes. Gualtenor doth not declare the name of this Knight, neither whose sonne he was, leauing it to the fourth part of this famous Historie. Onely hee saith, that hee was the famous competitor to the house of Tar∣taria, vntill that a kinseman which hee knewe therein,
should conclude the welcome peace, but first hee should couer the field with dead bodies, all caused through the loue to a Gréeke Ladie: Hee did not a little in the behalfe of the Pagans in the field battell, whose actes the sage doth not a little commend. All those Lords were much affected vnto him, although the most of them did desire to come to single combate with him. If the Youth had béen aduertised thereof, he would not haue refused it, although against Mars himselfe: for in the world was not knowne a prouder young man, and this made him to attempt great matters, wherein hee alwayes bare the fame of warlike. In discoursing of his va∣liancie, those Princes arriued at the Citie, where they were by all men expected, with some doubt of some danger that might haue happened vnto them, but knowing what had passed, all was turned into mirth. The noble Trebatius entertaining the valorous Ladies, said, I would not faire Ladies, that you should so estéeme the honour of Gréece, that you should therefore put your selues in such apparant danger. There was none (noble Emperour) answered Archisi∣lora, sith it was for your seruice, especially this Knight be∣ing there, pointing to the Knight with the Ladies, who for his valour may be compared with Mars: the rest affirming the same, it gaue occasion to the Emperour to embrace him with as great affection, as if he had knowne him to haue béen his déere nephew. All the faire Ladies bestowed on him new fauours, hauing heard of the valour of his person: By generall proclamation it was commaunded, that all should obey him as a Gréeke Prince: he lay with his beloued Uncle: the world neuer knew two which loued so déerely: they were deuising together, when into the hall there came two Knights from the braue Astrusio, aduertising the com∣ming of the enemies armie, and how that (without doubt) the next day they wold be in sight of Constantinople. They all put themselues in Armes, euerie one repairing to his
thrée hundred thousand men; a shew worth the sight: with all the Flowre of Fraunce, of Denmarke, and Apulia, went the braue Don Heleno commaunding that squadron: his friend Torismundo held him company, with the Prin∣ces of Tharsis and Argentaria: on the one side went the faire Rosamundi; Polidolfo held the third place, with all the Soldiers of his countrey, which were very many, and well armed. All the Portugals kept him company, & great part of the Persians. The fourth degrée fell to the valiant Persiano; wherein he commaunded all the Babilonians and Persians, which were without number. With the rest of the Campe remai∣ned the Emperour Alphebus, with all those of Trapisonda and Lira, much practised in the warres. There were ne∣uer séene troups better ordred, nor Captaine that better prouided for all poynts: hee was gallantly apparelled all in colours, with rich furniture of the same: for they say, the fight of the Generall contenteth the people: hee made them spread all along the coast, opening their rancks: in the middle (for their greater honour) went the Flowre of all humane might, Claramante, Archisilora, & the vnknowne Gréeke, twelue Spanyards, and as many Antiochians. Being drawne neere to the sea side, and in sight of the ene∣mies fléete, which comming neere the Port, drew them∣selues together vpon the top of a little hillock, with his Beuer vp, he vttered this oration: The Oration. IT hath pleased him (valorous Princes and excellent Knights) which hath formed the mould of the whole world, this day to put the Greeke valour in these spacious fields; to the end that the world may know the force of your armes: In praise whereof I would spend some speaches, but that the necessitie of the time doth force mee to be briefe. Onely this I would call to memorie: The royall blood from
whence we are descended, and that we haue a cause in hand which may be for our aduantage▪ The lot is already cast, and the destinies haue permitted it, that at ease wee may see our selues (not compassed with enemies) for, that your noble hearts could not endure: But at the point to let vs vnder∣stand, that wee defend our Countrie with the edge of our swords, I speake to my Knights: for to returne to our Coun∣trie it is impossible, except we ouercome, or lose our liues. And so seeing the Greekes themselues haue chosen and cal∣led vs to their aide, consider that it is honour to die to ad∣uance theirs: our enemies exceed vs in number, and we ex∣cell them in valour and courage; equitie is on our side, and we shall haue as firme ground to fight vpon as they: There resteth nothing but to fight with discretion, for that, and rea∣dinesse to be commaunded, maketh the most doubtfull en∣terprises, easie: neuer any nation made but one Generall, vnder whose commaund an Armie (be it neuer so great) is to be gouerned, attributing to him the glory of the conquest, or the dishonour of being ouercome. This I haue said in regard of mine honour, and of the Office which you haue bestowed vpon mee: for fighting in order, and vpon firme land, and the enemies in the water, if they should get any thing vpon vs, we should lose the hope of any good successe: as for me, it shall be glorie to liue or die in your seruice: and there is no more to bee said, but to march forwards whither victorie shall call vs. THe valorous young Gallant pulled downe his Beuer, leauing them all much affected vnto him for the discrete Oration which hee had made vnto thē, being al wel pleased to haue such a Captaine: and so they drew néere to the shore, spreading themselues at large ouer all those fields; where it was a world to see the wauing of their ensignes, the soun∣dings of Drummes and Trumpets, the neighing of horses, & the deuices of the Commanders; which to describe, requi∣reth an eloquenter tongue, and riper wit then mine. All the
Ladies were put into Venus Castell, which stood towards the Sea, from whence, some with sighes beheld their Lo∣uers, praying to God to saue their liues: they which could doe it, did publikely giue them skarfes and fauours, the bet∣ter to encourage them to aduenture their liues for them. Al∣ready was the mightie Astrusio on the Shores side, who leaping into a Friggot, went to the Emperour, reciting to him all that passed, and how neere they were to the enemies Fléet: Wherefore if your Maiestie please, commaund what people you like of, to enter into this Ship Royall, with you for your Gard: for wee are in readinesse, for the most memorable battell, that hath béene fought vpon the Sea, where, if fortune be our friend, they shall dearely buy their comming, although I assure you, that Xerxes Fleete was but small, in comparison to that which now com∣meth: But I haue so great confidence in the valour of your souldiers, and in mine owne desire to fight with them, that I doubt not, but that we shall ende it with honour. Do, valorous Captaine, in all, as to you shall seeme good, answered the noble Emperour; for neither now, nor at any other time, none shall resist your order. Presently he embarked with the company aforesaid: all the Princes which remained, repaired to their Gallies, where it was a thing worth the séeing, to behold so many Gallies together, so many standardes, so many flagges, streamers, and penons, such thundring of Ordinance; the brightnesse of the armours did so glister, that it beat backe Apolloes glistering beames: the valiant Warriours made so faire a shew on the toppes of the poopes, as gaue good hope of victorie: and so being put in forme of a Crescent or halfe Moone, they beganne to make towards the enemies Fleete, the which they discouered in order, veering in the wide Sea, holding their direct course towards Constanti∣nople, with resolution (although there were among them many opinions) to winne the mayne Port, with pure force of armes.
The desire which the Ladies had to be on land, did moue them thereto: and so the two Nauies came to encounter, where they discharged sundry Cannon shotte, in token that they should charge. The mightie Astrusio had in the vau∣ward of his Fléet, fiftie great Brigandines, which had no other commission, but on the one and other side, to discharge great Cannon shot, which put the valorous Captaine in good hope. The valorous Thebane, with an hundred Gallies, gaue many sudden assaults, and was euer in readinesse, to giue aid where néed was: the battell being ioyned, the Sea waxed calme. Oh, who had euer séene so vnhappy a day, when almost all was betwéene the water, and the flaming fire! the noyse of the shotte bereaued many of their hearing, with such furie, that all the world séemed to shake; for the smoke, the fire, the noise of prows and broken mastes, the callings, cryings, and sundrie noises, made a confusion: Priamus his Citie did not make so great a fire, neither were there so many braue swords drawne, neyther with such spéed and noise, as these two Nauies made, the one shewing to the other the valour of their souldiers. A thousand masts were broken in pieces, their high carued workes swamme vpon the water: it séemed, that the water, the fire, and the winde, had concluded a peace, whose effect was so fearefull, that the sea was on fire, as if heauen and earth would come together: the sundry deaths which were giuen that day, my slender wit is not able to expresse, neither would the great confusion which was therein, giue place to a man, although he had Argus eyes, to see the particular encoūters: for after the furie of the Ordinance was past, they came so néere as to strike with their swords, they were so néere on boord, where, with much shedding of blood, and many deadly wounds, were made many braue assaults. In this most cruell battell, death (which daunteth the stoutest) was not of power to discourage them, or put them in feare, for no man refused any labour or perill, although he saw the Cānon bent against his brest: they entred by the
began to burne in a light flame. Death was not there fea∣red; but yet séeing before their eyes so manifest danger, they began to fly from her, and to abandon the ship. The great Astrutio his people followed so hard in chace, who were most expert at sea, that some of those Princes were almost in danger. But there is no danger, where Commaunders are diligent: onely the Giants payd for it, who were so waighty that they could not make such haste, and so death ouertooke them, before they could come to the sight of Grecia. One of the best ships in the whole nauy was lost. There was no lesse to doe where the three lights of Knighthood, Claramante, Archisilora, and the disguised young Knight, with the Captaine generall by land were fighting. The braue Souldan of Egypt fell to their lot, but to his losse: for against the furie of those foure Princes, there was no force or temper of any Armour, was able to resist: for be∣fore he could put himselfe in readinesse, they had ouercome him, and had wholly ended it, if that foure Gallies had not with full sayles come to the rescue of their Prince: and with all this, presuming vpon the aide of the Gyants, hee placed himselfe neere the boord, where he assaied to shew his force to his enemies. His youthfull resolution lasted but a while, for his gard of Gyants little auailed him, neither his fierce Cousin which stoode by his side, whome Claramante, suddenly with a knocke with his Battel-axe, bereaued of his life: for taking him on the toppe of his Helmet, the sharpe edge of of his Battel-axe descended downe to his brest. This terrible blow strooke a cold sweat, into all the Gal∣lies which came to his aide. The warlike Causelio (as angrie as a waspe) taking the Souldans part, would needes be reuenged, who in the Empire was the next that succéeded the dead Souldan. Fortune was heere fauourable vnto him, reseruing him for greater daungers: for although hee fell into the handes
of Claridiano, yet he could not, although hee procured it, ac∣companie his honourable Cousin in his death but yet hee was stretcht out vpon the Hatches, mortally wounded, very neere vnto the death: hee would haue leapt aboord her, cry∣ing, Grecia, and had done it, and goten the Galley, ad not there come in his necke a mightie Galen to rescue the wounded youth. Herein did the Gréeke execute his rage: for in despight of those which came therein, he leapt aboord, and presently the thrée which followed him. The fight in no place in all the whole armie was more cruell, then aboord this Galley, neither were there hale so many laine men found elsewhere in that battel: for if these foure met but with neuer so little resistance, they redoubled their valour. To the losse of many liues they gat the Standard, iust at the instant when Don Heleno assailed the Admirall of the Romanes, for he had long béene about it. The furious Lady aduanced her selfe forwards, being verie angrie, for the de∣fiance which they had sent her husband. The first that was met, was the strong Brundusio, who séeing the armes of Dacia wauing in the maine top, hee presently imagined what it was, and to be that which he desired: hee made all haste with his Galley to come aboord the mightie Dacian. The Moores Galley came manned with so good Knights, and so warlike and mightie Giants, that here the battell was most obstinately maintained. The warlike Pagan fell into the Ladies hands, with whome shée began such a stur, and with such valour, as made them all to wonder; shée had the aduantage aboue all that followed the warres: for there was not a blow that shée gaue, but did cut their armours cleane thorowe, and most commonly the flesh withall. By reason heereof, the Pagan, notwithstanding that he were knowne to bee one of the most strong and valiant in the army, yet was hee so hardly be set by his aduer∣saries, that hee was bathed all ouer in his owne bloud: but
that was not sufficient to make him giue backe, neither was there in him any point of cowardize, but deferring his cruell destinie, be fought like a valiant Captaine. The Da∣cian his Galley was in great danger, for there were foure, which at once with full sayles, charged him on all sides. I beléeue it was to the ende, that he should the more shew his valor: for redoubling his deadly blowes, there was nothing worth the looking after, but he and his faire Ladie. They deuided themselues, ayding those which were in greatest di∣stresse. The high minded Spaniard was none of those which did worst, for both hee and his sonne made good shewe of the strength of their armes, wading almost to the middles, ba∣hed in Turkish blood: notwithstanding all this, they had hardly escaped, but that the warlike Zoilus came to their id, with his squadron of Galeons, appointed onely to yéeld assistance, where greatest néed required: hee came in, hur∣ling so much artificiall fire, and that with such swiftnesse, that hee thereby rescued the beaten Galley: which beeing therewith lightened, charged so the Romane Admirall, that they had almost taken her, when the warlike Lindauro ar∣riued, whom the Dacian deadly hated: he set the Romane at libertie, but not with such ease, but that hee first had some taste of his enemies valour. There was a huge noise in that squadron, wherein the mightie Alphebus was, in com∣pany with his Claridiana; and of the Troiane Oristides, and his faire Sarmatia, which was, that hauing aduentured far, coueting to take the Admirall of Niquea, they were enclo∣sed with aboue twentie Gallies, holding them in such dan∣ger, that if there had not béene therein such people as there were, they had without doubt béen taken: but the most strong Lisarte with his daintie sonne, kept all the one side, which did some what appease the battell. There were neuer séene more cruell blowes, then were giuen here: for the mightie Emperour, holding his valour for nothing worth, to sée himself so compassed about, gaue neuer a blow, which
bereaued not some one of his life; so as the Sea was full of dead carkasses, the enemies were so many, that they neuer mist ten or an hundred; for presently there came so many fresh men in their places, and of ours neuer a one: they had now no hope to depart from thence, for it séemed impossible, séeing their great valor, to do yt which they intended, which was, to take their Standerd. Afresh came the furious Knight of Epire, who was accounted for one of the most famous, he was much in loue with the faire Lisiana, where∣fore his doings were to be noted: he came in a very high car∣ued ship, he thought to haue caried all, at the first charge; but he found such company within boord, as was the flower of Cheualrie; who came to ioyne with the louing Moore: be∣fore that he could take footing, as a valiant man, for indéed he was one, the Emperour Alphebus gaue him so sound a knocke, vpon the top of the Helme, that he made him set his hands and knées both to the ground: he was scarcely risen vpon his féet, when with a thrust, hee set him faster then a∣pace, out of the Galley; he would haue followed him, had it not béene for feare to abandon his Galley, being in such dan∣ger: there came a Gyant (to his owne hurt) to séeke reuenge, but before that he could discharge one blow, Claridiana had left him armelesse, being desirous to hasten his death, shée came to the ships side, where, with a thrust shee pierced him cleane thorow: she escaped not so scotfrée, but that another smote her on the top of the crest, whose good temper gaue her life, & yet not so, but that she set both her hands to the floore: the Pagan would haue giuen a second, when the warlike Spaniard, Don Clarus drew néere, cutting both passage and life from the renounced Infidell. In many parts they be∣gan to crie Uictorie, Uictorie, but chiefly there, where the foure pillars of fortitude, Claramante and his companions went, who as there wāted not, on whō to try their swords, so was it a pitifull thing to sée, how many they slaugh∣tered. No lesse went they ouercomming euery where, where
the braue Astrutio went, encouraging his Souldiers to doe well, in hope of the reward which they expected: which made the Spanyards draw force out of weaknesse, and the most tired, to shew himselfe couragious: of such force are the spoyles of warre. But the enemies were so many, and their Ships & Gallies so innumerable, that they neuer mist any that were wanting: for all the care that Bembo, going from one part to another, nor of the mighty Pagans, Bra∣uorane and Brufaldoro could take, were not sufficient, but that they gaue ground vpon the water. In this conflict the Pagans were very desirous (notwithstanding they were mortall enemies) to meet with Claramante and his compa∣nion: fortune here in gaue them their wish, for those Prin∣ces Galley came where they were, that made way where∣soeuer they passed: well were they knowne by their Armes, the two valiant yong Gallants, Claridiano and Clara∣mante, whom with his Battell-axe no man would abide; so great was the damage that he did therewith. And the vn∣knowne Louer séeing himself in presence of his Lady, who tooke pleasure to see him, not knowing him for Claridiano: it was wonderfull what hee did. The foure rare men at Armes of ye world, séeing one another, with an excellēt grace and terrible boldnes came to ioyne. The braue Mauritaniā fell with Trebatius his nephew: at their encounter, they gaue together so mighty blowes, that they were inforced to receyue them with ordinary curtesie: they rose againe, and returnd to giue other, & being assured to receyue ye third; for they came not to the fourth, but yt they first saw the starres of the heauēs in their Helmets. Behind thē as a bird, some space was Claramante; who brandishing his axe, smote the Pagan vpon the rich Helmet more hard thē Diamant; his xteritie nothing auailed him, but that he made him giue two steps backwards with apparant shew of falling: hée gaue him a lucky thrust, which tooke him on the side of the brest plate; & barway the males, and therewith the flesh: that blowe did so much trouble him, that the Gréeke had
time to leap aboord his Galley, and to cry, Grecia, and for it, Uictorie. His speaches cost him deare; for Brufaldoro re∣turning to it, finding him neere at hand, and out of order with his leap, with all the force that he was able, he smote him vpon the rich Helmet, he made a thousand sparkles fly out of it, and the bloud out at his mouth. By this time came Brauorante as fierce as a Basiliske, & seeing his Galley en∣tred, he threw his shield to ground, and with both his hands he smote at him a cruell blow. The Greeke well saw it cō∣ming, and vnable to shn it, he crost it with his strong hal∣bert; for if he has stricken him at full, he had bene in great danger: he smote it backe to his Helmet, tormenting him so, that he had almost lost his senses. With another came Brufaldoro, which put him more to his shifts. It greatly grieued his Nephew to see what past: and although yt with his Uncles leap, the Galley was put off; yet taking his ri∣sing in his owne Galley, he leapt aboue twentie foote at a iumpe. With the force wherewith he came, he fell on his knées at Brauorante his feete, who was about to fasten another blowe on the warlike young man: but séeing him so neere vnto him, and knowing him by his Armes, he addressed it vnto him, discharging with all his power a cruell blow vp∣on the Gréeke there were but few Knights within boord, and those so busied, and some wounded, that they let these foure proceed in their battell, which was wonderfull to be∣hold. Claramante let slip no occasion to take reuenge on the Moore, who séeing him busied with his Nephew, before that the Mauritanian could come at him, making roome in the Galley, he came at him in such sort with his battel-axe, as would haue made Mars afeard. The valorous young Gallant mist not of his blowe; for striking him with great force on the one side of the Hel∣met, hee made him fall downe vpon his hands to the ground. Claridiano closed with him, meaning to haue
kild him, and had done it, had not Brufaldoro come so soone, who to rescue him, was likely to haue lost his owne life; for againe striking a downe right blow with his axe, the blow lighted on his left shoulder, leauing it all disarmed and with a small wound: they all betooke them to their weapons, where they began a battell worth the seeing: for those which fought it were gréedie thereof, and angry for former matters, which was the occasion that made it farre more cruell. The night came so fast on, that for all that they could doe, they could not end it: the Greekes being cō∣strayned (except they would lose themselues) to returne to their Galley, where they might sée their enemies Nauie burning in a light fire: for there comming a fresh gale of wind from the shore, it was a fearefull thing to behold the slaughter that there was made: if Nero had séene it, I be∣leeue he had séene that which he so much desired. The Greeke Nauie was not free from that danger; for as there were many Galleyes grappled together, the flame tooke hold on them, and had done much mischiefe, had not the Captaine wisely preuented it, casting on much water, and with all possible spéed (as the case required) cutting the grapples and tackling, falling off from the fire. The ene∣mies vsed the like policie, and were forced to take landing much lower then they would haue done, hauing lost great part of their Nauies: but séeing so great a multitude of people, they were recomforted purposing to make amends by land. That night and the next day, they landed all their people in the Hauen of Hircambela, ten miles from Con∣stantinople, which they would haue razed, but for staying. They presently ordred their battels according to Bemboes direction, who that night came forth of the Campe, accom∣panied with ye best men in the armie, with a hundred thou∣sand men of warre, to leuell the passages betwéene that and the Citie, and to pitch their Tents. The victorious Gréekes (although with some losse of their Gallyes) returned to their Port, & went ashore; there was
great ioy made in the Citie; the Emperour much estéemed this course of importance. The valorous Astrusio, taking his leaue of the Princes with many imbracements, returned to the sea, setting his hurt men ashore to be cured, hee came to the mouth of the Hauen for feare of a tempest, verie ioyfull of the victorie: the Captaine generall by land, séeing his enemies therein, began to shew the worthinesse of his person, as shall bee de∣clared in the next Chapter. CHAP. XV. Of the encounter which the Captaines souldiers had with the enemie, about pitching of their Campe. THere is nothing, most excellent Prince, that giueth the assurance in the wars, as discretion, that maketh easie that which is most difficult; the braue sonne of Sacri∣doro, making benefit thereof, ended great battels, as shall appeare in this famous and large Historie. This famous Captaine was the first man, shewing in all things not onely his valour, but ye excellencie of his wit also: for the golden Apollo had scarcely lookt out at his fayre baye window, spreading abroad his golden lockes, bathed in the Spanish Seas, when comming foorth of Constanti∣nople with all his royall Cauallarie, hee called the Spani∣ards and Antiochians, to whome for their much experience hee had shewne much affection: with him went the flowre of Cheualrie, Claramāte, Claridiano, and the faire Archisi∣lora, with him also went the warlike Giants, Brandafidel, Bramidoro, and the strong Tifereo. Few of the principall but did accompanie the Generall, who in few words told them whereabout he went, and how much it did import af∣ter
and séeing in what case the Moore had left him, before that he had space to draw his broad sword, the Ladie was come, and with hers, shée suddenly tooke him crosse the Helmet, cutting away a great part of the visor, and withall, made him réele in his Saddle; shée holpe him forwards with a thrust, so as his thicke armour auailed not, for shée hurt him sore in the middest of the brest, his bloud gaue testimo∣nie of his dangerous hurt. Like one of the wild beastes of Hircania, the Paynim set vpon the gallant Ladie, who sée∣ing the furie where with he came, gathering her selfe vnder her shield, for shée had no more roome, shée receiued the ter∣rible blow: it made the bloud come forth at her eares, and to her brest did shée bend downe her head, astonished with the blow; and but that her dexterity stood her in stead, he had striken her againe, which had béene no great matter to doe, shée was so ill of the last, for the Moore was verie strong; but reyning her horse, shée put her selfe somewhat from him: the force of the blow made the strong Pagan to turn about, and fall vpon the pummell of his Saddle, and his horse be∣ing prickt with the Spurres, brought him hard by Claridi∣ano, who was glad in his soule: for a thousand times he was about to leaue the battell, to come (although there were no néede) to aide the Quéene of his life. Seeing the good occasion, putting the Achaian from him with a verie strong thrust, with all his whole power hee smote him vpon the Helme; it was a verie fortunate blow: for lighting vpon the cannon of the Feathers, it pluckt it from his head, leauing it disarmed, throwing it at his horse héeles, and but for feare of the ioyning of the two battels, he had followed him; for séeing into what case he had broght his Lady, it made him deadly angry. Then came the Lady pursuing him, and séeing what reuenge was taken of him, euen enforced thereto, to her selfe shée said, O flowre of Cheualrie, how vniustly doth thy Ladie suffer thée to beare this deuice, being worthie to bee beloued by the most excel∣lent! I beléeue, that, but that shée loued Claridiano so ex∣tremely,
shée had sure giuen passage to Cupids forces, who sought by a thousand meanes to make her tributarie: but shee was so constant in her loue to the Gréeke Prince, that the Knight with the Ladies inioyed onely good will: shee would requite him for his blow, giuing Bembo another with both hands, of no lesse force then what of him she had receyued, she made him lay his head in his bosome, and be∣fore that hee againe came to himselfe, she gaue the Pagan such a thrust, as did much grieue him. In this hurry, came ye Captaine generall, and the most strong Mauritanian, being some what out of breath; for ha∣uing buckled together, there mist but a little that the Antio∣chian had not bene ouercome, for the Moore was so strong, that few could match him: they came before the Greeke, who stood beholding his beloued Archisilora, and suddenly the Pagan smote the sonne of Oriselua on the side of the Shield; it was great hap that he had not stricken it out of his hand, and his arme therewithall: he made him so dizzie, that he could not tell, whether he were afoote, or on horse∣backe; he would haue giuen him a second, and had stretch∣ed out his arme to giue it; but the valiant young man op∣posed himselfe, saying, Hold thee, thou ill taught Pagan, & know, that it is no valour to strike him which cannot de∣fend himselfe. He stayd for no answere, for in such cases it is excusable: but hurling his sword about his head with Mars his strength, hee smote him vpon the strong armes, which he had lifted vp, and made him to lose his blow, and also his sword out of his hand; which before he could reco∣uer againe, hee gaue him another, and within a little layd him at his horses féete. With the noyse, about turneth Claramante, who was in a terrible fight with the Scithian: neither the one nor other could passe any farther forwards; for the two armies came to ioyne with such a noyse, that it séemed that the heauens were vnhung, and should come downe to the earth: with a fayre encounter they repayred, wherein, aboue twentie
thousand lost their saddles: It was a fearfull spectacle to see the diuers kinds of deaths which were giuen: some fal∣ling from their horses, were troden to death: others being thrust thorow, so ended their iournie: others séeking reuēge, desired to kill, dying. As the place was narrow, and the people infinite, no man lst his saddle that could euer againe recouer it. The horses not féeling their riders, ran out of ye troup, leauing any more to trouble the troups. At the first charge, they lighted on ye famous Brundusio; who escaping without hurt, with a new Helmet, would néeds returne to the battell, desiring rather to die in cōpany of his Knights, then to liue any where else. He entred, reuenging himselfe vpon that poore people, among which he did exceding much hurt: Yet the Greekes did as great among them: so as some of their Colours began to retire to the passage where they first came into the field: but there they found the braue Sacridoro; who did not onely stay thē, but made a great slaughter among them, so as the Moores were bea∣ten on either side; for neither the force of their Captaines, neither their great number of people could defend them from hauing the worser of the day, by reason that to the Greekes came still new succours. This bloudy skirmish was knowne in the Citie, there remayned not one Prince therein: the Duke of Thebes executing the office of Sargeant Maior generall, brought forth in order, all the carts which came from Antiochia, which hee spred ouer all the fields, towards the willow field, where afresh they renued the battell: for the braue Emperour of Rome, which was much practised in ye wars, was come in great haste with all the rest of his armie, set∣ting before all the Giants which he had, to keepe their e∣nemies busied, while ye Pioners began to pitch their Camp by a woods side, leauing it to serue for a wall at their backs; but another day it put them in poynt to be lost and ouer∣throwne, as shalbe declared. They would enter to assist their Captaine: But the
braue King of Antioch had so warlike set his gards, that they would not suffer them, the Persians and Babyloni∣ans, which garded the passage, fighting like Lions: so as séeing the impossibilitie, they determined to passe ouer the top of the mountaine, although it were very hard to doe: they did it, but not without much labour, and the Greeke stood attending their comming, although all their princes were gone into the field where the battell was, refusing to returne to Constantinople without the fame of Ho∣micides. The Giants stood them in much stead, restraining the furie of the Greekes; and although, that by all meanes they sought to let it, they were not able: for within their sights they began to pitch their Tents, and their Pioners with all speed compassing the same with deepe trenhes. The warlike young Gallants could not end it of them∣selues, of the Moores part: for seeing what passed in the field, although the passage was vary craggy, yet Don Ce∣lino and Floralisa, with the gentle Clarisel, and Don Ar∣gante, and Torisiano, with the mightie Epitabio and Tin∣dauro, with the Kings of the East, which were most migh∣tie Giants, came downe the mountaine. With their comming downe, there beganne a most fierce and bloudy fight: for on that side where they came, they made a most deadly slaughter: and had it not bene for those Princes which were newly come, they had without all doubt done much more harme. Then there came Don Heleno, Rosabel, and the mightie Father and the Sonne the famous Emperours of Greece. Then came Trabisonda, with Florion of Babylon, and the fayre Rosamundi, whose, deeds deserue a particu∣lar historie: for betweene Brandafidel and Bramidoro, she was more mightie then Mars. They came to pel, mel, one with another: where were seene gallant blowes, bold assaults, and quick retreats. O Claramante, who had
séene thee girt with thy rich sword, and with thy axe in both hands, rushing in among thy enemies! He onely may bee said to be the death of them all: for as they went close toge∣ther; so sometimes at one blow he smote downe two ene∣mies, giuing neuer a blow in vaine. With all this they cryed, Uictorie, by reason of the many Captaines come to their ayd. Archisilora, which was by her louers side, came to ioyne with the faire Floralisa, knowing her by her Armes: and hauing a great desire to try her strength with her, said to ye beloued yonker, Kéepe you this side, for yonder Knight in the cornation hath much wronged mee. The Bull neuer better defēded his eares against the mastife, thē the Gréeke obeying his Ladies cōmandemēt, whorling his shield at his back: it was pittifull to sée what he did: for he gaue no blow, that was not deadly, giuing place to his Lady, to execute her cruell determination. The two valorous Ladies came to blows, there was neuer séene a more cruell battell: Flora∣lisa gaue the first blow, such a one as brought the Quéene of Lira to deathes dore; for she gaue her such a blow vpon the highest of her Helmet, that it made her lay her nose in her bosome, casting bloud out at her visor: she doubled her blow on one side of her shield, and beat it so close to her brest, that made her almost breathlesse. It was not long ere the Quéene came to her selfe, who as fierce as an Ounce char∣ged the Lady: there was no defence in her shield, for al∣though that she cut it not, for that it was Camillaes; yet she smote her so on the helmet, that she set her on ye pummell of her saddle. Shée paused, and then like a Lyonesse, giuing her a mightie thrust, she clasped her armes about her neck, and drew her out of her saddle. They both fell downe to the ground, where without all doubt shee had lost her life, had not Don Celindo leapt after her, and with him his three most famous companions, who when they saw their sister Floralisa in so great and manifest danger, and at the poynt to be ouercome, being enraged with great sury, and without any regard of what to Knights did appertayne,
they all thrée at once began to lay on load vpon the Quéen. O Claridiano, there was neuer Lion comparable with thée▪ for séeing his Ladie in such peril, although shée strangely de∣fended her selfe, he skipt from his horse like an Eagle: there fell into his hands a mightie Giant, which came to the noyse, and was going to close with the Lady. But the disgui∣sed louer being therewith displeased, brandishing his sword about his head, he smote him iust in the waste, his plancks of fine Stéele were like waxe before his sword, for in sight of the whole armie, in two péeces hee smote him downe at the Ladies féete, which then were in fight: a cold sweate ranne through all their veines, séeing so terrible a blow. This youngsters furie was not herewith asswaged, for hee more forcibly then a thunder bolt, rushed in where his La∣die was enclosed, and in great danger. Hee trode Don Ar∣gante vnder his féete, and shouldred Thorisiano a great way from him, and with a leape, assailed the valorous Assirian, which in defence of his Ladie, performed verie heroicall exploits. His faire lookes could not auaile him, for ye Gréeke with both his hands smote him on the Helmet, and made him set both his hand and his knées to the ground: he set vp∣on Don Celindo, who was hammering vpon Archisilora, and with a terrible thrust made him runne backwards, and fall vpon his backe among the footemen: and although that he were roundly assailed, yet, making way with his sword, hee came where the Ladies were, and gaue Floralisa a stumbling blow. Camillaes armour saued her life, but they could not saue her from falling on her face before his La∣die, who holpe her forwards with another which was no lesse. By this time were come to their aide, the two valiant Giants Brandafidel and his friend Bramidoro, who plaied the Diuels; they cleared the passage on one side, for he which had the Gard of Floralinda, neuer gaue blow with his Club which did not ouerthrow thrée or foure. With this good assi∣stance, the braue Gréeke tooke his Ladie in his armes, (the greatest pleasure that euer fortune did him) and set her
in her Saddle, saying, I would not, valorous Quéene, that your worthie acts should bring you into such danger. To ioy in yours, warlike Knight, it shall bee but well done to séeke it, séeing that therewith is purchased the sight of the valour of your arme. There was no time to vse many speeches, for they were in haste, for séeing the enemies on foote, no man remained on horsebacke. The Greeke with a light leape re∣couered his horse, leauing them all amazed at his doings; it was his good hap to be on horsebacke: for there came the flowre of Giant-land, with great Pine trées in their hands, these the Greeke desired to meete, and but for lea∣uing his Ladie, he had gone to seeke them: their huge bo∣dies were clad with planckes of Stéele: to meete them went out two, with the Princes: Brandafidel aduaunced him and gaue a faire blow, for hitting one of those fierce Giants on the toppe of his Murrion, hee put him out of his remembrance, throwing him to ground with a greater noyse, then if a great horse had falne: his death was not no∣ted, for there came so many, that there was no place voide, although they fell more and more. With all this, they felt the braue Greeke keepe a stirre, and working wonders among them: that which Bramidoro did, was no lesse worth the sight, who had alreadie slaine foure: the great troupes of men which came to rescue one another, parted the battel, but not the companie of the foure which first began. Claramante hauing vpon a suddaine slaine a King of the Giants, raising himselfe on his Stirraps, saw much peo∣ple towards Grecia: in a whirling, he repaired thither, con∣ducting the thrée Princes with him, one wondring at ano∣thers doing. They made great haste, for it was néedfull, and the matter was, that the young man whome wee will call the Knight of ye Starres, vntill the fourth part of this Histo∣rie, where hee shall lose his name and become a louer, it was hee which in the Forrestes, as is alreadie said, put the Princes in such danger, who was come in fauour of the Pa∣gans, as hee had promised to Bembo, whome hee went to
seeke. Before that euer he brake his Launce, he had throw∣en many of the most famous to the ground; for to the Prin∣ces of Fraunce, nothing did their valour auaile them: for he ouerthrow them. Liriamandro, Brandisel, and Barian∣del, with the braue Troiane kept them companie: it was his fortune with his sword in his hand to meete with that Knight, to whome by nature he was bounden, which was Zoilo the Tartarian. They both strake together, but the match was vnequall, for such as the young man are few in the world; hee had put him in danger of death or of being o∣uercome, if the warlike Lisait had not come to his aide, with his beloued sonne, and the Prince of Persia Bransinia∣no, the which with their power, hauing left the stand where Sacridoro was, séeing all in safetie, came afresh to the bat∣tel, and they came in good time for the Tartarian. The yong man more faire then Absolon, doubled nothing, but cast∣ing his shield at his shoulders, as he neuer mist blow, he put them all out of breath, without losing any ioat, who being neere the Prince of Hungarie, with a side blow he cast him to the ground sore wounded: after him hee set the Prince of Bohemia on all foure. Then came the Spanish Prince, who within a little held them companie, for hee set him sencelesse vpon his Saddles pummell: hee had a hundred swords about his cares, and those the most famous, but his lot was to make shew of himselfe, to bee the Phenix of the world. To his rescue came the foure Pillars of their Camp, Bembo, Brufaldoro, Brauorante, and the terrible Brundu∣sio, with whose aide he made more head against the Greeks. On the other side came the braue Emperor of Trapisonda, all couered with bloud, with Rosacler & his sonne, they held their swords to behold ye young gallant. God blesse vs, quoth Alphebus, what valor is in this knight, he would not assaile him? he so much affected him, but be held Rosabel, who like a Lion leapt into the middest of the throng. All those which were of his side knowing him, gaue him good way, and the enemies for feare, left the field frée: for the foure famous
warriours, Claramante and his companie, had taken them to taske, and so hauing fit oportunitie, they put their deter∣mination in execution. I would I were not so much affec∣ted to the young Knight with the starres, whose fame rea∣ched vnto them, because I would describe this battell with∣out passion, worthie to bee related by Virgill or Mantuan. For these two rare persons in valour comming to ioyne, it is not possible to expresse what blowes they gaue: onely Gualtenor saith, that they bowed downe their heads to their Saddles pummels, casting aboundance of bloud out at the visors of their Helmets: none of those which beheld the bat∣tell, durst to giue them any aide, for it was néedlesse: for they presently came againe to themselues, and each of them knowing the valour of his enemie, they began to vse dexte∣ritie. The bold Breton was most accustomed to armes, and therefore was more nimble in giuing the on-set, but the late lost blow of the yong man supplied that defect: for as fierce as a Serpent, he sought to attaine to the victorie. He came flying in with two blowes vpon the highest of his shield: the young man with the Starres was not one who would lose occasion, and insuch a case as that: and so beating by a thrust, hee smote him on the rich Helmet, it much auailed him that it had béene Hectors: otherwise hee had cleft him to the necke: it sounded like a Bell: he made the firie spar∣kles flie, and him beléeue that the skies were therein when they are most starrie, for hee did so astonish him, that for a good space hee lost his remembrance: it was a spurre to put life in him, for the young man to come with another as strong as the first, it cut off his plumes, and as Lupertius saith, the Cannon also wherein they were: but let it bee as it will, the Gréeke neuer saw himselfe in the like danger as then, in his life: but being chaffed therewith, and that his Father did behold him, he set vpon his enemie. In all these battels, there was neuer giuen a better blow: for against Hectors sword, no force nor magicall temper can resist. Smiting him vpon the top of the shield, hee claue
it in two péeces, and passing through to his shoulders, it carried with it his Poloron, leauing him shrewdly woun∣ded, hee ranne at him with a thrust, which cast him backe vpon his Saddle, and if he could haue fastned another vpon him, without doubt he had ouerthrowne him. There is no Uiper could bee compared to that warlike young man; for seeing himselfe handled in that maner, hee flung his shield to ground, and with his sword in both his hands, hee let flie a blow at Rosabel, which lighted on his shield; it pierced it not, but draue it to his Helmet with such rigor as made him sencelesse: ioyning with him, hee cast his armes about his necke, and within a little pluckt him out of his Saddle, but recouering his sences, setling his feete in his Stirrups, wheeling most strongly about, they fell both to the ground, where betaking themselues to their weapons, it was a world to sée their agilitie, the proud onsets, and couragious retreates. Strong was he with the Starres, but he had before him one which was borne with a brest-plate. Some aduantage there was to bee séene in him, but it was so little as could scarcely bee perceiued. The night drue on, for the Sun hast∣ning his course, hid his beames because he would not sée so cruell a battell. Wherefore those warriours were constrai∣ned to repaire to their horses, desirous to méete, where they might haue time and place to end the battell, which at that instant was so vehement, as was wonderfull: but the Moores had the worst, because they had no succours: this was the sorrowfullest day for them, that they had during the warres. For of one hundred and fiftie thousand men which entred into the Willow valley, there neuer returned the third part, with the losse of thrée Kings, which died among the first. The Gréekes did not wholly without losse enioy this victorie, although it were the greatest that euer they had in all the warres, for it grieued them to sée the Moores encamped: within sight of the Citie in a most conuenient place, the past all the night well content on both sides; the
one for hauing shewne, that by land they were those which with their persons defended their Empire, hauing shewne vnto the Moores, with the price of many of their liues, the valour of their persons. The others, notwithstanding that they had lost many people, yet were verie glad, that they were entrenched in so good a seate. The warlike Bembo, seeing the valour of the yong Knight with the Starres, ex∣tremely loued him, hee was no lesse accompted of by the Gréeke Princes, esteeming him more then all the rest of the Campe. But the commendations which were giuē of the knight of the Ladies, were such, and so many, that I am not able to recite them: there is no reason but to beléeue them: the first that beganne to publish his famous acts, was the faire Archisilora. Among the Pagans likewise his arme was much extolled, the which in fortifying their Campe, and burying their three Kings, spent eight daies, in the which there wanted no sightly skirmishes, nor dangerous encoun∣ters, wherein sometimes they were losers, and sometimes were victorious, a common matter to haue such aduentures in the wares: and while as they prepare themselues, I cannot forbeare to goe thither where I left Poliphebus, for it is expedient that in such a matter as this, so famous a Prince bee not forgotten, to whome, and that with great reason, is attributed the cause of the victorie of the Greci∣ans and of atchiuing of their enterprises, which otherwise were dangerous.
CHAP. XVI. How the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria, entred the Castle of the golden Bough, where hee deliuered the most faire Luzela, daughter to the Emperour of Egypt, from en∣chantment. I Am so afraid, faire dames, to be lothsome to your delight, with such warres as are past and are expected, that I am enfor∣ced to entermixe some matters of loue, with those of furious Mars, because that if the one bee tedious, the other may yéeld delight, and so I will shake off the feare wherein I was in this behalfe; for not to proceede with that sweete and pleasant stile as I would, it is enough to be loathed; without liuing in feare also, you shall take my desire, and not the fruite of my short witte in good part: for thereof, and of your daintinesse I am assured, seeming to me to bee of gold the libertie of the Tinacrian Ageno, and to haue it, I acknowledge that it is a death to me, and life to be estranged. Hee enioyed little by being at libertie, for that angrie passage being ended wherein we left him, hee went direct∣ly to those Portes, whose faire rich lustre made him to wonder, comming to the Portes which seemed to bee of no worse then gold. The sight of the faire Pictures and Paintings therein engrauen, yeelded delight to the be∣holders: hee came to the Pillar which stoode before the gate, and without feare winding the rich horne (for he much desired to know what was within) hee had scarcely winded it, when with a greater noyse, then if ye whole architecture
of the house had fallen to the ground, they opened. The coura∣gious young man put hand to his rich sword, and imbracing his strong shield, and séeing that no bodie came foorth, hee went directly to the gates: through them hee passed, when suddainely hee was held backe, for on either side stoode two deformed Giants, hauing their huge waightie Clubs lif∣ted vp. The young man was aduenturous, thinking with himselfe, that what he had done, was cowardice, if he should now retire, and so hee went forwards. There was not a liuelier Knight in all the land, and this aduaunced his va∣lour, for on foote few could match him. Hee entred with his shield before him, making a faire shew, and with a leape he cast himselfe in, but not without receiuing such a knocke, as made him set his knées to the ground: it was then no time to bee idle, for at an instant the most strong Giants were with him, who attended their comming, with deter∣mination, with discretion to maintaine the battell. As hee was skilfull in fencing, so he tooke his ground in the paue∣ment which was vnder the Port, vpon the which were the two rich Pinacles: the Giants were in hand with him by fits; it was not ill for him to goe flourishing, and to charge when he saw time, but if he were light and quicke, they were Pards, yet notwithstanding, his nimblenesse did auaile him, for they both together being about to strike him, with a skip (couering himselfe well with his shield) hee put himselfe iust betwéene them, making them to lose their blowes, but he, not his: for with a blow backwards in entring, hee smote him which was on his right hand, iust a∣boue the knee; there was no defence against his arme, for his sword entred into the bone. The Giant féeling himselfe sore burt, would haue closed with him, but his thigh failing him, he fell vpon his face to the ground: he did not let slippe the occasion which fortune gaue him, for before that the o∣ther Giant could assaile him, with a great blow he tooke him on the top of his huge Helmet, it was thrée inches thicke, but yet hee pierced him to the skull. The Tinacrian was so
gréedy of ending the battel, that it was like to haue cost him deare, for hee gaue oportunitie to the Giant to strike him: those blowes were not such, as that a man should stand to¦ward them, for it made him to set both his hands and his knées to the ground, casting out aboundance of bloud at his mouth: another blow the Pagan meant to haue giuen him, but his furie was such, that it made him to misse, for if he had hit him right, it had gone ill with him. Garrofileaes sonne arose, and seeing the Giant vnproui∣ded, for his blow was past, without any feare hee ranne at him with a thrust, and smote him in the middest of the broad brest, his armour was three double, yet the sword en∣tred into the hollow of his brest: he felt the wound which he had giuen, and séeing the Giant comming drawing his lame legge after him, with a leape he ioyned with him, who vnable to strike as hee pretended, compassing his Mace a∣bout his head, he threw it at him, and smote him in the mid∣dest of the shield; it was a wonder that he had not beaten it to péeces. The young man was not strong enough to kéepe himselfe from falling to the ground, the bloud gushing out both at his mouth and nosthrils. The young man could not defend himselfe, but that he tooke a blow on the shoulders, which made him thinke that all his bones on that side were broken. Being now as furious as a Lion, casting his shield at his shoulders, and smoake out at his visor, couered with bloud and sweate, brandishing his reuengefull sword, hee smote the Pagan a full blow on the brest; there were fewe such blowes as this euer heard of: for neither his thicke brest plate, nor his doublet of fine Maile could defend him, but that he almost cleft him into two péeces. The young man was glad that he had giuen so good a blow; but he esca∣ped not scotfrée: for turning about to set vpon the wounded Giant, two crowned Lions ramped vpon him, which in strength excelled that which the braue Hercules slue, they seyzed vpon him, and hee was not able to defend himselfe. His armour saued his life, but they so crushed him, that they
put him cleane out of breath. The most cruell Pagan had not lo his ioynt; who drawing out a broad crooked knife, was comming towards Poliphebus. He well saw him cō∣ming, and not (as was reason) without most great feare, séeing he had so much to doe to defend himselfe: but there he shewed the bloud, from which he was descended: for in despite of the Lions (haling them after him) he eschued the enemie; and so with all his force he got one arme at liberty, which he put to his dagger, and therewith ended the Lions warre. He was so gréedie thereof, that the fierce Pagan came; who being desperate, smote him vpon the rich Helmet, and beat a thousand sparkles of fire out of it, and made him set his knées to the ground. He came vpon him with ano∣ther before he could recouer himselfe: it was great hap that he had not stretched him all along, for he made him to fall on his face vpon the ground; and had it not bene for his lame leg, without doubt he had killed him. But the future louer, which now for that he was a stran∣ger, hastned his lot, séeing yt he came againe, shifted himself to one side, and with all the strength that he was able, he smote him vpon the shield: it was of hardned stéele, after ye maner of a Target, which hung at his necke: he parted it in two, iust in the middest, and made the Moore to réele, like∣ly to fall. The couragious young man, séeing him stand some what amazed, hee shewed not him selfe so, but suddenly leaped close to him, so as that before he could turne, he had giuen him a knock on the pate: he smote off halfe of his Helmet, and good part of the crowne of his head: he was driuen to trip to kéepe himselfe vpright. With another blow came ye sonne of the great Trebatius, wherewith he ended the bat∣tell, bereauing the accursed Moore of life, being so tyred, that he was constrained to leane to his sword, and put vp his vi∣sor to recouer his breath: hee might haue inioyed his rich hood, which was inestimable: he spent some time herein,
and thinking it more then reasonable, and taking a view of his weapons, he tooke vp one of the Giants Macee, and went to the other gate with so great courage, as would haue made Mars afeard, which stood wide open: a little within appeared a very comely Knight on a roane horse: his Armes were all lion coloured with some gréene spots: he séemed so comely a man, that the great Tinacrian affected him. He entred the gate without any shew of distrust, with his club on his shoulders. In passing a little vault, hee of the Castle came to him, saying, For the fayre disposition, Sir Knight, which you shew, I would not willingly fight with you; but being commaunded, of force I must obey, par∣ticularly Ladies, to whom is promised the head of euery one that commeth here, since the comming hither of a cer∣taine Damsell. Without fighting with you, gentle Knight, answered the Tinacrian, I would goe forwards; but seeing it impossible, I am to be excused: wherefore bethinke you of the maner of our battell. On horsebacke, answered he: for, for you cō∣meth one which the Ladies send you. He turned his head to one side, thinking that that had bene true which he of the Castle told him; but he had scarcely turned, when the other clapping spurres to his swift running horse, ouerturnd him with his horses brest, and gaue him a great fall in the mid∣dest of the yard. He thought that his body had bene brokē, the fall was so terrible. This horse was taught for this purpose onely: and so he was not full risen, when with a new carriere he returned to tread vpon him, and ouerthrew him vpon one side: this was worse then the first; for fal∣ling vpon one side vpō his shield, it had almost put his arms out of ioynt. There is no Hircane Uiper like to this netled yong man, who lightly raising himselfe on his féet, without losing his terrible club which he had takē from ye Giants, he attended the returne of ye horse, which was so quickly, yt he could hardly slep aside: he did him no harme to speake of.
But it was much for him to sée that hee had escaped the trained horse his brest, which with new force returned a∣gainst the young man: here hee gaue a signe of his warlike arme, and the great valiancie of his person; for leaping a little to one side, the horse mist to runne vpon him, hee gi∣uing a gallant blow: for raising his Club aloft, hee smote the Knight vpon the shoulders, making the bloud to gufh out at his mouth, hee stretcht him along vpon his horses necke: but the blow which the Master receiued, was no let to the horse, to returne againe at the Tinacrian, beating the pauement in péeces with his héeles. Now had the sonne of Trebatius taken fortune by the foretop: for slipping to one side, he tooke the knight by the arme: it auailed him not, that he was againe come to himselfe, neither that he bare a gal∣lant mind: for hee pulled him to the ground, where strug∣ling, at length they came to let goe their hold, beginning a now battell, and although bloudie, yet worth the sight: for he of the Castle was valiant, and he fought for no lesse then his life and honour, but he gat little by this young man, who was euerie way his better, and much accustomed to feates of armes: And hauing gotten him a foote in that manner, had he béene Mars himselfe, hee would haue made small ac∣compt of him. With all this hee of the Castle defended him∣selfe, and sometimes offended the mightie Tinacrian, who thinking that he lost much time, reatcht him a sound knock, yea he gaue him another, which made him fall on his hands to the ground, which, before that he could rise againe, he se∣conded, that within a little he had laid him all along. This warriour of the Castle, as fierce as a Lion (séeing his death before his eyes) considering the enemies force, falling into desperation, throwing his shield to ground, with his sword in both his hands, went towards him, striking him vpon ye shield: the fierce blow came with such strength, that it beat it to his Helmet, making him lose his sences. There was neuer séene greater haste then he made to secōd that blow, and smote him on the top of his most fine Helme,
bereauing him in a maner of his sight: he would haue closed with him with a stabbe: but the young man as fierce as a Basilisk, preuented him, beating it aside, they came to han∣dy gripes: and as hee was stronger then he of the Castle; so lifting him vp from ground, hee hurled him against the pauement, and gaue him a sore fall: hee of the Castle still kept his hold of him, being afeard of death: and recouering strength in his weakenesse, he began to defend himselfe, & to procure his libertie. But it was now too late: for knée∣ling downe vpon him, with his dagger in his right hand, he made a good end of his dayes worke; but so wearie, that he was not able to stand on his feete. With all this, thinking that he had yet something to do, desirous to know what that might be, which was so much defended, with the same club on his necke, he entred in at another gate, he came into a large walke, at the end whereof he saw about the number of twenty Ladies, so ex∣céeding faire, that they did euen make his eyes to dazle, thinking with himselfe (as indéede it was true) that there was nothing else to be séene. After that he drew neere to behold them, they were La∣dies of Gréece, which there were represented, although with new spirits, all taking that forme. Seeing him com∣ming, they set themselues to behold him, very well liking his proportion. One of them, which to him séemed to haue an Imperiall Crown on her head, said vnto him, We would not, Knight, that you should passe from hence without our fauour, which shalbe so néedfull for you, considering how much there yet remaineth, that without it, it will be impossible to haue good end of this aduenture. No man can deny it (sayd the young man, putting vp his Beuer) being a thing so well knowne, and wanting deserts: if it shall please you to bestowe any vpon mee, as on him which hath most neede thereof, you may binde me wholy to doe you seruice.
Wee are all well pleased therewith (sayd the fayned La∣die) but you are to receyue it heere in our lodging, because that euery one will impart some vnto you apart: and so you may come vp here, and I will lend you my hand. Being so heauily armed, faire Ladies (answered the Prince) it will bee very hard for mee to get so high. You haue your remedie in your hand, answered the Ladie, for disarming you; you may easily come vp to our lodging, and it shall be a new fauour for you, to be new armed at our hands. It will be so, sayd the Greeke; but in a Castle where I haue met with so many enemies, it shall not be safe to goe disarmed; wherefore if there be no other staires, I am not of opinion to fulfill your commaundement. Then I say, sayd the Ladie, that you shall not accom∣plish what you pretend, séeing that Ladies requests (so much in your fauour) you haue so lightly regarded. They were all gone vpon a sudden, leauing him at their departure in extreme darknesse. The Prince in some sort was sorrie that he had not obeyed them: but imagining that it was some inchauntment, he was glad that he had on his Armour. By chaunce he entred in at a gate which led him into a fayre Court: the Maiestie and richnesse thereof bereaued him of his iudgement; for there was nothing else to be seene but portraytures of gold, set with many rich pretious stones: they all seemed to the young man, to bee aliue, the colours were so excellent and so wel layd on. In the middest of the Court, hee saw a most fayre tree, the one halfe of most fine gold, and the other of siluer, set in so good and comely order, with such exquisite arte, that it was a most strange, wonderfull, and pleasing thing to behold. Aboue in the Galleries there seemed to bee people, al∣though hee could speake to no bodie, nor know how hee should proceede in this most strange aduenture: for hee
was very desirous to sée the end thereof. As he stood thus beholding the Castle, and the ingrauen workes of the walles, there came forth at one side of the Court, a most comely and well countenanced Knight, in his hose and dublet of greene cloth of gold, so faire and so young, that the Tinacrian wondred at his most excellent constitution. Hee came with his sword in his hand, and a scarlet mantle wound about his arme, with such a gesture as was strange to see, and with very good behauiour drawing neere towards him, he said, I would not, Sir Poliphebus, but yt you had falne into so great disgrace with the Ladies, without which, you might haue gone forwards with your good fortune, which did assure you a certayne end of this aduenture; but now be∣ing to fight, you are to performe it with mee, and not with any other weapons then such as you see I come with∣al: wherfore except you seee (as it is requisite) a mantle at some Ladies hands, hauing most highly offended those of this Castle, I know not what order we shal take to be able to fight, which is a thing that I haue much desired, for the great fame which in this Castle I haue heard of your va∣lour. I thanke you much, faire Knight, for that which you haue said, answered the Tinacrian. Although there bee no such matter in mee as you say; yet neuerthelesse, there shall want no good will to obey yours. This battell being ended, which seeing that it cannot be eschued (to end this aduenture) let it be as you will haue it, although I want a mantle, for I am perswaded, that I haue so offended those yonder Ladies in denying what they required, that they will lend mee none, and yet I knowe no reason for it, seeing that heretofore I haue bene so subiect to their obedience. All the Ladies which before he had seene, had seated themselues all aboue in the Galleryes to see the battell. Yet the Tinacrian was of opinion, yt what was past would
giue no occasion, that in such a case they should refuse to fauour him: and so he beganne with a very great good grace to put off his Armour, remayning all in blew, so gal∣lant a personage, as there was none like him. In that maner he went towards the Ladyes, and ma∣king vnto them a verie comely reuerence, hee sayd vnto them, I remember, Soueraigne Ladies, the small reason I haue (considering what is past) to come to intreat you: but in that that I did not performe your commaund, it is to be attributed to the naturall feare wherein I was, not conceyuing that your presence was sufficient to accomplish with honour, any action whatsoeuer though neuer so daun∣gerous, yet notwithstanding, being challenged to the bat∣tell by this gentle Knight, with mantles, and I hauing none, and to be giuen by Ladies, reposing my case in your generositie, and not in my want of courtesie, which I ac∣knowledge, I beseech you that it may come from some hand, which may giue me the palme of this, and all o∣ther warres which I shall vndertake to doe you seruice. I know not, Knight, with what countenance you can come to request any thing at Ladies hands, whom you haue so much offended, and in a matter which so much concerned you (answered she which first had spoken vnto him) particularly, there is nothing wherein Gallants at∣taine vnto greater honour, then by obeying Ladies: So as, that now if wee should at your bare request giue you our mantle, it would seeme that wee did it of great ne∣cessitie. Therein consisteth your noblesse, (most excellent La∣dies) answered the fearefull young man, and I will as∣sure you to returne it againe to you, whole and sound, al∣though it cost mee my life, which I will esteeme nothing so deare, nor no aduenture so hard that I will not vnder∣take: and there is no greater generositie, then to pardon an enemie, principally, acknowledging his error, and that he hath deserued punishment. As they stood denying
this Mantle, there came into that same roome, a most faire Ladie. O loue, how great is thy power! for shee was not fully come, and had set her selfe at the side of the Galle∣rie, when to her was subiected the most frée young man, who hauing forgotten what he requested, and himselfe also, for he stood gazing, fixing his eyes so vpon her, that hee was be∣sides himselfe, and knew not where hee was. And in ex∣change for beholding her, he gaue her the keyes of his heart, and was yet sorrowful, holding it yet too little, in exchange onely to behold her. Shée came all clad in cloth of Gold with sundrie colours, with her haires curled after her Countrie fashion, with a Dutch robe of the colour of the rest of her ap∣parell: the young man neuer saw any thing so well worth the séeing in his life. All the rest of the Dames séeing him in this maner, with a fained laughter, asked of him: How now, Sir Knight, what, haue you felt, that you haue so soone forgotten, not onely the Mantle which you desired, but euen your selfe al∣so? If it bee a wound of loue, it is ill falling in loue in this place, for here is nothing to bee hoped for, but cruell death. In her crueltie, answered the now firme louer, consisteth all my life, séeing I haue séene the most swéete death that can be imagined: he spake it with such passion, that I know not who would not but haue yéelded, considering his goodly per∣sonage. The faire Ladie was no lesse busied in her imagi∣nation, perswading her selfe, that there was not so comely a Knight in the world, giuing loue so frée passage into her brest, which lasted till her death, being no way able to leaue to loue. In her did loue shew an example of power, and va∣lour, and being vnable to doe any otherwise, (hauing vnder∣stoode the request of this young man, and what the Ladies denied) she said, Because, gentle Knight, you shal not think, that in this Castle is included all the crueltie of the world, I will giue you this Mantle, wherewith you may end the battell, but vpon condition, that you shall not depart from hence, before you shall first haue come to aske pardon of
the Ladies whom you haue so offended. That should bee a great want of discretion (Soueraigne Ladie) for a man to fall into the reckoning, what it is to offend you, séeing how much it concerneth mee, not to depart hence without it, it shall not need to aduertise mee, that therein I should pur∣chase your disfauour. Why then, valorous Knight, quoth shée, there resteth nothing but to giue you the Mantle, and therewith to wish you the victorie, as one which deserueth the same. In vttering these wordes with such a grace as would haue made loue himselfe in loue, shée tooke off her rich robe, & cast it downe to the Tinacrian, who being much enamoured, with his necke in her yoake, winding it about his arme, he turned toward the knight, who at his approach said vnto him, You haue, Sir Knight, made so long stay, that but for that, that I did so much desire the battell, I would haue returned to my lodging, without giuing you any place to go any further forwards. In that I haue made no longer tariance, I doe maruaile (said the valorous Gréeke) for I know not how I could possibly depart from my life, lea∣uing it in the hands of those faire Ladies. Is it possible (said he of the Castle) that comming in frée, you are become al∣readie so subiect? Therein appeareth the force of loue (an∣swered the gentle Tinacrian) for he giueth, and bereaueth of libertie at his pleasure. In this maner (said he of the Castle) you are desirous to giue end to this battel. It rather grieueth me much (answe∣red the valiant youth) that we stay so long, I expect no lon∣ger the contrarie, neither did the Tinacrian giue him aun∣swere, but rather the one making to the other a due reue∣rence, with angrie paces they came to ioyne. O Thalia, that a man might put this battell into thy hands, to the end that thou mightest giue it that Soueraigne grace which it deserueth, for with my dull wit, and want of fauours, it is not much, though I erre therein. All the faire Ladies be∣held the warriours. The Tinacrian did purpose rather to suffer himselfe to be hurt, then that the Mantle should bee
toucht: it did encourage him, and that verie much, that his Ladie had giuen it him; hee entred with his right foote bea∣ring the point of his sword firme forward. He of the Castle was nimble, and so with his left arme he bae by his thrust, giuing him another verie strong one: it did not a little auaile the young man, to sée that his Ladie beheld him, for other∣wise, without faile he of the Castle had hurt him, and yet he passed his sword vnder his right arme, & without comming to the flesh, entring his clothes, he let passe yt blow, winding to one side with such quicknes, as was strange. He cast ano∣ther at his shoulder: this gaue him the victory, for through his elbow, hee thrust the third part of his sword, hee drew it out dropping bloud, and not content therewith, hee mote him a∣thwart the thigh: it was somewhat a doubtfull blow, for had it not béene so, he had certainely hought him, he woūded him notwithstāding, although but litle. There was neuer Uiper that so returned against her enemie, as did he of the Castle▪ although somewhat out of breath, which was the daunge∣rous wound: being wholly desperate, couered with his Man∣tle, he entred, and with a strong thrust, hee stabd the great Tinacrian in the arme: it made him to grone, to féele himself so sore hurt. At the instant, the bloud sprang out vpō his La∣dies Mantle. I know not who most felt it: for she soing him hurt, waxed as red as a Rose: He, not for that hee was hurt, had also a good colour, but for pure anger, as he well made it appeare: for giuing a fierce leape, he ioyned with his aduer∣sarie, who warded it with his Mantle▪ ut that was but a poore defence, for he cut all the pleites therof, and part of his arme: hee saw him somewhat out of order, and lost not the benefit of ye occasion: for he closed with him, thinking to haue ouerborne him, but he gat but little by his comming: for fin∣ding himselfe preuented by his aduersarie, who with his dagger in his hand, if hee had béene a little more come to himselfe, without doubt he had kild him: for comming to handie gripes, he gaue him therewith a mightie stab: it was below his hip, wherein he left the dagger sicking. The va∣lorous Tinacrian tooke this wound verie in patientlie,
and put his hand to his dagger to haue ended the warre. Hee of the Castle set hand to the scabberd, being afraid of death, but he could not be master thereof. But going strug∣ling euen to the gate where the Ladies were, hee had the better in the wrestling, by reason of his hurt in the thigh: But comming where hee might behold his Ladie, (his co∣lour changing and all his body trembling) hee set vpon his aduersarie, whome being almost out of breath, he forced to fall on his knées vpon the floore, and with his dagger in his hand, hee meant to haue stabd him into the forehead, & had done it, had he not heard the Ladies which séeing it, cry∣ed out, holding him fast. The young man lifted vp his head to see who it was that called. They said vnto him, Sir Knight, in requitall of the displeasure which you haue done vs, wee entreate you to leaue that Knight with his life, sée∣ing how little it importeth you to be an Homicide, whereas you may otherwise haue the victorie. It is a thing which I should bee sorie for (answered the valiant youth.) I would valorous Ladies, that of your part I might be commaun∣ded, and as not a thing that I desire: and if it bee your plea∣sure, I giue ouer the battell, on condition that he suffer mee to giue an end to this aduenture: and so he parted from him, thinking to haue fought no more, (for his déede deserued no lesse:) but the Knight forgetting his kindnesse, with an en∣creased stomacke, farre more then at the beginning, assai∣led the young man, saying, Doe not thinke, sonne of Garrofilea, that thy comming into this Castle shal so litle cost thée. The Prince was asha∣med to sée himselfe so mocked. Hee turned to sée the Ladies, which holding his death for certaine, séeing him so ill hurt, and his enemie so sound and wel, had left the standing. The like did his faire Ladie, hauing made streames of teares for the great sorrow which shée felt, to see the Gallant whome shée so dearely loued, to bee so sore wounded: much more did the young man grieue at that, then to sée himselfe so wounded. But comming againe to himselfe, as furious
as an Aspicque, hee charged vpon his enemie, although drawing one leg somewhat after him. There is no cruel∣tie comparable to this, for death is not feared, so as reuenge may be had. He crossed his sword somewhat low, making shew to bee ouercome. His most strong aduersarie thought to make benefit thereof, but it hapned cleane contrarie; he put by the blow, but with a full blow he smote him ouer the legge, and almost cutting it off, hee made him to stumble with the paine of his hurt, and hee reached him yet another sound one before hee could stay. Hee smote him also on the shoulders, where was his first hurt, but therewith the Ti∣nacrian ended the battell, for with the fourth, hee felled him dead to the ground. He scarcely touched the ground, when he vanished out of sight: all the Court was filled with a thicke darke ; nothing was heard but the lamentations of dis∣tressed Ladies. That being past, the Tinacrian felt himselfe whole and sound of al his wounds and blowes receiued, and againe armed with his rich armour, which was that which made him most to wonder, hee saw nothing in the Court but the Siluer trée. He drew néere vnto it, wondring at the beautie and the rich enamelling of the body of the trée. He read an Epitaph, differing frō that which the faire Quéene of Lira met withall, when shée entred into this Castle, as was declared in the second part of this Historie, written with Gréeke letters in bloud; the Louer read them, which said thus, When the bastard Lion shall come into this habitation, and with winning it, shall lose his libertie, breaking off the Golden bough, he shall make frée from perpetuall enchant∣ment that personage which tooke him, leauing another frée entrie for the fierce Basiliske, who shall set at libertie the fa∣ther of this Damsell, and many other Knights which here shall bee enchanted with the flowre of beautie: leauing this Palace, this old and fresh repose shall be giuen them in O∣lympus, where they shall remaine many yeeres. The young man made no longer stay, but comming to
the Golden bough, taking good footing in the ground, hee set to his valiant hands, he bowed the bough so much, that hee made it like a bow, hee heard great exclamations, which came forth of the body of the trée, saying, O cruell Knight, the case which tormenteth me, I feele in the middest of my soule, leaue me, it sufficeth for my afflicted heart, that thou take compassion thereof, in knowing that I am that in∣fortunate Alpatraphio, Lord of all Egypt, and to my great hurt a great wizard, and this not sufficeth, for I was the murtherer of my owne daughter, in whome rested my life. These words, nor the pitifull complaints of the Emperour mooued him not, so as to make him giue ouer her determi∣nation: but rather with greater force then before, he so hard pulled the bough, that he brake it off, running downe great streames of bloud, all his armour and weapons were chan∣ged into that Purple colour, and hauing the boug, he went therewith to a gate within, which led into a great hall so rich, that it made him out of his wittes, to behold the Paintings and Carued workes which were round a∣bout it. The young man was much troubled to see the things, which were in that most faire hall: in one side thereof, hee saw comming foorth, an auncient Gentlewoman of good yeeres, leaning vpon two Nimphes, such as hee saw the Queene haue, apparelled all in white, cut vpon coloured Tinsell, which comming neere vnto him, said, I know not, presumptuous Knight, who hath giuen you leaue to come into my lodging, whither it is not per∣mitted to any man to come, without bringing the Golden bough, or at least, that of Siluer. Why then, honourable Ladie (aunswered the young warriour) I bringing the tokens of the tree which you speake of, you haue no rea∣son to shew your selfe displeased with me. And with that he held vp his hand, and shewed the Golden bough. The Ladie verie much reioyced, to see the Princesse at liber∣tie: shee came to the gentle Tinacrian, and taking him by
the hand, shee said, Come with mee, valorous Prince of Tinacria, and you shall enioy the spoyle due vnto your rare vertue. Shee brought him to a lodging, whose rich∣nesse and beautifull building, made him more to won∣der then all the rest, it was supported by foure Pillars, and vpon eurie Pillar, was a picture painted, holding arowe, signifying what he was. These shall not be freed from enchantment (valorous Prince) said the Ladie, with the sorrowfull Emperour of Egypt, which heere shall remaine punished for his fol∣lie, and manie faire Dames, vntill that the great Basi∣liske free his lodging: for the present, to you is onely gran∣ted the most faire daughter, for reward for the paines which you haue endured, in performing this enterprise, a reward worthie of the sonne of Garrofilea, and shee is a gainer, to bee beloued b so valorous a Prince. Shee would not let him staie any longer, but taking him by the arme, shee ledde him to other rich lodgings, till at last shee brought him verie neere where his Squire was, before he went forth. Shee put him in a rich square roome, which opened towards the Dungeon, where Luzela the Emperours daughter was, lamenting her misfortune, to see her selfe without libertie or any hope thereof. The Ladie verie pleasantly went in thither, saying, Come hither, Soue∣raigne Princesse of Egypt, for now the high heauens haue practised a meane to free you of your paine, and haue sent you the Prince of Tinacria, to set you at li∣bertie, for whome it was reserued, as for him which was most worthie. The Ladie surprised with ioy, could gaue no answere, the good, and such as that was, so busied all her sences, that she could not beleeue it, although she saw it. She came foorth with her, where in seeing the great Ti∣nacrian, she fell wholly in loue with him: in louing & being beloued, neyther of both had any aduantage. The valorous
louer set him on his knées before her, imagining that it was shée which had giuen him the Mantle, in pawne whereof, he left with her his heart and soule: he desired with great af∣fection to kisse her hand, and shée, not to shew herselfe vn∣kind, raising him, said, There is no reason, valorous Knight, that shée which hath receiued so much good at your hands, should be entrea∣ted for ought, séeing you haue more deserued. The most dis∣crete Ladie would not suffer them to spend any longer time, but bringing them foorth into the walke, where his Squire staied, giuing to the Princesse, those two Nimphes for her seruice, shée imbraced them, saying, Although that the pleasure, valorous Princes, which I now enioy to sée you, be great, I hope in the high heauens, to receiue greater, although not so soone: but the assured hope shall make mee liue contented, expecting the Basilisk, on whome your and my contentments doe depend. Shée had alreadie prouided Palfreyes for the Ladies, and againe imbracing them, not without teares, shée returned to the Castle, at whose going in, there was so great a noyse, as made the louers much to wonder, and within their sight, they sawe the building to arise and to flie in the ayre, vntill it past their sight, where∣of mention shall bee made in the end of this fourth booke, where it shall better fit, to tell you what those louers did. CHAP. XVII. How the Prince of Tinacria tooke his way towards Grecia, in companie of the gallant Luzela, and how hee set his sister Rosaluira at libertie, from the power of the Gi∣ants, which carried her to Sea. IN sight, faire Ladies, of the inchaunted Castle, wee left the two Louers, who seeing them∣selues alone, who is any way able to expresse, what the one conceited of the other? Now
I would faine haue a fauour to be able to publish with my owne experience, of what power a fauour is, which is gi∣uen with a pleasant countenance. All this was experimen∣ted in them: for if hee loued her, shee liued by adoring him: they were well matched, and to liue secure from the chan∣gings in loue, and with tendernesse of heart, the valiant young man askt her, saying, Soueraigne Ladie, séeing that the heauens haue reser∣ued me to be yours, and that I am neuer to depart your ser∣uice, neither from what you shall commaund, I should bee verie glad to knew your mind, and whither your will is that wee goe. My lot, valorous Prince, is so contrarie, (al∣though that I now haue my wish, seeing I am in your po∣wer) that I am to doe nothing after my owne will, but one∣ly follow yours. The Gallant hartily thanked her, saying, I well see, valorous Princesse, that this your generosity is wholly to inrich me, and seeing that it is your pleasure, that I shall dispose of all, for this present let our iournie be for the Greeke Empire, for I haue a great desire to make my selfe knowne vnto the Emperour Trebatius my beloued father, and also because that he may see what chaunce is fal∣len vnto mee, in comming to doe you this little seruice; for there your greatnesse may stay with the Greeke Ladies, in greater honour then in that sorrowfull habitation. Ualorous Prince (sayd the tender Ladie) I haue euer had a great desire to see the Gréeke Court, and the Ladies therein: for that I haue heard say, that they are the full per∣fection of all brauery. In this maner there is a thing come into my mind, which if it shall please you to heare it, I will tell it you vpon the way betweene this and the sea. Nothing (valorous Prince) shall displease mee, if you therein shall take delight. In Poliphebus armes the Ladie tooke horse, and so did the Nimphes giuen to doe her seruice. Hee as nimble as a flie, leapt into his saddle, (a new bayt to make the Ladie the better to loue him) and leading her
horse by the bridle, they went downe the hill. In comming into the plaine, the right way towards the Hauen, Poli∣phebus began after this maner: I doe, Soueraigne Princesse, vnderstand of the great warres wherein my father now is, and of the many ene∣mies which beseege his Citie: I neuer yet durst to make my selfe knowne vnto him, without doing something, whereby I might boldly vaunt my selfe to bee the sonne of the mightie Trebatius: and for this purpose I take occasiō to goe in your company; and hauing ye equitie of your beau∣tie on my side, betwéene the two Campes I purpose to maintayne the same; not against the Greeke Dames, for the loue of my sisters, and the rest of my kindred, which liue enamoured, which seeing my challenge, of force must come to contradict it. Fame hath reported, that in the Moores Campe there are Ladies, which for beautie, are the Phe∣nixes of their Countries: and if I prosper well in this at∣tempt, I may make my selfe knowne for the sonne of the great Trebatius. I would not, valorous Prince (sayd the Ladie) ye through my occasion you should lose that, which your vertue doeth assure of: for there want not Ladies, whose brauery and beauty is to be preferred farre before mine. I am not able to goe into Greece (answered the gallant Louer) without making it appeare what power your vertue hath within my brest. So then (answered the Ladie) there is nothing to bee sayd against your resolution. With swéete conuer∣sation they came to the sea side, where they past all that night with such contentment of either partie, as can not bee expressed. The next day, at what time as the faire Phebus began to beautifie the earth with his presence, the two be∣loued Louers embarked themselues in the ship which Poli∣phebus brought. The Masters and Mariners entertaining them with great ioy, and wondring at the beauty of the gallant Luzla, hoyse their sailes, directing their course towards Grecia, sayling with so great pleasure & content,
that they wished it had bene Vlisses voyage. After supper ly∣ing vpon the hatches of the ship, casting their eyes to be∣hold the vast seas, and the forme of the skies, this Gallant sayd vnto the Ladie, If it may be told without griefe vnto you, I would gladly know the cause of your enchauntmēt. Some it will be to me (warlike Prince in renning the re∣membrance of what I there endured; but to giue you satis∣faction, whatsoeuer you shall commaund shall be put in exe∣cution. Then know, valorous Knight, that my father had an Aunt, the wisest woman in all Egypt, where it is an ordi∣narie matter to be giuen to the arte Magick. My father comming to receyue the Crowne, as Emperour of Egypt, was defirous to learne that science; and so brought that his Aunt to the Court, of whom he learned the greatest part of all her cunning. He married, and the destinies would, that there should be borne so infortunate a Damsell as am I, to haue so many desastres. Comming to the age that I now am of, without any pardon as a father to his owne daugh∣ter, he came to be so farre in loue with me, that hee tooke no pleasure of the world, seeing I would not yeeld to his de∣sire. I imagining that I should wrong my selfe, to yéeld in such a case to my father. This my iust disobedience made such an impression in his heart, that from thenceforth his hatred was farre greater towards me, then euer his loue had bene. It did nothing grieue me to endure the troubles which he put me to, for denying him a thing so vniust. Wrath and blind affection so much preuayled ouer him, that being in my garden, little thinking of his paine, al∣though it did somewhat grieue me to see what hee endured, considering that he was my father, I saw him comming in a walke among Canes, with a more vnstaied pace, then his grauitie required. In seeing him I arose, & with a fayned smile wēt to méet him. But he which came drowned in a deuillish determina∣tiō, without regard of any thing more thē his passiō led him
vnto, with a strange furie tooke mee by the arme, saying, My Luzela, if it may giue you no occasion to ease my paine, in that I am thy father, and to sée what I indure with the griefe and torment which thy beauty hath brought me vn∣to; yet let the death which thou séest before thine eies moue thee to doe it. And therewith he drew out his dagger which he set at my brest. You may imagine, gentle Knight, what my soule felt betweene these two extremes, and each of them so great. In the end I chose rather to die, then so to defile my body, and answered him, My Lord and dearely beloued Father, the heauens beare record with me, that if the losse of my life might doe you pleasure, I would presēt∣ly giue it, and should take pleasure to lose it, and therein should offend no body, but rather ennoble ye obedience which I owe you: but to be obedient in this, a thing so much a∣gainst reason, I am of opinion, that therein I should doe iniurie, both to you and my selfe. Hee suffred mee not to proceede forwards; for with a strange fury, hee sheathed his cruell dagger in the tender brest of his louing daughter. Few blowes suffised to stretch mee all along. My father had not the power (repenting himselfe of that he had done) to take out his dagger. I thinke the heauens would not that he should kill me; to the end, that I in him should sée sudden change. O cruell destinies, began he to say, lifting his voyce to heauen, in how many sorts haue you shewne your selues coniured against me! O infortunate Emperour Alpatra∣phio, to how small purpose serued the science wherewith I was indued! O blind and vaine affection, séeing that from thence is growne, to sée before mine eyes, a fact so inhu∣mane! O heauens, if you heare me, be attentiue, that sée∣ing that you are witnesses of my great crueltie, so shall you likewise be of the reuenge, which I will take of my rebel∣lious heart. He was a thousand times about to pluck out the dagger which hee had stuck in my brest. I thinke hee
let it alone, because hee would not sée my bloud; and I saw it was euen s for comming vnto me, he vttered these spea∣ches: Ah my Luzela, sometimes beloued, not as a daugh∣ter; which is that which now  me, if there from the heauens, where without change, treading them with  immortall féete, thou doest aunce to  the alteration , I haue no eyes to caue pardon: but thou wanting life, which to me  I giue mine, it is not to bee sought for vpon earth seeing I haue sent it to the heauens, neither will I enioy any, because it will bee loathsome, see∣ing I cannot forget to haue bene thy murtherer. I doe pro∣ise thee, my beloued daughter, to accompanie thee in thy death, seing I loued  so dearely in thy life: If for en∣ted his soule, to sée how still I lay, imagining that I was dead, and in plling out his dagger hee had ne a greater harme, which he had done, had not his old Aun Cleonta preuented it, the which in her kind, being angry, vsing her accustomed inchaunments, put him farre from mee. Shée came to mee and pluckt out the dagger, and putting cer∣taine herbes into the wound, cured me of the hurt, and said vnto me, Notwithstanding that the resisting of your fa∣thers passion, be very worthy of commendation; yet in that that thou wast not sory for his payne (as was reason being his daughter) it is iust that thou make satisfaction therefore, in straight and close inchauntment, where thou shalt remaine, vntill that the braue Lion shall enter into my strong Castle, breaking by force of Armes the strength thereof, and ouercomming the gards which I shall there set: and then thou shalt begin to feele some comfort, al∣though thy father haue none; for it is requisite that he pay more for the iniurie which he hath committed, not onely a∣gainst thy renowne, but against his owne honour. But the siliske shall be giuen him, when he shall least think thereof. She sayd no more vnto me: but at that very instant me thought I began to want my wits, and without know∣ing
what I did, I went to that lodging from whence you set me free, where I did nothing else, but be waile the ab∣sence of my father, holding him for dead. She would ne∣uer tell me any thing of him, although that sometimes she came to visit me, giuing me hope hereof: and she told it me so playne, that I now perceyue how much is therein con∣taynes: and I am giuen to vnderstand, that the time shall come, that I againe shall sée my father. Yea, it will come (answered the gallant Louer) for the heauens giue not one contentment without another. In this and other pleasing things, they past the greatest part of the night; wherewith the young man began to ware somewhat bold: it was not wholly to offend her, but to shew with the mouth what the heart felt. He was of o∣pinion, that this Ladie was sent to him from the heauens; wherefore, with the greater ioy they past the rest of the time. It suffiseth, that to take their rest, they went to their Cabin (with a determination on eyther side) that nothing should hinder their loue. Before that Aurora had done the Sunnes Ambassage to the world, shewing his cmming, the master aduertised the Prince, that in the top he had descried somewhat neere, another Galley. Hee leapt out of his bed, not willing to shew any carelesnesse for the defence of his Ladie. With the masters helpe he put on his rich Armour, and being at all peeces armed, he went to put the Princesse of Egypt, and his soule also, out of feare: and with reuerence (being wholly ouercome with loue) he told her that there was an enemies Galley discouered: willing her, that shee should not therefore bee afeard, for the sight of her good grace did assure all. With greater valour, valorous Prince (sayd the La∣die) I would very gladly accompany you, for the succour which hereof can come vnto you (except the good will) is so little, that it will rather be a hinderance. Ill should
I, gallant Ladie (quoth the Tinacrian) goe to fight, if not going wholly yours, and in fighting, it shall bee onelie for you. By this time the two Gallies were come neere together, wherin, in seeing the Princes Gally, was heard a great cry, bidding them amaine, if not they should all dye The young man did it, but to another intent: for hee commaunded, that all those which could beare Armes, should take them, and should stand at the ships side. As the Marriners with all diligence had ended the cas∣ting of grapples aboord the other, to the ende that shee should not fall off, and that they might with their swords fight aboord (it was no euill counsell, for it gaue them the victorie) vpon a sudden there came some twelue Knights, which bade them to yeeld. The valiant young Prince stayed vntill that they had fastened the Galley: and getting a club in his hand, hee set himselfe vpon the poope, where hee gaue so good account of himselfe, that two of them lost their liues with one blow which he gaue amongst them. They were many, and for feare of their Commaunders they set vpon the Prince, but it was to come with their liues, and there to meete their death; for hee neuer stricke blowe which killed not a Knight, and sometimes two of them together payd for their folly: before that they could returne, he had made an end of them. By that time, there came forth three most fierce Gi∣ants, out of a withdrawing place in the ship, where the Tinacrian heard cryings, as of forced Ladies. Those thrée most cruell Pagans were much amazed, to sée how soone that Knight had made an ende of all their Knights. All of them forgetting the order of Knighthood, drawing out their monstrous faulchions, came to the shippes side: and one of them assuring himselfe of his agilitie, setting his one foote vpon his shippe side, leapt into the Tinacrians Galley, and had done it, if the young mans cruell club
had not by the way taken him a blow on the pate, and be∣reauing him of his life in the ayre, throw him in back a∣gaine into the ship dead at his friends feet, which were in a cold sweat. He which lost least occasion, was the Tinacri∣an; for with a light leap he set himselfe against the Giants. Whether that she which loued him better then herselfe, tooke pleasure therein, there is no doubt, thinking that no man could be loued with more reason then the Tinacrian, seeing his great valour conioyned with so much beautie as hath bene aforesayd. He was one of the most gallant perso∣nages in the world; so as many times he would not put off his Helmet, especially among Ladies, to whom he was as a Cockatrice. Uery ioyfull she set her to behold what he did in the Galley. He somewhat reposing himselfe, with a trou∣bled voyce, sayd, How now, you traytours, and so easily did you thinke to beare away ye prize. First you shall leaue your liues in pawne for your foolish presumption. The va∣liant Louer stayd for no answere, but whorling his club a∣bout his head, he smote one of them vpon the shield, which hee brake in péeces, and there withall his arme which it hung vpon. He escaped not without his paiment, for in the warres, for loue neuer giueth the palme without it: for they both smote him vpon the inchaunted Helmet, and made him set his knees to the ground: they there strake the Prince and his Ladie in the shield, which her soule hath that faith∣fully loueth: this, they which know what it is to loue, call the heart: hee saw that these fierce Giants againe smote downe right at him. Hee on one side crossed the blow with his club: and the other he shunned by skipping to one side. The club was no defence against the force of the blow, which brake it in the middest. It was good fortune that the Tinacrian gaue back with his body, letting goe his club, which was ye cause that he escaped the blow; which if he had not done, he had falne on his face: the handle onely remained with ye valiant louer, which he would imploy in his Ladies seruice, which
he saw did behold him: it did the more encourage him to doe it, for that, that by reason of the noyse, there came cut of a Cabbin in the Galley, a most braue dame, clad all in blew, cut vpon rich cloth of Gold, with her haire made vp, more bright then the Sunne beames, vpon her head, a net-worke of Siluer: the swéete prison of loue, which to him had béene life, if they would haue letten him alone, although somewhat painefull in that place. It was long since that the Prince had séene that Ladie, but he presently knew that shée was his beloued sister: the gallant Rosaluira, a cold sweate to sée her in that place, ran ouer all his bodie, he would defer no longer time: but threw the péece of the Club which hee had in his hands at one of the Giants; if it had béene shot out of a Culuerin, it could not haue fline with greater force; he smote him right on the Helmet, him, who had alreadie lost his arme: the gallant neuer in his life gaue blw more worth the séeing, for ligh∣ting on the end, it sheathed it selfe in his head: he therewith stept backe, and drew out his rich sword, and with a skip was with the Giant, who was yet troubled with the last blow, and with all the strength that he was able, hee gaue him a thrust in the middest of the brest. His strong doule brest plate auailed him not, but that his sword entred euen vnto his shoulders, and in drawing out his sword, cut came the Giants soule. He which remained aliue, was much vex∣ed therewith, and séeking reuenge with his sword in both his hands, he made towards the youth, he could not auoide the blow: and to haue receiued it, was like to haue béene the Princes last: for striking him on the top of the Crest, hee made aboundance of bloud gush out at the visor of his Hel∣met, he was readie to fall. The Moore came vpon him with another, which made him fall vpon his hands and knées vp∣on the ground: hee would haue troden him vnder his feete, but the warlike Prince had not yet lost his good resolution, séeing him come running, slipt to one side, letting him passe with greater force then a thunder-bolt. The young louer
followed him, and as hee turned about with his sword in both hands, hee smote him athwart the Helmet, and strake away all that side, and left him shrewdly hurt: hee prouided for him another, because hee should aie, and with a backe∣ward blow, hee left him astonied, for to smite him on the side of the head: euerie blow was death to him, hee closed with him, séeing the aduantage which then he should haue. The Giant, with the pangs of death griped him with such force, that his armour entred into his flesh. But the fierce youth with his dagger ended the warres, and throw∣ing them all into the Sea, hee went straight to his sister, putting off his Helmet, and said, I know not, Madam, and my beloued sister, how I shall estéeme this good hap, which the Gods this day haue powred vpon mee, séeing they haue brought me where I might doe you seruice: for I beleeue, you were forced to come hither with such euil companie. By this the Ladie knew him, and imbracing him with a thousand teares like Pearles, for ioy, shée said, Who that hath gained, valorous brother, hath béene my selfe, séeing that in giuing me libertie, you haue giuen me means to reioyce at your Cheualrie. They againe imbraced, for there were no brothers that more déerely lo∣ued then these two: he acquainted her with his aduenture, and the course which he held. The Ladie beyond all measure, reioyced to sée the prince Poliphebus so well employed; shée would then goe to speake to the Princesse of Egypt, taking much pleasure to knowe her for her Ladie and sister. The Prince carried her in his armes aboord, entertaining her with such courtesie as was expedient; and knowing her to bee his sister, whome shee so deerely loued, shee shewed her great affection, which lasted so long as they liued. The Princesse was verie sorie, to thinke how much her mother grieued for her absence: wherefore they tooke order, that two of their people should goe in the Giants Galley, directly for Tinacria, where they should bee well paid for their labour, which they did, carry∣ing
certaine letters from the Prince to his mother. They tooke their course for Grecia, where in few dayes they ar∣riued, and those with the letters at Tinacria, where they were well entertained, knowing for whome they came. The Quéene read the letters, reioycing to know what was become of her beloued sonne, the contents whereof were these. Poliphebus his letter to Garrofilea his mother. MY businesse hath beene such & so much, Soueraigne Queene and deare mother, that they haue not giuen me leasure to bee my owne messenger, notwithstan∣ding that I much desired the same: occasion was now offered me, when verie merily I tooke my way towards the Greeke Empire, in companie, and as husband of the Princesse of Egypt, and the high heauens willing to fauour me, ordained that in the middest of the Sea I met with my Sister, whom three cruel Giants carried prisoner. The gods were so fauourable, that I gaue her libertie, and with her am going to doe my dutie to our father, who is vexed with most cruell warres; and if mine and my sisters intreatie may ought preuaile with you, we beseech you, that (forgetting what is past) you will not onely pardon, but also assist him with men from your kingdome, which wil be much esteemed through the world, and to vs it shall be much honour, to be the chil∣dren of such a mother. We hope that your wisdome wil con∣sider that this is verie requisite, and much importeth. The gods preserue your royall person, and graunt vs life to re∣turne againe to doe our dutie vnto you. Poliphebus of Tinacria, and Rosaluira of Grecia, your louing children. The sonnes reasons did so much mollifie ye hard hart of the
cruell mother, that shée presently altered her mind. In the end, as shée was a woman, yet therefore she lost no part of her authoritie, but presently commaunded Proclamation to bee made through all Tinacria, that they all should with∣in few dayes, with the greatest force that they should bee able to leui, make their repaire to her Citie. Her subiects obeyed, for shée was well beloued of all: and when they knew what voyage they should make, they leuied thirtie thousand men, all verie well armed, shée issued of her trea∣sure what was néedful: for although that the warres would be long, yet there should bee nothing wanting: shée was a thousand times in the mind to haue gone for Grecia: but she found so many inconueniences, that shée was enforced to stay. Shée sent for Captaine of all this people, vntill they should méete with the Prince, the ancient and discrete Earle of Modica, a Knight, who for his valour was to be trusted in a greater matter then this: he accepted of the charge, and in companie of his sonne the mightie Fartemio, he departed towards Grecia, with so prosperous weather, that within eight dayes, without any tempests they came within sight of Arisa, ten leagues from Constantinople: it behoued them to beare into the Bay, because they saw the enemies Fléete, bearing about as though they would follow them: but it had béene in vaine, for the Tinacrian Gallies came wel appoin∣ted; and therefore the next morning they bare in with the Gréeke fléete, wondering to sée it, little thinking that the Gréeke had béene of such power: They set vp the Greeke Armes, as they were commaunded, making signe of peace. The Admirall bare in, giuing a merrie salutation. The most strong Astrusio commaunded them to bee answered. They tooke a Friggot, and went to speake with the Gene∣rall; who knowing what they were, entertained them with much honour, being verie glad of the good succours which came to the Emperour, where we will leaue them,
and the Prince, with the Ladies, taking land below Con∣stantinople, to declare what passeth therein. CHAP. XVIII. Of the bloudie skirmish which was betweene the two Armies, about the taking of certaine heards, and of the com∣ming of the Earle of Modica. IT hath béene no small matter, illustrious Prince, for a short wit, to haue prosecu∣ted so long an Historie, passing betwéene the two extremes of Loue, and the fierce Mars, giuing to either the right which his valour requireth. But now from hence∣forth, I am constrained to treate of so ma∣nie, which in the warres haue made proofe of themselues, that I hold it a hard matter for my small talent: but hoping of your most noble Lordships fauour, I will vndertake the charge; for without it, it shall not be possible to doe any thing of worth, or that may yéeld any content. The Greekes were glad of their victorie past, although it brought with it a corsiue, to sée the Moores (in despite of them) encampe themselues, who desirous to repaire the disgrace which they had receiued, by a thousand meanes sought to trie their fortune. It gaue them as good occasion as they desired, for their skoutes returning to the Campe, said, That vpon the top of the hill, they had discouered great aboundance of Cattell, on that side towards their Campe, and that there might bee about some thirtie thousand foote∣men, which had the gard of them. The Achaian was very wise, and as an expert Captaine, before that hee would de∣termine what should be done, he commaunded the mightie
Don Argante, and his friend Thorisiano, that with 500. light-horse, without charging the enemie, they should disco∣uer the hill, and to see whether there were any Ambuscado, and if there were none, they should with all spéede take the passage, aduertising what passed, for hee purposed to leaue none, if he once tooke the hils side: hee was not so ill aduised which kept the flocke, which was the good Knight Flami∣neo, but that he gaue present aduertisement to Constanti∣nople; for the two Princes could not get vp so high so se∣cretly, but that they would be discouered. The expert knight presently with ten thousand men, draue the flocke downe the hill, and hee with the rest came in the ariere Gard, for hee thought (and so it happened) that the enemie would charge him at their backes. The messenger came before the Emperour, who with all the haste in the world, in companie of his sonnes, with all the men of warre of Persia and Babylon, which were most refreshed, hee sayled a great pace out at the Sirena Port, thinking to get the hill, but all his labour was in vaine: for the furious Bembo, despited with what was past, had already taken it with fifty thousand fighting men, whereof the one halfe were his owne, and the other were Almaines, to whome hee was much affected. It was an vn∣luckie day for the Gréekes: for ioyning with Flamino his troupes, they began a verie fierce skirmish, but being too weake, hee was taken prisoner, and all his people ouer∣throwne, and the most part of them cruelly slaughtered. They made no great boast: for comming backe with the Cattell, verie ioyfull of the victorie, they could not passe so at their ease, but that they must extend themselues at large on the hils side, making head against the Gréekes, who vn∣derstanding what had passed, fought not like men, but ra∣ther like enraged Lions. The Alarum was giuen in both Campes, & there was no Knight of any accompt, but repai∣red to the battell, for the Princes of Fraunce, and the vali∣ent Torismundo, knowing of the taking of his wiues vn∣kle,
and how sorrowfull shée would bee when shée should heare the newes, euen by pure force of armes, they went vp to the top of the hill, and so returning vpon them which draue the Cattel, they tooke them from them, putting thē to cruell deathes. They draue downe the beasts, til they gat at the enemies backs, & then with a great cry they set vpon thē, assuring themselues of the victorie, and brought them to such a straight, that whether they would or no, they made them take the plaine, and, but for abandoning the heards, they had wholly ouerthrown them. But hauing againe re∣couered the hill, of force they were to stand there still, which stoode them in greater stead in the battell. Bembo was so carefull, that he had alreadie giuen notice to the Campe, to the end that Brauorante, & Brufaldoro, with all those of Ni∣quea, should with all spéede come thither, towards the hils side which falleth by the Sea side, for there hee most feared the Gréekes. The valorous Knight with the Stars, whom Bembo had made his Lieutenant generall, came with the rest of the armie openly to the battel. That yong man came verie desirous to fight that day, and so encouraging his soul∣diers, putting vp his Beauer, chearing them with the beau∣tie of his face, he said, This is the day, valiant men of warre, wherein friendly fortune hath put the enemy into our hāds, which now were carelesse for ioy of the late victorie. I will not encourage you, for I assure my selfe, that each of you in particular hath wished for this day, to let them know the strength of your armes, and séeing we are before them; there is now no time to make many spéeches, but remitting all to the valor, wher∣with the heauens haue enriched you, assuring my selfe there∣of, I am of opinion, that we shall make them pay their old score. He cast his Trunchion in the middest of them, which was a signe that no man should take any prisoner, but that they should put all to the sword: for there is neuer worse seruice, then that which is done perforce. They all showted for ioy, promising the Captaine, yt they
would all die, or ouercome. There went in the middle Flora∣lisa, and Don Celindo, néere vnto Don Clarisell. There went in the Uaunt-gard, aboue thrée thousand Giants, so high, that they séemed to be so many Pine trées: the valo∣rous Astorildo led the arrere Gard, desirous to méete with his Cousin of Dacia, with whome hee was much offended, because that hee had perswaded his sister Rosamundi, to re∣nounce the worshipping of their false gods. Thither came the mightie Emperour of the Romanes, accompanied with the best men in the armie: by his side came the Prince of Almaine, with the strong Brundusio, which could neuer be perswaded of the fiercenesse of the Greekes: there came for his Gard all the flower of Giant-land, which were aboue two thousand. The braue Califa led his people, so gréedily desiring to fight, that euen with passion not foreséeing the euent, hee commaunded his Standerd to march forwards, and so ex∣tending themselues in length, in good order they should pre∣sent themselues before the Gréekes, for this should put the victorie in their hands. The mightie Gréeke came not so ill prouided, but that hee brought all the Thebane horsemen by his side, commaunding the Duke to bring foorth all the Carts, Wagons set with hookes of Iron, & the Elephants, and if occasion were offred, to present a field battell, for hee with his sonne would take the gréene way. Then came the mightie Captaine Generall, with the best companie that was in all the whole world: for hee had twentie foure Gi∣ants, the most valiant that were in all the Armie, which on∣ly had the charge of his person: for so had the Quéene Orisel∣ua commanded, feareful for her déere sonne: therewith went the flower of Cheualrie, Claridiano, Claramante, and the faire Archisilora: there was also ye valorous Zoilo, with the men of Tiglia, who went a great pace to recouer a hils side, which was of great importance for the battell. Good were these preparations, but fortune being against them, they serued to small purpose: for the enemie led her by the fore∣locke:
for the couragious Bembo, which led the vauntgard, seeing the Armes of Trapisonda, which were fiue Eaglets in a field of siluer, said to the Gallants which were with him, Sée, yonder is the Emperour Alphebus, of whom fame hath made so great report; heere is the place where you are to shew your valour. The mightie Gréeke came mounted vpon Cornerino his good horse, with his strong and rich Armour which hee had wonne; for in this battell hee meant to shew himselfe a Gallant. With him hee brought three companions, which did assure any hard aduenture: which were the valiant Da∣cian, the fayre Rosamundi, with his Empresse Claridiana, of whome the sonnes of the great Tituan tooke charge: which were eight Giants, and they the most famous in all the armie. The braue Lord of Achaia went a little apart from his people, in signe that first they desired so many against so ma∣ny to breake their launces, to shew the valour of their per∣sons. They went forth foure, and hee made the fifth: which were Brauorante, and Brufaldoro, with the fayre Floralisa, and her brother Don Celindo. Face to face stood they a∣gainst the Flower of Christendome: for the great Empe∣rour, which had a great desire to proue himselfe against Bembo, addressed himselfe against him: and against the Scithian, the valorous Don Heleno: against Brufaldoro, Rosamundi: Floralisa, and Claridiana charged together: and against her beloued brother, the prince of the Persians, the valorous Bransiniano. Bembo his encounter was somewhat lowe, for feare of missing, as hee desired: it was not such as hee had giuen. But he that receyued it, his force not auailing him, lost both his stirrops. The like happened to the valiant Brauorant with the warlike Don Heleno, who turning his Tirian, re∣turned against a contrarie partie, and Alphebus did the like. There was neuer séene a more cruell particular battell in a field, nor better fought: for as for foure of them▪ they
could each of them apart doe as much in the warres, as the angry god Mars himselfe. The three past their carriere, amazing all the armie. Brufaldoro is more valiant; but the Ladies Armes supply her defect, and more too: for re∣turning vpon him, she gaue him a knock, the best that euer was stricken in the warres: for by chaunce her sword ligh∣ted betweene his shield and his brest: she strake it from his arme, and loosened a great part of his vaunt-brace: shee came vpon him with a thrust, and well shee felt that it fet the bloud. Neuer was Lion so furious, as was this Mauritanian against this Ladie: and although her Helme were most strong, yet it was not sufficient to keepe her from falling sencelesse vpon her saddle pummell, casting bloud out at her mouth. All the rest of the Combats were reasonably deuided, but they were presently parted: for the furious Dacian with the noyse of so huge a blow (by chaunce) looked back∣wards; and séeing his Rosamundi, to whom the Pagan was about to giue another blow, with two leapes off his Tirian hee was with him, and tooke him somewhat at vn∣wares. What shall I say of his blowes? they made him lay his head on the saddle pummell. Then he ranne against him with his horse brest, which made him stagger, and like∣ly (horse and man) to fall to the ground. By this time was Rosamundi come againe to her selfe, and was glad to sée her Dacian so neere her. The Combate could not continue, by reason that the two Armies ioyned with so great a noyse, that it seemed that the last day was come. Who is able to describe the sundry kindes of death, the mightie blowes, and the gallant attempts giuen and taken of either party that day? Some vnable to kéepe themselues vpright, tumbled to the ground, and before they could rise againe, death met with them: others which kept their sad∣dles much better, with seeking meanes to hold them, lost
their liues, and were glad that they were dead before they fell to ground: others were thrust thorow, from side to side, and were nothing sorry for their wounds, but because they had no time to bee reuenged: others were so impatient, that being close by their enemies, they had not so much trust in their swords, as in their fists, and with them mayn∣tained the warres, vntill that death cut off all hope to sée the triumph for the warre. There were aboue twentie thousand dismounted, and the greatest part of them lost their liues. At the first charge, where Bembo went and his fierce companions, Gualtenor durst not tell what they did, but comparing them, he sayth. That a Riuer breaking his bounds, and ouerflowing a corne field, doth not so beare downe the corne, as they did tread men vnder their feet. The Christians were so desirous of reuenge, that they would not suffer any place to bee voyd: for although they sawe that they met with their death; yet there was no bo∣die seene to refuse it, still being in hand with the gallant Pagans, whose swords and Armours were died in Gréeke bloud. No lesse harme did the valorous Alphebus with his mightie company; for he did so oppresse them, that he made them retire a great way out of the plaine. On that side where the Duke of Thebes was, the Emperour of the Romanes charged, with the Prince of the Almaines, and the valorous Brundusio: who, des∣rous to meete with some of the Greekes, made the battels to ioyne together with such a noyse, as if the skyes had fallen. The mighty Epirabio tooke charge of the assaulting of ye Citie: and so with all the instruments and engines requisite for such an exployte, with all the Assyrians & the power of the Parthians, they drew néere to ye walls with many tim∣ber Castles; with which they thought so enter ye great Ci∣tie. 3. clarions were soūded in ye Castle of Venus, frō whēce
the Ladies beheld the cruel warre. All the Gréeke Prin∣ces knew what it meant. The Emperour Trebatius was very sorry, fearing some ill hap; for he saw all the troupes of Niquea, in aboue sixty rankes, marching towards the fountaynes, to charge at their backes. He lifted vp his eyes to heauen, saying, Into thy hands, O mightie God, I commit my cause, and the equitie of this persecuted Em∣pire. He turned to Rosacler, saying, I doe beléeue that this day will neuer be forgotten: I beséech the Lord to looke vp∣on his people. Hee offered to come to fight with the Moores, but that was not their meaning; for they deferred it for a better oc∣casion, but onely to crosse the fields to recouer a hill, which was hard by the walles, where they meant to fortifie. It was wonderfull to sée; for the Captaine Aristoldo had al∣ready taken it. A better cōmaunder the world neuer knew; and truly to haue gotten the hill, had bene continually rea∣die to enter the Citie. The discréet Captayne returned within the valley with all the Spanyards, and made such haste, that they tooke it beforehand. The Pagan brought much valiant people, and hee was so of his person; but he met with those which he thought not of, which were the flower of Knighthood; no lesse then Uncle and Nephew, Claridiano, and Clara∣mante, with the faire Archisilora. These were sufficient to fight with their whole armie. The Captaine of the Moores came to an ill market, for he met with Lindabrides her lo∣uer, who smote him sencelesse vpon his saddle bowe: he was so quick with him, that before that he could recouer himself, he laid him on the hard ground, with a knock with his axe. Hee would not trouble himselfe any longer with him, lea∣uing him for dead: but withdrew himselfe some what from his companions for not to be troubled with his battel-axe, for therewith hee made more roome. There was nothing better worth the séeing in all those warres. There was ne∣uer any hired labourer in the countrey, which shaking the
Chestnut trée, threw down more Chestnuts, then the sonne of Trebatius threw downe Knights with his terrible bat∣tell-axe. Sometimes with thrée blowes hee felled fixe Knights: and sometime with a strong thrust hee pluckt Knights out of their saddles, filed vpon his axe, as papers vpon a thred. He neuer gaue blow, which made not the no∣ble company to looke about, and wonder at the strength of his armes. The vnknowne Louer gaue good account of himselfe, for hee sought not out particular Knights, but the grimme Giants; among which hee rushed without any signe of feare. Their comming to the rescue, was to so great effect, that they made the Moores to retire out of the field to Bem∣bo his squadron, who by this time was within sight, for he had intelligence, that there was a supply of men landed in the port of Antona. He made hast, in hope to ouercome; for he saw that by their hastie going, his people gat the aduan∣tage of the field. Wel did the strong Breton sée, that for that he was on the left wing, where he plaid the deuil: & as that ground was somwhat higher, those which tooke land might well possesse it; which ranging themselues into a strong Battalion, he saw tooke their way towards the field. Hee called the Prince of Argentaria, and sayd vnto him, Now is the time come, valorous Knight, to shew what hath bene hoped for at your hands: and therefore if you will be my conuoy, it behoueth me to passe by all these Tents, to goe to know what people that is which is newly arryued; for if they bee not enemy, we shall get the field. Doe herein, va∣lorous Prince, sayd the noble Florisarte, what shall please you, which to effect with the losse of my life, I shall be well content. The valiant Rosabel (for he had no time to stay casting his shield at his backe, and in his hand his sword) gaue his horse the reynes, who, as swift as a thunderbolt, parted frō his squadron towards the sea side. The Prince of Thar∣sis had inough to doe to followe him, hee went with such
fury and swiftnesse. Both campes beheld him. The Gréeks knew him by the blew scarfe which Liiana had giuen him. Some followed him, the first whereof were, Claramante, Claridiano, and the fayr Archisilora, because they saw that Aristoldo made all haste, getting ground vpon his enemie: for Epirabio being missing (whom sore hurt they had car∣ried out of the battell) in a maner turning their backes, they made towards their campe, notwithstanding that the Moores in that place had the worst of the fight: in most places else, they cryed, Uictorie: for Bembo reinforcing his squadron, had brought to his ayd a hundred thousand Assyrians; with which hee gaue so fierce a charge on the squadron of the Thessalonians, that hee made them retire aboue a bow shot. The Gréekes were in better case on that side where Flo∣risiano, with the gentle Polidolpho, with the people of Li∣ra, Apulia, and Croatia had entred: they were somewhat of kinne, and for that cause they alwaies kept company. They were of opinion, that the Sargeant Maior generall had reserued them and their people fresh, onely for that dayes seruice. They were very confident in their valour, & through that occasion they vndertooke great enterprises, and fell on that side from whence Rosabel went; who with the strong Floriarte being to go crosse the tents, had put thē in disorder. They came in good time; for the people of that countrey beeing but a fewe left, had retired to backe them∣selues with a little hill, whither came the two famous Cap∣taines with al the horsemen, which gaue so sudden a charge vpon their enemies, as did greatly annoy them; but the best was to recouer the ground which they had lost. They both did greatly encourage the people, shewing them what ho∣nour they wanne that day, seing it might well be sayd, that they had restored Grecia, being almost lost. These couragious speaches wrought such effect, that e∣uerie one fought for two: no man was afeard of danger, so great was the hope of victory. All was but neede; for the
Emperour of Rome did so busie the Duke of Thebes: and the Souldan of Egypt charged on the right wing, so as the Greekes had their hands full on euery side; for with the Souldan came mightie Giants. Against this squadron the braue Emperour Trebatius addressed himselfe, compassed about with the best men of all his armie: they two met, but the Greekes force was such, that excepting his sonnes, it was matchlesse: hee ouerbare both man and horse to the ground. Many aligh∣ted after him, some to defend him, others to kill him, or take him prisoner. Twelue Giants which were of his gard alighted from their Elephants to rescue him, which did much hurt. With all this as in a chase, there alighted the noble Emperour and Rosacler, with the Princes of Fraunce, and Zoilo the braue Tartarian, with Brandafidel and Bramidoro, and the gentle Tifereo. There was renued one of the most perrilous fights that had bene seene of all that day: for the Emperour making no reckoning of the Giants, rushed in amongst them, and at his entrie with a stabbe hee thrust their Captaine quite thorow the body, from side to side, who for his heyght was like to a well growne Pine trée. The fierce Giant fell not, seeking before bee dyed to be reuenged: for hee swinged his heauie club about his head, and therewith gaue the Emperour Trebatius such a blow athwart his shield, as made him goe staggering to one side, readie to fall, and hee had falne, the blow was so terrible, had not his valorous Nephew Clarindo bene by him, who held him vp with his hand. The yong mā made no stay there; for séeing what had hap∣pened to his grandfather, casting his shield at his backe, he made at the Giant. Others were come to the aide, so as he was well reuenged: for Bramidoro with his heauie club, & the Prince with his sword smote him both at once: one of them made his eies leap out of his scull, and the other with
his sword cleft his head. Rosacler turned to another which had smitten his Uncle, whom he made to lose his féeling. This day did the young man winne his credit and eter∣nall praise; for with a mighty blowe he cut him almost in two péeces. Much did the father reioyce to sée the force of his sonne, who mayntained a cruell fight against another Giant. This was no time to straine courtesie, for Branda∣fidel came, who with his hideous club knockt him on the pate: his Helmet could not protect him, for he stretcht him all along at the Princes feete. The Gréekes and Macedo∣nians seeing their Emperor, tooke herein so good order, that they wanne part of the Giants campe. There remained two to beare newes of the Greekes valour: and had there not come so much people, that the trampling of their horses was daungerous, they had without doubt taken the Soul∣dan: but they mounted him againe vpon a swift courser, whereon he rode encouraging his people. The Califa of Sicona kept him better company then he thought for, who seeing so much people there gathered together, brought wenty thousand men to the rescue. At their first comming they did some harme because they were flesh men, but it lasted but a while; for the Greekes, which by this time were already fleshed, made a cruell slaughter of them, sup∣plying that heere, which was lost in the rest of the battels: for the Fenician Prince, Don Argante, although vn∣knowne, came afresh with all the Medians, and for that cause where he entred he made a deadly but cherie. This was no day for the Greekes, for euen the Sunne was against them: for falling downe in the West, he be∣reaued them of their sight; so as the enemies might easilie charge and retire at libertie. The Prince of Britany could not sally on that side where he was, but that he chaunced to see the furious young man with the stars, who, desirous to end the war with him, seeing that his people had ye better in the fight: he wēt along ye side of a hill, which he could not do, but Bēbo would sée it, who with ye other 2. famous Knights
went to séeke him, leauing the charge of his gouernement with the warlike Celindo, who séeing himselfe in such au∣thoritie, began also to encourage his people, and with as good order as Bembo himselfe could haue done. What hap∣pened to those which so went out of the Campe, is fit to bee told in another Chapter. CHAP. XIX. How the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria came to the Campe, and what hee did for the libertie of the Flemmish knight, with the comming of the Princes of Silepsia, Leobu∣lo, and Claribel, and what with them happened to the Prin∣ces of Grecia. VAlorous dames, if to bee engulfed in the actions of bloudy Mars, bee an occasion to leaue to treate of louing matters, at the least, I cannot leaue to acknowledge the much which your Soueraigne worthinesse deserueth. I speake it, for that hauing one day detained mine eyes from beholding this intricate histo∣rie, kéeping continually my Chamber, I chaunced to looke forth, and saw my death and life both together. Death, be∣cause yt there is no remedie, for the euill which I then recei∣ued. Life also, which is to sée my selfe wholy wel employed, without enuie of a more happie louer (although he liue dain∣tily) for although they loue me not, neither doth my state deserue it, yet for mee to loue, it is a swéete life that I con∣ceyue therein. Being confident in my new wound (although it bee in my old soule) I presume to begin to make relation of the most famous warre that euer was séene, of so many against so many: for Rosabel had scarcely parted from among his friends, and enemies, when descending downe the side of
a hil which led towards the Strand, he saw come that way, a , (to his seeming) of a goodly proportion, in compa∣nie of foure Ladies. This was the valiant Poliphebus, who hauing landed, and hearing the noyse of the battel, in great haste drue néere vnto it, but durst not disclose his meaning, because he would not grieue the Ladies. The two nimphes of the Castle vn∣derstanding the matter, one of them said vnto him, O, you my well, valorous Prince, without caring for vs, goe to succour your Father, for it is not a little needfull: for if it were not so neere night, the whole house of Grecia would be neere ouerthrowne, considering the aboundance of ene∣mies that are against it: for know, that this Ladies Aunt, who is held for the wisest woman in al the vniuersal world, for shée was taught out of Medeas bookes, and in the same signe commaunded vs, that in this battel, and the challenge which you are to make, we should haue especial care of your person, for considering with what Knight you are to fight, you would lightly bee brought into danger, if shée vse no mene to the contrarie: but shee being of your side, you may boldly and merrily attempt any enterprise, bee it neuer so doubtfull, and shall preuaile. The Prince was verie glad of the newes, which the Nimphes had told him: & so willing him to goe before, for they would come to behold, he imbra∣ced them, & tooke his leaue of the Ladies, not without griefe: for the one he loued, as his sister, and the other as his loue, & the greatest in all Cupids band. He pluckt downe his Bea∣uer, & with his Launce in his hand, hee marched away like Mars, and came downe into the valley, hee did not bow the grasse where his horse went, hee flew so swift with the ena∣mored gallant. It was a luckie cōming for the Frenchman, who was taken prisoner and sore wounded, whome three most strong Giants and foure Knights carried away to∣wards their Campe, to goe in the more securitie. Both princes saw them, but the Tinacrian, like an Aspicque in fu∣rie, was the first that came, for knowing the Knight which
was prisoner, by his armes ful of Flowers  Luce, he held him for a man of worth, and of the Gréeke partie. He would aske no questions, but rather charging his Launce, assailed the Giants, who held him for a mad-man: one of thē opposed himselfe against him, who with his life paid for the young mans displeasure: for in méeting him, before that ye Launce brake, hee passed it a third part thorow his backe, and like a Lion, returned against the rest of the rascals. Foure times he hurled about his strong sword, wherewith hee dispatched the foure Knights, remaining alone in the field, with the two fierce Giants, where, O valorous Ladie, newly mis∣trisse of his soule, who can depaint this combat, in such sort as you may take pleasure therin? He which carried the vali∣ant Frenchman prisoner, was constrained to set him downe vpon the hard ground, and with his Club, to turne against the sonne of Trebatius, who making a hard rocke of his rich and sure shield, attended the blow, bearing his sword aloft; and séeing that the blow came, hee spurring his Rubicane, came so néere the Giant, that hee made him lose his blow. Luzelaes louer came with a good will, for with a thrust he hit him on the middest of the brest, & came with such force, that it past halfe thorow at one side: his armour was so thick, that he scarce hurt him. His other companion came with a great Cemiter in his hand, hee slaied for his comming, but before that he could make any resistance, he smote him vpō the rich Helmet, and made him sée al the least stars in the skies, and the bloud in great aboundance to gush out at his mouth: had it not béene Poliphebus which fought this battel, without al doubt they had ouercome him: for the two Giants were the best in all the Camp, & therfore Bembo had recōmended vn∣to thē the kéeping of ye good Frenchman, but they met with the sonne of Garrofilea, who more fierce then a Basiliske, a∣gaine rusht in betwéen them, & from him who had so handled him, on a suddain he smote his shield to the ground, with the gretest part of his arme. The yong mās fury rested not here, seeing yt he came néere to the knight, who also saw him, not
knowing whether he were his friend, although that (indéed) hee was the greatest that hee had in the world, he would not méete him in this hurly burly with ye Giants: for turning to the second, he smote him vpon the Helmet, and left his head all vnarmed, and therein a great wound. By that time came his lame enemie, who séeing himselfe without one arme, lifted vp his crooked Faulchion, but it was to smal purpose, for his wound tooke away the greatest part of his strength: with a leape he cleared himselfe from him, and iust as Ro∣sabel came, with his sword in both his hands hee smote him vpon the top of the shoulder; there was no defence in the hard Stéele: for hee strake away all that quarter, throwing him downe dead at his horse féete. Hee had so fatned him∣selfe therwith, that he gaue opportunitie to the other (being in despaire of his life) to giue him a blow, yea, he smote him a full one; and strake him downe vpon his horse necke, past all féeling, sencelesse: and so hee continued a great while, gi∣uing place to the Pagan to second it with another: and had not Rosabel come in time to hinder it, hee had striken him againe. The furious Breton returned, and smote the Moore on the side of the shield, the one halfe he flung away, with great part of his Uant-brace, leauing him sore hurt. By this time was Garrofileaes sonne come againe to himselfe, who see∣ing the Gréeke so néere him, hee presently knew him, and was wonderfully glad to sée him in that place, but he would not that he should end the warre: for giuing his Spurres to his strong horse (for there were few such, and for such did the wizard giue it vnto him) and ioyning with the Pagan, (desirous to giue his Cousin to vnderstand, that he was no lesse then himselfe) with both his hands hee smote him vp∣on the vnarmed head: and as he hit him on the skull, so hee cleft him downe to the brest: and then (as though hee had done nothing) wyping his victorious sword, he went to his Cousin Rosabel, saying, I would gladly know, Sir Knight, of whether of these two Camps you are: for if you bee of the
Gréekes, my mortall enemies, I shall bee enforced to be∣come ingratefull for that which for mee you haue done, by challenging you the combat, hauing farre better confidence in the equitie of my cause, then in my owne valour. In vn∣derstanding this, worthie Knight (in denying my selfe to be a Gréeke) I might auoide the combat. But because that you shall vnderstand that you come ill enformed, let our fight begin presently, and in what maner you will, where∣by you shall vnderstand, that the equitie of our cause will giue vs the victorie. Your personage, valorous Rosabel, is worthie of all the triumphes in the world: and putting off his Helmet, he went to imbrace him, saying. Why, did you thinke, Sir Knight, that I would not haue come into your Countrie to sée you, you hauing offended a Ladie in Silepsia, such as is Eufronisa, by whome I am commaunded to challenge you the single combat? The yong man could giue him no answere for ioy. Sometime Ma∣dam, a suddaine ioy bereaueth me of my sences, especially, when it commeth vnlooked for: but that qualme being past, imbracing him againe, he said, I did assure my selfe, valo∣rous Prince, and my Lord, that considering how much néed Gréece hath of your aide, you would remember it: let vs bee gone, to acquaint the noble Emperour your Father herewith. That may not bee yet (answered the valorous young man) but it behoueth rather to conceale my name, for the loue of certaine Ladies which come in my compa∣nie, whome I haue promised, to maintaine their beautie in the middest betwéene these two Campes, against the Moores: for against the Gréekes who shall dare, although it were Mars him selfe, Rosabel being of their side? Séeing that you so please (answered the nephew) there is no man that will gainesay your will: but first I would that wee might to day before the Sunne goe downe, let them know what your arme can doe: and it commeth well to passe, for I come now out of the battell, to sée what people this is which here commeth. I haue béene somewhat more neere
vnto them (answered the Tinacrian) and me thinketh that they beare the armes of Gréece. But I would not that wee should stay a ioat longer: and so presently they tooke the di∣rect way towards the place, where they saw these troupes, which were those which came from Tinacria, vnder the cō∣mand of the great Earle of Modica. In drawing somewhat neere, the young man knew his owne armes, which were on the one of the Gréeke armes: hee bare in blew the seuen Starres in Gold: he was glad in his soule, that his mother had partly forgotten the displeasure, which shée conceiued against his father. Rosabel, to bee briefe, séeing the alarum giuen towards S. Michaels Castle, gaue them to vnderstand thereof: the Tinacrians were excéeding glad for the méeting their prince, of whome they had heard, what a man hee was, and of his great valour: the Prince would not discouer himselfe to them, vntill that hee had performed his challenge. Rosabel presently drew them into the forme of an Hearse, and with the swiftest pace that they were able, they tooke their way towards the Campe: they came euen when the Sunne had ended his iournie, giuing a beginning to a new. Some of ye Gréeke Battallions were in a confusion, readie to flie: they lookt where was most néed, which was where ye Croacians fought, although that in the beginning they had done great hurt. But the greatest part of ye Sophi his people, with their Prince Thorisiano, charged into that quarter, making them (notwithstanding that they fought like Lions) to retyre frō the field. But the Tinacrians which were verie earnest, did so reinforce them, that had it not bin so néere night, they had pacified the fight: But it was fauourable vnto them, al∣though that it lasted not aboue an houre: for therein did the Tinacrians make knowne what a Captaine he was, which led them, for hee & his sonne Fartemio did beare themselues o couragiously, that they wan therewith Poliphebus good will. That which they did, stood them in no small stead, for it aduanced their house, euen to ye clouds, & to be the most prin∣cipall
in all that kingdome. All was nothing in comparison to that which the young man did: for séeing his fathers par∣tie to goe to wracke, there was neuer Mower that with his Sithe, did cut downe Corne so fast in harnest, as he with his sword in both his hāds did fel down those infidels, which were not accustomed to ouercome. At his first comming, hée encountred with the gentle Thorisiano, who seeing ye slaugh∣ter that that knight made of his people, called for a Launce and went towards him. The yong mā suspected him not, he was so busie; and his aduersarie was not a man that would greatly straine courtesie: for if his armour had not béen good, he had riuen him thorow from side to side: he cast him so far backe vpon his Saddle, that hee knockt his head vpon his horse buttockes. There was neuer any Uiper troden vpon, that was so angrie as Luzelaes louer: for comming to him∣selfe, & setling himselfe in his Saddle, with his verie lookes he made aboue foure of ye most proudest afraid: for being fixt in his Saddle, & his féete in the stirrops, spurring his Ru∣bican, with a leape he was with him, & with both his hands he smote him on ye shield, & (had not such hands tempered it) he had cleft it: for hee beat it close to his Helmet with such force, that hauing wholy lost his sences; he cast out the bloud out at his mouth, and set him on the arson of the Saddle: he had seconded it with another, & that had béene his death, for the sonne of Garrofilea was now impatient, and being so, none of his brethren excelled him: being angrie he was cru∣ell, which was soone past, which did much aduance his fame. Thorisiano had many Giants for his gard, which although that his father knew him not, yet he loued him déerly, com∣manding thē to haue regard of his person: & so one of thē (be∣ing little lesse then a great Béech trée, mounted vpon a furi∣ous horse, such a one as was fit to carrie such a personage) met with the Tinacrians horse, who if he had not beene giuen him by ye wise woman, they had both faln to the ground, for he had not his equal. With a faire shock they staid, & his pre∣sumption cost him his life; for in field battels courtesies are
not obserued: for Rosabel being néere his Unkle, with Hec∣tors sword ended that warre: for hitting him vpō the shoul∣der, hee cleft his armour and bodie to the hollow of his heart. His companion would reuenge his death, & charged amōgst them, as amongst ordinary Knights. But sée, hither came the famous Earle of Modica and his sonne, who lea∣uing the Gard of the Standard, came hither to their aide, as though they had knowne of the méeting: if Gualtenor may be beléeued, hee was one, that afterwards was verie famous in Grecia, who comming with great power, equall to his discretion, hee rushed into the middest of those Barba∣rians. The good Knight Flamineo held them good compa∣nie. Being couetous of fame, these thrée entred, as though they had gone a hunting: by their blowes they purchased fame, for the Tinacrians, (now Sycilians) at the first charge, ouerthrew two of those Giants. The Frenchmā was so ch∣lericke, who séeking reuenge, was so slow, that hee was like to haue béene lost: for a Giant being néere him, cast his armes about his necke, with such force, that within a little he pluckt him out of his Saddle. The Frenchmā was nim∣ble, and so drawing out his dagger, he suffered the Giant to beare him, who féeling his weaknesse, drew him from the Saddle: but hee put in practise what he had determined, for hee suddainely had two or thrée times stabd his dagger vn∣der his taces into his belly, fetching his soule out at the wound. They fell both to the ground, where Flamineo, obtaining the victorie, began to defend himselfe, but it had béene to small purpose, had not the Tinacrian béene there, who tur∣ning about his furious horse, made way to enter where the Frenchman was: hee tooke him by the arms, and as if hee had béene a child, he set him vpon the Giants horse; all men wondring at the valiancie of that Knight; which sufficed to giue meanes to Florisiano, and Poliphebus, to recouer what they had lost. They aduertised Don Celindo of what pas∣sed, who with the Assirian, & his sister, made thitherwards.
Here was the greatest presse of people that was in any place of all that day; for both squadrons comming to méet vpon a little playne, and seeing the great hurly burly, there were few of any account which came not thither. The first that came thither, was the valorous Don Celindo with his company: hee encountred Rosabel, and made a good en∣counter, although he lost both his stirrops. Rosabels cour∣ser was so well trayned, that at two leapes he was with his aduersarie, and by that meanes he smote him before he was in a readinesse, and had wholly ouerturnd him, had not Cla∣risel come running in, who well seated in his saddle, char∣ging his Launce aboue hand, hee darted it at the valiant Breton: the Armour which he ware, was not such, but that it could well resist that blow, so that the Launce being vna∣ble to pierce it, rebounded backe againe whole. The valo∣rous Damsell gathered it vp, and therewith went towards him whom she loued better then her owne soule: it was Lu∣zelaes louer, as hath already bene sayd. Floralisa, euer since that she saw his picture in the wood where she was bred vp, yéelded her soule to him, confirming the same, when hee went out of Grecia, admitting him for her Knight, which he thought not of. This Ladie was Mars in Armes, and Venus in beautie: shee brandished her Launce with such force and dexteritie, that I knowe not, but that if hee which receyued it had knowne her, hee would haue taken it for especiall fauour. Shee hit him right in the brest, the most enamored that the world knew, and brake it with the blowe, and made the Prince to bend on one side: who againe settling himselfe, knew her to bee the same which had done him so exceeding fauours. He would not take any reuenge on her. But the warlike Ladie not knowing who he was, turned her horse, and with Camillaes sword in her hand, she drew neere vnto him whom she most loued. Here appeared the valour of the mightie Tinacrian; who comming close vnto her, before she could deliuer her blow,
tooke her so fast by the arme, as if she had bene bound with a great cable, and in sight of all the armie, saying. Upon him who is lesse desirous to doe you seruice then I, warlike Ladie, you may execute your wrath, and not against him who is so much and so long time yours, and will be vntill I die. He spake it so suddenly, that she knew not who he was: and yet seeing him come with Armes differing from the Gréekes, and that he came with new supplie, shee present∣ly suspected that it was the gentle Poliphebus, & was glad at her heart: for it is an easie matter to perswade any one that hopeth, and feruently loueth, to beleeue any thing that they would haue, and sayd, I thought, valorous warriour, that my wounds were receyued for fauours: but séeing that in you there wanteth this acknowledgement, I will leaue thē for those which will take them for such. The youngster let her goe, which was to make her the more to yéeld: and sée∣ing the contrarie partie begin to presse forwards, and be∣cause that shee would not stay behind; otherwise she had a∣new fale in loue againe. Thus proceeded the battell, when the braue Knight with the stars, vpon a high rocke beheld him in the blew scarfe working wonders: for Florisarte was now come, who knowing of the battell, was sent by Rosabel from the Citie. As an Eagle came this warlike yong man downe the hill: and in despite of the Christians, crossing athwart their campe, hee came where those Prin∣ces were. He trode vnder feete all he met in his way, and came in such fury, that he would haue made small account of Mars: yet the Princes of Babylon and Argentaria made head against him, but he cared for none of them, after he had seene ye yong man: at his comming he smote Lisarte his sonne in the middle of the shield, and encountred him with his head and brest in such sort, that hee made him lay his head on his horses croope, and with another hee had o∣uerthrowne him, had not Bransiniano bene there, who with all his might gaue a happie blow for the Prince of Tharsis: for at what time as the young man lifted vp his
sword, the Persian spurring his horse, gat within him, and gaue him so great a blowe crosse the Helmet, as made him to lose his, and going from him, left him almost past remē∣brance. The Prince of Apulia which was hard by, gaue him a third. They gaue him so much to doe, that they made him more manifestly to shew the valour of his person: for seeing that three had set vpon him, he turned against them all, and put them so much to their shifts, that hee put them all out of breath. He charged & retired as quicke as thought, and sometimes it was impossible any way to hit him, hee was so light. Don Celindo had vnderstood that Poliphe∣bus had grieued his sister, and therefore with his sword (which was Queene Iuliaes) hee made towards the Tina∣crian. At that very instant came the famous Rosacler, who being neere, of force could not chuse, but know his owne good sword: a man cannot declare the contentment which he conceaued in seeing it: for he could no longer forbeare, but sayd, Away, away: for this fight belongeth vnto mee. He came where the Prince was, who refuing him not, the battell began. The Tinacrian at his comming knew him by his deuice, and therefore withdrew, addressing his blow against the magnanimious Lindauro, who to his owne hurt was returned to the battell: for the blow which Poliphebus gaue him, was like to haue cost him his life, who within a little had stretcht him all along at his horses héeles. All the soldiers (for not to be benighted) withdrew, to giue place to Don Celindo, who now more couragious then euer char∣ged the Gréeke: both together they gaue 2. mighty blowes, which brought their noses to their bosoms. The nights ap∣proch would not suffer them to giue the second, which made both armies to sound ye retreat, for feare to kill one another his friend vnknown. The Pagans were victorious, where∣of they made good shew with their ordinarie instruments. On eyther side died so many, that they were innumerable▪ and yet for all this, neyther in the Citie, nor in the campe was heard any complayning; for those which remayned,
were mightyly grieued, vntill they might sée the howre wherein they might either die, or be reuenged. For the hurt men the Duke of Thebes tooke especiall care, who was a most expert Captaine. This was that which hee with the starres desired; who leauing the battell, came to Rosacler, to whom with a gal∣lant grace he sayd, I would haue bene very glad, Knight, that you and I with some other whom you please, might haue gone and ended the battell that other day, for I much desire it. Let it be as it shall please you (answered the noble Bre∣ton, who desired the same no lesse then he) and leade you the way, and I will follow. The nerest at hand was Don Cla∣risel which kept him company: with the Greeke was the Tinacrian, who left word, if any body asked for him, they should say hee was gone about a little businesse, and would come againe straight. The Princes in withdrawing them, found some wan∣ting; the errand was left with Zoilo the Tartarian, who pacified his Lady and the rest: they were much better plea∣sed, when they vnderstood that Claridiano, Claramante, and the fayre Archisilora were also missing, thinking that they were all together. The night was wholly shut in, when the braue Don Heleno and his beloued Lady, with the Captaine generall, and Brandafidel, and Tirefeo went forth of the Citie: and within a little while after, the most part of the Princes went forth also, and likewise out of the campe, to seeke for their Gallants which were missing. What happened vn∣to them, shalbe declared in another Chapter, because (O Mistresse of my heart) I would not be noted to be tedious.
CHAP. XX. What happened to the Knight with the starers, and to Rosabel in the combat: and the end thereof. I Cannot (O Ladie of my life) leaue to ac∣knowledge what paine I indure; for Loue hath made mee feruently enamoured, and subiect to his swee yoke: yet I cannot haue time to treat of loue matters (a thing so pleasing to my life) but all of furious Mars; to whom (although I haue bene affected) yet now a strickt account is called for of the time spent with him, which might haue bene for loue. What good thing hath there euer béene without it? Who euer liued a merry life, if hee spent it not in loue? The imagination of field battels hath ouer∣whelmed me, otherwise, no man should haue made more manifest shewes of his loue in writing, then I: but not∣withstāding my desire, I am to follow those Princes which are gone forth of the campe. He with the stars had no great experience in the warres, and much lesse knew the countrey, for both which his few yéeres might excuse him; for yet hee was not fully sixteene yeeres old, and yet he gaue all the flower of Greece matter to thinke on. At last they came to a fit place for the battell, although somewhat farre from the Citie and the campe. Without speaking one word, these two warriours turned their horses and parted, to returne the one against the other. Oh that my Mistresse would allow herselfe to be beloued, which would giue me meanes to depaint this warre, which was the most bloudy, being betweene so many against so many, that happened in all those warres! it were a sweet pensill for mee to vnderstand, that she tooke pleasure to be
adored; yet perswading my selfe that I am beloued, I will goe forwards, because they came together with greater fu∣ry then the sea, when being most swolne, it threatneth the heauens, putting the ships in great danger. Neither of them mist in the encounter, breaking their launces as if they had bene réeds. They past the one by the other with Mars his countenance. Lirgandco saith, that he with the starres lost one stirrop, but it was not perceiued. The Briton had a better horse then those which draw the Sun, a reasō why he was with him before the yong man could turne about, he strake downe right. Achilles neuer strake better blow: for as it was Hectors sword, it did cut away halfe of his shield: for Lupertius his enchaūtment was not of that antiquity as the swords: he beat it to his helmet with greater force then can be imagined, & made him bow downe his head as low as the horses crooper, and gaue him a terrible stab: within little he had indangered him, for it lighted néere ye ioynting of his vant-brace. He would néeds close with him, which was to his owne hurt: for the yong man like a fleshed Lion, with a leap was on one side of him, the Gréeke passing by with his courser, as quick as thought. He with the starres followed him in hope of reuenge: fortune put that into his hands which he desired: for Oliuiaes son returning, he smote him at ease vpon ye highest of his helmet: the sword reboun∣ded as if he had smittē a rock. The yong man was nothing glad of yt▪ yet he gaue him another, which smote the Breton downe vpon his horse neck, casting out bloud at his mouth, nostrils, & eares. The furious Tinacrian his bloud did fréese to sée such a blow: at length cōming againe to himselfe, & in state to seeke reuenge, thinking yt he returned against his companiō, he came to ye Assyrian, saying, Sir Knight, there is no reason yt our friends should be in such dāger, & we stand and looke on. The same did the other desire: but the sonne of Garrofilea is secōd to none in valour, & was euery way too hard for him: they encoūtred with as great noyse, as if two rocks had met. The Assyriā lost both his stirrops & reines.
Luzelaes louer past forwards, estéeming him highly for the good encounter which he had receiued, & tooke more pleasure thē any man, to sée warlike Knights, & desired to try himselfe withall, although yt when he saw he had ye aduantage, he pre∣sently came to a peace; a thing which few men will do. The Assyriā was more enamoured then Loue himselfe, & was of opinion, yt bearing so high thoughts as he did, it were a great basenes for him to be ouercome bearing Miloes Armes. He returned against the Gréeks, & smote him vpon the helmet, which made him hold his head more at one side thē he would, and busied him so, yt he had meanes to giue him another, no lesse then ye first. He receiued it on his shield, which was dri∣uen back to his brest & rich helmet: it séemed to ye new louer yt a rock had falne vpō him, the blow was so mighty. There is no serpent in ye sands of Libia, so furious as was the Ti∣nacrian▪ but before he could be prouided, the Assyrian was with him with a strong thrust, and made him to bend backe vpon his saddle. Here choler moūted to the highest degree in the sonne of Trebatius; for now hee would not haue giuen place to Mars, but with him he would that the battell had bene: there was no defence against his blowes, but that he cut his Armour, notwithstanding the fine temper: at the first blow, he smote the Assyrian downe vpō his horse neck sencelesse, casting bloud: now he assured himselfe of the vic∣torie: for although that hee with the starres would haue holpen him, hee could not: for Rosabel with his Flyer was come, and his other valiant vncle with his Rubicane, and trusting in his swiftnesse, he set vpon the young man, be la∣bouring him with the best Armes that the earth knew, pul∣ling him out of his saddle: but hee came to himselfe before he fell to the ground. Don Clarisel was nimble; for draw∣ing his dagger, his fortune was so good, that hee stabd him in the closing of his brest-plate, and but that it crost in the entring, hee had wounded him deadly: but this serued him to no small purpose: for it made the Tinacrian to let him goe, and fall downe vpon his feete: it was a prodigious
thing, to see the Rubicane in the battell, for hee forbare no footeman; and so the Assyrian was not fully at the ground, when hee ran vpon him and gaue him a shrewd fall. The Tinacrian neuer perceyued that in his horse before, and was sorry for it in his soule; for hee would not ouercome him with any aduantage: and lightly leaping from him, he sayd, Pardon, Sir Knight, for it was not in my power; for I desire not to fight with any man with aduantage ey∣ther of horse or Armes. The Assyrian was so furious, that he made him no answere; but with his sword in both his hands hee set vpon him. On foote no man excelled the Ti∣nacrian, for he was an Eagle: he suffred him to approche: but before he could strike him, hee shifted him to one side, & made him lose his blow: which being past, he gaue him such a knocke vpon the Helmet, that he made him set his hands to the ground, and would haue closed with him, but it was too late: for the angry young man was againe on foote, & ve∣ry nimbly made a famous assault; for he gaue Garrofiliaes sonne two strōg thrusts one after another, which made him goe backwards, somewhat out of breath, which gaue occa∣sion to the young man with a wheeling about to lay him at his féete, and within a little had hought him, one leg tor∣menting him. The Tinacrian felt the blow, but would not shew the effect which it wrought: for hee charged his ene∣mie vpon one leg, vntill the great payne was past: rare va∣lour in a Knight▪ for the want of his leg was not perceiued: for with a leap, although but vpon on leg, he came home to the Assyrian: there was no defence against his arme: for hitting him vpon one side of the shield, he smote him so hard, as made him set his knées to ye ground: he entred & shouldred him, & threw him downe vpon his backe: he knéeled downe vpō him with his dagger in his hand. Floralisaes louer was in dout of his life, & this made him draw strēgth out of weak∣nes, setting both his hands vpō Poliphebus his arme, & held him so, yt the yong mās choler could go no further: ye Knight with ye stars was sory to sée his cōpanions il hap, & as angry
as a Serpent, hee leapt from his horse to goe to helpe him. Rosabel did she like, but the vnknowne youth came first. The Tinacrian saw him comming, & became he would giue no occasion of any ill successe, he stood vp, taking his good sword. The starred Knight came blind for ioy yt he came in time, whereby Poliphebus had meanes to giue him a cruell blow; for as he had neuer a shield, so hee gaue him a great slash in the brest. Now was the Assyrian on foote, who séeing Rosabel come running, he gaue him a thrust, but hee neuer boasted of it; for Lirianaes louer, with a blow backwards, made him to fall on his face to the ground: the noyse of this battell was so great, that all the hils and vallies rung there∣of. The moone shined bright, which gaue light to three Knights which sate on the hils side to sée all this battel; they were no worse men, then the Princes of Silepsia, Leobello, and Claribel, which came with the Knight, which found them newly borne, as hath béene before declared: hee was one of the chiefest in that Realme, and brought some troups to the aide of his King, which hee had sent vnder the com∣maund of his Lieutenant to the Campe; and hee with his two sonnes (for so he called them) went vp that mountain. By reason of the noyse of the battell, they came downe from thence in great haste, and came iust at the time that the Gréekes had the better: for Rosabel had wel-néere ouer∣come the Prince of ye Assyrians: and Poliphebus, desirous to make the Knight with the Starres, to know that hee was the glorie of armes, hastned so the battell, that he had already made him breathlesse. The Silepsian nouices wondred, who putting them∣selues in the middest betwéene the foure Princes, said, In courtesie (valorous Knights) tell vs the cause of your cruell fighting; for me thinketh, that the aide, which either of you might giue to your party, should be no smal matter: why wil you then end it thus alone? It is no other thing, Knights, an∣wered the beloued. Father, but that these Knights main∣ the quarrel of the Souldan of Niquea: and that which
we could not performe in the last battell, wee haue left for this present: and therefore stand out, for this battell is to be ended. Let vs intreate you, gentle Knight, (answered the Princes) to giue it ouer vntill to morrow, because we then may the better enioy the sight of your fortitude. To content the Princes, they all consented, whose beautie and comely∣nesse made them to admire. They all seuen sate downe vn∣der a gréene Oliue trée, and taking off their Helmes to take breath, it was a marueilous thing to sée, when the one came to behold the other: for if there were beautie in the world, thi∣ther it was withdrawne. Rosabel was not yet thirtie yeeres old, neither had his trauels altred his complexion, for hee was the Phenix of his time: for Poliphebus, all the sages a∣grée that he was excéeding faire. He with the Starres, and the two young men were but children: for the oldest was not yet fiftéene yeeres old, but so faire, that they contended for beautie with the heauenly inhabitants. The two Prin∣ces of Silepsia were so like vnto Poliphebus, that their fa∣ther did maruaile thereat, and séeing so much beautie met together in them sixe, that for complexions and armes, they were the flower of the world. The two youthes came with a desire to receiue the order of Knighthood, at the hands of the Captaine generall of the Pagans armie, whose fame reached to the starres: but ha∣uing seene the valiancie of those foure Knights, the elder of these youthes, whose name was Claribel, directing his pace towards Rosabel, whome according to the constellation of his Natiuitie, hee was inclined to loue, said, Ualorous Knight, my brother and I are desirous to receiue the order of knighthood, at the hands of some worthie man of warre, which desire hath forced vs to come from farre Countries with our father, to haue receiued it of the King of Achaia, whose worthines fame hath spread ouer the earth. But ha∣uing séene what you haue shewen in this battell, we both in∣treate you, that (although we haue not deserued it) yet wee may receiue it at your hand. The Prince did so affect the
two youths, that he was glad in his soule, that occasion was offred to doe them any pleasure, yet hee would not bereaue Bembo of that which hee deserued, saying vnto them, The heauens defend it, that séeing that you may receiue it at the hands of so worthie a Knight, as is that Prince whom you haue named, that you should receiue it of me, to whom for∣tune hath not bin so fauourable. This knowledgement, va∣lorous Knight, sufficeth (answered Leobello, which was the younger of these Princes) to assure my brother & me, that it remaining in your hands, there may happen vnto vs some rest of good fortune, and so wee beséech you to graunt that which my brother hath requested. I would be verie glad (an∣swered Lirianaes louer, and Father to these youthes) that this act might be performed with the solemnitie, which your worth deserueth, and not that I doing it, should wrong these Princes. Why then, we wil come to a composition (said the supposed father to these yong princes) that this knight with the stars, shall giue the order to one of my sonnes, and you, to the other; and this doing, both they, & I, shall be bound to doe you seruice all the daies of our life. Quoth Poliphebus, It is very fit, that they receiue it from so worthy a knight, as is he with the stars. And so Claribel knéeled downe before his father, who kist his faire chéeke, with as great affection, as if he had knowne him. He put on his Helmet, & pulled down the Beauer, and with his sword he smote him on the shoul∣der, saying, Arise, valorous Knight, & from hencefoorth shew to the world, the vertue which your good countenance & faire resemblance assureth: the like did ye vnknown Knight with the stars: and Leobello lost nothing by receiuing the sword at his hands: for he might wel say, that hee receiued it of the most valiant Knight that was knowne in the world, in that age. With pleasing cōuersation, thei past the rest of ye night, in the which the two nouices learned the cause of all those wars: & as the careful Titan sent his messengers to declare his cōming, the 4. challengers arose to giue end to ye battell: Claribel buckled on his father Helmet, & Leobello his with the stars. Poliphebus, which had lesse hope thē ye rest, buckled
on his Helmet himselfe, desirous to shew the worth of his person. With angrie countenances they came, the one to∣wards the other. I beléeue, to haue a sight of this cruel war, made Apollo to hasten his iournie: for iust as they encoun∣tred, hee shewed his golden face, with shining Garlands out of the East. Well did the one know the other, being as∣sured of the valour which either had shewen to the other: particularly Rosabel, who addressed himselfe against him with the Starres: and for this cause they fought with dis∣cretion, and would not through want thereof, lose that which otherwise they might bee assured of. Being well in breath, they charged, with the points of their swords about a third part before their Targets, standing firmely vpon their right féete, so néere together, that they might strike with their pummels. He with the Stars would haue ioyned with the Prince of Britaine, thinking suddainly to haue ouerborne him: but as the other was more nimble, and expert in the warres, then he; so he changed his foote with a thought, and thrust at him, and with a quicke skip he leapt backwards, giuing him in parting a blow in the thigh, whose bloud bare wit∣nesse of the blow. Here was lost all order in fighting, for the young man seing this blow, huring about his sword, thought to haue cleft the Briton, but he warded it with his Target, which was a small defence: for though he could not breake it, yet hee beat it to his Helmet, so close, and with such force, that hee made him to knéele vpon both his knées on the ground: hee thought to haue ouerborne him, setting his hands to his brest; but it séemed that hee met with a rocke. For the nephew of the great Trebatius, séeing him so néere vnto him, that hee could doe nothing but close with him, tooke him at some aduantage, and within little threw him to the ground: for hee lifted him from ground, and car∣ried him a little along the field. Hee with the Starres was mightily ashamed, that hee had receiued the first foyle, and that in strugling: for therein he thought to haue béene too
hard for Anteus: and locking with the gentle young man, enraged, he tooke footing, thinking againe to recouer what hee had lost: but that was more then hee could doe: for let∣ting goe their hold, with a strong whéeling about they tooke their weapons. The sonne of Trebatius séemed to be most couragious, and so was he with the starres, which made the battell doubtfull. It was more apparant betwéene Poliphebus, and Don Clarisel: for there the aduantage was easily to be séene. The Assyrian with a blowe would haue made an end of the bat∣tel; and so with his sword in both his hands, hee made to∣wards the Tinacrian, who made shew to stay for him: but knowing the ill successe of such desperate blowes, at the fal∣ling of the blow, with a light leap he set himselfe 2. fadome off from him: he so followed his blow, that it made him to fall on his brest vpon the pummell of Milo his good sword, whereof he strake a third part into the ground. The Tina∣crian lost not that good occasion, who turning to ioyne with him, with his hand he thrust him and made him to returne backe, leauing his sword sticking in the ground, breaking the little chayne. The victorie was in his hands, had not the fayre Leobello with his sword in his hand come be∣twéene them, doubting of the Assyrians life, séeing he had lost his sword. Succour came to eyther part; for of the Gréekes (which better knew the countrey) there came the Princes of Hungarie and Bohemia, and with them those of Fraunce and Spayne, which by the Armes knew the Knight to whose ayd they came, whose valour was much esteemed among the Gréekes: they cried to the two youths that they should hold, thinking that they would haue stric∣ken him. The braue Spanyard came in such haste, that hee met with Leobello: but hee might as well haue encountred a rocke, hee stood so fast, hee made his horse returne 2. pa∣ces backwards. Then came Don Clarus and his brother, Spanyards, of whom in the first part much account was
made, and with much reason, for their valour deserued it: but in this charge they got very little: for thinking to chase Leobello in the behalfe of their Prince, Claribel stept close to him and smote him on the top of the Helmet, and this was the first blow that euer the young man gaue with the sword, and was so good, that it smote him to the ground: he stayed for his brother, which came mounted vpon a great horse: but hee quickly lost him, and made the Princes of Hungarie and Bohemia hold them company: he rusheth in among them like Mars, and giueth not a blow, but that therewith hee bringeth them on their knées or hands vpon the ground. Leobello entertained the Tinacrian, while as the Assy∣rian recouered his sword. The braue Torismundo alighted seeing his friends on foote, and met with the reputed father of the two youthes, who was a good Knight, but he gat lit∣tle: for the Spanyard is one of the most valiāt of the world: hee smote him so, that hee made him stoope, and within a little had ouerthrowne him: he would haue followed him, but the furious Leobello holp him, who was neere at hand, putting the Tinacrian from him with a strong thrust. The young mans valour made him to wonder, and had hee not bene in such fury, hee had not smitten him: but hauing no respect of any, he smote him such a blow vpon the head, that although it was the first, if he had taken such another, as that, it had made an end of him: for it gaue such a thunder∣clappe, that hee knewe not not where hee was. They had aide at hand, for by the woods side came Don Celindo, and his sister, with Argante, and Thorisiano, who séeing their brother Don Clarisel (for so was he called) they all came a gallop. Poliphebus was in feare of their horse brests but drawing force out of ye danger (a thing worthy his va∣lour) they were troubled in such sort with their haste, yt Don Celindo and the Ladie were like to fall on their faces, and to auoyd it, it behooued thē to leap from their horses; but Don Argante, and Thorisiano, who reiued their horses, en∣countred
them with their horses brests, and made them to set one hand to ground, but to their damage: for there is no Uiper yt sheweth it selfe so furious, as Luzelaes louer. It was the Fenicians fortune to returne first. The Tinacrian made roome, standing firme on his féete, & with his sword in both hands, attēded his cōming, with al his might he gaue him a sudden blow: fortune was his friend, for ye blow ligh∣ted on the horse; it was stricken by the hand of Garrofileaes sonne: for deuiding ye horse into 2. péeces, setting Don Ar∣gante on ye groūd, so amazed, that before yt Thorisiano came, he gaue him a thrust. Gualtenor saith, yt he ouerthrew him: but the Prince stūbled, it made all their blouds to freese to sée 2. such blowes. Thorisiano wold end ye battell on foote, but he was deceiued: for ye Spanyard set vpon him; & before he could turne, had giuen him a blow, which much troubled him. The combats were well deuided: for now were they so many, to so many: but they which met with the two youthes, gat little: for within three blowes they were ouer∣throwne. The like happened where Poliphebus went, who although hee were somewhat weary; yet hee put Don Ce∣lindo with his haste out of breath: this order lasted not lōg: for of the Pagans, thither came Bembo, & the two emula∣tors, Brauorante & Brufaldoro, who, especially the Achaian, as he knew Rosabel, & had a desire, as hath bin declared in this historie, as a hungry Lion followed him, holding in his conceit ye battel for ended, & himself reuēged of the Prince. He with ye stars defēded him from being trodē vnder foote, fearing they would doe him some harme: & so the braue Bē∣bo lightly passed by. By another meanes ye 2. famous men sought reuenge and victorie: for standing strongly on their stirrops, they hurled their Launces with greater might thē if Mars had done it. Brauorante his Launce (for that it came from a better arme) lighted first, & smote him on one side of the shield, and being insufficient to breake it (the temper being so old) made it to turne twise about: and therefore Brufaldoro could not by any meanes hit it, but smote against a rocke, & pierced it ye third part of ye launce in
depth. The Knight with the sars iudged it for great cow∣ardise: for three, so famous as they, to set vpon one alone, it was more then basenesse: and seeing them returne, hee leapt to one side, saying, It séemeth to mee, Knights, that you come with greater passion then discretion, which hath made you to commit so great an error as is this. These words did so winne the heart, and animate the sonne of the great Trebatius, séeming to him that they were spokē with such generositie, that as if he had had wings, at 2. leaps he gat his horse, who neuer parted from the battell, and with another leap lighter then an Eagle he recouered the saddle, saying to him with the starres, Pardon me, valorous war∣riour, that I doe not end this battell with you; there shall not want time whensoeuer you shall giue me warning: for the ill behauiour of these Knights forceth me to leaue it, to make them know what error they haue committed. It is very reasonable (valorous Prince) sayd he with the starres, and I would goe to assist you, were it not to hold my credit and word which I haue giuen to be of their party. They could not proceed in their discourse: for with another turne they were againe come against the young man. He quickly aduaunced himselfe, & with a loud voice said, We shall haue time, you cowardly Knights, to make you know your cow∣ardise, and the passion wherewith you come, which hath made you to forget the laws and orders of Knighthood. He bare himselfe well against those 3. pillers: but he had bin in danger, had not Poliphebus come vpon his Rubican. The valiant young man had long sought Brufaldoro, and now knowing him by his Armes, hee came to him swifter then thought, & found him busy smiting of Rosabel. He gaue him a mighty blow on ye helme, laying him all along vpon his horse neck, & paid him yet another, which made ye bloud to spring out at his isor. Now were ye Moores in danger, for on one side of ye field came 4. which would haue giuē Mars battell: the one was Captaine generall of the Greekes, the other Rosacler, Don Heleno, and the fayre Rosamundi, who knowing Bembo, who for an old grudge euer since the
battell by Sea shée came to him more light then an Ounce, and with her sword which was forged in Babylon, shée smote him vpon the strong shield, the strength thereof ser∣ued for little, or for that it came from Lupertius, for from side to side shée cleft it, and it was a wonder that shee had not done the like by his arme. The furious Sarafin was more then enraged, for all that quarter was so tormented, that it had no féeling. The Ladie was not idle, for shée was one which tought most earnestly, and so before that the Sarafin could vnderstand from whence that blow came, shée tooke him another on the side of the head, which if shee had not ouerreached him, without dout had put him in great danger: for in hitting him in this maner, shée made him to fall so backwards, that within little hee had come to the ground. The Pagan was terrible when hee was angrie: for see∣ing her which had handled him in that maner, there was no Lion so fierce as he. Hee assailed the Ladie, meaning with that blow to haue felled her. Well did Aristoldo perceiue it, and the furie wherewith he came, being well knowne vn∣to them, by meanes of his ordinarie deuice which hee bare: the Antiochians horse was well in breath, with whome hée passed betwéene the Ladie and him, and aboue hand he smote him on the brest, wherewith hee made him to lose his blow, and lay his head on his horse buttockes. Now was this Prince cleane out of patience, renouncing his gods, and now séemed all they which were in the field, to be but a few: and taking his sword in both his hands, as the Cap∣taine turned, he smote him athwart the shield: hee smote it from his arme, and descending to his Helmet, hee brought him to deathes doore, for hee laide him sencelesse vpon his horses necke: hee meant to haue assured the victorie, and to haue béene reuenged by the death of such a Knight. The most mightie Dacian hindred him of his purpose, who as he had the best horse in the world, with a leape hee was with him, when his sword was aloft, hee had no more
time but to giue him a cruell blow athwart the armes, and followed his blow so well, that hee gaue life to Aristoldo, of whome the Gréekes stood in great néed, and made him with the force of his, to let fall the sword out of his hand. Rosa∣mundi came in so good time, that they had ouerthrown him: for they made the Moore to féele two thrusts, one after an∣other in his flesh. To his aide came hee with the Starres, wondring at the valour of those Knights. It had béene no great matter, had not the two youthes come: who holding their valour, which fought for little in regard of theirs, all hauing taken horse, they repaired thither where they heard the great noyse. The faire Claribel met with Aristoldo, although that in former time they had béen the greatest friends in the world: but he shewed it not now, for hee smote him vpon the rich Helme, making the bloud spring out at his nose & mouth, and laid him on his horses necke: hee ranne vpon him with his horses brest, and had not the Captaine had a good one, he had cast them both to ground: all this was nothing, for now were come to the battell, those which were borne for the warres, which were Claridiano, Claramante, and the faire Archisilora, who had mist the way, because that they knew not the Countrie, whose famous arriuall doth well deserue a new Chapter. CHAP. XXI. How the Princes of Grecia, Claridiano, and Claramante, with the Queene of Lira came to the battell, and what end it had, with that which after followed. I Know not, Soueraigne Ladie and mistris of my soule, being compassed with such warres, whither I shall repaire for refuge, to ease mee of the paine which I endure, but to your beau∣tie, to the end that by augmenting it, it may be my death: for with accepting of my faith and seruice, you
may ease the torment, which mine eyes haue brought mee vnto, through their presumption, referring all the griefe to the heart for hauing séene you, they remaining with the glo∣rie to haue séen your beautie, then which nature could frame nothing more excellent, to the end that ye world should hold you for the alone, and as the Fenix thereof. Being somwhat lightned, with speaking somewhat of that beautie, I wil tel you what an entrie the gallant Archisilora made, who at her first comming, met with the gentle Leobello, and setled well in her Stirrops, shée hurled her mightie Launce at him. The young Mars receiued it, but made an ill bargaine: for this Quéenes arme was one of the most famous. It passed cleare through his shield, & lighted on his brest, bea∣ring the youth so backewardes, that hee was almost ouer∣throwne. Shée past forwards like an Eagle, to whose en∣counter came the valiant Mauritanian, not knowing her, for shée ware a blew Scarfe ouer her armour. The Moore meant with aow to haue made an end of the warres, but it happened to him cleane contrarie: for the disguised young man, who tooke more care for that Ladie then for himselfe, preuented the Pagans blow, passing betwéene them with his horse: hee could doe no otherwise, but by holding vp his shield, to crosse the blow: but that was to small purpose, for he beat it to his head, and him out of his sences. Then came the matrone: and to requite the Knight with the Ladies, ca∣sting her shield at her backe with both hands, setled vpon her stirrops, shée gaue a mightie blow, it was one of the best that was giuen ye day: for as (at ease) she smote him vpon the highest of the head, shée smote away a little Target, which hee ware behind his Helmet, carrying there with part of his gorget of Maile. Shée returned with a thrust which pierced his flesh. But at vnawares, the furious Leobello smote her vpon her precious Helmet: hee smote her downe vpon her Saddle bow. Her louer turned his head about, and séeing his Ladie in such a plight, his furie cannot be described for ma∣king no accompt of ye Mauritanian, he made to ye yong man.
The sonne of Eufronisa bare no such armes, as were con∣uenient to receiue the blowes of this Gréeke: for hitting him a full blow on the brest, hee gaue him a maruellous wound, although without danger: hee gaue him another, which within little threw him to the ground. Brauorante did much affect this young man, séeing with what courage hee fought, and would haue come iust to his aide, but hee found in his way the piller of Grecia, Claramante, so néere him, that hee could doe no good with his Axe at large, and therefore drawing backe his arme, he gaue him a thrust in the middest of his shield, and although it had béene of Di∣amond, he had cleft it: for his force was rare, and the wea∣pon, the best in the world: hee made both him and his horse to make a stand. All men wondred at the blow, it set him so besides himselfe, that hee had time to retire from him, and fetching his Axe about his head, he reached him a knocke on the side of the Helme: and if hee had giuen him a third, I know not how it had gone with the Pagan. Then came the gentle Claribel, as fierce as a Furie, with a double blow. The Gréeke thought much of it, and knew not well where might bee contained so knightly va∣lour. After him came Bembo, for hauing heard the blowes, he well knew what it meant (as it was true) to his friends cost: hee gat little by his comming, for Claramante being come to him selfe, and missing the young man, hee fastned the blow vpon the Achian: it was terrible, for as hee had neuer a shield, hee tooke it on the middest of his brest. This was that which the Sarafin more feared, then all those which hee had receiued in his life, for the Axe entred his brest, wounding him mortally: he made no boast thereof, for he with the Starres and Claribel, smote him both together, the one vpon the shoulder, the other vpon the top of the Hel∣met; they laid him on the Saddle pummell. To the noyse came the famous Floralisa with Camillaes sword, shée came iust as Claramante raised and setled himselfe, and with a course shée smote him vpon the Helmet, it sounded like a
bell, and left him halfe astonied: shée would haue sent him another, but that shée found hard by her, the famous Rosa∣mundi, with Semiramis her diuelish sword, against whose edge, neither freele nor enchantment had any force. Shée gaue her a backe blow vpon one side of the shield, and smote off the one halfe thereof, with great part of her Uantbrace: to her aide came the woūded Don Clarisel, desiring to die in the sight of her whom he so dearely loued: and like a Uiper, drawing force, not out of his owne féeling, but from his firme faith, hee smote the Dame vpon the rich Helme, and made her bow downe her head lower then shée would: hee gaue place to Floralisa, to be reuenged of the Princese, gi∣uing her two thrusts, the one after the other. There is no particular combat, but may bee ended: for now, of the Moores side came Astorildo, and Epirabio, with the Calipha of Siconia, and the King of Giant-land, with foure Giants, all Cousins. They entred, treading the Gréekes vnder féete, and were like to doe much harme: for Brandusio, and the Prince of Almaine had aduanced for∣wards, with those troupes which remained at the entrie into the valley: but they found newly come before them, the mightie Trasondan, Poliphebus, and his brother Rosacler, with the two couragious Giants, Brandafidel, and Brami∣doro, with the gentle Tifereo, and the faire Claridiana. It was a thing worthie a Romans Theatre, to sée the en∣counters: for the Giants matched themselues the one with the other: it was like as if two ships had met in the middle of the Sea. In this encounter, the Gréeke partie had the bet∣ter: for Brandafidel (who was one of the most famous in the world) laid his aduersarie on the floore: Bramidoro did the like: they had them in chace, and presently many after them: for Tifereo had likewise ouerturned Lindauro; with∣in a little the warre had againe béene new begun: for in a maner, the greatest part of the Princes came afoote, either partie to aide their people. Brandafidel was furious when he fought; being angrie, they could fasten few blowes vpon
him: for on foote he was very light, and withdrew himselfe to play his part with his club, wherewith he did things, al∣though lawfull, yet verie pitifull: for there happened to en∣ter a Giant, which came with Brundusio: He hit him but two knocks, and both on the Helmet, there needed no more blowes; for he layd him dead at his féete. Brundusio would be reuenged; but it was to méete with his death: for Bra∣midoro was at hand; and in passing by, with his bat he made him goe vpon his hands. Tifereo holpe him, for he stretched him out all along. They left their clubs to repaire to him of Gibia, seeing that he of Zardus was come to gripes with him. They had killed him, had not Brauorante ariued: whose comming with Aristoldo did not onely rescue him, but also renewed the warre: so as it then séemed much more cruell then at the beginning. The great Alphebus after his old maner singled out Brufaldoro: for hee had long desired it, o∣uer since that in the woods of Gréece he would haue robbed his mother. The Pagan refused it not, but rather at his first smote him on the strong and rich helme, and made him auale his head downe to his bosome. The Mauritanian would haue seconded it: but the famous Emperour, which with those blowes was nothing amazed, whéeling his horse a little to one side, made him to lose his blow, and would not let slip occasion, but with all his might he reached him a blow vpon the shoulder, which smote away all his vaunt∣brace: it went not alone, for hee gaue him another, which put him out of his remembrance. The Gréeke spent so much time in sriking him, that he gaue opportunity to Claribel to come vpon him with a thrust: it was one of the most ex∣treme blowes that ouer the Gréeke had receyued. His La∣die would reuenge it; but she could not find him, for he was like an Eagle; and had vpon a sudden hardly handled the great Tartarian Zoilo: hee made a thrust at the Troiane; and had not the Princes of Tharsis and Argentaria bene néere, without doubt Hectors heyre had bene in danger. The faire Sarmatia was troubled to sée her Troiane in such
estate: and grinding her téeth, she set vpon the youngster: she came so néere, that she could not strike him: the blow did him greater fauour then he deserued: for casting her fayre armes ouer his backe, shee griped him so hard, that shee im∣printed his armour in his flesh, as she tooke him at vna∣wares; so was it a small matter to vse him so; and had hee bene any other, shee had pluckt him from his horse. In the chase came the great Tinacrian vpon his Rubican: he see∣med to be no other then a thunder-bolt, whistling betweene the clowds: he first tooke Don Argante to taske, and set him without iudgement vpon the saddle bowe: he stretched Lindauro all along vpon the ground; and finding Don Ce∣lindo néere him, with a strong thrust he set him besides his saddle. Trebatius his sonne was neuer séene in such a fury, his fiercenesse made them all to wonder; and had not he with the stars come, he alone had ended the battell in that place: for before that he came, he had ouerthrowne the Prince of Almaine: he leapt after him, holding it to haue bene honora∣ble to haue taken him prisoner, accounting him for one of ye most principall by his rich armour in their campe. The vn∣knowne yong man detained him from his purpose, smiting him at the entring, in the chest of his brest: it is a great hap that he had not kild him, for his sword pierced his armour euen to the skin, and with a little more hee had thrust him in the heart pit. Luzelaes louer suffered himself to be hurt with a stab, and séeing his bloud spilt vpon anothers weapons, there was neuer Tiger so fierce as he; for the fleshed Lion is tame in respect of him: for bringing his sword about his head with all his might, he smote him with the stars athwart the Helmet, and made him see them within the same with a∣boundance of bloud. The Gréekes would faine haue ended these battels, because they knew that therein consisted the strength of their armie, and (they being lost) the victorie a∣gainst them was certaine. But now there was no reme∣die: for the Emperour of the Romanes was alreadie entred the wood, with aboue a hundred thousand men. The Gréeks doubtfull of their Princes, had shewne no lesse care: for the
valorous Meridian was come with as many. The battels were ready to ioyne; but both the one and the other were in feare to bee lost through the discommodity of the place: and so they parted, either hauing something to talke of,  the valour of those Knights. The Greekes extolled the  Knights with highest praises, estéeming thē  the flowers of Chiualrie. They left no lesse occasion to ; particularly Poliphebus, who had shewē him∣selfe so valiant, that they wondred thereat, as prodigious, all men intreating him, and chiefly his brother, to tell who he was: but he excusing him selfe the best that he could, cau∣sed thm the more to mistrust; and most, when hee tooke his leaue of them, telling them that hee was to goe to trye a certaine aduenture. They all offred him their company: but then to be alone did best fit him, accepting (according as was reason) of their gentle offer: he tooke his way with his Ruvican, speaking first to Rosabel, whom he entreated yt he should not tell who he was, vntill hee had performed his chalenge. He went directly to the place where he had left the Ladies; but went not long to seeke them: for by ye Nymphes direction they met presently: they made that day holyday, passing it in reciting what had happened betwéene the Gréekes and the Moores; to the which they determined the next day to send their message. Their Captaine was much affected to valiant Knights; and seeing what the two youthes had done, he went to im∣brace them; who knowing what he was, desired to kisse his hands, putting off their Helmets, discouering more thē hu∣mane beautie; which strake them which were present with admiration, to sée them so young and so valiant. The war∣like Bembo imbraced them, saying, It were no reason, that they which haue so good hands of their owne, should kisse a∣ny mans in the world. All the rest of the Princes receyued them with such courtesie as was due to their valour. There were no greater friends, thē he with the stars and they: all the whole campe did celebrate their comming, reioycing
to sée them: especially the King of Silepsia, when he knew that they were his subiects, knowing the Knight whom they held for their Father, they all supt together in the Soldan of Niquea his tent: and to shew them the more pleasure, there was that night masking and dauncing, the Ladyes méeting there, then which, the earth bore none fay∣rer, nor more discréete. The Princesse of the Romanes sée∣ing there was no possibilitie to effect her good, sometimes from her seats with no small affection, she beheld the Lord of Achaia, séeming to her, that next after the Dacian, shee might best employ her beautie vpon him. Of this Supper grew many new loues: for the mightie Argante, who till then had béene frée from his snares, held the Soph his Daughter to be the Sunne of all beautie, and with this conceit, he gaue her his life and soule, submitting himself to her in such earnest and good fayth, that nothing was of power to vntie the knot which blind loue had made. Epira∣bio yéelded himselfe to the will of the gallant Lisiana, who séeing his valour, did neuer estrange her selfe from him. It serued to small purpose for the braue Soldane of Egypt, to subiect himselfe to the fayre ufionisa, who had her eyes, soule, life, and heart fixt vpon her Rosabel, and without hope of remedie, séeing him otherwise busted. Time being come to withdraw themselues (for some of the Knights were hurt) they all went to their tents, carrying with thē the yong Knights to their vnknowne Grandfather, which went, cōmending the brauerie of the Gréeks, who took no other race but to fortifie their Citie, iudging that that war would be of long continuance, both the one and the other had néede of truce. And so, from the Moores there came to the Citie to request it, the Kings of Fenicia and Armenia. The Gréeks granted it for fiftéene dayes, and that into the Citie there might come onely 20. Knights together. And séeing that both armies were in quiet, the discréete Earle of Modica, went to doe his dutie to the Emperour Trebatius, making himselfe knowne vnto him, who know∣ing
from whom he came, graciously receiued him. This in∣creased his good liking: for he gaue him a letter from , which the Emperour read alone, not without vn∣derstanding how much hee was bounden to that valorous Queene, which had so déerely loued him: he read the letter, which sayd in this maner. A Letter from Garrofilea to the Emperour Trebatius. TO the great Emperour of the Greekes, Garrofilea sen∣deth greeting. Had I not well knowne, mightie Mo∣narch, how worthie those errours are to be pardoned, when loue is the causer thereof, neither would I haue pre∣sumed to write, neither had I any mind thereto, although I haue had it, to desire thy death, my life depending onely on thee, that thou liuest. I acknowledge my fault: and for a∣mends, I send thee these Knights, to serue thy person, assu∣ring me, that the two sonnes which thou leftest heere, will doe the like. And if the affection which I doe and haue borne thee, may moue thee, the warre being ended, I pray thee to returne them backe to me againe, that I may enioy the presence of the sonnes, which I hope not of the father. The God in whom thou beleeuest, grant thee such health, as the forgotten Garrofilea desireth. If he had to his liking ended all these battailes, hee could haue receiued no greater ioy then he did, in receiuing that letter from that cruel Quéen, which was now become gen∣tle, milde, & amorous. Sée of what force loue is! for it hath e∣uen melted me, being of the countrey of the Tigers. The Princes of either side were glad of the truce: for ye Greeks desired to sée the Ladies in the Moores camp, & the Pagans were no lesse desirous to sée the Gréek Ladies, the fame of whose beautie recahed to the highest heauēs. With this de∣sire we will leaue them, to tell what the most mighty Poli∣phebus did the next day.
CHAP. XXII. How the Prince of Tinacria sent a Letter of challenge to the Pagans camp, with leaue from the Emperour of Gre¦cia, and of what followed thereof. IMagining, faire ladies, that chaptere of loue would be more pleasing vnto you, I haue conceiued so much ioy thereof, that it hath eased me of my paine which I begin to feele, as the cause of my life: & if I intreate of any swéete hope, it is but to deceiue mine owne fraile vnderstāding, who as a nomes in loue, is of opinion, yt there can be no remedie for his griefe. And my paine ma∣keth me liue euer doubtfull of any good: for although I loue in good earnest, my Lady doth not yet know it: an excuse for that which I endure, not to attribute it vnto other, but rather to mine owne mishap. The valorous Tinacrian go∣eth free and at libertie: for if he loue well, hee knoweth that hee is also well beloued. There is nothing in the world so swéet, as is mutuall loue, betweene a Lady & her gallant: for it sufficeth to make him cheerefull, & well con∣tent: for to sée himselfe beloued, was the occasion why he sent challenges to the 2. camps by the Nymphs, which he brought. She which went to the Citie, well knowing what she had to doe, stayed vntill all those high Emperours and Kings had made an end of their dinner, and til that the La∣dies were al come forth into the Hall: & séeing occasion, she entred, clad in such attire as was fit for such a message. At her comming in, she did her duty to such as were there: and addressing her spéeches to the mightie Emperor Trebatius, she sayd, Soueraigne Prince, whom in reason the world should acknowledge, confident in thy generositie, I am sent frō the Knight with the Eagle, who knowing yt thou hast granted truce to ye Moores for 15. daies, although that hée came from farre to serue thée (as all men ought to doe)
he would in the meane time with thy leaue, entertaine the louing gallants, giuing them occasion to shew their va∣lour: for in the middest betwéene these two camps, hee will maintaine after to morrow, that the two Ladyes which are come in his companie, are indéed the most faire of the world, and this at all perils of battaile. This is my demaund: and if it please thee that he come, he will doe it; and if not, he will stay vntill the truce be past, to come to thy seruice. This seemed to the Greeke Princes to bee a great presumption in a Knight: and so they desired that the Emperour should giue him leaue to come. The Gréeke Lord himselfe had beene so greatly enamored, that hée would haue gone in person to answere the challenge: but trusting in his sonnes, he sayd, Faire Damsell, I thanke the Knight much for that which he wil do for me, which de∣serueth that a greater request then this should bee granted, and so you may tell him, that hee may come in safetie: for no man shall offer him violence, excepting such as shal fight in combate with him, which will not fayle to doe it. The Damsell would haue kist his hands for the fauour, saying, Then, Soueraigne Emperour, with your leaue, I will deliuer a message to the Ladyes, which I haue brought for them. Do all that you will, (answered the Emperour.) So she wēt directly to the cloth of estate, where they were, which might be sayd to be a new Paradice of beautie: for they were come forth to recreate themselues, some to fa∣uour their Gallants with their looks, which sufficeth, for I would be glad to take it of my Lady, if it might be permit∣ted to come to sée her. In séeing the Damsell comming (quoth the gallant Policena, daughter to the faire Venus) & Polidolpho which stood hard by the secōd Helen, daughter to the Prince of Babilon, & Persia, & Bransiniano, with the fayre Aurelia, daughter to the great Tartarian Zoylo, and the Princesse Tigliafa, thrée Ladyes which did darken the Sunne in the middest of his carriere: they were those, which being but children, gaue hope to be most faire. There
was neuer a one there that passed Rosabela, daughter of the fayre Oliuia, although she were yonger. All which foure sate hard by Rosamundi. Quoth the young Girle, I beleeue that this Knight will challenge vs too. Your Ladiship née∣deth not to feare it (quoth the second Helen) for where these Soueraigne Ladies are, there may wee liue safe from any defiance. It will end according to the equitie of the cause (quoth Aurelia) and not for our beauties. Take no care for that (quoth Rosamundi) for there will want no Knights which will take pleasure so goe forth in our behalfe. It is to be doubted (quoth Policena) séeing how vnpleasing wee are. By this time was the Damsell come, who knéelde downe before the Empresse of Trapisonda; which stood close by her daughter; shée deliuered the letter to her hands, desiring her to be pleased to read it, because shée was spéedily to returne to the knight, who had sent her. It is a great confidence that that Knight reposeth in those Ladies (said the Empresse) & séeing that my Lord the Emperour hath giuen him leaue, we confirme the same. Rosiluera presently read the letter, with great laughter of all the Ladies, imagining that it came for her: it would not haue grieued Rosamundi, nor Ar∣chisilora, to haue tried thēselues against him: with gratefull hearing, the Ladies gaue eare to the letter, which said thus, The Letter. THe Knight with the Eagle, to the Greeke Princesses, greeting. It hath beene my fortune, Soueraigne L∣dies, so wholly to estrange my selfe, that I am enfor∣ced to vndertake the most difficill thing that can bee imagined: I acknowledge the great difficultie & your beau∣tie, whose fame flieth ouer all the world. I haue presumed to entreat your leaue, to vphold the beautie of my Ladies, in the midst of the field, against the Pagan army, wel knowing that my owne smal valour deserueth it not: but therein shal your generosity appeare. The gods haue you in his keeping.
This Knight said, Rosiluera is in the right, in making no questions against the Gréeke Ladies, which may also re∣turne without armes for his part, & séeing he hath such con∣fidence in vs, it séemeth good to me (with leaue of my Ladie the Empresse Claridiana) to send it him with all the fauour possible, to the end, that through our fault he lose not ye assu∣rance of those Ladies beauties, which are in his companie. We passe not for that (said Aurelia) for hauing no experiēce of this Knight, it should bee ill done to graunt him so much fauour. Rosabel came, to the end that his vnkles businesse might be so handled as he did deserue, and said, If my being suretie for the Knight with the Eagle, gallant Dames, may be a meanes to procure this fauour to be done him. I presently impawn my word. There is no cause to stay from giuing it, said the gracious young Rosabella, séeing that my Lord and brother hath taken vpon him the charge of our fame. They all laught at the girles spéeches, which was not yet aboue twelue yeares old: for so long time had the Pa∣gans spent in leuying their troupes. They all went to Rosa∣mundies lodging, where Rosiluera in all their names wrote to the Knight, & giuing it to the Damsel, shée tooke her leaue with great contentment, leauing them very desirous to sée the Knight. I beléeue, Soueraigne Prince (quoth Policena) that you doe better know this Knight then we doe, séeing you haue forced vs to fauour him in such a matter as this. His acquaintance and friendship (answered the gentle Bri∣tanian) hath cost me so much bloud, that I stand bound to bee his friend, so long as I liue. And this Soueraigne Princesse Serinda, being so much bound vnto his valour, I maruaile that shée intreated not for him. Presently, at the intreatie of the Ladies, hee told what happened when hee first knew him, fighting with the most strong Astratio for the libertie of Serinda, as in the third booke hath beene decla∣red, where they two fell acquainted, concluding such friend∣ship as was the greatest in the world: besides, they being so
néere of kin. Now I say, quoth Liriana, that the fauour hath béene verie small that hath béene done vnto him: and séeing that there is Truce, wee will encourage him with our pre∣sence. And that wil be a meane, quoth the faire Troyla, who∣ly to vanquish the Moore Ladies: for yet they had neuer car∣ried her to her Father the King of Argel, it was so for her pleasure. The Tinacrian very ioyfully receiued the answere, reading it in presence of his Ladies in this maner: The Answere. THe Princesses and Greeke Ladies, to the Knight with the Eagle, greeting. Thy thankfulnesse, valorous knight, hath so bound vs, and Rosabel the Prince of the great Brita∣nie agreeing thereto, as suretie, that thou shalt bee worthie the fauour which thou requirest: hauing in him reposed our hope of the victorie, wee giue thee leaue, to the end that in the field thou shew the degrees of thy faith, whither thy loue hath aduanced thee, subduing by them thy presuming to a matter so difficill. We would that in thy warres, com∣panie might bee admitted, which we would hold thee: for vpon thy sureties speeches wee would aduenture any ha∣zard. The gods haue thee in their keeping. Great was the contentment, which the Princes recei∣ued with the gentle answere of the Gréeke Ladies, giuing his nephew many thankes for that which hee had done for him: he presently dispatched another message to the Moores Campe, bearing a Cartel with his challenge. All the Prin∣ces and Ladies were in the Emperour of the Romanes his pauilion. The damsel went in, and doing her dutie, séeing so many of whome shée was to aske leaue, shée asked it in ge∣neral, saying, The high gods, soueraigne Princes, haue you in his kéeping. I am sent hither by the knight with the Ea∣gle, to deliuer a message, which I wil deliuer in few words. The president which was the King of Armenia, bade her to deliuer what shée had to say. Quoth the damsell, My Lord
the knight with the Eagle, considering the Truce granted, to the end, that idlenesse mortifie not the desire of Armes, hath thought good to entertaine this time, and to shew you that he desireth to serue all, and to maintaine in the middest of ye field, the beautie of two Ladies, which he hath brought in his companie, at all hazards, from to morrow forwards, and commanded me to giue this letter to him, who holdeth himselfe most enamoured. The great and famous Captaine Bembo rose vp, who in Loue causes desired euer to bee the first, and as such, shewing some discontentment, he gaue the letter to the frée Thorisiano to read, which he did, thus. Poliphebus his Letter to the Ladies of the Moores. THe Knight of the Eagle, to the death seruant to Cupid, to the Princesses and Ladies which are in the famous Bembo his Campe, greeting. Because, gallant Ladies, you may see the effects of Loue, in him which hath subiected his life, seeing it employed in so sweete a seate, assured, that no man hath seene the like quiet as I haue done: And relying on the beautie of the Ladies, in whose companie I come, more then in the valour of my person, I doe challenge any one that shall come from your partie, that she, which is mis∣tresse of my soule, is fairer & more discreet then al the Ladies in your Campe. It is a great boldnesse, but I am to bee excu∣sed, hauing iustice on my side, wherewith, and with my wea∣pons and horse, from to morrow forwards, I will defend my demaund, swearing the battell, against all the enamoured gallants of your Campe at outraunce. The gods keepe you. There was not one, whome Cupids (aye, me,) had tou∣ched, but shewed himselfe more fierce, then the Basiliske in the Libian sands, séeing the proud challenge of this knight: the night séemed to them long yeeres & many, that the next day they might make him know, in how great an error hee
came. They allowed the challenge, the Ladyes remaining highly displeased, which they could not forbeare to shew in their bitter answere, which they sent to the Knight by the Dāsel: who laughing at the smal account which they made of the Prince of Tinacria, gaue this answere. The fayre Luzela took it with great contentment, saying, This which belongeth to your soueraigne beautie, gallant Rosoluia, I purpose to reade, to sée how the Moore Ladyes receiued your brothers challenge. For as those Princes are fa∣mous, it should be expedient to send a fauourable aun∣swere. This belongeth to you, faire Princesse, answered Rosoluia, séeing that (grounding himselfe vpon your good grace and discretion) he hath aduentured to do this. Wel, let it be how it will, but I beléeue wee shall sée him in danger, Your fauour, valorous Luzela, shall draw me out of a grea∣ter, said the beloued Tinacrian. If that may serue the turne, (answered the Lady) there shall be no want thereof, and therewith she read the letter. An answere to Poliphebus. FOr not to returne without answere, seeing the much, wherunto thou knight with the Eagle hast opposed thy selfe, thy pride did not deserue to enioy such a fauour as is this. But because thou shalt know, with whom thou shalt encounter in battaile, hauing displeased vs, we from hence∣forth nominate for our part, our Captain generall, (which is the mightie Bembo, King of Achaia:) and as for the rest, he will make thee know in how great errours thou comest. The Gods keepe thee, and open thine eyes that thou maist see thy fault. With great pleasure the Princes made end of reading this letter, séeing how angrie these Ladyes were, atten∣ding the morrow, in the which what succeeded, is fit to be told in another Chapter.
CHAP. XXIII. How Poliphebus beganne to maintaine his challenge, and of the perilous battaile which followed. HOld, valorous Ladyes, for now it is re∣quisite that you condole my paine, to the end, that I may depaint what hap∣pened after this defiance: for the gol∣den Apollo had not throughly shew∣en his glittering beames, when in the middle betweene the two campes, ap∣peared one of the most sumptuous tents of the world, for it was little lesse then the Greeke Palace: it was all of coloured cloth of gold, with greene knots, and many sil∣uer Eagles embrodered vpon it; a man could desire no more. It was work enough for either armie to behold the fayre tent, imagining (as it was truth) that humane hands had wrought but little vpon it. All the Ladyes of the campe would sée the battell, vpon assurance of the truce. So came they in a Chariot triumphant, drawen by 20. Unicornes, as white as the driuen snow, couered all ouer with rich cloth of siluer. The Ladies came as it behooued for their valour and beautie: for there was no lesse to be seene, then in the Citie, from whence they might sée the Greeke La∣dies and Princesses begin to come, which as they were many, so of force they must haue two famous Chariots: there was neuer seene a fayrer shew. There were made by the Emperours commaund, certaine most sumptuous roomes for the Ladyes, couered al ouer with most rich Ca∣nopies,
where the Ladyes went vp, inuiting (with their standing so) those of the Campe. Some did it, to sée about them, those which they most loued, which were Rosilia, Arbolinda, and the fayre Eufronis, estéeming their courte∣sie as was reason, they remaining in their Chariots. Pre∣sently at one side of the campe, entred sixteene Knights, either of which would haue waged battaile against Mars. That day did Bembo lay aside his sad deuice, which hee euer vsed to beare. For Lupertius had sent him most rich greene armour, all wrought ouer with Sunnes: there was no goodlier sight in all the field, except the challenge. In his shield hee bore Lady Fortune, as though she procured his good, holding her hand out to him, with these words: My wheele sometime hath little power, If that loue do please to lowre, And the dame reiect valour. He had about his necke a blew scarfe, fringed with gold, mounted vpon a roane horse. The Greekes tooke great pleasure to see him comming in so good order: for although hee were an enemie, yet vertue wheresoeuer is beloued. Hee brought with him those, which in all mens iudge∣ment were most valiant. There came the Knight with the Starres with his ordinarie deuice, so gallant, that hee gaue them all matter to looke vpon. They stayed but little with him: for looking vpon the two youthes, to whom Lupertius had sent new Armours, they were all of the Lyons colour, with much Gold-smithes worke, and so many precious stones, that they could not bee va∣lued. The Caparisons for their horses were of the same, with great plumes of feathers in their heads: in both their Shields one deuice, which was this, they were depainted betweene Loue and Libertie, with these words:
If sorrow must needes come, T'is best to attend it, And seeke to amend it. Euerie man affected the two valiant youths. After them came with their old deuices, the fiue brothers of the hidden wood, sauing that Floralisa, and Don Argante, according to that which they felt, had set in their shields: for the La∣dy bore Ielousie proper, which was painted like a louer, hauing more eyes then Argos, with these words: No eyes can behold The plagues of this torment, Nor heart but will rent. The new enamored, whose eyes had made his heart to feele the flame, bore Constancie naturally depainted, with this motte: No griefe but may be endured, If louing at leysure, It passe not all measure. All the place noted the deuice of these two, although that none of the Greekes knew Floralisa: for fearing that the Knight would not fight the Combate with her, she coue∣red all her armour with blew silke. There came the fa∣mous Epirabio, so gallant, that hee gaue good hope of him: the like did Lindauro, and the most mightie Aristoldo, with the Prince of Almany, who came all in gray, with many waues of gold wrought with the hammer, on his armour. The mightie Brandaso, who would also shew himselfe affected to Ladyes, came into the field, armed with cleane & wel tempered stéele. The Pagan brought for his deuice, a Lyon, which he in his youth had torn in péeces with his hands, with these words: What force would worke his smart, Which yeelds himselfe in euery part, Sith the Lyon hath no hart? There went with him the mightie Coriandro, a valiant knight, although hee had ill lucke with the Greeke Prin∣cesses.
At last came in, with a gallant shew and furious as∣pect, the two emulators, Brauorante, although with no de∣termination to fight, and the braue Brufaldoro: who as hee so déerely loued his Ladie, so could he not endure the wrong which hee thought was done her. They all repaired to the place where the Moorish Ladies stoode, so faire, that they would make the Sunne to séeme foule in the middest of his course. The Knight with the Eagle (quoth the Emperour of Trapisonda) had néede of hands to answere all those which haue presented thēselues at the Lists: & truly he hath procée∣ded with much discretion, to craue fauour at the Gréeke La∣dies hands, for such cruell battels as hee is like to haue; which if he performe with his honour, it shall bee to him the greatest of the world; for the Knights with whome he is to fight, are the most famous vnder the Sunne. Al that which may bee giuen him for fauour (said the gallant Helena) hath béene giuen him by the hands of these Princesses: for hauing such a suertie as is the Prince of the great Britanie, what attempt but is assured? They could not procéede in their discourse: for in the place was heard a great noyse, which was, that the Tinacrian comming forth at one side of his Tent, would shew himselfe to the Greeke Ladies. There was neuer swéeter Musick heard in Gréece, then at his comming foorth, without knowing who made it: and there were many Squibs and fireworkes throwne into the ayre, which gaue great pleasure to the beholders: But much more, when they saw Poliphebus the sonne of Trebatius, come betwéene two Ladies so gallant, that hee carried eue∣rie mans eyes with him: his Armes were of the colour of his Tent, set with many Eagles of Gold, so artificially done, and with so many stones of sundrie colours, that the Sunne shining vpon them, no man could behold them, in the middest of his rich shield: whose borders were of most bright shining stones: in the middest betweene two tow∣ring Herons, he bare an Eagle, so excellently made as was
wonderfull to behold, and vnder it were written these words: The Eagles wings he ought to haue, Thereby to mount vnto the skies: From scorching flames himselfe to saue, Or other harme that may arise. His deuice was wel liked of, and for his presence there were very few but were wel affected vnto him. The ladies (whose beautie & brauery made al the assistants to wonder) came clad all in white, cut vpon coloured Tinsell, and tho cuts set with most fine Rubies: their Gownes were after the Spanish fashion with foure sléeues, one paire straight, and imbrodered with Gold, and the other paire, long and large, hanging downe, seruing onely for ornament: their hayre made vp verie faire, and set with rich stones, so faire, that many in beholding them, fell extremely in Loue: and vpon the top of al, rich Garlands. They came alone: for so would the Tinacrian haue it. He bare his Launce himselfe, with his Beauer downe, and with the same armes, which the Nimphes had giuen him, so as no man could knowe him. They wēt directly to those standings where the Gréek Ladies were, whither when he came, making his horse to knéele downe, putting vp his Beauer, with great reuerence, he said, Soueraigne Princesses of Grecia, the fauours haue béene so great, and so many, which I haue receiued from you, that I am not of hope to bee able to requite thē: but to acknow∣ledge the dutie on my part, and these Ladies all the dayes of our liues, employing the same in your seruice, and to lose it therein, shall be to vs gratefull. These Ladies beautie (said the Empresse Claridiana) is more worthie, and your valour (Sir Knight) bindeth all to fauour you, although that hee which bringeth so good assurance with himselfe, néedeth no greater fauour then from his owne presence, which is such as assureth the palme of ye battels, whose end we wish may e such as the Gréeke Ladies doe desire. The yong man
bowed downe his head to his saddle bowe, leauing them all amazed as much at his gallant countenance and good beha∣uiour, as at the brauerie and beautie of the Ladies, which séemed to them to be exquisite. They took their leaue, going directly to their Tent, where they were solemnly receiued with such heauenly musicke, as none could bee better vpon earth. In sight of the campe he was armed, but by whom, it was vnknowne. There was a stately Theatre made for ye Ladies, to behold the battell. Upon a great piller they hang∣ed the Princes shield, bringing an infinite many of Laun∣ces, that those which would but onely iust, should want no Launces for that purpose. The Tinacrian paced ouer the field vpon his Rubican (a beter horse there was not in the world) with such a grace, as Mars could haue done no better. There wanted not some in a readines to come into the lists: for Lindauro, who yet had not lost Venus loue, would there shew it. Ah, he that had so excellent a wit, as might be able to depaint (with contentment to all) those battels, which were the best worth the séeing of any that euer were in the world: for the Pagan which first presented himselfe in the lists, was valiant, and who without question was most enamoured; although he neuer attained to any thing whereby he might perceyue that he was beloued. He smote his furious horse with the spars: but with the Tinacrian he got little; for he made him with the encounter to take hold of the saddle pummell, for feare of falling. The young Gallant past forth with a braue countenance, and turned his horse vpon the hand, so lightly, as could not bee thought. The Prince came ashamed of his ill successe; and desiring to amend what was past, drawing his sword, with both his handes hee smote the Tinacrian vpon the Helme: it sounded like a bell; and the enamoured youth well felt the blowe: but seeing how many and how vali∣ant Knights there yet remayned to come, it behoued him to giue a good account of himselfe, or not to bee called the sonne of the great Trebatius, repaying him another
were but small hope of victorie. They encountred with Mars his might: for it séemed that some great house was fallen, when their lances brake, they made such a noyse. The Almaine lost his reynes and stirrops, and was so be∣sides himselfe, that the Tinacrian perceyuing it (trusting to his Rubican) ranne vpon him with his horses brest, and o∣uerbare them both to the ground; wherein fortune was con∣trarie vnto him; for as hee was taken so at vnawares, he had no leisure to pull his foote out of the stirrop, and so one leg was vnder his horse, who with the force of the encoun∣ter died presently. Trebatius his sonne alighted, leauing the whole campe amazed at his valiancie, and went to the Almaine, & holpe him to frée himselfe from his horse, saying vnto him, I will not, sir Knight, that you should lose that for want of a horse, which your valor doth assure you: and so you may end the battell on foote. But he was in so ill taking with his fall, y• he was enforced to giue ouer the battaile, and to leaue his shield behind, which much despited Bembo, who loued him very much, admiring at that which he with the Eagle had vsed towards him. I beléeue (quoth the fayre girle Ro∣sabella) that my Lord, my brother Rosabel, did better know this Knight then me, that hee was so readie to bee his suretie: & séeing wee were scrupulous in giuing him this leaue, it is reason yt we should recompense him with some∣thing, the better to encourage him against the Captaine of the Moores, who (they say) is very valiant. Her faire mo∣ther stood hard by, & laughed at the girles speaches, who wel knew what Knight that was: for her son Rosabel had told her: vpō which assurance she said, Séeing you are so careful for the good of this Knight, being challenged, I am content that you shal send him a pledge from your hand, that he may see how much his valour is estéemed. Al the rest of the yong girles hlpe to further what Oliuia had required. In the end Rosabellaes faire sister was to take from her necke, one of the most rich Iewels in the world: It had beene her mo∣thers,
which Rosabel had brought out of Astrutio his Countrey: there was not a better piece in that field. Shee gaue it to a Damsell of hers, who with many Knights which held her companie, came downe to the place where the Tinacrian, with a nw Launce in his hand, was on horseback. The Prince séeing her comming, leapt from his horse, receiuing her with much courtesie, which he shewed to women, more then any other Prince of the world. The Damsel sayd vnto him, Ualorous Knight with the Eagle, my Lady the Princesse Rosabella, daughter to the Prince Rosacler, commendeth her to you, & séeing the valor which you haue shewne, which shee imagineth to come from the Gréeke Ladies hāds, which with such generosity gaue you leaue, she sendeth frō them & her selfe this Iewell, to the end you should know of what credit your suite is, & how highly your valor is estéemed. The Tinacrian smiling, receiued it, & said, Tel these soueraine Princesses (faire Damsell) yt with such fauors, (such as the Gods are vnworthy of) it shall bee easie to accomplish this enterprise, & againe, a new to bind me to be theirs, which this rich gift cannot do, séeing I am so already, & shal be til I die. And acknowledging how much I am bounden, I find it to be so much, that to lost my life, it is too little to requie al, of what I haue receiued. He deliue∣red the message with so loud a voyce, that the Ladies which stood about the ent heard him. Luzela did assure her selfe of her Knight, séeing the gift came from so neere a kins∣woman. He put it about his neck, in sight of all the campe, which was a wound to the Moores Ladies hearts, to sée him so fauoured, which was enemie to their beautie. The Greeke Ladyes did celebrate the courteous answere of the Knight, who séeing the place cleare, tooke horse, as light as a bird, and taking his place, expected the com∣ming of some aduersarie, desirous to make them know their errours. There wanted not those who were so con∣ceited of their Mistresses beautie, that they opposed themselues against him, although that there were
some question about it: for euerie one would be ye first. At length the lot fell to the mightie Brundusio, who being ar∣med with strong plankes of stéele, made head against the Tinacrian, whose battell and the rest deserueth a newe Chapter. CHAP. XXIIII. Of the cruell battell betweene Brundusio and Poliphe∣bus, with the comming of the couragious Lindoriano, Prince of Niquea. WIth Soueraigne praises (most excellent Prince) did all Grecia extoll the noble Tinacrian, whose fame reached to the heauens: for in lesse then thrée houres, hee had ouercome thrée of the most fa∣mous Princes in the Moores Campe. And Brundusio Prince of Gibia, desi∣rous to reuenge their losses, with a most gallant shew con∣fronted Luzelaes louer: there was neuer séene a more an∣grie onset: for before the beholders could imagine it, they were together, making little splinters of their great Laun∣ces, whose trunchions flew out of sight, vp into the clouds. The Pagan lost a stirrop: they turned their horses, & com∣ming to strike both together with such force, as beat their heads into their bosoms, they strake againe, and againe; and comming to the fourth blow, (not able to endure the force of their strong armes) they laid their heads on the Saddle pummels. It was good for the Tinacrian that hee came so well armed: for although that hee did not cut his armour, yet he made his flesh black and blew. The contrarie happe∣ned to the Pagan: for in two or thrée places the bloud began to come forth. Garrofileaes sonne was not better chafed of all that day: for séeing how the Moore had vsed him, hee
flung his shield at his backe, (he was neuer wont to doe so, but when as in this maner he was in choler) and tooke his sword in both his hands. I beléeue that he of Gibia was afrayd, and had reason; for comming to strike him, he put many in feare to sée him brandish his sword. The Pa∣gan could not auoyd the blow; for Rubican was so swift, that before hee could be in a readines, the young warriour was with him, and cleft his shield from side to side, and the blow lighted vpon his Helme with such force, that it strake away the one halfe, with a péece of his head, and made him ready to fall. He knew not whether it were day or night: he gaue him a second, and hit him vpon one shoulder; it carry∣ed away the poldron and vauntbrace: all the camp thought that hee had done the like by his arme; and the Moore to saue himselfe from falling, tooke hold of his horses necke; yet he recouered himselfe, and more fierce then a Lion, he threw his broken shield to the ground; and taking his sword in both hands, hee set vpon the Prince, who lifting vp his sword and shield, receyued the blowe vpon both; and as the edge of his was so excellent, it cut the Moores in two pée∣ces, making him to lose the greatest part of the force of the blowe. This notwithstanding, hee strake him with the rest vpon the Helme and Shield, hurling him downe vpon the saddle pummell: hee saw the starres in his Helmet, and much bloud gushed out at his eares and nostrils. The Pa∣gan flung at him the rest of his sword, with such force, as if it had béene shot out of a Culuerine, and as hee raised him∣selfe, it smote him on the middest of the brestplate, such a blow, as smote the best part of the wind out of his bodie. And as he saw him thus troubled, valuing himselfe equall to him in strength, hee closed with him, and had hee beene any other then the Tinacrian, hee had pulled him from his horse: but it seemed to him that he met with a rocke. Trebatius sonne recouered his breath, and setting vpon the Moore (as he was stronger then he) he pluckt him from
his Saddle, but could not hold him for waight: for hee was a bigge man, and so hee was constrained to leape with him to the ground, where, before he could recouer him self, with his dagger he had almost let out his soule: for he wounded him deadly, and so left him being somewhat wearie (al∣though beholding his Ladie so faire and so pleasant, and all the rest of the Gréeke Ladies, which ioyfully beheld him to sée his rare valour) with a skip he recouered his saddle, their beauties reuiuing his wearied spirits. The most strong Astorildo scarcely suffred him to take his launce, when he came armed in skie coloured armour, with Death in his shield, painted so at life, that the work∣manship was pleasing, although the worke were not so. This frée Batchelour loued Eufronisa so much, that al∣though that hee playnely saw shee loued him not, yet hee neuer left to loue her vntill afterwards, as shalbe declared. Round about Death were written these words: Her name doth not put me in feare, For shee's with me at bed and boord, As my mishap doth beare record. The Lady knew well how dearely this Prince did loue her: but there is no greater griefe to one beloued, then not to be able to helpe, nor fayne any fauour. Hee came with a good grace into the field, assuring his businesse better then any before him. They parted swifter then the wind, and met in the middest of the cariers. With too gréedie co∣eting the Tinacrian mist his blowe, which went to his soule, and the more, for meeting the Calidonyan, he made him vilely to bend in his addle. There was neuer Hircani∣an Tigre that turned so; for séeing his Launce whole, he hurle it as though it had bene shot out of a Cannon: the one halfe entred into the ground, the rest beating the vn∣séene ayre. The stranger returned with greater courage thē a Lion,
glad of his good encounter, and would haue giuen the first blew, bearing his Shield more forward then was reason; but it happened accordingly: for the Tinacrian was more nimble then hee, who crossing his Sword, bore by the blow, and passing by with his Rubican, gaue him a knock athwart the Helmet, on the right side, and made him to hold his necke at one side. Hee returned at one side with a thrust, which put him from his Saddle, and had he knowne so much, he had ouerthrowne him. Rosamundies brother recouered, being ashamed to see himselfe in such a case, and being in breath, hee entred, not knowing his ene∣mies strength, and before that they had taken good hold of their swords, he suddenly smote him vpon the rich Helme. It seemed (according to the sparkles which flew out of it) that he had smitten vpon a fine flint stone: and the yong man shewed some forgetfulnes in his saddle, making the Moore more carefull to come with another: hee gaue it him vpon one side of the Shield, and beat it to his Beauer, with such force, that it made him hold his head backwards. Now was choler moūted to the highest degrée, and in such sort, yt it were méere madnes to fight with him: for taking his sword in both his hands, he would haue bea∣ten Diamonds to péeces: there was no defence in the shield, nor in the Armour, although enchaunted, nor in most pure stéele: for the one his arme breaketh: and the other, the an∣cient temper of the sword cutteth, that except Rosamundies and Rosabels, there was not such another in the world: it smote away a corner of his shield, and the sword lighted on the shoulder: it tormented him so much, that hee could not beare the wayght of the shield; and so hee let it fall, gi∣uing the yong man opportunitie to come vpon him with a thrust: and had he borne his arme a little more euen, he had thrust him thorow, from side to side, and therewith made him to féele it in his flesh. All the Campe was in a tumlt to see the yong mans vnmeasurable blowes; euerie where
there was no speech but of his rare valour. I feare me (said the Emperour Trebatius to him of Tribisonda) that the Princes of the Campe will encurre some danger, with this furious Knight. I am of that opinion (answered the sonne) although I assure your Maiestie, the courage which those thrée knights shewed, (which were, that Knight with the Starres, and the two new Knights) made mee to wonder, and I greatly desire to sée them tried with him. That will quickly be seene, (answered the Father) for as he layeth about him, there are few within the Lists to resist his arme (as it was true:) for turning againe to behold the battell, the aduan∣tage was apparant of Tinacrian his side, although that the other by defending and offending himselfe so well, deserued the name of valiant, notwithstanding that hee should re∣maine ouercome: for now they said it was no disgrace to be so, by such a Knight as that was: for the gods had not reser∣ued to themselues any greater valour, then they had infused into him. It seemed vnto him, that fighting with such de∣teritie and skil, hauing so much to doe, it was to spend much time. And so caring for nothing but to end the battell, hee griped the Pagan so hard, that he knew not where he was; and would also with a blow haue ended the fight: for taking his sword in both his hands, hee made towards his enemie; he made many afraid, to sée him come with such furie, assai∣ling him at one side. The Tinacrian would haue bettered it: but it was like to haue béene to his owne dammage; for the Moore was subtill, and perceiuing that hee warded not his head, he gaue him the greatest blow that euer he had smit∣ten: hitting him at one side, hee beat his Helme round, and made him to lose part of his sight, casting out much bloud: notwithstanding all which, he was stil very heedfull, which in such extremities, was that which did assure him of y• bat∣tel: forlosing with him with his dagger (for therewith great aduētures were to be performed, although not with ye Tina∣crian,
but by another yong mā, as in the fourth part of this History, he which ruleth the heauēs giuing me health, shall be declared) he gaue him two mortall wounds, and left him (although on horsebacke, yet breathlesse) and seeing him in such sort, hee shouldred him, and threw him to the ground. There was no fault in this Prince, but that in particular battailes hee was verie cruell vntill they were ended. He caused him to be borne out of the field, leauing his shield for a pawne. All the Moores were mooued, and Bembo would be the first, but that Flora would haue him to be the last. Into the Lists came the famous Thorisiano, with his accustomed armes, which were as good as any in the world. He was not enamoured, but yet was sent by the Ladyes. And as he was knowne to the Gréekes, and held for so valiant, they were in doubt of the Tinacrian, but not they which knw what belonged to the wars: and much lese Rosabel, who was ouerioyed to see how wel his vncle had acquitted himselfe: and he did the more reioyce, to thinke, what contentment his mighty Grandfather would conceiue, when he should know him to be his sonne. If your fauour were euer disagreeable, faire Ladies, sayd the Empresse Briania, to the yong Ladyes, in my opinion it is now: for with this comming of the aduersarie, all the companie doth mutter, doubting of your Knight. There is no cause of feare (soueraigne Empresse) sayd the faire Au∣relia, our warriour being so much loued and fauoured as he is. They had not stept a foot from the place, when they heard a great noyse in the field, which was, that the one ranne at the other, with a greater swiftnes, then an arrow flyeth out of a bow. The Pagan was extreme strong: but hee met with one which in fighting renewed his courage: for com∣ming to encounter in the cariere, their Launces flew into small splinters, and Thorisiano hardly escaped falling, for he was driuen to seize on his horse neck, without knowing what hee did. Luzelaes gentle louer was somewhat trou∣bled, which was well perceiued by the assistants, whereby
they iudged of his enemies valour: who drawing the braue Astrutio King of the Medes his good Sword, made to∣wards the Tinacrian. At one instant they strake two mor∣tall blowes, which made them both to sée a thousand stars in the floore. The Challenger had the best horse in the world, for which cause his enemie could not meete him, al∣though hee returned with excellent swiftnes against him, but rather carryed away with his furious blow, gaue place to the Louer to giue a terrible blow behind, vnder his righ shoulder, which did so torment him, that hee scarcely felt his sword arme. The paine was soone gone, which was an aduenture for the yong man: for the Tinacrian was come with another, with greater haste then good speede: for he came so neere, that Thorisiano might well strike him. The Greeke neuer receiued a greater blow: for hee smote him on the brimme of the Helmet, and with a little more had stricken it from his head, making him bow lower then he would haue done: and before he could recouer himselfe, he gaue him a sore thrust, and hit him luckily in the ioynt of the vaunthrace, and was the first that dyed his sword in the Tinacrians bloud▪ The rest (which remained) freezed in his bodie, and roring within himselfe, more fiercely then a furious Tiger, he ranne vpon Thorisiano. Had Mars himselfe seene him come with that furie, he would haue beene afraide of him. There was no steeled shield, nor plankes of fine steele, but all was too little against the furie of the Tinacrian. Hee strake away his shield, and it was a great chance, that hee had not done as much by his arme: the blow passed to his Helmet, with such force, that it made it flye from his head, breaking the buckles, leauing all his face bloudie, which came out at nose and eyes. Where∣with was heard a great shout in the field, crying, The Moore Ladyes Champion is dead. The Tinacrian séeing him so fayre, and so amazed,
was mooued with compassion, and to doe that which he neuer did, which was, to hold his hands: for if he had stri∣ken him againe, it had been the last battaile that euer that Prince had fought. But he stayed to let him take breath; & when hee was fully recouered, making himselfe readie for his defence, he sayd vnto him, I would not, sir Knight, that your great mind should bee any occasion of your dis∣grace, for which I should bee sorie: you are wounded and disarmed; the best course will bee, to giue euer the battaile without farther contention. The vnknowne Thorisiano was of good behauiour, and séeing his gentle offer, hee sayd, I am verie sorie, sir Knight, that by so many wayes you haue the victorie of mee: but séeing the heauens haue so ordained it, all is for the best, and which best fitteth mee. The Tinacrian tooke his answere verie kindly, calling to his Squire for the Helmet which he gaue him, saying, I wil not that your Shield remaine with mee, as a signe that you are ouer∣come, but for a token that I am yours. The courteous speeches of the Tinacrian did greatly winne the hearts of all those which were in the field. The yong man went forth of the Lists, of whom was made great account for the va∣lour of his person. There was made a great noyse in the campe: for Don Argante had taken the place with so angry a countenance, that all men perceiued with how great furie hee came. All this was nothing to mooue the Tinacrian. For with greater mildenesse then in such a case was requisite, hee went to the place where the Launces were, and there hee chose a great Launce: and putting vp his Be∣uer to take the ayre, and to wipe away the bloudie sweate, (for neuer did any Knight endure so much in so little time) hee encouraged his Rubican, and giuing him the spurre, hee became as fresh as the wind, when it commeth foorth of his darke dungeons, and then with a wonderfull and incredible swiftnesse hee made towards
the disguised louer. They met with so great noyse, that if two great Carricks had met in a rough sea, they could haue made no greater. The Fenician with the force of the encounter, lost his horse reynes, but he quickly recoue∣red them: they turned their horses with such a grace, that Mrs could haue done it with no greater. Trebatius his Sonne being mounted vpon his Rubican, had the aduan∣tage of all the world, and with that strong armour: for in it (notwithstanding so many battailes) there was not one scarre to be seene: but as the Sunne went downe into the Spanish Seas, there was no fayrer sight to be séene, then the colours and reflection which it made, which sufficeth to make Luzela to loue him: which ioyfull to see him, sayd to the fayre Rosoluia, I doe beleeue that but for your beautie, the Prince could neuer haue atchieued so many battailes with so much honour. Nay, from your beautie, faire Prin∣cesse, springeth his valour which he hath shewen, quoth the Princesse, and let vs see how he fareth with him in the gréen scarfe, who in my opinion is valiant. The one tooke his course more swift then thought, against the other. They met, and made a fearefull noyse at the breaking of their Launces, whose splinters flews out of sight, they entred so farre into the region of the ayre. They were both couragious: and so they returned, the Fenician hauing lost both his Stirrops, which he so quick∣ly recouered, that it was scarcely perceiued. The Tinacri∣an presuming of his Rubican, would medes make a proude attempt, but his hope failed him: for this louer was one of the most readie men in the world, & in this case would rather dye, then bee ouercome. For as the Tinacrian approached (putting his horse aside, hee made him to lose his blow, giuing meanes to Argante to smite him as he passed by, a mightie blow backwards, making him to lay his brest on the Saddle pummell. He hastened after him, and both together met with such force, with their Shields and Helmets, that both of them without any
power to auoyde it, fell together to the ground. The Ti∣nacrian fell vpon his feete, although so troubled, that whilst hee was in that passion, the Fenician had time to rise a∣gain, but so brused with the fall, that hee much douted of the battaile. But hee was so couragious, that there∣with he supplyed that imperfection, and on foote, held himselfe sufficient to giue battaile to Hercules. The battaile was worthie to bee seene by such persons: for both their dexterities were such, as made all the beholders amazed. But it was quickly seene, that the Greeke had the better: for (as it hath beene alreadie sayd) hee had the aduantage of all men. His aduersarie would haue closed, to haue wrestled with him, hoping thereby to haue gotten ground. The Tinacrian was well breathed, and had his sword with the poynt forwards, which the Greeke crossed, meaning to beare by the blow: but hee vnder∣stood his enemies meaning: for hee was not well fitted to that ward, when letting fall his Shield and Sword, hee closed with him so suddenly, that Poliphebus could not helpe himselfe with his armes. This Louer tooke so good hold of him, that he raysed him from the earth, and had he bin any other then Garrofileaes sonne, he had layd him all along vpon the ground, getting great part of the Lists vpon him: whereat the people made so great a noyse, that the Tinacrian became as fierce as a Basiliske, and taking footing, hee recouered all that hee had lost. Thus they struggled together ouer the field, bea∣ting themselues out of breath, vntill that at last, the Tinacrian holding himselfe disgraced, with a round wheeling about, layd him all along vpon the ground, where, in despight of him, (although that hee therewith was more troubled, then hee had beene all the day be∣fore) he made him leaue his Shield for a remembrance of his ouerthrow: which all men did so admire, that they knew not what to say, seeing that braue Knight ouer∣come, who was more furious then a Lyon.
The Tinacrian went into his Tents, to take something of the Nymphs, to refresh him of his wearines, which Lu∣zelaes aunt had giuen them. He stayed but a little, for now the Sunne beganne to withdraw his light, and already was come into the Lists. No worse man then the Prince of Assyria, Don Cael, who desirous to be auenged for his two deare friends, brandishing a great Launce, came twarde the Tinacrian. The strong blowes which were gi∣uen would haue cleft a Rocke, and yet not them, which bore Shields more hard then the hardest Diamond. The Assyrian was borne backe in his Saddle, with the force of the encounter, although so little, that it was scarcely percei∣ued: but they rather sayd (as it was true indeede) that hee was the most valiant of them all, which had entred into battaile with the Prince of inacria. They returned with an excellent grace, and with their strokes, each of them bowed downe to the Saddle. They seconded them with others, which with their bloud bore witnesse of their valour. The Assyrian was skilfull, and wore an excellent Sword, although that against the Greeke Lyons Armor, the goodnesse thereof serued to small purpose. And so the furie of the battaile was referred to the strength of the arme, striking him so cruelly, that all his flesh was blacke and blew. The Assyrian escaped no better cheape: for his armour could not defend him, but that the bloud came forth in sundrie places, not without some greefe to Floralisa, who knowing how much that Prince loued her, shee could not choose but loue him againe, and bee sorie for his hurts: the sight of his bloud did redouble his strength. Wherefore taking his Sword in both hands, he set vpon the Tinacrian, who could not auoyde the blow, which came with such furie, that it made him set one hand to the ground: hee ouer∣tooke him with another, which made him set the other to ground, to keepe him from falling downe-right.
There was neuer Uper troden vpon, that returned like to this angry yong mn: it serued to small purpose to haue a Shield: for beating it to his head, hee made it so thunder a∣bout his eares, that hee went crosse-legged, readie to fall. He hlpe him forwards with a mightie thrust, with such force, that if the Louer had not wound about, letting it passe, it had killed him: and for all this, hee made him set both his hands to the ground: but he arose again with more discretion then the Tinacrian imagined, who staied, seeking oportunitie to strike him without dāger. The Assyrian pre∣uented him, setting one knée to the ground, letting the thrust passe ouer his head: and therewithall thrusting out his arme, he smote him on the left legge. The Greeke bescarde, thought that he had surely lost it, the blow was so terrible: and drawing it after him, he became as fierce as a hungry Lyon, and with both hands smote the Assyrian such a blow vpon the Shield, that it cut away a péece thereof, wounding him somewhat in the shoulder: and therewith closed with him, fearing (because it was almost night) that hee should not ouercome him by day light; which would haue much gréeued him. They came to catch that catch may, where was a terrible struggling: but as the Tinacrian led For∣tune by the fore-locke, hee made him hold companie with the rest: yet he went out of the field with double honour, so much extolling the Tinacrian, that his fame passed the cloudes. Into the place came one of the most choyse knights in all the fields, he was armed in blew, set with hearts of gold, so well and so artificially, that it was very pleasing to behold. In the middest of the Shield, which was of the same colour that his armour was, he bore Fortune depain∣ted, as if she with her hand raysed him from the earth, al∣though with small contentment, with this writing: My hand will serue thee to no end, Or other helpe that I can lend, If thy Lady and loue be not thy friend.
There was no man in that place, but tooke pleasure in that small shew, which fortunes Knight had shewed: for so they all called him, who comming to the Tinacrians Tent, and knowing his beloued Rosaluira, there is no griefe com∣parable to that which hee felt, when hee saw that it was for her, that this Knight fought these combats, and that shee tooke pleasure therein. The disease of iealousie touched him, and seeing that no man came into the Listes, spurring his horse, he entred, all men wondring at his good countenance. Poliphebus made more accompt of him, then of any of the rest past, being much delighted in beholding his good con∣stitution, perswading himselfe, that he should accordingly be verie strong. With a slow pace bearing his launce vpon his arme, the mightie Tinacrian went towards him: and put∣ting vp his Beauer, séeing that hee was not of the Moores Campe, he said, Ualorous Knight, in my Cartel I challenge onely those which are in the Campe, defending the beautie of the Moore Ladies, against her which commaundeth my soule, and so séeing that you are none of them, I cannot enter into the combat with you. This made him more hautie, to heare the mild reasons of the Tinacrian, gessing that in déede it was for feare, and so he answered him, For many causes I may haue the combat against you: for I assure you, that in the Campe is that whereto I owe most dutifull loue, and the like in your Citie, so as I may well fight with you. I doe beleeue it, aunswered the Tinacrian. But yet, except you maintaine the beautie of the Moore Ladies, I am not to fight with you, these fifteene dayes, and then there wil want no occasion for you and me to méete. It may not bee endu∣red that I should goe forth of these Lists, without making you know the errour which you vphold, and although that I may not shew you my Ladie, which is here present, and that you are not worthie to maintaine such a challenge for her, I doe challenge you to fight presently. The yong man was so much displeased herewith, that hee was about to
turne his horse, and had done it, but for displeasing those of the Campe, who attended to fight, and said vnto him, I ne∣uer thought, that by vsing you courteously, I should haue gi∣uen you occasion, to shew such pride: but because I will not deferre the reuenge, let vs goe to the Iudges, and they shal say, whether that I may enter into this single combat with you or not, hauing onely challenged the Princes of the Campe. All the Iudges, which were foure Kings, said, that hee could begin no battel without leaue from the ladies. Stay, presumptuous Knight, said fortunes Knight, for I will goe to demaund it; for your death doth as much import me, as my owne life. He went to the proud Chariot where the La∣dies were, where doing a slight reuerence, hee said, Soue∣raigne Princesses, seeing the great valiancie of the knights which were appointed to be of your partie, and for that you haue reposed this matter in their hands, I haue not presu∣med to intrude to bee of so valorous a number, but by an∣other way I hope to let you know, how much in the world there is due vnto you, and thereupon I haue deied the Knight with the Eagle, vpon this, that hee is not worthie to maintaine such a challenge; but hee may not fight with mee hereupon, without your leaue: although that I haue not deserued it, yet relying on that desire which I haue to doe you seruice, I beséech you to giue me leaue, séeing there yet remaineth time enough for these Princes, to answere the challenge. The most strong Bembo drue néere, to heare the Knights Ambassage: to whome (when the Empresse of the Romanes saw him) shée said, This Knights request, sée∣ing it concerneth you, is to be answered according to your liking, whereupon all these Ladies and my selfe will stand. The pride wherewith he answered ye courteous Tinacrian, had almost angred him, & thinking that hee would giue ac∣compt of himselfe, he said, There is no more to bee said, but that I may goe with your good leaue: for I shal stand in néed thereof. The Pagan humbled himselfe vnto the Ladies,
although not to Bembo, whereat he was not a little offen∣ded. And returning to the Gréeke, he said with a loud voice, that all those which were in the place might heare it: Goe, to, you cowardly Knight, the Ladies desire to sée how deare∣ly your presumption will cost you. At the least, if pride may beare it (answered the Tinacrian) there was neuer seene a∣nie more valiant then you. Let the battell begin presently, wherein I will shew you better hands, then you doe mee a tongue. The Iudges stayed them, saying, that after Sunne set, a particular combat was not to bee allowed, and therefore they were to stay vntill the morrow. Let it bee as it shall please you, answered Fortunes Knight: for I neuer was in any Countrie in my life, where combats were admitted with so many conditions. He went from the Lists and the Campe also, because he would not bee knowne, before that battell were ended: for you shall vnderstand, that it was the most strong Lindoriano, who knowing in Tinacria, that they had stollen away his Ladie Rosiluira, went to séeke her, vntill that in Niquea, hee remembred to come to the aide of his Father the Souldan: for where there were so great assemblies of men, hee might peraduenture heare of her: and his fortune brought him in so good time as this: and although that he were one of the most courteous knights in the world, yet iealousie did so torment him, that it made him shew his pride. Those in the sumptuous Chariots, came to salute the Gréeke Ladies, betwéene which past many discreete spee∣ches, the great Trebatius inuiting them to the Citie, du∣ring the time of the Truce. Some were glad thereof, where∣of Arbolinda Princesse of Scotland was none of the last, who looking among those Princes, found out her beloued Florisarte, so gallant, and so braue, that shee would that shée had had another soule, to haue imparted one vnto him in payment. Also it did somewhat reuiue the spirits of the Romane
Princesse, to sée her Don Heleno. Shee which sped worst at this méeting, was the gallant Eufronisa, who could not sée her beloued Rosabel, who was secretly gone to visite his vn∣kle, who did not a little regard him, when the Ladies de∣parted from the Campe. The valiant Tinacrian went to accompanie the Greeke Ladies, till they were out of the field, where he tooke his leaue, saying, that he could goe no further. With great ioy the Ladies receiued him, passing the rest of the night in pleasant discourses, although the Tinacrian were so angrie with the Knight of Fortune, that he longed to haue him by the eares. Arbolinda desired nothing so much, as the day, because shee would send a message to the Prince of Tharsis. In the next Chapter you shall know what passed: for now it is time to take rest. CHAP. XXV. Of the cruell battell betweene the two Princes. THe power of Loue, valorous Dames, doth now so withdraw me, that in the middest of so much bloud as heere is spilt, I cannot chuse but steale a little time to treate of the disease of Loue, and what power it hath in the soule of the gallant Arbolinda, who came to her lodging, euen Loue-sicke, which did so gripe her, that shée could not forbeare to send to speake a word with her louer, vnder the name of Artimio,
which was the name which he tooke, when in the habite of a Squire he went with Florisarte, as in the second part of this true Historie is declared. And taking paper and ke, shée wrote a letter to the Prince, which shée gaue to a fauorite of hers, to giue the same vnto him, so soone as the appointed battell should bee ended. And herewith the Ladie reposed her selfe, attending the day, which appeared so faire, that it séemed that the Sunne had sought out new & more bright shining beames: for he shewed himself more faire, then when he was heards∣man, and kept his flocks by the shoares of Silisia. Through all the Citie (for so had Rosabel commaunded, that at the breake of day, they should discharge the watch with a peale of Ordinance, giuing a merrie good morrow) the great cap∣taine Astrutio from the Sea answered them, who leauing his charge with his Cousin, went disguised to the share to sée those battels. The Ladies came forth of their Campe in their mightie Chariot, and hard by them, those which re∣mained for the battell. The faire Gréeke Ladies came ac∣companied, as well with beautie as with Knights: for all the best of the Citie came with them. They tooke their stan∣ding, attending the comming of the Ladies of the tent, the which were clad all in gréen cut vpon Cornation, so faire, yt therewith they did assure the palme of victorie to the knight with the Eagles; who mounted vpon his mighty horse. came armed at all péeces in gréene Armour, with so many artificiall knots, and such aboundance of pretious stones, that more could not be wished for: hee bare in the middest of his shield his vsuall Eagle, so excellently well drawne, that it séemed to be aliue, and had changed the inscription: for by the Herons he had this motte: Well may firme affection, Which is fixt and will not start, Assure it selfe of iust reward, And certaine solace for the hart.
The Gréeke Ladies were much delighted with the Ti∣nacrians pleasant deuice, who doing reuerence vnto them, with a great Launce in his hand, expected the comming of his enemie, who was not slacke in comming into the lists, armed with his strong Armour: and without speaking one word, séeing his beloued Rosaluira clad in the same colours as the Knight was; as malicious as a serpent, he made to∣wards him as swift as the wind. The two famous warri∣ours brake their Launces into small sticks, although the Pagan in the encounter lost one stirrop, with a foule backe bending in his saddle: Our Prince did likewise double some∣what in his, but it was so little as could hardly be seene. He was so earnest and so cholericke, that he did not sée the time to bee reuenged according as hee desired; but spurring his horse, he passed so far forwards, yt he could giue no blow to the purpose: which the warlike Moore perceyuing, gaue him (before that he could cleare himselfe from him) so huge a blowe athwart the Helme, that it made his téeth chatter in his head; and comming with another with no lesse force, he smote him in the middle of the shield; which although he could not pierce for the finenesse of the mettall, yet he bore it against his head, adding more payne to the former, ma∣king him to forget himselfe: and with the third he set vpon his horses necke. All men wondred at the fiercenesse of the Moore; but much more at the angry lookes wherewith Garrofileas son turned to sée himselfe so ill intreated. Hee expected no de∣fence in his shield, which he threw at his backe, and as an enraged Knight, he set vpon him of Niquea. Euery body was afrayd, and he (as strong as he was) was afrayd; for raysing himselfe in his stirrops, hee gaue him one of the most cruell blowes that had bene giuen in all those battels: for hee smote him off a great corner of his shield, & the terrible sword falling vpon his left shoulder, left all that side disarmed and sore woūded, and before he could fit himselfe again, he gaue him a thrust, but it was sidelong:
it was great hap that hee had not nayled the one side to the other, but it carried away the side of his brest-plate, & part of his shirt of Mile, casting him backe vpon his horses buttocks. The Tinacrian shewed courtesie to many men, but this Louer had much offended him, and so séeing him in that taking, trusting much to his Rubican, he meant to end the battell, by treading him vnder his horses éete. But this yong man, who had béene in many fights, before he could come at him, made his horse to bound, making him to misse of his cruell intent: and so he passed so farre forwards, and with such furie, as made many to laugh, although hee were none of them; who returned with greater furie, then the hungrie Lion into the heard. They both together strake vp∣on their rich Helmete, and saw within them the cleare skie, when it is most starrie. They doubled their first blowes, making their blood to beare record of ye force of their armes: if they had giuen the third, I beléeue, that with their liues they had ended the sport: but they both withheld, entring like skilfull men of warre. The Niquean his sword sped best, because that his enemie striking aloft, and finding re∣sistance, letting fall the point of his sword, hee gaue him a proud thrust beneath his brest-plate, and bare away more then a hundred Mailes of his shirt, with part of his thigh. Trebatius his sonne ranne out of his wits, when he felt himselfe hurt in the thigh: hee cared not for such preparati∣ons as men doe vsually make: for he suddenly hurled at him, with a mightie blow vpon the Helme, and made it cleane to his head, giuing him a shrewd hurt: hee came vpon him with an other, which put him quite besides himselfe, and with better heede then before, he closed with him, and with∣out being any way able to defend himselfe, hee pluckt him from his Saddle, leaping with him to the ground, where the Pagan séeing the danger wherein hee was, held the Tina∣crian fast, where they began a dangerous wrestling, with great quantitie of bloud falling from either of them. It made all men to admire, to sée how long they did endure the
fight, with such force and obstinacie, with a fierce plucke, the vnseised falling one from another, with great admira∣tion to all that were present, holding the Knight of Fortune for couragious, seeing hee could so long make his part good against the Tinacrian, who (thinking that his long stay would bee noted for cowardise) began to presse his enemie with such force, that he made him to shift from side to side, being almost out of breath; but he defended himselfe so wel, as purchased him great credite, but it lasted but a little: for within three houres after the battell began, the aduantage did plainely appeare on the Tinacrians side. Hee perceiued it, being willing to shorten the battell, which was likely to haue beene to his owne hurt: for the Moore being well aduised, séeing him comming close, stayd for his comming, and before that he could deliuer his blow, he gaue him one, which made him put his hands and knées to the ground. There was neuer any Knight séene in such a chafe as was the Tinacrian; for rising againe vpon his féete, hurling his sword about his head, he gaue him athwart the Helmet, a terrible blow, which made him goe backwards ready to fal: he holpe him forward with two thrusts one after another, shaking with anger: but he felled him, and then more light then a Bird he set vpon him, bidding him to yeeld, who for feare of death, and in hope to bee reuenged in the field bat∣tell, yéelded, with such feare to the rest which remayned, as is incredible; for now there was no talke but of his great valour. Many sayd that it was Claridiano; for he had bene long missing from the Gréeke Court: for of the rest of the Gréeke Princes there wanted not one. The Prince was neuer so wearied in any battell as in this: wherefore to bee cured of his hurts, as otherwise o rest himselfe, he speedily went into the Tent where the Nymphes were, who very care∣fully cured him, which studyed nothing else but to giue him content in all things. Hee againe came forth out of the Tent, whereat they
wondred more then at his battels: for according to the liue∣lynesse of his countenance, it séemed as though he had done nothing. He chose him a great Launce, wayting for him which would next come, which fayled not; for the braue Celindo tooke the matter in hand, who was knowne to ma∣ny by his Armes. Of this battell many were doubtfull, imagining that the vnknowne Prince was more couragious then ye Gréek. They made one at another as swift as the wind, at which time there was a great rumour in the campe, about know∣ing of the Knight of fortune: for the Souldan his father, seeing him so sore hurt, would not that they should proceed with those battels any farther, but that they should renew the warre, being very desirous to be reuenged for all toge∣ther: and had not Bembo bene present, without doubt it had bene so, who saw that therein he should hazard his ho∣nour, which he dissembled. The wise Lupertius cured him, but could not imagine what Knight that should bee which was so couragious and valiant: for the wise Lady had bet∣ter prouided for her Nephew, (for so she tooke him) to end these aduentures: who spurring his good horse Rubican, the Souldan being now turned to behold them, they met in their cariere with so great noyse, as though two great rocks had met. The Tinacrian encountred him so luckily in the middest of the Beuer, so as he disarmed his head, and made him to misse the shocke. He returned againe vpon him, hol∣ding the successe of that blow for excéeding good fortune: and before that hee could drawe Quéene Iuliaes precious sword, with his hee had giuen him two blowes one after another, which was a thousand to one, but that he had killed him, hit∣ting him athwart the Helme, without touching the fore∣part, where a great péece was gone. The enamored young man returned as fierce as a Basi∣liske, and with his rich sword, smote the Tinacrian vpon the Helmet, which was as much as if hee had smitten  hard well tempered ell, and therewith made him
shake like an Aspen leafe: he returned with another so soon, that before that he could defēd himself, or set himself in any good order to fight, he had againe striken him in the same place, and made him bow downe his head to the horses necke. There was neuer séene a readier Knight, then the Sonne of Meridian, who séeing the yong men somewhat pesered, bearing his Sword hand close by his side, he gaue him a strong & a luckie thrust, which bore away his vaunt∣brace, taking it iust in the ioynt: and it was great lucke, that he had not thrust him thorow the arme. Saturne ne∣uer shewed himselfe more angrie against Mars, then the Tinacrian did against the Sonne of Floralinda: for hurling his good sword about, hee smote away his Shield at one blow, cutting those hands which hung on his arme; and but that he drew back, he had put his arme in danger, which notwithstanding did much torment him. They now care no more for defence, but ioyning their horses close toge∣ther, as though they smote vpon Anuilles, so did these war∣riours vpon their Helmets, amazing all that behold them. The Knight of the campe (quoth the king of Macedonia, and Grandfather to the Prince) is of a mightie strength, but I beleeue that no man can compare with the Knight with the Eagle: And had I not séene his face, thereby assured that it is not Claridiano, I should haue thought that it had beene the same: for I neuer saw man so like him, in lordly grace, and comelinesse in bat∣tailes, as hee is. Your highnesse saith truth, answered the great Zoilo, and I beleeue that the Pagans haue met with one, who will giue them inough to doe. I expect nothing, (quoth the fayre Archisilora) vntill the two youths come in: for men of greater courage the world contayneth not. The warriours lost no time, which being out of breath, were yet more furious then the raging sea. It séemed vnto the vnknowne Macedonian, that hee spent much time in
that battaile, and the Tinacrian thought no lesse. It séemed also that they agreed in one: for lifting vp their swords, they smote so great blowes, that cleane without any feeling, they fell vpon their horses neckes. Garrofileaes sonne within a while came againe to himselfe: hee was neuer woont to charge at aduantage, but now hee was so blind with passion and furie, that he forgate himselfe, carried a∣way with desire to ouercome: and so seeing his enemie, who as yet was scarcely come to his remembrance, with two iumpes he was with him, iust as he came to himselfe; yet he could not strike him, but tooke him at such aduantage, that hee pluckt him out of his Saddle, giuing him so great a fall against the ground, that he could hardly rise, he was so sore brused therewith. All the Pagans campe was verie sory for Don Celin∣do his mishap. Luzelaes Louer leapt after him, and be∣fore that he knew where he was, he gaue him two blowes one after another, which put him past all remembrance, leauing him breathlesse vpon the ground, taking from him the best Shield that euer hee got, and was glad in his soule, that he had so ended the battaile. Much did those foure shining Lampes of beauty, extoll the valiancie of the Tinacrian. Let vs attribute it, quoth the fayre Policena, to our fauour: for it is not possible that it should come elsewhere. He would make a new challenge hereupon, sayd the fayre Aurelia: for I rather beleeue, that it procéedeth from the Ladies which hee bringeth in his companie, who are endued with no lesse beautie then courtesie, in fauouring so warlike a Knight. Well may hee bee called fortunate, sayd the fayre Iewish Ar∣timisa, seeing that they striue to giue him contentment, who are able to giue and take it away, in despight of loue it selfe, There remaineth yet (fayre Ladyes, quoth the se∣cretly enamoured Rosaluira) so much for him to doe, that in my opinion, this may be referred to the end of all these battailes. She sayd this in regard of Bembo, whome she
loued with her soule. The proude attempt of Floralisa put them from this matter, who séeing her brother ouer∣come, there was no Uiper that shewed it selfe so mali∣cious. This Lady had a most delicate horse: for in his course he would haue outrunne euen thought it selfe. Shee gaue him the spurre, who passed his carriere swifter then any Eagle, and at their meeting made a greater noyse, then when a great high built house talleth to the ground: they passed with an excellent grace the one from the o∣ther. There was no man among the Gréekes that knew the Lady, for shee came disguised, for feare that the Knight should refuse the battaile against her. And hereupon was much suspicion among them, who this might be, séeing it was the first that matched the yong man in the carriere. The Lady was of a mightie courage: for if Mars himselfe had béene in the field, she would not haue refused him in the single combat, with that Lords sword, which was the Troians greatest enemie. Shee made towards the Greek so spéedily, that it wan his good will, although hee much felt the blew: for in receiuing it, it made him bow downe as low as his Saddle. The Lady lost no opportunitie; for shee was one that vsed all diligence: and so, before that the Gallant could recouer himselfe, shee, which lo∣ued him farre better then her owne soule, gaue him a se∣cond. O strange effects of loue! The warlike Damsell entred with her shield somewhat farre from her brest, and came so neere to him, that before that he could deliuer his blowe, shee gaue him so strong a thrust, as had almost set him be∣sides his saddle, and made him to lose the halfe of his strēgth. The Lady gat hereby, otherwise it had gone hard with her; for with that little which hee gaue her, hee made her to sée a thousand stars vnder her faire browes, and troubled her so with the blow, that thereby he gat meanes suddenly to giue her another.
He smote her crosse the Helme, and smote her so much to one side, that he had almost ouerthrowne her to the ground. There was neuer any Dunce like her, for she plyed the yong man so well, that shee put the battaile a thousand times in doubt, which his Lady gaue him to vnder∣stand for she carryed her selfe so in her standing, as though the blowes which he receiued vpon his armour, had pierced to her heart. The Tinacrian perceiued it, and imagining as it was, hee charged the Daughter of Meridian in such ot, as made all the assistants to wonder. The Ladies haue made some signe to that Knight (sayd Venus) for the fierce∣nesse wherewith he set vpon his aduersarie, can proceede from no other cause: for nothing doth so much encourage warriours, as the fauour of their Ladies. The second Venus sayd not so, without reason: for hauing seene his Ladyes countenance, hee was so grieued, that hee would that that Knight had beene Mars. But for all that he could doe, the Lady defended her selfe so well as could bee wi∣shed. The Tinacrian entred like a master at the warres, mea∣ning at his pleasure to haue giuen her a great blow, bearing his sword aloft: but the warlike Matron vnderstood his pretence, and suffering him to come neere to her, with an excellent quicknesse shee foyled his ward, and with her sword in both hands, shee gaue the Prince vpon the Be∣uer, one of the most cruell blowes that euer hee receiued in his life: for falling vpon his horses necke, the bloud be∣gan to spout out at his mouth and eyes. There came a cold sweate all ouer those 2. Ladyes, when they saw their Poli∣phebus in ye taking. But that being past, there was neuer any Lion so furious as he shewed himselfe. For very despe∣rately he flung his Shield at his backe. There were few in the place but were afraide of his angrie countenance: and gnashing his téeth, he spurred his angrie Rubican, and was so soone with her, that she had no time to defend her: for he smote her vpon the rich Helme so aswash, that he could not
pierce it, yet he brake all the riuets on that side: which the yong man well perceiued, and giuing her another, that the bloud sprung out, hee set hand to her Helmet, and with a touch pluckt it away, leauing her couered with a fine Cawle of gold. All the companie was stricken with admiration, when they perceiued that shee was a woman. The Queene of Lira knew her, and doubting that Poliphebus would haue vsed her discourteously, she would haue gone down to entreate him to giue ouer the battaile, for the great loue which she bore her, euer since they had beene together in Tinacria, as is aforesayd: But the Greeke was so grate∣full, considering how much loue this Lady had shewen him in time past. He sayd vnto her, You hauing so good assurance of your part, valorous Lady, haue wronged your beautie, to séeke it with your victorious hands, which if in ought I haue offended, as I doubt not but that I haue much, you may with lesse cost take iust reuenge, although that comming hither vpon commandement, it may some∣what excuse mee. The victorie is yours, and so are all in the world due to your beautie and worthinesse, and so I beseech you in token thereof, to take my shield. To beare a pawn from so warlike a Knight, (quoth the Lady) ought to haue béene done by some valorous knight, for it is not iust that wee should take that, which to your worth belongeth, séeing that you haue so well woonne it: for I am yours, o∣uercome in battaile, which otherwise I will not bee. She would haue left her Shield, which was held for an excéeding greatnesse of mind, for it was one of the fay∣rest in the world. But the Tinacrian would not yeeld there∣to, but rather accompanying her forth of the Lists, offered her his seruice: and so returned to his tent, dering the rest of the battels vntill the euening; for these already en∣ded, had somewhat wearied him. Bembo seeing what ho∣nour that Knight had gotten vpon his deare friends, came forth like a Lyon. There was a great hope of those which remained, that they should againe recouer that, which the
rest had lost. In the standings, whither the Emperor com∣manded meate to bee brought for dinner, there was no speech so long as it lasted, but of the valour of this Knight. If euer he had neede, fayre Ladyes, of your fauour, sayd Liciana, it will be this euening: for I am of opinion, that there remaine some behind, which will put him to his shifts: and God grant that hee fall not into their danger. Hee shall not, sayd the fayre Rosamundi: for sith that these La∣dies fauours haue serued his turne, for so good a beginning, and middle it will be (no doubt) sufficient, to make a glori∣ous end of that which remaineth. They all wished it, for they loued him in their soules, and were neuer well, vntill they might againe returne to see him. Those of the campe stayed not long at dinner, they were so sharpe set: and the Greekes being aware of their comming, came to the stan∣ding windowes to behold them, whose sight deserueth a new Chapter. CHAP. XXVI. Of the cruell battaile fought betweene the youth Clec∣bulo, and Poliphebus of Tinacria, with what happened to Floriarte of Argentaria. FAire Ladies, by often crauing your ayde (as is reason) I am become troublesome to you. But my necessity, & so great occasi∣on is offered me, that I cannot forbeare to reire anew vnto you, for some new fauour, whereby I may bee able with a pleasing stile, to deliuer vnto you, the ma∣ner of foure of ye most famous battels that euer were fought in the world: for they which fought them, were the flower of all valiancie, and for such a cause, as would haue made a Lambe a Lion. There were many cruell blowes giuen, but those which the Ladies gaue to those youths, could neuer be cured, but by them which gaue them. No man employed
himselfe so well, nor with ore reason, then the sonnes of Eufronisa, which (notwithstanding their braue and coura∣gious hearts) yeelded their soules to two Princesses of Grecia, whose braue beautie would haue expelled the first Venus. She to whome the gentle Leobulo subiected him∣selfe, was the gallant Aurelia, daughter of the valorous Tartarian Zoylo, and the fayre Princesse Tigliaf, whose loue gaue occasion to this Prince, and his elder brother, to worke wonders, as I will (the Muses assisting mee) declare in the fourth part. Well did Lupertius know what peace would grow of these warres, and that hee should be a friend to the Greeks. But hee was so much offended for the imprisonment of his fellow Scholler Selagio, that he sought to bee reuenged of the Greeke Princes. The de∣struction of Troy was neuer so much desired, as was now the ruine of Grecia. And although that he would that these youthes should haue dyed thereby, to haue despighted Ro∣sabel, yet he forbare, to the end he might see the bloud which they would shead in the Gréeke fields, and in the behalfe of the Pagans. And for this cause, seeing the furious ene∣mie, with whom they were to encounter, and the lucke of his hand, hee sent them certaine most rich enchaunted Ar∣mours, which were of the best in the world, all russet, with certaine knots of colours, which made a marueylous faire shew. They both bare one deuice: for the gallant Claribel had chosen for his Soueraigne Lady, the fayre Policena, daughter of the valorous Polidolphus, and of the second Venus. In the middest of their shields they bare the God of Loue, giuing him for tribute the spoyles of their hearts and soules, with these words: What may accounted pleasure, Which doth yeeld no greater smart, If loue therein haue no part. Both the camps tooke great pleasure, to sée these two
gallant contented youthes; which passing ouer the place, tooke the first standing, although there were some question about it, for the Knight with the Starres had first desired the battell. Brufaldoro was almost mad, because hee could not be first. The braue Lord of Achaia challenged it to bee his. These fiue had fallen out about it, had not the Empe∣rour of the Romanes, and the Souldan of Niquea taken vp the matter, which brought them to agréement, which was, that they should draw lots: whereto they agréed, because they would not fal out. The first lot happened to him, which in all was equall to the best, which was Leobello, and the second to his brother, the third to the Knight with the stars, and next after him to Brufaldoro, and the last of all to the furious Bembo, who was as fierce as a Lion, who imagi∣ned that after those Knights, there would bee no meanes left for him to fight the battell: but the Tinacrian did so wel discharge himselfe, that hee gaue them all their hands full. The youth came into the field, with so gallant a counte∣nance, that all affected him: for putting vp his Beauer, hee went to the Tinacrian, who entertained him verie courte∣ously, for they were maruailous like: to whome the valo∣rous youth said, Mightie Knight with the Eagle, although it bee a pre∣sumption for me to enter into the Lists with you, yet, for that my Ladie is fairer then shee, whome you haue made Ladie of your soule, if you please, let our battell begin pre∣sently: if not, I will giue place to these Princes which re∣maine to giue end to theirs. The Gréeke did highly estéeme the good spéeches of the young man, imagining that they procéeded from a pure noble mind, & made answere, To the end, valorous Knight, that I might not fight with you, I would bee glad that you were excluded out of my Cartell: but being of the Pagans Campe, my challenge is to be vn∣derstod to extend as wel to the knights as the Ladies. The young man gaue him no other answere, then by turning a∣bout his horse, and putting downe his Beauer, and tooke
so much ground as might suffice for his carriere. The Ti∣nacrian did the like. Here, oh Nimphes of Pernassus, your helpe is wanting: and in no occasion, O Mrcurie, thou canst employ thine better, then to explaine, with what grace the one parted from the other. As for me to intermed∣dle in the matter, I shal but wrong those valorous knights, which made the one towards the other, and came so soone together, as could not be imagined. Their strong encoun∣ters would haue soone broken the hard rockes: but they met with so hard brests, that the Launces being shiuered into small splinters, flew vp into the ayre as high as the clouds; true witnesses of the mightie strength of those two warri∣ours, which without any mouing, as though they had béene lockt in their Saddles, with a singular good grace passed a∣long the one by the other: they returned with their swords aloft, and terrible were their blowes. The sparkles which flew from their shields, seemed to set them on fire. The Ti∣nacrian lost the reynes of his bridle, and thought that the last day had béene come, hee heard such thundring about his eares: and out at his mouth came aboundance of bloud, and hee was a while past remembrance. But the young man which had receiued a full blow, and from the best arme in the world, whose sword hath the best edge, fell vpon his Saddle bow bereft of his sences. But his horse carried him ten paces off, and euerie body looked when he would fall: but when he came againe to him selfe, there was no Serpent that was troden vpon, nor Ly∣on in a feuer, that was so furious. The courage wherewith he came, made the sparkles of fire to flie out of his eyes. The Tinacrian came againe to himselfe, wondring at the migh∣tie blow which he had receiued: and séeing his Cousin come so furious, hee thought it were but folly to stay for that blow: and as he was more nimble, and was better moun∣ted, so he bare to one side, making him to lose his blow, which came with such force, that it made him to fall downe vpon his Saddle pummell, so hard, that when he would haue set∣led
himselfe againe, he was not able: and the horse fiding his head at liberty, with two boundings cast him to ground, although hee fell vpon his feete. The Eagle neuer stooped with greater fury after her pray, then the Tinacrian did af∣ter the young man, which was not yet fiftéene yeeres old: he was one of the most light young men of the world: and when hee came to perfect age, no man excelled him; and so with a leap he came to the place where the Gréeke alighted, and with a strong thrust hee bare him a great way back∣wards. His strong Armour saued his life; for the sword had pierced thorow both his sides, had not such cunning handes forged it. The Gréeke stood no longer vpon his skill, séeing him∣selfe so battered; but layd on such load vpon the new Louer, that he put him quite out of breath, not without losse of some bloud▪ for against the Gréeke sword there was no enchaūt∣ment that could preuaile. Hee gaue him crosse the Helmet a cruell blow, hee thought by his staggering that he would haue fallen. Neuer was man so furious: for noting his e∣nemies strength, he began to make benefit of his skill. And the Tinacrian meaning to ouerthrowe him with some side∣blow, let fall his sword, and setting forwards his other foot, with his shield ouer his head, gaue him an vnhappy thrust, which the Gréeke thought had put him in danger: for glaū∣cing, it chanced to hit in the closing of the armour, where it entred into his left arme, drawing out bloud in streames: & not there with content, he pitcht his knee to ground, & smote him athwart the right thigh, giuing him another wound, although not great: hee could not escape, but that the Tina∣crian would giue him another knocke at his ease ouer the shield, & smote away a great part thereof: ye trenchant sword ighting vpon the Helmet, gaue him so terrible a blow, that he set him vpon his hands & knées vpō the ground: he would haue layd him all along, striking him vpon the shoulder: but the yong man stood firme, & laid hands on the son of Treba∣tius, who was not retchlesse, for yt is most dangerous in such
cases, but suddenly drue out that famous dagger, with which so many high enterprises were to be accomplished, and gaue him 2. stabs, far enough more dangerous thē the youth did imagine: for trusting to his armour (which indéed was good) he tooke no care to ward them, he thought he had bin woun∣ded to the death, & so in despaire (caused through his hurts) he set his left hand vpon his dagger hand, which he cros with his right, & with maine force wrested it out of his hand, and would haue strickē him therewith, and (without doubt) had killed him, if he had not takē hold of his wrest, which he held faster, then if it had bin tied with a Cable rope. Eufronisaes sonne did not let slip the occasion: for seeing the Gréeke bus∣ed, and his right arme at libertie, he wonderfully gat hold of his legs, & lifted him from ground, who séeking to saue him∣selfe, fel with his head first to ground, pulling ye youth down after him: one sought to get aduantage of another, and so tumbling ouer the field, til they both were al bloudy: but that auailing not, as light as two birds, they skipt to their wea∣pons. The youth was not so much vsed to thē, neither so rea∣dy, nor strong, by reasen of his age, as his wel growen kins∣man, who had the best sword & armour in the world. There was small aduantage to be gotten in this second battaile, for that they were both so well armed: but the time came when they were armed alike, & the youth cme to riper age, when he made him to sweate drops of bloud, recouering then, that which now he lost. But now it was impossible to match the Tinacrian, which in armes was so skilfull. But for all this he so plyed him, that hee made him to shift from this side to that, being galled with his woūds, & much more with the feare to lose the battel: but this was ye Tinacrians day, as he made it well appeare: for the young man entred with an excellent ward, which gaue great cōtentment to all men, saying, that if hee & his brother liued to come to perfect age, they would be the best men at armes in the world, as in déed they were. There was much sorow in al ye camp, especi∣ally the knight with ye stars grieued (who loued him dearly)
when he saw that hee with the Eagle breaking his ward, on a suddaine cut away a great part of his Helmet, and the sword slipt downe vpon his brest: he also cut away the skirt of his brest-plate, with more then halfe of his Taces, and made him to shake like one that were in great feare: but the paine (which was great) being past, with his sword in both hands hee returned, and before that the Gréeke could step from him, hee was likely to haue laid him all along. The blow was so furious, and it was so great, that it drue much bloud, and put him out of breath. Garrosileaes sonne well perceiued it, and holding the vic∣torie for certaine, crossing his sword aloft, hee bare by a weake blow, through want of bloud; and closing with him, he lifted him vp from ground, before hee could recouer his breath; and so in his Armes he sent him to the Knight with the Starres, his shield remaining with the Tinacrian. The two youthes were so well beloued in all the Pagans camp, that a man cannot imagine what sorrow there was made for the ouerthrow of Leobello, and chiefely Bembo, who loued himselfe; and he with the Starres wept bloud out at his eyes, in steade of teares. The gallant Claribel was so vexed, that he was besides himselfe: they began to disarme him, with such griefe to the King of Silepsia, and Eufronisa, as though that the one had knowne him for his nephew, and the other for her sonne. Then came Lupertius, who with his cunning stopped his bloud, saying, that it was nothing: wherewith they were appead all, sauing the Ladies, who gaue the Knight with the Eagle, a thousand curses. They were about to returne to the Campe, but it staied them to sée the braue Brufaldoro, who séeing the Princes busie about Leobello, leaped into the Listes, more furious then the raging Sea. The Tina∣crian was glad at the heart; for hee had many a day desired this battell, as hath béene before declared, about a Pagans wife: hee knew him by his Armes, which was, a halfe Moone in a blew field. The young man made haste, because
that Claribel should not challenge the fight, whose lot it was. In comming néere to the Moore, he said, Me thinketh by your Armes, Sir Knight, that you should bee the King of Mauritania, to sight with whome I haue much desired. The time is come (quoth the Moore) wherein we may end it, séeing thou hast so much desired it, but I would faine know with whome I should fight this battell. I will tell thée, said the couragious Tinacrian, vpon conditiō, that thou wilt sweare vnto me by the order of Knighthood, to kéepe it secrete, vntil my challenge be ended. I will doe so, said the Moore. Then thou shalt know (answered the young man) that I am hee, to whome at Sea thou gauest the order of Knighthood, and which brought thy wife from the hands of those fierce Gi∣ants: and I am glad that so old a challenge shall now bee ended, for I will not giue it ouer, vntill one of vs lie in the dust. Nothing could so well haue pleased the Pagan, who no lesse desired it then the Greeke. Without answering one word, he went to his place, while as the young man refre∣shed himselfe, praying to the god of his Father to graunt him victorie, against that furious Pagan, with a determi∣nation to forsake his Law and to bee baptized. With this new vow, hee returned, more couragious, then with any thing that the Nimphes had giuen him, which charged him to be verie circumspect: for it should bee behouefull in this battell, because it should be the last. They were all verie at∣tentiue, without mouing so much as their eye-lids, for feare, that in the meane space they should encounter, and they not sée them. There was neuer any Galley that went so swift with sayles and Oares, driuen by a fresh gale, as they flew one against another, ending their carriers, with farre greater noyse then the Sea maketh, when in a tempest it assaileth the firme rockes. On the shoares side they brake their Launces, as if they had béene little réedes. The one passing by the other without any mouing, they turned their horses, with their naked swords in their hands, giuing such blowes
as caused great feare, euen in those which were farthest off. They were expert in Armes, and therefore they made good shewe, with charging and retiring with such spéed, that thought could not ouertake them. The Gréeke had the ad∣uauntage, by reason of his rich Armour and weapons: for he neuer gaue blow but it was bloudy: and although that he saw not his bloud, he was so weakened with the blowes which he receiued, that it put him out of breath. The Knight entred, bearing his sword aloft, meaning to haue ouerborne him with a course: but the Pagan who in strength was e∣quall to Milo, drawing backe his sword to one side, gaue him two thrusts one after another, which séemed vnto the Gréeke as though he had broken all his ribs: He staied so long, by reason of his paine, that the furious African had meanes to strike him behind vpon the Helms; which al∣though that the hardnesse thereof gaue him life, yet it could not saue him from turning his head more to one side then he had would: he trusting in ye strength of his armes, would néeds close with him; but his presumption cost him deare: for ye valorous Tinacrian, who although almost choked with bloud, which ran out of his mouth downe his throte, had not therefore lost any part of his vnderstanding; but séeing him comming, he spurred his good horse Rubican so hard, yt he made him to run vpon the Moores horse: there was neuer séene a more fearfull shock in ye world; for whether ye Moore would or n, he fell, horse and man to the groūd, which gaue him a shrewd fall. The braue Rubican fll backwards, set∣ting his buttocks on ye ground, so brused with the encoūter, that hee could goe no farther forwards. The Gréeke leapt from him, very glad that he was on foote; for in that maner he would haue giuē the god Mars battell. The Painim was also glad, who was both light and valiāt, so as fortune gaue to them both that which they desired. They came one to∣wards another like Masters of fence: for the Painim bea∣ing his shield at his brest, and his sword aloft, made to∣wards the fierce young man, who came quite contrary; for
he bare all his bodye firme vpon his left foote: they came to crossing of their swords, each of them knowing the valour of his aduersarie. This ward lasted but a little while: for Tre∣batius his sonne changing footing, lifted vp his right arme, and suddainely with all his strength, strake him vpon the top of his Helmet with his rich sword, hee rapt away his Plumes, with part of his gilded Crest: and stepping backe, drawing his sword after him, he gaue him a thwart blow, which was the luckiest that hee gaue in all this battell: for hitting him below the skirt of his brest-plate, it strake a∣way aboue a hundred péeces of his shirt of Mayle, cutting his Taces, and therewith part of his thigh, he could not so safely doe it, but that the Mauritanian fastned a low vpon his most strong shield, and bare it to his head with such force, that it made him cast bloud out at his mouth and eares; he thought it had béene night, hee saw his Helmet so full of starres. The Pagan in these cases was not so carelesse, but that hee would giue him another before hee should recouer him∣selfe, and made him set his hands to the ground; hee would haue shouldred him, but hee found him as fixt as a rocke, and came so neere vnto him, that the Tinacrian could not strike him, but casting his Shield at his backe, hee tooke hold of him, which he did so suddainely▪ that hee had almost throwne him to the ground. The King of Mauritania recouered himselfe, and ta∣king good footing, they began so to wrestle, that Mars did enuie them: the one assailed to trippe vp the others heeles; they trample, they sweate, somtimes they gripe, and sometimes they locke legges, that it was wonderfull; all the companie did wonder, to sée the furious obstinacie of those two warriours. Somtimes wheeling about, they seemed as though they would haue falne to the ground, sometimes they graspled, so as they were cleane out of breath: it séemed vnto thē that
in this maner they spent much time, and so with a strong whéeling about, the one hurled the other away from him, with greater force thē if they had bin shot out of a Cannon. They both fel on their hāds, but it séemed, yt in touching the ground, they recouered new strength, by their furious run∣ning to their weapons, beginning the battaile anew, much more cruell then at the first. Vulcan his workman made no greater noyse, when they forged Achilles Armour, then did these two warriours, tormenting their flesh. Thrée houres did this second battaile endure, without any shew of wea∣rinesse, or any aduantage. The Tinacrian was in such a rage, to sée how that Knight did defend himselfe, and offend him, that hee hastened his blowes in such sort, as hee was dyed all ouer with bloud. The Moore was hurt in foure places, and the Tinacrian in two, both in the ioynts of his armour. They both agreed to rest them: for there was neuer any such battaile seene, that lasted so long, nor that was maintained with such generositie; the couragi∣ous Tinacrian walking vp and downe, saying, Truely, I know not how thou shouldst be called the sonne to such a fa∣ther, séeing that in his presence, and of thy mistresse, with so many brothers and kinsfolkes, one Moore hath brought thee into this estate. The braue Moore was no lesse gree∣ued at the long stay, who a thousand times renounced his gods. This did so much greeue them, that in all haste (as fierce as two Lyons, they ranne to their weapons. But in this battaile, the aduantage appeared in the Greek, where∣of all men were glad (I meane those which were of his faction) but Branorante was hee which most greeued at it: for séeing yt Brufaldro was once ouercome, it should be no disgrace for him to ouercome him also, and for the other lesse honour. He roared like a Bull, that he had not first challen∣ged the battaile: and had it not béene for the Emperour of the Romanes, and the Soldan of Niquea, which pacified him, he had, without doubt, lept into the Lifts, & challenged them both the battaile. But they perswaded him to defer it
vntill the battaile in the field, for that none of them but would be there. Floralisa preuailed much with him, whome the fierce Pagan adored, who made him to doe whatsoeuer shee would, concerning Brufaldoro, who now maintained not the battaile as at the beginning: for the yong man now ranged him at his commaund, and without doubt had ouer∣come him, if the sunne had not ended their dayes worke, which was the cause that the Iudges came betweene them, alleadging, that according to the lawes of the Greekes, they might no longer proceede in that battaile: which much greeued the Tinacrian, who would rather haue en∣ded that, then all the rest which remained, for that he had so much desired it. But for that hee would not giue any signe of ill behauiour, hee withdrew, and the Barbarian went out of the Lists on foote, vnable to get to his horse, he was so sorely wounded. Hee went vp into the Chariot a∣mongst the Ladyes, returning with them to the campe, and the Greeke Ladyes to the Citie, carrying with them matter enough, to talke of the valiancie of those two war∣riours, affirming that they had not their Péeres in the world. For this occasion stayed the messenger of Arbo∣linda, Princesse of Scotland, who burned in Loue fire for Florisarte of Argentaria, who comming vnto him, for hee had learned which was hee, and giuing him the letter, hee sayd that hee came from Artino his old Squire, who was newly come to the campe, desiring him that the next day hee might haue an answere. The constant Louer tooke the Letter, and withdrawing himselfe from the Squire, hee went to his lodging, and reading it, saw that it sayd thus: The Letter. THe forgotten Artimio, to the valorous Prince of Ar∣gentaria and Tharsis, greeting. I doe not write, soue∣raigne Knight, for that I am perswaded that absence
hath beene of power to make thee to change thy faith, as to call to thy memory, and to put thee in mind of the pro∣mise which thou diddest make to mee, to loue whome I would. Now is the time come to accomplish it: for the con∣tentment was so great which I receiued in thy companie, that I haue procured by all possible meanes, to requite thy fayth. Be reuiued, if thou wilt bee adored: and because thou mayst see to whom thou gauest thy fayth, if thou doest remember her picture, thou shalt see the substance, which shall bee the Lady clad in greene, cut vpon cloth of gold, hard by the Princesse of Rome: and thou shalt see, that her beautie deserueth constant affection. I desire no answere, vntill thou shalt see her whom thou hast loued, whom thou oughtest to loue, and by whome thou art beloued. The Gods keepe thee, and grant thee that rest which thou desirest. It is not possible to describe the ioy, which this ena∣moured young man conceiued of this ioyfull newes, that his Lady was in the Campe: hée was a thousand times in the mind, to goe the next day disguised, to fight with the Knight with the Eagle: but hee had gotten lit∣tle thereby; for the Tinacrian was too hard for him, who departed to his Lady, sufficiently ashamed, for that he could not ouercome the Pagan: but they with the loue which they bare, did comfort him; to whome after the day was shut in, the Nimphes▪ spake in this maner: Ualorous Prince of Tinacria, you may well acount your selfe for one of the most fortunate Knights of the world, hauing obtained such a father and brothers, which are held for the light thereof: and also for that the heauens haue preserued this Princesse to bée your wife, with the victo∣ries which you haue obtained in her seruice, which haue béene so many, as could not bee imagined in any other Knight but of you. The rest which remaineth, cannot bee
ended, because there is this day a most mightie Pagan come, who is King of Comagena, with a great armie, and hath besieged a citie of importance, called Hircambela, destroying all the marches thereof: and so the tuce being broken, there will bee no time to end your businesse: con∣tent you with that which is past, which hath béene so much, as will make them remember it so long as they liue. There is no more to be done, but to morrow to make your selfe known to your warlike father, who will be very glad of you: as for vs, we were commaunded by this soueraigne Ladyes aunt, that wee should accompanie her thus farre: and so shée hauing no more néede of our companie, wee will to morrow returne to her, attending the time wherein we shall meet again with great contentment. Present this tent vnto your Father, for no Prince in the world hath recei∣ued a better gift. The Armes which shée gaue vs for the last battaile with the Captaine of the Moores, wee will leaue to you: for séeing you shall often meete with him in sundrie battailes, we can with nothing pleasure you more▪ then with them. Some sorrow the thrée Princes shew∣ed, when they vnderstood that the Nimphs would be gone; but séeing that there was no remedie, they must haue pa∣tience. Then came his beloued nephew Rosabel, who euerie night came disguised to sée his Uncle, for there were no kinsmen in the world that more dearely loued, or that bet∣ter shewed it then they. They receiued him verie glad∣ly, and hee verie breefely told them the newes of the siege of Hyrcambela, and how that succour was sent thither, vnder the conduct & command of the Prince M∣ridian, and how angrie his Grandfather was therewith, determining to giue them the field battaile presently. The Moores were no lesse sorie thereat, especially the mightie Bembo, and because they should not thinke that it was done through his procurement, hée presently sent to excuse himselfe to the Gréekes, and to Poliphebus,
which was noted in him for great generositie: and so Rosa∣bel tooke his leaue, attending newes from Meridian, which is left for another Chapter. CHAP. XXVII. How the Prince Poliphebus made himselfe knowne to the Emperour his Father, and of the good reliefe which Meridian brought to the besieged, and of the rest which followed. THe golden Apollo had scarcely disco∣uered his golden lockes, which he had bathed in the Spanish Seas, when in foure parts of the great Citie of Con∣stantinople, they sounded the alarum, in signe that the warres were renew∣ed. The Pagans answered them with their accustomed instruments. All put themselues in a readines. The carefull Generall Oristoldo, angry and ashamed that the Moores had gotten the first on∣set vpon him, went plotting some stratage me, whereby hee might be reuenged of them, and found ut so good a one as shalbe declared, which was like to haue bene the totall de∣struction of the Moores. All men prepared themselues for the field battell, which should be about eyght dayes thence: for the Emperour was weary of this long warre. The most mighty sonne Poli∣phebus made no longer stay, but tooke his leaue of the Nimphes, with teares charging them to recommend him vnto the wise Ladie. Hee went foorth armed with the best Armour that was in the world, sending his Lent to the Gréeke Emperour his father, to whom he went betwéene the two Ladies, whose beauty dazeled the Sun, and made the most faire enuious. They were clad in lion colour,
cut vpon blew, and the cuts set with precious stones of sundrie colours: they agréed with the Prince, whose ar∣mour was of the same colour, set with so many stones, that they could not be beheld, they gaue such a reflection like the sunne. The Emperour vnderstood of their comming. Ro∣sabel and his father, with many Princes, came to receiue the Tinacrian, amazed at his beauty and constitution. Ioy∣ned with these Ladies, they came before his father, all thrée vpon their knees, desiring to kisse his imperiall hands: who, for that hee knew them not, would not suffer it, allea∣ging that it was a wrong to those which should doe it. Your Maiestie may suffer it, said his Nephew Rosabel, receiuing them for your Maiesties children. For the valiant Knight with the Eagle, is the famous Prince of Tinacria, & this Lady (poynting to the fayre Rosaluira) is his sister, together with this royall Princesse of Egypt, Luzela, whom the hea∣uens haue giuen to your déere sonne for his wife. The graue old Emperour wept for ioy, and embracing them he sayd, Now children of my loynes, my mind will bee at rest, hauing such a Prince in my companie as you are. The Ladyes presently tooke him away, chiefely the foure yong girles, who had so much fauoured him: with which, and the rest of the Princesses, as well hee as the two Ladyes▪ passed many things in making acquaintance. They kist the hands of the Empresse Briana, who entertayned them as her owne children. There was no time to stay long, for the Prince Meridian had sent word by other messen∣gers, of the great harme that the Moores had done in all the frontiers thereaout. This was anew to set all the Gréeke campe in an vprore. To the Tartarian Prince Zoylo, was committed the leading of the Apulians and Thessalians, with some part of the Frenchmen, for  arrer gard: (to the end yt if they met with the enemie, th should fight with them, if they should sée themselues in st to do it) there was neuer a famous Prince but went with Zoylo, euen to the Prince Poliphebus, al with close cask▪
Claridiano, & Archisilora, went by themselues, ouerthrow∣ing the enemies, as the wind doth leaues in Autumn. The furious Spaniard Thorisiano and his sonne, did no lesse on the other side, in companie with Don Heleno, his deare friend, & the faire Rosamundi, then the famous Tinacrian with his brother Rosacler, and his déere nephew: they were few in their hands: for they went thorow the armie from side to side, leauing some without heads, others thrust clean thorow, and those which now were at libertie (lately so gid∣die & amazed, yt they were ready to giue vp hte Ghost) came forth of the citie, with a desire to be reuenged. Great was the slaughter which they made, although that through the great multitude of enemies, they payed deare for their victory. For the cōming of such Princes, was the totall destruction of y• Moores, who had neuer a famous Prince amongst thē, but the braue Moore. A mā cannot imagine what a slaugh∣ter they made: for where Brandafidel, Bramidoro, and the gentle Tefereo went, there was no defence against their clubs, for they trode all vnder foot. The greatest part of the Pagans was slain, before that their succors came from the campe. In the auaunt gard came the flower of Chiualry, which were Bembo, Brauorante, Brufaldoro, & the young men, although y• Leobulo by reason of his hurts, was not to haue taken armes so soone. On the other side came the fiue of the wood, desirous to méete with the Gréeks, who being more ready, séeing thēselues reuenged, and so much to their honour, sounded a retreat, garding their backs with ye Citie wals, leauing the enemy with lesse then ye third part of their people. And the greatest euil was, that Poliphebus, desirous to make shew of himselfe, in company with his brother and Nephew, wan the Standard of Comagena, & the King com∣ming to the rescue, lost his life honorably, because it was by the hands of the Tinacrian. This king was cousin and great friend to Bramarante, and vncle to the furious Brauorante, who when he knew of his death, Gualtenor durst not tell how angry he was: for before that the Gréeks were wholly
withdrawn, he slew aboue a hundred of thē, & would not re∣turne to the campe without reuenge. The diuelish young man went so compassed with his enemies, that in despight of them hee went into the citie, where I would gladly sée thée (O Homer) to sing the acts which he there performed: he would not refuse to fight with a hundred, for hee sought with them all. He met with the Princes of Hungarie and Bohemia: it was nothing to strike them to the ground, con∣sidering what he pretended. He turned to Thorisiano, whō he left sencelesse at his horses héeles. And the braue Tarta∣rian, although he deserued it not, hee had neere bereaued of life; for casting bloud at his mouth and nostrils, he threwe him to ground. The strong Florisiano and the Prince of Croacia escaped not scotfrée, for he left them astonied. A proud attempt: six∣téene Princes he threw to the ground, in so ill plight, that it was doubted of their liues. He came to encounter the two famous Giants, Bramidoro, and Brandafidel: to which he had an eie euer since their méeting in the willow valley. He entred betwéene them, nothing weyghing their terrible clubbes: and they which were borne to be feared, nothing feared him: for whorling about their feareful weapons, they both together smote him so strongly, that they made him bow both his knées to the ground, and had taken him, but the terrible young man bestirring himselfe with his broad sword, strake Brandafidels club out of his hands, and came vpon him with another, which set him from him, faster then a good pace, which gaue him place to rise, and ouertake the furious Bramidoro. Hee had paid no lesse then his life, for the displeasure of this angrie young man: for hee made him to fall vpon his hands, and would haue closed to make a fi∣nall end of him, and had done it, had not the gentle Tifereo come, who with a fierce blow, hindred the purpose of the fierce Brauorante. But he paid that which he ought to Poli∣phebus: for with a thrust he wounded him verie sore in the middest of his brest; and if his sword had entred a little fur∣ther,
hee had nayled the one side to the other. Brandafidel came to the rescue, laying hand to his monstrous crooked Fawchion, wherewith he thought to haue defeated the Pa∣gan, and smote him athwart the Helme, and made him sée a thousand starres therein. The Prince of Fraunce, Clarin∣do, by chance came at one side of him, who was so eager, that he could not strike, although hee would faine, but was likely to haue met with his death: for the Pagan séeing him so néere him, yt hee could not strike him with his sword, gaue him so sound a knocke with the Hilts, that he aid him at his feete. Gualtenor saith, that had any of the other famous Princes entred with him, the Citie had béene in danger to haue béene surprised: he roared like a Bull at the stake, and was more wight then an Ounce: and thinking that hee should better execute his rage on foote, he forsooke his horse, and so iustled those which came mounted vpon great horses, as though hee had béene an Elephant: with two blowes hee strake downe the two brothers Spaniards, which were held for as valiant as most in the Campe: yet there were so many that desired to come to blowes with him, that ye place was neuer void, but rather they met him in the way, seeking reuenge. All this did but inflame his rage, had not the Gréeke Princes béene aduertised thereof, who desirous to kill him, came in all haste. The Dane came first vpon his Tirian, very cholericke, for yt he had ouerthrowne his Captaine, which brought his troupes out of Dacia, who entred pale with anger, and ran vpon him with his horse brest, but hee stirred him as much, as if he had met with a rocke. Then came the braue Clara∣mante, who had many times made him to feele what hee could doe with his Halbert, who leapt from his horse, to whome euerie one gaue place: hee stood somewhat aloofe, and whorling his weapon about his his head, smote him o∣uer the Helmet, and did more then Don Heleno his horse could doe, for he made him set his hands to ground: he secon∣ded it with another, which made him starke mad: for ma∣king
no reckoning of the third (although that he saw it com∣ming) hee ioyned with him, giuing him a suddaine blow with both his hands vpon the Helmet, and made him to set both his hands and knées to the ground: no man came to his rescue, for feare to offend him, thinking that he would make an end of the Pagan: but hee was become such a Basiliske, that if the whole Greeke Armie had beene there, hee would not haue refused the battell, against them all. The louer gaue him a thrust in the brest, and had not his armour béene so good, hee had nayled him thorow, and made him make two steps backwards. By this time had all the flowre of the Greekes compas∣sed him about: and the Tinacrian had so great a desire to trie himselfe against him, that hee leapt from his horse, with his Shield vpon his arme, desiring his brother to leaue that battell to him, wherein he should doe him pleasure. All mē desired to content him: for he was beloued of all. The Pa∣gan knew him well by his Eagle, and knowing that he had slaine his good Unkle, hee assailed him, bidding them both to prepare themselues: which Claramante would not doe by any meanes, but left the battell for his brother, who as hee came fresh and eager, before hee could turne about, had gi∣uen him two blowes, one after another: there was no en∣chantment against his weapons, nor force equall to his; for both his knees he made him set to the ground, and reached him another, no lesse then the former. The Pagan sawe that which hee neuer had seene: for the swordes point entring at a cracke in his brest-plate, as it found a little entrance, it cut the rest, till it set out the bloud: it was a great chance; and God preserued him, to the end he should bee his fiend, and the greatest in the world to this Prince: for falling in loue in Egypt, hee was a meane to put the Ladie into his hand, as shall bee declared in the fourth part of this Historie: and so winding himselfe to one side, the sword slipt out, leauing him wounded, although not much.
The braue Pagans bloud did fréeze in his belly, to sée it vpon the Grecians sword, and giuing a fierce crie, he assai∣led him; and but that his nimblenes did much helpe him, I beléeue, that hee had incurred great danger: for notwith∣standing all this, he hit him a blow vpon the rich shield, and made him runne stumbling forwards readie to fall. The Pagan (to his owne hurt) closed with him: for the Prince was as strong as hee, who letting goe his shield, set hand to his rich dagger. But the Moore had such confidence in his armour, that hee made no accompt thereof, and the young man remembring the vertue of that weapon, gaue him vpon the top of his shoulder, two sore wounds, one af∣ter another, which made much bloud to run out. The Moore was so highly angred, that with a push hee put him far from him: and séeing that it was meere madnesse to striue any longer, hauing no assistance, hee assailed the Knight Flami∣neo, who was mounted vpon a good▪ horse: hee pluckt him out of his Saddle, pulling him ouer those which were on horsebacke, and with a leape hee gat the Saddle, and rush∣ing through the thickest, aboue foure lost their liues, in the Pagans going forth. At the top of a hill all the whole armie staied, expecting him, hearing the noyse, but they were not able to come to helpe him: for from the turrets and Parrapets of the wals, they threw so many stones & Darts; that without manifest danger they could not come néere him, and the Pagan esca∣ped not without it: so as when he came to the Campe, he was as wearie, as furious: he would speake to no man, but rather méeting with Brufaldoro, not remembring their a∣greement, he set vpon him, roaring like a baited bull. The braue Mauritanian encountered, for hee neuer feared him, where they began one of the most fierce battels that euer was in the world: for they were two of the best Knights therein: but Bembo came to part them. Herein did the Pa∣gans blindnesse appeare, who not respecting him, turned a∣gainst him, saying, that they should all fight against him, for
his deare Uncles death could not be reuenged with lesse, then with the destruction of all the world. The great Cap∣taine would not lay hands on him, although hee had much angred him. All the whole Campe could not haue made him giue ouer the battell, had not Floralisa come, whom the Pagan euer since he met her in Mauritania, had chosen for his God: for hee was of opinion, that there was nothing in the world worthy to be regarded, but her beautie. Well did the Lady know how dearely the Moore did loue her, al∣though it were single loue, for she was otherwise prouided, although she liued the most sorrowfull life of the world, sée∣ing her hope to marry with the Tinacrian frustrate: yet to appease the battell, she tooke off her Helmet, and putting herselfe betweene them, she sayd, Giue roome, Knights, for this battell cannot now be ended, and you wrong the Soul∣dan of Niquea his whole campe, if in time of necessitie any of your Armes should be missing. The Pagan lifted his sword no more vp, after he heard his mistris voyce. Strange power of affection: for what so many Princes could not doe, was ended with her sight one∣ly. I would haue bene very glad, valorous Lady, (said the Mauritanian) if you would haue suffred mee to haue ended it: but seeing it is your pleasure, I leaue it in your hands. Let it rest (sayd the Ladie) vntill the field battell be ended. Let it be as you will appoint it (sayd he, now very gentle) which before seemed to be a Lion; for from henceforth in a∣ny part I will not breake it: and so they returned to their campe, and although against his will, yet she made him to sup in the Ladies Tent, where (although fained) she shewed him a thousand fauours: they were meanes to withhold him from his fury, for he had determined to pursue them al, to be reuenged of the death of his Uncle. There was great sorrowe for the losse of that day; and meaning to make amends in the field battell, they con∣cluded that it should be eight daies after. What happened in the meane season, you shall knowe by the next Chapter.
CHAP. XXVIII. How the Greekes with victorie returned to the Citie, where they made preparation for the field, and how the two youthes were made knowne to their mother. WIth such contentment as winners vse to enioy, most excellent Prince, the Greekes remained in the Citie of Hir∣cambela, wondring at the furie of that Pagan, holding it for a matter incredi∣ble, if with their eyes they had not séene it, and so much to the cost of such perso∣nages, as they were. There was none of the Princes but desired alone to fight with him, especially Poliphebus, of whome the old King of Macedonia (returning to Constantinople) repor∣ted wonders; all were glad thereof, especially his Father, who loued him in the same degree, as he did the Emperour Alphebus. By the Ladies which boldly might doe it, those knights were disarmed, some helping one with their hands, and with their eyes and soule, another. What passed in the Campe was discouered, and how that from thence, eight dayes, they had appointed the field battell: because that by that time, Leobello would be cured of his hurts: Lupertius cured him verie carefully, that all might sée how much hee loued them. One night the discréete Selia came by chance, who had folded them in their swadling cloathes at the time of their birth, being much affected to their valour, without any
knowledge of them, by reason of Eufronisa, who was in the same Tent, shee went to see how hee did of his hurts. Shee came as Lupertius was dressing of him, and as wo∣men are verie bold, and being by night, for that shée would seeme to doe him some fauour therein, shee tooke the can∣dle, to giue him light to dresse him: but hee had scarcely lif∣ted v his shirt to see the wounds in his brest (for those were the most cruell,) shee was so much troubled, that shée was readie to let the candle fall out of her hand, and see∣ing the picture of a Ladies face in the young mans brest, and remembring that that marke was vpon one of the chil∣dren borne by the Princesse Eufronisa, and shee imagining that (without doubt) this was one of them, with verie ioy shée was ouercome. Shee desired to stay with him, to the end to know more of this matter: fortune was her friend, desiring to doe that Princesse some new fauour; and there being no fit companie to stay with the Prince, if hee would haue a∣nie thing, shee offered her selfe to stay for that purpose: which the young man much esteemed, and more would haue done, if hee had knowne the occasion thereof: And see∣ing her selfe alone with him, shee came to his beddes side, saying, I would, valorous Knight, that you could impart your paine to her, who feeleth the same as much as your selfe. Your visiting me, faire Damsell, answered the yong man, is a sufficient ease for all that I feele, being from my La∣die the Princesse Eufronisa: which in conclusion, doth that which is annexed to her valour, which is, to remember them which are in need, as I am. And to remedie it with losse of her owne contentment, (answered the Damsell) I doe beleeue, that shee gladly would doe it. And for my part, I should take it for much fa∣uour, to know what marke that is vpon your brest, which I saw when you were a dressing.
I know not the cause thereof, answered the young man, but that I was borne with this face, and my brother Clari∣bel with an heart crossed, and hitherto we knew no other, but that we were the sonnes of the discreet Sergio, for hee brought vs vp: but within these two dayes, hee hath put vs out of doubt, telling vs that we be not his children, but that in Silepsia, néere vnto the Citie of Golbergt, he found vs newly borne, and his mother brought vs vp in stead of her owne children: wherein, as I say, we haue continued vntill now, that hee hath otherwise assured vs. The pleasure which this Damsell conceiued was such, that shée presently taking her leaue of him, went into her Ladies Chamber, and without speaking one word, shee imbraced her. The Princesse maruailing at the newes, asked her the cause thereof, which should not be little. So great (answered the the Damsell) is the good, which the heauens (deare Ladie) this day haue done you, that you may liue merrie and con∣tented all the dayes of your life: for know, that the two fa∣mous youthes are your two lost sonnes. The Princesse could giue no answere, shée was so surprised with suddaine ioy, which was then the grea∣test that could happen vnto her. Ah, my Selia, I can∣not beléeue that so great a good as this, can happen vnto so vnluckie a woman, no way deseruing it; and there∣fore it cannot be possibly. Without doubt it is as I tel you, for I haue seene the verie markes wherewith they were borne, and that which Cleobulo hath, I saw this night, when hee was a dressing: and then shée told her what had passed betwéene the Prince and her, whereof the Princesse was not able to containe the pleasure: and being vnable to make an end of renewing her delight, she said, It behooueth me to see it, to the end to make me liue cōtented. That shal be an easie matter to doe, answered the Damsell: for now euerie body being at rest, I wil leade you thither, without discouerie: but why will you not beléeue that I haue told
you of him? She presently came forth with her: for the hope to sée him, did encourage her in such sort, that she would ad∣uenture to come to the Princes lodging: to whome at her comming she said, My Damsell, Sir Knight, hath told me so many and so rare things of you and your brother, (that being somewhat hard of beléefe, although it may be noted for lightnesse) that I in exchange to see it, haue put my selfe in danger to be noted. It is to me, Soueraigne Princesse, a great fauour that which you doe, and the cause being ma∣nifest, bringeth therewith the defence: as for the rest, seeing it is your pleasure, there is no more to be done, but to sée it with your eies: and so putting his shirt a little by, he shew∣ed that faire face. The Princesse had so imprinted it in her heart, that shee presently knew it. She had almost discouered her selfe: but considering what might ensue thereof, and to publish her contentment, shee tooke her leaue of him, the most ioyfull of any woman in the world. Well did shee deserue it, hauing recouered two such sonnes as shee had, being in all so ac∣complished. Shee was now of opinion, that fortune could doe her no greater pleasure, then that which shee had recey∣ued with the sight of her two sonnes. They withdrew them to their lodging, with determina∣tion neuer to marry, seeing she had two such children; ney∣ther to make them knowne to the Greeke their father, for feare that they would stay with him in Greece. Heere∣with they passed the seuen dayes which remayned: shee in one campe, and be in another; vntill that that wished day did come, wherein should be the generall death of him, or of his enemies. It seemed that Apollo this day hastened his course, to the end that there should want no time for this bloudie warre: he appeared of a bloudie colour, and Mars with his armed Trident appeared low, wherewith he touched Vul∣cans Shield. There was neither Faune, Satyre, nor god in the woods, which came not to the top of ye Mountaines to
sée the battell. In the Campe, before the Captaine Bemboes Tent, was pitcht vp a blacke standard, the sides being of co∣lours: a signe that the warres should be made with fire and sword, and bloud, and that he should die for it, which tooke a prisoner: he drue forth his Infanterie, which was innume∣rable, making thereof his maine battell, lyning it with the fierce Parthians, which were aboue a hundred thousand men al Archers, with their bowes and quiuers, wherewith they did notable harme: for being on horsebacke, before they came to charge their Launces, they wrought great hurt in the head of the Cauallerie, which were diuided into twelue mightie squadrons. Foorth came those two mightie Prin∣ces, the Soldan of Niquea, and the Emperour of the Ro∣manes, whose persons compassed with huge Giants, were garded with no lesse care, then Achilles was with the Mir∣midons. With the rest of the people he made 2. Battaliōs: one of which he tooke for himself, leading them to the right hand. At one side of him, went those two braue competitors Brauorante, and Brufaldoro, with the most principal troups of Achaia. In the Arrere gard, with ye Africanes came those thrée mightie young men, he with the starres, Claribel, and Leobello, whose comly personages were pleasing to al. The Duke Ferrer bare the Standard royall, with all the fierce Almaines, hauing twentie foure Giants for his gard. On the other side went the mightie Soldan of Egypt, bearing downe towards the valley of willowes: in whose compa∣nie went the fiue of the faire wood, with the flowre of Giant land, which séemed as high as Pine-trées. The King of Fe∣nicia, and the mightie Assyrian, had in charge the gard of the Campe: the charge of battering the Citie, with all the Chariots with Sithes, and the strong Castles vpon the mightie Elephants, wherewith they thought it an easie matter to batter it, with all the Rams and engines, which seemed to bee greater then the Citie of Constantinople, was committed to the King of England, with part of the Frenchmen, & a brother of the Duke of Thebes, who was
no lesse fit for it, then his brother for the campe: who tooke good order for the gard of the Citie, putting all the Ladies into Mars his Castle, making thereo faire weather. Those which could send fauours to their allanis, did it with a good will, praying to God to giue them victory. They ex∣pected the comming of Trebatius his power (which séemed no lesse then the Moores:) the Captaine generall commit∣ted to the Emperour of Trapisonda Alphebus, the leading of one poynt of the horsemen: who with his beloued Em∣presse, and the braue Oristides and his wife, with the Giants of the Ilands Baleares, which were aboue 2000. tooke downe into the valley, ouer against the Souldan of Egypt. The other point he recommended to the mighty Trebatius, whose company was no lesse in shew, thē that which Hec∣tor had: he went betwéene Poliphebus and Rosacler, with his Nephew, the valorous Rosabel, Bramidoro and Bran∣dafidel, with the gentle Tifereo and the sonnes of Tituan, tooke charge of his person: the Battalions in the middest he deuided, as best fitted: hee reserued the auaunt gard for himselfe: by him went the flower of Chiualry, Claridiano, and Claramante, with all the Spanyards, Lirians, and Antiochians: although that one halfe of the Spanyards, with part of the Hungarians and Albanois, he had made passe by 2. and 2. & 4. and 4. to the number of 60000. to∣wards the campe, and yt lodging themselues among those crags and bushes, they should there make a stand, vntill yt he should come to giue assault to the campe: it was the grea∣test stratageme yt euer Captaine deuised, as shall appeare. In the rere gard came ye braue Torismūdo, & his son, with ye Princes of Fraunce & Bohemia. On the right wing, with all those of Dacia, went ye mightie Heleno, with his belo∣ued Rosamundi, armed in their rich armour: 24. Knights of his chamber had charge of his Ladie. The great Tartarian Zoilo, & the prince Meridian were left with a maine troup for supplies, with many spare horses for those which should be lost. The Roiall stādard was borne by ye Theban Duke.
Floristano and Polidolpho, with the good king Sacridoro, and the valiant Lisart of Argentaria were reserued, for that the Captaine had sent them to commaund the Ambuscado, committing to their discretion and valour, a matter of so great importance. Three times in all the Castles of the Citie, the alarme was giuen, aduice being giuen to the fa∣mous Astrutio, that then hee should giue the onset vpon his enemies, all the troops being ranged in good order, and in a readinesse to charge. The mightie Aristoldo, armed that day in the most rich armour that he had, with a faire colou∣red scarfe, which his mother had sent him, in the head of the troopes, his Beauer being put vp, with the but end of his Launce stucke in the ground, spake in this maner: The Oration. THis is the day (most excellent Princes) wherein the heauens and fortune will, that wee shew that valour which it hath giuen vs. In this action it shall be good to die, seeing that herein is purchased eternall fame. It resteth in our armes to be conquerours, fighting with cou∣rage and discretion. Otherwise in losing our liues, wee lose our fame likewise. Our enemies are in sight, and to those, whom it so much behooueth to doe well, it shall not neede to vse many words, but that euery one consider how much this busines concerneth him; and that in ouercomming, he shall purchase the fame and credite of valiant. As he had sayd these words, he cast his Generals Trun∣chion to the ground, and pulling downe his Beuer, hee put himselfe among his louing friends, expecting when the braue Captaine Bembo should doe the like: who before his people, with a couragious mind vsed these words: Oration. I Would, mightie Princes, and valorous Knights, that the gods would beare witnesse, and at this instant make ma∣nifest,
with what desire I goe vnto this battell, to die for a∣ny of you, making our enemies know what equitie, Armes, and hearts we haue. It shal be an easie matter to ouercome, hauing this aduantage, and being three times as many, here∣in is no more to be said, but to be readie to be commanded, and that euerie one obserue the order wherein hee is set: for this maketh men atchiue noble enterprises. And seeing that you all may be Captaines, to day you ought to bee Souldi∣ers, for that, and the courage of our hearts, will giue vs the victorie: for I, in the Office wherein I am employed, doe meane to die for your seruice. Hee likewise threw downe his golden Trunchion, and commaunded presently thrée Clarions to bee sounded, a cer∣taine token that they should presently giue the charge. Hee imbraced the two competitors, a custome vsed in his coun∣trie, and worthie to bee noted; for he (say they which haue skill therein) which entreth into the battell, goeth to con∣tend with death. He turned about to sée whether they kept their first order, and was verie ioyful to sée such Cauallerie: and as they began to ioyne, it was worthie of a new booke, much more of a new Chapter. CHAP. XXIX. How the field battell began, and of the perilous combats and famous actes which therein succeeded. THe time is come, worthie Dames, & war∣like Princes, if euer there were single combats & louers cases in the world, here∣in they shall be séene, at life, but with your fauour, for without it, there is no passage to bee giuen to my slow pen, to lay colours on such a péece of painting, as is this,
wherein an excellent wit and loftie stile is very requisite. A sight worthie to bee séene, although it made some afraid, but to the rest it yéelded new courage, to sée so many faire en∣signes flying in the aire, so many Cornets wauing, so much Armor glittering, such neighing of horses striking one at an∣other, such thundring of Ordinance, so many instruments of warre, such crying of Souldiours, such encouraging of Captaines, fixing their eyes on the palme of the victorie, which turned the most cowardly Souldier, to a fierce Lion, the noyse of the Charriots, and the snorting of the Ele∣phants: hauing séene this, who would not haue thought, but that the last day had béene come? The infantrie of either side extended it selfe at large; whose Pike heads did so shine, as they dazelled the Sunne. The most Christian Emperour full of water, lifted vp his eyes to heauen, saying, Séeing this is thine (O Lord, be∣hold thy people.) Both together in the points met these two angry Captaines, charging the first battels, that it séemed that the earth was not onely oppressed in it selfe: but that the highest heauens were vnhung. In the Auaunt-gard of these battels, came the flowre of both armies: for with the Generall Bembo, were ioyned the two competitors, which aduanced themselues forwards. And on our side, the migh∣tie Generall, and Claramante, with the vnknowne Gréeke, which came to ioyne with greater force, then can be ima∣gined. Oristoldo lost his stirrops, but hauing so good a horse, he past furiously along; the like did the foure which remai∣ned: they returned the one against the other with as great courage, as possibly could be imagined. Bembo desirous to strike Claridiano, came so néere, that he could not strike him, and so came to handie gripes: the Greeke knew the Pagans strength, and leauing his stirrops, he suffered himselfe to be carried away: but in plucking him from his Saddle, he took so strong hold, that he pluckt him out of his, before that hee was able to quit his stirrops; which if the Gréek had know∣en, he would haue trailed him from his horse. It was a luc∣kie chance for Archisiloraes Louer: for as he was stronger
then ye Moore, so he set him vp against his horse, and with his dagger was like to haue slain him, for he hurt him, although not dangerously. The yong man was almost lost; for the Gi∣ants séeing the Pagan in ye ground, charged with their squa∣dron, & had troden him vnder foot, had he not bin closed with Bembo: but this & the approach of ye battels gaue thē place to take horse, beginning betwéene them anew so furious a battel, as if they had bin alone within the Lists. It lasted not long, for the flouds of friēde & enemies parted them, being mixed among the troupes: where, oh who is able to expresse what blowes were giuen aboue 30000. lost their saddles, & some presently their liues; for they were either troden vn∣der the horse féete, or smoothered with extreme heate, who had seene ye gallant Claramante with his shield at his backe, charge ye enemie with his Battel-axe, & at large to let driue at those Giants, which as they were huge & so many, he ne∣uer mist blow, & at euery blow felled one to the groūd, stop∣ping the passage against the horsemen: his friends held him so good companie, yt it gaue great pleasure to behold thē: for Claridiano, carefull of his Lady, suffered her not to strike a blow, although she wel made shew of the valor of her persō. The warlike Lady charged in so far among ye Giants, that before she was aware, hauing hot her horse, they had her a∣foote: her Louer repaired to the noyse, & séeing the Queene a ground, I cannot tel, whether a man should relate what the Gréeke did. For 4. Giants being alighted to help their Cap∣taine, which was at handy gripes with the Lady, he laid thē on the ground at 4. blowes, and came where ye Giant was, armed with plankes of stéele, & his Helme. He let her go, sée∣ing ye Gréeke cōming, & prepared for his defence, but it was too late: for before he could turne, with ye furie which did pre∣dominate in him, hee smote him with both handes vpon the head, & rasht away a great piece therof, & of his thick helmet: hee seconded another together with Archisilora; shee with a thrust pearced him thorow, & he, before hee fel, had cleft his head, so as the best & fairest hands in the world wrought his death. Many did enuie ye Giant for his death in such maner.
Oristoldo and Claramante would not bee out of the way, when they should assist them. The thrée famous Pagans turned backwards hearing the noyse, and those which were a foote, were like to bee in danger by their comming, for in the Generals gard, they had done much harme. It was strange to sée Bembo with his sword died in bloud. The fu∣rious Brauorante bare that day a great Mace of stéele; be∣ing stung with the death of his Uncle, hee sufficiently reuen∣ged it, for hée gaue many for one: at his comming hee met with those of the Generals Chamber, and flue thrée of them at two blowes, and charging the Giants which had the gard of his person, being nothing afraid to sée himselfe alone amongst them, he began to stirre in such maner, that if Cla∣ramante had not come (hauing first mounted those two prin∣ces) hee had made an end of them: but knowing him, they gaue place, whose battell is not to bee forgotten: for the one with his Axe, and the other with his Mace, at euerie blowe made the bloud to gush out at their Uisors. It was good hap for a great many, and as a man might say, ordained by the heauens: for at one blow with his terrible Axe, hitting close by his hand, hee smote in two péeces his Mace of steele, and it was maruaile that he had not done the like by his armes. O who had then séene the angrie Moore, more furious then a Basiliske! hee was nothing amazed, neither did hee strike sayle to furie, but rather drew out a sharpe skeane, wherewith hee would haue smitten the Gréeke: but it was too late, for he had alreadie the edge of his Axe vpon his Helme: here he saw that which he neuer thought of his wea∣pons; for hitting him athwart the Creast, he smote it cleane away, & a great part of his stéele Cap. Forwards went the louer, glad to see the Standard to march forwards, getting ground. The infidell Bembo perceiued it, and with great furie would haue set vpon him which bare it, which was the good Duke of Thebes: had not his hands béene as good as his iudgement, according to ye force wherwith he pluckt
it, he had ne're caried it. Brufaldoro followed the chase. The old man was in great danger; but his 3. sōnes which were ye flowre of the Gréeks, defended their father as wel as they did the standard. Oristoldo and Claridiano wel saw ye hurly burly: but the Giants did so much trouble them, that they could not passe: but séeing what was lost in the Standard, notwithstanding he had a good gard, throwing downe those which stood in his way, the furious Claridiano cae, and met with Brufaldoro, and taking him at vnwares, it was a maruell that he had not killed him: for in passing by, he gaue him a mighty thrust in one of his sides, which finding entrance in the iointing, came forth againe all died in bloud. The yong man passed by so swift, that hee could not strike him: but others of lesse worth which remained behind, paid for displeasing him. Bembo would that all the whole army should charge: for ye being by halfe more then the Gréekes, being mixt al together, they might the better one helpe ano∣ther. The horne was thrise winded, which was a warning to giue the charge. The braue Oristoldo well vnderstood it; & retiring with his company, then which, a better was not in the world, he said vnto them, The time is now come, va∣lorous Princes, wherein your valour wil appeare, for Bem∣bo hath giuen signe for the generall charge: and because he shall not thinke that we are carelesse, it shall be good to get the hand of them, which he did: for he presently winded his, so lowd, that all the valleys rang thereof. The Ladies in Mars his Castle knew it, and the Gréekes were in such rea∣dines, yt as he left, they marched as swift as the fresh wind. A sorrowfull day for a great many: for there they met with their deaths in a thousand maners. The earth shrnk, it was so oppressed. The Sunne hid his beames, because he would not sée so many deaths. The noyse wherewith the battels ioyned, was so terrible, that rebounding vp to the skies, it made there also a great slaugh∣ter: for the flying soules wanting ayre to maintayne their flight, came dead to ground. The 2. Nauies at sea, although
they had already ioyned, heard the noise which was at land. In came the mighty Trebatius, accōpanied with his sons, so furious, that he séemed like death it selfe; they did so well gard him, that he neuer receyued blow. The famous Tina∣crian was the best armed and mounted of any man in the world; and so earnest, that sometimes his kinsmen could not follow him, notwithstanding that they wrought mira∣cles. But the Pagans were so many, that although that they, where they went, had the aduantage; yet the Moores had it in the rest of the campe, fighting sometimes foure a∣gainst one, and sometimes at more ease. On that side where the Souldan of Egypt was, there the Gréekes had the better; because on that side happened to fight the inuin∣cible Alphebus, with the no lesse furious then redoubted Knight Oristides, who séemed no other, then as Hercules among the Giants in the plaines of Egypt: or as Samson among the Philistims. Lirgandeo reporteth, that before yt hee had euer drawne his sword, hee had felled ten Giants: those with that in his hand he sought, and not the weake simple Knights. They made a broad stréet for him: but Don Celindo taketh him in hand, with his sister & friends: he rushed in among them, & vpon a sudden seized vpon Tho∣risiano: he made him lose his reynes, and almost his saddle, and therewith his life, had not Don Argante come at one side, who with his rich sword (when as this braue Empe∣rour would haue seconded his blowe, & there with haue stin∣ted the strife) entred with a strong thrust, which he made at him, hitting him in the brest, shrinking vp his sword arme with the paine, and so he could not strike the yong man, but turned against the Fenician more fierce then a Leopard, & smote his plumes from his head; & had he borne his hand a little lower, he had endangered him: he returned a thrust at ye Assyrian, who séeing what ye knight did, which knew him not (for he would neuer enter into any battell, but as a pri∣uate soldier) had aduaūced himselfe forwards with a desire to strike him: he hit him in the middest of the brest, and vn∣able
to pierce it for the goodnesse of the mettall, hee pushed him so farre backe, that hee tumbled him out of his saddle. There was neuer a better blowe giuen in all the battell. Claridiana was glad to sée it, who had taken Floralisa to taske. Their battell was apart: for the high heauens in va∣lour, although not in beautie, had made them equals. No man came to their ayd, séeing their equalitie in fight. But Don Celindo, who was of greater force then the Troiane, sorry for his friends blowe, parted from him, and assayled the Trapisondā Lord. He was neuer weary with fighting, for therewith he was refreshed: he let him enter, and with all his might, stepping aside, as he was more nimble & vali∣ant, seizing vpon him with his armes, he pluckt him out of his saddle: and but for feare to bee ouerborne by the beasts which the Giants rode on, he had kild him: hee let him goe, spurning him with his feete: but he was presently remoū∣ted. The Souldan of Egypt was extreamely sorry, to sée that of his side they had the worst of the battell, and there∣fore he fought not, but did more in giuing directions: for by turnes he brought new succours where they were ready to fly. Those in the middest charged with all possible force. Rosabel his sonnes, and the vnknowne young man with ye starres, had descēded more lower into the valley. They sée∣med like the bright Sun beames, amidst the black clowds, and amazed all the army, to see how they plaid the deuils. They resembled Auteus in strength, and Cesar in fighting. They left not a Knight wounded; for they strake them all starke dead. The orchard kéepers beat not downe fruite so fast with their long poles, as they did the Gréekes with their sharpe swords. No man durst abide them: and so climing vp a little hils side, and séeing that in all the rest of the battell, their friends as fast as they could goe, did get ground (& although yt they saw them fall by heaps, yet they were so many, that there was no man mist) leauing ye stādard in his hands, who well knew how to defend it, they came downe ye hils side.
The two brothers wore seuerall coloured Scarfes, which their mother had giuen them, although not by that name, but as their country woman: they were séene by both armies. Hee which went to méete them, was no lesse then the fierce Don Heleno, with his beloued Ladie, who was knowne to haue the aduantage of all men, with those cruell Armes, which sometime did belong to Semiramis: on his left side went that valiant Spaniard Thorismundo, to whose trust might be committed any charge, although not this: for without doubt, Claribel was more valiant, who fel to his lot, who (as this was the first battell that hee had séene) so would he therein purchase fame. Hee suffered the Spaniard to enter vpon a faire horse, of the race of Cordu∣ba, in whome he did put too much trust & to his valor, giuing the young man a great blow, who was nothing mooued therewith, and preparing a second, hee entred, striking him vpon the rich Helmet, which then gaue him his life: but for all that, it set him vpon his Saddle bow, casting bloud out at his Uisor, and with another, hee would haue ended the warre, and had done it, had not his sonne come running, who séeing his father in such case, drawing force out of feare, with both his hands tooke reuenge: it was enough to make him to lose his ow, for thereby hee recouered his Fathers life, who with the helpe of his sonne, set vpon the young youth, who was glad thereof, the better to make them to know the strength of his arme, which tired him more then they knew for. This was nothing to the battell betwéene Don Hele∣no, and Rosamundi, with his brother and the Knight with the starres. Shée reposed great trust (as there was reason) in her rich weapons, and for that cause, shée ioyned euerie foote with the youth, cutting both his armour and his flesh: he went more enraged then a chafed Bull, to see himselfe so hurt: for before that hee could cleare himselfe from this La∣dies hands, he had receiued foure wounds, which were the first that he had receiued in all that battell. The Ladie was
no lesse tyred and endangered, then if she had bene cruelly wounded: for in parting from him, and at the arriuall of troupes of either side, shee was constreyned to put vp her Beuer to take breath. Don Heleno came to her, intreating her to goe forth of the battell. Doe not desire it, my belo∣ued Heleno, answered the Matrone: for what pleasure can she which loueth you, haue in rest, without your presence? and to bee perswaded to this, were a notabid iniurie: for yet my mind doth serue me to conquere another, Don He∣leno: and therewith she pulled downe her Beuer; and cal∣ling for a Launce to them which had the charge to giue thē, shee turned to her husband, saying, Now see what it is to haue you by my side. It seemeth that fortune had brought into her presence, the King of the profound Iland, in pro∣portion like to a strong Pine trée: hee had a crowne vpon his head, and aboue a thousand Giants in his company. The Dame meant to charge him, passing through those Gi∣ants: and sure, there was neuer any better encounter giuen with a Launce: for hitting him in the middle of the shield, she sowed it fast to his brest, striking a fadome of the launce thorow the other side. Her Knights did much reioyce there∣at, holding themselues for happie, to serue such a Ladie. He which most reioyced, was the Dacian; and to be equal with her, with a new Launce aboue hand, hee bereaued a Giant of his life, whereat the Ladie was very glad. Now was he with the starres parted from the Spany∣ards, both the one and the other entring among the thickest of their enemies: the which (I meane the Pagans) with their great number, with their ensignes displayd, draue vp the hill all ye Greeke Cauallery to that part where the braue Trebatius was; who séeing the ill successe of the battell, with new griefe recommended it to God. It seemed that his force was two fold increased: for lifting vp his voice, saying, Goe to, my sonnes, this is the most fortunate day for those which shall die, séeing we shall doe it in defence of our coū∣trey: and if death must come, let vs sell them our liues as
deare as we can. O, who had séene Poliphebus his eies full of water with his fathers speaches! for all the armie sée∣med little vnto him: he gaue not one blow, but that there∣with he threw downe a Knight. He saw the gentle Epirabio, who to him seemed to be a man of account, although he had before ouercome him, and made to him, and giuing him a fierce blow, laying hands vpon him, hee pluckt him from his horse, and for all that his gard could doe, hee tooke him, giuing good direction for the carrying of him to the Citie. There came into that quarter 2. famous warriours, doing many faire exploits vpō the Gréeks, which were the Prin∣ces of Niquea, and of Calidonia. The Tinacrian rushed in betwéene them, giuing them so much to doe, that he made them both past remembrance. He closed with Astorildo, & trusting to his Rubican, he ouerbare him to the grūd with his horse brest: he would haue kild him, for he meant to leap vpon him, if the signe agréed vpon with Astorildo had not letted him, to the end that they should repaire to the campe: who winded his horne so lowd, that it resounded, making both armies afraid, sauing those two, the Uncle and Ne∣phew, Poliphebus and Rosabel; who séeing that their people had somewhat the better, asking their fathers blessing, de∣parted when ye Generall sounded. In their passage they o∣uerthrew the flowre of ye Moores: for the furious Rubican meeteth with no body, but he treadeth them vnder his féete. The valiāt Nephew Rosabel vpō his courser doth no lesse: for with his horses brest, & with the strength of his arme he leaueth no man aliue. They were beheld by all the campe, & knowne to some, who although they followed the chase, it was to their owne hurt: for these 2. went, resolued to passe any aduenture, were it neuer so difficill. Rosabel saw cer∣taine Gréeke Knights, at whose féete were 2. Knights at ye point either to die, or bee taken prisoners: for there follow∣ed thē, the 2. Spanish brothers, and ye Princes of Bohemia and Hungarie: each of which had 24. Knights in his gard: whose betters were not in the army. Lirianaes louer knew
them both, which were no lesse then his Ladies father & her brother. His bloud fréezed in his body to see thē: for he pre∣sently imagined how sory Liriana would be for any hurt that might happen vnto them. The Uncle & Nephew furiously entred, and the troupe knowing thē, gaue place, thinking yt they had come to ye same purpose that they were. The yong man being somewhat doubtfull of his father in law, leapt into the middest of ye prease, and in oing thitherwards, the Soulan thinking yt he would trike him, as he was a man of high courage, he gaue him a strong blow. Trebatius his nephew skipt aside, letting ye blow passe, & then closing with him, hee tooke him in his armes, saying, Soft, Soueraigne Souldan, I know no cause why you should so shew your selfe towards your daughter & me, and therefore you shall see how much you are in the wrong, séeing I could in despite of all mine enemies kill you, or take you prisoner: but I will not, but performe ye dutie of a sonne, & so will doe euer: and so giuing a leape with him, hee set him vpon a mighty horse of one of the Gréeks. And to do his kinsmā a pleasure, Poliphebus had done the like by Lindoriano: and so without speaking one word more, or attending any answere, they kept on their way: for vpon a little hill they saw the Gene∣rall. The father & son were so amazed with the gētle acts of the Gréeke (both which they knew, the one by his deuice of the Eagle, & the other by his voice) yt they knew not what to say. Who can frō hēceforth, my beloued son, beare armes (quoth the Souldan) against those which haue giuen vs our liues & liberties? I haue heretofore told your Maiesty (quoth the sonne) that ye gods doe take especiall care for the Gréeke Empire: & séeing we are now in ye field, we may not returne againe without some honorable agréement: otherwise, we shall remaine with perpetuall infamie. They had no lōger time to discourse: for certaine Gréeks cōming thither, for∣ced thē to withdraw them to their squadron. A new band of courtesie, if ye passion had not blinded them altogether. Great cryings were heard that way which the 2. warriors
went, which was, that the King of Giant land, with aboue 200. Giants, had taken their passage, where it is incredible what they did: for giuing head to the best horses in ye world, with their shields at their backes, and their swords in both handes, they did wonders; they were euen together: for they were equall in valour, doing things although lawful, yet pittyfull: for rushing in betwéene those Giants, they smote thē downe as if they had bin ordinary horsemen▪ but they were so many and so strong, that it behooued them to doe more then they did. The inuincible Alphebus with his valorous company came to their aid; who knowing them for his friends and néere kinsmen, kept such a stir, that in despite of them they made way to follow on their iourney, leauing aboue 40. of those Pine trees stretched all along vpon the ground. The mighty Trapisondan followed them not, thinking that they went about some matter of impor∣tance; but rather assembling the sonnes of Tituan, he begā afresh to charge the Giants. The King of Giant land had long desired to méete with Alphebus: and now seeing him present, he went to him saying, Now ye time is come, Greek Prince, that with thy head shal be restored the damage done to my bloud. Hee which meant to preuaile with déeds, an∣swered him not with words: for hee had scarcely said this, but with a Partisane hee smote him ouer the rich Helmet. The Emperor of Trapisonda was euen at deaths dore: for the Pagan gaue him another, which made ye bloud gush out at his Beuer. Ther was neuer any Uiper, but might be ac∣coūted gentle in respect of Alphebus: for before that ye Moore could againe lift vp his cruel club, he was come close to him, and with both his handes smote him vpon the crowne of gold which hee ware: he smote it in peeces, and a great part of the Helmet hee cut from it, leauing him both sore wounded and disarmed: hee came againe with another, which did wholly perfect the victorie: for hitting him there where hee was disarmed, the one halfe of his head hee smote to the ground, leauing him dead and on horse∣backe.
Thither came so many for reuenge, that the no∣ble Gréeke had beene in danger, had not Bramidoro and his friend Brandafidel with Tefereo come to his aide: for to the noyse came Brauorante, ouerthrowing more Greekes then the wind doth leaues in Autumne. There began a braue battell, for the Gréeke desired it, and the other was readie to die for it. By this time were the two famous warriours come to the little hill, Poliphebus, and Rosabel meeting there the flowre, not onely of the Campe, but of the whole world, Claramante, and Claridiano, with the faire Archisi∣lora. There was great ioy at their meeting: for they did reci∣procally loue extremely, and not without great griefe they beheld the successe of the battell: for although that particu∣lar men did preuaile, yet the multitude of the rascall Moores was so great, that they gat ground vpon them, although that at Sea the famous Astrusio sped better: for therein hee was the most expert in the world. For as being better of sayle, with his greatest vessels he bare towards ye South, where, with a fine Southeast wind, which blew a faire gale, haling their Tackles close aboord, they weathered the enemies Fléete, and comming hard a∣boord them, they cast so much wild fire into it, that they set certaine shippes on fire, which they left burning in a light flame, with such a mortall slaughter of men, as cannot bee imagined: for as the wind from the shore was a helpe vnto them, comming close aboord the enemies ships, they fired the greatest part, and the best rigged and appointed in the Fléete: and but for the losse by land, it had beene great plea∣sure to haue seene them: but that which made them most to wonder, was, to see come from the South with both sayles and Oares, a great Fléete, which drawing néere the shore a little beneath where the battell was fought, vpon a sud∣daine landed so many men, as excéeded the number of two hundred thousand, with aboue thirtie thousand mightie Gi∣ants. They saw them diuided into two battels, and that the one ouer the valley towards the Citie, went in ye maner of a
Crescent, without charging Launce, or assailing any body, gathering together those which were dispersed ouer ye fields. As the Sunne was then at the highest, shining vpon their armour, it was a faire sight to behold: the other battell wherein there séemed to be a Chariot triumphant, drawn by twelue Elephants, tooke the lower way. Both armies were much troubled herewith: for they well saw that to whether partie this should leane, there the victorie was certaine. Now is there néede of your horses swiftnesse, and the va∣lour of your arme, said the Captaine Oristoldo: first to the sonne of Garrofilea, and then to the vnknowne Claridiano, who obeying the commaundement of the braue and discréet Captaine, answered, Let it bee as it shall please you: but it fitteth better for our businesse, séeing that they are friends, that wee should at our pleasure sacke their Campe: for I haue to day a great desire to steale some Ladies, or at the least, if I misse thereof, that ensigne, which is set yonder in the side of the little hill: for they shall not ioy at our losses. And therefore, valorous Prince, (with your fauour) I will winne it, and with my owne hand will giue it to the most faire and ingratefull Ladie of the world, in the behalfe of the most faithfull Louer therein, and worst rewarded. Here∣with they descended downe the hill, farre more swift then thought. The exployts which were done in this iournie, are not to be written in so true a Historie as is this, which I fol∣low: for there were no foure Knights of the most valiant in all the Campe, that durst to stand two blowes: for a stone doth no more easily strike down the tender eares of Corne, then their swords did fell those Infidels. They threw to the ground aboue two hundred, not wounded, which had béene a greater harme, but starke dead. The furious Giants which opposed themselues against them, could not stay them in their iournie: for against them, like the lightning, finding some resistance, they shewed themselues more furious. As they were perceiued to mount vpon the side of the little hil,
some from the Imperiall Standard came to their reliefe, among which were the sonnes of Rosabel: but both one and other came too late: for the furious Claridiano, much stron∣ger then a thunderbolt, rushed in among the flowre of the Almaines, which had the gard there. The blowes which they gaue, nor the Launces and Darts which they hurled, could not defend them: for with∣out lifting vp his sword, he assailed him that had any, stri∣king him downe with his fis, with greater force, then the hungrie Tyger doth the heardes in the mountaines Rifei. Hee was assailed by many, but there were aboue twentie Knights which tooke his part, which before had knowne him; with whose aide, and the helpe of the famous Poli∣phebus, in the sight of both Camps, he tooke the Standard, which was the richest in all the armie. They crossed the Campe (although with much adoe) which did encourage those which were ouercome, to see the Pagans Standard in the hands of the Knight with the Ladies. They came to vnderstand of the armie which was arriued, and séeing by the wauing of their colours, that they were Greeke en∣signes, without longer stay, holding now the victorie on ei∣ther side for certaine, in the twinkling of an eye, they came to the place: where the Generall with his friends stayed for them, glad of the exploite which they had done: and the cou∣ragious young man, taking the ensigne in his hand, deliue∣red it to his Lady, saying, Although that it be a presumptiō and apparant errour, valorous Ladie, I bestow this Stan∣dard vpon your beautie and valour: but seeing it is done, and that I haue gotten it in your name, my ouer-boldnesse is ex∣cusable. Upon some other more worthie (answered the La∣die) I would you had bestowed it: but comming from you, none will refuse to receiue it (as from the best Knight of the world) and I will this day bee Standard-bearer to all this companie, to charge into the Campe, for it now groweth somwhat late. And setting vpō those which are come to the Campe, it will be their whole ouerthrow to sée themselues
assailed by so many: for there is nothing that putteth men in such feare, as to sée before their eyes, their goods & friends consumed with fire. And presently they tooke their way downe the hill, vntill they were out of sight of those of the Campe, who were busied with beholding the great armie, which was newly arriued. The sixe valorous Princes came to the Ambuscado, where Florisarte ioyfully receiued them, and with all spéede put their people in order. What followed and who it was which came, shall be declared in another Chapter. CHAP. XXX. How the mightie Andronio, Lord of the great Tartaria, came to aide the Greekes, and of the end of the field battel. HOw highly gratitude (most excellent Prince) is to be estéemed, it shall bee néed∣lesse with many examples to amplifie, ha∣uing one in sight, as the comming of the fa∣mous Tartarian, who as he euer had béene a friend to the Dacian Prince, and to Tho∣rismundo, as in the first and second parts was declared, who in his countrie hearing of the warres which the Ro∣manes made, determined to come to their aide, with the greatest power that hee was able▪ hee leuied two hundred thousand men, and thirtie thousand Giants, with which (for they were both valiant, and expert in the warres) hee purposed to aide his friends: he came thus late, because hee thought that the warre had beene in Dacia, whither hee went, and there vnderstood of the fierce proceedings of the greatest part of the world. Hee came in good time, and was not a little glad thereof, especially when hee saw that the Greekes had the worse, imagining that his succours would be the better esteemed.
In comming to land, hee deuided his troopes into two battels: and with the one he sent the mightie Prince Da∣risteo, with 15000. Giants; who taking his fathers bles∣sing, was accompanied with those prowd Giants, where∣of, 100. had charge of his person, which was armed with ye most coly armour in the camp: for it was set with stones of great price; and in some places, with exquisite workman∣ship were set great Carbuncles, which when the Sun did shine vpon them, bereaued men of their sight. There was no goodlier shew in all the campe; for he was a very youth, not yet 15▪ yéeres old; but matched the Gréeke Princes in valour. Of his standard, which was of the colour of his Ar∣mour, which was Lion-colour, 50. which were the flowre of all the Giants had the gard, which presumed to defend it against hath the campes. As he tooke the way about ye camp, he might well sée the estate of the battel. He hasted to come to the port of Mars his Castle, where all the Ladies were: for he perceiued that the Gréeke Caualiery gaue back: and to get before them, he hastned his march, to the end that with his ayd they might be encouraged, cōming at the in∣stan, that the ramer of humane harts, the sonne of Venus, attended his comming: for passing before their windowes, that the Ladies might sée, and bee séene by him, delighted with his brauery, and the more, for that he came in their ayd, he looked by chaunce, & saw his life, enclosed in a sweet death: for as Rosabella the daughter of Rosacler did shine like the Sun at noone-tide, hee could not resist the beames which came from her beauty, but that he must yéeld, giuing her his soule in exchange, for the pleasure which hee con∣ceyued in beholding her: neither did she so escape from his brauery, but that she thought him to be one of the most gal∣lant youths in the world (which in deed was true.) With this new alteration, marshalling his troupes, he stayed, ve∣ry ioyfull to sée himselfe by his fathers direction so well imployed▪ who whéeling along the bottome of the valley, had placed himselfe right ouer against the flowre of the
Parthians, which were those, which of all others had done most harme in Grecia. In the triumphant Charriot they thrise sounded three great Clarions, so lowd, that the noyse was heard ouer all the fields. As they left, the mighty yong Daristeo stayed no longer, but with the greatest courage of the world, casting vp his golden trunchion, taking a great Launce in his hand, he turned about to behold his Ladie, which to him séemed now more beautifull then before. I know not how to expresse the noyse which hee made when he gaue the onset: for it séemed that all the whole frame of heauen and earth would haue suncke. At the first encoun∣ter they threw to the earth aboue 30000. for as those fierce Giants went in the vaunt gard, there was no defence a∣gainst their armes; for they were the totall confusion of the Pagans. The fierce yong man hauing well imployed his Launce, drew out a rich sword, wherewith hee began by the déedes which he performed, to resemble Hector of Troy: for hee gaue no blow, but ouerthrew a Knight, and somtime, both horse and man. Heerein did Bemboes wisdome appeare, prouiding for either partie: for against this young man came Brufaldoro with all his people, who had not yet char∣ged: but his valour could not serue the turne: for the Tar∣tarians, to winne their Princes fauour, fought valiantly. Both Captaines met with their swords aloft. The blowes which they gaue were cruell, for they saw the starres with∣in their Helmets. They came againe with others, which made the bloud to gush forth at their visors. Then they ad∣uaunced themselues, beginning one of the most perillous battels of the world. The Affricane was more accustomed to labour: but the young man, being in his sprouting youth, and being newly wounded with loue, was so ready to strike and retire with his well made horse, that he made the Moore sweat drops of bloud. Neuer was man séene so furious: for perceyuing that he was none of the Gréekes, and to sée him so valiant, it put him out of his wittes. This fight lasted
but a while, for the armies comming to ioyne, made them to part, eche of them going where was most danger, the better to shew their valour. But the Mauritanian had a mishap: for as he charged in among those Giants, working wanders, at the last being so many and well angred, they lue his horse: hee leapt from him like a Bird, and on foote he began to defend himselfe so valorously, that no man durst come neere him, vntill that they seeing him somewhat wea∣ried with the Launces, which they darted at him afarre off, then those furious Giants drew neere, putting him in such a straight, that he was out of breath vpon his knees in the ground. But the dead bodies which hee had before him, were as good as a Rampart to defend him, especially against hor∣ses, so as they could not trample him vnder their feete; and so he prolonged his life: which had beene but a while, if the most strong Brauorante had not come to part the affray, who like as the Sunne parteth the clouds, euen so made he a lane thorow his enemies: some he troad vnder his feete, others he slue with the sword, and those which came néerest to him, he defeated with his fist. He saw from his high horse, his braue competitor, and being able, would not leaue to giue him assistance, which hee esteemed to bee nobly done, which in deed was verie worthie. At his comming, hee bereaued foure or fiue of them of their liues, and leaping from his horse, he said, Courage, King of Mauritania; for Brauorante being here, there is no cause of feare, for the gods will graunt thee life, to los it by my hands, the time being expired which wee haue a¦greed vpon. These wordes gaue such paine and courage to the most furious Affricane, that with a leape hee came on foote, saying, Because I will not shew my selfe ingrate∣full for the helpe, which thou, proud Knight, hast giuen mee, therein giuing mee my life, without stirring any one
steppe from this place, I would kéepe touch with thy desire and my credit: for my valour is not yet so decayed, that I will giue thée any preeminence. Now to doe it (answered the prowd Pagan) agreeth not with my honour: but the time will come, wherein I shall make you knowe the va∣lour of my person. The two couragious warriours could passe no farther forward; for the Giants were so many which came against them, that they had much to doe to recouer their horses: but being mounted, séeming to the world to be friends, they be∣gan to kéepe themselues side by side, so close and in so good earnest, that they did much harme: but they were but two onely, and had lost through the force of the Tartarians, a∣boue a flight shot of their ground, retiring backe as farre as the Almaines which led the vaunt gard, with which they began a new stir: but as they were newly come, and the young man led them, there was no resistance in all the ar∣my against the force where with his standard mached. All this, in respect of what his father did at his first comming, is nothing: for with the mighty and tryumphant Charriot, with those with the Elephants, hee did mortall hurt, with so much glittering armour, with such puissance, with such cries and shoutings, that all the campe was troubled. O cruell Nero, haddest thou séene this spectacle, how much it would haae eased thy mind! for presently streames of bloud began to runne ouer all the field. I speake it not without teares: for the most part of the Almaines and Parthians he tare in pieces. O cruell Roselia, it sufficeth that thou wast a Romane, to extend thy wrath so farre, as that thou mightest sée the Gréeke fields dyed with Romane bloud, and of the Al∣maines. Heere the Souldan of Niquea séeing his army goe to wrack, considered of his error. Héere the Souldan of E∣gypt repented for comming to his ayd, although another thing grieued him more then this.
The mightie Andronio, vpon his Chariot cast his eyes about, to sée his two friends: and their good hap would, that hee found them in good time, for they were in danger: for they had entred so farre among the Assyrians, which gaue them so much to doe, that the bloud flowed out at their Ui∣sors, and had wounded Rosamundi with a stab. With a great crie knowing them, hee enred, calling them by their names. His Chariot ouerthrew aboue two hundred to the ground, and when hee saw them at libertie, hee sayed; and lifting vp his Beuer, he intreated them to come vp into his Chariot. They presently knew him, for they loued him as themselues: and they all thrée leapt vp, putting their horses in sure kéeping of those Giants, which tooke care of them. I cannot in so great a warre spend so much time, as particu∣larly to expresse the pleasure they conceiued in séeing their friends, but will leaue it to their consideration which haue felt the like. In companie they returned to the Camp, making a great slaughter, so as where so euer they went, the Moores lost ground, the Gréekes taking more courage, seeing such suc∣cours, and most of all when they heard them sound in their Camp, in signe that they were in distresse, which was such, that the most part of those which battered the Citie, were constrained of necessitte to leaue the batterie, to goe to suc∣cour them. The braue Earle of Modca and his valiant sonne, were no small let vnto them▪ verie ioyfull for the fauour which Poliphebus had done the young man, giuing him his owne companie, for his greater honour. Those of the ancient Ti∣nacria, did so long and so valiantly detaine the Pagans, that the Captaine Generall, with his couragious companions, might set vpon the Campe, although that those Princes, whose force was to bee feared, were left to gard the same, and had defended it (notwithstanding that they were surpri∣sed) had not those Pillars of humane fortitude led the way, which were Oristoldo, Claridiano, Claramāte, Poliphebus,
Rosabel, and the faire Archisilora, with the beloued Flori∣arte, who went ioyfully, in hope to sée his friend Artimio, and also to know his Ladie. As hee was put in hope by the letter, the furious Spaniards entred, being gréedie of spoyle, doing notable harme: for not content to cut, and ouerthrow the Tents, they presently set them on fire, which in a Pa∣ter noster while, was greater then that of Troy. They are not things to bee written, what those seuen Princes did in this iourney, for I know not whether I shal be beléeued or no: for keeping themselues together, they brought death to those in the Campe, which in the middest of them were slaine and troen vnder foote. In lesse then halfe an howre, they had ouerthrowne all their enemies: they happened all together to enter a Tent, leauing at the entrance fiftie Spanish Knights for a gard, which would haue held it against Mars, which Tent was the Empe∣rours, where waued an ensigne with the Armes of Rome: all the Ladies of the Moores were there assembled, which were no lesse faire, then those of the Citie. The seuen warriours entred, being besides themselues, to see such braue beautie. At an instant, they all, excepting the faire Queene, put off their Helmets, putting them out of feare, assuring them, that they should haue no harme, notwithstanding the noyse which they heard in the Campe: but it gaue them greater, to see some which they loued bet∣ter then themselues: for Eufronisa with the sight of Rosa∣bel, was stricken speechlesse. The faire fearefull Arbolinda accompanied her in de∣light. The mightie Generall which was not acquainted with Loue, became suddainely enamoured: for seeing Cla∣bela, the daughter of the mightie Assyrian, so faire and so young: he gaue her his heart for a recompence: they were some of those, which deerely loued, & which endured much, as shall be declared in the fourth part. The first which spake, was the beloued Tinacrian, to the faire Eufronisa, saying, I haue trauailed with such
paine, most excellent Princesse, seeing my selfe your det∣ter, and vpon my word, that I haue sought all meanes to accomplish it, to bring you to this Knight, pointing to Ro∣sabel, to the end that you take such reuenge of him, as your beautie deserueth. With such hazard to these Ladies, valorous Prince of Tinacria, I would not that you should haue accomplished it, although that therein you haue done me a fauour, accor∣ding to the hope conceiued of your valour. There is no re∣uenge to be taken of this Prince: my griefe sufficeth mee, which shall serue for a punishment for his vnkindnesse. I was neuer so (worthie Princesse) answered Rosabel: the much which I owe you, bindeth me to lose my life for your sake. They could no longer continue their discourse: for the greedie Spaniards made such a noyse, and such shoutings, as though the skies would haue fallen. Let this satisfaction suffice (said the most faire Quéene of Lira, putting off her rich Helmet, whose rare beautie made them all to wonder) vntill you come to the Citie, where shall want no meanes to fauour your cause. And so I beseech you, in behalfe of all these Knights and my selfe, you wil be pleased to come with vs: for so faire a prise is not to be left for any thing in the world: and more, I being the cause, and onely instrument which hath ordained it. To many of them, it was no griefe to goe prisoners thither, and although that others grieued, yet perforce they dissembled it. Loue tooke good order herein: for the faire Arbolinda, seeing her beloued Prince Florisarte of Argentaria, was glad to goe in his Armes, & Clabela, with Oristoldo, which was life to the young man. Eufronisa at length came to see her selfe in the Armes of her beloued Britanian, as though that shee had neuer beene there before. Claridiano tooke the Sophie his daugh∣ter, Claramante the kings of Fenicia, Poliphebus ye Soul∣dans of Egypt: all the rest which I leaue out, whose beautie was great, the Spaniards tooke, so as they departed with
the most rich bootie of the world, which were sixtéene daugh∣ters of the chiefest Princes in the armie, with a sister of Bemboes, verie young, whose beautie in her time caused no small troubles. There was much to doe to get the gréedie Spaniards out of the Campe, vntill that they saw their Princes goe peste∣red and loaen with rich spoyles vp the hill, at which time rescue came from the Armie, but it was too late: for they had alreadie made their boote, and put the same in safetie: for hauing the hill at their backes, they would haue defended themselues against all the armie. These warriours descen∣ded at that point, which leadeth downe into the valley, on which  the Citie was not battered, for the strength thereof. There they entred with their pray, a better then which, and without bloudshed, Alexander neuer tooke with all his Monarchie, neither the famous African, much more victorious. The newes was presently knowne in the Armie, where the battell was fought of the taking of these Ladies, which was an occasion to encourage the Pagans. O who had séene the migtie Bembo, the redoubte Brauorante, with the brothers of the Wood, with this n sickle newes! They fought not like men▪ it is not to be imagined what hurt they did: fourtéene Knights of the Gréeke Emperours chamber, by their hands lost their liues,  a number which were troden vnder foote and wounde  but yet they had the wor∣ser: and although that the Princes were absent, that was no hindrance to the victorie, which they had wholly ended, had not the warlike Sarmatia, and Bembo his mightie cou∣sin come to their aide, who séeing him fight so desperately, came to him saying, In such times, valorous Captaine, you are to take order, not with your disliking, but with fortune, which declareth it selfe for your enemie: for I see all the Armie at the point to bee lost. The Campe is spoyled, the Sea died in your bloud, so as there is no remedie, but to take this blow with
patience, and know▪ that it commeth through the small equitie of your cause, which was great, to couet those spoyles which the heauens had prepared for the Brittish Prince. Looke well to it, for you ought to giue ouer a thousand bat∣tels whatsoeuer, rather then to giue cause of offence to your Ladie, whome you make shew to loue so much: and seeing that shée is not able to doe you pleasure, put mee in trust, and I will so employ my selfe, as shal be to the contentment of all. The discreet Ladie had taken off her Helmet; and there∣by the Captaine knew her, who wel considering, that what shée had said, was wrought by the Almightie hand, and preserued for some great Christian, hee put the matter in the Princesses hands, willing her to doe as best pleased her: although that being so many, which hold themselues a∣grieued, it will bee a hard matter to obtaine any peace, in the middest of such a tempest, I desire nothing, but that some occasion may bee offered, wherein I may bee able to doe Liriana any seruice. Leaue this charge to me (quoth the Ladie) for I will obtaine it of those which can doe most in this warre. Shée tooke so good order, that shee perswaded the Soul∣dan of Niquea to peace, séeing how much it concerned him, seeing he thereby should recouer such friends and kinsmen. Shée obtained the like of the Emperour of the Romanes: and all perceiued, being of the losing side, that it better fitted with their Nobilitie, to offer them peace, then when they had the better of the warre. And as of these men depended the commaund of all the rest, and the new enamoured Ori∣stoldo agreeing herein for the loue of his Ladie, with all haste the retreite was sounded betwéene both armies, that valiant Ladie being the occasion of all that good: they were parted at an instant (for it behoued them that were ouer∣come, séeing it was for their good) and the others, to please their Princes, sheathed their swords.
The Pagans would not that night enter into the Citie, because they would take order for their hurt men, and to bu∣rie their dead, which were so many, as made all men ama∣zed thereat: from the Citie they sent many dainties to the Campe, which were not a little estéemed, for the want which there was thereof in both Campes. There was as great ioy, as though there had béene no such slaughter. All the Gréekes awayted the morning, to goe foorth to receiue the Moores: what passed, shall bee declared else∣where: for certainely with iust reason hee may bee wearie, who hath ended a warre so cruell as was this. CHAP. XXXI. How the Princes of the Campe entred into the Citie, and of the feasts which were made them: and the Marri∣ages, which were contracted for the confirmation of the peace. SO swéete is peace (most excellent Prince) that Dion said, that a man was to fight a whole yeere, to enioy one day of peace: it is so pleasing a good, that it cannot bee valued, being so highly extolled. So said hee which desired it, as Aristophones: That it grieued not the maymed man, to eate his bread poorely in peace, although it had procéeded from a cruell warre. Well did the famous Bembo vnderstand that, when he so easily yeelded to all that which the Princesse of Lacede∣monia required, who the better to make her doings more famous, had spoken to the most principall gallants, to the
end that the next day they should in her company goe forth (as with her which had ended that which séemed impossible) to receyue the Pagans. They were all content to please her, séeing that therein she had done the like by them. The next day with new beautie, not with any bloudy colour, the Sunne shewed himselfe, hastening his course to behold so much brauery as there was among those Gallants, which by that time were gone forth of the imperiall Citie in a well marshalled squadron, all light, with their swords one∣ly, with such costly attire, as a man would not desire to see more in all his life time. Betwéene Claramente and Claridiano, went the fayre Sarmatia, armed with most rich Armour, which Lirgandeo had giuen her, without any Helmet, and in stead thereof, a coloured hatte of the colour of her Armour, with such costly workmanship, that the price thereof could not bee va∣lued. In the middest of her brest (for shee bare no Shield) shee ware Peace paynted so at life, that it was very pleasing to behold it, with these words: The name of peace is passing sweete, Which to obtaine, Wee ought to take payne. Shee had so good a grace, besides her beautie, that all men reioyced to see her. By that time beganne to come forth of the imperiall Pauilion, those mightie Monarchs, the Souldan of Ni∣quea, and the Romane Emperour, Constantius, with the Souldan of Egypt, and the rest of the mightie Kings (inhabiting thereabouts, which came to this most sumptu∣ous sight) being in all aboue thirty. There were neuer séene
so many together, nor that commanded so many countries, in comming so nere that the one might see the other, the warlike Ladie said, Soueraigne Princes, and valiant Knights, because you shall know how much the Gréekes doe estéeme of the peace graunted on your behalfe, they commend them vnto you, praying you to accept of their Citie at your seruice, where∣in they will shew you (in doing you seruice) that, if they fought, it was but to come to enioy this day: there is no∣thing sweete, but what is gotten with paine, which seeing it hath beene betweene both Campes, it is reason that they both should enioy that which is redounded thereof. Ualo∣rous Ladie, answered the courteous Bembo, although it were but to be delighted with your valour and discretion, af∣ter so many tempests, they were all employed, and we will accept of the fauour which those Princes offer vs, entring into their Citie, from whence it will be more hard for them againe to put vs out, in peace, then in open warre. They all tooke their way towards the Citie, where was nothing to be seene but Knights and Ladies, the sight where of excée∣dingly much pleased the Pagans. I know not how, discreete reader, I am entred, neither the middle, nor ending of these entertainments: for euen to imagine it, is as much as for mee to wade thorow the swolne Sea drie-foote. Who is able to describe what Bembo felt, when the faire Liriana came to speake to him, say∣ing, I neuer thought, famous Prince, that your arme should haue wrought me so much displeasure: but now to content you, I will requite you, praying you to dispose of all: for al∣though I haue gone with you in the opinion of a tyrant, I will draw you from that by experience. The young man could not suddainely answere her, vntil that feare was past, and then hee said, Most excellent Princesse, I euer thought that your beautie would one day come to take compassion of my griefe, but not to remedie it: I neuer pretended, but that all the whole world might knowe, of what
power my sorrow was: and if I came to this warre, I was forced thereto, to the end to enioy the sight of you. Let those old quarrels proceede no farther (said the most fayre Lindabrides) for hearing of this Prince his valour, I had affected him without offence to Claramante: for ha∣uing him in our power, he shall see, how much worse it shall be for him to get out of our hands, then from the Gréeke Princes. As these things passed, it was a life for Bembo: for it séemed to him that fortune would turne to fauour him. The excellent Sarmatia had made such haste, and taken so good order, that shee had procured for Bembo, no lesse then for Rosiluira, which was, to giue him what hee desired, and her, what shee desired, although that Don Celindo was grieued thereat in his soule, who by Lupertius his order, who was there present, was made knowne to bee Meridian his sonne. Hee restored to the Assyrian, his sonne, and to the King of Fenicia, and the Sophy, theirs: a thing which anewe renewed their content, and for them also: for they knewe that their father Selagio was at libertie: who what hee did when hee sawe himselfe frée, shall bee declared here∣after. The Emperour of the Romanes was very glad, that Don Celindo was so high a Prince, which was the cause why hee gaue him his daughter. The fayre Arbolinda, vpon the way séeing herselfe in the armes of her beloued Florisarte, told him the effect of all her loue: hee made them to betroth Rosabel, and be∣cause that there should bee perpetuall peace, they gaue to the prince of Niquea, Lindoriano: the fayre Tinacrian, Rosiluira, whom hee loued as his soule: to Astorildoes lot, fell the faire Clarintea of Celandia: and to the Prince of Fraunce Clarindo, the fayre English Artemisa: to the Princes of Bohemia and Hungarie, to the one, the fayre
Troyla, and to the other, the faire Feniciana, sister to Don Argante. The mightie Tartarian Daristeo▪ was so enamoured of the young Rosabela, that her Gréeke parents were glad to giue her▪ seeing how much they were beholding to him, which cut the heart of the Knight with the starres, for therevpon grewe a great quarrell, which lasted long, to the losse of much bloud, as you shall heare. All these marriages were deferred for the space of fif∣teene dayes, because that Bembo was to bee christianed, and Poliphebus and his wife, with Lindoriano and his wife. Triumphes are a preparing, which will bee reported ouer all the world. In the meane time, vpon agréement, the Moores discharged their Nauies, remayning for eue∣rie Monarch, twelue Galleyes. They set at libertie all prisoners, and amongst the rest, Epirabio, whom, as hee had deserued, they gaue Lisiana, which hee so much desired. The great Assyrian, Don Clarisel (by the consent of all the Greeke Princes) marryed with Floralisa. In this pleasure, remained all those Princes and fayre Ladies, which of all the world were the flowre, when as Selagio framed a newe reuenge; for herein is crueltie de∣paynted in his colours: hee obtayned so much by ouertur∣ning Lupertius his bookes, that hee came to finde this prophesie: Into Mars his Castle, no man shalbe suffred to enter, but him which mounting vpon the hill Olympus, shall winne the passage, and after that hee is entred, shall bereaue Mars of his Armes. Hee was verie glad, imagining that no man could doe it: and hee stealing away the greatest part of the Ladies, which were busied with pleasing feastings, being so hard to set them at libertie, hee should remayne somewhat satis∣fied.
In a moment hee put it in execution: for taking a Charriot with flaming fire, which hee brought into the hall at Constantinople, so as no man could stirre, with such lightnings and thunder, as though heauen and earth should haue come together: which being past, there were missing the fayrest Ladies of the world, which were Policena, He∣lena, Aurelia, and Rosabela, with the faire Artemisa: and of the Moores, the daughter of the Sophie, of the Assyrian, of the Fnician, Troyla, and Bembo his sister, although but a girle, and the Souldans of Egypt. All the Court was in an vprore, and there would goe to séeke them particular∣ly, Rosabel his sonnes, and hee with the starres, with the great Tartarian: but in the meane time in came Nauato, who pacified them, saying, that then to goe to séeke them, was to no purpose: for hee found, that they should not so soone be set at libertie: for there was a prophesie, that vntill that the disguised Lion should hold the Ounce in his pawes at the poynt of death, who loued him as her selfe, hauing wounded her, and set her in such maner, not springing from thence the furious Basiliske, which may breake open that which is lockt, it shall be impossible for the world to sée the inclosed Nymphes. So as, excellent Princes, it beho∣ueth you to make merry (although there be so many Ladies missing) by reason of the peace which hath cost you so much: and because I haue much to doe, and all for your seruice, I can stay no longer, neither sée any body, vntill all be accom∣plished: and so he presently vanished, leaing both ye Gréeks and Moores somewhat satisfied, in that they knew that they were in some part, whither they might goe to séeke them. And so all the gallant youths began to prepare for ye feasts, vntill that one day, all the Ladies passing their time merri∣ly with their Gallants in the middest of the great hall, with all those mighty Princes, discoursing of pleasant matters, the famous Brauorante sung with his owne honour, rose vp, and began in this maner:
CHAP. XXXII. How the redoubted Brauorante required the braue Brufaldoro to performe the challenge past and agreed vpon, and of the cruell battell which was betweene them, with that which followed. A Touch in honour (most excellent Prince) is of such force, that there is no pleasure ta∣ken in any thing, vntill that it bee defaced, or the breach repayred: wee haue an exam∣ple heereof in the most mighty Brauoran∣te, who being stung with the sight of his fathers Armes in another mans hands, it made him starke mad: and it was a sufficient paine, sith hee felt not how great it would bee to him, to see Floralisa married: but his wits were so troubled with this griefe, that it gaue no place to feele any other, which he plainely discouered: for nothing regarding what discontentment hee should giue therein, in time of so much content, he stood vp and said, The gods are my witnesse, Soueraigne Princes, what pleasure I conceiued, to see you reconciled for so many yeeres, and that after that you haue shewed the heights of your displeasure, it endeth in such ioy, so fixed, that it is needlesse to feare that fortune may alter it. In generall, wee are all victorious: for if the Gréekes may glorie in that name, the Pagans may also weare gar∣lands of gréene ke: but in particular I alone cannot ioy in this name, although that for some respects I haue so much deferred that, which ought not to be endured for a mi∣nute: and how can it be, that I should liue contented, sée∣ing
my fathers Armes in the handes of Brufaldoro, so much defended by the Gréeks, that therein they haue bound mee to doe them seruice so long as I liue? and hauing twise giuen ouer the battaile, for the loue of my Lady Floralisa (and a hundred would:) but shee deferred it vntill the end of these battailes: and seeing that they are so well ended, there is no reason why it should be any lon∣ger delayed: for it is a great stayne to my honour, and much for this King to haue challenged mee. And heere∣with the Barbarian gaue an end to his discourse, remay∣ning so furious, that all men marueyled at the order which he obserued in his chalenge. The braue Brufaldoro stood vp, and with that fierce∣nesse wherewith the heauens had endued him, hee sayd, I would, Brauorante, long since haue accomplished thy de∣sire: but in time of such ioy as this, to trouble them with new warres after so many past, it is rather a signe of pride, then of any thing else: and because thou shalt knowe, that if I tooke those Armes, I meane to defend them, to mor∣rowe I will in the place fasten them to a Launce, from whence if thou take them not, it will bee for want of that valour, whereof thou so much vauntest. The Pagan leapt out, crying, It is to bee delayed no longer: for there is time inough betwixt this and night to chastice thée. The braue Affrican had set vpon him, had not the most mightie Tinacrian stept betweene them, at whose re∣quest it was deferred till the next day. It was a maruey∣lous thing to see; for before that Titans Messengers were departed from their logdings, the place was all full of peo∣ple, which attended the sight of the horrible battell. As they were couragious, so were they both desirous: and it séemed to bee one of the most sightly battels of the world, and with much reason: for therein were fewe that could match them.
All the Gréekes discoursed of the successe thereof, but durst leane no more to the one then the other, not to disgrace eyther, although that in secret, some more affected Brauo∣rante, for that which they had séene him doe in those warres. When Apollo began to shew his golden lockes bathed in the Spanish seas, all the Court began to stirre: some set vp tables: others, scaffolds: there was nothing in the place, but was put to vse. Then came forth the Gréeke Ladies, so fayre, that if the Sunne had not taken care of those warriours, hee could haue taken no benefit of the counsell which he gaue to his sonne, it would so much haue troubled him to see so much rare beauty together, séeing that hee onely for one, left his aboade in the heauens, liuing in a rude office, and held it for greater glorie, then in his rich Charriot to compasse the heauens, who séemed to stay, which was for that, that at one side of the place, the two famous warriours presented themselues: with the one, came all the Affricanes: he would not haue his armes brought to him, for hee came in with his Beauer downe, and with his Launce in his hand, with so angrie a pace, that there was great hope of him: hee was couered all ouer with cleane and well tempered steele, enamelled greene, with many knots of gold. In the middest of the shield, which was of the same co∣lour, hee had his Ladies picture, when hee tooke her from foure Giants, which he slue in requitall for their presump∣tion, with this ot in the borders; A strong conceite in a louing mind, Maketh easie what euer it doth find. Hee rode round about the place, with a greater grace then Mars, causing at one side thereof, a great Launce to bee set vp, and thereon to set vp the Armes which had be∣longed
to Brauorante: to the end, that hee who gat the victorie, should beare them away for a Trophe and token of his valour. Hee presently tooke his place, attending the great Scythian, who had chalenged the famous Affrican, if euer there were any in that land. On the other side came in (in valour) the rare Brauo∣rante, with all the Assyrians (that were left) in his com∣pany. It was a thing worthy to bee séene by the Greekes, to see how prowdly hee came in, all in cleane tempered steele, from the head vnto the foote: his colours were Lyon-colour, with many streames of greene, and the skirtes gilt. There was neuer seene in the world (except it had beene a Giant) a greater or a goodlier Warriour: and in remembrance of the Ladie which hee had chosen for his god, hee bare her paynted so at life in his Shield, as when hee met her in the kingdome of Mauritania, where hee fought for her, as in the beginning of the third part is declared. The borders were so set with precious stones of such inestimable price, that there was no fayrer shewe to bee seene. Therein was also a Warriour farre in loue, and be∣twéene the two, these words: Well may hee presume to winne, Who first found you, And by his seruice bound you. Hee came in, with a furious aspect confronting his aduersarie. The Iudges of the field were the two famous Quéenes of beautie: for the Affrican chose for his part, the fayre Archisilora: and the great Brauorante chose his goddesse Floralisa, which doing that, which to that office
did appertaine, appointing them an equall space for their carriere, armes, and sunne, they withdrew them to one side, to giue the more roome. Although this be the last, faire Dames, there is no rea∣sō, that he which in the beginning craued leaue to begin this Historie, and to giue it, in the middle should now leaue to repaire to your beauties, to giue it a pleasing ending, and to extoll the blowes of the most famous warriours vpon the earth: for with angrie paces they set themselues face to face, and the Sunne betweene them both staying his course, be∣cause they should hasten theirs; which they did more swift then the fresh wind in Autumne. None of those which beheld them, durst cast their eye a∣side, for feare to lose the sight of the effect of their swift car∣riere. They performed it (gallant Ladies) with greater noyse, then the raging Sea maketh, when it threatneth the highest heauens, and being vnable to reach vnto them, con∣tenteth it selfe with beating the rockes vpon the shores side. And although that their Launces had beene Shippes masts, they would haue broken them in small peeces: for they came more strongly seated in their Saddles, then any rocke in the Mountaines, and their Launces being broken into splinters with the force of their encounter, flew into the ayre cleane out of sight. I beleeue they flew so high, as to the Throne where the angrie god maketh his abode, who did malice their péerelesse encounter: they past one by another with a better grace, then he could haue done. They returned in the ayre with their swordes in their hands, with so fierce a countenance, and so proud an aspect, that the most valiant of the Greekes cast their cloakes o∣uer their faces, because they would not see it, all their bloud of their bodies being retired to their hearts. And seeing that Claramante was afraid, and Claridi∣ano shrunke aside, what shall my wearied pen, and my dul short wit, but make an end of this booke, entreating par∣don
for the faults which are in them all, not looking into them, as into a worke of so tender yeeres; but onely into my desire so giue content? But being now entred into more ryper yeeres, I doe promise the fourth part: in the which, an end shall bee giuen of this terrible battell, and also of the loue of the vnknowne Greeke, with the noble acts of the sonnes of Eufronisa: and also of the Knight with the starres, with the mighty Daristeo: for the things which they did in seeking the Ladies, were wonderfull to the world, which doth anewe encourage mee to treat of their loues, which were not comparable with the Quéenes of Lira. Wherefore (worthy Ladies) excuse my errors, and my so abrupt giuing ouer this Historie: whereof if  may be assured, I shall begin it with courage, onely to giue you contentment. FINIS.
