18940 23904412 26969
THE Heroycall Epistles of the Learned Poet Publius Ouidius Naso, Jn Englishe Ʋerse: set out and translated by George Turberuile Gent. with Aulus Sa∣binus Aunsweres to certaine of the same. Anno Domini 1567. ¶ IMPRINTED AT London, by Henry Denham.
To the Right Honora∣ble and his Singul good Lord, Lord Tho. Hovvrde Vicount Byndon. &c. George Turberuile wisheth Nestors yeares, increase of Ho∣nor, with preseruation of de∣sired health.
RJGHT NO∣ble, indebted to your Honor for a number of vndeserued friend¦ships, and vnable altogither to re∣quite the least of a thousande cour∣tesies: sought the meanes howe to acquite mee of some parte thereof. But waying mine owne defaulte, and considering your Honors me∣rits, wox almost in vtter dispaire: vntill at length it repairde to my thought, that it was no greater to∣ken of Honor, liberallye to bestowe vpon other great rewardes, than a proofe of Nobilitie gratefullye to accept at others hāds slender gifts according to their hability that of∣fred the same. Artaxerxes his good acceptaunce of a handefull of run∣ning water, bred me to this bold∣nesse to offer your Honor a handful of written Papers: hoping that as be thought no disdain of the one, so you wil not take scorne of the other. Let me craue this one thing at your Honors handes, that the basenesse of this my translatiō of the learned Poet Ouid, procure not you to re∣fuse the Patronage and defence of my slender Muse. Which as J know vndoubtedly shal neuer coū∣teruaile your courtesies: So doe J assuredlye hope may be a proofe of my good will & not forgottē dutie. The very name, Heroycal (for so are the Epistles termed) deserued an Honorable & Heroycall Per∣sonage to be their garde. Which if your honor refuse not (as I know you wyll not refuse) waying the giuers intent, and seeing that these are the first fruites of his trauaile) you shal not onely purchase immor∣tall praise of others: but I be encou∣raged and animated to greater and grauer attempts: which I shall no sooner atchiue, but you shall be a witnesse of my endeuours, & arā∣pier to my exploytes. Thus hauing boldly importuned your assistance, and tediously molested your eares with circumstances, leauing now at length to abuse your friendly paci∣ence, J ende: wishing to your Ho∣nor increase of Nobilitie, with a moste happie lyfe: and after the
Catastrophe of this worldly Come∣die, (wherein you play a state∣lye parte) the gladsome ioyes of the euerlasting Seignorie. Your humble Orator G. Turberuile.
The Translator to his Muse. GO (lender Muse) and make report to men That meere desire to pleasure them in deede Made mee in hande to take the painefull pen: Which if I may, I haue my hoped meede. I neyther gape for gaine nor greedie fee, My Muse and I haue done, if men in gree will take this trifling toye.
To the Reader.
LEARNED, Courteous; and Gentle Reader, I had long ere thys time bid thee to a slender ban∣quet: Had it not bene that o∣ther by their good willes had preuented my gentle offer and good meaning therein. But I sawe so many riche and stately bourdes couered, so many cu∣rious carpets laide, such dainty delicates deuisde, such courtly cates & conficts daily brought in, as loth I was vpon such iun∣kets & fine fare to procure the to a rude reare supper. But cō∣sidering that mine habilitie is not to make ani better or more sumptuous: and waying that of dutie and good will I ought to manifest my well meaning with the reast: I haue here at length byd thee (I saye) to a base banquet, to sharpen thy stomack, and procure thy ap∣petite to fyner fare. Hoping that thou wilte not scorne or lothe any dishe that shal be set before thee. If it be so that thou my slike any thing, impute the blame to the cooke. For dout∣lesse the Cates of themselues in their kinde, are passyng cu∣rious, but for want of cunning in dressing the same, maye ap∣pere nothing delectable to the eie, nor toothsome to the taste. The feast was deuised long a∣gone by Ouid at Rome, & pas∣sing wel liked in learned Italie: no lesse for diuersity of disshes, than copie of confictes. May be that if thou shewe thy selfe friendly in well accepting this prouisiō, thou shalt be inuited to a better banquet in time at my hands, who as soone as oc∣casion wil serue, will giue thee to vnderstand of my good wil. Meane while plaie a friendfull guestes part, and mislike not a∣nye thing that shall be serued thee, without iust cause. Cha∣lenge not vnto thee an ouer∣curious mouth & taste. Thus loth anye longer to withholde thee from thy vitailes, I wishe thee to feede and farewell. George Turberuile.
¶ The Argument of the first Epistle, entituled Penelope to Vlysses. THe angrie Greekes for Helens rape preparde To Troie: when wise Vlysses marryde late A furie fainde, in hope to haue bene sparde: But Palamede lothing to lose a Mate So needefull as Vlysses was, bewrayde The fraude of him that gladly would haue stayde. A way he goes. When ten yeares warre was spent; And flaunting Troie troden to the ground: With other Greekes to shippe Vlysses went; But Pallas then the wrathfull Goddesse fround, And made the Grecians greedie of their home, Full ten yeares space on surging Seas to rome. Which absence long Penelope aggrieude, That little space hir husband had enioyde: (For saken wight) she verilie belieude Some other Lasse Vlysses had acoyde. And this procurde the louing wife to wright, That she his cause of absence learne might.
The first Epistle. Penelope to Ʋlysses. TO thée that lingrest all too long, thy Wyfe (Vlysses) sendes: Gayne write not, but by quick returne for absence make amendes. To Gréekish Nymphes that hatefull Troye is now to ruine brought: Scarce mought the King and all his wealth requite the wrong they wrought. O that the surging Seas had drencht that lustfull Lecher tho: When he to Lacedemon came imbarckt, and wrought our wo. Then shoulde I not haue layde my limmes in desert coutch alone: Ne made complaynt that Phoebus steades too slowe to glade had gone. Then shoulde no Beldames distaffe made, my Wydowish hande so faynt: Whilst I to waste the wearie night, with spinning was artaynt. When stoode I not in worser awe in déede than was befell? Aye loue is passing full of feare, though euery thing be well.
Mée thought I sawe a swarming troupe of Troians thée aboute: No sooner Hectors name I heard, but Hector made me doute. If brute had blazde Amphymachus of Hector to bene slaine: Amphymachus by such report procurde my dreade againe. Or when Menetius sonne was sayde in forged armes to die: I sorrowde that the Troians did Patroclus craft espie. When Tlepolemus lost by force of Lycian launce his life: By Tlepolemus death were made my slacked sorrowes rife. In fine what so they were of Greece, that dyde amid their foes, A feare within my breast more colde than Mountaine yse arose. But righteous God that Hymen hight, and true loue hath in care: Hath kept Vlysses frée from scath, and Troians caught in snare. The Gréekish Chieftaines are returnde, the sacred Altars flame: Of barbarous spoyle the Gods haue part, that well deserude the same.
The Matrones for their salued Féeres most gratefull giftes prepare: And they, how Troie by their toyle atchieued was declare. The sage with siluer haires doe muse, and daintie Damsels eake: The wyues about their husbandes hange when they begin to speake. And lo when Tables once are laide, one ginneth straight to showe The wreakefull warre, and drawes with Wine the Troian Tentes arowe. Here Symois (sayth he) did flowe, here is Sigeian lande: And here the aged Priams Hawle and Princely house did stande. There fierce Achylles pight his Tentes, there wise Vlysses lay: Here Hector rent in dolefull wise, the horses did affray. Thus auncient Nestor made reporte, who tolde thy sonne the same: And he (as was his parte to doe) declarde it to his Dame. How Rhesus thou didst make to rue, and Dolon yeelde to death: Th'one shéeping, th'other by thy guile did lose his vitall breath.
And didst thou dare (thou retchlesse man and ouerbolded wight) To Thracian Tents to shape thy course in vgly shade of night? And onely by the ayde of one, so many men to slaye That woonted were to be so ware and minde thy wedlock aye? With quaking feare my heart was colde, and visage passing pale: When thou didst passe along the Host, and Thracian horses stale. But what to me (vnhappie Feme) auailes the Troian wracke: And walles which you by breach haue brought, to vtter spoyle and sacke: If I in Wydowes state remaine, as I tofore haue done: And must for aye Vlysses lacke, as when the broyle begonne? To me that Troie sole doth stande though Souldiers had the spoyle: And they that Victors were with plough for lucre tourne the soyle. Where stately buildings were to see, and Troian towne did stande: There sprouteth corne, with Phrygian bloud so fatted is the lande.
Halfe buried bones of warlike wightes the crooked Culters teare: Both grasse and graine with hearbes do growe, where haughtie houses were. Thou Victor euer art alack, ne once wilt make me showe By louing lynes, or message meanes, what cause of stay doth growe. No straunger stumbles on our stronde, or bringes his Barck to bay, But I enquire him of thy health or ere he passe away. And so his fortune fauour, that on thée he chaunce to light, I pray him yéelde those louing lines, which I to thée endight. I sent to Pylos to inquire, (where aged Nèstor dwelt) No certaine rumor of a truth from Pylos haue I felt. From thence I sparde not for expence to Sparta me to hie: But Sparta can not make accoumpt, where thou doe liue or die. More better were for me (in fayth) if Troie stoode againe, (But I vnconstant wight am wroth with these my wishes vaine.)
Then should I certaine be and sure where thou didst lead thy lyfe: Then onely shoulde I dreade the warres, and stormes of styrred strife. Then should my drearie dolefull plaint conioyned be with mo: That in the absence of their Makes should take some taste of wo. I fraughted am with feare, but what I dreade I knowe not well: My cares encrease, the way is wide that leades me to this hell. No perill on the tossing Sea, or on the lande is séene, But I surmise that they forthwith thy cause of stay haue béene. Whilst fondly thus amazde I stande, (such is thy pleasures plight) Thou mayst bestow thy loue a freshe vpon some other wight. To whome thou makste a shew perhaps, how homely is thy wife: And how at Distaffe she delights to leade a Rusticks life. But (Gods) O let me be beguilde, let whisking windes transport Such thoughts, and thou that mayst retyre, dislodge not in such sort.
Icarius my grutching Syre woulde force me breake my Heast, And blaming this thy flack returne, would make newe marrige feast. But as I am, I will be thine let rancor feede his fill, Penelope will be the wife of hir Vlysses still. Yet naythelesse my endlesse sute at length hath mooude my Syre: Who rules hys rage with reasons brake, and Masters wrathfull yre. From Ilandes rounde about doe flocke of suters many one: Zacinthus, Samus, with the reast, by sute encrease my mone. Those roysting rufflers beare the sway within thy Pallace gate: With catching clawes they waste thy wealth, and séeke t'impayre thy state. Pyzander, Medon, Polybus, Eurimachus yfere: Wyth Antynous t'is no néede, for to recite as here. What shoulde I these, with others name, who seeke to spende thy good: Which thou by manly Marte hast got in daunger of thy blood?
The raskall eke doe rule the rost, Melanthius, and Ire, (Which soundes to thy disworship most) together doe conspire. Wée are by tale, but thrée, God wote, thy weake and wretched wife: Telemachus thy little sonne, Laërtes lothing life. Thy Sonne not long ago was like by craft to bene consumde: Whilst he, to passe against their willes to Pylos had presumde. But Gods I grate this onely boone, that he by course of kinde, His fathers eyes and mine may close, and liue himselfe behinde. This is the crooked Nurces woorke and clownish Cowardes care: And he that dailye serues the swine, a lyke is woont to fare. Laërtes ouerlode with yeares, vnable to the warre, Amidde these states can strike no stroke when they begin to iarre. Thy Sanne (so Gods dee lende him life) to mans estate will growe: But thou, in these his childish yeares, shouldst garde him from the foe.
I Miser wight am not of force to banishe them the place: Wherefore see thou who art our ayde, that thou returne apace. Thou bast (long mayst thou haue) a Sonne, that in his tender age, Shoulde follow on his fathers steppes, and lyfe for worship gage. Liue not aye retchlesse of thy Syre, whose eyes thou oughtst to shutte: His dying date drawes on apace, the twine of lyfe is cutte. And I that at thy parture was, a Gyrle to beholde: Of truth am waxt a Matrone nowe, thy selfe wilt iudge mée olde.
The Argument of the second Epistle, entituled Phyllis to Demophoon. DEmophoon minding after Troian broyle To long desired Countrie to retowre: For all his force, for all his painefull toyle, Was brought to Thrace by meane of stormie showre, Where Phyllis raignde, who likte hir guest so well, As first to boorde, and then to bed they fell. Within a while Demophoon gan to faine And forge excuse to Athens to repaire, With gaged fayth to shape returne againe Within one Month, and bid hir not despaire: But when the fixed time was gone and past, Thus Phyllis wrote vnto hir guest at last.
The seconde Epistle. Phyllis to Demophoon. I That thine Hostesse, Phyllis was, a Rhodopeian Mayde: Mislike that thou my guest, beyonde thy fixed time hast stayde. Thy plighted promise was with shippe here to arryude againe Before or neere aboute the time the waxen Moone should waine. But Phoebe fourthly hath repayrde hir wasted hornes a newe: Yet may I not on Thracian coast take once of thée a vewe. Though thou accoumpt the fléeting time, (which Louers note by trade) Thou shalt not finde that Phyllis hath too soone hir plaint ymade. And long ynough I fedde on hope, for such is Louers guise: We hardly credit hurtefull happes till damage doe arise. I haue oft flattred with my selfe, and thought the Southren winde Had stuft thy sayles, and brought thy Barck, which yet I can not finde.
I haue accursed Theseus oft, that was thy cause of stay: And yet may be that he at all bred not this long delay. Another while I stoode in awe, least thou to Haebrus Lake Directing course, in middle Seas by wracke thy bane hadst take. Full often haue I for thy health in milde and humble wise, With Incense made request to Gods, that lodge in loftie skies. And sundrie tymes when Aeole had his broyling impes inclosde: That if thou were aliue, thou wouldst haue commen, I supposde. Thus loyall loue (what so might bréede and be a cause of stay To such as trauell) did deuise, excusing thy delay. But thou not forcing on thy fayth, ne counting of thy Hest, Not dreading Gods to witnesse callde, dost minde thy Phyllis lest. Demophoon to the windes ingagde his promisse with his saile: I sorrow that the ones returne, and th'others fayth doth faile.
Denounce to mée what I haue done, but looude thée all too well? By mine offence I haue deserude that thou with mée shouldst dwell. In mee one haynous fault is found that harbourde such a guest: But this my guilt hath force of boone, and merit there doth rest. Where now thy solempne sacred othes, thy plighted trouth with hande? And Gods appealde as true recordes to witnesse of thy bande? Where is that holy Hymen nowe, that vs as chosen Feares By frée assent conioynde in one yfeare to wast our yeares? First sworst thou by that gastly Goulfe, where winde and waue doe rore: By whome thou were in poynt to passe, as oft thou hadst before. Then Neptune was to witnesse callde, thy Graunde and woorthie Syre, (Vnlesse thou faine) who quailes the Surge, and swelling waters yre. Then Venus, with hir winged wight, (that bred me all this téene) Was sommond, whose reuenger tooles are bowe and arrowes kéene.
Dame Iuno, that hath spousall charge and wedlocke, shewde hir face: And Ceres with hir solempne rytes, was cyted to the place. If eche of these forenamed powres and witnest thus in vaine, Should seeke on thee to wreake their wrath, couldst thou endure the paine? My selfe (least thou shouldst want at néede a Barck to leaue my lande) Infonded, did repaire the shippes that ragged lay on sande. I trimde vp all thy broken Oares, whereby thou mightste depart: And thus my selfe haue forgde the tooles, that thyrled haue my heart. Thy many smooth and filed woordes did purchase credites place: I did beleue thy stock, thy Gods stoode all in Phyllis grace. I thought thy teares had bene of trouth: can they be forged to? Thy teares which at commaundment are, from flattering face to flo. Thy Gods did make mee iudge the best, these pledges were in vaine: God wote one parcell of them mought a siely Mayden traine.
That I supported thée at néede it mooues mée nought at all: So that thy harbour all had bene, the matter had bene small. But shamelesse and with blinde forecast, from bourde to bed to goe: And there to passe in Venus toyes doth agrauate my woe. O that the last forepassed night before that cursed tyde Had bene my last: then Phyllis might with spotlesse fayth haue dyde I hoped better, by deserte who had thy friendship wonne: The hope, which méede and right procures, they say is well begoonne. The glorie is not great by guile to circumuent a Mayde: You rather should my simplenesse with friendly fauour payde. A woman, and a louing wight thy forged fraude hath made To be intrapt: God graunt thy prayse by Phyllis spoyle to vade. Among th'Athenian noble wightes thy seate shall be assignde: Thy Syre amid his spoyles shall stande, and thou his sonne behinde.
When shamefull Syron shall be read and fell Procustes death, And Scynis with the Minotaure, whome Theseus reft his breath: When Creon conquerde shall appeare, and Centaures there be séene: And be recorded that thy Syre, at Plutos Court hath béene: Beneath thy Fathers manly factes, shall stande this stately stile: (Lo this is that vnfaithfull guest, who Phyllis did beguile.) Of all thy fathers noble actes, and woorthie feates of fame: Thou onelie doste resemble one, which he accoumpts a shame: For he king Minos daughter reft, and hir forewent at last: And thou (as heire of all his guile) doste frame a iugling cast. But shée hath made a wise exchaunge, (I spite not) for the best: Vpon hir Tigers bridled braue, shée rydes at quiet rest. But now such suters as in Thrace, of mée were scornde before, Despise to be espousde to hir who loues a straunger more,
Than such as were my Countrie men, to Athens let hir go, (Saye they) to weare the Thracian crowne we want not one I trowe. The ende is it that tryes the fact, God sende him sorie haps, That alway thinkes it best to iudge the cause by after claps. But so my Countrie waues were cutte, and sundred with the keale, Then myght I vaunt my loue imployde, to tende to publike weale. But slender was the loue I bare to this my natiue soyle: My Pallace moues not thée a mite, ne Bystons pleasaunt goyle. The countnaunce and the gesture both, are yet imprinted fast Within my breast, that thou didst vse, when Phyllis sawe thée last. And didst thou dare with clasping armes, imbrace hir carkasse so? And touch hir chirrie lyppe with thine, a thousande times and ino? And to confounde thy brackish teares, with Phyllis salted brine? And that the weather serude so well, a fault with Aeole fine?
And when thou tookste thy last farewell, adue how darste thou say? Demophoon will retyre againe, that (Phyllis) is no nay. Shall I expect his gainecome that hath minde on nothing lesse? Or gape for sayles that shonne the porte where was their chiefe redresse? And yet I can but long to sée thy comming, though be long: Though fixed day be past, reuert and quite somepart of wrong. But what doe I vnhappie wishe? an other daintie dame Both thée, and all thy loue hath wonne to thy reprochefull shame. I thinke that Phyllis is forgot, that vsde hir guest so well: Fie, fie, of Phyllis make not straunge, ne aske the place I dwell. I am that Phyllis (would thou wist) who harbourde thée at néede: And gaue thée porte that long on Seas hadst wandred all in dréede. Whose goods inricht thy poore estate, and hauing wealth at will Did succour thée, and woulde haue done if thou hadst taryed still.
Euen shée, that made thée Lorde and Prince of all Lycurgus lande: And yéelded thee a Scepter farre vnfit for womans hande. As farre as chillie Rhodope to busshie Haemus goes: And sacred Haebrus with his streames, and weltring waters floes. Euen she that gaue thée leaue to pluck hir Maydenhead all beshroude: And with thy craftie hande to let hir honest belt abroade. At that synister time was prest Tisiphone in place: And eke the Owle, with dolefull shriche, and monstrous vgly face. Not farre from thence with snakie bushe, the fell Alecto lay: Who with hir gastly glowing eyes, the presence did affray. Yet naythelesse to ragged rockes, and shore I vie to hie: And all about to kenne the coast I cast my gazing eye. When starres in rowling skyes doe ratinge, or Phoebus yéelde his light, I go to see where Aeols windes with Neptunes waues doe fight.
And whatsoeuer shippe I vewe come cutting on the Sea To Thracia warde: I iudge it straight our natiue Gods to be. Then lyke a Bedlam wight to waues and drenching seas I ronne: As farre as swelling waters flowe, when ebbing tyde is done. But how much more the Barke ariues, and néerer is to lande: The more amazde, and from my wittes estraunged doe I stande. Then gyn my sences all to fayle, my liuely partes to faint: And (were not for my Maydes) I shoulde with swouning be attaint. A créeke there standes, that is by kinde, not farre vnlike a bowe: Whose picked pointes with ruthlesse rocke, and hardoned stone doth growe. I was resolude wyth stayed minde, and vnappalled heart, From thence to cast my corps adowne, and will if thou depart. Then restlesse floude, and fleeting waues, my carkasse will applye To shore, and thou thine Hostesse shalt vnterred sée with eye.
Though Adamant thy rygor then and stubburne stéele excéede, Yet wilt thou saye, fye Phyllis, fye, this pursute had no néede. Sometime my fansie serues me well with venoms drench to die: And straight with sworde to hast my death, I am at point to trie. Then with a string to stoppe my breath, I thinke it passing fit: And with a ruthlesse hande, a corde about my throte to knit. For certaine fully bent I am, with spéedie leaning life, To recompence my spotted fame, in choyse shall be no strife. And thou that didst procure my bane, for thy desert shalt haue This Verse, or some such other lyke, insculped on my graue. Demophoon, that guilefull guest, made Phyllis stoppe hir breath: His was the cause, and hirs the hande that brought hir to the death.
The Argument of the third Epistle, entituled Briseis to Achylles. THe Greekes ariude at Phrygia, fell to sacke The neighbour townes to aged Priams walles: When fierce Achylles brought to wailefull wracke Cilisias both, and tooke two Virgins thrawles: Th'one Chrysis hight a passing goodly Dame, And Briseis th'other not much vnlike the same. Chrysis Atrides chose to sporte withall, Achylles Briseis had for like intent, But when at last the Prince forewent his thrall, He Briseis reft, whome earst Achylles hent: Which done, he left his Launce, he fled the fielde, And would no more his wonted weapons wielde. The Chieftaine sawe at length Achylles lacke, And former fight in fielde with furious so, To stint the strife, he sent him Briseis backe, But he refusde to take the Ladie tho: Which when the Virgin sawe, this following verse Faire Briseis sent his brasen breast to pierce.
The thirde Epistle. Briseis to Achylles. THe dolefull lynes you reade from captiue Briseis came: Whose Troian fist can scarcely yet with Gréekish figures frame. My flushing teares did cause the blottes and blurres you sée: Yet in these dréerie droppes I knowe the weight of wordes to bée. If lawfull be to plaine of thée my Lorde and Féere: Of thée my Feere and Lorde the plaint thy selfe shalt quickly heare. I déeme it not thy guilt, that I fro thée was sent: Yet in some part for yéelding mée so soone thou mayst be shent. No sooner Eurybate with Talthybius came: But I was yéelded to their handes my iourney forth to frame. And they with glaunsing eyes ytossed too and fro, In secrete silence did consult my fansies plight to know.
I might haue stayde a while, deferring of my wo Had earned thankes, I did not kisse my Lorde Achylles tho. But teares beraynde my chéekes, I retchlesse rent mine heare: And least I had bene rapte againe, I stoode in gastly feare. Ofte minded I by breach, and fcape to haue retournde: But scoutes and warders lay in waite, that me my purpose wornde. To issue out by night of foes I stoode in dread: Though if I had bene caught, I should to Troian Dames bene lead. But yéelded vp, I haue bene many nights alack: Not rescude by thy haughtie powre, thy malice is too stack. Patroclus did enquire, (when I from thee did go:) What bred my dole, since quick retyre, should soone abridge my wo? Thou doste not onely cease to sue for me againe: But aye procurste the most thou mayst, the Captaine shoulde detaine
Thy Briseis from thy clummes: go nowe I saye and boast (Thou hote and earnest louer) of thy loue in euery coast. To thée Amyntors sonne, and Aiax came yfeare: Thy fellowe Phoenis, Aiax was by bloud to Achyl neare. Vlysses was the thirde, which shoulde haue brought me back: Of gentle wordes and guerdons great, thou shouldst haue founde no lack. Atrides Tables sent twise tenne of glowing Brasse: So finely wrought as to beholde their matches rare it was. Seauen stooles of semblant Arte and weyght, with Talants fiue Of Golde, a dosen stately steades, to gallop passing bliue. And (more than néeded too, or that Achylles lackt) A troupe of daintie trulles that came from Cities lately sackt. With them a pretie peate, (of Agamemnons thrée Faire daughters, but thou néeded none) thy louing wife to bée.
Of lyke the summe is small Achylles woulde bestowe Vpon my raunsome, if he scorne, the things he shoulde forgoe: That hauing proffer made of mee with heaped gaine, Refuseth mée and all the wealth, and barres mee by and maine. Aye mée, by what desert hath Briseis lost thy loue? Achylles, why so soone from hir shouldst thou thy heart remoue? Doth cankred fortune still persist in yrefull rage To Myser wightes? will neuer calme these hurling broyles asswage? I by thy manly Mart sawe Lyrnes brought to sack: And I in Lyrnes had a share, which now is gone to wrack. I sawe with ruthfull eye, of myne allyance thrée, (Of three my Mother déere was one) there lyked lyues to flee. I sawe my husbande eke on bloudie soyle, with gore Besprent, with wide and gaping woundes in vglye wyse to rore.
For all these hurtes endurde on thée I made my choyse: That thou my Lorde and Louer art, and brother I reioyce. Thou sworste by Tethys tho, that I shoulde scape annoy: And that my bondage shoulde not bréede my domage, but my ioy. Euen to this fine it tendes that I with all this dowre, Shoulde of Achylles be refusde for Agamemnons powre. Moreouer brute hath blazde, that when the morning light Hath clearde the pole, that thou on Seas with shippe wilt take thy flight. Which fell reporte no soo∣ner came vnto mine care, But I by sodaine chaunge of hue declarde my chaunge of cheare. And wilt thou thus depart? to whome wilt thou me leaue? Who will relieue my vile estate, or succourlesse receyue? Let gastly gaping gulfe and quaking earth deuoure: Or let me féele of Vulcanes boltes the stroke, and scathfull scoure.
Let flasshing flame of fire and lightning Briseis burne, And so by sodaine clappe hir corps to partched cynders turne: Ere shée from Pthia sée hir Lorde Achylles wende Imbarckt, and leaue his thrall behinde, which mightie Ioue forefende. If my returne may like, or countrie Gods thée please: My burden shall not bréede the Barcke, or thée such great disease. The Victor as a thrall, (not as a spouse hir Make) I will attende: my hande to spinne and carde shall vndertake. In all the Achaian soile, to wife the brauest Dame Receiue, let hir with Achyl lodge Cupidos feates to frame. A worthie daughter lawe for Pelius, Aeacus sonne: To whome, olde Nereus to become a Seignour would not shonne. The while, I sielie wenche prompt to obey thy hest, Will doe my taske at turne and Cardes or Distaffe with the rest.
So that I craue hir nought, but onely that thy wife, (Which woulde torment my heart full sore) will cease from grutching strife. Ne banishe me myne ease, ne suffer hir to teare In spitefull wyse, my golden lockes, and rent my crysped heare. In silence to thy selfe saye: this was once my loue, As th'other is my wedded spouse, whose rygor I reproue. I force not what I bide, so I with thee may staye: But Briseis hath a doubtfull dréede, that puttes good hope awaye. What dost thou more expect? Atrides wrath is gone: And Greece, in dolefull wise, before thy féete doth make hir mone. Represse thy raging yre, that dost the rest subdue: Now cruell Hector makes the Gréekes their restlesse rage to rue. Achylles take thy loue and Briseis once againe: And then with luckie Mart, thy fist with Troian bloud distaine.
Let hir that was the cause of wrath, appease thine yre: Let hir, that forst thy griefe, bée cause that thou to ioye aspire. Ne doe thou thinke disdaine to graunt me my request: Since Meleager yeelded him to Cleopatras hest. I speake it by reporte, thou knowste the matter well: How Althaea sought to spoyle hir sonne, (O Achyl) thou canst tell. Who was a valiant wight, and noble for his Mart: And yet he did renounce his armes, and from his Countrie start. Whome onely milde request of Cleopatra bowde: But Briseis wordes are of no weight, hir sute is not alowde. Whereof I ne disdaine, who may not iustly craue The title of a spouse, but am a vyle and bounden slaue. For sundrie times when thou were bent to Venus playe, Then wouldst thou bid vnto thy bedde thy seruant come hir waye.
Among thy captiues one a Madams name me gaue, Those are vnsitting tearmes (quoth I) not gréeing to a slaue. By my good husbandes bones layde in vntimely pit, (Which bones I minde to honour aye till liuely twine vnknit) And by my brothers gostes which did resist tyll death, And in defence of natiue Gods to lauish were of breath: By both our heades which wée haue often led yfeare: And by thy weapons, which my friendes haue tryde to much, I sweare. That none of all the Gréekes my secret partes doe know: Forsake and as an abiect scorne mée, if it proue not so. But if I shoulde demaunde an othe of thée againe, That thou hadst with none other Lasse but with thy Briseis laine. And say: thou valiant wight, hast thou not past in play Since I to Agamemnon went? Achylles would say nay.
The Gréekes surmise that thou doste leade thy lyfe in wo, And mourne for want of Briseis: but I sée it is not so. Thou rumblest on thy Lute, swéete musicke lykes thine eare, Some lustfull Lasse will not permit Achylles coutch be leare. If question were, why thou didst stynt from wonted fight: Thou wouldst auouch that Venus were with greater pleasure freight. More safetie is to lincke, and rowe in Venus Barge, Or with a pleasant Thracian Lute all sorrowes to discharge: Than in thy hande to haue a shielde with bloudie speare, Or heauie Helmet on thy head, and feltred lockes to beare. But worthie workes of warre were more imbraced earst, Than such a safetie, when thy breast with glories Launce was pearst. What? were thou onely stoute when I by fight was wonne? Is all that courage quayled quite now Lyrnes siege is donne?
Nay, Gods forbid that thou shouldst séeke thy fame to loose: Yet rather let thy Launce the breast of haughtie Hector broose. Sende me (you Gréekes) to treate, as seruaunt will I sue Vnto my Lord, and all my woordes my kisses shall ensue. For Briseis will preuayle farre more than Phoenis can And more than wise Vlysses tals or Aiax with the man. T'is much with folded armes his neck to haue imbrast: And louing lookes by fancie forst with glauncing eye to cast. Though thou (Achylles) bee with rigor and with rage Repleate, yet naythelesse with teares thy wrath I will asswage. And may they now take place? if so, Gods graunt thy Syre (The worthie Peleus) to his yeares and hoped age aspire. If so thou heare my sute, Gods graunt that Pyrrhus may (Thy worthie sonne) to battayle go in good and luckie day.
Beholde thou manly wight. thy Briseis clad with wo: Abandon rygor in good time that paynes thy Louer so. Or if thy loue be chaungde, from loue to lothsome hate: Force hir that liues in heauie plight to yéelde hir due to fate. The fine will proue it so, my corps and colour fade: The soule to kéepe his former force thy onely hope hath made. Which hope, when so shall faint and be debarde his hyre: Thy Briseis to hir husbands soule and brothers shall aspyre. To force a woman die, no glorie mayst thou gaine: But so thou long to haue my death let me with sworde be slaine. Some bloud as yet remaynes in carefull corps inclosde, Which would flush out, if with thy sworde the vaine were once disclosde. With selfe same weapon pierce my weake and feeble syde, Wherewith (if Pallas had not beene) Atrides should haue dyde.
Yet rather saue my lyfe as thou to fore hast donne: And thou that were by pittie moonde, by humble sute be wonne. On Troian wreake thy wrath, thy fierce vnfayned foe: Go hath in Phrygian bloud, thy blowes on Priams friends bestowe. Achylles say the worde, and where thou come or stay, If thou wilt haue me make returne, thy Briseis commes hir way.
The Argument of the fourth Epistle, entituled Phaedrato Hippolytus. THe frantick Phaedra, Theseus wedded Make, In absence of the Duke hir husband fell In loue with Hippolyte, and did forsake The worthie wight that looude his wife so well. But he delighted with Diana more Than crancking Cupid, or Dame Venus play: Aye kept the chase, and slue the sauage Bore, Not forcing what his Motherlaw did say. She naythelesse attacht with glowing gleede, To winne the chastfull youth to filthie lust: In subtile sort his humors sought to feede, Perswading him hir sute to be but iust. With sundrie sleightes she went about to winne The retchlesse youth, that minded nothing lesse Than shamefull lust and filthie fleshly sinne. The Mothers minde this Pistle doth expresse, These suing lynes hir sluttish sute bewray, Wherein to Hippolyte thus gan she say.
The fourth Epistle. Phaedra to Hippolytus. THe health and gréeting that she sendes, the same shall Phaedra want, Vnlesse thou (Hippolyte) such health vouchsafe to Phaedra graunt. Receyue and reade what so is sent, what damage may ensue? In these perhaps there lurckes that may thy pleasures plight renue. As well by lande, as surging seas, such writtes are woont to wende: And foes that féede on rancour, reade the lynes the foes doe sende. Thrise was I bent to haue disclosde to thée my couert sute: But thrise my foltring tongue was tide, I stoode as one were mute. I mingled bashfull shame with loue, till loue furpassed shame: Wherefore the woords I blusht to speake, in wryting reade the same. For what so Cupid giues in charge t'is madnesse to dispise: For he doth conquer God and man as nature did deuise.
He when I stoode in gastfull dreade to penne my earnest sute, Said, write on Phaedra, he shall yéelde and pay thy paynes with fruite. Be prest thou mightie Prince of loue, and as thy feruent fire Doth burne my brest: so cause him frie with Phaedras hote desire. I minde not by enormous guilt to breake my spousall knot: For (would thou wist) my life as yet is frée from shamefull blot. How much the longer t'is ere loue inuades a womans breast: The sorer is the cruell gashe, and bréedes the more disrest. My inward parts are all inflamde, my bowels boyle with heate: My scorched heart forepinde with wo a lurcking wound doth freate. As Bullocks may not well abide the crooked yoke at furst: Nor trampling Colts with bit or brake to haue their iawes yburst: So fares it by my skillesse brest that hardly may endure. Vnwoonted loue, or such vnrest as Cupid will procure.
In youth when skill by practise commes, the knowledge is profounde: But who so loues when youth is spent can not with Arte abounde. The first taste of my spotlesse fame vnto thy share shall fall And eche of vs at once shall bée to sinfull lust in thrall. T'is somewhat from the fraughted boughes to pluck the fruite at full, And Primrose with a nimble nayle from slender stalke to pull. Euen so the former brightnesse of my passed age was cleare, Obscured with no cloudie crime, as doth in prouse appeare. But well it chaunceth that I am attacht with worthie flame, A foule Adulter, than the fact doth bréede a fouler shame. Though Iuno would to Phaedras vse of Ioue renounce hir right: Yet Phaedra would Hippolytus preferre with all hir might. And now (which thou wouldst scarcely déeme) I am not as I was: I haue delight in quechie groues, by brutish beastes to passe.
Now Dian with hir bended how and shaftes is all my care: I yéel de mée wholy to thy will, in wrack and wealth to fare. My pleasure is to haughtie hilles, and bushie brakes to hie: To pitch my hay, or with my Houndes to rayse a lustie crie. Or else with weake and willing arme a trembling dart to throwe, Or wearie limmes in grasse and greaues with pleasure to bestowe. T'is oft my practise in the plaine a Charret for to guide: And with a bitte, to wrest and winde the horse from side to side. Sometimes by restlesse raging fittes much like to Bacchus Nunne, Or to Cibeles brainsick Nymphes in Ida Mount, I runne. Resembling those whome Dryades, and Faunes doe force to flée: Whome Semigods we déemen and halfe heauenly wightes to bée. This tale is tolde to me at large when furious fittes are past: To mee I say, whose couert parts with silent loue doe wast.
We may perhaps vnto the fate and fortune of our kinde Impute this loue, and Venus longs by tribute vs to binde. For first the faire Europa was of mightie Ioue imbrast: Who in the figure of a Bull did play a sluttish cast. Another brutish Bull my Dame Pasiphae beguilde: Who with an vgly Monster was by him begot with childe. False Theseus by my sisters shifts and track of silken twine, The crooked Caue and doubtfull denne of Dedal fled in fine. And last of all, least I should séeme to swarue from Minos trade, The remnaunt of that noble race the like attempt haue made. And that by fatall doome procurde, one house two Nymphes hath woonne: My sister looude the father well, and I imbrace the sonne. Two sisters were away conuaide by thée, and by thy Syre: Erect two Trophées of one house, whereto you did aspyre.
That time when we in Athens did to Ceres incense yéelde: Would Gods that Gnosian quiet soyle in Creta me had helde. Then most of all (but euer well) thou stoodste in Phaedras grace, And chiefely tho thy piercesant loue my yéelding heart did race. Thy vesture was as white as snow, and head with garlands deckt: Thy visage swarth, was séemely then with Rosie redde infect. Thy countnance, which to other Dames so clownish séemes and grimme, For clownish, comely Phaedra thinks hir eye doth iudge it trimme. Fye on those fonde vnmanly men that séeke in nice attyre Against their kinde, the curious tricks of women to aspyre. Thée (Hippolyte) thy warlike face and staring locks commend: Thy countnance grymed all with dust a comely shape doth lend. Where thou with Raine dost rule thy horse and gallop in the fielde: I maruell at thy Arte, that so canst force a Courser yéelde.
Or where thou with thy nymble arme a thyrling Launce dost cast: I muse how such a slender Dart should pierce the ayre so fast. Or where thou holde thy hunting staffe, ytipt with stubburne stéele, Or ought dost else, it glads my minde my heart the ioy doth feele. Wherefore, this rygor to the woods and knarrie trées expell, I am not shée, that doth deserue to die for louing well. O to what purpose wilt thou put Dianas feates in proufe, And take from Venus all hir due and stand from hir aloufe? For what so lacks successiue rest and respite after toyle Which should refresh the fainting limmes, must néedes sustaine the foyle. For tryall, take thy crooked bow and let it stand ybent, And neuer cease to shoote, and thou shalt féele his force relent. Though Cephalus in silent woods were woont to waste his time, And kill his game with dexter hande when sauage were in prime:
Yet naythelesse to Auroras Couch and Cabbin would he wende: In lothed Tythons woonted roome the ioyfull tyme to spynde. Not once, nor twise, but sundrie sithes the Goddesse Venus lay With Adon in the waylesse woods hir pleasures to assay. So with the faire Atlantas loue sir Meleager glowde, Whome he in proufe of perfect loue the monsters spoyle allowde. So let vs now at length I pray, be numbred with the mo: The rudenesse of your chase appeares if Venus it forgo. My selfe will follow at a foote, though rockie hilles say nay: No gnashing Bore with threatning tuskes thy Phaedra shall affray. Two seas there are that with their waues enuiron Isthmos so, That all the Iland heares the flouds on eyther side that flo. There I with thée in Trezen will soiourne in Pytheus raigne: For now that soyle contents mée more than all my Countrie vaine.
Now loytring Theseus doth dislodge, not minding to retire As yet, Perithous his friend his presence doth desire. And least we should apparant truth with frowarde will denie: That Pyrrith he preferres before our looues we may espie. And not this onely wrong (though this were much) we both endure: But he in greater matters doth our open wrong procure. My brothers bones with balefull blowes of knarrie clubbe he brake: My sister eke suspecting nought, this Theseus did forsake. The chiefe of all the Amazons for prowesse and for fame Thy Mother was, who well deserude great fauour for the same. But if thou chaunce of hir what is become, demaunde to make: Thou shalt descrie that she hir death by Theseus sworde did take. And that before she was conioynde in mariage. Wote you why? For thou base borne shouldst neuer raigne and Princes roome supplie.
And more than that, on me he gat some Impes, whom Theseus wrath, Not mine (I witnesse all the Gods) too soone bereued hath. O Lord, what so she were aliue that would thy spoyle intende: Amidst hir trauell would hir life by shamefull death might ende. Wherefore go too, doe reuerence vnto thy fathers bedde: Which he by his vnhonest meanes and faythlesse flight hath fledde. Be not surprisde with foolish feare nor rapt with gastfull awe, That I thy lotted stepdame am, and thou my Sonne in lawe. These rytes and superstitions by Saturn were maintainde: But all such lawes in future time are like to be restrainde: That rustie Saturn now is dead, his statutes are all gone: Now follow Ioue, who gouernes all, and raignes as Prince alone. For Ioue as lawfull hath allowde what so may bréede delight: And now the brother may his fayth vnto his sister plight.
They whome Dame nature had allyde and linckt by lawe of kinde, By mutuall loue, and friendly league the knot more firmely binde. To kéepe in couert such delightes it is but slender skill, The cloake of kinred will procure the worlde to iudge no yll. When so our kissing shall be séene, or clipping close be knowe: That I a stepdame am so kinde, to both our prayse will growe. Thou shalt not néede to come by darke or bleare the Porters eye By comming to the lodging late where I am woont to lye: As we haue soiournde long yfeare, so we hereafter will: And as we haue in open kist, so may we franckly still. With mee thou mayst be safe and sounde thy fact shall purchase fame: And though thou in my bed were séene it will not bréede thy shame. Wherefore expell all fond delayes. and hast to Venus ioy: So Cupid, that on me doth rage, procure thee none annoy.
Thou séest I take not in disdaine in humble sort to sue: Lord, where is all my pride become and haughtie wordes that flue? I was in minde and fully bent resistance to haue made, Reuolting aye: but now I sée no stay in Louers trade. Thus conquerd, with erected handes and falling at thy knée I sue for grace. What best beséemes we Louers can not see. Now honest shame hath fled my face and makes no longer stay: Relent, and since I doe confesse, ridde rygor cleane away. Since Minos that doth owe the Seas my stately Syre is knowne, Since from my Grandsires wreakfull hands the thundring boltes are throwne: Since Phaedra that doth make request of Phoebus line discendes, Who to the soyle his blazing brandes for earthly comfort lendes: (In this my loue great honour lurckes) let noble stocks dissent, (If Phaedras sute may not be heard) enforce thée to relent.
All Creta, where the mightie Ioue was fostred, is my dowre: Which I will wholy yeelde to thée to vse thereon thy powre. Exile this ruthfull rage, my Dame a sauage Bull could mooue: More cruell than a brutish beast wilt thou thy selfe approoue? For Venus sake I craue remorse, whome I doe honour faine: So graunt ye Gods that Hippolyte may neuer loue in vaine. Diana chast in silent woods so prest be at thy call: And Lawndes so lende thée store of game to glad thy minde withall. So Satyrs, friendly shew your selues, and Mountaine Panes eake, So on the cruell tusked Boare thy Iauelaine mayst thou breake. So, (though thou hate the hurtlesse Nymphes) let Nymphes from Christall flood, Alowe the lycor to expell thy thirst in desert wood. Vnto these milde requestes of mine I added teares withall: When so thou reade the lynes, surmise thou sawste the drops to fall.
The Argument of the fift Epistle, entituled Oenone to Paris. KYng Priamus wife with childe, and neare hir time, did dreame That she was brought abed with flash, and flaming fierie streame. The doubtfull Sire demaundes the Oracles aduise. Which tolde that damage by the Babe to Troie should arise. The father gaue in charge the childe should die the death: The Dame deliuerde sought the meane to saue hir Babe his breath. A Hyard bad the childe, that growne to mans estate, Of Oenon was enamoured, and tooke hir to his Mate. But when the Ladies stroue for beautie, Paris gaue His verdit on Dame Venus side: that promisde he should haue In token of good will, a passing wench for hewe: Meane while the Syre by secret signes his sonne sir Paris knewe.
To Greece the gallant goes and steales Atrides wife, That was the cause of wailefull warre, and roote of ranckling strife. Which when Oenone knewe (Report had blazde it so) Agrieude shee made hir iust complaint: and prayde him to forgo The wrongfull Greekish rape, and take hir to his Feere, The wordes shee wrote with painefull penne▪ began as you shall heare.
The fift Epistle. Oenone to Paris. TO Paris that was once hir owne though now it be not so, From Ida, Oenon gréeting sendes as these hir letters show. May not thy nouell wife endure that thou my Pistle reade? That they with Grecian fist were wrought thou néedste not stand in dreade. Pegasian Nymph renoumde in Troie, Oenone hight by name, Of thée, (that were mine owne) complaine if thou permit the same. What froward God doth séeke to barre Oenone to be thine? Or by what guilt haue I deserude that Paris should decline? Take paciently deserude woe and neuer grutch at all: But vndeserued wrongs will grieue a woman at the gall. Scarce were thou of so noble fame. as platly doth appeare: When I (the ofspring of a floud) did choose thée for my Féere.
And thou, who now art Priams sonne, (all reuerence layde apart) Were tho a Hyard to beholde when first thou wanste my heart. How oft haue we in shaddow laine whylst hungrie flocks haue fedde? How oft haue we of grasse and greaues preparde a homely bedde? How oft on simple stacks of strawe and bennet did we rest? How oft the dew and foggie mist our lodging hath opprest? Who first discouerde thée the holtes and Lawndes of lurcking game? Who first displaid thée where the whelps lay sucking of their Dame? I sundrie tymes haue holpe to pitch thy toyles for want of ayde: And forst thy Hounds to climbe the hilles that gladly would haue stayde. The boysteous Beech Oenones name in outwarde barke doth beare: And with thy caruing knife is cut Oenon, euery wheare. And as the trées in tyme doe waxe so doth encrease my name: Go to, grow on, erect your selues, helpe to aduaunce my fame.
There growes (I minde it verie well) vpon a banck, a trée Whereon there doth a fresh recorde and will remaine of mée. Liue long thou happie trée, I say, that on the brinck dost stande: And hast ingraued in thy barke these woordes, with Paris hande. When pastor Paris shall reuolte. and Oenons loue forgoe: Then Xanthus waters shall recoyle, and to their Fountaines floe. Now Ryuer backwarde bende thy course, let Xanthus streame retier: For Paris hath renounst the Nymph and prooude himselfe a lier. That cursed day bred all my doole, the winter of my ioy, With cloudes of froward fortune fraught procurde me this annoy: When cankred craftie Iuno came with Venus, (Nurce of loue) And Pallas eke, that warlike wench, their beauties pride to proue, No sooner heard I of that hap which thou thy selfe didst tell, But streight through all my quiuering bones a trembling feare there fell.
And plunged all in doubtfull dread, of aged folkes I sought What might this gastly matter meane: some haynous thing they thought. Then with a trice the trées were cut, the timber went to wrack: And tallowed Keales did forrow Seas and made the Cabels crack. At parture saltish teares were shed thou canst but say the same: In fayth this latter loue of thine deserues the greater shame. Then showres of brackish brine began of eyther side to raine: And both repleate with griefe alike at parture gan to plaine. Not Bacchus braunches so imbrace, ne lymber limmes of vine Enuiron that whereof it growes, as thou this necke of mine. How often were thou wroth with windes when windes did serue thée well? Thy iourney Mates began to smyle when they thy sleightes did smell. How oft didst thou me sweetely kisse and then vnkisse againe? How did thy (last adue) procure thy foltring tongue to paine?
With wished wind thy sayles were stust that hoong vpon thy Mast: The waters waxte as gréene as grasse th' Oares went on so fast. With sight as long as sight would serue, thy Barcke I did pursue And when mine eye might sée no more, my heart began to rue. To gréene Neriedes I did fue that thou mightst soone retyre: And I (to further this my woe) thy gainecome did desyre. Whose comming is to others vse procured by my sute: (Alas) of all my traueling toyle a harlot hath the fruite. A huge and haughtie hill there is that gapes into the flood, Repelling all the waltring waues that beate his banck a good. From thence I tooke my prime prospect and knew full well thy shippe: A sodaine ioy well nigh had made me from the Mount to skippe. But whilst I stayde, I sawe in toppe a purple banner shine: Which colours made me sore adradde, I knewe they were not thine.
The shippe that slacked not to sayle came by and by to shore, With quaking heart I saw a Lasse I neuer knew before. Ne yet could that perdie suffice, (but wherefore made I stay?) The hatefull harlot out of hande hir manners did display. Then mourning gan I rent my Robes, then beate I on my brest: And with vnfriendlie fist my face in wailefull wise was drest. My yelling clamours Ida heard, and witnesde all my woe: I carred thither to my Cotte my teares, that fell as snowe. So graunt yée Gods that Helen rue and spoyled of hir Make, Of these my griefes procurde by hir the greatest share may take. Now hast thou brought them home by Seas and ouer wandred waues. That haue their loyall husbandes fled and left as lothsome slaues: But when thou were in vile estate and led a Hyards lyfe: Poore Paris had but Oenon tho to his approoued wyfe.
I am not she that weighes thy wealth thy Pallace mooues me nought: Ne to be Priams daughter I by earnest sute haue sought. Yet néedelesse is that Priam should of such a daughter shame: What should procure olde Hecuba, to blush to be my Dame? I well deserude, and verie faine a Princes spouse would bee: A Scepter would beséeme my hande and passing well agrée. Though I with thée in open holte amid the sedge were séene: Disdaine me not, a purple bedde were fitter for a Quéene. In fine my loue is voyde of dreade thou needste not warre at all: Reuenger ships are not in sight to sack the Troian wall. But hatefull Helen is requirde with wreakefull warre againe: This is a daintie dowre in déede where bloudshed is the gaine. Aske Hectors counsell in this case where thou shouldst hir restore; Deiphobus, Polydamas, with other Troians more.
Let sage Antenors tale be hearde, let Priam giue aduise: For they by long expence of yeares haue gotten to be wise. It is a shamefull thing in déede a strumpet to prefarre: The goodnesse of thy cause appeares, the Gréekes doe iustly warre. Maist thou assure hir to be true or ought in hir affie, Whome thou so quickly wanst with words and made hir countrie flie? As yong Atrides doth lament and sorrow this his fate, And takes in griefe a straunger should enioy his wedded Mate: So Paris shall in processe proue and sweare that gaged fayth Once faléed, may not be restorde till life doe ende by death. Put case she loue thée (Paris) well, so did she loue the Gréeke: But now the fiely man is sole, his Helen is to séeke. Thrise happie was sir Hectors wife, hir lucke was passing good: Thou shouldst haue followde Hectors trade and to thy bargin stood.
More light art thou than partched leaues when suck and sappe is lost, That with the winde for want of weight from place to place are tost. In thée lesse suretie to be found than weight in bearde of wheate, That is surprisde with Sunnie rayes and Phoebus feruent heate. I call to minde thy sisters sawes which tho I tooke as vaine: The Prophetesse pronounst in prouse that now is passing plaine. What madnesse makes thée thus inragde to sow thy séede in sande: O Nymph (she said) with bootelesse Plough thou breakste a barraine lande. A Gréekish Hayfer comes to Troie, that both thy Countrie soyle And thée, thy house, (which Gods forefend) will bring to vtter foyle. With spéede go sincke that shamefull ship, let drowne the beastly Barcke That fraughted is with Phrygian bloud, repleate with Troian carcke. No sooner had this Sibyll sayde, hir Vassels thought hir woode: But I with quaking feare was rapt, my haire erected stoode.
Thy words (Cassandra) were of weight, thou art a Sibyll true: The Hayfer leapes within my leaze that makes my heart to rue. Surpassing though hir beautie bée dishonest is hir life, That leaues hir Countrie Gods, and is become a straungers wife. Once was she earst away conuayde from Greece by Theseus theft: I wote not by what Theseus, but by Theseus was she reft. Might she with Maidenhead make retyre from such a wanton guest? No, no, I know the trade of loue as well as doth the best. Well, pose it to be rape and stealth, so cloake the crime with name: Yet shée that was so often wrongde assented to the same. Oenon neuer swarude hir Hest though Paris were vniust: Of right thou shouldst haue béene beguilde in whome was slender trust. Sage, swift, and séemely Satyrs would with me bene coupled faine, Whome they in leauie woods haue sought with great and grieffull paine.
The fonded Faunus oft in Ide my friendship did request: Whose head with hurelesse hornes, and boughes of Pine was brauely drest. The faithfull Phoebus (Troians trust and rampire) looude me well: Vntill such time my daintie fruite vnto sir Phoebus fell, And that by force: in proufe whereof I rent his golden haire, And scratcht his face with frowarde fist, the signes as yet appeare. No Iewels I, ne Gemmes receiude for filthie lukers hyre: T'is beastly so t'ingage the corps for greedie mucks desyre. He déemde it recompence ynough his Phisick to bestowe: My skillesse bande and barraine skull he taught his Arte to knowe. What hearbe soeuer were of powre or vertue to recure, To learne his force and lurcking might I could my selfe assure. Aye me, the most vnhappie wench, vnluckiest vnder Sunne: Though I in Phisick haue good sight by loue my skill is wunne.
Apollo Phisicke that diuisde Admetus flock did féede: And had his godly breast incenst with Oenons partching gléede. But Paris worst thou what? the health that neyther hearbes may lende Ne Gods may graunt, thy friendly fist at once to me may sende. Thou canst, and I haue well deserude, take mercy of a Mayde: I come not like a Gréekish foe, Atrides powre to ayde. But thine I am, and from thy youth thy louer haue I béene: And will whilste (lungs shall lende me breath) thy faythfull friend be séene.
The Argument of the sixt Epistle, entituled Hypsiphyle to Iason. THe Oracle pronounste to Pelyas, that hee Should then in daunger stand of death when be did chaunce to see One barefoote, doing rytes vnto his Fathers ghost: T'was Iasons hap to mecte him, that by hap his shoe had lost In floud Auaurus foord. The Vncle waying than The prophecie, to stande in doubt of dreadfull death began, To Colchos he per swades the lustie youth to fleete To fet the golden Fleese a spoyle for such a Gallant meete, In hope the daungers would the wanton wight deuourde Sir Iason with a troupe of Greekes through chocking chanell scourde. At Lemnos he at length and all his route arriude, An Yle where cursed women had their husbandes lyues depriude.
Hypsiphyle the Queene did entertaine the Greeke And all his traine, for courtesie they neuer sawe the like, There two yeares he soiournde, his Mates at last bespake Their Captaine; and perswade him thence his voyage on to take: The Queene was great with Babe, away the Grecians go, Ariude at Colch he wanne the Fleese Medea looude him so. The conquerour conueyes the Mayde with him to Greece: Which Queene Hypsiphyle hearing off, and of his prettie piece, Repynde at Iason sore; that Medea had possest. The place which shee had woonne before by vsing well hir guest. She ioyes at his retourne, the Witch shee felly hates, And thus with ioyfull Iason in hir Pistle shee dehates:
The sixt Epistle. Hypsiphyle to Jason. THe flickring fame reportes that to Thessalia soile Thou art with luckie Barck returnde, enricht with golden spoile. I ioy (as much as thou wilt giue me leaue mine owne) To heare thy health, but yet I shoulde thereof by letter knowne. For that thou shouldst not leaue my lande at thy returne Vnséene: thou couldst not haue the windes to serue thy hoped turne. Thou shouldst haue sent mée lines though weather did not serue: I stande assurde that Hypsiphyl a greeting did deserue. Why came report before thy Letters made me showe, That bluddy Mars his sacred Bulles the pinching yoke did knowe? And that of scattred seede there weapned Wightes arose? And that thy balefull hande was prest to deale them deadly blose?
And that the waker Fenne the glittering spoyle did kéepe: Which thou in fine with manly hande hast reft the shining shéepe? To such as hardly woulde beleue the wonders tolde, How blest were I, if I my vaunt thus Iason wrote. Beholde. What shall I say thou hast not playde the husbandes part? So I be thine, thy friendship farre surmounts my small desart, The brute doth blast there is a barbarous Witch arriude With thee, who hath mée of my spouse and bridely bedde depriude. Loue lightly will beleue: woulde God I might be sed A rashfull Dame, and false reportes of Iason to haue spred. A guest of Thessal came from Hemus partes of late, Who scarcely had set foote within my vnacquainted gate. How fares my Loue (quoth I) olde Aesons sonne I pray? But he with countnance cast to grounde for shame had nought to say.
Then forth I skipt in hast, and renting mine attire: Liues he (quoth I) or doe the fates my death also require? He liues (quoth he) an othe in proufe therof I craue: I made him sweare, yet to his Gods I hardly credit gaue. When to my selfe I came, thy manfull actes to knowe I long: and he how Mars his Bulles had turnde the soyle did showe. He sayde that snakie téeth for séede were cast on lande: And vpstart men with armour cladde both sworde and shielde in hande. And that the earthly broode in ciuill warre was slaine: And in a day lost sodaine lyfe by sodaine death againe. And of the Serpents fall. againe where Iason liues I aske. So hope and doubtfull dread for chiefest credit striues. Whilst he eche thing displayes desirous for to prate: He makes me shew how thou hast wrongde thy loyall spouse of late.
O where is plighted fayth? where nuptiall othes and bande? And that which shoulde béene cast in flame, I meane the spousall brande? Thou knowste me not by stealth, Dame Iuno was in place, (Who hath the marrige charge) and there did Hymen shew his face. But neyther Iuno did nor Hymen holde the light: Some furie fell with bloudshot eyes did frame this cankred spight. Why I with Minyes did deale? or Pallas sacred pine? Or (Tiphus) what hast thou to doe with any soyle of mine? Here was no famous Ramme with fléese of glowing golde: In Lemnos was no Pallace for your aged Prince to holde. First was I fully bent, (but destnie me withdrue) By womans powre to put them off and wandring guestes subdue: For Lemnian Ladies knowe too well to warre with men: My lyfe with such a valiant troupe should haue bene garded then.
I gaue the man at once my hostage and my heart: For two yeares date thou werte with mée, and neuer didst depart. When thirde Autumne came on that thou of force were faine To hoyse thy fayles: these woords thou spakste with gushing teares amaine: Mine owne I must depart, if Fortune say Amen, From hence I passe thy spouse, and will thy spouse repasse agen. The Impe within thy Wombe Gods graunt that it may liue: And wée his parents both yfeare a decent name may giue. Thus much (I minde) thou spakste, when salted teares berainde Thy falsed face, the remnant of thy sermon was restrainde. The last of all thy Mates thou clambst the sacred Arge, That spinde along, thy sayles did stroute they had so great a charge. The ship was shooude apace vpon the grayish flood: Thou threwste thine eyes to shore, and we to Seawarde lookte agood.
There standes a Turret by that ouerlookes the place: To whome I ranne, and did with teares imbrue both breast and face. I looked through my teares, mine eye as friendly light Had larger kenning than of course, and farder stretcht his sight. Adde therevnto my vowes and Prayers ioynde with dred: Which sacred vowes I will perfit since thou hast haply sped. But shall I pay my vowes? shall Medea them enioy? My heart doth ake, and wrath with loue combyned doth annoy. Shall I beare gifts to Church or be at charge at all? To loose my louing Iason shoulde there any Hayfer fall? I was not calme in minde, I alwayes stoode in awe Thy Father would not entertaine in Greece a daughter lawe. Of Greece I was in dréede, but other worke my woe: I haue receyude a hurt of one whome earst I did not knowe.
By beautie nor desert she wonne thée, but by charme: With Sorcerers Syth she sheares the Grasse whereby she workes thy harme. She sayes from woonted track the waywarde Moone to wrie: And dimme with duskie cloude the stéedes that praunce in open skie. She bridles running streames and fleeting flouds doth stay: Shee makes the Holtes and ragged rocks for ioy to skip and play. Dissheueld with hir lockes she walkes by buriall graues: And certaine of the lothsome hones from wasting flame she faues. She curseth absent wightes, of Waxe she pictures makes: And prickes with pinnes the pensiue lungs wherewith the bowels akes. Thus Loue that should be wonne with beautie and desarte: Is got (which would I had not tryde) by Herbes and hurtfull Arte. What? canst thou roll and clip or sléepe in selfe same bed With hir, deuoide of waking care and free from carking dred?
As earst she yokte the Bulles so hath she bound thée fast: And tamde thée, as the Dragons fell were conquerde by hir cast. To that she spoyles both thée and all thy Mates of prayse: And by the meane of such a wife the husbandes fame decayes. In Thessalie are some to poyson that impute Thy factes: and there will be ynough which will beleue the brute. Not this olde Aesons sonne but Oeetes daughter wrought: T'was she, not Iason, that the fléese of Golde from Colchos brought. Aske Alcimedes aduise, thy Dame doth this disléeke: Thy Father eke from chilly Role who did a daughter séeke. Let hir to Tanays go and séeke in Scythian soyle Hir louing spouse, and gape for him from Phasis farthest goyle. Fye, faythlesse Iason, fie, more light than windie blast: Why dost not thou thy painted words with déede confirme at last?
Thou partedst hence my spouse, why art not so returnde? O barre not that at gainecome which at parture was not wournde. If Noble line thou lyke, and gentrie mooue thy minde: That I King Thoas dearling was and daughter mayst thou finde. My Grandsire Baechus was, and Bacchus wife ycrownde Doth farre surpasse the lesser lights that hir enuiron rounde. Lemnos shall be my dowre, as fruitfull as the best To such as there soiourne: and me, accoumpt among the rest. Who now am brought a bed, let dubble ioy possesse Thy heart, the Father made the throwes of trauaile séeme the lesse. The number gladdes my minde, (Lucina thancked bee) Of good successe, a luckie twinne to light are brought by mée. Whose shape and shewe they beare if thou demaunde, I vaunt Thou mayst be knowne by them, saue they the fathers fraude doe want.
Whome I was euen at poynt by Legates to conuaie, Saue that the cruell stepdame was the onely cause of staie. Medea made mée dréede, who iustly may be thought More than a stepdame, with hir hande eche cursed fact is wrought. She that hir Brothers bones and fleshe coulde fling in fielde, Rent first with cruell fist: would shée haue ruth vpon my childe? Yet hir the fame reportes, (O woode and wretched Wight) That thou before thy Hypsiphyl preferrste with all thy might. She goyng for a Mayde hath playde a harlots cast: But with vnspotted bridely chaine we two were lincked fast. Hir Father she betrayde, I saude King Thoas lyfe: Shée fled from Colche, in Lemnos I remaine thy louing wyfe. But whereto? if a Drabbe an honest woman winne? And that hir crymes for iointure haue and stead of dowrie binne?
I blame the Lemnian Maydes, I muse not at their déede: For dolour to the angrie will bring wreakefull tooles with spéede. Say on, if forst with windes (as right did will thée doe) Both thou and all thy troupe at once my Port had commen too: And I with this my broode had met thée at the doore: Then wouldst thou not haue wisht the gas∣ping soyle thy corps deuoure? (Ʋnthriftie) wyth what face vpon those Babes and mée Wouldst thou haue lookte? fie traytor what had bene fitte death for thée? Thou mightst haue liude at ease and safe by my consent: Not for thou didst deserue so well, but cause I did relent. I with that Wytchesse bloud my face shoulde haue imbrude: And Iasons eke, which with hir Hearbes the Harlot did delude. To Medea I shoulde haue bene Medea then: (And if in skies be any Ioue that will giue eare to men)
As Hypsiphyl doth plaine and sobbe alone hir fill: So let that beast (Medea) mourne plagude with hir handie skill. And as I lose my Impes and am bereft my Make: So graunt, that hir as many babes and husband may forsake. Ne that she may retaine but leaue with worser hap Ill gotten goodes: and banisht begge hir breade with dish and clap, As loouing sister shée and daughter eke hath bene To Father and to Brother both: Gods graunt she may be séene So spitefull to hir Spouse, and armde with prefull rage Euen to hir tender Children whome she ought to garde in age. When Sea and Lande she hath consumde, vp to the skie Let hir go rangle lyke a Rogue and by selfeslaughter die. Thus I bereft my spouse King Thoas daughter pray: In cursed Cabbin leade your liues you beastly folkes I say.
The Argument of the vij. Epistle, entituled Dido to Aeneas. WHen Priam was opprest and Troie brought to sack, Aeneas with his aged Syre and Reliques on his back, Ingagde himselfe to Seas and shope his course aright: But yet at length it was his luck on Libie land to light By force of froward floud, where Dido gan to rayse A stately towne. The curteous Queene the wandring Troian prayes To make abode with hir: shee likte Aeneas so, As host age with hir heart at once on him shee did bestow. The messenger at length from mightie Ioue was sent To new Carthago to demaunde the Troian what he ment In Libie lande to lodge and loyter so in loue, And not to seeke the lotted lande, that was for his behoue.
Away the Troian trudgde, whose will when Dido knew Was fully bent to leaue hir lande: the Princesse gan to sue, That eyther he would staye according to his hest, Or graunt hir space to banish griefe from hir agrieued brest. When shee had wasted wordes and manie teares yshed, At poynt of death the quiuering Queene thus to Aeneas sed.
The .vij. Epistle. Dido to Aeneas. EƲen so when fates doe call ystrecht in moysted spring, Ʋpon Meanders winding banches the snowishe Swanne doth sing. Not for I thinke my wordes may ought preuaile, I write: For why I knowe the haughtie Gods, at this my purpose spite. But since my fame, my corps, and spotlesse minde are lost By cankred hap: to wast my woordes I reck it little cost. Now art thou bent to passe and leaue poore Dido so: And with the selfe same windes thy sayles and fickle fayth shall go. Aeneas now thou mindste thy Nauie with thy vowe To lose: and séeke Italia lande but where, thou doste not knowe. Not Carthage built anewe, ne yet the rysing wall, No not my stately Scepter may conuert thy minde at all.
Thou fléest the thing atchiude for those that are not donne: Thou hast bene in one lande, and now wilt to another runne. Suppose thou finde an Ile, who will giue thée the place To rule? will any yéelde his soyle to men of forraine race? Newe loue remaynes for thee another Dido eake, With other troth to be impaunde which thou againe mayst breake. When will it be that thou wilt builde Carthagos péere? Or vewe from Turrets top a troupe of such as soiourne héere? Though all these came to passe and thou hadst wishe at will: Yet where wouldst thou haue such a spouse to beare thée like good will? Euen as a waxen Torch with Sulphure toucht I burne Both day and night to Didos thought Aeneas makes returne. Euen that vngratefull guest that scornes the gistes I gaue: And he, whome I might want full well as wisdomes loare doth craue.
Yet hate I not the man though he deserue dispight: But make complaint of his vntruth, and lesse imbrace the wight. O Venus, vse hir well that maried with thy Sonne: O Cupide, friend thy brother, let him in thy number ronne: Or else let him (for why I ne disdaine to loue) Whome I began to fancie, force me greater cares to proue. I sée I am deceyude, his Image bleard my sight: He differs from his mothers trade and swarues hir maners quight. Thee rocks and ragged Hilles and Okes in Mountaynes bred Begat, and thou of brutall beasts in desert hast bene fed, Or of the goulfe, which nowe thou séest turmoylde with winde: On whom (though waues rebell) to passe thou fixed hast thy minde. Why? whither fleest? the stormes doe rage: let stormes haue powre To ayde my case, see how the Seas doe surge with Eurus sco wre.
Let mée indebted be to stormes, for that which I Had rather owe to thée: more iust than whome the waues I trie. I am not so much worth (though thy desert be small) That fléeing me by waltring Seas thou lose thy life and all. Thy hate is deare in déede and of no slender price, If whilst thou goe from mée, to die thou reck it but a trice, Within a while the Seas will cease their swelling tyde: And Triton with his grayish Stéede on calmed waues will ryde. O that with winds thou wouldst exchaunge thy ruthlesse minde: And so thou wilt, vnlesse of Okes thou passe the stubburne kinde. What if thou didst not knowe how raging Seas coulde rore? Yet thou that hast so often tryde wilt trauaile as before? Though waues were neuer so smouth when thou shouldst leaue the bay: Yet dure and dooleful things God wote might happen by the way.
And further, they that false their fayth in daunger are On perillous seas: the place with them for treasons guilt doth warre. And most when loue is wrongde, cause Venus hath béene thought T'haue had hir ofspring of the waues that in Cytheris wrought. I feare least I vndone shall be thy cause of woe: Or least by wrack of ship I should endaunger thée my foe. I pray thée liue, for so I may reuenged bée Farre better than by death: thou shalt be saide to murther mée. Put case, that thou were caught with sway of whirling winde: (But vaine be this abodement fell) what then would be thy minde? Then wouldst thou oft reuoke to thought the Phrygian tongue, That did pronounce the periurde talke which wrought poore Didos wrong. Before thine eyes the forme and Idoll of thy Féere Deceyude, would stande in saddest sort, with bloudie feltred héere.
Thy selfe wouldst graunt, thou hadst deserude these torments all: And thinke the thunder cast on thee what so should hap to fall. Wherefore giue time to wrath and rage of roaring flood: Great is the price of little stay, thy passage will be good. Hast no respect to mée? yet spare Iülus breath: Sufficeth thée to haue bene thought the Author of my death. What poore Ascanius hath or Countrie Gods deserude? The Sea shall sinck the Saints, which were from Phrygian flame preserude. But neyther thou thy Syre ne priuate Gods didst beare Vpon thy back: thy vaunting crakes these to Elisa were. Thou lyste at euerie worde, not now thy tongue doth ginne To gloze, ne I the first in trappe and guilefull snare hath binne. If question were what of Iülus Dame became: Hir cruell husbande hir forsooke to his eternall shame.
This thou to mée displayste. which made my breast to bende: Much sooner will my torment finde than this my cryme an ende. And I doe nothing doubt but that thy guiltie minde Will thée condemue. Thou seauen yeares space no resting place couldst finde. At length I gaue thée porte, cast vp on blisfull shore: And did infeffe thée with my Realme thy name scarce tolde before. Would Gods this had bene all the friendship I had showne: And that report of bedding had not bene so lightly blowne. That day procurde my bale in which for sodaine raine That pourde adowne, to couch in one selfe Caue we both were faine. I hearde a voyce, I thought the Nymphes had howlde for ioy: But they were Furies that forespake of this my fell annoy. Nowe broken fayth I owde to olde Sichaeus name, On me take vengeance, that to Hell must go bereft of shame.
In shrine of Marble made I haue Sichaeus bones, Whome boughes and snowwhite fléeses shroude appoynted for the nones. Foure times with wonted mouth he callde me to the place: To whome with whispring voyce, he said come Dido, come apace. Without delay I came sometime thy wedded Féere: But this my shamefull fact procurde me slacker to appéere. Forgiue my fault, alyke∣loe man hath mée betrayde: And one that hatred of the fact and foule despight hath stayde. His Dame a heauenly wight, his Syre on shoulders borne Did force me iudge he would haue stayde, and not haue béene forsworne. If néedes I must haue errde, this errour hath a showe Of iust pretence: Be true and then I shall not yrke it so. But as my life at first vnluckie was begonne: Euen so the tenour of the same to latter day doth ronne.
At sacred Altars slaine my husband fell to ground, And of the fact the spoyle vnto Pigmalion did redound. I as a wight exilde my natiue soyle did lose: And left the cynders of my spouse pursude by wreakefull fose. At length escaping Seas and brothers wrath, was brought To coast vnknowne, where all the soile I gaue to thée I bought. I framde it vp a towne, and with farre stretching wall Enuironde it, to neighbour townes which was a deadly gall. Then battayles broyle began, with warre a forraine wight, And fielie woman was pursude when gates was scarcely pight. A thousand suters came which ioyntly did complaine That I a raskall had preferrde, and had them in disoaine. Why staggerest thou to yéelde mée to Hiarbas handes? My self will stretch mine armes abrode to bide thy cursed bandes.
I haue a brother eke whose hungrie hande doth long For Didos bloud, as earst it did Sichaeus life to wrong. Lay downe thy Gods prophande and Reliques brought to lande: It fittes thée not such facred things to touch with hurtfull hande. If thou of force were he that should transport the same, Reserude from fire: no force had bene if they had burnt in flame. (Vnthrist) perhaps thou leauste thy Dido great with childe: And in my wombe is part of thée whome thou hast so beguilde. The miser Impe will adde vnto his Mothers death: So thou shalt kill a fiely Babe that neuer tasted breath. Iülus Brother with his Dame shall so be slaine: And one selfe torment shall bereus the liuely powres of twaine. But God doth force thée flee, would God had kept away Such guilefull guestes, & Troians had in Carthage made no stay.
No doubt that God procures the waywarde windes to blowe: And makes thée waste the wearie time in sandie Seas so flowe. As when that Hector liude if Troie stoode againe) To passe to Troie thou scarcely shouldst endure a greater paine. But not to Symois thou but Tiber mindst to passe: Arriued there, yet shalt thou be a straunger naythelasse. Thou seekste a lurcking lande and vncouth place to holde: Which scarce will be thy lot to finde till thou be waren olde. Ambages layde aparte, more better were for thee Pigmalions wealth to haue in hande and soiourne here with mée. With luckie happe to Tyre thy Troian stocke transport: And sacred Scepter holde in hande in place of Princely port. But if thou long for warre, or yong Iülus séeke By manly Mart to Purchase prayse and giue his foes the gleeke:
Cause naught should want, he shall haue foes to wreake his wrath: This place of lawes and armes good store and broyling battayles hath. For olde Anchises sake and bowe of Venus Boie: For all those sacred Gods which thou hast safely brought from Troie: So Gods agrée that they which from thy Countrie came, May Victors be, and all mishap conuert to gladsome game: And yong Ascanius liue white siluer lockes to haue, And olde Anchises broosed bones may lodge in quiet graue: I pray thée spare the house that yéeldes it selfe to thée, Saue that I looude, what crime at all mayst thou impute to mée? Not I from Phthia came, ne from the Mycene lyne: My husband ne my father were no spitefull foes of thine. Thine Hostesse let me bée if of thy spouse thou shame: So I remaine thy Dido still I force not on the name.
The waues on Afrus bancks that beate I know full well: Sometime they fauour passengers sometimes they doe rebell. Then launch thy ship from shore when weather doth applie, But now the wéedes will let thy Barcke on waltring Seas to hie. Giue me in charge to marke the Tyde, and then be bolde To furrow flouds: though thou wouldst stay then will I not withholde. Thy wearie wandring Mates doe lack, and looke for rest: Thy Nauie faine would stay, till tyme hir tackle were adrest. For my deserts, and that which after I shall owe To thée, for marrige hope doe not as yet thy thrall forgoe: Till surge of Seas doe cease and loue doe temper trade: Meane while for to sustaine the worst I stronger shall be made. If not, I minde to waste my lothsome life ere long: It is but for a time that thou shalt worke poore Dido wrong.
Mine ymage whilst I write O that thou sawste with eye: I write, and in my lappe the while thy Troian sworde doth lye: Downe by my chéekes the teares vpon the weapon fall: Which now in steade of brine with bloud shall be imbrued all. Full well thy giftes agrée to this my wretched fate: My graue shall be small charge to thée vnsitting to my state. Not now my brest at furst with cruell Launce is pierst That place with dure and deadly dinte hath Cupid crased earst. Thou sister (Anne) that wast of counsell in this case: Now offer vp thy latter boone to Dido in the place. When that my corps is burnt, I will not then be sed Sichaeus Dido: on my Herse this scripture shall be red. Aeneas gaue the cause and sworde wherewith I dyde: But desperate Dido on hir selfe hir ruthlesse hande hath tryde.
The Argument of the viij. Epistle, entituled Hermione to Orestes. BEfore the styrre at Troie to Pyrrhus was Hermion by sir Menelaus behight: The Father hauing cause from Greece to passe To quaile the courage of his foes in fight, Left all the rule to Tyndarus, that than Despoused Hermion to another man. Orestes had a promisse of the peece, Who thought him selfe assured of a Mate: But when proude Pyrrhus made retourne to Greece He reft the Mayde, whome shee pursude with hate: For that in deede shee looude Orestes so, As loth shee was with Achylls Sonne to go. But choyse was none to choose: shee naythelasse By secret stealth aduertisde him that shee Might rescude be, and from his Prison passe. Which fell in fine: for when Aegysthus he The Lecher had despoylde and Mother eake, Orestes gaue Achylles Sonne the gleake.
The .viij. Epistle. Hermione to Orestes. TO him that both my spouse of late and brother was I wright: My brother now, for of my spouse another hath the right. That Pyrrhus, that Achylles steppes for courage doth ensue: Gainst law and right hath closde me vp and kéepes me fast in mue: As much as lay in me to doe I stoutly did withstande: But I could doe no more than might a weake and womans hande. What dost thou (Pyrrhus) now quoth I? will none reuenged bee Thinkst thou? I am but as a May∣den seruant vnto thée. He deffer than the ruthlesse waues when I (Orestes) caulde: Me by the locks with cruell hande into his Cabbin haulde. If Troian Dames me thrall had tane or Lacedemon wonne: I should no worse haue bene abusde than now by Achylls Sonne.
More friendly founde Andromache Achaias famous soyle: When with the gastly Grecian flame the Troian wealth did broyle. But oh Orestes (if to mée thou haue respect at all) Lay hands on that which is thine owne, and to thy bootie fall. What? if by falsehoode from thy folde thy flock be borne away, Wilt thou take armes? and for thy spouse to fight in fielde wilt stay? Let Menelaus myrrour bée that for his rapted wife Did vndertake such honest warre and stirde such stately strife. Who if had slept and slugde at home or loytred like an Asse: My Dame had béene to Paris linckte as to my Syre she was. Thou hast no néede a thousande shippes or bending sayles so haue, Nor any Gréekish Souldiars helpe, thy onely ayde I craue. Yet rather so (than not at all) I should be fette againe: T'is famous for a man to fight if wedlock suffer staine.
What? was not Grandsire to vs both Atreus King Pelops sonne? At least thou art my bresher, if the marrige were vndonne. I pray thée Brother helpe thy Si∣ster, husbande helpe thy Féere, A dubble title will procure thée in my cause to stéere. My Grandsire for his aged yeares and wisdome passing graue, (Who of his Neece had all the rule) mée to Orestes gaue: To Pyrrhus not acquainted with the match, my Father vowde: But most of both my Grandsires deade as caldste should be allowde When I with thée conidynde, I wrongde none by my spousall right But if I incke with Pyrrhus, their from thee I am not quight. My Father Menelaus will wincke at my fact I knowe: For cause himselfe hath felt the force of winged Cupids bowe. That will he graunt his sonne in lawe which he himselfe hath looude: My Dames example aydes my case that Venus sportes hath prooude.
Looke what my Syre is to my Dame, euen that art thou to mée: The slipper practise Paris playde, with Pyrrhus doth agree. And he is stoute and stately for the factes hys Syre hath donne: So thou mayst bragge and boaste vpon the spoyles thy Father wonne. Who all the trowpe of Tantals trayne, Achylles eke did leade: A chieftaine he among the Dukes, a Souldier stoute at neade. Thy Grandsire great King Pelops was, and Pelops worthie Sire, And if thou coumpte aright from Ioue thou art the fift esquire. Thy manhoode is well knowne ynough, thou foughtste I wote well whan: But what shouldst thou doe in that case? thy mother slue the man. Would God vpon a better cause thy stoutenesse had bene wrought: Yet dare I vaunt the cause was giuen to thee, and neuer sought. But thou didst bring it to effect that Aegisthe did with gore Of gaping wounde defile the floure as had thy Syre before.
And thereof Pyrrhus often prates, and to reproche doth wrye Thy earned prayse, and yet endures my presence with his eye. I frette, and as my face doth puffe, so swelles myne inwarde minde: And burning breast with silent flame of dolor scorcht I finde. Before Hermions face imbray∣ded should Orestes bée? I want but force and brainsick blade to be reuengde for thée. But wéepe and wayle I may my fill which lessens parte of woe: And downe on eyther side my face my teares as conduites floe. Them onely to commaunde I haue and out I poure them still: Alongste my stayned théekes eche hours the welling teares doe trill. This fortune followes all our race and to our age is brought: And all that are of Tantals line a séemely rape are thought. I will not hete alleadge the lyes of false and fayned Swanne: Ne yet complaine that Ioue in plume did lurck both God and manne.
Where Isthmos streatching out at length two Seas did so deuide: Hippodamie on waxen whéeles and counterfaite cart did ride. Faire Helen once conuaide away by craftie Theseus traine, By Castor and sir Pollux was in fine restorde againe. The selfesame Ladie through the Seas by Troian guest was brought: For whome the noble Gréekish Péeres in wreakefull maner fought. I scarce remember, yet I minde how tho the people wept, In mournefull moode: and dismoll dreade into their hearts it crept. The Grandsire gronde, the sister sobde, the brothers gan to broyle: Lamenting Leda with the Gods and Ioue did kéepe a coyle. And I with locks not long as then rent all about my hedde Exclamde, O mother leauste me thus? and from thy childe art fledde? (For then hir husbande was a lacke.) and least I shoulde be sed No Impe of Pelops broode, I am a praye by Pyrrhus led.
O that Achylles had bene frée and scapte Apollos bowe: Then woulde he blame the beastlye rage of Pyrrhus pride I knowe. It neuer pleasde, ne now would lyke Achylles, if he liude, To heare a wifebounde Wight lament of lyked looue depriude. What guilt of mine hath made the Gods and Heauenly powres so rage? What cursed starre might I accuse to gouerne thus my age? My Dame I was bereft in youth, my father waged warre: And though they both did liue, yet I from them was kept afarre. Not I to thée in tender yeares, nor Cradell clowtes did crye Deare mother mine: nor from my lippes the lisping words did flye. Ne did I with my pliaunt armes, thy séemely neck enfolde: Nor thou vpon thy louing lappe thy babling Brat didst holde. No carke of clothing me, ne care did pierce thy pensiue brest: Ne didst thou cause a marrige bed for Bridewife to be drest.
But when thou didst returne againe (the troth I not denie) I met thee, but my Mothers face I coulde not then descrie. But for thy beautie did surpasse, for Helen thée I tooke: And thou didst make enquirie then, and for thy daughter looke. Good hap in one respect I had, that Oreste was my Make: But he vnlesse he fight it out Hermion must forsake. Mée Pyrrhus as a Vassell kéepes though Victor be my Sire: This goodly guerdon haue I gainde for Troie burnt with fire. When golden Titan ginnes to guide his glistring steades by day, Then I (vnhappie wenche) some ease of pensiue paine assay. No fooner blackfaste night doth growe, in howling sort I hie Vnto my cankred carefull couche appointed there to lie. In place of swéete and slumbring sléeps mine eyes with teares doe floe: And from the man in all post haste I flée as from a foe.
Oft times mishaps doe make me muse, vnmindefull of my case I touche with hande proude Pyrrhus parts vnwitting of the place. I leaue to touch the man as soone as euer I knowe the fact: And thinke my handes polluted straight with such a shamefull act. Oft times for Neoptolems name Orestes doe I call: And loue the errour of my tongue, right well content withall. I sweare by this vnluckie lyne and Lorde of all the race, That Land and Seas yea haughtie skies afrayes with frowning face: And by the bones of him that was mine Vncle and thy Sire: Who owes thée for reuenge of those that did his death conspire: Or I will in these flowring yeares abandon lothsome life: Or I (that came of Tantals broode) will be Orestes wife.
The Argument of the ix. Epistle, entituled Deianeira to Hercules. THe heauie stepdame Iuno by hir fraude And friende Eurystheus, purposde to destroy Alcydes: for the Prince of Mycene lande Stirrde him to conquer Monsters. But with laude And life he scapt away, nor had annoy By any beast the Champion tooke in hande: Bulles, Dragons, Dogges, and Semitaurs he slewe, And aye more greene his gotten glorie grewe. He conquerd all, till filthie loue at length Of King Eurytus daughter made him thrall, Whose Syre and Countrie be had earst atchiude: Fled was his force, stint was his stately strength, To spinne and carde be thought no shame at all, Nor of his Lions spoyle to be depriude: Which Deianeira bearing by report, (His louing wife) sent to him in this sort. Amid whose lynes and letters that she wrought Came newes (a dolefull thing to written here) And tidings, that the Shirt the wife had sent Alcydes bane, and spitefull spoyle had brought, The louing wife had slaine hir manly Feere, Which shee poore sielie woman neuer ment. But to requite hir husbandes death with paine, At poynt to hang hir selfe thus gan she plaine.
The .ix. Epistle. Deianeira to Hercules. QEchalia to be woonne I ioy to heare the fame: It grieues me that the Victor should haue yeelded to the same. Report was brought of late to Grecia that agrées Full yll with any fact of thine the tales we heard were these, That whome not Iuno coulde nor dreadfull trauels foyle, The selfesame man had Iole made in seruage yoke to toyle. Eurystheus would it so, and Iuno passing faine Would learne that thou with such a crime thy former facts would staine. What? t'was not thou I trowe that could not be conceyude In one whole night? I thinke herein my selfe to be deceyude. More domage Venus doth than Iuno earst to thée This raysde thee vp by spitefull hate, she makes thée bende I sée.
Behold the world by thée that liues at quiet ease, As wyde as watrie Nereus gyrdes the ground with frothie Seas. The greater part of earth, and all the flouds as farre As both Apollos lodges reach to thee indebted are. The Skies thou hast sustaynde that shall thy carkas beare: And Atlas holpe thée at a pinch when thou too wearie weare. But what saue open shame by these thy facts is got? If those thy valiant feates of armes with bawdie rule thou blot? Doe men report that thou (for Ioue a worthie childe) In Cradle crasht two crawling Snakes? in fayth they are beguilde. That Babe was better farre than is this bourly man: Thou nothing makste an ende so well as thou thy déedes began. Whome not a thousand beastes nor Steneleus atchiude, Nor Iuno could for all hir spite; hath craftie Cupid giude.
But for I am the wife of Hercules, and hée My fatherlaw that guides the Skies and lettes the thunder flée: I am surmisde a happie Dame and maried well to bée. How yll vnegall Steares in painefull Plough accorde: So yll a simple woman matcht with such a stately Lorde. No honour commes thereby but burthen and debate. Who so wilt well be wedded, wed with one of thine estate. My husband is alack, my spouse is absent aye: A straunger better knowne to mée, he dreadfull beastes doth stay. I in my desert home doe nought but wishe afright, And sore tormented least my spouse be spoylde of foes in fight. Amid the Serpents I and gréedie Lyons pawes, And tusked Boares am tost, in feare I stand of gaping iawes: Of Dogs, that with their téeth from bones will rent thy flesh by flawes.
And mée debowled beastes and ydle dreames of night, With griesly pictures of the dead doe maken sore afright. For fléeing fame I hunt and rumors rashly spred: By doubtfull hope is feare exilde, and hope by feare is fled. Thy Mother is alack, and grieuously doth grutch That to haue likte the mightie Ioue hir destinie was such. Amphitryon is away, whome men surmisde to béene Thy Syre: and Hyll the stripling eake of vs can not be séene. Eurystheus that doth forge the cruell Iunos wrath Is felt of vs: endurde to long the Goddesse anger hath. But these are trifles, oh, thou addest forraine loue: And eche may be a Mother made by thée that list to proue. I spare to speake as nowe of Auge whome ere while, (Alcide) amid Parthenian vales thou fowly didst defile.
And thée (Astydame) I minde of purpose to concile. Ne meanes thy wife God wote Teuthrancian trulles to name (Of whome there scapte not one vntoucht) to bréede thy farther shame. A recent crime there is a foule yll fauourde iade, That vnto Lamus mée of late a Mother lawe hath made. Meander (that so oft in one selfe circle ronnes, And eke rebounding waues againe vpon his shoulders, shonnes) Sawe when about thy neck there hoong a chaine of golde: That neck that thought the burden light the Welkin to vpholde. What? didst thou nothing shame those brawned armes of thine With Goldsmithes work, wt glittring Gemmes and owches braue to bine? Euen those selfe armes (I say) the Lyons lyfe that rest: Whose noble spoyle for mantell serues vpon thy shoulder left? What? didst thou dare aloft vpon thy curled heare,
(For which a Popple fitter was) a mytred Hat to weare? Ne didst thou blushe in guise of Lydian Lasse to don A silken Scarfe, and Riband fine thy bourly Waste vpon? Was Diomede forgot that cruell Carle then? That fatted vp his trampling steades with fleshe of murthred men? In such a nice attire if Busyre thee had séene: No doubt he woulde haue scornde of thée yconquerde so to béene. Let Antaeus loose for shame these iewels from thy throte, For feare he loth that thou the palme in wrestling collars gote. T'is blasted that thou stoodste of womans threates in awe, And eake amyd Meonyan Maydes the twisted twine didst drawe. What? didst thou nothing shame that hande with Flare to foyle, That had long earst in valiant fight ygot so many a spoyle? With thwacking thombs thou drawste a very boysteous thréede:
And to thy stately Maystresse yéeldste a iust accoumpt with dréede. How often whilste thou sponne with fingers nothing fine, Amid thy crabbed crushing handes hath crackt the twisted twine? And standing of the whip in trembling feare, they say That thou before thy Maystresse féete in dréede of lashing lay. And spoyles ylaide a part of gotten prayse the pryce, Thou toldste thy déedes that should bene tho concealde in any wyse. To witte, in cradle how the crawling Snakes thou slue: And rent their gaping ia wes in two and did their force subdue. And how Tegaean Boare in Erymanthus lyes: And with his weight doth wrong the ground, so monstrous is his sies. Thou dost not let to tell of Diomedes hedde Firt on his Thracian gate, his Stéedes with flesh of man that fedde. And of the triple beast Geryon thou didst boast:
That for his heirde the welthiest was in all the Spanish coast. And of the Hellish hounde, that Cerberus was height (Thrée headed Curre,) whose pate with locks of Snakes was fowly freight. The Serpent eke, whose woundes reserude him from the death, And gashing scotches giuen afresh infeft with better breath. And how Antaeus hoong with broken iawes betwyne Thy left side (an ylfauourde weight) and shoulders right behyne. Ne doste thou then conceale how Centaurs thou didst chase (That double shaped were, and dars not trust their legges in place) Athwart Thessalian craggie cliffes, and made them runne apaee. And canst thou cladde perdie in Sidon soft araye, And womans nyce attyre, for shame haue any worde to saye? Beside the Iardan Nymph vpon hir shoulders thrue Thine armour, and did conquer the that Monsters didst subdue.
Go now, and proudly vaimt thy noble déedes of fame: A man thou shouldst not bene of right she bett deserude the same. Than whome so much thou art inferiour, how much more Thou stronger were than such as thou hadst slaine with hande before. Shée hath atchiude the fame of all thy former déedes: To hir, as to thy lawfull heyre thy purchasde prayse procéedes. Oh, shame: the shagheard case the Lyons rybbes bereast, Enuironde rounde a womans corps and to hir carkas cleast. Tushe, thou art foule deceiude, no Lyons spoyle it is, But thine thou flewste the beast, and shée hath conquerde thée ywis. A woman bare thy darts with venom ranck that weare And Hydras beastly bloud imbrude, in hande that scarce coulde beare A Distaffe fraught with Flax: thy knarrie clubbe she helde, And gazing in a shining Glasse thine Armour she behelde.
This brute I hearde, but gaue no credit to the same, But yet from eare some part of griefe vnto my senses came. But now before my face the hatefull Whoore doth ride: Nor I the secrete smart I féele haue farther powre to hide. Thou wilt not haue hir gone, shée passeth through the stréete A captiue: whome of force we sée, not as a captiue méete: With tresses hanging downe declaring hir estate, And hidden face to shew that Channes hath giuen hir the Mate: But braue in beaten Golde she passeth to and fro: As thou ere this in Phrygia were accustomed to go. From stately seate shée yéeldes the people such a chéere, As though Oechalia stood againe and eake hir Father deere Did liue, and thou (Alcides) by Eurytus conquerde wéere. Perhaps deuorcement made twixt Deianeire and thée,
No more thy drabbe this hatefull Whoore but wedded wife shall bée. Th'abodement makes me feare, colde my corse Doth  hande doth lie in bedde withouten And me among the rest as wife with honest zeale Thou hast pursude: I causde thée twise with warlike tooles to deale. For Achelous vppe his broken hornes did take With dreerie chéere that laye disperst, and hid in durtie Lake His maymed front and erdwne yerackt for Deianeiras sake. The Monster Nessus with thy deadly darte was slaine, And with his Horses gorie bloud the waters did distaine. But whereto write I this? for tidings now is brought, The shirt I gaue my husbande hath his cruell death gwrought. Aye me, what haue I done? what forste me this to frie? O Deianeire, O cursed wench, why dost thou doubt to die?
And shall thy noble Féere in Oeta Mount be rent? And thou suruiue that were the cause and wrought that foule intent? What now remaines to a perfite prouse Was Hcles wife? the truth therein my doolefull death shalt trie. Thou Meleager in mée thy sister shalt descrie: O Deianeire, O cursed wenche why doste thou doubt to die? O lynage of missehappe, O haplesse house I say: My aged Syre Oeneus lyues at point of last decay. Tydeus my brother is a poore exiled Squire, The tother fryde by Mothers meanes aliue in fatall fire. My Dame vpon hir Corps the cruell sworde did trie: O Deianeire, O cursed wench, why doste thou doubt to die? By geniall rights I craue this onely thing of thée Not to surmise this wicked death of purpose meant by mée.
For Nessus stroke with Dart, declarde me that his blood Would forcen loue, and saide it was for that excéeding good. I sent a Shirt to thée imbrude therewith to trie: O Deianeire, O cursed wench, why doste thou doubt to die? Now crooked Sire farewell, and sister Gorge adue: Thou Countrie with my brother exilde, farewell I say to you. And thou that art so lyke to be the latter light Mine eyes shall see: and Hercules my spouse (O that thou might) And little Hyl (my prettie boy) I bid you all good night.
The Argument of the x. Epistle, entituled Ariadne to Theseus. ANdrogeus by deceyte was done to death And murthred by the men of Athens towne: King Minos warrde to wreake his lasse of breath, And brought in fine his sturdie enmies downe, Scuen Mayden Babes, as many men by th'yeare They yeelded vp to make his Monster cheare. By lot they went, vntill they came at last To Theseus, he into the doubtfull denne (Clept Laberinth) to Minotaur was cast: But ruthfull Ariadne taught him then How to destroy the Monster, and to passe By tracke of twist from Prison where he was. With Ariadne he, and Phaedra scapes, Ariude at Naxus, Bacchus gaue him charge To leaue the one of those his goodly rapes (That Ariadne hight) and let hir large. When night was come, and she to slumber led, With Phaedra he from Ariadne fled: The Nymph (when sleepie nap was quite exilde, And senses came to former force againe,) Seing hir selfe so shamefully beguilde, In wretched wise with teares began to plaine: Requesting ruth, and platly making showe That he to hir a better boone did owe.
The .x. Epistle. Ariadne to Theseus. MOre friendly haue I founde than thée the brutish kinde: A worser garde than thou hast bene I déeme I mought not finde. Theseus: the lynes thou vewste from that selfe shore I wright: From whence (forsaking me by meane of sayle) thou tookste thy flight. Where mée, my fléepe, and thou, (a wofull wight) betrayde: Thou (out alas) that chose thy stemme when I to sléepe was layde. It was the tyme when soyle with foggie Deaw was dight But lately falne: and shrowded Foules in shadie bushes shright. Where I were waking then or slumbring I wote nere: But out I floong my fist to féele where Theseus were there. Was none such. Backe I drewe my hande: and out againe I rousde mine armes about the bed, but (oh) it was in vaine.
The feare all sléepe exilde, I rose in gastly dredde: And from my wyddowish Couch I fell and foule forsaken bedde. Forthwith with ruthlesse handes, I strake my bared brest: And rent my locks, that hoong (as I abrayde from sléepe) vndrest, The Moone gaue light, I lookte to vewe the countrie rounde: But saue the stronde, and stonie rudge, was nothing to be founde, Now hither, thither then I ranne and too and fro I rangde, the Sande did lode my legges I had much worke to go. Thus whilste about the shore on Theseus name I crie: The hollow rocks at erie call and cleaping did replie. How oft I callde, the place so often Theseus namde: As though it woulde a wofull wight hir ayde and succour framde. There was a Mount, whereon fewe trees aloft did growe: Which now is wore a hanging rocke yfret with waues that flowe.
Whereto I clambe, the heart my limmes doth strenthen so: As rounde about the surging Seas my wandring eyes I throw. From thence (for tho the windes on me did vse their powre) I sawe how with a Southren gale thy strouting sayles did scowre. I sawe it: or at least for that I so surmisde, More colde I woxe than yse, and dead∣ly pangues my heart surprisde. Whome long to languish griefe would not permit as than: Abrayde from traunce, vpryste to call on Theseus I began. Why? whither fléest? (quoth I) retire vnthriftie wight: Doe turne thy Barck that lacks his load, and is not throughly fright. Looke what my voice might not my plangor did supplie: And with my wordes I medled strokes, eche blowe ensude a crie. Put case thou didst not heare: yet mightst thou sée it plaine: My handes displayde gaue siker signes and tokens of my paine.
Vpon a pole I hoong a flittering Kerchiffe white: That might reuoke to minde, that thou hadst mée forgotten quite. At length I lost thy sight then teares gan flush apace: My chéekes long earst were woxen wanne and flecked was my face. What should mine eyes haue done but waylde my wofull plight? When that they saw they might no more haue Theseus ship in sight? Or I with tresses then depending sole did runne, Incited by the Ogigian God as doth the drousie Nunne: Or casting eye to Sea did sit vpon a stone, My selfe as much a rocke as was the seate I sate vpon. Oft times to bedde that had receiude vs both I hast: The bed which coulde not yéelde againe the man that thence was past. And as (I might) for thée thy steps I did imbrace: And eke the couch not throughly colde where thou thy corps didst place.
I laie me downe, when teares my deadly chéekes distaine: And crie, reyéelde accoumpt of two that hast receyued twaine. Since hither both we came, why part we not yfeare? Thou trayterous couch, the chiefest part make shewe where is it? where? What might I doe? or sole why whither should I flée? Within this Ile ne workes of men nor toyles of Oxen bée. The Sea enuirons rounde the Lande on euery side: No shipman here, nor Hulck that dares on perillous Sandes to ride. Put case I had both Mates and windes with wisshed saile: My Syre debarres me to returne, what shall the rest preuaile? Though in a blissefull Barck through calmed Seas I passe: Though Aeole pease the windes, I shall be banisht naythelasse. Not Crete, that fostred Ioue is léefull for to sée: Wherein of great renoumed fame a hundreth Cities bée.
For not alone the soyle where Minos beares the sway, But eke my Father by my fact I fowly did betray. When least thou vanquisht, shouldst in Laberinth haue dide, I gaue thée twiste thy skillesse foote and twine thy steppes to guide, When thou me spakste (by these my present perills I Protest that thou shalt aye be mine till both of vs doe die.) As yet we both doe liue and I am not thy Make, (If women may be saide to liue whome periurde men forsake) If with the Mace, that reft my brother monsters breath, Thou me hadst slaine, thy Hest had béene accomplisht by my death. Not now to minde alone my future happes I call, Which must ensue: but such as to forsaken wightes doe fall. Vnto my troubled thought a thousande kindes of death Resort, which lesse would grieue my ghost, than this my lingred breath.
Now feare I  Woolues that come: With gnashing téeth, and ramping pawes my griefull guttes to nooine. Perhaps this sauage soyle the Lyon browne doth bréede: Who wottes the ruthlesse Tygres where this yrkesome yle doth féede? To that, the Seas are sayd great Whales to cast on lande: And who (if I with sworde were wrongde) by me would friendly stande? Oh let me not be bound as Vassell caught in bande: Ne waste the day at turne and twist, or carde with captiue hande: That Minos haue to Sire and Pasiphae to Dame: And (that I chiefly fixe in thought) thy pacted spouse that am. When I suruey the Seas, the lande, or stonie fleate: The grounde doth manace manie things, the waters eke doe threate. Then onely skyes were left the formes of Gods I feare: A pray in wilde Desart forlorne for hungrie beastes to teare.
Though men po I giue no trust at all: For wronged once, the forraynes fayth into suspect I call. O would Androgeus liude, nor Athens bought so deare, His doolefull death, by yéelding such a tribute by the yeare. Ne thou with knottie Mace hadst done to death the Beast That was a man for vpper partes, a Bullock for the reast. O that I ne had giuen to thée the twisted Clewe, Whereby the darcksome Denne to scape, when thou the Monster slewe. That thou art Victor aye I nothing muse perdie: Nor that thou madste the vgly Beast of Creta so to die. Thy steelie heart coulde not be pierst with hurtfull horne: Thy breast was garded well, thereon though were none armour borne. Thou thither flints conueydst, and Adamant didst beare: And that which slints doth farre surmount, a Theseus hadst thou there.
O cruell sléepes, why did you tho my limmes detaine? I should as then with ruthlesse death but once for all béene slaine. Ye windes were spitefull eke and readie (oh) too soone: Ye puffing blastes to force my teares ye haue your deuor doone. The hand was cruell that my brother and me hath slaine: And faith ygraunted me that was a name requird in vaine. Sléepe, wind, and gaged troth did all at once coniure: One silly Nymph by triple cause was guild without recure. Oh that my mothers teares I dying shall not sée: Nor any for to close mine eyes with fréendlie fist will be. My haplesse ghost to straunge and vncouth skies will flie: No louing hand wil noynt my limmes and carkasse when I die. But for my bones vngraud the Seafoule fowle will striue: A worthy Sepulture for one that well deserud aliue.
To Athens thou wilt passe, where in the Cittie when Thou art receiude, and plast in pride amids thy countrie men: And shalt declare the death of double shaped beast: And stonie lodge to doubtfull wayes that doth so ofen wreast: Display how me forlorne thou leftst in Desart tho. I naust not be forgot, ne séeme to spoyle thy title so. Not Aegeus was my fire, nor Aethra gaue the brest: Of rocks & waues that thou were bred may eastlie be gest. From ship top would thou mightst me miser Wight haue viewde: My grisly picture would haue forst thy stony hart t'haue rewde. Nowe not with eye beholde but in thy mind suruay, Mée clinging to the deaten rocke which makes the waues to staie. Sée how my locks doo hang in wailefull mourning moode: Behold my clothes with teares as moist as they were washt in flood.
My carkas quakes as corne enforst with Borias might: My trembling fist the letters marres as I my lynes doe wright. By no desert of mine (for that it framde awrie) I sue to thée: let not my factes deserue such thanks perdie: Ne griefull paynes procure, for though thy liuely breath I ne did saue: yet hast thou no iust cause to hast my death. These fainting fistes, with bea∣ting of my breast a good, I (wofull wretch) extende to thée through ouerwandred flood. These locks (which yet are lest) in doolefull wise I showe: And by these teares I pray, which teares thy facts enforce to flowe: (Good Theseu) turne thy shippe with wrested winde retoure: Though ere thou come I die, yet of the bones thou shalt be sure.
The Argument of the xj. Epistle, entituled Canace to Machareus. KYng Aeols Sonne Machareus, fell in loue With Canace beyonde the boundes of kinde, To bed this beastly broode are gone to proue Vnlawfull lustes delight, nature repinde: She naythelesse fowly begot with Childe Was brought a bed, a signe she was defilde. The Nurce conuayde the Babe, who at the doore Exclamde: The Grandsire heard the yelling sounde, And found the filthie fact: he made no more Adoe, but sent the Babe in blankets bounde Into the fieldes of Rauens to be rent, Or hungrie Dogges, or wandring Woolues he ment. Beside, a sworde to Canace he sendes, By cursed death to ende hir beastly life: To worke hir fathers will the wench intendes, But ere she felt the force of fathers knife, To Machareus (to Delphos that was gone For succours sake) thus ganshe make hir mone.
The .xj. Epistle. Canace to Machareus. JF any blots doe blinde, or blurre my lynes, The murther of their Maistresse makes ye sann My right hande holdes the pen; the left a sworde, And in my carefull lappe the Paper lyes. Of Canace such is the griesly forme, Whilst to hit brother she deuisde to write: For so I may suffice my wrathfull Syre. Oh, that himselfe were here a gazer on His daughters death: Oh, that the Author sawe With present eye, the thing he gaue in charge. So ruthlesse he, and passing farre in rage His whirling Southren blastes, that he with dr And teareles cheeks, my gaping woūds wold vew T'is much (in fayth) with raging windes to liue, Vnto his peoples kinde his nature grées, A Ruler fitte for such a ruthlesse race. Hee checks the Southren winde, and Zephyrus, With Northren Aquilo he kéepes a coyle, And (Eurus eake) thy stubborne winges he rules. He maisters all the windes, not swelling wrath, Vnto his vice, his conquerde kingdome yéeldes. What now auayles by Grandsires to the skyes Aduaunst to be? With Ioue to be allyde? If naythelesse in womanish hande I holde
Vnsitting tooles the sworde, a scathfull gift? (O Machareu) the day that vs conioynde After my death one houre should haue be faine. A brother why, more than a brother ought, Imbrast thou mee? and why to thée was I More than a sister to hir brother shoulde? Eke I was toucht with loue, and I wote nere What God it was that set my heart in flame. My colour quite was fledde, my carkas leane And bare became, my mouth refusde to féede. Full harde by sléepe I came, eche night a yeare Did séeme, I gronde, and had no hurt at all: Ne coulde accoumpt my selfe why so I did, Ne knewe what loue did meane, and yet did loue. My Nurse with aged minde, perceyude it first, And saide at first, I was with loue attachte. Whereat I blusht, and cast mine eyes to ground, And whist, which tokens were of guiltie minde. At length my growing wombe began to stroute, And wt his weight my weakned limmes opprest. But then, what hearbe or drench was to be foūd, That she ne brought, and boldely did applye? To fine (which onely prancke thou neuer wiste) My venter might of burthen be releast, That woxe so fast within my growing guttes? But (oh) the infant was so rype, and stacke So nere my ribbes, as it was safe from scathe. When Phoebus sister ninthly woxen was,
And tēth Moone gan to chase hir lightsome stedes: I wist not what procurde my sodaine throwes, A skillesse wight (God wotte) to beare a childe. No longer I from crying coulde refraine, Or holde my peace. What will you so vnfolde (Qd Beldam Nurse) ye crime? & stopt my mouth. What might I Miser doe? griefe forst me grunt, But feare, and shame, and Beldam it forbode. Then dolor I represt, and vttered wordes Reuokte, and was enforst to drinke my teares. Death stoode before my face, Lucina quite Denyde to helpe: and death it selfe had bene A monstrous cryme, if I as then had dyde. When thou, with garments rent and foren lacks, Relieued with thy breste my dying limmes, And saidst. O sister liue, liue sister deare, Ne in one corse destroy thou bodies twaine. Let hope reduce thy force, that brothers spouse Shalt be, and wife to him by whome thou art A Mother made. In fayth I was reuiude At those thy chéerefull words, that lay astraught, And was releast of griefe and gylt at once. Why doste thou so reioyce? King Aeole sits Amid his stately Hawle, my fathers eyes Muste neuer sée this filthie fact of mine. The busie carefull Nurse with fillets fine The Infant hid, and boughes of Oliue white: A sacrifice she faynde and prayde apace.
My Father and all the people gaue hir way, And licenst hir with fayned rites to passe. When she to Thresholde came, the yelling crie And clamor of the Babe the Father hearde; And so the sielie childe it selfe bewrayde. The Infant all inragde, Aeolus, raught, And with his furious shrich the Pallace fillde, The falsed sacrifice reuealing quite. Euen as the Sea doth shake & trembling quappe, When with a gentle gale it is enforst, Or as the Ashe with Southren wind doth wagge So mightst thou se my bloudlesse members shake, Who lay as then ystraught vpon my bedde. He rushing in, and with an open crie Disclosde my fault, and from my Misers face His ruthlesse handes with much a doe withhelde. I blushing, nought, saue flushing teares gā shed, With quaking feare my trebling tōgue was tide. He gaue in charge the Babe, (his nephew) should To Dogs and rauening foule in fieldes be floong. The childe exclamde, as though he had conceiude The Grandsires minde, to whom he sude for ruth With voice, as he the sielie Miser coulde, What heart had I then (Brother) to your doome? (You may my case coniecture by your owne) When fore my face into the desert groue, My cruell foe, in hande my bowels hare, Of Mountaine Wolues to be in quarters torne?
But out at length he from my lodge diuerts. Then beate I on my breast with balefull strokes, And with despitous nayles I rent my face. Meane while wt mournful chéere frō Aeole comes In message one, that thus bespake me tho. Aeole (my Lorde) to thée this sworde hath sent, (And therwith tooke it mée) and biddes thée know By thy desert and merite what it meanes. I wote, and will this sworde with courage vse, Stabbing my Fathers gift into my breast. O thou that gauste me life, with such rewardes My mariage dost thou minde for to enrich? O Father, shall thy Daughter thus be dowde? Hymen deceyude, doe way thy bridall brandes, And flee this wicked lodge with troubled foote. On me, ye swarth Erinnyes, fling the flames You beare, therewith to make my buriall blase. O happie sisters, lincke with better lucke But aye my fact in mindefull breast retaine. Alas, what hath the sielie Babe deserude, So lately brought to light and lothsome Skyes? What fact of his ye Grandsires wrath might stir? Let him be thought to haue deserude the same, If so he could deserue. But (out alas) His mothers guilt the Miser Infant byes. O Sonne thy Mothers dole, the pray of beastes, O thou the day of byrth, thy Dame berest, O childe of haplesse loue, the piteous pledge,
This day thy first, and this shall be thy last. Ne lawfull was for me with yolded teares To bath thy corps: nor on thy graue to cast My clipped locks, and tresses cut thereto. Ne lay I on thy limmes, ne from thy mouth The chillie kisse I caught and latter breath. But gréedie beastes my rapted bowels rent. And I by lurching wound the infants ghost And shadew will pursue: ne will be saide A Mother long, nor voyde of Babe to be. But thou (whom all in vaine, and all for naught Thy wretched Sister hopt) the scattred benes Collect in fielde of thy yong Sonne and mine, And bring them to their Dame, & place thē there, Let one selfe vrne our bodies both containe. Remember mée, and bath my Herse with teares; Ne feare the corps of hir that looude thee well, I craue thée to fulfill thy sisters Hestes. A Miser most of all: and I will séeke My cruell Fathers will to put in vre. Thy dying wyfe and sister sayes adewe.
The Argument of the xij. Epistle, entituled Medea to Iason. IAson in youthfull yeares to Colchos came, And with the Fleese be filcht away a Mayde Medea cleapt, and gan his voyage frame To Thessalie, where once arriude he stayde. The feeble Aeson she reducde againe By solemne charme to lustie youthfull age, With fresher bloud enstuffing erie aine. She made him yong to sight that earst was sage. King Pelias daughters deare she did perswade (A monstrous acte) to kill their aged Syre, In hope she would the Prince a princoxe made: Which they poore sielie Maydes did most desire. With other fowler factes, which when shee had For Iasons loue (as she reported) donne, He shooke hir off, which made Medea mad, And causde hir write these lynes to Aesons Sonne: She sigth, she sude, she sobde, she manast eke To be reuengde vpon the guilefull Greke.
The .xij. Epistle. Medea to Iason. I Minde it yet how I of Colchos Queene Aplide to thée, when yu my succor craudste That I by Arte wold gard thée frō ānoy. The sisters tho, ye mortall twist dispence, There flaxen webbe should haue vnfolden quite: Then might I Medea well haue lost my breath, From that my lingred life is but a paine. Aye mée. Why euer forst with youthfull armes Came Iasons shippe to fet the Phrygian Fléece? At Colchos why Magnetian Arge arriude? And Gréekish route of Phasian flood did drinke? Why more than néeded I thy golden lockes Did lyke? thy featurde shape, & glosing tongue? If once (for that a forraine shippe to shore At Colchos came, & brought vndaunted wightes And dreadlesse men to lande) Iason vnwares, Not Phisickt first, had ronne to breathed flames, And poynant hornes of fell and yrefull Bulles, Or sowne the seede and had as many foes, And Tilman had of tillage so bene slaine: How much disceite (vnthrift) with thée had dide? And I of how much wo acquited bene? It is some pleasure to vnthankfull wightes, For to obiect the good forepassed tournes.
That I will vse of thee, that onely ioy And solace I will gaine, thou faythlesse man. Thou hauing charge at Colchos to arriue, In vncouth Hulke my wealthfull kingdome, and My Countrie camste vnto, where I was then The same that here thy nouell spouse is déemde. My father was as rich, as is hir Syre. He Ephyren with double Sea possest, In frostie Scythia tother gouernde all, As farre as Pontus lefter side doth lye. Oeta tooke the youthfull Greekes to guestes, With him, you men of Thessale did soiourne. Then sawe I thée, and gan to knowe thy name: That season brought my minde to ruine first. I both did sée and perisht eke, inflamde With fire vnknowne, & fride wt straūgie gleade, As fore the Altars burnes the torche of Pyne. Both featurde well thou were, and fates me drue, Thine eyes my dazeled lightes did rauish quite: Which quickly thou discridste. For who may well Kéepe loue in mewe, that no man it discerne? Aye flame it selfe by casting light, bewrayes. Meanewhile ye king cōmaunds, & giues in charge The bulles with brawned necks to bring to yoke. Mauors his bulles they were dreadfull for horne, Not sole, but breathing out a gastly flash: Whose houes were brasse compact, their noses set with gads of steele, which blak wt breathing lookt.
Moreouer in open fieldes to cast the séede Engendring men thou were commaunded the, Which wold assaile thée wt their late borne darts, A thancklesse crop for him that tilde the soyle. The waker Dragons eyes, that neuer slept To guile, of all thy trauels was the last. Thus spake Oetes, vp in gastefull dréede Ye rose eche one, and from the Table start. How farre from thee was then Creusas dowre? And raigne in ioynture giuen? thy Fatherlaw How farre? & mightie Creons daughter deare? Away thou wentst dismaide: with vapord eyen Whome I pursude, and softly bid adewe. As soone as wounded I to Cabbin came Where lay my couch: I spent the night in teares, Before mine eyes the balefull Bullocks stoode, The cursed séede, the watchfull Dragon eke: Here feare & quiuering dréed, there loue did stand, The feare it selfe my loue to more increast. In dawning to my lodge my sister came, Where me with toren tresse, and lying groufe Vpon my face, besprent with teares she found She craude my helpe for men of Thessalie: What she requirde, that I to Iason gaue. There stands a groue wt Béech & houlme so black As scarce Apollos rayes may pierce the same: There is in that (or tho at least there was) Dianas Church, the Goddesse standing there,
With barbarous hande yframde of massie golde. Minde you? or is the place with me forgot? Thither we came yfeare, with ruthlesse tongue And guilefull mouth when yu didst bourd me thus. To thée hath fortune right and powre assignde Of life and dreadfull death: within thy hande (By hir appoynted lore) my state doth stay. Sufficeth powre to spoyle, if any take Therein delight: but I reserude from scathe Shall make thy former prayse and glorie growe, And blast thy brute in Trumpe of endlesse fame. By my sinister haps (which lyes in thée For to redresse) and by thy noble race, And Grandsire, that all mortall things surueyes: And by the triple forme of Dian, and Hir priuie sacred rytes, this Countrie Gods, (If any here within this soyle doe raine) Rne on my Mates and me, O (Quéene) I pray: And oblige mee vnto thée by this boone. And so a Gretian thou not séeme to scorne, (But how might I the Gods so friendly finde?) Sooner my soule to weightlesse ayre shall waste, Than any (saue your grace) with me be linckt In spousall bande, and bridely knot be tyde. Let Iuno witnesse bée, that hath in charge The mariage rites: that holy Goddesse too Within whose Marble Church we stooden now. These, or the least of these, a siely Nymph
Might moue to ruth: our hands were ioyned ek I saw thy trickling teares. Where parte of guile In them doth lurcke? so I was quickly wonne, And soone entrapt with thy dissembling tongue. Thou broughtst to yoke the brasen footed Bulles Vnhurt of flame, and brakste the bidden soile With pointed plough: wheron in stéede of graine The Serpēts teeth yu floongst, wherof there sproong A troupe of Souldiers sterne, wt sworde & shielde: That I (who gaue thée oyntment) stoode in dréed, To sée the sodaine broode with armour clad: Till time the earthly brothers, twixt themselues To ciuill combat fell, and fought yfeare, A griesly sight, and wofull thing to tell. Behold, the waker Serpent hissing came With crackling scales, & with his bending breast Did swéepe ye soile. Thē where was dowre becōe? Then where thy Princely spouse? & Isthmos that The double Sea deuides, and cuttes his course? Euen I, that nowe so barbarous am become To thée, (a poore and hurtfull person thought) With forced sléepe, the Serpents eyes did feede, That safely thou mightst reue the golden Fléese. My Father I betrayde, my natiue soyle, And kingdome I forsooke: and got the gyft Which in exile a woman may attaine. My chastice was a wandring Rouers pray: My sister and my louing Dame I left.
But thée (O brother) I ne lefte behinde At time of flight: my letter in this one Place ginnes to faint, the thing my vētrous hand Did dare to doe, it dares not to recorde: So I (but euen with thee) should haue bene rent Yet dradde I not (for what should me appall As then a woman, and a guiltie wight) My cursed corps to surging Seas to gage? Wher are those gods? where those celestial states? On vs amid the goulfe deserued plagues And torments sende: on thée for thy deceyte, On mée for that I gaue such credit light. O that the ruthlesse rocks, Symphlegads, had Our lymmes surprisde, and rent our bodies so As might my bones vnto thy carkasse cloong: Or cruell Scylla sent vs to hir whelpes And Dogs to bene deuourde: for Scylla ought Vngratefull wightes to plague, and pay wt paine. Charybdis eke that belks the swallowde waues, O that it had vnder Sicilian surge Our yrkesome corses cast, & whelmde in goulfe. Safe thou, and Victor to Aemonia comste, And to the Gods presentst the golden Fléese. What should I Pelias daughters name, that did Aguilt to pittie mooude? who rent with hande Their aged fathers bones? though other blame Medea, yet thou haste cause to like hir well, For whome I haue so often done amisse.
Thou didst not shame (O that I words doe wa To shew my iust complaint) thou didst not shame To say: from Aesons house dislodge in haste. Commaunded I departed, followde with Mine infants two, and loue of thée, that aye Pursues my track, and followes where I go. Vnto mine eares as soone as Hymen came, Carolde aloude, and kindeled Torches shone With Bauen blase, & Shaulme began to sounde Ditties of loue, ioyfull to thée, but more Doolefull to me than is the Trumpets clang: Afright I woxe, suspectyng no such yll, Ne yet so foule offence: but naythelesse Through all my breast the frostie cold did runne. A rout of people ranne, and Hymen cryde, Repeating oft the same: how much the voyce More neare approcht, the more increast my wo. My seruaunts sobde, and couertly did mourne Who gladly would so great an euill reporte? And me auayling more had bene, what so It were, not to haue knowne. Yet sad and trist I woxe, as though I had the truth discride. When of my Boyes the lesser, for desire To see tofore the doore at Wickat stoode. Oh Mother mine (quoth he) forgoe the place, With ioyly pompe my Father Iason commes, And glittring twixt two chayned chyuals rydes. I out of hand (my vesture rent abrode)
Did plague my brest wt blowes, wt nailes my face. My minde perswaded me amids the throng And thickest presse to runne, the garlands gay From tresses smouthly trimde in rage to pull. I hardely me withhelde from crying outs (As I dissheuled was) t'is mine: and scarce From laying handes thereon I tho abstaynde. O wronged Syre reioyce: ye men of Colche Be glad: and of my Brothers ghost receiue Th'infests. My Countrie, house, & kingdome lost, My spouse in stéede of all that stoode to me, I reast refusde, and vtterly forlorne. Serpents I did subdue, and furious Bulles, One man to daunt vnable or to tame. And I that raging fire by Arte repelde, Can by no skill my wasting flame eschue Inchauntments, herbes, and soceries faylen now, The Goddesse nought, or mightie Hecate Preuayles or helpes Medea in néedefull tyme. Not pleasant is to me the day, the nightes (That bitter are) I wake: no gentle sléepe Doth daine to lodge in lamentable breast. I, that my lymmes to flumber can not force, Was able well the Dragons eyes to close. Other my Artes, than me, doe more auaile. The corps that I preserude a strumpet straynes With folded armes and of my paynes hath sruite. And thou perhaps whilst to thy fonded spouse
Dost braue, hir eares desirous to content, Against my face and maners new found crymes Dost forge. Well may she laugh at these defaults Of mine: well let hir laugh in stately seate With purple Robe attyre: the time will come That she shall mourne, and wéepe againe as fast, And farre surmount these hiddē scorching flames. Whylst yron, fire, or poyson may be found, No foe of Medeas shall vnwroken go. If so by hap my prayers be of powre To touch thy stéely heart, now lende an eare To wordes that are inferiour to my minde. For I to thée in humble sort doe sue, To me as thou full oft hast done of yore, Ne prone to lie before thy féete refuse. If me thou set so light, yet haue remorse Of those our Babes, that common are to both. A cruell stepdame will my children wrath, And rigorously entreate in ruthlesse sorte: And they too much resemble thée, that are Trapt by thy forme, whose ymage moues me sort And whome how oft I sée: so oft my face And moysted chéekes wt teares are all bedewde. By Gods I make request, by flaming light My Grandsire giues, and by mine earned boone, And by thy Babes (the pawnes of perfite loue) Reyéelde the bridely bed, for which I shonde So many things: accomplish thy behest,
And doe with ayde thy Miser spouse relieue. Gainst men, or Bulles, of thée no ayde I craue, Ne that thou shouldst ye watchful Dragon drench, And force him yéelde his daunted eyes to sléepe: But thée (that art mine owne infeft) I craue, That by thy fact hast me a Mother made. Demaundste thou for my dowre? in ye self fielde (That was to eare for golden Fleese) it lay. That verie Fléese of golde, my ioynture was, Which if I should reclaime, thou wouldst debarre Thy selfe preserude my dowre: the Greekish youth My ioynture was, therewith the wealth compare Of Creons darling, iudge the price of both. That thou dost liue and art a wifebound man, Linckt with a spouse, and hast a Fatherlaw,) And that thou canst nowe shew thy selfe vnkinde: To me impute it, whence the guerdon came. Whome I will out of hande. But to foretell The paynes what wil auaile? Ay swelling wrath Is full of threates, disclosing secret thought. Euen whither yre shall leade, I will enfue. And then perhaps he shall repent his déede, As I lament, I gaue a faythlesse man Such credit, and beléeude the wordes he spake That god descerne the same, which stirrs my brest I ne wote what greater thing my heart intendes.
The Argument of the xiij. Epistle, entituled Laodameia to Protesilaus. WIth fourtie sayle when Protesilaus went To Troie warde, to fight for Helens rape, The tempest so withstoode the Greekes intent, As they from out port Aulide could not scape. When flickring fame this brute had blasted wide, His louing wife Laodameia wrought Him thus, she shewes hir dreames, she willes beside That he the Prophetes wordes should print in thought. Whose aunswere was, that who so leapte to lande First of the Greekes when they to Troie came, Shoulde die the death, t'was bootelesse to withstande, For why, the Gods appointed had the same. He naythelesse for all his spouses wordes (Coragious Lad) first leapte from shippe to shore, And for his paine, was done to death with sworde, As had the Oracle pronounst before, This was the cause Laodameia pende These lines, this made the wyfe this Pistle sende.
The .xiij. Epistle. Laodameia to Protesilaus. AEmonian Laodameia sendeth health, And gréeting to Protesilaus hir spuse: And wisheth it, where he soiourns to stay. Reporte hath spred in Aulide that you lie In rode, by meane of fierce and frowarde gale. Ah, whē thou me forsookste, where was ye winde? Thē broiling seas thine Oares shold haue wtstood, That was a sitting time for wrathfull waues. Moe kisses with a greater charge, I would Vnto my spouse haue giuen, and parled more. But hedlong hence thou wentst, & wished winde Of Seamen not of me, thy sayles allurde: That gale was méete for Mariners, vnfitte For those that loue. O spouse and Féere electe Too soone I was thy clasping armes bereft. Vnperfite were the wordes, my foltring tongue Pronounste, scarce coulde it speake and bid adue. Then Boreas blewe and bore thy sayles away, And yu (O spouse) were quickly hence conuayde. It did me good (as long as lawfull was) To gase vpon thy face, and with mine eyes At parture to beholde thy countenaunce. When thou were out of sight, I saw thy sayles, Thy sayles, that long my staring eyes detaind,
When neyther thée at last nor sayles I sawe, And nought saue waltring waues was to be sene: With thée my eyesight fled, and bloudlesse all (With darkesome cloude beset) I fell to ground. My fainting knées refuse to beare the corps. Whome Iphiclus my Fatherlawe, nor olde Acastus lod with yeares, ne Mother searce With water cold, from swowning might reduce. A charitable déede they wrought, to me Gainelesse, I loth that I ne tho had dyde. Euen with remembrance, griefe renude againe, And loyall loue did gripe my chastefull breast. No care had I as then my tresse to trim, Ne yet with curious robes my limmes to wrappe. As they with leauie thirse whō Bacchus beates: So to and fro, as furie forst I ranne. Phylacian Matrones came to me and cryde, Laodamie, doe on thy brauest wéedes. Shall I in purple Robe and Silkes be clad, And he wage warre vnder the walles of Troie? Shall I go kembe my tresse, and he an Helme Vpon his head sustaine? fresh garments should I weare, and he his clattring Armour welde? As neare as euer I may, thy trauelles I Resemble will with doole: and during time Thou art in siege, will lead a dismoll life. Duke Paris, Priams Sonne (whose beautie bred The scath of thine) I wish thou mayst as slow
An enmie be, as yll thou were a guest. Oh that or thou disliked hadst the face Of yong Atrides spouse, or she thy porte. Thou Gréeke, that for thy rapted wife to great A strife dost stirre, and ouermuch dost toyle: (Aye me) doolefull reuenge to manie wilte. In future time, and wailefull wreake procure. Yée Gods I pray from vs th'abodement fell Remoue, and graunt that my reuerted Féere In temple may to Ioue his armour yéelde. But sore I dreade, and looke how oft I minde The lamentable warre, and fearefull fight, Teares from my chéekes as thawed snow do tril. Ide, Tenedos, Xanthus, and Ilion With Symois, are gastely names to tell. Ne would the guest presumde or bene so bolde Away to haue a Greekish Feme purloynde, Vnlesse he had by powre and strength of hande Bene able to maintaine, and beare it out. His puissant force to him was not vnknowne. He came reported, all betrapt with Golde, And Troian wealth vpon his bodie bare: With men and armoue storde, the aydes of warre. And who with all his Countrie strength at once And Princely powre to forraine landes doth goe? These Helen (I surmise) did thee attache, And vanquished, which may the Gréekes annoy. Of Hector I adrad, I know not whome,
But Hector (by report of Paris) fightes With bloudie hande, & deales with deadly sword. That Hector, that beware, what so he be, If any loue of me as yet be left, His graued name in mindefull brest ensculpe, Him when thou hast escapte auoide the reast: And many Hectors there surmise to bée. And saye (when thou art euen at poynt to fight) Laodamie my spouse did bid me spare. If lawfull be that Gréekes shall conquer Troie And Ilion by sorted lotte subdue: Without thy woundes let it to ruine runne. Let Menelaus martch against his fors, And Paris spoyle of that which Paris reft. Let him amid the presse of enmies throunge, And winne in armes, whome he in cause subdues. The husbande ought the wife to rescue, yea Though she were plaste amid a troupe of fees. Thy cause is farre vnlike, contende for life, And harmelesse to escape, and onely to Thy Ladyes lappe in safetie to retyre. Yée Dardanes, of so manie spare me one, Ne from his corps enforce my bloud to flush. He is not one whome may be seeme to fight. Or to his martiall foe his breast to gage. He better may that fightes for heartie zeale, Let others flash, let Protesilaus loue. Him I confesse I would withhelde at home,
My tongue for feare of yll abodement stack. When from thy fathers house to Troie warde Thou wentst, thy foote at thresholde stumbled tho. Which when I sawe, in silence mourning sayde, Graunt Gods that this portende a good retourne. Now doe I this display, for thou in armes Too ventrous shouldst not be: procure that this My feare to vaine and vacant windes may turne. And sort (I wote not whome) appointed hath To vndeserued fate, that first of Gréekes With forwarde foote shall touch the Troian soile. O cursed Feme, that first shall waile the losse Of hir adempted feare. I craue the Gods Thou shew not then thy selfe excessiue stout. Of thousand shippes let thine the latter bée, And last of all the sundred waues deuide, (And this for warning take) go last on lande. T'is not thy natiue soyle thou flittest too, At thy returne let sayle and Oare be plyde, And haste thy Barck to thy well knowne shore. Where Phoebus lurke, or else doe shine aloft, Both day and night thou bréedste my griefull wo. But most by might, for that a season is To women (that with clinching armes im brace Their louers limmes) of sugred sport and ioy. For falsed sléepes I hunt in carefull Couch, Féeding on false delights, for want of true. But why to me thy Image pale appeares?
And from thy mouth why such cōplaint procéeds? Enforst to watch, the yrkesome ghostes of night And visions I adore: no Altare through All Thessalie my fuming smoke doth lacke. Incense I yéelde with intermedled teares, Which mingde doe surge as wine ycast in flame When I with gréedie armes, shall thée retourde Imbracing lie, and senselesse ware for ioy? When lodgde with me in one selfe carelesse couch Wilt thou the valiant factes of battaile blase? Which whilst yu shalt describe, though I to heare Shall long, yet will we coll and kisse betwixt. For kissing deckes the tale with better grace, And stay procures ye tongue more prompt to parle. But when I think of Troie, both wind and Seas Returne to minde: and hope by hoofull feare Is vanquisht cleane, and put to sodaine flight. And that the windes your middle passage barre Moues me. In spite of waues you minde to passe. Who to his Countrie would with frowarde gale, Against the will of windes shape his returne? And you from Greece in troublous tēpest trudge. Vnto his towne Neptunus barres your course. Whither hast you? eche vnto his home retyre. Why, whither go you Gréekes? beholde ye winds And coūterthwarting blasts. Some God procures (Not soddain chaūce) no doubt, this lingring stay. What saue a shamefull drabbe and harlot rancke,
By this your warre & battayles broyle is sought? Whilst yet you may, and lawfull is your sayles And flitting Barckes back to Achaia bende. But why doe I reuoke? or call thée home? Let all abodements go. I pray the windes And calmed waues to further thine intent. I spite at Troian Dames, that shall suruay The Funerals of their Féeres & waileful spoiles, Nor haue their foes farre frō their coūtrie boūds. The late betrothed spouse hir selfe will d'on Hir husbands Helme and harnesse with hir hand. She will giue armour, and whilste armour shée Doth giue (a gratefull thing to both) will kisse, And fellow forth hir spouse, with charge to make Retyre, and say (to Ioue thy weapons vowe) Reseruing he his recent charge in minde, Will warely fight, and cast an eye to home: She at returne will loose hir spouses Helme, And doe his Targe away, his wearie limmes Relieuing with hir ayde as best she may. We doubtfull in suspence, and dreade doe stande, Fearing eche thing that may by fortune fall. Yet whilste in forraine coast thou wagest warre, Of War that represents thy face, I haue A table made: to whome I tell my tale, And kisse, as I thy corse was wont to coll. The picture is more than it séemes to sight. In fayth allowe the waren forme a sounde.
And it will be Protesilaus out right: That I beholde, and in my husbandes steade Betwix my paps doe place, and frame complaint Thereto, as though it had the powre to speake. By thy retourne, and corps (my saints I sweare) By egall lightes of mariage and of minde: And by thy head (which fright with siluer locks To fine that I may sée: and that thou mayst In health reuert) I sweare, that whither thou Shalt giue in charge, to thée I will repayre As fellowing Mate, whether thou liue, or oh That more I dreade and stand oh more appald. With this precept and onely charge I ende, Respect thy selfe, and haue remorse of me?
The Argument of the xiiij. Epistle, entituled Hypermnestra to Lyncius. TO fiftie daughters Danaus was Syre, His brother Aegypt had as many sonnes: Whome be to match did earnestly desire, With Danaus daughters: he the mariage shonnes, And reason why: the Oracle had sed His sonne in lawe should hewen off his bed. Aegyptus wroth with this his brothers deede (Of purpose that to Argos went his way For cause the mariage should not so proceede) Sent all his sonnes with Souldiars for to stay Their Vncle: or his daughters at the least To take to wiues, and make a mariage feast. The siedge was layde and Danaus in fine Of force compellde for safties sake to yeelde His brothers sute although he did repine: When mariage day approcht, the father willde His daughters to destroie with cruell kniues Their husbandes, and to reaue their Nephewes liues. The day was come, eche slue hir slumbring Make, Saue Hypermnestra, that of all the rest
Spared hir spouse, and warned him to take His flight: such ruth did lodge in louing breast. According to hir counsell so he did, And by that meane himselfe from daunger rid. In dawning when the father came, he sawe Eche daughter had hir sleepie husband slaine, Saue Hypermnestra: whome withouten lawe He sent to warde, in Prison hir to paine, Where being lodgde, these lynes to Lynceus she Deuisde and sent from Gyues releast to be.
The .xiiij. Epistle. Hypermnestra to Lynceus. TO him that of so many brethren lyues, And sole suruiues, I Hypermnestra sende: The rest by their wiues guilt were fowly slaine. I lode with Giues in Prison am detainde, And not aguilting is my cause of scath. For that my hande to murther not presumde, I did offence: but so I had done euill And ruthlesse bene, I semblant prayse had wonne. More leffer I accoumpt guilt to sustaine, Than in such sort to please mine angrie Syre. Ne loth I hands of murther voyde to haue. Though me my Syre (whō I ne wrongde at all) With threatfull flame consumde, or manace with The fire that present was at sacred rytes, Or slea with sworde which shamefully he gaue, And wife sustaine the death hir husbande should: Yet shall he not my dying iawes enforce For to repent, or loth such friendly ruth. Let Danaus, and my sisters for their fact Agrise: This ende such mischiefe aye ensues. Recounting of that bloudie night doth make My heart to quake, and sodaine tremor force My hand to stay from that I thought to write: She whom they déemd could haue hir husd slain
Of murther not committed dreedes to write: But yet I will assay. With mantle black When yrkesome shade gan ouerspreade the soyle, And fayling day did yéelde to growing night: We sisters led to Danaus Castle came, And there Aegypt his daughters intertainde, Which priuily were armde wt wreakfull blades, On euerie side the golden Lamps did shine, And in vnwilling flames the incense fumde. The people Hymen cryde, but Hymen fled The place, and Iuno tho hir towne forewent. When staggring they with wine, & fellowes crie, With garlandes fresh about their moysted locks, To lodgings glad (their buriall places) go, And on their funerall beddes their corpses cast. With Wine and slumber now they loden lay, And quiet rest throughout all Argos was, When (to my séeming) round about I heard Of dying men the grunts: which I in déede. Did heare, and as I drad, it fell at last. My bloud was fled, the heate forsooke my limmes And in my nouell Couch full coulde I lay. As Zephyrus the flender Reedes doth stirre, And winter ayre doth shake the Popple trée: Euen so (or more) I quooke: astraught thou layst, The wine I gaue thée, was to forcen sléepe. My fathers charge all feare had quite exilde, I rose, and tooke in trembling hande the sworde.
(I tell but truth) thrise caught I vp the toole, And thrise from out my reaching fist it fell. I naythelesse constrained by my Sires Ruthlesse precept, and wailefull warning giuen, Vnto thy throte applide the threatning sworde. But feare and pitie my attemptes withstoode: My ruthfull fist refusde my fathers charge. Renting my purple robes and tresses downe, In whispring wise then thus I gan to speake. Thy father (Hypermnestra) cruell is To thée, fulfill his Hest: a fellow let Thy husband Lynceus to his brothers goe. Ah, I a maiden am by nature and By age debonaire, ne my hande for warre And slaughter sitting is, vnseemely fact. But what? go to, and whilste occasion serues, Thy valiant sisters sue: I déeme by this They all their Feeres haue sent to Plutos Court. Fye, if this hand could any murther done, Vnto my bloud it should an issue giuen. For bearing rule within their vncles reigne, They not deserued death, which naythélesse To forraine sonnes in law should bene assignde. Put case the men had well deserude to die, What haue we misers done? or how aguilt? What makes that I should not be ruthfull aye? Fie? what with cruell sword haue I to doe? What should a Maid wt warlike weapons deale?
My handes for turne and twist more fitter were. Thus I, and whilste I plaine, my teares ensude, And from my face vpon thy carcasse fell. Whilst me to colle, yu threwst thy senselesse armes The sword well nie thine armes had recht a woūd At length of Sire, his seruants and the daye Dreading: these words to breake thy sléepe, I spake Lynceus, that of thy brothers sole doste liue, This night (vnlesse thou haste) will be thy last. Thou startst affright, and sléepe abandoned In trembling fist thou sawste the cruell sword. To thée that tho didst long to know the cause, Whilst night wil giue thée leaue (flée, flée, {quod} I) By night thou fledst, and I remainde behinde. Aurora rose, when Danaus gan to compt And tell the corses of his murthred sonnes: Thou onely of the tale were founde alack. That of his nephewes one had scapte the death, He tooke in rage, complaining not inough Bloudshed to be: such was his eger thyrst: I from my fathers féete was taken straight, And halde by the haire, to cruell prison thrust: Of ruthfull pitie such the guerdon was. Dame Iunos wrath hath euer sith endurde, That Iö of a Nimphe a Cowe became And from a Cowe to Goddesse was transformde Alas, t'was paine inough a sielie maide To lowgh in fieldes, and not hir Ioue to please.
But lately made a Cowe, hir fathers banckes She stoode vpon, and gazed in the flood Vpon the hornes which earst were neuer hirs, And minding for to speake she lowght a good, Both of hir forme, and of hir voyce afrayde. Why Myser dost thou flée? why musest at Thy selfe in foorde, and numbrest so thy féete? That art to other members now transmude? Thou, whome Dame Iuno had in great suspect, With boughes, and sedge thy famine dost expell. Of floud thou drinkste, and gazest all agast Vpon thy forme, dreading the hornes thou bearst, And one, of late so rich as might accoye The mightie Ioue, lyest bare vpon the soyle. By Seas, by landes, and cosin flouds thou runst, Both sea and lande, and lakes doe giue thée way, Passage both sea and lande, and Lakes allowe. What is thy cause of flight? why (Iö) why Ranglest thou so the largie Seas about? Thine owne countnance yu mayst not wel auoide. Why (Iö) whither fléest? the thing thou shoonsts Thou followste aye, and doste by flight pursue: Thou doste both leade and follow hir that leades. Nilus, to sea with seauen folde streame yt flowes, Made hir doe way hir brutishe shape at last. What néede I name the reast, that aged folke Recite? my yeares occasion yéelde of plaint. My Syre and Vncle warre, wée sisters wée
Of Realme and raigne exilde, are banisht farre, He cruell both the Seate, and Scepter rules, We néedie rangle with our néedefull Syre. Of brethren now the lesser parte doth liue. Whome I (as well the parties done to death As Authors of the cruell facte) bewayle. For looke how many brothers I am bereft So many louing systers loste I eke. For eyther part my dolefull teares I shead. Lo, I (cause thou doste liue) sustaine the smart. What should I guiltie beare? what tormēt bide, That wrongfull paine without desert endure? I that was one of hundred allyes earst, One brother liuing Miser shall be flaine. But thou (O Lynceus) if regarde at all Of ruthfull Syster lodge within thy breast, And worthie be, the friendship I haue showde Or ayde mée, or with death foredoe my corse. And laye my limmes deuoide of lyfe by stealth In earth, my bones engraue with faithfull teares, And on my Tombe this slender title write. A boone vnfit for ruth, in wrong exile the death Bode Hypermnestra, cause she saude hir brother Lince{us} breath. Much more in heart yet coulde I finde to write, Saue that my hands ye clincking chaines doe lode, And gastly feare my wonted strength bereaues.
The Argument of the xv. Epistle, entituled Paris to Helen. SYr Paris gone to Greece faire Helena to coy, In Lacedemon landes at length, receiued lyke a Roy At Menelaus house: the Host to Creta goes Atreus goodes but lately deade, in order to dispose. Whose absence gaue the guest occasion to bewraye His sute to Helen, whilst (goodman) hir husbande was awaye. He shewes his secret loue and what good will he beares, And to make breach into the Forte the subtile Souldier sweares. He bragges of stately stocke, be vauntes of Princely kinde: He telles of Dardan dames of Troie and more than was to finde. The Ladie to allure, his painted sheath he showde: And in this wise his Pecocks plumes the Troian spred abrode.
The .xv. Epistle. Paris to Helen. THis gréeting Paris sendes to Ledas daughter deare: Whose helthfull state doth whole depend vpon thy friendly cheare. What? shall I speake? or néedes not this my flame be showne? And more than I coulde wishe to be is loue alreadie knowne? More leffer shoulde it lurcke (if I might haue my will) Till Fortune framde, as feare ne dreade my gladsome ioyes might spill. But I to cloake by craft my loue not knowe the wayes: For who can hide the flanckring flame that still it selfe betrayes? But if thou looke that I with worde confirme the déede: Take this as proufe of hidden heart, I frie with feruent gleede. Let him that doth confesse finde at thy hande such grace: In reading friendly all the reast, as fittes thy featurde face.
It made mée ioye to heare my Letters were receyude: Whereof that he shall fauour finde thy Paris hath conceyude. Which hope I wishe to be of force, nor thou for nought Of mée through ouerpassed seas by Venus Hestes be sought. For least thou witlesse ere, I came vnto this place By warning of the Gods, and no small God doth ayde my case. Great matters I demaunde, but not vndue to mée: For Venus did compounde that I should fast be linckt with thée. By hir conduct I from Sigeian countrye came In Phereclean Barck, and did by seas my iourney frame. Shée gaue me windes at will, and weather safe to saile: No maruell if she that was borne of waues, on seas preuaile. Let hir persist, and calme the raging of my breast, As earst she did the seas: and bring my vowes to harbours reast.
I brought with mée this fire I founde not hers my flame: Which was the cause that hither I my voyage long did frame. Not hither winters stormes or errour mée did driue, At Tenaris was aye my minde and purpose to ariue. Surmise not mée with wares or marchaunts Mart to wende Through fishfull flouds: the wealth I haue immortall Gods defende. Ne as a gaser I to Graian Cities came: For Troian towne (my natiue soyle) the Greece would lightly shame. But thou, whome Venus earst vnto my bedde behight, Didst cause me come, for whome I wisht or ere I knewe the wight. In minde I vewde thy face before I sawe with eye: And brute by stickring fame at first thy beautie did descrie. And maruell is it none if I as one that was Ystroke a farre with thirlings shafte, in loue my time doe passe.
For so it pleasde thē Fates, which least thou séeke to breake: Lende eare to such vndoubted truthes as I intende to speake. When me within hir wombe my mother did detaine: And that the wearie poyse thereof hir strowting corps did paine: She séemde by Morpheus meanes in dasled doubtfull dreame, To haue as then bene brought a bedde with flaming fierie streame. Afright with feare she rose, and what she sawe she tolde The aged King, and he forthwith consulted sages olde. Who preaching did pronounce that Ilion shoulde flame With Paris fire, this ardent loue I féele, it was the same. My forme and forwarde heart (though then I séemde but base) Was proufe and token that I came of Noble haughtie race. A place there is in Ide myd bushie laundes belowe, Whereto no open way doth lye, but Pire and Houlme doth growe:
Where neyther simple shéepe, nor Mountaine Goate did gnawe: Nor lumpishe Oxe with flapping lyppes had filde hys mownching mawe. From thence the Dardane walles, and buildings huge to sée: And waltring waues of drenching seas, I leande against a trée. With trampling féete me thought the soyle began to moue: (Though I displaye but truth, yet thou wilt scarce my tale approue.) By force of flickring wings was brought vnto the place Cylenus, (Atlas Nephewe néere,) and stoode tofore my face. (As lawfull t'was to sée, be léefull to recite) And in his hande a golden rodde, the God did holde vpright. And Heauenly Ladies thrée, dame Venus, Iuno and The Princely Pallas, all at once set footing on the sand. I quooke for dread, my haire stoode staring on my head: When (set thy feare aside) to mée the winged Herawide sed.
Thou art a Iudge of formes, stint all this godly warre: And tell which of these thrée by right thy verdit doth prefarre. And least I shoulde refuse, from Ioue he gaue me charge: And therewith flue with gate direct into the Heauens large. My strength began to growe, and courage come anewe: And then I drad not of the thrée to take a perfite vewe. All were surpassing wightes, but yet I stoode in dred, (Assigned Iudge) that erye one might not alike be sped. For one among the reast surmounted other so: As that it were the Nurce of loue thy selfe wouldst lightly knowe. Such carke they had to winne, as eche one did intende, By largesse, and their goodly giftes my doubtfull doome to bende. An Empire Iuno gaue, dame Pallas vertues raigne: I doubtfull stoode where powre or ver∣tue were the best of twaine.
When swéetely Venus sinilde, let giftes not moue thy minde (Quoth she) friend Paris: both repleate with trouble thou shalt finde. My onely boone shall be, that thou shalt loue, and haue The snowe white Ledas dearling deare and daughter passing braue. She saide, when iustly scande both formes and profers weare: The last with pricke and prayse began to mount vp to hir spheare. Meanewhile (as frowarde fates to better fortune grewe) By certaine signes for Priams childe the Troians Paris knewe. The sonne receyude, the house long time was filde with ioie: And that selfe day continues still as halowde yet in Troie. And as I long for thée, so maydens looude me well: Thou onely mayst their wishe atchiue, and beare awaye the bell. Not Princes heyres alone or daintie dames imbrast: But séemely Nymphes in ardent loue with me were coupled fast.
But lothsome was their loue, I wayde them all aléeke. When I of Helen stoode in hope, whome Venus willde me séeke. I waking with mine eye did sée thy face by daye: And in my heart I vewde thy forme when Phoebus fled awaye. What wilt thou present doe, that in thine absence so Didst Paris please? I fryde though farre the fierie flame were tho. Ne longer this my hope I coulde deferre at last, But that my purpose to aspire to Sea I went in hast. With Phrygian Axe were cut the Troian troes to grounde: And timber what so for the seas most fittest then was founde. The haughtie hilles were spoylde of great and woxen woods: And Ida leant me many a trée, with all their sturdie shrowds. The Okes for warped Keales and rudder were ysquarde: And with his crouked clinching ribbes the ship was well preparde.
Wée added Maste and toppe, and hanging sayles thereto: And in the sides our painted Gods were portred all aroe. In shippe wherein I went was with hir little boye Dame Venus grauen, whose behest was causer of my ioye. When Nauie was addrest, and readie was the charge: To passe vpon Aegean seas was giuen me in charge. My parents by request my voyage woulde haue stayde: And that I would soiourne with them, as earnest suters prayde. My sister with hir lockes (Cassandra) lolling downe: (When shippes were ready to avale from porte within a stowne) Why? whither goste ({quod} she?) thy freyghting shall be flame: Thou little knowste what fyre thou feest, that doste thys iourney frame. I finde hir wordes a troth, I féele the foresaide heate: And raging loue in yéelding breast as kindled cole doth freate.
With that I left the porte, by meane of blissefull blast And friendly gale: I did arriue vpon thy coast at last. Thy husbande tooke mee guest, with whome I harbourde thoe: And not without the Gods aduise he practisde that I knowe. Who made mée shewe of all that goodly was to vewe In Lacedemon, or else where in stately Greece he knewe. But nought might please my eye, or hungrie fansie leeke: Who for thy passing praysed shape with longing heart did séeke. Whome when I sawe, I musde, mine inwarde parts I fealt Surprisde with newe vnwoonted cares in monstrous wise to mealt. A face resembling thine (of trouth I minde it well) Had Venus, when to iudge of hues to Paris lot it fell. If thou hadst there bene prest, contending for the game: I doubt where Lady Venus shoulde so lightly wonne the same.
Reporte hath spread thy prayse, and Fame hir trumpet blowne: So that in euery countrie is fayre Helens beautie knowne. In Troian towne is none, nor from the rifing Sunne A famous Lasse, that for hir hue a semblaunt prayse hath wonne. And if thou darste beleue, thy beautie doth surpasse: And common rumor doth impayre and bréedes thy beautie lasse. Here finde I more than mée the Goddesse had behight: And all that glory by thy face and forme is passed quight. Not Theseus looude for nought, that knewe so well thy shape: That were of such a noble Duke surmisde a séemely rape. When by the Gréekishe guise a naked Nymph didst sporte With naked wightes, in place of playe where Grecians did resorte. I prayse him for his rape, I muse he would forgoe So good a pray: with valiant heart it shoulde bene healde you knowe.
For from these shoulders first should fall my scotched skull: Ere thee out of my griping handes a mortall wight shoulde pull. Would ere these armes of mine haue let thee so depart? Or during life mightste thou at all from Paris clummes astart? If néedes I should forgone, I would haue had a share, Nor all in Idle should haue layne the lustfull Venus ware. Or I thy maydenhead woulde and daintie flowre haue gainde: Or that which might haue bene allowde; if maydenhead were restrainde. To Paris plye, and thou his constant heart shalt trie: Who vowes with thée in selfe same fire and funerall flame to frie. For I haue thée preferrde before the regall Mace, Which welthfull Iuno offred, when I sate in Iudges place. And to thée fine I might with armes thy neck enfolde: I scornde the vertue Pallas gaue, more worth than glowing golde:
That time when Ladies thrée appearde in stately Ide, By dexter iudgement there to haue their doubtfull quarrell tride: I sorrow not my choyce, ne yet repent at all: My stable minde doth aye persist as then it did, and shall. This one request I make, let not my hope be vaine, (O famous dame) that well deseruste pursute with endlesse paine. No Raskall séekes to match himselfe in Gentils blood: Ne thou to be my wedded spouse mayst thinke thy selfe too good. The Pleyade mayst thou finde, and Ioue with stately stile To me alide, the middle Grand∣sires though I shoulde concile. In Asia raignes my Syre, (a freshe and fruitefull soyle) Which scarcely may enuironde be with long and painefull toyle. Of Cities many one, and lodges shalt thou sée: And Temples such as fit for Gods thy selfe wilt déeme to bée.
Great Walles with loftie towres and Ilion shalt thou bewe: Which stately buildings by the sounde of Phoebus musicke grewe. What of the hugie presse of people should I tell? The Countrie scarce containes the folke that in the Cities dwell. A troupe of Troian Dames, and Matrones thée will méete: The Phrygian Femes will stuffe eche Porch, and euery other streete; How often wilt thou saye Achaia is but powre? The wealth of Gréekish townes is founde in euery little bowre, Ne lawfull is for mee thy Sparta to despise: The place where thou were fostred, I most blissefull doe surmise. Yet Sparta is but spare, more pompe thou dost deserue: So meane a soyle for such a face doth nothing fitly serue. Such beautie larger coast would well beséeme in déede: And aye on new delights were méete for such a face to féede.
When thus thou vewe our men attirde, and brauely dight: What wilt thou iudge of Troian trulls, and of their vesture bright? Now shewe thy selfe a friende, nor of a Phrygian scorne Thou daintie dame, in Therapne∣an countrie that were borne. For he a Phrygian was and come of Troian line: That to the Gods their Nectar giues commixt with water fine. A Troian Tython too, and yet she likte him well, That with the golden dawning doth the drowping night expell. Anchifes was a Tro∣ian borne, and bred they say, With whome the Dame of Loue in Ide in shrouding shaddowe lay. Thy spouse with me comparde (though thou thy selfe were iudge) For yeares and séemely shape would be a Rascall and a Snudge. I will not giue to thee a Fatherlawe, that by His cursed fact did force the Sonne his fearefull steades to wry.
Ne Pelops was the Syre of Priam, that with blood Of Oenamus imbrude his handes, and Mirtill drencht in flood. Nor doth our Grandsire gape for fruite in flattring lake Of Styx: nor séekes for waues in Well, his growing thirst to slake. But what auaileth this if one be linckt with thée Of their discent? Ioue is enforst this families head to bée. Fye shamefull act, all night that same vnworthy patch With thée doth fléepe, and with his armes thy sugred corps doth catch. Thee scarcely I discrie when table clothes are led: And that selfe time with cark and care, and sorrowe ynough is sped. Vnto my mortall foes such banquets fall I craue: As when that Bacchus comes to broode I sielie Paris haue. I hate mine harboure sore, when so the rustick layes His armes vpon thy snowish necke, and with mine Hostesse playes.
I swell with wrath (but what should I now all declare?) When with his clothes displaide the Chuffe thy husbande, hydes thy bare. But when you gan to kisse and coll eche other apace: (For that I woulde not sée) the cuppe I set before my face. Looke when he thée imbraste, to grounde mine eyes I threwe: And in vnwilling mouth my meate, and yrkesome prawnder grewe. And grunting oft with griefe, I sawe full well when thou At those my woes in wanton wife wouldst smile with laughing brow. With wine oft times I would that fuming flame supprest: But dronkennesse was flame in fire and thus my heate increast. And sundrie sights to shunne, away my head I tourne: But thou estsoones wouldst make mine eyes and fancie to retourne. Thus doubtfull what to doe, agriefe these things to sée: But yet a greater griefe away from such a face to hée.
As much as lay in mée this rage I striue to hide: Yet naythelesse dissembled loue is quickly to be spide. Ne art thou ought deceiude, to thée my woundes be knowne: And would to God that of my griefes thou priuie were alone. How oft when teares gan flush, turnde I my head awrie? Least he the cause of mournefull moode should fortune to discrie? How often with cup crasde haue I some looue exprest? And would vnto thy featurde face eche worde and sentence wrest? And of my selfe in close and fayned name made showe: Euen I am he that looude so well, if thou the same not knowe. And that I franckly might vse wanton words at will: I woulde make wise of Bacchus wares as though I had my fill. Thy breast (I well recorde) (thy vesture being lose.) Displayde vnto my staring eyes, thy beautie did disclose.
Thy breast than Mountaine snowe or morning Milke more cleare, Or Ioue that in the forine of Swanne to Leda did appeare Whilst at the sight I gazde (I helde a Cuppe by happe) And from my fist the Cuppe it fell and in the floore did snappe. When thou thy daughter kist, I would, the kisse to winne, Hermions chéekes and cherrie lippes eftsoone to smack beginne. Sometime laide bolte vpright of former loue would sing: And other sithes by beck would giue a signe of secrete thing. The chiefe of all thy Mates I bourded but of late: To Clymen, and to Aethra I in humble wise did prate. Who aunswerd nothing else but that they stoode in dread: And euen amid my earnest sute away from me they flead. Would thou were plaste as price at some notorious watch, That he who best in armes deserude, thée for his Feere might catch.
Then as Hippomenes wanne Atlanta in the fielde, To whome a flock of suters earst in running race did yéelde: As Hercules the hornes of Achelous broke, When Deianeiras loue to fight the Champion did prouoke? I would my valiaunt prowesse in semblant sort haue showne: And that thy beautie causde the same to thée it should be knowne. Now nought remaines, but euen to sue to thee (faire Dame) And groufe to fore thy feete to fall if thou permit the fame. O flowre, and present prayfe of both thy brothers hyre: O worthie wife for mightie Ioue if Ioue were not thy Syre: Or to Sigeian porte with thée I will retire: Or in exile at Tenaris: my carcasse shall expire. For why, no slender darte hath clest my breast in twaine, The mortall wounde hath broosde the bones, and ransackt euery vaine.
In this (I minde it well) Cassandra spake aright: Who saide in future time on m a heauenly shaft should light. Wherefore, doe not despise the loue allowde by fate: So mayst thou haue the gastely Gods thy friendes in néedefull state. I haue a thousande things which franckly to recite, Receyue me to thy carelesse Couch in fere and silent night. What? dost thou shame, or stande in such a bashfull dred, For to defile with secrete scape thy chaste and bridely bed? Too simple sure thou art, a rustick might I say? Thinkst thou that so wel formde a face from guilt may scape away? Or thou must chaunge thy hue, or not be hard at least: Twixt beautie and an honest life was neuer warre infeast. For Ioue delightes in stealthes, and Venus loues the same: Ne Ioue had bene thy Syre vnlesse had Leda likte the game.
If griefes of loue haue force scarce chaste thou mayst be thought: Whome lustfull Ioue and Leda light into this worlde brought. Then leade an honest life, when we in Troie shall be: Let none be able to defame fayre Helen, but by me. Now let vs forge the fact which mariage shall amende: If Ladie Venus wordes be true as tho she did pretende. Thy husbande not in wordes but déedes perswades thereto: Who, for he would no hindrance be, deuisde from Greece to go. He had no fitter time to ride from home but than: O Lord it is a worlde to sée the subtile craft of man. Mine Host is gone, who saide at parture: wife I will Thou take in charge my Troian guest▪ thy husbands Hestes fulfill. I sweare, thou dost neglect thy absent Féeres request: For why, thou hast no carke at all to entertaine thy guest.
What dost thou thinke in déede that doltish sielie man, The thewes of Helens passing forme may iudge, or throughly scan? In fayth thou art beguilde: for if the good he owes He knew, therewith he would not trust, a guest he scarcely knowes. Though neyther thée my voyce nor friendship may procure To yéelde me grace: conuenient time may cause vs to play sure. Or else we are but Doltes, and more than he to blame: If such occasion we permit to flide deuoyde of game. In maner with his hande he gaue his guest to thée: Sée thou doe vse such simplenesse that hath such care of mee: The long and lothsome night thou lodgest all alone: And I poore Paris to redresse my haplesse harmes haue none. Let intermedled ioyes conioyne vs both yfeare: And that selfe night shall séeme to vs than brightest day more cleare.
Then will I make my vow, appealing Gods to othe: And by a sacred bande to thée for pawne ingage my troth. And then (vnlesse the trust I in my selfe repose Be vaine) I vnto thée estsoones my Scepter will disclose. But if thou shame, and dread to condescend thereto: I onely will sustaine the guilt and thou exempt shalt go. For why, thy brothers fact, and Theseus will I take As myrrours: nearer proufe than this I know thou canst not make. The Theseus earst, they two Leucippids haue bereft: And I as fourth example made and mirrour shall be left. My Nauie is at hande, of men and armour store: We shall to Troie flit in haste by meane of winde and Ore. Thou like a stately Quéene through Dardan streates shalt ride: The Commons will some Goddesse new surmise to haue espide.
What way soeuer thou goest, the perfumes they shall sweate: And slaughtred beastes the gorie grounde with bloudie strokes shall beate. My sisters with my dame, my brothers with the King, And all the Troian Matrons shall their ample presents bring. Oh, scarce one parcell I of future things recite: Thou shalt haue more than in these lines my feeble penne can write. Ne doe thou rapted stande of dreadfull warre in awe: Ne feare that grudging Greece hir force to wreake this rape will drawe. Though sundry were conuaide, was neuer none pursude With clattring armes: of troth this dread vs causelesse doth delude. In Boreas name the men of Thrace Orithia stole: Yet Byston had no hatefull warres, nor enmies to controle. In nouell Barcke was brought by Iason through the Seas Medea: Colchos kept no coyle ne Thessale did disease.
And he that stale the first reft Minos dearling deare: And yet his men of Creta did not once in armour steare. The feare in these affaires the daunger doth excell: But afterwarde of feare we shame when euery thing is well. Put case, that warre were wagde? (if so thou list to thincke) What, I haue men, and armour eake yea such as will not shrincke. And Asia is no lesse, than is your countrie wide: Of valiant wightes we haue good store, and startling steades to ride. Nor Menelaus shall of greater courage bée Than Troian Paris, nor in armes more stiffe and stoute than hée. For being yet a childe I slue my haughtie foes That stale my heirde: and of that fact my valiant name arose. And being but a Ladde in sundry combats wanne The palme from Illioneus, and eake Deiphobus the man.
And least thou sole surmise mée to preuaile at hande: I can enforce my thirled shaft full neare the marke to stande. The like attempt in youth Atrides neuer made: Ne Menelaus mayst thou match with Paris for his trade. Though all things else thou graunt, yet Hector can not bée His brother, which will stande in steade of thousande men to mée. Thou little knowste my powre, my force from thée is lockt: Thou canst not tell what man is he with whome thou shalt be shockt. Or with no tumult thou shalt be requirde againe: Or Greekish tentes to Paris Marte to yéelde they shall be faine. Yet néede I not disdaine to warre for such a wife: For why, the price doth well deserue to stirre a greater strife. And thou, if all the worlde for thee shoulde séeme to striue: Shalt stande assurde in after time for aye to be aliue.
Wherefore hath dreadlesse hope departing from this shore, And blissefull Gods, demaunde the giftes I thée behight before.
The Argument of the xvj. Epistle, entituled Helen to Paris. WHen Helen had the Troian writte perusde She thought hir selfe too shamefully abusde. She deemde it not the part of any guest, To whoredome so his Hostesse minde to wrest. To quaile the Princockes pride, and make a prouse Of spotlesse fame, at first she standes aloufe. At length when to and fro she had discourste Of this and that, and collour well disbourste: She fawnes, she frownes, she freates, she speakes him faire, She offred hope, but fed him with dispaire, As women wont, deuising many a toie, But Paris hir in fine conuayde to Troie.
The .xvj. Epistle. Helen to Paris. HOw since thy letters haue thus rashly wrongde my sight: I thought it needefull with my penne thy Pistle to requite. And didst thou dare a guest, (the boundes of hostage broke?) And honest Matron well espousde, to pleasure to prouoke? For this by whisking windes ytost on wauing Seas, Did Taenaris thée with porte relieue thy painefull plight to ease? Nor (though inguestred thou camste from a Countrie farre) My Pallace did gainst thée as then his churlish gates debarre? That such a wrong should be rewarde for good desart? Thou that didst enter so hast playde no guestes, but enmies part. Though lawfull be my plaint, yet doubt I not at all, But thou (when so thou heare thereof) a rude complaint wilt call.
A rustick let me bee, so I not passe the bounde Of honest shame, and in my lyfe no cankred crime be founde. So I in fayned looke doe cloake no churlish cheare: Nor in my face no grimme disdaine nor bended broowe appeare. Yet honest is my fame, I liue deuoide of spot: No lustfull Lecher for his life is able me to blot. Which makes me muse the more what should enbolde thée so, To take this straunge attempt in hand a maried wife to wowe? Cause Theseus wrongde me once, well worthie am I déemde To be a Ruffians rape againe, and so to be estéemde? The guilt was mine if I allured were to yll: But so I rapted were by force, what coulde I doe but nill? Ne he by that his fact his hoped bootie gote: Set feare and womans dread aside, I nought abode God wote.
The wretch by wrestling wonne at Helens hande a kisse: And laide hir on the lippes sometime, he had no more but this. Scarce would you bene content (vnthriftie so you arre) With that: I thanke the Gods, that he and thou didst differ farre. He yéelded me againe and me did scarcely touch: And did repent him of his fact, his modestie was such. Did Theseus so recant that Paris should succéede? For feare least on my blased armes. the people should not féede? Yet I am nothing wroth, (for who can angrie bée With that shée loues?) if this my loue be faithfull vnto mée. For thereof doubt I sore, not for distrust at all, Or that my face and featurde forme into suspect I call. But for such light beliefe and credit workes our woe: And suters tales art freight with fraud, and fired faith forgoe.
But others doe aguilt, an honest Matron rare: Who barres that I among those fewe should haue a partie share? For cause my mother errde, perhaps thou thinkste me light By hir example to be wonne, by meane of natures might. To cloake my mothers crime an errour is in store: For why the Lecher lurckt in plume to worke his will the more. If I should doe amisse of force thereof I knowe: There is no errour mine offence to hide from open showe. Hir scape is well allowde, the Aucthor made it lesse: There is no Ioue at all to cloake my fault if I transgresse. Thou braust vpon thy stock, thy Grandsires Princes are: This house of worthie Auncesters and Nobles is not bare. I will conceale that Ioue was Atreus Grandsire great: Of Tantalus, or Pelops I, nor Tyndaris minde to treat.
But Leda lendes me Ioue my stately Sire to bée: Whome foule beguilde with swannish forme and falsed byrde we sée. Now vaunt thy Troian heades and ginners of thy race: Let Laomedon be in presse and Priam eke in place. Whome I commend: but he that fift is of your line, (Thy greatest pryde) I finde the same the formost man in mine. Though Troian Scepter I accoumpt to be of fame, Yet iudge I not our Empire ought inferiour to the same. Suppose our wealth you passe, and Teucrian troupe excell Our Gréekish soyle: yet barbarous is the countrie where you dwell. So great rewardes your lynes and Letters me behight, As well they might accoy, and cause to yéelde a heauenly wight. But so I minded were to breake the boundes of shame: Thy selfe shouldst sooner make me yéelde than all thy giftes of fame.
Or I for aye will liue and leade vnspotted life, Or thée more rather would ensue than all thine offers rife: As I not scorne the same, in price so are they thought The greatest gifts to whome the gi∣uer hath their beautie brought. But most of all I weigh thy loue, that for my sake Such paines abodste, whose hope to passe the Seas did vndertake. And eke at tables set (though with dissembling browe I séeke to hide thine amorous tricks) I note them well ynowe. Sometime thou (wanton wight) doste cast a glauncing blinck With wrested looke, whereat well neare my daunted eyes doe shrinck. Againe you sigh as fast, another time you take The Cup, and where I dranck euen there your falsed thirst doth flake. With fingers (Lorde) how oft, and wyth a talking browe, Hast thou me giuen secret signes I wote well where, and howe?
And oft I stoode in feare my husbande sawe the same: And often dreading to be spide I blusht with bashefull shame. Oft times with whispring wordes vnto my selfe I sedde: (This is a shamelesse guest) my wordes did hit the nayle on hedde. And often wrought in wine, I rad vpon the boorde, Euen vnder Helens name (I loue) I well recorde the woorde. But that I had distrust therof, my lookes did showe: But now (alas) to write the like doth haplesse Helen knowe. These fansies might haue forst my ruthfull breast to bende, And tournde my heart, if to aguilt I would at all intende. Thy feature I confesse is rare, and such to sée, As might allure a womans heart to linck hir selfe with thée. I wishe that hap to fall vpon some single dame: Ere I with forraine loue should séeke my bridely Bedde to shame.
Well liked things to lack by my example leare: It is a vertue to abstaine from what thou hast so deare. How many youthes haue wisht for that which thou doste craue? What? Paris dost thou déeme, that thou alone good iudgement haue? Thou séest no more than they, but madder is thy minde: Thy courage is no bett than theirs, lesse shame in thée I finde. Would then thou hadst repayrde, and hither come by floode: When me in prime and flowring yeres a thousande suters woode. Of thousande thou the first if I thee tho had séene, (My doome to heare withall I craue my husbande) thou hadst béene. To things possest thou comste, and gotten goods too late: Too slow thou were, another hath in that thou crauste, estate. As then thy Troian wife, I would haue wisht to bée: So now Atrides not against my will enioyeth mée.
Eease thou with wordes therefore to ransacke Helens heart, To hir (thou fayst thou loouste so well) procure no grutching smart. But let me kéepe the sort that Fortune hath allowde: Séeke not my fame and good report to darke with shadie clowde. But Venus so behight, and in the vales of Ide Thrée heauenly Wightes starke naked came to clayme their beauties pride. Of whome one gaue thée raigne, th'other Bellonas skill: The thirde pronounst that Helen shoulde be plyant to thy will. In faith I scarcely thinke such Ladies would vouchsaue, For chiefest beauties péerelesse price thy doubtfull doome to haue. Suppose it were a trouth, the reast was all vntrue: That for such iudgement I should be a recompence to you. I stande not so much on my beauties pride, to déeme That me the greatest gift of all the Goddesse did estéeme.
My feature is content of men to purchase fame: I like it not that Venus should so much commende the same. But nothing I denie the prayse full well I léeke: For to what ende should I gainesay the thing I chiefely séeke? Ne let it wrath thée that I hardely thée beléeue: To matters of importance great we scarcely credit geeue. Wherefore I ioy it most that Venus likte me so: And next for such a stately gift that thou did take me tho. And that thou didst preferre my blased beauties good Fore Pallas gift, and Iunos raigne that there in iudgement stood. Then I thy vertue am, then I to thée a raigne: I were too stonie if I woulde not loue the like againe. Good fayth, I am no stéele, but him to loue I shonne Who scarce (I thinke) may be my spouse when all my worke is donne.
Why should I fondely seeke to plough the barraine sande? Or hope on that which place it selfe doth very much withstande? I skillesse am in scapes, the Gods recorde I call I neuer by deceitefull sleight beguilde my Féere at all. In that to couert scrole my wordes I now commit, My letters doe attempt a thing they neuer practisde yet. Thrise blest that are inurde, I wote not how to play That part as yet, to guilt full harde I doe surmise the way. This dreade doth much annoy and sore I am agast, Suspecting all the peoples eyes on vs are fixed fast. Nor this I feare in vaine, the bussing brute I know: And Aethra, what report had gone, to mée but late did show. Vnlesse thou minde to cease, dissemble thou therefore: But why shouldst thou now stint thy sute? thou canst dissemble sore.
In secret vse thy toyes, and spare thou not to play: Now scope we haue, though not the most, my husband is away. He now is farre from home affayres compellde him so: A iust and good occasion he had out of towne to go. When in a doubt he stoode his iourney forth to take, Dispatch ({quod} I) good sir, and sée a quicke returne you make. Th'abodement likte him so; as he to kissing fell: And gaue me charge of house and goods, and bad me vse thée well. I scarce my laughter helde, which whilste I striue to stay: Saue that it should be so in déede, I had no worde to say. To Crete he went in hast by helpe of winde and Ore: But thou, that all things léefull are, must not surmise therefore. So is my spouse alacke, as in his absence well He doth me garde: that Princes haue long reach canst thou not tell?
Fame doth impayre our ioyes for how much more you léeke And prayse me: So much more you cause to stande in feare the Greeke. The laude I loue so well (as now consistes the case) Annoyes: more better were that fame had neuer blazde my face. That I am left with thée now he is farre away Muse not: he trustes my manners well and thinks in me some stay. My face did make him dread, he trustes my life full well: The suretie which my manners bréede, my beautie doth expell. Thou willste me to be wise and vse the present tide: And not to let so fitte a time deuoyde of game to slide. I would, and am afrayde as yet my heart doth quake: And fearefull breast in doubt doth stande, and knowes not which to take. My spouse doth nowe dislodge, and thou alone dost lye: Thy beautie likes mée well, and He∣lens shape contents thine eye.
The nightes are passing long, and we to chatte begin: And thou art euen a pleasaunt guest and both one house within. Good sooth eche thing doth séeme this fact to further aye: And yet I knowe not how the same my quiuering feare doth staye. As thou perswadste but yll, would well thou mightst constraine Mée to thy will, this rudenesse then should be expelde amaine. Sometime receiued wrong auailes the pacient much: How blest were I, such force to byde if Helens hap were such? More better were while loue is rawe and gréene, to staye: For flame that scarcely kindled is will soone consume awaye: Fewe drops of sprinckled water will the sparckling fyre delaye. As straungers starters are vncertaine be their loues: And when thou thinkst them surtte of all their wauering faith remoues. Let Hypsiphyl recorde and Mynos daughter trye:
For they them selues with wandring wightes in bridely bande did tie. And thou of whome Oenon was many yeares imbrast, Art sayd without a iust desert to shonne the Nymph at last, Which thou dost not denie; and verie troth to tell, My chiefest care was to enquire where thou didst vse thée well. And though thou wouldst full faine be stable now in loue, Thou canst not, for thy Teucrian ships will out of hande remoue. Whyle we doe tale yfeare, and fixed night shall bée, The wind will serue thy sayles so well as thou wilt part from mee. Amid his pleasant course, that vnacquainted play Will stint, and with the whisking winds our friendship passe away. Shall I (as thou perswadste) go vewe the Troian towne? Or vnto great Laomedon a Daughterlaw be fowne? Perdie I more accoumpt of swift and flickring fame,
Than that in euery lande it should haue powre to spred my name: What Sparta might of me and all Achaia speake? What auncient Asias famous townes, and Priams mansion eake? What Priamus of me, and Priams wife might say? Thy brothers, with the Troian dames what might they blast I pray? And last, how mightst thou hope mée faythfull spouse to finde? Thy owne example would procure distrust within thy minde. What guest soeuer shall to Ilion repeare, Will bréede suspect within thy breast, and make thée stande in feare. How oft wilt thou inragde tearme me by harlots name, Forgetfull that thy owne offence was causer of the same? Thy selfe wilt both procure and blame the fact at last: Ere that I wish in hollow vaute my carkasse to be plast. But I shall haue the wealth of Trose, and braue aray:
And mo rewards than promise was, thus did thy Pistle say. Of precious Purple I and Arrasse store shall haue: And be enricht with hugie heapes of massie golde so braue. Forgiue that I confesse, I way not all the golde: I wote not how this soyle doth séeme thy Helen to withholde. For if I wronged were, in Troie no succour is: My brothers ayde I stande assurde, and fathers helpe to misse. False Iason euerie thing to Medea behight: And yet in fine from Aesons lodge she was expelled quight. And being so refusde, she could not make retourne To Aetes, Ipsea, nor with Chalcio∣pe for shame soiourne. I nothing dread the like, no more did Medea tho: But sundrie times abodements doe good hope delude, we know. The shippes that now in surge and yrefull seas doe ride:
When first they wayd their Ankcors, had a calme and pleasant tide. The brande doth bréede my dreade, wherewith thy Dame was sed Before hir wonted time of birth, to haue bene brought abed. The Soothsayers sawes I feare, which spake the time would bée, When men of Troie within their walles the Greekish flame should sée. As Venus friendes thee, for shee wanne the glittring fruite, And foylde the other two that were hir riuals in the sute: So dreade I their disdaynes which (by thine owne reporte) In iudgement were so put a back in such reprochfull sorte. And if I follow thée, I doubt it not (alas) But that through swordes and wreakefull blades our haplesse loue shall passe. With Centaurs to discorde, and bloudie warres to wage Did Hippodamia cause the men of Thrace in yrefull rage: And dost thou déeme my Féere will vnreuenged go
In quarrell iust? my brothers both and Tindaris also? For that in brauerie you your Martiall déedes recite: The truth is thus, that from your wordes your feature differs quite. For Venus fitter thou than Mars dost séeme to bée: Loue Paris, and let men of force go fight in fielde for thée. Let Hector, whome thou so dost vaunt, in armour broyle: Another kinde of warrefare is farre better for thy toyle. If I were in my wittes, or somewhat bolder were I would vse these: the woman that are wise will vse this geare. And laying shame aside perhaps hereafter I Will condiscend, and conquerde with continuance will applie. For that in secret thou dost long the rest to tell, The couert talke that thou wouldst vse, I know it passing well. Too hastie sure thou art, thy haruest is in grasse:
Perhappes this tariance will the bet∣ter bring thy will to passe. Thus ye my letters leaue my guiltie minde to showe: Thou Quill, that wearied hast my hand, in this no farther go. The reast by Clymen I and Aethra will disclose: Which two are of my counsell chiefs, in whome I trust repose.
The Argument of the xvij. Epistle, entituled Sappho to Phaon. Phaon in passage Boate his pain full liuing gate, And ferriyng folke from shore to shore, relieude his needfull state. T'was Venus happe at last, without a profred hyre To Phaon for his painfull toile, a passage to desire. The Whirryman agreed, and ferried hir for nought, Whome he no heauenlic Goddesse, but a mortall woman thought. She in rewarde a Box of ointment gaue to him, That coulde enforce a featurde forme, and make the beautie trim. Within a while this Lad the Lasses had allurde, But wanton Sappho least of all his beauties beames endurde. She looude hym passing well, he forste hir not a rush: Hir sielie Nymph inragde with loue a thousand cares did crush.
To Sicil Phaon goes, then Sappho seemd vndonne, And thought by speedie leauing life bir wasting flames to shonne. From Leucas she pretendes (Epyrus Mount) to sall, And so by hastned death to leaue both loue and life withall. To Leucas ere she came, to suing flat she fill, And to vnfriendlie Phaon did deuise this friendlie Bill. In hope to winne the Wight, and purchase loue againe, Wherein she telles hir twi ching griefer and pennes hir pinching paine.
The .xvij. Epistle. Sappho to Phaon. WHere when thou sawste at first my louing lines with eye, Thou knowledge hadst frō whence they came and notice by and by? Where if thou hadst herein not read the Authors name And Sappho seene, thou hadst not knowne from whome this writing came? Demaund thou wilt perhaps what me procurde to write This kinde of verse, that mirrie tunes and Luting doe delight? For that this loue of mine is doolefull, and the verse Elegia callde, a wofull kinde of miter to reherse. No Cytheron serues a mourning minde whome cruell cares doe pierse. As straw doth kindle soone, when Eurus ginnes to driue The flash into the fertill fieldes: euen so I frie aliue. To Aetna Phaon nowe hath tane his way in hast:
And me poore wench as great a fire as Aetnas flame doth wast. I can not frame my frets, my stubburne strings doe iarre: For why, in déede of quiet minde such verses tokens arre. Pyrino is forgot, ne Dryads doe delite My fancie: Lesbian Lasses eke are now forgotten quite. Not Amython I force, nor Cydno passing fine: Nor Atthis, as she did of yore, allures these eyes of mine. Ne yet a hundreth mo whome (shame ylaid aside) I fanside erste: thou all that loue from them to thee hast wride. In thée doth feature flowe, thy yeares for daliance apt: Thy face, O face t'is thou that hast my shaken senses rapt. A Quiuer and a Lute take thou in hande, and thée Apollo men will deeme: d'on hornes and Bacchus thou shalt bee. And Phoebus Daphne looude, king Minos darling deare
God Bacchus lykte, yet neyther of both a Cytherons string could steare. But me Pegasian Nymphes haue learned on the Lute, And throughout all the worlde is borne of Sapphos songes the brute. Nor Alcaeus (though vpon a statelier string doe sounde My Mate for Arte, and Countrie eke) a greater prayse hath founde. Though I at natures hand no featurde face could gaine: Yet those defaults of kinde I quite by goodnesse of the brains. Disdaine me not, although but meane my stature bée: And in pronouncing verie short you Sapphos name doe sée. Put case I be not faire? swarth Andromed to vewe. Duke Perseus pleasde: Morisco soyle allowde hir tawnie hewe. Full oft the whitest Doues with specled Culuers tred: And oft we sée the Turtle browne with Popingay doth wed. If none, vnlesse hir forme could match thy featurde shape,
Should lincke with thee: thou doubtlesse shouldst from mariage aye escape. But when thou vewdste my verse, then Sappho séemde in sight A comely wench, thou swarste that me alone became to wright. I sang, I minde it well, (for Louers fixe in breast Forepassed toyes) and thou the whilste to kissing thée addreast. Those busses likte thée eke, for euerie point I was Befancide well: but most when we to Venus prancks did passe. Then did my wanton tricks and loftie mounting, more With sugred wordes, delight thy minde (my Phaon) than of yore. And that when both our ioyes confounded were, I lay With wearie limmes, and languor lame and had no worde to say. Now are Sicilian trulles thy nouell pray, I sée: In Lesbos what make I? a wench of Sicill I will bee. O Nysian Matrons, O Sicilian Dames I say,
This loytring guest of ours expell your Countrie boundes I pray. Ne let his glosing tongue your listning eares beguile: For why to vs he hath ere this yvsde that selfe same stile. And Ladie Venus, thou that knowen art to dwell (Rue on thy Poets piteous plight) among the Sicans fell. Will aye this cruell chaunce in one selfe tenour roonne? And still persist in spitefull sorte as when hir race begoonne? For but a Babe in yeares, and lacking thrée of nine, My parents bones I gathered vp and bathde with saltish brine. My néedefull brother burnt with beastly strumpets flame: And did endure both wrack of wealth and spitefull losse of fame. To beggrie brought he plies the sliding seas with Ore: And gettes againe with shamefull shifts the wealth he spent before. And me for sounde aduise pursues with deadly hate:
This was the onely good to me that my freespeaking gate. And eake, as though I lackt a cause to bréed my dole, My little daughter heapes vp hoe, that prettie pratling soule. But last of all, thou art the forger of my bale: Aye me poore wench, my beaten Barcke flits not with pleasant gale. Marke out of order how my lolling tresses flée: No glistring Gem, or Iuell is vpon my hande to sée. My vesture is but vile, not spanged is my toppe: My hanging haire with Ciuet, nor Arabian dew doth droppe. For whome (vnhappie Girle) should Sappho go so gay? Whome féeke to please? the Author of my brauery is away. My gentle yéeiding breast eche lightsome dart may broose: And aye I finde a cause to loue, and can none other choose. Or else at time of birth the sisters set this lawe:
Allowing me such cruell twist that did my destnie drawe: Or custome growes to kinde, and vse becomes an Arte: I wote not well, but sure I haue, by kinde a gentle heart. What wonder, if with such a beardlesse youth I were Attacht, whose tender childish yeares allowde his chinne no haire? I drad (Aurora) least for Cephalus thou wold Ychosen him: saue that thy for∣mer rape doth thée withhold. If Phoebe vewe him once, that all suruayes with eye: My Phaon shall be quickly forste in slumber long to lye. In Iuorie Wagon would dame Venus, to the starres Borne him: but that she fearde he wold haue coyde the God of Warres. O thou that neyther art a boy, nor man in sight, But aptest age: of all thy race the most excellent wight, Come hither, come, and to my bosome make retowre;
No loue I craue in fayth of thée, but thée to loue the powre. I write and from my chéekes the deawie teares distill: Beholde how many blots they cause in Sapphos doolefull bill. If néedes thou wouldst haue gone, yet this allow for true: Thou mightst haue saide at parture, O my Lesbian Lasse adue. But now no teares of mine ne latter kisse thou had: Ne (to be short) of such mishaps as are befall, I drad. With me is nought of thine, saue wrong yleft in déede: Ne gaue I warning that thou hadst of faythfull loue the méede. I gaue thee no precepts, nor would haue done a iot: But made a sute that Sappho might at no time bene forgot. By loue, that neuer farre may from thy breast astart: And sacred sisters nine (my saincts) whome I embrace with heart, I sweare: when one exclamde (I wote nere who to mée)
And said, now Sappho iogges thy ioy, thy Phaon now doth flée: I had no teares to shed, my lippes did language lacke, Mine eyes did want their gushing teares my foltring tongue it stacke Vnto the roufe, and ysie colde my fearefull breast did racke. When griefe was somewhat swagde, and sorrow gan to slake: I howlde with toren lockes, and with my fist my bodie strake: As doth the louing Dame that to the Temple beares Hir Babe his corps withouten sense, and bathes his Tombe with teares. Charaxe my brother ioyde, and often past before My face and to and fro did iet to make my doole the more. And to encrease my shame, would wit my cause of woe: And say, why wéepes this woman? why? hir daughter liues I trowe. Oh, shame and earnest loue can neuer well agrée: How there with open breast I stoode the Vulgar folke did sée.
Thou Phaon art my carke, my dreames reduce to minde Thy countnance: dreames which clearer than the shining Sunne I finde. I meete thée oft in sléepe, though thou be nothing nie, But of this sléepe the slipper ioyes too soone away doe slie. Full oft vpon thine armes my lodging neck I laye: And then me thinks thy head as much my limber armes doe staye. I know thy kisses well, and am not now to seeke How thou were wont to smack thy wench, and she to doe the léeke. I play the wanton Gyrle sometime, and séeme with thée To chat, and think my slumbring sense awaked wide to bée. I blush to tell the reast that followes, but there is Naught left vndone that bréedes delight, I coulde not Phaon misse. But when that Titan splayes his face, and all beside: I make complaint that winged sléepe so soone away did slide.
To Groues and Caue I trudge, as though they did me good: The Caue and groues that witnesse there in place of pleasure stood. Inragde I thither runne, as doth the Frantike fro Whome fell Erichtho hath in chase, my locks at random go. There plainely I discrie with rotten Tophe yspred A place, that earst in lieu was to me of better bed. I finde the Wood where we with boughes and gallant greaues Yshadowde haue full often laine among the flittring leaues. The owner is alack both of the place and mée: The place is but a filthie soyle, the place his dowre was hee. The twifolde turning turffe I knowe it very well, And Grasse, with bended head to grounde that with our tumbling fell. I layde me groufe vpon thy wonted side: the banck (A pleasaunt plot of pleasure earst) my flushing feares it dranck.
Againe the naked boughes (their garments layde in grounde) Did séeme to mourne, no mirrie fowle did vse his warbling sounde. The wofull Dame alone that fouly was awroke Vpon hir sonne, that Itis hight in doolefull dittie spoke. The chyrping Fowle hir childe, but Sappho wayles hir loue, Forlorne Lasse: when all things else the slumbers ioyes doe proue. A Christall Well there is than shining Glasse more shéere, A holy spring, some déemen that some sacred Sainct is there. A watrie Lotos spreades his sprayes athwart the Well: And all aboute with tender Sedge the gréenish grounde doth smell. Where wofull wight, when I had layde me on the grasse: Eftsoone a stripling did appeare, a proper boy it was. Hee stoode him still and sayde: what meanste thou (Nymph) I pray To frie with such vnegall flames? to Ambrace go thy way.
There Phoebus from a loft the open sea doth face: Leucadium men they say, or else Actaeum terme the place. Deucalion thence inragde with Pyrrhas loue did fall Of purpose, and he naythelesse sustainde no hurt at all. And straight conuersed loue forsooke his swelting breast That was ydrencht: and so good man Deucalion came to reast. Such is the place his powre and hidden force by kinde: Go thither in post, and skip adowne, let feare not mooue thy miude. He vanisht with his voice I rose me vp agast: And all to bainde my cheerelesse cheekes with teares that flushed fast. I (Nymph quoth I) will trudge vnto the bidden place: Let raging loue haue force and powre all feare away to chase. What fortune so befall, will better present plight: O gentle ayre beare vp my corps that now is passing light.
And thou (O friendly Loue) come vnderset thy wing: Least if I die, defame vnto Leucadian goulfe doe spring. Then I to Phoebus will my pleasant Lute bequeath: And brauely cause to be ingraude this Ʋerse or two beneath. O Phoebus, this hir Lute hath Sappho left to thee: For in that Arte she during life and thou did well agree. Fye (Phaon) why dost thou me to Actaeum driue: And thou thy selfe mayst make returne and saue thy loue aliue? More healthfull than the floud of Leucas thou mayst bée: And by thy beauties féemely shape Apollo vnto mée. And canst thou (oh) more harde than rocke, and ruthlesse waue If so I die the title of my death indure to haue; Ah, how much better might my breast conioyne with thirie, Than thus be cast from craggie cliffe to Sea of surging brine?
That selfe same breast which thou commended hast so oft: And which with passing wisedome fraught thy selfe (friend Phaon) thought. Now would I were faconde, but dolour hinders Arte: And all my witte is me berest by long enduring smart. My wonted vaine in verse is ouerdrie become: My lowring Lute laments for wo, my Harpe with doole is dombe. Ye Lesbian Lasses all that border on the Lake: And ye that of the Aeolian towne your names are thought to take, Ye Lesbian Lasses (that for cause I looude you sore Bréede my defame) vnto my Harpe I charge you come no more. Looke what did like you earst, of that is Phaon sped: Alas poore wretch, my Phaon I had very neare ysed. Cause Phaon to retire and then your Poet will Reuert againe: t'is he that doth both make and marre my skill.
What? doe my prayers preuaile, or pierce his stéely brest? Or is he standing stiffe at stay, a retchlesse rigorous guest? Or doe the puffing winds transport my wordes into the west? The gale that hence conuaies my voice, oh that it might Reduce thy fléeing Barck againe, and bring thy shippe in sight. O ouerlingring Ladde, in fayth if thou were wise, Thou wouldst attempt to make returne and follow mine aduise. What? wilt thou come? or no? we for thy shippe prepare Our vowed gifts: why doth thy staye enforce our hearts to care? Anale, and lose thy Barcke, take Seas: for Venus shée That came of seas, wil calme the surge come off the gale will bée As friendly to thy comming Keale as thou wouldst wish to sée. At Helme will Cupid sit, and steare thy shippe to lande: He both will hoyse, and hale the sayles with skilfull Boateswanes hande.
Or if thy pleasure be from Sappho farre to trudge: (Who neuer did deserue so yll of thée, thy selfe be iudge.) At least let cruell lynes will hir vnhappie wench Ʋnto Leucadian foorde to flée, and there hir corps to drench.
The Argument of the xviij. Epistle, entituled Leander to Herô. LEander looude a Lasse that Herô hight And dwelt in Sest, the chanell did deuide Their countries so, as Sestus was in sight Of Abydon, that stoode in th'other side. Nightly the youth to Herô shoope his waie, And woulde returne againe before the daie. At length the tempest rose, the windes did blo, The waters wrought so roughly as they coulde, That seauen daies space Leander might not go To Sestus shore, as he was wont of olde: But yet by chaunce a Mariner there went, By whome these lines vnto his Loue he sent, Wherein he shewes his Loue and faithfull heart, Wherein he plaines against the troublous Tide, And vowes at last (all dreade yset apart) To swim the Seas, that he before had tride: He rather chose to hazard life, than dwell A weeke or two from hir he looude so well.
The .xviij. Epistle. Leander to Herô. FRom Abydon these lynes Leander doth endite, And health to Herô sends, which he would rather bring than write. If Neptuns waters were with friendly Gods agréede: There were no choise for thée to choose, but thou my woords shouldst réede. But Gods withstand my wish, and kéepe my hope arcare: That will in no wise giue me leaue to flitte vnto my Feare. Thy selfe dost sée the skies with pitchie cloudes so blacke, And waltring waues so tost with winde as shippes are nie the wracke. Yet one, than all the reast more bolde, by whome I send These lynes, to Sestus by the Seas did dare his course to bend. With whome Leander would haue bene imbareked faine: Had not Abydos giuen the gase, and séene his shipping plaine. I could not kéepe the fact hid from my Parents eye As earst I had, but that they would
At length I tooke my Quill, wherewith I might endite, Go blissefull scroll to Heros handes, than snowe ({quod} I) more white. First will she thée receiue, and after touch with lippe When she with tooth shall go about the signed seale to rippe. These whispring wordes I spake in soft and silent sort: The reast my writing hande did will my Paper to report. That hande wherewith I would more rather swimme than write: And cut the waues from drenching goulfe my flitting corps to quite. Than fist that fitter is to clappe the flood that floes: And yet will serue my turne right well my secretes to disclose. Now seauen nights are ypast since Neptunes rage begunne: A yeare well nie it séemes to mée, so flow the time doth runne. If any pleasant nappe or quiet sléepe mine eyes In all this space surprisde: let Seas persist in prefull wise.
Sitting in doolefull dumpe vpon a rock, I sée Thy strond, my soule is present where the carkasse may not bee. Beside in Turrets toppe a Lambe I did discrie: Or else mine eyes were foule deceyude, and tooke their marcke awrie. Thrise layde I downe my robes in safe and sandie shore: And naked thrise assayde to swimme, as oft I had before: But swelling waters made me of my purpose fayle, And by the force of frowarde streames did drench me toppe and tayle. Oh waywardst of the windes, of Aeols Impes the wurst? Why dost thou shewe thy selfe to me, so cruell and so curst? I, not the surging Seas, of this sustaine the smart: This were ynough if thou of loue hadst neuer fealt the dart. For though with colde thou quake, yet canst thou not denie, But that with Orithias flame thy frostie flesh did frie.
When thou wast fully bent Dame Venus sportes to trie: If any had restrainde thy course thou wouldst haue lookte awrie. Oh, (Boreas) tame thy wrath, rebate thy raging yre: So Aeole giue thée nought in charge but as thou wouldst desyre. My sute is all for nought my labour is in vaine, He doth not seeke the tossed waues to maken smoouth againe. Would Daedal would allowe mée wished wings at will: Though by such sleight his sonne into the neighbour waters fill. What fortune so should chaunce Leander would abide: To fine his fethred corse might flée on waues that wont to slide. But whilste I am debarrde by wrath of waue and winde To furrow Seas: I doe reuoke my passed ioyes to minde. When Phoebus gan to fall, and gaue his Sister place: (I ioy to think) my Fathers lodge I fled with spéedie pace.
And straight with shifted robes all dread I did remoue: And in the floud I flong mine armes, the Delphins Arte to proue. The Moone did shine as light as any Sunnie day: As one that would with all hir powre assist me in the way. I casting vp mine eyes on hir that clearly shinde: Said. Mercy (Moone) thy Mariner: call Latmus Hill to minde. Endymion thee denies to beare a ruthlesse heart: Wherefore to these my secret stealthes thy friendly face conuart. Thy selfe (a Goddesse) didst a mortall Wight imbrace: And shee, whome I pursue, is euen a Goddesse for hir face. I leaue hir thewes vntoucht, wherein she may compare With heauenly Péeres, such feature falles on earthly creatures rare. Saue Venus passing shape, and thine vnspotted face Is none whome shée ne doth excell, thy selfe discerne the case.
How much thy golden Lampe (when thou thy pride dost show) Surmounts all other streaming starres that in their circles glow: So farre surpasseth she eche other mortall wight: And if thou doubt thereof, good fayth deluded is thy light. Such wordes I did pronounce, or not vnlike to these, Whilst I by night directed course, amid the yéelding Seas. The water glistred with rebounds of Phoebes rayes: And night for clearnesse might compare euen with the brightest dayes. No voyce I heard with eare, but euerie thing was husht: Saue whilst my bodie brake the waues the troubled water rusht. Alcyones alone did vse a pleasant note: And did recorde Ceycus loue with sweete and warbling throte. At length my handes gaue vp, mine armes coulde worke no more: Then stoode I on the waues aloft, and cast mine eyes to shore.
No sooner sawe I light: My loue is yonder way (Quoth I) that coast doth harbour hir on whome my life doth stay. Then streight my strength renude, mine armes had force againe: Me thought (than earst) the foming Seas I swam with lesser paine. The ardent gleames I bare in close and louing breast, Would not permit that I should be with watrie colde opprest. The more I came to shore, or did approch the lande: Me thought I could a greater charge of swimming take in hande. But when I came in sight that thou mightst take the vewe: Thy gladsome lookes my fainting force with comfort did renewe. Then shewde I all my skill, to féede thy hungrie eyes: And, for thou mightst decerne mine armes, I heaude them to the skies. Thée from the flowring foorde thy Nurce coulde scarce restraine: With fixed eye I markte it well, and sawe it passing plaine.
Whome though the Hag withheld, as was in hir to dooe: Yet with the swelling Tide thou wettste the leather of thy shooe. And clasping me in armes didst kisse Leander oft: Such kisses as of Gods by Seas were worthie to be sought. And from thy shoulders gauste me garments of the best: And dridste my haire that was béedewde, and with the waues opprest. The reast, thy guiltie towre, the night, and we doe knowe: And Phoebe with hir friendly Lampe that did my passage showe. That nightes surpassing ioyes no bett may be discryude, Than Hellespontus waltring waues, that Helles life depriude. How shorter was the space on Venus to bestow, We tooke the greater héede that it in idle might not go. Thus weares away the night, and Lucifer the Starre Declares that Tythons louing spouse (Aurora) is not farre.
Then forging doolefull plaintes that Nox hath runne hir race With ouer hastie foote, our friend∣ly kisses walke apace. But when the crabbed Nurse beginnes to chide and chowre, With heauie heart I take my course to Seawarde from the Towre. At parture both lament, to Helles goulfe I goe: And whilst the furge will giue me leaue, to thée my lookes I throwe. In fayth vnto thy stronde I like my swimming well; But backwarde when I bend my course, it likes me neuer a dell. And certes, when I come, the middle Sea séemes plaine: But rough and full of hanging Hilles when I retyre againe. And (little wouldst thou thinke) I stay against my will In Abydon I long to lodge with thée in Sestus still. Oh Gods, why should the surge two lincked hearts denide? Why they that are of greeing mindes, one hostage are denide?
Else I with thée in Sest would make a long soiourne: Or thou with mée to Abydon shouldst shape a quicke retourne. I force not on the place, so we yfeare may dwell, Thou louste my Abydos, and I thy Sestus like as well. Why doe I cease to swimme for raging waters yre? Or why the roring winde (a slen∣der cause) makes me retyre? Now crooked Delphins know the faithfull heart I beare: All other kinde of scaly fish will for Leander sweare. With passing to and fro I haue a path ymade In waters, as the Cartes are wont where chiefely lyes their trade: Which could not come to passe with flitting now and than: That now for windes I can not doe the lyke, I curse and ban. Now drenched Helles floud is so with tempest tost: As Hulkes in harbour hardly saue themselues from being lost.
When she poore siely wench by waters lost hir life, I iudge that tho th'infamed waues were at a semblant strife. This Goulfe hath hate ynough and shame for drowning one: Wherefore it may the better let Leanders life alone. I spite at Phrixus fate that on the golden Ramme, These fretting Seas in spite of waues and surges safely swamme. But I will neyther sheepe, nor ayde of Shippe require: If so the waters would be such as swimmers would desire. No forraine helpe I craue, so waues go not too rough: My selfe will be the passage Boats and Bargeman well inough. I will by neyther Beare direct my stearelesse shippe. My loue such publike peeuish starres. estéemes but as a chippe. Let those that list beholde Andromade the fayre: The golden crowne, or Parrhasis that shines in Northren ayre:
Leander makes no coumpt of any of their light: No not of hir whome Perseus chose, or Bacchus for delight. Another starre I haue surmounting all the rest: That will not sée mine earnest loue with darcksome cloude opprest. Whereon when I so gaze, to Colchos Launcher bound As Iason did, I trauell could, or to a further ground. I would in flitting farre Palaemons cunning passe: Or Glaucus that became a God by tasting of the grasse. Mine armes doe often ake with sundring of the waue: That scarcely can I swimme to shore my wearie corps to saue. But when I say (good cheere, you shall not faile your hyre, And for your paine eftsoones you shall to Heros neck aspyre.) Then wonted valiant force beginnes to grow againe: And like a Courser forth I thrust that would be formost faine.
Thus I my burning flames reserue in couert brest: And thée pursue of heauenly staule as worthie as the best. Yet though thou well deserue a heauenly wight to bee: Demour in earth, or make me showe how I may come to thée. I sée it thence procéedes that I thée seld enioy: And thence it comes that with my mind the wrathfull Seas annoy. What gaynes Leander though the passage be but small? For him it were as good that these were wydest Seas of all. I somewhat doubtfull stande, what first to wish or craue: To be so nigh, or farther off both loue, and hope to haue. The nearer I approch, the more my flame doth gléede: I lacke the thing I most desire, though Hope mine humor feede. I may welnigh with armes, (so neare it is) imbrace, And not enioy: which makes the teares ofte tymes imbrue my face.
I may my lotte compare with Tantals hungrie lore: That hath both foode and lyquor by, yet famine bytes him sore. What shall I neuer straine thée in my folded armes But when the water lift? redresse is none for those my harmes? And since no suretie may in winde and waues be found, Shall all his hoped trust in waues and winde Leander ground? If tempests thus doe rage whilst Aestas is in place: How wil they rore, when watry signes shall showe their storinie face? Or else I doe not knowe my fonde and witlesse rage: Or else euen then I shall my corps vnto the goulfe ingage. And least thou shouldst surmise my painted promise vaine: My deede shall well approue my words within a day or twaine. Ere many nights shall passe, (in spite of Neptuns powre) I minde to swimme the swelling Seas Leander dreades no showre.
For eyther will I liue, and Heros loue enioy. Or by my death of carefull loue abandon all annoy. And so it sorte I die, this onely boone I craue, My carkasse to be cast on lande with thée his Heirse to haue. I know thou wilt both touch, and eke deplore the same: And say (Leander) I thy death against my will did frame. This fell abodement may perhappes offende thy heart: And these forespeaking lynes of mine increase thy silent smart. Let all such fancies go, helpe (Hero) to request That waltring waters may be calme, and belking Seas at rest. Small time of truce will serue to bring me to thy shore: Whē I am there let Neptune frowne, and ruthlesse Chanell rore. There may Leander make a safe and sicker stay: His shippe no surer harbour can nor Barck haue better Bay.
Let Boreas me include where I so faine would bee: And then Leander loth to swimme from Sestus thou shalt sée. I will not then go scolde with déeffe Seas as to fore: Ne yet, that waters are vniust in wonted wise deplore. Let Heros armes withholde, Let windes enforce my stay: Let double cause preuaile to stoppe Leander if they may. When tempest shall permit, to Sestus will I hie: Sée that thy Lampe be burning aye for feare I swimme awrie. The while receyue my lynes I wrote with quaking pen: Ere long myselfe will be with thée, if fortune say Amen.
The Argument of the xix. Epistle, entituled Hero to Leander. WHen Hero had Leanders lines receiude, His louing letters read, and throughly scand: His faythfull heart and constance she perceiude, Which made hir write againe with willing hand. Some time for sluggish him the Wench controlde, To shew hir selfe a louing Lasse in deede: Some time she biddes him not to be too bolde, Nor hasten more to Sestus than were neede. Now cries she out against the Mounting waues, And craues a calme at cruell Neptuns hand: And by and by with Aeolus she raues, And Boreas blamde, that did hir loue withstand. Some time she dreades least she forelorne were, (As common trade of Louers is to do:) But last of all she willes him to forbere, And not to come whilst windes did bluster so, And waters warrde, that perill was to passe The curssed streame where Helle drenched was.
The .xix. Epistle. Hero to Leander. THe health thou sent in wordes, that I may haue in deede: Doe way (Leander) all excuse and come thy way with spéede. All stay tormentes me sore, that doth my ioyes expell: And mercy, since I doe confesse I loue thée passing well. We both doe burne alike and frie with egall flame: But I am weakest of the two, my nature willes the same. As womens corse is faint, so are their mindes not strong: If thou doe not repayre at once I shall be dead ere long. You men contriue the time and lothsome tide away: Sometime in tillage of your soyles, sometime you hunt the day. Sometime at open barre you plead a Clients case: To Tennis now, and then with horse you runn a lustie race.
Sometime you pitch for foule, for fishe you lay your line: And when the day is spent and gone, you fall to quaffing wine. Now I can none of these though lesser were my flame: Thy Hero can doe nothing else but cleape hir louers name. And that which sole remaynes (Leander) that I proue: And, more than any wight would deeme, I rage with ardent loue. Or I with Beldam Nurce doe sit, and chatte of thée, And doe not little muse what should thy cause of lingring bée: Or séeing Seas to surge by meane of windie flawes: In thy behalfe I checke the windes with wide and wreakefull iawes. Or when the calmed Seas haue somewhat quaylde their powre: I say thou mayst, but wilt not come to Heros wonted towre. Amid my griefull plaintes the saltish teares gush out By streames which crooked Nurce doth wipe, and dryes with Linnen clout.
Oft tymes I séeke in sande where I thy steppes may finde: As though the foote once gone, the print would aye remaine behinde. I aske when any came, or any mindes to go To Abydon: to fine I might thy state by wryting know. What should I speake how ofte I kisse with louing lippe The robes which tho thou lefest behind when thou to Sea didst skippe? Thus when the day is spent, and night our friendfull ride Hath banisht Phoebus from the Pole, and starres doe shew their pride: In stately turrets toppe a blazing Lampe I sette: Whereby thou wonted are my shore and perillous stronde to fette. Then I to passe the time in haste to Distaffe coonne: An Arte which woraen vse the griefes of yrkesome stayes to shoonne. O that thou knewste my wordes, that I pronounce the while: Leanders name is all my talke, Leander is my stile.
How thinke you (Nurse) is he by this come out of doore? Or doth he stand in dreade of scowtes that on his passage poore? Hath he remooude his robes? (good Beldame tell thy minde) Or oylde his ventrous carelesse corps as swimmers wont by kinde? With that she giues a nod, not for she heares my talke: But drowsie slumber so procures hir gogling head to walke. And then I pawse a stounde: then (now he flitts) I say, And with his well approued armes he beates the waues away. Then spinne I for a space, and twist a threede or twaine: And where thou be in middle Seas to learne I am full faine. Sometime I giue the gaze where I may see thee swimme: And then we pray that Neptune will not shewe his cheare too grimme. Sometime we heare with eare a noyse that makes vs thincke, That thou art then ycome to shore and safe to Sestus brincke.
Thus when the greatest part of night is flitted by: The slumbring sleepe by secret stealth inuades my weried eye. Then (gainst thy will perhaps) thou dost with me foiourne: And (though thy selfe wouldst faine dislodge) yet art thou here atourne. For now I séeme to sée thée swimming in the flood: And then to throw thy limber armes on Heros backe a good. Another while with clothes and wonted robes I hide Thy moysted limmes, and lay me dowlie fast by thy wished side. And other toyes to taste and other feates to frame: Which though I ioyde to put in vre, my tongue to tell doth shame. Oh mée vnhappie wench whose pleasure makes no stay, And falsed is: for thou with fléepe art wont to slippe away. O Lord let vs that loue at length wich firmer lace Inchaine our selues: let dreames no more true pleasurs so deface.
Why haue I lodgde alone so many nights arowe In colde and carefull couch? why dost thou proue thy selfe so stowe? As now the waters are too boysteous I confesse For such as swimme: but yesternight Neptunus rage was lesse. Why lettste thou slip that lide? thou shouldst haue fearde the wurst: And not haue stoode in earnest hope for better than the furst. What though the weather shape as well againe to swim? Yet that, because it was the first, of both I iudge it tm. For Seas haue sodaine chaunge, the floud is altred soone: And when thou willing art to come thy course is sooner doone. Arriude to Sestus shore, no cause thou shouldst at all Haue of regréete: thée in mine armes what winter storme might gall? Then I with gladsome minde would heare the windes to rage: And pray that Neptuns surging Seas their swelling might not swage.
But how befell you feare your wonted passage so, And dréede the goulfe you scornd ere this? the cause I long to know. For yet I well recorde that when thou camste to Sest, The Chanell was as rough, or nie as rough as may be gest. When I exclamde aloude, (mine owne) be not too bolde: Least I be forst to rue thy fate, if I thy death beholde. Whence comes this sodaine feare? where is that courage now? Where he that scornde the force of flouds and waters wont to flow? Yet naythelesse be wise, not retchlesse as thou were: And swim in safetie if thou mayste, if not a while forbeare. So that thy fayth be one, as those thy lines did showe: And so that kindled flame of thine to cinders doe not growe. I dreade not so the windes that barre my wished ioye: As least thy loue, will like the winde exchaunge by chaunge of toye.
Of this I stande in awe, least perill passe the gaine: And least thou thinke thy bootie farre inferiour to thy paine. Sometyme I quake for feare least Abydon deface My Sest, and least Leander thincke his Herô farre too base. But all I can endure, with well contented will, So that thou haue no daintie Dra thy pleasures to fulfill. So that no strumpets armes about thy necke depende: Nor nouell loue procure thy first and former flame to ende. Oh rather let me die than such a crime to know, Let Herôs liuely twist be shrid, ere thou doe trespasse so. Not for thou gauste me causs of future griefe, I speake In such a wise: no newe report moues me my minde to breake, Saue that I feare the worst, Who loues deuoyde of dreede? The place doth forte the absent wight oft times on feare to féede.
Oh happie Nymphes whome place and presence makes to know Committed crymes, and kéepes from seare of things that are not so. No lesse the forged fact than wrong ydone in deede Doth moue our mindes: from both alike lyke dolour doth procéede. Oh, that thou wouldste repaire or else thy cause of let From winds & grutching father mightst, and from no woman fet. Which if I heard of troth, for grunting griefe I die: And great will be thy guilte, if so thy loue thou séeke to strie. But more than needes I dreade thou wilt not so offende: For churlish tempest is in fault that will not let thée wende: O Gods, what mounting flouds doe driue against the shore? How doth the darkesome cloude inclose and kéepe the light in store? Perhaps the virgins Dame is commen to the flood: And for hir drenched dearling sheddes hir saltish teares a good.
Or Ino being woxe a Seanymph but of late, Turmoyles the Goulfe, that Helle brought to such vntimely fate. That floud doth nothing-friend the Mayden sexe I know: For there did Helle lose hir life, where Heros hurt doth grow. But (Neptune) waying well and calling oft to minde Thy former flames, me thinks thou shouldst not hinder loue by winde. For Amymon can well, and Tyro trie at neade, That thou were truely toucht with loue as we in stories reade. Alcyonê the fresh, and Iphimedia faire: Medusa on whose skull as then there hoong no hissing haire. Laodice the browne, Celaeno fixt in skie: Whose names I sundrie times haue read, and séene with searching eye. With these, and diuers else (of whome the Poets write) Thou (Neptune) chambred hast full oft, and past in loues delight.
Why then that hast so oft the valiant force of loue Assayde, by tempest to forelet our wonted course dost proue? Cruell be calme awhile, wage warre where Seas be wide: This is a slender Chanell that two Countries doth deuide. It better would beséeme a high and haughtie Roy, To hoyse the Hulkes, to broile with Barks, or Nauies to annoy. T'is shame for God of Goulfe a swimming youth to sincke: Eche little Lake this conquest would, and spoyle vnsitting thincke. He is of noble bloud, not of Vlysses line: At whome, not vndeseruedly thou (Neptune) dost repine. Giue leaue, at once saue two: for though he sole doe swim, Yet in the selfe same tossing Tide my hope consistes in him. Meanewhile the Torch (for by a Torch I sit and write) Doth happer, a blissefull signe that all shall not successe aright.
Beholde how Beldame poures the wine into the flame: And sayes (to morrow we shalbe mo) and drinckes vpon the same. Oh, come by fliding Seas, increase the tale by one: Thou whome I fix in faythfull breast, and let delayes alone. Home to thy tentes retyre, that fleest thy friendly spouse: Why doe I sole amid my Couch my carefull carkasse rouse? No cause there restes of dreade, the bolde is sure of grace At Venus handes: she that was bred of flouds, will rue thy case. My selfe oft tymes to méete in middle Goulfe doe dare: Saue for the floud is friend to men, not women wont to spare. For why (when Phrixus with his louing sister came By Sea) did Helles onely giue the gastly Goulfe his name: Perhaps you dreade returne, least force will faile you feare? You stand in doubt you may not well this double trauaile beare.
Wherefore make hast, and méete thy friende amids the flood: And there aloft vpon the waues shall kisses walke a good. That done, let eyther to his stronde reuert againe: Though this were small, t'is better some, than naught at all to gaine. Would eyther bashfull shame that féedes this serret fire, Or fearefull loue would yéelde to fame: of both I t'one desire. For yll they can agrée, that neuer are at truce: T'one sweete, and t'other séemely is, I wote nere which to chuse. When Iason did arriue at Colchos carefull port: Hée his Medea well imbarckt did thence with spéede transport. No sooner Priams sonne to Lacedaemon came: But straight he made returne to Troie with famous Grecian Dame. But thou as often leauste thy liked loue behinde As doste repaire: and comste when ships may scarcely passe for winde.
Be naythelesse auisde (thou Victor of the Seas:) So scorne the floud as thou maist feare least Neptune thée disease. Huge, high, and haughtie Hulks, yframde by Arte doe fayle: And canst thou déeme thine armes will more than shauen Ores preuaile? The Pylates stande afright the shelfes thou swimste to coste: For Barks ybroosde, and shaken shippes, in such a sort are loste. Oh mee vnlucky wench, I woulde not thus disswade, But be as bolde for all my wordes as is thy wonted trade: So safely thou ariue, and laie those armes of thine Vpon my backe, that oft were beate with Sea of bealking brine. But I wote nere what colde my quaking breast doth nomme, As oft as to my restlesse minde a thought of Seas doth comme. My last nights dreame torments and makes mée sore afright: Though I to Morpheus ere I slept, had done my sacred right.
In creake of dawning day when torchlight gan to faile: (A tide when true vndoubted dreames the slumbring corse assaile) Out of my sléeple hands the twisted twine did fall, And to my pensiue Pillow I my head applyde withall. And with vnfalsed fayth, and certaine sight I sawe A crooked Delphin flit in floud, ytost with windie flawe. Who when by drift of waues and turning Tide was tost To sandie shore: he both at once his lyfe and waters lost. What so it be I dreade, haue not in scorne my dreames: Ne (yet vnlesse the waters serue) commit thy corse to streames. If selfe care all be past, yet way thy friendly Mate, Whose wealth & welfare doth depende vpon thy healthfull state. I hope that yrefull Seas will shortly be at reast: Then do thou breake the calmed waues with safe and sicker breast.
Meanewhile, cause surge turmoilde thy passage doth restraine: Let louing lynes ysent, abridge some part of lingring paine.
The Argument of the xx. Epistle, entituled Acontius to Cydippe. To Delos, where the rites were done to Dians grace Acontius trauailde, many Nymphes and Maydens were in place. Atroupe to Temple came, but one aboue the rest (Cydippe namde,) with louing dart did craze Acontius brest. Who for be saw the wight vnegall in estate: Surmisde he should not for his life haue giuen hir the mate. Yet naythelesse at length he bourded hir with guile: And in a goodly Apple did inclose this craftie stile. By Dians sacred rytes and misteries I sweare, That I will make repaire to thee and be thy friendly Feeare. In Temple at hir feete he floong the flattring fruite: She tooke it vp, and reade the rymes. Cydippe woxe as mute
As fish, and Scarlet red hir lillie Cheekes became: For hauing made a vowe she knewe she should obserue the same. For what so was beheight before Dianas face, By commen order was decreede should take effect and place. Hir Father after this vnwitting of the othe His daughter made, Cydippe to another did betrothe. Meanewhile the sillie wench with Feuers was opprest, And fealt a thousande furious fits ybreeding hir vnrest. Acontius in his lynes induceth hir to thinck This Feuer faine by Dians wrath, forcause she sought to shrinck Hnd false hir plighted fayth in presence and in place Of all those sacred Saincts, but most of good Dianas grace.
The .xx. Epistle. Acontius to Cydippe. ABandon dreade, for to thy Louer thou shalt frame no farther hest ne swere again: Thy once ingaged faith I recke ynough. Read & suruay my lines: so may this griefs And languor leaue thy corps, which is my tene When any limme of thine sustaineth smart. Why blush you? and why with vermilion taint Beflecke your chéekes? in Dians temple so I déeme thy face with scarlet hue infect. Marrige and plighted troth, no crime I craue: I loue not as a Letcher, but a spouse. Reuoke to minde the wordes in Apple graude, Which to thy guiltlesse handes I did proiect. There shalt thou finde confirmde by solemne oth, That I require: vnlesse both fired faith And wordes at once out of thy breast are fled. Euen as I drad in déede, the Goddesse frettes. O Nimph, thou rather than the Goddesse shouldst Stand mindefull of thy Hest and promisse made: And now I feare the like. But oh to more Hir raging force is growne, and flame increast By lingring staye. And loue that neuer was Slender, by yéelded hope in processe springs. Thou gauste me hope, my loue leant faith thereto
That Dian witnesde thou canst not withsaye. She tho was prest, and noted well the wordes And séemde with mooued tresse to giue assent. Report that by deceite thou were intrapt, Whilst Cupid did enforce me forge the fraude. What meant my craft but to be linckt with thée? That thou complainste, may well me reconcile. Not guilefull I by vse, or nature am, Me thou (my wenche) in fayth hast subtill made. (If I did ought by Arte) with sleightfull words, The wilye Loue hath fast with mée enchainde: I knit the knot with wordes that he pronounst, And craftie I by Cupids counsell, woxe. Let guile sustaine the name, let me be saide Subtille, if things beloude to winne, be craft. Beholde, I write a fresh, and frame request, Another frande whereof thou mayste complaine. If I, in that I loue, annoy thée so, Incessantly I will: and though thou bée Full well aduisde, I will pursue thée aye. Others by sword haue many Nymphes purloynd And shall a letter forgde by craftie sleight, To me as haynous crime obiected be? Gods graunt I thee in faster knot may chaine. As thou mayst neuer finde a way to start, Nor flie thy fixed faith. A thousand trickes There are, and I in that one trauaile toyle, Nothing my loue permits vntride to goe.
Though doubtful be where thou wilt yéeld or no, (The ende is in the Gods,) but thou shalt yeelde, And be entrapt, and forst in fine to bow. Some toyles put cuse thou scape? yet al the ginnes Thou canst not passe which crafty Cupid pight: Moe Nettes there are than thou surmisde to be. If Arte may not auayle, to armes we will, And I will thee, as rape atchiude enioy. I am not he that Paris fact controlle, Nor any that such manlike parts haue playde. And I. But now no more: though death ensue This rape, should lesse aggrieue than thée to lose. Oh, would yu were worse featurde than thou art, With reason then of me thou shouldst be sought: Thy-face doth me to valiance now procure. Thou, and thine eyes (surpassing flaming starres, Which were the causers of my glowing gleade) In me this courage moues, and stoutnesse stirres, Thy yellow golden lockes, thy yuorie necke, Thy handes, (of whome I long to be accold,) Thy feature, and thy blusshing countenance Deuoyde of rustickes grace: and feete such as With Thetis may cōpare, this boldnesse bréedes, More fortunate were I, if all the reast I might condignly prayse: but doubt I nought But that the whole vnto his parts agrees. By thys thy forme enforst, no maruell though I sought to haue thy parling voyce his pledge.
In fine, sith that thou art constrainde to yéelde Thy selfe beguilde, by my deceytfull sleight (O Virgine) be thou conquerde at the last. Let me sustaine the hate, and reape the fruite For hatred so endurde: So haynous cryme And blame why doth it want his earned hire? Hesion Aiax, Briseis Achylles tooke, And eyther of them their Victor did ensue. Me spare not to accuse, ne sticke to wrath Me, so I may thée angrie wight enioy. We that procurde the yre, will pease the same If neuer so little leysure be allowde, And respite giuen to lessen swelling wrath. Let me besprent with teares tofore thy face Stand, adding to my teares lamenting sounde? And as the frequent vse of Vassels is, When they of lashing scourge doe stand in awe, (Groufe at thy féete, stretch out my yéelding hāds) What? knowst yu not thy right & Mistres powre? Cite me. In absence why am I accusde? As Ladies woont, giue me in charge t'appeare. Though thou my tresses teare in stately sorte, And make my face with buffets black and blewe: Yet all I will endure, fearing but that My bodie should thy tender fifies annoy. In Chaine or Gyue t'is néedelesse me to binde Inlaste in loue, that haue no powre to flée. When so thy wrath with wreak shal be repleate,
And anger be reuengde: thy selfe shalt say Oh God, how paciently the man doth loue? Thy selfe shalt say (when I haue all endurde) My seruant thou that seruste so well shalt bée. In absence why am I (vnluekie) dée mde Guiltie? and though my cause be passing good Yet for default of Patrone, goes to wracke? The bill that Cupid wrote, and gaue in charge, It is my wrong and practisde iniurie, This onely fact in mee thou must reproue. Dian with me deserued not the bob. If so the thing to me thou hast behight Thou loth to yéelde, let Delia beare the same. For being prest she saw when thou intrapt Didst blush, in mindefull eare the words she plast. Abodements laide ayart more fiercer than Diana, (when she sées hir Godhead wrongde,) There is not any God, nor halfe so sterne. The Calydonian Boare can well recorde: For by his meane, how cruell was the Dame Vnto hir sonne, we haue full often read. Witnesse Acteon eke, that fedde his Houndes That earst with them had sundrie quarries made. The haughtie Mother too to Marble turnde, In ruthfull sort that in Migdoni standes? Aye me (Cydip) I dreade the troth to tell, Least I be thought for goodding of my cause False matter to alledge: yet needes I must
Now plead the same. This is the cause (in fayth) That thou at Nuptiall day art so diseasde, Vnable from the sickle Couch to rise. Dian would doe thée good, and paynes hir sore Least yu shouldst be forsworne: she gladly would The sicklesse, and vnbroken Hest reserue. Thence it precéedes (as oft as thou dost séeke To swarue thy fayth) yt she thy carkasse plagues▪ Leaue off to stirre the cruell Virgins Bowe: Yet if thou wilt to ruth she may be brought. Spare thou thy corse with Feuers to molest, Reserue thy featurde face for me to vse: That countnance kéepe, to set my heart on flame By nature made, where Rose with Lillie striues▪ So fare my foe, and who so else doth barre Thée to be mine, as the diseasde I liue. My griefe is one, or when thou linckest with An other wight, or féelste tormenting téene, I wote not which I recke the worst of both. Sometime it yrkes me that I bréede thy doole, Déeming thy gripes by my deceite to growe, Praying the plague of periurie to redounde On mée, that thou mightst by my scath escape. And oft to wit, and vnderstande thy plight, Doubtfull (God wote) I wander to and fro, Thy Mayd at ynches suing and thy Man, Demaunding how thy meate, and sléepe auaile, Wo me, that I the rules of Phisick scorne,
And put them not in vre, ne wring hir wrestes, Ne on hir cowch for comfortes sake, doe lye. And woe againe, that I absent me thence, An other perhaps, whome I ne would, is prest. He féeles thy pulses, and doth sit him downe By thy diseased corse, hatefull to Gods, And with the Gods, of me detested too. And whilst wt thumbe he féeles ye leaping vaines, He straines by meane thereof, thy snowish armes, Handling thy breast, and by escheate perhaps A kisse doth gaine of those thy sugred lips, A greater guerdon than his paine deserude. Who gaue thée leaue my haruest to forereape? Vnto an others hope, who made thy way? That bosome (friend) is mine, fowlly from me My kisses thou bereauste: wherefore do waye Thy flippant fist from that my pacted corps. Vnthrift, do way thy hands, the thing thou feelst Is me behight: hereafter if thou doe The like, thou shalt a Leachers name procure. On single Nymphes, and not dispoused Maydes Make choyse: I woulde thou wist, this is possest. Beleue not mée giue to the bargaine, eare, And cause hir reade the wryting, to this ende Thou déeme hir not vntrue or false to bee. Goe from anothers bridall bed, I saye, What makst thou here? go pack, this knot is tide. Put case thou haue a partie promise eake?
Yet is thy cause and mine vnegall farre. She made me perfect vow: hir Sire the Nymph To thee behight: but nearer than hir Sire, Vnto hir selfe the sielie Mayden standes. Hir Father made a promise: she by othe Conioynde hir selfe in league of stayde loue. He witnesde men: She Dian did protest. He dreades the name of Liar to sustaine: But she the blot of periurde tongue to beare. Of both déeme thou which is the greater feare. And last of both the perils to compare, Respect the euents of both, and latter lotte. She lies diseasde: he liues releast of woe. And we with dispar mindes for hir contende Ne hope to both, nor egall is the dread. Thou forcest not the sute: more griefull were Repulse to me than death: alreadie I Imbrace the Mayde, whome thou in future time And after this mayste haue the hap to loue. If iustice, or regarde of right did lodge Within thy brest, yu to my flames wouldst yéeld Now since this furious wight maintaines a strife In wrongfull cause, (Oh Cydip) to what ende Do I to thée fruitlesse lines endite? He bréedes thy doole, and makes thée be suspect Of Dian: him (if thou be wise) renounce. Barre, and forbidde him to approche thy lodge. These perrils by his meane thou doste endure:
That would he might acquite thy corse from we, That forger is of these thy pinching paynes. Whome if thou flée, and lincke with him in loue Whome Dian not condemnes: release of fittes Thy selfe shalt finde, and I shall be reuiude, Virgin exile thy feare, doubt not recure, Reuerence the temple where thou madste ye vow The Gods delight not with a flaughtred Oxe, But with a fayth performde without recorde. Some women health to gaine, and purchase ease, Both scarring Launce, & scalding flame endure: Other the bitter drench acquites of paine. These néedelesse are to thée: flée periurie: Thy selfe, thy Hest, and mée referue at once. Pardon of passed crime by ignorance Shall be procurde: quite from thy mind was fled And plighted promesse quite thy thought exilde. Thée both my wordes, and these thy present haps Haue warned, which thy carefull corse assault As oft as thou from pawned fayth dost wrie: When these are ouerblowne in trauell thou Wilt craue of hir, of baron to be well And soone releast, and haue thy throwes abridgde. Which she will heare, and rolling in hir minde Will aske, who was the sielie infants Sire? Thou wilt auow. She knowes thy Hest vntrue. Thou wilt protest, and binde with sacred othe: But she wottes wel thou canst the Gods beguile.
It nothing toucheth mée: yet greater hoe I haue, and carefull is my heart of thy Indaungred life, that now in perill stands. Why lately did thy doubtfull Parents mourne, For thy distresse, whom thou thy crime cōcealdste? And why are they vnwitting of thy guilt? Cydip, thy déedes deserue no shame at all. Display in order thine acquaintance first With me, as to Dian thou didst thy rites: And how, when first (if well thou didst attende) I saw thy face, I stayd, and gaue the gaze, Vewing with staring eyes thy comely corse, And whilst I muzde thereat (a sicker signe Of frensie) from my backe my vesture flid. And after, how by hap (thou wottste not howe) A rolling Apple trillde, with lynes ingraude Thereon, which were by subtile sleight deuisde: Which being read by thée, in presence of The sacred Goddesse, bound thy faith in bande, Which, cause Diana heard, must not be slipt. And to the fine she may the writing know, As earst thou didst, so reade the same againe. Wedde (will she say) with my good will, to him With whom ye blissefull Gods haue thée cōioynd, Let be my sonne, whom thou to spouse hast tane, Who so it be, shall like me, for he earst Hath stoode in Dians grace. Thy Mother thus Will say, if so that she thy Mother bée.
If who, and what I am, she make demaunde, Let hir beholde, and she shall well perceiue That well for thee Diana hath puruayde. The famous Ile (where the Coritian Nymphes Did lodge of yore, inuironde with the Sea Aegaeum,) Caea cleaped is the soyle Where I was bred: and (if thou doe accoumpt Of Gentils bloud) my Grandsires were of fame. And we are wealthie eke, our maners are Not fraught wt shameful crimes, suppose ther wer Nought else? yet loue hath shackled vs yfeare. Vnsworne thou mightst selected such a spouse, And neuer forst with such a husbande wed. This is my dreame, Phoebe the Archeresse, And Loue awakt, did will me write to thee: Of whom th'ones darts haue thirled erst my hart, Beware least th'ochers shafts doe thée annoy. Our healthes are ioynde in one: Rue on thy selfe And me: why dost thou stagger both to ease? Which if befal, when blasted Trumpe shal soūd, And Delos be with yolded bloude imbrude: The golden Image of the blissefull fruite Shall stande aloft, with cause in myter graude. Acontius, by the Apples forme, recordes Th'insculped lynes to haue bene brought to passe. But least thy weakened limmes, and féeble corps. My ouer long Epistle should molest: To fine I may in wonted maner ende, Aconce thy friend, biddes the (Cydip) adue.
The Argument of the xxj. Epistle, entituled Cydippe to Acontius. WHen Cydip saw hir furious fits increase, And fretting Feuer grow to worse disease, Then thought she verily that no release Was to be had, vnlesse she mought appease Dianas wrath: wherefore she thought it best To stand vnto hir former plighted hest. Then tooke she pen in hand, then gan she write These following lines to Aconce, making showe That she would yeelde, and banish rigour quite, And pay the det to him that she did owe: Crauing his helpe in peasing Goddesse yre, That she to health the sooner might aspyre.
The .xxj. Epistle. Cydippe to Acontius. A Fright in silence I thy lines suruayde, Least yt vnwares my tong to witnes should Haue callde the Gods, and for records appealde. I déeme thou wouldst haue bourded me againe. With craft, hadst yu not thought in iudging mind One Hest (as thou confest) to haue suffisde. He had I vewde thy lines and Letters sent, But that I thought the yrefull Goddesse wrath By duresse would to furder rage increast. For all that I can doe, though incense I To Dian offer, yet she friendes thée more Than reason willes she should: & as thou crauste Credit to winne: so she with mindefull wrath Vpon my corse for thée awroken is. So stiffely scarce by Hippolyte she stoode. But she (a Virgin) rather should haue showne Fauor vnto a siely Maydens yeares: Which to abridge least she doe long I feare. For why the cause of this my languor lurckes And hidden lyes by Phisicke not recurde, So meager am I woxe, so leane and bare, As scarce I had suffising force to write, With leaning on mine Elbowe able scarce My pined limmes and carkasse pale to raise.
Now dreade I least beside my Beldame Nurce Some one discrie our entercomoning. Tofore the gate she sittes, to askers how I fare (that I may write) she sayes I sléepe. But when within a space fuspected is Excessiue sléepe, and slumber ouerlong, And such she sées repaire whome to debarre Were duresse: then she spits and giues a hemme, A feygned signe that some is at the doore. I leaue my lynes vnperfite then for hast, And to my bosome thrust the scrolle eftsoone, Forth with in spéede I plie the same againe, And set my hande and penne to former taske. Which thing how yrksome toyle it was to me, Thy selfe mayst well discerne, and be the iudge. Which thou (in fayth) hast passing yll deserude. But thy merites and iust deserued hire My ruthfull clemencie shall farre surmount. By thée, vncertaine of dispayred health, So oft by thy deceit I haue, and yet Endure tormenting fittes and troublous téene. This is the good my vaunted beautie gaines So oft extolde by thée aboue the starres. It me annoyes thée to haue likte so well. If in thy sight I had deformed béene, (Which rather I could wishe) my blamed corps In neede of Phisicks helpe had neuer stoode. Now being praysde I mourne by your discord
Betrayde: my proper good doth forge my woes. Whilst thou dost scorne to yéelde, and he repines To lose his roome or be in second place, Thou barrste his wish, and he doth hinder thine, I like a shippe am tost, whome Boreas blast Into the Chanell driues, but surge and tide Repelles to shore, from déeper foorde againe. And of my Parents when the wished day Arriues, excessiue heates my limmes besiedge, And at the cruell mariage day, my doores In yrefull rage Proserpina doth shake. I blush & dread (though guiltlesse in my minde) Least I by ought haue stirrde the Gods to wrath. Some pleade it commes by hap, and some surmise This man to be dislikte of heauenly powres, And fame of thée hath also hir reporte: Some déeme it done by my inchauntments eke: The cause is hid: my hurtes too plaine appeare. Ye wage a restlesse warre and endelesse strife: But I meane while am she that bide the smart. I nowe will say as I was wont of yore, By louing if thou thus annoy thy loue, Howe wouldst thou hurt by hate the hated thing? If whome thou loue thou hurte, go loue thy foe, Wish me full yll to fare, and saue my lyfe. Or now of hoped spouse thou hast no carke, Whom vndeserude, thou ruthlesse lettste to pine: Or if in vaine thou to the Goddesse sue,
To me why dost thou so auaunt thy selfe That standest nought in Dians grace at all? Say what thou wilt, thou wilt not swage hir yre, I cleane am out of thought: thou canst not, thou Appease the Goddesse, thou art quite forgot. Or would I neuer had, or notas then Delos (that is inuironde withthe Sea, Aegaeum) knowne: a haplesse Ile to mee. Tho was my shippe to surging Chanell brought Vnluckely, sinister was the houre Wherein I shoope to take the cursed Seas. How set I foorth my foote? from Threshold with What foote went I? or to my painted Barck With what vnluckie foote did I repaire? Yet twise with froward winds my ship recoylde, And made retoure to shore: but oh I lie, That winde was blissefull and no froward gale: A blessed blast that brought me back to baye, And went about to barre my haplesse course. And would it had contended with my sayles, And stoode in longer strife and greater warre. But folly is the fickle windes to blame. Mooude with the place his fame, and fresh reporte, To Delos I my hastie voyage shoope: And in a nymble Barck did passe the floud. How oft did I controll the sluggish Oares, Complaining that the sayle clothes did not strout But flagging flue, not stuft with gladsome gale?
Nowe Mycone, Tenos, and Andros I Had past, and Delos was discouerde plaine. Which when I scride afarre. Ile why (quouth I) Dost thou me flée? Where yet (as earst thou didst) Doste thou in largie Seas and Chanell rode Aye fléering to and fro? I came to lande When day was put to flight, and Phoebus gan His wearie stéedes from purple whéeles discharge Whome when he had to wonted rising brought, Againe at morne (my Mather giuing charge) My comely tresses were in order laide, And frisled lockes in brauest maner trimde. Hir self bespangde my hands wt curious Gēmes, And purlde my haire with golde: hir self applide Vnto my shoulders vesture passing fine. Then yssuing out to Rulers of the Ile And sacred Gods incense with wine we gaue. And whilst my Mother with hir vowed bloud The Altar staines, and Bowels broils on coales In ranges casting Fume to loftie skies: The busie carefull Nurce led mée about From place to place, frō Church to sacred Fane: In Porches now I passe, now musing at The giftes of kings, and sundrie sightes I sawe. Then gasting on the Altars made with hornes And tree, gainst which the wandring Goddesse at Hir time of bearing childe did rest hir corse: And what beside (for I ne all to minde
Can call, or lawfull is I say, to tell) Was to be séene in daintie Delos tho. Whilst I (Aconce) of these so straungie sightes Was taking vewe thou me perhaps discridste: Who for so simple was, and voyde of fraude, Did sitting séeme to be entrapt of thée. By steppes I came into a stately Church Where Dian was: might any place more safe Or sicker bée than where the Goddesse stoode? Tofore my féete the trilling Apple came Gliding on paued ground whereas I sate, Hauing this verse ingraude. (Aye me well nigh I had to thée another Hest ymade) Which Beldame Nurce tooke vp, & said (beholde) Where I thy craft (O noble Poet) read. The name of marrige redde, blushing I felt My chaunged chéekes to glow with sodaine flash. In bosome fired fast mine eyes I helde, Mine eyes that workers were of thine intent. Vnthrifte, why doste thou ioy? what glory hast Thou gainde? what praise shalt yu (a mā) atchieue By craft one sielie Virgin to deuoure? Not I in armour cladde with Pollare stoode As ventrous Penthesilea did at Troie: No Belt with Amazonian golde beset Thou me hast reft, as Quéene Hippolyte was. Why leapst thou so for ioy? in that thy wordes Haue fowly me beguilde, and I by dole
And subtill sleight, a siely Nymph was tane? Cydip an Apple tooke, Atlanta did The lyke: another Hippomenes now thou art. More better were it if thou hadst bene thrall Vnto the Boy, who hath by thy report (I wote not well) what flaming fierie brands. After the guife of honest wightes (by fraude Not to fordoe thy hope) I rather was To béene intreated, than by craft intrapt. Why thou ne me displaydst in time of sute Such things as I in thee should haue belikte? Why rather to enforce, than to perswade Mée didst thou choose, if thy condition redde By mée had powre to make the bargaine sure? What now to thée auailes the former othe, And Goddesse prest for erue recorde appealde With tongue? it is the minde that makes the hest (Wherewith I neuer sware) it onely addes Faith to the words, and makes the stable othe. It is pretenced minde and purpose set That bindes the bargain sure: no band auailes, Or is of force without consenting thought. If so it were my will to ioyne with thée, Then spare thou not to claime thy marrige right. But if I spake the worde and meant it not, The forcelesse words & nothing else thou gainst, I sware not, but pronounst the wordes of othe. I must not so select thée for my spouse.
Guile other so, certes if that be good And take effect, the riche mans wealth bereaue, Procure that Princes sweare that thou shalt haue Their Scepters, & their soueraigne seates possesse, And let be thine what so the world enioyth. In faith thou dost surpasse Diana farre, If that thy letters haue in them inrolde Such present Godhead and auayling powre. Yet when I haue thus sayde, and flatte affirmde Me not to be thy spouse, and pleaded haue My promesse in best forme that euer I may: I graunt, I dread Dianas yrefull wrath, Déeming frō thence my grieful pangues to come, That plague my wretched corse & limmes tormēt, For why, as oft as spousals are addrest, Languish my limmes ransackt with deadly téene? Thrise Hymens clamour cōming to mine eares Fled from my chamber doore, and did astart. Scarce coulde he make th'infased flame to flashe, Scarce would the stirred bronds & faggots burne. Oft sithes his head furnisht with garlands gaye, Annoynted dropt, and oft his Scarlet Robe And costly vesture was in hand to d'on. When he approcht the doore, and wayling sawe, With flowing teares and feare of griesly death, And other such abhorring his attyre: Straight from his forhead he the garlands floong, And from his perfumde locks the Oile did wring.
Shaming with mirth amiddes so sad a route To rushe, his garments hue his face distainde. But miser I with Feuers am attachte, And frie with durning fittes: my vestures are More weightie than they shoulden weightie be. Vpon my chéekes I sée my parents showre Their drearie teares and saltish brine for woe, And stead of marrige wād, deaths brond appeares. Thou Goddesse that in quiuers doste reioyce, And bended bowe, fauor a sickly Nymph, And lende me now thy skilfull Brothers helpe, To ridde my corse of this my vexing smart. T'is shame for thée that he abandons griefe, And thou doste séeke the title of my death. Where I vnwares approched haue the place, Whilst yu didst bathe thy chastfull limmes in ford? Haue I, of all the Gods thy Altars left And ouerpast withouten sacrifice? Or did my Dame the Ladie Mother scorne? I not aguilt, saue that I periure radde, And skilfull was in an vnluckye verse. Doe thou (vnlesse thy loue be fayned) cast Incense for me into the flaming fire. The handes that hurt, let them my helpe procure. Why she that freates that I behight to thée Am not thy spouse, makes that I can not be? Hope well thou mayst whilst yet I liue & breath: But (cruell) why bereues she me my lyfe,
And thée dispoyles of thy well hoped boone? Surmise not him whose wyfe I am assignde And lotted spouse, my payned limmes to touch And féele with griping hande. Certes he sittes Him downe by me, as lawfull is to doe, Minding my coutch to be a Maidens lodge. And I wote néere what he doth iudge of mée. For oft (the cause vnknowne) he baynes his breast With showres of trickling teares: Not ouerbolde He coyes mée, and doth seldome kisse among, Whispering with fearefull voice, that I am hys. Ne maruaile I if he discrie my minde, That doe my selfe so openly bewraye. When he repayres, I wrie mée rounde about, And vse no wordes, but winking faine to sléepe, Shunning his fist that would me gladly touch. He mournes & drawes his sighes frō silent breast, And not aguilting hath my high disdaine. More iustly thou that laughste at my distresse, And pleasure takste therein (If I coulde spoake And vse my tongue) shouldst my yll will acquire, And haue my hate, that such a Panther pight, By letter leaue and licence thou dost craue To sée my wretched plight, and feebled corse: Farre off thou makste abode, and yet annoyst. I not a little maruailde that thy name Acontius was: in déede thou hast an edge So sharpe as farre can lende a lurching wounde.
I scarce am yet recured of the hurt, Mée like a Dart thy lynes haue scarde aloofe. Why wouldst thou hither come? a wretched corse (Thy double spoyle committed) mayst thou sée. My fleshe is falne away, my colour fled And bloudlesse is my face, a semblaunt hue (As I remember) had the subtile fruite. In visage wanne no scarlet redde appeares. Of Marble picture hewen but of late Such is the forme: Such is the siluers hue At bankets that with chilly water toucht In Basan cast, is pale for deadly colde. If now thou sawste mée, thou wouldst quite denie Me earst with eye of thine to haue bene séene. And say: by Arte and subtill sleight, in sooth She not deserude to bene atchiude of me: Sending me back (for feare I shoulde by othe In marrige shocke with thee) my plighted Hest: Desirous that Diana woulde forget And cleane put frō hir thought the bargain made, Procuring eke perhaps contrarie othe And quite repugnant to my former vowe, Sending a nouell verse for me to vewe. Yet naythelesse (as thou hast longed earst) I would thou sawste thy Miser spouses plight, And limmes with lanquor passingly opprest. (Aconce) more harder than the stubborne stéele Though be thy ruthlesse breast, yet pardon thou
In my behalfe wouldst purchase me I knowe. To shewe the meane how I may be recurde And come by health againe. At Delphos is A God forespeaking things that are to come, Displaying future fates, his counsell seeke. He eke (as whispring fame doth flie) complaines Of one (I wote nere whome) that broken hath And scornde a promise made before recorde. This both the God, the Prophet, and my verse Declare, thy vowe doth want no verse his ayde Such fauor how shouldst thou procure? vnlesse Some letter late deuisde by thée, the haulte And stately Gods had tane? Since yu doste stande In grace and fauor of the Gods so great, I will ensue the name of heauenly powres, And willing yéelde my handes vnto thy Hest. Vnto my Dame by my vnwitting tongue Of plighted promesse I haue made a showe: She downe to ground hir blushing coūtnance cast. Looke what remaines be thine the care & charge, More than a virgin should (in that my hande Dradde not to write these lines to thée) I did Now long ynough my sickly corse with quill Molested is, my pained hande denies A farther dutie: What remaines there now, (Saue that I long to lincke my selfe with thée) For these my lines, but thée to bidde adue?
The Argument of the replie to the first Epi∣stle, entituled Vlysses to Penelope. VLysses hauing throughly scand The earnest verse his wife did write: Thought good and needefull out of hand Hir louing letters to requite: What so she did obiect to him, The Greeke reaunswerde very trim. He quittes himselfe of all such blame As by his wife imputed was: He telles his worthie feates of fame, And perils that he chaunst to passe, And how the Prophet willde the Squire In beggars habite to retire, And that his wife alone should knowe Hir husband that disguisde him soe.
Vlysses Replie to Pe∣nelopes Epistle. VNto Vlysses miser wight good hap at length hath brought The louing lines (Penelope) thy hand in tables wrought. I knewe thy friendly fist at first and tokens passing well: They were a comfort to my woes, and did my sorrowes quell. Thou blamest me of retchlesse slouth, more better were perhaps To linger, than to wrie my woes, and tell thée afterclaps. Greece blamde me not for that ywis, when I a furie fainde, And made as though I had bene madde with thée to haue remainde. The earnest loue to thée (swéete heart) and to thy bedde I bare, Procurde me tho so like a madde and Bedlam wight to fare. Thou wouldst not haue me write a whit, but hasten home a pace: Loe, when I thinke to come, my sayles the froward windes doe chase.
I loyter not in Troie, a Towne of Gréekish Gyrles defide: For Troie is now to cynders come, suppressed is hir pride. Deiphobus is flaine, with sterne Hector, and Asius eke: And who so else did bréede thy feare is conquerde by a Gréeke. I scapte the Thracian furious fights, and hauing Rhesus flaine, Vpon the captiue chiuals came into my Tents againe. And safe from Pallas sacred Church I stole, and did conuaye The fatall Relique of the Towne Palladium awaye. Nor in the horse his hollow wombe and bellie I adrad: Although Cassandra (Troians) cryde burne, burne as she were mad. Burne, in this fayned tymber frame the wylie Gréekes doe lurcke: That séeke this day poore Troians fal and latter bane to woorke. Achylles honour of his graue and Tombe was like to lack: Had I to Thetis not conuaide Achylles on my back.
Ne did the Greekes (I thank them) grutch with prayse my paynes to pay: I had the Armour of the corps that I had tane away. But what auailes it? now t'is drownde, I haue nor shippe yleft, Nor Mates aliue: the swalowing Goulfe hath euery whit bereft. Thy onely loue that part hath tane with me of all my paine, As onely fellow of my fates doth aye with me remaine. Not rauening Syllas wawghing whelpes coulde force him to depart, Ne yet Charybdis churlish Cha∣nell, plucke him from my heart. Not fierce Antiphates, nor yet Parthenope the trull, With swéete deceytfull Syrens songes from mée this loue coulde pull, Not Circe, nor Calypfo though by Magick Arte they wrought: And th'one to bring me to hir bent by meane of marrige thought. I had them both by promise bounde that they woulde take away My mortall twist, and teache me to King Plutos Court the way
But I, not forcing of their giftes did loue my wedlock best: Although perhaps in séeking thée I shall be sore distrest. But thou perchaunce such daintie dames suruaying in my write: Impaciently wilt reade the reast, and be in cholar quite. What I with Circe had to doe or fayre Calypso, thée Will aye procure a (fearefull wench) in doubtfull dumps to bée. In fayth when I Antinous name, and Polybus did reade, With Medon: I amazed was, and ouercome with dreade. Amid so many lustie Laddes and Tossepots to be chaste? Alas, what should I thinke herein? I am full sore agaste. Why, if thou shed thy teares so fast, should any leake thy face? What? haue not yet those trickling teares beate beautie out of place? Beside, thou hast behight to wedde when twist is all ysponne: And all in feare thou dost vntwist as fast as thou begonne.
A good deceyte. But take good héede least whilst with such a wile Thou doe thy suters eyes deceyue, thy selfe thou not beguile, Ah (Polyphem) I rather wish within thy denne to haue Bene murthred, and my wofull dayes yfinisht with the graue: Yet rather had I conquerde, and of Thracian sworde bene flaine, What time the wandring Barges did in Ismaron remaine: Or that I had the gréedie iawes replenisht with my bloud, Of hungrie Helhounde, when I went downe to the Stygian floud. Where I (thou wrotste not of it) sawe my Mother, well at ease That was when I departed from thy coast, and tooke the Seas. She tolde mée of the house his euils: and thrise she fled mée fro, As I with reaching armes did catch more newes of hir to know. Sir Protesilaus I discride, that forcing not a pinne The Prophets wordes, to fling the flame to Troie did beginne.
A happie and a blessed man, for with him went his wife With laughing browes: that for his sake forsooke hir lothsome life For Lachesis the Goddesse had hir twist not throughly spoonne: It did hir good vnto hir spouse before hir time to roonne: I sawe (but oh with flowing teares that gusht on eyther cheeke) Duke Agamemnon lately slaine, a thrise renoumed Greeke. He neuer tooke that hurt at Troie, vntoucht he went his way Through spitefull Nauplius secret snares, that in Euboea lay. But what did that auaile the wight? for when he surely thought Returnd to pay his due to Ioue this beastly death he cought. This was the guerdon Helen had prouided for the man, In steade of better present when she with the straunger ran. Ah, how could I reioyce to see sir Hectors sister, and His wyfe among thy other thrauls and Teucrian trulls to stand?
I could the aged Hecuba had and vsed hir in bed, That thy mistrustfull minde I mought beguilde, and ielous hed, That would haue thought thy husband had of no such peece ben sped. She gaue the first abodement fell that on my shippes should light: Whome there I sawe not with hir partes and woonted members dight. Hir bitter plaintes and wofull cryes a howling did pursew: She was become a verie Curre in euerie part to vew. Dame Thetis musing at the sight, turmoylde the quiet flood: And Aeole gaue his blustring winds in charge to blow a good. From that time Miser I was driuen to wander in the Seas, And follow euerie floud and flaw, too cruell things to please. But if Tyresias be as true in telling of good haps, As earst he was in making show of euill forepassed claps: Now misaduentures are ypast by land and sowfing waue,
I hope I shall retyre to Greece, some better lucke to haue. Now Pallas vndertaken hath as following Mate to mée, To safe conduct mée to the lodge where I doe long to bee. I neuer saw hir from the tyme of Troies latter wrack, Till now the wronged Goddesse hath from anger bene alack. What so Oenides did, it lightes vpon vs all aleeke: Vpon the Gréekes from man to boys reuengement shée did séeke. Not thee (good Diomed) she sparde whose armour knowen was: She hath enforst thée Miser eke through many broyles to passe. Nor him that Telamon begat vpon a captiue Lasse: Nor him that with a thousande ships to wreake his wrong did passe. Plisthenides, thou were yblest, what fortune so befell: For aye thy wedlock went with thée, whome thou didst loue so well. And whether windes did bréede thy staye, or surging Seas annoide;
Thou didst by meane of mutuall loue incroching cares auoide. Nor blustring blastes, nor troublous tide from kissing thée dismayde: With clinching armes thou hir imbraste, and neuer wert afrayde. Oh that I might not wander so, (swéete wench) thou wouldst procure The surge séeme calme, with thée I should no deadly smart endure. No sooner I had tydings that Telemach was aliue, But that the newes forepassed griefes from gladsome minde did driue. Whose going againe by tossing flouds in weake and rotten Barck To Pylos and to Sparta, did reduce my former carck. That loue deserues no thancke in déede wherein such perill is: And when you let him go to Sea you did not well ywis. But all the broyle will be at last, the Prophet sayd I shoulde At length imbrace thy friendly corse as I had done of olde. Whom thou alone shalt know, but then take héede and well beware,
That other by your gesture learne not why so glad you are. I must not deale with force of hande or as an open foe, The Prophet sayd that to foretell Apollo bidde him soe. I shall perhaps deuise the tyme, to be awroken fitte, With bow in hande to rushe me in when they at tables sitte. And then perchaunce they maruell will mée hatefull man to sée: Oh Gods, when will that day come on and pleasant houre bée, Wherein I may renue againe the swéete delights ypast: And thou begin to repossesse thy louing spouse at last?
The Argument of the replie to the seconde Epistle, entituled Demophoon to Phyllis. HErein his treason and delay Demophoon minded to deface, That had ybēne so long away from friendly Phyllis noble grace: Somtime vpon his Countriē men the lingring Louer layes the blame: On perillous passage now and then, and lacke of winde he cast the same; But last in spite of waue and winde he made hir promisse to reuart: And so he did, in hope to finde the Queene as when he did depart. But oh, impacient of hir panges, that she had for hir guest sustainde, In Almon tree good Phyllis hanges, and this was all the Hostesse gainde.
Demophoons Replie to Phyllis Epistle. EVen from his Countrie soyle Demophoon wrytes to thée: His Countrie (Phyllis) that he mindes thy gratefull gift to bée. Demophoon is not linckt with any nouell Lasse: But not so happie as with thée acquainted well he was. Duke Theseus, of whome thou euer stoodste in awe, (Which made perhaps thy flame the more) to be thy Fatherlawe: (A shamefull thing for mée to suffer such a déede) By cruell foe was reft his reigne: this was olde ages méede. Euen he that whileome had Amazons courage quaylde, A mate for Hercules that so in armour had preuaylde, Euen he that Mynos made a father of a foe, Amazde to sée his monstrous Beast by valiance conquerde so.
I am accusde to béene the cause of his exile, My brother layes it to my charge, I must not pleade the while. Whilst thou (quoth he) didst fonde on Phyllis, and didst craue By earnest sute vnto thy wyfe a forraine wench to haue: The slipper time did passe with hastie foote away, Thy loytring was the cause that thou doste sée this doolefull day. Thou moughtst perhaps at first this wicked stirre haue stayde: At least, though matters had bene past, thou moughtst haue bene an ayde. But Rhodopeian Reigne I better did esteeme: And of a Nymph, whome better than hir Scepter I did déeme. Then Athamas gins to chaufe, and thundring words bestowes: And Aethra harpes vpon the same, a crooked péece God knowes. She sayth my lingring was th'occasion that hir sonne Could not shut vp his mothers eyes as duetie was to donne.
I can not it denie they both excladme a good, And cryde on mée when that my ship rode on the Thracian flood. Demophoon (quoth they) why stayste thou lingring so? The winde doth serue: home to thy Gods, and natiue Countrie go. Let Phyllis myrror be whome thou dost loue so well: She fancies thée, but loth she is for thée hir Realme to sell. She craues thée to retire, thy iourney Mate to bée She scorns: more than thy Raigne she waies hir barbarous soyle we sée. But I in silence would amid their brawles (I minde) A thousand thankes bestow atonce vpon the blustring winde. And when I should depart, imbracing Phyllis harde, I ioyde with all my heart to sée how dashing waters warrde. Ne would I feare the same before my Sire to vaunt: For by thy meritts I attainde my libertie I graunt.
Thou must of force confesse that with no stéely heart I went my way, nor in post haste thy Countrie did depart. I sobbde and wéeping thée to solace made a stay, When to forgo thy friendly shore was come the fired day. I clambe the Thracian Barke, and tooke my shippe in deede: When Phyllis bid it should not o∣uer hastely proceede. Forgiue since I confesse, your selfe remember well King Mynos daughter in your brest, that auncient loue doth dwell. As often as my Sire to Skieward lookes: he sayes, She whilome was my louing wench that hath those glistring rayes. God Bacchus bidde him leaue and yéelde him vp the Mayde: But he (goodman) sustaines the blame, they say he hir betrayde. By his example I a periurde man am thought: Ne doste thou (cruell Phyllis) aske the cause mine absence wrought.
Ne thinckst thou it ynough, or able to requight My former fault, that I am not in loue with any wight. Why (Phillis) hast thou not heard of the cruell fate Of Theseus Pallace? of his house? and lamentable state? Hast thou not tydings that my fathers death I wayle? A farther griefe than fathers fall Demophoon doth assayle Not of Hippolyts happe? he miserable man Fell headlong from the fearefull stéedes that downe the Mountaine ran. I séeke not to excuse my lingring, though there bée A thousand cares that heape my hoe, I aske a space of thée. Let mée or ere I come lay Theseus in his graue, And sée that he who was my Syre his buriall rites may haue. Giue space and leaue I pray, not like a Traytour I Absent me: than thy soyle I knowe not safer where to lie.
Since Troie went to wrack, and battayles broyle did stay, What ease so ere I felt at Sea or otherwhere: I say I had it all in Thrace, (yet there I found some griefe) that onely soyle vnto my woes was succour and reliefe. And is, if thou be one, and be not mooude awhight, That now I haue a stately house so Castleyke in sight: Nor that my Fathers happes or Mothers shamefull fate, Or these my yll successes cause thy fancie to rebate. What if I went to Troie in mariage linckt with thée? And thou thy husband waging warre full ten yeares space shouldst sée? Thou hearste Vlysses wife what honour she hath got: A myrrour she became, for that she liude withouten blot. Who (by report) deuisde a charitable wile In sprinning: wherewithall hir in∣stant Suters to beguile.
For whatsoeuer she by day in sight had wrought: At night the selfe same twisted twine from thréed to wool she brought. But Phyllis you doe feare your Suters will be gone That profferde wedlock earst in Thrace: canste thou with any one, Or haste thou heart to matche thy selfe in bridely band? What? will not feare of broken Hest thy shamefull act withstand? O Lord how thou wilt blush, O Lord how thou wilt shame, When thou shalt vew my sailes aloofe and know they be the same? Thou then wilt blame thy rashe complaint (but all too late) And say: Demophoon was to mée a true and faithfull Mate. Demophoon is retirde that Southren blast abidde, And cruell tempest, whilst vpon the sowsing seas he slidde. Ah, why in such post haste did I this blame deuise? I broken haue my plighted Hest, which makes my heart agrise.
But (oh) go forward so more rather than to mée (Swéete Phyllis) greater griefe and care should chaunce againe by thée. What Gibbet (oh) is that that thou dost manace so Ʋnto thy selfe, and froward sate to worke thy waylfull wo? The Gods that in this soyle doe dwell are ouerbolde I trow. I pray thée spare, and cause no more defame to spring From out our race: whose traitrous crime too loude a Bell doth ring. Ariadne may excuse my Father since hir lotte Was party cause shée was forlorne. who me may iustly blotte? Now selfe same windes my words that did my sayles conuay: I would returne with all my heart but haue good cause to stay.
The Argument of the replie to the fift Epistle, entituled Paris to Oenone. THe lynes that Oenon sent When Paris had perusde, And saw thereby she ment That she was quite refusde, Of him that had conuayde from Greece Faire Helena that passing peece: He wrote in this effect, And flat at first gan tell, That when he did reiect The Nymph, he did not well: But therewithall he laide the blame On Cupid that procurde the same. He makes hir open showe, How stately was the stroke, Of blinded Cupids bow, And how he brought to yoke Both man and God, and did not let To say that Destnies so had set.
Paris Replie to Oenons Epistle. SO lawefull is thy plaint (O Nymph) as I confesse, My hand doth hunt for currant termes my meaning to expresse, It hunts and can not finde, I féele my guilt so great: I would recant, but (oh) the same my nouell loue doth let. My conscience me condempnes if thou not angrie bée Therewith: but what? in cause I know thou mayst not match with mée. For mée whome thou dost blame, Cupido to his raigne Hath forst to yéelde: anothers pray euen so I now remaine. Thou were my wedlock first, I graunt it true to bée That I in gréenish yeares my loue and fayth behight to thée. Ne was I then so proude as in your Letters you Obiected me: ne I my selfe king Priams noorie knew.
Deiphobus not I nor Hector thought to bée My brothers when I fedde my flock in Ida Mount with thée. Not Hecuba I knewe but by a Mothers name: And thou didst well deserue to had hir aye to béene thy Dame. But Loue from Reason swarues, thy selfe shalt iudge the case: For thou art wrongde, and hauing wrong dost loue me naythelasse. And whereas Panes thée, and Satyrs did desire: Thou shoonste their loue, and aye in minde dost kéepe thy former fire. Beside, this latter loue was furthred by the fate: My sister eke Cassandra sawe of future things the state: Not I as then had heard the brute of Helens name: Ne to mine eares by hir report the Gréekish tumult came. You sée that all is true, my guilte doth sole remaine: And to request your pardon I in humble wise am faine.
Within thy powre doth reast the doome of life and death: Now binde me thine for euermore by sauing of my breath. Thou weptst (I minde it well) and yet thou sangst withall: And sayd, God shilde that no such euill at any time befall. No though his déedes deserue and euerie thing beside: Yet Oenon I to worke his bane wil neuer be discride. Oh pardon: selfesame loue that forgde this fraude to thée, Made me to thinke herein not halfe so many feares to bée. That God doth strike the stroke: Sometime into a Bull He Ioue conuerts, into a Foule sometime to coy his trull. Not Helen now in earth so passing goodly Dame Had béen, (at wench by nature made to set my breast in flame) Had not the mightie Ioue become a Swanne in sight: That earst a golden shattering showre on Danaes lappe did light.
A fayned Fowle sometyme in Ida Mount did sore: Sometime amids Agenors neate in forme of Bull did rore. Alcydes who woulde thinke the valiant man to haue Ysat at distaffe? Loue did make him twisten lyke a slaue. Againe the man was séene in Ioles garment clad: And she the hairie Lions case vpon hir shoulders had. And Oenon thou (I minde) (I touch my selfe too nie) The God Apollo scorndste, and didst to Paris mind aplie. Not for I him excellde, but Cupid wilde it tho That in such sort his subtill shafts in Oenons breast should go. But comfort thou thy wrong, in that thy ryuall shée A passing wench, and daughter braue to Ioue is knowne to bée. But that she came of Ioue it moues me not a mite: But (oh) hir face is passing faire, t'is it that workes the spite.
And (O) I wish that I a skillesse Iudge had bin, When to  beauties pride the Ladies did begin. For then not Iunos ire nor Pallas wrathfull brest Should hurt me ought, for liking of the Ladie Venus best. She Cupids flames deuids, and franckly fire on those (By euen and odde, by quick and slow) on whome she list bestowes. Yet neyther she hir selfe those weapons coulde auoyde: The Bow she bare for other, hath hir proper breast annoyde. For halting Vulcan grutcht when he by fortune founde The warlike God and hir in bedde, and caused to resounde His wofull plaint before the Gods, and Ioue that saw them bounde. And mightie Mauors now laments and lowres as fast: For she hath fled this soyle, and of Anchises is imbrast. Nowe wholy she delights Anchises eye to leake:
To him alone she closely clings, and giues the reast the gleake, What wonder was that she should haue the powre to ayde Those egall flames of loue, whose fire poore Paris hath assayde? Whome Menelaus wrongde doth loue, I fancide well Not wrongde at all: beside she matcht with one wrongde neare a dell. And I perceyue it plaine that for this rape there arre Reuenger Gréekes with wreakfull ships to bidde the Troians warre. The goodnesse of the cause (I nothing doubt) will bée Allowde: to forcen Dukes to fight hir features are we sée. If me you not beleue, beholde the Chieftaine Gréekes In Armour: I must holde hir fast whome they so sorely séekes. But if you stande in hope by force to wrest my will, Why cease your hearbes and Magike Verse? where is thy woonted skill? For in Apollos Arte thou canst as much as she
That is the best, the truest dreames of Hecate thou dost see. I well remember thou hast fet the Moone aback: And stayde the Starres, and dimde the daye with duske and cloudie black. I fed the frowning Bulles, and maruelde much to sée Amid the Heirde by Oenons charmes the Lyons tame to bée. Of Xanthus what shoulde I, or Simoys now report? Or tell how both those streames were stayde by thée in monstrous sort? Thy Sire him selfe in feare his daughter farde amisse, Amid his waters all bewitcht would often stay ywisse. Now (Oenon) here is place, doe what thou canst by skill: Or quench thy flames, or cleane put out my brande that blazeth still. FINIS.
¶ The Translator to the cap∣tious sort of Sycophants. THe Ploughman hopes in recompence of toyle. And winters trauaile past, to reape the graine That he (goodman) hath sowen on his soyle, Wyth great encrease of crop and goodly gaine: And reason good why so he should in deede, For he thereon long earst bestowde his seede. The fearefull Fisherman that castes his Nette In hauen mouth, and layes his bayted hookes, Doth trust at length by happie hap to get Such store of fishe as may suffice the Cookes, And Caters eke, and bring him in the mucke That ventred life in hope of happie lucke. If Ploughman then and Fisher gape for gaynes, And hope assuredly to haue the same, To quite there troublous toyles, and dayly paynes Endurde ere they could bring their feates to frame: why should not such as climbe the craggie Mount Where Muses wonne, of earned hyre account? And looke for laude at least at learned handes, That knowe the cares of vndertaken woorkes, And wote full well how hie Pernasus standes With stately steppes, where Poetes Lawrell lurkes: A haughtie hill that euerie wight must clime Ere he attaine with Poets pen to rime. For though the thing but slender be in sight, And vaine to vewe of curious carping skull,
In mother tongue a forraine speach to write: Yet he shall finde he hath a Crow to pull, That vndertakes with well agreeing File Of English verse, to rub the Romaine stile. Deuises of the language diuers are, Well couched wordes, and feately forged phrase, Eche string in tune, no ragged ryme doth iarre, With figures fraught their bookes in euery place: So that it is a worke of prayse to cause A Romaine borne to speake with English iawes. Which laude I leaue, and prayse to paynefull men That haue with nightly sweate of busie browe Set out their workes of fame with forwarde pen: For this my Muse I would accoumpt ynowe To scape the spitefull Zoyles chiding chaps, That (like a Curre) eche willing writer snaps. So I might go vntoucht of Momus traine, And neuer feele the force of enuious Hate, Sufficed me, well quitted were my payne, I might be thought a man of luckie fate. But, oh, it can not be, the best of all (That Homer hight) to nipping nayles was thrall. But let those Snakes, and beastly Vipers broode (I meane the spitefull Spider, Momus mate) When they haue done, recoumpt their gotten good, They gaine ywis but scorne and lothsome hate: Wherefore departe the racke thou Curre (I say) And let the lustie Courser champe the hay. If thou thy selfe for kimpish idle life No leysure hast to take in hande the like,
But kepste thy Couch: put vp that cankred knife Wherewith thou wonted art the good to strike: Let other presse in place to purchase fame, For vertues sake that woorke to winne a name. Discerne their deedes, when all their toyle is donne, Say thou thy worst, when they haue done their best: Condemne them not or ere thou hast begonne To vewe their workes, but ouerreade the rest: That done, let eche sustaine his earned meede, This were the way to purchase loue in deede.
