20062 99840162 4636
¶The preceptes of the excellent clerke & graue philosopher Plu∣tarche for the pre∣seruacion of good Healthe. ❧LONDINI.❧ In officina Richardi Graftoni. 1543. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
¶To the right honorable lorde, the lorde Audeley of Walden, lorde Chaūcellour of Englāde, Ihon Hales hartely wisheth moste prosperous healthe with encrease of honour. THe custome to geue newe yeres giftes grounded vpon be∣neuolence, cōfirmed by ye consent of peo∣ple, calleth and willeth, yea ra∣ther commaundeth me (right ho∣norable lorde) at this tyme to rēdre vnto your honour my due∣tie: whiche my good will is redye & veraie desirous to obserue, not myndyng ye breache of a custome that hath a foundacion so chari∣table, a continuaūce so laudale▪ and an ende so honest and profi∣table.
Musyng therefore in what thyng bothe for this tyme grate∣full, and herafter fruitefull, I might chiefly declare thesame, no thing in my minde could bee wis∣shed, nothyng coulde bee deuised, nothyng coulde bee prouided, so requisite, so meete, so necessary for your good lordeship, who is con∣tinually occupied either in ye high affaires of ye cōmen wealth, or in hearyng & determinyng causes of controuersie, causyng peace ye most coumfortable nourissher of people to reigne euery where: as some brief thyng to aduertise your goodnesse of the preserua∣cion of your health, how ye maye long to Goddes pleasure cōtinue in your vocacion, how ye maye ma eres execute your office accordyng to the godly zeale and
loue, yt ye beare to iustice, whiche ye haue and do dayly declare and expresse to the worlde. And syth it hath pleased almyghtie God, and the kynges moste gracious maiestie, to constitute and depute you in the chiefest authorite and office vnder his highnes in this realme, to bee to his maiestie in ye stede and lieu that Aaron was to Moyses (the chiefe mynister of God ouer the childrē of Israel) whiche is to be his graces mouth, to vt∣ter to vs his moste humble sub∣iectes, yt his highnes shal receiue of God, to be to yt comē lawes of this hys realme a lifely equytee, hauīg power by your cōsciēce to ordeine remedy, wher it hath pro∣uided none, to mytigate thesame, where it shal seme to be rigorous: we ought daily not onely to geue
prayse & thākes to his most excel∣lent goodnes for thesame, but we bee also bound to studie & deuyse to our power, howe so iuste and vertuous an offycer maye longe continue emong vs. For as they that beare good wyll, and loue to the comen wealth mooste reioyse and be glad, whē iustyce and the lawes be iustly executed and my∣nistred, and hertely desire that they may be so maynteyned and kepte as pyllers withoute the whiche no publique weale can stāde, no, nor any lytle famyly cā endure. So ought they to be ioy∣full, when the rulers and myni∣sters therof bee in healthe & pro∣speritee hable to execute thesame: and besydes to studye and ende∣uour how they maye so cōtynue. For as a woman that hathe no
hed nor gouernour is lytle ha∣ble to gouerne and rule her ser∣uaūtes, if thei be froward: so can iustice & lawe litle do in a comen wealthe, where people be euill di∣sposed, yf those lacke yt shuld sup∣porte, maynteyne and put theim in execucion. On thother parte they that bee in autorite & office, as they bee bounde not to bee re∣myfe and negligente in execu∣tyng their dutie, so ought they not ouermuch vexe, molest, wery, and consume their bodies, but so preserue their healthe, as they maye longeserue God, and their prynce in their vocacion. And as Iethro seeyng Moyses ouermuche troubled in hearyng the peoples suites and causes, saied: It is not well dooen thus to consume and waste your selfe: So maye  bee
iustly saied to suche as bee in au∣thoritee and office, hauyng their mynde so fixed to the expedicion of causes, that they regarde not their healthe: Ye dooe not well, thus to cosume your selfes. For as in a campe or army, no souldi∣our maye departe without licence and pasporte of his Capitayne, but must so vse hym selfe whyle he is there, as he maye bee at all times ready and hable to serue at commaundement, so ought eue∣ry christen man to lead his life in this world, not to seke or laboure to bee out of it, not to shorten his daies, but to tary vnto such tyme as he shall haue licence and pas∣porte of the Lorde almighty, and not in the meane season to make his bodye feble and weake, that he shall not bee hable to do that
he is elected and called vnto. Plato saieth that Aesculapius (who for his excellēt knowlage in phi∣syk is called God therof) would not that suche as professed yt fa∣cultie and scyence, should enter∣prise or take in hand to cure suche as wer of nature subiecte to dis∣seases, or had gotten siknesse wil∣lingly by intēperaunce, although they wer neuer so ryche. The one, because they engendred & begate chyldren lyke theim selfes, that is feble, weake, syckely, not hable to serue in the common wealthe. And the other, for yt they wylling∣ly vnhabled theim selfes to serue therin, and yet besides consumed that others lacked, who wer both hable & wylling. But men som∣tyme wyllingly must bryng their
bodies out of temper, & sonest of all suche as bee great rulers and Counsailours, who for ye safete of the hoole cōmen wealth be en∣forced vpon presente occasion, to prouide present remedye, to dooe thinges out of hand, which with∣out great daunger will not tarye time, whom neither Aesculapius nor any man that hath reason, would to bee without redresse. For the whiche cause many excellent cler∣kes aswell in other sciences as in phisycke, haue deuised how to re∣store suche mēne to their pristyne state and health of body, & emong others the exellent clerke & graue Philosopher Plutarchus Chaeronensis bothe Scholemaister and Coun∣sailour vnto the most vertuously disposed Emperoure of all Gen∣tiles raanus, in a booke entytled Preceptes to p̄serue good health
wherein not like a botcher with poticarye ware, but naturally he teacheth those that bee in autho∣ritee & office in the publike weale, and suche as bee geuē to the stu∣dye of good letters, howe to pre∣serue & maynteine their healthe. And because it is not onely his, but also all other learned & wyse mennes opinion, yt there is none so great enemie to health, as sur∣faicting & distemperaunce, wher∣by more men hath & dooe daylye dye, then by y• sweord or plague: he firste teacheth how the appe∣tite and sensuall lustes of the bo∣dye maye bee restrained and bry∣deled, that they shall not procure and cause intemperaunce, then if it chaunce a manne to fall therin, how he shall come out again, af∣terward being in health what di∣et he shall kepe, what exercises he
shall vse to preserue and kepe the same. Whiche I haue translated into our Englishe tongue, & dooe presēt vnto our honorable lord∣ship for a newe yeres gyfte, most hartely desiring & praiyng God the father almighty, that his most godly minyster the Kynges most royall maiestie maye many yeres more reigne ouer vs in moste prosperitee, and felicitee: and your good Lordeship long to serue and rule vnder his highnesse in honor and healthe. At London the firste daye of Ianuarye, in the yere of Christes incarnacyon. 1543.
¶The preceptes of PLV∣TARCHE for the conser∣uation of good healthe, made in fourme of a dialogue. The speakers. MOSCHION. ZEVSIPPVS. GLAVCVS the Phisician was yesterday desi∣rous frēd Zeu∣sippus to haue disputed with vs philosophi∣cally, yf ye had not putte hym in feare. ZEVSIPPVS. That is not so frende Moschion, neither I did dyscourage hym, neither he was
minded to conferre with vs. But rather I did escheue his compa∣ny because I would not prouoke hym to stryfe, that was desirous of it.aucus a yng phy∣an. For wythout doubte, in Physike he alone maye compare wt a greate many. But he is not wel affected and minded toward Philosophie: he hath alwayes in his talke some bytter ouer∣thwart and wayward toyes,lacu{us} not ll affected ward phi∣ophie. and at that tyme he was purposelye set and dysposed to bee out wyth vs, criyng wt a lowde voyce yt he had enterprysed a verye naugh∣tie parte, that dysputyng howe men should liue to preserue their health dyd cōfound & myngle to¦gether the lymytes of faculties. He sayd that the professyon of Philosophers and Physicians
were two thynges and seuerall, euen as the borders of Misia and Phrigia bee dyuers. And many thynges that we spake (in dede I cōfesse) not verye cyrcumspect∣ly, nother as we mente, but yet not wythout some profyte, he re¦petyng dyd checke, taunte, and shake in pieces. MOSCHION. Yet Zeusipdus, I would verye fain haue hearde bothe those, and the reast. ZEVSIPPVS. You Mo∣schion beeynge a Phylosophier naturall are dyspleased wyth a Phylosophier that doth not stu∣die Phisike:The offi parte of  philosoph & take it for a non de∣cet yf he shuld thynke it hys part and office rather to seme to be oc∣cupyed in the studye of Geome∣trie, Logike, and Musyke, then to searche out & desyre to knowe
what thynges good or euill bee doone in his owne house, that is, in hys bodie. And yet a man shal see more resorte of people there, where money is delte to the co∣mers to allure theim, as is vsed in Athens.he praise  commē∣iō of phi∣e But Physike is so to bee estemed emong lyberal Sci∣ences, that for finesse, clerenesse, & pleasaūtnesse, it may be compa∣red wytb the rest. And it draweth and enticeth menne to the studie & loue therof with a boūtifull and large reward & gifte, whyche is, holsomenesse of bodye, and pro∣sperous helth. Wherfore menne may not bee displeased with phi∣losophiers as though thei exce∣ded their boūdes,hilosophie tural and isik be an∣red either  other. yf thei dyspute of those thynges, that bee mete & profitable for good health, but ra¦ther
Philosophiers ought to bee chalenged & accused, if thei min∣gle not together sciences,The stu of philo¦phiers if they thought it not theyr veray dutie to bee sene generally in all thyn∣ges that bee honest, appliyng thē selfes bothe to that yt in argumēt may delite, and that for mannes life is necessary. MOSCHION. I pray the Zeusippus leat vs leaue talkyng of Glaucus: who is so proude, and so muche standeth in his owne cōceipt, that he thin∣keth he hath no nede of Philoso∣phie, yet of good feloship repete you to me all the dysputacyon: and fyrst, if ye think good, what Glaucus did reproue, whyche ye saye ye spake not in earnest. ZEVSIPPVS. That same ioyle frend of ours saied that he heard
a man saye that it was very pro∣fytable for bodely helthe to kepe alwayes the handes warme, and not to suffer theim to bee colde. And that the cold of the extreme partes of the bodye, whyle it dyd dryue the heate inwarde, dyd induce a famylyaritee & custome of the feuer. On the other parte in case those thynges, that come outewardely vnto ye extreme par∣tes dooe brynge and bestowe the matter together wyth the heate through all the bodye,v the bo∣is to bee ed for or heate it is very holsome. And therefore, when we dooe anye thyng wherby our hā∣des be occupyed, thē the heate of it selfe by the mouyng of the bo∣dye is brought into the membres and there kepte. But when we dooe nothyng, then ought the ex∣treme
partes to bee kept from colde. Thys was one of the thin∣ges that he had in derision. An other was (as I remēber,) of me∣ates that bee vsed to bee myni∣stred to the sycke, he woulde that menne shoulde receiue and take theim long before, to vse theim in the tyme of helthe, that after∣ward as chyldren dooe, we dooe not abhorre and lothe that dyet, but he woulde we shoulde make theim by lytle and lytle acqueyn∣ted & famyliar wyth the stomake so that in syckenesse we shoulde not therewyth as wyth medici∣nes bee offended.Mēne m vse in hea some part diet y• mu bee had i time of si¦nesse. And that we should not bee greued if necessy∣tee should compell vs, to take ye that were sodden wythout spices
& other ingredience. Hys mynde was also that somtyme we should alter our dyet,meates ee exhibit∣in sycke∣e. and take our meate although we wer not was∣shed before in the bayne, and that we should now and then drynke water when we had wyne pre∣sente, and an other whyle warme drinke albeit we had snowe to a∣laye the heate (as in some places it is vsed) despisyng theim that for ostentation and vnder the co∣lour of temperaunce,w the sto∣ke is to  accusto∣. bostyng and crakyng dooe absteyn from suche thīges. But rather leat vs of our selfes by lytle & lytle so ac∣custome the stomake, that when nede shalbe it maye wtout grefe take that that is profytable. And leat vs put clere out of me∣morie when we bee sycke ouer
muche scrupelous & superstici∣ous care of suche thynges, that we maye not lamente wyth those that howle and crye that they be brought from their olde delycate and pleasaunte life, to that fyl∣thye and base kynde of dyet. Certes that goodlye saiyng Choose the best kynde of lyuyng, Vse shall make it plesaūt,The best kynde o liuyng to bee chose is veray {pro}fitable in what soeuer ye shall go about, and chiefly in those thynges that concerne the dyet of ye bodye, and the maner of liuyng.Vse of thynges. By vse of those thynges that be holsome, ye shal make theim frēdes acquain∣ted and famyliar with nature, remembryng what many in their syckenesse bothe suffer and dooe, how greuously thei take it, how thei can scace suffer to receiue
warme water, a supping, or a sop¦pe of brede, callyng not only those thynges detestable and vnsaue∣rye: but also those that compell theim to receiue ye same detestable and lothesom. Moreouer, baynes haue destroyed many mēne,any men roied by nes. vsed at ye first, not when thei wer verie sicke, but because thei could not nor wer able to receiue sustenaūce onlesse thei had been first was∣shed, wherof Titus thēperour was one, as thei reporte, that way∣ted on hym whilest he was sicke. He did also besydes reprehende this,e and er bo∣ are the e heal∣. that sclender and leane bo∣dyes wer euer more healthier, & that ingurgitacion, fyllyng of ye paūche, dronkennesse, & vnmesu∣rable vse of delicates wer chiefly to bee takē hede of and eschewed
of theim that entende to make so∣lempne banquettes, or dooe pre∣pare to receiue their frēdes with feastes: or yt bee inuited by some riche manne or prince to a sette dyner, appoyntyng on the cōmen guyse of {pro}uyng masteries ī quaf¦fyng, whiche at suche tyme maye not bee refused, wherby doubt∣lesse thei make ye body then quiet, prest, and light, euen as it were, a yenst a greate storme of wyndes & fludde of waters toward. For ve∣rily the entisementes prouocaci∣ons, & lawes of good felowship (as thei call) bee suche,The sav of good f¦lowship e¦mies to health. yt it shalbe very harde if ye chaunce to come emong theim, not to dooe as thei dooe, to kepe your self within a meane & to obserue your accusto∣med dyet: but yt either ye shalbe
thought disdeignfull and not cō∣tented with ye compaignie, or thei shalbe wery of you. Therfore to thentent that fyre maye not bee put to fyre, as the prouerbe is, yt is,Gluttonie st not  laied on ttonie. nerie con¦pte and  of Phi¦pus. that glottony bee not laied on glottony, intemperaūce couched on intemperaūce, it shall behoue you to remember diligently that Philippus kyng of Macedonie did merily in sporte. The mater was this. One had desired him to sup∣per, as he was goyng thither, he met with dyuers whom he tooke with hym for his geastes. The good māne of ye house seyng hym bryng so many, & hauyng made but litle prouision, was moued & troubled. Philippus {per}ceiuyng the∣same caused a seruaunt to warne all his frendes, yt thei should not
eate to muche, but yt thei should reserue a place, and kepe a corner for a delicate dishe yt was to come. Thei trustyng therunto, eate li∣tle of that yt was before theim. By this meanes the prouysion yt of it self was veray sclēder, was made sufficient for them all. After this sorte ought we to prepare our selfes ayēst ineuitable quaffyng: reseruyng a place in our bodyes for meates, iunkettes,To fea∣styng we must bry a perfec appetite. yea & drun∣kēnesse, and to bryng with vs to suche feastes a perfect appetite. If whē we bee full alredy & haue surfaicted, we shall soodenly for the compaignie of our betters, or by confluence of straungers, for shame bee forced to come to drinke with suche as bee hable to beare it, there must the saiyng of
Creon that he speaketh in the tra∣gedie bee our chief buckler and defense ayenst shame, a thyng ve∣ry noysom to menne, and ayenst vncomly blusshyng. ¶Your boune o frende, frendeship doothe not sauour, But malice rather, and hatred grete, That to your frende so vnfrendely dooth labour. His no small hurte, and your self no profete Adieu therfore frende, welcome foo, Better it is in tyme to departe Then thus to continue, & at length in woo To lamente our foly when we smarte. Good ma∣er vama∣erly.Verily, he that for feare to bee reputed wtout good maner, will willyngly cast hym selfe into a∣pleuresis or the dissease of ye rey∣nes, maye bee in deede accoūpted without good maner: yea wtout witte and reasō, whiche thynges who so hathe, knoweth how to
kepe compaignie with menne, wt out eatyng and drynkyng out of season and suche good maners. For he that iently & curteisly re∣fuseth, shall haue asmuche thāke for refusyng as for drynkyng. Besides,How both to kepe te¦peraūce a to please cōpaigni he that deyntely dooth carue and distribute the meate, tastyng nothyng hymself but ab¦steinyng, and in the meane seasō at their eatyng & drynkyng doo∣the prouoke theim to myrthe and pastyme with some plesaūt talke of hym se;lf, shalbe reputed for more meryer, then if he did bothe drynke dronke & fill the paunche with meate. I had alleged for my pourpose one example oute of antiquite,Alexand dyed of v measura quaffyng how Alexander ye great conquerour after he was well whitteled, beyng {pro}uoked of fres∣she
to quaffe with Medius, and fea∣ryng ye by his refusyng the other should wynne the victorie, sanke vnder ye bourde, and lost his life for his labour. And of our owne tyme I brought foorth an other exaumple how one Riglus a great wrastler called into the bayne erely in ye mornyng by Titus them∣perour,iglus▪ went thither and wasshed with hym, & when he had droūke but ones (as the cōmen voyce is) beeyng taken with an vniuersall palsey, he died soodēly. The thyn¦ges before rehersed did Glaucus in ye waye of derisiō obiecte vnto vs like a scholemaister as prīciples & rudimētes of his sciēce. Of other maters thē {pro}pouned, neither he was willyng to heare, neither we disposed to declare: for he regar∣ded
nothyng yt was spokē Socrates therfore first of all aduisyng vs to forbeare meates that prouoke to eate of freshe when we bee not hūgrye,Socrates & drynke yt calleth come drynke me when we bee not thur∣stie, dooth not vtterly forbyd vs to vse theim, but teacheth vs to vse theim whē nede shall require, that we should applye the delec∣taciō and pleasure of those thyn∣ges to profet & necessitie, as thei dooe, that in a cōmen welth dooe conuerte the money that was ge∣uen to bee bestowed in commen plaies & disguysynges, to thuses of warre. For what thyng soeuer of nature deliteth as lōg as it is parte of that that nourissheth her it is her owne good. And thei yt bee hungrie, ought rather to eate
that is necessarie then yt is swete, & specially not to prouoke a freshe stomacke & a newe appetite whē thei haue dooen with their accu∣stomed diet of fedyng. For in like maner as leapyng was to Socrates no vnplesaūt exercise,e when ee well. so he yt vseth to fede on iunkettes, fruites, and deyntie disshes, taketh lesse hurte of theim. But who so already hath receiued that is cōpetent for nature, & hath filled hymself, leat hym specially beware yt he bee not gredy on suche thynges. And he∣rein lacke of knoweledge & am∣biciō bee asmuche to bee exchued, as voluptuousnes & glottonye because these thynges many ty∣mes prouoke a māne to eate whē he is not hungrie, to drynke whē he thristeth not, whilest thei mi∣nister
vnto hym vnclenly and vn¦quiet ymagynacions, euen as though it were a greate shame to leaue at any tyme a delicate mor∣sell vneaten, as a fatte tripe, mu∣shroms of Italie, a marche paine or suche like deintie meate. Igno¦raunce and pryde, many tymes dooe entise and drawe a māne by the trayne and sauour of vayne glorie to vse straūge and deintie meates, when the bodye hathe no nede to eate,Many  surfaict vain gl to the entent he maye make vaūt therof to other, who shall wōder at hym, & thinke hym happie that maye haue the sruicion of suche delycate & fyne dishes. In like sorte bee some mēne disposed towarde womē.The in¦peraunc voluptu persone It happeneth sometyme that when thei bee wt their owne wifes bee∣yng
bothe beautifull & louyng thei haue no phāsie nor courage, but wt money obteinyng ye lue of Phryne, Lais, Iulian of Rumfod or suche like abhominable harlottes thei stiere and {pro}cure theimselfes through wantōnesse to folye whē thei bee weake and feble of bodie and not apte therto, to the entent thei maye crake and boste yt thei haue had to dooe with so notable an harlott, & that onely for vaine glories sake: witnesse herof Phrine her self, who when youthe had ta∣ken her leaue, when beautie had bid her farewell, and age wt de∣formite wer come to associate her abhominable cōuersaciō, would then saye, that many bought the dregges or lyes for the name and glorie of ye wyne, vndoubtedly it
wer a thyng muche to bee mer∣uailed at, if we shud escape hurt yeldyng to ye bodye all suche ple∣asures as nature either desireth, or is able to beare, yea to take no harme, where for our businesse, we should so striue with her desi∣res, as we would differre the vse of veraie necessarye pleasures, when nature required theim, or then to avoyd daūger, when (as Plato saieth,) we should, as oft as appetite incensed or moued vs, vtterly yelde to all kynde of lu∣stes. Neither maye it by any rea∣son bee,The so taill of  luptuo¦nesse pr¦dyng of mynde. that desires and lustes of nature whiche out of kynde dooe breake out of the mynde into the bodye, forcyng thesame to obeye & folowe her lustes shall so clene retourne, but that thei shall leaue
behynd in ye same veray greuous & great incōmodities of her fōde, vayne, & feble pleasures. It is in no wyse cōueniēt to prouoke and stiere ye body to pleasure through the desire of ye mynde. For it is a∣gainst nature ye pleasure should frō thens procede. For likewyse as ye ticklyng of ye armepittes do not mynister to the herte cause of hertie nor earnest laughyng, but displeasaunt & like to a crampe, whiche causeth a manne to seeme to laugh when he doeth not.sures asaunt So whatsoeuer pleasures the bodye stired and troubled receiueth of the mynde,e glorie th of nyng of ea∣ they bee like hardes, soone set on fyre, and soone out, troublyng the nature and cōtra∣rie therto. Wherfore whensoeuer any notable or dentie dishe shal∣be
set before vs to bee eaten, we ought rather to seke glorye by absteinyng, then by eatyng: re∣mēbryng yt (as the philosophier Simonides saied) it neuer repented hym that he helde his peace,The saiy of Simo¦des. but ofte that he spake: so leat it not repent vs at any tyme, yt we haue refused eatyng, neither yt we haue droūke water in ye stede of strong wyne: but rather on the cōtrarye parte not onely nature ought not to bee enforced to these thynges, but also if any thyng be set before vs yt she desyreth,The app¦tite mus sometym bee restr¦gned. it shalbe rather cōuenient for vse & exercyse often∣tymes to call backe, and tourne her from her appetites to light thynges, & such as she is vsed wt. For if we shal breake ye law (saith the Thehane although not rightly)
let vs breake it to rule & gouerne. But leat vs mende that saiyng, and saie: If we shall nedes desire glorye, leat vs desire it for ye loue of health by abstynence frō suche delycacies. Yet there is a greate noumbre in whom nygardenesse and gluttonye bee ioyned toge∣ther, that in their owne houses can restrayne their appetites,ny that ytle ea∣ at home luttons de. and bee lordes ouer theim: but when thei are at others tables, laye their handes about theim on e∣uery syde, their tethe ceasse not gryndyng as long as the belye will holde, euen as thei dooe that come to the sackyng of a towne in tyme of warre, snatchyng and ryflyng as though no more suche praies should chaunce. guar∣ of gur∣ndyng. But their rewarde is at hande, soone after
their bodies weaxe vnlusty, their heddes heauye & dull, & the nexte daie thei faill not of cruditie of stomake.The saiy of Crates ¦gainst sup¦fluitee in fare. Crates therfore thyn∣kyng that sedicions & tyrannyes grewe in cōmē wealthes through dētie meates and superfluitee, by a mery woorde gaue this taunte vnto a certain manne: Syrha ({quod} he) make no sedition in the com∣men wealthe by enlargyng thy disshes, whē litle meate wil serue. But let euery manne dispose and enioyne hym selfe to a competent rate, not vtterly contempnyng, cresses, oliues,Surfaicty reiseth se¦cion wit the bodye. and other commē fare, and in steede thereof fall to delicate made meates, deyntie fysshes, and costelye disshes, and so through surfaityng reyse wt∣in his bodye sedition, trouble and
a flixe. For ye comen meates cause ye appetite shal not desire more thē serueth nature.Diuersitee sauces oe corrupt  holsom s of the eate. But the cunning of those that bee deuysers and dressers of dyuersytee of meates, their subtyll dyshes, their swete sauces alwayes dooe sette for∣warde, and encrease the lymy∣tes of appetyte and corrupte the vertue and holsomnesse of the meate. But yet I can not see how it hangeth together, that we should abhorre and haue in disdain wo∣men that seke to haue the loue of menne with drynkes and char∣mes, when we hyre Cookes, pa∣stelers, and suche others, to cor∣rupte our meates with their con∣fectyons. I had almoste for∣gotte my selfe, and called it Sor∣ceries
and Juglynges.The saiyng of Arces∣laus ayenst lecherous persones. Therfore that Arcesilaus sayth sō∣what bitterly againste aduoute∣cers and lecherous persones. It forceth not whether the acte bee dooen naturallye or unnaturally: Yet it a∣greeth well with that wherof we now speake. For what difference is there (to bee playne) betwene these twoo, whether ye moue and stiere intemperaunce to sensuali∣tee with plaies and gestes, or pro∣uoke the taste with swete odours and deintyes, so that alwayes we should nede clawynge and rub∣bing as scabbed membres dooe? But an other season perchaunce we will speake ayenst sensualitee, and set foorth how honest a thing of it selfe temperaunce is: oure purpose nowe is to treate of the
diuersite and greatnesse of snsu∣all pleasures. We bee not hindred nor dooe we lose so many matters, so many hopes, so many iourneys, so ma∣ny exercises through disseases as we dooe pleasures.Who would aue plea∣ure must ot neglecte ealthe. And therfore is it not expediēt for hym yt moste seketh for pleasure to neglecte the healthe of his bodie. Many there bee in deede, to whom sycknesse is none impedimēt, but yt they maye applie their studye, ne to others, but that they maye bee in ye war∣res,Sickenesse oste cōtra∣ie vnto plea¦ures. ne to some but that they may dooe their duetye in the commen weale: but the bodyly pleasure is suche, that in sickenesse no manne can haue the veray fruicion ther∣of.leasures n sickenesse ke to sonne shinyng in store. Yet the delectaciōs that come therof, beyng of their veray na∣ture
shorte, bee not pure but ve∣ray much mixed and enterlarded with hurtes, & maye bee compa∣red to a litle faire wether or sonne shinyng that happeneth in ye mid∣dest of a greate tempest or storme. And verely Venus beareth no rule when the bely is glutted, but rather when the bely is quiet and at rest. For the ende and perfecti∣on of loue is pleasure, as it is of meat & drinke. And pleasure recei¦ueth no lesse cōmoditee of health of the bodye, then sea gulles take of the calmenesse of the wether, yt suffreth theim to lay their egges, and to hatche forthe their birdes.The saty of Prodic Prodicus sayed veraye feately, that the fyre was the best sawce. And so maye a manne saye veray tru∣ly,Healthe th best sauce all. that health is ye moste heauēly
and mooste pleasaunte sawce of all. For if a manne bee sycke, or haue eaten to muche, or haue an euyll stomacke, meates though they bee sodde, rosted, or broyled, bee neither sauerie ne pleasaunt. But if he bee in perfecte healthe and haue a good and pure appe∣tyte, there is nothyng that com∣meth amisse,ealth ma∣th al thing uerye euery thyng is swete touthsome, holsome, and such as he wyll be desyreeus to haue a snatche at. But as Demades saied of the Atheniense, that they would begynne warre euer oute of sea∣son, and that they woulde ne∣uer make anye decree to haue peace,emades iyng of the theniens but in mournyng weedes sorowyng the losse of theyr mēne so we neuer remember moderate
and meane fare, but when we lye bournyng in the feuer as hootte as coles, and bee dryuen to our Poticarie ware and sloubber-sawces. And yet when we bee fallen in to theim,The fals clooke of o foly in ty of yckene it is to bee woondered howe we can cloke and couer our foly, leaning ouer muche to fame and opynion, as the common sort of people dooeth, that tourne the faulte sometime to the alteration of the ayre, somtime to the vnhol∣somenesse of the countrye, or to ouer muche laboure, because it shoulde not bee knowen that su∣perfluitee, and immoderate ea∣tyng and drynkyng was ye cause thereof. But euen as Lysimachus beeynge emonge the barbarous.The saiy of Lisima∣chus
Scithyans & for lacke of drynke constrayned to yelde hym selfe to his enemies, after he hadde recei∣ued a syppe of coulde water to quenche hys thirst withall, sai∣ed, good lord howe greate felici∣tee haue I forsakē and put away for a short pleasure, weemea∣s haue oft mes soure uce. euē so ought we in our syckenesse to call to re∣membraunce that for a draught of water taken out of due tyme, or by goyng to ye bayne out of seasō, and by quaffyng for good felow∣ship, we haue forgon many plea∣sures of ye same thynges, a greate many notable businesses haue re∣mayned vndone, and besydes we haue loste not a fewe mery pasti∣mes and pleasaunt exercises. For the continuall thynkyng theron shall cause sorowe to byte vs by
the stomake, & leaue in y• memorie sche a scarre and marke, that we shalbe the more chare and cir∣cumspecte, when we bee hole to chose and obserue good dyet. For then the body beeyng restored to healthe will not breade veraie greate lustes and appetites suche as cannot bee brydeled and re∣strained, nor straunge, nor suche as cānot bee subdued, but it shal∣bee requysite if any suche gredie appetyte happen to breake out,The app¦tites mu bee resiste and to leape at suche thynges as it coueteth, that we bee of vali∣aūt and bolde courage to resiste. For ye appetite can dooe nothyng but wepe and sobbe for a while like a childe,Appetite compared to a childe. and afterward by and by dooth holde her peace, when the meate is out of sight
and will neither complayne nor bee angrie, but on the contrary parte, rather beeyng clene and lustie, and not heauie nor fulsom endureth till the next daye.ow Ti∣theus did ise Pla∣is fare. As Timotheus after he had fared meanely and sobrely at supper with Plato in the vniuersite, saied, yt those whiche vsed to suppe with Plato, wer the better in healthe the next daye after for that sup∣per. The reporte gooeth also that Alexander after he had re∣iected oute of his seruyce hys cookes and bely mynistres,exanders kes and ce. v∣sed to saie that he had reteyned better in their place, that is, stir∣ryng of the bodye erely in the mornyng before daye, and put∣tyng it to laboure to make his
dyner fauerye, and small fare at dyner,Labour or cold sōtyme  sickenes to make his supper plea∣saunt and touthesome. And yet I knowe it right often to chaunce, that laboure, heate, and colde, dooe caste a manne in a feuer, but as the sauour of floures of theim selfe not verie strong, beeyng myngled with oyle haue a more vehement sente,The bo replenish wt humo is apte q¦kely to r¦ceiue sick¦nesse. in like maner dooeth abundaunce of humours before gathered, make apte and dispose the bodye to receiue suche disseases as procede of the exter∣nall causes aforesaid. If exteri∣our causes fynde the bodye emp∣tie, the bloodde pure and sub∣till, and the spirites clene, there is no daunger of theim, they bee easyly and soone dispeched.
but if the bodye bee full and re∣plete wt humoures, thē as mudde maketh the water fowle whē it is stiered, so it infecteth all partes, and bryngeth theim in case that thei cānot bee easely cured.ier char∣g ye sto∣ke must diligētly yded. Ther∣fore we must take hede that we dooe not as shipmen dooe, who for gredynes to carye muche in their shippe dooe cause it to take in waters, and bee constreyned by ladyng it out to labour still at the pumpe. So we ouerla∣dyng and chargyng the stomack bee forced to pourge and emptie it with purgacions and clysters. But it shalbe requysite to pre∣serue it prest and light,ow ye sto∣acke must  preserued. that if so bee it fortune to bee ouerwhel∣med, it maye for the lightnes ryse vp and appere as a corke
dooeth in the water.Disseas the beg¦nyng m bee look vnto. And we must bee charie and circum∣specte at the first in any wise, whē sickenesse is towarde and felte. For not all disseases steale on a manne sodenlye without war∣nyng, but thei haue messagers & postes that renne before,Moste p of dissea geue wa¦nyng ere  come. and de∣clare their comyng, as cruditee of stomacke, slougth, and dul∣nes of bodye. Heuynesse of the bodye (saieth Hippocrates) and we∣rynesse growyng without cause, bee tokens that sickenesse is at hande:Foresign of sickene and the cause thereof se∣meth to bee by reason of aboun∣daūce of humoures and the puf∣fyng out, swellyng, & the grosse∣nesse of the spirites,Hippoc¦tes lesson  sickenes ¦warde. that hang on the synowes. And yet there bee some that when the bodye selfe in
a maner striuethe folishe erdyng ome per∣es in dietyng m selfes. and woulde bee fayn layed at rest, wyll forth∣with into the baynes, fall to drynkyng, and furnyshyng the bodye with vytayles, euen as though a long assaulte and ob∣session shoulde folowe, and as though thei feared least the feuer should take theim ere they had dyned. Other agayn muche este∣myng theim selfes, folowe not this trade,de shame dissēbling enesse. but while they bee a∣shamed to cōfesse ouermuche ea∣tyng and crudite of the stomake, to kepe theimselfes all daie in their clothes, will forthwith their compaigniōs to practise feactes, and put of their clothes, to dooe as they dooe that bee in perfecte healthe.Hope ma∣th some to de in sick∣s. Many there bee whom in defense of their intemperaunce
and delycacie hope pricketh and persuadeth, that forsakyng their beddes they maye boldelye re∣tourne to their pristinate dyet, to taste a heare of the mad doggue that hathe byten theim, euen as though thei might expell wyne wt wyne, & surfet wt surfet.Thereme of Cato ¦gainst ho Against this hope Cato his remedye must bee vsed: Hope (saieth he) maketh those thynges yt bee greate lytle, and those that bee litle it maketh nothyng. And it shalbe also ne∣cessarye to remembre, yt it is bet∣ter to absteyne frō eatyng whē a māne nedeth it not, & to be at rest,Better it to abstey with healt then to ea and bee sick then to eate, & afterward to bee drawen & allured to y• baynes, & to eatyng and drynkyng, there to synke down, & to bee in ieoperdie. For if there bee any daunger, he
maye fortun to haue his parte therof if he bee not wyse, & haue not preuented the matier and ab∣steyned from it. If there bee no daunger, yet shall it bee no hurte to haue rectifed and purfied the bodye. But that childishe person that feareth to disclose to his frē∣des & seruauntes, that his sicke∣nesse came of ingurgytacion and superflutee, that foole that for shame will not at the begynnyng confesse crudite of stomacke, shal shortely after maugre his tethe bee cōpelled wt shame to declare yt he hathe a flixe, a feuer, or fret∣tyng & grypyng in ye belly. Mēne take it for a great shame to bee a houngred, but they maye well thynke it a greater reproche, if any go to ye baynes with a rawe
stomake ouerladen or puffed out with meate,The proche gluttoni eue as they should bryng to ye sea an olde rottē shyp yt leaketh. Vereli in like maner as some Maryners bee ashamed to kepe the shore in a great tempest, but after not able to brooke the seas bee with more shame cast on lande criyng out and vomityng: so those that perceyue theyr bo∣dye disposed to sickenesse, whyle they thynke it a reproche to kepe their bed, or to forbeare meate for a daye,Ple bee geu sickene are afterwarde to theyr greate shame constreined to kepe it many dayes, whylest they bee pourged, rubbed, emplaistred, e∣nointed: whyle they muste bee at all cōmaundementes of the Phi∣sicyās, while they desire to drinke wyne or colde water, beyng com∣pelled
in the meane season parte∣ly for feare not onely to saye but also to dooe many thinges bothe contrarye to reason and also vn∣comlye. But it shalbee requisyte to en∣structe and warne those that bee∣yng drouned in sensualite bee not lordes of their selfes, but disposed and geuen to affectes & lustes bee rapte hedlong into the same, how the greatest parte of pleasures & delectacions comen of the bodye selfe, and as the Lacedemonians when they gaue their cookes vi∣neagre and salte, wylled theim to seke out other sawce in the meate it selfe:he best e for e is to eceiued a whole e. so the best sawce for any kynde of meate is to bee receiued into a lusty, whole, and clene bo∣dye, for a thynge maye bee swete
and deintye of it selfe withoute confectyons.How mea¦tes are ma delectable. It is made after this sorte pleasaunte, yf it bee re∣ceiued into a bodye that hath de∣lyte and pleasure thereto, & that liueth accordyng vnto nature. But on the contrary parte if they chaunce to come into a body that hathe no phansie therunto, bee∣yng crude and euil disposed, they lose their relyse and vertue. Therfore this is not to bee pon¦dered wehther the fishe bee newe, or the breade fyne and pure, whe∣ther the bayne bee warme,More r¦pecte mu bee had t bodie felf then to th meates. but a manne must consyder in what case he hym selfe is, whether his stomacke standeth ayenste it, or whether he bee out of quiet, whe∣ther his bodye bee corrupted or
throughlye distempered, whiche thing if he dooe not, this shall fo∣lowe, yt as yf a sorte of reuellers and droūkardes come into a place whee people bee mournyng and sorowful, they shal cause no plea∣sure nor mirthe, but rather make theim to crye out: so yf Venus, meates, baines, wynes bee myn∣gled in a bodye that is euell dys∣posed, and vnnaturally affected, they brede and make no pleasure: but the humours whiche as yet bee not perfectely corrupted, they stiere and trouble, and more and more prouoke phleugme & cho∣lere. Moreouer, there is no delectacyon in theim greately to bee estemed, neither the pleasure of the fruiciō of theim doth aun∣swer to the expectation. Therfore
the precise diet obserued to the vt∣termust poincte, bothe maketh the bodye fearfull and subiecte to pe∣rilles,Ouer pr¦cise diet i not best. and breaketh the strength and courage of the mynde, whyle it refuseth all busynesse, whyle yt dare not bee occupyed neither in pleasure nor in laboure, whyle it hathe in suspiction the doynge of euery thyng lest it shoulde hurte, and gooeth aboute nothyng cou∣rageously and boldely. But ye bo∣dy must bee ordered as the shyp∣men dooe their sayles in a calme weather, who neither take theim in, nor vtterly strike theim down, nor suffer their sheates to bee lose, theim selfes beyng neglygent or slouthfull when they thyncke a storme toward. So it is conueni∣ent to take hede, to make the body
lighte & prest whē we looke not for crudite, flixe, burnyng or dulnesse, which thinges bee messagers & to∣kēs yt the feuer is at hand,ckēs that e feuer is hande yet some ther be yt when thei perceiue thē sel∣fes alredy distempered, doo scacely then fall to good diet. But rather before sykenesse come, we ought to preuent & prouide for it as shipmē do agaynst a tēpest whē thei se the northē wynd doth sheuer & wherle the toppe of the water of the seas.nes must prouided before it ne. Forverely it is a thing repugnaūt to al reason, & a very fondnes dili∣gētly to obserue & marke the alte∣ration of the wetherby criyng of crowes, the crowing of cockes, the hogges towsyng the straw about their eres as though thei wer mad (as Democritus was wōt to say) and not to note and perceiue the
motiōs & stormes of the body and other prognosticatiōs of diseases, to be ignoraūt in ye tokens wherby ye shal perceiue a tempest towarde in youre selfe.By wha thynges state of ye dy maye gathered perceiued Wherfore it shalbe requisite and expedient to obserue and note the body, not only in his meates and exercises, whether it be offended or dooe grudge at thē, more thē he was wont, or whether it bee more thirsty, or desyrous of meat thē it vsed to bee, but also ye must mark if ye slepe not soūdly, if ye be troubled or vexed therin, if ye make many slepes. It shalbe also well dooen to note ye absurdites of dremes For if ye haue any foule or vnacustomed visiōs, it betokeneth yt the body is replenished wt grosse humours, or the spirites vitall of the body bee distempered wythin.
By the affections and dispositiōs of the mynde a manne maye also gather whether ye body be dispo∣sed to a dysease. For oftē tymes it happeneth, that a manne shalbe sad and pensife without iust cause and bee putte sodenly in feare. Some bee also mad angrie, and wilbe offēded and displeased quic∣kely. Other wilbe sad, wepe, and mourne for a trifle, and this hap∣peneth as ofte as euell vapoures sower and grosse exhalaciōs dooe stoppe or occupie the cyrcuites of the mynde. Wherefore those per∣sons to whō suche thynges dooe chaūce, must cōsider and remem∣ber that yf ye occasion procede not of the mynde, it must come of the body, whiche requireth to be kept more temperate & abated. It shall
dooe good, also that a manne hauyng his frēdes disseased dooe aske ye cause therof,Sophistic bablyng stede of g counsaile not to thētēt to chattre sophistically & nothyng to yt purpose of dēsitees, incidēcies, and cōmutacions, and suche like folishe termes, and to shewe and ostēte how cūnyng and well seen he is in doctours names: but whē he shall not negligētly heare this light and commen thynges, yt is of surfaictyng, emptines, wery∣nes, dreames, he ought chiefly to enquire what dyet he kepte when he fell into the feuer, and after∣warde to saie,A marine ought to bee warne by others faultes. (as Plato was wont to saie, seyng other mennes faul∣tes,) that I herafter bee not in yt case. Thus of his frendes sicke∣nes and euilles it is requisite yt a manne prouide for hymself, and
take hede and remember that he come not to the like, that he like wise kepte in his bedde, haue not cause to prayse and desire yt moste precious iewell of health.ltha pre∣is iewell  so to bee t. But whē an other is sicke, he will note with hymself what a iewell it is to bee in health, and bee diligent, that hauyng that treasure he pre∣serue it well, regarde it, and fa∣uour it.e must e māne hymself ember  diete. It shall not bee vnprofi∣table also, if we remember by our selfes what our dyet is, for if it shall chaunce that we shalbe at drinkyng, or feastyng, or at great labours, and other intemperate busynesse, the body in the meane season not suspectyng ne felyng any dissease: yet it shalbe best for vs of our owne myndes to take hede and preuent, that after vene∣reall
actes or werines we kepe y• body in quiet and rest, that after surfaictyng and quaffyng we drynke water.What i bee dooen ter surfa¦tyng or m¦tes heaui digestion▪ And specially if we haue eatē meates heauy of dige∣stiō, as of flesshe or other meates of diuerse sortes: thē it shalbe re∣quisite to eate littell, and to leaue nothyng superfluous in ye bodye. For as these thynges of theim selfes are the cause of many dis∣seases: so thei brede mater & geue strength to other. And therfore it is notably saied yt to eate without saturite, to bee lusty to labour,What thy¦ges are m holsome. & to conserue naturall seede, bee thynges moste holsome. For ve∣rily immoderat cōgressiō wt wo∣men, because it pulleth out chief∣ly yt strength whereby the meate is digested,Venus hu¦tefull to t health. bredeth verie muche
su{per}fluitie, & therefore leat vs re∣pete our communicacion settyng euery thyng in his place & order, & first leat vs talke of suche exer∣cises as bee meete for those yt bee geuen to ye studie of good lettres. But as he whiche saied yt it was nothyng nedefull to wryte vnto theim yt dwell by ye sea costes any medicines for the touthe ache, did in yt woordes teache theim to vse saltwater: so maye a manne saie, we ought not to prescribe to stu∣dentes preceptes of exercisyng their bodyes,utuall di∣taciōs of udentes a eruaillous oo exercie  the bodye. forasmuche as the daily vse of disputacions (if it bee vsed by mouth) is a maruelous exercise, and profitable, not onely for ye health, but also to ye strēgth of the body. I meane not suche strength as wrastlers haue, nor yt
retcheth ye skynne frō ye fleshe, or dooeth make a scurfe on it & stop∣peth it wtout as masons do a wal of a house,what strē studētes ¦quire by ¦sputacion but suche as dooeth in the liuely & vitall partes (whiche vital partes we maie moste apte∣ly call ours) geue and encrease an inwarde strength, and a perfecte lustynesse.Breath muche en∣creaseth th strengthe  the bodye. And to proue that the breathe muche encreaseth the strēgth of the body, the masters & teachers of wrastlers dooe de∣clare, cōmaūdyng theim to rubbe one another, to bee alwaies pat∣tyng, & iently beatyng ye skynne, to preserue ye partes of the bodye wt enoyntyng & continual hand∣lyng.The voice stiereth the breathe. And for asmuche as y• voice is a mouyng and stirryng of the breath, whiche worketh not light∣ly nor on the outsyde, but in the
inwarde partes at ye veraie foun∣teyn, encreasyng heate, & makyng the bloodde subtile & pure, pour∣gyng the veynes, & openyng the sinewes, it suffereth not ye super∣fluous humours to weaxe grosse, nor to congele, whiche like dreg∣ges remayn in ye place where the meate is receiued and digested. Therefore they must endeuour chiefly to vse & make theimselfes famylyar wt this kynd of exercise contynually disputyng, talkyng, readyng or repetīg,eadyng o lowd voice kynd of ex∣cise. if thei suspect their body to be any thyng wery or weake. For what {pro}porcion ri∣dyng on horsbacke or in a wagō, or like beyng caried hath to ye vio¦lent labour of wrastlyng, & ren∣nyng & suche like strōg exercises: thesame {pro}portiō & cōparisō hath readyng wt a lowde voice to di∣sputacion.
For readyng doeth as it wer in the wagon of an other mās talke iētly moue vs,Disput a strōge ¦ercise th readyn & after a quiet sorte cōueigheth & carieth our voice. But disputacion hath annexed vnto it straynyng of the voice, & a kind of enforcemēt, whē ye labour of ye mynde wt ye labour of ye bodye bee clapsed together.Clamor streigny of the br¦is hurte Howbeit we must refrayne frō to lowde noyse & brallyng clamour. For vnmeasurable straynyng & violēce of ye breath do induce and cause crāpes & rupturs. But whē your repeticiōs & disputaciōs be ended, before ye walke,After d¦taciōs  bee vsed rubbyng fore wal¦kyng. it shalbe cōueniēt to vse warme, iētle, soft & smoth fricaciōs or rubbīg wt oyle to make softe ye fleashe, & so faire to wipe it, as (ye skyn & fleashe be∣yng opened) ye inwarde humours maye haue the more free course
to come out, and yt the spirite maie in due proporcion ientely sprede abrode into thextreme partes of the body. Leat this bee your pro∣porcion, yt ye vse it so long, tyll ye perceiue your body pleasaunte & lustie. Whosoeuer after this sorte quieteth & recreateth the motion or trouble growen within, and ye intenciō & streinyng of yt breaeth, shal neither fele griefe ne heauy∣nesse of su{per}fluitee.hole na∣ of hr correc∣ tat is sse in y• ye. And although the time will not serue, or his bu∣synesse will not suffer hym to vse walkyng, yet ther shalbe no daū∣ger, for nature self hath corrected and emended yt belonged to her. Neither let to do this while ye be on shipbourd,e of the th mut bee neg∣d. or beyng in yt cōmē ynne, no nor although euery mā laugh at you. Veryly where it is
no dyshonestie to eate, there it is no shame to walke▪ but rather it is more dyshonestye to feare shipmē, horsekepers, hostelers, & tapsters mocking you, not because ye play at ye sphere, wherlegyg, or tables, or dooe not exercise to fyght with your own shadow, but because in youre exercyse ye dooe dyspute, teache, demaūd questions, learne, or exercise the memorie,The sai of Socra for exerci the bodye wherfore Socrates vsed to say that he yt would leape, nedeth a large roome to ex∣ercise hym self: but he yt would oc∣cupy hym selfe in singing or spea¦kynge, euery place woulde serue bothe to stande & sitte. One thing also in that must bee forseen,Hauīg al¦dy surfai we must f¦beare e. that knowyng our selfes to haue sur∣faicted, or to haue exercised ye bo∣dy ouer muche with woman, or yt
we bee wery,loudes kyng. we bee not to vehe∣ment of spirite, nor crye out ouer loude, whiche is a cōmen practise emong lawiers & schoolemen cri∣yng out and exclaming more thē nedeth, some for glorye and am∣bicyon, and some hired to bee at a barre,iger the phiste &  he died. or at cōmen disputacions. Our frende Niger professyng so∣phistrye in Galatia by chaunce had swalowed in, the backe bone of a fyshe. In the meane season while an other Sophiste being a straū∣ger had begoonne to exercise his feate, Niger fearing to be preuen∣ted by hym, & to bee defrauded of his glory and praise, if he should g place, the bone sticking styll in his throte he beganne also to crye out. But the place beginnīg to wll and to bee harde, and he
not hable to abyde the paine, was forced to bee launced and cut & to bee serched veray depe with an in¦strument of yron: ye boe was t∣ken out, but ye wound being made veray daungerous, & renning di∣speched ye man of his lyfe.Colde ¦nes afte ¦bour of  bodye a hurteful Some man will remembre this an other tyme whē he seeth cause. But it is rather ambityon and ye parte of a yoūg foole, then a thīg healthfull to vse cold baines after labour of the body, for the euyll disposicion and hardnesse whiche it semeth to make in thexteriour partes, bre∣deth muche more mischief inward lye, stopping the pipes, congeling humours, letting exhalations yt alwaie couet to bee lose & at liber¦tee. And besides this, they yt vse cold baynes must of necessyte fall
to the precise and prescripte dyet, (whiche we vtterly forbed) euer carefull and doubteful lest if they omitte any iote prescribed, euery fault foorthwith may bee sharpe∣ly laied to their charge. But in v∣sing hotte baynes is much perdō and libertee.e vtilitee tte bat∣. For yt decreaseth not so muche ye lustines & strength of the body, as it encreaseth health, because it minystreth suche thyn∣ges as bee profytable & frendely to digestion. Those thinges that cannot bee digested it dooth with¦out great grief sprede abrode and dissipate, onlesse they bee crude & sticke in the toppe of ye stomacke, it recreateth and refresheth ye pre∣uy werinesse, nd with the heate dooth mitigate the same. Yet whē ye shall perceiue by nature decla∣ryng
the same,Enoynt in stead baynes that the bodie is in good tempere and well desposed, it is better to leaue baynes, and to be enoynted by the fyre, if the body shall nede heate, for because that doth conueigh & bestowe the heat through all partes of the bo¦dye. In the soonne ye maye vse it neither to muche nor to lytle, but after such measure as the tempe∣ratenesse of the ayre wyll suffer. Hytherto haue we sufficiētly spo∣ken of exercises, now leat vs come to diet. If y• that we haue saied be¦fore concerning the restreynt and mytigation of appetite,The pau hath no e¦res said  to. dooe any¦thyng auayle, what shall we nede any further to geue preceptes & rules? If it bee peinful to entreat and handle the belly as one set at lybertee and out of prison, and to
contende with the paunche that lacketh eares,he order tet as Cato saied, then must we goo about to fede it with meates lyghter of digestiō. That shalbe thus, yf we fede charely on grosse meates, & of muche nutri∣ment being set before vs, as grosse fleshe,osse vian . cruddy meates, dry figges, hard egges. Vtterlye to forbeare thē it wilbe hard Leat vs tede wel of such as be fine & light,e mea∣. of which sort bee diuers herbes, wild foule, & suche fishe as is not fat. It may so bee, that takyng these ye shall content your appetite, and yet not hurte your body. But chiefely we must take hede of that crudite whyche cometh of eatyng fleshe,dite of yng fleshe efely to be ewed. because it doothe not onely make the body forthwth very heauie, but also their hurtfull leauinges
dooe afterwarde remayne.Muche e¦tyng of fl¦s to bee  steined And it shalbe best so to accustome the body, yt it desire not to eate fleshe. For the ground doth bryng forth many thynges, whiche be not on∣ly for the sustenaūce of man, but also for delicacie and pleasur suf∣fycient: wherof some it so geueth,The gro brīgeth fo enoughe t fede o. that ye maye vse theim forthwith without anye businesse. Other a∣gain beyng myngled with other thinges do sawce and make them very pleasaūt. Now forasmuche as vse and custome so lytle dothe differ frome nature, that in a ma∣ner it is turned therunto,Custome nexte cos to nature we may not vse the eatyng of fleash to fyl the gredye appetite as woulfes and Lyons dooe: but when we haue made a foundacion and grounde thereof,Fedyng fleshe mu be moder it shalbe requi∣site
then to fede on other meates, those that shall moste agree with the nature of the bodye,he vsyng thynges uide. and that lest shal dulle the reasonable part of the mynde, whyche then appe∣reth and shyneth as out of a fyne and lyght matter.ilke must  vsed for eate and t for a nke Concernyng those thynges that bee lyquyde, ye may not vse milke for a drinke but for a meate, for that it causeth heauinesse, and it is of muche nu∣trymente. To wyne we maye saye as Euripides sayed to Venus God sende me to haue enough of the,he saiyng Euripides Venus. but not to muche nor to litle. Truly wyne is a drynke muche profitable, a medycine mooste pleasaunte,yne. a meate leaste of all hurtyng, yf it be vsed temperately,ater and receiued by lytle and lytle at ones, rather by it self, then alayed with water.
Water not onely if it bee mixte wt wyne but also a draught ther∣of alone nowe and then emong wyne alaied, maketh that that is alaied lesse hable to hurte. And therefore we must daylye vse be∣side our generall diet to drynke twoo or three cuppes of water, wherby the strength and force of the wyne maiebe abated. And the body vsed to drynke water,Water da to bee dro¦ken. shall not bee offended with the straun∣genesse and noueltie therof, nor refuse it when necessitie shall re∣quire. Many menne sometyme desire wyne, and then especially, when water wer moste conueni∣ent, as when thei burne in the soonne, or contrarily whē thei bee veraie colde, or when thei haue been muche occupied with tal∣kyng,
or haue fixed their mynde on a thyng earnestly, to bee shorte thei thynke that wyne ought to bee drounken after laboures and werynesse, as though nature de∣syred some coumforte to bee geuē to the bodye to refresshe it after laboure. But nature desire the no coumforte,ature re∣ireth no licacie. if ye call dilica∣cie coumforte. But it lokethe for suche recreacion as is meane be∣twene pleasure and laboure. Wherfore at suche tyme ye must eate lytell, and drynke no wyne, or at the least it must bee alaied and tēpered with drynkyng wa∣ter now and then. Wyne must ee alaied wt ater.For wyne beeyng vehemente and subtill in efficacie and ver∣tue, dooeth make the bodye that
is alredy out of temper, more out of temper. And it dooeth exaspe∣rat and stiere more, that that al∣redy is moued: when it ought ra∣ther to bee assuaged and quieted: for the whiche purpose water ser∣ueth. Experience teacheth that if we drynke hotte water, not when we bee thirstie, but after weri∣nesse, or vehement commocion, or heate, we shall by and by per∣ceiue inwardly a locyng or mol∣lifiyng: because the humour of the water is ientle and dooeth not binde.Water lo¦ceth & mo¦fieth inw¦dely On the cōtrarie parte, drynkyng of wyne hath a greate violence and a strength, nothyng frendely ne pleasaunt when dis∣seases begynne to growe. But because there bee that
saie that hunger breedeth a dry∣nesse and bytturnesse in the body, if any manne feare that, or if any (like children) thynke it harde to forbeare meate till the feuer come whiche he mistrusteth will come in deede, it shalbe conue∣nient for hym to drynke water. For oftentymes when we honour and celebrate the feaste of Bac∣hus the god of wynes, yet we lyue sobrely and absteyne from drynkyng wyne, takyng vp a good vse that we dooe not all∣waies desire wyne, by it self vn∣mixed. But Minos kynge of Creta emong other his lawes or∣deined that pipyng should not bee vsed at the feastes of god∣des,we made Minos  of Cre∣ nor dauncyng when thei mourned, and yet we knowe yt the
pensife mynde is not offēded nor can bee hurted with melodye or myrthe,The p mynd is hurted  melodie. but no bodye is so strōge but it wylbee hurte if when it is moued and enflamed, wyne bee put into it. Menne saie, that cer∣taine people called the Lydes,The c¦stome of Lydes i tyme of scarcitee. would eate but ones in two dai∣es, if any famyn or scarcitee of vitailles happened emōg theim: the rest of the tyme they spent at dice & other games. But he yt is a student & loueth learnyng, yf he shall haue occasion to suppe late, wyll looke on a Mappe, or a booke, or playe at the lute, stri∣uyng & fyghtyng with the bely,Studen haue m meanes  restreign appetite. and by dyligentlye callyng the mynde from meate, and tour∣nyng it to studye, will wyth lear∣nyng soone shake of his appe∣tite
For if the rude Scythian be not ashamed in ye myddest of his drynkyng oftentymes to drawe his bowe, and when it is vubent, to syng, by this meanes kepyng hym selfe from droūkēnesse, shall a Greke feare to bee mocked, that with letters and hys bookes do∣eth by lytle and lytle shake of importune and the vnrulye ap∣petites? The younge menne of whom the famouse Poete Menan∣der in hys comedies treateth: (whom whyle they wer banquet∣tyng, an olde Bawde thought to trappe in a snare with bryngyng in dyuers fayre and gorgeous harlottes,) did caste downe their heddes, and fell to their dely∣cates, not so hardy as ones to caste their iyes on theim. But
those that loue good learnyng haue many honeste and plea∣saunte wayes to withdrawe and pluck backe the mynde, if they cā by none other meanes restreigne the gredye and beastely appetite when it seeth meate. And where those ye bee teachers of feactes dooe crye out, the ma∣sters of games dooe ofte inculke into their scholars, that dys∣putyng of learnynge at mea∣les corrupteth the sustenaunce, and causeth heauynesse of the hedde. It is not alwayes to bee feared, but when we goo aboute to defyne weightie matters, or to dispute for the victorye who shall beare the bell. The brayne of a Phenix is veraye pleasaunt
and delicate, yet it is saied, that it causeth the hedde ache. Disputacion at meate, as it is no pleasaunte susteinaunce,gainst m that llowe utyng reaso∣g at les. so it bredeth veraye muche ache and heauynesse of hedde: Thus saye they. But if they wyll not suffer vs at meales to demaunde or op∣pose, dispute, or reade any other thyng then that shall delite and helpe pleasure: and if they re∣ken that to be a parte of honestie and profite, we will geue theim warnyng that they trouble not ne molest vs, leat theim piycke theim from vs, & teache it their felowes and scholars. Whom while thei discourage from good lettres, and vse to spende their lyfe in mockyng and rayllyng, they make like to the pyllers of
their schoole, grosse in bodye, and dul in witte, like a stone, as Aristo. veray featly saied. And yet theself same men beyng counsailled and perswaded by Physiciās dooe al∣waies cōmaunde,A pause t bee made ¦twene sup and gooi to bed. not to gooe to bed immediatly after supper. But suffer a pause to bee betwene sup∣per and gooyng to bed, not hea∣ping together ye meate, troubling and oppressing the spirites, leste thei ouerlaye concoction, ye meate being rawe and boilyng in ye sto∣macke, as they be woont that en∣tende after supper to moue y• bo∣die, who dooe it not with renning nor with extreme, but with softe & ientle exercise, as walking,The min after mea must bee  quiete as as the bod or mo∣derate dauncing: euen so oughte we to thinke yt the mind after sup∣ster must not bee troubled, neither
with businesse, nor with cares, nor with subtyll contentions, whiche commenly growe into an ambici∣ous conflicte & tumulte:xercise of dētes af∣ supper. but there bee many questions of the nature of thīges, whiche as they bee not weighty, so be they probable, ma∣ny narracions also that concerne good maners, wherin some thing is worthye to bee consydered and weighed, void from all contenti∣on and stryfe, and yet mixed with suche pleasures as maye coum∣forte and delite the mynde. And some there bee, that for pleasure haue called such exercises in que∣styons of historyes & of Poetes, the secound course of studentes & learned menne. There bee narra∣cions besyde that bee easye, and wherin is no tediousnesse, there
bee also fables. To heare of ye con¦ceiptes of ye lute or other īstrumēt it is more easy thē to heare ye harpe or shalme gooing. There is also a {pro}porciō of time herin to be regar¦ded, yt is,Aristotle  opinion o walking ¦ter supper whē by the softe & ientle setteling of the meate ye digestion is temperat, & suche as we would haue. But forasmucheas Aristotle is of this opinion, yt he thynketh walkyng after supper doth stiere the heate, & slepe incōtinētly doth suffocate thesame, & other thinke the contrary, that digestiō is fur∣thered with quiet, and yt it is hin∣dered with mocion: some folowīg Aristoteles mind, dooe walke imme¦diatly after supper, other inclinīg to thother parte do rest. Mine opi¦nion is, that ye folowe a peculiar waye made of both, yt may coūfort
the bodye after supper, and kepe it, not vexing the mynde, nor yet suffring it to bee idle, but (as be∣fore is saied) ientely mouing the spirites, and making theim more pure & fyne by tellyng or hearing some pleasaūt and mery cōceipte, that neither may frette the minde nor cast it in dumpes.omites & rgacious t to bee v∣ but in ne ytee. Ye shall be∣sides not practise vomites nor lax¦es or losyng of ye bely made with medicines, excepte great necessy∣tee requireth, because they bee e∣uell coumfortes & solaces of sur∣faicting. And yet the cōmen sorte of people vse it, who to thentēt to pourge & euacuate their bodyes, dooe purposely fyll ye bely and a∣yen dooe pourge & emptie the bo∣dy to fyll it, booth ayenst nature, no lesse in ye meane seasō troubled
with replecion, then with empti∣nesse, yea, rather by all meanes a∣uoydyng repletion as a lette to delicacie, prepare and make redy emptines as a place and space for pleasures. It is euidently know∣en,The hurt¦fulnes of v¦mite. that eyther of those thynges troublyng and shrinkyng the bo∣dy hurteth the same. Vomite hath a peculiar mischefe, in yt it increa∣seth and nourisheth insacyabili∣tee, and is neuer satysfied. There cometh of it vehemente hounger and troublesome, as it wer floud∣des at diuers tymes, whyche by violence pulleth a māne to meate being alwaye tormented, not by reason of appetite desiryng meate conuenient, but by the inflāmaci∣ons and exulcerations of medici∣nes, & playstres. By reason wher∣of
of when they haue pleasures, the same are nothing pleasaūt ne pro¦fitable, but ye partyes haue much trouble in the fruicion of thē, and besyde, the retchynges and violēt cōmocions of the pores and spiri∣tes, dooe impresse & leaue behinde theim certain remaines, that will not tary and looke for a purgati∣on, but so redounde and flowe in∣to all the body, as the fylth dothe in a shyp when the pumpe is ful, whyche hathe nede rather of ca∣styng out,urgayōs d medyci¦s dooe of∣n tymes ore harme en good. then to haue more lode laied on. And the cōmotions that throughe medycines bee made in the botome of the bellye, dooe corrupt and make moyst the par∣tes subiecte thereunto, & encrease more superfluitee then they bring oute. And therefore, euen as one
beeyng dyspleased wyth the mul∣titude and greate compaignie of Grekes dwelling in a cytee dooth banyshe thē & replenysh the same wyth Arabians and Scythes beyng straūgers: so, many beyng out of ye way, whē thei haue emp∣tied their bodies of those thinges that it was vsed with, and super∣fluitees, thei put therein straun∣gers, as for exaumple, ye graines whiche the Potecaries call grana Cnidia, and Samonie, & an houge quantitee of suche lyke thynges that can so lytle pourge nature, yt thei them selfes haue more nede to bee pourged. Wherfore it shal be best to kepe the body by mode∣rate & sobre dyet in suche case con¦cernynge emptinesse and repleci∣ons, that it shall not nede of it.
ow the ho∣ maye bee ewed, yf de shale▪And if it shalbe requisite at any tyme to renewe the state of the bo¦dye, then vse a vomyte wythout medicines and without tormente suche as maye nothyng trouble you. For in like maner as clothes washed in a bucke and scoured with ashes and salt peter, be more freted and wasted then when thei bee washed in fayre water: so vo∣mytes that bee forced with medi∣cynes, do more hurt, corrupt, and consume the body. When a man is bound there is no better medi∣cyne, thē to vse suche meates that wyll easely moue and styrre and gentlye lose the bellye. Whereof, whē ye haue familiar experience,he way to e the belly hen it is unde. the vse therof is wythout griefe. If it wyl not bee losed with those meates, ye muste drynke water
many dayes, or kepe abstinence,Clisters better  purgacio and afterwarde receiue a clister rather then any medicines, be∣cause thei bothe trouble and cor∣rupte the body. And yet the com∣men people verie gredyly & ligh∣tly desire theim:Why the men sort people t purgacio but for none o∣ther purpose then harlottes vse sorcery to make aborsions, and to destroye that thei haue in their wōbes, to thētent thei maie quic∣kely fall ayen to lechery, but leat vs passe these thynges. Those yt bee to muche diligent and pre∣scribe to theim selfes abstinence & fastng at certain tymes, dooe not well. For thei whē nature ne∣dethe not, dooe teache it to nede scarcitee of meate, and by vse ma∣keth abatement, and minisshyng of meate necessarie, whiche ought
to bee geuen in tyme. It is better to adde suche correccions frely when nede shalbe, then to vse prescribed tymes. But when ye fele not, nor suspecte any dis∣sease toward you, it shalbe re∣quysite to prepare so for all the other rate and order of your diet, that vpō occasion geuen, it maie easily and for the profite of the bodye suffer noueltie and bee o∣bediente, not to serue and to bee bounde to that trade of liuyng, so taught and vsed, that it must of necessite bee reduced vnto cer∣teyn tymes, quātitees, and cour∣ses. For that is neither sure, nor easy, nor good maner, and it ap∣pereth rather to bee the life of an oyster that gapeth at certayne
tydes, or of a stocke rather then of a manne. For thei that so tye theimselfes at all tymes to one trade in meates, abstynences, ex∣ercises, or reste, dooe bryng theim selfes to a vaine and vile life, phantasticall, that no manne v∣sethe, clene contrarye to amytie, glorie and ciuilytee. And that I saied I commended not. Veryly good healthe is not made nor ordeyned to bee idle and at rest, whiche bee the twoo greatest mischiefes that bee annexed we sickenesse.Idlenes a rest bee t of ye chief eiuilles th bee toyn we sickenes And there is no difference betwene hym that preserueth the syght of his eies by that meanes that he maye see nothyng, and his voice that yt maye not speake, and
betwene hym that thynketh that good health cannot bee preserued but by not vsyng and not exerci∣syng thesame. And although he fare well, yet he nothyng the more profiteth hymself to dooe dyuers thynges yt belong to humanite, & ientlenes. Thefore we maie not thynke that idlenes is holsome,Idlenes destroieth healthe & pleasures. for it destroieth yt, wherfore health is desired. And it is not true that thei fare better yt liue in quiete. For Xenocrates that liued in moste quyet, fared no better then Phociō, who was still occupied: nor Theo∣phrastus better then Demetrius. And the fleyng of administracion of thynges and ambicion, nothyng auailed Epicure, or his Epicu∣rians, to that state of the bodye that thei so muche commended.
But the naturall habite & state of the body must bee preserued by other meanes, so that in all kyn∣des of liuyng we ought to remē∣bre, that there is in the bodye of man one place for sickenesse, an other for health. And yet those yt haue to dooe in matters of ye cō∣men wealth,Plato h admonic to his sc¦lars at hi goyng ou of ye schoo (I saied) must bee o∣therwyse admonyshed, then Plato vsed to teache his scholars: De∣partyng out of the schole, he vsed to saie to theim: Take hede my chil∣dren, that ye bestowe this idle time in some honest thyng.Wherin r¦lers of ye  men wea shall exer¦cise their b¦dies & wh But we wyll exhorte suche as haue to dooe in the com∣men wealthe, to exercyse theim selfes in honest and necessary la∣boures, and that they stiere not ye bodye for light & meane maters. Many troublyng them selfes for
euery matier, watchyng, takyng iourneyes, rydyng vp and down fal into sickenesse, whēin ye meane season thei do nothyng profita∣table or for thaduauncement of a cōmen wealth, but lye in awayte to hurte, do enuye & hate others, and hunte for a lytle vayne & vn∣profitable glorie. That that De∣mocritus saied agreeth chieflye a∣gaīst theim (if I be not deceiued) If ye body should sue his tenaūt,e mynde tenaūt to body. the mynde, it could not bee auoy∣ded but he should be found giltie for euill vsyng his offyce. Per∣chaūce Theophrastus saied true, whē by a metaphore he saied, that ye mynde gaue the body a great re∣warde and fyne, to admytte hym to be his tenaunt. For verily the body receiueth more hurte then ye
mynde, not vsyng his lorde as is conuenient, nor regardyng hym as he ought. For as ofte as the mynde is occupyed in his affecci∣cions, laboures, and cares, he fa∣uoureth not the body. I meruaill therfore what Jason ment when he saied, the lawe must be broken in trifles, to thentent that iustice maye be executed in greate ma∣tiers,Whē ru shall take creacion. We will vpō a good groūd warne hym yt is a minister in the commē wealth, to be remisse and quyet, & to take his ease when he hath but trifles to dooe, to coum∣forte & recreat hym self in theim, yf he wyll haue his bodye hable to suffer paynes in notable and harde matiers, not sicke, dull or weake, to hynder hym: but as it were healed and renewed in
an ydlenesse and reste whilest he wer on shipbourde, so that when the mynde shall call hym againe to his necessarie affayres, he maie folowe his trade as the colt vsed to sucke renneth with the dame. Wherfore whē they may for their busynesse, leat theim coūforte and cherishe theim selfes, & leat theim defraude the body neither of slepe neither of meate, nor of suche ease and recreacion, as is meane be∣twene pleasure and payne, and doeth not obserue prescripte time. For as burnyng rō wasteth be∣yng quenched in water after it is dryuen out and beaten together with vehemēt laboure:ten alte∣ions cō∣e the bo∣. so is the body of māne consumed by alte∣raciōs, sometyme ouercharged & laden wt busynesse, another while
drouned & ouerwhelmed in plea∣sures, and when after beeyng made dissolute and feble through bodelye pleasure and drynkyng wyne it is forced to come to hear causes, or to exercyse some lyke funccion whiche requireth sore laboure, effectuall diligence,Heraclit called ye dr¦sie a cōtir¦al shoure rayne, an sought to cured the but the m parte of n dooe soo thē selfes though t sought to haue sick rather t health. and earneste studie. Heraclitus beynge syck of the dropsie willed his phi∣sician to tourne the shoure into drieth: a greate manye go cleane oute of the ryghte waye, who af∣ter thei haue been long occupyed tossed and tourmoiled in labours & werinesse, when they haue kept the body long wythout meat and slepe, then chiefely go about, and geue theim selfes to make the bo∣dy weake and feble with wanton¦nesse and pleasures. And by and
by vppon the same dooe eftsons put it to asmuch payne as it is a∣ble to beare. For nature desyreth not suche patching and botching of the body, but the folysh mynde rather beyng intēperate and vn∣naturall. For in lyke maner as shypmen and maryners whē thei come to the lande geue them sel∣fes to pleasures and wantonesse and theruppon incontinently bee called to the sea again to their for¦mer painful labours: so the min∣de sequystred from businesse, is rapt wt pleasurs & immediatly v∣pon the same returneth to his ac∣customed labours & wil not suffer nature to haue yt she hath mooste nede of, y• is quyetnes & reast: but euer ofte chaunging from contra¦ry to contrarye doothe trouble it,
and bringeth her out of her owne state and course. Those that haue wytte wyl not apply theyr bodies to pleasure whē it is weried. Thei do not desyre it, no thei remembre no such thyng, because the wyt is geuen to honest busynesse, and ye part of the mynde yt should desyre pleasur, is ouer whelmed and oc∣cupyed with other desyres. Tru∣ly that whyche Epaminondas sayed meryly when an honest man died in the tyme of the warres betwen the Thebans and a towne in Boeoti called Leuctrum,Studente haue no me to sper in dyssol lyuynge. good lord what le∣sure had thys man to dye at thys tyme in thys greate busynesse it maye bee trulye sayed of hym that 'is occupyed in matters of the common wealth, or in studye of good learnynge, what tyme
hath thys man to bee balkyng, to bee droūken, or to playe the wan∣ton? Yet when they haue tyme to coūforte refreshe and recreat the body, let them beware and eschew both laboures vnprofytable and chefly pleasures not necessarie, as enemyes to nature. For I heard Tiberius Caesar ones saye, yt he was a very lobcoke that after he pas∣sed ye age of .lx. yeres dyd desyre a physician to fele his hande. But it was somewhat arrogant∣lye spoken. Neuerthelesse, I thynke thys to bee true that it is requisite that a manne be not ig∣noraunte in hys owne pulses:ery man ht to we  own pul and what ng is d or euell his body. e∣uery man hath a diuersitee ther∣in, yet nomanne ought to bee ignoraunte in hys owne tempe∣rature, how hotte, how drye hys
bodye is: neither what thynges dooe it good or hurte. For he lac∣keth the knowlage of hym selfe, & a blynde and brute mynde dwel∣leth in that bodye, yt must learne these thīges of a Phisician, whe∣ther he bee more in healthe in so∣mer then in wynter, and whether he maye vse thynges yt bee moist easlyer then drye, and whether he haue a dull or fast beating pulse. To knowe these thinges it is not onely profitable but also easy: be∣cause we bee dailye in experyence therwt, & bee parties therto. But in the diuersytee of meates & drin¦kes it is more requisyte to knowe what is good, what is euill, and to bee expert in those that bee frē∣des to the stomacke, rather then enemies: to knowe what furthe∣reth
digestion, then what is plea∣saunt and delicate to the mouthe. s a shame ske of a ysician at mea∣ bee good digestion  what cō¦rye.To demaunde of a Physician what is easy to bee digested, and what is harde, what prouoketh a laxe, & what byndeth: is asmuche shame, as to aske what is swete, what is bittur, what is soure, what is sharpe. Ye shall see some that wyll checke and correct their coo∣kes, subtilly discerninge yf there bee to muche swetenesse, salte, or tartnesse in their meate.y pot∣e is seldōe l seaso∣, and the y cōmen ceinpe∣. And yet they know not what thing, if it be receiued into y• body is light, vn∣noysome, or profytable: wherof this foloweth yt their pottage is seldome euell seasoned, & yet tem∣pering and seasoning theim selfe veray euyll & out of course, they cause ye Physiciās daily to haue
muche businesse. And suche mou∣thed mē take not their pottage to bee best, when it is moste delicate but they put therto many thīges that bee sharpe: yet into the body they poure ī many pleasures yt fill & prouoke it to vomite, partly be∣cause they knowe not, partly for yt they dooe not rememēbre, ye na∣ture hath ioined wt thinges y• bee holsom & profitable suche pleasur as is wtout hurte & stil endureth. This also maketh to y• purpose, to remēbre what bee frendly, & apte, for the body, and what otherwise: to know in sodain affecciōs y• doo daily & hourely chaūce & other cir¦cumstaūces how tapply to euery thīg his {pro}pre & peculiar diet. For ye scrupulosite & frowardnes of ye cō¦mē people yt find theimselfes gre∣ued
with alteracion of the palme of y• hande, and who by other displea∣saunt tokens growing of lacke of slepe and swimmyng in the hed, gather and coniecte that ye bodye within is corrupted and infected, is not to bee feared nor regarded of studētes, or suche as bee occu∣pyed in affayres of the commen wealthe, to whom we speake. But they must auoyde an other more vehemente doubte in learnyng, wherby it happeneth that they be forced not to fauour or spare the body, nor to regard it, oftentimes when it is almost dooen, still con∣straining it to make mortall war with immortal thinges,ery tale ust stu∣tes that our not r bodies. & earthly conflictes wt heuēly matiers. But at lengthe it chaūceth to theim as it did to the camele, whom his fe∣lowe
the oxe desired to ease hym of his burden, to helpe him being weryed to beare it, the camele re∣fused it: well saied the oxe, it will not bee long, but thou shalt bothe carie me and all my burden. The oxe was a south sayer, for beeyng ded, the camele was compelled to do it in dede. Euen so it hapeneth to the mynde, who deniyng for a while to geue ye body being weri∣red tyme to bee recreated and re∣freshed, not long after falling in∣to a feuer, or into hed ache is com¦pelled to be sycke, and to be pay∣ned with the body,plato wo that y• bo shoulde  bee exerc without mynd n mynd w¦out the b leauing bokes dysputacions, and all other exer∣cises of learning. Wherfore Pla∣to did geue a good lesson, that we should neither exercyse the bodye without the mynde, nor the mind
without the bodye, but that we should indyfferently preserue the body as maried to the mynd, spe∣cially when it attendeth on the minde, and maketh it selfe parta∣ker of the laboures thereof,othyng so cllnt as lth. then shoulde we agayne bestowe on it care and solicitude, geuyng to it for rewarde that noble and desy∣red health, thinking y• of al thin∣ges that procede from the mynde, no gyft more ex∣cellent maye be geuen to the body, then that it may be with∣out all impedimente and hynde∣raunce eyther to the know∣ledge of vertue, or to ye profyte of speaking and doyng {inverted ⁂}
printer's device of Richard Grafton
