22241.5 24042794 27102
THE Three Partes of Commentaries, Containing the whole and perfect discourse of the Ciuill warres of Fraunce, vnder the raignes of Henry the second, Frances the second, and of Charles the ninth. With an Addition of the cruell Murther of the Admirall CHASTILION, and diuers other Nobles, committed the 24. daye of August. Anno. 1572. Translated out of Latine into English BY THOMAS TIMME MINISTER. Seene and allowed. DEVTERON. 32. Remember the dayes of olde, consider the yeres of so many Generations, aske thy father and he will shew thee, thine elders and they will tell thee. IMPRINTED AT LON∣don, by Frances Coldocke. ANNO. 1574.
R Regard not worldly wealth, I In Christ repose thy trust, C Consider well thy finall end, H How thou art but dust. A Aske mercy for thy sinne, R Reioyce in vertues lore, D Detract no time for to atchieue B Beatitudes in store, A Aboue where Christ doth raigne K King of imperiall power, E Eche Angell his triumphant praise R Resounding euery hower. T. T. bookplate
To the right worshipful, Sir Richard Baker, Knight, Thomas Tymme wisheth desired health and prosperitie, with full perfection of Chri∣stian vnderstanding and godlynesse. IN all Ages and times, there haue bene some godly and well disposed Fa∣thers that imployed theyr tyme and trauayle in descri∣byng the State of Christes Churche and of the common wealth of the Lordes Israell: As for example, In the tyme of the law before Christ, Mo∣ses, Samuel, Esras, Nehemiah, and others: After the law, since Christ, S. Luk, Theodoret, Sozomenus, Epiphanius, Nicepho rus, Iohn Sleidan, and in our time Maister Iohn Foxe oure Countrey man, (whose godly labour hath deserued great cō∣mendation.) As these fathers and godly learned men, in their times, by occasion haue labored and trauailed to benefite the Church of Christ, which through ignorance hath bene much endamaged: euen so that notable, graue, godly learned Fa∣ther, Petrus Ramus, the Authour of these Commentaries of the state of the Common wealth and Religion of Fraunce (whereof this booke is but the first part) hath taken no lesse paines to the same ende: and shall profitte in deede no lesse than the trauaile and paine of others, taken that way. For in his Commentaries (beside the godly lessons both concerning doctrine and manners, and otherwise) are conteined manye notable examples of Gods great mercyes, in defending and preseruing the Christian professors of his name in Fraunce in extreme perils, and also diuers experimentes of his seuere iudgements in ouerthrowing the cruel tyrants, and in puni∣shing
the persecuters. In consideration wherof, I thought is good to translate the same into our English toung, both for that I thought it should generally profit our countreymen, (and not those alone which vnderstand the Latin toung, as your worship doth:) and also for that I thoughte it a meete occasion, wherby I might testifie my good will and meaning towardes your worship, for the freendly inclination and wil∣lingnesse to benefit me, that I haue heretofore found in you. Desiring you to accept the dedicatiō hereof, though not for the worthinesse of the thing giuen, yet as a sure testimonie of such a well willing mynd, as by this which he here presen∣teth, declareth what he would do, if he had any thing of more price to giue: and also to suffer my trauaile to passe forth vn∣der your fauourable protection and garde, to the com∣mon profitte of our countreymen, and the glory of God, who send you long life, increase of wor∣ship, and the perfect felicitie of the life to come. Your worships Thomas Tymme.
The Authors Preface to the Reader. WHat a great businesse and much adoe there was of late yeares for Religion; & that in the Kingdome of Fraunce, there is no man but he knoweth▪ yea all men sée the same to be such that it ought with diligence to be Cronicled for euer: and to be sent to the borderers of the vtmost part of the earth for all posterities. But he which hath taken this labour in hand of good will, desireth earnestly that it may generally take effect and turne to the profit of all men. For (so farre as I know) there is nothing extant to be read, but certaine writings which were put forth and set abrode, as the matter required, and certaine Commentaries in the French togue: and if there be any thing, it is so obscurely written that the same of all men can not be vnderstoode. And truly there are certaine reasons which stayed ma∣my men of great wisedome and experience in these mat∣ters from that publique writing. For who, not knowing as yet what would come to passe, dare take vppon him to set foorth openly a whole Tragedie or Comedie, without ma∣nifest daunger to loose his labour, or at the least to séeme to lose it? Furthermore, who séeth not, that it is a thing at this time full of perill, and procuring enuie and displeasure? And beside all this, such laboure at this time séemeth al∣most vnprofitable. For those matters are as yet freshe in memorie, and more sensibly felt of a great manie, than were to be wished, and are noysed abroade by others in for∣reine Nations. To conclude, this thing séemeth almost hurt full. For when as these controuersies haue ben stirred vp tho rough diuers opinions of religiō, which controuersies burst
forth into so great perturbations and troubles, the rehersall now of these thinges, shall not only séeme pernicieus, but also vntimely and out of order. The which also séeme to bée other causes which haue discouraged learned men (who no doubt did diligently note and marke the reasons and falling out of those matters, which wonderfully hapned in these our dayes) from labouring to set forth this history. For either the hast is vnprofitable, or else the vntimely com∣ming forth ridiculous, of this so spéedie & vnseasonable labor Therfore least any man should thinke that it is our pur∣pose, to write and sette foorthe a iust and true Historie of the state of the Churche of Fraunce: wée giue to vnder∣stand, that it is neyther our purpose, nor yet agréeing to the time. Howbeit, hereafter more copions and plentifull woorkes of better learned menne, so soone as the troubles and lettes of these times bée taken awaye, will come a∣broade: and will also committe to those that shall come af∣ter, a perfecte and full memoriall and Chronicle of mat∣ters. Let this now bée our beginning and entrance, and a cer∣taine declaration of a greater worke: that we may shewe some part of that large and ample argument: and that we may reduce into these Commentaries a certaine Uiew of the seuerall times of our Churches, both that we may stirre vp such of greater learning and experience, as may happily hereafter take this matter in hand more fully to handle the same: and also that in the meane time wee may giue some fast of the greatest matters to Christian men, desirous to know the truth of this thing, and to men of forreine nati∣ons, bewayling our estate and condition. And in these thrée first Bookes of our Commentaries, we set forth vnto the reader, the first beginnings of the Church of Fraunce, béeing as yet but of tender yeares as it were, and in the fire, or at least wise, euen now by little and little cō∣ming out of the fire.
Let the causes of the hatred and debate▪ by these very few things be considered, with the which the Bishop of Romes men so outragiously & vniustly are inflamed against ye faith full, & against the cause of the faithfull. We must not looke here to haue a description of the faithfull and professours of Christ, in armes, (as our aduersaries doe nowe obiect vnto vs) but rather of the vnarmed & naked members of Christ most cruelly afflicted, onely for this cause, bicause they pre∣ferre the true and pure doctrin of the Gospell now a grow∣ing, before the auncient customes & traditions of men. The naked Church in time past was vexed, and the Gospell dyd run as it were through the sides of poore men, and broughte them to death: then Christians were accoūted as lyers, cal∣led heretikes, and by al maner of meanes vexed & oppressed, then were they cast in prisons and in bonds, then were they whipped, then suffered they proscriptions and banishmēts, yea and cruell deathes, without fauour. But nowe when it pleased the omnipotent God to ap∣poynte vnto his Church a more clears and beautiful estate, and to qualifie and quenche those fierce fyres, Sathan not forgetting hys olde subtilties and sleightes, deuiseth a new accusatiō, whispering into the eares of kings, that the Gos∣pell will plucke their Scepters out of their handes: and by∣cause the faithfull throughout the whole kingdom of France defende their libertie graunted vnto them by the Kings E∣dictes, and by all lawfull causes, with force of armes, a new crime is nowe layde to their charge, namely Sedition, re∣bellion, and treason to the king and country: & these crimes are obiected agaynste the godly, by those which (abusing the Kings name and authoritie to exercise their own tirannie) éeke moste of all the destruction of the Kings maiestie: and bicause they haue bene let of their purpose by the faithfull, therfore do they spewe out all the poyson of their hatred a∣gainst them. By these beginnings it shall euidently appéere how obe∣dient
the Faithful haue bene alwayes to their Princes and Magistrates: that this thing béeyng layde as it were the foundation, it may plainly be séene who they be, which are the true authours of so many troubles as haue flowed tho∣rough this whole kingdome. God truely hath armed and fortified his Churche at thys daye with many externall helpes and fortresses: yet for all that, the cause is not chaunged: Christe is the selfe same Christe still, the Gospell is not chaunged, but it is the selfe same Gospell, whiche was vnreuerently handled and dealt withall in the persons of the Faithfull, by the sharpe pu∣nishementes of the wicked. The Faithfull are the same men still in obeying their Magistrates, and in reuerencing their Princes that they were before. But they are rebells whiche abusing the name and authoritie of Princes, and disloyally violating all Lawe persecute the Churche, go a∣bout to extinguish the Gospel, and as if they were Giants, furiously fight with God. And by the reading of these Commentaries, the Fayth∣full shall finde many things which they maye applye vnto themselues, to stay and comfort themselues in the middest of these troubles. In these lamentable tymes, manye daungers of moste greuous calamities do compasse vs on euery side, many dif∣ficulties and newe troubles do dayly burst forth also: But if we consider & weigh the times paste, we shall in very déede haue a gesse nowe, what wil come to passe hereafter in our tyme. For séeing God hath afore time sette and placed hys Churche in a straunge and wonderfull order: We maye gather, that the same God being a perpetuall keper and de∣fender of his seruauntes, will applie his power and proui∣dence to dispatche vs out of these our troubles: the whiche is a most firme and inuincible argument. Let vs call to remembrance the thicke mistes and darke cloudes of the former night: let vs sette before oure eyes in
what state the Church was in the dayes of Francis, the first, Henry the second, and Francis the second. All thinges were then full of feare. Infinite kindes of punnishmentes, and paynes were layde vppon the Church, as banishmentes, proscriptions, and burninges: Then no man durst so much as name the Gospell, without he would be counted a ma∣nifest heritike: Fewe men or none, and that of the meaner sort, when they were in their secret corners, durst not once mutter of the Gospell: men coulde not then enioy the libertie of the Gospell, except they woulde willinglye ba∣nishe themselues their countrey, and wander into foreine Nations. But who will not merueile herevppon at the issue and end of those afflictions? Looke what thinges were then harde of a fewe, did openly ringe in the eares of all men: Looke what things were reiected in some places, and great∣ly punished, were publikely receiued of the greatest part of men: yea there were many of the Nobles which sealed that doctrine with their bloud. By the deathes of Kyngs, the Gospell had passage, victo∣rie was gotten, Triumphe was made, and within fewe dayes, the Gospell went through the greatest parte of the Kyngdome, by open sermons, by publique Disputations, where most men were assembled together, so that the Gos∣pell had gotten many and singular witnesses. The places which had séene the tormenting fyres and ashes of the Faithfull before, sawe now great assemblies and multitudes of the Faythfull gathered together to heare the worde of God: and the Kynges Edictes which were al∣together made for the hurt and destruction of the faythfull, were at the last, for all that the aduersaries could doe, made to preserue the faithfull. To be short, these Commentaries did bring to our re∣membraunce and consideration, such wonderfull and straunge matters (the like wherof wée our selues haue not
safely séene) that by the prosperous and happye issue and ende of these perturbations, we oughte to conceyue a sure and vndoubted hope. The matter was then tryed by fyre: but now by force of armes: he which quenched the flamyng fires by the death and destruction of those whiche were fully purposed vtterly to ouerthrow and destroy the Churche, the same Lord of hostes & graund Captain of battailes shall di∣rect and order these warres to the libertie and peace of his seruants. Therfore the examples of those things which wer done in time past, do plentifully shew, that whatsoeuer shall happen at the length (which in déede is not to be measured by humane reason) shall fall out for our health and welfare: and that bicause God will not leaue his worke vnperfected. Wherefore I truste it is euident by the consideration of the things which are set foorth in this Booke, what great profite shal come to those whom the boisterous waues of these tem∣pests haue touched. And bicause this is not a priuate matter neither appertaineth to euery one man, but common to the whole Church of God dispersed throughout ye whole world, we think also yt the manifest & true knowlege of these thin∣ges is loked for of many mē of forein nations, & that the first beginnings of those things in these our Commentaries shal not be read of them without some frute. Neither do we dout but that many when they haue gotten peace and tranquili∣tie after troubles, will behold our miseries, not as thoughe thei themselues were quite out of danger of the like, but be∣ing moued with the féeling of our afflictions, will truly be∣waile our estate. For whose sake also we haue writtē these things in Latin, that they by some means at the least, may be generally vnderstoode of all those which séeke the glorye of God, and the preseruation of his Church▪ Wherfore we trust if we be accused of rashnes, as though we had vnaduisedly set forth these things which should haue bin deferred till more conuenient and better occasions, wée haue to answere for our selues, and to make vs cleare from that faulte. For if in a matter commendable and deseruing
praise, simple and small diligence ought not to be blamed, this may be a iuste defence for vs against learned and indif∣ferent mē, namely, to wil is sufficiēt in matters of weight. It shal be no reproch or shame to vs at all, that there be con∣trollers of a learned & perfect story. But this is the summe of our whole desire, that ye very truth of those things which were done in Fraunce for religion, might be knowne to all men, as, what is the goodnesse of the cause of the Faithfull and true churches, and what is the iniquitie and iniustice of their aduersaries. Let al mē know for a suretie that the Churches of France are not guiltie of sedition and rebellion, but are so called by the enimies of the truth and pure doctrine, for defending the libertie of the Gospell. Let all men know, that many thou∣sandes of faithfull Christians, being spoyled of their goodes, haue, like banished mē, forsaken their houses and countrey: let them knowe that by warre, and by other meanes, they haue become true martyrs, and by the fraude and deceyte of the Antichristian Guyses, are dayly martyred, who vio∣lating and breaking the moste strayte lawe and faith of pro∣mises, haue abused the kings name and authoritie to exer∣cise their tirannie and wickednesse. To be shorte, let al men know that Fraunce is falne into these ciuil wars through ye wickednesse of aliens, not through the fault of the faithfull. Moreouer (gentle Reader, whiche desirest to be satisfyed in the truth) we testifie and affirme thus muche for our sel∣ues, that we haue written all things truly, simply, and vp∣rightly, without anye manner of parcialitie: not gathering any thing by rumours or reportes, but by certaine and vndoubted arguments: in so much that we are not afrayde to appeale to those that are yet alyue, as too eye witnesses, yea and to the very time it selfe. Farewell▪
Edward Grant Schoolemaister of VVestminster, to the Booke. WHo lists to lern the blustring broyles, & frāticke fumes of France, The troublous times in three kings raignes, that dolefully did chaūce: May here suruey a perfect platt, of pageants plaide in vewe, That will enforce eche Christian harte, most ruthfully to rue: To see and heare the true discourse, of superstitious tymes, That shattered pure Religion, with spytefull cankred crimes. VVhere errour blind and ignorance, true Christians did suppresse, And armed all her lungish loutes, the godly to distresse: To rage and fume against the Church, that lurking lay in feare, VVith spitefull hate and infamies, of those that did it teare. Christes faithfull spouse not suffered, through furious foes to shine, Through rancour lodgd in Princes heads, that did from truth decline. Gods chosen sheep and vassals true, raisd vp to doe his will, In puritie him for to serue, proud papistes sought to spill. Their throates to cut, their heades to poll, their corpes in fier to caste, That to Gods pure Religion, came flocking wondrous faste. Some choackt with gibbets, gabbet at, some murdred spitefully, Some stabbed in with goting blades, and daggers wilfully, And all for hating Romish rytes, and Belials bragging broode, For cleauing to the Chrrstian church, that sore astonyed stoode. Among the superstitious troupes, of Antichristian foes, Starke blinded with the Popes delights, (behedgd with wailsul woes) Starte vp some chosen chieftaines stoute, of Christes disperpled band, That did defie such beggeries, in Fraunce that famous lande▪ VVhich few at first did more allure, vnto their sacred sawes, To serue the Lord in Hymnes and songes, according to his lawes. And secretly to pray and preache, to set foorth his dew prayse. In corners and in hidden holes (for feare) his trueth to rayse. Vntill the rage of hellish hagges, the common blinded crew, Dyd spye and spite their godly wayes, and many of them slew. Accused them as Lutherans, before the Peees and Kings, (Of Luther that reuin'd the same) with fond inuented things. Hereof came sectes and taking partes, the people censt with rage, By might mayntaynd, did spoyle the iust, the godly▪ and the sage. Edictes were made to staye such broyles, and Parliaments were held, To let the faithfull be at rest, but yet the enemie sweld: And daily raged more and more, till faithfull did encrease, And this reform'd Religion some noble minds did please. VVhom God raisde vp to ayde his flocke, his chosen sheep to garde,
Against th▪ assault of waspishe wolues: when their loud cryes he hard. For whose defence rose ciuill warres, and many a bloudy day, The Popish crewe by force did seeke, Christes pacient sheepe too slay. To roote out this Religion (that planted) lurking lay. And feared not the skalding threates, of th' antichristian route, But paciently abyde the crosse of Christ, with courage stout. Though Antichrist the Popes proud grace, did rage and fume his fill, And all his cankred Cardinals did ioy their bloud to spill. They dread not all the Guisian gardes, that fierce and mighty be, And perfecutors of the trueth, that pyne and poute, to fee Such valiaunt Captaynes of Christes bande, that doe the truth defend. And with the gaging of their bloud, their frendly ayd doe lend. A princely part here Conde playd a prince replet with grace, And all his house trew Souldiours stoode, the trueth still to embrace. Burgeus suffred losse of lyfe, and feared not the fier, For Gospels sake and truthes defence, a lew of his desire. Suruey his lyfe and trayning vp, his constant faythfull harte, His zeale, and stout confession, he playd a martyrs parte. Chatillon shrinke not here a whit, a chieftane of the troupe Of Gods dispersed faithfull flocke, that made their foes to stoupe. Three tymes for this rife ciuill warr, the papistes shewd their spight, The true and trustie protestants stood stoutly in the right. Their cause they manfully mayntaynd, Christ Iesus was their shield, Sometimes thei foyld their fretting foes, that gainst them rose in field. Some Nobles slayn, and valiant Knights cast downe before their time, And all in fence of Christ his cause, accused thus of crime. Some goard with sword, some choackt with rope, some battred down There many parēts wer dispoild of their beloued sonnes. Their tong cut out whē they shold dye, for feare that they shold speak with guns And more entyse vnto their God. that alwayes aydes the weake. Oh Fraunce thou famous realm before, and eke most populous place, Thou art dispeopled, wasted, tourne, thy owne doe thee deface. Thy Cities cract, thy Townes bereft, thy men and nobles rackt, Thy faythful subiects burnt and slaine, thy welth and strength is sackt. Ah pity, pity for to heare, how altered is thy state, Through tyrannous popish, cruel carles, that Christ his truth did hate The Lord hath iustly plagued thee, for so defacing his, VVho in the end will ayd his flocke, thou maist be sure of this. If euer land might loth her lucke, and lamed lowring state. Fraunce thou hast cause for to deplore and waile thy cruell fate. One of thy owne, a pearle of thyne, by learned treaties loo, And true discourse, thy mangled state, lets all the world to kno.
Thy Ramus here, thy Phoenix (France,) thy worthy learned clarke, In volumes three conioind, displaces, thy broiles, that he did marke. And like a good and natrall child, (lest thinges should be forgot) Hath painefully here pend thy brunts, that do thy glory blot. And like enough through cruell spite, for these his learned paines, Among the Popish crew of late, dasht out was Ramus braines. VVhose death ech scholler may bewaile, for learning had a fall, VVhen Ramus fell, replet with skill, thy chiefest clarke of all. VVhat chief in France some may obiect? ther liueth better still, If I haue mist, I pardon craue, I speake it for good will. That I did learned Ramus lend, for his sure grounded skill, In learnings lore: who for because he wrote in Latin stile, (VVhich only learned vnderstand) well pew'rd with learnings file▪ Tymme truly hath disrobed him, of all his Romane tier, And decked him in English clothes, with zelous good desire, To profit all his countrie men, that they may see and vew, The stormie tempestes of the French, and partes of Popish crew. The whole three volumes painfully, Tymme hath absolued here, And offers them vnto thy sight at last good Reader dere. VVhich doth conteine the Ciuill warres, or true Religions cause The spights of Papists that repind, against Gods sacred lawes. VVorthy the sight, worthy the vew, a mirror to beholde, Of Gods elect, of tirants fell, of Papistes proude and bolde. How God his chosen Church doth saue among her perillous foes, And cancred, cursed, currishe kind, that it oppresse with woes. Therfore good Reader here embrace, the founder of this frame, And honor Ramus painfull pen, the author of the same. Giue Tym that Tymme doth wel deserue, for Englishing this for thee VVhose paines do merit worthy praise, let praise then be his see. And waile the wracke of frushed France, and giue God hrtie thanks, That hath preseru'd this Royall realme, frō such proud popish pranks. FINIS.
Robertus Rollus in Historiam de Gallicae Ecclesiae statu recens editam. UExata est olim priscis Ecclesia seclis, Carceribus, flagris, ignibus, ense, cruce. Haud minor est hodie cedes: tu Gallia testis▪ Sis dudum paribus sanguinolenta modis. Qui fidei nuper multis fulsere magistri (Prôh pudor) indignam sustinuere necem. Quo{que} magis possent inceptum absoluere factum Nullum papicola preteriere scelus. Penè datur sceleri lex, hoc qui credere posset Vix (est tale nephas) vnus & alter erit. Ante erat historia hec libris quasi manca duobus Nunc prodit numeris vndi{que} plena suis. Si authorem spectes plena est, si rem quota pars est▪ Omnia nam tangi tempora nostra vetant. Ascraei verba illa senis Quàm sunt huîc mirè consona dicta libro? Nempe haec quae legimus quasi dimidiata supersunt Et quasi de domini clade relicta sui. Quae{que} modò aspicimus libris{que} notata videmus Debemus scriptis (Rame deserte) tuis. Sed ne{que} (Tymme) tua merita fraudabere laude Cui{que} oneris pars est, pars & honôris erit. Τελοσ.
The summe of those things which are contained in these three first bookes of Commentaries. IN these thrée first bookes of Commentaries, we comprehende the space of foure yeares, namely from the yeare. 1557. vnto the yeare 1562. which was in the first motions of the ciuill warres: beginning at that time which seemeth to be most fitte for this purpose: the matter so aptly offering itselfe, that we may very néere be∣gin at the same time in the which Iohn. Sleidan, that lear∣nedIohn Sleidan. man, left and ended his Commentaries concerning the state of the Cōmon welth and Religion. First of all we set forth that great destruction and losse of men which is com∣monly called by the vulgar people, Iacobs slaughter, whichIacobs slaugh∣ter at Paris. séemed wholy to deface, not onely the Church of Paris, but also the Churches of Fraunce being now as it were, but in the swadling clothes: then we shew what cruell afflictions came at that time vpon the faithfull, what the aduersaries did then, and what our men also did. We declare also thatNewe deuises to abolishe the Gospell. while newe deuises and practises are sought for to abolishe the Gospell quite, nowe beginning to growe in Fraunce, the whole kingdome being moued and troubled with newe threatenings of Edictes and punishmentes, and the kings of Fraunce and Spaine being nowe in councell concerning this matter, in the very league, euen in the middest of their consultation, when a scourge was a preparing for the Church by the solemnitie of mariage, euē at that time came the sodeine death of Henrie the king, of all men vnlooked for. Then, howe the uises had the gouernement of the Realme, during the time of the nonage of king Fraunces the second: how Annas Burgaeus a noble Senatour of the Par∣liament of Paris, at that time, was cruelly burned, and
what other persecutions there were also: among whichThe tumult of Ambaxian. persecutions, how the tumult of Ambaxian chaunced, the causes and effectes whereof shall be declared. After this, the solemne assemblies had at the kings house at Fontisbel∣laquaeum, to mitigate the tumultes, who agréed to call a Parliament, and a Nationall Councell or Conuocation, to stay the controuersies of Religion, of the which also we will intreate in order. Also howe the king set forth an E∣dict,The king E∣dict of pardō. promising them to forget and forgiue all former offen∣ces committed for Religions sake. Then, how the Guises went about to subuert and extinguish the Gospell, coacting an assemblie to be made at Aurelias for the same pur∣pose: howe the deathes of the king of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde were conspired, the tumult and trouble of Ambaxian being maliciously and falslye layde to their charge. But while the Prince of Conde was straitly imprisoned, and his death a preparing, we will shew, howe the sodeine death of king Fraunces the seconde happened, to the great a∣masingSodeine alte∣ration by the death of king Fraunces. and grieuance of the Guises. Furthermore, we will declare what great alterations came to passe after this, the yong King Charles comming to the Crowne: As the great peace and tranquilitie giuen and graunted to the Churches by the benefite of the Kings Edictes, the daily increase of the faithfull, the flourishing of the Gospell in euery place, the defacing of the Popes doc∣trine by solemne Court of Parliament, the truth also em∣braced of many of the Nobles. And here we will shewe what séedes of dissention were sowne by the subtile practi∣ses of the Guises betwéene the Nobles: Then I will speake somewhat of the Actes of the parling of Possi∣acen.The Kings E∣dict cōmonly called the E∣dict of Ianu∣arye. Last of all, I will declare the summe of the Edict of Ianuarye, by which greater libertie was graunted to the
Churches: And bicause about that time there were great troubles of warres, I will there make an ende of thys booke, leauing the declaration of the rest vntill a more con∣uenient time: Notwithstanding part thereof, (that is to say, the explication of the first Ciuil warres) shall be declared in our thrée latter bookes, we looking to haue occasions offe∣red to describe other mat∣ters which are be∣hinde.
The booke of Commentaries con∣cerning Religion, vnder the reignes of Henrie the seconde, Fraunces the se∣conde, and Charles the ninth. THe doctrine of Religion, which in our time is amended and reformed, came at the last into Fraunce. But they were hardly delt withall which receyued that doctrine, they were banished, burnt, and with all maner of torments vexed, they were also called Lutheranes, which name then was made a common reproch to the godly. Notwith∣standing all this, that doctrine did more largely and vehe∣mently spreae it selfe abroade: and the more that menThe name of Lutheranes. were toriented, the more they came o the same by flocks. Many, to the end they might escape the crueltie of their pu∣nishments,  might enioy the frée vse of religiō, wet vnto those places n the which y• same was purely & publikely set forth: amng which the greatest part went to Geneua,Geneua a sanctuarie for the godly. From whence many bookēs and letters being written, a great number were brought to the knowledge of that doc∣trine. The which dailie increasing more and more, great matters afterwardes came to passe: those things which were done in the beginning with feare and secretely, were afterwarde frée, and common for euery man to vse, vntill such time, as punishments being repressed, torments taken away, and the fierie flames quite extinguished, that doctrine was receyued of noble men, of Gentlemen, and of all e∣states: but on the other side, the aduersaries of the reformed religion Resisting y• same, there arose great tumults, which by mortall and ciuill warres vexed and much endamaged the great and noble kingdome of Fraunce. But these first beginnings are particularly touched in other bookes, in the
which the noble and excellent triumphes of Martyrs are described. I will therfore begin at that yeare since the which, mat∣ters of Religion being more opēly set forth, and more vehe∣mently againe resisted, haue more happily and euidently appeared. And then, this was the state of the kingdome. After sundrie and long warres betwéene Henrie the se∣conde King of Fraunce, and Charles the fyfth Emperour, at the length both their Legates, whē they could not by peace ende the controuersies, which were betwéene them, conclu∣ded a truce or peace for fyue yeares, the which being shortly after broken by the Cardinall of Lorraine, the warre began a freshe betwene the two kings. And Fraunces Duke of Guise taketh his iourney into Italie with a great armye. And Philip king of Spaine, and sonne of the Emperour Charles goeth into Picardie: who making hast to the towne of Sanquintine, gaue the Constable (which came out to mete him) a great ouerthrow, and toke him with a great number of Gentlemen. This ouerthrowe and great slaughter of men was called Laurence day, bicause it chaunced at the feast of S. Laurence▪ After this, Sanquintine was taken, and certaine cities nere vnto the same. So that what with the rumor of the sodeine slaughter, & what with the feare of the enimie which now approched to Paris the chiefe citie of the kingdome, all men were wonderfully afrayde. While these things were thus a working, there began to be a great fame and rumor of the increase of the Lutheranes, by reason whereof there followed a notable persecution a∣gainst them, which by the popular and vulgar name is cal∣led, The winning of S. Iames streete: and it was so called forGreat persecu∣tion in the Church of Paris. this cause: When the faithfull perceyued the great perill and daūger that hong ouer the whole kingdome of France, by reason of this newe plague and punishment, they gaue themselues to prayer, and therfore congregated themselues
togither by a great number, the fourth daye of Septem∣ber,Anno domini▪ 1557. in certaine houses of S. Iames stréete in Paris, and that in the night (for in the daye time they might by no meanes come togither) minding to heare the worde prea∣ched, and to haue the supper of the Lorde celebrated. But they being bewrayed, the common sort of people with wea∣pons in a great tumult ranne with all haste to this stréet of S. Iames, where the faithfull were assembled, who being in those houses before mentioned, and séeing themselues to be compassed on euerye side with the furor and rage of the multitude, had small hope to escape: howbeit, part of them when they sawe a waye to be made for them through a cer∣taine gate (which wonderfully opened for the safegarde of many, when the houses on uery side were beset) repeated their former prayers, and escaped by flight without harme, euen as though God himselfe had gone before them: the greater part were taken of the Magistrates, among whom were many noble women, and women of great parentage, and as they were led away by the officers, were shamefully intreated and vnhonestly handled of the people. Now, the matter being in question concerning this assē∣bly, it was first founde, that when the people were assem∣bled togither, there was a Lecture of the holy Scripture in the vulgar tongue: secondly, that all the congregation knée∣ling, prayers were made by the Minister: thirdly, that the Minister expounded the place of the eleuenth Chapter of S. Paules first Epistle to the Corinthians, in the which, ye vse of the Lords supper is declared: fourthly, that then prayers were made for the King, for Princes & Magistrates, for all estates of people, & for peace and quietnesse of the kingdom: and last of all, that the breade end wine of the Lords supper was communicated and giuen to those which were not iud∣ged vnworthie. For these offences they were taken. Being therefore taken, and cruelly intreated of the people by the way, were notwithstanding very vcourteously delt with∣all
in prison. For théeues and murtherers, and such as by the lawe deserued to die, were taken out of their colde and noysome prisons, and these men put into the same in their steade, all men forbidden to haue any recourse vnto them. Notwithstanding, it was brought to passe by the singular prouidence of God, bicause euery man could not haue a prisō by himself, that some of them were thrust togither into one prisō, & so it came to passe that one of thē receiued comfort of another, in somuch that the prison in the which they were, soūded with the prayers & Psalmes vttered & song by them. But to make these men the more to be hated, diuers ru∣mors were euery where spred, namely that ye Lutherans did assemble themselues togither in the night, and being on a heape togither without candle light, did fulfill their wan∣dring lusts one with another, killed their yong infants, and committed other wickednesses. The Monkes, they made exclamation of this thing in euery place, to inflame the peo∣ple to reuenge the same. And not only the common sort of people were stayed with these rumors, but the same also of these things came euē to the eares of the Péeres of ye realm,Wicked slaun∣ders deuised a∣gainst the faithfull. in so much that one of the Inquisitors, or Commissioners, durst auouch before the King, that Tables spred, and great prouision of daintie cheare was founde in that place, where the faythfull had assembled themselues. The which report, so inflamed the Kings minde, that he sought nothing more than the destruction of the faithfull: yea, and the mindes of all men did so boyle in hatred against them, that he thought himselfe to excell that coulde best conspire the death and de∣struction of the faithfull. At the last a cōmaundement was giuen by the king, that some méete man should be chosen to knowe & consider their causes which were taken. Nowe at Paris there was a Magistrate, a Citizen called Munerius, a man (as it was commonlye reported) verye apt for all maner of fraude and deceyte. At thys time this Munerius was as a Batte
in the night, and did seldome openly shewe himselfe, bicause he was accused of falshood, in the matter of the Countesse of Senigana, or Seniguen, the which he pretended to haue com∣mitted,Duke Arscotus a Brabantine. that Duke Arscotus, who was then takē and in hold, might escape. Notwithstanding, to this man this office was committed. And bicause by this meanes he hoped to haue pardon, and shoulde be restored to his former dignitie he was so forward in his businesse, that within fewe dayes, many of their causes which were taken prisoners, were brought to haue sentence and iudgement. In the meane time, those reliques which remayned behinde of that vaste and great shipwracke of the faithfull, were cast into great distresse and sorrowe, notwithstanding, they thought it not good to faynt or quayle in those extremities. For they which were the chiefe gouernours of the Church, went a∣bout euery mans house, exhorted euery one to be of good chéere, & perswaded that nothing had happened without the singuler prouidence of God, by which also it came to passe, that many escaped that daunger: moreouer, they sayd that they remained to defende the other partes of the Church which were left: and that this calamitie shoulde not be the ruine and quite ouerthrow of the Church: and on the other side, that the same is the waye to increase and inlarge the Church, which God both by his word hath shewed, and al∣so by experience approued, for the gathering togither of the Church. And thus when they had exhorted and comforted one another, and had committed themselues and all things else to the prouidence of God, first of al they appoynted that in euery house there should be extraordinary praiers made, and that those fae rumors shoulde be put away by Apollo∣gies and aunsweres of defence, and also that the brethren which were taken, should be confirmed and strengthned, so often as might be, with letters, and also with wordes. Therefore they write letters vnto the king, and bring to passe, to haue them caried secretly into the Kings chamber,
by which they ment to pacifie the kings minde, to remooue the same from the euill opinion which it had conceyued ofAn apologie for the faithful captiues. them, and to obtaine the hearing of their cause. They af∣firme in their letters that they are falsly accused and slaun∣dered with such slaunders as are not newly deuised, but with such as long before had bene obiected agaynst the Church, by which Satan went about to make Kinges and Princes to hate the same: and are now againe put forth by those only which desire to haue the truth oppressed, to the ende they may fréely enioy the riches and goods which they haue vsurped and wrongfully gotten by wicked deceit. And that be ought to séeke to haue sure and vndoubted proues of euery matter, specially in businesse of so great weight. For if it were sufficient to condemnation to accuse, who shoulde then escape an innocent? Wherfore, if he would vouchsafe diligently to search out the truth of this matter, it shoulde well appeare that they assembled themselues togither for no other ende and purpose, than to praye vnto God for his prosperitie and the peace of the kingdome. Also that their doctrine did not maintaine sedition, neyther was an enimye to the obedience of Magistrates: the which thing they had alway hitherto shewed, neuer refusing to obey, although they were many in number, when they were euill intrea∣ted, onely for following the worde of God. And that thys was their onely desire, that Christ might appeare to be the chiefe and heade alone: and that the inuentions of men be∣ing abrogated, God might be obeyed and serued according to his prescript will. Wherefore, if it woulde please him to vnderstande their cause, he might, if he woulde, make some publike disputation betwéene some one of those that were in prison, and the Sorbonistes or others which might dis∣pute of those things now in controuersie. In the ende, they doe pray and humbly beséech him that he woulde not suffer the innocencie of good men, their cause not being hearde, to be condemned, séeing that wicked men, and such as do most
déepely transgresse, obtain so much libertie, as to shew their cause, and aunswere for thēselues. These letters were read before the king, and those also which were then present, but small fruite or profite came thereby, certaine of the Cardi∣nals then crying that they were lyes and tales: so that not∣withstanding their reasonable suite and request, they had not so much graunted vnto them as libertie to aunswere for themselues. After this, there was yet another letter sent to the king, the effect wherof was, yt all men did confesse that these cala∣mities with ye which the christian cōmon welth was vexed, procéeded of the iust iudgement of God, being offended that so many he resies and corruptions shoulde take place: But the greatest offence to consist in this thing, namely, that none of those, to whome the care and charge of the Common welth was committed, had any regarde at all, to discerne heretiques, by the worde of God, from Christian maintay∣ners of the truth. And yet notwithstanding, that it did be∣long vnto the King to applie himselfe to know this thing, according to the example of the good Kings Ezechias and lo∣sias. And after certaine notes put downe of true and false religion, it began in maner as followeth. Weye and consider with your selfe your estate, and you shall finde that all things haue happened ouertwhatly vn∣to you, euer since you haue gone about to vexe the Luthe∣ranes. When you set forth the Edict made at Cast ellobrian, then began warres. But when you inhibited and forbad the executiō of that Edict, and were an enimie to the Pope, in sending a power into Germanie for the libertie thereof, bicause of the afflicted religion, your busines had very pros∣perous successe. But what hath hapned vnto you euer since you entred into friendship with the Pope, taking the sword of him, by which, truce being broken, warres might begin a fresh? God vndoubtedly shall turne thy felicities into those calamities which are now ready to fall vpon thée and thy
dignitie. To what end went the armie of the Duke of Guise into Italy, when he had serued Gods enimie for hire? went he not to this ende, that when he returned home againe; he might vtterly destroy the Churches of the valleys of Pede∣monte, and might so offer and dedicate his victories vnto God? Surely, the ende and successe sheweth, that God doth bring the deuises and counsels of men to naught, when they turne to their own destruction: as appeareth by the slaugh∣ter which happened on S. Laurence daye of late, at what time he derided and frustrated the proude threatningesThe arrogant threatnings of the Constable. of the Constable, which boasted that if he returned home a∣gaine a victor or conquerour, he woulde roote out and vtter∣ly destroy Geneua. Thus after the repeating of many examples, in the which the iudgements of God did appeare against ye aduersaries of his truth (whose memory also was yet fresh in ye heads of al men) this letter at ye length cōcludeth: that afflictiōs cannot abolish & destroy ye Church of God, séeing that (as Tertullian sayth) The bloud of Martyrs is the seede of the Church: and that it is the office of a King to take vpon him the care of re∣ligion, ye which all men might sée by diuers ways to be con∣taminated and neglected, & that this might lawfully be done by calling a Councell. In the meane time, that their cause as yet being vnknowne, & not certaine, they may be peace∣ably, & not cruelly intreated, which protest that they follow Gods truth: and that so holy a name cannot in such wise be cōtemned, but some inquisition must be made: also yt iudge∣ment ought to be had, not from the deuises of men, but from the worde of God, the only and most certaine rule of truth. Therfore (say they) if we be not conuinced by Gods word, it is neither fire, nor sworde, nor any maner of punishment that can terrifie vs. These shall be the triumph and victorie of our faith, that by being ouercome, we shall be ouercom∣mers at the last: by this Chariote, we shall come at the length to the hauen of euerlasting lyfe.
But that Edict which was made at Cast ellobrian (of the which we haue made mention before) was very straite and cruell against Religion, in the which, among many things these were the speciall sentences: First, that all former E∣dictes concerning the putting of heretiques to death, should be confirmed: That no man shoulde be admitted to anye publike office, before he had made his cōfession agréeable to the Catholike and Romishe faith: That in euery Parlia∣ment, and in the thirde moneth also, there shoulde be assem∣blies made, which are commonly called Mercuriales: and that first of all, matters concerning Religion shoulde be handled, and that there shoulde be speciall regarde and eye had to the assembly of the Parliament, least some corrupti∣on or heresie might secretly créepe in. There was also another Apologie set forth for all men to vse, so written, that the auncient forme and state of the Church being represented, and compared to that which is at this day, the auncient fathers themselues also by their own wordes and writings, might defend and maintaine the ve∣rye selfe and same cause which they nowe defended: and in such wise, that they which sayde, that they reuerenced and embraced antiquitie, might heare antiquitie defending and supporting the cause of the reformed Church (so called.) These things truly, are plentifully set forth in this wry∣ting, but the summe is this: That it was against right, that the faithfull shoulde be accused for well doing: but more in∣iurious, that they should be condemned, their cause not be∣ing heard. Notwithstanding, that the Church of Christ be∣fore this time long since, had felt the same iniuries: & ther∣fore no maruaile, if they, whose cause was like, were made equall to them in trouble: Howbeit, that Sathan and his Ministers shoulde so little preuaile, that for all their force, the Church shoulde arriue through the midst of their temp∣tations to the safe and quiet hauen: and the thicke and dark Clowdes being blowne ouer, the light of innocencie should
appeare, and the enimies of the same be founde lyers. After this, those slaunders and reproches which were obiected a∣gainst them, being particularly examined and considered by them, were also fully aunswered altogither out of the wri∣tings of the Fathers, that their Apologie or defence myght plainly appeare to be true and sounde. Furthermore, many letters were written to the brethren which were in prison, yea, and Churches of farre Countries, bewayling their e∣state, did comfort them with their letters: so that hereby they were wondefrully confirmed. And among other Chur∣ches or congregations, the congregation of Geneua shewed the dutie of the faithfull brethren, insomuch that they did not let, by all meanes possible, to doe them good. While those things were prouided for of the faithful, the aduersaries on the contrarie part sought by all meanes pos∣sible to worke the death of the faithfull which were in pri∣son, so soone as they coulde: and in this matter Munerius the ciuill Magistrate was not a little diligent, and the peo∣ple for their part gréedily gaped, and continually looked for the same. Now, there came forth a commaundement from the King, that all other matters set apart, for a time the se∣nate shoulde wholy applye themselues to vnderstande the cause of the faithfull, and to iudge of them according to the e∣uidence that shoulde be brought against them by Munerius the eiuill Praetor. Notwithstanding, the Kings commaun∣dement herein, the whole Senate or assembly of the Court refusing and reiecting this Munerius, both for that he with∣stoode the auncient custome of the Court, and also bicause (as is before sayde) he was accused of falshoode, concluded that by the relation and report of anye one man which shoulde come forth and giue euidence, the iudgement and sentence of those Iudges that were put in trust, shoulde be ordered. The whole Senate therefore, although they were not a little troubled with the great number of prisoners, yet notwithstanding, what by the expresse commaunde∣ments
of the King to them, and what with the olde and spyte they vare to Religion, so greatly preuayled within fewe dayes, that their causes in déede came to iudge∣ment. Of the which, they which constantly helde the confes∣sion of the true doctrine, were condemned by great consent of the people to dye, and were burnt with fire: and suffe∣ring most excellent Martyrdome by death, they woonder∣fullye triumphed of the crueltie of their enimies. The which thinges, bicause they be specially touched in another Booke, it shall not be néedefull here to speake any more of them. Many deliuered thēselues from death by diuers meanes and wayes that were not lawfull. But they to whome this charge and trust was commited, boldly doing their office, and being nothing slow to exercise crueltie, certaine of their friendes which in holde, propounded causes of refu∣sall against the Iudges, desiring that there might be other Iudges set in their places. This thing for a time stayed the rage of the persecution. Notwithstanding, the king being certified hereof, sendeth letters, by which he declaring those refusals to be nothing, commaundeth that all other things set apart, they giue their diligence only to intende vpon this thing: and that the Nobles which were in authoritie, should choose out, according as they thought good, Counsellours to supplie the places of those that were absent: and that in the Praetor Munerius oume (bicause for the causes before allea∣ged he was remooued) other should serue: & to be short, that final iudgement might be giuen of those matters: howbeit, that he might haue warning before any matter were ended. These letters did againe displease and anger the mindes of those iudges, which tooke it heynously yt they were refused. So that choller was then set on fire against many: & for this cause séemed as though it would rage and burne in the new yeare following. For the aduersaries went about of late toAnno domini. 1558. establish & bring in the like inquisition that was in Spain,
(which they thought was ye only way vtterly to ouerthrow the gospel) & letters at the last being obtained frō the Pope, by which thrée Cardinals were appointed chief inquisitors, they wēt about all that they could to set forward this deuise. The king for his part consented. Notwithstanding, ye senate of Paris, hauing better consideration of the matter, greatlye withstode this new practise, & alleaged these causes to ye king of their withstanding and prohibition, saying: If this thing should be brought to passe, looke how much the power of the ecclesiasticall Iudges and Inquisitors should be enlarged, so much should ye supreme authoritie of the king be diminished: Secondly, that it was a matter of great weight, for the na∣turall subiects of the king, to be made destitute, and after a sort, depriued of their King, and to be brought to the power of forreine Iudges, and to be made subiect to an Offy•ciall or Inquisitor: Thirdlye, that it shoulde be a defrauding of the kingdome, but specially of the subiectes, to be spoyled of the helpe & safegarde of the king, and to be themselues, and all their goodes, iudged & disposed, after the supreme iudgement of an ecclesiasticall Iudge: Fourthly, that it would come to passe, that when they had gotten infinite power, and the greatest part of ye kings authoritie, that is to say, when they had gotten power to iudge of life & death as thē listed, with∣out further appeale to any higher Court, they might easily abuse their offices. For (say they) the libertie to appeale, is the onely sanctuarie and defence of innocencie: Fiftly and last of all, they say that the King to whō the appeale should be made, is the reuenger, and the defender of violated and wronged innocencie, and that, iniurie shoulde be done, if this thing went forward, not only to the people, but also to Princes, to Dukes, to Nobles, yea, and to the Kings nere kinsemen, who also shoulde be bounde with this bonde. By this prohibition and resistāce, the matter was delayed for a time: at the length, when the Kings Court was at Paris, the verye same aduersaries of the truth brought to
passe that those letters were confirmed of the King, as he went to the Senate or Parliament, for this cause. Thus when they had gotten the lawe into their owne handes, and had written new Edictes, appointing mortall punishments for the faithfull, (whome they called Sacra∣mentaries, Sectaries, and such lyke) euery man looking now for grieuous persecutions, it pleased God for a time to disappoint those cruell practises and threatenings, by trou∣bling the kingdome with warre and other businesse. Neither is it to be buried in silence, by what meanes God shewed his vengeaunce vpon many of those persecu∣torsCertayne ex∣amples of Gods venge∣ance shewed vppon diuers persecutors of the Church. which were the chiefe Capitaynes in S. Iames slaugh∣ter. That Munerius the Praetor which was the first that delt with the causes of the faithfull, and had many wayes cruel∣ly intreated them: being afterwarde at the length condem∣ned of falshoode in the cause of the Countesse of Senigana, suffered by the decrée of the Senate punishment openly in diuers places: and being thus ledde from place to place to be made an open spectacle for all men to behold to his great infamie and reproch, was also banished his countrie. This man while be was kept in prison, sayde, that he knew that the punishments which he suffered, were a iust reward and recompence to him for his euill intreating of the Luthe∣ranes: and that he woulde neuer after séeke to do them any harme. In like maner one of the Counsellers which were appoynted to vnderstande and iudge of the causes of the faithfull, not long after died by sodaine death. Another of them likewise being sodenly striken with a most grieuous sickenesse, and being also at the poynt of death, sayde, I see plainly that I haue grieuously sinned against the Lutheranes, which so godly pray vnto the Lorde. In lyke maner, two o∣ther whiche were very cruell against the faithfull in the slaughter that was made on S. Iames daye, sodenly dyed in the sight of all men. Moreouer, two other when they re∣tourned from the murther of the afflicted faithfull, fell at
contention within themselues, and at the last were slaine one of another. Thus the Lorde shewed many examples of his iust vengeance vpon his aduersaries. Then the Church obtayned peace for a time, and somePersecution stayed for a time. occasion to rest and breath for a whyle▪ by reason of those tempestes. They which were before, as it were discouraged through that former great slaughter, receyued nowe heart and courage againe: many others which were eyther con∣firmed by the constancy of those blessed Martyrs which suf∣fered, or els were lately brought to the knowledge of God, ioyned themselues to the Church: they also which to flye persecution went aside from out of the citie, were not alto∣gither vnfruitful. Among these there was one which came to a towne called Crucillum in Britayne, neare vnto the sea coaste, the which towne was at that time greatly giuen to superstition, but it was brought to passe by his meanes within short time after, that many of the townesmen were called to the acknowledging of truth, insomuch that there was a congregation there. At the which good successe Satan was greatly grieued. Therfore when the fame of this thingExamples of iniuries done to the faithful. was spred abroade, the Bishop of Nauetensis or Nauntes, with a certaine power of his men, came thither, whome he had gathered togither for this matter: he giueth commaun∣dement that clothes of tapistry work and other ornaments be hoong forth of euery house, vpon the solemne daye in the which he with his wandring power shoulde passe through16. leafe. the Citie, thinking by this meanes to fynde out, who they were that were Lutheranes: then he commaundeth the Drumme to be stricken vp, and a signe to be giuen for men to prepare themselues to sight, and thus he filleth the Citie with armour and tumult. There was then present a certaine noble man, who was appoynted by the Kings commaundement to presse and muster men for the warre: this man admonisheth the Bi∣shop into what perils he may bring the Citie, the Englishe
men their enimies approching neare, who, if they had knowledge of these troubles, might easily obtaine the Cuie: but his perswasion preuailed so little, that he was also in daunger of his life, and hardly deliuered himselfe from the mad rage of the common people. Therefore the franticke people through euery corner of the Citie, are as it were drunken mad by the guidance and leading of the Bishop: and doe besiege and forciblye set vpon the houses, in the which there were ninetéene of the faithfull congregated to make their prayers vnto God. But the faithfull earnestlye beseech the people to be quiet, and if there were any thing to be obiected against them, they were ready to put them∣selues into the hands of the magistrate: The Bishop aun∣swereth that the cause of their comming was onely to haue the Minister, which they knewe to be among them. The faithfull intreate that the Magistrate of the Citie might be called forth, and he shoulde vnderstande the truth of the matter. When the Praetor or Magistrate of the Citie had entred the houses, and made diligent search through the same, he declareth that the Minister is not there. Notwith∣standing the Bishop commaundeth the souldiers to set vp∣on and assault the houses: the which thing the people did with all the force they were able to make, seeking also to vn∣dermine the houses. But all in vaine: for the faithfull that were in the houses, affirmed that vnlesse they woulde de∣part, they would driue them away. And thus they being no∣thing dismayed or troubled, commended themselues vnto God in Psalmes and songs. The Bishop hereat being more angry, commaundeth them to yéelde themselues: the faith∣full refused not to come forth to him, if the people might de∣part, saying that they were ready to make answere to those thinges whereof they were accused. But for all this the gunnes and other instrumentes of warre were set to, and bent against the houses. The faythfull séeing into what straytes and extremities they were brought, thought nowe
within themselues, that there was no remedie but that they must defende themselues: but bicause it coulde not be done without great slaughter of the people, if they did rash∣lye fall to offer strypes, they thought it good not so to de∣fende themselues vntill the verye extremitie came. Not∣withstanding, when the people ranne with haste into the houses through the holes of the walles which they had made with Gunnes and other weapons, the faythfull shotte at them with Crossebowes, by force whereof ma∣ny of them being stayne, the myndes of the other were so discouraged, that by and by the whole multitude ranne a∣waye, and great quietnesse was made throughout the whole Citie. They therefore being thus miraculouslye deliuered, came forth singing the hundreth and foure and twentye Psalme, as they went through the middest of the Citie, and so escaped. The next daye following, the people be∣ing gathered togither againe, ouerthrewe those houses in the which the faythfull had bene, yea, and their hou∣ses also whome they suspected to bée fauourers of their cause. The Bishoppe vnderstanding that the Senate of Paris dislyked of this his facte, went to the King, and brought it so to passe by the meanes of them that were companiens and confederates wyth him in the same hys wicked furo, that the King allowed all that he had done. So lyttle was the equitie of the cause of the faythfull estéemed. And very neare about this time also there séemed to be gi∣uen a newe occasion to scirre vp affliction. For at Paris in a medowe or fielde nere adioyning to the same, commonly called the Clearks field▪ many of the faithfull, when others were busie at their sport and playe, began to sing Psalmes, little thinking that others would be stirred vp to do the like by their ensample. Notwithstanding, at the length it grewe to this, that when this▪ exercise had bene vsed certayne
dayes, many, and men also of great estimation and fame, came togither to heare the swéete and pleasant harmonie of the singing multitude. They which coulde not sing, and which had not as yet the knowledge of God, went into the most conuenient places of the fielde, to heare that which was soong: and hearing the same, confessed that it was wic∣kedly done to forbid the singing of so honest & godlie songs. But while this went forwarde, the aduersaries, as though they were vtterly spoyled, went to the king, and declared to him that the Lutheranes had mooued sedition at Paris: that they were ready to thrust his maiestie out of his king∣dome: that a great number of them were gathered togither in armour to conspire against him: and therefore they re∣quested him to prouide for this mischiefe: for (say they) the Catholike Church, and your whole kingdome is in great daunger. When the King heard this, he commaundeth that there be prohibition and stay made by a publike Edict, that men sing no more in that place, nor in that companie: and also that there shoulde be inquirie made of those which had soog. They which were the chiefe of the reformed Church, séeing into what suspitious those companies were brought, giue admonition to their friendes, that they neuer againe gather themselues togither in that place to sing as they did before: if they woulde sing, to sing at hme. In the meane time, many for this matter were apprehended, who not∣withstanding afterward for the lightnesse of the cause were set at libertie. At the last, when the Bishops preachers saw that the king did fauour them, they perswaded with the people, that it was an atteptable thing vnto God, and a me∣ritorious worke (as they call in) for a man o kill a Luthe∣rane. And truly, the beastly rage and madnesse of that peo∣ple by these perswasions, was prouoked, insomuch that the reynes of temperancie loosed, they ran headlong to commit what mischiefe they could: of the which matter, among ma∣ny, we will bring certaine examples▪
On a certaine day, after a Sermon, it so fell out, that two men contended togither by wordes in the Churchyarde of S. Innocentes, the one of them, to the ende he might stirre and procure hatred to the other, by a reprochfull and odious name, cried that the people might heare, which were nowe going out of the Church, a Lutherane, a Lutherane: when the people hearde this, they fell streight way vpon him, and pursued him into the temple, whither at the length he fled as to a sanctuarie and place of refuge. A certaine Noble man by chaunce passing through the Church, with his bro∣ther with him, who was a Priest, and hearing that the peo∣ple were about to kill a man, ranne in all the haste vnto them, and sought by gentle wordes to turne the mindes of the people from their wicked purpose, that therby he might deliuer the man out of their handes. But a certaine Masse priest crieth out, saying, that he was the man whome they sought for, being one that durst take vpon him to defend a Lutherane, at the hearing whereof, the people run vpon the Noble man, vsing violence, and at the first beating him with their fists. The Noble mans brother, which was with him, began to intreate for him: but the people were more vehement and madde, by his intreatie, insomuch that they bring them both violently out of the temple, least it shoulde be defiled with bloude, or prophaned. One of these two, namely the Noble man, being stronger and better able to shift for himselfe than the other, escaped their handes, and fled into the Curates or Parishe Priestes house harde by. The other, which was (as we saide before) a Priest, was not so soone out of the Church, but he was thrust through with a dagger: of the which, he being nowe lyke to die, cal∣leth vpon Saints, and desireth to be confessed of his sinnes, (whereby it might haue appeared of what religion he was) and at the length being wounded with other strokes, he was quite dispatched of lyse. And yet this stayed not their rage and madnesse: for when he was starke deade, they did
all to bemangle and cut his deade carcas: yea, and some of them thrusting their handes into the gréene woundes, did afterwardes bragge that they had dipped their handes in the bloude. This man being thus dispatched, they beset the house of the Parishe Priest rounde about, least the o∣ther brother shoulde escape awaye, being fledde thither (as is sayde before) for succour and defence: saying that they woulde offer the like violence to the Magistrate, yea, and to the King himselfe, if so be he woulde helpe a Lutherane. But at the length the night comming, they forsooke their siege, and so the noble man escaped. Not long before this tyme, there happened another thing, which also I thought good here to insert. There was a certayne Sorboniste, or Popishe Doctor, whome men called the Soule of Picardie: This fellowe was a famous blower forth and moouer of sedition: being oftentimes ve∣rye vehement to inflame the people against the Luthe∣ranes, perswading them that it was a verye good and ac∣ceptable worke before God, to shedde the bloude of the Lutheranes, and that they shoulde no lesse deserue at his handes thereby, than did the children of Israel in slaying the Idolatrus Cananaeans: adding moreouer, that in so doing, the handes of the godly Catholikes should be conse∣crated and hallowed. Therefore as this man on a time, was preaching to the people, a certaine deuout man which canie to heate his ser∣mon, vpon some occasion, or cōceite that he had in his mind, laughed vnto his fellow that late next vnto him. The which an old womā there present, saw, who crid that there was a Lutherane in ye Church, which did deride & laugh ye preacher to scorne. When the multitude that were there assembled, hearde this, they sodenly start vp, & reasoning no further of the matter, they drew the man out of the temple, & putting forth his eyes, and pashing forth his braynes, most cruelly flew him. These were the fruits of these seditious sermons
preached by the Sorbonistes and Papisticall Doctors. TheThe fruites of the sermons of the Papistes. faithfull being thus miserably handled, were accused to the King, and to all the people, of sedition, and were accounted and taken for seditious persons. About this time also, Andelotius the brother of the Ad∣mirall Castillion, or Shailion, was taken for religion, and put in holde, by this occasion. At what time intreatie was made for peace, betwéene the Kinges of Fraunce and Spayne, Granuellus Bishoppe of Atrebatesis or Artois, made complaynt to the Cardinal of Loraine (for these were the Ambassadours betwene both Kings) that Fraunce was greatly infected with Lutheranes, in so much that the Noble men of the Realme also were polluted therewith: among whom, he said, that Andelotius had sent a booke to his bro∣ther the Admirall, in the which booke he did grieuously con∣demne the Masse: the which talke and communication was caried by the same Cardinall of Lorae to Henrie King of Fraunce: and Fraunces Duke of Guise, going with an ar∣mie to Thionuilla, sayde vnto the King, that he did not looke to haue prosperous successe of his armie, if Andelotius were Generall of the footemen, which charge in déede was before committed vnto him. When the King hearde this, being desirous to retayne the friendship of the Constable, he com∣maundeth the Admiral Castilliō, brother to Andelotius, and Marescallus Momorencius, to perswade Andelotius, that he shoulde giue vnto him a reuerent aunswere concerning the Masse. The King (as hée was instructed by the Cardi∣nall of Loraine) demandeth of Andelotius, what he thought of the Masse. To the which question, he answereth fréely, saying: Wheras the Masse is called a sacrifice for the quick & the dead, which only belongeth to the sacrifice of Christ (being once offred for all, and neuer to be offered againe) I think yt it is a detestable Idol fained by the brain & inuentiō of men. The King hearing this aunswere, tooke it in very e∣uill part, and being angrye, forbad him his presence, and
commaunded that he shoulde be put in warde: and another to be made Generall of the footemen in his steade. But af∣ter the returne home againe of the Constable, Andelotius was restored to his former office, and reconciled into the sa∣uour of the King againe. At the length the peace before spoken of, was concluded, betwéene the two Kings, the chiefe and speciall point of the which peace was, that the two Kings should procure forth∣with a generall Councell to be holden, to the rooting vppe and destroying of heresies. It was reported among the cō∣mon sort of people, that the Kings made a peace to this end, that they might ioyne in force togither to warre against the Lutheranes, who mightilye increased dailye in both their Realmes. They were greatly confirmed in these opinions, by the Cardinall of Loraine, and also by Granuellus Bishop of Atrebatensis▪ commōly called Artois who within a while after was made a Cardinall by the Pope. Notwithstan∣ding, the number of the Lutheranes newly increased from day to daye, the blame and fault of the which increase was layde vpon the Iudges, and specially vpon the Senate of Paris, as though they had bene to fauourable in their dea∣ling. For the which cause it was apointed that there should be a newe assembly made to consider of the Edict of Castel∣lobrian:The parlia∣ment at Paris. (of the which we haue spoken before, and that they shoulde first of all deale with matters concerning religion. The company therfore being asse▪ bled & called togither, the Kings Solicitor propounded vnto them these matters: First, that there were diuers opinions in matters that cō∣cerned Religion, founde lately in the Senate, disagréeing and contrarie one to another: as, when lome condemned heretikes to be burnt, other some woulde not haue them to be burnt, but mittigated the pane by banishment: the which woulde redounde to the reproche and shame of the Senate: Wherefore he required that their sentences and iudgements might be conformable and agréeing euer here∣after
with the prescript and tenure of the Edictes which ap∣pointed the punishments of death. The which in déede was the most speedie and readie way to detect those Iudges that were suspected of religion, as after truly it came to passe. For when euery man fréely vttred his minde and opinion, as the custome is, there were diuers iudgementes: some woulde haue no punishment by death, but banishment: o∣ther some, before any thing was determined, woulde haue it knowne whether they were heretikes in déede, which were counted heretikes. Also he sayd that it was the Kings will that heretikes shoulde be punished: and the office of the Senate to sée and finde out who they were that were guiltye of heresie. And for this cause he willed them to make supplication vnto the King, that according to the first article of the peace concluded, he woulde cause a law∣full Councell to be assembled, to iudge of these contro∣uersies: and that they shoulde in the meane time leaue off to punishe. But some sayde that it coulde not be hidde, but was apparant for all men to beholde what greate corruptions had inuaded the Church, and howe néedefull and requisite it was, a reformation to be had, and that by the worde of God, which is the onely rule of veritie, and not custome, antiquitie, or the opinions of men. Further∣more they added, that there was daunger, and therefore great héede to be taken, least while they (whome they cal∣led Lutheranes) were condemned, Innocentes also shoulde be put to death. For (say they) the Lutheranes (as we terme them) haue probable reasons to defend their doctrine with∣all: whose life is irreprouable, and without blame, vsing themselues oftentimes to praye deuoutly and zealously to God, as it hath well appeared to the Senate: to be short, such is their constancie, that thereby they shew themselues not to be such maner of men as they are sayde to be, among the common sort of people. Thus at this time, some spake one thing, some another: howbeit, the greatest part, would
haue either the punishment to be mittigated, or else the men to be quite discharged. Many feared least this sentence and determination of those that spake in the behalfe of the Lu∣theranes, shoulde take place: wherevpon two of the Coun∣cell (as it is credibly reported) namely Egidius and Minar∣dus, went to the King, and declared the matter wholy vnto him, before the Court had concluded what shoulde be done (against both lawe and auncient custome) saying vnto him that the matter was nowe come to such a straite, that great remedie must be prouided for the same, otherwise great perturbations and trouble would ensue: adding moreouer, that the boldenesse of some was such, that they durst arro∣gantly deride the auncient religion, and as for the Edicts of the King, they made no account of them at all. The King being inflamed and greatly stirred with this newes, came the next day into ye senate: where he declared that he hauing now obtained at the handes of God, the most excellent benefit of peace, & confirmed the same with the so∣cietie & sure knot of matrimonie, there wāted yet one thing which he greatly desired, namely, ye setting of matters cōcer∣ning religion, in a good & vniforme order: & for this cause he said that he came into ye Court, namely to vnderstand, both in what state the matter stoode, & also to cōfort & incourage them by his presence. And so he signified by the kéeper of the seales, that he would haue them to follow that order which they had begon, in shewing their opinions. Therefore of thē which resisted, some were more colde, fearing some subtill practise to be in hand, other som notwithstāding▪ spake their fantasies and opinions, with no lesse boldnesse than they did before, especially concerning the lawfull calling of a Crūcel or Parliament. And among others, Anoas Burgaeus, a man very godly & wel learned, when he had first of al giuē thaks vnto God, that he had so wrought in the hart of the Prince, that he would be a witnesse & indifferent Iudge of so weigh∣tie a matter, and when he had exhorted the King to bend his
minde, and giue good eare to so great & vrgent cause (being in deede the cause of our Lord Iesus Christ, which ught to be defended by the patrocinie & garde of Kings) very boldly and fréely vttered his minde, affirming at the length that he dd wholy giue his cōsent & agrée that there should be a coū∣cel called, & that the punishments then vsed toward ye Luthe∣ranes, for that time should surcease. Others also after him, af∣firmed ye like. When the King had heard thefe men, he ma∣king first his preamble, said: that to his griefe and sorow he saw corruption to be crept in euē into his Court, being very sorie that any of his Nobles should be stayned therwith: the good he knew, as for ye others, he said he wold▪ so punish, that he would therby extirpe & quite pull vp by▪ ye rootes that mis∣chief which was now a growing. These threatnings ended, & talking a while with those that stoode with him, he cōmaū∣ded that Annas Burgaeus & Lodouicus Faurus should be takē: y• which his cōmandement was streightway executed by Mō∣gomerie Captaine of the Garde, After this, others also were taken, as Fumaeus Foixius, & many others. And those yt wereFoixius. of these opinions, loking to be handled as they were, got thē out of the citie: but afterward they were opēly proclaimed. About the same time almost, a Synode was helde at Pa∣ris, many ministers of the Churches (which were thē called the reformed Churches) being then called togither for thys matter, in the which both the doctrine of the faith, and also Ecclesiasticall discipline, were copiously & largely intreated of▪ & truly as the time required, the forme of discipline which was alredy appointed, which was also afterward by many Synodes and Councels inlarged, and examined by the rule of Gods word, and the approued▪ customes of the auncient Church brought much profit: all which matters here to de∣clare, is not our purpose. Howbeit, these thinges followingThe first sy∣node of the Churches of Fraunce. were the principall points thereof. 1 First, it is agreed, that the confession of the doctrine, which may testifie▪ the cōmon consent of the Churches,
be registred, to the ende that no straunge opinions craf∣tily be conueyed in. 2 That all things be done in order in the Churches. 3 That so often as might conueniently, there shoulde be Councels, Synodes, or Parlings, of those Churches that were not farre oft. 4 That there be diligent eye and heede giuen, specially to the doctrine, and also the maners of Ministers. 5 That no Minister vsurpe superioritie or principalitie by any maner of meanes among his fellowe Ministers, but that all things bee done indifferently, and soberlye a∣mong them. 6 That all offences and stumbling blocks be taken away. 7 That the faithfull be taught their dutie, and also instruc∣ted in the puritie of the worde, and in the chaste rule of discipline▪ 8 That nothing in this discipline be rashly altered by one man, or by one Church without the authoritie of the generall Councell. But now when the most excellent and famous Princes Protestantes of Germanie, vnderstoode of the great punish∣ments and intollerable afflictions layde vpon the faithfull for the Gospels sake: they sent their Ambassadours wyth their charge and letters vnto the King, beséeching him that he woulde inhibite and staye those grieuous persecutions: of the which their letters, this was the effect and summe as followeth. When they vnderstoode and weyed with themselues,The summe of the letters of the Princes of Germanie sent to the King. that men in all ages, estates, and times, suffered imprison∣ment and bondes for professing the doctrine of the Gospell, which is contrarie to those superstitions which are of the most part obserued: and that for the same cause onely, they were extréemely punished both in body and goodes: they also knowing themselues to be members of the same heade Christ with them, whome they hearde to be so cruelly han∣dled,
and being perswaded, that they were bounde in con∣science to helpe them so much as they might: they thought good for these causes to sende their Ambassadours vnto the King with those letters. And that the King might not thinke that the matter is not throughly considered off of them, they signifie vnto him that they knowe for a suretie, that those men which were restrained from their libertie, did maintaine or defende no seditious opinions, nor any thing else that is contrary to the true and Apostolicall articles of the Christian faith. And bi∣cause they themselues did take no lesse labour and paine than the King himselfe, to roote out and abolishe all those things which were against the glorie of God, and did onely desire to defende the true inuocation of his holy name, and the syncere doctrine of the Catholike Church, contained in the writings of the Prophetes, Apostles, and Fathers: and also did seuerely punishe the maintainers of false doctrine, and men of impure and vnhonest lyfe: and to be short, bi∣cause they themselues did acknowledge and worship one God, as the hyest and Lorde of all: these were the causes which had moued them to write those letters of intreatie, for the releasing of those captiues out of miserie, whose do∣ctrine they knewe to be farre from all falshoode, heresie, and sebitious opinions: the which thing might euidently ap∣peare by their confession, the which they sent vnto the King to that ende: There is no man but he will confesse that many corruptions are crept into the Church, and haue pre∣uayled, partly by error, and partly by couetousnesse, to roote out the which (saye they) that diuers good and godly men haue taken great paine of late: and that not long since also, certaine vertuous and singular learned men in the vniuer∣sitie of Paris, as VVilliam of Paris, Gersone, VVestelus, and others, had done the like: and also that they themselues haue reformed errours in their dominions, for the which, they are not a little ioyfull: Moreouer, that his father king
Frances of happie memorie, a Prince of singular wisedome and vertue, purposed to haue made the like reformation, fo∣lowing herein the examples of his auncelors the Kings of Fraunce, who woulde oftentimes themselues finde out the controuersies that happened in the Church: The which waye he ought to followe in ending these matters, rather than to suffer the crueltie of manye against their brethren and his subiectes: assuring himselfe of this, that he shoulde so smallye preuayle in suppressing the doctrine of the Gos∣pell, by those sharpe and cruell punishments, that contrary∣wise the bloude which was shed for the same, shoulde be the séede more and more dailye to increase the number of christians: and furthermore▪ that by this meanes, namely, by shedding of bloude, he shoulde haue the greatest part of his faithfull subiectes cut from him. Eeside all this, that God doth threaten to take vengeaunce of the bloude of In∣nocentes vniustly shedde, and will seuerely punishe those which shall reiect the perfect knowledge of his doctryne and truth. Moreouer, they signifie vnto the King in their letters, that they did of late sue vnto him, and require the selfe same thing of him that they doe nowe, by their letters then, and Ambassadours also, and were almost perswaded by his aunswere againe that he woulde neuer more suffer the miserable Christians so to be afflicted and appressed with those iniuries: Notwithstanding, that they vnder∣stoode that the same affliction, by all maner of punish∣ment was as great in his kingdome, as euer it had bene before. Insomuch, that in this poynt they did greatly be∣wayle, (so much as Christian Charitie required) the state and condition of his good and faythfull subiectes, who for this cause were onely afflicted, for that they followed that doctrine which they retayned sure and firme in their Chur∣ches, and in the which they grounded their fayth: The which wonderfully grieued them, not onely bicause they sawe that it was preiudiciall and hurtfull to them, but
chiefly bicause they perceyued the glorie of the most migh∣tie God to be defaced, and as it were derided. And bicause Charitie with the which his subiects were beloued of men, did prouoke them also to wishe their peace and tranquili∣tie, and aboue all things to desire that the King might be∣haue himselfe in that thing which appertained to the glorye of God and soules health, that he might not prouoke the wrath of God against him: they most hartily beseech hym that he woulde prudentlye expende and weigh all the cir∣cumstances of this facte: and specially that he woulde con∣sider the causes why his miserable subiectes shoulde be so greatly troubled: and that he woulde endeuour himselfe that the Church of God might be pourged from all these corruptions with the which it had bene a long time conta∣minated and infected: in so doing he shoulde satisfie the honest desire of a great number in this poynt. And bi∣cause he coulde not come to the knowledge of those things which were of so great weyght, without the hearing of the iudgementes of godlye learned men, they perswaded him so call vnto hym out of hande, men expert in know∣ledge, and desirous of Gods glorie, after the ensample of his Elders, by whome the matters nowe in controuer∣sie might be vprightlye and peaceably decided and deter∣mined by the rule of holye Scripture. Also, that whyle these thinges were in hande, and vntill it were fully con∣cluded of the matters in controuersie, his subiectes which followe the doctrine agréeing to their confession which latelye they defended, might go vntroubled, and vncon∣streyned to doe anye thyng agaynste their conscience: that nothing myght bée deuysed to put them in peryll of lyfe and goodes: and that they whiche were in pri∣son, myght bée sette at libertie. To conclude, they af∣firme, that they perceyue that their earnest requestes shall no lesse preuayle with him, than the cryings and importunitie of the aduersaries of the truth hath done.
The which, if it come to passe according to their expectatiō, he shall fulfill the commaundement of the sonne of God, who specially committeth his Church, which he hath redée∣med with his most precious bloude to Princes: & also shall shewe great mercie and compassion, and be very beneficiall towardes his subiectes, if so be he woulde giue them leaue to inuocate and worship God aright. In reknowledging whereof, they testifie themselues to be ready, and vpon this condicion, will constantly avide for euer the Kinges friendes. To these letters subscribed the Earle of Palatine, the Duke of Saxnie, Marchio of Brandeburge, VVolfgangus Earle of Weldentsius, and the Duke of Wirtemberge. The king when he had suluted the Ambassadours, accor∣ding to the maner and custome, maketh a very short aun∣swere, in this forme, saying: that he will forthwith sende such an aunswere, that he trusted thereby sufficiently to sa∣tisfie them. But notwithstanding, the Ambassadours of the Princes were as yet scarcely departed, but that the fire of persecution, which séemed to be extinguished before, by their comming, burned the faithfull a freshe, Moreouer, theAnnas Burgae∣us examined, condemned, and iudged to dye. causes of those Counsellers, who (as we sayd before) were taken in the Senate of Paris, came now in question. Iud∣ges also were chosen, which shoulde consider the cause of Annas Burgaeus, but not indifferent Iudges, but such as were great enimies to that which he defended. And among others, the Bishop of Paris, and Demochares the Inquisitor were chosen for this purpose: the which Iudges when Bur∣gaeus refused, desiring that he might be iudged of the whole felowship and assemblie of the Senate, according to the an∣cient and accustomed lawe of the Senate of Paris, he was commaunded by the Kings letters patents to aunswere be∣fore those iudges. The which letters when he had hearde them red, he affirmed, that for obedience sake to the King, he woulde aunswere, otherwise he woulde haue made no
aunswere at all: therefore, they demaunding of him, he made aunswere to all those principall points of Popish re∣ligion, which are at this day in controuersis: as to the tra∣ditions of the Church, to inuocation of Saints, to Purgato∣rie, to the Masse, and to the rest. All the which he dislyking and gaynsaying, was at the last condemned by the Bishop of Paris, for an heretike: and bicause he had taken certayne orders (as they call them) the same Bishop giueth com∣maundement that he shoulde be disgraded, and so giuen o∣uer to the secular power. The which sentence as it was falslye giuen, so Burgaeus appealed from the same to the celestiall Iudge. And nowe at this time those outragious stormes of per∣secution did seeme to beate vpon euery corner of the church of Christ. The King sent new letters to euery Parliament, in the which he commaundeth that the Lutheranes shoulde be most seuerely persecuted. Heretofore (sayth he) in the troublesome time of warres, the Lutheranes greatly increa∣sed: but now that he had inioyed and gotten peace, he wold wholy bende himselfe and all his force vtterlye to race and destroy them: wherefore he exhorteth them to vse the same diligence in doing the like. If they want power and stregth, he promiseth that he will prouide for them a bande of soul∣diers, to be redy to ayde thē at al néede. In any wise he wil∣led them not to be colde in their businesse, as some began to be, for if they were, he woulde first begin with them, and make them féele the smart of punishment prepared for others. Therefore all the Courtes, Senates, and Assemblies be∣ing with this general commaūdement of the King mooued, they thunder out, and shake▪ both heauen and earth with newe threatnings and Edicts. In the middest of this great distresse and troubles of the faithfull, there was great ioye, triumph, solemnitie, and feasting, for the peace confirmed betweene the two Kinges by the knot of matrimonie: all
which ioy and pleasure, was by and by, sodenly turned in∣to great sorrowe and wo. For King Henrie to solemnise the matrimonie, willed a Iusting or running at Tylt to be prepared, the which being done, and diuers of his Péeres and Nobles armed in a readinesse, he himselfe desired, a∣mong all others, to runne against Momgomerie Captaine of his garde: who being very loth and vnwilling so to doe, was commaūded earnestly of the King to run against him, the King himselfe putting a speare into Momgomeries hande: and running togither in a broade way that leadeth to S. Anthonies stréete, not farre from the Castell into the which the two Counsellers (of whome we spake before) were put, a péece of one of the Speares or iusting staues, by the great force and violence of their running, strake the King through the helmet into the eye, and so to the brayne,The death of king Henrie. wherewith he was sore hurt. Then the wounded King, af∣ter much bléeding, was caried into the house called the smal towers. Manye men report that he sayde in his greatest griefe and payne, that he greatly eared, that he had com∣mitted wickednesse, and done iniurie agaynst his two Coū∣sellers: but the Cardinall of Loraine did labor earnestly to turne his minde from that opinion, often crying and incul∣cating these wordes into his eares: The aduersarie of the faith tempteth thee: perseuere constantly in the faith. The King by the earnest and continuall perswasion of that Car∣dinall, had bene verye cruellye minded and bent against those Counsellers, in so much that threatening, he spake these wordes: I my selfe will see the burning of Burgaeus. It was noted of manye, that the King was wounded and stayne by him, whome he commaunded to carie Burgae∣us to prison: who was (as is sayde before) Momgomerie, a mortall enimie at that time to the reformed Religion, the which he vehementlye persecuted vpon the straite com∣mandements and charge giuen vnto him for the same pur∣pose. But afterwarde he was brought to the knowledge of
the truth, & became a very profitable member of the Church of Christ. And thus king Henrie being weary of his mortall life, through extreme griefe and paine, surrendred the same againe to him that gaue it, in the yeare of our Lorde God. M. D. LIX. the. x. day of August. By this sodaine chaunce, the ioy and mirth was turned into sorrowe and beauinesse, all men woondring to beholde so sodeyne an alteration and chaunge. The Court which was séeled, pergitted, sumptuouslye decked, and prepared for dauncing, leaping, and other pastyme, to make a plea∣sant and ioyfull mariage, was nowe conuerted to another vse: namely, to kéepe the Kings deade bodie. There, be∣waylings were made, with dolefull and lamentable songs in blacke and mourning garments, the space of fortie days, and fortie nightes. But notwithstanding this time of mourning and sorow, the afflictions moued against the Church, which séemed by that wonderfull chaunce of the King to cease, coulde not be asswaged by any meanes: neither did the aduersaries cease to prosecute and follow the law against these two Counsel∣lers. Therfore when Burgaeus had oftentimes appealed frō them, his appeales being pronounced by the Court to bée nothing and of no force, he was at the length condemned by the Bishop of Paris, from whome before he had appealed: and was also disgraded. The which he taking in very good part, as might appeare by his cherefull countenance, spáke these wordes: To daye (sayth he) it is brought to passe by the singular goodnesse of God towardes me, that to the ende I might neuer more haue to doe with Antichrist, the badges and markes of that great beast are taken from me. Diuers thought Burgaeus vsed many appeals to put of his aduersaries, yt thereby he might delay the time & prolong his life: notwithstāding, he writing letters to ye church of Paris, affirmed yt he did it not to preserue or prolōg his life, ye which he wold willingly bestow for the gospels sake, but rather ye
he might séeme not to pretermit any thing which appertai∣ned to defende his right. And therfore thinking that he had not done sufficiently by his plaine and manifest answeres, he writeth also a confession, in the which he professeth plen∣tifully and plainly what he thought of euery speciall point of religion. Notwithstanding, afterwarde by the earnest perswasi∣ons and importunitie of his friends, he was brought to that poynt, that he propounded and deliuered to the Iudges a certaine ambiguous and doubtfull confession: in so much that then there was great hope that he shoulde be set at li∣bertie. Of the which thing when the heads & gouernours of the reformed Church had intelligence, being very carefull for Burgaeus, notwithstanding, being sorie that he should af∣ter that maner be deliuered out of prison, and from death, commaunded one of the Ministers, to put Burgaeus in mind of his dutie. And certainely their friendly admonitions did so much preuayle with Burgaeus, that he by and by earnestly acknowledging his sault, desired at the handes of God, par∣don for the same: and quite altereth that which before hée had done. Therefore he offereth to his Iudges againe ano∣ther suppliant booke, by which he reueketh his doubtfull and last confession, affirming that he standeth to his first confession, and requireth that he maye haue iudgement of his cause thereby, and that the last sentence eyther of con∣demnation or deliuerance may stande therevpon. That confession is truly more large, notwithstanding, so well deseruing to be remembred, that I thought good hereThe summe of the confession of Burgens. to insert the same▪ And first of all in that confession, he affir∣meth himselfe to be a Christian, that is to saye, such a one as embraceth the doctrine of God the father, and his true sonne Iesus Christ, of one substance and coeternal with the father, and also of the holy ghost, who is all one with the fa∣ther and the sonne, being the very power of the father and the sonne. Secondly, that God created man after his owne
Image and similitude: who notwithstanding by the sugge∣stion of ye Serpent, that is to say, of Sathan, fell from God, and made not only himselfe, but also al his posteritie parta∣kers of grieuous punishmentes, sinne also cleauing to hys séede vnto the ende of the worlde. Thirdly, that there is but one waye to saluation, namely Iesus Christ, who being the very sonne of God, became perfect man, and tooke vpon him all our infirmities, sinne only excepted. This seconde Adam hath fulfilled the lawe for vs, and made vs thereby partakers of euerlasting righteousnesse: he liued here a time on earth, died, and was buried, and after he had ouercome death, he rose againe the thirde daye: ascended into heauen, and sitteth at the right hande of the Father, making inter∣cession for vs daily to him, vntill he shall come to iudge the quicke and the deade. Fourthly, that he doth leane and stay himselfe onely vpon Gods worde (that is to saye, vpon the bookes of the olde and newe Testament) penned, pronoun∣ced, and vttered by the holy ghost, the Prophetes and Apo∣stles being only instruments. And that this is the only and euerlasting rule of truth: to adde vnto the which, or to take any thing therefro, is great wickednesse. Therefore all the lawes and Ceremonies which Popes and others haue made, cannot binde the consciences of men. And when he had layde this foundation, he sayth that he doth detest the constitutions of the Pope, by which he woulde séeme to be more wyse than the most prudent and mightie Lorde: be∣ing also most contrarie to all truth: the which thing he ma∣kethA comparison betvvene the doctrine of the Gospell, and the Romishe doctrine. more manifest, by comparing the commaundementes of God with the traditions of the Pope. God (sayth he) cō∣maundeth vs to worke sixe dayes, and to rest the seuenth daye: but the Pope to adde thereto his deuise, exempteth certaine dayes in the which he forbiddeth to works. God permitteth vnto vs the vse of all meates with giuing of thankes: but the Pope forbiddeth the same. Our Sauiour Christ commaundeth that they which haue not the gift of
continencie shoulde marie: but the Pope most seuerely forbiddeth his Clergie to marie, against the custome of the auncient Church. God forbiddeth Images to be set in chur∣ches, but the Pope cōmaundeth the contrarie. And therfore he concludeth that he is very Antichrist, and very liuely de∣scribed of the Apostle Paule so to be▪ After this, be answereth2. Thes. 2. 3. to euery one of the Articles of the interrogatories one by one: as to inuocation of Saints: to the placing of Images in the temples: to the Sacraments: to Purgatorie, and to the rest. I therefore (sayeth he) acknowledging by what su∣perstitions and errours I haue bene hytherto ledde and blinded, doe nowe affirme, that I doe vnfeynedlye ab∣iure and abhorre them all, euen from the bottome of my heart, as things contrarie to the doctrine of my Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ, which is the worde reuealed by the holy spirite of God, and written by the Prophetes and A∣postles. The which worde, I receyue and embrace as the rule of my whole lyfe, euen as in olde time, the fierie piller led the children of Israell through the Desert to the lande of promise. I protest that I will direct and frame my whole life according to the prescript rule of that word, by the assi∣stance of Gods holy spirit, which shall be with me, & order all my wayes: without the which I can do nothing, and by which all things are possible vnto me. Insomuch that I am perswaded that all things shall happen to the glorye of the Lord, to the enlarging of the kingdome of his sonne, to the building of his Church, and to my soules health, which I commende vnto him: to whome I giue most harty thanks: whom I most humbly pray in the name of Iesus Christ his welbeloued sonne, that he will strengthen and slablishe me by his holy spirite in this fayth vnto the ende: and that it will please him to graunt me-strength, for his mercies sake with my heart and mouth boldly to confesse his holy name, both before the faithfull, and also before Infidels, tyrants, and murthering butchers of Antichrist, euen to the shed∣ding
of the vtmost drop of my bloud. All my desire is to liue and dye in this sayth, being fully perswaded that the same is grounded vpon the worde of God alone, and that all the Saintes, Patriarkes, Prophetes, and Apostles, did lyue and dye therein. This is the only true knowledge of God, in the which the vndoubted and eternall felicitie of men is placed. This I saye, is the fayth in the which I will both liue and die. To this confession I haue subscribed with my owne hande, being readye also to seale the same with my bloude, for the defence of the doctrine of the sonne of God: whom I pray to open the eyes of your heartes, that at the length (if it be his will) ye maye knowe and vnderstande the truth. Therefore when he had wholye confirmed that confes∣sion, and had with his owne mouth plainely testified the same before his Iudges, then was there no hope left that Burgaeus shoulde be deliuered. For he had great and migh∣tie aduersaries, among whome, his chiefe and principall enimie was the Cardinall of Loraine, who left nothing vn∣done that might by any maner of meanes hasten his death. For he feared, least at the length he shoulde bée deliuered by the King. For many Noble men, as Fredericke Earle of Palatine Prince Elector, and others, had very earnestly written to the King for him. All things therefore being so appoynted, as wée haue shewed, hys aduersaries thought that they had manye iust reasons, by which they might condemne him to dye. And therefore on the twentie day of December, they pro∣nounce the sentence of death agaynst him: namely, ThatThe sentēce of death against Burgaus. Burgaeus being condemned of heresie, shoulde be burnt with firé, vntill his bodie were consumed to ashes. The which sen∣tence Burgaeus heard, and receiued cherefully: and when he had heard it, he gaue thanks vnto God that had suffred him to sée so ioyfull and happie a daye: and prayed also vnto God, that hée woulde pardon and forgiue his Iudges,
who had iudged him according to their owne conscience and knowledge, but not according to the true knowledge and wisedome of God. Many wordes be vttered vnto them at that time, which were so rhetoricall, weightie, and senten∣cious, with vehemencie vttred, that it might well appeare, the holy ghost rather to speak than he: the which his words here to repeare, shall be nothing from our purpose. Hath (sayth he) that fraudulent message of hell full of all guile and deceyte, and an abhominable lie, with deadly hatred, still striuing against the truth, so preuayled, that being accused vnto you falslye for those men which we are not, shall so be condemned? We, I saye, are the sonnes of God, whome we knowe to be our father, with whom there is no respect of persons: with whome we are able to doe all thinges, and without whome, nothing: he it is, whome you ought to heare, speaking nowe vnto you, otherwise he threateneth vnto you death and destruction. It is (trulye) the part of great and intollerable boldenesse, for men to dare presume so much against the holy and intolable com∣maundement of God. Shall we suffer our redemption, and the bloude so plen∣tifullye shed for our sinnes, to be troden vnder foote? Shall we not obey that our most mightie King, who woulde haue vs to defende his cause, who séeketh vs, who sustaineth vs, who is also our▪ Captaine in fight? What shall we do then? shall feare make vs vnconstant, or driue vs from doing our dutie? No, we shall rather be strong and valiant, séeing we encounter with so weake an enimie. But beholde what this wicked generation commaundeth? that we suffer God to be blasphemed: that we betray the truth of God, and such like: the which bicause we will not do, we are counted exe∣crable and wicked, yes, we are called seditious. Ye are (say they) rebels to Princes: and wherefore? bicause we will not offer vnto Baal. O good God, how long wilt thou suffer the vnbridled lustes, and ambitions willes of men to haue
their swaye. In the meane time, most merciful and louing father, till it shall please thée to restraine them, haue mercy vpon vs: leade vs forth, and gouerne vs, in defending of thy truth, to the vtmost of our power. Make it to be knowne (O Lord) that they themselues are rebels in déede to Prin∣ces: and I for my part while I haue breath, will not let to tel them so. Is this to play the part of a rebell, for a man to giue vnto his Prince both body and goodes and whatsoe∣uer else, to be at his pleasure? Is this the part of a traitor and Rebell, to praye vnto God for the preseruation and prosperitie of the King and the kingdome, and that he and his Ministers, Counsellers, and Magistrates, maye truly and faithfully doe their dutie, that all false worship being taken away, God may be glorified alone, and of all men purely worshipped? Is not this rather, rebellion, to deface Gods glorie, and to giue that honor due vnto him to crea∣tures, and to followe the deuises and fantasies of men in worshipping him, to count it a vertue, to rent and teare the name of God with blasphemous othes, to suffer brothell houses and common stewes, and an infinite number of wickednesses mo? I appeale here vnto you ye Senators: if ye beare the sworde of the Lorde only to reuenge his cause, to the punishment of wickednesse and vice, take héede I ad∣uise you what ye doe. Will ye giue iudgement and pro∣ condemnation against your selues? Weigh and consider I pray you a little with your selues, the wickednes that is layde to our charge, and first of all iudge whether it be more méete for vs to obey you, rather than God. Are ye made so drunke with the Cup of the great beast? Doe ye after this sorte bring the people from falling into sinne, whome ye bring from the true worship of God? If you re∣uerence and feare more the opinions of men, than ye do the iudgement of God, consider with your selues what the peo∣ple of forroine nations and kingdomes shall thinke of you, when the crueltie of your iudgements shall be spoken of in
euery place▪ yea, and that before so famous Princes. Howe many wickednesses doe ye commit, by the com∣maundements of that ruddie purpuled Phalaris, (canst thouBy the tyrant Phalaris he meaneth the Cardinall of Loraine. O cruel tyrant, by the cruel death cease our sobbing sighes?) who at his owne pleasure, for his proper aduauntage and gayne, aduanced the authoritie of certaine rulers, to the de∣struction of the King and the whole kingdome. At his com∣maundement ye so racke and torment our bodies, that ye your selues are constreyned to pitie the same. Howe great is your crueltie? But me thinketh I sée teares fall from your eyes. Why wéepe you? Can you hide the burthen of your consciences. Feare not, hardly, the iudgement of God, although ye be constreyned to tremble thereat. They which are condemned of you to die, reioyce, accounting death to be vnto them life: they are nothing abashed or dismayed at your crueltie, they regard not the iniuries offered vnto thē, and as for death, they count it a sléepe, according to the Pro∣uerbe: The conquerour dieth, and he that is conquered, la∣menteth. What should it grieue me to be hanged? I know Lorde, that if euer any wickednesse deserued punishment and payne, the wickednesse of those deserueth it euen to the full, which reiect and contemne the benefite of thy sonne Christ. I imbrace (O Lorde God) that saying which thou hast put into the mouths of certaine of thy Martyrs, name∣ly, that he is worthy of double punishment which receiueth not the offered redemption of our Sauiour. No man shall separate vs from Christ, what snares of trappes soeuer are layde for vs, and with what paynes soeuer our bodies shall be tormented, I knowe that we were appointed long ago as shéepe to the slaughter. Let them therefore kill vs, let them grinde vs to pouder and ashes: yet notwithstanding, they which dye to the Lorde liue still, and shall so ryse a∣gayne at the resurrection of the iust. Whatsoeuer come to passe, I am a Christian, & a Christian will I be. Uerye ear∣nestly will I crie, that I may be hearde, dying for my Lorde
and sauiour Iesu Christ. Since the matter standeth thus, why do I stay? take me hangman & carie me to ye gallowes. And repeating these wordes againe, and that with such ve∣hemencie, that he made the teares to come out of the eyes of his aduersaries, he spake these words to ye Senators which were then present, namely, that he suffred death, bicause he woulde not acknowledge, iustification, grace, sanctification, merites, intercession, satisfaction & saluation to be in any o∣ther, than in Christ: & that therfore he died for the doctrine of the Gospel. And after many other words concerning this matter, at y• length he concluded with these words: Put out, put out one day those your flaming fires, come vnto the lord in newnesse of life, that your sinnes may be done away, let the wicked man forsake his ways, & the wicked cogitations of his heart, and then the Lorde will haue mercie. In the meane time, meditate and consider these thinges in your mindes. Beholde, I go now vnto the death. When he had thus vttered his minde, the hangman tied his handes, and bounde him to the Cart, in the which he was caried to the strete commonly called San-Iani Greuaei, aboue foure hundred armed men garding him: beside this, the whole Citie of Paris, as though it bene at the cōming of their enimies, was furnished with armed men: the wayes that led to the place of execution were stopt vp, & the frequē∣ted places kept. Yet for all this, this godly Martyr, was no∣thing abashed, but abode couragious and constant. When he came to the place of execution, he put off his clothes him∣selfe, and being stripte naked, fetching great and déepe sighes, he looked vp stedfastly into heauen. And at the length vttered these few words only to the people: I am not come hither, either for theft nor murther, but to suffer only for the Gospels sake. For he had the libertie of his tongue graūted vnto him (which libertie other of the faithfull had not whē they came to suffer, hauing their tōgues first cut out of their heads) vpō this condition, ye he should not speak to ye people.
The which he promised to obserue, that he might the better praye vnto God. Therefore when he had made his prayers to God, and shoulde nowe be sacrifised, he oftentimes re∣peated these words with a loude voyce: O my God, forsake me not, least I forsake thee. And being strangled, he was cast into the fire, sealing that with his bloude, and death, which before he had subscribed with his hande. This was the ende of that good and godlye man being of great fame among the learned, both for his witte, and also his learning, and being also of honorable calling and great welth: who had no doubt in short time attayned to greater honor and dignitie in this lyfe, had not God reserued him, by the pure knowledge of his name, to this greatest prefer∣ment and dignitie of professing his truth, which the world counteth reproch. For Burgeus came of an honest familie and stocke, being borne in Rionssius, a towne in Auergne, and brought vp in good letters, who had so giuen himselfe to the studie of the lawe, that he became famous in the pro∣fession thereof. Afterwardes, being chosen to be one of the Senate of Paris, he left great fame of wit and learning be∣hinde him, among the most noble men. Being therefore in the waye to come to greater honor and preferrement, be∣holde, God indueth him with more pure knowledge of hys worde, whereby he fearing no perils of times, ioyned him∣selfe to the reformed Church, and woulde be present at the sermons which were then secretly made: and thus dailye he was feruent more and more in godlye zeale: Insomuch, that he had not bene partaker of the Lordes supper passing once or twise, when he spake his mind so fréely before king Henrie in the Senate house in the defence of the Gospell: by whose commaundement he was cast in prison, and from thence (as ye haue hearde) caried to execution. A singular example of the efficacie and force of the knowledge of God, and also of godlye constancie in so worthie a man, at the which, the godly hereafter shall iustly maruaile. His bloude
truly was the séede wherby the Church of Christ in Frāce did greatly increase and growe, as may plainly appeare by those things which followe. Touching the other Counsellers, whom we sayd before were taken togither with Burgaeus, this was the ende: after a while, they had diuers iudgementes giuen of them, by which they were deliuered. And the causes why these so es∣caped are these: namely, either the new Iudges, who to vn∣derstande their causes, examined them after another ma∣ner than the other was examined: eyther the diuersitie of times, in which chaunced many troubles: or else truly the very inconstancie of the captiued Counsellers themselues, relenting somewhat to their aduersaries. About this time, Nicolaus Durandus, (who altering his name, called himselfe Villegagno, that is to say, a Conque∣rour of Cities, as though he had bene a newe conquering Vlysses) obtained of the King a nauie of shippes with men and vittaile accordingly, to sayle to the South Indians, ta∣king with him many men which professed the reformed re∣ligion: to the ende (as he sayde) that the Gospell might to them be preached, and there planted. And when he was ar∣riued into America, he sent to Geneua, that Ministers might be sent vnto him from thence: the which his desire was graunted, insomuch that he obtained two, namely, Peter Richerius, and George Charterius. who came vnto him with a great number of those faithfull Protestantes that fled out of Fraunce in the hote time of persecution. These men when they were come, began to preach the worde of God, and to appoint an order of discipline. There was al∣so among the rest, a certaine man called Ianus Contachus, not long before, a Sorbonist or Papist, who came thither after Villegagno. This man being ambitions, desired great∣ly to be made a Bishop. Therefore he thought this a verye good way to obtaine his purpose: namely vpon the daye ap∣pointed for the ministration of the Lordes supper, to mooue
certaine questions: as, whether Copes, and Surplesies, and such Priest like garments were necessary to be vsed in that ministration: also, whether vnleauened breade and the mixing of water with win, shoulde not in the same be vsed. The which he did in déede. Howbeit, for all this contention mooued by him, the Supper of the Lord was then purely ce∣lebrated. But the controuersies increasing daily more and more among them, it was tolde vnto Villegagno, that there was a fame and report in Fraunce, that many Lutheranes were come into America, by his meanes and guidance. At the hearing whereof Durandus Villegagno being made a∣searde, quite altered and chaunged his former minde and purpose, concerning the bringing in and establishing of the Gospell in those regions. And when as on a time Richeri∣us ministred Baptisme, and sayd that all those things which were by the Papistes ioyned to Baptisme, after the institu∣tion of the Apostles, were depraued and corrupted addi∣tions, Villegagno made open proclamation, saying that Richerius lyed, and streight way affirmed that he had rather followe the ancient rites and customes of the Church made a thousande yeares ago, than the new opinions of Caluin, and other newfangled persons: adding also to this, that woulde neuer more haue to doe with them. At the last, af∣ter long controuersie, it was concluded among them, that the articles which were in question, shoulde be sent to the Churches of Fraunce and Germanie, to iudge of them, whose iudgement and opinion they agréed to followe. For this cause Charterius was sent into Fraunce. But when Villegagno vnderstoode by rumors that great persecution continued still in Fraunce, he plainly vttereth his minde, and declareth that he would stand to none of all their iudge∣ments and opinions, but woulde imbrace the doctrine of the Romishe Church, and forbiddeth Richeris to preach or o gather togither the congregation to praye any more. Thys was the cause why Richerius and Pontanus returned into
Fraunce, notwithstāding, the lets and impediments which Villegagno obiected vnto them: who in déede went about to bring to passe, that so soone as they came into Fraunce, they both might be deliuered into the handes of the magistrate. Many in like maner of the faithfull which abode in Ameri∣ca, were very euil intreated for religion, some for this cause being drowned, left a signe and remembrance to the vtmost partes of the world, of their sufferance for the Gospel. And this truly was the issue and ende of the rashe and vndiscrete zeale of Villegagno, But now let vs here bring in that, which we left behind vnspoken, concerning ye death of king Henrie. After that he was buried, & his funerals celebrated according to custome, & the new king Frances set in his roome, the Guises (hauing gotten authoritie and fauour with the King, by the meanes of the Quéene of Scottes his wife) left nothing vndone to aduaunce them to dignitie: séeking all they could to remoue others, to whom the gouernement of things appertained, but specially in this time of the Kings nonage, and at their pleasure placing whome it pleased them, to the great detri∣ment, losse, & reproch of those Princes that were the Kings neare kinsemen, being of the same familie and lyne that he himselfe was of. But this their authoritie & power hapned vnto thē chiefly, to the destruction of the Church. Therfore that persecutiō which séemed to end by ye wonderfull chaūceGreat afflictiō of the Church after the death of king Hērie. of king Henrie. begā now to be more vehement thā before. And ye chiefest persecutors were the Guises, both for the olde cankred spite they bare to religion, and also for the vnbri∣dled and ambitious desire they had to beare rule, and to get authoritie: the which they saw by no other meanes coulde stande. For the Cardinall of Loraine who also ioyned with the Guises, was greatlye dismayed and made afearde by newe rumours, which were daily brought from for∣reine Nations, namelye, that a conspiracie was made a∣gainst them, by manye men whiche coulde not bea
their tirannie. And therefore the Guises thought it best to proclaime open warre against the Christians. Then was there newe Edicts deuised and set forth more cruell than the other that were before, with newe punish∣mentes added to the same. In these, it was forbidden so make any secret or priuie assemblies vpon payne of death: and also promised to the bewrayets of such as should make the assemblies, the one halfe of the confiscation or forfey∣ture of their goodes, beside manye other great rewardes. There was also commaundement giuen to the ouerséers and searchers out of such, to receyue diligently the accusati∣ons brought vnto them: to take those that were accused: daily to search houses: and to certifie the Senate of the Ci∣tie what they had done in the premisses. Furthermore, there was authoritie giuen to the Prae∣tor, to hang and drawe, at his pleasure: that he might giu sentence of death against such as were before him accused for heresie, the benefite of appeale denyed and taken away from such as were condemned. The Ucars and Curates also of euery Parishe were commaunded not to be slacke in excommunicating those whome they knewe to be Lutheranes. Besides this, there was impunitie and pardon giuen to the accusers, if so be, it fell out that their accusation were founde false. About this time Sathan (who séeket all that he may theAn example of two false brethren. destruction of Christes Church) to the ende nothing might be left vndone that might by any meanes hurt the same, ta∣keth newe wayes in hand: as ye shall heare by this which followeth. So it was, that two false brethren fled from th Church of Paris. One of them was a Goldsmyth by his oc∣cupation, whome the Lorde had sometime vsed (as he doth oftentimes other hypocrites) as a meane in bringing many men to the knowledge of him: the other was a certaine Painters seruant. The first of these two, which was the Goldsmith, being for his wickednesse and euill life excom∣municate
from the Church, came to Democharis the In∣quisitor, and tolde him that he knewe many things concer∣ning the Lutheranes, and that he for sooke their companie for this cause, that he might so much as lay in him, worke their destruction. And so whatsoeuer he knewe might be hurtful to the faithfull, the same he declared to the Inquisitor: gi∣uing vnto him the names of such as were chief of ye church, and burdening them with grieuous crimes. To be short, he left nothing vntold, that might serue any maner of way to be hurtfull vnto them. To this fellowe, the Inquisitor gaue diligent eare, and encouraged him with great com∣mendations to procéede in his well doing, promising vnto him great things: and to the ende he might not séeme to dal∣lie, he gaue vnto him a summe of money for an earnest pe∣ny: and for the newes he brought him, he called him Saint Paule the Conuert. To be short, this fellowe perceyuing some fruite and profite to come vnto him for his treacherie and playing the Iudas part, added yet to his former wicked∣nesse another mischiefe. So many as he knew to be weak, and not fully seled in the Christiā profession, he perswaded to go to the Inquisitor, and to desire his friendship, that they might be absolued and discharged of the punishment ensu∣ing. Also he caried with him Catchpoles to so many of the houses of the faithfull, as he knew, that by them they might be apprehended. By this his secrete treason he made all the chiefe of the Church to flée. Nowe the other, which was the Painters seruant, enuying his maister for due correction ministred vnto his deserts, went and tolde the Iudges that he had frequented the Lutheranes companie by the com∣maundement and will of his maister. Whome the Judges séeing to be so readye to accuse, inticed him by many faire promises, to bewraye such as he knewe to be Lutheranes: The which request of theirs he satisfied to the vttermost, saying that the common report was true, namely, that they satisfied their filthie lustes one with another: and saying al∣so
that he himselfe had to doe with diuers yong maydens, whome he named. For the which cause he required that those Maidens with their mothers might be brought before the Judge face to face, and the matter throughly examined. The which matter at the length being manifestly proued false, this wicked accuser was constrayned to confesse that he was procured by Democharis the Inquisitor, and one of the chiefe of the Senate, to forge these things. Howbeit, this slaunderous rumor did much harme, for it was noysed abroade, that all maner of wickednesse was committed by the Lutheranes when they came togither. The same wherof being brought to the eares of the yong King, made him more cruell against the faithfull. And so persecution waxed hote and vehement againe, the Iudges Flyes (for so were the Inquisitors called) flying abrode in euery corner. Insomuch that for the space of nyne monethes the faithfull were castGrieuous af∣fliction. in prison, banished, murthered, and their houses and goodes confiscate. Notwithstanding all these things, God preser∣ued the remnant of his Church: and suffered not, for all this, the preaching of his worde to be taken away. Manye therefore were then burned for the Gospels sake, whose cōstancie wan many to the same. And among the rest which suffered for the testimonie of the Gospell, there was oneMargaret Riche. woman, called Margaret Riche, a booke sellers wife, of won∣derfull constancie. This woman by the falshoode & deceit of hir husband was betrayed into ye hands of the Judges, who notwithstanding was the first that instructed hir in ye truth, & brought hir to know & reiect hir former errors. Annas Bur∣gaeus affirmed that he was much encouraged by ye constancy of this woman, which was kept in bonds when he liued. Thus, the Kingdome of the yong King Frances being go∣uerned as it pleased the Guises, who hauing gotten the su∣perioritie, thought and deuised nowe howe to bring two things to passe, which séemed to be so necessary for thē, that without the obtaining of them, they could not get their pur∣pose:
the which two thinges were these, the extinguishing and taking away of the libertie of Fraunce, and the libertie of the Gospell. But while they went about to bring these things to passe, many complaintes of them, and libes that touched the practise of these things were cast abrode: name∣ly, that ye Guises did not secretly go about to conspire against the kingdome: that they went about in the dayes of King Henrie by subtil & sinister meanes, to subuert and wast the Duchie of Andegauensis and the Countie of Prouince: that they oftentimes complained that the King had doe them iniurie in this thing: that they went about to proue by lear∣ned men whō they had taken to search the Chronicles, that they came by true lineall discent of Carolus Magnus: that Hugo Capetus (of whom come the kings of Vales that now raigne) vsurped the kingdome: that they sayd that they ho∣ped for a time to come at the length, when they should haue more cōuenient time to reason & iudge of this matter: And therfore that the Guises hauing practised these things in the dayes of Henrie ye King, had now greater hope in these days of the yong king, to bring their purpose to passe: that it was done against all the lawes of the Realme, that they shoulde arrogate to themselues the gouernement of the Kingdome, séeing the same pertained to the Princes which were the Kings neare kinsmen, whom notwithstanding they had ex∣cluded frō that lawful dignitie appertaining to them: yt the kingdome could not be committed vnto them without great daunger, specially séeing they contended for the same: that it wanted not great suspition, that they banished the auncient kinsfolks of the king frō the Court, to the intent they might do al things as thē listed: yt they did chaūge the gouernors of Prouinces and Cities, to the ende such might beare office as would be ruled by them: that it appeared by manye things that their gouernment was pernicious and hurtfull for the kingdome: as both by the freshe memorie of the late wic∣ked acte done in the dayes of King Henrie, concerning that
notable viage to Naples, by which the one was minded to make himselfe Pope, and the other purposed to make him∣selfe King: and also by the sundrie exactions with the which the people were oppressed, when they shoulde rather haue bene eased, considering the great warres and charge that they had bene at before, being charged with warre a freshe, carying the souldiers that were wearied in the former warres into Seotlande, and all vnder the pretence of reli∣gion. And here for examples sake, the dealings of those were brought in, who vnder the colour of custodie, prote∣ction, and wardship, had inuaded the kingdomes of Or∣phantes. These were the contents of those libels dispersed abrode, cōcluding also that it was no offence at all, but well done, with the sworde to resist the tirannie of the Guises. While these things were published abrode, and on both sides writings of defence dispersed, manye rumors were brought from farre Countries to the Guises, but among the rest, this in especiall, namely, that manye had made a con∣spiracie to set vpon them euen in the Kinges house. The Guises therefore being moued with these writings and ru∣mors, layde the cause of all these things to the Lutheranes charge, and went about to perswade the King that the Lu∣theranes disdaining to be so greatlye afflicted, had made a conspiracie to destroy him. And for the more safetie of theThe descriptiō of the tumult of Ambaxia. King, they caried him to Ambaxia, being a litle towne, and fortified with a Castell: appointing watch and warde to be in euery place through which the King should passe to Am∣baxia, commaunding also to take so manye as they founde armed, or by any maner of meanes suspected. This done, the Kings power and authoritie was committed to Frances Duke of Guise, to supplie the Kings roome, for confirmation whereof, he receyued the Kings letters patentes. Notwith∣standing all this, the Guises as yet were vncertaine of the reported conspiracie, as, from whence, after what maner, by what waye they woulde come, and who the conspirators
were, vntill the Cardinall of Loraine was plainly certified thereof by a certaine lawyer of Paris: to whome were gi∣uen for his rewarde in reuealing this matter, ten thousande French Crownes, out of the Kings treasurie. But nowe, what maner of conspiracie or practise this was, ye shall heare: There were verie manye which dis∣dained and repined at the authoritie committed vnto the Guises, but specially the Noblemen, which tooke it in euill part, that the libertie of Fraunce shoulde be defaced by the tirannie of straungers. Againe, many of those which were of the reformed Churches, being wearied with sharpe and grieuous afflictions, and laying the burthen and blame of all these cruelties vpon the Guiles, as the chiefe and princi∣pall enimies of religion, thought if they might be repressed and put downe, they shoulde finde the King more mercifull and readie to heare their petitions: and they should defend their cause before the Magistrates, if they were there vnto lawfully called. Yea, the matter came so farre, that they thought they had iuste causes to put downe the Guises, the which shoulde turne to the profite both of the King and countrie. And this counsell and practise was enter∣prised at Nameta, which is a towne in the lower Bri∣tayne, by certaine which came thither, vnder the colour of méeting togither at a mariage. The chiefe perswaders and procurers of which matter, were Godfridus, Barreus, Re∣naudius, and Garreus, being Noble men. Whose determi∣nation and purpose was to compell the Guises to giue an account bowe they had discharged their offices: and to re∣moue them from that dignitie, which (they sayde) they had vsurped, and to place the Princes which were the Kinges neare kinsemen in the same. To bring the which thing to passe, they determined, if néede shoulde require, to take the sworde in hande. And thus they concluded their purpose, the summe whereof was: That nothing shoulde be done a∣gainst the King, against the Kings kinsemen, and against the
state of the Realme: and that their dignitie, and the libertie of the countrie shoulde bee defended so much as might bee from the violence of straungers. And to bring this thing to passe, Renaudius was chosen Captaine, to whome they ioy∣ned sixe other, whose counsell he might vse in any matter: and thirtie men also very skilfull in feates of armes, to at∣tende vpon him in seruice of warre. The time and place al∣so of méeting was appointed. And so euery man diligentlye went about the thing concluded: they prouided money and artillerie, and appointed souldiers. Notwithstanding, the manifolde rumors of their doings, and the exquisite diligence of the Guises (or rather the pro∣uidence of God which had a greater worke to finishe) be∣wrayed their counsels & deuises. At that time the Earle of Sansserrensis was lieutenant of Turon: who hearing that the Lord Castelnouan and certaine valiant captaines with him, abode there certaine dayes, came to them, & séeing the Lord Castelnouan, whom he knew, very earnestly inquired of the matter, but at the last they fell togither by the eares. How∣beit, they escaped, and fled to the castle called Nozeus, to the which, they had before determined to come: & there, by the industrie of Renaudius, were gathered togither the number of fiue hundred horsmen. But the Earle of Sansserreus went without delay to Ambaxia, & told there al the whole matter. Whervpō captaine Nemorosius was sent to Nozeus with prepared souldiers, to take a view, & also to knowe their in∣tent and meaning. Whither, when he was come, he desired to talke with thē. The which being graunted, he demaūded what cause they had so to deale, asking also, if they by their disloyall disobedience woulde bring infamie & reproch to all their countrymen, who were wel knowne to be euer faith∣full and true to their Kings. To this they answere by Barō Castelnouan, that they ment nothing against ye Kings ma∣iestie, but were armed to defend the King, & the state of the Realme, & intended to shew his Maiestie the fraude and de∣ceyte
of the Guises, which they practise to destroy the King and the kingdome: and that they were therfore gathered to∣gither with a great companie of Nobles, to resist the tyran∣nie of the Guises, their manifest violence & oppression both of lawes and auncient institutions: Affirming also that they woulde retaine the name of faithfull subiectes in the middest of these troubles, whatsoeuer they were thought off. To this Nemorosius replyed, saying that it became not Subiectes to come vnto their Prince with weapons and armour. They on the contrarie part sayde: that they did not beare armour against their Prince, but against the Guises, his vndoubted enimies, who will suffer none of his subiectes to haue recourse vnto the King. And therfore they sayde they were armed, that they might haue accesse vnto the Kings maiestie: to whome they knewe and woulde giue due honor and reuerence. This cōmunication passing betwene them, Nemorosius at the last fel to intreating & beseching them, promising that if they would vpon trust yéelde themselues into his hands, and go vnto the king without armor, they should sustain no harm. Who at y• length being perswaded, yéelded thēselues into his handes, counting it a great good turne, if so be they might haue frée accesse vnto the King, without the vse of weapons and armour. Notwithstanding, so soone as they were come to Ambaxia, they were cast into prison, & hand∣led, euen as they had bene traytors to the kings Maiestie. The day folowing, the band of footmen, not knowing what had happened, went through the woods to Ambaxia & being euery one of them inclosed and taken by an hoste of horse∣men, were the same daye put to death, some being hanged, and some drowned in the riuer. The thirde day, the bande of horsemen (among whome came Renaudius) hauing tra∣uailed all the night, by the conducting and skill of Champ∣deus, a Noble man, came by the breake of the daye, to the Castell gates of Ambaxia. But béeynge betrayed,
they fled away, & were scattered here & there. And this was the ende of this enterprise, & thus it was stayed. They whō Nemorosius had persuaded to yéelde, which were takē, were diuersly put to death, some had their heades chopt off, some were hanged out of the Castell windowes, and some cast into the riuer. And among others that were taken, Castel∣nouanus was one, of whome we spake before, being a man of great fame, both for his birth, and also for his bringing vp. This man hearing himselfe to be pronounced giltie of treason against the Kings maiestie, cried out, that he was giltie in no respect of that crime, neyther that he coulde so be proued by any meanes. This one thing he cōfessed to be true, that he went about to resist the tyrannie of the Guises, with a great number of the Nobilitie of Fraunce: if this were to offende the Kings maiestie (sayde he) they must be called Kings, before I and they can iustly be condemned of treason. And séeing they might not haue libertie to appeale to mortall Iudges, he sayde that he appealed to the celestiall Iudge for so vniust iudgement giuen vpon him, the which ere it be long, will take vengeance on innocent bloude so vniustly shed. The like also many others affirming, and committing their in∣nocencie to God, caused manye to lament their state with teares. And among the rest, one whose name was Ville∣mongius,Villemongius bathing his handes in the bloude of his fellowes which were newlye slayne, lifted vp his handes imbrued with bloude to heauen, crying: Lord this is the bloud of thy seruants: thou shalt take vengeance. Nowe therefore these horrible slaughters, a man woulde thinke had bene sufficient to make Renaudius forsake his former purpose, but he notwithstanding continued in the same. Wherefore he went about to gather togither againe his men which were dispersed, as you haue heard euē now: the which while he assayed, he met with a horseman of hys enimies side, who shot of at Renaudius his dag, but missing
him, was at the last by Renaudius slayne. But Renaudius by a souldiour standing by, being the seruaunt of the horseman that was slaine, was also wounded to death with the shot of a Dagge: whome notwithstanding, before he died, Renau∣dius also manfully slue. But streight after by the grieuous∣nesse of the wounde he dyed. Whose deade carcas being brought to Ambaxia, was hanged vp with this title: RE∣NAVDIVS captaine of Rebels, and Author of Sedition. After this, it was deuided or quartered into foure partes, and set vp in diuers places, and his heade set vpon a forke. A wonderfull and straunge thing it was, that so many men should come togither from all parts of the Realme, and yet be séene of none. But this was not the ende of this tumult. The Guises, against whome this conspiracie was made, made great search and inquiry for those that were suspected to be guiltie of this conspiracie. Moreouer, the King of Na∣uarre: and the Prince of Conde, in this contention tooke part against the Guises, as hereafter shall be declared. The Constable, at the commaundement of the King, went to the Senate of Paris, and there opened the whole matter concerning the tumulte of Ambaxia, commending the great diligence of the Guises in pacifying of the same: But bicause he sayde, that this conspiracie was made a∣gainst those that were in chiefe authoritie about the King, the Guises tooke the same in very euil part, who would haue had all men perswaded, that it was made for the destructi∣on of the King and the whole Realme, that all good order being taken away, euery man might rule and gouerne as him lysted. At this time, Oliuarius the Kinges high Chauncelour, who had condemned those that were taken in the tumult of Ambaxia, was grieuously taken with sickenesse: and be∣ing very extréemely handled therewith, sayde that he had iustly deserued the same, for that those whome he had con∣demned, had great iniurie done vnto them. Moreouer, hée
made exclamation against ye cardinal of Loraine, (who hea∣ring of his extreme sicknesse, came to sée him) saying: Thou (O Cardinall) art he that bringeth destruction to vs all: And so fetching déepe sighes & grieuous grones, be ended his life. Nowe there came forth a newe Edict very cruell against those which followed the newe Religion, as they termed it. Notwithstanding the late conspiracie being founde to come through the cruell punishmentes layde vpon men, whereat they boldly repined, brought to passe that the Gui∣ses being afrayde, thought it best to temper and mittigate those punishments. Therefore there were sent abrode let∣ters of pardon, in the which ye King declared that he would not in the first yere of his reigne begin with the miserablehe Kings rs of par∣n. slaughter of his subiects (although they had deserued ye same) but wold rather folow ye example of our heauenly father, to retain his seruāts by his lenitie & mercie, than by seueritie and punishments. Therfore he sayd he sorgaue all offences concerning religion, and gaue generall pardon: notwith∣standing, vpon that condition that they which enioyed the benefite therof, should liue catholikely as others did. More∣ouer, the same that came by the conspiracie, troubled also the Cardinall of Loraine, being a man by nature verye fearefull and wauering, insomuch that now, after a sort he shewed himselfe very gentle toward the fauourers of the Gospell: yea, and hearde willingly many of the Ministers of Gods worde, which were not afearde to talke with him concerning the chiefe pointes of the Religion nowe in con∣trouersie, affirming also that he himselfe did agrée with them in many points. But the Quéene, to the ende she might vnderstande the true causes of the tumult of Ambaxian, and might sée also what remedies might be had for those troubles which were nowe readie to come vpon the kingdome, sent for one cal∣led Planchaeus, bicause he was sayde to be a man that had by long vse, great experience, who being come, and brought
into hir priuie chamber, she declared that she had sent for him to this ende, that she might vnderstande by him what were the causes of the troubles nowe at hande, and also what remedies might be prouided for the same. Of which, she sayde, no man coulde better satisfie hir than he. Who, when he coulde by no excuse shift off or denie this request, at the last affirmed that for his obedience sake, he woulde take this thing vpon him, and so farre as he coulde satisfie hir request. First, therefore he began thus, saying: there are two sortes of them, who hauing their names altered, were no more called Lutheranes, but Huguenotes. I saye ofSpirituall  guenotes a Temporall Huguenote these, there are two factions: the one of religious persons, the other of Ciuile or politike persons. Of the whiche two factions, the first for their afflicted Religion, the other, for that the gouernement of the Realme was put into the handes of the Guises (the Princes, the Kings neare kinsemen beyng defrauded of the same) were greatlye displeased. These were the verye causes of these troubles: to remedie the which, there is no waye, but to satisfie both their wylles. The first, namely, the religious persons may easilye be perswaded, if so be, godly and learned men were gathered togither, and disputation made of those arti∣cles nowe in controuersie. But the others, which were of the Temporaltie, can not be so easilye pacified, bicause they thinke that they haue iust occasion to put themselues in armour, and to resist. This therefore is the onely re∣medie, if the Princes the Kings neare kinsemen be kept and set in their owne proper degrée and dignitye: and the Guises by some faire and gentle meanes remooued from gouerning the Kingdome. For the Nobilitie will not suffer the Princes which are the Kings neare kinse∣men, to bée in lesse estimation than Straungers. And althoughe the Princes throughe their humanitie and great modestie woulde suffer them selues to bée so aba∣sed, yet notwithstanding, the Nobles woulde not beare
it, nor abyde the gouernement of Straungers. And to confirme this which he had spoken, he brought in manye examples, that the Guises being Straungers, were neyther in the number of Princes, nor at anye time so accounted:The names of Princes did not appertaine to the Guises, in the king∣dome of Frāce and that therefore it was not lawfull for the Guises, to ar∣rogate vnto themselues the titles and authoritie of Prin∣ces, which onely appertained to the Kings bloude, as the auncient custome of the kingdome woulde declare. This (sayth he) to pacifie those of the temporaltie, whose do∣ings were the more to bée feared, for that the greater part of the Nobilitie was of that side, sauing such as were woonne and procured awaye by the Guiles for the Kings money. Thus Planchaeus largely and fréely vttered his mynde. But all the whyle that he had this talke with the Quéene, the Cardinall of Loraine, was hydde behinde the Ta∣pistrie clothes that hng before the wall of the Closet. Who, when Planchaeus had leaue of the Quéene to depart, came forth, and talking with the Quéene, appointed that Planchaeus shoulde be called agayne, and commaunded to procéede in his former declaration, and to shewe who they were that were the authors and Captaynes of she late con∣spiracie: the which, except he woulde promise to doe, that he might be caried to prison. Therefore Planchaeus being called againe, began to vtter his minde as fréely as he had done before, shewing the parentage and stocke of the Gui∣ses, and also howe they were Straungers, and nothing ap∣pertaining to Fraunce: adding moreouer, that it was very euill done to commit the gouernement of the Realme to Straungers, and speciallye to such, as did contende ambi∣tiouslye for the Kingdome, and thought it shoulde apper∣tayne to them. The Quéene being offended with his bold∣nesse, and speciallye, séeing he affirmed that he knewe no∣thing of the conspiracie, commaunded that he should be ca∣ried to prison.
All which Planchaeus spake, was euen as it were the voy∣ces of the people speaking by the mouth of one man. After this Michael Hospitall the Kings Chauncelour, af∣ter the death of Oliuarius, of whom we spake before, a man verye well learned and wyse, was sent to the Senate of Paris, to consult with them about many matters that be∣longed to the gouernement of the Realme, and among the rest, concerning the prouiding such remedies as might take away the tumults alredie begon. And thus afflictions wax∣edAfflictions af∣ter a sort cease. more easie than they wers before: and remedies were prouided for so generall a mischiefe. But the fame and re∣port of the increasing of the multitude of the faithfull day∣lye, was in euery place of the Realme: and bicause great troubles séemed to be at hande, all men had regarde vnto them, more than to the report of the increase of the faithful, the most part endeuouring themselues to staye and pacifie these troubles. And at this time, this was the state of France: the Gui∣sesA description of the Scotres warre for Re∣ligion. sent the same prouision of warre, with the which they withstoode the religion in Fraunce, into Scotland, ouer the sea, to the intent they might there deface and put downe the religion newly begon. For the Nobles of Scotland with a great multitude of the people beside, had cast off the Popes yoke from of their neckes, & had plucked downe their Ima∣ges, their altars, and abolished the ceremonies of the Papi∣sticall seruice: causing the Quéene to get hir into a little towne by hirselfe, for that she was sore offended at that which they had done. Therefore lacking helpe, the Guises brought to passe to haue an hoste of men sent out of France, to the number of foure thousande. Of this bande of men, Brossaeus was Generall, with whome was ioyned the Bi∣shop of Ambianensis, to the ende, the one might fight with the sword, and the other with Papisticall power. Therfore they toke their iourney with these cōmandements, namely, that they should seuerely punish the Rebels, and the chiefe
authors of sedition: and that they shoulde restore the won∣ted and vsuall obedience of the Pope. Wherfore, so sone as they were come into Scotland, they made proclamation that euery one should go to Masse, & de∣test and forsake the new religion. The Bishop wrote vnto the King, that he woulde bring all the people within fewe dayes to the catholike faith. Brossaeus wrote, that he woulde destroy all within sixe moneths which woulde not come to the auncient Religion. But it came otherwise to passe. For after the death of Marie Quéene of England, the Gui∣ses made claime and title to the Crowne of Englande, for their Néece the Quéene of Scottes, as though she had bene the lawfull heire. Whereat the moste gracious Quéene Elizabeth hauing great disdaine, sent worde to the King of Fraunce, of this great iniurie done to hir Grace by the Guises, and biddeth battaile. Nowe the Scottés to the ende they might abide the for∣ren power of the Frenchmen, féeling also that they stoode in néede of helpe and ayde from some other place, went to the Quéene of England, beséeching hir that although they were hir olde enimies, yet that she woulde vouchsafe to ayde them in so iust a cause of Religion, saying that they had ra∣ther to abide any extremitie, than the tyrannie of the Pope. To whom the Quéenes maiestie willingly and gladly pro∣mised and graunted helpe. The Scottes therefore being encouraged by this ayde, did so withstande the French power, that they made great slaughter of the French men, and draue them to such a strayte, that except the matter had bene taken vp by peace, it shoulde séeme that they had bene all vtterly destroyed. Peace therfore was concluded, and the reformed Religion there established. And so that tumult was turned to the peace and quietnesse of the Church, notwithstanding, the subtill practises and cruell threatnings of the aduersaries. There were also at that time grieuous afflictions layde
vpon the Church in another place. For in the townes of Sixtus, and Guardia, in the countrie of Calabria, there wereCalabria, a countrie ioy∣ning to Na∣ples. manye, yea, to the number of a thousande, which by the Popes commaundement were put to death for Religions sake: and many horrible cruelties also committed, by the meanes of one Marchion Buciane. In the Kingdome of Fraunce also in diuers places, as at Paris, and Rhoane, many of the faythfull were murthered, vpon the solemne feast daye of the Bishops deambulation. For the faithfull began more and more to assemble them∣selues togither: and exhibited vnto the King a little booke containing the confession of their faith, requiring to haue libertie graunted vnto them, to declare their cause. Wher∣fore, it shall not be disagréeing from our purpose, to put downe here the same their confession: to the ende we may therby sée what a notable consent and agréement there was in the doctrine of faith, among the Churches of Fraunce, notwithstanding the oysterous tempestes of the first af∣flictions. A Confession of the Fayth made by the Churches of Fraunce. WE belcue and confesse one God, which is the only and simple spirituall essence, eternall, inuisible, immutable, infinite, incomprehen∣sible, vnspeakable, omnipotent, onely wise, good, iust, and mercifull. 2 This onely God shewed himselfe to be such a one vnto men, first both in the creation of his works, and also in the conseruation & gouerning of them: secondly, in his word, & that more euidently, the which worde in the beginniing he reuealed vnto the fathers by certaine visions and oracles, and afterward would haue it to be written in those bookes, which we call the bookes of holy Scripture.
3 All this holy Scripture is cōprehended in the Canoni∣callThe Scripture. bookes of the olde and newe Testament, the cataloge of the which bookes, is this: First, the fiue bookes of Moses, namely, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, Deuteronomi∣um: then Iosue, Iudges, Ruth, the two bookes of Samuel: the two bookes of Kings, the two bokes of Chronicles called Pa∣raly pomenon: the booke of Esdras, Nehemias, Esther, Iob, Psalmes, Prouerbs of Salomon, Ecclesiastes, otherwise called the Preacher, the booke of Cāticles, otherwise called the Bal∣lets of Salomon: the Prophecie of Esaias, Ieremias with the lamentations, Ezechiel, Daniel: the twelue lesser Pro∣phetes, namely, Oseas, Ioel, Amos, Abdias, Ionas, Micheas, Nahū, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias: the holy Gospell of Iesu Christ, after Mathew, after Marke, after Luke, and after Iohn. The Actes of the Apostles: Paules E∣pistle to the Romanes, his two Epistles to the Corinthians. his Epistle to the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colos∣sians: his two Epistles to the Thessalonians, both his Epi∣stles to Timothie, his Epistle to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrues: Iames Epistle: both the Epistles of Peter, ye thrée Epistles of Iohn, the Epistle of Iude▪ and the Apocalyps, or Reuelation of Iohn. 4 These bookes we confesse to be Canonicall, that is to saye, the Rule and stay of our faith, the which we haue not onely by the common consent of the Church, but also much more by the testimonie and inwarde perswasion of the ho∣ly ghost: by the instinct and motion whereof we are taught to discerne them from other Ecclesiasticall bookes, the which, although they be profitable, yet notwithstanding, they are not such, that we should ground any article of our faith vpon them. 5 We beléeue that the worde comprehended in theseThe worde. bokes, came from God alone, from whome onely it hath his authoritie, and not from men. And séeing this is the summe of all truth, contayning whatsoeuer is requisite
for the worship of God and our saluation, we saye that it is not méete, neither for men, nor yet for Angels to adde or de∣tract any thing from the same word, or to alter any thing in the same. And herevpon it followeth, that neither antiqui∣tie, nor customes, nor multitude, nor humane wisedome, nor Judgements, nor Edicts, nor decrées, nor Counsels, nor Uisions, nor Miracles, ought to be compared or set against that worde of God: but rather that all things oughte to be brought and examined according to the prescript rule ther∣of. Wherfore also, those three Symbols or Creedes, as the Apostles Crede, the Nicene Crede, and Athanasius Crede,The three Credes. are allowed of vs, bycause they are agreing to that worde of God. 6 This holie Scripture teacheth vs, that in that singular and simple diuine essence, there are three persons, the Fa∣ther,The Trinitie. the Sonne, and the holye Ghost. The Father is the first cause in order, & the originall of all things. The Sonne is his wisedome, and eternall word. The holy Ghost, is the vertue, power, and efficacie of them both. The sonne was begotten of the Father before all worldes. The holy Ghost procéeded from the Father and the Sonne frō euerlasting. The which thrée persons are not confounded, but distinct, and yet for al that, not separated, but coessentiall, coeternal, and coequall togither. To conclude, in this mysterie we al∣low that which those foure ancient Councels did determine and do detest all those sectes and all others what soeuer cō∣demned by those auncient holy Fathers, namely, by Atha∣nasius, Hilarius, Cyrill, Ambrose, and others, by the worde of God. 7 We beléeue that God, (the thrée persons working togi∣ther) by his power, wisdome, & incomprehensible goodnesse, made all things, that is to say, not onely heauē and earth, and all things in them contained, but also inuisible spirites, of which some fell to perpetuall destruction, and other some abode still in their obedience. The first, as they are by their
owne wickednesse depraued, so are they perpetuall enimies of all goodnesse, and therefore of the whole Churche. But the other beyng preserued by the méere grace of God, are Ministers of his glorye, and appoynted for the saluation of the elect. 8 We beléeue that God did not onely create all things, but also ruleth and gouerneth them, and disposeth also and ordereth at his pleasure whatsoeuer is in the worlde. Not∣withstanding we deme him to be the author of euill or of those things that are done amisse in anye wyse to deserue blame, seing that his will is the chiefe and moste certayne marke and rule of righteousnesse and iustice. For he hath rather admirable than speakeable reasons, by which he so vseth all Diuels and sinfull men, as Instrumentes, that whatsoeuer they wickedly do, the same as he did iustlye or∣daine, so also he tourneth it to good. Therefore when wee confesse that nothing is done without his prouidence and ordynaunce, wée do humblye adore the secrete mysteries that are hydden from vs, neither doe we curiously inquire and séeke after those things which are aboue our capacitie. But doe rather apply that to our vse and profite, which the Scripture teacheth for oure quietnesse and tranquilitie: Namely that God, to whome all things are subiecte, doth with fartherly carefulnesse watche for vs, in so muche that not one heare of our heade shall fall away without his wil. And as for Sathan and all oure enimyes, he hath them in such holde and bonds, that except they haue power giuē vn∣to them from him they can do nothing at all vnto vs. 9 We beléeue that man being created pure and perfecte and according to the Image of God, fell throughe his owne faulte from the grace which he had receyued, and therefore caste him selfe from God the welspring of all rightcous∣nesseMan. and goodnesse, in so muche that his nature is altoge∣ther corrupted, and his heart defiled, whereby he hath loste all his former integritie without exception. For althoughe
he hath some discretion of good and euill: notwithstanding we affirme that whatsoeuer light he hath in him, the same is tourned into darkenesse, when he seeketh after God, in so muche that no maner of way he can come vnto him, by his owne vnderstanding & reason. Moreouer, although he hath a wil, by which he is named to doe this or that, notwithstan∣ding, seing that the same is captiued & made subiect vnto sin, it hath no libertie at all to will or desire that which is good, but onely that which it receiueth by the grace & gift of God. 10 We beleue that all the progenie and ofspring of Adam, is infected with this contagion, the which we call originallOriginall sin▪ sinne, the which commeth by propagation and not of imita∣tion, as the Pelagians haue thought, all whose errors we do detest & abhorre. Neither do we thinke it necessarie to en∣quire how this sinne may come from one to another by pro∣pagation. For it is sufficient to know that whatsoeuer God hath giuen to Adam, was not giuen to him alone but to all his posteritie: and therefore we in his person are spoyled and bereft of all those benefites, and are fallen into all this miserie and malediction. 11 We beleue that this deprauatiō or corruptiō is very sin, & maketh al men, yea ye very infants as yet in ye wombes of their mothers, to be giltie of euerlasting death before God. We do also affirme that the same, after Baptisme is mini∣stred, is very sin, in respect of fault, how beit they which are ye children of God shal not be cōdēned therfore, bicause God of his frée mercy & goodnesse doth not impute the same vnto thē. Furthermore we say that this euil doth alwayes shew forth some fruits of wickednesse & rebellion, in so much that they which are the most holy, althoughe they doe resist the same, yet neuerthelesse so long as they liue in this worlde they are defiled with infirmities and offences. 12 We do beleue also, that out of this corruption & vniuer∣salElection. dānatiō, into the which al mē by nature are cast & drow∣ned, God hath takē some, namely such, whō he hath elected
and chosen by his eternall purpose and euerlasting counsel, of his owne mercy & goodnesse in his sonne Christ, without any respect of their merites. And othersome he hath lefte in that corruption and damnation, in iustlye condemning of whome, when time commeth he will shewe his iustice, euen as he declareth the riches of his mercye vpon others. For some are not better than other some, vntill God make the one to be knowne from the other, by that his euerlasting purpose, which he determined in Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the world: neyther can any man by his owne strength attaine vnto that blessednesse, since that by nature we haue no good motion, neither are we able to thinke a good thought, vntill God by grace assist vs and guideth vs vnto that which is right and good. 13 We beléeue that whatsoeuer is requisite and necessarie for our saluation, it is offered & giuen to vs in Jesus ChristChrist. alone, who is giuen to vs to saue vs, and is also made vnto vs or for vs, wisedome, righteousnesse, sanctification and re∣demption, in so much that whosoeuer forsaketh him, forsa∣keth the mercie of the Father, that is to saye, our onely re∣fuge. 14 We beléeue that Jesus Christ, the wisedome, and euer∣lasting sonne of the Father, toke vpon him our nature, in so much that in one person, he is both God and man: a man,God and man. passible both in body and soule, and in all things like vnto vs, sinne onely excepted, whose fleshe is very séede of Abra∣ham and Dauid, although by the secrete and incomprehensi∣ble power of the holy Ghost, he was in his time conceiued in the wombe of the virgin Mary. And therefore we detest and forsake all those heresies with the which the Churches in time past haue béene troubled, as most contrarie to the truth, and namely those diuelish Imaginations of Seruettus attributing to our Lorde Jesus Christ, a phantasticall dei∣tie and such like. 15 We do beleue that in one persō, which is Jesus Christ,
those two natures are so truelye and inseparably conioy∣ned,Two natures in Christ. that they are vnited together in one, and yet both of thē retaine still the distincte propertie of their natures, in so much that as in this coniunctiō, the diuine nature of ye word retaining his properties, abode vncreate, infinit, and reple∣nishing all things: euen so also the humane nature abode & shall abide for euer comprehensible, hauing his naturall forme, measure, and propertie, from whom the resurrectiō, and glorification, or assumption to the right hand of the fa∣ther shall not take away the veritie of his humane nature. Therefore we so consider of Christ in his Deity, that we spoile him not of his humanitie. 16 We beleue that God hath shewed his vnspeakable loueThe death of Christ. and goodnesse toward vs in this that he hath sent his sonne to dye and to rise againe and to fulfill al righteousnesse, that he might purchase for vs euerlasting life. 17 We beleue that by that only sacrifice which Jesus christThe Sacrifice of Christ. offered vpon the Crosse, we are reconciled vnto God, and are counted iust in his sight, bicause we cannot be accepta∣ble vnto him, neither obtaine the fruite of our adoption, ex∣cepte we haue forgiuenesse of sinnes at his handes. Ther∣fore we affirme that Jesus Christ is our full and perfecte redéemer, in whose death we haue full satisfaction, by which we are deliuered from all our sinnes, and from the which we can be absolued by no other meanes. 18▪ We beleue that all oure righteousnesse is placed in theRemission of Sinnes. remission of our sinnes, the which, as the Prophete Dauid testifieth, is our onely felicitie. Therefore we reiect openly all other waies and meanes by which men thinke that they maye be iustified before God: and laying aside all trust of our owne merites and righteousnesse, we rest and stay our selues wholy vpon the obedience of Jesus Christ, the which is imputed vnto vs both that all our sinnes may be thereby couered, and also that we may attaine grace in the sight of God. To be shorte, we beleue that if we decline neuer so
little from this foundation, we can not finde where to rest, but shal be rather alwayes vnquiet, bicause we cā not haue peace with God, vntill we are certainely perswaded of this that we are loued in Jesus Christ, bicause in our selues we are worthy of all hate. 19 We doe beleeue that by this onely meanes we haue libertye to call vpon God, with certayne truste that hée will declare him selfe to bee our Father. For we haue no accesse vnto the Father, but by the meanes of the media∣tor. 20 We do beleue yt we are made partakers of this righte∣ousnesseFaith. by faithe onely, as it is written that he suffered to saue vs, that whosoeuer shal beleue in him might not perish. And it is thus appointed to this ende, bicause the promises of life offered to vs in him, are then applyed to our vse and profite and are made effectual to vs, when we imbrace thē, nothing doubting of the hauing of those things of the which we are certified by Gods owne mouth. Therefore the righ∣teousnesse which we obtaine by faith dependeth vpon the frée promises, by which God testifieth and declareth that we are beloued of him. 21 We beleue that we are endued with the light of faith,The grace of the holy gost. by the secrete grace and working of the holy ghost, ye which faith is the frée gift of God, & proper to them alone to whom it pleaseth God to giue the same: that the faithfull might haue nothing in them selues to boast of, whē as rather they are two folde more bound to God than others, in that they are preferred before others. Also we beleue that faith is gi∣uen to the electe, not that they should once onely walke in the right way, but rather to cōtinue in the same al the dayes of their lyfe: bicause as the beginning is of God, so is also the ende. 22 We beleue that we which are by nature the seruants ofNewnesse of lyfe. sinne, by the same faith are regenerate into a new life. For by faith we receiue grace to lyue a holy and godly lyfe, whē
we imbrace that uangelicall promise, that the Lorde will giue vnto vs the holy Ghost. Therfore faith is so far from taking away the desire to leade a godly life, that it doth ra∣ther inflame the same in vs, from whence good workes ne∣cessarily do follow. But, although God doth regenerate vsGood works. to the ende he might fully saue vs, notwithstanding we af∣firme that the good workes which we do by the assistance of Gods holy spirite, are not so regarded of God, that we shuld be iustified by them, or deserue to be counted the sonnes of God, bicause we shoulde alwayes doubte and feare if so be that we had not that satisfactiō, by which Christ Jesus hath deliuered vs from all harme. 23 We beleue that all the figures of the law are taken a∣wayThe figures of the law. by the comming of Christ, although we know that the truth and substaunce of them remaine in him in whō they were fulfilled. Howbeit we must vse and exercise the Law and the Prophets, both for the framing of our life, and alsoThe doctrine of the law. that we may be the more confirmed in the promises of the Gospell. 24 We beleue that seing Jesus Christ is giuen to vs to beOne onely aduocate. our onely aduocate who also commaundeth that we should boldly come to the Father in his name, and seing it is not lawfull for vs to pray in any other order and forme than in that which God him selfe hath appointed in his word, what soeuer men haue deuised concerning the intercessiō of deadIntercession of saintes. Saintes, it is nothing else but the deceite and crafte of Sa∣than, to drawe men from the right and true forme of pray∣er. We doe also reiect all those meanes whatsoeuer, that men haue inuented to delyuer them selues from the wrath of God, for so muche as they doe derogate so much from the death and sacrifyce of Jesus Christ as men gyue and attri∣bute vnto them. To cōclude, we thinke that Purgatory is a fable, broughtPurgatory forth of y• same shop, frō whēce also came Monastical vows, pilgrimages, prohibitiō of Matrimonie, & the vse of meates,
the ceremoniall obseruation of certaine dayes, Auricular confession, Iuduigences, and suche like abhominations, by which, some thinke, that they merit grace and saluation. All which things we do reiecte, not onely for the false opinion conceyued of meriting adioyned vnto them, but also bicause they be the inuentions of men, and a yoake layde vpon con∣sciences by the authoritie of men. 25 We beléeue, bicause we can not obtaine Christ, but by the Gospell, that the holy and inuiolable discipline establi∣shedEcclesiasticall discipline. by his authoritie in the Churche ought to be obserued: and that therefore Pastours ought to be in the Church, to whom appertaineth the office of preaching the worde, and the ministration of the Sacramentes, whom men ought to honor and reuerently heare, if they beyng lawfully called discharge their dutie: not that God of necessitie néedeth such inferior helpes, but rather bycause it thus seemeth good vn∣to him to rule vs, as it were with a bridle. And therfore we do detest all those fanaticall persons, which so muche as in them lyeth séeke to abolishe the holy ministerye, that is to say, the preaching of the worde, and the administration of Sacraments. 26 We beléeue therefore that it is lawfull for no man toThe vnitie of the Church. withdrawe himselfe from the Congregation, and to trust in himselfe: but is rather the duetie of all men to defende and kéepe the Unitie of the Churche, submitting them selues to the common Institution and yoake of Christe wheresoeuer God hath appointed the true and Ecclesiasti∣call discipline, althoughe the Edictes of Magistrates be a∣gainst the same: from the which order, whosoeuer separate them selues, they resist the ordinance of God. 27 We beléeue that with great diligence and discretion theWhat the Church is. true Church must be discerned, by the name whereof many are too much abused. Therfore we affirme out of the worde of God, that the Churche is a company or congregation of the faithfull, which do agrée in following the word of God,
and in imbracing true Religion, in the which also they day∣ly profite and go forward, grounding and confirming one another in the feare of God, who although they receiue ne∣uer so great profite, yet must they daylie of necessitie seeke for remission of sinnes. And yet for all this will not denie but that manye hipocrites and reprobates are mixed with the faithfull, but yet their wickednesse can not take awaye the name the Church. 28 Therfore in beléeuing of this thing, we also openly af∣firme that where the worde of God is not receiued, nor no profession of that obedience shewed that belongeth thervn∣to, nor no vse of the Sacraments, there (to speake properly) we can Iudge no Church to be. We therfore condemne the Papisticall Church bicause the pure truth of God is bani∣shed out of the same, in the which the Sacramentes of faith are corrupted, falsified, or else quite abolished: in the which all superstition & Idolatry is to be founde. And therfore we thinke that all they which do ioyne themselues to such acti∣ons and do communicate with them, doe separate them sel∣ues from the body of Christ. Nothwithstanding bicause in the Papacy remaineth some Imitacion of the true church,The Papacy. and specially the substance of Baptisme, the efficacie wher∣of dependeth not vpon him that ministreth the same, we graunt that they which are baptized in the same Popishe Church, haue no néede to be baptized againe: howbeit, by∣cause of the corruptions with the which Baptime is there mixed, no man can offer his childe to be of them baptized but he must pollute him selfe. 29 We do beléeue that the true Churche oughte to be go∣uerned with that discipline, which our Lorde Iesus ChristDiscipline of the Church. appointed, and to haue in the same, Pastors, Ministers, and Deacons, that the pure doctrine of the Gospell may be prea∣ched, vice bridled, and poore & afflicted persons (so far as nede shall require) comforted. 30 We do beléeue that all true Pastors, wheresoeuer they
be placed, haue power and authoritie all a like, vnder that onely head, and chiefe vniuersall Bishop Iesus Christ: And therfore that it is lawfull for no Church to chalenge vnto it selfe imperie or rule ouer another. 31 We do beleue that it is vnlawfull for anye man of his owne authoritie to presume to take vpon him the gouern∣ment of the Church, but ought rather to be chosē to the same by lawfull election, if so be the same may be had. We addeThe lawful e∣lection of mi nisters. this (if) bicause sometime (as in oure time also) when the Church hath bene troubled and persecuted, many haue béen constrayned without ordinarie callyng, by the motion of Gods holye spirite, to take vpon them to repaire the rui∣nousnesse of the decayed Church: notwithstanding howso∣euer the matter be, we doe beléeue that this rule ought to be followed, that all pastors and ministers maye haue suffici∣ent testimonie of their calling. 32 We doe beléeue it to be necessarie that they which are chosen to be the chiefe ouerséers of some one Churche, doe diligently waye and consider among them selues, by what waye or meanes, the whole body of the same Churche may be best gouerned. Notwithstanding so that they swerue in no poynt from that which our Lorde Iesus Christ hath ap∣pointed. And this letteth not but that certaine places maye haue their peculiar and speciall institutions to them apper∣taining as it shall séeme best. 33 And we doe exclude all humane inuentions and lawes whiche vnder the pretence of the worshippe of God doe bynde the consciences of men, and we doe onely admit and alow those which tend to the maintaining of concord, & the keping of euerye one in due obedience, in the which thing we thinke it méete, to follow that which our Lord & sauiourExcommuni∣cation. Christ appointed, concerning excommunication, the which with the circumstances also we allow & thinke necessarye. 34 We doe beléeue that there are Sacramentes ioyned to the woorde, for further confirmations sake, as pledges and
seales of the grace of God, by which our infyrme and weake faith may be stayed and holpen. For we confesse these ex∣ternallSacraments. signes to be such, that God by them worketh, with the power of his holy spirit, that nothing there might be set before vs in vaine. Notwithstāding we doe thinke that al ye substance & veritie of them resteth in Christ Iesu, frō whō if they be separated, they are nothing but vayne shadowes. 35 We doe confesse that there belong onely two Sacra∣mentes to the whole Church, of the which the first is Bap∣tisme,Baptisme. giuen vnto vs to testifie our adoption, bycause there∣by we are grafted into the body of Christ, as beyng washed with his bloud, and are also renewed to holynesse of life, by his spirite. This also we affirme, that although we are but once baptized, yet notwithstanding the fruite of Baptisme doth appertaine to the race of our whole life, to the ende that this promise mighte be sealed in vs by a sure and certaine seale, namely, that Christ will be alway our sanctification, righteousnesse, and redemption. Furthermore, althoughe Baptisme be a Sacramente of fayth and repentaunce, yet notwithstanding seyng God doth recken and accounte the children wyth the parentes to be of his Church, we affirme that infantes borne of holy and godly parents, ought, by the authoritie of Christ to be baptized. 36 We affirme that the holy Supper of the Lord, which is the other Sacrament, is a testimony vnto vs of our vnionThe Lords Supper. with our Lorde Iesus Christ, bicause he did not thinke it sufficient for vs, onely to dye, and to be raysed agayne the third day, for our sinnes, but also féedeth vs still▪ and nou∣risheth vs with his fleshe and bloude, that being made one with him, we maye be partakers of life with him. For al∣though he be now in heauen, and shall abide there vntill he come to iudge the worlde, yet notwithstanding we beleue that he doth by the secrete and incomprehensible power of his spirite nouryshe and quicken vs wyth the substance of hys fleshe and bloude, apprehended by faithe.
And we saye that this is done spiritually, not that we go a∣bout to put fantasie and imagination in steade of efficacie and veritie, but bicause this misterie of our vnion, and knot made betwene Christ and vs, is sodaine and far paste our reache, that by no meanes we are able to comprehende it. To be shorte, séeing it is a thing so diuine and heauenly, it can not be by any meanes apprehended but by faith onely. 37 We beléeue (as it is saide before) that the Lord as well in the Supper as in Baptisme, doth giue vnto vs in verye déede, that is to saye, truely and effectually, whatsoeuer is therin figured Sacramentally, and therfore we ioyne with signes the true possession and fruition of that thing, which is so offered vnto vs. Therfore we affirme that they which bring a pure fayth as a vessell, with them, to the holy table of the Lorde, doe verily receiue that which the signes doe there testifie: for the body and bloude of Iesus Christ is no lesse meate and drinke to the soule, than bread and wine is the sustenance of the body. 38 In like maner we saye that the element of water, al∣though it be corruptible doth truely testifie vnto vs the in∣ward washing of our soule in the bloude of Iesus Christ by the efficacie of the holy Ghost. And therefore we reiecte all those fanaticall persons, which reiect these outward signes, when as our Sauiour Christ him selfe spake these wordes saying: This is my Body, and, This Cup is my Bloud. 39 We beléeue that it is Gods will that the world shoulde be ruled and gouerned, by lawes and politique gouerne∣ment, that there may be some meanes by which the immo∣derateMagistrates. desires of the worlde may be bridled and restrained: and that therefore he hath appointed kingdomes, common weales, and other kindes of dignities, whither they come by inheritance or otherwise? and not onely that, but what∣soeuer pertaineth to right and equitie, the author whereof he himselfe woulde be counted. Therefore also he hath put the swerde into the hands of Magistrates, to punishe offen∣ces
not onely against the seconde table, but also against the first. Wherefore we must for his sake which is the author of this order, not onely suffer that they may rule whome he hath set ouer vs, but also honour and reuerence them as his Ministers appointed by him to take that lawfull and holy office vpon them. Therefore we affirme that lawes and statutes ought to be obeyed, tribute and taxes payed, and all other burthens discharged, and voluntary subiection yelded to magistrates, yea although they be infidels, so that God be not dishono∣red. Therefore we detest all those that denie rule and go∣uernment and refuse to obey, desiring a confusion and to haue all things common, and going about to ouerthrow all lawe and good order. This therefore was the plaine and simple confession of the faythfull Christians of the reformed Churches of Fraunce, and a plaine ex∣plication of that Doctrine for the which they were so greatly persecu∣ted by the Popishe Bishops. Thus endeth this first Book.
¶ The seconde Booke of Commen∣taries of the state of Religion in the king∣dome of Fraunce. IT was prouided and appointed (as we haue shewed before) by the kings Edict, that there should be a Parliament, by which, the great perturbations which at that time all men sawe to be imminent and readye to fall on the kingdome, might be appeased and mitti∣gated. Therefore at the daye appointed, diuers of the kings priuie counsel & other noble men came togither. The which assembly being made, the King declared the cause of their comming togither at that time, and commaūded that euery man should freely declare his mind both for his owne pro∣fite, and for the benefite of the kingdome also. The rest (he said) they should heare more at large of his Chauncelour, of the Duke of Guise, and of the Cardinall of Loraine. Then the Chauncelour stoode vp & made a large discourse concer∣ning the state of the kingdome, shewing that all men ought most chiefely to endeuour them selues to finde out the cau∣ses of so great perill & mischiefe as the whole Realme now stoode in, the causes wherof being knowne, the remedyes might be the more easily prouided for. And, to this end and purpose he said, this assembly was made, namely, to finde out the causes of this mischiefe, & to prouide remedyes for the same. Adding moreouer that all things were done for the safetie of the people, for whom the King had most deepe and especiall care. And after hym the Duke of Guise brief∣ly shewed the cause of his gathering together of an Ar∣mie. These things onely were done that daye: the next daye
those which before were assembled, came together againe into the same place. And then the Chauncelor declared that it was the kings pleasure that euerye man shoulde freelye vtter his minde, but firste of all they of the priuie counsell, that by their example and beginning the reste might more boldely and cheerefully goe forwarde. Then Ianus Monlu∣cius, Bishop of Valentia, the last coūseller being commaun∣ded first of all to vtter his minde: Gasper Castillon the Ad∣mirall strait way stepte vp, came to the king, and when he had reuerently saluted him, he deliuereed vnto hym two supplications, written in their name, which called themsel∣ues,The supplica∣tions of the faithfull deli∣uered by the Admiral to the King. The faithfull Christians dispersed through diuers places of Fraunce. Both the whiche supplications at the Kyngs commaundement were read, the summe and effecte wher∣of was: that they had good occasiō offered them by this their assemblye to offer their supplications and their humble re∣questes to the King, praying and beséeching him that he woulde haue regarde to the greatest parte of his subiectes, who were euill intreated euen vntill that present time, and that for this cause onelye: for that they mynded to frame their lyues according to the prescript rule of the pure word of God. Affyrming also that they soughte for nothing else than to haue their doctrine examyned by the same rule of Gods worde, and that their cause might throughly be way∣ed and considered: that all men mighte knowe for certaine howe greatly they did hate and abhorre those seditious and heretical opinions with the which hitherto they were false∣ly burthened. Seyng they were thus euill intreated and oppressed, they flée vnto his maiestie for succour, beseching him that he would not disdaine but vouchsafe to behold and way their cause, & in the meane time yt it would please him to omit the punishments, by which their blood had béen shed in euery part of the kingdome, by the wickednesse & crueltie of many of the Iudges: who hauyng no regard to the peace and welfare of the Subiectes, but séeking rather to sa∣tisfie
their owne fantasie, lust, and desire, had shed the blood of poore men vndeseruedly and most vniustly, & had brought to passe to make a stay, that their requests and supplicatiōs might at no time come to the kings eares. Wherefore they humbly beséeche his grace that he would maintaine and de∣fende his poore subiects against the wicked crueltie of these men: for which cause, they acknowledge him to be their King, and will render vnto him, according to Gods com∣maundement, all due and seruisable obedience: and doe commit them selues wholy with all theirs, vnder his pa∣trociny and safegarde, and also doe account him, their bul∣warke, refuge and staye. Protesting before God and hys Maiestie, that they neuer intended any thing against hym, or to omit that loyall duetie and obedience, which they owe vnto him, for whose prosperitie, they daylie make their prayers vnto God. Adding moreouer that they sought for no euill libertie, or to haue sinne vnpunished: but rather that they might haue libertie to liue so néere as they coulde, according to the Gospell which they professed: and that in this thing they might not feare the iudgemēts of their chie∣fest aduersaries. Againe therefore they beséech and praye his Maiestie that it would please him to graunt them leaue to heare the worde of God, and to receiue his Sacraments, vntill the matter were more fully wayed and considered of the Counsell: and that to this end and vse, they might haue Churches graunted vnto them, least their congregation or assembly being priuate and secrete, might come into false and euill suspicion. This libell being red, the Admiral desired the King that he would take it in good part, bringing in diuers testimonies of his faithfulnesse towardes the kings Maiestie: As, when he was in Normandy to prouide things necessarye for the Scottishe warre, and was appoynted by the Quéenes com∣maundement diligently to inquire out the dealings and be∣hauiour of those which were called Faithfull▪ and perceiuing
that they rendred certaine reasons of their doings, he pro∣mised vnto them to offer their supplications vnto the Kings maiestie. To this the King aunswered, that he had diuers good and notable testimonies of him, and of his deserts, and also that he did take all things that he had done in very good part. And then the King commaunded againe the Bishop of Valentia to speake his iudgement. Who in effect vttered this which followeth. DIOCLESIAN was wont to say, that the state andThe sentence of the Bishop of Valentia. condition of those Princes was miserable, which were of∣ten deceyued by those, in whome onely they reposed their trust: bicause they forsaking the gouernement of the com∣mon wealth, and being as it were, drowned in their plea∣sures, might so be easily deceyued. The which hath not happened vnto the King, forasmuch as there was diligent prouision made against those perilles by the prudent wise∣dome of the Quéene, and by the diligence and care of the Guises; by which it was brought to passe, that the tumultes alredy raised were suppressed. The which being appeased, the King did wisely foresée howe to prouide for the like to come, and that for this cause he had caused this assembly to be made, in the which there were so manye good men that sought the Kings quietnesse and profite, that it coulde not be but that his Maiesties desires should be satisfied in euery poynt. For so great is the confusion and trouble in euerye place of the Realme, that it coulde not be more expressely described by the Prophete Esay, to be the dissipation of all things, of all orders and gouernement, than it is. The do∣ctrine which hath so drawne away the mindes of men, was not swne lately, as it were, two yeares ago, but for the space of fortie yeares since, or thereabouts; by many Mini∣sters of the same doctrine, being men verye expert in the knowledge of holy Scripture: who, by their great mode∣stie, grauitie and godlynesse, hating all vice, and specially couetousnesse, and contemning their owne life for the ren∣seruation
of their doctrine, and hauing alwayes in their mouth that moste swéete name Christ Iesus, finding al∣so the people going astray without a shepehearde or guyde, were easily hearde, and receyued, and brought great in∣crease to their doctrine: and no marayle, seeing they left nothing vndone, that might be done eyther by preaching, by writing, or by any other meanes, to publish and spreads the same abrode. But to come vnto those vsurped meanes and wayes which were attempted to ynder and suppressBishops of Rome. that doctrine: if we shall begin first of all with the Bishops of Rome, we shall find that they haue very diligently gone about to sowe discord, and to make warre betwéene Kings and Princes. But our Kings, moued with godly zeale, haue appoynted paynes and punishmentes by Edictes, thin∣king by that meanes to driue awaye those opinions, and to bring the people to one onely kinde of Religion: but in vaine. For the Iudges, both greatlye abused those E∣dictes, and also oftentymes executed them after their owne euill disposition and pleasure, to gratifie those which craued the confiscation and spoyle of their goodes which were accused. Of this matter we haue a manifest example shewed not long ago, of a man of no meane calling, which desired to haue the confiscation and spoyle of one which was accused of heresie, whose iudgement he tooke vpon him to order and appoint. If any Magistrate, Counseller, or Lawyer,Lawyers. had bene an euill or wicked person, to the intent he myght hide his former faultes and wickednesse, his maner was, by and by to séeke that these causes of Religion might bée brought before him, and that he might be put in office and authoritie to deale in these causes: the which authoriti when he had rashly abused, vnder the colour of zeale, he shoulde streight way haue a name, and all that he had done before, shoulde be forgotten and forgiuen: as though that Religion ought to be defended by these supportations. So
that it ought not to séeme straunge vnto vs, that these exe∣cutions haue no better successe, and also if the people cannot abyde and suffer such wicked and cruell practises. On the o∣therBishop. side, the Bishops haue bene slouthfull and negligent, and haue had no consideration and care, to giue an account of their flockes committed to their charge: but haue rather sought all that they coulde to maintaine and encrease their yerely reuenewes, which they consumed vpon filthy, vaine, & vnprofitable things: insomuch that at one time forty Bi∣shops togither were at Paris, banquetting, & satisfying their filthy pleasures, and liuing ydly, while al disorder and wic∣kednesse increased in their Diocesses. Moreouer, we know that Bishoprickes, or the office of a Bishop, hath bene be∣stowed vpon children, vpon Infantes, yea, before they were borne, vpon vnlearned and simple men also, which neyther knewe howe, nor woulde discharge their office. And thus the eyes of the Churches, that is to saye, the Bishops, were blynded, and the pyllers of the Church cast downe to the grounde. The Ministers therefore of this and that sect, vsing the occasion of these perturbati∣ons and troubles, haue omitted nothing to winne the peo∣ple vnto them. And as for Curates, they are couetous,Curates. vnlearned, and conuersant in all things sauing in doing of their dutie: and as the most part of them haue gotten their Priesthoode by wicked meanes, so doe they most vn∣godlily retaine the same still: for Cardinals and Bishops let not to make their seruaunts, their Cookes, and horsekée∣pers, Priestes, whereby Ecclesiasticall persons, are be∣come a ieast and laughing stocke to euery man. But the onely meane and waye to prouyde for, and to remedie these mischiefes, is to flée vnto God, who in his iust iudge∣ment is wroth with Ecclesiasticall persons, insomuch that he séemeth to intende their destruction, as hée did once the destruction of the Iewes. Also, certayne godlye men must be sought for, and called togither from all partes
of the Realme, to consider of these and the lyke wickednes∣ses, and to deuise meanes and wayes to extirpe and root them out: and the King for his part must sée with all dili∣gence that the name of God be not polluted and blasphe∣med, as it hath bene hitherto: and that the holy Scriptures may be purely and plainly expounded to the people: and al∣so that they may haue daily in their houses godly sermons, and exhortations: the which shall be able to stop the mouths of slaunderous persons, which shamefully sayde, that God was not once named or spoken of in the presence of the King. And you (sayth he) O Quéenes, graunt me this one thing,He speaketh to Queenes, namely to the Kings mother and the Kings wife. I beséech you (if I maye be bolde to beséech you) that you woulde bring to passe, that in steade of prophane and vn∣semely songs, all your traine and retinue maye sing godlye and vertuous Psalmes to the prayse of God: Knowe ye for a suretie, that God doth allowe or like of no companie or congregation, in the which he is not praysed and extolled. To this he added much more, by which he proued▪ that it was against reason, that the singing of Psalmes shoulde beThe singing of Psalmes. forbidden, if the interpretation of them, which was noted about them, were not allowed, he sayde, it was better that the errors were noted, than that the whole worke shoulde be so reiected. And he shewed also that the Psalmes were made, not only for the publike vse of Churches, but also to be daily and priuately vsed. And therfore in forbidding the singing of Psalmes, there is iust occasion offered to sediti∣ous persons to calumniate and speake euill: For nowe in this we striue not against men, but against God, whoseThe seconde remedie to appease trou∣bles. prayses are so hindered and let. The seconde remedie is a generall Councell, the which the Fathers alwayes vsed as a remedie to pacifie and appease the dissentions of the Church. I sée not howe the Popes conscience can be quiet, nor to be in rest the space of one houre, séeing he séeth so ma∣ny soules to perishe through the diuersitie of opinions, and
yet for all that séeketh no meanes how to remedie the same. But if it shoulde come to passe, that the Generall Councell shoulde be let or hindered, then the King shall doe his dutie in calling a Councell of his owne Nation, after the ensam∣ple of his auncetors, the Kings of this Realme, as of Caro∣lusThe example of the kings, Carolus Mag∣nus and Lodo∣wicke. Magnus, and Lodowicke his sonne. Nowe, they must be called to be of this Coūcell, which are counted to be the best learned men among them of that sect: and learned men of the contrarie part also, that they maye dispute togither of the principall groundes of Religion nowe in controuersie. Thus did Theodotius the Emperour at Constantinople, a∣gainst the Arrians and Macedonians, although they were iustly condemned by the Councell of Nice and others: and afterwardes the Emperour woulde haue the actes of the Councell handled before him, to be openlye publyshed a∣broade. But concerning the paines and punishments which wereThe Gospell of diuers men diuersly re∣ceyued. hitherto appointed, this (he sayde) was his opinion▪ and iudgement: That doctrine, for the which, all this trouble a∣riseth, is of diuers men; diuersly receyued. Some, so soone as they hearde of the same perfecte and approued doctrine, and had in no poynt imbraced & receyued the same, thought it sufficient to knowe this one thing, namely, that no man ought to heare Masse: and that it was lawfull to eate fleshe in Lent: that men were not bounde to Auricular confessi∣on: and that it was lawfull to speake euill of Priestes. These men vndiscretely went about to defend that doctrine by force of armes: but to be short, these men vnder the pre∣tence of Religion, were mere seditious, and are by no mea∣nes to be excused. For if these kinde of men were Christi∣ans, or by any maner of meanes true receyuers of the Gos∣pell, they ought to remember, that the Apostle commaun∣ded to praye for Kings, and to render all obedience vnto them, yea, though they were cruell and wicked: also they ought to call to minde, that neuer in the Church, specially
in the time of the twelue great persecutions, in the which an infinite number of Christians were put to death, there was any one man founde, which went about to defend his cause by force of armes: but rather ouercame the crueltie of their Emperours, with their pacience. Another sort of men there are also, which imbrace this doctrine, and retain the same, with such zeale, loue, and obedience towardes God and the King, that they woulde in nothing offende them. By the life and death of these men, it is manifest, that they haue a desire to attayne saluation, and to finde the way that leadeth to the same: and when they haue founde that way, they neither feare losse of lyfe and goods, nor any ma∣ner of punishment, but to ye vtmost of their power prosecute that way. Wherfore, they are not to be counted among the number of those wicked professors before spoken off, nor to be numbred in the companie of seditious persons. As yet we see it playne inough that those punishmentes which haue bene deuised, haue done no good: but on the contrarie part, their patience which they manifestly shewed in the middest of the fierie flames, hath stirred vp many to haue a liking, and to fauour their cause. Herevpon it came to passe, that they which neuer hearde of the same doctrine for the which they suffer, were desirous to vnderstande what do∣ctrine it was, and at the length hauing intelligence of the same, they did receiue it with no lesse affection & zeale, than others had done, being ready by the ensample of others, to suffer death for it. Therfore set before your eyes and consi∣derWith what weapons in time past the Bishops resi∣sted heretikes. the examples of the thrée hundred and eightene Bi∣shoppes, in the first Councell of Nice: of the. 150. in the Councell of Constantinople: of the 200. in the Councell of E∣phesus: and of the 630. in the Councell of Chalcedon: who ne∣uer vsed any other armour than the worde of God, against the Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, and other heretikes, conuicted of blasphemie against the holy Trinitie. Constantinus, Valentinian, Theodosius, Martian, being
Christian and godly Emperours, did vse no greater punish∣ment against the authors of sects, than banishment. And, as touching assemblies and multitudes gathered togither, they were always forbidden, for the daūger that séemed therof to arise: ye king also hath sufficiently prouided for this thing by his Edicts. And thus this Bishop made an end of his oratiō, adding this one thing: (by the Kings leaue) that it was mete in punishing to haue a prudent consideration of the place, of the time, of the wils of men, & of the cōpani called togither. After this man, Carolus Marillacus. Bishop of Vienna in Dolpheny, vttered his opinion in maner and forme folowing. Although that matter which is propounded vnto vs to de∣liberateThe oration of the Bishop of Vienna. vpon, is very hard & long: bicause it is left at large, and is general, & therfore the more vneasie to be concluded, séeing we must come frō that which is generall, to particu∣larities: in discussing wherof, the diuersitie of Iudges will bring (as it is likely) great varietie of opiniōs: yet notwith∣standing, we must hold this as a sure & certaine rule in the discussing of all matters: namely, that after long consulta∣tion & debating of things, some certaintie at the length must be concluded: & that there cannot be a more pestilent mis∣chiefe, & mortal plague in the gouernment of common wea∣les, than to wander among the diuersitie of opinions, & to appoint and retaine no certaine thing. And if this rule, so greatly commended of wise men, & so prudently obserued of Kings, of common weales, & of Princes, which euer at any time florished, ought to stirre vs vp to follow the same way and rule: truly, the necessitie & the extremitie in the which we are, hath brought vs into such a strayt, yt we cannot do o∣therwise though we would▪ And as all men of sound iudge∣ment wil confesse, y• matter cannot abide in that state, in the which it is now, any lōger. But lest I be tedious vnto you▪ I will come to the matter. The tumults which of late haue hapned, the feare of newe things, the complaintes and dis∣pleasure of many men, and the feare also and dreade that is
among men, ought to stirre vs vp to séeke and prouide for remedies in time, which may defende vs from these great troubles, which else wil make a great alteration of y• state. And that I may briefly conclude this matter, I thinke that there are two things, as it were two pillers, by which, theTwo pillers of the kingdome state of the kingdome may be fortified and borne vp: name∣ly, the integritie of Religion, and the good will of the peo∣ple. The which, if they were stable and firme, we néede not doubt the safetie of things: but if they be once cast downe (as it is to be scared) there must néedes followe great ruine and destruction of that hie and notable building. These two things therfore must be stablished and confirmed to prelient that ruine which is like to come: and to this ende (as both common profite and necessitie requireth) all our Councels, reasons, deuises and deliberations ought to tende: séeing herevpon both the due obedience to the King, and the con∣seruation of the people dependeth. The which things are so ioyned togither, that the one of them by anye meanes can∣not stande without the other. As concerning necessitie, we must measure and wey the same by hauing a respect and consideration of the King, and of his principall members or ministers, which vnder him gouerne the people, and of others also who ought to obey. First of all therfore, it is theThe office of a King Kings duty to wey & cōsider whervnto he is called, & wher∣fore ye Lord hath giuen vnto him ye rule of so great a people. In so doing, he shal find that the Lord hath chosen him to be a King to this ende, that he might kéepe the people vnder the knowledge, feare, and obedience of God, that he might gouerne them by good and wholesome lawes, and also to saue and defende them from the enimie: and in all thinges to shewe himselfe so studious and carefull for the common wealth, that he may be honoured and be beloued as a father of the people. For this is the onely difference betwéene a King & a Tyrant: The King reigneth and ruleth with theA Tyrant. good will, loue, and consent of the people: but the tyrant
ruleth by violence and force. In a King therefore a man may behold the ordinance of God, the author and preseruer of Common welthes and humaine societie: In the tyrant the force and violence of the Diuel, who goeth about to per∣uert that ende to the which God hath ordeyned Kings and Potentates. Herevpon it commeth, that as the King is lo∣ued of all men, and hated of none, but of wicked men and Rebels: so the tyrant is feared of all men without excepti∣on, and therefore hated of all, according to the olde Pro∣uerbe, Quem metuunt, oderunt, him whome men feare, they hate. Therefore if the King will be loued, and obey the commaundement of God, and retaine the obedience and loue of his subiectes, he must of necessitie stablishe Religi∣on, he must heare the complaintes of the people, and must prouide for them remedies, as a father prouideth for his children: séeing that he is set in the kingdome to that ende, neyther can he doe otherwise, except he will make himselfe vnworthy of the grace of God, by which he confesseth that he doth reigne: as both examples of holy Scripture, and do∣mesticall examples also do plentifully declare. The first bond therfore which confirmeth, knitteth, andReligion. retaineth the obedience of kings, is Religion: ye which is no∣thing else than to know God, as it becommeth vs, that is to say, according to his prescript wil. And now séeing we ought to acknowledge him, to be ye creator, author, & preseruer of all things, it must néedes folow, that al our actions ought to tende to the setting forth of his glory. Whervpon it cometh to passe, that Religion, which is yt most assured bonde of hu∣mane actions, and of the true obedience of subiects towards their Kings, ought to be reformed, preserued, & maintained. But bicause that bonde is dissolued and broken in these our dayes, both by the malice & wickednesse of some, and also by the doting madnesse and folly of other some, and by the cor∣ruption of our time: it is no doubt, an euident demonstra∣tion and token of the wrath of God, which threateneth
vnto vs great destruction, not farre hence, vnlesse it be pro∣uided for out of hande. For besides the varietie of doctrines, who euer sawe the ancient discipline of the Church so mise∣rably abused, contemned, and deiected: errors so dispersed and rooted euery where, offences and stumbling blockes so common, the life of Priests so corrupt, and so much to be re∣prehended, and also so many and great tumultes among the people. The way to remedie this great euill and mischiefe, is a generall Councell, the only ancient & vsuall meane: but as it plainely appeareth, that is not to be hoped for, and thatWhy a gene∣rall Councell is not to be looked for. for two causes: The one is, It is not in our power to bring to passe, that the Pope, the Emperour, the Kings, and the Germanes, shoulde by & by agree, of the time, the place, and maner of holding of a Councell: in which things there are oftentimes great cōtrouersies. The other cause is this, Such is the disease and mischief, & it so grieueth euery part of the kingdome, that there is small hope of any remedie: Like as if a man troubled with a cōtinuall feuer, or with some other grieuous disease, which requireth letting of bloude, or some other present remedie, cannot tarie to haue the Phisitions help which dwelleth farre of, bicause of ye great vncertainty of his cōming. Therfore we must bring to passe to call a coū∣celA Parliament. of our Nation, as it was before concluded, the which also the King hath alredy openly promised: And this parliament must of necessitie be called, both for the necessitie which so vrgeth the miserable Church, being brought to so great ex∣tremities, & also for the kings estimation and credit, who by his owne letters hath openly giuen forth & declared y• same: but specially bicause there hath nothing happened since that time which might let or hinder the same: but on the contra∣rie part, there grow new things & occasions daily, which do vrge and driue vs to séeke to call a Parliament, vnlesse we could be contented to lose all that we haue. The Emperour Charles the vlately deceased, whē he came to Bononia, and had conferred with Pope Clement concerning matters of
the Church, he willed his Chauncelor to talke with yt PopeThe contro∣uersie betwene Charles the v. and Pope Cle∣ment. concerning the calling of a Coūcell, both to reforme the ma∣ners of Church men and also to establish the doctrine which was in controuersie. The Pope vehemently withstode this thing, affirming that there was no néede to call a Councell, neither for doctrine, séeing that al new opinions are refuted & condemned of the ancient Councels, neither yet for Eccle∣siasticall discipline, which was so wel appointed, that it was sufficient only to obserue & kepe the decrées written concer∣ning the same. But the Emperour being not satisfied with this answere, replied againe, that it coulde not be, but that the great assembly of the generall Councell, shoulde bring great profit, & doe much good, both to cut off that euill which daily increased more and more: and also to repaire and con∣firme those things which were very well already receyued and allowed, & to hinder & cut off that which might abolishe them by discontinuance and want of vse. And in this minde concerning the procuring of a Councel he continued, so lōg as he liued: In the which matter he founde no greater ad∣uersaries than those, who shoulde haue set him forwarde in so commendable an enterprise. Our auncetours were woont euery fiue yeares to call ge∣nerall Councels, as it is to be séene in the decrees. But as touching priuate Councels, or Councels assembled out of our owne Nation, we shall find in the histories of the Kings of Fraunce, that they were called in euerye Kings tyme, beginning at the raigne of Clodouaeus, vntill the tyme of Charles the great, and so forth, vntill we come to Charles the feue uth his dayes. The which Parliamentes, or assem∣blies, were sometimes gathered togither from euery part of the whole kingdome, sometimes from one halfe of the Realme, sometimes but out of certaine Prouinces onely. By which Parliaments it was sildome séene but that there ensued great fruite and profite to the reformation both of do∣ctrine and maners.
Let vs not staye therefore any longer at the matter, but followe the examples and wayes of our elders: and let vs not be afrayde to be accused to be bringers in of newe cu∣stomes, séeing that we haue so many examples to followe: but let vs assure our selues, that there must néedes follows thereof prosperous successe, séeing that God is alwaies pre∣sent with those which assemble themselues togither in hys feare and name. Neither let vs defer the time any more, sée∣ing that necessitie doth so vrge vs, and séeing spéedie reme∣dieForewarnings of delolation to come. is so greatly required. We haue many sorowful and la∣mentable examples to set before our eyes, which are fore∣warnings vnto vs of great desolation to come, as the mise∣rable state and condition of the Churches of the Jewes, of the Greekes, of the Egyptians and Africans, the which in time past florished, but at this day they scarsly retain a chri∣stian name. For these causes I conclude that we must defer the time no lenger to call a Parliament, to remedie these things, without hauing any consideration or respect to those things which the Pope maye obiect as lettes against the same: séeing that both it is lawfull for vs so to doe, and also bicause our conseruation & safetie is now in hazarde. For if any one part of the kingdome were lost, it is not in the Po∣pes power to restore the same vnto vs againe. Whatsoeuer my happen or befall, we must not perish to fulfil the Popes minde: but must rather follow (at this time specially) that rule which God hath giuen vnto vs, and which our elders haue so oftentimes folowed. But yet truly while this Par∣liament shall be a preparing, I think it shall serue very wel for the purpose, if we prouide thre or foure▪ remedies, which may greatly further this our enterprise. The first is, of the Churches that Prelates maye remaine and abide in their Diocesses: and in this point let no man be borne withall. And here I think it good to put you in mind of the Italians, who enioying and occupying the thirde part of the benefites & spirituall promotions of this kingdome, draw vnto
selues great profit, & like horseleaches suck out our bloude, hauing no care at al to dwel vpō their benefices. And laugh∣ing vs to scrone, we are so blinde that we cannot sée it: And if we chaūce to espie it, we are pacified againe by their flat∣tering words. If the King should hire a great multitude of souldiers, and giue them wages, and if they should abide stil at home, & haue no care of their martiall affaires in ye war, had not then (think you) the King iust occasion to depryue them of their wages, & to dismisse them? And thus truly doe our Prelates behaue themselues, who in the troublesome time of the Church, when heresies & such like wickednesses were in diuers places sowne abrode (ye which in dede is the greatest warre of the Church, being so much greater than the earthly warre, as ye helth of the soule surpasseth & excel∣leth the helth of the body) sate notwithstanding in the midst of their pleasures, voyde of all care of their flockes cōmitted to their charge. The second remedie is, to shew & declare by some notable & manifest act, that we are fully perswaded, & bent seriously to séeke a reformation, least the aduersaries should cauil & say, that we call a Councel, not to reforme the Church, but to séeke our owne aduantage, & to stablishe and confirme our owne prerogatiues & priueledges. In ye which matter nothing séemeth to me more méete & conuenient for vs, to declare that we haue an earnest care for the reforma∣tion of the Church, than if we looke diligently about that nothing be done in the Church for money and bribes: to the ende that Babilonicall beast Couetousnesse, which hathCouetousnes the Babiloni∣call beast. brought so many euils & corruptions into the Church, may at the length vtterly be ouerthrowne. And so we shall finde a more easie waye to controuersies: and shall also stop the mouths of those that slaunder & backbite vs. If any man ob∣iect & say, that so great a matter cannot be brought to passe by so small a number of men as we are, without the deter∣mination of the Generall Councell, we make vnto thē this answere: namely, that there is no new or vnwanted thing
brought in by vs, but we séeke to bring those things to passe which Christ hath plainly commanded, Councels determi∣ned, & Kings the executors of Councels confirmed, & which in our time also they which haue ben the best learned in the Romish Church, by their iudgementes haue allowed. The authoritie of this voice abideth for euer, Freely ye haue re∣ceyued,Math. 10. Giue freely. Spirituall things are giuen fréely: ther∣fore it is not lawfull to buye & sell them: and are in that or∣der that they were giuē to be distributed, that is to say free∣ly. Herevpon they are called Simoniakes, which take vntoSymoniakes. themselues that vnlawful and forbidden game: of the which simonie or forbidden gaine, we haue so many examples both in the scriptures, & also in the historie of ye ancient Church, that we shall not néede at this time, to make any longer dis∣course of the same. And to say somwhat of the Coūcels, how oftentimes was this forbidden, namely, that not onely cor∣ruptions, but also suspition of corruption, should be taken a∣waye? Inso much that they which distributed & gaue the al∣mes, were forbidden to giue it in the time of the sacramēts, least they should séeme to giue their almes for the receiuing of the sacraments, as ye may reade in the Councel of Ancy∣rane, and others. In like maner king Lodoicus, séeing that confusion créeping by little and little into the Church, com∣maunded that the Clergie shoulde abide and dwell in their Diocesses, and that no money euer after should be caried to Rome: shewing how greatly this chopping and chaunging did displease him: & yet there was neuer any man that was counted a greater Catholike than he. Also Pope Paulus thePope Paulus the thirde. third, himselfe, in our time, séeing that many departed & for∣sooke the Church of Rome, and fearing that this mischiefe wold grow more & more, was constrained by the continuall cries of the Protestantes, to confesse that there were many errors got into the Church, & therfore commaunded certain men that were coūted notable in learning, to note diligent∣ly what things were worthie of reformation, & swore them
to hide nothing thereof from him: threatning them, that if they did not discharge their office throughly, they should in∣curre the penaltie of excommunication. Among the rest to whome this charge was cōmitted, were these, Contarenus,Contarenus. who was made Cardinal in Germanie, for his dealing in y• notable cōtrouersie: cardinal Theatinus, who after the same Paule the third was made Pope: Cardinall Sadoletus, & car∣dinallSadoletus. Poole the Englishman: & fiue others also, which forCardinall Poole. their great learning were chosen to this office. These men, whē they had diligētly examined ye matter, gaue forth their sentence & opiniō in publike writing, the first article wher∣of was this: Nothing ought to be done for money, in the vse and administration of the keyes, that is to say in the power of the Church. Notwithstanding, that Pope Paule the thirde which was so hote in the matter with his thundering threat∣nings, did nothing at all therein when it came to the pinch. Neither would Pope Paule the fourth his successor, whē he was yet but Cardinal, establish that which he thought to be mete & necessary. I omit that which Bernard & other learned fathers haue said: only this I say, except we aply our minds, & put our hāds to the tearing vp of this roote of al euil, Jesus Christ will descend from heauen with a whip in his hand toMath. 27. The thirde remedie. expel vs as buiers & sellers out of the temple. The third re∣medie shal be, to confesse our faults, the which in dede is the first step to helth, & to make the same manifest by publike & generall fastings: the which maner was alwayes obserued in the olde Church, whensoeuer any great perill or daunger was like to come vpon the Church, as plague, famine, or warre: the which thrée euils in these our dayes inuade the realme togither. For what greater plague can there be, thā that which slayeth mens soules? What greater famine can therebe, than the famine of Gods word? Or what warre cā be more mortall or cruell, than the corruption of pure do∣ctrine? By which we being drawn frō God, are depriued of the eternal kingdom which Christ by his bloud hath purcha∣sed for vs. Let vs therfore turn vs vnto those old accustomed
remedies, as to Cmmon praier, to fasting, and to wéeping:Olde accusto∣med remedies. and first of all, we must take into our handes the sworde of God, that is to say, his word: the scahard wherof we scars∣ly retaine: neither must we thinke that Myters, Croziers, Cappes, Garments, and other ornaments (the which in old time were outwardly worne, to shewe that which was in∣warde, that is to say, that godly doctrine ought to be ioyned with a godly life) can deliuer vs frō the cōtempt of the peo∣ple: seeing that which is eternall is wanting, & there onely remaineth an outward shew & feined sight. Let vs set before our eies this horrible sentence which John the Baptist pro∣nounced against the Jewes, saying: Nowe is the axe put to the roote of the trees, euery tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruite, is ew e downe and cast into the fire. The fourth remedie shall be, while the Councel is a pre∣paringThe fourth remedie. & gathering togither to stay seditious persons, & so to restraine thē that they break not by any meanes the cōmon peace & tranquilitie: & let this be kept as a law ratified and inuiolable, yt it is not lawful for any subiect, vpō any occasiō, or for any cause, to take armes, & to lift vp ye sword without the cōmandement or leaue of the Prince, ye only moderator & gouernor of warres. This I speak for ye sorowful exāples sake which hapned, & are like to happē, except we take heds. Of the one part we saw the tumult of Ambaxia: on y• other part, there were certain Preachers, which stirred vp ye peo∣ple to tumult, & violently to set thēselues to destroy & banish those protestāts, vnder a pretence of godly seditiō: as though that Religion coulde or ought to be established by sedition. And thus there was greate offence committed on both parts, insomuch that many were slaine, which were thought to be Protestants. Moreouer, those protestants did greatly offend, enterprising many things rashly, to put away these iniuries offred vnto thē, taking armes, therby violating the law of ye magistrate, which belōgeth to no priuate persō For the end of ye law is, to liue according vnto Gods wil, to hurt
no man, and to obey the lawe of Armes. Therfore the king is the maintainer of Gods law, and the moderator of wars, the which he may and ought to vse to the authoritie of the lawe, and to the punishing of rebelles and traitours. To be shorte, he counteth him selfe a king, who, although he be not ordained of God, yet of his owne will and authoritie moueth warre. And truely herevpon it followeth that he ought to be counted of all men as an enimy, and to be puni∣shed as a breaker of Gods ordinance and publique power. For this cause I thinke it good that commaundement be gi∣uen to inferior Magistrates, that they diligently attend vp∣on their charge and offices, least some newe thing happen by their carelesse negligence. Hereby therefore it euident∣ly appéereth that the first bonde to preserue the kings estate is, so to establishe Religion, that no man may abuse y• same at his owne pleasure, against the authoritie of the law, and the ende thereof, which is, that both God and the king maye be obeyed. But now to come to the seconde principall point, as con∣cerningThe seconde principall point. the ordering and kéeping of the people in due obe∣dience, we thinke this to be the waye, namely, to heare the complaintes of the subiectes, and to vse conuenient reme∣dies for the same. Notwithstanding there is great differēce betwéene priuate & open complaintes, for if the complaints be made of priuate persons to priuate persons, the diligence of the Judges which are appointed to ordinary gouernemēt, is a spéedie way to remedie and helpe them. But when there are generall complaints, or when ey∣ther the confirmation or alteration of things commeth in question, we must straight way haue recourse to those aun∣cientThe state of the kingdome which consis∣teth of these three, namely of the nbili∣tie, clergy, and communatie. constitutions and orders by whiche the safetie of the kingdome standeth: the which are nothing else than those thrée orders which we call the states. That is to saye, that those things being made manifest and opened which maye bring any confusiō, and the remedies which were prouided
to put away the same, being diligently sought for, the king for the loues sake that he beareth to his people, maye deter∣mine and appoint that which is iustly required to the ho∣nor of God and the cōmon profyte of all men. Of the which thing, the good will of the people wholy dependeth, that ha∣uing done that duetie which he oweth vnto God, he may in lyke maner satisfie the mindes and willes of his subiectes. And so he shall not onely kéepe the name of a king, & the gifts of nature appertaining to a kingly name, but also may rule and gouerne by peace: seing that gentlenesse may al∣lure them of their owne good wils to do more, than force or violence can extorte from them. And to the ende it may euidentlye appéere that the com∣plaintes are such yt they ought to be heard and examined of the assembly of ye States, I will shewe vnto you a generall reason, namely this: The extraordinarie taxes, tallages, & Tributes. tributes haue so increased, that now the subiectes not onely are not able to beare this great burthen, but also not able to satisfie & discharge those old duties which were before time accustomed to be payde. Is not this a complaint to be consi∣dered & talked of in the assembly of States? Seing the grea∣test part of ye people complaineth of the same, and are by no maner of meanes any thing disburthened: but specially se∣ing that to heare the afflicted & oppressed, is the beginning of consolation, & to declare a readinesse and good will to ease thē, is the greatest & principall point to heale: the which at the least may stay thē least dispayring they shoulde séeke an alteration & remedy. If on the cōtrary part, the king aledge for him self, the calamitie and trouble of the long continued warres, the diuers and manifolde charges and costes that grewe thereof, the scarsitie and emptinesse of his Treasu∣rie, and also the greate arrerages and debte in the which he founde the Crowne when he came first to the same: Is not this a complaint to be considered and talked of in the assem∣bly of States?
If the people alledge that the King oughte to maintaine himselfe and his traine by his yeerely reuenewes, and that he ought to hold and maintaine warres with his subsidies, and to set forth armies with his customes and tributes, the which things were for this cause graunted in time paste. If in like maner the king declare that he found almost al his demeines distracted, deuided, and conueyed awaye, the greatest part of the subsidies taken vp before hande, and yet he himselfe, greatly burthened and indebted, to the ende he might obtaine by the consent of the people, that those bur∣thens being somewhat eased, mighte remaine as yet for a time, vntil meanes and wayes, which are dayly deuised to recouer againe his demeines, may be brought to effect. But is there no other better waye to be had to bring things to passe than by ye assembly of the States? To speake briefely, if there be anye maner of complaint whatsoeuer, pretenced or otherwise, where can it be better put forth thā in the generall assembly of the States? and if it be a iusteThe commē∣dation of the generall assē∣bly of the States. complaint, where can he haue a more present remedie than yt which shal be deuised by so many men? but if it be vniust where can the same be sooner found out thā in ye assembly? There is also another consideration of necessitie, wherof there arise great daungers, seing in these straites and exte∣mities, there is no ordinary remedie vsed. First of all, the King is scarcely obeyed in his Edictes and statutes: ye which is one of the greatest signes of sedition. For when the peo∣ple are not heard in those things wherof they do complaine, it commeth therevpon that they cast away all hope to haue redresse, and so they fall into such desperation, that they dare enterprise to ease and vnburden them selues, without the hauing of any consideration of the kings cōmaundement or his officers: yea they arme & prepare thē selues against all perils, as though nothing were more sharpe & intollerable. On ye other part, they which say yt they are greued, capti∣ously take this cōplaint of ye people, & increase y• same: & do al
that they can, to amplifie and enlarge that with newe lyes which they haue once falsely tolde and reported for a truth. Herevpon commeth the vnhonest publishing and castingSlaunderous bookes. abrode of slaunderous bookes and publique writings. And the people being exulcerated and vexed with their owne di∣sease, willingly receiueth that which appertaineth to their disease, and by the ignorance of the kings matters, doe flyde and fall into these sinister and wrong opiniōs. Of the which things to haue so great and manifolde destructions arise, is great daunger, many examples whereof we see dayly. To auoide which destructions, it séemeth most necessarie to call an assembly of the states. And although the causes hytherto spoken of shewe no necessitie, yet not withstanding the ne∣cessitie of the assembly of these men is such, that it ought to be wished for of all men. For what is more to be desired, & méete for a yong King to gouerne his kingdome, than to be taught the things that concerne his kingdome, that he may know the maners of his people, and those things also whichA lesson for Kinges and Queenes. belong to the order and gouerning them. Therefore let him learne to spende as he may and not to excéede: and let hym play the part of a good shepherd, who in shearing of his shepe doth not flea and pull of skin and all, but leaueth the skinne that he maye receiue the fléece at another time againe, and let him consider that whatsoeuer he spendeth more than his ordinarie reuenewes, tribute, custome and tallage, is as it were the substance and bloud of the people whome he is set to gouerne by Gods appointment. Herevpon shall come honest and godly education: here∣vpon shall come, both good beginnings and happie successe of all things: and at the last the king shal get vnto him that Magnificent name with great glorye, as, to be called, Pater Patriae, The father of the countrey, as King Lodowic ye twelthLodouicus. xii. pater pa∣triae. was, which leaueth a notable memorie behinde to all the posteritie, & is more to be desired than the Laureat crowne for victorie in warre. Another commoditie also will ensue
and that is this. The people of Fraunce, being chéered vp and comforted by this demonstration, they will séeke all that e∣uer they be able to ease those burthēs: for they once vnder∣standing their kings businesse and néede, will imploye all that euer they haue to doe their king seruice. But we must take héede least that prompte willingnesse, being to often styrred, doe not turne at the laste to impacient and brutishe madnesse. And these commodities are ioyned with great honestie, for that the king, if it please him, maye in the beginning of his raigne, examine olde customes and lawes, the which is the onely waye to correct and amende matters that are out of order. For althoughe the king alone be the author of the law, & he onely can rule, yet notwithstanding those things which he hath constituted and ordained by this assembly of the states, are of greater force and efficacie: and those will the people more willingly obey and kéepe, bicause they vn∣derstande that they were confirmed by many mens opini∣ons and Judgements: wheras otherwise, onely a fewe be∣ing assembled together, they Judge that the matter was done according to the mind and phantasie of a fewe, the rea∣sons not examined & wayed which might haue bene brought against the same. For by these meanes the Frenchmē haue preserued them selues and the kingdome vnto this daye: neither is there anye well ordered kingdome, in the which this order of assemblies is not obserued: the which ought to be of great waight and highly estemed. For seing so many kings do confesse that they féele and perceiue so many commodities to spring and growe of thys good order, and that they doe counte the same the staye and strength of their scepter, we can not certainely well and ho∣nestly departe from so ancient & commendable a custome. And as for the contrarie reasons which were wonte to be broughte to hinder these assemblies, they can preuaile no∣thing at all, seing the perill of those things which happened
at another time are by no meanes to be feared, the Kings authoritie at this day being so firmely established, and con∣firmed by the counsell of the Quéene, and by so many con∣sents of Princes and Nobles, that if these reasons might be receiued and take place, there is no doubt but that all their practises would be voide and frustrate which thinke it good and persuade themselues that it is necessary to haue a new alteration of the common weale, and shoulde be a most spe∣die remedy to mittigate & take away al perturbations. TheThe ende of this oration. which one thing we muste with all diligence possible pro∣uide for. And thus he made an end of his oration: In the repeating whereof we haue béene some what long, but yet for all that the matter is worthy of repetition, and not disagreing from our purpose. The day following the rest declared their Judgementes, and first began the Admirall, and the Cardinall of Loraine,The sentēce of the Admirall. made an ende. But this was the sentence of the Admirall Shatillion▪ namely: that he would haue had that those sup∣plications which he had offered to the king, shoulde be sub∣scribed of those in whose name they were put forthe: who answered, that they were readye either in a small or great number to subscribe those supplications which they had ex∣hibited: yea, they sayde that they would assemble themsel∣ues together to the number of fiftie thousand before ye kings Maiestie, if so it pleased him. But there can nothing be de∣uised more pestilent, thā the Prince to stand in feare of his subiectes, & to be in perill of them: & in like maner the sub∣iectes to haue an euill opiniō of their Prince, and to be sus∣pected of their king. Also he saide that it was ill prouided to bring vp a yong prince in that feare, & also to giue those oc∣casions to ye subiects of fearing. At the last he concluded that his sentence was, that the errors of the Church shoulde be taken awaye, that the garde lately giuen to the king should be remoued, and that there shoulde be called forthwith an
assembly of the States. Thus when the Admirall had made an ende, the Duke of Guise taking occasion vpon that which he had spoken, be∣gan thus, saying, that it was not wel saide of some that theThe sentence of the Duke of Guise. king ought not to be so & so brought vp, when as he is so ex∣cellently ordered, & specially by the Queene his mother by whō he is indued, as it were with a certaine fulnesse of all vertues. And as touching that which was spoken concer∣ning the increasing of the Garde, he said that he himself did mislike alwayes of the same, vntill certaine did moue a se∣dition & put them selues in armes, which seemed to be en∣tended altogether against the kings maiestie. But wheras it is commonly reported that this sedition was not moued against the king, but against manye of his ministers & offi∣cers, that is a vaine cloake, & nothing answering the mat∣ter. For there is not any one of vs that euer hurt one of thē by priuate offences, or harmes. But they beare all that ha∣tred against vs for the executing of our offices, which we haue by the kings authoritie and leaue: and therefore to speake more truely, they hate not vs but the king. Wherfore he said, he sawe no reason, why that number which was newly added to the Garde shoulde be remoued and taken away. And as touching Religion, he saide, that he stoode to the Judgement of more learned men thā he him self was: how beit this one thing he would protest & professe, that no coū∣cels at any time should so preuaile with him, yt they should bring him frō the ancient Religion of his elders, & specially frō his beliefe of the holy sacrament of the Altar. Finally, he said concerning the assembly of the States, yt he wholy re∣ferred the same to the kings maiesties will and pleasure, & to like or dislike of the same with him. The Cardinall of Loraine begā his sentence vpō those con∣fessiōs which were offred to the king by ye Admiral, saying, yt they were nothing lesse thā obedient & faithful, howsoeuer
they boasted them selues. For so long as the King will likeThe sentence of the Cardi∣nall of Lorain. of their opinions and sects, or at least wise suffer them, they will shewe them selues obedient to the king. But I appeale (sayth he) to the Judgements of all men in this matter, whether it be more méete to follow the opi∣nions of these Jolly fellowes, thā the authoritie of the king. To graunt them Churches, were to allowe their Idolatry, which the king could not doe without manifest perill of de∣struction. And as concerning a generall Councell, or a Coū∣cell assembled together out of our owne Natiō, I cā not sée (saith he) by any meanes how it should be necessarie, seing that it should be called onely to reforme the maners of cer∣taine ecclesiasticall persons, the which might be done with lesse businesse a great deale, namely by particular admoni∣tions. And as touching that which else appertained to Re∣ligion, he saide that the same had bene so oftentimes esta∣blished and confyrmed, that he wished that onely to be fol∣lowed which had béene hitherto obserued and appointed, for so much as all assemblies of Councels whatsoeuer, can ap∣poynte no more than the obseruation of those things that haue béene kept alreadie. And where as it was sayde that they which should subscribe their names to those supplica∣tions which they had put forth, would assemble them selues together to the number of fiftie thousand, to that he answe∣red, yt the king might set against thē ten thousand mē of his Religion. But it is manifest (saith he) of what minde they are, by their railing libels which they scatter abroade in all places against euery man. Among which great number ofThe Cardinall of Loraine ho∣peth to get ho∣nor & fame by keeping libels that were scat∣tered abroade. libels, he saide, that he had in his handes fiue and twentie, which he diligently kept, as a testimonie of great honour, bycause he was euill spoken of by those villanous knaues, trusting that they should be Monuments of his eternal and euerlasting praise. Therefore he wished that those sedici∣ous & troublesome persons mighte be most seuerely puni∣shed, and specially they which woulde put them selues in
armes as many had begon. But, he said he thought it good that they should sustaine no punishment which frequented those sermons withoute armour, and onely for consciencs sake of Religion, which sang psalmes, & went not to Masse, and such like: Adding moreouer that he was very sorie for the sharpnesse and crueltie of those punishments which had béen hitherto vsed, protesting that he would most willingly spende his owne life, if it might doe any good, to bring them into the right way. Affirming also that Bishops and other learned men oughte to indeuour them selues to bring this thing to passe, according to the commaundement of our sa∣uiour Christ in the Gospell, saying Reproue thy brother be∣tweeneThe reforma∣tion wished for by the Cardinall of Leraine. thee and him. &c. Also he wished that the Gouer∣nours and other Lieutenants of the Prouinces, would di∣ligently attend vpon their offices, to see that none seditious∣ly put thē selues in armor: in like maner that the Bishops and curates, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, would haue a care and diligent eye to their charge, to note and marke the abuses and errors of the Churche, and to certe the KingA Nationall counsell, is as much to say as a counsell ga∣thered onely cute of the French nation, which I gasle we maye call a conuocatiō of the clergy, whereas a ge∣nerall counsell consisteth of diuers nations. within the space of two monethes of those things whiche they knowe, that thereby it may be knowne how necessary it is to haue either a generall counsell or a Nationall coun∣sell. For it is verye profitable to call and assemble all the states together, that all men may perceiue and sée how wel the Realme is gouerned. And thus he made an ende. When they had thus vttered their sentences and minds, the King and Quéene gaue thankes to the whole assembly, whose Counsell they saide they were readye to followe, graunting vnto them that, whereupon they had concluded, namely, That all the states of the Realme, should be assem∣bled togither, and that if there coulde not be a generall coun∣cell, there shoulde be with all speede a Nationall Councell. Therefore they determined and concluded that the states of the Realme should be at Meldis, the tenth day of ye moneth of December nexte comming, excepte it shoulde please the
kings maiestie to appointe some other place. And that the States belonging to euerye prouince should make in their prouince, an assembly and consultation particular before that time, to the ende that those things which should be de∣bated of in the general assemblies, might be vnderstoode. Al∣so that bycause it was in a maner agréed, of a generall Coū∣cell, betwéene the Pope, the Emperour, and the Christian princes, the Bishops should come the tenth day of Ianuary next comming to the king, that they might agrée & conclude of the sending to the generall Councel, or else of the hauing of a particular and Nationall Councell. And that in the meane time the Bishops should get them to their Diocesses, both to prepare them selues, and also di∣ligently to note and marke those things which lacke refor∣mation. In like maner that the Ciuill and substituted Ma∣gistrates, shoulde kéepe the people in peace and obedience, sparing and omitting neuerthelesse, paynes and punish∣mentes due to offenders, excepte it be to suche as put them∣selues in armes and moue sedition: and yet notwithstan∣ding the King to reserue vnto him selfe his power and au∣thoritie to punishe those which are counted the authors of seditions and tumultes. This was the conclusion of that consultation, the which shall appéere wonderfull if we consider the state of the for∣mer times. For that libertie, which as yet is but little, but before lesse, being restored frō fiery flames, and from death it selfe, so preuailed before the King, that it increased more and more. But for all that the aduersaryes ceassed not their wicked Councels and practises, what faire and paynted wordes so euer they vsed, who by and by againe burst forth & shewed them selues, by these occasions. There was a certaine seruant belonging to the King ofA tumulte a∣gainst the Prince of Conde. Nauar, whose name was Sagua, who being come to a place called Fontisbellaquaeum, and méeting with a certain souldier
called Banna, talked with him, & earnestly persuaded with him that he would not serue vnder the Guises, for (sayth he) there are wayes deuised, to punishe and handle them as they haue deserued: and at the laste made rehersal of cer∣taine things more particularly. Banna the souldier hearing this, went and tolde the whole circumstance to Marshall Brissacus, who exhorted him to goe to the Duke of Guise. To him therfore he went, and tolde him all the whole matter in order. Then the Guise desired him to faine friendship and familiaritie toward this Sagua, and to fawne vpon him, & often times to repeate their for∣mer communication, also to shewe him to one of his house∣holde seruants. The which this Banna did. And Sagua was apprehended by the Guise. There were also taken in theLetters sent to the Prince of Conde taken. hands of Sagua, certaine letters of Monsier Vidam of Carnu∣tum, to the Prince of Conde, in the which he declared: That if the Prince would take any thing in hande, worthy of king∣like seruice, he was ready to serue him, and for his sake to spende both goods and life. Upon the onely occasion of these letters, the king gaue commaundement that Monsier VidāMonsier Vidā apprehended. of Carnutū shuld be takē. The which was with all diligence broughte to passe by the Guises. In the meane time, there came from Lions frō the Abbat Sauignius, letters concerning the bewrayed & frustrated practises of Malignius, who was said to go about to take Lions. Sauignius for his rewarde re∣ceiued the Archbishopricke of Orleans. By the meanes of these newe tumultes the king came from Fontisbellaquaeum, to the Citie Sangerman. But the cause and mischiefe of all these things was layde vpon the Prince of Conde, who was openlye accused to séeke the alteration of the state of the common weale, and also to be the author of the tumulte of Ambaxian. Then was Cursolensis senteThe king of Nauar, and the prince of Cōde are sent for to the king. to the King of Nauarre to commaunde him to come vnto the King, and to bring his brother the Prince of Conde with him.
In the meane time Monsier Vidame althoughe he was very sicke, yet was he very straitly imprisoned, in so much that his owne wife might not come to visite him. And being straitly syfted by those whiche were appointed to examine him concerning the meaning of his letters, he still made this answere, namely: That he did write expresly of those things which appertained to the obedience of the king, and of whatsoeuer else that shoulde be done by the kings com∣maundement: Also he saide, that he was a néere kinsman and friend of the Duke of Guises, yet for all that, if there were any priuate controuersie betwéene him and tho King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, he woulde rather take part with them thā with him, in so much that for them two, namely for the King of Nauar, and for the Prince of Conde, he would spend both life and goods. On the other part, the familliar friends of the Prince of Conde, with whome he was thoughte to haue conference and consultation, were dayly caste in prison: and the suspi∣cions of ye Huguenotes dayly increased more & more, for by this newe and straunge name were the faithfull of the re∣formed Church then called. Then was there a newe Edict made That no Prince, orA new Edicte against the re∣formed Reli∣gion. any other man whatsoeuer shoulde contribute money, armor, horses, and such like to the setting forth of Souldiers: and that he which shoulde be founde to doe this, should be counted a Traitor to the King. There was yet a seconde messenger sent to the King of Nauar, that he and his brother should come with all spéede. This Messenger was Cardinall Burbonius their brother. Publique supplicatiōs for the peace of the kingdome, were euery where forbidden. And wheras the assembly of States was determined be∣fore to be holden at Meldis, it was now translated and remo∣ued to Aurelias, Marshall Termensis, being sente with two hundred armed men to kepe the citie.
At the feast of Saint Michaels order, Monsier Vidam, be∣ing one of the foresaide order, put vp a certaine supplicati∣on by the Cardinall of Loraine, as by the Chauncelor of that order, desiring that according to the auncient custome he mighte be iudged of all those that were of that honorable order of Saint Michael, and that for those causes onely for the which he deserued, to be dismist of the same. This thing at the length was graunted through the ear∣nest sute of the Constable: and the selfe same day that Mon∣sier Vidam was dismist of the order of Saint Michael, there were xvij. into the same honorable order, by a newe and vnacustomed maner chosen by the trauaile and meanes of the Guyses▪ to the intent they might bynde many vnto them by that benefite or promotion. While the king of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, were loked for, commaundement was giuen to the Gouernour of Poictiers, to goe to Pictauium, and not to suffer the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, his brother to come into the Citie. But for al this, at the length by the kings letters and commaundement, the King of Nauar was receiued of the Marshall Termensis into Pictauium, with all his trayne: being neuerthelesse on euerye side beset with armed men: the which suspicions the King of Nauarre toke in verye euill part. Then the King came frō Sangermane to Paris with a greatThe king cō∣meth to Aure∣lias. armie both of footemen and horsemen in battaile aray, the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall of Loraine attending vpon him. From thence he went to Aurelias, with the same army, and in warlike order entered into the Citie: being reported abroade that the King came thither for two causes, the one was to kéepe the Citie from the treason of the king of Na∣uarre, the other was, to call and summon a Parliament. Many therefore were made afearde, but speciallye they which were chosē to be of the assembly or Parliament, whē they hearde that so greate an armie of men came with the
king. Then cōmaundemēt was giuē that euery one should rehearse & confesse the confessiō of his faith according to the prescript & rule of those articles which were set forth by ye Papistes, in the yéere of our Lord God, M. D. XLII. and it was reported for truth that ye Cardinal of Loraine had drawn forth in writing those things which shoulde be inacted and established in that assemblye. There was also watche and ward throughout the whole Citie appointed to be kept, e∣uen as if the enimie had come to assaulte the same. Againe commaundement was sent to the King of Nauar, that he should come with al spéede, and bring his brother the Prince of Conde with him, many also were sent into diuers partes of the Realme, to take the names of all those that were noted to be of the reformed Religion. At the length the king of Nauar, & the Prince of Conde hisThe prince of Conde taken at Aurelias. brother came to Aurelias, there to salute ye King. But so soone as they had saluted ye King, the chiefe & principall of ye kings Garde, as they were cōmaūded layd hands vpō the Prince of Conde & caried him to ye next hold prepared for y• same pur∣pose. The which holdes were forthwith fortified and made strong with Irō grates in euery window, & a Castell was hard vy the same erected & built to receiue the footemen. Thē were there certain mē chosē to watch & kepe ye King of Nauar, whose Chaūcelor also was taken, & by & by with al spéede was the Lady Roye, mother in lawe to the Prince of Conde, takē and arrested & brought to the citie Sangerman, to whose charge it was layde that she was giltie of treason. The Magistrates were ready to take & receiue hir & ope∣ned the prison dores to bring hir in. Straight after this also was Hieroine Grostotius the Gouernour of Aurelias taken, in whose house the king lodged, being accused of negligence and stouth in searching out the heretikes: Howbeit he was quit and discharged of this matter by the decrée & Iudgemēt of the Senate of Paris. But the Andelote, whē he had saluted the King and the Duke of Guise, & had excused himselfe by
the disobedience of the French hoast of footemen, departed in very good time, otherwise as the most likly report went, he should haue bene taken with the Prince. In the meane time there were subtile deuises and craftie meanes inuented to assault and trouble the Prince of Conde. And when Iudges were chosen oute of the Senate of Paris, as Fagus, and Viollaeus, & the Lieutenant of Thou, the kings Solicitour was commaunded to open the cace now in con∣trouersie, and to procede with the same. But the Prince al∣leaging for himselfe his noble bloud & princely state, stan∣deth with them vpon this point, yt he ought not to be iudged of them, but rather of the king him selfe & of no other, in the Senate of Paris, the Peeres and Nobles of the Realme beyng assembled together. Therfore he saide that he appealed to the King. Then the appeale was brought vnto the Priuye Counsell, the which appeale, they said was nothing, and of no force: And this was done often times. But at the laste they concluded, that excepte the Prince woulde answere before those Iudges, he should be condemned of hie treason. Then the Prince of Condes wife desired of the King that so much libertie might be graunted to hir husband, as to cō∣sult wt learned counsell. The which was graūted vnto hir, in so much ye he was permitted to take y• coūsel of two law∣yers, namely of Petrus Robertus, & Frāciscus Marillacus, coū∣lellers in ye court of Paris, but he was no otherwise permit∣ted to haue them, thā vpon this conditiō, that whensoeuer he cōsulted with then the king to haue vmpires & indifferent mē, to be present at their talke. The Prince also required ye it might be lawful for him, beside these two counsellers, to consult & confer wt his two brethrē, the king of Nauar, & the Cardinal of Burbō, & also with his wife, & to ioyne with thē what vmpires & witnesses soeuer it shoulde please ye King, affirming yt he was very loth to doe any thing without his brethrē, specially in a matter of so great waite. The which request notwithstanding was denied him: only he obtained leaue to write vnto them his minde.
At the length being come to the matter in controuersie, he said to his counsellers that were present, that the affliction which he now suffered, was not laid vpon him by God, for that he had gone about to worke any thing against ye kings maiestie, but rather that by this affliction he might trye his constancie. Also he said that he did not thinke him selfe to be Captiue, seing that he inioyed the fredome of minde, and a pure and sound conscience: but rather that he thought those to be captiues which had their mindes & consciences bound and clogged with the burthen of their sinnes and wickednes∣ses in a body set at libertie. When he had thus spoken he gaue certaine notes of the defence of his cause vnto his Counsellers. For king Fran∣ces by the subtill meanes and false persuasions of the Gui∣ses, was fully persuaded that the Prince of Conde conspired his death, and that therefore he was giltie of treason and worthy to suffer condigne punishment for the same. Therefore while the bloudy slaughter was a preparing, and whilest all men loked to sée great things come to passe, beholde sodaine and vnloked for alterations happen. For the king had a ceataine paine and disease in his eares: Of the which after he had bene sicke a while he dyed, the fifthThe death of king Frances the seconde. day of December in the yeare of Lorde God. M. D. LX. At the which sodaine alteration the Guyses were not a little dismayde. When King Fraunces was deade, the Quéene his mo∣ther sent vnto the Constable, (who had detracted the time to come to Aurelias) assuring him of hir friendship, and promi∣sing vnto him that neuer hereafter none should intrude him selfe into an other mans office, and praying him also that he would come vnto hir with all spéede. There the Constable came to hir to Aurelias, without delay with Martiall Momo∣rencius his sonne, and saluted the newe King. Neuerthelesse the Prince of Conde was kept in holde still, but not without greate reuerence of his kéepers shewed towardes him, and
continusd in prison after the death of the King by the space of ten dayes, denying to go out of prison, vntill he knewe his aduersarie in this matter layde to his charge. But all the matter was layde vpon the King deceased. Therfore by a wonderfull and straunge way or meane, as by the death of the King, the subtill practises of the aduersaries were brought to naught: whose funerall was so slenderlye cele∣brated, that he was depriued of that vsuall pompe which Kings commonly haue at their buriall, all men wondering that the Guises woulde suffer the same: the which also was very wel noted by a publike Epigram or libel sent abrode. There were truly, within a short time, wonderfull & ma∣nifest signes of Gods iust iudgemēt against many Princes: the which al mē at that time did plainly sée & acknowledge. Concerning the which, these verses folowing were made. Charles a Tyrant King, of all kings that before him went,1 Most craftily by counsell gainst Christ, his force he bent, Till that his foolish madnesse, of children being espied, In midst of all his mischiefe, most sodenly he died. And thou O Henrie eke, by men that wicked were & nought,2 VVast too much led, and therfore greedily hast sought The bloud of godly men, thereof to drinke thy fill, But he that sittes aboue, restrainde thee of thy will. For in thy witlesse mode, thy rashnes great thou didst declare,3 & therfore woūd of deth, by spere thou hadst ere thou wast ware: And so thy bleding corps ēbrued the earth with blood, Bicause to kill the Saints, to thee it seemde so good. Frances that was his sonne (vnhappie childe) did so direct4 His fete in his yll wayes, that Christes voice he did neglect: He stopt his eares as deafe, when Christ to him did crie, And therfore putrefacted eares did cause hī streight to die. Be warnde therefore (O Kings) by these examples iust, VVisedomes doctrine to receiue, or else to turne to dust.
Thus rumors were spred euerywhere abroade, that so wonderous a thing had happened, the lyke wherof was ne∣uer heard of before: namely, that they which were brought to that passe, yt they should haue bene put to death, were nowA wonderfull alteration after the death of King Frances the seconde. aduaunced to great honor. And contrarywise that it was come to passe, that they which thought their authoritie to be confirmed for a long time, sawe the same taken awaye, and were brought to their former state and degree. They which were of the assemblie of States, trembling and quaking before for feare, tooke now vnto themselues a bolde courage, and with one consent make petition that the king of Nauar may be the ruler & gouernor of the kingdome during the time of the Kings nonage & minoritie: & also that the Princes the kings nere kinsemen, with the Constable, the Admiral, ye Andelote, & with ye rest of the Nobles, might be always of the kings Coūsel & that Cardinals & Bishops should be sent to their diocesses, to discharge their Ecclesia∣stical offices, according to ye rule of the canōs in that behalf. The Kinges mother tooke it not in good part that so greatThe priuy displeasure of the Queene, against the Prince of Na∣uarre. good will and fauour should be shewed to the king of Nauar, whom she demed not long ago to be hir enimie: & they in∣creased these suspitions, which went about to cōfirme their authority by their dissentiōs, working hatred & spite against the king of Nauar, through ye sentence of the assembly of the parliament, which wished him to haue the rule of the king∣dome. And thus the minds of the Nobles being diuided into two factions: one part helde of the Quéene, & another part with the king of Nauar. Insomuch that a man might sée, the Constable, ye Admiral, & his two brethren alwais in the cō∣pany of ye king of Nauar: On the other part, ye Guises, Nemo∣rosius, ye Marshal Santandrae, & ye Marshal Brislac, & the cardi∣nal of Turnō always were about the Quéene, & stode wthir. So that now, there was great daunger of present seditiō:The King of Nauar yeldeth authoritie to the Queene to gouerne the Realme. but the king of Nauar, by his courtesie & suffrance, put away all this daunger like to arise, yéelding vnto the Quéene au∣thoritie
to gouerne the kingdome. Then the Quéene being somewhat appeased, plainly saide, that she knew nowe the causes of all the troubles past, namely, that all the Princes which were of the Kings blouds, were displeased, that they were not accoūted off, according to their worthinesse, which thing, she said, she woulde sée reformed euer afterward. By this occasion the stomacking and taking of parts betwéene them, séemed somewhat to be repressed. There folowed therfore a wonderful alteration & chaūge: and all men began to talke one to another, & to say, that the companies of armed mē were prepared & gathered togither to some other vse & purpose, than for ye safetie of the King: & that their coūsels and meanings were otherwise, which had arrogated vnto themselues authoritie: also that theirThe peace of the Church af∣ter long af∣fliction. practises shoulde not so easily haue successe nowe. But the churches now, which before were in great perplexity & fear, obtained peace: and all men hoped nowe for a better state. For amidst those sundrie troubles and manifolde affli∣ctions which happened vnder the raigne of king Frances, the administration of the sacraments, & the preaching of Gods worde neuer ceased in the reformed Churches, although the number that were assembled, were but small, & though also the same was not done without great daunger & warinesse. For at that time there were cruell conspiracies against the Church, which woulde haue done great harme to the same, had not the Lorde by his prouidence tourned them away. Then did the reformed Churches cōmaunde solemne pray∣ers with fasting to be vsed: and they which were the go∣uernors and chiefe of the congregation, exhorted their bre∣thren to be of good chéere, and comforted them, willing them paciently to looke for helpe from the Lorde. So that after so great afflictions and feare, there followed excéeding ioye, and the sodennesse of the chaunce made the matter to seeme more wonderfull. Then was there newes brought of the death of Monsieur
Vidame of Carnutum, who was kept at Paris in holde forThe death of Monsieur Vi∣dame. those causes whereof we haue spoken before. Whose death many of the Nobles tooke very heinously. Then were certaine thinges appointed and determined, concerning the gouernment of the kingdome: & the imperie and rule was deuided betwéene the Quéene and the King of Nauarre: and that in such order, that the chiefest authori∣tie to gouerne the Realme, was giuen to the Quéene, a∣gainst all law and auncient custome of France. Wherfore by reason of this sodaine chaunge, the assemblye of States were interrupted and brake vp for a certaine space. But they were assembled togither againe in the sameA conuocation of States, or of a Parliament in king Char∣les the. ix. days place, the. xiii. daye of December, Charles the King, the Quéene, and the Princes, according to the maner accompa∣nying them. Then the Chancelour at the commaundement of the King declared, that there was no lesse willingnesse in the King, than there was in his brother before him, toThe oration made by the Chauncelour. haue an assemblie of States: and that the rather bicause the King himselfe was newlye come vnto the Kingdome. And he procéeded speaking very seriously and plentifully, of the cause, ende, and vse of calling an assemblie of States: and why the same being omitted for the space of eight and twentie yeres, shoulde nowe againe be brought in vse. And when he had shewed the King and the Subiectes also their duties, he came to speake of those causes more particular∣ly, which brought to passe, that there should be an assembly of States: that is to say, of the Seditions, which he wished might be taken quite away, for that they were like to bring so great troubles to the whole Realme. And to finde out spéedye and profitable Remedies for the same, he sayde, the causes of so great euill must first of all bée noted and knowne. We must (sayth he) in euery respect and condicion, disa∣loweSedition what it is, and wher of it commeth and vtterlye condemne sedition, the which is nothing else but a separation, and a pulling awaye of the subiectes
from the Kingdome and Common wealth. And it sprin∣geth of diuers causes: First, of feare of some imminent e∣uill which may come by iniurie and oppression: and also of the expectation of great things, to put awaye penurie and scarcenesse. But the speciall cause is Religion. And this is very straunge, and most wonderfull: bicause God the only true author and preseruer of Religion, as he is an enimy to dissention, so is he the defēder and preseruer of peace. Chri∣stian Religion néedeth not the defence of Armes: neither doth the beginning, or conseruation therof stand vpon force of armes. Neither is their aunswere to be allowed, which say, That they take not armes and force in hande, to offend any man, but to defende themselues. For by no meanes is it lawfull for the subiect to ryse against the Prince, yea, it is no lesse vnlawfull for him so to doe, than for the children to resist their parents, whether they be good and courteous, or sharpe and cruell. Thus did the godly Christians in tyme past set forth and maintaine Christian Religion, namely, by long sufferance and pacience, & also by deuout prayer for wicked Emperors, which ouercame their crueltie. The ve∣ry Ethnikes truly praysed & highly cōmended those, which had suffered iniuries and reproches for their countrie. But we which are Christians, ought not to allowe the opinions of the Gréekes and Romaynes, concerning the killyng of tyrantes. If men were such as they ought to be, there should neuer come any strife or contention for Religion. But it is mani∣fest, that there is no greater force than the first conceyued opinion of Religion, whether y• same be good or euill. ThereThe force of Religion in the of men. is no peace to be hoped for betwéene men of contrarie Reli∣gion. There is nothing that doth more violently assaile the hearts of men, and that doth more inuade them: there is no affection that is of greater power, and more violent, either to bring friendship, or to bring hatred, than Religion. The Jewes hated all other Nations as prophane: And all other
Nations hated the Jewes. But wherefore? for Religion. What and howe great hatred was there in time past be∣tween the fathers, and the Arrians? But I omit such ancient examples, and I will come nearer, euen to our selues Eng∣land, and France, embracing al one Religion, shall be more surely linked and knit in frendship and loue one towardes another, thā they which disagréeing in Religion, are of one Countrie, kinred, and name. Diuersitie of Religion dissol∣ueth all the bondes of loue: it setteth the father against the children, and the children against the father: brother against brother, the man against the wife, and the wife against hir husbande: according to this place of Scripture, I came not to sende peace▪ but a sworde. Herevpon it commeth to passe, that in all Realmes there are oftentimes grieuous sediti∣ons. For if it come to passe, that there be variāce & disagrée∣ment betwéene those that are by nature so fast linked togi∣ther, by the meanes of Religion, what maye we thinke of others? Not the diuersitie of tongues but the diuersitie of Religion, maketh diuision of Kingdomes, and of Com∣mon weales. Herevpon commeth that olde Prouerbe, Vna Fides, vna Lex, vnus Rex, that is to say, One fayth, one Lawe, and one King. Among these diuisions and discordes, howe can it be that violence and force of armes shoulde not be v∣sed? For warre followeth alwayes discorde and dissention, according to these verses. Discordia, that Ladie of stryfe and of wo,Bellona is the Goddesse of vvarre. hath with hir, Bellona hir handmaide also: VVho alwayes doth carie a most bloudy scurdge, the vndoubted reuenge of strife and of grudge. Therefore the principall and chiefe cause of this disease and mischiefe, is the discrepance and varietie of Religion. To cure the which mischiefe, there is not a more present re∣medie, than to haue a Councell, as it was lately conclu∣ded at Fontubellaquaeum, and we haue nowe great hope to ob∣taine the same at the hands of the Pope. In the meane time
let vs shewe our due obedience vnto the yong King. Let vs not, for Gods sake, receyue newe opinions according to our owne fantasie. Let vs in time with wisedome consider of the matter, and let vs diligently seeke to vnderstande the same. It is no trifle that we haue in hande, but it is the saluation of our soules that is in question. If it maye be lawfull for euery man at his owne discretion to receyue what Religion him lysteth, take héede that there bée not so many Religions as there be men. Thou sayest that thy Religion is better than mine, and I defende that which I embrace, whether is it more meete that I followe thy opi∣nion, or thou mine? Who shall ende our controuersies, but the holy Councell? In the meane time let vs not alter any thing rashlye, least by seditions we bring warre into our Kingdome, and so there followe a confusion. The King and the Queene will leaue nothing vndone that may procure a Councell, and if this remedie maye not be had, they will séeke other remedies. And nowe our Prelates and Ecclesiasticall persons (if they well consider the weigh∣tinesse of the matter) will looke better vnto their office and duetie than they haue done heretofore. Let vs knowe, that the dissolution of our Church, was the first begin∣ning of heresies: but it is to bée thought, that a Reforma∣tion will take them away againe. This victorie must not be sought for by violence, or by force of armes, but by god∣lye exhortations, and by godlynesse of lyfe. Wyth these weapons, the Heretikes in tymes past, were ouercome. We must not hate the menne, but the vyces and wic∣kednesses that are in men: and wée must goe aboute, all that wée maye, to bring them into the waye that are in errour. Let vs therefore put awaye all factious and seditious names, as the names of Lutheranes, Hugue∣notes,Factious names. Papystes, and suche lyke, and let vs retayne and kéepe still the names of Christians. But bicause there are manye founde, whyche wyll not bee satisfyed,
desiring tumult and confusion, enimies to peace and the cō∣mon welth (and as it appeareth) contemners of God and Religion: the King which otherwise of himselfe is gentle and long suffering, hitherto hath vene constrayned, and per∣aduenture shall be hereafter vrged, to indeuour himselfe to punishe the frowarde obstinate. It may seeme a very sharp remedy, but if we looke well vpon the disease and mischiefe yet a growing, we shall find it very necessary for the same. Notwithstanding, it is so come to passe as yet, by the good∣nesse of God, and the clemencie of the Prince, that there hath bene no greater punishment layde vpon any man, nor no greater destruction followed, as the subuersion of Ci∣ties, the burning of houses, the disfraunchizing of Cities ofThe accusatiō of forreine Princes. their priuiledges, and the restraint of their liberties: the which, other Princes that dwell about vs, haue oftentimes vsed, euen within the compasse of our remembrance, for the punishing of seditious persons. And bicause it is to be fea∣red, least the armies of souldiers being dismist, the seditious will begin to practise and conspire a freshe, of two things the one is to be done, namely, that either the armies be kept and maintained still (which cannot be done without the great cost and charge of the Subiectes) or else that the Ci∣tizens of euery Citie, endeuour themselues to punishe such seditious and seditious persons: and he that shall be first founde to go about to alter the state of the common welth, let him by his seuere punishment be an example to all the rest. The King to this ende and purpose will giue you a power of armed men. Consider with your selues which of these wayes is most for your profite, either that you main∣taine garrisons of souldiers to kéepe the cities for the king, or that you your selues in your owne persons, do it at your owne costes and charges. As for all other things the King will prouide and sée vnto them by his officers. In the meane time, let such as are Ecclesiastical persons, doe their dutie by prayers, by Sermons, and by diligent in∣structing
of the people. And so it will come to passe that the King shall be obeyed, and you shall enioye peace & tran∣quilitie. Whē the Chaūcelor had procéeded thus far forth, and had spokē somewhat concerning the Kings substaunce and great erpences, exhorting the Court of Parliament to ease the same, he declared that it was the King and the Quéenes pleasures that euery man shoulde fréely put forth his complaintes and sutes: for that their Maiesties inten∣ded with all clemencie, as it was meete, to prouide for all thinges. And this only was done the first day. In the next méeting the assemblye of States chose out thrée men to speake for them, the which thrée stoode before the King and made their seuerall orations. The sum wher∣of I will briefely repeate, so far forth as they shall séeme ne∣cessary for our purpose. The speaker for the thirde order of States, that is to say, for the Commonalty, was named Angell, a Counseller andThe oratiō of the cōmenal∣tie, made by Angell. a pleader of causes in ye Senate of Burdeux in Gascoyne. This man declared by many reasons, that for the due putting a∣way of perturbations and troubles it séemed good and most necessary to the people, first of all to remoue and to take a∣way the causes. Which causes (he saide) were partlye the corruptions among Ecclesiasticall persons: among which corruptions (which were very many in number) there were thrée notable and more pernicious than the rest: namely, Couetousnesse, Ignorance, and Luxurie. Ignorance (he sayd)The ignorāce of prelates. was so manifest that no man néede to doubte of the same: and so great also that among that sorte of men it was to be séene from the hyest to the lowest. Which ignorance is the mother and Nurse of all errours, as both experience, and also the testimonies of learned fathers aboundantlye de∣clare. To remedie this, he saide, Canons and decrées woulde be prouided but in vaine. For so great is the contempte and negligence of preaching and instructing the people, (which
is notwithstanding the office of a good pastour) that Bishops at this day counte it a shame and reproch vnto them to féede the flocke of Christ. And such as are Curates, and other masse priests, follow∣ing the euill example of Bishoppes, doe also euen abhorre their office, and doe commit the same to vnlearned vicars: who singing Masses for their rewarde, haue onely some one slender bosome collation or other, which they alwayes vse without discretion, as one plaister to all maner of soares. The seconde vice is Couetousnesse: the whiche as it is noCouetousnes. lesse pestiferous than Ignorance, so is it no lesse to be séene as well in the heades as in the inferiors. And as for Luxurie & the pompe and pryde of Prelates, he fayde it was suche, that it was a great stumbling blocke and offence to all men. For they are painted and set for the as though by an outwarde shewe in the world they should represent the maiestie of God: when as they shoulde rather expresse the same by godlynesse and integritie of life. How greatly haue our Bishoppes of late dayes degenerated from the meane estate, puritie, and godlynesse of the true By∣shoppes of olde time? All these corruptions (saith he) must be taken away by a godly, and lawfull Counsel called, and also by the kings authoritie. The speaker for the Nobilitie was one Iacobus Sillius.The oration for the nobi∣litye. This man began first to speake many things concerning the power, authoritie, and office of Kings, and largely also concerning the order of Nobles, which he saide was verye profitable and necessary to preserue and maintaine the dig∣nitie of the king. In speaking of matters concerning Religion, he founde this fault aboue all others, namely, that hytherto there had béene great ouersight, in suffering Ecclesiasticall persons to haue so great power and authoritie, and so large lyuing and reuenewes: who haue incroched vnto them selues ye houses of Noble men, & do wickedly abuse all that euer they haue.
Wherfore (saith he) it is necessarye that these sortes of men shuld he reformed. Also he wished that it might be diligent∣ly foreséen that the office of an Ecclesiasticall person might not be committed to an vnlearned, vnapte, and ignoraunt person, affirming it to be vnlawfull for them to dwell from their flockes in other places at their owne pleasure, and so giuing them selues to worldly businesse, wholy to neglecte their offices: but (sayth he) it is the Kings duetie to cal them to their office againe. And in the ende he made earnest peticion that there might be wayes taken in time to stop the seditions at hande: and also that it wold please the king to haue regard & considera∣tion to his nobles, as his auncetours had done before him. When he had thus spoken he put vp a Supplication, in the which peticion was made in the name of the nobilitie that temples might be graunted, for the vse and seruice of the re∣formed Religion. After this man, one Quintinus Heduus, who was chosenThe oratiō of the Clergy. to be the speaker for the Clergie, when he had commended the king and Quéene to their face, saying that the kings of Fraunce, were specially chosen, euē as if they had béen borne and appointed, to be defenders of the Churche of Rome, and that therefore they had that moste auncient name from all ages, as to be called Most Christian Princes, he sayde that this assembly of States or court of Parliament was verye well called. The causes of the which assemblye (saith he) is that the complayntes of the people mighte be hearde and holpen, and that meanes and remedyes might be prepared for the scarsitie of the kings treasure and substāce. But this (saith he) is the greatest cause of all, whiche I speake with great sorrowe and griefe, and yet notwithstanding muste néedes speake the same, namely, that the corruptions and notable faultes of Ecclesiasticall persons myghte bée re∣fourmed and amended. For (sayth he) the matter is nowe come to thys passe, that they thē selues which shuld declare
this Ecclesiasticall holynesse by their life, are more afraydeThe faultes of persons Eccle∣siasticall. of the kings Edictes than they are of Gods word, and of the Gospell of Christ. Notwithstanding we muste therefore thinke (saith he) that the reformatiō of the Church is sought for, which hath not erred, neither can erre: but a correction only of those most greuous faults in those men which were the chiefe gouerners of the Church, which correction must procéede from the king: but so notwithstanding the king must vse correctiē, that he follow the steppes of those kings that haue gone before him, who alwayes fauored ye Church. Adding to this also that those kings his auncetours woulde neuer haue suffered the wicked practises of these newe fel∣lowes, which falsely and wickedly of late time take vnto them selues the profession of the Gospell, that they mighte therby both refuse all ecclesiastical order, and also abolishe, if they might, al Ciuill power and authoritie. For (saith he) the king ought to this ende specially to exercise his authori∣tie, and draw his swerde to punishe and vtterly to roote out all heretikes giltie of criminall punishments. Therefore he desired that Churches might not be graun∣tedChurches. to those horrible men (for so he termed them): and that they also might be counted & punished as heretikes, which durst offer the supplications of Heretikes to the king. This truely (saith he) hath bene the olde subtill practise of Sathan to bring this libertie to heretikes, that they might the more securely and without feare of punishment destroy the Gos∣pell, the which subtill practises he hath nowe also in hande, and therefore the more diligent héede (saith he) ought to be taken. In like maner also he desired the king that according to the doyngs of his Auucetours, and also according to the example of Charles the great (whose name he bare) he wold constraine all his subiectes to liue according to the Canons & rules of the fathers. For detestable (sayth he) is the bold∣nesse of these new heretikes, which scoffing at the authori∣tie of the fathers, and reiecting the doctrines and Canons of
the Churche, saye that they will haue nothing but the true Gospell onely: as thoughe ye promise of Christ were vaine and to no effect, who promised that he would neuer forsake his Churche: and as thoughe that they were wiser than so many Fathers, which left so many godly Canons behynde them in writing: also as though they alone vnderstoode the word of God. Horrible boldnesse & reebllion is that (sayth he) which casteth of the yoake of the Church: and what else will they do at the last but murmur and grudge also against the power and authoritie of the Ciuill Magistrate? Moreouer he said, that the notes & badges of the Church were not obscure, which these new men wanted: as the e∣uerlasting and continuall successiō from the Apostles time, and the Canons and rules which the Fathers left behinde them: which badges the Church of Rome hath. Therefore (saith he) that they may neuer hereafter abuse the name of the Churche, we must plainely pronounce and affirme. That the Church of Rome is the Catholique, or vni∣uersall Church. But if these newe men take vnto them the name of the Church, we will not denie it them, but we saye that they are not of the True Catholique Church, but of the Malignant Church. Also he made petition that they which had fled the Realme for Religions sake, might be banished men for euer: that they might loose all maner of priuilege, and that they mighte, be handled euen as if they were for∣raine enimyes. Furthermore he saide, that aboue all things, that drow∣ning floud which had flowed out of the diches of Geneua, was most pernicious: and therfore he exhorted the king that he would to the vtmost of his power roote out all such as came from that place, and not to holde the yong childe excused, if so be he came from thence: seyng that God would call him to an accounte for the doing of his duetie: And perswadedEuse booke 51. the lyfe o Constantin. Queene Katherine also (the kings mother) by the example of that Katherine of whome Eusebius maketh mention, to
ouerthrow and roote out these newe Heretikes. Therefore he sayde that this was the onely cause of the great mischief at hande, that there were so many heretikes in euery place to the destruction of the Realme and all estates. Moreouer he desired of the King that Ecclesiasticall persons might be defended and maintayned, accordyng to the commaunde∣ment of God, bycause they are The Lordes Christes, or an∣nointed,Shauē crowns the badges of Christes an∣. as their badges, that is to say, their shauē crownes doe declare. Also he complayned that the authoritie to chose Prelates was taken from the Clergy and giuen to Kings, saying that it was done against Gods word, against the ho∣lye Canons, and againste the approued examples of the Elders: and that euer since that tyme, (namely, from the yeare of oure Lorde God. M. D. XUII. when the same was first vsurped) all things haue had euyll successe. For (saith he) in that very yeare, in the which that law∣full right was abrogated from Ecclesiasticall persons, be∣gan that damnable heresie of Luther, whiche afterwarde soke suche rooting in euerye place: and herevpon followed an infinit number of mischiefes. He intreated therfore that the same authoritie might be restored againe to Ecclesiasti∣call persons: and that the king woulde take away no more the reuenewes of Churchmen, for that they were consecra∣ted and halowed, and coulde not be taken away withoute some manner of sacrilege, séeyng that men of the Churche ought carefully to be fed and maintained. This thing if the king would doe after the ensample of Charles the great, he should get a most glorious name, and at the length be called Charles the greatest. And last of all he made petition that al the Clergy might neither pay tribute nor tax: for that was the prorogatiue of the Church which oughte not to be taken from it. For saith he it is the chiefest part of the Kings duetie to defende the Christian faith and doctrine, and to maintayne Ecclesiasti∣call persons. The whiche if he did, (he sayde) that he pro∣mised
vnto hym in the name of the Clergye, all prosperi∣tie in thys worlde, and in the worlde to come euerlastyng lyfe. Thus much concerning his oration, which we haue tru∣lye reported according to the written coppie of the same. Many maruelled what he ment so vndiscretely to inueye a∣gainst the protestantes of the reformed Church, seing that he him selfe sometime had approued the same, and for that cause was constrained to depart from Pictauium. Moreouer bycause he wished them to be taken and puni∣shed as newe Heretikes which shoulde offer supplications to the King, (all men at those words loking vpon the Admiral as though he had openly noted him) the Admiral made com∣plaint hereof to the king and Quéene. Therfore Quintinus was called to come before the king, to gyue an accounte of that which he had spoken. Who ex∣cusing him selfe by the instructions gyuen to hym of the Clergye, promised that he would openly in the assembly or courte aske the Admirall forgiuenesse: the whiche also he performed. But after thys, ballets, and scoffing Libelles were set vp agaynst him in manye places in so muche that he was openlye derided. Wherevpon at the length, part∣lyeThe death of Quintinus orator for the Clergy. by the impaciencie of these contumelyes and repro∣ches, and partlye by the griefe of hys owne mynde for his euill déede, he fell into a sickenesse and gaue vp his life. After this there beganne to aryse certayne quarels, com∣plaintes and controuersies againste the Guyses. For the Burgeses of the Parliament that were chosen for Burgundy and Dolphiny, of the which Prouinces the two brethren the Guyses were gouernours and chiefe, went aboute to bring to passe that the Guyses mighte be counted as honorable, as anye of the Princes the Kings neere kinsmen were: to the whyche notwythstandyng the greateste parte of the Burgeses of other Prouinces woulde in no wyse con∣sent.
At the whiche, the Guises beyng offended, called those that hindered their estimation, sedicious persons. They on the other side, misliking to be so called, complayned therof to the Queene, who onely gaue them this aunswere, saying, that the Guises, did so call them, adding this condition, that if the Burgeses did enterprise any thing against the kings Maie∣stie, and not otherwise: and thus by and by they were sent away. Then were there certaine dayes spent in bringing the assembly of the Parliament together againe, and in deba∣ting of diuers matters. At the length, by earnest sute of ma∣nieThe parliamēt breaketh vp. the Parliamente was proroged vntill another time, namely vntill the first day of May nexte following. And so with thankes giuen to the king and Quéene, the Parlia∣ment brake vp. Then commaundement was giuen to all the prelates of the French Church, That they shuld prepare themselues for the Counsell. Also that all Magistrates shoulde set them at li∣bertie both in body and also in goods, which were kepte in prison for Religions sake. And that no manner of punishe∣ment or iniurie shoulde be offered for Religion, or factious names. Then, when the rumour and fame of Religion increa∣sed dayly more and more, the Constable attended with all diligence vpon the king of Nauarre, in so much that he was seldome from him. In the meane time, the Bishop of Rome, hearing of the kings pleasure concerning the calling of a Nationall coun∣cell, and fearing least the same woulde be hurtful vnto him, vrged by and by that there mighte be a generall Counsell holden at Trent, summoning the same incontinent and de∣claringTrent in Italy. it by publique writing. Against ye which one Paulus Vergerius sometime a Bishop & a notable papist, but at the length for taking the Popes doctrine, became a member of Christs Church. This Paulus (I saye) wrote letters in the
Italian toung to the Bishops of Italy. In the which he decla∣redThe letters of Paulus virglus to the Bishops of Italy. that the Pope had giuen forth a Bull, for the calling of a generall Councell, the which Bull when he had séene, he had great sorrow and griefe of minde and that for waighty cau∣ses. Namely, for that the Pope went about to disperse and scatter, and to ouerthrow & destroy the Churches of Christ, and to bring the same againe to the former state of desola∣tion. Adding herevnto, that the Pope was greatly offended with the light of reformatiō, which God had caused to shine in earth the space of these fortie yeeres to men yt were blin∣ded and ouerwhelmed in thicke darknesse of errors. As though (sayth he) you Bishops were iudges, & shoulde be vmpires in the Counsel to determine and ende matters. So soone as ye be come to Trent, ye shall heare some profoūd disputation or other by Monkes: but ye shall heare no man that dare truely reply against them. Then shall be song very solēne songs of ceremonies, ye shall be brought into the Temple of S. Vigill, ye shall haue faire and sumptuous clothes of Tapisery hong before you, ye shall haue Miters put on your heades: ye shall sit vpon maruelous faire chaires, which ye Cardinal of Trent brought from Millaine. And being there thus placed ye shall heare so∣lemnly read out of a Pulpit, the decrées, which the Pope, an vnlearned and foolishe man, with the helpe of some one monke or other hath deuised. But as for you, ye must doe nothing but howe downe your mytered heads to the Pope, and say to whatsoeuer you heare Placet, very well: and so to approue the same, as thoughe at the first sight you dyd vn∣derstand and consider of the matter very well. Then will the Pope euery where publishe abrode, That the Bishops of the Catholike Church, haue iudged the Luthe∣rans to be Heretikes. Whereas you neuer so determined or iudged of thē, but he alone which sitteth in Peters Chaire. And yet notwithstanding, ye shall be the cause of all these euls. Also shal that be called a general coūsell, in the which
neither we our selues, whose cause is in hande, are hearde, neither yet the Bishops that are present do any thing of thē selues, but stande onely for sifers in agram? And the Pope will sende the Canons which were made at Rome, to Trent, that they may be counted the decrées of the generall Coun∣cel. And to ye end that ye might not doubt of this, what say ye to that which was don by Pope Paule. iij. and also by Pope Iulio. iij. Of the which matter I my selfe can be a sufficient witnesse, and my testimonie the more worthye to be recey∣ued, for that I my selfe for bewraying this coloured deceite, was constrained to depart from Trent. Who knoweth not that here vpon came this prouerbe: The holy Ghost is brought from Rome in a Cheste. I my selfe was once a Bishop, as ye be, and that waye bent, that ye are, vntill I forsoke the Pope, and got me to the Church of Christ. The which I count the greatest benefite that euer I receyued. But truely those toyes and deceitfull fleightes, are appointed now out of tyme in these dayes, soing ye cléere light of the Gospel so brightly shineth throughout the whole worlde, and séeing the deceites of the Pope are so openly knowne. Is this your generall Counsell, from the which, we that are the contrary part, and for whose cause y• same is assembled, are excluded? Is this I say the order of your ge∣nerall Councell, that ye Pope shall commaund Patriarkes, Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbates to be at the Councell, & shall exhort Kings and Princes also to sende their Clergye and prelates thither which are our aduersaries, and seclude vs which ought to make answere before we be condemned. And wheras the Pope woulde séeme greatly to desire that Kings and Princes shoulde either they themselues be pre∣sente, or else their Legates and Ambassadors, what a ieste and ridiculous thing is that? seing they haue no definitiue voyce in the Councell, but are onely lookers on. Therefore in your Councels, not wisedome, not godlynesse, not gra∣uitie giue Councell, but your Miters.
This and muche more he wrote, which for breuities sake we omit. Thus the Pope went aboute to bring to passe to haue a Councell at Trident. And now at this time the Electors and Princes of Germa∣nie which were protestants, met togither at Numburgh, that they might deliberate and consulte of the Confession made at Augusta, and offered to Charles the fifth in the yeare ofAugusta, is  citie in Ger∣manie called Ausburgh. our Lord God. M. D. XXX. and that bycause they heard that they were many wayes misreported of before the Emperor Ferdinando. And writing letters to the Emperour, they de∣clared that they did hold fast & embrace with one cōsent that confession made at Ausburgh, & that they were ready to giue an account of ye same confession out of the word of God. While the Princes were thus occupied, there came twoThe Pope iu∣uiteth the Princes of Germanie to the generall Councell. Legates from the Pope, to intreate the Princes of Germanie to come to the generall Councell. The which two declared their message as followeth. The one of them began thus, saying: That the most high bishop so soone as he was called to the most holy & reuereud office of gouerning ye Churche, to the end he might do the dutie of a true pastor, he had this care aboue al others, to correct and amend whatsoeuer was amisse: that the Church mighte be quiet, & that all nations might be of one consent & minde, and embrace one doctrine. To bring the which thing to passe, séeing he saw no better way or remedie than an assembly of a generall Councell, by due aduise & deliberatiō, & by his own authoritie also which he hath frō God, hath ordained & appointed a councel, which shal be holdē at the feast of Easter next cōming. And that the Princes might be ye more fully certified of this matter, & to the end they, ioyning their indeuor with the Popes careful∣nesse, might be willing & diligent to procure ye tranquillitie & peace of Germanie, they said yt his holinesse, greatly desiring & seking the peace & quietnesse of ye countrey of Germanie, had sent his legates, to pray & exhort all mē to come to y• holy as∣sembly: in ye which it should be lawfull for all men to speake what they would.
Also they intreated those Princes by name, yt they woulde not by any meanes hinder that godly zeale and peace of the Church, the most holy Father being ready to giue vnto all men a most large Charter of the publique faithe, and most solemnly to be bound to performe the same: his holynesse exhorting al Princes to send their Ambassadors to that ho∣ly counsell with their commissions: to the ende the contro∣uersies of the Church, (in the which there are so many opi∣nions as there are heads, and so many Gospels as there are teachers) maye by their industry and diligence be spéedily ended: and that they also giuing that honor which is due to the Church, one Faith may be kepte, and one God alone a∣dored and worshipped. Thus when the first Legate had very copiously vttered his mind, the other also begā in maner & forme following, saying yt he would not repeate those things whereof his fel∣low before him had spoken, séeing yt they had all one charge and commission from the holy Father. There is no man (sayth he) that can be ignorant of the most greuous calamities of the Church, and into what mi∣serie the same is cast one euill and mischiefe following an∣other, occasiō being giuen to the enemies of Christes name to calumniate and speake euill of the same: Insomuch that of necessitie, so great confusion must be prouided for, & a re∣medy sought. For the dangers do require these things, the oportunitie of the time persuadeth to the same, and the cle∣mencie and godly zeale of the holy Father, allureth men therevnto: so that there could neuer be a better consent, and a more fitte occasion offered: the Christian common welth being pacifyed, & Gods grace so plentifully being giuen to y• most holy father, who is not only very careful for Princes, but also for souls helth, & ye peace & tranquilitie of ye church,The answere of the Princes of Germany to the Popes Le∣gates. Thus they both made an end of their Oration, to whom this answere was gyuen: The moste honorable Electors, Princes, Ambassadors, and Counsellers, of the moste sacred
Empire of Rome make this answere to the proposition of the Legates: namely, that they doubt not, but that a great sorte of learned, godly, and wyse men, of all ages and conditions, haue wished a long tyme, that the Churche might be in bet∣ter state: praying that at the length the pure doctrine of the Gospell might be restored, and yt the wicked errors might be takē away. Of the which matter Byshops of Rome ought to haue a speciall care, for that they haue of long tyme at∣tributed to themselues the tytles of Pastors of the Church: but (say they) experience hath hytherto declared, that they haue bene rather occupyed in establyshing of their Tyran∣ny, and in bringing errors into the Church, than in amply∣fying and setting foorth the glory of God, and in curing the diseases of the Church. The which truly is most manyfest, by too too many sorrowfull effectes, as the best friendes that the Pope hath cannot but confesse, if there be any shame in them. Also they sayd that they did not a little maruel what mo∣ued the Pope, and what hope he had of them, that he sente his embassage vnto them, and that he woulde call them to this Councell: as though he were ignorant what Religion the States of the Empire followed: who of late, that they might reforme their Churches according to the true doc∣trine of the Gospell, were constrayned to plucke their neck out of the Popes yoake, that is to say, to separate thēselues from their fellowshippe, which went about to oppresse and destroy the true doctrine of the Gospell. We woulde therefore (say they to the Legates) that ye should knowe for a suretie, that the most noble Princes of Germany, will by no meanes obey the Pope, nor acknow∣ledge that he hath any power, either by Gods lawe, or by the lawe of man, to call a Councell: specially, being such a one as maketh dissention & strife in the Church, and most cruelly warreth against the truth. Furthermore, they affir∣med, that they were misreported of & slaundered, as though
they retained no certaine faith, but that there were now a∣mong them, So many heads, so many opiniōs, So many Gos∣pels, so many teachers: wheras they retained the plaine and manifest confessiō made at Ausburgh, and offered to the Em∣perour Charles the. v. in ye yéere of our Lord God. M. D. XXX. in the which not only all the principall grounds of faith are distinctly contained, but also y• celestial truth manye wayes therby set forth and published. Also they said that the gene∣rall complaints of all mē did sufficiently declare with what errors the Church of Rome was filled, and with what filthy superstitions the Gospell was there suppressed: in so much that the same is rather like to the traditions & vaine inuen∣cions of heathen men, than Christian Religion. Wherfore (say they) bicause we haue of late separated and deuided our selues from the Churche of Rome, (not by anye rashnesse or vaine curiositie, or being led by any leude affections, but by the only commaundement of God which willeth all mē to flee Idolatry) we protest that we wil so abyde most constāt∣ly, and not be subiect any maner of waye to the Pope. For we acknowledge no maner of iurisdiction, besides the iuris∣diction of the most renoumed Emperour Ferdinandus. And as touching the two Legates, the Princes saide, that were it not for the Popes ambassage, on which they came, they being worshipfully borne in Venice, they would shewe vnto them so great courtesie, fauour and friendship as might be: both for that they loued the countrey of Venice, and also bycause the Legates themselues by the dignitie of their birth, were worthy, as they thought, to be well entertained. And thus the Popes Legates, with lost labour, retourned from Germanie againe. Then beganne Religion and the great number of the faythfull to increase more throughout euerye prouince of the kingdome of Fraunce, but the deuill enuying that nota∣ble increase, there were then many perturbations and trou∣bles raised vp in many places.
In Prouince (whiche was sometimes called Narbon) therePersecutious in Prouince. was great a doe and much trouble. And the Gospell beyng much preached in the region of Langres, almost in euery citie with great assemblies of people to heare y• same, at the laste ensued great affliction by the Earle Villarius. Daulphenie also (which is called the Regiō of Sauoy) embra∣cing y• same doctrin, felt ye like persecutiōs. And by ye meanes of one Mottaegondrinus, who was Lieutenant to the Duke of Guise, there was grieuous persecution at Valentia, in so much that a Minister of Gods word, and certaine honest ci∣tizens with him were beheaded. Moreouer garrisons of souldiers were placed throughout euerye citie, to the great anoyance and detriment of the faithfull, who notwithstan∣ding wonderfully increased both in number & in zeale daily. The Prince of Conde beyng sente for of the King, came to hym to the Courte, which was at Fontisbellaquaeums, withThe Prince of Conde sent for to the Court. a fewe onely attending vpon him. The daye following, he was called before the priuie Councell, and beyng come, he openly demaunded of the Chauncelor if he had any thing to saye against him, who answered that he had nothing to ob∣iect againste him: the like answere also made all the reste. And then he sat hym downe in his accustomed place. Then the King declared before all the assemblye, that the Prince of Conde had giuen vnto him due proofes and testimonyes of his innocencie: (for as we declared before, by the practises of the Guises he was accused of treason) the which he saids he dyd in no wise doubte of. And therfore he gaue comman∣dement to the Senate of Paris to giue leaue to the Prince of Conde to haue larger testimonyes of his innocencie. And to the ende the Iudgement of the priuie Councell mighte be knowne to all men, commaundement was giuen that the same shoulde be registred in the Register of the Senate, and sent also to the Ambassadors of other Nations. There∣fore for bycause of these things, the Prince of Conde went to Paris.
In the meane time there arose new conttions betwéenThe contentiō and lling out beweene the Queene & the king of Nauare. the Quéene and the King of Nauarre, he complaining to the Queene that he was not well delt withall, for that he was ill requited for that great good will and courtesie which he shewed towardes the Quéene in yéeling vnto hir the go∣uernment of the Realme, the Duke of Guise being in office and authoritie aduaunced before him, who had not onely the keyes of the Tower to kéepe, but also by the Quéenes will did what him liste: Saying also, that the matter was very ingratefully handled, that he which had béen alwayes his enimie euen in the dayes of King Henrye and Frances, shoulde as yet be aduaunced before him. Also that if he were contented for the Quéenes sake to dissemble all things, and not to bewray his griefe, it was the more vnméete that he for his facilitie and tractablenesse shoulde be abused by hir. In fine he saide, that either he, or else the Duke of Guise must néedes forsake the Court: adding also that he coulde by no meanes abide with the king, except the Guise depar∣ted. To this the Quéene made answere, that she did meane to gratifie the king of Nauarre, so much as she might, and so much also as equitie shoulde require: but seing as then she sawe no iust cause, she saide that she woulde in no wise ex∣pulse the Duke of Guise from the King, bicause those offi∣ces that were committed vnto him, of necessitie required his presence aboute the King. She sayde also that she well perceyued that these complaints of the king of Nuar were continual, and that one thing being graunted, she must day∣ly graunt more and more, and that there shoulde neuer be any measure or end of these complaintes▪ Notwithstanding for his sake, and to yelde vnto his complaintes, she said that she would giue cōmaundement that the keyes of the tower mighte be deliuered vnto him: although they pertayned to the Duke of Guise, bycause he was Lord great Master: as maye appéere also by the example of the Constable, who heretofore bare the same office. To this the King of Nauar
that the Constable didde it not vpon the same considera∣tion ad in that order, but in respecte of his office of the Cnstableship, the same thyng proprely appertayning to his office. But herevpon was kindeled a more fyerie con∣tention, and sharpe and bitter wordes passed on bothe par∣tes: and in suche sort that the next day the king of Nauarre made himselfe readie to depart, and his caiage and sump∣ter horsses béeing sent before, he himselfe was now readie to mount on horsebacke, and with him were readie to goe all the Princes, the kings néere kinsmen, the Constable, the Chastillions, and the greatest part of the Nobles, the which if it had come to passe, the Guises, and they of their parte shuld haue ben left only with the King. And the report was that they would go no further than Paris, that there calling the assemblie of states together, they might fully determine concerning the gouernment of the kingdome. The Quéene béeing verie sorie for this sodaine intention and purpose, by the aduise of the Cardinall of Turnon, called vnto hir the Constable, and to the ende she mighte stay and deferre hys going, she brought to passe that king Charles hir sonne (two Secretaries being called to make record) commaunded and charged the Constable in this necessitie to abyde with him as one of the chiefe officers that might not be spared. This charge so stayed the Constable, that he neuer durst (as hée had promised) follow the king of Nauarre, for all the persua∣suasions that duke Momorencius could vse, who persuaded him to the same. Therfore the king of Nauar was let of his purpose. But it was euery where reported, that the Quene for the hatred she bare vnto the king of Nauar, made muche of the Guyses. The which rumour broughte to passe, that they which should come to Paris to the particular assembliesDeliberation of the particu∣lar assemblie of states at Pa∣ris. of the States (as in other prouinces of the realme they did also) came the more spéedily. In the whiche assemblie ma∣ny things were moued, concerning the order and maner of gouerning the realme: as, concernyng the remouing and
placing some from and to the most honourable offices: con∣cerning the Guyses accompt to make of the money whiche was spent in the tyme of king Frances the seconde: concer∣ning their euill behauiour in the tyme of king Henrie: and concerning their briberie and vnlawfull receyuing of mo∣ney: In the whiche crime also the Marshall Santandrae, the Duchesse of Valentien, and others were guiltie. All whiche were forbidden to be of the Kings priuie Counsell, vn∣till suche tyme as they had made their accompt. Then they whiche were for this cause assembled togither at Paris (as it is declared before) were forbidden to doe any thing con∣cerning the gouernment of the kingdom: but they notwith∣standyng, go forwarde with that whiche they had begonne, affirming that the same did specially appertayne to the as∣semblie of States to be talked of, and not to be left to the determination and will of the Princes and kings kinsmen only. When the Queene heard this, she was oute of mea∣ure troubled, and fynding no better way or remedie, than to be reconciled to the king of Nauarre, she desired the Con∣stable that he woulde endeuour himselfe all that he coulde, to bring the same to passe. And at the length, the ConstableReconciliation betweene the Queen, and the king of Nauar béeing a meane, there was a newe couenaunte and league made betwéene them: namely, That the King of Nauarre shoulde bee taken for the Vicegerent, or Regent throughoute the whole Realme: And that the Queene neuer after would doe any thing withoute his counsell and will. This and the rest whiche tended to this effect, were con∣firmed and fully agreed vpon both by words and writings, and Registred by the Kings Secretaries in publike record. These conditions beeing concluded and agréed vpon, all the Princes the Kings kynsmen, and the Prince of Conde, being for this cause sente for from Paris, subscribed to the same. The Duke of Guyse in lyke manner subscribed with them, promising from thence forwarde to shewe him selfe mor obediente to the Kyng of Nauarre. Then com∣maundemente
was giuen to the Marshall Momorentius that he shoulde with all spéed cause the states particularly assembled at Paris, to be reuoked and called backe agayn, and that the same whiche was done at the first concernyng th order of gouerning the kingdome, should be quietly amen∣ded, and corrected. The which thing was wysely brought to psse by him, to the great pleasure of the Quéene, and al∣so without any offence to the king of Nauarre. Among the Ambassadoures of forreyne Princes and na∣tions, whiche came into Fraunce, to gratifie the newe kyng Charles, there was the Ambassadoure of Denmarke, called Georgius Gluchus. For this man the king of Nauarre made a feaste, and desired him to tell his lorde the kyng of Den∣marke, that be would before a yeare came came about, bring to passe, that the Gospell should be openly and fréely prea∣ched thoroughoute the whole realme of Fraunce▪ For the whiche thing, when thankes was giuen to God, and the good intent and purpose of the king of Nauarre commended, Georgius Gluchus the Ambassadoure prayed him that hée woulde take héede that the doctrine of Caluine, and of the Heluetians myght not be receyued in France, but rather the doctrine of Martine Luther. Whyche doctrine the king of Denmarke his Lorde, and the kyng of Sueuia, and many o∣ther kings and Princes (whose dominion and power is no lesse than theirs whiche acknowledge the bishop of Rome and his Churche) doo followe. To this the king of Nauarre answered, that Martine Lu∣ther and Iohn Caluine did wholly disagrée from the Pope in fortie Articles, and of those fortie Articles, they agréed be∣twéene themselues in nine and thirtie: So that there is but one betwene them in controuersie. Wherfore (sayeth he) both parts must endeuor themselues mutnally to bēd their minds & force first of al against the Pope, that he being once ouercome, they may seriously togither consider, confer, and
come to agréement, in that article in controuersie: and so the Churche at the length may be brought to his former pu∣ritie. But the Constable when the Quéene and king of Nauar were made frendeu, obteyned great fauour on bothe sydis, perswading himselfe that he had not ben a lttle beneficiall to both of them: by this meanes he was verie familiar with them bothe. But when he saw that in Let flesh was com∣monly eaten, and openly vought and solde: and that there were lermons openly preached in the prince of Condes cham∣ber: & heard also the Quéen opēly say, that it was the kings pleasure and hirs also, that there should be godly Sermons euery day in the kings house, he began to suspecte that the king of Nauarre and the Quéen had secretly agréed together concerning religion. And there preached before the Kyng one Ianu Monlucius, Bishop of Valentine, at whose prea∣ching the Constable and the duke of Guise were euer but once: and the Constable being verie angrie with the bishopThe Constable is drawn away frō the pnce of , and from others o the reformed Churche. of Valentine, sayde that it was inough for him to come once and no more to suche a matter. To whom the Bishop sayd, that he prayed God that his worde might profite and take place euery where. The day folowing, the Constable and the Duke of Guise went together to a sermon of a certaine Monke, and from that tyme their mynd began to be alte∣nated and drawne away. After which tyme the Constable was angrie with the Admirall his nephew openly, bicause he did freely and publikely professe the Gospel. And the wife of the Constable greatly pricked him forward to this euill, who was greatly offended that the familie and stocke of the Chastillion shoulde bee aduaunced, hir brother the Earle Villarius being not in that estimation that she woulde haue had him. Therfore she moued & prouoked him wyth these prickes, saying, that the Admirall wente aboute to depriue him of that benefite which the Quéene had bestowed vpon him: that he did instātly persuade the Quéene to promote &
set forth ye true religiō, for the king of Nauars sake: yt the Cō∣stable ought not to suffer y authoritie of the church of Rome to be diminished, he being not onely the chiefe officer o the king, but also such a one as had his original & ofspring of the firste Christian of the kingdome of Fraunce, as the poelie of his armes did verie well testifie, whiche was this: Pro∣tegat Deus primum Christianum: that is, God defende the firste christian. Also the Marshall Santandrae, a suttle, craftie and malicious man, blew in his care that by the suttle procure∣ment of the Admirall, he was put vp by the assemblie of States to be a bryber and an extorcioner. By thys meanes he thoughte to staye him: for he feared that the Constable would not easily be brought to their wic∣ked religion, except it were by these persuasions. Therfore he proceeded, saying, that he whiche came of so noble a stock and hadde doone suche woorthie and notable seruice in the kyngdome of Fraunce, gouernyng the kingdome fortie yea∣res, oughte not to suffer newe religions to be brought in, to the hurte of the catholike churche. The lyke persuasions also vsed the Earle Villarius hys wyues brother, bearing no lesse spite and malice agaynste the Admirall than his sister did: and that bycause hee vn∣derstoode, that the Admirall did disproue before those of the kings priuie counsell that whiche he had done in Nar∣bon against Religion. Therfore they withdrewe the Con∣stable all that they coulde. The whiche thyng Marshall Momorentiu fearing, and foreséeing a daungerous tem∣pest lyke to aryse by the meanes of these dissentions, hée shewed to his father the Constable so muche as he could, what he thought néedfull to be doone. And least he shoulde be drawne awaye from the greatest parte of his strength, leaste he shoulde chaunge awaye certaine frendship for that which was vncertain: and leaste he should ioyne hymself with newe reconciled fréendes, he repeated vnto him their olde enmities and fallings out. Adding moreouer, that hée
shoulde peruerte and ouerthrowe the greatest foundati∣ons of his stocke and kinred, when he should alienate and withdraw himselfe from the Prince of Conde, from the Cha∣stillions, from the Earle of Rupefocaldensis, and from the rest which professe the reformed Religion: beside this, he should loose thereby the good will and fauor of the king of Nauarre, and peraduenture the Quéenes fauoure too. It is better (sayeth hee) to suffer the Chastillions and the Guiles to contende togyther, than for you to take parte, and yet ne∣uerthelesse you shall kéepe youre faythe. Affirming also, that yf the Guyses were ouercome (as it is moste lykely, bycause they haue procured the hatred of all the assemblies, agaynste themselues) then shoulde his prudence, experi∣ence, and goodnesse bring to passe, that he shoulde be a mo∣deratour and a iudge of the reformation of the Churche: the errours of the whiche Churche he ought not to defend, bycause he was the chiefe officer vnder the King, and the successour also of the firste Christian that was in Fraunce. Also he sayde, that he ought not to count it an iniurie that mention was made of hym by those that were of the As∣semblie at Paris, seing that he had doone nothing but by the authoritie of Kings, and of the hyghest powers: and sée∣ing also that he hadde receyued so little of kyng Henrye, that there was no manne but hée woulde iudge hym woorthie of greater rewardes, bothe in consideration of the office, whyche hée had so long, and also for the mo∣ney whiche hee bestowed in the Kings seruice. Moreouer, hée sayde, that it appeared by the Bookes of accompte, that the gyftes whyche the kyng gaue hym, were not so muche by the seuenth parte as those giftes were, whiche were bestowed vpon the Marshal Santandrae, so farre they were from being compared with the Guises gifts, and with the giftes of the Duchesse of Valentien. To these persuasions onely of Momorentius, the Con∣stable made answer, saying, That Religion coulde not be
altered without the mutation of the state, & ciuil regiment: that he was a faithfull seruant of the king, and of his bre∣thren also: that he feared not to be found guiltie: that not∣withstanding he woulde not suffer the actes and deedes of the Kyngs deceassed to be reproued, and disalowed: That hée desyred that hys nephews the Chastillions might be so good Christians in verie déede, as they séemed to bée in woordes: also that hée dyd willingly forgiue those that had offended him whatsoeuer they had doone. After this verie shortly, the Chastillions, Odetus the Car∣dinal, the Admiral, the Andelot came oftentimes vnto him, protesting that they bare no hatred in their heartes agaynst the Guises, but went only about to frustrate their practizes and deuyses, whiche (as it euidently appeared) tended both to their destruction, and of the realme also. Whome the Constable (saye they) oughte to resiste aboue all others. But they persuaded in vayne: for his mynd was drawne awaye, and was linked in the freendship of the Guyses, by diuers that allured him therto. Thus dissentiōs grew dayly more and more by the mea∣nes of Religion, and openly burste foorthe: insomuche that both partes sought to iniurie and to reproche one another, the fauourers of the Popes doctrine, calling the professours of the Gospell, Huguenotes: and the Protestantes callyng them agayne Papistes. Herevpon came a rumour abroade of Seditions, the Popes chaplains in their Sermons mo∣uing and pricking the people forward to the same. Wher∣fore the king sent his letters to the Magistrates of euerye Prouince: the summe and effect wherof was: That no man shoulde call another contumeliously by theThe kings Letters. name of Huguenot or Papist: that no man shuld abuse that ho¦ nest libertie which euery mā ought to enioy, either in his own house, or whē he is in his freds house: that no mā shuld enter ei ther with gret or smal nūber vpō other mēs houses, vnder pro∣tēce of the former edicts which prohibited & forbad vnlauful
assemblyes. That they which were kept in bondes for Religi∣ons sake, should be by and by deliuered and set at libee, be∣fore the first Edicte made for their deliueraunce. That they which had fled the Realme for Religions sake, shoulde haue leaue to returne home againe, with full and safe libertie to en∣ioy their goods and al things else that they had before, so that they would be contented to liue Catholikely and without of∣fence. But if they would not, that it should be lauful for them to sell their goods and to get them to another place. These letters, the Senate of Paris went aboute to let and stay, but in vaine: neither could their admonitions (as they term them) which they sent to ye king, preuaile so much, but that these letters wer euery where published abrode, which also almost in euery place were diligently obserued. They were deliuered which were kepte in prison for Religion. And many, which for the Gospell wyllingly chose to lyue in exile in other landes, retourning nowe home agayne, greatly increased the Churche: The Churche more and more flourished, the Gospell was confirmed: All menne, as though they had quite forgotten all other things, talked onely of the Gospell: Euery one of what estate and degrée soeuer he was of, only reasoned of the Gospell: Sermons were made euery where both in the Cities and in the fiel∣des: All men diligently resorted to heare them: yea the ve∣rie rude and ignorant sort of people, bicause of the newnesse of the thing, came also to heare them of which a great num∣ber by this meanes were brought to the knowledge of God. But the aduersaries, they stoode amazed, wondering and musing at so great a matter: The seruice of ancient cere∣monies began euery where to waxe colde, yea and in ma∣nie places to be derided: yea verie manie casting asyde the Popes badges and markes, came into the Churches of the faithfull, and were made as one with them. So greate al∣terations came to paūe in so little a tyme. The Prince of Conde, (as we haue declared before) came
to Paris, that his innocēcie and guiltlesnesse might be farther tried by the Senate. He therfore, the Cardinall of Burbon, and many other noble menne attending vpon him, pleaded with the Senate of Paris, concerning this matter as follo∣weth: manie men maruelling that he was thus dealt with∣all. It is (sayth he) a special token of Gods prouidence, by whiche I béeing deliuered from the platformes and secrete traps of my enimies, shall get vnto my selfe an euerlasting testimonie of my innocencie in those thynges layde to my charge. The lying in wait and mischeuous practizes of wic∣ked men, do nothing at all hurt those which haue their hope & trust in God. I haue always wished that my cause might be throughly wayghed and vnderstode of the Senate, which is the moste notable place in Fraunce for the executing of Iustice. I should (sayth he) be iniurious to my self, vnlesse I should bring the equitie and integritie of my cause againste the slaunders of my aduersaries, before so worthy an assem∣blie, that the matter being worthie of the laudable and ho∣norable sentence of the Senate, may by the grauitie and vp∣right iudgemēt of the same be defined and ended. Wherfore he prayed them to consider of his estimation, whiche to hym was more deare than his lyfe. Then when he had required of the Senate that Petrus Robertus his man of lawe mighte be peaceably and quietly hearde in making his declaration, he so departed. Then Petrus Robertus by and by made his oration, say∣ing,The oration of Petrus Rober∣tus, the man of law for the Prince. That it hadde pleased God to trie the Prince of Conde with that triall of affliction, with which▪ he doth oftentimes trie his faithful seruāts, which affliction he doth oftentimes sende to those that are his, but specially to those that are set in high degrée, and that for two speciall causes: First, that Kings and Princes, and men of great calling might know that they haue their power & dignitie from God alone, vp∣on whō dependeth eyther their preseruation or destruction. Secondly, that the innocencie of his seruantes maye more euidently appere, by false accusation, & that by that meanes
there may be perfect triall of their integritie. When he had thus spokē, he declared what things were wrought against the Prince at Aurelia, howe his appeales were not receiued, howe he was condemned his cause not heard: and therfore he sayd, that the sentence pronounced a∣gaynst him was voyd and of none effect. At the length whē many things were debated & reasoned of betwene hym andThe conclusi∣on of the Se∣nate of Paris. the Kings Sollicitour, it was concluded: That all matters that had ben broughte in agaynst the Prince, should be refer∣red to the Senate: And if nothing could be found that should deserue or require an extraordinarie waye then by and by the Senate should pronounce the ful and absolute sentence of ab∣solution and discharge: But if the Senate should find any mat∣ter of greater weight, that then it shuld be lawful before those testimonies and proofes were receiued and credited, to exa∣mine the witnesses again, and to consider the matter more de∣pely: and that the sentence pronounced by the former Iudges should be voyd, seing that it appertained to the Senate alone, (which is the court appertaining to the king & to the nobles of France) to examine and iudge the causes of the kings kins∣men, if any criminall cause were obiected against them. The which point Petrus Robertus the prince of Conde his aduocate, expounded and opened at large: least the Prince shoulde seeme by the weaknesse of his cause to forsake that former iudgemente of the iudges whiche were chosen by king Frances the second, of purpose to giue sentence on him. He declared therfore, that the Prince did refuse those iudges, bicause they were far vnmete to iudge him: besides that so it shuld haue ben preiudicial to ye priuilege & right of the prin∣ces, ye kings kinsmen, for that they being accused of any mat∣ter, maye appeale to be iudged of the king only their chiefe lord, and the head of their stock, in the Senate of Paris. To this the kings solicitor answered, That he did not on∣ly allow the sentence of the kings priuie councel, cōcerning the innocencie of the Prince of Conde, but also earnestly de∣sired
that the same mighte be ratified and confirmed by the iudgement of a parliament: notwithstanding saith he the same must be established by an ordinarie and lawful way. Therfore the Prince of Conde was made playntiue, and the Kings Solicitour the defendant▪ and it was concluded, That for somuche as the Prince of Conde was put vpon his further triall & purgation, the whole assemblie of the Se∣nate house would receyue any manner of accusation to bee made agaynst the Prince of Conde, and duly consider of the same: to the ende if nothing coulde be brought agaynst him wherby he myght be founde guiltie, e myght straightwaye by publike sentence, be declared and pronounced to be in∣nocent and guiltlesse. Wherefore all the Senatours com∣maunded, that if any man had any manner of accusation a∣gainst the Prince of Conde, he should come into the Senate house, and then he shoulde be hearde. Yea euery one of the prince Councell were asked by name if they had any thing to obiect against the Prince of Conde: Who affirmed in ge∣nerall by a solemne othe that they had nothing to obiecte a∣gainst him. Then was ye final sentēce of the Senat giuen in maner & The decree of the senate con cerning the innocencie of the Prince. forme folowing, that is to say, That the Prince of Conde had done nothing against the kings Maiestie but was pure, inno∣cent, and guiltlesse of all those crimes layd to his charge▪ that all actions commensed against him were voyde. Also that he should haue libertie to arrest and sue whom he thought good, that hee myght bee satisfied according to the dignitie of his person. VVith prouiso also that this decree shoulde be pro∣claymed in the hyghest Courtes of the king, and registred in publike Recordes. Thys ordinaunce and decrée was pronounced and open∣ly read▪ by the chiefe iudge of the Senate, the gates of the Senate house beeing set wyde open, and all the Senatours assembled together solemnely apparelled in their Scarlet Roabes, accordyng to order. And also at the Readyng
hereof, there was a great multitude of people, and the grea∣test part of the Nobilitie of Fraunce, as the kyng of Nauarre, the Cardinall Burbon, Monpensier, and others of the Prin∣ces the Kinges kinsmenne: and with these also were pre∣sent the Dukes of Guise, Nemorosius, the Constable, Mo∣morentius, the Marshall of Santandrae, the Cardinal of Lor∣rayn, and the Chastillion. Others also, which were accused for the same cause with the prince of Conde, receiued the sen∣tence of their purgation openly read. And vndoubtedly, the Prince of Conde alwayes denyed, that he was the author, or of the counsell of that umult of Ambaxian, howsoeuer the Guises maliciously interpreted that counsell and way which was deuised to kepe them vn∣der, to be intended against the kings maiestie, and the state of the realme. By these and such like practizes, those two brethren the Guyses inflamed the yong king Frances against the men of Burbon, leauing nothing vndone that might séeme to proue their accusations. Accusers were diligently sought for, and matters of accusation inquired after: By gifts & by threat∣nings all things were attempted. And in the iudgement of the Prince of Conde, they leaned specially to one witnesse, whose name was Sagua, a seruant of the kyng of Nauar, of whom we haue made mention before. That Sagua being ta∣ken and apprehended by the Guises, was diligently exami∣ned concerning the Prince of Conde, if he knewe whether he had conspired against the king or no. Sagua at the first de∣nied this, saying that he knew no suche matter. But at the length Frances the duke of Guyse broughte it to passe, (ha∣uing with him a hangman and a halter) by thretning death vnto him except he would plainly accuse the Prince of Conde of conspiracie against the king. But at the length being es∣caped out of the Guyses hands, he most cōstantly sayd both by word and writing, that the accusation agaynst the prince of Conde was extorted from him by force.
This publike sentence therfore of the Senate toke away from the Prince of Conde, that spite and slaunder wherby he was sayd and thought to be guiltie of the tumult of Amba∣xian. But if the sentence of the Senate had not cléered and purged him, yet the effect and sequele of that whiche follo∣wed, maye be sufficient to approue that he neuer conspired against the king: As his only studie and moste vndoubted good will in defending the young king and the realme also, being in great perill, from the mischiefe and lyings in wait of forrain enimies. The which he would neuer haue doon, if he had intended to hurt the king any maner of way. The Cardinall of Lorrayn complayned to the Quéene thatThe complaint of the Cardinal of Lorrayn. the matter was euery daye worse and worse, and that the people presumed and toke too much libertie vpon the kings Edictes, and also that the negligence and carelesnesse of the Iudges increased more and more: affirming that there was no wiser way to be found, than in suche troublesome mat∣ters, to take counsell of the Senate of Paris. (It was re∣ported that he went about this thing, being assured and cer∣tified before of many of the mindes of the Senatours, that by this preiudice he myghte helpe the Nationall Councell shortly at hande.) Therefore the King and the Quéene and all the priuie Councell came vnto the Senate to deliberate wyth them of those matters whiche appertayned to Religion, and the gouernement of the realme. The Chauncellor briefly declared, that they wer therfore called togither by the kings commandement, that they might shewe certaine ready and exquisite wayes to qualifie those perturbations and trou∣bles, whiche would euery day more and more increase by reason of the diuersitie of Religion: to the ende the Kings subiects might peaceably lyue vnder his obedience. To the which matter (he sayd) it pertained nothing at al to talke of religiō, bicause the ciuil gouernmēt was only now in hand: as for religion (he sayd) it should be reserued to be handled
in the Nationall Councell, to whome it belonged to discusse the same. When the Chauncellour had ended his oration, euery man spake his iudgement: Some wishing punishe∣ments1. for religions sake to e styde, vntil the Cuncel had determined of the same: Other some wyshing to haue pu∣nishment2. by death, which was contrare to the ancient cn∣stitutions of the Bishops of Rome. Other some deeming it3. best to haue the whole matter left to the authortie of Eccle∣siastical iurisdiction: In the meane tyme they thought good to forbid, that there should be no conuenticles or assemblies either priuate or publike▪ eyther with armes, or withoute armes: allo that there shul be no sermons, or administra∣tions of Sacraments otherwyse than according to the vsu∣all maner of the Church of Rome. And thus the whole assem∣blie were deuided into three eueral opinions. Uerie many were of the first opinion: how beit the last opinion and ad∣iss pruayled, hauyng three voyces more than the other had, for the whych cause, there arose contention, many men suspecting that the Notarie being corrupted, wroughte de∣ceytfully, rekoning the names of some whiche came vuloo∣ked for, whyle the assemblie were vttering their opinions: the whiche was againste all order and custome of the Se∣nate. Neuerthelesse there was an Edicte made, whyche was called, the Edicte of Iulye. The effecte whereof,An Edict cal∣led of the Mo∣neth of Iuly. was thys. That all men should liue peaceably: that there shouled bee no iniuries doone vnder the pretence of religion: That all disturbers and breakers of the peace shoulde suffer death:The summe of the Edict. that there should be in no wyse any maner of elections, or any other things, which pertayned to factions or diuisions: That preachers should vse no wordes of offenc that myght breed sedition among the people, but shuld rather modestly instruct them, and that also vnder payn of death: That ther should be no sermons made, or sacraments ministred either priuatly or publikely, either with armes, or without armes, after any o∣ther
maner than that which was vsed in the catholike Church set forth by the king and his clergie of France, & that vnder the pain of death & confiscation of all their goods, which of∣fended herein. Also, that the knowledge and examination of heresie should be left to Ecclesiasticall persons: and that who∣soeuer was found guiltie therof, should be committed to the secular power, and susteine no other punishement than exile. All these thinges to continue vntill the determination of a generall or Nationall counsell: Pardon and full forgiuenesse of all crimes for religions sake being graunted to those that hadde offended, vpon condition that they woulde euer after∣warde liue peaceably and catholikely. Besides there was in this Edicte seuere punishments appoynted for false accusers. And last of all strayte commaundement that no man shoulde weare armour. It was also agréed and concluded in this assemblie, that the Prelacie or Clergie shoulde be forthe with gathered to∣gither, and also the ministers of the reformed Religion, being waranted from the king to come withoute harme in peace to that assemblie. The Cardinall of Lorrain bragged, that he would confute them by the authoritie of the aunci∣ent fathers, and so made many men to hope to sée wonders. Therefore the Quéene seeking to hasten this triumphe, and fearing least the States of the realme woulde once againe make request to haue Temples, gaue forthe commaunde∣ment, that the Clergie of the Churche of Fraunce shoulde be at the towne of Possiac, neere to Sangerman, the tenth day of August following. Fraunce béeyng in the middest of these troubles, there was warr also aboute that tyme, occasioned by the mea∣nes of Religion, betweene the Duke of Sabaudi, and the Inhabitauntes of the Ualleys of Pedemount, of the whiche to make relation, béeing occasioned for one and the selfe same cause, and in the nexte region, it shall not be greately beside our purpose.
Pedamount néere vnto the mountayne Vesulus, is called the valey of Lucern, of a little towne called Lucerna, néere ad∣ioyning to the same: To this there is also an other adioy∣ning called Angronia, so called of the Riuer Angrone, néere to the which the valeys of Perossa and Samnartine doe lye. Those valleys haue dwelling in them fiftene thousande in∣habitants. Of which number the greatest part professe the Gospell: also, there were some in those places long agoe, which abhorring the Pope and his doctrin, had some know∣ledge and taste of true religion. But after that the lyght of the truth in our tyme brast forthe and more cléerely appea∣red, than it had done before, it began also more cléerely to shine in those valeys. Therfore when they were better in∣structedWarres be∣twene the duke of Sa∣baudia and the inhabitants of the valeys. in the doctrine of the Gospell, then did they more vehemently professe the truthe: and that specially in two little townes aboue the rest, where the same was openly professed. These men of the valleys had many noble men appoynted to rule and gouerne them: but among the reste, they acknowledge the duke of Sabaudia, their chiefe Prince and gouernour. Therfore these inhabitauntes being hated for religions sake of the noble men that dwelt about them, were diuers and sundrie wayes by them vexed. And their chiefe Prince the duke of Sabaudia was sore agréeued, that Religion began to flourish among them: in somuch that he oftentimes cōmanded them to forsake the religion: and to warne their ministers to receyue the Masse and the aunci∣ent religion, otherwise he threatned them cruelly to punish them as rebels. They being carefull by reason of these new commaundements, sende at lengthe their Ambassadour to the Prince with a supplication and confession of their faith, protesting that they beléeue all things conteyned in the old and newe Testament, the articles of the Christian fayth, called Symbolum Apostolorum, the Nicene Créede, and the Creede of Athanasius: also the foure firste Councelles, and the doctrine of the auncient Fathers, so farre forth as they
with the word of God. Humbly beseching him to giue them leaue to liue according to the rule of Gods word, and not to constraine them to doe any thing against their conscience, affirming that they were readie not onelye to giue an ac∣count of their Religion, but also to acknowledge and con∣fesse their error if they might be brought vnto it by ye word of God. Adding herevnto that this doctrine had continued a long time among them, as they coulde well approue by great testimonyes receiued from their ancetors. Desiring him also to inquire how they behaued them selues towards their gouerners, and in what order they liued: protesting that their only desire was to render vnto him all obedience as vnto their chiefe Lord and Prince, and that if they shouldThe Edict a∣against the in∣habitants of the valleys. be founde otherwise, to be sharpely and seuerely punished. This was the effecte of their ambassage to the Duke, but it did nothing at all preuaile. For the Duke gaue strait com∣maundement that no man should come or resort to those ser∣mons which the Ministers of the inhabitantes of ye valleys made: if any did resorte vnto them, their first punishment was the losse or forfeiture of. 100. Crownes, and the seconde punishment was to be a Gally slaue. He commaunded also all the Nobles and Magistrates that had authoritie to pu∣nishe, seuerely to execute the same againste the offenders. Therfore the Noble men began to waxe fierce against the inhabitantes of the valleys: in so much that when they had taken certaine of them, they burnte them: among whome were two preachers of Gods worde. All men vsed violence against the mē of the valleys, euen as if they had béen mor∣tall enimyes: great damage and hurte was done to them: and those which dwelt about them, making an armie made hauocke of them and spoyled them. The men of the valleys were contented with all this iniurie, and by the exhortati∣ons of their Ministers and preachers bare these things pa∣ciently for a time. But at the length being ouerladen and wearied with these troubles, they purposed to defend them∣selues,
in so much that they flew many of them which came to pray and spoile them. Wherevpon the Duke gaue forth a commaundement that they shuld leaue off to spoile them anye more: and sent vnto them Ranconensis and Triniae∣us.Ranconensis & Trinitaeus. two of his gentlemen, to intreate them friendly. Not∣withstanding they retourned home agayne as they came, bycause they woulde haue bounde them to sende away their Ministers and Preaches. The Duke beyng angrye wyth this, intended to make open warre against them. Where∣vpon he sente agaynst them Trinitaeus with fiue thousands soulders (the greatest parte whereof were gunners, and some horsemen) commaundyng hym that excepte the men of the valleys woulde doe as they were commaunded, he shoulde deale with them as with mortall enimyes, to spoile their goods and to put them to fire and sworde. First of all therefore Trinitaeus assaulted Agronia, with a thousand and a halfe of gunners: certayne of the Towns∣men to the number of thirtie being slenderly armed wyth flyngs and Crosbowes, straighte waye went against them, and withstandyng the firste fronte of the Armie, were straite way rescued with two hundered oute of the valleys adioyning vnto them: and so by and by they put their eni∣myes to flight, and slewe three score of them, three of their owne side onely being lacking. When Trinitaeus sawe that he had assaulted Agronia, in vaine, he assaulted the villages thereabout as Comba and Ta∣gliaret: but at their handes he receiued the repulse also with losse of thirtie of his men. Seyng therefore howe hardly he should obtaine his purpose, and that he little preuayled by open violence he soughte to practise by subtiltie and crafte. And sent to the inhabitantes of the valleys, promising them peace, if they woulde vnarme them selues, sende men to the Duke to craue pardon for their rebellion, and gyue vn∣to hym sixtene thousande Crownes. The people desyring peace and to bée eased of all their troubles, easilye yelded to
these conditions. And sente chosen men for the purpose to Trinitaeus. saying that they woulde fulfyll his commaunde∣ment: and so they put off their armoure, which by and by was taken from them by the souldiers. They sente in lyke maner in their owne name to the Duke two men to con∣firme the obedience of the people vnto hym by an othe, so that they might haue libertie to vse their Religion. In the meane time there was a great summe of money required, the one halfe beyng payed, and a daye appoynted for the payment of the other halfe. Within fewe dayes after the Duke sente for the two Legates of the valleys, and the Popes Legate sitting by him, and a great multitude of peo∣ple beyng present, commaunded them, kneeling on theyr knees, in the name, and on the behalfe of the inhabitantes of the valleys, to confesse their faultes, and to craue pardon for the same: firste of the Duke, and then of the Pope in the person of hys Legate there presente: and to sweare both of them euer afterward to be loyal and obedient. This thing beyng extorted from the Legates by feare, the Duke by the meanes of these promyses, commaunded the men of the valleys to put awaye their Ministers, and to re∣ceyue suche as he sente vnto them, and to come to the Masse. The inhabitantes of the valleys, blamed the in∣constancie of their ambassadors, saying that the same shuld not deceyue them, neither that they woulde consente vnto that which they had done, beyng agaynste theyr wils and commaundemente. They woulde (they sayde) obey theyr Prince, but so notwithstanding that they woulde haue the libertie of their conscience. Wherfore they desired that they might haue leaue to ex∣ercise that doctrine which before time they had followed. So soone as the Duke hearde of this, he sent an armye againe, and that in the deepe of Winter, inuading all the countrey, burning houses, spoiling goods and Cattells, and showing so much crueltie as might be.
The men of the valleys therefore being constrained, for∣sooke their houses, and fled to the toppes of the Mountaines with their wiues and children, beyng couered with snowe. From thence they sawe their houses on fire, their trées cut downe, their cattell taken away and spyled. And yet for all this eueryone of them, yea euē their women shed no teares for the same, but gaue prayses vnto God who had made thē worthie to suffer for his name, and had made their houses ashes to throwe in the eyes of Antichrist. Therefore when they sawe whereabout their enimyes went, they dispayred not in the middest of so great affliction, but made their pray∣ers vnto God: and sayde with one mind and consent, that in so iuste a cause they would spende their liues, thinking it bet∣ter to dye than to receiue such horrible superstitions, beyng fully persuaded, that in so good and iust a cause God woulde not fayle them. And thus they bended them selues to séeke their owne defence: appointing scoutes and watches in cer∣taine conuenient places, making certaine holdes: stopping the wayes againste their enimyes: and setting all thyngs that was necessarye for them in so good order as they coulde. There was therefore dayly skirmishes on bothe sides, and within a fewe dayes there were a hundred men slaine on the Dukes side, and on the other side not fortie. Among o∣ther valiant Captaines there was one called Carolus Tru∣chetus, a very expert fellow in the warre, and of great esti∣mation and authoritie with the Duke. This fellowe sought how he might win the Castles and holdes of their enimyes, and therefore by the skill of the places and by the knowledge that he had of their situation, he brought to passe by cōming on the backe side of the mountaine, that he brought a thou∣sand souldiers and placed them on the ridge of a hill: and ha∣uing quietly possessed the same, he put his souldiers in com∣fort to haue the pray: and after he had fortified the same, he made hast to win another holde. Of the which, when many were ware that kept a little hill harde by, they tolde the rest
of their fellowes: of the which, part went to repell their eni∣myes: and parte with all spéede gaue warning to all those that dwelt there rounde about, with the sounde of a Trum∣pet. And at the laste two hundred men being gathered toge∣ther, they easilye put their enimyes to flight. And making hast to remoue those souldiers which were placed on the top of the hill, they sawe certaine troupes of their enimyes ma∣king hast to get a forte néere vnto them of great force. Ther∣fore when they had altered their purpose, leauing their for∣mer assault which they had ment to giue against those on the ridge of the hill, they made hast to encounter with the other part: and setting vpon them before they were readye, they slew many of their enimyes, and had made a greater slaugh∣ter, had not a certaine preacher of Gods word by his admo∣nitions stayed their force. But Truchetus being strickē with a stone on the legge, was caryed away by two souldiers. TheThe slaughter of Truchetus. which when a certain Cowheard which fed oxen there saw, he threw a stone at him with a sling, with so great violence, that he falling to the ground, and being lefte of his souldiers, was slaine with his owne sworde by the same Cowhearde. And nowe for wante of Gunnes, the men of the valleys had made them crossebowes of wood, which would deliuer stones with great force: and therefore the men of Sabaudia being on the lower ground were very muche anoyed with this newe kinde of shooting. Wherefore the men of Sabaudia, to saue thē selues from the force and violence of the stones that were thus shot at them, deuised great Targets, with which they might couer their whole bodyes. Therefore they sending be∣fore them fortie men shéelding them and defending them frō the force of the stones with their Targets, marched on in hast with all their armies. The which when the men of the valleys perceyued, they set vpon them on the one side, and slewe many of them, and put all their armies to flight. And at the length the enimyes vnloked for, toke the towne Taglaretus, and there some were
slaine. But they which were n ye edges of the mountaines, set vpon the enimyes, & slewe many of them, & put the rest to flighte. And thus Traeus hauing no hope to preuaile by wars against these mē, certified the Duke what a hard mat∣ter he had taken in hand. Afterward the men of the valleys were called to parley, with whom these couenantes were made, namely, That they shoulde vse their accustomed exer∣ciesThe agrement an uce be∣tweene the Duke of Sa∣baudia & the inhabitants of the valleys. of Religion: that they should by no maner of meanes be accused or called to account for this warre: that they shoulde haue free libertie and intercourse to bie and sell through all parts of the Dukes dominion: that they shuld render vnto the Duke all dutie and obedience belonging vnto him: that they also should lie without offence. There were diuers other par∣ticular matters, which because they serue not for our purpose, we omit. While these things were thus handled, Philip King ofPersecution in Spaine. Spaine, on the other side, left nothing vndone to punishe & vex with all maner of torments, so many as imbraced the Gos∣pel in any part of his dominiōs but specially in Spaine, & Belgio, the murdering inquisitiō in euery place most cruelly was ex∣ecuted: the houses in the which the faithfull came together were burned: they which were taken were spedilye put to death, some being burned, some drowned, & some tormentes with new kinds of death: yea, there was no respect of persōs had, were he poore or rich, gentlemā or noble mā, he was not frée frō these torments. The king being greatly inflamed & He might ra∣ther be called Granvillan, or greate villane. pricked forward herevnto by ye Cardinall Granuellan, who a little before was made Cardinall in Belgio, at the creation of new bishops. Neuerthelesse the faithful of ye prsecuted chur∣ches offer their confessiō to the king of Spaine, and publish the same euery where abrode: & by publique writing open theirThe confessiō of the Church of Flanders offered to the King. cause to the magistrates, shew how iniurious a thing it is to condemne a man before his cause be heard, beséech that they might haue libertie to be heard, that their confessiō might be read, which would manifestly declare yt they were vniustly
condemned: these troubles (say they) do arise of two sorts of men, The first are such as are led by rashe & vndiscrete zeale. to defend their errors, which haue long time continued in the Romish Church: The second are such as are afeard to haueNewrs. the Gospell preuaile, bicause they know yt the doctrine therof reproueth their wicked doings & affections. It is great arro∣gancie to condemne those that leane to ye worde of God, & to prefer the inuentions of mē before the same. Wherfore they desire yt before they be cōdēned they might be cōuinced by ye word of God, & that the disputatiō might not be with fire and sword, for (say they) the word of God is the vndoubted & cer∣taine rule of truth. But this was the sum of their confession. We beleue in one true God, which by his glorious names & titles, may be discerned frō false & counterfeite Gods: which may also be knowne by that most mighty worke of ye whole world, but specially by his word: we also imrace & receiue the only word of God by faith, not so much bicause ye Church receiueth the same, but bicause it is sealed in ye hartes of the faithful by the holy ghost. We beleue that one God in essēce is distinguished into thrée persons, which are, the father, the sonne, & the holy Ghost, reseruing notwithstanding to euery persō his special propertie. We beleue that God which hath created the worlde doth gouerne & preserue the same by his prouidence. We beleue that he created man after his owne image & liknesse, yt is to say, holy, good, & perfect: & that he fell by his owne faulte, & hath wrapped his prosteritie in y• same giltinesse of sinne, & corruptiō, that he him selfe was in. We beleue yt Iesus Christ, both God and man in one person, is a true mediator, & the onely meane & way to saluation. We beleue that he beyng promysed long before vnto the Fathers, and represented and shadowed vnder the Cere∣monyes and fygures of the lawe, came in his time, and ful∣filled all things that pertayned to oure saluation: and that withoute greate sacrilege and robbing him of his honor, no o∣ther meane can be taken: also that the faithful are partakers
of these benefites, which are the Church of God, which is go∣uerned by the holy ghost, and not tyed to places or perfons. We beléeue that the pure and sincere preaching of Gods worde, the pure Ministration of the sacraments, and the dis∣cipline, by the which the Churche is gouerned according to the rule of Gods worde, are notes and markes of the visible Churche. We beléeue that the Sacraments were ordained to con∣firme our faith, and doe then profite when they are ioyned to the power of the holy Ghost. We beléeue that there doe belong onely two sacraments to the Church: namely Baptisme, which is a seale of remis∣sion of sinnes, and of our regeneration, and therefore a testi∣monie of our entrance into the Churche: And the Lords sup∣per, which signifieth that we are truely made partakers of the body of Christ, and of all his graces and benefites, that is to saye, that oure soules are nourished to euerlasting life by his fleshe and bloude, euen as our bodyes are nourished with breade and wine: but we muste bring faith to receiue the truth of that Sacrament, that is to say Christ: therefore we beléeue that the Lords Supper doth only profite the faith∣full, & bringeth to the vnworthie, that is, to the vnbeléeuing, condemnation. We beléeue that God to defende and preserue the societie of men, hath ordayned lawes and pollitique gouernement, which al men ought to obey: & that tributes, custome, and o∣ther taxes ought to be payed to Magistrates, who ought to be reuerenced, and for whome we ought to pray vnto God. We beleeue also that Christ shall come againe with al po∣wer, maiestie and glory, in the latter day to iudge the quicke and the dead. Thus much concerning their persecution. But now to returne to our selues againe. When the Duke of Guise had bene at no small variance with the Prince of Conde, he purposed with himselfe, partlye by his owne mind, in hope of profite & partly by the Counsel
of his friends, to come into his fauour and friendship again,The reconci∣liation of the Prince of Cō∣de & the Duke of Guise. the Quéene and the Constable, exhorting him ther vnto and helping him to haue hys purpose. Therefore the King, when he had called the Prime Councell together and all the Prin∣ces beyng present, he called both of them before hym: and when the matter was opened he commaunded the Duke of Guise to declare the whole matter to the Prince of Conde. The which the Duke of Guise did, protesting that he ne∣uer caused nor counselled the King (which was departed) to apprehend the Prince of Conde. To which the Prince of Con∣de answered that he did counte him a wicked and naughtie person, which wente aboute to worke him that mischiefe, what so euer he was. The Duke of Guise sayde, that hée thoughte him in lyke manner to be no lesse, but he coulde not helpe it. At the length by the Kings commaundement they embraced one another, and promysed to put away all grudge and malyce, and to be euer afterwarde true and faithfull friendes. This reconciliation gaue the Constable occasion more fréely to ioyne him selfe and to kepe company with the Guises, and to begyn afreshe to suppresse Religion, the which he had alwayes obstinately resisted. We sayde before that the assembly of States, or Courte of Parliament was delayed and put off vntill the moneth of May. Therefore they resorted agayne in the moneth of August to Pontosia a towne in Picardie: and by and by there arose dissention betwéene the Princes and the Cardinalls aboute the order of sitting: the Princes denying to sitte belowe the Cardinalls. Wherevpon the Cardinals Turnon, Lorayne, and Guyse went away verye angry. But when the Earles and Nobles were gathered together, the Chauncelor propo∣sed the matter according to custome, shewing the cause of their comming together, and willing euerye man fréely to vtter that which he had to say. Therefore the Legates or Speakers for the thrée estates
made their seuerall orations: in the which they spake much concerning the duetie of the King, and of the subiectes, and of those matters which are commonly handeled in Ciuill conuocations, the whiche we meane not to repeate, for bi∣cause they appertaine not to our purpose. Notwithstanding this is not to be pretermitted, that the Legate for the com∣minaltie complained very muche of the corruptions of Ec∣clesiasticall persons: bycause they ought to teach the people and to exhorte them both by their doctrine and also by their example to a pure and honest lyfe: but foule and filthy ig∣norance was among them, and their corrupte and vnchaste lye was a greate offence to all men. Moreouer he said, that they were hyrelings, and carefull for nothing lesse than for oyng their dueties, but were whollye gyuen to filthy pleasure: and this thing (sayth he) ariseth hereof, for that they bée more plentifully fedde and fatted, than their offices wyll beare: what hath béene the cause (sayth he) in tymes paste of all the corruptions in the Churche, but the too much ease and lyuing of Ecclesiasticall persons. Also he made pe∣tition in the name of the thirde state, whiche we call the comminaltie, that the King woulde refourme these greate faultes, and woulde so temper and order the lyuings and reuenewes of Ecclesiasticall persons that they mighte not lyue too licenciously at their ease. Moreouer he declared that it was the office of a King to take vpon hym the defence of Religion, and bycause so ma∣nye troubles daylye did aryse for this cause throughout the whole Realme, he sayde it was a presente remedie to pa∣cifie them, to call forthwith a Nationall Counsell, and to gyue to all men leaue to come vnder safe conducte: and that it woulde please the King also with the Princes hys Kinsmen to bée present at the same, and to call for learned and godly men to come to that parley, and also to remoue all those that might be suspected. Furthermore that they whiche thinke that they can not
wyth a safe conscience come to the Ceremonyes of the Churche of Rome, myghte haue libertie freely and quietly to come together into some temple or other publique place, where they maye be taughte the worde of God in theyr vulgar tongue, and maye haue the rytes of their Religi∣on Ministred. And bycause many things maye be sayde to be done a∣misse in those assemblyes, he wished that the King woulde commaunde certaine of his officers to be presente in those assemblyes to see what shoulde be done. Also he sayd, that they oughte not to be counted for here∣tikes whiche were condemned, their cause not hearde, but should be tried and iudged by the word of God. Finallye, he made humble supplications that it woulde please the King to graunte suche reasonable requestes: the which also the Nobilitie with one consent required, but the Ecclesiasticall order or Clergie soughte diligentlye by all meanes possible to defend their cause. But to the ende it maye more plainely appeare whatCertaine Ciuil actes worthy to be noted. greate alterations haue happened within a shorte tyme, it shall not be amisse to repeate certayne things whiche were done in that assemblye concernyng matters Ciuill, and yet those things onely which also seeme to be more neere to Re∣ligion, the state wherof to shewe we meane. Therefore these remedyes were deuised to discharge the Kyng of that debte and paymentes of money wyth the whiche wee sayde before the Kyng at that tyme was great∣lye burthened: Firste, that they whiche had had the occu∣pying of the Kyngs Treasure, shoulde come to accounte: In the meane tyme that so manye as were of the Kings Priuye Counsell shoulde bee forbydden to come into that assemblye, vntyll they hadde playnelye made theyr accountes: also that all shoulde make an accounte (the Queene onely excepted) of all excéedyng giftes, rewardes, and doles.
That so manye as in their owne persons, did not discharge their Ecclesiasticall offices, should loose all their reuenewes sauyng some parte which shoulde bee lefte them for the de∣uine seruice, and for aimes deedes. That all the reuenewes of Benefices in controuersie should be brought to the kings Treasurie. That so many Benefices as had their pastors resident, if they were worthe fiue hundred pounde in mo∣ney, shoulde paye vnto the King the fourth parte: if they were worthe a thousande pounde, the thirde parte, if they were worth three thousande pounde, that then they shoulde paye vnto the King the one halfe. Also that they which had in yearely reuenewes comming vnto them twelue thou∣sande poundes, shoulde haue onely remaining to them of the same, three thousande, and the reste to be payde to the King. That from the Cartusian Fryers, the Minimi, the Mathu∣rines, and the Moniakes should be taken all their reuenews that surmounted and came to more than would finde them ordinarie meate, drinke and clothe: bycause by the order of their rytes and vowe, they ought to haue no more. Also, (they saide) they had yet a better and more compen∣dious way, and that was this: if all the landes of Ecclesia∣sticall persons belonging to their benefices and spirituall promotions, sauyng onely a house for the Bishop, Canon, Maister of the Colledge, or person to dwell in were solde. And of some parte of the money for the same, the Kings debtes should be payde, and the rest to be distributed to Ec∣clesiasticall persons that had more neede of the same. Also to the ende the king with the rest might perceyue howe profi∣table a way this would be, they declared that the reuenews of those ecclesiasticall landes woulde be worth fortie thou∣sand pounde, and their proper liuing and remainder neuer∣thelesse twelue hundred thousand poundes. And they sayde that these lands would the sooner be solde because they were frée from tribute, & were all most lords within themselues.
Adding moreouer yt Ecclesiasticall persons should sustaine no harme hereby for they should neuerthelesse haue inough to liue vpon, and the king of the ouerplus of those yearely reuenewes should both pay his debtes, and also haue euery yeare a great summe besides, towardes the maintayning of garrisons of souldiers, the fortifying of Cities, and other such lyke vses to the great profit and commoditie of the peo∣ple. They made Supplication in like maner that the Edict of Iuly, of the which we made mention before and in the which the faithfull were forbydden to assemble themselues together, might be taken awaye: that also there might be vsed peaceable and quyet meanes in matters of Religion, and yet notwithstanding that no Heretikes, Libertines, A∣nabaptistes, Atheistes, and suche lyke seditious persons might be borne withal: And that there might be called out of hand a Nationall Councell to reforme the errors of Ec∣clesiasticall persons. Furthermore they requested that the King with his kinsmen the Princes woulde be at the coun∣sell: that all men might haue frée libertie vnder the kings warrant to come to that conuocation: that they might haue Churches for the administration of their doctrine and Sa∣cramentes, graunted vnto them, which affirme that they cannot with safe conscience come to the Ceremonies of the Romishe Churche: that they mighte openly and plainely professe and maintayne their Religion, and put awaye all occasions of slaunder and reproche. Last of all they required, that all iurisdiction mighte be taken away from Ecclesiasticall persons, and restored to the King to whome the same truely appertayned: that Ec∣clesiasticall persons myghte haue no place in the Ciuill as∣semblyes of Parliamentes: and also that Ciuill or tempo∣rall persons mighte not haue benefices or spirituall promo∣tions. These things were spoken by the orators and spea∣ker for the States, according to their commission. Moreouer at the length motion was made vnto them o
helpe to confirme the couenant made betwéene the Quéene and the king of Nauarre concerning the gouernement of the kingdome. To the which they answered that it seemed vn∣to them verye vnmeete and strange, that a woman should rule the Realme of Fraunce, which was plaine againste the lawe therof, called the lawe Salic. After long contention, by the earnest persuasion of the king of Nauarre, (who sought to haue the Queenes fauour) and sayd that he did willingly giue place vnto hir, the spea∣kers answered, that if the king of Nauarre woulde departe from his right, and that the king and Quéene could so agrée they would not be against it, nor hinder it. But it was sayde that those speakers dyd not well in that they swarued from their Commissions: and therefore that theyr assente to be voyde and of none effecte: neither was the facillitie and myldnesse of the King of Nauarre well lyked of. Nowe the Pope feared (as we sayde before) that Natio∣nallCardinal Fer∣rer, sent from Rome to hin∣der the Natio∣nall Counsell in Fraunce. Councell which the king had promysed, least it woulde be greatly hurtfull vnto him: therfore so muche as he could he made haste to haue a generall Councell. And for thys cause he sente the Cardinall of Ferrer, to the king. Thys Romishe Cardinall called hym selfe the Protector of the Churches of Fraunce, for the which names sake manye pre∣sents and giftes were giuen to him in Fraunce. At the nexte comming together of the States, it was con∣cluded that the Pope should neuer afterward haue authori∣tie to giue anye benefice or spirituall promotion in Fraunce. Therefore the Cardinall, when he was come, woulde haue vsed his accustomed power and authoritie, but beyng let by the newe decree of the States, or Parliament, he rayled vp great controuersies. Then the Chauncelor  af∣firmed, that it was a thing not to be suffered, that so newe a decrée of Parliament shoulde be infringed and broken. Not∣withstanding the matter came to that pase by the daylye
complayntes of the Cardinall, that the king gaue straighte commaundement to the Chaūcelor to seale his letters. The Chauncelor sayde, that it was against lawe and equitie so to doe, howbeit he sealed his letters with the kings seale, and subscribed these wordes with his owne hande, without my consente and will. Then these letters, according to cu∣stome were sent to the Senate of Paris, that they also myght confirme them. But when the Senate had read these wordes of the Chauncelor, they made this answere, They cannot, neither oughte they to be receyued. Which wordes they alwayes vse when they meane to note any vnlawful or vniust mat∣ter. Therfore Cardinall Ferrar was without hope of his let∣ters, and was very sore agréeued to sée the Popes authori∣tie so sore diminished and shaken in Fraunce, besyde this, bal∣lets and rymes were made f hym, and hauing his Crosier goyng before hym (as the manner is) he was deryded of boyes and chyldren that followed him: also pretie Libels were set forthe agaynst hym, and the image of Pope Alex∣ander his grandfather finely paynted with a liuely descrip∣tion of his wickednesse oute of the wordes of the Poet Pon∣tanus, was helde forthe in euerye mannes hande againste him. The Cardinall taking this in very euill parte, depar∣ted out of Fraūce, loking for better occasions to haue his pur∣pose the which in deede he gat afterward. But shortlye after thys, the Popes authoritie was cut off more and more in Fraunce, and all the people almoste euerye where sayde, that nowe the authoritie of men must not be wayed, but the substantialnesse of reason and truth: that the great errors whych long ago were growne, were nowe spredde abroade: that the Couetousnesse and Luxu∣rie of the Churche men was insatiable: that they were more outragious and cruell agaynste those whiche fol∣lowed the contrarye opinion in Religion. All estates and degrées had these and the like communications often∣tunes
in their mouthes: yea, and they which as yet were on the Popes side came not so often to their owne Chur∣ches as they had wonte, but came often to the sermons of the refourmed Churche, kepte companye with the fayth∣full, and had often conference with them concerning Reli∣gion, and sayde that for this cause there ought to aryse no trouble, nor breache of friendship or brotherly loue. They which more obstinately leaned still to their olde opinions, kepte thēselues so cloose within their dores, that they scarce durst to come in anye companye. Many were dayly alured to the companye of the faythfull, in so muche that the alte∣ration of Religion séemed nowe withoute all doubte to be at hande. The greatest parte of the Nobilitie also embra∣ced the doctryne of the Gospell: And the Queene séemed to prefer Religion verye muche, and openly to fauour those of the refourmed Religion: whether to please the king of Nauarre, or to serue the tyme, I knowe not: and wrote ve∣rie earnestly to Pope Pius the fourth, desiring him that he would prouide remedies to stay those troubles.The effect of the Queenes letters sent to Pope Pius the fourth. And when the time of the parley appointed was rome, she wrote very large letters to him the fourth of August, to this effect as followeth. If (sayth she) the state of the Kingdome of Fraunce maye be expressely described to the holye Father (for so she was wonte to call hym) in what and howe manye straites and perills the same was, by reason of the diuers opinions of Religion, he would prouide with al spéede for it, and would helpe to staye these troubles bothe wyth his presence and authoritie, and also woulde bende all his Counsell, wise∣dome, and power, to finde oute remedyes for the same. On the one parte he might set before his eyes the infinite multitude of soules which runne headlong, as it were, intoMultitude. destruction, bycause they knowe not well the waye of sal∣uation. On the other parte he might sée part of the kingdome to be
distracted and drawne away from the communion and fel∣lowship of the Churche, whiche consisted of the greatest part of the Nobles, of learned men, of the best citizens, and most ciuil sorte of the common people, who wante neyther force, nor counsell, or any other meanes to atchieue theirQualitie. purpose: séeing there are among them men of great wealth and riches, which will not let to spend their goods and sub∣stance in their cause. Furthermore such is the concord, con∣sent and vnitie, among them, that it is wonderful to sée howConcorde. carefully one of them doe defende an other: in somuch that they can neither be drawne from that concord, neyther can they be ouercome by force of armes: And without present perill this kingdome can not be cast into those straites whi∣che threaten vnto the same no doubte greate ruine and ex∣treme destruction. Seing therfore the matter standeth thus, and séeing ther is a manifest token of great troubles as hād,The increase and force of the faithful. the number of those men increasing and waxing strong eue∣ry day more and more, she also being persuaded, that the ho∣lie Father being myndefull of those benefites which he had receyued of the Frenche kings, would carefully indeuoure himselfe to prouide remedies to ease these troubles: for this cause she was bold to flee vnto him as to a refuge, that he woulde apply all his counsell, wisedome, and power, to procure the vnitie of the Church. It may please him ther∣fore to vnderstand, that this thing might the more easyly be brought to passe, bicause by the goodnesse of God there are not in the whole realme of France, any Anabaptistes, hereti∣kes or any that speake against the Christian Articles of the faith, nor yet against the declaration of those Articles madeDoctrine. by the sire generall Councels. And (she sayd) this was the opinion and iudgement of certain lerned men, with whom she had conferred, that the holie Father might receyue them which confessed that catholike profession of the faith, plainly confirmed and expounded by those sixe generall Councels, into the Communion & felowship of the Church, although
they were of diuers opinions: And that other opinions can not let the vnion of the Churche, euen as in tyme past the diuersitie in celebrating the Passeouer, the diuers and sun∣drieDiuersitie of rites. obseruations of fastings, and rites in sacraments, and other partes of diuine seruice, did nothing at all hinder the vnion of the Churche: and that the same waye then vsed, should be very profitable now to stay the controuersies of the Latine and Gréeke Churche. Therfore they trust the controuersies being at an end, yt God wil be with them, and that the darke & mistie cloudes being driuen awaye at the length, he will shewe the true and perfecte lyghte of the truth. And (sayth she) if this ge∣nerall waye shall not be approued and allowed, although it oughte to be referred to a generall Councell, yet not∣withstandyng it is necessarie that the holie Father do pro∣uide a spéedie remedie before that time, considering the pre∣sent necessitie. For delay will bring such greate inconueni∣ences with it, as can not easily by any meanes be recoue∣red againe. But the remedie séemeth to consiste in two thinges:The remedy First that they which haue alreadie separated themselues from the Cōmmunion of the Churche, might be called and brought to the same agayne: Secondly, that they which as yet haue not withdrawne themselues, might be kept in this communion still. To winne the first, it may séeme very ne∣cessarie, to vse often admonitions, and to haue mutual and quiet conference on bothe partes. Bishops and their mini∣sters muste diligently preache Gods worde, and exhorte the people to mutuall peace and concorde: and names of reproche on bothe sydes muste quyte be taken awaye. The whyche she hoped, was a speedie waye to bring con∣corde and loue. The whyche also (she sayd) she had giuen in commaundemente to those that were separated from the Churche, and was hytherto obeyed. But as touching those whyche as yet hadde not separated them selues from the
Communion of the Churche: there are many (sayeth she) whiche as yet purpose not to departe from the same, and yet notwithstanding they stande continually in doubte, and specially in these thrée principall poyntes. The first is, that they vnderstande, that the primitiueThe fyrste poynte of offence. Churche had no images. They knowe that God hathe ex∣pressely forbidden to worshyp them, or to set them in those places where they maye be worshipped: They know also that Gregorie hath foribdden the same: and that diuers good men in lyke maner, whiche synce that tyme, receyued them into the Churches, expressely declared that they were ordei∣ned for no other vse, than to put the ignorante people in mynde of their Gods whiche were absente. Notwithstan∣ding, many errours, deceytes, and lyes haue preuayled and crepte into this kingdome and realme of Fraunce, and ma∣ny deceyuers, contrarie to the doctrine of the auncient Fa∣thersWorshipping of images. haue moste wickedly abused the worshipping of i∣mages to their owne lucre and gaine, in so muche that the cousciences of many men for this cause are greately offen∣ded, and therefore will not come into the Churches, least they shoulde bowe theyr knée before the Images. The matter therefore béeing well examined, if on the one parte the inconueniences whyche may aryse héereof, and the fruites and commodities whyche are lyke to come, bee wyely wayed, it shall bée founde that it is better to re∣moue them, than to woorship them with offence of many: specially seeing the same is neyther the commaundement of God, nor yet hath bene receyued of the Churche vpon any necessitie. Therefore to cut away all occasions of slaunde∣rous reporte, and to keepe those still, of whome we speake, in the fellowship of the Churche, lette it be considered if it bée profitable to remoue these Images from the Altars: and to place them aboute the Temple, eyther within or without: the causes béeing declared, namely that certaine vngodly men séeking theyr owne gayne on the one parte,
and on the other part certaine ignorant and vnskilful men, also wil bring to passe, that the people shall abuse them a∣gainst the ordinaunce of the Churche. 2 The second principall point is concerning the admini∣strationSacraments. of Sacraments, of Baptisme, and of the Lords sup∣per. In the administration of Baptism, it seemeth strangeBaptisme. to many good and godly men, that Exorcismes, and many formes of prayers should be vsed: the which may somwhat profite those that vnderstande them: but séeing the greatest parte of the people doe not vnderstand them, it séemeth bet∣ter to omit them. And where as it is beléeued and taughte that these things are necessarie to be done before Baptism, they say that it is done against the pure and sound iudgemēt of the Churche, which hath decréed and appoynted Water and the Worde to be only necessarie in the Sacramente: but as for Exorcismes and Prayers not to be necessarie to the Sacrament. Furthermore they saye, that in BaptismeCatechismes. the wordes of the auncient Catechismes are reteyned still, the vse wherof is nowe gone, and therfore at this tyme is vsed in vayne in Baptisme. Also many do very much misse∣like that a diseased or infected priest should spit his vncleane spittell into the mouth of the infant: wherby some great e∣uill and perill mighte arise. All these inconueniences (she sayd) might be remedied if it might be left in the choyce of al men, eyther to vse Exorcismes and prayers in baptizyng their infantes, or else purely and simply without any ad∣ditions to kéepe the substance of Baptisme, that is to saye, water and the word: and to haue the same ministred in the vulgar tong that the people may vnderstand it. The whiche libertie were more tollerable, than eyther the offence, or separation of many men: and so no infantes shall be bapti∣zed out of the Congregation of the Romishe churche. 3 As concerning the holie Comunion, many good men do misselyke thrée things in the same: Of the which, the firsteThe holie communion is, that it is giuen to communicate only vnder one kynde:
Whose consciences in this matter can not bée quieted and stayed, eyther by the authoritie of the Councell of Constance, or by the obseruation of custome, receyued not many yea∣res agoe: seing that Iesus Christ playnly sayth, Take yee, eate ye, drinke ye, Paule the Apostle also sayth: VVho soe∣uerThe custome of the aunci∣ent Church. eateth of this bread, and drinketh of this cup. To the which expresse word of God is ioyned also the auncient cu∣stome of the Churche, constantly obserued for a thousande yeares and more. And although for reuerence sake whiche they owe vnto the Church, they will not condemne the coū∣cell of Constance, yet notwithstanding, seing thorough feare of erring, they leane only to plaine testimonies of Scrip∣ture, and to the auncient custome of the Church, it is to be feared, that whyle there is controuersie aboute this mat∣ter, others whiche are weake will easily be broughte to their opinion, and so withdrawne from the fellowship of the Churche of Rome. For the obiection of the aduersaries séemeth to be of greate force, seing they bring bothe the ex∣presse word of God, and also euident reasons for that whi∣che they alleage. Maye it please him therefore to consider whether it be not best to giue libertie that the communion may be ministred vnder both kindes, although the councell of Constance be against the same. 2 The seconde thing they misselyke in the holie Commu∣nionThe second poynt that is mislked. is this: Manie are afeard to come to the holy commu∣nion, being ministred in such order as it is in the Romishe Churches, that is to say, to one or to a few alone, vsing no prayers that may be vnderstode of the common people, nei∣ther yet expounding the vse of the Sacrament: the aduer∣saries on the contrarie part saying, and openly shewing in verie deede, that they haue restored in this poynte, the ap∣proued maner of the auncient Church. The which matter, when diuers reasons and wayes of communicating, are al∣leaged on both sydes, can not be tolde howe many of oure countreymen it doth pierce and moue, in so much that there
is no doubt but that very manie shal be constrayned for thisThe sunie rceiuing of the Sacra∣ment. cause to depart from the Church▪ For when n the one part they sée some one alone, or a cerain smal numbre, without prayers, without a sermon, without giuing of thanks, to any part of the sacrament, and that in an vknowne tongue: on the other part a congregation of a great number of men, together plainly to make confession of their faith, publikely to confesse their synnes, to giue thankes vnto God, to pray vnto God, to sing Psalmes in the vulgar tong, to come to the Sermon, by which they may be instructed to lie a godly and a chrisian lye, and to prepare themselues alo to receyue the Sacrament: it is harde to say, but that they whiche take oure parte onely for a zeale and true de∣syre of Religion, will take these occasions to fall awaye from vs. To remedie this inconuenience, let the Pope himselfe consider, if it shall not be well doone to suffer the holy cm∣munionTymes to reeiue the cōmunion. to be ministred euerye moneth, according to the maner of the primitiue Church: that the Pastors and El∣ders of Churches, may call all those togither, whiche wyll communicate, the first Sunday of euery moneth, or oftner, if they be required, and that there, in the vulgar tongue, & Psalme maye be soong, and a generall confession of fayth, and of sins lykewise to be made, publike and cōmon pray∣ers also for the preseruation of Magistrates, for the pure∣nesse of the ayre, for the frutes of the earth, and for suche as are afflicted, deuoutly to be sayde. And to them, thus assem∣bled togither, some place, either of the Euangelistes, or of Paules Epistles, whiche concerneth the vse of the Lordes supper, may be red: and so to be receyued to the cōmunion vnder both kynds. And although this seemeth to be newe, and not customably heretofore to be vsed: yet notwithstā∣ding seeing the Apostles, and they which straight after suc∣ceded them, did so, it can not be sayde, that the holy father hath done, or appoynted any thing against the cōmandemēt
of God and the maner of the Church. And to the end he may vnderstande for what cause they vrge and so earnestly de∣sire this thing, it may please him to know, that there is no∣thing that so much troubleth and burdeneth their conscien∣ces, as the feare of not rightly receiuing the Sacramentes. And here the aduersaries triumphe, and crie that the com∣maundement of God is broken: and thus by little our mi∣nisterie and all our doctrin groweth out of credite: insomuch that the shame and reproche hereof will redound to the ho∣lie Father himselfe at the length, except it be foreséen. For the which they thinke that there can not be a better & more present remedie founde, than if the Lordes Supper be ce∣lebrated in that order, as is before declared. The whyche thyng she hir selfe, so muche the more vrgeth and earnest∣ly craueth, that he might helpe and remedie so greate trou∣bles in tyme. 3 The thirde speciall poynt of offence is this: There areThe thirde point that is misselyked. many men of the more learned sort in al the realme, which are offended at that rite or feast, whiche is commonly cal∣led Corpus Christi day: at which yearely feast the bodie of the Lorde is caried about the Cities: to the which solemnitie they saye they can not with safe consciences come, and that for these causes: Firste bicause it is against the expresse in∣stitution of the Sacrament, Take ye, eate ye, drinke ye, Al∣so, Doo this in remembraunce of me. That is to saye, Do yée as I haue doone. And therefore they say, that there is so great difference betwéen the giuyng of bread to be séene, and the eating of breade in déede, euen as if a man shoulde not receyue that wholsom medicine giuen vnto him for his health, but should cause it verie sumptuously to be caryedSpirituall worship. vp and down the chamber. They saye also that Paule sayd not, Carie this bread about the stretes: but, VVhosoeuer ea∣teth of this bread and drinketh of this wine. Furthermore, they say, that Christe is in heauen, and that therfore there is onely required a spirituall worship. Wherevpon they
say, that great inirie is done to him by those corporal and externall worships, seing he exalted from earth to heauen, to the end he might be worshipped and adored with true and spirituall honor. And last of all they say, that this rite of carying the Lords bodie vp and down, was brought in, and by little & litle established, not by any authoritie of Scripture, but by the deuotion of some singular man. Also that neither Clement nor Gregorie bishops of Rome, whiche appointed the same to be a solemne fease, haue not spoken one worde of that deambulation, and that therefore our sa∣crifiing Priests do erre and offende against their will and institution, seing that no other day hath such fréedome and libertie to commit all kinde of wickednesse as that hath: the whiche truly is not the waye to knowledge and worshippe Christ, seeing that he requireth of his disciples purenesse and newnesse of lyfe, and in his holy worde vtterly dete∣steth all sinfull libertie: The which things séeme hurtfull, not onely to those whiche haue separated themselues from our felowship, but also to those which will not leaue the same. They doe perceyue that herevpon many things are done amise, as the pollutin of the Sacrament against the word of God, and the approued customes of the Church. Also that by the occasion of this day, many men are aused and led to commit wicked and horible things: and that the same day is a vere pruocation of most sedition, as we hitherto to our great griefe haue felt. Therefore, ex∣cept this thing be foreseene, and a reme prouid for the same, at the length experience will shewe that it is better to séeke a more deuoute way to worship God withall, than to refeyne & kepe this ryte to the hurt and offence of many. The Masse also is an other greate cause of offence. AllThe Masse of greate of∣fence. men crie out that the Masse is a great offence & slumbling block to the Church, the same being sold of ignorant, disso∣lute and most vngodly Priests: and yet no man seeketh to reforme and amende the same.
This thing truly, hath of late diminished the deuotion of the people very muche: yea, and many of our felowship do proceed further also, & o doubt of the Masse, both touchingIn the substāce of the Masse. the substance, and also touching the forme. In the subsāce they doe note, that the Churchemen afirme, that the prie∣stes do offer Christe: and do more esteeme of their owne sacrifice, than they de of the sacrifice of Christe. And that certaine of the Doctours doe saye, that the same sacrifiice whiche the Priests offer, is onely a monument and signe of the true sacrifice whiche Christe offered for vs once for all: but the ignorāt people are taught by ignorant priests, yt he ought to be counted for an heretik which thinketh other∣wise. The which truly, seeing it seemeth to be most absurd, it giueth great occasion to ye aduersarie to speak euil. But in the forme of the Masse they note foure principall things.In the forme of the Masse. First that all things are done in the same in a strange & an vnknowne tong: the which in déed is vnprofitable and dan∣gerous, séeing no fruite commeth thereof vnto the people, but are onely fed with certaine outward shewes. Wheras on the contrarie part (say they) it is necessarie that the con∣fession of the faith shoulde be plainly and euidently vnder∣stode of all men: and séeing the Latine tongue muste needes be vsed, let the same yet be expounded into the mother tong that it may of all men be vnderstode. And seing the prayersA straunge language. which are there made, appertaine to the common profit of all the hearers, who vnderstanding not what is spoken, shall aunswere, Amen? Furthermore they saye, that the consciences of the Clergie doe accuse them, and tel them that they doe amisse, séeing no part of the vse of their Masse is declared: without the which notwithstanding the admi∣nistration of the Sacramente seemeth to be but vaine. Thirdly, séeing those things which are spoken in the Masse doe belong to the whole congregation, and not to the Prie∣ses alone, and specially those things whiche concerne the Communion, and yet neuerthelesse one Priest only com∣munica,
the people sanding by, and looking on: it sée∣meth iusly to be vere farre out o order, and not agréeing to the truthe. Wherfore they thike it that it shoulde be reduced and brought to the ancient maner of the church, agréeing to the first institution▪ Fourthly they misyke the order of the diuine seruice. In the which is to be coidered what great profi the singing of Psalmes, and the maingSinging of Psalmes. of Prayers in the vulgar tong hath brought in tyme paste. And truly our aduersaries of late days vsing these meanes haue allured and drawne many vnto them. Wherefore let the holy Father consider, if it shall not be best to giue liber∣tie to haue the Psalmes soong, and Prayrs also made in the vulgar toung, that they maye be of all the people. These are the principall poyntes whiche they sae, are needfull to be amended, en they which haue separated themselues from our felowship, which they to haue taken in good part, seeing they go not about to violate the Apostoliie authoritie of the holy father? and perct in these two things: namely that nothing be altered n d∣ctrine: And also that if the Minisers of the Churche dō of∣fende in any thing, the Ministee therefore shoulde nt be taken away, but the authoritie thereof alwayes to remain preserued and safe. These two things being firmely holden, they thinke it no absurditie if diligente inquiition be made of other mat∣ters which haue neede of reormation. Therefore she dothe humbly beséeche the holye Father that he woulde prouide for these thinges, for that greater inconueniences no dout woulde folowe if so be that there were not remedie proui∣ded in tyme. As for other thinges, the Quéene promiseth that she hir selfe, with the counsell of good men, and with hir diligence and ideuour, will looke vnto so muche as she maye, both for the peace and quietnesse of the Church, and
also for the dignitie of the Popes holynesse. These thinges haue ben by vs faithfully gathered out of the Copie of hir owne letters. ¶ The thirde Booke of Commen∣taries concerning the state of Religion, and or the common vvealth of Fraunce. IN the meane season the Prelaes and Cler∣gée came from all partes of the realme to a towne called , néere to Sangeiman at the ay appointed in the moneth of August: to reason and fréely to dispute on both parts of the principall poyntes of Religion nowe in controuersie. bertie was graunted vnto all of the reformed Church, freely to come to heare sam: and that vnder safe conduct by the kings . Certain men were chosen to be of that Councel▪ of the rrmed: Churches▪ being conducted at the king cōmanment by his gard, from Paris to the towne called Sangeiman▪ Among whome, the principall were these, namely (Peter! , rofessor of diuinitie in the Tygur Churche and The tore ho were chiefe in this disputation) of Gods word t Geneua, wh were procured to thither by the kyng of Nauarre, and by the reformed Churches▪ There were also icolaus Gelaus, Augustinus Marloraus, Iohannes ▪ Francicus Morellus, and Iohannes▪ Malo: wyth whom also came , a lesr man, whiche a little before, abjuring and forsaking the Popes religion, imbra∣ced the doctrine of the Gospell.The begining of the puta∣tion at . They therfore to begin ye matter, offer to ye king a suppli∣cation,
in the which they desire that this disputation might be begon forthwith by his authoritie: and that these might be the conditions to be obserued in the same: Firste, that those prelates, which were of the contrarie opinion, might not be set as chiefe Iudges in this disputation, but that the king with his Counsellours, shoulde by his authoritie mo∣derate and rule the whole matter: Secondly, that all con∣trouersies should be referred and ended by the word of God only. Thirdly, that what soeuer should be determined and concluded in that disputation, shuld be registred in the kin∣ges publike commentaries by his notaries. To the whiche the kyng made answer, that he woulde consult of this mat∣ter with his councel, that if it might be, al the matter might by some meanes, with the consent of the Prelates, quietly be ended. But the Prelates complayned and sayd, that this libertie of disputing oughte not to be graunted vnto them, which were long agoe condemned. Whervpon they defer∣red the matter for certayn dayes, béeing busied in the mean time to ynde out the scruples and doubtes of these questi∣ons, namely, concerning the dignitie of Cathedrall Chur∣ches: Concerning Regulars, and their exemptions: Con∣cerning Cures and their ordinarie presentation: Concer∣ning the excéeding number of inferiour Priestes: Concer∣ning the reformation of Monasteries. Concerning plurali∣ties of Benefices, and such like: seeking to helpe the disor∣dered Churche in due time with these inquisitions. But this one thyng they specially pretended, that they should haue great iniurie, if authoritie to iudge were taken from them. But nowe it shall not be disagréeing from our purpose to make mention of certayne communication had, betwéen the Cardinall of Lorayne and Theodore Beza, before the solemne diputation began.
Certayne communication betweene the Cardinall of Lorrain, and Theodore Beza Mini∣ster of Geneua. BEza came into the bedchamber of the king of Nauarre, be∣ing so commaunded by him, to the intente he might sa∣lute the Quéene. And at that tyme there was also the Car∣dinall of Lorrain. Then the Quéen began to talke with Be∣za concerning his bookes. Upon which occasion the Cardi∣nall then sayd to Beza as foloweth. Card. Lorrain. I haue séene a booke, the author wherof you are sayd to bée, in the whiche are contayned these wordes: Chryst is to be sought in the Supper, after the same manner that he was, before he toke vpon him our flesh. I haue heard also that you haue written another moste absurde saying, which is, that Christe must be sought for in the Supper, as in the myre and dirte. At the whiche saying the standers by, greatly maruelling, Beza answered. Beza. If the bookes were here, I could the better tel whi∣ther they were myne or no: but concerning the first saying, it may séeme very absurde as you repeate it: but the place being diligently wayed, it shall be founde to be moste true. As for the seconde it is blasphemous and wicked, neyther shall it bée founde written in myne, or in anye of oure bookes. Card. Lorrain. No doubte I maruell, that any man dareConcerning our comu∣niion with Christ, and of the fathers vn∣der the lawe. affirme, that we haue no more than the auncient Fathers had i the tyme of the lawe: and how could they speake of the flesh of Chryste, which as yet was not. Beza. Do ye thinke that there was alwayes a Churche from the first creation of the worlde? Do ye thinke that the Church which was from the beginning of the world, was called a Churche by him whiche was a Mediator betweene God  men? And do ye thinke that Iesus Christe was that Mediature.
Card Lor. It is my opinion. Beza. Therefore the communion of the faithfull wyth Christ, oughte not to be restrained to that tyme, when he ioyned his diuinitie in verie déede to our nature▪ for y• which was not as yet by the order of nature, was notwithstan∣dingIohn. 8. alwayes by the force and efficacie of faithe. Is it not sayd, that Abraham sawe the day of Christ, and reioyced? And Paule sayth: That the fathers did eate the same spi∣rituall1. Cor. 10. meate, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, whereof we haue droonke, namely Christe. Card. Lor. It is verie true: For he is the Lambe that was stain from the beginning of the worlde. After this when Beza had brought in manye places con∣cerning the difference betwene the olde and newe Testa∣ment, there began a newe disputation concerning the pre∣sence of the bodie and bloud of Christ in the Supper. Card. Lor. We do disagree in the explication of these words, This is my bodie, Beza. We disagrée in very déed, for which we ar very sory. Car Lo. I teach the children of my dioces, whē they are de∣maūded what the bread in the Supper is, to answer, that it is the bodie of Christ: do ye disalowe this? Beza. No truly, for they are the very wordes of Chrise. But I demaund, how the bread is called the body of Chris? For all that is, is not after one fashion or manner. But the Cardinall vrged these wordes, The rocke was Christe. whiche wordes Beza had cited before, agaynst the1. Corin. 10. which he set these wordes of S. Iohn, The worde became flshe. To the which Beza answered.Iohn. 1. Beza. There is great difference betwéen that substantial communion and the Sacramentall communion: And this question (sayth he) doth consst of foure principall . The first is of gnes: the second, of the thing signified: the third of the coniunction of signes, & the thing signified: the fourth is of the participation of signes, and of the thing by
them signiied. Concerning the first, we differ in this, that1. Sacramentall signes. you apoint in the Supper only accidnts for signes: but we for signes put the substāce of brea and wine as the nature of Sacraments doth require, and the Scripture vniuersal∣lye teache. Heere the Cardinall interrupting Beza in his talke, sayde: Card. Lor. I thinke truly, that I am able to proue & desend Transubstantiation: but I thinke that the same was not greatly néedefull to be founde oute by the diuines, neyther doe I thinke that there oughte to be in the churches any di∣uisions for this matter. Then Beza proceeding with his for∣mer purpose, sayd. Beza. Concerning the seconde, we doe not saye, that the2. The thng si∣gnfied. mrites of the death and passion of Christ, are onely signi∣fied by the outward signes of bread and wine: but also that the verie bodie of Christe which was cruified for vs, & his bloud which was shed for vs, is by them represented. Also that Iesus Christ very God and perfect man is offered vn∣to vs by visible signes, that our myndes being lifted vp by faith to heauen (wher Christ now is may spiritually behold him, & receiue & enioy all his graces to euerlasting life, and that so certainly and truely as we sée and receyue, and eate and drinke the corporall and visible signes. To this the Cardinall of Loraine agreed, affirming that he was glad to heare those wordes, for so muche as he percei∣ued that the doctrine of the Faithfull was otherwise than he thought it to bée. Beza. Concerning the thirde, there is greate difference3. The conc∣tion of signes, and the ing signifid. betwéene common water, and that with the which we are washed in baptisme: betwéene the bread and wine whiche we dayly vse, and that whiche is vsed in the Supper. For the water of Baptisme, the breade and wyne of the Sup∣per, are Sacramentes, that is to saye, visible sygnes and Testimonies of the bodie and bloud of the Lorde. But we denie (saith he) that there is any such mutatiō in ye substāce
of the Elements: but we affirme that the change is in this, that they are applyed to an other vse than that which is na∣turall, bycause they seruing of themselues & by their owne nature, for the nutriment of the body, & being Sacraments, they signifie that thing whiche doth feede our seules. Fur∣thermore we doe not assigne the cause of this mutation to the words, or to the mynd and purpose of him that pronoū∣ceth them, but to the vertue and power of God, whose will is reuealed in his word. Therfore bycause the thing signifi∣ed is offred vnto vs, and so truly giuen vnto vs as the signe it selfe, we muste also acknowledge by the same reason, the coniunction of signes with the thing signifyed. And by this meanes the body and bloude of Iesus Chryste, in that they are truely giuen vnto vs, are in the administration of the Supper, and not with, vnder, or in the breade, or in any o∣ther place than in heauen, where, as he is an, he is contai∣ned, vntill he shall come to iudge both the quicke and dead. The Cardinal also agréed to the same, and affirmed that he did not allow Transubstantiation: but thought rather that Chryste shoulde be sought in heauen. Notwithstanding as one in dout, he added other sayings of certayne Germanes, to the end he might therby séeme not to haue greatly trauel∣led in this matter, excusing himselfe to be let from the same by other businesse. Then sayde Beza: I graunte that we and certaine Ger∣manes doe disagrée in this thyrde Article: but in this not∣withstanding we agree that we altogyther, ioyntly with one consent denie your Transubstantiation. Card. Lor. Doe ye confesse that we are truely and substan∣cially partakers of the body and bloud of Chryst? Beza. This is the fourthe principall poynt, whiche before4. The participa∣tion of the si∣gnes, & of the the thing sig∣nified. I noted, and resteth to be declared. In sūme therefore we do affirme, that the visible signes, whiche are naturally eaten and dronken, are touched with the handes: that the matter of the Sacrament, that is to say, the body & bloud of Chryst
Iesus, is offered truely and without deceyte to all men, that the same is receyued by faythe, and not by naturall reason, but yet, that the same is so truely giuen vnto vs by faythe, as if we were naturally ioyned with Chryst. Then the Cardinall affirmed that Beza hadde satisfyed him in this poynte, and very friendly and louingly desired Bza that he might haue conference with him. Notwith∣standing it was reported, that the Cardinall had confuted Bza by these firste small tryalles and assayes. And so they fully persuaded themselues to haue the victorie. But when they which were the chosen mē of the Chur∣chesThe ministers desire to haue the disputatiō and obtaine it. to dispute, lawe that new delayes were founde out day by day, they vrged that their petitions, whereof we spake before, might be graunted vnto them, and they desired also to vnderstande the Kings mynde in writing. At the length they receyued this answere of the Queene, that the Pre∣lates shoulde not be their Iudges, but that there shoulde be graunted vnto them certayne of the Kings Secretaries: that the matter should be ruled wholy by the word of God: and that the King with the Princes his kinsmen, woulde be at the disputation. And herewith she admonished them to behaue them∣selues modestly, and to seeke onely the glorie of GOD, whiche she thought (she sayde) they greatly desired. But to graunt them any thing in writing, she thought it not expe∣dient, séeing their wordes might serue well inough. When the chosen men of the Churches hadde receyued this answere, and were departed, there came strayght way vnto the Queene certaine Papistes, beseeching hir that she woulde not heare these men of the newe religion: and if she were mynded to heare them, that she would at the least be∣ware and sée, that the yong king came not to their disputa∣tions: bycause it was daungerous, least hée in his yong and tender yeares, shoulde be taken and snared therewith. For (say they) it is not meete that they shoulde be hearde, which
not long agoe were conuicted of heresie. To whome the Quéene onely answered that she woulde doe nothing without due Counsell and aduise, and that they shoulde well vnderstande that the matter shoulde not be handled after the wil and pleasure of those men of the new doctrine, as they termed them. The next daye after, which was the ninth day of Sep∣tember,The first sessi∣on o is dis∣putation. was the time appoynted to begin the disputation. Therefore the King and the Quéene his mother, the Duke Aurelian the Kings brother, Margare his Sister, the King and Queene of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, with the reste of the Princes the Kings kinsmē, and the Priuie Counsel, and a greate number also of Noble men and Gentlemen, were assembled together, in a verye large hall, which men commonlye call, the Hll of the holye Virgins of Posiac. Hyther came also the Popes chiefe Prelates the Cardi∣nals, the Archebyshoppes, and Bishoppes, to the num∣ber of fiftie, beside a great many substitutes and deputies in the places of those that were absent, a great many diuines and men of learning counted, standing about them. In the highest place sat the King, and harde beside him, according to custome, the Princes his kinsmen: the Bishops sitting all a long on both sides the hall vpon gréeces one aboue a∣nother. Then were brought in the chosen men, for disputa∣tion, of the reformed Churches, which were twelue Mini∣sters, and twentie others, which were sent also of the same Churches: whom the Kings Gard at the commaundement of the king had brought from Sangerman thyther, least there should be some tumult raised against them. When euery man kepte sylence, the King spake in ma∣ner and fourme following: All men (sayth he) know wellThe proposi∣tion of king Charles the ix. enoughe, what and how great perturbations and troubles are in the Realme: for the which cause I haue appoynted you to come together at this time, that those things which ye knowe haue néede of reformation, maye quietly of you
be declared, without any maner of affection, hauing no con∣sideration or care for any thing, but for the glorye of God, and the peace and quietnesse of consciences: The whyche thing I greatlye desire, in so much that I haue determined not to suffer you to departe hence, before you haue made some ende of all controuersies, that at the length all dissen∣tions being taken away, mutual peace and concord may be had among all men. This thing if ye bring to passe ye shall giue me occasion to maintayne and defende you with no lesse care than those kings my auncestours, that haue béene before me, haue done. Then he commaunded his Chauncelor to declare hisThe proposi∣tion of the Chauncelor. minde more at large. The Chauncelor therefore began to shew that the kings will was according to the wils of his predecessors that had béene before him, in staying the con∣trouersies of Religion, the which, when those Kings of hap∣pie memorie went diligently aboute to bring to passe, they had in their labors very small successe, in so much that day∣lie more and more new troubles arose: wherfore he would that all men should the more diligently, wisely to apply thē selues to pacifie in time these troubles, for the which cause he had caused them to come togither, and minded in his roy∣all person to accompany them, that disordered matters in Religion which concerned both doctrine and maners might be reformed: he vnderstanding that this was the onelye cause of all troubles, woulde diligentlye prouide for them as his office required. The remedie which nowe he intendeth to vse, séemeth to be a present remedie, as it was of late deliberated and con∣sidered of in the most noble assembly of the Princes & Coū∣cel, namely, that by this peculiar and particular conference, the matters of Religion in controuersie betwéene both par∣ties, might be quietly reasoned and disputed of▪ But to loke or séeke for remedie by a general Councel, it isGenerall Coū∣sell a vaine re∣medie. euen as vaine as if a man hauing good and sufficient reme∣die
at home, shoulde notwithstanding trauaile to the Indyes, to séeke the same. For (sayth he) we our selues shall better prouide remedyes for oure selues, than men of strange and forraine countreys can doe, which know neither the state of our cause, nor the condition of our people: of which kinde of strangers notwithstanding the generall Councell shall con∣siste. Greater fruites and profite haue often times come by Nationall Councels, than haue come by generall Councels. As may appeare by that generall Councell of Ariminum, theAriminum o therwise cal∣led Remino, an old citie in Flaminia in Italy. which Councell openly fauouring and maintaining the secte of the Arrians, was reproued and corrected by particular Sy∣nodes. Also, in this our realme of Fraunce, Hilary Bishop of Pictauia, by his industrye and faithfull dealing, in Synodes, banished the heresie of the Arrians out of these partes. Ther∣fore (sayth he) there is no doubte but that there shall aryse great profite and commoditie by this assembly: specially se∣ing it pleaseth the king to take such paines himselfe, who no doubt wil helpe both with his power & authoritie. Wherfore he wished the disputers on both partes onely to be carefull to doe their duetie, both of them ioyntly to seke concorde, the greater part not to despise the lesser: not to vse curious dis∣putations without profit: and to iudge & examine al matters by the word of God only, which being wel vnderstoode, fewe other authours shall serue: also that they which say they fol∣lowe the newe doctrine, woulde not counte the prelates of the contrarye parte for their enimyes, séeyng by Baptisme they retaine the name of Christians. For the king (sayth he) hath therefore giuen you leaue to come together, that men mighte sée what reasons you haue, and that the Prelates on ye Popes side, might séeke by strong arguments to confute thē: that the disputation at the length beyng published abrode, all men may euidently sée, that they are condemned for iust causes, and not by the vaine authori∣tie of men. Therefore, take héede in any case, that you do no∣thing ambitiously: know ye, that ye are not iudges: and in∣deuour
yourselues to finde out and manifest the truth. So shall you both glorifye God, and also profite your countrey: and God himselfe shall blisse your indeuours, and the moste constant minde of the king, in this matter. The matter being thus propounded by ye Chauncelor, theThe exception of Frances Cardinall of Turnon. Cardinall of Turnon, in the name of the Prelates, gaue great thankes to the king, to the Quéene, and to the Princes: that it pleased them to come to this holy assemblye, and for that the Chuncelor by the kings commaundement had put forth these matters: the which he desired to haue giuen vnto him in writing, that they mighte deliberate and consider what was néedefull to be done in these things. Then the Chaunce∣lour saide that he woulde not giue the matter in writing, se∣ing it was plainely enough declared. And thus they coulde get nothing at the handes of the Chauncelor, althoughe the Cardinall of Loraine required the same. Then the ministers, which sat oueragainst them, hauing leaue to speake, Theodore Beza, began thus. Seing that allThe oratiō of Beza in the name of the protestantes. things (O king) both great & small, & specially those things which belong to the worship of God, and which doe far sur∣mounte oure capacitie, doe depende vpon the same God, we thinke it not troublesome to your maiestie, if we begin with prayer vnto God. When he had spoken these wordes, he falling on his knées with the rest of his fellowes, beganne to pray vnto God in that forme of confession of sinnes which is vsed in the refourmed Churches, pronouncing the same with a loude voyce: and that done, straight way he added vnto the same these wordes. For so much as (O God) thou hast beneBeza his prayer▪ so fauourable this daye to thy vnworthye seruauntes, as to graunt them leaue to professe the knowledge of thy truth be∣fore their King, and this most honorable assembly, we moste humbly beseeche thee (O father of lightes) that it may please thee, according to thy accustomed goodnesse, so to illuminate our mindes, to gouerne our affections, and to make them apt to be taughte: so also to direct oure wordes, that whatsoeuer
knowledge of thy truth thou shalt giue vnto vs according to our capacitie, we may both with hearte and mouthe vtter the same, to the glorye of thy name, to the profit and prosperitie of our King, and of all his subiects, and specially to the peace and tranquillitie of this Christian common wealth & realme. Whē Beza had thus ended his prayer, turning his speach to the king, he vttered these wordes in manner and forme following: They which doe faithfully serue and obey theirBeza directeth his speache to the king▪ Princes, (most noble King) doe thinke themselues moste happie in this thing aboue al other, if so be they may behold the faces of their Princes: ye which representing as it were a certaine visible maiestie of God, can not chose but stirre vp and delight the mindes of faithfull subiectes. For such is our nature, that those things which we sée oure selues with our eyes, do more effectually moue our affections, thā those things which we féele and perceiue by the bare and simple apprehension of the minde. But and if it come to passe, that not only the subiects may sée their Prince, but also may be sene of their Prince, and that which is more, may be heard, & at the length approued of him, then they thinke that they haue al that they cā wish or desire. Of these foure things (O king) it pleased God to depriue many of your faithfull subiects, for a time, to their great sorrowe & griefe, vntill the same God in his infinite mercy & goodnesse at our sorrowful teares & continual sighes forgiuing somewhat, so spared vs, that he hath giuen vnto vs this daye a benefite more of vs wished, than hoped for, namely libertie to beholde your maiestie, that of the same we may both be sene & hard, in this most noble assembly, al∣most of the whole worlde. If we had neuer receiued any o∣ther benefite, neither should hereafter receiue, all the resteHowe greate a benefite it is for subiects to be hard & sene of their Prince of the race of oure life shoulde not be sufficient to celebrate and set forth so great a benefite of God, and to giue immor∣tall and condigne thankes to your Maiestie. But seing we doe ioyne this also to those former benefites, that this daye
doth not onely giue vnto vs accesse, but dothe also inuite vs, with one minde and consente, to professthe name of oure God, and the obedience due to your maiestie: we muste no doubte confesse that oure mindes are farre vnapte to con∣ceiue so greate benefites as these be, and oure tongues also lsse able to vtter and expresse that which we féele in oure myndes. Therefore this benefite surpassing all humaine e∣loquence, we had rather by modest sylence, to confesse oure imbecillitie, than with the barenesse of words to diminishe the greatnesse of the same. But this one thing we wie, that oure duetifull obedi∣ence maye be acceptable to your maiestie this daye. The which we hope will come to passe, if so be our comming to∣gether maye ende not onely the miseryes of oure afflictions paste, (the remembraunce whereof this most happie daye doth quite banishe) but that thing also which alwayes sée∣med vnto vs more bitter than death: which was, the great troubles raised in this Realme for Religion to the great de∣structionTroubles fo▪ Religion. of manye. But nowe there are manye occasions, which euen at this day, will not suffer vs to enioye so great a benefite, and haue also taken cleane awaye from vs al hope to enioy the same, except by other meanes we be stayed and comforted. First of all, there are many men, which (by what mischiefe I knowe not) are throughly persuaded of vs, that we are troublesome persons, ambitious, whollye wedded to our opinions▪ & enimies to peace & tranquilitie. There are also other some, who although they doe thinke vs not to ab∣horre peace & concorde, yet notwithstanding they do thinke that we do require ye same vpō such vnlawful & straight cōdi∣tions, yt we ought by no meanes to be receiued, as though we wold inuert ye whole world, & after our owne fantasie make it new againe, & depriue many from their goods that we our selues might inioye them. There are also other suche like great impediments: but we had rather to bury them in sy∣lence, than in speaking of them, to rubbe and renewe olde
punishments: specially at this tyme, when complaintes are not to be made, but rather the remedies of complaintes to be sought and prouided for. But who doth incourage vs among so many lets & stays? We are destitute of helpe (O King) seeing of all men we are the most base sorte. But this maketh vs bolde, namely our good conscience, whiche is a helpe vnto our cause, the which we trust, God will defend, & reuenge, by the meanes of your Maiestie. In lyke maner your clemencie (O king) which most dilectably is to be seene in your mouthe, counte∣nance, and talke: the equitie and vprightnesse of your mind, most excellent Quéene: the goodnesse of your mynde and of the myndes of the Princes the kings kinsmen, moste noble King: the occasion also whiche you haue giuen vs to thinke well of you most honorable Councellours (who agreeing in one, do your selues no lesse desire to giue vnto vs necessarie and pure concorde, than we earnestly desire to receiue the same) doe giue vnto vs great boldnesse and hope. What shoulde I vse many wordes? There is also an other thing whiche maketh vs to haue some hope: and that is the rule of charitie, which we trust will so moderate you, with whō we must enter into disputation, that you will rather seke with vs, (according to our slender capacitie) to manyfeste the truth, than to obscure the same: to teach, than to contend to expend and weye reason, than wilfully to refuse reason: and also that you will rather restrayne euill, that it goe no farther, than to loose the reynes to the same, and to make it incurable. This truely is our hope, and persuasion of you. And we praye and beséech you, by the name of the mightie God, which hath gathered vs here togither, whiche shall be a witnesse of our cogitatious and wordes, that▪ whatsoeuer hath bene written or spoken for the space of these 40. yeres) you will with vs put awaye all preiudiciall meanes: which maye possibly hinder the fruite and profite of this laudable way, now taken in hand: and that it will please you to hope
and to assure your selues of that in vs, whiche by the grace of God you shall find, that is to saye, a mynde apt to be tau∣ghte, and to receyue whatsoeuer shall be shewed out of the pure worde of God. Thinke you not that we are come hy∣ther to defende and mayntayne any error, but to the ende that wherinsoeuer you or we haue offended, we maye ac∣knowledge the same and amende it. Thinke you ot, that we are so arrogant, that we would abolyshe the Churche of our God, which is sempiternall. Thinke you not, that we seeke means to bring you into this vile & miserable conditi∣on, in the which notwtstanding, by the greate grace of God, we ar very wel quieted & contented. This is that, which we séeke for, namely that the ruine of Hierusalem maye be re∣payred: that the spiritual temple may be buylded: & that the same house of God being builded vp with liuely stones, may recouer his former excellencie: & also that ye scattered & dis∣persed shéepe, may be gathered & brought again into ye shéep∣fold of that only & most excellent Shepherd Christ Iesus. This is our purpose, this is our wil, this is our desire: the whiche if you as yet beléeue not, we truste you will then be∣léeue, when we conferre with you, with all pacience and méekenesse. But I would to God that in stead of our dispu∣tations & arguments, we might with one voice and consent, sing a Psalme vnto God, and shake handes as friendes: as once it came to passe betwéene the Infidels, the fielde béeing pitched, and bothe armies ready to meete and encounter to∣gyther. At which thing truely we might be ashamed, if both of vs preaching the doctrine of concorde and peace, shoulde easily be deuided, and made enemies, and hardly reconciled agayne. But what néede these wordes? These things ought and may be wyshed for of men, but it onely belongeth vnto God to bring them to passe: the which he will doe when it shall please him with his goodnesse to couer our sinnes, and with his light to driue away our darknesse. And heere (O King) to the ende it maye appeare, that we
simply and plainly meane good soothe, we will (if it so séeme good, and if leaue may be graunted) briefly declare the chief and principall pointes of this Conference or Disputation: notwithstanding in such order that no man shall haue iuste occasion to be offended. There are some whiche thinke and woulde also persuade others, that we disagree in matters of small waight, and in those thinges which are indifferent, & not appertayning to the substance of our faith. And ther are other some, which hauing no knowledge or vnderstanding of those things which we beléeue and defende, do thinke no∣thing lesse but that we agrée with the Iewes and Turkes. The purpose and thought of those first sort of mē, we trust shall be approued by vs, to be no lesse commendable than the other is to be reiected. And yet certainly neither of their opinions are firme and true. For if we shoulde beléeue the opinion of this last sort, the one part could not stand by any meanes without the destruction of the other. But if the first opinion be receiued, many matters shall be left so raw, that occasions of greater troubles will thereof by and by spring and arise. Therefore we graunt (the whiche we can scarsly do without teares) we confesse (I say) that as we doe agrée in certaine articles of our faithe, so in certaine of them, we do wholly vary and dissent. We confesse that there is one God, in one essence, infi∣niteIn what thin∣ges the Papists and Protes∣tants do agree, and in what they do disa∣gree. and incomprehensible, distinguished and deuided in three persons consubstanciall and coequall in all thinges: namely into the Father begotten of none: into the Sonne begotten of the Father before all worlds: and into the holy Ghost procéeding from the Father and the Sonne. We confesse that ther is one Iesus Christ, perfect God & perfect man without confusion of the two natures, or separation of the Prophets. We confesse that Christ, as he is man, is not the sonne of Ioseph, but conceiued by the secrete power of the holy ghost in the wombe of the virgin Mary: a virgin I say, both before the byrth, and after also.
We confesse his Natiuitie, his life, his death, his buryal, his descending into hell, his Resurrection, and his assention, euen as they are contained in the holy Gospel. We beleeue that Christ is now in heauen at the right hand of God, from whence he shal come to iudge the quick & the dead. We be∣leue in the holy Ghost, which doth illuminate, comfort, and defend vs. We beleue that there is one holy Church, Catho lique, that is to say vniuersall, which is the companie & fel∣lowship of Saints, out of the which ther is no saluatiō. We are persuaded of the frée remission of our sinnes in the bloud of Iesus Christ: by whose power, whē our bodies being ray∣sed vp from deathe shall be ioyned againe to our soules, we shall enioy with our God, moste happy and euerlasting life. What then? (will some say) are not they the articles of our faith? In what therfore do we disagree? First of all we disa∣grée in the interpretation of some of these articles. Second∣ly, bycause it semeth vnto vs (& if we erre therin, if it can be proued, we are ready to acknowledge our error, that many things are added vnto those articles as thoughe they were not sufficient: & so as though the edifice shuld neuer be buil∣ded, the new inuentions of men haue dayly ben brought in. Furthermore we say, that whatsoeuer hath ben buylded & set vp more, was not (so far as we can perceiue) builded vp∣on those ancient & first foundations: & therefore they do not only, not set forth & beautifie the building, but also wonder∣fully defile, deforme, and disgrace the same: & yet notwith∣standing greater credite and authoritie hath bene giuen vnto those fayned inuentions of men, than to the pure woorde of God. This is the summe of those things whiche we beleue and teach. But to the end our purpose may be the better vnderstād, these things whiche we haue touched generally, we will (if it may séeme good) declare particularly. Therfore we do af∣firme,In the manner of obtaining Saluation. and are persuaded that we may defend with al sobrie∣tie and modestie out of the worde of God, that the true God
in whome we beléeue, is spoyled and robbed of his perfecte righteousnesse, if we set against his wrathe and iudgement for sinne, any other satisfaction or purgation, eyther in this world, or in any other worlde, than the sounde and perfecte obedience, the which can be found in no other, sauing in Ie∣sus Chryst only. In lyke manner also, if we shall saye that God doth forgiue onely parte of our sinnes, that we maye bring vnto him the other parte, we spoyle hym wholly of his mercy. Héerevpon it followeth, that when we speake of the manner of saluation, we muste stay our selues in the passion and death of Chryst Iesus our Sauiour and redée∣mer onely: or else we must appoint in the place of the true God, some straunge and fayned God, which is neyther per∣fectly iuste, nor perfectly mercyfull. Heerevpon also depen∣deth another speciall poynte, and of great force, concerning the office of Iesus Chryst. For except he aboue be wholly our saluation, that precious name Iesus, that it to say, a Sa∣uiour, béeing gyuen to him of the Angell, dothe not apper∣tayne vnto him. In like maner also, except he be our only Prophet, which hath so fully declared vnto vs the will of his father, as should be expedient for our saluation: firste by the mouth of his Prophetes: then by himselfe with his comming at the fulnesse of tyme, and after that by his Apostles: except also he alone be the spirituall King of our consciences: and ex∣cept he be our euerlasting Prieste after the order of Melchi∣sidech, and by that sacrifice of himselfe only, once offered for al, and neuer to be offered againe, hath reconcyled men vn∣to God: and doth also now alone in heauen make intercessiō for vs to God, euen to the end of the world: And to be short, except we be complete & perfect in him, that name of Messi∣as or Chryst, that is to say Anoynted, and appoynted of God the Father, for vs to be a Sauiour, dothe nothing at all bée∣long vnto him. Therefore if the preaching of his worde out of the bookes of the Prophetes and Apostles be made in∣sufficient,
he is spoyled of his prophèticall office: if newe lawes be made, and layde vpon the consciences of men, hée should be depriued of his kingly maiestie: And if he be offe∣red again for remission of sinnes, & other ways also be found out to pacifie the wrath of God, althoughe it shoulde not be sufficient to haue one Aduocate and Mediator in heauen be∣twéene God & mē, he should be defrauded of his Priesthood. Thirdely we agrée not, neyther in the defiinition, neither in the original, nor in the effectes of faythe, which by the au∣thoritie of the Apostle Paule we call Iustifying: by whiche only, we affirme that Iesus Chryst with all his graces, is made ours. As touching good workes, if there be any that thinke we contemne them, they are vtterly deceyued: For we se∣parate no more, fayth from loue, than we separate lighte & heate from fire. And with Iohn we say, He which sayth hee knoweth God, and keepeth not his commaundementes, is a lyer. But in these thinges we confesse we disagrée in thrée speciall poyntes. First of all in the originall of good woorks,In the matter of faythe and good works. that is to saye, from whence they come: Secondely, what those good workes are: And thirdely to what vse they are good. As touching the first principall pointe, we finde no o∣ther fréewill in man than that whiche is made frée by the grace of Chryste, and we affirme that our nature, being in that state, into the which it is falne, hath néede not onely to be holpen and susteined, but rather to be mortified, and as it were killed by the power of the holy Ghost: which founde our nature not only weakned in grace, but also destitute of all strength, and enemie to all goodnesse, and deade, yea and putrified in sinne and corruption. And this honor we giue wholly vnto God, neither do we think that in this matter we ought in any wise to be ioyned with God. For we as∣signe to his grace and mercie, the beginning, the middle, and the ende of working in vs. Concerning the seconde pointe. We acknowledge no other rule of righteousnesse and obe∣dience
which may stande before God, than his commaunde∣ments whiche are faithfully described and put downe to vs in his worde: to the whiche we thinke it not méete, that any creature should adde any thing that apertaineth to the buil∣ding of mens consciences, or detract from the same. Concer∣ning the thirde point, namely to what vse these good works are profitable. We confesse that so far forthe as they come from the spirite of God working in vs, hauing their begin∣ning from so good an originall, they are good, and ought to be called by that name: howbeit, if God would examine thē according to the rigour of his iustice, he should finde many things in them worthy of condemnation. We say also that they are profitable for an other vse: bycause by them our God is glorified, & men brought to the knowledge of him: but we are persuaded that for so much as the holy Ghost is within vs (for he is certainly knowne by those effects) we are of the number of his elect, and of those that are predesti∣nate to saluation. But for so much as it cōmeth in question to knowe by what title the kingdome of God appertaynethRom. 5. vnto vs: we say with S. Paule, Eternal life is the free gift of God, and not a due reward of our merits. For by this means Christ Iesus doth iustifie vs with his righteousnesse onely, which is imputed vnto vs, sanctifieth vs with his holynesse only, giuen vnto vs, & redéemeth vs with his only sacrifice imputed vnto vs, by true & liuely faith of the grace & liberali∣tie of our God. Al these riches & treasures are giuen vnto vs by the power of the holy Ghost, vsing the preching of Gods word, & the administration of the sacraments to this ende: not as though it hath néed of those means (for God is omni∣potent) but bicause so it pleaseth him to apply & cōform him self vnto vs, & by these ordinarie meanes to create & nourish in vs y• most precious gift of faith, which is as it wer at hand to apprehend & take hold of those gifts, & as it were a veell to receiue Christ wt al his riches, to saluation. Moreouer we receiue only & imbrace for ye word of God, the doctrine con∣tained
in the bokes of the Prophets & Apostls, called by theThe authoritie Gods word, & of the Fathers. name of ye old & new Testament. For who can assure & cer∣tifie vs of our saluatiō, but they which without exception ar the gretest witnesses? And as touching the authoritie of the doctors of ancient time, & general coūcels, before they be re∣ceiued without any examination: first they shuld be compa∣red with ye scriptures, & then thēselues, with thēselues, for so much as the holy ghost is by no means contrarie to himself.He speaketh to the Prelates. The which (my Lords) I think ye wil neuer take in hand, & if ye do, giue vs this leaue that we may sée ye matter before if we beleue that ye wil not do it. But what? Are we of the progenie of that wicked Cham, which vncouered the priui∣ties of his father Noe? Do we think our selues to be better learned than so many gréek & latine doctors? Are we so wise in our own conceites that we think yt we are the first which haue opened the truth? Are we so arrogant, as to condemne the whole world of error? God forbid, yea that be far from vs. Notwtstanding my Lords, we trust you will graunt, vs this, that euery ancient councel & euery doctor ought not to be receiued rashely, for so much as there haue ben long ago many false prophets in the church of God, as the Apostle in many places techeth vs. Secōdly, as touching those doctors1. Timo. 4. Act. 20. which ar to be receiued, seing al truth which may be found in thē, necessarily ought to be drawn from ye scripturs, what sounder way shall we finde to profit in their writings, than to examine all things by that touchstone, namely by ye wel∣wayed resons & cōsidered testimonies of scripture, by which we ought to interpret thē? No mā truly can giue vnto them more, thā they wold giue vnto thēselues: And these are the very words of Hierom writing vpō the Epist. of the Gala. The doctrine of the holy Ghost is that which is contained in the Canonical bokes of scripture: against which to decree any thing by coūcels, is not lauful. And S. Aug. writing to Fortunat{us} saithAust. ad For∣tunatus. we must not so much esteme of the disputations of mē, although they be catholike & of great authoritie, as we must esteme of the
Canonicall Scripture: except it bee lawfull for vs, sauing the reuerence due to those men, to mislyke and reiect somewhat in their writings, if it be founde that they haue iudged other∣wise than the truth will beare, which wee or any others by the grace of God do knowe. This is myne opinion in other mens wrytings: and such do I wishe the readers of my works to be. The like words also he hath in his. 112. Epistle: Also in. 37. cha. of his second booke against Crescon. In like maner S. Cyprian sayth, VVe must not haue regarde what this or that man doth before vs, but what Christe Iesus hath done, who is before all. Like vnto this is the rule whiche S. Augustine gaue to Hierome: And in an other place also when hée disputeth againste those which woulde vse the Councell of Ariminum: Neyther will I (saith he) alleage the Councell of Nice against you: nor shall you alleage the Councell of Ari∣minum againste me. By the authoritie of Scripture lette vs weye matter with matter: cause with cause: and reason with reason. Chrysostome was of the same opynion, as may ap∣peare in his. 49. Homely vpon Mathew. For the Church is founded vpon the foundation of the Prophetes & Apostles. Therefore (to conclude this matter) we embrace the ho∣ly Scripture for the fl and perfect declaration of al things, which appertayne to our saluation. But as touching that which appertaineth to generall councels, and to the bookes of the fathers, we meane to vse them, and we forbid not you to vse them so farre foorth as that which ye shall bring from them, be not disagreeing with the worde of God. But for Gods sake bring not in their bare authoritie, vntill al thin∣ges are examined by the Scriptures. For we saye with S. Augustine in his seconde booke De doctrina Christiana: the. 6. chapter. If there bee any difficultie in the interpretation of Scriptures, the holy Ghoste hath so tempered the Scriptures that what soeuer in one place is obscurely spoken, in another place is more playnely and euidently reuealed. And thus far concerning that Article, the whiche I haue prosecuted the
more largely, to the end all men maye knowe that we are enimies neither to generall Councels, nor yet to the aun∣cien Fathers. There remayne yet to speake of two articles, namely concerning the Sacraments, and Ecclesiasticall discipline. The first truely deserueth a copious and long tractation, by reason of the often and great controuersies euen at this day concerning the same: but bycause it is not our purpose to dispute, but onely to declare the special pointes of our con∣fession, it seemeth enough to me to eplicate the summe of our faithe. We agree as I thinke, in the description of theThe opinion of the refor∣med Churches cōcerning the Sacrament. name of the Sacrament: namely that Sacramente are vi∣sible signes, by the meanes and helpe whereof, the coniunc∣tion which we haue with our Lord Iesus Chryst, is not on∣ly simply signified or figured, but is also truely offered vnto God, and is confirmed, sealed, and as it were grauen by the power of the holy Ghost in their mynds, which with a true faith apprehend that, which is so signified and offered vnto them. I vse this word, Signified. not to weaken or abolishe the Sacramentes: but to the ende I might distinguishe the signe from the thing signified. Herevpon we confesse, that it is alwayes necessarie in Sacramentes, that there be a heauenly and supernaturall change: for we say not, that the water in Baptisme is simply water, but a true Sacrament of our regeneration, and of the washing of our soules by the bloude of Christe. Neither do we say, that the breade in the holy Supper of our Lorde Iesus Christe, is simply breade: but a Sacramente of the precious body of Christe Iesus, whiche was giuen for vs, and that the wine is not simply wine, but a Sacrament of his precious bloud, which he hath shed for vs. Neuerthelesse we deny that there is any change made in substance of the signes, but in the ende and vse for the which they are instituted. We denie also that the same mutation is made by the efficacie of certaine wordes pro∣nounced, neyther by the intention of him that pronounceth
them: but by his wil only which hath ordeined this heauē∣ly and diuine action: the institution also wherof, ought eui∣dently and playnly to be expounded in the vulgar tongue, that all men might vnderstand and receiue the same. Thus muche concerning externall signes. Nowe to come to that which is shewed and exhibited by those signes. We say not that which many do, who not well vnderstāding our myn∣des, haue supposed that we haue taught: namely that in the Lords supper ther is only a cōmemoration of the death of our Lord Iesus Christe. Neither do we say, that we are partakers of the frutes of his death & passion onely in that thing, but do ioyne the ground it self with the frutes whiche do come fro him to vs: affirming with S. Paul▪ The bread which we breake according to the Lords instition is ,Coinonian. that is to say, ye participatiō of ye bodie of Christ, which was crucified for vs: The cup which we drinke is the parti∣cipation1. Cor. 10. of his very bloud which was shed for vs, yea uē in ye verie same substance, which he toke in ye wombe of the vir∣gin: & which he caried vp into heauen. Behold I pray you, can ye fynd any thing in this Sacrament which we séeke, & find not? But me thinks I heare some body make answer. For many wold haue vs to confesse ye the bread & the wine are changed, not into the sacraments of the body & bloud of our Sauior Iesus Christ, but into the very bodie & bloud of our Lord. Other some peraduēture wil not so vrge vs, but wil haue vs cōfesse that the body & bloud is really & corpo∣rally in, with, or vnder ye bread & wine. But here my Lor∣des, I pray you heare me paciently a little, & for a time sus∣pend your iudgements. If either of these opinions shall be proued vnto vs out of the worde of God to be true, we are redy to imbrace it, and wholly to reteine it. But it séemeth vnto vs (according to the measure of oure faith,) that this Transubstantiation cannot be reuoked or brought to the a∣nalogieTransubstan∣tiation. & substance of faith, and to sounde doctrine, bicause it is wholly repugnant to the nature of Sacramentes: in
which it is necessarie that there remaine substātial signes, yt they may be true signes of the body & blod of Iesu Christ. Furthermore it doth euert and confound the veritie of the humane nature in Christ, & of his ascentiō. And as my opi∣niō is of Trāsubstantiatiō euē so is it also of Consubstātiatiō:Consubstanti∣ation. which hath no groūd in the words of Christe, neither is it necessary to this, that we be partakers of the Sacraments. But if any man demaund of vs if we make Christ to be ab∣sent frō the supper: we answer that we do not separate him from the supper. But if we haue respect vnto the distāce of places (as we must of necessitie whē we speake of his cor∣poral presence & of his humanitie distinctly considered) wee affirme that his body is so far absent from the bread & wine as the heauen is absent from the earth, fr so much as we & the sacraments are in earth, but he is so glorified in heauē, that his glorie (as S. August. saith) hath not takē away theAugust. ad Dardanum. veritie of his bodie, but the infirmitie of his bodye. If any man herevpon gather that we separate Christ frō the Sup∣per, he gathereth amisse. For we do bring this honor vnto God, yt although the body of Iesu Christ be in heauen & no where else, and we in earth & no where else, yet notwith∣standing we are no lesse partakers of his body & bloud, by a certaine spirituall maner & instrumēt of faith, than we tru∣ly sée with our eyes ye sacramēts, touch thē with our hands, tast them with our mouthes, & are nourished & sustained in this corporal life with their substance. This truely, in fewe words, is our faith in this point, yt which we thinke, is not repugnant to ye words of Christ, nor to ye Apostle Paule, & destroyeth not ye humane nature of Christ, neither ye article of the ascention, nor the sacramentall institution, it giueth no occasion to bring in curious & obscure questions: it doth by no meanes derogate frō the coniunction which we haue wt Christ, which is ye speciall end of ordaining of sacramēts, not to ye end yt it might be either worshipped, laid vp, caryed about, or to be offered vnto God for a sacrifice: to be short,
(excepte we be deceiued) it giueth more to the power and to the wordes of the Sonne of God, than their opinion, which thinke that his body must be really ioyned with signes, to the ende we might be partakers of him. But concerning the administration of Baptisme we say nothing at all. For I beléeue that there is none of you that accounteth vs in the number of Anabaptistes, bycause they haue no greater enemies against them thā we. As touching certaine other particular questions in this argument of Sa∣cramentes, we trust God willing, that the speciall articles being brought to some order, by this modest and quiet con∣ference, the rest shall of themselues easily followe. As tou∣ching the other fiue Sacraments, as ye call them, thus wee thinke, that vntill we be better taught by the Scriptures, they cannot be called by the name of Sacraments: but not∣withstanding, we think that we haue broght in the true cō∣firmation, which standeth in this, that so many as are bap∣tisedConfirmation in their infancie, and all others, whatsoeuer, before they come to the Lordes Supper▪ maye be instructed in the Cathechisme. We teach also true repentance, whiche consisteth in the true acknowledging of sinnes, and in satisfaction either pu∣bliquely or priuately, of the parties offended, also in absolu∣tion whiche we haue in the bloud of Iesus Christ, and in a∣mendement of life. We do allowe Matrimonie according to S. Paule, in all those whiche haue not the gifte of continencie: and wée thinke it vnlawfull for any man to bynde himselfe with a perpetual vowe to leade a continent life, and neuer to mar∣ry: and we condemne all fornication & lightnesse in word, gesture, and deede. We allowe the degrees of ecclesiasticall offices, euen as God hath ordeined them in his house. We allowe visitation of sicke persones, as the speciall parts of the Ministerie of the Gospell. We teach, with S. Paule, that no man ought to be iudged for choyce in days, & meats,
for the kingdome of God doth not consiste in those corrupti∣ble and externall thinges. The last point to speake of, is of external order and gouernement of the ecclesiastical State, of the which we think it lawful for vs to say, by your leaue, that all things are so corrupted, that very hardely, the notes and printes of that auncient buylding very well ordered & appointed by the Apostles can be seene. Of the which mat∣terEcclesiasticall discipline. you your selues maye be witnesses, whiche toke some paines not long agoe herein. But we omitte these matters, the whiche we thinke better not to disclose than to vtter. And to conclude this Oration, we proteste before God and his Angels, before your Maiestie, (moste Christian king) and before this honorable assembly, that our purpose and meaning is nothing else, but to bring the state of the Church to that puritie and perfection, in the which it so greatly flo∣rished in the Apostles tyme: and that so many of those ad∣ditions, as should be found either superstitious, or else ma∣nifestly against the worde of God, might quite be abolished and counted superfluous: also that all thinges might be ta∣ken awaye whiche (experience teaching) bring men to su∣perstition. But if certaine thinges be founde profitable and necessarie to edification, firste consider of them wisely by the auncient Canons and authorities of the Fathers, then let them be obserued and kepte as it shall be thought expe∣dient and méete for the times, places, and persones: that so with one consent God maye be worshipped in spirite and truth, vnder your obedience (O King) and the obedience of those whome God hath appointed to your Maiestie to go∣uerne the Realme. For if there be any yet whiche thinke that the doctrine which we professe, dothe withdrawe menObedience to Magistrates. from their dutifull obedience to Kinges and Magistrates: we haue to answere them. For this we teach that the firste and principall obedience is due vnto God, whiche is King of Kings, and Lord of Lordes. But if our writings may not suffise to cleare vs of that crime layd to our charge, we wil
bring forth many examples of principalities, of rules, and of kingdomes, that haue bene reformed by the prescript of our doctrine, which may be sufficient witnesses of our in∣nocencie. To be short in this point we say with S. Paule, Let euery soule submit himself to the authoritie of the higher powers▪ Yea and Chrisostome writing vpon that place, faith, Yea, let him submit him selfe though he be an Apostle or Euangelist, bicause that subiectiō doth not derogate from the glory of God. Wherefore if it shall come to passe here∣after that any man falsely professing oure doctrine, shall be found to rebel, but against the least of your officers, we pro∣test before God and your maiestie (O King) that such kind of men shall not be of vs, neither shal they finde more mor∣tall enimyes against them than we. Therfore (O king) our desire to aduance ye glory of God, our obediēce & loue which we owe to your Maiestie, our loue also towards our cun∣trey, & specially to the Church of God, haue brought vs into this place, trusting yt the most mighty God according to his accustomed mercy and goodnesse, will blesse you no lesse thā he did ye yōg king Iosias: & that by your most happie gouern∣mēt (O Quéene) & by your coūsels (most honorable Prin∣ces, & coūsellers) the ancient memory of ye famous Quéene Clotilda, shal be renued: whose diligence ye Lord vsed as a meane to make himself knowne throughout this Realme. This is our hope (most mightie king) for the which we are readie to spende our liues: yt obeying your maiestie in this so godly a matter, we may sée ye golden world, where oure Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ raigneth with all honour and glory for euer and euer. Thus far Beza procéeded in his oration: who with his fellowes fell on their knées, and standing vp straight way againe, offred vnto the king the confession of the Churches of Fraunce, and then he spake thus vnto him: We beséeche your Maiestie not to regarde oure rude and barbarous speache, but our well wishing mindes wholy consecrated to
obedience. But, bicause the principall pointes of oure doc∣trine, are more plainly and copiously contained in this con∣fession of our faith, we beséech your Maiestie to receiue the the same: and we trust (by the leaue of God) it will come to passe that when we haue conferred together with all so∣brietie and reuerence we shall come to some agréement. But if our iniquities be the cause that we may not obtaine so greate a blessing, we doubte not but your Maiestye will consyder of all thinges, and prouide for them accordingly, without preiudice of any partie. And here wée thinke it not good to let one thing passe, namely, that when Beza intreated of the Lords supper, and spake these wordes, As touching the distance of places, the bodie of Christ is so far from the bread and wine, as the hea∣uen is higher than the earth: the Prelates were so moued, that by and by they began to make disturbance, and to mur∣mur, but this being somewhat quieted, Beza made an ende of his oration. After whom the Cardinall of Turnon, hauing great indignation, and shaking and trembling for very an∣ger began in the name of the Popishe Prelacie (of which he was chiefe) to declare vnto the king, that the Cardinall, Bishoppes, and the reste of their fellowship, by reason of the kings commaundemente, gaue their consente that the newe Euangelistes (for so he termed the menne of the re∣fourmed Churches) shoulde be hearde what they coulde saye, but notwithstanding, not withoute some offence of their consciences, bycause they perceyued that they myghte speake manye things not méete for a Christian Prince to heare: which might also, (and that not withoute cause,) of∣fende the mindes of many good men▪ Therfore he sayd, that the Prelates suspecting that it woulde so come to passe, had giuen hym commaundement to intreate the King, that if any suche matters fell oute he woulde not in any wyse be∣léeue their wordes. And that therefore he would reiect both
the wordes and sentence of that fellowe, that had spoken in the name of those of the new Religion: staying and suspen∣ding his iudgement vntill the Prelates hadde otherwyse opened the matter: the which if it might please him, he tru∣sted that both the king, and the whole assembly shoulde vn∣derstand & see▪ what diffenrēce there was between the truth and a lye. He required also, that he might haue a daye giuen him to answere. Adding that had it not beene for the regarde they hadde vnto the King, and to his commaundementes, they would not, at the hearing of those horrible and abhemina∣ble wordes which that other fellowe vttered, haue suffered him to haue procéeded any further. At the length he besee∣ched the King that he would follow the faith and footesteps of his auncestors: the whiche he prayed all the Saintes in heauen, and the Uirgin Mary to graunt. To this the Quéene answered that nothing was doone inThe Queene answereth the Cardinall of Turnon. this matter without due aduice and counsell, by the delibe∣ration of the Princes, and the priuie Councell, and by the iudgement and consent of the Senate of Paris. The whiche (she sayd) was not done to alter any thing in Religion but to quiet the troubles that were rysen through the diuesitie of opinions in Religion, and by these means to bring those that were gone astraye into the way againe. Which (sayth she) you and your fellowes ought to séeke, specially at this time, by vsing good and strong argumentes. Thus the mynds of the Popishe Prelates being galled, and very much grieued at the first méeting, with the words of Theodore Bza, the daye following, he writ vnto the Quéene, saying, bycause he feared that she was not fully sa∣tisfied, by reason of certen words wherat the Prelats were offended: therfore he earnestly desired of hir, that he might haue libertie more plainly & largely to discourse that mat∣ter, which then he could not copiously declare. The occasi∣on therfore (saith he) of those words by me vttered, was the
opinion of certaine men, which not wel vnderstanding our mindes, thought that we went about to exclude Christ frō the Supper: the which to doe were manifestly wicked, se∣ing we haue the contrary to be found in the word of God, namely, that, that precious Sacrament was therefore or∣dayned by the sonne of God, that he might make vs more and more partakers of the substance of his verye body and bloude, whereby we might more straightly be vnited vnto him and mighte growe to euerlasting life: And vnlesse it should be so, it were not the Supper of Iesu Christ. And therefore it is so far from vs that we should say that Christ is absent from the Supper, that none of all others, more resiste that blasphemie than we. But we saye that there is great difference betwéene these, to say that Iesus Christ is in the Supper in that he gyueth truely vnto vs his bodye and bloude, and to say and affirme, that his bodye & bloude is ioyned to the bread. That first I haue affirmed, bicause it is the principall & chiefe, the seconde I haue denyed, bicause I thinke it to be repugnant to the truth of Christ his nature, and to the arti∣cle of the ascention, as it is in Scripture, and as the ancient fathers expounde the same. This sentence and opinion gy∣ueth more dignitie and authoritie to the worde of God, thā that, which teacheth that Christe is really and corporally ioyned to signes. This therefore is the declaration & mea∣ning of that which we spake, which I desyre may satisfie you: being ready to be taught if better be shewed. To this also he added certaine testimonies of the Fathers. As of S. Augustine, writing vpon the. 5. Chapter of S. Iohn, where he saith: VVhen our Sauiour Christ saide ye shall not haue me alwayes with you: he spake of the presence of his bo∣die. For, according to his Maiestie, prouidence, and inuisible grace, that which he promised in another place, is fulfilled: I will be with you to the ende of the world: But according to his humane nature which he toke, according to that, that he
was borne of the virgin Mary, that he was crucifyed, & bu∣ried, and rose againe, it is said: Me, ye shall not haue alwayes. VVherfore? Bicause according to his body, he was conuersant with his disciples fortie dayes, and as they went wyth him, ascended from them into heauen, neither is heere any more. Also the same Saint Augustine saith, writing to Dardanus. As he is God, he is euery where: As he is man, he is in hea∣uen. And Vigilius, whiche wrote againste Eyches in the yeare of our Lorde God. 500. sayth, The sonne of God in re∣specte of his humanitie is departed from vs: but in respect of his diuinitie he saith, I am with you to the end of the world. He is with vs, and he is not with vs: for he hath not forsaken those, in respecte of his diuinitie, whome he hath forsaken, and from whom he is departed in respecte of his humanitie. Moreouer he sayth, VVhen his fleshe was in earthe, it was not truely in heauen: but nowe bicause it is in heauen, it is not, no doubte, in earth. Againe he sayth, The onely sonne of God, which was also man, is contayned in one place, ac∣cording to the nature of his fleshe: And is not contained in any place according to the nature of his Diuinitie. Nowe in the meane time, while these things were thus a working, the Prelates came together, and certaine of the Ppisticall doctours of the Canon lawe, beyng made ac∣quainted wyth the matter, did deliberate and consults together what answere they were beste to gyue to the re∣fourmed Churches. Here it is reported that the Cardinall of Lorayne sayde, I would to God that eyther he were dumbe, or else wee deafe and coulde not heare. The matter beyng diuersely reasoned and considered of on bothe sides, at the laste it was concluded, that answere shoulde be made, to to speciall pointes of the oration: the firste poynt concer∣ning the Churche: and the seconde poynt concernyng the Lordes Supper. They did also deliberate, whether it were not good to haue a confession made, which shoulde be offered to the pro∣testants,
but if their chosen men, which were appointed to dispute for them had denied to imbrate the same, that then they should haue the sentence of condemnation proncūced against them as heretikes: & so the disputation shld ende. But this their deuise was not fully concluded vpō, for that many of them woulde not agrée vnto the same And when ye ministers of the reformed Churches heard of this deuise, they complained to the king & Queene that the matter was not indifferently handled, beseching them that the fruit and profite of the conference might not be hindred by these plat formes and subtill deuises. Therfore the conference began againe the sixtene day ofThe seconde session. September the king & Quéene, the king of Nauar, and the Princes the kings kinsmē being presēt. And here the Car∣dinall of Loraine first of all spake very largely in the behalfe of the Prelates, concerning the obedience of his fellowesThe oration of the Cardi∣nal of Loraine. towards the king, ye which they acknowledged to owe vnto him by the commaundement of God, & confessed that they wold gladly giue the same vnto him. Notwithstanding that the king ought to haue great care to defend the Church, not as heade, but as a member of the same: and, that in thoseNote here the subiection of Papistes. things which appertaine to doctrine, he ought to be subiecte to the Church, and to the ministers thereof, as the expresse testimonies of scripture, and the examples of the ancient fathers doe declare. Therefore (saith he) we doe make this the grounde of all our reasons, that all obedience ought to be giuen to the King. But comming more neere to his mat∣ter, he declareth yt the assembly whose cause he had in hand did consist of Archbishops, of Bishops ordinarily made, of Priests, of Canons, & of a great nūber of others. Whose le∣gte (saith he) I am, & this is ye sum of my imbassage. Wher as many to my great griefe were fallen from the Church not long a go professing the contrary Religion, neither sub∣mitting thēselues to their owne constitutiōs, being within these few dayes called thither by the kings cōmaundemēt,
had declared some good will to profite: if they would come againe into their cuntrey and into the ancient house of the Fathers, they shall be receiued, and haue nothing yt is past cast in their téeth: if so be yt they wil shew themselues pe∣nitent, and will become obedient children to the Churche. Therefore I will frame my selfe according to their infir∣mities: being glad that they professe with vs the articles of our faith: and I hartely wishe that as in words so in iudge∣ment we maye agrée together. Therefore I will answere them in the spirite of loue and modestie. But I will handle onely two articles, bicause it will be to tedious to intreate of euery one of them particularly. And the two articles whereof I will speake, are concer∣ning the Churche, and concerning the Lordes Supper. Wherfore, concerning the firste, it is not true I hat the Church doth consist only of the Elect, bicause in the Lords barne the chaffe is mingled with the wheate: and yet not∣withstanding the Church cannot erre. But if some part of the Church shoulde erre, the whole body ought to be preferred before one corrupte member: if any euill should créepe in, then we muste haue recourse to antiquitie, and muste haue respecte to the chiefe and princi∣pall Churches, among which the Church of Rome hath had alwayes the principall place. If any thing were founde to be amisse in some perticular place of the Church, we must set against the Ignoraunce of a small number of men, the decrées of the auncient and of the generall Counsels. But if this thing maye not suffice, we muste diligently séeke for the iudgements of the approued fathers of the Catholique Churche: notwithstanding we must specially giue place to the testimonies of Scripture, being expounded by the true voyce and interpretation of the Church, least heretikes shoulde bragge and saye that they alone haue the worde of God. For the Catholique Churche must giue authoritie to the word of God. The which order, bicause the Arrians kept
not, they fell into great mischiefes: into which destruction they also are like to fal, which seyng not the beame in their owne eyes, are very busie to plucke out the moate in other mens eyes. As touching the seconde pointe, which concer∣neth the Sacrament of the Lordes Supper, I must néedes confesse that I and the whole Clergie are greatly gréeued to sée that the blessed Sacrament of the Euchariste, which theThe opiniō of the Cardinall of Loraine concerning the Sacrament. Lorde left vnto vs to be a bonde and pledge of peace and v∣nitie, should by curiositie of searching out of déepe matters, be after a sort, an occasion not onely of infinite controuer∣sies, but also of forsaking the truth, which maye scarcely be kepte among these controuersies. For in the Eucharste we ought to consider foure things. The firste is the vnion and1 concorde, which ought to be among the faithfull, according to, that which the Apostle saith, that VVe are one body, and partakers of one cup. The second is the vnion with Christ2 Iesus, as it is sayd, He which eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloude abideth in me, and I in him. The thirde is remis∣sion3 of sinnes, which is purchased by the effusion of Christe his bloude. The fourth is, the hope of euerlasting life, ac∣cording4 to that which is writtē, He which eateth this btead shall liue for euer. But the contrary doth happen in this dis∣putation, namely distractions and diuisions in the Church, the separation from God, the losse of remission of sinnes, & of the hope of euerlasting life. Diuers and sundrye are the controuersies of oure aduersaries concerning this matter, of the which there are eight in number. It is better to abide in the approued opinion and iudgemente of the Catholike Church, which is, that the very body of God & of our Lord Iesus Christ & his very bloude also, is present and receiued in this Sacrament: according as it is sayd, This is my bo∣die. The which wordes, excepte they be in déede of as great force as they sounde and séeme to be, why are they so dili∣gently repeated in like wordes of all the Euangelistes and of the Apostle Paule also? Why did not the other three
Euangelistes, & the Apostle Paule, which wrote after Ma∣thew, writ after that maner yt our Sacramentaries would write? specially seyng in a matter of lesse waight they doe one of them expounde another: and that which one of them setteth forth obscurely, another plainely declareth. This is the mynde of the Testator, which by no maner of meanes ought to be disalowed or violated: This is also the iudge∣ment and doctrine of all the ancient writers, that not onely the breade is giuen by the Priest, but also the very body of Christ really. Therefore I imbrace this stable & hole some opinion, and I doe abhorre with all my hearte the curious opinions and sayings of these newe men, which seme so to represent Christe, as if they shoulde bring him forthe in a Tragedie or Comedie. As thoughe it were not better to retaine and kepe the simple wordes of our Lorde and sai∣our than the false imaginations of men, seyng that this is most firme and certaine, that we are not onely ioyned to Christe by faithe, but also by the force and efficacie of the Euchariste, beyng rightlye, worthily and really receyued, yea, and to speake more playnelye, Substantially, Naturally, and Corporally. And here he alledged many things out of the ancient fa∣thers: and plainely reprehended Beza, bicause he vsed the words of Austen in his epistle to Dardanus, in this matter of the Sacramentes, seyng in that epistle he intreated no∣thing at all of the Sacramentes, & also bicause he had con∣demned the opinion of certaine Germaines, concerning Con∣substantiation, contrarye to his owne opinion. And then he concluded his oration with these wordes: I come & yelde (sayth he) to your opinion of the Sacramente, excepte ye thinke that Iesus Christe, as touching his fleshe, is in this world from the time of his ascention, and that, more nowe than he was before he toke vpon him our fleshe: excepte ye thinke that Christ hath some other bodye than that whiche is visible: excepte ye thinke that he is otherwise in the Sa∣crament
than in the preaching of the worde: if ye thinke it to be all one to put on Christ in Baptisme, and to eate his body and bloude: and to be shorte, if ye think, that he is so in heauen that he is not in earth also: and that he is no o∣therwise in the Supper than he is in the Myer: we which are taughte that the Supper is not in heauen, but celebra∣ted in earth, and which are not so curious that we woulde by ingenius and wise speculations bryng and separate Christe from the Supper▪ to answere you fullye, affirme that we are so far from your opinion, as the heauen is hyer from the lowest parte of the earth. Let them therefore sée and consider which iudge and examine oure Religion not by Philosophie, but by Diuinitie, which of vs two doe attri∣bute more to the power of God, and to Iesus Christ. And so praying to God to roote out these daungerous and deadly opinions, and not to suffer these controuersies to be in his Churche, he exhorted the king and the Quéene, that they woulde take vpon them the patrocinie and defence of thys matter: and protested in the name of the Prelates of the French Churche that he would liue and die in the defence of this doctrine which he had set forth. After this all the Prelates which were present rose vp,The protesta∣tion of the Prelates. and came néere vnto the king, and in their name the Car∣dinal of Turnon protested that this was the confessiō of their faith which they woulde seale with their owne bloude, be∣ing the vndoubted truth of ye holy mother the Church. The which the king oughte to imbrace and followe, according to the manner and example of his elders. But if they whiche had separated themselues from the Churche of Rome, would subscribe to that confession, then they shoulde be receyued and be heard more fully in other articles in the which they sayde they woulde be satisfyed, otherwyse they oughte not to be hearde at all. And it is the Kinges parte to banishe them oute of his Realme: the which he must earnestly de∣sired him to doe.
Then Beza vehementlye desired of the King by and by leaue to make answere oute of hande to the oration of the Cardinall of Loraine. For the ministers feared that they shoulde haue no more leaue to come together againe, fame reporting euery where, that the prelates had determined, from that day forward to deale with them no more but by excommunications. Notwithstanding thoughe the Mini∣sters that day could obtaine no leaue to answere, yet obtai∣ned they another day, the which neuerthelesse by reason of diuers rumors, was deferred vntill the day following. Bi∣cause of these detractions of times, the ministers fearing that the disputation shoulde be ended, they determined to offer vnto the King a supplication, praying him, that, for so much as, at his commaundement they were come thether from so far countreys, quietly to confer with the Prelates for the rooting out of errors, which so manye yeares had op∣pressed the Church, they mighte haue leaue to confer toge∣ther, and to declare their cause, & that he him selfe woulde take vpon him the defence of Religion: whiche they sayde, was the meane and way to raygne and rule himself, and to preserue his kingdome in peace and tranquillitie. When they had offered this Supplication oftentymes to the King, at the last they obtayned leaue to haue the conference con∣tinued, not in publique but in priuate place. Therefore at the length the assembly was renewed a∣gayneThe thirde Session in an∣other order. which a long time was broken off, a small number of men, the King and Quéene, the king of Nauarre, the Pre∣lates and twelue chosen Ministers, and a few others being only present. Then the Cardinall of Loraine began to shew, that this assembly was gathered togyther, that the Mi∣nisters might be heard what answere they would make to those things which he had lately expounded. Beza therfore in the name of his fellowes began thus, saying. When we haue called vpon the name of God, that he woulde aide and assist vs in a matter of so great waight, and would bring to
passe that this assemblie might be gathered together to the glory of his name, to your dignitie, and specially to ye peace and tranquillitie of the king and Quéene, of the whole Christian common wealth, and kingdome: we will briefe∣lye answere to that which was lately propounded by the Lorde Cardinall of Loraine, concerning the two principall poyntes of our confeion: namely concerning the Church, and the Supper of the Lorde. But if we mighte haue had leaue to answere at the first out of hand, when those things that were spoken were yet freshe in memory, we mighte haue bene able more aptly and distinctly to haue made an∣swere. But notwithstanding we will speake as God shall make vs able, that it may be vnderstande, in what things we agrée, and in what also we doe disagree: of the which I woulde to God there mighte be made a perfecte vnitie and concorde. Therefore concerning the first principall poynt, which is of the Church, we will declare thrée things. First, what the Church is: Secondly, what are ye markes of the Churche: and thirdlye, what is the authoritie of the same. There is no doubte, but that this name, Church, was dri∣uedWhat is the Church. of the Gréeke worde, which signifieth to call from one place to another. But in the Scripture there are found two kindes of callings. The one conioyned with the efficacie of the holy Ghost, of which there is mention made in the E∣pistle of S. Paule to the Romaines, in these words: ThoseRom. 8. whome God hathe iustified, he hathe called. The other al∣though it be allone with the first, as touching the externall matter, yet notwithstāding it is of no efficacie, as touching saluation, not that God is to be blamed therefore, but tho∣rough mens default, which will not heare the word of God. Of this thing the Lorde speaketh when he saythe, Manye are called, but fewe are chosen, Herevpon it commeth that the name of the Churche, which is a congregation of men gathered together by the voyce of God, which calleth them, is taken two maner of wayes. For if it be taken generally
for all those which doe externally professe that they doe an∣swere to Gods calling, then there is no doubt, but so many reprobates and ipocrites are comprehended And thus tru∣ly haue we alwayes both writtē and taught with one con∣sent, seyng that matter is very common in the Scriptures. But if this worde or name Churche be taken more proper∣lye and strictlye, as oftentimes it is, then we saye that it onely comprehendeth those that are predestinate and cho∣sen of God. And to the ende men maye perceiue that wee haue not deuised nor inuented this phrase of speache, and much lesse this doctrine, when it is sayde, That the Church is the bodye of the Lorde, bones of his bones, and fleshe of his fleshe, how can the reprobates be comprehended in this1. Cor. 12. number, seing they are the members of the Deuill? For these two things cannot agrée together, To be a member ofAugust. contra Crescō cap 21. Christ and a member of the Deuill also: the which S. Au∣gustine well vnderstoode. This same distinction of the Churche that Author also vsed writing vpon the sixtie foure Psalme, when he sayth, The Churche fignified by Hierualem began at Abel: and Babilon at Caine. And yet notwithstāding in this first booke of Baptisme against the Donatistes, the sixtene chapter, ta∣king the name of Churche more generally, he saythe, He which begat Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, & the Prophets: begat also Cayne, Ismael, Dathan, and such others. In fine, therfore, let vs take that which the same Saint AugustineLib. 7. cap. 51. hath written in the forenamed booke, where it is sayde, that there are two sortes of men, as touching the Churche: For (sayth he) some are the members of Christe and of the true Churche, and so of Gods house, that they are euen the house of God. But other some are in the house of God, but are not the house of God. For they are as the chaffe with the wheate. But hereof there séemeth to aryse a question, whether theQuestion. Churche be inuisible: the which séemeth of necessitie to be concluded, for so muche as God onely knoweth his electe, &
seing also we confesse that we beléeue the holy Church: AndAnswere. that which is beléeued is not séene. But hereby maye come great inconuenience, if we haue not a more depe considera∣tion of this matter. For if the matter be so, into what as∣semblie can we come? Where shall then be the waye of our saluation except the Churche be knowne that we may cleaue vnto Christe Iesus, seyng that he doth declare his vertue and sauing health in one Churche? Therefore wée saye, that althoughe the Churche in consideration of those things, whereof we spake euen nowe, can not be séene of men, yet notwithstanding we haue certain notes to know, to what Churche we oughte to ioyne oure selues, namely, the pure worde of God, and the sincere administration ofTrue notes of the Church. Sacramentes. The which notes are so plaine and many∣est, that wheresoeuer they shall be, wée oughte to be oute of all doubte that there is the Churche of God, in so muche that by the rule of Charitie, we oughte to account all those for the faythfull Children of God, which professe the pure Religion, excepte God shall reueae their hipocrisie. And of this matter Saint Paule hathe giuen vnto vs a playne example, when he calleth the Corinthians and Galathians1. Cor. 3. Saints, attributing also vnto them the name of the Church althoughe there were greate errors among them, both in corruptions of doctrine and also of manners. The which al∣so he hath shewed in another place, when he sayth, If anye1. Cor. 3. man build on this foundation Golde, Siluer, Precious stones, Tymber, Hay, or Stubble. &c. Thus therefore we speake of the Churche not transfor∣myng the same into fantasticall imaginations, neyther yet (as it séemeth vnto vs) doe wée giue occasion to aye man, to counte vs in the number of suche as are fantasticall as the Catharistes, the Donatistes, and those furious Anabap∣tistes also that were in our time, with whome diuers of our brethren oftentimes haue contended,
Nowe therefore I come to those notes and badges of the Churche, the which we must diligently beholde, seing out of the same there is no saluation, neither anye manner of thing which Sathan our auncient ennme hath not gone a∣bout at all times to counterfaite and falsifie. I sayde that there were two certaine and vndoubted markes, namely the preaching of the word, and the sincere administration of Sacramentes. There are some also which adde Ecclesiasticall discipline, and the fruite of the preaching of Gods worde. But bicause our iniquities will not suffer these two notes to appeare, therefore let vs con∣tentour selues with those two first. That the word of God is a true badge and marke of the Church, it may hereby appeare, that the word is compared vnto seede. Therefore Paule sayth, that he had begotten the Corinthians in the Lorde, that is to saye, by the preaching of the worde. And therefore in manye places, it is called meate and foode, according to the saying of the Lorde: My sheepe heare my voyce, but they knowe not the voyce of a straunger. Also the sacraments are a true note of ye Church, bicause the Lord would instruct vs not onely by the eares, but also by the eyes, and other corporall senses: in so much that he would haue the Sacramentes to be manifest testi∣monies, and certaine and visible notes of the vnion of the faithfull, first with him, and secondly betwéene themselues. Therefore it was sayde in the time of the olde Testament: Let the man that is vncircumcised be thruste oute from a∣mong the people: and therefore the maister of euery house was wont thrice euery yeare to present themselues in Hie∣rusalem, that they mighte testifie the vnitie of faith and Reli∣gion by those sacrifices. Afterward, the vayle being taken a∣way, and the cloase shut gate being broken open, the Iewes and the Gentils grewe into one bodye, not onelye by the preaching of the worde, but also by Baptisme, and by theEphe. 2. holy Sacrament of the bodye and bloud of Christe. And ac∣cording
to this, Christ sayd to his Apostles, Go and preache to euery creature, baptizing in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Whereby both the word and Sacraments are noted. For that is to be ioyned with bap∣tisme which Paule speaketh of the Supper, saying, that He gaue that which he receiued of the Lorde. And this is also the verye same whiche is saide in another place, That the Church is founded vpon the Prophetes and Apostles, that is to say, vpon Christ Iesus, which is the heade corner stone, that is to say, the matter and substance of the propheticall and Apostolical doctrine. And thus the other place of ye same Apostle oughte to bée vnderstoode, that the Churche is the strength and piller of truth, that is to say the word of God, and the same truth of God (as S. Ihon sayth) doth sustayne and holde vp the Church, as also Chrisostome interpreteth it. These are the true and visible notes of the Churche, the which Church, bicause it bringeth forthe the faithfull, and nourisheth them with the heauenly & incorruptible meate, is called their mother and Nource. But and if the worde be preached and the Sacramentes ministred, it must néedes followe that there be pastors and teachers, to whom those offices may be committed, as the scriptures in diuers places testifieth, and the Apostle Paule also. Herevpon it commeth to passe, that many adde a thirde note, namely, ordinarie succession from the time of the A∣postles. To the which we answere, that suche successionSuccession in the Church. ought to be greatly estéemed, so long as it is rightly consi∣dered and applyed: euen as the Fathers often times vsed the same against heretikes, as it is to be séene in Tertulliā, Irenaeus, and in Augustine against the Maniches and Dona∣tistes. But bycause they set that buckser againste vs, as bringers in of newe things: it is necessarie that we declare what we thinke of this thing. We say that there is one succession of doctrine, and ano∣ther
of persons. The succession of doctrine we acknowledge for the true and vndoubted marke of the Churche, according to those things whereof we haue spoken before. For althoughe the doctrine of the Gospell is neuer a whit the more worthy to be beleued for antiquitie, & although it commeth to passe by the iudgement of God, for oure iniquities, that the same is counted sometimes so newe vnto men, when it shoulde be familiar and knowne: yet notwithstanding the auncient & continuall succession doth greatly preuaile with men, euen to the farther confirming of the authoritie of the same. As touching the succession of persons, we acknowledge the same: but vpon that conditiō, that it be ioyned with the succession of the Prophetes & Apostles, specially in the sub∣stantiall and principall points of faith, & not otherwise. But waye and consider that I speake of doctrine, & not of man∣ners. For although the integritie of doctrine & of life be here vnto required, that a man shoulde be counted for a good and true pastor, yet notwithstanding we do not reiecte a pastor for ignorance, or the diuersitie of opinions in smal matters of doctrine, and for maners, if so be that he kepe the founda∣tion. Thus are we taught of Christ, who sayth, So far forth as the Scribes and Pharisies sit vpon Moises chaire, doe that which they teach, and not as they do. The which place, S. Augustine writing vpon Ihon, saith ought to be vnderstande of hirelings, which neuerthelesse retaine sound doctrine, & not of false pastors, of whō Christ speaketh, saying, Beware of the leuen of the Phariseis. By∣cause (sayth S. Augustine) they sit vpon Moises chaire, they teache the lawe of God, & so God speaketh by them: but if they will teach their owne doctrines, ye shall neither heare nor do that which they teach. Therfore to come to the matter, bycause false prophetes may succéede true prophets, & wolues the true shepheards: this truely is a sounde and manifest reason, wherefore we
thinke that personall succession ought not onely, not to be receiued, but also vtterly to be cōdemned, bicause it giueth place to that which is false, & craftely coloureth the same, least the succession of doctrine should be laid for the founda∣tion. Furthermore, if personall succession should simply be taken for a true note of the Churche, we muste bring forth and shew a certaine sure promise of God, by which he hath bounde his grace to certaine definite places and Regions, the which we thinke can in no wyse be shewed oute of the newe Testament: seyng this is rather manifestly decla∣red, that there is a certain catholique or vniuersal Church, bycause the particular members thereof are dispersed tho∣roughout the whole world, euen as it pleaseth God to shew forth his iudgements vpon those whō he hath vtterly caste off, or whō he chastiseth for a time, and to shewe his mercy and blessings vpon those, whom he preserueth, or whom he newly bringeth to the knowledge of him. For God shewing his vengeaunce in certaine places séemeth to abolishe atl things, in so muche that there is no manner of signe of the Church left, as it is come to passe in all Africa, Greece, & in the whole East part of the world. But sometime that personal succession doth decay only for a little while, as it happened at Antioch, in the time of Samosatene, & at Alexandri, in the ex∣ile of Athanasius, & in many other Churches also, so long as there were heresies among them. And to be short, personall succession ceassed in the time of Honorious, who was con∣demned in the yeare of oure Lorde God. D. LXXXI. for the execrable doctrine of Eutiches, and in the time of Iohn the xxii. of that name, who was condemned of Heresie: excepte we shoulde saye that manyfest Heretikes maye be true pa∣stours. I omitte to speake of those things which happened in the tyme of that womā Pope IOANE, and of the ma∣nifolde tumultes of the false vsurping Popes, which the hi∣stories make mention of. These things therfore cōsidered, I conclude, that if we wil
rightly knowe the Churche, we muste not haue regarde toSuccessors of the Apostles. personall succession, but to the puritie of doctrine, & to the sincere administration of the Sacraments: in so much that we must counte them for the true successors of the Apostles which being rightly called, do build vpon their foundation: and do first of all set forth the word of God in certaine pla∣ces, whether the succession of persons be perpetual, or whe∣ther it decay or ceasse for a time. Wheras on the contrary parte, they which either preach not the word of God at all, or else preache their owne doc∣trine in stéede of the Apostles doctrine, althoughe they al∣ledge and bring in for them selues, a thousande continuall successors, are not to be hearde as pastors, but to be shun∣ned as wolues: according to the expresse commaundement of Christ Iesus and of his Apostles. But some man will obiect and say: is it lawfull then forObiection. euerye man to preache the worde and to minister the Sa∣cramentes? No truely, it ought not so to bée. For al things muste be done in the Churche of God (as the Apostle saith)1. Cor. 14. in order? Who are then true Pastors? surely suche as are lawful∣ly called. It resteth therefore now to consider what is lawfull cal∣ling,Vocation in the Churche, ordinarie, and extraordinary. that this speciall matter also may be vnderstoode. We say that there is one forme and maner of ordinary calling, and another of extraordinarie calling. That is ordinarie calling, in the which, the order appointed of GOD in the Church, is obserued. In this order the first thing is, The ex∣amination1 of doctrine and maners: the seconde, lawfull2 election: and the laste, imposition of handes. These thrée3 things may be gathered & approued, by diuers testimonies of Scriptures: as by the election of Mathias, and of the se∣uenAct. 1. Act. 6. 1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1. Deacons in the Actes of ye Apostles: and also by those things which Paule writeth in his Epistles to Timothie, & to Ttus. This is the descriptiō of ordinarie calling. Wher∣by
it maye be gathered, that the same is an extraordinarie calling, in the which, although it be lawful by Gods autho∣ritie, either one of these two things, or both, or else all, are wanting. The which kinde of callings God hath oftētimes vsed as in the Scriptures appeareth. For who layd handsExod. 28. Esay. 6. 9. Dom. 1. 17. Amos. 7. 14. on Moyses to dedicate Aaron: Who annointed the Pro∣phetes, Esayas, Daniel, Amos, and many others? Therfore when they which had authoritie, abused the power of ordi∣narie calling, then I saye, it was necessarie that the Lorde should vse extraordinarie meanes, not to bring in confusi∣on, but to refourme those which had peruerted and depra∣ued al things in the Church, vnder the colour and pretence of ordinarie succession. And that the matter standeth thus, the writings of the Prophetes which specially inueye a∣gainst the Priestes, do manifestly declare. If any man obiecte and say, that they had extraordinarieEsay. 28. Iere. 7. Ezechiel. 22. Soph. 3. testimonies of their calling confirmed with certaine mira∣cles, we answere, That this is so far true in some, that in o∣ther some, it is starke false: except we shuld speake of those things of the which there is no testimonie. And truely I cannot tell whether there be many Prophetes to be found of the progenie of Aaron, vpon whome hands were laide af∣ter an ordinarie maner. If in like maner it be alledged that they contented themselues with the office of reprehending and reprouing, and exercised not the office of sacrificing: we answere, first of all, that this is not founde euery where to be true. For Samuel which was not of the familie of Aa∣ron,1. Samuel. 7. 1. King. 18. but of Chore sacrificed in Mispa. And Elias in Carmel. Secondly we answere, that it ought not to séeme straunge that the prophetes at that time extended not that extraordi∣narie office, to the doing and fulfilling of ceremonies, seing that the same office did appertaine by inheritaunce to the kindred and stocke of Leui, which at this day is out of vse. Thus far therefore concerning these speciall pointes, what is the Church: what are the markes of the same: what is
the vocation of Pastors, we haue spoken oure iudgement. The which things if ye meane to call in question & to séeke and trie whether they be in oure Churches, or in oure per∣sons, we trust, by the helpe of God, to bring suche certaine reasons, that no mā can doubt that we haue ye true Church, and that our calling is lawfull. Now let vs come to the third principall point, which con∣cernethAuthoritie of the Church. Hebt 11. the authoritie of the Church. It is manifest by those things wherof we haue spoken already that we do derogate nor take away none of those precious & magnificēt notes wt1. Cor. 14. the which the Church is beautified. But we say, that it is ye body of the Lord, yt as yet it is a pilgrime in this world, lo∣king for ye fulnesse of the head yt is, Christ. This is the houseEphe. 4. of the Lord, which is dayly builded & erected by little & little which is gouerned by the holy Ghost, but as yet fighting a∣gainst the fleshe, it is purified, but so, that by little & little itGalathians. 5. may be brought to the perfectiō of that beautie & cleannesse in the which there is neither spot nor wrinkle: it knowethEphe. 5. 1. Cor. 13. God, but in part. To be shorte, we confesse, that out of the Church, there is no saluation, seyng there is life no where else, thā in Christ Iesus, who exerciseth his quickning lyfe in no other than in his members, the vinion and coagmen∣tatiō wherof is called the Church. But in this all the wholeWhether the Church may erre. controuersie consisteth namely, whether the Church maye erre in this world: whether it be subiect vnto the scripture, or ye scripture vnto it. To the which I answere that it is out of all controuersie & doubt, yt the particular members of the Church, may erre, & do dayly erre, both in doctrine & in ma∣ners, according to this place of the Apostle Paule, saying, VVe know in part, And S. Ihon sayth, If we say, we haue no1. Cor. 13. 1. hon. 1. sinne, we deceiue our selues. If any man would go about to exempt the ancient fathers from that nūber, he shall not be offended, if we beleue not his words. For it were an easie matter (sauing y• reuerence which we owe vnto thē) to note many blemishes & spots, euē in the greatest & most ancient
fathers, but we wil not stand in repeating of them, both for the honour which they worthily deserue, & also for that the Lord Cardinall (if I wel remēber his words) thinketh not that they ought rashly and indifferently to be receiued. This is our opnion concerning the particular mēbers of the church, whose perfectiō notwithstāding is no such cause or let, but that the Church may consist of them. For ye faith∣full profit by litle and little both in the knowledge of God, and also in the perfection of maners. But and if the mēbers of the Church be considered more generally, as they be distributed into diocesses, & prouinces, shal we say that they may erre? Moreouer, if I be not decei∣ued, my Lorde Cardinall thoughte of late that particular Churches, and prouinciall councels may erre, and haue of∣tentimes erred: And truely this thing is confirmed by so long experience, that I thinke not that any man in his rightGeneral coun∣selles. wittes will denie the same. It remaineth therfore that we consider the whole Church vniuersally. But how? For if we beholde the same in the representa∣tion of a certain general Councell, first, it is not likely that all the force and vertue which the holy Ghost hath powred out vpon the Church, is restrained to a certaine number of prelates, which are oftentimes neuer the more learned nor any whit ye better, although they represent all those, of whō they are sent. For how oftētimes may it come to passe that some one man altogether vnlearned, shall haue more wise∣dome thā all ye learned of ye whole cōpany beside? Ane ther∣fore is it writtē in ye Glose: Thou hast declared concerning elections, that one priuate faithfull mā, which bringeth better reasons, ought rather to be beleued than the whole coūcel, & the Pope. But rather in ye great Nicene coūcell, who did let that law of chastitie, which from that time brought so ma∣nie corruptions into the Church, that it might not be esta∣blished? One onely Paphnutius, not greatly learned, as the storie maketh mention.
Furthermore, at what time was there euer so generall a Councell gathered together, but that not onely the grea∣test part of learned men, and of godly men, but also of Pre∣lates, was left behind? And who will denie, but that they which are absent, haue oftentimes had the more sound and better iudgement thā those that were present? Beside these things, ye also my Lordes doe know, what great confusion raigneth in the Church, and specially in the greatest offices of the Prelacie: in so much that we may say, The greatest corruption hath bene in that part, which ought to haue béen more perect and sounde. Of late we had many examples, and the holy Bishoppes haue fet suche déepe sighes for these things, that the sounde of them is hearde as yet. And truelyBernar. in lib. de consider. & in sermone. 33 in Cantica. & in sermo. de conuersione Pauli. the saying of S. Bernard is no lesse knowne than true, when he sayth. Oh Lord, they which loue the hyest romes and de∣sire principallitie, are the first which persecute thee, they haue taken mount Sion, they haue taken the arke of the couenant, and by force haue set fire on the whole Citie. But let this be spoken, my Lordes, not that I touche or meane any of you, but onely to declare, that seyng the prin∣cipall vocations in the Churche are so fowly corrupted, it cannot be, that the generall Councels after so long time e∣stablished by a multitude of such wicked men, should be so gouerned by the holy Ghost that it cannot erre. A certaineCayphas pro∣phecied. hon. 18. ancient Priest prophecied also, although he were vngodly and wicked: but it was the holy Ghost that prophecied in him, being ignorant what he sayd, & being driuen to speake by the contrarie spirit, that is to say, by the spirit of the De∣uill, in appointing to kill an innocent, namely Christ Iesus the sonne of God. Furthermore if a general Councell haue this priuiledge, that it cannot erre, neither in the rule of doctrine, nor in the forme of maners, we demaunde, when and at what time it obtained this priuiledge. For there was neuer at any time, but one faith, & one Church. And the Prophetes do plainly
declare, and the histories doe euidently confirme the same, that the ancient Church in the tyme of the olde Testament hath erred. All the beholders thereof are blinde, (sayth theEsay. 56. Prophet) they knowe nothing, they are dumbe dogges. And the Prophet Ieremie sayth, From the Prophet to the PriestIeremie. 6. all haue gone astray. And least this should be restrained to the life of singular men, it is expressely sayde in the four∣tene chapter of the same Prophet: They prophecie lyes, andIeremie. 14. set forthe a false vision. Also the Prophet Esay sayth: The wisedome of the wyse shall perishe, and the intelligence of those that vnderstand: God shall put out the eyes of the pro∣phetes.Esay. Ezechiel. 7. Moreouer in Ezechiel it is sayde, The lawe shall de∣parte from the Priest. But who slewe the Prophetes, who put the sonne of God to death, who cōdemned the Apostles but onely the Prelates and hie Priestes of the Iewes. If any man obiect and say, that these things happened in the time of the olde Testamente, we reply that this is no answere, for bicause it shal be alwayes a strong conclusion, that the congregation of the Prelates or Papistes of the Church although it be vniuersal at the last, is gouerned ra∣ther by the spirite of error than by the holye Ghoste. Se∣condly if we come to the newe Testament, hath not the A∣postleActes. 20. Paule plainely admonished the Churche in the per∣son of the Ephesians, that wolues shall come forthe from a∣mong2. Thes. 4. the shepeherdes? and also that the sonne of perdition shall sit in the Temple of God? And certainely yf the coun∣cels be compared one with another, manye contrarieties shall be found in them, in so much that we must néedes con∣fesse that they were not alwayes led and ruled by the holy Ghost, but rather that Sathan hath transfigured himselfe into the lighte of the generall Councels, to couer and hide his lye and error. There is also another place of S. Augu∣stine,Aust. lib. 2. de bap. cōtra Do∣nat. cap. 31. in the which he hath these words: The Epistles of par∣ticular Bishoppes, are corrected by prouinciall Councels, and the Epistles of prouinciall Councels, by generall Councelles,
when as, by experience that which was before hidden, is now manifest, and knowne. This place I alledged before in my firste oration, to the which my lord Cardinal made answere, that it ought to be vnderstoode of external matters, which might & ought to be altered as necessitie shuld require. But y• whole matter be∣ing more diligently considered, it shal appéere yt the worde (corrected) which Austine vseth, doth presuppose some er∣ror, which was afterward amended. And S. Austine in that place dothe not intreate of externall discipline, but of one speciall point of doctrine, namely of the sentence of Ciprian, and of the councell of Africa, which concerned Rebaptizing. If also this place be obiected against vs, as where our sa∣uiour Christ saith, that He will be in the middest of two or three that are gathered togither in his name, hereby to proue that this promise doth appertaine rather to a general coun∣cell than to a fewe men: We answere, that we may thus thinke of this promise, but there is great difference betwéen our imagination, & a most certaine knowledge. For seyng the wickednesse of men is growne to that passe yt it abuseth the name of God to a lie, there may be some which hauing the name of God in their mouth, carry his aduersarie the Deuill in their heartes, & we do affirme that in so great in∣firmitie of humane wit, & amidst so many troublesome de∣sires, he is in gret daūger to be deceiued, which only leaneth to mēs iudgements, and to the external shew of a councell. What thē? shal we say yt the doctrine of the Church, seing the Church may erre is vncertaine? Nothing lesse. For we confesse, yt although we sée in part (as S. Paule saith) and so error may be ioyned with ye truth, yet notwithstāding God wil not suffer the knowledge of ye principal groūdes of our saluatiō to be buried & forgottē, but there shall be alwayes one or other of his seruaunts, which shal know that which ought to be knowē, & shal follow that which ought to be fol∣lowed: as we see it happened to Helias, in time of the capti∣uitie
of Babilon, & in Israell in the time of Christ his cōming, when as there was scarsly left one Zacharias, one Elizabeth one Ioseph, one Uirgin Mary, one Anna, the Prophetesse, which among so many corruptiōs of ye Scribes, Phariseis, & Saduceis, had the true vnderstanding of the Prophecies concerning the cōming of Christ. These interruptiōs ther∣fore & lets which fall into the Church of God, are as it were a certaine tempest & cloude, which God driueth away by the cōming of his Sonne, that is to say, of his word, according to the dispensing of the secretes of his iudgementes & mer∣cies. May we not condemne general councels? God forbid. For ye know that if we shall go about to reforme or amēd any thing by them, ye shall chaunge and alter manye more things thā we: in the which not long ago ye trauelled. Not∣withstanding we require this thing at your hande, that the worde of God may be as a touchstone, that whatsoeuer is eyther spoken or done in the Churche maye be tried by the same. If this thing séeme straūge vnto you, I pray you my Lordes consider that noble place of Augustine, where he writeth to Maximinus Arrianus, being in the seconde booke,Aust. lib. 2. ca. 4. ad Arrianū. and fourth chapter, saying. Is there a more approued Councell, than the firste Nicene Councel? None I beleue. VVhat was the councel of Ariminū? It was reiected, & condemned and that iustly. But whereof doth S. Augustine intreate in that place? Surely, of one of the principal articles of our faith, so oftentimes concluded & cōfirmed, namely of Consubstantiatiō of the Sōne of God. Neuerthelesse S. Austine confesseth that he wil neither be tried by the coūel of Nice, nor by the coūcel of Ariminū but by the scriptures, which he calleth indifferent witnesses for both partes. But if here we will obiecte & say that the scrip∣tures are harde and obscure, we must confesse with Saint Paule, that the carnall man doth not vnderstane ye things that are of God, and with the Apostle Peter, that the scrip∣tures1. Cor. . 2. Peter. 1. haue not a priuate explication.
And if the obscurenesse of the Scriptures be such that they cannot manifest themselues vnto vs, why doth not Christe sende vs to some other thing rather than to them, when he saith, Search the Scriptures. Furthermore, what did they,Ihon. 5. which vsed onely the writings of the Apostles before there were any commentaries of the Doctors? I remember, my Lorde Cardinall, that ye saide, that the firme and vndoubted interpretation, which was alwayes in the Church, euery where, and of all men receiued, oughte to be imbraced. But who will certifie vs of those thrée prin∣cipall pointes? Furthermore if we come to these wordes, Alwayes, and Of all men, at what time shall we begin, but onely at the Apostolicall Churche? And who shall be coun∣ted the first, but the Apostles thēselues, whose stories Luke hath so faithfully described, and are also to be séene by their writings. Therefore bicause all truth dependeth vpon God, which hath made the Prophetes, and Apostles to be inter∣preters of our saluation, we alwayes come to this foundati∣on of Scriptures. And yet neuerthelesse we reiect not the iudgementes of Councels and of the Fathers, so that they agrée with the Scriptures: the which, as S. Austine saythe, are so tem∣pered and placed by the holy Ghost, that the same which in one place is spokē obscurely, in another place is more plain∣ly vttered. Notwithstanding here remayne certaine doubtes to be opened, and expounded. For there are many which thinke, that the will of God, as touching our saluation, is not fully contained in the writings of the Apostles. But I pray you consider with your selues, if this be graunted, what a way is made to all errors? And truely, by this way, Sathan hath greatly broken into the Lordes vineyarde. Neuerthelesse we doe not denie, that God before Moyses time, ordered and taught his Church by visions and reuelations, and that the Apostles builded the Churches with their owne voyce, be∣fore
they had written any thing. But why would God, the number and wickednesse of men increacing, haue this doctrine to be described, which was preached and knowne to all men? for this cause truly that he might preuent their subtill craftes, which colour all their doings, wyth the names of tradition, of reuela∣tion, and of custome. But if this doctrine be onely written in part, what shall this remedie profite? Ihon truely spea∣keth not thus of the Scriptures, whē he sayth, These thingsIhon. 20. are written that ye mighte beleeue, that Iesus is Christ, the Sonne of God, and that in beleeuing, ye might haue life: the which no doubt should be false, if there were any other doc∣trine necessarie to saluation. In like manner the Apostle Paule, expounding the vse of doctrine, and in the person of Timothie, instructing all the ministers of the Churche, had not sayd, that The Scriptures make the man of God, that is2. Timo. 3. to say, the minister, and euery faithfull man) perfecte, and fully giuen to all good woorkes: if any thing oughte to be ioyned to the same. Notwithstanding we doubte not, but that there haue bene alwayes from time to time vnwritten traditions, as touching the order and maner of doing. But bycause manye of late dayes do abuse this worde (Traditi∣ons) we will shewe what Traditions oughte to be recey∣ued. The which shall be easily done if these two things be considered: namely, if the doctrines be conformable, and fyt to edification. For this is alwayes firme and certaine, that the Apostles and true shepeherdes, neuer appointed rites, either dirictly or inderectly contrary to holesome doc∣trine: or other things which might in any point or ot draw men from the spirituall worship of God. Therefore when this rule shall be obserued and kept, it will be an easie mat∣ter to discerne true doctrine from traditions, and true tra∣ditions from those that are false. You also may remember how greatly Tertullian, in his tractation of the Scriptures, condemneth those which sayd that the Apostles lefte some∣what
obscure & not sufficiently expounded, which appertai∣ned to our saluatiō. I will say more, namely that the same which the Apostles haue done here is not perpetual: not as though they were not by al exception the greater witnesses but bicause they did beare somewhat with the infirmitie of the Iewes by the rule of charitie: as in willng them to ab∣staine frō things offered to Idols, & from strangled: and in that also which Paule did in Timothe & in himself, ye whichAct. 15 16. 18 things at this day ought to haue no place, but onely by a ge∣nerall rule of indifferent things, which of themselues areThings indif∣ferent. neither good nor euill, in which things we ought to applye our selues to the infirmitie of our brethren. These things also may be gathered of the rytes which a∣gréed with their times, as the maner of kissing one another in going bareheaded in signe of authoritie, which is cōtrary to the common custome of many people. All these things therfore ought to be considered, before a custome be established as apostolicall: least the Apostoli∣call authoritie and custome be abused to the disturbing of the churches, as it came to passe after the Apostles tyme, for the feast of Easter, and in the Apostles time for the au∣thoritie of the Church of Hierusalem, as appeareth by Luke.Actes. 15. How then shall we thinke that the Apostles founde oute so many ceremonies, in which afterwards was placed remis∣sion of sinnes, when as plainely they haue testified the con∣trarie. Augustine complained of these things long ago: and there is no doubte, but that if he had bene in these our dayes he shoulde haue had greater occasione to complaine. To be short therfore, we wishe that the Scripture which is very plaine in these matters, maie Iudge betwene traditions that are good and euil betwéen holy and prophane, betwene profitable and hurtful, and betwene such as are necessary, and those that are super flucus. The which being graunted, this question may easily be resolued, namely, VVhether the Church be aboue the scrip∣ture:
The which questiō semeth so absurde vnto me as if a mā shuld demaund, whether the father were inferior to the sonne, or whether the wife were aboue the husband, or mā aboue God. And truly the true Church neuer complaineth and mur∣mureth against God in this matter, but alwaies modestly submitteth it self vnto him. Neither maketh it any matter that the Church was before the Scriptures. For that word which was afterwardes written, is moreThe worde of God more an∣cient than the Church. ancient thā the Church, seing of the same, the Church was conceiued, begotten, & brought forth, & hath also of the same his denominatiō. And to disproue this the saying of S. Au∣stine is brought against vs, when he saith: I would not be∣leue the scripture, were it not that the authoritie of the church did force me thervnto. But we must consider yt S. Austine speaketh here in the person of Manichaeus. For whē two mē do contend about the truth of some instrument, to whom in the end shal they go but to the Scriuener or Notary, yt hath the first draught or coūterpane of the same: Notwithstan∣ding it doth not here vpō folow yt the authoritie of ye instru∣ment doth depend vpō the person of the Notary, the which should be no lesse firme and strong, althoughe the Notarie being aliue, woulde refuse to giue testimonie of the same. The same answere muste be made to those, whiche thinkeCanonicall Bookes. the authoritie of the Canonicall bookes of scripture to de∣pende vpon the determination of the Church. But I will content my selfe to adde vnto that, wherof I haue spoken before, one only argument, confirmed by the authoritie of certaine approued Fathers. The argument is this, Christe him selfe did so muche e∣stéeme of the doctrine of the Prophet, that he sought to con∣firme hys doctrine by their testimonies. After the same ma∣ner the Apostle Paule went about to confirme the Thessa∣loniansActes. 17. in his doctrine. Peter also the Apostle commendeth vnto vs and alloweth this order of teaching.
Therefore it is not méete that they which call them selues Christ his vicars, and the successors of Paule & Peter shuld2. Peter. 1. Cap. 6. lib. 2. in Hiere. refuse the same condition. Furthermore, thus sayth Saint Hierō, The error either of the fathers or of the elders, ought not to be followed, but the authoritie of Scriptures. And Chrisostome sayth, He which will knowe which is the ueHom. 49 in Math. 24. Church of Christ, Howe shall he knowe the same in so great confusion of likenesse but by the Scriptures? Also in ye same place he sayth, Let them whiche are in Iudea flee into the mountaines: that is to say, They which are in Christianisme let thē busie themselues in the Scriptures. But why would he haue all Christians at that time be occupied in the scrip∣tures? Bycause so soone as heresie hadde entered into the Churches, there coulde not be had a true probation of Chri∣stianisme: neither can they which would knowe the truth of faith, finde any other refuge than the holy scripture. Whosoeuer therefore woulde know the true Church of Christ, how shuld he know the same but by the Scriptures? In like maner the Lorde knowing that there should come so great confusion in the latter dayes, commaundeth Christi∣ans which will haue the assurance of true faith, to haue no o∣ther refuge than the holy Scripture: otherwise if that they seeke for other meanes, they shall be offended, and perishe, not vnderstanding what is the true Church and so shal fall headlong into the abhomination of desolation, which is pla∣ced in the holye place of the Churche. Also Basill sayth, IfBasill in noua summa Mora. cap. 22. whatsoeuer be not of faith be sinne, as sayth the Apostle: and faith commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, then whatsoeuer is beside that worde giuen by diuine inspi∣ration is sinne. Also in the sermon of the confession of Faith, he saith, If God be faithfull in all his woordes, and if all his commaundementes be firme and certaine for euer, framed in truth and righteousnesse, it is a forsaking of the faithe, and a poynt of arrogancie to retect any part of those things which are written, or to bring in any thing not written.
Thus far (O Quéene) we haue answered copiouslye, ac∣cording to our knowledge to the first principall point of the Oration made by the Prelates, concerning the authoritie of the Churche, being readie paciently, and quietly to heare, whatsoeuer shall be shewed contrary to that which we haue spoken. There remaineth yet to be spoken of the Article of our Lords Supper, the which if it seeme good vnto your Ma∣iestie, I will nowe pretermit: both for that I haue heide you and the whole companie ouer long, and also bicause we desire to haue this conference hereafter framed in better order. Notwithstāding if it shal séeme good vnto your Maie∣stie that wee procéede anye farther, we are readie to vtter those things which the Lorde shall put in oure heartes: al∣wayes submitting our selues vnto those things, which shall be obiected vnto vs oute of the Scriptures, moste humblye praying and beseeching your Maiestie (O Queene) to be ful∣ly persuaded in this one thing, that nexte vnto the glorye of oure God, wée wishe and desire nothing more vehement∣ly, than the dignitie of your Maiestie, and the peace & tran∣quillitie of the Realme. After that Beza had thus ended his oration, then the Car∣dinall, beckning to Claudius Espensius, a Sorbonist, willedEspensius ie Sorbonist. him to make his oration. Thē Espensius beginning to shew, that not long agoe he had wished to haue this mutuall con∣ference: and that he alwayes vtterly abhorred those cruell punishmentes, which were vniustlye vsed againste those which imbraced the Religiō: he sayd that those things which were alreadie spoken of the Church, and of the markes, and succession of the same, were in his iudgemente, verye true, adding herevnto, that if this way had been taken in hande at the first, all controuersies had been by this time ended. But as touching that principall poynte of the Succession of the Churche, I haue (sayth he) oftentimes maruelled with my selfe, by whose authorite, and by whose calling ye are ente∣red into the Church, and haue taken vpon you the office of
teaching, seing that ye are not come in by the ordinary way, nor by such as haue ordinarie authoritie, nor haue not recei∣ued of thē the impositiō of hands. Here vpō he gathered that the ministers of the reformed churches, were not true & lau∣ful pastors, for so much as they could not say that they wereSuccession or∣diniarie and extraordinary. come in by ordinarie successiō, much lesse by extraordinarie, bicause extraordinarie vocatiō ought to be cōfirmed by mi∣racles, euē as Moises being raised vp of God to deliuer ye peo∣ple, was established by extraordinarie miracles, or else tru∣ly these extraordinarie callings, ought to be cōfirmed by some expresse testimonie of scripture, as the calling of Ihon by the testimonie of Malachy. Both the which seing they lacked, he cōcluded that their calling & ministery was not lawflul. As concerning traditions, & the interpretatiō of scripture, if ther shal happē to be any disputatiō about thē, thē we must run & haue regard to ordinarie successors, as to those to whom the holy Ghost is promised, who were ordained to yt end & pur∣pose, as it is manisest by ye example of the Leuites wt whom in time past mē ought to consult, & from whose iudgement it was not lawful to decline. Many things, yea euē those thatTraditions of the Fathers. are most certaine & farthest from all doubt, are retained by traditiō: As ye the father is not begottē: that ye sonne is of like substance wt the father, that infantes ought to be baptized, y• the virgin Mary was a pure virgin after the birth of Christ, & so remained, & such like, the which being receiued from the fathers, although they be not plainly writtē in the word of God, ye is to say, in the bookes of the prophets & Apostles, yet notwithstanding they are not of lesse credit and authoritie. Moreouer he said, ye whatsoeuer was cōcluded & determined by generall coūcels, were & ought to be accounted most cer∣taine & true, seing ye councels coulde not erre in those things that appertained to doctrin. For ye, which (saith he) you haue alledged out of S. Austin, that one coūcell was corre & proued by another coūcell following, neuer came to passe in those things which appertained to Religiō. For there were
only thrée councels in the time of S. Augustine, namely theThre councels in S. August. time. coūcell of Nicene, against the Arriās, the coūcell of Constantino∣ple against the Macedoniās, & the Ephesine councel specially a∣gainst Nestorius, none of the which were afterward repro∣ued & amēded. That which you brought in cōcerning Paph∣nutius, it is neither certainly true, nor yet doth it appertaine to the purpose. Here vpō he repeated that which was spoken cōcerning the Supper, disputing a little about the corporall presence, & he alledged many things out of the books of a cer∣taine author, which (as he saide) the ministers could not re∣fuse, meaning Caluine one of whose bookes he brought forth. It was said yt Espensius at the cōmandemēt of the Cardinal of Loraine, of purpose begā to reason concerning the Supper, to the intent he might finde conuenient occasion to breake off the conference. While Beza was about to make answer to yt which Espē∣sius had said, a certain Sorbonist, a white monke, whose name was Xainctius, being fully bent to dispute, rose vp, making a long & tedious repetitiō of those things which were spokēTraditions coū ted of a Monk of greater force than the scrip∣tures. by Espensius before: & said that traditions had a more firme foundatiō than the scripture it self, bicause ye scripture might be drawen euerye waye by the varietie of interpretations: for the which cause he saide, that Cyprian contended with many Affricans, affyrming that Christ said not, I am custome, but, I am the way, the truth, & the life. The which sentence frō that time forward, was many wayes wrested & trāsformed. To the same effect he cited the testimonie of Tertulliā, in his booke of prescriptions of heretikes, & said that Beza had spo∣ken very stately, sending him to the same place of Tertulli∣an, to reade it more diligently: Who saythe (Quoth theTertullian. Monke) that, Heretikes bring in the scriptures, and do leade the ignorant into error, beyng moued by the authoritie ther of. And thus he concluded that the Scriptures ought not to be vsed, and that from them simply we ought not to take weapons to conuince heretikes, for bicause of thynges
so vncertaine, the certaine victory of truth cannot be gotten. At the last he obscurely sayde, that God beside his Councell, had giuen vnto vs his doctrine in writing, & saide that Chri∣sostome was the author of this saying. Here Beza made answere that those long & tedious words of the Monke were very impertinent to their conference, and nothing helping to that peace and concorde which they wished: and directing his oration to the Quéene, he did be∣sech hir to prouide that they might neuer afterward swarue & fall into perturbations & troubles not seruing to the pur∣pose. Therefore (sayth he) that I may answere to the firste doubt of Espensius, from whence the Ministers of our Chur∣ches, had their calling, seing they were not called by ordina∣rieImposition of handes. meanes, neither had receiued the imposition of handes: know ye, that Imposition or laying on of handes, is not the speciall note of lawfull calling: for the principall and sub∣stantiall notes are, the Inquisition of maners and doctrine,Signes of lau∣full calling. and Election: from the which two, if imposition of handes shall be wanting, yet we muste not thinke the calling to be any whyt the lesse lawfull. We are elected Ministers, and approued of our Churches, which with one consent haue al∣lowed our Ministerie. But wheras we haue not had impo∣sition of handes, nor appointed by those whome ye call Or∣dinaries, that oughte not to séeme straunge, seing that in so greate confusion of all things in the Churche of Rome, wée would not receiue imposition of hands of those, whose vices superstition, and false doctrine we disalowe: for that they were open enimyes to the truth. It is out of all doubte, that the Prophetes in olde time had no greater aduersaries than the Priestes, whiche reiected sounde doctrine, and neglected their office and duetie. Did the Prophetes therefore at any time, which were raised vp of God to be enimies vnto themThe cōfirm∣tion of the ministerie. desire the confirmation, or approbation of their offices vnto the which they were called, and appointed of God? And yet notwithstanding who will say that they did intrude them∣selues
into those offices, which they executed and discharged faithfully with great perill and daunger of their life? The which also we ought to do at this time. And it ought not to be said that Myracles are necessarily to be required to extra∣ordinarie callings: for that which is written concerning the calling of Moyses, is not common to all. For by what Myracles were the callings of Esayas, Da∣niel,Miracles. and Zacharias confirmed? Did the Apostle Paule loke for imposition of handes of the Phariseys, that he might exe∣cute that office which God had committed vnto him? And when he woulde confirme his Apostleship, he speaketh not onely of the Myracles whiche he had done, but also of the fruites of his preaching: The which also we may say, of so many kingdomes and prouinces, which haue receiued the Gospell by our preaching, notwithstanding so many lettes and impedimentes to hinder the same: and we thinke that there cannot be required of vs a more firme confirmation of oure Ministerie, seyng the vertue and power of God is manifest in vs, the which neither bondes, neither impri∣sonment, neither fire, neither banishments, nor death could let. Albeit, sayth Espensius, bring ye me one onely example done a thousand fiue hundred yeare agone like vnto yours. Al things, sayth Beza that haue happened, are not put down in histories: but howsoeuer the matter be, it doth not folow that this our example is not manifest inough, and set forth of God in his due time: who went not about to giue a new Gospell, but ment to renewe that olde Gospell, which wasThe Gospell. exquisitly written by the Apostles, and sufficiently confir∣med by Miracles. And so by a certain vnwonted and singu∣lar meane or way, he caused that bright light to shine. But concerning Traditions, what foolishe madnesse is it to make them either equall with the Scripture, or else more certaine than the same, bicause of the diuersitie of interpretations? For what shall be the staye and foundation of oure faith if
we stande in vncertaine opinions? But what so euer men do, this notwithstanding is most certainely to be imbraced,Truth will be truth still. That truth shall be most firme and constant, although for a time it seme neuer so obscure: and although heretikes do a∣buse it, yet neuerthelesse ought we alwayes to leane to the same. Also, touching the place of Tertullian, which Xainctius willeth me so diligentlye to consider, I haue so certainely considered the same, as I am sure he hath falsely cited Chri∣sostome, in whom that shal neuer be founde, which he hath falsely fayned. We will not denie but that Tertullian was deceyued in certayne places: and yet notwithstanding the place cited,The place ta∣ken out of Tertullian ex∣planed. beyng rightly vnderstoode, and the ende thereof considered, it shall be verie easie to be expounded. For it was his pur∣pose to declare, that we muste not dispute in vayne against heretikes: but as the Apostle Paule sayth, they beyng once or twice reprehended must be reiected. But shewe vnto vs, with what Heretikes he had to doe: surely euen with thoseTitus. 3. whiche being conuicted by the worde of God, obstinately thrust in certaine testimonyes of scripture, transformed to maintaine their errors. Against these men Tertullian bringeth in the traditions of the Churche, the whiche he sheweth ought to be of greater waight than the new deuises of many men. First of al ther∣fore it is méete that we should be conuinced by the word of God, that we may be brought from error. For if we should simply leane vnto traditions, which are neither Apostoli∣cal, nor agréeing to their doctrine, we should set open a way to a thousand deceites, and at length peruert and ouerthrow the certaintie of the Scripture. And why dothe Tertullian cast the heretikes in the éeth, saying that They, contrary to Scripture, doe beleeue without Scripture, but onely to teache them that they must leane and cleaue to the certaine truth of the Scriptures, and by them conuince errors? But if the traditions and ceremonies, which are at this daye obiected
vnto vs of our aduersaries, were Apostolicall and alwayes vsed of the Churche, we might otherwise thinke and deter∣mine: but seyng we can shew their beginnings, it followeth that they are not come from the Apostles. And truely Ter∣tullian dothe greatly reprehende them which thought that all things, whiche appertained to saluation, were not put downe to vs by the Apostles. Therfore, when truth comes in question we must haue recourse to the Apostles, whom Christe hath sent to teache the Churche. But how shall we agrée of the Apostles doctrine, but by their writings? For therefore were they called of God to that office, that they might plainely teache and instructe vs in all things that ap∣pertained to our saluation. After the same maner also the place of Chrisostome may be explaned in the which we haue these words, Christ lefte nothing to the Apostle in writing: did he therefore forbydThe place of Chrisostome expounded. them to leaue anye thing in writing? No truely. But he dyd rather illuminate them by his holy spirit, to the ende his doc∣trine being put in writing, mighte abide for euer. Howbe∣it, the Apostles taughte certayne things, which they haue not written. We denie it not. But we say that those things whiche they haue not written, doe not appertaine to oure saluation. For those things whiche mighte appertayne to certaine rytes profitable for that time, and to the order and gouernement of the Churche, they haue shewed and decla∣red by woorde of mouthe. But bycause those things are of suche condition that they maye be diuersely altered accor∣dyng to the circumstaunces of the place, tyme, and per∣sons, therefore they neither oughte nor can bynde the con∣sciences of men. And as concerning these wordes: Not begotten, Con∣substantiall, Trinitie, and suche like, althoughe they be not to be founde so expressely in the Scripture: yet notwyth∣standing their sense, effect and meaning is plentifully to be founde therein.
Wherevpon afterwards to auoyde the subtil lightes of he∣retikes, these and such like wordes were founde out and re∣ceiued of the ancient fathers. Thus Beza answered to those obiections: that white Monke  in the meane time crying out against him, interrupting him, and still inculca∣ting this thing, that neither the virginitie of the virgin Ma∣rie, nor the baptizing of infantes, coulde be proued by testi∣monies of Scripure. And thus crying and exclaming still, after the manner of scholes, he was verie troublesome to the whole assembly. At the last, after this confused disputa∣tion to and fro, the Cardinall of Loraine perceiuing the inci∣ulitie of his fellowes (as it may seeme) least they should be reprehended of the Quéene, he himselfe ended this contro∣uersie, as though the question had ben sufficiently handled. Upon which silence the Sorbonistes afterwards persuaded them selues to haue gotten the victorie. Then the Cardinall began to speake concerning theCardinall of Lorain mode∣rator of the controuersie. Lordes Supper, protesting in the name of al the Prelates, that they woulde procéede no further, vntill that question were fully determined and answered: both for that it was the principall pointe of all controuersies, and also bycause the Ministers hadde so playnely declared their opinion and iudgement concerning the same in that their first Oratiō, that the rumoure thereof is gone thoroughout the whole Realme. Therefore he demaunded of the Ministers whe∣ther they woulde receiue and imbrace the Augustane Con∣fession:Augustane confession. And the Ministers on the contrarie part demaun∣ded if they also would receiue the same. The Cardinal faring as though he woulde answere to this demaunde, began to bring for the the iudgement of cer∣taine Ministers of Germanie, concerning the Lords Sup∣per: the whiche (he sayde) was sent by them, to him out of Germanie. But herein he played the craftie Foxe, to the ende that if they had openly denyed this thing, he mighte haue set them and the Ministers of Germanie togither by
the eares: but if they had imbraced the same, that then hee mighte tryumphe ouer them as if they had gotten the vic∣tory. Beza to auoid this Dilemma, and subtill traine, answered, That he and his fellowes came thyther to defende the con∣fession of their owne Churches, whiche they were, onelye by them, inioyned to doe. So that he desired that the order of the disputation might be framed vpon the forme of their confession: to the end that they might gather thereby bothe the greater fruit, and also come into a more perfect concord. For the order of nature doth require that firste of all those things which are more easie shoulde be handled: and we must first of all dispute of doctrine, bycause the Sacramen∣tes doe depende of Doctrine. Notwithstanding the Cardi∣nall did with no lesse vehemencie still vrge the matter. Therefore the chosen men of the Churches, fearing least by this meanes occasion mighte be taken to breake off the conference, and that the blame thereof shoulde be layde vp∣on them, they desired to haue leaue to vewe and consider that writing, whereto the Prelates wente aboute to make them to subscribe, and so they woulde deliberate together what they were best to doe. Then was broughte for the a fourme of the article con∣cerning the Lords Supper, written (as the Cardinall said) oute of the Augustane confession, thus. VVe doe Confesse that the very body and bloud of Christ Iesus, is truely really, and Sacramentally in the Supper of the Lorde, and is so giuen and receiued of those that doe communicate. There were also broughte forthe manye opinions of the Saxone Mini∣sters concerning this matter, written in the yeare of oure Lorde. 1559. And thus was the assembly dismist vntill a∣nother day. In the meane time newes was broughte, that the wri∣tingThe subtill sleighes of one Balduine. exhibited by the Cardinall of Loraine, was by the in∣dustrie of one Frances Balduine, sente with letters, whiche
signifyed that he woulde come verie shortly and bring cer∣taine ministers with him out of Germanie, which shoulde di∣spute and contend with Beza, and with the rest of the chal∣lengers of the reformed Churches. Balduine therfore came to Poossiac in the time of the conference, leauing notwith∣standyng behynde him those ministers of Germanie, making the more haste, to the intent he mighte offer vp a certayne Latine booke, intituled, The office of a godly man, among the controuersies of Religion: perswading himselfe by this meanes, that he shoulde please all men, specially the By∣shoppes. And this Booke he highlye commended and bragged of, as a certaine singular meane and waye to worke peace and vnitie: the author of the which booke, the miserable ambitious man partlye affyrming, and partlye denying hymselfe to be, by vayne dissimulation, the name of Cassan∣der, beyng suppressed and quite taken awaye, whiche had patched the same together, would that all men should haue counted hym to bée the authour thereof: perswading hym∣selfe hereby to wyn greate fame. But his expectation for all this was deceyued, for he was called of neyther part in∣to the conference, for that all men feared his inconstancie and lighte rashenesse, whiche he had all his lyfe time she∣wed by manyfest proofe and shewe of his subtill and false minde. But his hatred for this matter was wholly kindled a∣gainst the Ministers of the reformed Churches, whom he thought to be the cause that he was not called to the confe∣rence. Afterwardes he inueyed againste Caluine and Beza, who by theyr answere agayne declared by euident argumentes, that he was giltie of a lye, of falsehoode, and of impietie. That is to saye, Balduine not long agoe ayned to loue the Gospell, and declared the same also by setting forthe ofBalduines in∣constancie. bookes, and was conuersaunt in the refourmed Churches,
whereby among good men he had gotten a good reporte: notwithstanding chaunging oftentymes his Religion, one while he séemed to imbrace the doctrine of the Gospell, go∣ing to those places in the whiche the same was publique∣ly preached: another whyle he wente to the Papistes, see∣ming to lyke of their seruice, whereby at the last all men iustly Iudged hym to bée of a wycked and vnconstant mind. Therefore after he hadde experience and proofe of diuers Religions, shyfting oftentymes from one to another, the subtill fellowe thought that he had at the last founde oute a certayne vndoubted fourme of Religion, and reported a∣broade that he knewe a sure meane or waye to appease all controuersies for Religion. And beyng broughte vnto the King of Nauarre, by the practise of the Cardinall of Lorayne, hée made hym to haue a wonderfull opinion of him. And whilest the King of Nauarre was greatly disturbed with the fayre promyses of the Pope, (of the whiche wée wyll speake anon) thys fellowe dayly called vpon him, who also bringing forthe argumentes, oute of certayne auncient notes and abbreuiations, whiche he sayde, hee hadde founde by chaunce, he put the Kyng of Nauarre in suche hope to get the Kingdome of Nauarre, that his loue and zeale towardes the Gospell waxing colde by little and lyttle, at the laste he vtterlye renounced and forsoke the Gospell, to the greate detrimente and hurte of the refor∣med Churches, and of the whole Realme of Fraunce, inKing of Na∣uar an Aposta∣ta. furtheryng whereof before tyme, he had notwithstan∣dyng béene very diligent. Balduine for brynging these things to passe, receiued for his reward, a great summe of money, and had also commit∣ted vnto him the charge to bryng vp the kyng of Nauarres, bastard, for which he receiued a stipend. But nowe againe they come to the Conference, so that,
when they were all assembled togyther, and leaue giuen to the Ministers to speake, Beza pronounced this Oration be∣fore the Quéene. We declared of late before your Maiestie, (noble Quéene) according to our skil, our opinion concerning the Article pro∣pounded vnto vs of the Church, and of the markes and au∣thoritie of the same: in opening of the which things we haue so followed the word of God, that we trust no man hath had iust occasion to complaine of vs. But for so muche as those things which haue bene opened by vs, ought either to be ap∣proued, or else to be reprehended by the worde of God, it was euen nowe demaunded of vs by what authoritie wée would preach the worde of God, and minister the holy Sa∣cramentes: in the which demaunde, to make our cause to be hated there was lefte nothing vndone. We knowe not to what end these things haue bene propoūded. For first of all, we came not hyther, eyther to preach the word, or to mini∣ster the Sacraments. So that it séemeth superfluous to de∣maund of vs by what authoritie we would doe this thing. If answere be made vnto vs, that this was therfore demaū∣ded that we might giue account of those thinges whiche we haue done afore time, it was to be cōsidered that this assem∣bly doth consist of two sorts of men. For some are Ministers of other Cuntreys, in such places, in whiche their calling is approued. Of these men ye haue nothing to do to take an ac∣count of their offices. Other some there are here whiche preach the word of God in this Realme: but ye haue not cal∣led these men before you, to constraine them to make an ac∣count of their calling, but to conferre with them concerning doctrine: otherwise they mighte séeme after this manner to be brought to iudgement: the which we thinke (O Quéene) not to be your will or meaning. But if ye did it for disputa∣tiōs sake, by your leaue, I must say, that it was not meete to moue any such talke openly: to answere the which we had no good occasion offered vs, excepte we woulde offende the
mindes of the Prelates: the which to doe we would be ve∣rie loth, least we might seme to be the cause that the confe∣rence should be broken off. And least we may séeme to speake without reason, con∣sider that so often, as two partes come together to conferre or to dispute: If the one parte demaunde, why do you this? and the other parte also demaunde the same thing, saying, why do you this? it cannot be but in these questions reite∣rated there shall discention arise. But omitting the Prelates of this Realme, whome we will not offende, let vs imagine with our selues, that there were here a certaine Bishop which should demaund of vs, saying, by what authoritie doe ye preache, and minister the Sacramentes? And we in like maner should demaund, by what authoritie he did the like: that is to saye, whether he were elected by the Seniors of his Churche, in the which he is Bishop: whether the people desired to haue him: and whether his life, maners, and doctrine were firste exami∣ned. He would answere that he was in that order called: but the contrary is manifestly knowne, and we call the consci∣ence of those to witnesse that heare vs, & knowe how y• mat∣ter standeth. If he should saye vnto vs, ye are no ministers, bicause ye haue not the impositiō of hāds, we in like maner would answere, neyther are ye Bishops, bicause in your in∣stitution, the principall and most substantial matters com∣maunded by the worde of God are lacking. If the disputa∣tion procéede farther, we maye vse these wordes: ye haue but one onely thing, which is required in the right institu∣tion, namely, laying on of handes. If the lacke of this one thing, make (as you thinke) that we are not ministers, must néedes the lacke of the other two, (namely the electi∣on by Seniors, and the triall of life and doctrine) proue you to be no Bishops. The Councell of Chalcedone, euen one of the firste vniuer∣sall
Counsels, appoynted that the ordering and appoyn∣ting of a Prieste shoulde be voyde whiche was not doone by the Ministerie of some one Churche. A greate deale more might we say to the Byshoppe disputing with vs, sée∣ing that two principall and substantiall thinges are wan∣ting1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1. to him, centrarie to the commaundemente of the Apostle. There is also an other thing whiche we speake agaynst our will, and yet notwithstanding we must speake it, that all the whole assembly maye euidently sée, that this questi∣on concerning Uocation, is full of perill and . If ye shoulde demaunde of that Byshoppe of whome, he hadde receyued imposition of handes, and for howe muche he hath bought the same, what woulde he saye? Surely he woulde make aunswere that he hadde receyued imposi∣tion of handes of Byshoppes, and that he hadde not bought the same, but that he gaue for it so many thousande Crow∣nes: whiche is as muche as if he shoulde saye, I haue not bought the breade, but I haue bought the wheate. If this disputation verily shoulde be iudged by the Counsels and Canons of the Church, it woulde make many Byshoppes and Curaes ashamed. Into the whiche Disputation we woulde not willingly enter, leaste we shoulde offende any man. But take not this to be spoken, to the ende we might enter into that disputation, or to the intent we myght ren∣der quid pro quo, or check for taunt: but to the end you might vnderstand (O Quéene) that we did therfore very vnwil∣lingly touche the matter, leaste the peace and concorde a working might be hindered. As touching the Article of the Lords Supper, we would of late speake no further of the same, bycause we hadde re∣garde to many men of this assembly, whiche neuer hea∣ring of any suche matter before, mighte easily haue béene there at ofended, as at some newe thing. We hadde ra∣ther that they shoulde heare the wordes of the aunciente
Fathers of the Church than ours, for somuche as the Car∣dinall of Loraine, by open promise bounde himselfe, to per∣suade and satisfie in this principall point of doctrine, by the proper words of the fathers, the which thing we great∣ly desired. To satisfie this our desire, and the expectation al∣so of a great manye men, the article of the Lordes Supper was put forth, decided out of many and verie necessarie ar∣ticles of the fayth, and it was sayd vnto vs, Either subscribe vnto this, or else we wil proceede no farther. If ye were oure Iudges, and had authoritie to sit vpon our liues, ye woulde not say, Subscribe vnto this but, VVe condemne you. Your office leadeth you to another maner of speache, and willeth you to shewe vnto vs our errors if there be anye in vs, and to instructe them in the doctrine of truth, which are readie to giue an account of their faith by the word of God. We are here before you (O Quéene) & that for two spe∣ciall causes. The firste is, that we maye giue an account of our faith to God, to you, & to the whole world. The seconde is, that we may obey God the king, & you, so much as in vs lyeth, to the pacifying of those troubles which are raised vp for Religions sake. If ye had to do with vs onely which are here, ye might the more easily haue yur wils and purpose, but hehold we represent a great number of men, which are not onely in this kingdome, but also in the chiefest partes of Heluetia, Polonia, Germanie, England, Scotland, and Flanders, and which long to see to what ende this conference will come. But they shall vnderstande, that in steade of the determi∣nation of a free and generall Conference, the tenth parte of an Article was exhibited: and that it was sayde, Ey∣ther subscribe vnto thys; or else wee will proceede no far∣ther. And admit we should subscribe herevnto, what were ye the better? They whiche haue sente vs hyther, wyll knowe, whether by constrainte against our wils, or else by force of good and holesome Argumentes, we haue sub∣scribed.
Therefore (O Quéene) we most earnestly beseche you, that so good and godly a worke be not brokē off, and that ye will vouchsafe to graunt such men vnto s, which will not disdaine peaceably and soberly to conferre and dispute with vs: otherwise you may consider with your selfe what great inconueniences will hereof arise. Notwithstanding least we might séeme to want an an∣swere: wée affirme that we doe receiue all those things, which Espensius hath alleaged and brought out of the booke of Caluine. But the article exhibited by the Cardinall is onely a portion of the Augustane confession. In the which matter many things are to be cōsidered: First ye whole con∣fession should be propounded vnto vs: for it is not méete to set before vs one verse▪ and to omit the rest. Then we must sée, whether the Cardinall doth this thing of him selfe, or in the name of all the Prelates. For herevpon we should giue thankes vnto God, that they them selues do confesse them∣selues to be ouercome in the Article of Transubstantiatiō, the which truely is condemned by the consent of all the re∣formed Churches of Germanie and of others. And if it be méete for vs to subscribe, then is it méete for them to subscribe also, that our Churches may vnderstand what wée haue done. But & if they wil thus come to the whole confessiō of the Germanes, wée trust we shall come into a very good waye to haue concord and vntie. In the meane time (O Queene) we do affirme that Iesus Christ is present in the vse of the Supper, in the which he offereth, giueth▪ and truely exhibi∣teth vnto vs, his body and bloud, by the operation of the ho∣ly Ghoste: but we eate, and drinke the same body that died for vs, & the same bloud that was shed for vs, spiritually, & by faith: that we may be bone of his bones, and fleshe of his fleshe: that by him we may be quickned, and may perceiu whatsoeuer pertaineth to our saluation. And if this be not sufficient, (as it is a daungerous and hard matter to speake
of so great a mistery in so fewe woords) if it seme good vnto the Cardinall that we search and confer together the Scrip∣ture and the writinges of the aunciente Fathers, (as hee hath also promised) and if it may please you (O Quéene) to make a conuenient forme of collation, and to cal Notaries whiche may receiue our disputations, we trust you vnder∣stād that we came hither not to bring disorder and trouble, but peace and quietnes. For this one thing we wishe, that both to this doctrine, and also to the Sacramente the verye natural and proper integritie and perfection it selfe may be restored. In the which matter we dedicate and wholly giue our selues to God, to your Maiesties, to ye whole Christian commō wealth, and specially to the peace and tranquillitie of this Realme. Thus far procéeded the oration of Beza. But the Pre∣lates toke it very haynously, that Beza had thus spoken of their vocation. Therefore the Cardinall swelling with an∣gerThe braule of the Cardinall with Beza. saide, that the Quéenes Maiestie was dishonored with these wordes, into whose hands the righte and libertie of e∣lection was giuen, and by whome they themselues were e∣lected. Adding that the ministers spake of that, wherof they were ignorant, not knowing that the Prelaes, the people being called at the sounde of a bell, are elected. Beza answered yt he was altogether giltlesse of this fault, saying, that Kings had taken vnto thēselues that libertie & authoritie, bicause Churchemen had so filthily abused the same. As touching Election, no man is ignorant that they make as it were a play or enterlude of it: I speake not this of purpose (saith he) but am constrained therevnto, to the defence of our Ministerie, and to the intent also I might de∣clare what maner of calling it is: the which notwithstan∣ding without cause is contemned. To this the Cardinall answered, That Beza first began to offer iniurie and not he, without the hauing of anye re∣garde of the reuerence due to the kings: willing him and
his fellowes to loke vnto that which appertained to them∣selues, for that they were not bothe of them in one condi∣tion. This talke being ended, he presently demanded of them, why they refused to subscribe to the Augustane Confession, The ministers answered yt they knew net whether they were required to subscribe by a generall consent, or whe∣ther he did it in his owne name. My brethren that are here (saith the Cardinall) cn witnesse with e that I do it with cōmon cōsent: Notwithstanding, ther was not one among them which declared whether he consented or no, notwith∣standing that the Cardinall loked vpon them, to the ende they might confirme that which he had spoken Then saith Beza, for so much as ye require not this thing, it is not méet that we should doe it. This comunication being done, the Cardinall of Loraine called in question the article of the Lords Supper, & euery prelate obiected against the Ministers all the doctors & C∣nons they had. Then sayde Espensius, we cann recey Christ, except we receiue him with the breade▪ And there∣fore it is that Caluine saithe, VVe receyue the substance of the body of Christe. The Ministers to this answered, that they doe willingly agree with Caluine. Saying that by this word (Substance) was not ment a corporall and grosse ea∣ting, but that the spirituall and true eating was discerned from that which was by imagination ad phansie. To the which effct Peter Martyr spake very much in the Italian oung, bycause he coulde not speake French. And as he proéeded all men giuing good heede to that whiche hée spake, and hauing him in greate admiration, the CardinallPeter Martyr interrupted by the Cardinall. of Lorayne interrupted him, adding this reason, that he wold not dispute with men that spake in a straunge toung: not that he him selfe vnderstoode not the Italian toung, or that manye coulde not vnderstand Peter Martyr. Then Espensius stoode vp and gaue him this commeu∣dation
before them al, That no Deuine in their time, had so plainely and distinctly spoken of the Sacrament as he had done. Then starte vp a certayne Spanishe Monke a Iesuite, whiche hauing obtayned leaue to speake, did nothing but poure out contumelious and reprochfull sentences against the Ministers, calling them, vnconstante, craftie, deceite∣full, Wolues, and Apes, which he sayde, oughte to be shun∣ned and auoyded. And beginning to speake of the LordesThe vnapte compason of a Spanisha Monke. Supper, he would shewe and manifest the Corporall pre∣sence of the Lorde by this stmilitude. Euen as (saythe he) the King, hauing gotten the victorye ouer his enimyes, to celebrate the remembrance thereof, ordaineth certeine playes, of the which he maketh him selfe chiefe ouerséer, euen so Christ intending to make the remembrance of his death euerlasting by the institution of the Supper, is also himselfe present at the same. At the last, exhorting the Quéenes maiestie to be an e∣nimie to the ministers, by his foolishe madnesse, and madde folly, he moued the most parte of them that were present both to laughter and also to indignation, euen together. Then Beza aunswered the Monke, saying that he dealte with them, as though they were alreadie condemned of he∣resie, which was not done, but, (saith he) I wil reserue your contumelious iniuries, and railing sentences for you and your companiōs. And as for ye Quéene, she wil do al things with good will, and by due and holesome counsel, for the be∣nefite of the whole Realme, and standeth not in néede of a Monkes aduise. Concerning the Lords Supper▪ you haue so vreuerently spoken of the same, that you make a playe of it, in the which Christ shoulde be the speciall person, the which is to childishe, ridiculous, and prophane. And so Beza tournyng hym selfe to Espensius, sayde, Ye vrge the consente of the Euangelistes, in the fourme of woordes, in that they haue all sayde, Thys is my bo∣dye: but remember that the Euangelystes haue also
sayde: This is my bloud of the newe Testamente And also, This Cup is the newe Testamente in my bloud, the whiche cannot be vnderstoode without a figure, as I haue alreadie shewed that it is a sacramentall kinde of speache, as Saint Austine expoundeth it in his Epistle to Bonifacius. If Sacra∣ment▪Aust. ad Boni∣facius▪ (sayth he) should haue no agreement with those things whereof they are Sacramentes, then were they no Sacramen∣tes: for this similitude, they oftentimes receiue the name of those things, which onely they represent. As therefore the Sacrament of the body of Christ, in some respect, is the bo∣die of Christ, and the Sacrament of the bloud of Christ, is the bloude of Christe: euen so the Sacramente of fayth, is sayth▪ neither can there be a Sacramente withoute the fi∣gure. Then saide Espensius, if the case be so, that oure Sacra∣mentes are not withoute the figure, they differ not muche from the Sacramentes of the olde Testament, which wereHow the Sa∣cramēt vnder the law were Figures. fguratiue. For they were figures and shadowes of the truth, which is now made manifest and fulfilled in Christ, Otherwise we must say that they are figures, of figures. The Ministers denyed this consequence, affirming that the Legall Ceremonies which were appointed by God, had respect to the truth, whereof also, the ancient Fathers were partakers before the comming of Christ, and we after his comming, in which time, we are not vnder ceremonies, but yet notwithstanding we néede visible signes and sacramen∣tes, so long as we shall be in this world: and yet for al that it doth not followe that we haue the lesse vnderstanding of the truth, although we haue externall Sacramentes. After this a certaine Sorbonist demanded of the ministers, what the (This) in these wordes, This is my bo∣die, signified. The Ministers answered, That it shewed the bread, and signified the body of Christ: that it might be vnderstande, that the breade was a signe of the bodye, which they confir∣med
by the testimonies of the fathers. On the contrarie parte the Popishe Doctors replyed, that the Grammer rules would not suffer this woord (This) to be referred to the bread. But the ministers sayd, that this was repugnant to the nature of Sacramentes, in the which it ught not to be de∣nied, but that the signe is ioyned with the thing signified. Thus these Rabbines, and Sorbonistes, making exclamations in all things and a confused noyse, spent the day. And one among the rest, shaking his finger at Beza, sayd, if we had thée in oure schole. At the laste the assembly wasBeza is here threatned. dismissed, and the conference, after this, was no more kept in the same order and forme, the Cardinall fearing, (as it was reported) least by their disputation in the vulgar and knowne tong, the matter might the more plainely appéere to the Princes and nobles that were there. Therefore from that day forward the maner of the con∣ference was altered: fiue out of eyther part, that is to saye, fiue of the Prelates and fiue of the Ministers being chosen and appointed for this conference: by whome all matters mighte be reasoned and disputed of peaceably and quietly. The fiue that were chosen from among the Prelates, were these: Ianus Monlucius▪ Bishop of Valentia, Vallius Bishop of Sen, Bottillerius an abbot, Espensius a Sorbonist. The fiue that were appointed out of the reformed Chur∣ches, were these: Peter Martyr, Theodore Beza, Nicolaus Gallasius, Augustine Marlorate, and Espensius. Then they agréed concerning the order of the disputation, the place, the time, and concerning the Notaries whiche shoulde note & receiue the disputation. And although it séemed méete and conuenient to all men, that the confession of the reformed Churches, shoulde by order be handled firste, yet notwith∣standing they began the disputation concerning the supper, bycause they had before propounded the same, in that arti∣cle
which concerneth the Lordes presence in the Supper: and the matter being diuersely canuassed and handled be∣twéene them, at the length both partes agréed vpon thys article following. Forsomuche, as Faith maketh things that are promised toThe article a∣greed vpō be∣tvvene the Pa∣pistes and the protestantes concerning the presence. be present, and doth truely receiue the body and bloud of our Lorde Iesu Christe, by the power of the holy Ghoste: wee confesse the presence of his body and bloud in the Supper, in the which he offereth, gyueth, and truely exhibiteth nto vs, the Substaunce of his bodie and bloud by the operation of the holy Ghoste: in whome wee receiue and eate spiritu∣ally and by Faith, the same body whiche was offered for vs, that wee maye bee bone of his bones, and fleshe of hys fleshe, and maye bee quickened by him, and maye also perceyue, and vnderstande what so euer doth appartayne to our saluation. The fiue disputers for the Prelates, shewed this arti∣cle vnto their fellowes, which they wholly mislyked. Ther∣fore the daye following, another Article was exhibited vn∣to the Ministers in their name, in ye which there was some∣what altered: for that which the first article attributed vn∣to faith, the seconde attributed to the worde. This article for the ambiguitie therof, the ministers would not receiue, least it should be the cause of greater errors. But least the contention myght seme to stand in words, they al agréed wt one cōsent on both sides to put down ye article in this form. VVe confesse, that Iesus Christ in the Supper, offereth, gy∣ueth, and truely exhibiteth vnto vs, the substance of bis body and bloud, by the operation of the holy Ghost, & that we do receiue and eate, spiritually & by faith, the same body which dyed for vs, that we might be bone of his bone, and fleshe of his fleshe, to the ende also we might be quickened by him, and may vnderstand al things that appertaine to our saluatiō: And bicause Faith beyng grounded vpon the worde of God maketh things that are promised, and of vs vnderstode, to be
present by this faith, we truly and effectually receiue, the true and naturall body of Christ Iesus, by the power of the holy Ghost. In this respecte we confesse the presence of his body and bloud in the Supper. These things thus determined, the chosen men on both sides, went to shewe the matter vnto their fellowes, that both partes mighte freely shewe their opinion and iudge∣ment. At the first sight therefore many of the Prelates re∣ceiued this article. But when the matter was communica∣ted and declared to the Sorbonistes, they did afterwardes with one consent reiect the same. And layde vnto the charge of their chosen men that disputed for them, and which con∣tinued in the same opinion, in the whiche, they concluded with the Ministers of the reformed Churches, that they had made a compacte and agréemente with the Ministers, and therefore they were not suffered to conferre or dispute any more after that. Therfore the ministers hauing occa∣sion offered, sente this explication of that article vnto the chosen men that disputed for the Prelates. VVe affirme that no distance of places can let the commu∣nicating which wee haue with the body and bloud of Christ, bycause the Supper of the Lorde is a heauenly thing. And al∣thoughe we receiue in earthe, with oure mouthe the breade and wine, beyng true signes of his body and bloud, yet not∣withstanding by faithe, and by the operation of the holye Ghost, our myndes (of which this is oure speciall meate) be∣ing lyfted vp to heauen, doe receine there his bodye and bloude. And in this respecte wee saye, that the bodye doth truely ioyne it selfe to the breade, and the bloude, to the wyne: and yet notwithstanding no otherwyse than after a Sacramentall manner: that is to saye, neyther locally, nor naturally: but bycause they effectually signifie and declare, that God doth giue them faithfully and without all doubt to the communicants, who do truly and certainely receiue them by faith.
This therefore is the plaine opinion and iudgement of the reformed Churches, concerning the presence of the bo∣die and bloud of Christ Iesus in the sacrament of the Sup∣per. But there were nowe come certaine ministers oute of Germanie, by the meanes of Baduinus (as we sayde before.) But they, bewraying the councell and purpose of the Car∣dinall of Loraine, by whose practise these things were spede∣ly brought to passe, returned home again with losse of theirThe deceite of the Cardinall labour, and their expectation being deceiued. The purpose and practise of the Cardinall was to bring these ministers and the other into one disputation and contention, and so contending and striuing together, he might cause the confe∣rence to cease, and make them to be a laughing stocke to all men. The Prelates doubting of the fayth and trust of their men, which they had chosen to dispute for them (as we said before) woulde haue no conference after this with the mi∣nisters, wherevpon the conference brake vp the▪ xxv. day ofThe end of the conference of Poscene. Nouember. And this was the ende of the Conference of Possiac, manye being gathered together for the same, the space of thrée monethes: fter the whiche there ensued not onely no profyte, but also great trouble and motions of warres. Thus the conference being ended withoute fruite, there was no waye founde for peace and concorde, but rather the mindes of both parts beyng exasperated, there insued great quarels and discentiens. So that great discorde rose dayly betwéene the Papists and the Protestants more and more some complayning and finding fault with the Prelates for their disordered departing from the conference, (the which in deede sufficiently declared the weakenesse of their cause) and other some misliking of the authoritie of the Generall Councell, shortly alter to come, and of the Churche of Rome. Neither were these dissentins onely among the common people, but also among the Peeres & Nobles of the realme,
mens mindes being distracted and drawne into manifest factions, whiche foreshewed not onely bare contentions of wordes but also greate and mortall warres at hande. For the compactes, and manifest practises of the Guises, of the Constable, and of the Marshall of Santandra, were well y∣nough sene. Yet notwithstanding their purpose and inde∣uour, was very muche let and hindered at that time by the authoritie of the King of Nauarre, whome they thought good to assay by all meanes possible, to the entent they myghte drawe him from taking part with the Protestantes. In the which matter the Cardinal of Ferrer (of whom we spake be∣fore) being the Popes Legate in Fraunce, take verye mucheKing Philip by the suff∣rance of the Pope, had cer∣tain yeares in∣ioyed the king dome of Nauar which lyeth at that parte of Spaine, that bordereth on the mountains Pyrenaei. paines, promising vnto the king of Nauarre, in the Popes name the full possession of the kingdome of Nauarre, affyr∣ming that the Pope should easily obtaine this thing of king Phillip, for that he already promised to doe the same for the Catholique Churches sake. Moreouer the Cardinall of Towers, the Bishop of Ansseren, and Escarsius, also certaine of his houshoulde, confirmed him in this matter: and vsed day∣ly persuasions, being wicked men and set on for money by the Cardinall of Loraine. Among whom also was that Frances Balduine, of whome mention was made before, as diligent and busie as the best to bring the matter about, whereby he thought he shoulde reape no small gaine. This man forging a new Gospell, caused the king of Na∣uarre to hate both the doctrine, and also the men of the refor∣med Churches. So that now he began to hang betwene di∣uers opinions, to forsake the loue of Religion openlye, to shew himselfe an enimie to the reformed Churches, to bée more couersant and familiar with the Guises, to giue him selfe to lightnesse & filthy pleasure, & also to go to the Masse and to the Popishe Churches. When the Duke of Guise had deliberated and consulted of the matter with the Con∣stable, and the Marshall of Santandre, and willing them to
gathered vnto them forthwith so great power as they could he departed from them leauing them in Fraunce, and came to Imuilla in the moneth of Nouember: and after he had tary∣ed there certayne dayes, he wente to the Cittie Tabernas, whiche bordereh vpon Germanie, to prouide for his busi∣nesse, and to consult with many of the Princes of Germa∣nie about this matter. Notwithstanding the number of the faythfull dayly more and more encreased, and was wonderfully confyr∣med: a great part of the Nobles comming to the reformed Churches. Therefore there were assemblies and congre∣gations in great number: almost in all the noble Cities of the Realme, in the whiche the worde of God was openly preached, and the Sacramentes ministred, notwithstan∣ding the Edict of Iuly of whiche we spake before. Where∣vpon notwithstanding there arose oftentymes greate dis∣cntions, and of those seditions ensued great perils. For they whiche were grieued and offended at these assemblies of the faythfull, made exclamation that Edictes were bro∣ken, and did so prepare themselues to trouble the faythfull, that there séemed to be present occasions of great mischief, whiche brake foorthe in many places, but specially at Paris, For the faithful being gathered togither the. 26. day of De∣cember, to heare ye word of God in Paris, in the suburbes ofThe sedition of Sanmedard. Sanmarcellus, a place specially appointed vnto them by the King, for the same purpose: the Priestes of the Temple of Sanmedardus hard by, in the time of the Sermon, caused such a noyse to be made with ringing of bels, that the voyce of the Preacher coulde by no meanes be vnderstoode. Wher∣vpon two of the Congregation, men vnarmed, and with∣out weapon, came to these Popishe Priestes, and be∣séeched them that they woulde not make suche a dynne with ringing their Belles, that so greate a companie of menne shoulde be lette from hearing the woorde of God.
The Priestes hauing with them diuers other men, be∣gan to abuse them and shamefully to missecal them, saying that they would not leaue of their ringing: and straytwaye they ranne vpon them, and made haste to shut the Churche dores: but one of them escaped by flight, the other they toke, whome they wounded so sore that he presently dyed. Then they ranne vp into the Churche stéeple, and toppe of the church, they rang the Belles, and tumultuously cryed Toc∣sanctum, whiche worde the people vse, when they crye A∣larum. At the which crye the people ranne with all spéede possi∣ble from euery part of the Suburbes: So that, what with the crye of the people, and what with the hurling of stones into the place where the sermō was then made, there was a great & terrible noyse. The which noyse being heard, but specially Toc-sanctum, or Alarum aboue the reste, they whiche were chiefe of the Congregation, least the whole assembly shoulde be quite discomfited, thought it néedfull to prouide helpe out of hand. Therefore when they had willed euery one to be quiet and not to stirre, they chose out of the whole Congregation (whiche was in number about 13. thousande men) a certaine small number of experte souldiers: willing the Minister to procéede: and sent the Lieutenant his ser∣uant (for he was then there, by the Kings authoritie) to wil and commaunde the Priestes in the Kings name to cease the tumulte whiche they hadde begonne: Notwithstan∣ding the Arrowes and stoanes came so aste aboute his eares, that hee was constrayned strayte waye to returne backe agayne. The faithfull fearing the Sedition like to ensue, whereby they being naked and vnarmed were like to be oppressed, thoughte it good before the matter wente any further, to sette vpon the Popishe Priestes, and to staye their rage. Therefore euen at once, they ranne vpon them with all their myght, euen through the thicke Hayle of stoanes and arrowes, and brake open the Church
dores, behinde the whiche they founde the deade carkas of their slaine brother, and the Priests with their coherentes armed: who, at the first outragiously like mad men beha∣ued them selues, but afterwardes, being easily repressed & tamed by the faithfull, part of them, being constrained, yel∣ded themselues into their handes, and part fled into a high tower, shutting the dore faste to them, from whence, they cas downe stones, tymber, arrowes, & many other things, yea whatsoeuer in their madnesse, came nexte to hande: in so much that breaking the Images of their Saints (as they call them) in peeces, which they had caryed out of the Tem∣ple, least they should be violated and defiled, most furiously they threwe them downe, still crying Toc-sanctum, Allarum. But the faithfull seyng their outrage, threatned them to fire them out of their holde or Tower, wherevpon the Po∣pishe Priests & their coherentes, ceassed at the last frō their Popishe madnesse, fortie of them being sore wounded, and fiftene of the authors of the Sedition being taken, and de∣liuered into the handes of the Magistrate. And thus was that sedition pacified. But the congregation of the faithfull, was garded & safe∣conducted by the same Lieuetenaunt and Centurion of the Citie, least the people shoulde begin againe some newe se∣dition. It was reported that this sedition was appointed and deuised certaine dayes before, by the knowledge & con∣sent of many of the gouernours and Senators of the Citie, who promised to the Curate of Sanmedarde that he should be blamelesse and escape vnpunished whatsoeuer happened. It was also founde, that they had caryed before into other houses, (fearing what woulde come to passe) their Albes, Crewets, Censers, their Chalice, their Copes and precious vestments, and the rese of their implementes which they sayde Masse withall. The daye following the outragious multitude, hauing certaine Popishe Priests their guides, came into the houses of the faithfull, broke chaires, stooles,
settles, and spoyled all things euen to the bare walles, and set fire vnder: thus they set fire on the houses on euery side vntill they were chased away by certaine horsemen and the magistrate of the citie. Then were those that were before taken prisoners exa∣mined. Howbeit the Senate ioyning with them such men, whō they thought méete for their purpose, brought to passe, that they were deliuered, and many of the faithfull cast in∣to prison, as giltie of that matter whereof the other were ac∣cused: and writing letters to the Queene, they layd all the cause of that sedition vpon the faithfull. The which notwithstanding was manifestly found false by the open voyce of the people deriding the faithfull, and boasting of the fauour of the Senate. But by suffering so great a fault to escape vnpunished, the people of Paris, which before were prompt and ready ynough of themselues to se∣dition, began nowe to be more incouraged to worke mis∣chiefe against the faithfull. Therefore newe rumours were spreade abrode of the wickednesse of the people in that copious citie, and manye of the Bishoppes and nobles of the Realme made exclama∣tion that the Kings Maiestie was greatly offended, bycause the authoritie of the Edict of Iuly was contemned, the Hu∣guenote▪ hauing their Sermons euery where, for so were the faithfull called. And euerye daye complayntes were broughte of bothe partes, from euery coast of the Realme. But the reformed Churches dayly increased, and had their Sermons euerye where, whether the king gaue leaue or no: And thus the kings will and pleasure not knowne, great troubles were like very shortly to insue. The matter standing thus, the Quéene fearing what would come to passe, perceiued that it was needefull to pro∣uide a spedie remedie. But the king of Nauar being also doubtfull what to doe,
and beyng made afearde with dayly Rumors and reportesThe cause of the Edict of Ianuary. sawe that it was ie time to prouide, saying that those mat∣ters coulde not be ended withoute the benefite of a more large Edicte. Therefore by the authoritie and commaundement of the king, the Quéene, and of the king of Nauarre, and by the consente of the Princes and the kings priuie Counsell, the kings purseuauntes were sent to summon a Parliamente to be holden concerning this matter the. xvij. of Ianuary at Sangermane. Men also of singular discretion and knowledge were sent for out of all partes of the Realme. The whole assembly being called together (in the which also were the Princes, and the kings kinsmen) the king de∣clared howe néedefull and necessarie a thing it was to pro∣uide meanes and remedyes to pacifie so greate troubles, when as euerye daye greuous rumours of Seditions did a∣ryse. Wherefore he prayed them to shewe with pure and vpright myndes such meanes and wayes to pacifie them as might be to their owne profite and for the benefite of the Realme: promising that he woulde followe their Iudge∣mentes so farre as shoulde be nedefull. Therefore when the Chauncelour, according to custome had propounded the cause of their assembly, and had shewed the necessitye of thyngs, euery man spake his Iudgement: And when they hadde all concluded, a newe Edicte was set forthe by the Kings commaundemente, whiche was cal∣led the Edicte of Ianuarie: the summe was this follow∣ing.
FOr so much as the King had founde in the begin∣ningThe Edict of Ianuary. of his raigne, diuers and sundrie troubles, hee vvente aboute by due aduise and Counsell of the Queene his mother, of the Princes, his neere kins∣men, and of his Lordes and Nobles to prouide reme∣dies for them, setting forth to this ende and purpose diuers Edictes, and among the rest, one, the last of Iu∣ly: In the vvhich all doctrines vvere plainely forbid∣den, sauing the auncient and accustomed rytes and ce∣remonies of the Churche of Rome: the force not∣vvithstanding and effecte of the vvhich Edicte, vvas not onely let and stayed, but thereof also folovved di∣uers perturbations and troubles, through the obstina∣cie and headinesse of the people, complayning and finding fault vvith the seueritie and rigor of the same Edict. Therefore he hauing regarde to the peace and tranquillitie of his Subiectes, by the Counsell, aduise, and consent of the Queene, the King of Nauarre, and by the consente of the Princes and Nobles of this Realme, and by the aduise of other vvise and graue mē of the Parliament, hath and doth, appoint, charge and commaunde: That the men of the reformed Re∣ligion, so called, doe forthvvith restore vnto all Eccle∣siasticall persons, their Churches, houses, or fieldes, and their reuenevves or Tenthes, vvhich they haue occupied, and that they doe suffer them, peaceably and quietly to inioy them: that neither directly nor indirectly, openly nor priuily, they hinder, vexe, or moleste them. Yet notvvithstanding, it shall not bee lavvfull for those persons of the reformed. Religion, eyther vvithin, or vvithout the Cities, to builde them
Temples or other conuenient places for the gathering of assemblies together, and for preaching of Sermons. Also he vvilleth and commaundeth, that no Crosses, Crucifixes, and Images be ouerthrovven, oranye o∣ther offence in these things hereafter commited: vp∣on payne of death vvithout any hope of pardon. Furthermore, it shall not bee lavvfull for them to haue anye Sermons or the administration of Sacra∣mentes vvithin the Cities, by any manner of meanes, openly, or secretely, in the day time, or in the nighte. Notvvithstāding for the peace and tranquillities sake of his subiectes (vvhich he specially seeketh) he hath vvilled and commaunded, and by these presents dothSermōs with∣out the cities permitted. vvill and commaunde that, vntill the determination of a generall Councell, no maner of punishment, vn∣der the pretence of the former Edictes, be executed vpon those vvhich shall preach or minister according to the reformed Religion, or vvhich shall come to, or frequent those Sermons or administrations of the said reformed Religion, so that they be vvithout the cities: Earnestly charging and forbidding all Magistrates & Protection of the protestātes. others his Maiesties officers, to doe any hurt or harme to the men of that Religion for these causes, as for go∣ing to Sermons, or suche other like exercises: yea hee vvilleth and commaundeth the sayd Magistrates, and all others that beare any manner of publique office, to protecte and defende them, and to saue them from all iniurie and harme: if they neede armour in their de∣fence to put on armour: but in anye vvise notvvith∣standing to take and punishe according to the Edicts most seuerely such as are seditious, vvhat Religiō so
euer, they say they follovve Also hevvilleth & com∣maundeth all men of both sortes of Religion, of vvhatInhibition of armour. state or condition soeuer they be of, that they do not assemble themselues together in armour: And that no man bstirred or prouoked for his Religion, or bee miscalled vvith contumelious, or factious names: but that all men liue peaceably and quietly together. Moreouer he vvilleth and commaundeth the Mini∣sters of the reformed Religion, so called, that they re∣ceiue no man into their fellovvship or congregation, before their lyfe and manners beevvell examined: to the intente that if anye man be founde giltie of anye crime, he may be deliuered into the hands of the Ma∣gistrate. But if any of his officers vvill goe to their assemblyes to heare and consider of the doctrine vvhich is there preached: his Maiestie vvill that they be honourably receiued, vvith due consideration had of the digni∣ties and offices they beare. Also he vvilleth and straightly chargeth, that they make no nevve ciuill Magistrates among them: andSynodes and Consistories. that they haue no Synodes, Courtes, or Consisto∣ries, excepte some one of the officers be present therat. But if any thing should be needefull to be appointed by them concerning the vse of their Religion, then he vvilleth them to bring their matter before his officers, that by his authoritie all things maye be confyrmed. Also he vvilleth that there be no choise of men, or en∣tering into league of either part, for the putting avvay of mutuall iniuries. That there be no contributionsContribution of money. of money, but if contribution be made for almes sake,
let the cause firste be shevved to the Magistrate, and then let it be done. Furthermore he vvilleth and com∣maundeth that those men of the reformed Religion,Poll ike laws to be obserued doe obserue the politique lavves, and specially those things vvhich concerne festiuall dayes, that no trou∣ble for this cause doe arise: in like manner that they obserue in the bondes of Matrimonie those things vvhich concerne consanguinitie: Also that the Mini∣sters of that Religion come vnto the Magistrates, to svveare before them to obserue and keepe this Edict, and also to preache and teache the people onelye the vvorde of God vvith all purenesse and sinceritie, do∣ingThe oth of the Ministers. nothing against the Nicene Councell, and against the bookes of the olde and nevve Testament. Moreo∣uer he vvilleth, that they vse no reproches, nor seeke to constraine any man by force to heare or to beleue their doctrine: this he giueth in charge to the Mini∣sters. Also he vvilleth and commaundeth that no man of vvhat Religion or condition soeuer he bee of, doe bolster, hide, or conceale anye that is a seditious per∣son, vpon payne of forfayting (for suche as beryche) to the poore a thousande Crovvnes: and vpon the paine, (for suche as be poore and not able to paye) of vvhipping, and then banishment. Finally he vvilleth, chargeth and straightly commaundeth, that no manBookes of in∣famie. make, sell, or cause to be solde, anye Bookes or vvri∣tings that tend to the defaming or sclander of any per∣son, vpon paine of Cudgeling for the firste time, and for the seconde time death: And that Magistrates doe their duetie vvithin their precincte, othervvise to be remoued from their offices. Also if any seditions hap∣pen,
that then they enquire out the authours of the same, and punishe them, being found, most seuerely, & the matter being manifestly proued to pronounceThe dutie of Magistrates. against them the sentence of death, vpon paine of the Kings displeasure. This Edict, he commaunded to be proclaimed, and obe∣diently obserued and kept throughout his whole Realme, without exception or exempting of anye person whatsoe∣uer. Yet notwithstanding, the Senate of Paris, after the first, seconde, and third commaundement of the king, scarce∣ly published the same: where as in all other Courtes and parts of the Realme it had béen very solemnly proclai∣med, according to the kings commaundement in that behalfe. But the obstinate contempt of the Se∣nators, which were set on by manye of the nobles was not altogether hidden, but euidently ynonghe appeared to all men that woulde sée the same. FINIS.
The translator to the Reader. THus gentle Reader endeth the firste part of these Cōmentaries, faithful∣ly collected and gathered by that sin∣gular learned man Petrus Ramus of Fraunce, who himselfe, (bycause he was a zealous professor of the Gospell, and an e∣nimie to Antichrist) was slaine in this last horri∣ble butcherly murther, in the yeare of our Lorde God. 1572. The speciall cause that moued the sayde Petrus Ramus to spende his trauaile in pen∣ning these Commentaries in the Latine toung was (as you maye perceyue by hys preface in the beginning of this Booke) that all Christian Realmes might be certifyed of the true originall and cause of all the warres, troubles and sheding of Innocente bloude, that haue beene from the yeare of our Lorde God. 1557. vntill this pre∣sent daye. To the ende therefore, that his desire might be the better satisfyed, when I had con∣sidered the worthinesse of his trauaile, and what great fruite woulde spring of the same to al that will vouchsafe to spende sometime in reading of this worke: for that all men vnderstande not the Latine toung: I thought good to translate the same into Englishe, that none of our Countrey∣men might be stayed from the taste of such fruite as will growe thereof. And as I haue spente sometime in translating this firste parte, so I
meane (God willing) to goe forwarde with the other two partes: the seconde beeing nowe in hande, and shall bee printed (if God permitte) against the nexte Terme. In the meane tyme I beseech thee (right Christian Reader) contente thy selfe with this, accept my labor, and requite my good will with diligent reading of the same. Before the which I shall desire thee to correct with thy pen, suche faults as I haue here caused to be noted. In so doing, no one sentence (I trust shal seeme obscure vn∣to thee.
Faultes escaped in Printing. Line. 2. Page. 9 For (it) reade, he. Li. 19. pa▪ 12. for (might defende) reade, might séeme to defend. Line. 18. pag. 17. reade acknowledging of the truth. Line. 16. pag. 40 for (other wile) reade, otherwise. Line. 22. pag. 43. reade, as though it had bene. Line. 5. pag. 73. read, we will not deny. Line. 8. pag. 73. reade, name of the Church. Line. 4. pag. 76. for (is sodaine) reade, is so highe. Line. 31. pag. 112. for (there) reade: Then. Line. 3. pag. 124. reade, must not therefore. Line. 25. pag. 125. in these words and if that) leaue out, if. Line. 23. pag. 164. bring in these words: might be solde from them. Line. 32. pag. 194. for (Prophetes) reade, properties. Line. 5. pag. 167. for (although) reade, as though. Line. 1. pag. 239. for (only thee) reade, only thrée. Line. 18. pag. 235. for (they shall) reade, shall they. Line. 20. pag. 235. for (doth) reade, doth not. NOte here (good Reader) that these faultes escaped in Printing, are not so escaped in al the Bookes of this im∣pression, but in some. Least therefore they to whome those should happen, might be troubled in the reading with ob∣scure sense, I thought good to make a generall note of all.
THE INDEX. A. Affliction of the Churche after the death of King Henrie. 47. Affliction rysing of false reportes. 50 Affliction somewhat ceaseth. 61. Agronia assaulted. 161. Ambaxian Tumult. 2. Andelot put in pryson. 23. Andelot answereth. 23. Andelot escapeth pryson. 110. Andelot in fauour againe. 24. Annas Burgeus defendeth the gos∣pell in the Parliament house. 26. Annas Burgeus caryed to pryson by Mongomerie. 27. Annas Burgeus examined. 32. Annas Burgeus condemned. 33. & 39. Annas Burgeus disgraded. 35. Annas Burgeus confession. 36. Annas Burgeus taketh his iudge∣ment thankfully. 39. Annas Burgeus Oration. 4. Annas Burgeus burned, 43. Annas Burgeus bringing vp. 44. Angell, speaker for the Commi∣naltie. 121 Apologie for the faythfull Cap∣tiues. 9. Arrogant threatnings of the Con∣stable. 11. Augusta a cittie in Germanie. 131. Authoritie of God worde. 199. Authoritie of the Church. 227. B. Baptisme. 75. Beza his prayer. 189. Bishoppe of Nauntes author of the Tumult. 17. Bishoppes of Rome sowers of dis∣corde. 82. Bookes of sclaunder. 100. Brosaeus, Generall of the Armie that went into Scotlande, 61. C. Cardinall of Loraine an enemie to Burgeus. 39. Cardinall Poole. 95. Cardinall of Loraine seeketh to get fame, by keeping Lybelles of reproch. 104. Cardinall Ferrer sent from Rome, to hinder the Nationall Coun∣cell. 166. Calabria persecuted. 63. Christ our righteousnesse. 68. Christ God and Man. 68. Christ hath two natures. 69. Christ dyed for sinne. 69. Christ our Aduocate. 71. Church what it is. 72. 217.
Churches denyed to them of the reformed Religion. 124. Commendation of the protestan∣tes. 25 Communion with Christ and the Fathers vnder the law. 18. Comparison betwene the doctrine of the Gospel and papistrie. 37. Cōfession of the french church. 63 Confession of Annas Burgae{us}. 36. Confession of the church of Flan∣ders offered to king Philip. 166. Confirmation. 204. Constable proudly threatneth. 11. Constable drawne away from the Prince of Conde. 140. Constable misseliketh of the pro∣fession oft he Admirall. ibidem. Controuersie betwene Charles the fifth, and Pope Clement. 91. Contention betwene the Queene and the king of Nauarre 136. Consubstantiation. 203 Couetousnesse the beast of Baby∣lon. 93. Couetousnesse of Priestes. 122. D. Democharis the inquisitour sitteth vpon Burgaeus. 32. Democharis a slanderous inquisi∣tour. 50. Denises to abolishe the Gospell. 1. Discipline of the Church. 73. Disputation at Posiat. 179. Doctrine of the lawe. 71. Duke Arscotus a Brabantine. 8. Duke of Guise an enimie to the Andelot. 23. E. Earle Villarius an enemie to the Admirall. 141. Ecclesiasticall Disciplne. 72 Edict of Castellobrian. 24. and. 12. Edict of Iuly. 150. Election diuine. 67. Election of Ministers. 74. Example of two false brethren ve∣ry notable▪ 48. Excommunication. 74. F. Factious names. 118. Faith and good vvorkes. 167 Faith cōmeth by the holy Ghost. 70. Faith attaineth righteousnesse. 70. Faithfull sclaundered. 7. Figures of the Lawe. 71. Forewarnings of desolation. 92. Fruites of Popishe Sermons. 22. G. Geneua a Sanctuarie for the God∣ly. 4. Generall Councell not looked for. 90. Generall Councell, a vayne re∣medie. 187. Georgius Gluchus Ambassadour out of Denmarke. 139. God omnipotent. 65. Gospell hath diuers professors. 85.
Good workes. 71. Guises rule the Realme. 50. Guises persecutors of the Gospel. 51. Guises no Princes. 60. Guises make claime to the crowne of England. 62. H. Huguenotes, a name giuen to the faithfull. 59. I. Iacobes slaughter at Paris. 1. Iacobus Sillius, speaker for the Nobilitie. 122. Ianus Contachus, moueth contro∣uersies. 45. Ignorance of Priestes. 122. Iniuries done to the faithfull. 17. Innocencie of the Prince of Con∣de. 147. Inquisitors of Fraunce called Flies. 50. Intercession of Saintes. 71. K. King Hentie the second, set against the Protestantes. 26. King Henrie threatneth Burgaeus. 27. King Henrie slayne. 34. Kinges duetie. 100. King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde sent for to the King. 107. King Fraunces dyeth. 112. King of Nauar yeldeth his autho∣ritie to the Queene. 114. King of Nauar forsaketh the court in displeasure. 137. King of Nauar promiseth to pro∣mote the Gospell. 139. L. Letters from the Princes of Ger∣manie to King Henrie 28. Letters of Pardon. 58. Letters sent to the Prince of Con∣de taken. 107. Letters of the King. 143. Letters of Paulus Verglus, to the Byshops of Italy. 192. Lodowick the. 12. called the Father of his Countrey. Lodowick Faurus caryed to pry∣son. 27. Lutherans, a name giuen to the Protestantes. 22. Luxurie in Priestes. 122. M. Man at the first perfect. 66. Magistrates. 76. Margaret Ryche Martyr. 50. Matrimonie. 204. Monsier Vidam apprehended. 107 Monsier Vidam dyeth. 116. Mongomery slew king Henrie. 34 Mongomery of a persecutor, be∣came a faithfull Christian. 34. 35. Murther done nere to Sainte Inno∣centes. 21. Murther at a Popishe Sermon. 22. Myraculous delyuerance of the faithfull. 19.
N. Names of reproch. 118. Nemerosius sente to dissuade Re∣naudius from his enterprise. 54. Newnesse of life. 70. Neuters. 167. Nicolaus Durandus called Ville∣gagno. 45. Notes too knowe the Churche of Christ by. 219. O. Obedience to Magistrates. 205. Office of a King. 88. Oration of the Byshoppe of Vien∣na. 87. Oration made by Beza. 189. Oration made by the Byshoppe of Valentia. 81. Obedience to Magistrates. 205. P. Parliament at Paris. 24. Parliament. 116. Parliament breaketh vp. 128. Peace after long persecution. 115. Persecution in Spaine. 166. Persecution in Prouance. 135 Persecution in Paris and Roane. 63 Peace betwene Spain & Fraūce. 24. Persecution stayed for a time. 17. Persecutour receiue Gods venge∣ance. 16. Persecution in the Churche of Pa∣ris. 5. Planchaeus Counsell. 59. Planchaeus imprisoned. 60. Pope Paulus the thirde. 94. Pope summoneth a Councell. 128. Pope inuiteth the Princes of Ger∣manie to the Councell. 131. Pope renounced by the Princes of Germanie. 134. Prince of Conde sente for too the Court. 135. Prince of Conde appealeth to hys Peeres 111. Prince of Conde taken. 110. Protestants called Lutherians. 21. 4. Purgatorie. 71. Q. Queene of Englande aydeth the Scottes. 62. Queene falleth out with the King of Nauar. 114. Queene sendeth Letters too the Pope. 168. Quintius Hedius speaker for the Clergie. 123. Quintius receiueth his Oration. 127 Quintins dyeth for sorrowe. 127. R. Reall presence. 210. Rebaptizing. 73. Reconciliation of the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Guise. 161. Reconciliation betweene Queene and the King of Nauar. 138. Reformation wished by the Cardi∣nall of Loraine. 209. Religion. 89.
Religions force in mens myndes. 117. Remission of sinnes. 69. Renaudius Captaine againste the Guises. 54. Renaudus slayne. 57. Richerius minister of the congre∣gation vnder Villegagno. 46. S. Sacraments. 201. 75. Sacramentall signes. 183. Sagua, seruant to the Prince of Cō de apprehended. 107. Scottes war for Religion. 61. Scriptures. 64. Seditious Preachers. 20. Sedition defyned. 116. Shauen crounes, the badges of po∣perie. 126. Singing of Psalmes. 20. Singing of Psalmes required of no∣ble women. 84. Sclaunders raysed vp againste the faythfull. 7. Soule of Picardie. 22. Supper of the Lorde. 75. Supplication of the faithfull deliue∣red to the king. 79. Succession of the Church. 221. Successors of the Apostles. 224. Synode at Paris, 27. Symoniakes. 94. T. Transubstantiation. 202. Trent in Italy. 128. Trinitie. 65. Tributes. 98. Truchetus slaine by a Cowhierde. 157. Truce betwene the Duke of Sabau∣dia and the mē of the valleis. 166. Tumult of Ambaxia. 52. Two Pillers of the Kingdome. 88. Tyrantes raigne by force. 88. V. Vidam answereth to his letters. 108. Vidam dismiste of Sainte Michaels order. 109. Vidam dyeth. 116. Villers an enimie to the Admyrall. 141. Villegagno goeth to the weste In∣dies to plante the Gospell there. 45. Villegagno a fearfull Apostata. 46. Villemongius a constant martyr. 56 Vnitie of the Church. 72. Vocation ordinarie and extraordi∣narie. 224. VV. VVarres betweene the Duke of Sa∣baudia and the men of the Val∣leys. 125. VVorde of God. 64. VVorde of God a weapon againste Heretiques. 86. VVorkes, and faith. 167. VVorshiping of Images. 171. FINIS.
The seconde parte of Commen∣taries, Conteyning the whole discourse of the ciuill warres of Fraunce, vnder the raigne of CHARLES the nynth. Translated out of Latin into Englishe, by Thomas Tymme, Mini∣ster. Seene and allowed. Imprinted at London, by Frances Coldock. And are to be sold at his shop in Pawles churchyard at the signe of the greene Dragon. 1574.
To the right woorshipfull Sir Richard Baker, Knight, Thomas Tymme, wisheth health and prosperitie, with full perfection of all Christian knowledge, and godlynesse. PArtly Experience of the former friendly acceptation of my good will (right woorshipfull) and partly pre∣sumption vpon the same agayne, twoo bold guides, haue moued me to attempt the Dedication of these two other partes of Commentaries (to the which also is ioyned an Addition of the horrible, and cruell slaughter of the Admirall Chastillon and other No∣bles) vnto you: hoping that as you haue already worshipfully receyued the first part, and taken the same to your protectiō, so likewyse you will not refuse these other partes, set foorth with such diligence as conueniently might be vsed. The gyft (which is my small labour in the Translation) is scarce woor∣thy the presenting to your worship, but the Argument which concerneth the affaires of so noble a kingdome as Fraunce is, I boldly presume in the learned Authours name too presente vnto you: especially seeing the reading and knowledge ther∣of shall not onely redound to the profyt of our Countrey, but also greatly illustrate and set forth the glory of God. For whē we shall compare our happy estate, with the miserable condi∣cion of the afflicted people in Fraunce: when (I say) wee shall call to mind the happy dayes of peace and concorde, and the prosperouse successe in our ciuill gouernement, which by the vnspeakable mercy and goodnesse of God, wee haue enioyed since the raigne of our gratiouse Soueraigne: and contrary∣wyse, the bloudy warres, the sore dissentiō and stryfe, with the horrible desolation that hath ensued in the realme of France, we cannot choose, but we must needes be forced too magnifie and extol the great mercies of our God, which hath deliuered vs from the lyke destruction, no lesse deserued by our sinnes.
Shall we say that the Frenchmen our neighbours are greater sinners than any other Nation vnder heauen, because of the great desolation fallen vppon them? No verily, but except weeLuke. 13. repent, wee shall in lyke manner perishe. Therefore (right woor∣shipfull) by the benefite of this discourse of the ciuill warres, we shall not onely be drawne to the knowledge of our selues, but also bee prouoked to gyue God moste harty thankes, for our quiet & peaceableestate, which by our Soueraign Prince we enioye. These are the frutes which shall ensue to the Chri∣stian Reader, by these Commentaries: the which if they maye reape, as no doubt they shall: I may account my labour well bestowed. Thus hauing boldly craued your worships courtesie in re∣ceyuing this base and simple present of myne, I cease wyth thankes for your liberalitie shewed towardes me: committing you & my good Lady your wyfe, into the handes of Almigh∣ty God, who send you prosperouse successe in al your affaires, desired health, and the blessed felicitie of Gods Electe in the kingdome of Heauen. Your worships humble Oratour Thomas Tymme.
HIC tibi depingit, sparsi monumenta cruoris, Sed tamen innocui (lector amice) liber. Aspice Saeua mades tu Gallia cade tuorum, Guisius ecce tuus, perforat ense tuos. Te regit obductus tenebrosis nubibus error, Martius erroris, Dux{que} Comes{que} furor. Proh scelus, erumpunt districtis agmina telis, Armat sanguineos ad scelus omne Satan. Concutiunt{que} suo sanctorum turbine coetus, Et duce vesano cuncta furore patrant. Horrida pestiferi machinantur bella papistae, Perpetrat infandas improba turma neces. Coeduntur, pereunt, lapidantur membra piorum, Qui coluêre tuum numen honore Deus. Torrescunt rapidis trepidantia corpora flammis, Et vexant miseris agmina sacra modis. Mactatur trepidus, trepida cum coniuge coniux, Chara{que} cum chara filia matre perit. Quis furor anguigenae proles Cocytia diri Papicolae miserè pectora vestra premit? Carnifices, cur vos insontes ensibus agnos Mactatis? facinus respice quaeso Deus. Contundes rabidos dulciscime Christe papist as, Qui iusto spoliant nomen honore tuum. Mortua non laus est, quamuis tu mortuus ipse (Rame) tuus viuit, te moriente, liber. Est quo{que} Timme tibi tua laus tribuenda, quòd Anglis Foeda papistarum bellica facta canas. Quisque per hoc noscet, quam sit tua prona voluntas, Et prodesse tuis, & meruisse decus. E. G.
To the Christian Reader, desi∣rouse to know and to vnderstand the truth. IT were to long, and peraduēture to loth∣some a thing vnto thee (Christian Reader) for vs to make rehearsall of those things which not vnaptly came to my minde at the writing out of these Tables of Commentaries: And although they should not be vtterly besides the purpose of this present Argument, yet if in so small a worke, I should wan∣der into any long circuit of preface, I see it might bee obiected vn∣to me, that I pretende one thing and do another, which is a thing woorthy reprehention: as Horas in his verse noteth: Currente rota cur vrceus exit▪ that is, The porter purposed to make a wyne measure, But in tourning of the wheele, is proued a water pitcher: Therefore, I will let them passe, if you be at leysure, and may vouchsafe to reade these fewe thinges. For nowe I haue here for thee (Gentle Reader) breefe Commentaries of the whole Ciuill warres of Fraunce, wherein I haue followed the order & course of the matters rehearsed by vs in the former three bookes of Com mentaries. And if I shall begin to excuse my selfe, first for that I being a man euen without name, haue enterprised to begin the Hi∣storie of so waighty matters, which had ben a fit Argument for o∣ther learned writers: I see that strayght way, that may be obiec∣ted to me, which was obiected to Albinus the Romane, excusinge himself and asking pardon for writing a history in the Greke tong, wherein he was not very skilfull, (to wit) that he had rather aske pardon for his faulte, than to be without fault. But beit that I am in a faulte, whether it be rash nesse or temeritie (for I know that this my enterprise shall incurre the iudgements of diuers men) yet I truste, I shall not be accused of rashnesse before they haue red me, except it be of such, as by giuing their verdict of an vncertayne and vnknown matter, may be accused of temerity themselues. And as for the iudgement of those learned & moderate men, which shall reade these our Commentaries, I do not greatly feare it, neyther will I thinke my labour wast, but rather count it for an excellent gayne vnlooked for, if I shall prouoke them to set them forth bet∣ter for the vtilitie of other mē. But least I should stay lōger thā I promised, in the defence of this extēporall writing, not lyke to liue aboue a day, lacking his Genius, I wl only sai thus much: that if I haue offended for thy sake (gētle reader) I haue offended, that thou mightest not be destitute altogither of the discourse & rehear∣sall of so great matters committed in Fraunce, for religions sake: And surely if euer any thing heretofore, or in our tyme were wor∣thy to be put in writing, these are worthy of the same: neither do I doubt but that thou shalt receyue frute by reading them. Here then thou mayst behold how many wayes God doth go∣uerne and preserue his church, among the manifolde chaunges of
worldly businesse: and how maruelously he prouideth entertainment for them in the seates of Monarches. The Gospell being spred abroad and planted in Germany, Switserland, England, & in other places, France remained vtterly without so great a benefite, established by publique au∣thoritie of the Magistrates. But it is a most delightsome thing to call to mynd by what meanes God did bring the gospel into France, & by what maner of men, and how mightely God did work by weake vessels. For first the foundacion being layd by the helpe of poore men, which suffered sclaunder, proscriptiō, stripes, torments, burning, & euery kind of slaugh∣ter, at the length also when it pleased him, he ioyned vnto this Churche, men of greater account & fame, euen noble men, Peeres, & Princes: and those great difficulties, which could not but hinder the course of the Gos∣pell, he toke away, & layed open a broad entrance, to the propagation and enlarging of the same, that he might make it known, how far his power reacheth and extendeth it self to the preseruation of his Church, and that the same is contayned within no limites. The cace was so greatly chaū∣ged, that whereas before the maliciouse enemies of the church, had the chief rule, and the authoritie of the Magistrates was armed against the same: now contraywyse, those maliciouse enemies were so restrayned & holden vnder, that thei seemed to be brought on their kneese, the fame al∣so of those matters were brought vnto them which fauoured the gospell, & seemed to haue a speciall care to spread & plant the same. But the mat∣ter fell out far otherwyse: for he which seemed to haue most abilitie to promote & further the cause of the gospeil, reiected the gospel & became an vtter enemie to the same: so that he seemed most of al men to haue ope∣ned a wyde window to the ruyne therof. But how trimly did the Lorde disapoint Sathan & Antichrist of their purpose: yet did he alwayes so mo derate the matter, that neither the church when it was expedient, might seeme to want mans help, neither might seeme wholy to be stayed there∣vpon. Greeuouse warres arose: God gaue vnto his seruants strong de∣fences of mans helpe, yet least they should depend thervpon, he weakned the same also, & that so greatly, yt great daungers in diuers places ensued to the church, notwithstanding the end fell out for their safety. In the middest therefore of these confusions & tumultes, God himselfe the Prince of Princes, shewed his singular prouidence & care which hee hath effectually towardes mankind: but especially & peculiarly, towards his church, to preserue and stablish the same mightely in the iniddest of al worldly troubles: neither by one meanes only, bnt by sundry meanes, as it hath seemed good to him in the diuers formes of rule & gouernment, to assigne vnto his church an abyding place: as of old time in the gouerning of the primitiue Church immediatly after the Apostels, and in our tyme in Germany, Switserland, England, Scotland, and in other places, it hath appeared: and more of late in these our countrey of Fraunce, is eui∣dently seene: not that in this varietie we should ascribe any thing to the rule of fortune, but that the manifold and maruailouse efficacy of the wis∣dome of God, might be considered, which doth singularly wateh ouer the safety of the Church. And if it may please thee to consider the second & middell causes and reasons of the Instruments, which God vsed in the beginning of this worke; you shall see how cōtrary they be, and how va∣riable: On the one side the wicked and vnbridled iustes of men proue to
worke mischief, doo appeare: a colour of religion is pretended to worke the ouerthrowe of Religion: the kinges name is vsurped when they go about to suppresse the King himself: and in the meane time, the gospeil is accused as a common enemy, and the subuersion of the same is conspy∣red. On y• other side, God styrreth vp many men to preserue & defend his church in those troubles, because the destruction of the same was chiefly desired. Ther appeareth in those mē as the history plainly sheweth, a de∣sire of the safety of the church, of the Kings dignitie & authoritie, & of the publique peace: and yet in the exution of that their laudable desire, it ap∣peareth that they were not vtterly faultlesse. yet is the Church preser∣ued in the middest of all these misorders: that as it is manifest, that men cannot be sayd to be the very authors & keepers therof, so must we nedes confesse that God is the very author, preseruer, and keeper of the same. Therfore, the church doth not triumphe as hauing gotten the victory by mans ayde, neither doth it lye vtterly prostrat by the violence of worldly tumultes: which being fashoned like vnto her head, raigning in the mid∣dest of hi enemies, doth so stryue in continual conflictes in this world, because she certainly knoweth that the heauenly Iudge, hath prouided  time when they shall fully triumph. The church hath heretofore ben ex∣ercised in many battails, & how many are behind, God knoweth, bycause the time which is appointed for the last victory is vnknown: yet the pro∣mise of the heauēly reward is most true, which yt most valiant Chāpion hath pronounced with his own mouth saying, That through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heauen. If the promise of God as touching y• victory of his church were included within the limites of this world, su∣rely it should triumphe in this world, by the vertue & power of the om∣nipotent & euerlasting God: but that her triumph is appointed elswher, the often & greuouse spoyles and calamities of the same declare. In the meane time let vs consider these things, & contemplate wher & in what partes of the world the tokens of that Catholike & true church do appeare, & let vs aduaunce the prouidence, wisdom, bountifulnes, and power of God in preseruing & gouerning the same, least if the blind igno∣rance of men be reprehended, & that worthely, because they see not God, who hath not left himself (as saith the Aposte) without witnesse in this world: we also be much more worthy of blame, who see not the light be∣fore our yes▪ nor the Sunne beames glistering throughout the whole world, neyther do reuerence Iesus Christ diuersely triumphing by the mighty working of the Gospell. Truly, gentle reader, this is my counsaill & purpose in writing these Commentaries, to giue thee occasion by preseruing the memory of these things, to contemplate & reuerence the prouidence of God in the gouern∣ment of his church, wherof we be members: and that we thereby, while the whole body is assaulted, enduring manfully our own particular con∣flicts might wt all our mind, long for the reward of the heauenly victory. Moreouer, what soeuer in this litle work (wherin I haue traueled faith∣fully) belongeth vnto me, I dedicate the same wholy, liberaly, & frankly to thee Christian Reader, neither shall it greeue mee too beare the cen∣sure of diuers iudgements, so that thou by reading these siender Cōmen taries, mayest be encouraged, and prepared to reade a iust history. FARE WELL.
The Table. A ACtes done by M des Adretz in Dolphini in the countie of V ayas. 143 Aunswere made by the Prince of Conde to the supplicatiō which was put vp too the King and Queene by the Guises. 91 Aunswere made by the Prince of Conde and his friends to the de∣cree of the Senate of Paris. 148 Assault giuen too Cesteron (by the Papistes) a citie in Prouance. 181 Auinion a Citie in Prouance yeel∣deth to the faithfull 80 Aide commeth from the Princes of Germanie the Protestants, to the Prince of Conde to Orleans. 214 B Blesa and Towers taken by the Pa∣pistes. 137 Breach of the Edict of Ianuary cau sed the Ciuill warres. 2 Burges besieged by the Papistes. 199 C Cane in Normandie woon by the Admirall. 259 Ciuill warre caused by the breach of the Edict of Ianuary. 2 Ciuill warres begon. 124 Complaint made by the faithful of the slaughter at Vassie. 14 Comparison made betweene the Princes request and the request of the Guises. 110 Conde forsaketh Paris 19 Conde commeth to Orleans. 21 Conde enclined to peace. 24 Conde perswaded to take the pro∣tection of the young King. 26 Conde complaineth too the olde Queene of the murther done a Sens 34 Conde sory for the slaugher of Mot recondrine. 085 Conde returneth to Orleans with his armie. 173 Conditions of peace offered by the King to the faithfull. 124 Conditions offered by the Prince of Conde at the first parley. 219 Conspiracies made against the Gos pell by the Guises, the Marshall of Saint Andrew, and the Con∣stable. 4 Craftie pollicies wrought by the cō spiratours to seduce the King of Nauar to take their partes. 5 Conspiracie against Languedocke. 184 Crueltie vsed at the takinge of O∣range. 140 Coūsaile holden at Orleans by thē of the reformed Religion. 72 D Declaration set forth by the Prince of Conde the second time. 56 Decrees made by the Senate of Pa∣ris against the men of Orleās. 145 E Edicts set forth in the kings name, promising peace to them which had and would forsake the Ad∣mirall. 245. F Foure speciall constitutions in the kings minoritie. 168. G Great cruelty vsed by the papistes to the inhabitants of Orange. 140.
Great slaughter of the papistes. 194. Guyses vnder collour of pence seke to dece the prince of Cōde. 130. Guyses seeme to goe home to their houses. 134. Guyses remoue their armye from Bogencia and take Blesa and to∣wers. 137. Guyses ayded by the Germans and Switsers. 145. Guyses authours of moste horrible murder done at Vassy. 10. Guyses come to Paris againste the Queenes commaundement. 16. Guyses hauing gotten Paris seke to get the king also. 19. Gnyses seeke to staye the Prince of Conde from ioyning wyth the Englishmen. 237. Guyse being at the siege of Orleans was slaine by treason. 258. H Horrible murder done to them of Towers by the Guyses after they had won the towne. 137. Horrible murder cōmitted at Mō∣byse by Baron des Adretze. 183. Helpe desired by the Prince of Con de, of the Queene of England & the princes of Germany. 146. I Idols broken downe and defaced at the Citties of Towers and Blayse. 50. Idols broken downe at Orleās. 50. K King of Nauarie being shotte into the shoulder with a small pellt dyeth. 202. L League made betwene the Nobles and the Prince of Conde. 25. Letters sent by the olde Queene to the Prince. 31. Letters sent from the Prince of Con de to the reformed churches. 47. Letters sent by the olde Queene to the Prince. 50. Letters sent frō the prince of Cōde to the Emperour. 70. Letters sent from the Senate at Pa∣ris to the Prince of Conde. 51. Letters sent from the Prince of Cō∣de to the Prince of Palatine. 71. Letters sent to euery congregation from the Counsell holden at Or∣leans. 73. Letters sent to the countie Palatine from the Synode at Orleans. 76. Letters from the Prince of Conde to the Queene. 115. Letters from the Prince to the king of Nauar. 118. Letters sent by the Prince of Conde to the Queene of Englande and the German princes for aide. 146 Letters found in the Papistes tent after they were put to flight, be∣wraying their hole purpose. 195. Letters sent to the Germanes which were in the hoast of the Guyses by the Priaces of Germany to di∣sade them to take his part. 210. Letters parents giuen out to them which had started awaye frō the Prince of Conde. 212 Letters written to the Germanes which were in the princes of Cō∣de his army to dehort them from his seruice. 2540 M
Marshall of S. Andrew being taken and wounded in the head dyeth in the fielde. 243. Momorantius the Constable ioy∣ned in amitie with the Guises. 3. Montauban taken by the Fayth∣full. 74. Monsieur Montbron put to flighte with his army. 181. Monsieur oyse besieged Montpe∣lier. 185. Monsieur Bularges got a wonder∣full victory ouer the enemy. 193. Monsieur de Adretze his acts done in Dolphiny and in the countie of Venayas. 143. Mottecondrine slaine. 81. N Names of the Captaines ouer the faithfull. 139 Narbone is left by the faithfull too the tuition of the Papistes. 79 Nemeaux, otherwise called Nemis is taken by the faithfull. 80 Nemours winneth Vienna. 248 Nemours deceiued by an Inhabi∣tant of Lions. 249 Noble men of the Prince of Cōdes side went too parley with the Queene. 133 Nonay cruelly spoyled. 252 O Orenge assaulted and taken by the Papistes. 140 Orleans vexed with a greeuous pe∣stilence. 146 Orleans besieged by the Papists. 255 P Paris being gotten by the Guises they seke to get the King also. 19 Parleyes hadde betweene the olde Queene, the Admirall and the Prince of Conde. 24 Peace offered by the king too the faithfull but vppon conditions. 124 Peace taken on bothe partes. 260 Poictiers woon by the Mashall of Saint Andrew. 145 Pollicies wrought by the Guises to expell the Conde out of Paris. 17 Prince of Conde becōmeth pledge. 131 Practises to take the Prince of Con∣de. 131 Prince of Conde returneth to his ar mie backe againe. 136 Prince of Conde forsaketh Paris. 17 Prince of Conde specially inclined to peace. 24 Prince of Conde cōplaineth of the murther done at Sens. 34. Prince of Conde receiueth letters from the Senate at Paris 51 Prince of Conde returneth from Pa ris to ioyne with the Englishmē 237 Prince of Cōde taken prisoner. 242 Purpose of the Guises concerninge warre. 22 Pultrot sent from Lions to Orleans with letters. 256 Pultrot sapeth the Guise and by the meere prouidēce of God is taken againe. 258 Pultrot is drawne in peeces with horse for killing the Guises. 265 Q Queene of Scottes promised to bee giuen in mariage to the king of Nauar. 7 Queene mother denieth thevse of the reformed Religion too the Prince of Conde. 134 Queene mother would haue the
Prince of Conde and his friendes banished. 135 Queene of Nauar sheweth her self to be a vertuous Lady. 202 R. Requestes made by the faithful. 124 Roan in Normandye besieged, but in vayne. 138 Roan besieged the second time. 201 Ruzeus a professour of the Gospel, commaunded to ward. 23 S. Saltanus Lieuetenant of Lyons, an∣enemie to the gospell. 82 Slaughter at Tholoze 79 Slaughter of the faythfull at Vassy, cōmitted by the Duke of Guise. page 10 Supplication offered to the King & Queene in the name of the Tri∣umuiri. 87 Supplication offered the seconde time to the King and Queen by the Guises and his confederates. pag. 90 Suze his army in Dolphiny, great∣ly anoyed the faithful 146 T Talke betwixt the King of Nauar, the Old Queene, and the Prince of Conde. 115 Talke betwene the old Queen and the Nobles on the Prince of Cō∣de his side. 133 The second declaratiō of the prince pag. 59. The true cause of the firste warres. pag. 168 The beginning of the ciuill warres. pag. 124 The reasons that stayed the Prince of Conde from going into exile. pag. 222 The forme of the gouernement of the realme in the Kings minori∣tie. 222 The order of the meeting of booth the battailes on the plane of Dreux. 238 The first battaile wherein the Con∣stable was taken and many Swit sers taken and slaine. 240 The Admirall goeth into Norman∣die. 257 V Valentia taken by the faithfull. 81 Vienna woon by the Papistes. 248 IV VVarre purposed by the Guises. 22 VVickednes almost vncredible com mitted by the Papists against the faithfull in Prouance. 185 VVritings published by the Queen of England cōcerning the helpe she sent to the Prince of Conde. page. 203 VVritinges published by the Prince of Conde wherin hee declareth himselfe not to be the beginner of these warres. 215 FINIS.
Faultes escaped in Printing both in the second part, and also in the last part. Page. 57. line. 7 leaue out, of the which. Page. 88. line. 10. for and, reade an. Page. 97. line, last, for, They then sayd, read, Thus much they said at that time. Page. 105. line last, for they, read the. Page. 133. line 13. for orget, read forget. Page 147. line 13 for oh, read, of. Page. 169. line 27. for Bishoppes, read, Kyngs. Page. 175. line. 6. for a, read, as. Page. 174. line. 28. for, the, read, then. Page 176. line 6, for, rnd, read, and. Page. 187. line. 8. for breathe, read, bredth. Page. 188. line. 22. for ayy, read any. Page 204. line 30. for my sée, read, maye sée. Page. 224. for, it it, read, it is. Page 51. line, 20. for do, read, to.
The fourth Booke of Commentaries concerning the state of the common wealth, and Religi∣on of Fraunce, in the raigne of Kyng Charles. IX. THe Edict of Ia∣nuary,Anno Do∣mini. 1561. (whereof mention is made in the end of the third Booke goinge be∣fore) being at the last, af∣ter the delayes of the Se∣nate of Paris, published & proclaymed at Paris, and in the whole Kingdome, made a ioyful and prospe∣rous end of all troubles: the Gospell had peaceable pas∣sage throughout all the dominions, all most, of Fraunce: and the faythfull, according to the tenure, and prescript of the Edict, gladly leauing the Churches and places, which were within the cities, flocked together in great assemblies without the Cities, insomuch that all men greatly delighted to looke vppon them. But Sathan en∣uying that peace and tranquillitie, caused after a while not only priuate perturbations, and troubles betwéene man and man, but also, open and Ciuill warres, by the deuises and practises of the aduersaries, to the great hurt of the Realme. The which things, as briefely, e∣uen so truely will we declare in this historie: In pen∣ning whereof, we know into what sundry hap and ha∣zard of iudgements we are in, what a large scope wée
haue, to set forth diuers matters, and also, what hatred and perill we bring vnto our selues. But the truth shal defend it selfe, and shall also take away all sclaunder & reproche. Many gréeued and repined at the increase and good successe of the reformed Churches, greatly misliking of the Edict of January, for that it tended much for theirThe very cause of the Ciuill warres was the brea∣king of the Edict of Ianuary peace and quietnes which fauored the Religion. Of these repyning enemies there were two sortes: The first sort were such as had their liuing by the Benefices, re∣uenewes, and spirituall promotions of Priestes: and of these many were gentlemen, and men of high cal∣ling, who perceiuing that the greatest part of their sub∣stance came vnto them by the sayd Benefices, thought that they should sustaine great hinderance and losse, if so be they of the reformed Religion should obtaine and enioye the benefite of the Edict. The second sort, were such noble men as being inriched, not onely with those great and huge sommes of money which came to them by the yerely reuenewes of those Benefices, (the fatte wherof, they reserued to them, and theirs,) but also with the innumerable giftes of King Henry the second, and Fraunces the second: feared, least they being called to giue vp their accompts, (according to the custome of the Realme) should be found giltie of extorcion. Among these latter sort, the chiefe were the Guises, the fatall de∣struction of the kingdome of Fraunce: who also as yet were to make their accoūt for great sommes of money taken out of the Kings Treasury, for common affaires, and other waightie matters in the time of King Fraun∣ces the second: and also of their euill demeynor, wherof they were playnely accused, vnder the raigne of Kyng Henry the second. Also the great losse of that high auctho ritie, which almost they alone had during the minority of King Fraunces the second: and with the same losse,
the feare foreséeing the great euilles to come, pinched them euen to the hart, and gréeued them to the very gall. To these also was ioyned the Martiall of S. An∣drew, a man full of all subtiltie, guile, and mischief, who being out of measure riche with the great giftes which he receyued of Kyng Henry, for his euill and cruell ser∣uice, was pricked in conscience for spoyling, by sinister meanes, diuers noble men of his familiar acquayntāce. By the practise and endeuour of this Martiall, the Con∣stable Momorentius (as we sayd in our other Booke) aMomoren∣tius the Constable made a friend to the Guises. little before a mortall enemie to the Guises, hauing di∣uers times experience of their hatred, was brought to the familiaritie and friendship of the Guises. And to the intent they might winne the Constable wholely vnto them, by a new benefite, they graunted franckly vnto him, the dominion of Dammartine, for the which, afore time there had bene great contencion betwéene them. Therefore the daily adhortations of the Martiall of S. Andrew, and the Duches of Valence, (beside the do∣mesticall and daily perswasions of his wife, and of the Earle of Uillars) greatly vrged and pressed the Consta∣ble: as, that the ancient and catholique doctrine was a∣bolyshed: that the common wealth was disturbed: that they of the reformed Religion did plainly threaten to bring such as had bene officers of the kings afore time, to giue vp their accoūts: that those mē sought only by lit tle and little to place them selues in authoritye, and to abase those that serued and had borne office vnder the kings in time past, and to haue the spoil of their goods: that the Queene Mother, was led away with their per∣swasions: and that shée being an effeminate & weake woman, would incline to that parte which was moste strong: also that it was manifest that shée did fauoure those of the reformed Religion for the king of Nauar hys sake, who séeketh all that he can to haue the Religion al∣tered,
being thervnto prouoked by the Prince of Conde, to spight those which are suspected to be the authors, that he was cast into prison: And therfore that they, if they might bring al things to passe after their owne de∣sire, as to haue their enemies subdued, and the state of the kingdome and of Religion altered, would bring the Constable him selfe to their owne bent and wil, & wold in like manner call him to account. These perswasions being oftentimes inculcated and beaten into the Con∣stables eares, being rather an enemy to Religion, drewe him quite away at the last to the contrary part: and so by little and little for saking the king of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde, he openly shewed his displeasure and choller against ye Chastilions. Therfore now began to be manifest familiarity and frendship betwéene the Con∣stable and the Guises, in so much that they bāketted one another, and had oftentimes secreate conference be∣twéene them selues. Wherfore at y• last they conspired together, name∣ly that the Duke of Guise, as a Prince of aliance to theThe conspi racie of the Guises, the Constable and the Martiall of S. Andrew against the Gospell. king, and Lord great master of Fraunce: the Constable as chéefe officer vnder the king: and the Martiall of S. Andrew, as head Martiall, should bend their whole en∣deuors in this, that no parte of the ancient and Catho∣lique Religion might be altered. And because, notwith∣standing the constitutions and Edictes of the former kings, a new Religion was brought in, they would in∣deuor them selues with all their force and might, that those hereticall doctrines might be quite abolished and destroyed: And also that they would not suffer newe Decrées to be made concerning the state of ye realme, and the willes of the former Kings to be disproued: that they would openly declare them selues to be ene∣mies to all those, which would go about this thing: And finally, that in this cause they wold do what they could,
euen to the spending of their goods and liues: To per∣forme the which, they swore solemnely one to another. The matter being thus agréed vppon betwéene them, they did deliberate and aduise them selues, what they were best to doe, namely that they would gather together al the power they were able to make, and that they would séeke for all the helpe and aide at their re∣tainers and fréends handes that might be had: they be∣ing assured of aide, out of Spaine and Jtalie: and that the Guises should proue what helpe they could get out of the partes of Germanie. But first of all they thought it ne∣cessary, to intise and win the king of Nauar, & to bryng him if they could to defend their part, to get Paris: and finally, to haue the King and Quéene at their becke. These things once obtained, they perswaded them selues easely to obtaine their purpose. Concerning the winning of the king of Nauar, they had good hope, be∣ing voluptuous, geuen to ease, and vnconstant: and ha∣uing his housholde seruaunts hired by the Cardinall of Loraine, to vse their diligent endeuor to bring y• same to passe. Who, being once woon to take their part, they perceiued a plaine way to haue their purpose. There∣fore, to the entent they might win him, they vse very subtill and crafty meanes. First, they assay what they can do by his houshold seruaunts, the byshop of Aussere▪ Monsire Escars, and Frances Balduinae, being sent in to confer and talke with hym. These declared to the king of Nauar, that they of the Religion, sought now, to bring in new and more seuere Lawes than were woont to be, to reforme Princes: as though it were not lawfull for Princes to liue as they list, and to do what séemeth good in their owne eyes. If credit be gyuen vnto these men, than must men frame a new lyfe: and if these mē be made Iudges to reforme what they thinke good to be reformed, (the which no
doubt they goe about) there will ensewe no smal daun∣ger. But he being one that had chéefe authoritie in the Realme of Fraunce, ought rather wisely to follow that which was agreable to the present state: and to consi∣der into what troubles he should bring the Realme, if he would abolish the auncient Religion, which so many Kings before time had receyued. There are (say they) opinions of diuers Religions, which as they come with tyme, so with tyme they fade away agayne. If therfore he shuld be of the reformed Religion, the King of Spaine would be his open enemie: And beside this, the Pope would set whole Jtalie & al Christian Realmes, against the kingdome of Fraunce, whiche might easely be van∣quished and ouerthrowne, in the middest of so many dis sentions. But looke how much hurt and dammage hee should bring to himselfe and to the whole Kingdome, if he should defende that new Religion, and the professors thereof: so much profite, glory, and fame, should come to him and to all his stocke, if he did not to much intan∣gle himselfe in these controuersies of Religion, but dyd rather frame himselfe wysely according to occasion and tyme: that is to saye, when occasion is offered, to main∣tayne and defende the auncient and Catholike Religion, whereby he might looke to finde great profite. Thus if hée would shewe himselfe, he should winne the Popes fauour, and bind his holinesse to requite him with some great benefite, by whose meanes he might recouer a∣gayne the kingdome of Nauar, which belonged to his Ancetours, without warres▪ for that the King of Spayne greatly estéemed the Popes Authoritie. Consider ther∣fore (say they) with your selfe what you were best to do, least sodenly by the force of sinister persuasions, you bring your selfe to great extremitie. Cōsider with your selfe, that as the tymes are perillous, so is the euent & successe of all things vncertayne: wysely wey therefore
with your selfe what is most profitable for you. Admit the cause of Religion should be dissided by disputacion: should men so leane to the opinions of a fewe, that they should not imbrace other mens Iudgments? For amōg those men which imbrace the doctrine of that new Gos∣pell, what contrarietie is there, and difference of opini∣ons? But you which were borne, not to Iudge of Scho∣lasticall Disputacions, but to the exployting of greater matters and of more waight, may occupy: and trouble your brayne with these matters, at your leisure. Ther∣fore we wishe you, according to your wisdome, to weye and consider what is most néedfull to be done. The King of Nauar, being to much giuen to volup∣tuousnesse and ease, harkened all to soone to these persua¦sions: and being ouercome, forgetting his authoritie, he wholy gaue himselfe to his Aduersaries: by whome he being spoyled of that his authoritie, and of his wittes also, was the occasion of many and great mischéeues. The waye therefore being thus made wholely to ouer∣throw and subuert the King of Nauar, there came then vnto him the Cardinall of Ferrar, and the Cardinall of Towers, with many faier promises from the Pope, that hée, if he would thus imbrace the Catholike Doctrine, should prosper and benefite him selfe very much. For (sayed they) the Pope will bring to passe that the Kings of Spayne should very shortly gyue vnto him agayne the kingdome of Nauar. And also, that he would geue vnto him a bill of diuorcement, that he being diuorced from his wife, which was to much inclined to that new Re∣ligion,Queene of Scotts pro∣mised to be giuen in mariage to the king of Nauar. might marry with the Quéene of Scottes, a woman of excellent beautie, riche, and the widow of a renowmed King. And thus he should haue two King∣domes, namely the Kingdome of Nauar, and by this new mariage also, the Kingdome of Scotland. Wher∣by, was offered vnto him oportunitie, to exployte and
bring to passe great matters, when as hée hauing the kyngdome of Scotland, might clayme also vnto him the kingdome of Englande, which bordered vpon the same, which the Scottish Kyngs afore time challenged vnto themselues as their right. And so, he being of so great power both by his owne kyngdomes, and also by the helpe and ayd which he might haue out of France, out of Spaine, and from the Pope, should easely conquer and enioye England, and so become a great Monarch. Wherfore they exhorted him to consider how many occasions Fortune luckely offered vnto him to bring to passe whatsoeuer he would. The which if he should for∣slowe and neglect, and on the contrary part like of and mayntaine the new Doctrine, they wished him to con∣sider, according to his wisedome, what gréeuous perils and troubles he should fall into, the which yet might easely be repressed and anoyded, if so be he would hear∣ken to good and wholesome counsell. Adding moreouer, that the Prince of Conde, would do as he did, and that the Chatillions would not be behind: and as for the rest of the nobles and common people, it should not force, if so be that he would vse the aucthoritie of the Kings E∣dictes and his owne power, and ioyne himselfe with the faythfull and trustie seruants of the King. After these persuasions, the kyng of Nauar, dayly more and more shewed himself, not only to dislike of the reformed Religion, and of the professors therof, but al∣so was angry and sore offended with them. Insomuch that he cōmaunded the Ministers of Gods word which were with him in house to depart from him: and went him selfe oftentimes to the Popish Churches, heard Masse: and earnestly cōmaunded his wife, which was a very honest & vertuous Lady, (who also refused) to do the like: gaue him selfe to filthy pleasures of we∣men: and was also very familiarly conuersant with
the Guises, the Constable, the Martiall of S. Andrew, and with the Cardinals. Notwithstanding all this, the reformed Religion so preuailed, that new reportes and rumors were daily brought into the Court concerning the same. The Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and many of the Nobles, diligently séeking to haue the same pre∣ferred: The Quéene mother also was ruled by good coūsell: And as for the king of Nauar, he was vncertain what to doe in the middest of these troubles, and was like vnto an vnskilfull marriner destitute of counsell, hauing diuers cogitations in hys minde, vncertaine whether to go, and yet neuertheles, standing stil as one amased. In ye meane time the Edict of Ianuary (wherof mencion is made before) toke place, and was put in ex∣ecution. But then were the minds of the Guises, of the Constable, and of the Marshall of S. Andrewe so vexed & gréeued, that they thought good not to delay the time any longer: they being encouraged to procéede wyth their purpose, for that they might rule the king of Na∣uar as them list. Therfore euery man being appoynted what to do: the Duke of Guise departed from the court: The Constable, went home to his house: and sent for his retainers and fréendes to see if they woulde sicke vnto hym: and such as he doubted of, he sought to win. The Marshal of S. Andrew did euen the like. The Guises (as is sayde before) had taken vpon them to winne the Princes of Germanie to take their parte: and therfore they wrote letters oftentimes to di∣uers of them. And to further their busynes they vsed the helpe of the Rokendolfe, and the Rheingraue: the Car∣dinall trimly countenancesing, and dissembling that he imbraced ye Ausburgue Confession. And that he minded, not long agoe, to establishe the same in Fraunce: but he sayde, that the men of the newe Religion did greatly gainsay & let the same: whome he blamed in all things,
as vngodly men, and the vpholders of all monsterous opinions. Moreouer he sayd that the Prince of Conde by the meanes and counsel of the Admiral, went about to aspire to the kingdome: and that vnder the pretence of Religion, he liued a licentious and voluptuous life. After these practises, the Duke of Guise him selfe, came to Sauerne, a towne bordering vppon Germanie: and there he talked wyth the Duke of Wirtemberge: fained that he embraced the Confession of Ausburge: slādered and falsly accused the prince of Conde, and the reformed churches, and craued his aide against them: and vnder the pretence of that communication, the Duke of Guise vaunted and bragged muche of the fréendship of the Duke of Wirtemberge, saying, that he was sure that he would wythout all doubt take his parte, and also allea∣ging that he had taken these enterprises in hand, by the Dukes aduise and counsell: For the which the Duke of Wirtemberge afterward blamed hym, and proued that he perswaded him selfe to haue more frendship at hys hands, than euer he meant vnto him, and did falsly dis∣sēble, wherfore he earnestly exhorted the Guises to cease from persecuting the reformed churches. After this, the Duke of Guise, hauing gotten to take his parte, certaine valeat captaines, by the meanes of the Rokendolfe, and the Reingraue came to Jnuille, & there & in the townes thereabouts, he chose out armed horse men: when he had so done, vpon occasion of letters sent from the king of Nauar, he intended straighte way in all hast to come to the Court with an army of mē: and after deliberation had, he began hys voyage with a la∣mentable slaughter, as you shall heare. There is a cer∣ten Town bordering vpon Champaigne, nere to Jnuille,The slaugh ter at Vas∣si, made by the Duke of Guise. the Lordship of the house of Guises, called Vassi, within the dominion of Fraunce but no parte thereof. In thys towne there was a certen number of ye faithful: but be∣cause
the Guises bordered so néere vnto them, they durst not professe the reformed religion so frankely as they wold haue done. Notwithstanding they being at ye last prouoked and incouraged héerevnto, by the mē of Troy their neighbors, were fully bent to vse the benefit of ye kings Edictes, & procured of the congregation of Troy a minister of Gods worde to attend vpon them, & so af∣ter the disputation in the Conucation at Possi, they had a church established among them, wherby the nom∣ber of the faithful wonderfully increased more & ore. The Guises hearing of this, greatly grdged againste it, & were much displeased therwith, and sent thē worde yt they should euill fauoredly enioy their liberty, Ther∣fore the Duke of Guise returning from Sauern, and ma∣king hast into Frauce to the King, fully determined to set vppon the enhabitantes of Uassi (which earnestly folowed the reformed Religion) with force of armes as he went. So that he charged all his retainers, (whych dwelt in the villages about Uassi) to be in a readinesse against his comming to Uassi, by the which he meant to take hys iorney withall spéede into Fraunce. The which commaundement of his was fulfilled. Therfore the Duke of Guise, vpon the first day of the moneth of Marche, being the Saboth day, on the which he knewe the faithfull would chéefely assemble them selues toge∣ther, came by the breake of the daye to a village called Dammartine from whence, after he had heard Masse he went to Uassi. And when he was entred the citye, be heard that the Huguenotes were assembled together to heare a sermone: to the which place he went in . Nowe, the people whych were assembled together, were in nomber a thousand and fiue hundred persons, and the Preacher had begonne hys Sermon. There∣fore the Duke of Guise, hauyng hys Brother the Cardinall wayting vppon hym, sent for manye of the
townes men, and for the chéefe parishe priest, (as they call him) & the gouernor of the citie, to come vnto him. Wyth these men he entred into a popish church, which was not farre from the congregation of the faithfull: And after that he had disclosed vnto them hys purpose, he went out again, and commaunded hys men to make haste to go to the Huguenotes sermon. The soldiers be∣ing come to the place, where the sermon was made, be∣gan to cast their dartes among them. At the first the faithfull maruelled what the matter was: but inconti∣nently many of them were slaine: and the soldiers of the Guise in great number rushed and fell vpon the con∣gregation: and thus they being hemmed in on euerye side, and hauing no waye to escape, the Duke of Guise himselfe stode at the doore wyth his sworde drawne in hys hand, ready to receiue such vpon the same as should séeke to escape by flight, crying out moste outrageously against thē, and incouraging his soldiers to the slaugh∣ter. Who making a violent assault, fell vpon the feare∣full and trembling multitude, and suche as sought to es∣cape by flight, or by climing vp to the top of the house, they slew without pity or mercy: yea whomsoeuer they met withall, were they men or wemen, olde or yong, they put them to the sword most cruelly against all hu∣manity, making hauocke of them all together. In the meane time the clamors, howlings, and pitifull cries of these innocent shéepe appoynted to ye slaughter, were not ceased, but were made wyth the sound of the trum∣pet whych blew all the time of the flanghter, to be more dolefull and terrible, to all those that hearde the same. Wher vpon the Duches of Guise the Dukes wife, wal∣king by chaunce by the walles of the citye, and hearing this feareful noise, was abashed therat: In so much that shée sending straight way a messenger to her husband, earnestly desired and beséeched him, to cease and mak
an ende of that miserable slaughter, least wemen great with childe in the city hearing that fearful noise should be deliuered before their time. Therefore the Duke of Guise being troubled and somewhat terrefied with hys owne horrible and wicked enterprise, commaunded a retreit to be blowne. And then was brought to hym the Preacher, whom he miscalled and reuiled at hys plea∣sure, and then committed him to the charge and custo∣dy of a souldier. But yet for all this the soldiers ceased not to slay and kill committing murder in diuers pla∣ces of the citye, and defiling the streates wyth bloude, yea with the bloud of innocents: to describe the whych as it was don in déede by these bloudy butchers, it wold abhorre any christian heart to heare. At the last when they had made an ende of killing and slaying, they sear∣ched throughoute euery corner of the place where the people had assembled them selues together, they ouer∣hrew the seates and benches that were therein, and brake them to péeces, they did cut the holy Bible in pée∣ces: yea and the rascall soldiers spake thus of the same. What shal I do with this word of God, I passe not for it, I can make no money of this, geue me therefore the golde, the siluer, and apparell. It cannot be vttered with what and howe many blasphemies the gospell was blasphemed. The Cardinall Guise also had in his hande a certaine Bible which was found in the pulpet: Of him the Duke of Guise demaūded, what booke it was? The Cardinall an∣swered that it was ye holy scripture: What holy scrip∣ture is it (sayeth he) and loking vpon the first leafe of the booke, he sayde, that that booke was not made aboue two yeres since: shewing by hys warlike rudenes and ignorance, what litle knowledge and vnderstanding he had of the word of God. At the last, euen as if the city had ben ouer runne and vanquished by the forraine enemy, the lackeis and
seruing men, fayning the voyce of a Crier sold gowns, coates, cappes, and wmens apparell to the popish sort of the towne, which greatly scorned & derided the faith∣full. The houses also of the outdwellers and borderers vppon the citie were despoyled: and many by the waye as they went were euill intreated and slaine. Then the Duke of Guise commaunded the kéeper of the Castell to come before him: whome he sharply reprehended, be∣cause he knew of those sermons that were made in the Citie, and threatned to punish him, commaunding him to follow him. Many also of the townesmen were led away with them bound. The Minister or Preacher (of whom we spake before) being sore mangled and woun∣ded, and lying groueling vppon a Ladder, was so cari∣ed by the commaundement of the Guise to a towne cal∣led Sandiser, being derided, miscalled, and euill intrea∣ted as he went. Now the fame of this horrible act and butcherly slaughter was brought by and by to the Churches bor∣dering therabouts, and thereof also diuers rumrs and reports arysing, it was diuersly reported in the Kyngs Court, and sodenly astonished and amazed all those that heard of the same, vntill within few dayes after cer∣taine messengers came from Vassi, and from certaine of the Churches thereabouts, certifying the truth of the matter, and complayning of the horrible fact e the Gui ses, and making humble supplicatiō that remedy might be prouided for so great a mischiefe: adding hereunto that the true subiects of the King, could not beare any longer the great crueltie and iniuries of the Guises, be∣ing straungers. The matter being thus reported, sée∣medComplaint of the faih full of the flaughter. to all men very presumptuous & rash: Insomuch yt ye Prince of Conde the Chastilons ye Chauncelour, & others cried out against the same, saying that it was a wicked and horrible act, and against the Edicts and lawes of
the Realme: and that therfore it was nedefull to pro∣uide a present remedie. Notwithstanding the dayly ru∣mors of the comming of the Guises to Paris, caused al mē to feare, foreséeing diuers great troubles and calami∣ties like to ensue. At this time the King was at Mon∣ceaulx, a house belonging to the Quéen his mother who was there also, accompanied with the Prince of Conde. But the King of Nauar, the Martiall of S. Andrew, & the Brissac were at Paris: to whom straight waye also came the Constable. Now the Duke of Guise was come to Nantuille, a place of his dominion: and it was repor∣ted that he woulde come the next daye to Paris. The Prince of Conde much marueiled at this sodaine and hasty comming of the Guises to Paris, after the comitting of so wicked & presumptuous a déede against the kyngs Edict. He went therfore to the King and Quéene: and declared that the matter was such, that except a reme∣die were prouided in time, great destruction would fall vppon the whole Realme: Wherfore he wished that so great a mischiese might might procéede no farther: For (saith he) if the Duke of Guise come to the Citie, there will followe present perill of most gréeuous calamities. The Quéene the Kinges mother, liked well of this aduise of the Prince and agréed to the same. Therfore she wrote to the kyng of Nauar, exhorting him, accor∣ding o his office, to sée that the kinges Maiestie and the Realme also, fell into no perill: and chargeth the Guise also by her letters not to come to the citie: but to come him self to ye King with a few only wayting vpō him. To the which the Guise aunswered, that hée was busie in entertayning his fréendes and could not come: Whereupon the Quéene wrote her letters againe: but in vaie. Therfore after deliberation had, the Duke of Guise came to Paris the twenty day of March, with his bro∣ther
the Duke of Aumal, the Martiall of Saint Andrew, which came to him to Nantueile, and with a great ma∣ny noble men more, and with a great Armie of horse∣menThe Guise commeth to Paris a∣gainst the Queenes commaun∣dement. also. And entering into the citie, there went to méete and entertayne him the chief master of the mar∣chaunts, a man of great aucthoritie and estimation a∣mong the Parisians, thrée counsels of the Citie, sumptu∣ously apparelled, and a great concours of the Citizens, crying, God preserue the Duke of Guise. The which accla∣mation is proper only to Kinges. Now when they were come, there were many doubtfull and vncertaine reportes in the Citie: and the conspiracy betweene the Guise, the Constable, and the Martiall of S. Andrew, eui∣dently appeared to all men: Who ioyning with them certayne of the Senators of Paris sate in counsell euery daye. The Prince of Conde also came to Paris, accompani∣ed with certaine noble men, and exhorted the faithfull not to forsake him in so great perill and daunger. The Guises were very sory for this comming of the Prince of Conde, which they iudged would be very hurtfull for them. For although the common sort of people of the Citie of Paris were foolish, hawtie, & stout, at the first, by the cōming of the Guises, yet notwithstanding their courage and pride, was brideled and abated euen with the name of the Prince of Conde: insomuch that they stayed from open outrage. Therfore the Citie, by the comming of the Prince of Conde, was quieted, and as it were, newly altered. But this thing did very much hinder the purpose of the Guises, which greatly desired to obtayne Paris, being the chiefe Citie of the kyngdome, and a very fit place to bring their matters to passe. Therfore, first of all they saw that they must bring to passe that the Prince of Conde might depart from the citie. Wheruppon they
practised by the King of Nauar, that, Marshall Memo∣rencie the Lefetenant of the citie, might be called backeThe practi ses of the Guises to expell the Prince of Conde out of Paris. againe: and that the Cardinall of Borbon, which woulde be at their commaundement, might be sent in his stede: the necessitie of the tyme, (saye they) greatly requiring this thing. The Constable brought to passe that his sonne Mo∣morencie, should not greatly refuse this thing: who, if hée had cōstantly withstoode them and denied their request, they had very hardly brought their purpose to effect, hée being a man of excellent wisdome, and experience, but yet withall a tyme seruer. By this tyme, the King of Nauar was come to the King and the Quéene, which lay at Moncaulx: thither came also, out of hand, the chief master of the Marchāts, an Authour of Seditions, hyred and sent by the Guises. This fellow declared to the King and Quéene, that the Prince of Conde wrought sedition at Paris, the whiche, would shortly tourne to great mischief, except he depar∣ted from thence: the which if it should come to passe, hée to whom authoritie was giuen to prouide remedies for the same, should beare all the blame. So that, with hys often complaynts to the Quéene, he brought about, that according to his request, the king of Nauar should goe out of hand to Paris. Then the Guises, ioyning with thē certayne of the Senate of Paris, that were fittest for their purpose, and séeking to haue the greater authori∣ty through the presence of ye king of Nauar, which was chiefe Uicegerent, they determined to haue a common counsell: to the which they neuer called the Prince of Conde. And this they called The Kings Counsel. The king of Nauar, by the decrée of this counsel, wrote out of hā to ye Quéene, that it was necessary yt the Prince of Cō∣de should departe from Paris, and get him home to hys house: except she would haue present perill of sedition,
by reason of his presence, to burst foorth into open and manifest perturbation and garboyle. Notwithstanding it was to be doubted what would come to passe: For a man might beholde thoroughout the citie, the diuersitie of mennes myndes by diuers shewes: Somewhile they trembled, somewhile they triumphed: both partes in one hower chaūged: Diers rumours were disperst abroade: In so much that there appeared euident and most certayne tokens of immi∣nent sedition. Great was the power of the Guises, through the au∣thoritie of the king of Nauar: The Senat had the hand∣ling of the cause. The greatest part of the people con∣sented, the common multitude being easely led. On the other parte, the authoritie of the Prince of Conde was not small, his name hauing suche a maiestie, that the people trembled at the same: great also was the num∣ber of the faythfull, and no lesse was their power: In so much that there was no great inequalitie betwéene both partes: yet the twayne the Popes number was the greater, yea by many. Also the Prince of Conde perceyued well enough all the practises of the Guises: and how they went about to bring the king and Quéene to Paris. But hée was not as yet fully determined, what to doe, for he feared least hée forsaking Paris, the Guises should possesse the same: and if hée should abyde at Paris, that then by the Coun∣sels of the Guises the King and the Quéene should bée wonne from him. Notwithstanding he wayed and con∣sidered with himselfe the graitie and wisedome of the Quéene, of whom he was fully persuaded, that shée would withstande the practises of the Guises. And hée could not be altogyther certiied, That his brother the king of Nauar would be so blynd, as to preferre straun∣gers
before his owne bloud. Being therefore doutefull what way to take, hée was the more colde in his bus∣nesse. In the meane tyme, the Queene, being stirred and prouoked with the dayly complayntes of the Marchant maister, wrote vnto the Prince of Conde, wisshing him to forsake Paris, and to come to the King: And the Prince of Conde was dayly disturbed and persuaded hereunto by the Cardinall of Burbon his brother, who was sent (as we sayd before) to kepe the Citie. Therefore he went from Paris, to his house calledThe Prince of Conde forsaketh Paris. Fertea in his owne Dominion, purposing to goe from thence to the Kinge, as the Queene had giuen com∣maundement. Things being thus appointed, and the Guises being free from their gt feare, by the departure of the Prince of Conde, they appointed a very great and strong garrison of soldiours, (ordayned before by the Mar∣chant maister) to keepe Paris. Thus when they had gotten the citie according to their own desire, they seek to atchieue and bring about another principall poynt of their counsels and deuises. Therefore they made hast with an armie of men to the king, who at that tyme was at Fontainbleau. The Queene being amased and afrayd at his sodein prepa∣ration, looked for the Prince of Conde: who euen now also had taken his iourney to come. Of the which, when the Duke of Guise had intelligence, fearing least the Prince of Conde would enter into Paris, hée gaueThe Guise hauing go ten Paris seke to ge the King also. charge and commaundement to the Marchantmaister, to looke diligently thereunto. Uppon this commaun∣dement the Marchantmaister, warned the Captaynes to haue their Souldiours armed and in a readinesse: appointed watch and ward to be in euery place of the ci∣tie:
and planted péeces of Ordinance, in suche places as he thought néedefull. Therefore when the Prince of Conde came néere the citie, notwithstanding mynding not to enter therein, the whole citie roonge and sounded with the noyse of the great Gonnes. In the meane tyme the Guises, otherwise peraduēture scarse able to match with the Prince of Conde, thought it not best to tarry his comming at Fontaynbleau, least they should put their purpose in hazard. Therfore they purposed to carry awaye the King from Fontaynbleau, which was a place, not of strength, but of pleasure, to a more strong holde. Whereuppon they caused the king of Nauar, whose authoritie they abused in all things to serue their turne, to persuade with the Quéene, that it was very necessary, for diuers present necessities, to de∣parte from Fontaynbleau: The Prince of Conde com∣ming to take the king. To this the Quéene answered, that there was nothing more vnlikely, than that his bro ther the Prince of Conde, being the Kings kinsmā, shuld purpose any such thing against the king, his leige Lord and maister: and beside this (saith she) the king will not departe to any other place. The Quéene constantly persisting in this mind, was agayne prouoked by the king of Nauar, who sayde, that they must of necessitie departe from thence: otherwise the king would be destroyed: and excepte shée would graunt hereunto, he sayd he would him selfe of his own authoritie and office, being the Kinges kéeper and Pro∣tectōr, transporte the King to another place. Then the Quéene began to beséeche the King of Nauar, to knowe his intent, and why hée should haue these suspicions of the Prince of Conde. The King him selfe also sayde that hée would goe to no other place, and in his childish ve∣hemence, hée declared his griefe with teares. But the
King of Nauar still affirmed, that there was no re∣medie, but that they must néedes departe from thence. Therefore hée and the Guises caryed away the King, and the Queene his mother, his bretheren, and his Sister, from Fountaynbeleau, to a Towne called Mellune: The King so soone as hée came thyther, was appointed to lodge in the Castell that was therein, without any ma∣ner of Kinglyke prouision for the same: the which Ca∣stell afore tyme had bene vsed as a prison to kéepe of∣fenders in, and such as had deserued death, by their euil demeanor. By reason of this expedition and haste of the Guises, the Prince of Conde had no way or meane to doe any thing as hée would: In so much that now there was a playne gate set wyde, to open warres. For the Prince of Conde, being the Kinges néere kinsman, and séeing that his elder Brother dyd not his dutie, thought that hée ought not to suffer the safegarde of the King, and of the whole realme to come in perill. Therefore, hée tooke counsell out of hande: hée cameThe Prince of Conde commeth to Orleans. to Orleans strayt after that hée had sent the Andelot with certayne horsemen, and kept the same, béeinge a well fenced citie, and fit for his purpose: gaue com∣maundement by publiqne Edictes, That no man shuld cause any tumult, vnder the pretence of Religion: and that all men, of what Religion so euer they were of, should obserue and kéepe the kinges Lawes & Edictes. He commaunded also the kings Officers and the Ma∣gistrates of the Towne to come vnto him: Who being come, hée straytly charged them to doe their dutie, vpon their alleageance and obedience to the king: gyuing them to vnderstand, that he was not come thyther vn∣der his owne name, but in the name of his soueraygne Lord the king. The faythfull according to the prescript of the kings
Edict, had their Sermons without the Citie. The Pa∣pistes on the other part fréely vsed their rightes and ce∣remonies: frequented their churches, and the morrowe Masse Priestes walked through the citie in their priest∣ly apparell: All things were done fréely on both parts: the Prince gyuing new commaundements and charge from day to daye, that no man should be so hardy as to breake the kings peace. This was done in the moneth of March. After this, that the Guises were certified that the Prince of Conde was come to Orleans, yea, and thatThe pur∣pose of the Guises con cerning VVarre. great rumours were brought dayly vnto them, they were fully determined to take no small enterprise in hande. Therefore the societie in the which they were lynked before with the Constable, and the Martiall of S. Andrew, being confirmed now agayn betwene them selues, they sayde that it was nowe a more conuenient tyme to proclayme open warre, than would be after∣warde, by further delay. The king of Nauar was woon on their side: Paris they enioyed: And the king was in their handes, But they feared and stoode in doubt of the Quéenes mynd, which at that tyme playnely séemed to inclyne to the Prince of Conde. Least therefore the Quéene ioyning with the Prince of Conde should go about some new practise, first of all they determined to carry the king and the Quéene, to the most conuenient place for their purpose, that all oc∣casion of feare might be quite taken away. And to serue their tourne, they vsed diuers pretences and coloures. By the king of Nauar they declared vnto the Quéene, that it was most necessary, in consideracion of those perillouse tymes, that the king should be caryed to Pa∣ris. Beside him, the Marchant maister dayly persua∣ded
that it was necessary for the King to come to Paris, to stay the hurleyburleys, and to quiet the people by his presence. They declared therefore to the Quéene that it is fully decréed that the king should be carryed from Melune to Paris: notwithstanding that the Queene earnestly requested the contrary. First, came the Constable, with thrée hundred horse∣men attending vpon him, from Melune to Paris: and then began open warre agaynst the faythefull. The Constable vnderstanding that Ruzeus, a noble Councel∣ler in the common place Court of Paris. professed the re∣formedRuzeus a professour of the Gos pell, com∣maunded towarde. Religion, sent for him and commaunded him to prison. And Ruzeus demaunding of him by what autho∣ritie hée did so, he aunswered: It is authoritie sufficient, that the Constable himselfe hath done it. After this, hée, hauing a great multitude of people sol∣lowing him, came to those places which were limited to the faythfull by the kinges Edicte, for the preaching of the worde, and the administration of Sacramentes: and there, casting all the pewes, selles, seates and ben∣ches on a heape, hée set them on fyre: The cōmon mul∣titude highly commending him for the same: who bee∣ing encouraged by the familiar example of the Consta∣ble, by and by set the howses belonging to the same on a light fyer, and burnt them downe to the ground. Then had euery man frée leaue & libertie to put him selfe in armour: Insomuch that a man might then sée in euery streate and corner of the citie armed men, well appoynted to fight: and the rash multitude of labo∣ring men hauing weapons in their hands to lay lustely about them, committing murther and rapine through∣out the citie: falling with violence vppon euery on that was said to be a Huguenote: Yea a mā might see inordi∣nate sedition in euery place. If any man made com∣playnt
to the Constable of any violence or wrong done to him, he should for his recompence be threatened to the gallowes. The houses, at the last, the streates, and the riuer were filled with dead carcasses: There was nothing so cruell, which the furious multitude did not attempt. To this tumultuous and sedicious citie, did the Gui∣ses bring the king: first of all to the Castell which ap∣pertayned to the King: then the King entered the citie without any maner of kinglike pompe, to the Castell called Lower. All thinges falling thus out, according to the desire of the Guises, they now seriously studie and beate their braynes concerning the order of their warres: and they communicated their busines with the Kinges counsell (which they had almost renued, chusing such as they knew were for their purpose, and putting out others, cōmaunding also Michael Hospitall the kings Chaūce∣lour to get him home to his house) requiring them to prouide for the mayntenaunce of the warres, euen as if they should haue delt with the forreyne enemy. They sent also Ambassadours, into Spaine, into Italy, and into Zwitserland to haue helpe and ayd from thence: Euery where, but specially at Paris, there was pressing out of souldiours, the Marchants and the shaueling Priestes, setting forth many souldiours, armour, goonnes, and all maner of furniture, being prouided for the warres. On the other part the Prince of Conde, séemed to be very carefull, and disquieted with these commotions, musing what successe his enemies should haue, and of the euent of the imminent warre, being very lothe (as it shuld séeme) to warre wyth them. Wherupon, he cauThe Prince of Conde specially in clined to peace. sed the Edictes concerning the maintenance of peace to be proclaimed, least any mā for religions sake or for any other cause should make a tumult: and declared to
the magistrates of the towne, and to his Centurious, that he desired nothing more than to haue all men liue according to ye prescript of the Kings Edicts. He wrote also daily letters to the King, to the Quéene, and to the King of Nauar hys brother, beséeching them to take héede and sée that all things were done peaceably, and by cōmon consent, if it might be: admonishing also such as had the gouernment of the Common wealth to be ware, least by the ambition of the Guises, and of his ad∣herents, the King and the Realme were broughte into great pearill and danger, for the auoiding whereof, so many meanes of late were vsed: protesting héerewyth that he desired rather to sée the very extréeme end, than warre: and that he wished specially that ye king in that hys tēder age, and hys realme also, might be according∣ly prouided for. Notwithstanding, the willes and purposes of hys aduersaries, so manifestly appeared, that he was admo nished by diuers prudēt and wise men, which attended vpon him, that it was his part to séeke all that he could to let and hinder them, least they did turne to the ruine and subuertion of the whole realme, and of the refor∣med church. For there came vnto the Prince of Conde, of all estates some, from all partes of the Realme: and very many also of the Noble men, as the Admirall, the Andelot his brother, and the Cardinall Odette, ye Earle of Rochefoulcaut the Prince Porcian, Piennes, Crusol, Soubiz, Mouy, Sanli Estern, and manye others, which came to the Prince in great number to Orle∣ans. These men perceiued wel inough the horrible and wicked enterprises of the Guises, and their adherents: the manifest violating of the Kings Edicte: the iniury offred to the yong King, and to the Quéene his mother: and the conspiracies of straungers againste the Kings
kinsmen: and therfore they thought it their duty to pro∣uide for these mischéenes. Whervpon, after deliberati∣on had with ye Prince of Conde, they earnestly persua∣ded with him to take vpon him ye patrociny and defēce of the realme, for that the right of gouerning ye realme during the time of the Kings minoritie, pertained vnto him, the King of Nauar hys brother, neglecting his du∣ty in that behalfe. They prayed and most earnestly be∣séeched him, being of the Kings bloud, that he wold not forsake the captiued King in such time of perill, that he would not suffer the Kings Edictes, to be violated and contemned of strangers, of whose violence he him selfe not long agoe, had experience: and principally that he would not permit that true Religion, (wherof he hym selfe was so zealous a professor) to be suppressed so furi∣ously by warre. This thing, they being the kings faith∣ful subiects, most humblely beséeched him that he wold vauchsafe gladly to take in hād: they promising to shew them selues ready at all times to shewe all manner of lawfull obedience, and to spend their goodes, and their liues to, in so iust a cause. The Prince of Conde, being moued in conscience, with this plaine declaration of his duety, and hauing so oftentimes called vpon the mother Quéene by his let∣ters, he at the last toke vpon him the defence of thys cause, and the charge so earnestly offered vnto hym. Wherevpon the Prince of Conde and the Noble men made a league betwéene them selues, for the defence of that cause: and then caused the same to be put downe in wryting the eleuenth day of April in maner and forme folowing.The league betweene the Prince of Conde, and the Nobles of Fraunce. WE Lodowic Borbon, Prince of Conde, and the greatest Parte of the Nobilitie of Fraunce, whose names are subscribed to this League, esteeming nothing
more precious, next to the honor and glory of God, than the obedience of our King, and the conseruation of the Crowne aed Dignity, during the time of this his Mino∣rity, established by the Authority of the Quene, and by the high Court of Parliament: and seeing the presump∣tion and boldnesse of certaine of the Kings subiectes to be such, that not only they dare beare armoure, contrary to the Kings Edictes, to destroy his subiectes, because by the benefite of the Edictes, they come together to heare the word of God, and to call vpon his holy name: but al∣so haue taken into their custody, the King, the Queene, and her sonnes, againste all Lawe, bothe of God and the Realme: seking hereby (so farre as we can perceiue) vnder the pretence of the Kings authoritye, to deface true reli∣gion, and to destroy the greatest part of the Kings Sub∣iectes, which in dede were the way to get the Kingdome into their owne handes. VVe therefore (I say) for these causes, to restore, (so much as we may) first of all the Kings maiesty, to his dig∣nity, & the Quene to her authority: and may also main∣taine and kepe the Kings faithfull subiects, in the liber∣ty of that Religion and conscience, which is licensed and geuen to them by the Kings Edicte, made by the iudge∣ments, and consents of the Princes the Kings kinsmen, and of the Kings counsel, and also of the whole assembly of Parliament: which ought to abide firme and immuta∣ble in this tender age of the King: are constrained accor∣ding to our duety and office, as the Kings loyall & faith∣full subiects, to take the sweard in hand: the which is the only remedy geuen of God at this time, to remedy and resist so muche as we may these outrages and vnlawfull actions. For the more sure accomplishment wherof, af∣ter we had made our faithfull prayers vnto God, and had duely and rightly wayed and considered all things, wyth one heart, minde and free will, haue entered into league, by solemne oth of the name of the liuing God, the which we haue sworne, and before God and his Angelles haue
promised to performe and kepe, by the assistance of hys grace and mercy inuiolable, vpon these conditions. First of al, we protest, that in this League, we haue no manner of consideration or regard either of our priuate persons, or of our goods: but do only set before our eyes, the honor of God, and the deliuerance of the King and Queenes Maiesties, the obseruation of the Edicts which they haue commaunded, and a perfecte good will to pu∣nish Rebels, and such, as contemne the King & Queenes Maiesties. And for these causes only we sweare, and pro∣mise, that we and euery one of vs, will spend and bestowe all that euer we haue, euen to the last drop of our bloude. And this League shall abide inuiolable, vntill the Kings Maiority, that is to say, vntill the King come to his law∣full age, and doe take vpon him selfe the gouernment of the kingdome: that then we may obey him in all things with voluntary obedience. At which time, we trust, we shall geue so good an accounte of this our League, (the which also we wil do to the Quene, she being at her own libertie, whensoeuer she wil) that it shalbe manifest that this was no conspiracy, but our duety of true obedience, to preserue their Maiesties in these perillous times. Secondly, to the end all men maye vnderstand and know that we haue entered into this league, with a pure conscience, and in the feare of God, vppon whom wee call, as vppon the vpholder and protector of our society: VVe declare, and promise by our othe, That wee will not suffer any man among vs to commit any thing a∣gainst the honour of God, and against the Kings Edicts: as Idolatry, Supersticion, Blasphemy, VVhoredome, Theft, Sacriledge, and all suche otherlike, forbidden by the lawe of God, and by the last Edict of Ianuary: the which if any do commit, we will seuerely punish. And to the end all thinges may be done according to the pre∣script rule of Gods word, we will haue in all our assem∣blies, faythfull ministers of Gods word, which may teach vs the wil of God, and whom as it is meete, we may heare,
that we may obey the will of God. Thirdly, we elect and nominate the Prince of Con∣de to be our Captaine generall, being the Kinges neere kinsman, and therfore one of his Counsel, and the lawful protector and mayntayner of the Crowne of Fraunce: VVhom we promise to helpe, ayd, and assist, with al our might, and to giue to him all obedience, in all those thinges, which appertayne to this League: and if we neg∣lect to do our dutie in any thing, we submit our selues to such punishment as it shall please him to lay vppon vs. And if it shall so happen that the Prince of Conde, shall not be able to go forward with this enterprise, be∣ing let with sicknes or with any other reasonable cause, we promise to serue and obey him, whom he shall no∣minate to be his Vicar or Deputie. And the Prince of Conde, for the glory of Gods sake, and for the obedience sake, which he oweth to the King, byndeth him selfe to these conditions: promising to all that are of this confederacy, by his othe, that hee will with all diligence and courage, by the helpe of God, ac∣cording to couenant, constantly do the dutie of a true Capitayne. Fourthly, we comprehend in this League all the Kings Counsellers, except those which contrary to their office, beare armour, to make the King and Queene fulfill their mindes: The which armoure, except they put of againe, and do giue an account of their doinges with all subiecti∣on and obedience to the Queene, and King, whensoeer it shall please her to call them: VVe giue them to vn∣derstand, that for these iust and reasonable causes, we wil accompt them giltie of treason, and troublers of the cō∣mon wealth. And to come to the ende of this our league (the which we protest againe wee haue made, only for the glory of God, for the dignitie and libertie of the King, and for the peace and tranquillitie of this Realme, which is to
be mayntayned vnder the aucthoritie of the Queene mother) wee affirme and promise euery one of vs, and do confirme the same by solemne othe before God and his Angelles, that we will prepare and prouide out of hand, all that wee are able, as money, armoure, horses, and all other thinges necessary for the warre, that wee may be in a readines so soone as we shall be called by the Prince of Conde, and that we may followe him whither soeuer it shall please him to commaund vs, and also that we may obey him in all thinges that appertayne to this league, euen to the vtmost perill of our liues. And if it shall happen that any of our companions and fellowes in this seague, shall sustayne, any hurt or detrement, for this leagues sake, we promise that we will helpe, ayde and assist him all that wee can, at the com∣maundement of the Prince of Conde. But if it shall hap∣pen (as God forbid it should) that any one among vs for∣getting his dutie and othe, should conspire with our e∣nemies, and should violate this league by horrible trea∣son, and should not stand to these conditions and co∣uenaunts: VVe sweare and protest with all constantnes of faith, that we wil bring such an offender to the Prince of Conde, and will accompt him for an enemy and han∣dle him as a traytor. And thus be it ratefied and establi∣shed betweene vs, with free consent, and irreuocable. This league being made, and the causes thereof being declared in maner and fourme, as ye sée, & then euery where published abrode: the Prince of Conde sent letters diuers times to the Queene Mother, and to the King of Nauar his brother, tending still to this effect: That they should consider and haue regard to the state, and that they should set before their eyes the manifolde perilles and troubles at hand, except they according to their office and dutie, did better prouide for the same: that they should looke to the obseruation of the Edictes
made by the act of Parliament, specially now in ye time of the Kings minority: Protesting herewith for him∣selfe and the rest, that they would be subiect and obedi∣ent to all thinges reasonable and lawsull: but if the matter should come to triall by sword, he sayd that then they feared no maner of perilles, but would for the mayntayning of the glory of God, the Kinges auctho∣ritie and the libertie of their consciences, spend and be∣stowe all that they had. The Queene Mother, tooke the matter very gréeuous∣ly, and signified to the Prince of Conde by her letters that as her person was a Captiue, so also she was re∣srayned of her will, and could not do what she would, whom she perswaded in her letters to take the mateer into his owne hand, and to defend the same: and decla∣red also at that time by her letters, that she did vtterly dislike and abhor the Guises. Certaine of the which let∣ters, according to the very tenor of them, which remay ned in the Prince of Conde his handes, I thought good here to bring in: The coppie wherof, is this. I Haue receiued, welbeloued Cosen, the letters which you sent vnto me by the Lord Guardius and I signifieLetters of the Queen to the Prince of Cond▪ vnto you, good Cosen, that I am as fully perswaded of those thinges contayned in your letters, as I may bee of any thing, and am no lesse assured of them than I am of my selfe: neither wiil I bee vnmindfull at any time of those things which you do for the King my sonnes sake. And because the same messenger retourneth back again for those causes which he shall declare vnto you, I will wright no more at this time. Onely his I will request at your hands, that you beleue me in those things which he shall speake vnto you in my name, who, wisheth so well vnto you, as if she were your owne mother, namely your deare Cosen CATHARINE.
The Coppie of another of her Letters. I Haue talked with M. de Iuoy, euen as if you your selfe were present, of whose fidelitie and trustines, I doubt not. And whatsoeuer I send backagain, I assure my selfe, that he will disclose to none sauing to you: and that you in like maner for my sake, will keepe all secret. Only be mindfull to preserue and defend the Children, the Mo∣ther, and the kyngdome, as he to whom this thing doth specially appertaine, and he, (namely the kyng) will ne∣uer I warrant you be vnmindfull of so great a benefite. Burne this letter when you haue red it. Your deare and louing Cosen KATHARINE. These things, I say, at that time were wrytten by the Queene. In the meane time the King of Nauar, fo∣lowing the willes of the Guises and his adherents, both thought, and spake very muche euell of hys brother the Prince of Conde. All things daily, on both partes, wax∣ed worse and worse. Newes was brought to Orlians concerninge the slaughter of the men of Sens, which greatly inflamed the mindes of men. Sens is a noble Citie bordering vpon Burgondy. In the which the faithful ac∣cording to the Edicte of Ianuarye, congregated them selues together to hear the word of God. And although there were new rumors daily concerning the pertur∣bations and troubles at hand, yet notwithstāding they continued in their godly exercises. Therefore diuers Bands of soldiers well appoynted at the commaunde∣ment of the Cardinall of Guise, who was Bishop of the same Towne, sodenly and vnloked for, sette vpon the Congregation and flew many of them: and at the last,
such was their rage, that they killed both old and yong, yea wythout all pitye or mercy, man, woman, & childe. The which slaughter cōtinued the space of thrée dayes, and had continued longer if so be any store of the pro∣fessors of the Gospell had ben left aliue to kill. Yea and it was reported that diuers women great wyth childe, were put to the swerd, and the children, most horrible∣ly torne out of their wombes. Suche was the spoyling of the houses of the faithfull, and the shedding of bloude in this Citie, that the horrible murther committed by the Guises at Vassi was counted nothing in respecte of thys. When newes héereof was brought to the Court, it made all that heard the same abashed. Yea they them selues that had commaūded this to be done, when they heard of the euent were also abashed. Notwythstan∣ding after these presumptuous enterprises and begin∣nings after the slaughter of Vassi, all men were fully bent to Ciuill warre. The Prince of Conde complained of this thing to the Quéene by his letters, which he wrote the ninth of Aprill, to this effect: First he sayth that he thought that the fault and blame of the wickednesses afore time com mitted, would haue stayed their boldnesse which enuied the peace and tranquilitye of the common wealth, and haue taught them at the length to embrace, folowe, and obey the Kings Edicts. But (sayth he) so hath their ma∣lice increased, that they can no more restraine and bri∣dle their wickednesse, but do violate and breake al law: which may moue vs to loke for nothing but the seueri∣ty of Gods iudgement to fall vpon vs. Of thys brutishe boldnesse (sayeth he) after so many olde examples, there is now a newe come in place to be séene in the pitifull slaughter at Sens, vppon those that professed the liberty of the Gospell by the benefit of the
Kings Edict: the description of the which Tragedy, he sayeth, he sendeth vnto her. Not doubting, but that shée according to her natural and great goodnesse, wil trem∣bleThe prince of Conde complay∣neth of the murther. at the hearing of so horrible a butcherly murther: wherby shée hath to consider what is to be looked for at their handes, which blinde and beguile men with theyr faire and flattering woordes. He cannot (he sayeth) but he must néedes complaine vnto her of so great wicked∣nesses committed: and is constrained also, to hys great gréefe, to say, That if these presumptuous and horrible murthers escape vnpunished, the crye of the innocent bloud that is shed, will so pearce the heauens and enter into the eares of the highest, that the ruine and vtter subuersion of this whole realme by the iust iudgement of God is to be feared. Therfore (he sayth) he beséecheth her, setting before her eyes the examples of so greate and horrible wickednesses, and considering also his pa∣tience in forbearing so long time, euen vntill that pre∣sent day, for the King and her Maiesties sake, that shée would diligently vse her authority, to repel and reform them: and not to suffer suche manifest contempt of the Kings maiesty to escape vnpunished: least violence and rebellion, were planted in steade of equitie and iustice. In so doing shée should preserue the Kings maiesty, and the tranquillity of the Realme. Otherwise lamentabl afflictions were like to ensue. Notwithstāding thys reasonable and godly request of the Prince, both the people of Parris, at the hearing of the Rumors waxed more outragious daily, and also the Guises wyth their Adherentes, wholely bent them selues to warre. We haue spoken before concerning the league betwéene the Prince of Conde and hys Ad∣herents. All things therefore daily growing from ill to worse, nothing now was looked for but warre. But be∣fore the warres began, the Prince of Conde, and they of
hys part, set forth another Proclamation, in the which they shewe the causes and reasons of their purpose, and why they were constrained to lift vp the swearde. And after certaine letters sente to the King and Quéene, and to the king of Nauar, they sent vnto them that Proclamation also: which was, to this effect folowing. Althoughe they whych of their owne authority doe first of all put them selues in Armoure, oughte to geue account and reason of their so doing: yet notwithstan∣ding the Prince of Conde, séeing that this motion, for diuers circumstances, is subiecte to diuers mennes Iudgements, and because the knowledge hereof apper∣taineth to all men, would, to put away all occasions of slaunders, shewe to all men manifest reasons, whych haue constrained him to ioyne with a great number of his fréends and retainers, to serue the King & Quéene, and to procure the peace and tranquillity of the whole Realme. All men know that after the diuers perturbations and troubles for Religions sake, when as greater also wer lyke to ensue, to stay & appease them, at the last in the moneth of Ianuary laste past, there was made an Edicte by the Kings commaundement, to quiet and pa∣cifie bothe partes, wyth the aduice and consent also of the most Noble of the high Court of Parliament. The Proclamation of thys Edicte, (whych at the first was much hindered) caused suspicions to arise that these things were done not wythout a confederacie, which teded to a farther matter. The which suspitions wer increased ye more by ye méetings of ye constable, and ye Magistrates of Paris, by the cōmoning of ye senators, & also by the often assemblies of the chéefe Marchantes. Notwtstanding all the whych, the Prince of Conde, or any of the reformed Churches, neuer did or spake any thing, which might interrupt or breake ye publike peace
any manner of meanes. Yea euen in the midst of those vexations and troubles, they loked quietly and modest∣ly for the Proclamation of the same Edicte in the Se∣nate of Paris. Thys proclamation being at the lengthe made at Paris, and being extorted by the Supplications of the King and Quéene rather than by commaunde∣ments, the Prince of Conde after his gréeuous sicknes, when he had saluted the King and Quéene, gotte hym home to hys house to recreate him selfe. Amidst these troubles, there came newes concer∣ning the cruell and horrible slaughter at Vassi, done in the presence of the Duke of Guise, and by hym: many of the Kings Subiects both men and women being slain, which according to their manner, by the benefite of the Kings Edict came together to heare the worde of God. This horrible Acte being reported at Paris, great∣ly moued the mindes of all men of bothe partes: inso∣much that much mischéefe was like to followe. And a∣mong other Rumors it was reported that the Duke of Guise was comming with a great armye of men, to the intent he might vtterly destroy the churches of the reformed Religion. Whervpon the mē of those Chur∣ches came out of diuers places to the Court, and requi∣red of the King and Quéene punishment of so greate and notable wickednesse committed. Thys was the cause why the Prince of Conde going homeward stayed at Paris, & went from thence to Monceaulx at the com∣maundement of the King & Quéene: to whom he said he feared the commotions & troubles like to ensue: to stay ye which (he sayd) he thought this ye only remedy, namely that the Duke of Guise, which was said to be cōming to Paris with a great army of men, might not be suffered to enter therein: the which aduise séemed to please the Quéene and the king of Narre very well. And accor∣ding to this aduise, the Quéene wrote her letters to the
Duke of Guise, intreating him, that he would come to the king and to her to Monceaulx. The which thing being twise required by the Quéene, was also twise de∣nied of the Guise: the first tyme, hée made excuse that hée was busied in entertayning his friendes, which were come to sée him: and the second time by silence, making no aunswer at all▪ But hée came to Paris with a great nomber of armed men, hauing also with him the Con∣stable, the Martiall of S. Andrew, and diuers others of his counsell. And hée was receyued into the citie by the citizens with great pompe, the Marchantmaister being their Captayne: and the people crying as hée entered into S. Anthonies gate, euen as if hée had bene king, God preserue the Duke of Guise: he séeming in no point to dislike of the same. The Prince of Conde returning from Monceaulx, that hée might goe to his house according to his former purpose: and being certefied of the cōming of the Duke of Guise and of his company to Paris, hée altered his pur∣pose: and determined to abyde at Paris, according to his dutie, to defende the kings subiectes: being persuaded that his presence would staye the mindes of the citizens of Paris, which began to waxe somewhat haughty by the comming of the Guises. And truely all men knowe that so long as the Prince remained at Paris, there burst forth no great Sedition. Notwithstanding there were many & great reasons why the Prince and many of the Nobles which were with him, should be disdayned. For the Guises so soone as they were come to Paris, calling vnto them such out of ye Senat, as they thoght méet, had a counsel, which they called the Kings counsell: as though a councell consisting of the chief officers of the king were very lawfull. The which truly séemed very straunge to the Prince of Con∣de, and to those noble men that were with him.
Is it lawfull to haue any other kings counsell, than that which is néere to the king and Quéene? and the Prince of Conde the kings néere kinsman, to whome a care of the king and Quéene appertayned, and being al∣so in the same town in the which the counsell was held, not to know thereof? This euidently declared a mani∣fest conspiracy, which would bring no small hurt to the king and Quéene. For if in that counsell of the Guises, those things were handled which appertayned to the preseruation of the kings authoritie and the common wealth, what cause was there why thei should shoon the presence of the king and Quéene, and of the kings co∣sell? Moreouer, it is well enough knowne what displea sure the Guise tooke with the Quéene, when he departed from the court: complayning & misliking that he was thoght to be made acquainted wt Nemours his dealing, who was accused to go about to carry away the king. The Constable also of late very contemptuously vsed the Quéene in woordes: & méeting with the kings retinew, and being told that the king was present, hée passed by so vnreuerently, as if hée had met with some straūgers: his proud and lofty wordes whiche he also oftentimes vttered at Paris, did plainly declare that ther were some new things a working. Also the Martial of S. Andrew▪ did not only refuse to goe to attend vpon his charge cō∣mitted vnto him by the kings commaundment: but al∣so before all the kings counsel, he so contented with the Quéene in brawling woordes, that it might euidently appeare that hée leaned to some other greater trust. In consideration therfore of these men, which sepera∣ting themselues from the Kings counsell, called a coū∣sell of their owne authoritie, and put men in armour, the Prince of Conde could not but looke for some lamen table ende. Beside all this, when the Quéene had openly decla∣red
that hir will was that both of them should depart from Paris: the Prince of Conde vnderstandinge of the Quéenes commaundement, by the Cardinal of Bur∣bon his brother, went strayt way from Paris. But the Duke of Guises mind was so far frō departing thence, that gathering more souldiours vnto him, he did more strongly fortefie the same than he did before, and came vnto the King and Quéene, contrary to their expresse commaundement with an army of men: and caryed thē whether they would or no, from Fontaynbleau to ano∣ther place. The which manifest force and misliked cap∣tiuitie of the King and Quéen, may manifestly appere, both by the open complayntes of the Quéene, and also by the Kinges teares. And because the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Martiall of S. Andrew, so boast of their dignitie and offices, as though it were lawfull for them to make an armie when it shall séeme good vnto them for the behoofe of the King and the Realme: and also because they doo deryde, and manifestly abuse the authoritie of the King of Nauar, the kings high Legate, all men may sée how they doe abuse themselues and the offices committed to their charge. These things should first of all haue bene done by the aduise and consent of the Quéene, who alwayes open∣ly resisted their dooings. Let them therefore if they haue any greater authoritie than she in this kingdome, shewe the same. So seriouse and waighty a matter al∣so, should haue ben handeled in the Kings lawfull coun∣sell: or else let them say that thei are in authoritie aboue the kings themselues, which alwaies consult with their counsell concerning warres, before they take them in hande. But if they replye and say, that the Quéene now is contented with their dooings: admit it be so, yet let them remember that this is not the first time that they haue begon warres: their purpose & intent doth plainly
appeare by that horrible slaughter don by them at Vas∣sy, which displeased both the King and Quéene, and all those that heard of the same, except themselues, as an acte cōmitted agaynst the manifest lawes of the king, and contrary to all humanitie. Let them not therefore colour ouer their doings with the Quéenes will, whom they haue captiued, and rule as them list. And to take away al bolstering & coulering of the mater, who know eth not, that before the Duke of Guise came to Paris, and had troubled the minds of men with that horrible mur∣ther at Vassi, there was great peace and tranquillitie throughout the whole Realme. But if any thing haue happened otherwise tha it should haue done, it is come to passe by their Counsels and assemblies, specially through the default of the Se∣nate of Paris, which obserued not the authoritie of the kings Edict, as they should haue done, and by their ex∣ample made the mindes of men the more out of quiet. As for example, the commotion of Prouance which was raysed by the preuarication & collusion of many of that Assembly, and was at the kings commaundement paci∣fed agayne by M. Curlsol. with the help and ayde of the reformed Churches, which haue alwayes shewed what obedience they will shewe forth towards the king and his lawes. To be short, all men may behold and sée what will be the ende of all their Counselles which they take in hand, euen the great shame and reproch of the king, and the destruction of the Realme. They kéepe the kyng captiue, and abuse his name at their owne pleasure, and to the end they maye at the length quite ouerthrow the kyng, they stoutly threaten men with the Kinges name, if they refuse to do any thing as they would haue them. Moreouer they séeke all that they can to make the Prince of Conde to be en∣uied,
and not estéeming the auethoritie of the kynges Edictes, they do euen what they list. And to the end they may set vp their stocke and kinred with the ruine of the kyngdome, they conuert the aucthoritie, and the whole substance therof to their owne vse: & troubling & molesting the kyngs lawfull and faythfull defenders, do raigne and rule alone, and do moderate the lawes, statutes, and decrees of the Realme as they list them∣selues. What is he then that séeth not what their mind and purpose is, in causing these garboyles & troubles? And as touching Religion no man can chuse but sée, that they bend themselues to worke both the decay ther of, and also of publique and common libertie. They do very vndiscretely alleage for thēselues that the Prince of Conde hath certaine other particuler causes of com∣playnts. For the Prince of Conde doth protest that hée is driuen to take these thinges in hand, for the only de∣sire he hath to defend the Kyng and the kyngdome, and to mayntayne the Kyngs lawes, according to his office: and doth greatly mislike that the benefite of exercising the reformed Religion should be taken from the kyngs subiectes, against the playne commaundements of his wil, and that from the kyngs subiects should be taken, not only the libertie of their consciences, but also the peace and tranquillitie of their bodies. Let the Duke of Guise call to minde the horrible slaughter at Uassi, which as yet is fresh in memory: Let him remember the great crueltie shewed of late to the men of Sens. And let the Constable remember what hath happened at Paris, and what is like dayly to happen by his behaui∣our. Whose wicked déedes doon against the willes of the kyng and Quéene, he hopeth to sée one day seuerely punished. If men neglect the doing of their dutie, God no doubt in his iust iudgement will punish the same. These therefore are the occasions offered to the
Prince, to go forward with those enterprises that hée hath taken in hand. These men thinke to rule and go∣uerne the kingdome as they themselues list: And ther∣fore it commeth to passe that they cannot abide the go∣uernement of the Quéene, and the libertie and integri∣tie of the kyngs counsel. They thinke that the time ser∣ueth for them very wel, not only to couer all their wic∣ked actes, of the which they are neuer able to giue a rea son and an accompt, but amiddest this troublesome sturre, to inriche themselues. By which their boldnes and presumption, there cannot chuse but be most grée∣uous mischiefes following, the troublesome alteration of al thinges, the hurt of all estates, specially of the No∣billitie, diuisions also & sempiternall hatred. They coul∣lor all their doinges with Religion, as though they would not suffer the auncient and Catholike Religion (as they terme it) to come into contempt, and for this cause they cause vs to haue many enemies. But why doe they take awaye the benete of the kinges Edict, which doth permit vs to vse and exercise that Religion, which we beleue to be good and true. They them selues liue according to their conscience, by the benete of the kyngs lawes: And what reason is it then that they should not suffer vs to do the like by the benefite of the kynges Edict! There is not one of vs that moleeth or troubleth them in their Religion, or that doth hinder their Cler∣gie by any maner of meanes. And if there were any of vs that would so do, or that would behaue our selues otherwise than we ought, there are lawes and punish∣ments to punish vs. But, truely, vnder the coullor and pretence of Religion they séeke another thing. We de∣nie not but that they hate the truth of the Gospell, as they haue of late declared by fyer and sword: but this is the speciall thing they séeke for, to trap and snare those
that before tyme miraculously, haue escaped their handes: to be reuenged of others, whome they haue al∣wayes hated: and to enrich themselues by the spole of others. The whic to bring to passe, they care for no Religion. And such as go about to resist their practises, by which they séeke, both the prill of our kyng, and the destruction of his subiecte by Ciuill warre, they call open enemies to the kyng. THese and many other things, which time will re∣ueale, being wayd and considered, the Prince of Conde testified before the kyng and Quéen these things also following, and wished all kyngs, Princes, Nobles, and all others of the Realme of Fraunce, and all Christi an Nations▪ truely to vnderstand these thinges. First of all therfore he testifieth, that he is not mo∣ued by desire of his owne profite: but only with loue of the glory of God, and of the profite of the whole com∣mon wealth, to séeke the which he thought him selfe spe∣cially bound vnder the Quéenes auethoritie. So that, for conscience sake to do his dutie, and for the loue hée beareth to his Countrey, he sayth he is constrayned & compelled to séeke all lawfull meanes, to set the Quéen and the kinges Sonnes at libertie: and to mayntaine and defend the kyngs Edictes, and the Edict of Ianuary, which was made for the ordering of Religion. And he prayeth and beseecheth all the kynges true & lawfull subiects, waying and considering the matter, as is before sayd, that they would ayd and assist him in so good and godly a cause. And because the king in the beginning of his raigne found him selfe oppressed with a great burthen of debt, and hauing but little any maner of waye to discharge the same, many of his faithfull subiects gaue vnto him a great summe of money, both to discharge the same, &
also to recouer his patrimony: but there is no doubt, but that they which are the auethors of this Ciuill warre, will now laye holde and catch vnto them that sum of money, which was giuen to the kyng for those causes, and will spend and bestowe the same to oher vses: Whereby, both the people shall receiue great hurt and losse, and also the hope which the Quéene and the kyng of Nauar had for the paiment and discharge of all the kynges debtes, that the people might be brought into the same state, in the which they were in the time of kyng Lodowi the xij. that hope I saye, by the wa∣sting and consuming of that money, should be and quight taken awaye. For these causes the Prince of Conde affirmeth, that they which shall get vn to them that money, shalbe bound to restore the same againe, and at the length shall giue an accompt for the bestowing therof. But he testifieth that he and all those that fight vn∣der his banner, shall mayntayne & furnish themselues with their owne proper costes and charges. And God, sayth he, will heare from heauen, the rie of his poore oppressed people, against those which begin warres, and refuse all reasonable order, which séeke trouble, and constrayne vs to defend our selues wyth force of Armes. And because all men do vnderstand and knowe, that the kyng and Quéene, being beset on euery side wyth souldiours and captiued, and ruled, and that the greater part of the Counsell, are so quayled wyth feare that they dare not resist the authors of this warre: The Prince of Conde would haue all men certefied, that hée myndeth and will shew towards the kyng and Quéene all obedience, in the which he will giue place to none: and that he will not suffer him selfe to be so deceiued & mocked, vnder the pretence of rescriptes, of commaun∣dements,
and of Letters, vnder the kinges name and seale: but will warre against them vntill the Kyng and Quéene do recouer their former libertie and autho∣ritie, and may declare their willes by their owne méere gouernement. Concerninge the kyng of Nauar his brother, the Prince of Conde, beside the naturall bond of brotherly loue, & ye particuler cause of obedience, which he ought and will giue vnto him, he testifieth that he doth consi∣der of him according to his worthines, and will giue vnto him next vnto the King and Quéene al obdience. And h trusteth that he wil giue an accompt of his dea∣ling, whensoeuer it shalbe required at his handes. To be short the Prince of Conde, and a great multi∣tude of Earles, Lordes and Nobles, and other estates, to declare that they speake simply, and in good earnest, and that they séeke for nothing more than the glory of God, and the excellency and dignitie of their kyng: Do earnestly pray and beséech the Queene Mother with all reuerence, that setting the feare of men aside, whych gard her after a straunge fashion, with force of Armes, as if she were a captiue, that she would, according to hir iudgement and mind fréely declare, whether part were to be blanted: and that she would goe vnto that Citie whererevnto she had most mind: that from thence shée might cōmaund both parts by the meanest seruant she hath to put of their Armour, & so they would shew that dew obedience, which shoulde become loyall subiectes, to shew vnto their soueraigne Lord: and would also mo destly answere to their doings according to the lawe. The Prince promiseth that he will obey her lawull commaundements, vppon the condition that others, would shew themselues ready to do their duties. But if they refuse, he testifieth that he with fiftie thousand men more, which are of the same mynd will spend their
liues. And if it please not the Quéene to go to another place to do these thinges, then let her first of all seeke, that they by whom she is garded and captiued may goe to another place, putting of their Armour, namely the Duke of Guise and his bretherne, the Constable, and the Marshiall of S. Andrew. And although he being a Prince and the kynges néere kinsmen, were their su∣perior, yet notwithstanding to the intēt it might apéere that he is in no poynt the cause of trouble and vnquiet∣ns, he promiseth that he and his whole armie will de∣part euery man home to his owne house, vppon those conditions before spoken of. Also hee sayth that hee hath a speciall care for this, that the Kynges Counsellers may haue their accusto∣med libertie, and that the kyngs lawes and the Edict of January, may be obserued and kept: vntill the kyng comming vnto his Maioritie, may iudge of the matter him selfe, and may punish those according to their de∣sertes which haue abused his authoritie. But and if these conditions were not perfourmed, and that the Guises and their fellowes went on still to shew violence against the Kyng, the Quéene, and the kynges Counsell, to deceaue and beguile men, vnder the kynges name, and to be iniurious to the kyngs sub∣iectes, the Prince of Conde testifieth that hée wyll not beare it, and will bring to passe that hée shall not bée found giltie of all those calamities, mischiefes, and mi∣series, which will happen for these commotions and troubles, but rather they themselues which are the au∣thors, and only cause thereof. This his Protestation, being published abrode, all mens mindes séemed to be troubled, and diuersly occu∣pied: the faythfull being more bolde and couragious to defend themselues, who at the first sturre of the Gui∣ses, were not a little terrefied.
The Prince of Conde sent letters to all the refor∣medLetters of the Prince of Conde, sent to the reformed churches. Churches the twenty day of April, sending diuers messengers with the Copy of those letters throughout all prouinces of the Realme: to this effect: Forsomuch as the necessity of the time is such, that we must openly resist the violence and tiranny of the Guises, aduersaries of the Christian Religion, who hauing captiued the King and Quene▪ do so abuse their name, that they tread vnderfote true Religion with the liberty of the Realme, and doe what they list them selues: see that ye prepare your selues against these troubles, and beware that you leaue nothing vndone that may further you in your bu∣sinesse. And because we must nowe of necessitye begin warres, be diligent to prouide Armor, Mony, & all kind of Artillery so sone as may be: and whatsoeuer you do, certefy me of the same by these messengers that I haue sent vnto you. But aboue all things see that ye behaue your selues so peaceably as ye may: and forget not dili∣gently to call vpon God the vpholder and defender of his truthe, and of all iust causes. That former declaration, wherof we haue spoken before, was scasely come to Paris, when as two Edicts were solemnely proclaimed there in the Kings name: to thys effect: The King séeing what great troubles & garboyles were in the Realme, is very sory and much agréeued, who hth left no remedies vnsoughte for, for the main∣tenance of peace and tranquillity, by the aduise of the Quéene, the King of Nauar, and the Princes, as may appeare of late by the Edict made in the moneth of Ia∣nuary, by which, to order all matters peaceably, he she∣wed him selfe very fauorable, contrary to the manner and come of his Acetors the Kings, towards Reli∣gion, that by this meanes in bearing with the froward∣nes of men, be ght maintaine publique peace & con∣corde: yt notwithanding for all this they can not be
content and quiet, as appeareth by diuers tumultes by them all ready raised, manye of them (which hath not bene heard of before) being so bold that they dare make open warre, and take diuers of the Kings Cities: The which, although it be very greuous vnto him, that men should so lewdly and impudently behaue them selues, abasing him in this hys tender age, to the great hurt of the Realme: yet notwithstanding he will continue still toward them hys accustomed clemency and goodnesse. And therfore to confirme that his will and meaning, he willeth and commaundeth by this publique Edict, that al men vse the rites and administration of their religi∣on fréely, according to the prescript of the Edicte of Ia∣nuary. But because at Paris, the Metropolitane Citye of the Realme, there haue ben oftentimes great perils of moste gréeuous seditions, he willeth in consideration of the present time, that there be no exercise of the re∣formed Religion, so called, in that City, nor in the Su∣burbes, borders, and limmites neare adioyning to the same, vntill it shall séeme good otherwise to the King. There was also publiquely set forth about the same time very solemly, the Kings Rescript, whych they call Letters patents in manner and forme folowing. All men sée the great perturbations and troubles of the Realme, and also howe the mindes of all estates and degrée, are so vexed and disquieted, that there can∣not chuse but insue great hurt, except God of his mercy and goodnesse turn away the same. Notwithstanding it is wonderfull that men which are the authors of these troubles & dissensions, shuld so couler ouer the causes of their wickednes, that they cā deceiue therby the simple sort of people. But wheras they cōplaine of ye violating and breaking of y• Edict which was made for Religion, ye is most false, as may apeare by ye manifest declaratiō of ye Kings will, which he plainly of late shewed by hys
Edict. And this also is a most impudent slāder, wheras they say that the King and the Queene his mother, hys bretheren, and sister, are captiues in the handes of cer∣taine of his chief officers and seruants, and do boast that they lift vp the sworde, to the intent they may set them at their lawfull libertie. But the King and the Quéene do openly testifie, and would haue it generally knowen for a suertie, that hée, his mother, his brethren, and hys sister, neuer came, thankes be to God, into that state of captiuitie: but cōtrarywyse, do retaine & kéepe, libertie, autority, & kingly dignitie and power, and shal no doubt by the goodnesse of God, enioye the same, with the help and diligence of good and faithfull subiects. And bicause those seditiouse persons doe greatly abuse the facilitie & gentle nature of the Prince of Conde their kinsman, whom they haue chosen to be the Captaine of their con∣spiracie, he testifieth that he will doe all that he can to restoare him to his former libertie, and to pacefie the troubled state so much as he may. There was also at this time mustering of men in Pa ris, specially of Noble men, which are cōmonly appoin∣ted to be horsemen: and commaundement was sent tho∣rough euery prouince to all men to be in a readinesse a∣gainst the moneth of May nexte comming. Paris also was in euery corner replenished with armour, with sol diours, and Enseignes. The Prince of Conde being entered into Orleans, ve∣ry many of the faythfull, which bordered thereaboutes, tooke cities for the Prince of Conde, professing notwith∣standing that they mayntayned the Kings authoritie: as they of Towers, of Blais, of Angew, and many others as hereafter shalbe declared. Notwithstanding the E∣dict of January was rightly obserued, by the seuere cō∣maundements of the Prince of Conde, which were of∣tentymes repeated by his seruaunts.
But all things growing dayly néerer warre then peace, the greatest part of the inhabitants of Towers and Blayz, sodenly rose and went into the popish churches, and brake downe and quite defaced the Images and pi∣ctures which they there found: notwithstanding there was no murther committed. When newes hereof was brought to Orleans, the Prince of Conde greatly misliked of their doing, & gaueCertayne Idols bro∣ken down. commaundement that enquirie should be made of the doers hereof, and that they shold be punished according to the prescript of the kings Edicts. At Orleans, they of both Religions, liued peaceably, and according to the E∣dict of January, the priests openly in their churches, v∣sed their superstitiouse rytes and ceremonies: and the faithfull on the contrary part, went out of the Citie to heare sermons. The which notwithstāding continew∣ed but a short time, as shalbe declared anon when occa∣sion is offered to speake of the same. The Prince of Conde had sent the causes in writing that moued him to warre (of the which we haue spoken before) to the King and Quéene and to the king of Na∣uar his brother: praying and beséeching them, that vpon the conditions which he propounded vnto them, ye whole matter might be peaceably ended: and concerning the same matter also, he wrote to the Senate of Paris, that his writings and letters, might be kept in the publique Commentaries and Register of the Senat, for a remē∣brance, whatsoeuer might chaunce afterward. After the which letters, the Quéen answered the Prince of Conde the second of May, by hir letters agayne. In the whichletters sent from the Queene to the Prince of Conde. shée sayd, she was glad that the Prince of Conde shewed himselfe to be desirouse of peace and concorde, whereas otherwyse ther was cause why shée should greatly sor∣row and lament: for that shée being a woman, to whom by the common consent of the States, the gouernment
of the king and realme was committed, was nowe in the middest of so great troubles: to be ryd out of which, shée trusting to the Prince, doubted not, but that hée would do all that hée could for the good will and obediēce sake which hée did owe vnto the King, and for the pro∣fite and quietnesse of the whole Realme, and would not refuse any reasonable condicion, for the establishing of peace and concord. Therefore shée sayd that hée should do very well, if so be he would come vnto the King and to her out of hand, putting of his armour, and trusting to the promises of her fayth, which should be as sure vn to him, as any obligation, if so be hée would remember the friendship and loue which shée alwais bare towards him, who loueth him as tenderly, as the mother loueth her childe. Therefore shée sayeth that hée shall doe very well, if so be hée come boldly to the Court, that hée may ende all matters at once before the King and hir. The Senate of Paris also sent letters of aunswer to the Prince of Conde, the fiueth day of May, to this effect following. Wée haue receyued your letters, with the forme ofLetters frō the Senat of Paris to the Prince▪ of Conde. your declaration, the which we could not reade without our great sorrow and grief: Séeing that wée know you to be a Prince and the Kings neere kinsmā, of one of the most noble stockes of the kings kynred: neyther do wée doubt, but that your nature and disposition is agréeable to your offspringe (as it is commonly séene in the best Princes) if it be not alienated and drawne away wyth euill counsells. And although it be our office onely to deale in the principal poyntes of the law, yet neuerthe∣lesse, seeing you haue made special complaints vnto vs, wée thought it not good to let you want all that wée are able to do in that point, but fréely and truly to set before you our opinion and iudgemēt: wherby you may know how reuerētly, according to our duty, we estéeme of you
We haue considered and do perceyue that your com∣plaintes do consist in two principall poynts: The first & principall is, that it hath bene told you that the kyng & Quéene, were captiued in the custodie of certaine of the Nobles which attended vpon them: and that many of his Connsellers were with threatninges made afeard. Wee beséeche you, that you would not any more be∣léeue these reportes: séeing it is so manifest and eui∣dently knowne to all men that it cannot be doubted of, how that the King of Nauar your Brother, a man of great wisedome, and such a one as is very carefull for the preseruation of the king and his dignity, is with the King and Queene, who will not, without all doubt, suf∣fer any maner of violence or iniury to be offered to the King, being both of kyn to the Kyng as well as you, & also charged with the king by his office. Beside this the Cardinall of Borbon is with them, who hath no lesse care for the safetie of the king and the Realme than you haue. Moreouer there are with him other Princes his kinsmen, men of wisedome, which are bound both by their office and also by the bond of loue to defende the kyng, with a great sort of his Counsell also, which if the kyng were so shamefully misused, would lay their heades together to remedy the same: because if in this poynt they should fayle to do their dutie, they might be sure to be euill spoken of among all men. In that ther∣fore they do so diligently séeke with one consent the pre seruation of the state, and would haue you to be ioyned with them, you may thereby certainely perceiue how false those reports haue bene: the which reports would greatly haue offended and gréeued the mindes of your bretherne if that they had not here tofore declared their fayth, and great good will: for if they should so behaue themselues towards the king, it wold greatly redownd to their reproch and shame.
If you will wey and consider these things, you shall find that those reporters, do vnto you and to them also great iniury, séeing that ye are bretherne. This also we woulde haue you to vnderstand, that we haue none otherwise confirmed letters concerning the libertie of the King and Quéen then the very truth thereof hath caused vs, least you should thinke that we had done any thing rashly or through feare. We feare no man in the executing of our office: in doing whereof, we haue only a consideration of the kyng, specially in those thinges which do belong to the obediēce of the kyng, and to the profite of the Realme: being ready for these causes to spend our life and goods. Know you also for suertie that all dew reuerence & obedience is shewed here to the King and Quéene. And because we vnderstand by your declaratiō, that you find fault with certaine of vs, as though we forsaking the Kinges lawfull Counsell were present at certaine se∣cret Counselles: Know you also this for a certaine, that none of vs were present at that counsell, which was kept here extraordinarily, by the aucthoritie of the king of Nauar your brother, but only by the slat commaun∣dement of the Cardinal of Borbō your brother also, and the kéeper of the Citie: neyther did we heare, sée, or perceyue that anything was done there, which did not appertaine to the obedience of the King. The other principall poynt of your complaints, con∣cerneth Religion. The which truely is no lesse straung and wonderfull vnto vs. Of the which, we perceyuing that you haue ben otherwise infourmed, than it is, haue thought good to certifie you of the trueth. You knowe that the Edicts which haue ben made in these our kings dayes, pertaine to no other end, than to kéepe the kings subiectes in their obedience, and to auoyde seditions, vntill such time as the kyng were come to his full age:
for all those Edictes are temporall, and serue but for a tyme, to the intent they may be chaunged▪ if so be ne∣cessitie and experience of things shall so declare it to be best. The Edict of Iuly was not so soone made as abro∣gated, at the making wherof you your selfe were pre∣sent: and yet notwithstanding the same ought not ther∣fore to be defended by violence▪ After this, there was made another Edict, in the moneth of Ianuary. And least it should rather bring trouble than tranquillitie, at the first we doubted to confirme the same: but when we had good hope of peace and tranquillitie, we confir∣med the same, otherwise we would not haue doon it. And vppon the same hope of peace, thrée dayes agoe, we confirmed and published another Edict like to the Edict of Ianuary in euery poynt, sauing that Paris the Metro∣politane Citie is excepted. The which exception was not made without great cause: For when the sedition which was there of late dayes wared more gréeuous than in other places, it could not be otherwise appea∣sed. The end of those Edicts was not, to bring in news Religions, but, as it is sayd already, to kéepe the people in peace and tranquillitie. If the offence be as great in the first as in the second: the Kyng hath power of him∣self to continew or to alter lawes, and not the subiects by priuate aucthoritie & by force of Armes. The whiib thinge truly wee cannot couller or hide, séeing wée read in your declaration, how that you say that you, and fiftie thousād more, which are of ye same mind, wil spēd your liues in this cause. We wish that you may receiue this our admonition to your profite: & to consider that it is a great deale more méet for you, being the kings néer kinsman, to defend his dignitie, than to ioyne your selfe to others which are not in the same conditiō. If by your following of other counselles the dignity of the king be deminished, ye greater blame & reproch shalbe youres.
You know that we haue maintained your Innocē∣cie: and do perswade wyth you to vse wholesom Coun∣sell: least you hurt your selfe. We cannot offer vnto you a better testimonye of our good wil ready to serue you, which we wil constant∣ly retaine so long as you shew all due obedience to the King and Quéene. Concerning other matters which are written in the same your declaration, because they doe not apper∣taine vnto vs, you shall vnderstande the Kings will, to whome they do appertaine. This one thing we adde, That the examination of the slaughter committed at Uassi, is appoynted to vs to be examined, the which shall be handeled of our parte, according to oure office and manner, wyth iustice and equitie. WE haue spoken before concernyng the letters which the Quéene sent to the Prince of Conde: In the which shée perswaded him to come vnto the King vn∣weapened and wythout Armor, that the matter might be ended quietly among them, and that he might by his presence put away those slanders which were reported of him. For there went diuers euell reportes abrode of hym, and the more by reason of the Declaration which he caused to be published, the Kings Letters being set forth against the same: insomuch that the causes of all the troubles were openly layd vpon him. Wherevpon the Prince of Conde, published another wryting the. ix.This name Triumuiri signifieth three chosē officers of equall au∣thoritie. of May, in the which he declared that the Guises, whych were called the Triumuiri, and not he, were the causes of al the troubles: declaring reasons, by which it might appeare, that he had soughte peace, did, and would still séeke the same: And although (sayth he) I haue alwayes hitherto declared by vndoubted Arguments, not only a singuler loue, and an obedient mind towards the King
and Quéene, but also a notable desire and care for the profite and concorde of the Realme: the which also of late I declared, when as I deferred the putting my self in Armor, euen vntil the very pinche and extréeme ne∣cessitye, at what time I was constrained to doe it, that IThe secōd declaratiō of the Prince of Conde. might resist their violence, which threatned to kill and slay, and made great bragges, and which of late, when they had gotten an Army of men, contrary to the King and Quéenes commaundement, armed them selues, & entred into Paris, where I was at that time, being not ignorant what they ment to do: yet notwithstanding I made no sturre or do, least I should put the City in pea∣rill. Yea, I hauing no consideration of my estate and condition, although I was not the first that put my self in Armor, yet notwithstanding at the first commaun∣dement of the Quéene, least I might séeme to omit any thing lawful that might bring peace, I with mine wēt from Paris, minding to get me home to my own house, and to dismisse al my train, thinking that my aduersa∣ries would haue done the same: who notwithstanding cōtrarywise, kéeping Paris still, and doing many things there against their office, and also hauing vsurped the Kings authoritye, kept the King and Quéene captiues not only in body but also in minde. I, on the contrarye part, ceassed not from yt time forward, to propounde al reasonable conditions that might be, to ye end all things might be ended peaceably, as testify my wrytings, and those men them selues, whome I vsed as meanes to bring matters to quiet ende: although (I say) all these things were done thus by me, that it might plainly ap∣peare that I desired nothing more than the Kings dig∣nity, and the peace and tranquility of the Realme: yet notwithstanding, fearing least my answers to the Re∣scripts from the Quéene, after I had offered the condi∣tions of peace, be not so truely and wholely brought to
her handes as they passed from me: I thoughte good to haue the whole matter put in wryting, both to the ende they may be considered of the King and Quéene, and also that they being published throughout all Christian Realmes, may be known to all Princes, to our Frends in Fraunce, and specially to all Courts and Parliamēts of this Realme: of the which, but specially of the Court of Paris, to the which before this time I haue sent my Declaration, I require and craue, that these explicati∣ons of my reasons, may be put in the publique Rege∣ster: to the ende I may geue accounte of all my actions to my Prince and soueraigne Lord the King, at what time be shal come to that age that he may Iudge of the merites of his subiects, and of their euell desertes also, which haue don any thing during the time of the kings Minoritie. First of all, this I thinke for a suertie, that it ney∣ther can, nor ought to be sayd that I haue ben the cause either of stirring vp or of maintaining these commoti∣ons and troubles: when as my ennemies them selues wil confesse that I was not the first that toke ye sweard in hand: and when I did take it after them, whych put them selues in Armor againste the King and Quéenes willes, I had good occasion so to do. For by the Lawe of Nature, being a Prince and one of the Kings kinsmen I ought, and am bound of duety, to defend and maintain the dignity of the King, and the peace and tranquillitye of the Realme. So soone as I put on Armoure I prote∣sted that I woulde put of the same againe vppon suche reasonable conditions, as shoulde appertaine to the li∣bertye of the King and Quéene, and to the peace and concorde of the Realme. Whervpon it must néedes follow, that they are the causes & authours of troubles, which haue refused those conditions, and which, when they could not abyde the
peaceable gouernement of the Quéene, and that shée should be the head ouer the Kings subiectes, and disday∣ning at her, for that shée looked so straytly vnto thē, least they should defraude the kings creditors of any of their debt, put themselues in armour, came with a bande of soldiours to the King, and beset him about with armed men, that hauing the king and Quéene in their owne power, they might gouerne the Realme as thei list thē∣selues: they committed horrible murthers vppon the kings subiectes liuing peaceably according to the kings lawes, and thus haue brought vpon the whole Realme of France these stormy tempestes of trouble, beginning euen a litle before to enioy peace and tranquillitie, both partes being contented to liue peaceably, so that they might enioye their Religion. But and if (leauing the present state of things) wée will call to mind and consider euery mans actes in time past, in good sooth, wée shall finde these same men, which at this day stirre vp these troubles, haue ben also afore∣tyme, the causes of great inconueniences to the Crown and dignitie: séeking by the perturbation of this realme to enrich themselues, whereas by peace and tranquility they decay. And to omit that which king Fraunces, a mā of excellent wisdome and Iudgement, sayd of them, and to omit also many of their bold and presumptuouse en∣terprises, who knoweth not that they hating publique peace & concord, were the onely causes and authours of the truce and league breaking betwene king Henry and king Philip of Spayn, to the great dammage and hurte of Fraunce: In so much that they brought the same, by warres, in great perilles, and all to haue their will and pleasure by one meanes or other. Beside this, after S. Laurence slaughter, when thei had gotten vnto them the Treasurers office, which thei had before gréedily gayed for, what detriment or hurt did they not bring vnto the
kingdome? What did they also to King Heny, who dis∣king & being weary of their violent and cruel dispositiō, mynded to haue sent them away frō the Court to their howse, had he not ben preuented by death? But after∣ward in the dayes of king Fraunces the second, being but yong, these Straungers, and violent Carters, agaynst law and equitie, and against the auncient constitutious of the realme of Fraunce, vsurped the mere impery and gouernement of the kingdome: during which time, was the realme voyd of troubles? Did they not in the sighte of all men go about to set that yong king, being by na∣ture very gentle, and full of clemency, agaynst his sub∣iects: and to haue made him infamouse with the note of cruelty for euer? Did they not cause him to be a mortall enemie against his subiectes, euen in the middest of his raigne, in so much that except GOD in his mercy ha turned away so great calamities and miseries lyke too haue ensewed, we all should haue rued the same, to re∣member he which, it would cause any Christian harte to tremble? And to make an end of so lamentable a Tragedie,A Tragedy beginneth merily. but endeth sorowfully When kinge Fraunces was dead, these boysterouse stormes were blowen ouer, & the sky was more cleare, the gouernement of the Realm being committed to the Quéene, and to the king of Nauar: vntill such tyme as their ambition hating peace and tranquillitie, styred them vp and their fellowes, to set heauen and earth to∣gyther, and to cause the state to be troublesome, as (to my great gréefe) is to be séene. Therefore I leaue the Iudgement of these, to all indifferent men, to discerne who are the authours of troubles: whether they, which haue sought peace and concord by all meanes possible: or they, which haue so mayntayned dissensions always, that thei dare at this time, to the great hurt of the whole Realme proclayme open warres. Besides this, there
is so little cause for any man to marueile why I should be so busie to deale and so ware and circumspecte in the matter, that I shuld be in great falte if I did otherwise. For their actes in time paste againste me, haue taught me sufficiently to beware how I put my selfe into their handes. And it is playne enough to be séene, that their purpose is to destroy the greatest part of the Nobilitie, and of all estates of men which imbrace the truth of the gospell, specially those that attende vpō mée. The which their meaning may easely be gathered by the talk which the Duke of Guise, and the Constable had togyther of late in the Senate of Paris, before a great assembly. But what obedience they shewe towardes the Quéene, it may appeare hereby, that contrary to the Quéenes wil which she oftentimes declared, they dyd frustrate the kings Edict of Ianuary, adding this new exception: Let not the Religion be vsed at Paris. Who seeth not that they intend nothing else, but euen to banish the Gospell out of all partes of the Realme? when as also of late procla∣mation was made at Paris, to banish al the new Christi∣ans. To what purpose shoulde I say that by no other meanes, the Inhabitants of Paris, can be kept in quiet? For we haue séene that the Prince of Rochesuryon, and Martial Momorentius, hauing about them only twelue soldiers, haue kept the people of Paris in quiet without any maner of tumult, the space of thrée monethes togy∣ther. The which continewed euen vntill that daye, on the which the Duke of Guise entred into Paris. But this is worthy the remembrance, that when the same Mar∣tiall Memorency had somewhat increased the number of soldiers to kéepe the ordinary watch, wherby the con∣federacies of certeyne factious persons, might be preuē ted, the Marchant maister and certeyne of the Citizens sayd, that the people might be kept in peace and quyet with lesse ado a great deale. Notwithstanding after the
comming of the Guises into the Citie, the mindes of the people were so altered, that to kéepe them in quiet they were fayne to haue a band of men which they appoin∣ted without the knowledge and wil of the Quéene. But I knowe it came to passe by the singular prouidence of God, that the Duke of Guise and the Constable should dis∣close the secrets of their harts, before so great a multi∣tude, that their toong no doubt might runne before their wyt. The which thing truly doth sufficiētly declare that those things are true which certeine of their familiar friends, and houshold seruaunts haue reported, & which doth also appere by diuers of their letters that haue ben taken, namely, that their purpose is to depriue me of that company of men which are here with me, & to pu∣nish them with such punishments as they had already deuised. The which in déed the slaughters, and spoyling rapine committed by the soldiers of the Constable, & those things also which were done in diuers places against the mē of the reformed Religion, do opeuly declare: but specially that horrible murther don by the Guises at Sens. Of the which calamities they are to giue an account, and to an∣swer. But as touching the cōmaundemēt of the Quéen, by which shée hath willed me, laying my armour asyde, to come vnto the king vpon hir fayth and trust, and too make me such assurance in wryting as I shall require: I protest truly, that I haue a singular desire & good will to obey hir commaundements: but I vnderstand yt these are the subtil practises of my enimies, which bring all things to passe as they lust themselues: And agayne, I sée not how the Quéene can saue me harmlesse, so longe as shée is in that state that she is now in. For how shall she resist them, who putting thēselues in armor against hir wil, haue beset hir round about? And as like it is that my brother the king of Nauar cānot exercise his power
and authoritie as he should, whose facilitie & sufferance thei haue greatly abused, & do what they list themselues both against his will and the Quéenes: eut̄ as also they haue done oftentimes heretofore, when they were put in authoritie to gouerne. The which iniuries done to them, if they would remember, they must néedes think themselues much bound to the prouidence of god, which hath safely preserued them from the counsels and prac∣tises of the Guises. To be short, I sée no other way for the safegarde of the king and Queen, than for the Guises to depart from the Court home to their howse, and for the Quéene hir self to recouer hir former libertie. For, truly, I will not thinke and beléeue that they are to bée trusted, so long as they kéepe themselues in armes, & doo retayne those bandes of men which they haue gathered vnto thē: yea I my self am plainly taught to take héedby their promises heretofore. For what mischief is it not, that they séeke to worke against me, and those also that are with me? They openly reuile vs as rebelles & open enimies to the King and the realme: and doe thruste vs out of our offices: and also threaten death vnto vs. For who knoweth not what false rumors, and shamelesse re ports, they haue openly bruted abroad against me? Who séeth not the preparation of warres which they make a∣gainst me, both within the kings dominions and also without? They conspire with foreyne Ambassadours to make warre, partly without the Quéenes knoweledge and consent, and partly by hir consent, which they ex∣torte from hir through feare, abusing hir facilitie, ma∣king hir beléeue that which they intende not. They set the King and encourage him agaynst his faythfull sub∣iectes. They spende and waste the kings Treasure in warlyke affayres, which should be better bestowed to the paying of his debtes: So that the same whiche the people gaue to helpe their King withall, is nowe tour∣ned
to their destruction. And to accomplish their wickednesse at the full they mind vtterly to destroye the greatest part of the Nobi∣litie, which mislike of their wicked actes. The which certainely is nothing els but to bring the kyng and the Realme into present destruction. And in the middest of these their diuelish Counselles, am I in safe∣tie? For whereas it is sayd, that I do séeke my owne pri∣uate commoditie more than the common wealth, that certainely cannot be rightly sayde of me, but more tru∣ly a great deale of them which adde dayly to their olde wickednes new mischiefes: being so obstinate and wil∣ful, that they had rather bring the kyng and the Realme in to this perill of warre, than for common quietnes sake, somewhat to relent. They say that they will not go home from the Kyng. What faythfull Subiecte would denie to obey his soueraine in this? To the auoy∣ding the causes of such present and imminent euilles. For whereas they obstinately say, that it is not méete for them to depart from the Kyng in this his minority, they haue no reason for it. For the Quéene is sufficient inough to discharge that matter, specially whē as great and vrgent cause requireth the same. Let them remem∣ber that they were aduaunced to their dignities, not to do all thinges after their owne mind, and contrary to the wils of the kyng and Quéene to bring the Realme into these daungers: but to the end they might kéepe the same in peace and concord, that is, to leaue it in that state, in the which it was before thei enterprised to take armoure. In putting on of the which, dare they say that they haue done according to their office? It is lawfull for no man truly in this Realme to put on Armour, ex∣cept it be by the expresse commaundement of the kyng. It hath not bene lawfull at any time by the lawes of
Fraunce in the dayes of those kynges that haue bene of lawfull age, for the kynges naturall bretherne, though they retourned from warre, to enter armed▪ into the Court. And haue they aucthoritie so to do in this time of the Kinges minoritie? But if they were the Kynges faithfull subiectes, séeing that by their comming in Ar∣mour into the Court, the whole Realme is in a roare, they would for the peace & tranquillitie of the Realme, depart. And séeing this is the only way to bring peace and concord, they, if they were good and faithfull subiectes, woulde shew themselues to haue more regard to the cōmon profite of all men, than to themselues. Although truly I my selfe am not only as they are an officer to the kyng, but also the Kinges néere kinsman, and ther∣fore haue more right and authority to be with the king: yet notwithstanding I, which was not the first that put my self in Armour, for the common wealthes sake, do protest and promise that I with all that are with me, will depart euery man to his house: vppon condition that they will do the like. To the which condition except they graunt, all men may sée, that it is not I, but they which prefer their owne gaine before the common wealth. But and if they cannot be satisfied with these rea∣sons, let them also search for examples: let them call to mind what hath ben alwayes wont to be done hither∣to in these matters: and they shall find that the Kynges aforetime of Fraunce haue vsed this meane, that when controuersies haue fallen out betwéene their Princes, and that both partes had put themselues in Armes by their priuate aucthoritie, to giue commaundement vn∣to them to vnarme themselues, and to go home to their houses: and afterward to make them answere to the same.
But admit that they had aucthority to abide stil with the Kyng, against right, and all approued customes, be∣ing but his seruants only and to beset him round about with such souldiours as they haue gathered together by their priuate aucthoritie: yet notwithstāding it cānot be denied but that I haue great iniury, I (I say) which shoulde haue this prerogatiue before them, beinge the Kinges néere kinsman, and which haue not put on Ar∣mour, but by them constrayned, only for this cause, to defend the Kyng, the Quéene, and my selfe from vio∣lence: these thinges (I say) considered, I haue great in∣iury except I haue leaue in like mauer for mée, & mine to be about the kyng: which are sworne as well as o∣thers vnto him: and which I say and affirme are the Kynges faithfull subiectes and seruants, as they haue both shewed already, and also will shew hereafter: at what time they shall be commaunded by the kyng of Nauar, the kynges Deputie, to defend the kynges li∣bertie, and the aucthority of the Quéene, and of the kyng of Nauar, being ready for the same to spende both their life and goods. But and if they will not suffer the Quéene to vse that equallitie that she ought, let her not leane to the one part more than to the other (howbeit if she be more inclined to any part, she should rather be inclined to me being a Prince and the kynges néere kinsman) and let her vse her aucthoritie to remedy the mischtefe at hand otherwise than she hath done before: for no man wyll thinke that any thing hath ben done by her consent, sée∣ing that shée is of such wisedome, and so carefull for the preseruation of the kyng her Sonnes dignitie, that she woulde not bée negligent to do her dutie in a matter of so great waight. But there is no doubt, but that which shée did, was for feare of them, which hauing hir in holde, pulled her from doing of her dutie.
When as also it is manifest that the King is broughte to that state that he is constrained to graunte manye things against his will. To proue this thing, their chu∣sing of new Counsellers shall serue: whom they ther∣fore chose, that vnder the pretence of a Counsell, the Quéene might be constrained to do what they wold by a more clenly way. For it is knowne in what order it was done, and in what estimation they nowe haue the Quéene: who deliverate and take counsell together by them selues a parte, and do conclude whatsoeuer they them selues do like of. They do many things by their owne priuate authority, and when they haue don, then they come to aske her minde and opinion. And what soeuer they them selues lust to haue done, they cause the high Courte of Parliament to confirme the same. And in very déede they preuatle more wyth those of the Parliament than the Quéene her selfe can. Finallye, who will deny, that it is necessarye at this time, to deli∣uer the Quéene from feare of this violence, that shée may recouer her former authority: and so they to lay a∣side their Armor, and to goe home to their houses, that all suspicion of violence being taken away, there maye be more quietnesse héereafter, and the perrils of great calamities auoided? For I and all that are wyth me he fully perswaded and bent, that except the matter be vp∣rightly and indifferently handled, rather to abide the extremity, and to sèe the end, than that they which haue vsurped to them selues power, against all law & right, to the great hurt and detrement of the Kings subiectes hitherto, and also as yet going about to worke their vt∣ter destruction, by so many horrible murthers cruelly committed against the kings Edicts, should still héere∣after impudently procéede in their Insolencie. And to take away all occasion of slaunder whych they may haue against me héereafter: wheras they say
that the kings letters were taken away frō the kings Postes by my cōmaundement: I answere that I haue geuen contrary commaundement to those that attend vppon me, neither were there letters at any time ta∣ken by them, which were sent eyther to the king, to the Quéene, or to the king of Nauar. This I confesse to be true, that there haue bene many letters taken which haue bene sent to diuers priuate persons: by which are to be séene an infinite number of sclaunders, false ru∣mours, counselles, and practises against me: many thinges being quite contrary to those promises which they haue made vnto me concerning peace and con∣corde. But concerning the casting downe of the Images at Towers, and at Blais: I protest that I was very sory for the same: in so much that I signified to the kinges Officers which are in those places, that I would ayde and assist them, to punish those according to the kings lawes which should be found gilty in the fact. This is and may be an Argument of my will and meaninge, the which also I haue done, and doe as yet, at Orleans. Euery one of what state and condition so euer he be of, prayseth and commendeth the moderation and behaui∣our of al those which are with me, which liue peaceably and quietly with the Townes men, without any ma∣ner of offence, or breach in any poynt of the Edicte of Ianuary. And as touching those which kéepe in hould certayn Cities: I affirme that they do it for no other cause, than to keepe those Cities for the vse of the Kinge, and not to suffer them to come into their handes, which abusing both the Kings name, and his Artillery, do séeke to get power for their owne priuate profite. For so sone as the Quéene shalbe restored to her former liberty, and into that state wherin she was within these thrée Mo∣nethes,
she shal wel perceiue and vnderstand that those Cities will shew all obedience to the Kinge and to her as they had euer done before: and will alwayes conti∣nue in the same so faithfull, that in that point they will geue place to no Citie within the Kings dominion: no not to Paris, which of late hath gone about to cause this ciuill warre, spending great store of money to that end and all vnder pretence of Religion. And nowe, I and mine are so farre from forgetting these thinges and buryinge them in silence (as we are wished to do) that we would rather haue thē to be chro∣nicled for euer, to be written in Tables, and to be por∣trayed in letters of Golde, and to be shrilly proclaymed throughout all Christian realmes, that they may sée our dutifull obedience and faithfull trust, shewed towardes our King greatly iniured in this his younge and tender yeres: and also that so notable an example of my cou∣rage & concord with the rest of the Nobilitie of France, which haue ioyned our selues together with one hart & consent, to preserue the dignity of the kinge & Quéene, may be a memorial for euer in writing to ye posteritie. I for my part, truly, do thinke, that I could not haue better occasion offered, to expresse my loue and duty to∣wards the kinge, and to get vnto my selfe true honour and prayse than by this meanes: and fully I am perswa ded, that my King and Prince will consider my dutifull seruice which I now shew vnto him, when he commeth to that age that he is able to iudge hereof: and to weigh the sayth and truth of my good wil, shewed in such time of néede. For these causes duly considered and weyed, I which haue sought al meanes and wayes to pacey these trou∣bles, which are like to bring destruction to the realme: & which haue offered and do offer still al reasonable cō∣ditions to be takē for the laying aside of armour on both
parts, only vpon consideratiō of the king and Quéene, & of the cōmon welth, do protest again before the king & quéene, & before al the states of the realme, yt the whole fault and blame of all those calamities and mischéeues, which are like to ensue by the meanes of these warres, is to be attributed to those alone, whom I haue decla∣red to be the causes of these perturbations & troubles: who refuse in the presente peryll of the destruction of the Realme, to departe from the Courte and the kinges Counsell: which their armor layd apart, would bring peace and concord. I do earnestly pray and beséech all the kings Courts and Parliaments, and all estates and degrées, to weigh and consider all thinges in due time: and to be diligent in doing of their duties, for the preseruation of the kinges dignity, and the authority & gouernement of the Quéene: that one day they may geue an accoūt of their doings (as I trust to do of mine) to the king, when he cometh to his lawful age, that they may rather haue praise & reward for their doings, than reproch & ignominy And not to forslow themselues, ei∣ther for to satisfy their own desires, or for fear or fauor of those which seeke to colour their faultes. And to con∣clude, I hartely pray and beséeth all the Kynges fayth∣full subiectes to helpe, ayde, and assiste, me in this so good and iust a cause: callinge God to witnesse, that I, onely for the aduancement of Gods glory, for the set∣ting of the Kynge and Quéene at theyr former liber∣ty, whom I sée beséeged and inclosed about with theyr subiectes, for the mainteyninge of the Quéene in her authoritie, for the defendinge of the common wealth, and for the putting away of those iniuries offered to the Kinges subiectes, for these causes I say, I haue bene prouoked to put my selfe in armour, and to resist theyr violence: The which euen at this day I iudge and sée to bée so profitable, to bridle the outragious madnesse, that
I trust hereafter God will blesse my labours, and will bringe the woorke which he hath put into my handes to so good effecte, and to so prosperous an ende, that his name shalbe glorified, our Kynges dignitie and Royal seate defended, and peace and tranquilitie main tayned. This was the whole summe of this Protestation, which the Prynce of Conde sente to the Kinge and Quéene, by certayne Messengers, to whom he gaue commaundement to declare howe earnestly he deūred peace: for the which he woulde refuse no indifferente conditions. He wrote also to dyuers Princes that were his fréendes in the kingedome of Fraunce, and spe∣cially to the Princes of Germany: whom he prayed to be meanes to make peace amonge them. He wrote also letters to the Emperour the fower and twenty day of May, to this effect. In consideration of the singuler clemency, humani∣ty,Letters of the prince of Conde to the Em∣peroure. and wonderfull wisedome, which for diuers causes, I haue thought to be in you, I thought it my dutye (al∣though to my great gréefe) to make you acquaynted with the state of Fraunce. Know you therfore that the matter is come to this, that the Guises conspiring with the Constable, and the Martiall of S. Andrew, haue gotten the king into their hands, insomuch that they haue ta∣ken away from him and frō the Quéene their liberty: and setting at naught the kinges Edictes, they do euen what they list themselues. And they haue already so be∣goon their Practises and Counsailes, that if they may bring them to effect, ther is no doubt but that the kings dignitie, and the liberty of the kingdome of Fraunce wil quight be ouer throwne. But to the ende you may vn∣derstand the whole matter, I sende here vnto you the trew and plain explication of al things, whych both the Guises and I my selfe haue done in this businesse. By
which it may euidently appeare, that the Guises, are the conspiratours, and the breakers of the kings lawes and dignitie. But I to stay these troubles, & for the defence of my kinge, to whom I am bound, both by duty, and al∣so by the bonde of nature, & also for the Realme, my na∣tiue contrey, will spend all that I am able, and my life it selfe: And I alone will not do this, but a great manye more of the same mind. Wherfore I hūbly beséech you to waigh and consider the reasons of all my doings: the which if they seme iuste and good, be an ayde I pray you in these perillous times to the king and Quene, and to al the family of Valesia: and set to your helping hand for peace and concorde. In so doing your maiestie shall do a most godly acte. He sent letters also to the Countie Palatine calledLetters sent to the prince of Palatine. Frederike, all most to the same effect, with both his wri∣tings also in the which he declared the maner of his do∣inges: and because he had alwaies wished al his actions to be knowen to all men, and to be iudged of those, that will vprightly consider of the same: he sayde he greatly desired that the truth of all thinges, might be faithfully and truly knowen to all men: to the end all those slaun∣ders might be takē away, which his aduersaries, the au¦thours of al the trouble, to his infamy, euery where co∣lourably spred abrode. Although therefore the truth nedeth no defence, and although he had both the testimony of a good conscience, and also a sure testimony of many men, for all his do∣inges, to maintaine his cause, yit notwithstanding, he said, he thought good to signifi vnto him, with how great care & labour he had sought (as it became a faithful sub∣iecte to do) to make peace and quietnesse. Where by hée trusted that he should sée, both his faithfulnes towardes the king, in the which he would alwaies abide: and also should marualle at the peruerse obstinacy of his ene∣mies:
which intend rather to cōfoūd & peruert al things than to forsake their ambitiouse desire to rule. There∣fore hée sayd that hee wold write vnto him those things which he had great cause to lament, beséeching him, that for the loue and friendship which he bare to the King & the realm, he would helpe to further his purpose, which only tended to the working of peace and tranquillitie. To the same effect also, he wrote two letters to the Duke of Sabaudia. About the same time, there was a Synode of the refor∣med churches of Fraunce, at Orleans: to the which thereA Synode at Orleans. came diuers Ministers of Gods word, and certaine cho∣sen men also of other churches. There was chosen, accor ding to custome, by the cōmon consent of the whole as∣semblie: to moderate this Synode, Antonius Champdus, minister of Gods word in the congregatiō of Paris, a mā of singular godlynes, learning, eloquence and modesty. This man was borne of a noble house, and being but a very yong man, be embraced and professed the doctrine of the Gospell, in so much, that hée was chosen by the church to the ministery of Gods word, the same church being but tender and yong, and beside that, much anoyed with affliction: & as he was chosen to this office, so was he no lesse diligent in the same: whereby hée became a most profitable mēber to the chuche but specially to the cōgregatiō of Paris, of ye which he was Superintēdent. In this Synode there arose a great controuersie concer∣ning ecclesiastiall discipline: which certaine light heads at that time began to discusse, seeking to maintayne the licentiousnesse of the common people. This controuecsy being at this time stayed, burst forth afterwarde more vehemently, and troubled many churches. And because the ciuill warres increased more & more, the Ministers by a common decrée, proclaymed publique prayers to be made in euery congregatiō, to turn away the wrath
of God from the Realme, who was not without great cause displeased with the same. And they sent to euerye congregacion, letters, to this effect. Al mē euidently sée what great troubles are at hand,Letters sēt from the Synod. like to fall vpon the Realme and the whole churche, for the which specially this mischief is prouided, Sathan & his soldiers, enuying the propagation and prosperity of the Gospell, and the peace which the same hath enioyed by the great goodnesse of God. And do perceyue that the causes of those troubles are the iuste iudgements of God, punishing the sinnes of men, which reiect so notable a benefite, as the glad ty∣dings of the gospel, the power of God to saluatiō, or else estéeme not so reuerently of the same as they ought. Our sinnes therfore are the very causes of these calami ties, so that we must seriously séeke all that wée may too appease the iust wrath of God: but specially they, who vnder the name of the reformed Religion, liued very wickedly. But to such as doo truly and from the bottom of their hartes repent them, & study to liue in newnesse of life, the promises of God are effectuall and doo apper∣tayne. Séeing therfore the matter is come to this point that all men maye plainly sée, that they which raise vp these troubles of warres, do séeke the ruine of the Gos∣pel and of the church, and therfore do warre and fight a∣gainst God himself: they must pluck vp their spirits, be of good courage, and certaynly perswaded that God will not fayle his seruaunts, whom he vouchsafeth so to ad∣uaunce, that whereas thei haue deserued to be seuerely punished for their sinnes, they might be afflicted for the truthes sake, and for the glory of his name What haue the enemies left vndone, by which thei might extinguish the doctrine of the gospell? Yet notwithstanding it hath escaped, Sathan and the Romish Antichrist etting & fuming in vayn. Therfore we must make this our cry,
The Gospell is assaulted, the destruction of the church is sought, and open warre proclaymed against God. Therfore god will fight for him selfe and for his. There are also other causes  for beside yt their deestable coun∣seil to abolish the Church, all men knowe that they goe about to bring most gréenouse troubles vpon the realm, to the ende they themselues alone may gouerne. They haue arrogantly broken the Edict of Ianuary: they haue added cruelty to their impudent boldnesse: they haue put the Kings subiects to death in diuers places, vsing qui∣etly the benefit of the Kings Edicts: and they haue hād∣led them more cruelly, than euer were any forreyn eni∣mies. What mischief hath not their vnbridled crueltye brought to passe? They came to the king being but yōg, to the Quéene a woman, and not able to resiste, armed with a band of men, and tooke them and caryed them, wil they nil they, whether they would. And hauing cap∣tiued both their bodies and their willes, at their owne pleasure, they most impudently abused them, breakinge the Kings Edictes, and violating his dignitie. There∣fore (say they) there are great causes why we shuld hope that God the author of humane societie, but specially ye preseruer of his church, will not suffer the vnbrideled force of those violent and cruell counsailes to procéede more outragiously than they doe: but will make hys Churche in the middest of all the trouble, the conque∣rer. And we haue a new and manifest argument, beside those which haue appered heretofore, of this his good wil towards his seruants: in that hée hath in these dayes of his afflicted church, raysed vp the Prince of Conde to be a Patrone and defender of this cause, by miracle of hys diuine prouidence. For this cause, we must gyue harty thanks vnto God, the first and principall author of thys benefit, & we must looke for happy successe of his cause. And because hée will vse this meane to preserue his
church we for our partes, must be diligent, faithful, cou ragiouse, and constant: least we omitte good occasion to bring things to passe, being offered. Wee séeke the cōser uation of the Gospell and of the church, and for the be∣fendinge of the libertie and dignitie of the King, of the Realme, and the whole common wealth. Who will denie that these are iust and lawfull causes, to put on Armour, and specially for them to whom that authoritie appertaineth? It is méete and necessary ther fore (say they) that you and we to the vtmost of our pow er, and to the spending of our liues, do aid and assist the Prince of Conde, & the rest of the kings officers, which haue made a sollemne vow for the defence of the King, the Realme, and the Church: and to be very carefull to giue vnto the Prince of Conde, for this cause, money, fourniture, and all maner of warlike prouision when∣soeuer he shall require the same. In so doing (they said) this thing should be so profitable for them all, that no∣thing can be more necessary, the time being considered: And as they thought it to be their dutie, to admonish them of these things, séeing that now, the glory of God, the safetie of the Church, and the preseruation of hu∣mane societie, was to be sought for: euen so (saye they) you must not delay the matter, being of so great waight by any maner of meanes. But forsomuch as all mans helpe is wholely vnprofitable and vaine, except wée haue first of all the helpe and ayd of God, the aucthor & reuenger of this cause: We must take héede that wée be diligent in calling vpon God, and that we professe the true Religion with holines of life, least in the mid∣dest of these troubles of warres, the care of true godli∣nesse be quight extinguished. The best weapons that may be had to fight against our enemies, is holines of life, and godly prayers. If these be wanting, our words shall runne through our owne sides. And because (saye
they) we sée before our eyes such horrible calamities: we, following the approued custome of the Church, haue appoynted by a common decrée of all men, that in all congregations, their should be fasting and sollemne prayers for certaine dayes, which we admonish you to vse modestly, deuoutly, and godly: and also that God should be prayed vnto publiquely and priuatly, to send a happie successe of all these troubles, to the glory of his name, and to the peace and tranquillitie of his Church. They wrote letters also in the name of the wholeLetters to the Coun∣tie Pallen∣tine, from the Synod. Synode, to Frederike, County Pallentine at Rheine, whom the refourmed Churches of France had found alwayes in time of cruell persecution a fréend, and ready to helpe at néede. This was the coppie of their letters. We are not ignorant, that the basenes of our con∣dition is such, that we should not trouble you with our letters: but notwithstanding both the experience which we haue had of your singuler clemency and humanitie, and also the waight and sharpenes of our miseries and calamities, do constrayne vs in these our extremities to flée vnto you for ayd: séeing that of long time you haue professed the trueth, and haue had a singuler care to pro mote the glory of God, and to mayntaine and defende those which professe the trueth of the Gospeel in what place soeuer they are. First of all therfore we pray vn∣to God omnipotent, and to the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, which will haue Kings and Princes to bée Nourses of his Church, that he will vouchsafe to con∣firme and strengthen your highnes, in true fortitude & constancy, by his holy spirit, which fortitude you haue hitherto aboundantly shewed, with great commendati∣on, in setting forth and promooting the woord of God in your Churches. And we giue you most harty thankes for those benefites which we receyued of you within these few yeares oftentimes, intreating our kynges
on the behalfe of our bretherne which were afflicted for the doctrine of Christ. And now we being gathered together of late out of all partes of the Realme, for a common Counsell or Synode, gladly call to mind the benefits which you haue shewed vppon vs: and so much the more willingly al∣so, because at this time the truce being broken, by which we began to enioye the benefite of the Kinges Edict, we stand in great néede of your clemency. We foresée the great tempest, and calamities of our Churches like to ensue, the state of your Churches of Germany in that Ciuill warre, comming into our mind: the which trou∣bles and calamities, being ended by God so happely, who hath promised without all doubt to helpe his ser∣uants, there is no cause why we should feare. Notwith standing we cannot chuse but be very carefull for our flockes commited to our charge. But to make the matter more playne, because we know that ye vnderstand already our care by certaine Noble men, we will not be tedious vnto you. Thus much we ad concerning our Churches, namely, That there is such a conspiracy made against our Churches, that except God in his mercy do prouide for the same, there is like to ensue no lesse calamitie and confusion, than there hath happened long agoe, to the Orientall, Greeke, and Affrican Churches. For, to conclude the matter in few wordes, when the Duke of Guise, and they which haue conspired with him, perceyued that by the Edict of Ianuary, men had leaue fréely and openly to preach the Gospell, and that they were restrayned of crueltie, which till that time they had declared by all maner of punishments: many of the Kinges officers & Noble men imbracing the doctrine of the Gospell: they made a conspiracie with the enemies of the true Reli∣gion, to kill in euery Citie the professors of the Gospel.
Of which their conspiracy we haue had manifest argu∣ments: First, by the horrible slaughter committed at Uassi it may appeare, and then by the cruell and bloudy murther of the men of Sens, the Bishoppricke wherof pertayned to ye Cardinall of Guise, so great slaughter of them being made, that for the space of fower dayes, there was such killing and steying, of men, women, & children, without any respect of person, that the only remembraunce therof, cannot but cause teares to bée shed: Yea, the dead bodies of such as were slayne, came swimming down the Riuer of Seine, to Paris requiring (as it were) their buriall, and complayning of this tira∣nie, or rather calling for vengeanee of God, and man. And now, although we know it rather to be our dutie to pray for our enemies, and for those which do perse∣cute vs, than to accuse them: yet notwithstanding, we trust that you will interprete to the best these com∣plaints of our iust grief, & of our manifold calamities. And for so much as, those our aduersaries, to leaue no thing vndone that might be to our destruction, haue re∣quired your Realme of Germany to ayd and assist them, we earnestly pray and beséech you, for the loue which you beare to the Church of Christ, that you will bend all your might, to withstand and put away this euill, least Germany imbracing the same truth of the Gospell which we do, be euill spoken of, for séeking to hurt and anoye vs. And we intreat your honour by the tender mercy of God, that you will vouchsafe to be a meane for vs to the King and Quéene, that there may be some consideration had of our Churches: and that you would helpe to mayntayne and defend, so iust a cause, the time requiring the same. Concerning the Letters which the Prince of Conde sent to the refourmed Churches of Fraunce, we haue spoken before: in the which he willed them, when they
sawe warres to begin, to prepare themselues to the warre with a good courage. Whereuppon in many pla∣ces they obeyed his commaundements, some prospe∣ring very well in their affayres, othersome, not hauing so good successe. They fortefyed with men and munitiō, so much as they could the Cities. And after the inhabi∣tants of Towers, of Blais and of Angewe, had so done al∣so, the men of Poicters, did the like, and then the Nor∣mans, which fortefied diners Cities, & tooke their chiefe Citie called Roane. But at Burdeux, and almost throughVasconia is Gascoyne. but Gascoyne, except in certaine meane townes, the faith full were molested, by Monsiere Monluce, the Lieu∣tenant, who delt very cruelly with the faithfull euery where, but specially at Bourdeux. By the meanes of this Monsire Monluce, there was a great slaughterthe slaugh ther of Tolosa. committed vppon the faithfull at Tholoz, and the rest of the multitude, which were many in number, and had escaped this gréeuous murther, brake out of the Citie, being a necessary place of refuge, both for them, and also for al the faithfull of the Countries therabout. The citie Montaubane in Langnedoc being taken by theMont au∣bon. faithfull townesmen therin, and fortefied with their garison, who, being oftentimes assaulted by the inha∣bitants of Tholoz and M. Mōluce, and encountred with all also in playue battaile, with great courage and con∣stancie defended themselues, and had good successe. ¶ Therfore in the prouince of Languedoc diuers things attempted, had diuers successe. In the Townes called Chatronouar, and Limos, many of the faythfull were slaine. The faithfull fled out of Narbon, being not able to withstand the power of Monsier de Iuoys theThe actes of Narbon in general. Liuetenant: they fled also out of diuers townes about Towers, the inhabitants wherof are called Rheni. Castra Albiens a Noble Citie was taken by the faithfull, and many other cities néere adioyning to the same. Pezenac
chum, a Citie, so called, yéelded also to the faithfull, but within a while after they were troubled againe. Also the Citie called Blitter, was taken and fortefied by the faithfull. Aijgnes also a Noble hauen lying vppon the Mediteran sea, was yéelded into the hands of the faith full. Monpellier, also a Citie very famous for Phisicke, and healing diseases, and very rich also for that it bor∣dered vppon the sea, was fortefied by the faythfull. Al∣so the faithfull tooke a very strong hold called S. Peters Castell, & thrust out a Bishop that kept the same, after which they got the whole Citie, the Ile, and the castel of Maguelon. The tooke also a towne called in old time Foss Marian, but now Aquae Mortuae, a noble hauen of the Mediteran Sea: but the Captayne thereof being slayne, through treason, the Papistes got the same a∣gaine.Nemaux otherwise called Nimes Moreouer the faithfull tooke Nemaux a Citie very rich, and noble by the auncient monuments of the Romanes, and they tooke not only this, but the whole ter ritory thereabout. The whole territory also almost of Uiuar, and Seuenas yéelded to the Faithfull: with the Medowes on both sides the riuer called Roane, from Lions almost to Auinion, after the which, they tooke a very strong holde called Rochmor Castell, which after∣wardesAuinion in Prouince. greatly anoyed the men of Auinion. Therfore, a great part of Narbon, which is called Languedoc, being very rich and replenished with stout and valiant soul∣diers, yéelded to the faythfull. On the other part, the Inhabitants of Dolphiny, being a great number which professed the reformed religion, made almost the whole prouince on their side, putting al such as were Papistes to silence. And herein they vsed the helpe of Baron des Adretz, who hauing with good successe done many valiant actes in those regions, with the very terrour of his fame and name, euen at the first quayled the mindes of the Papistes thereabouts. The
Citie of Ualentia also was taken by the faithful, but notValentia taken. without great perill In the which Citie there was one M. Mottecondrin, Deputie to the Duke of Guise, (who was gouernour of that prouince) a man of warre, and by the meanes of the Guises, a mortall enemie to the re∣formed Religion. This man to withstand the faythful, gathered togither all the power hée was able to make:Mottecon∣drinus slaine. and brought into the Citie new garrisons of soldiers, & apointed new watch and ward at euery gate of the Ci∣tie, to the great terror of the faithfull Citizens, who per∣ceyuing the present daunger, fled to the Churches that were reformed thereabouts, crauing their helpe & ayd. Wherevpon many came from Roman and Montill▪ noble citties, and from the hyther part of Viuaretz. And now when assault was made, the faithful of the ci∣tie of Valencia got the gate, and whilest the souldiours of Mottecondrin made hast to withstand them, the fayth∣ful rescued them on euery side: in so much that the Pa∣pistes were constrayned to giue backe: And Mon∣tecondrin himselfe, after he was come to his house from the tumult, was besieged, & at the length by fire, which was set to his house, constrayned to yéeld himselfe into his enemies hands. Then the Captaynes entered into communication with Mottecondrin. And while they were thus in talk togither a good while, the people stood wayting at the dores, and long looking when Mottecon∣drin shoule be slayne: and at the last they threatened certaine of their captaynes which went about to saue his lyfe, that except they deliuered into their handes Mottecondrin, they would slay them. Uppon this, one Mongoni, a noble man came to Mottecondrin, & sayd vnto him: That which thou wentest about to bring vpon o∣ther, thou shalt now taste of thy selfe, and shalt suffer punishe∣ment for so many good men that haue ben slayne. And then vnarming him, he thrust his dagger into his side, and so
slew Mottecondrin: and hoong the dead carcasse out of the window for the people to behold. And thus the faith full enioyed Valentia, and almoste all the chief Cities in Dolpheny, as Grenoble, Uienna, Romans, Montil, Crest, and others. It was reported that letters of the Duke of Guise were found among the writings of Mottecon∣drin, in whiche hée gaue commaundement to kill the faythfull in euery Citie: and it was reported, that the fourth of May, was the day appointed for that murther the which rumour greatly stirred vp the mindes of the faithfull, they plainly vnderstanding whereabout their aduersaries the papistes went. While these things were thus a working at Valen∣cia, and throughout all Dolpheny, at Lyons also (as com∣monly it commeth to passe in so great garboyles) diuers mens mindes were diuersly occupied. The papistes sée∣med to excéede the faythfull both in strength, and also in nomber. Who notwithstanding, what with their own might, and what with the help of their neighbors, were not weake, and as touching their mindes and courage, they did no doubt far excell their enemies. The Lieuetenant at that time of Lyons, was one Sal∣tain, a Noble man being of quiet and modest dispositiō,Saltanus Liefetenāt of Lions. and was not altogither an enemie to the reformed Re∣ligion: & yet hée was very carefull to maintayne peace, according to the prescript of the Kings Edictes. There∣fore hée endeuoured himselfe all that hée might, to kéepe both partes and sortes of men in peace and concorde. Neuerthelesse there came newes to the Elders of the reformed churches, that the destructiō of the church was euen now a working: certeine noble men papistes, that were of the Guises faction, intending to be at Lyons, by a certeyne daye, as Mottecondrin, Aches, Calmentius, Mongeronius: who were reported to haue gathered great armies of soldiours from euery place. Soldiours
also were mustered at Lyons, Saltain not knowing thereof. Their conspiracy and purpose was, to remoue Saltain from the custody of the Citie, & then to destroye all the faithefull. Then came Mongeron to Lyons, and shewed to Saltain the kinges commaundement, thatSaltain Liuetenāt of Lyon. hée should be ioyned with him in the custodie & gouern∣ment of Lions. By whose comming the Papistes were not a litle cōforted. Wherevpon the faythfull thought, that in this extremitie, it was not good any longer to de∣lay the time. According to their manner, they had Ser∣mons in the suburbes: notwithstanding being carefull to defend thēselues, euen now of late, they had brought soldiours, & armour into the Citie. In the meane time newes was brought to Lyons of the tumult of Valentia, almost about that hower, in which the sturre was there made. Then wente Mongeron from Lyons: and by and by Fame reported, that Mottecondrin was slaine at Valentia. Therefore the faithful thinking it best to behaue thē selues māly, they in ye night time, secretly placed diuers armed soldiers in sōdry places of the cōmon streates: & & at the length when thei had gotten the Townhouse, & had fortified euery place of the Citie, and had taken the Churches they came into Parley with the Brother hood of saint Jhons, which were fat and rich priestes, who had leaue giuen them to departe out of the Citie vnarmed. And so the faithfull had the City to themselues, placed certaine péeces of ordinaunce in diuers conuenient pla∣ces, & fortified, the City. After those things, they came to Saltain the Liuetenaunt, and declared vnto him, that they had not done these thinges, eyther for contempt of the king or his magistrates: but to defend the Citye frō iniuries of open enemies, and to kepe it for the Kynge: obeyinge (as their dutye required) the commaunde∣mēts of the Prince of Conde, to whom the conseruation
of the king and Quéen appertayned: and therefore they willed him, according to his accustomed maner, to pro∣ceed in the gouernmēt of the citie. But M. Saltain with∣in a while after forsaking his office, got him home to his own house. And M. des Adretze, in the name of the Prince of Conde, tooke vpon him the gouernment of the Citie. And when consultacion was made by the Citi∣zens what were best to be done, they agréed at the last vpon this: That there shuld be chosen out two thousand men of the reformed Religion to kéepe the Citie: and yt they should be payed their wages, both out of the com∣mon treasury, and also out of Ecclesiasticall liuings. That no man should be indammaged or hurt for his re∣ligion: but that it should be lawful for euery one to liue with his conscience to him selfe. Notwithstanding, that there should no Masses or other rytes and ceremonies be vsed, either within or without the citie. That there should be twelue of the chiefest of the reformed Religi∣on, ioyned with the Consuls or Aldermen of the Citie. And that it should not be lawefull for the Aldermen of the citie to do any thing without their cōsent. And thus Lions came wholy into the handes and power of the faithfull. After this the people spoyled the popish chur∣ches, brake the Images and pictures of saincts and other ornamentes belonging to the Masse. And it is reported that there were only thrée slaine in the winning of thysLions wonne by the Pro∣testants. so great a citie. Lyons being after this manner brought into the handes of the faithfull, they tooke also the grea∣test part of Burgundy: Monsieur Tauuanes the Liefete∣nant séeking in vaine to hinder and let them. The newes of these things, thus prospering on the Protestants side, being spred throughout Fraunce, trou∣bled the mynds of the Guises a new, and encouraged the Prince of Conde, and those of his syde to procéed in their purpose. Notwithstandinge the Prince of Conde was
very sory that the men of Valentia had slayne M. Mot∣tecondrin,The Prince of Conde sory for that Mo: condrin was slayne and much discommended them for the same. Neyther did the Prince of Conde allowe the breakinge downe of Images, and the spoyling of other such super∣stitions, the which notwithstanding hée him selfe could not staye when hée was at Orleans: the people crying e∣uerywhere, that the Idolles which were the causes of all these troubles, ought not to be spared: and that séeing the defenders of them were so cruell, that they would not let to kill liuing men, is it not necessary then to o∣uerthrow those false worshippes of Idols, that the Ido∣latrers themselues mai see their punishments for their abominable wickednesse? And the people were not a little displeased with the Prince of Conde, for that he se∣uerely forbad these things to be done. Therefore vpon a certayne small rumour of the throwing downe of I∣dolles which were set vp in a certaine place in the sub∣urbes, the fame thereof was by and by spred throughout the whole citie, in so much that all men ran to the chur∣ches, some into one church, and some into an other, and made such a spoile of Images and other monuments of Idolatry, as thogh it had ben so appointed by the kings commaundement or by an Edict: this I saye, they dyd, notwithstanding that the seruauntes of the Prince of Conde did all that they could to staye them. And least yt the church called Holy Rood Church, which was more beautyful, should be thus serued and spoyled, the Prince of Conde commaunded certayne souldiours to garde the same: but they also shutting vnto thē the church doores, began to pull downe the Images and to deface the pic∣tures. In the meane tyme the papistes being sorrowe∣full, ran vp and downe the Citie & cryed, that the kings Edictes were broken. At the last the faythefull of the Churche of Orleans (where this broyle was) with much a do, obtayned leaue f rince of Conde to haue
sermons in the citie: yea & with importunate sute they went about to obtayne at the laste leaue to haue their Sermons in those Churches, in the which the Idoles were defaced. But the Prince of Conde said, that his purpose was not to deface Idoles: but to see that nothing shoulde bée done contrary to the Edict of January, for the breaking wherof his aduersaries, he sayd, being giltie, were to be punished. But the common voyce notwithstanding of the people was this to him againe: Séeing, say they the aduersaries of the trueth haue first begoone to ex∣tingnish the reformed Religion, and to persecute the professors thereof, why should we not destroy all false worship? And why should they deale coldly, which had taken vppon them the defence of the trueth, and of the liberty of the Realme, séeing that their aduersaries had proclaymed open warres against the truth, the Kyng & the Realme. The affayres of the faythfull going forward as ye sée, diuers rumors of them in the meane tyme, being brought to the Court, the Duke of Guise, the Constable, Momorencius, and the Marshiall of Saint Andrew, to the end they might make it séeme a matter of enuy that they were charged to put themselues in Armour to kéepe the Kyng and Quéen captiues, (as might appéere by the Letters of the Prince of Conde which were spred abrode to that effect) they would haue all men, they sayd, to know that all thinges were done by the autho∣ritie and will of the Kyng and Quéene, and that ther∣fore they were falsely sclaundered. They offered ther∣fore to the King and Quéene a Supplication to this ef∣fect following. TO THE intent it may appeare vnto you to the whole worlde, that we haue alwayes borne towardes you and towardes the kinges your auncetors of happy
memory our soueraigne Lordes, a faythfull and louingA Supplica tion offe∣red in the name of the Tium∣uiti. mind, and haue sought to the vtmost of our power the aduauncement of your dignities (for the mayntenance whereof next to the glory of God, we will spend our liues and all that we haue:) we pray and most humbly beséech you that ye will vnderstand our very purpose and meaninges, which we wholely and truely declare vnto you in this Supplication: to the end also we might declare the causes why we came vnto you, and why al∣so we are with you as yet, and why we do thinke in our conscience that we ought not (in cōsideration of the offices cōmitted vnto vs) to depart from you, except we woulde incurre the daunger of perpetuall oprobry and shame both to vs and our posteritie, as carelesse and vn∣trustie seruants to you, and as despisers of the glory of God, the safetie of the Kyng, and of the common peace and tranquillitie of the countrey: the which wée sée in most gréeuous perill at this time of ineuitable destruc∣tion, vnlesse it be holpen in time by the only remedies of these Edictes, which we hope you will preferre, and which ought to be confirmed by all Parliaments, but specially by the Parliament or Court of Paris. The which remedies we propound here before your Maie∣stie with all obedience, and reuerence, in manner and fourme following. First we thinke it necessary, not only for our con∣science sake, but specially for the conseruation of the Kynges dignitie, and for the defence of that othe, which the Kyng tooke at the time of his coronation, by which he bound him selfe to mayntaine the peace, tranquilli∣tie, and safetie of the whole Realme: least the Lawe both of GOD and also of man should be confounded, (whereby the perturbation and vtter destruction of all Realmes, Kingdomes, and Monarchies, must néedes follow.) For these causes it is necessary, that the Kyng
declare by and euerlasting Edict, that hee will not suf∣fer hereafter diuersitie of Religion, and of Churches, diuers doctrines, and sundry fashions of administrati∣ons of Sacraments, and of Ecclesiasticall rites, nor the Ministers of such, in his Realme, But that he would will and commaund one Catholike, Apostolique, and Romish church, which he and the Kyngs his Auncetors before him had receyued, to be retayned & kept through∣out his whole Realme: forbidding all other assemblies or congregations to set forth and teach any thing to the contrary. That all such as beare any office in this Ralme, as Iustices, Treasurers, or any other such like officer vn∣der the King, be cōmaunded to imbrace and follow this only Religion, and openly to professe the same: and such as should denie or refuse so to do, by any maner of waye, to be depriued of their offices. Prouided notwith standing that for the same thei be indammaged neither in body nor in goods: so that they be found not to be the authors of troubles, of Seditions, and of forbidden as∣semblies. That all Prelates of what state or condition soeuer they be of, make the same confession of faith & of Reli∣gion: and such as shall disobey this, to lose their spiritu∣al promotions, and the profites therof to go to the kings treasury: or els to place fit men, ordinarily called, in their roomes. That all temples and churches through∣out the Realme, which were violated, spoyled, broken downe, and defaced, to the dishonour of God, the con∣tempt of the church, and of the king, and the manifest breaking of the wholsome lawes made both of late and also aforetime, should be reedefied, repayred & restored to ye former comlines & decēt beauty that it euer at any time had: & that ye breakers of the Kings Edicts shuld be punished according to the prescript of the kings Edicts.
That all maner of men, what state or condition so euer they were of throughout the Realme, or what couler or pretence soeuer they had, should put of their armoure, except they had put on the same by the expres cōmaun∣dement of the king of Nauar, the kinges visegerente of the whole Realme: and if any refuse so to do, that then they bee proclaymed and accompted of all men for Traitours, Rebels, & enemies to the king & the whole Realme. That it may be lawfull for the king of Nauar the kinges deputy, or for whom soeuer he shall appoint, to haue bandes of armed Soldiers for the orderinge of these things and such other like, which shal séeme mete for the conseruation of the king and quéene. That those Armies which were gathered togither at the Kinges cōmaundement for the causes afore sayd, may be main∣tayned for certain monethes: in the which space there is great hope that there wil spring some frute of these re∣medies, and that we shal sée publique peace. Other mat∣ters and necessary Cautions for the workinge of thys peace, shalbe supplied and put in by the counsell & iudge ment of the highe courte of parliment in Paris. These things (without the which we must néedes looke for the destruction of the Realme) being thus ordered and ap∣pointed, we are euery one of vs ready, not only to go home to our houses, if it so séeme good vnto you, but also to be banished for euer into the vttermost parte of the world: wée being fully perswaded that wée haue gyuen vnto God, to the king, to our countrey, and to our selues that honour, obedience, loue, & natural affection which wee owe vnto them, in so great perill and daunger, as is now: to auoyd the which wée are ready to spende our lyues, and whatsoeuer els wée haue in this world. The which, we signifie to you and to the king of Nauar, both to the end ye may be Iudges & witnesses to vs of these thinges, and also that ye may apply these conuenient re
medies to those inconueniences. And wée testifie & pro∣test before God and you, that we only séeke the safetye & peace of your dignities, and of the whole Realme. And we trust that all they which séeke the same, will gladly yéeld vnto the things contayned in this Supplication, which we wishe to take effect, for the duties sake which wée owe vnto God and you. This was the summe of their Supplication. To which the King and Quéene made answer, that it was not their willes, that they should departe thence to any other place. Therefore, the same day they offe∣red another supplication to the Quéene to this effect: Beside those things which wée haue already offered to your Maiesties in writing, that ye might plainly vn∣derstand that wée will submit our willes and opinionsAnother supplicatiō offered to the Kinge by the Guise and his. to your Iudgements: after we hearde that it was your pleasures, that we should not depart to any other place: wée thoght good to make this offer, namely, That if they which were at Orleans, laying asyde their armour, and yéelding vp to the King, the Cities and Townes which they had taken, would be sworne to shewe all obedience toward the King, as to their soueraigne Lorde, & would also obey the Kings Edictes which were al ready made, and shalbe made hereafter by our cōsent, and confirmed by the Senat of Paris, we would depart of our owne ac∣corde. To the which, except they will graunt, wée can∣not in consideration of our office depart from the King, except we would shew our selues to be carelesse in de∣fending the King and the Realme, in so great necessity. But if they will yéeld vnto these conditions, we are rea∣dy to get vs to our owne houses, and to obey the cōmaū∣dement of the King of Nauar. But we meane not here∣by to seclude the Prince of Conde from the Kings com∣pany, nay we wish rather that he were néere the King, and that he were sent for, to come from them with whō
he is now linked, and to be daily with the King: trusting that so worthy a Prince will do nothing but that which shall become him to doo. After that these supplications of the Guise and his fel∣lowes,The Aun∣swer of the Prince of Conde to the Sup∣plications▪ came to the eares of the Prince of Cōde, he made answer vnto them, sending letters to the Quéene with his answer, beseeching hir that she would also diligently wey and consider his reasons, and that she would cause both his writing & his aduersaries also to bée kept for a memoriall for euer, yt both their actions might one day be shewed to the King. The aunswere which he made was to this effect: Although (saith he) I haue heretofore oftentimes declared, both by writing, and also by other meanes, why I haue put myself in armour, and vppon what condicions, I am ready to vnarme my self agayn, and to go to my house: yet notwithstanding I could ne∣uer obtayne any thing at their handes, which haue the King and Quéene in hold, but threatnings & contumeli∣ous wordes. So soone as I came hither, before they vn∣derstood any thing of me, they sent letters, & such seuere & sharpe commaundmente, as though they had had to do with théeues, & the most wicked men aliue. But nowe, when they perceiue that I regarde not their impudent boasting & proud threates, & that thei cannot stay me frō my purpose, & also that I cōstātly perseuere in my law∣full request, hauing no consideration of my selfe, but of the libertie of the King & Quéene, and of the peace and tranquillitie of the realme, they séeke to preuayle by o∣ther subtil wayes. And this forsooth is their deuise, they haue offered a certayne supplication to the king, in the which they pretend al obedience, submission & reuerēce. But if a man read & mark the same well, he shall find it rather a Decrée than a Supplication. For it is a flat sen∣tence and decrée made & concluded vpon by these thrée, namely by the Duke of Guise, the Constable Momorencie,
and by the Martiall of S. Andrew: & with these also was the Popes Legate, & the seruants of straungers. But they which for six monthes ago, marked & noted al their doings, can testifie vpon what foundacions these conclu sions do stand, not vpon zeale of Religion and fayth: but rather vpon the fraude, deceypt, and ambition of those thrée: who séeing thēselues to be out of the court, were offended, not that thei had any iniurie offered them, but because they could neuer yet abyde that the Prince, be∣ing of the kings bloud, should be about the king: percei∣uing also that the Quéene rather sought the Kings pro∣fite, and the peace and tranquillitie of the Realme, than to satisfie their willes: they began to ioyne ano asso∣ciate themselues togyther, to recouer their former libertie againe, to rule and gouerne all thinges as they list themselues. And when they saw that they could not haue helpe of the Nobles, nor of the common sorte of people to bring their matters to passe (for ye they were iustly hated of them): they coloured their purpose wyth the pretence of Religion, hoping therby that the popish priests and those yt hoong vpon them, would ayde & assist them. And thus winning so many to take their parte as they could, and séeking to haue ayd by straungers of for reyne Nations, they minded to come to the kinge and Quéene in such battayle aray, that no man should once resist them. And to the end they might haue better hope to rule, thei tooke and kept the names of all those, whom they thought or suspected would be hurtfull vnto them, minding to kil some, to banish other some, and to spoyle and depriue many of their offices: And among the prin∣cipall number, was Michael Hospital, the Kings Chaū∣celour, & diuers of the kinges counsell, and many other good men, set in authoritie and office vnder the Kinge. There were also already some placed in their roomes, which were eyther slaine or banished. And truely, they
very well declared their iudgement of late, in chosinge those six, whom they appointed to be of the Kings coun∣sel: the matter being so ridiculouse that the people made a game or ieste of that choyce. The Quéene was sent a∣way to Cenoncellum, to busie hir selfe in gardening. The Prince Rochsurion, the kinges néere kinsman, be∣ing a very wise and godly person, was called away frō the King: and in his place were set new Tutours, that he might neuer heare any mention made of God, or of any godlynesse, nor any thing else which appertained to good education, he being of himselfe of a good disposition, and well inclined: And that he might not bée taught to vnderstande his estate, which the Quéene his mother went about to instruct him in, teaching him to heare e∣uery mans cause peaceably: to make much of his noble men: to estéeme the vse of armour for necessities sake: to looke to iudgement, to maintaine his people, & to be a gard to the afflicted, & to deliuer the oppressed: and aboue al things to beware least he retayned any suche persons about him, which vnder colour of frendship & humility, would take vpon him the kings office, & vse tyrannie a∣gainst the kings subiectes. These things (I say) were taught him of the Quéen his mother: which these thrée Suppliants much mislike of, who would haue the King frame himself to their bent & disposition, as to daunce cunningly, to sit or ryde a great horse well, hansomly to carry a speare, to be a wātō louer, to loue another mans wife more than his owne, and (to be short) to bee igno∣rant of all honesty & vertu. For they say, ye it is not méet for a King to be occupied and troubled with suche hard matters. But rather (say they) it is méete for a king, to shewe him selfe very seuere towards his subiectes that come vnto him: to enriche his housholde seruaunts, and to commit the gouernement of the Realme wholy vnto them: not to trouble himself in hearing mens causes, in
reading letters, in setting too his hand and seale: (least their deceites which they vse vnder the coullour of his seale should be espied:) to fancy and fauour a few (which cōtend one with another who shalbe the greatest theef:) to be liberall only to a few, and to other some sparing & hard: and to dispoyle the people of their goods: to sell the offices of Judges for money to simple and vnlear∣ned men: & last of all to fill the Court full of al vanities, and wickednes. I speake not these things vnaduisedly: the Quéene knoweth these things to be true as wel as I. These Suppliants therfore haue made a more per∣nicious and hurtfull conspiracy to this Realme, than e∣uer was that which Sylla, which Caesar, and which the Triumuiri made. And it had by this time caused much mischiefe to be done, if I my selfe had not with all my might withstode the same vnto this daye. I marueyle that they so impudently contend before the Quéene in wordes: and I doe wonder that the Quéene will hear∣ken and agrée to their wordes, as though she had neuer heard any thing of their wicked counselles: the which truly playnly declareth that she is more than a captiue. And truly if she were not afeard to be stifeled or stran∣geled in her bed, (which they haue threatned to her, as I appeale to her selfe if she may speake her conscience) she would not haue giuen her consent to their Suppli∣cation: but would haue tolde them to their téeth, that their couetousnes and Ambition is the cause of all these troubles. Séeing therfore at this time the Quéene, in so great perill, cannot speake of the matter, as she would, nor restst those which abuse her wt feare, to bring their purpose to passe: I my selfe am constrayned to defend her aucthoritie and the Kinges also, to answere to their suppliant petitions, in the King and Quéenes name, of whose libertie I confesse my selfe to be a defender. And why should I not trust that God will prosper my inde∣nours,
and that good will which he hath giuen to mée, and the Kinges faythfull subiectes also, doing their duty in so honest and godly a cause? 1 First of all they begin with their titles of dignitie, séeking therby to get the more aucthoritie: and magni∣ficently paynt forth the memory of their actiōs in time past: and would haue men to iudge of their minds and meanings, by these their actions. Truly it is necessary that so glorious a beginning, shuld haue as euil & base an end set against it. And why so? They haue very well behaued themselues towards their Kinges (they say) in times past: is that sufficient not only to couer their faultes at this time, but also so to countenaunce them, that wicked actes shalbe taken for meritorious déedes? If they haue done any thing profitable or worthy of commendation for their Kings (as they haue done no∣thing so farre as I know) if they haue not in all this time receiued their deserued recompence, it doth not fol∣lowe that they should so importunatly craue to bée re∣compenced at this time, to the ruine and destruction of the King, and the Realme. But they thrée séeke so great ly for their profite, and are such carefull followers of gayne, that they would not tary so long before they would craue and receiue a reward for their deserts, if they euer deserued any thing. For probation wherof, what say you to this? That their profites and yerely re uenewes do amount aboue the summe of two hundred and fiftie thousand french Crownes, more than their patrimony, beside other helpes. On the contrary part, let them remember (if any of them will say that they haue not ben fully satisfied in all thinges) How many good and singular men, by their meanes, were cast in prison: how many Noble families haue ben, by them destroyed, in the raigne of Henry the second, and Fraun∣ce
the second: In so much that it may euidently appeare that they abused the fauour of those Kinges, not onely to the inriching of them selues, but also to the reuen∣ging of their malicious mindes, to the ruine and de∣struction of many. Wherefore if they will haue their mindes and counsayles (as they say) to bee examined, tried, and iudged by their actions in time past, go to then, and let them haue that triall and iudgement: and let them denie, if they can, whether their doinges haue not ben such, that they ought to be reproued and resi∣sted, by all the Kynges true and faythfull subiects: Further more they saye that the Kyng and the Realme are in great perill: and least they should fall into that meui∣table destruction, they offer vnto him certayne sure remedies? but (say they) with all reuerence and obedience. If it should be demaunded of them what were the very cause of this destruction, and if they aunswered truly as their con∣science beareth them witnesse, they must néedes im∣pute the cause, and the whole blame hereof, vnto them∣selues. For after the proclamation of the Edict of Ja∣nuary, there was peace throughout all partes of the Realme. Now if they will denie that they were not the di∣sturbers and breakers of this peace, then they shall de∣nie a thing so manifest that all men can giue testimo∣nie against them. For in what state was the kyng∣dome when the Duke of Guise, began warre and com∣mitted horrible murther at Uassi? To what end were the conspiracies of the Constable and the Marshiall of Saint Andrewes? What ment the beastly barbarous rudenes, and rude barbarousnesse shewed at Paris? For where as they professe their reuerence and obedi∣ence to the Kyng, how incredible séemeth that in the eares of all men? Those thrée often times contemned the Quéenes com∣maundements:
as when the Quene commaunded thē to go to their Mannors, & Lordships: when by her com∣maundement also in tyme ef perill, they were sent for to Monceaulx: is this to shewreuerence and obedience to the king and quéene? They came also contrary to the Quéenes commaundement to Paris, with an armye of men: and would not departe from thence, for any thing that the quene could do either by intreaty or otherwise. Whereas I my selfe to obey the quéenes commaunde∣mentes went from Paris: they abyding in Paris at their pleasure, when they had made there al things sure, came to the king and quéene with an army of men, & brought them whether they would or no violentlye, from Fon∣tainbleau, to Paris. I appeale to the conscience of the Quéene for testimony of these things, if shée may fréely speake. They were fully determined to rule all thinges at their owne pleasure. But this is their obedience to∣ward the king which they shewe by the open breaking of the kinges Edictes: This is their loue toward theyr countrey, to destroy the which they thinke it not suffici∣ent to arme thmselues and theirs, except also they cause the aunciente enemyes of the Realme to arme them∣selues against the same. 3 They seke to haue a perpetual edict made for religiō: but to what end? Whē wée desired to haue the Edict of January kept, vntil the king came to sufficient age him selfe, they sayd it was a very vnlawfull, request: adding that the king might order change, amplify, and restrain the Edictes, when, and how it pleased him: and that we, in desiring that the same which was decréed by the king and his Counsell might be kept vntill he came to his full and ripe age, went about to make the king a bonde man, and to shut him vp as it were into prison, which would limitte his power and authoritye with these exceptions. They then saide. And now they go about to
make that an euerlasting and irreuocable lawe, which they thrée themselues haue deuised and decréed. Truly, we may with better reason and truth conclude, that they go about to make the king a captiue and bonman vnto them, not only in this his minoriti, but in his ma∣iority also. Who séeth not their sondry and contrary de∣uises? Who séeth not that they go aboute, not only to haue the king in their handes, and to rule him at theyr pleasure, but the whole Realme also? when as in a mat ter of so great waight and perillouse, they dare take vp∣on them to determine & decre what they thēselues list. Dyd euer those Triumuiri of Rome namely Au∣gustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, which by their conspiracie peruerted the lawes and the common wealth of Rome, any thing more bould and presumptiouse? If they had ben moued by the loue of peace (as they say) and not by the outragiouse heate of sedition: if they had ben moued by zeale of Religion, and not by the force of ambition: they would not haue begon those their counsailes with force and murder: they would haue come reuerentlie and modestly: they would haue declared the causes whi they could not allow of the Edict of January: And they would haue intreated the kinge and quéene to consulte with their Coūsail for the remedeing of those troubles, to the glory of God, the dignity of the king, and the con∣seruation of the Realme. And so they should haue decla∣red that they were moued by zeale of their consciences. But while they go about these things, they sufficiently declare that they take Religion but for a colloure, to the end that they may draw away the Kinges subiectes to take their part: yt by their help, & by ye help of straūgers, they may bring al things to their rule. Can the Princes the kings kinsmen suffer this, that straūgers shal make lawes, & Edictes, to rule the king & the whole Realme? 4 They require to haue ye church of Rome, which they
call Catholike and Apostolicall, to be alone through out the whole Realme: and that the vse and administration of the reformed religion should be forbidden. Let this be the Edict of the Duke of Guise, a straunger, of the Con∣stable Momorentius, and of the Marshall of saint Andrew, the kinges seruauntes. Let their willes, mindes, and decrese, be set against the authority of ye kinges Edict, which the king, the quéene, the king of Nauar, the Prin∣ces, the kinges kinsmen, the kinges Counsel, and forty chosen men out of euery court of the realm, haue made. Let them oppose, and set this their Edicte both against the decrées of the nobility, and the cominaltye, by their supplicatiō, which they offered to ye king first at Orleans, then at saint German, concerning the orderinge of Re∣ligiō after this maner, & thē they must nedes acknow∣ledge and confesse that their Edict, will be the cause of ciuil warres, and in tyme, the destruction of ye realme. But blinde Ambition carieth them out of the way, to bind the king and the Realme to them, (as they saye) by these merits. For this I affirme that the Duke of Guise and his brethren, can not deny, but that while they go a∣bout to molest, & trouble those that are of the reformed Religion, what zeale soeuer they pretende, they brynge the Realme into greate perill. Let them remember what happened of late almost in the same counsel to thē in Scotland. There, both sortes of men, yt is to say, both papistes and Protestants, liued peaceably, & obedient∣ly vnder the gouernement of the Quéene: vntill it was commaunded by the aucthority of the Guises, that no o∣ther religion should be there receyued, then that which is of Rome. Then a certen smal nomber of men for this cause being raised, and appointed to battaile, by the wis∣dome of the quene, and by the help of the Nobility, were easely put down again. The which thing ought to haue made the Guises, sease from their former purpose, for
feare of greater trroubles, whiche would ensue by the meanes of those Edictes. But they on the contrary part more obstinately went forwarde with their purpose to hinder the reformed religion, writing sharp letters vn∣to the Quéen, because shée shewed hirself so fauourable: and perswaded with hir, that it was necessary that the principal authours, and many of the Noble men, should be put to death. Therefore to bring that to passe in déed which they vttered in woordes, they sent an army of mē into Scotland with M. Brosseus, & the Bishop of Atniens. At whose comming most seuere Edictes were made cō∣cerning the obseruation of popish rytes, and comming to Masse. The Bishop said that he would soone cal those that were gone astray (as hée sayd) to the obedience of the Church of Rome: and monsieur Brosseus said, that hée would quickly within few dayes by force of armes put all the rebels to flight. And as cruelty hath always co∣uetousnesse ioyned with it, they beheld & considered the landes and possessions of the noble men, and wrot to the Guises, that they could both make the people tributary, to pay vnto the Frenche king two hundred thousande Crownes, and also assigne to a thousand Noble men of France which should continually maintayne warre in Scotland, houses and land. The Guises hearinge of the which, were glad: but the Quéene & Osellus (a noble mā of Scotland) said vnto M. Brosseus, that the Scotts could not be so easely cōquered: who if they were cōstrayned, would craue helpe of straungees, which imbracinge the same Religion, would not desire to haue better occasion to banish the Popes Religion out of Scotland, whereby the Kings Royall estate should come in peril. But they refusing these admonitions of the Quéene & Osellus, said that the Quéene with hir facilitie and sufferance would marre all: and they called Osellus, foole and dastard. Ther fore these wise men so wrought, that the greatest parte
of the nobility gathered vnto them an army of men, and within few dayes eyther slewe or put to flight the Pa∣pistes and sacrifising priests: which if this had not ben, might haue liued peaceably. And thus thei which before would binde Beares, and which triumphed before the victory▪ did not only dishonour the Duke of Guise, but al∣so lost the aucthoritie of the Church of Rome. By this example the Guises ought to acknowledge their fault and to leaue of their enterprise, & also to haue no more in their mouthes these wordes: One of those two Religions must be banished the realme: and some muste needes giue place to other some. These proud words become not subiectes and seruaunts: but a king, of full and per∣fect age. And whereas they would haue no religion but ye Romish religion established within the realme, which they go about to defende by force of armes, they bring the realme into great perill and daunger: And truly, it were a great deale better, to kéepe both partes in peace and concord, and to vse in stéede of blowes, woordes and writings, omitting all force, warres, & sheding of blood. The which peraduenture will so prouoke God, and his vengeance to fal, that the papists and priests thēselues, which might quietly enioye their offices & liuings, shal∣be the first that shal féele the furour and madnesse of the people. To be short, the protection of the Suppliantes, cannot chuse but bring great trouble and garboyle vnto them. But, when they may be assured of this, that they néed not without they will themselues, be endāmaged, neyther in body, office, nor goods, haue they iust cause to complayne? except peraduēture they will say that they were carefull and sory for the losse of our soules. But what hath made them so sodenly so carefull, when as neyther any one Bishop, Curate, or popish priest, hath laboured or takē any maner of paines to that end? Sée∣ing therfore we neuer intended to hurt any of thē, what
néed was there to bring them into this contention, and to pretende the name of the Church? Is not this too set one against another? and to cause the people whiche be∣fore could not abyde those priests, to hate thē the more? Was there euer a more sorowfull sight séene in thys Realme? Can there be any profit, benefite or good turn so great, that it maye make a sufficient mennes for so great destruction? Can the Popes pardones and Indul∣gences restore the bloud that▪ is shed for this cause? These Suppliantes maye one day say vnto the Kinge, that they to defend that which no man gainsayed, and to preserue the Romish religion, which no man wente a∣bout to hinder. haue lost, or went about to loose the one half of his nobilitie, and chiefest of his subiectes. Then, and that truely it shalbe obiected vnto them, that as by their fayned and dissembled opinions concerning Reli∣gion, they had brought the Realme of Scotland into great perill of destruction, and caused much bloud too bée shed: euen so by the same opinions, counsayles and In∣struments, great discord hath ben sowen in this realm: and▪ both sortes of men set togither (as it were) by the eares, in such sort, that they may iustly hereafter amōg all posterities be sayd, to be the authours and causes of all mischéeues and calamities which shall happen to the men, both of the reformed, & also of the Romish Religiō. And, to cause more trouble, they would haue all the Kings officers, and all Ecclesiasticall persones, to pro∣fesse the confession of their faith: and that such as should denie or refuse so to do, should be depriued, if they were temporall men of their offices, if they were priests, then to loose their benefices. For this is the other Edicte of those thrée Suppliants against the receyued & approued lawes of ye king. For there is no man that can remēber, neither hath it ben heard of, that any king, that hath ben heretofore, hathe constrayned hys true Subiectes to
receiue any other confession of faith, than that which is in the Apostels Créede. Let that Lawmaker, by whose craftie and subtill witte these their supplications were made, bring forth but one only example. The which, truely, he cannot do, except hee will bring into this Realme the Inquisition of Spaine: the which by the iudgement of all other Nations is counted so wicked, that they all reiect the same. These are the very same trappes and snares, which they layd at Aurelias, (other∣wise called, Orleans,) a little before the death of Kyng Fraunces the second, and which cannot chuse but bring the extreame ruine and destruction of the kyngs sub∣iectes. For those Suppliants know that there are ten thousand Noble men, and a hundered thousand souldi∣ours, which neither by authority nor by force, will for∣sake that Religion which they haue receiued: and wyll not suffer the preaching of the woord, and the administra¦tion of the Sacraments according to the forme of Re∣ligion which they professe, to be taken from them, and will defend themselues with the sword, against them which abuse the aucthoritie of the Kings name. That great number cannot be ouercome and de∣stroyed (which God forbid) without the anoyance and ruine of those that shall set vppon them. And to conclude the matter briefely, I saye and af∣firme in the name of the Noble men, Gentlemen, and of many others which are here with me, that this De∣crée is made by thrée priuate men, which by their autho∣ritie peruert the kynges Edictes and make no accompt of them, and to put their decrée in execution, before they made the Kyng and Quéene acquaynted with their do∣inges, they put themselues in armour, and tooke them both captiue. I say and affirme that the same Decrée is against the lawes of this Realme, against all Christian order, against the State, against the Edict of January,
which was only made for this cause & against the digni∣tie & safetie of many of the kings subiects: whose ene∣mies they openly shew themselues to be, & whose goods and life they séeke to take away, and all vnder the pre∣tence of Religion & conscience. This decrée also, taketh away the liberty of going to a Counsaile, the which should haue ben considered by that subtill counsayler. For if it be decréed, that the same confession, which they call the confession of the Faith, shalbe receiued of all the inhabitants of this Realme, that is to say, if all men be constrained to receiue the Popes doctrine and ceremo∣nies: this must néedes be a plaine sentence of condem∣nation against the reformed church: neither is it then lawfull for our Ministers, or for the Ministers of for∣reine Nations, imbracing the same doctrine, to go vnto a Counsaile: when as they, being not heard are condem ned. But before the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinall of Loraine his brother, bring forth the decrée, concerning ye confession of the Romish faith, let them renounce & de∣nie many speciall poynts of the confession made at Aus∣burge, which, when they were at Sauern, they said thei imbraced, & promised to one of the Princes of Germany, that they would cause them to be obserued in Fraunce. It is néedfull also that the Cardinall of Loraine, should declare by open writing whether he do persist in that opinion, which sometime he said to the Quéene before a great many witnesses, concerning Transubstantiatiō, concerning the carying about of the Sacrament, concer ning Iustification, Inuocation of Saints, Purgatory, Images, and concerning many other speciall points al∣so, of which he spake plainely against the iudgment of the Catholique and Apostolique church of Roome. 6▪ Furthermore in that supplication, straight after this, they call to mind the throwing downe of Images, & require, that the same Images be repayred, and the
breakers of them be punished. But thervnto I make this answere: The punishments, wherwith I punish them, which brake downe Images, first in diuers pla∣ces, & at the last in Orleans, shall witnesse before God, & men, that this misdemeanor of the rash multitude, al wayes displease me: both for that it was contrary to ye Edict of January, & also against the forme of y• League & othe taken of vs not long since. But if that deiection of Images deserueth any punishment, because any such fact is contrary to the kyngs Edict, what punishments then deserue they, which so greatly abuse the kinges name, that vnder the coullour therof, they cōmit great wickednesse, as may appere by the cōmitted murthers at Uassi, at Sens, at Paris, at Tholoz, and in many other places He that preferred this Supplication, shuld first of all haue considered and remembered himselfe, that it is read in no place, that a dead Image requireth ven∣geance: but it is read, that the bloud of a slaine man, which is the liuely Image of God, cryeth and calleth for the vengeance of God, and doth at the last cause the same to fall vppon the bloudshedders. 7 Moreouer those Suppliants, or rather commaun∣ders, require that they may vnarme themselues, which without the commaundement of the king of Nauar put on the same: and that they should be counted for Rebels and enemies to the King and the Realme. I would glad ly demaund of them, which thinke them selues so wise, and saye, that they séeke for the peace of the common wealth, if that be not the way to cut of all hope of con∣cord, when they require that I, and they that are with me should be counted Rebelles and enemies to the king and the Realme? For they say not, Let them which wyll not put of their Armoure, but, which haue put on Armour, be accounted the Kinges enemies. They which poynt re∣quireth another maner of aunswere than by writing.
But I trustwtin these few daies to sée them, & to disput wtithē by ye dynt of sword, whether it be méete for straū∣gers, & two such mē as they are, to iudge a Prince the kings néere kinsman, & ye chiefest part of ye Nobility of Fraūce to be rebels & enemies to ye king & the Realme. And let not them pretend ye name of ye king of Nauar, to whom they in the former kinges dayes were sworne enemies. They abased him all that they could, and cau∣sed him to be little regarded of the king, hys right and dignity being suppressed in matters of great waighte. They cannot deny, but that of late dayes, when they went about to vsurp the gouernement of the Realme, by their meanes it was brought to passe, that whatsoe∣uer the king of Nauar required, was denyed: al occasi∣on to rule and gouerne, either in tyme of war, or peace, being taken from him: and to discharge their spitefull stomacks, in the dayes of king Fraunce lately disceased, they made him to be lesse estemed then a man of meane state and condition: being sent for to Orleans with thret∣nings: and commaundement giuen to Noble men that they should not entertaine him at his cumminge: also Marshall Tremen béeinge sent with two armies one of horsemen another of foote men, was commaunded, to take and▪ spoyle all his Dominion, and to cal the straun∣ger to the pray. And when thei saw that their deuise and purpose was let by the soden death of king Fraunces yet notwithstanding they sought by all meanes possible to be deliuered of him, and would haue kept him from ha∣uing any authority to rule or gouerne. The Duke of Guise openly sayd, that he would not departe from the Court, neyther at the intreaty, nor yet at the commaun dement of the king of Nauar: The Marshall of S. An∣drew, euen in middest of the kinges Counsaile said that be knew no other king or Quene. And now, they abuse the name of the king of Nauar, whō they haue so much
abused heretofore, vnder the pretence wherof they seke the ruin and destruction of his owne naturall brother. And they go about to bring to passe, that whereas the kinge of Nauar, is now beloued of all the Nobilitye of Fraunce, he may here after be hated of al: that they at the length may spyte out their venemouse hatred at the full vppon him. These are their practises, and herevnto tend all their deuises and Counsailes. 8 Whereas they require, that the king of Nauar wil bend all his force to bring these thinges to passe, they plainly euough, declare, eyther great impudency, or els an earnest desire to hinder peace and cōcord. For seinge they are fully determined to subdew all those of the re∣formed Religion to their willes by force of armes, they should haue kept it close in secret to themselues, vntill we ad bin vnarmed. But séeing they do so plainly de∣clare vnto vs their meaning, wée will take héede that we be not circumuented, and beguiled: that is to say, we will not vnarme our selues, but vpon very sure con ditions, and cautions. 9 Furthermore they require that by the sentence and wisedome of the Senate of Paris, al other things might be added & supplied to the making of the Edict. Where∣by they euideutly shewe in what estimation▪ they haue the Quéene, the king of Nauar, and the kings Counsell. But I maruaile wherfore they haue no regard of those wise and graue men, to vse their Counsell▪ whom they chose of late to be of the Kinges Counsaile▪ I doubt not but that ther are in the senate of Paris, good men, which are nothing inferiour to those of the Senate heretofore in vertue, in wisedome, and in religion. But those thrée Suppliantes, haue so handled the matter by bying and selling of offices, and by other vnlawfull meanes, ye the greater number of the Senate are subiect to the Guises, so that the voyce of the smaller number▪ quayleth. For
probation, whereof we haue this: The Senat of Paris, refused to cōfirme that Edic which was made at yt peti∣tion of the thrée estates of the Realme, and sollemnely confirmed by all the Parliaments and Courtes of the Realme, notwithstanding that the kyng him selfe sent his letters and Messengers twise vnto them: but of late by the simple commaundement of the kynges Letters, another Edict, which is contrary to that former Edict in many thinges, was by them preferred without any maner of stay. This is the hope that we haue of their good and wholesome counsaile. 10 To be short, they adde this request, that the Cities might be yéelded vp againe to the kyng, and the Inha∣bitants therof sworne a new vnto him. They woulde bring to passe & earnestly séek (as they did in the daies of kyng Fraunces ye second lately disceased) to perswade men that they are the kynges enemies, which cannot abide their tirany. The Duke of Guise and his brethe∣ren should hold themselues content with this, that they haue once already vsed these subtill meanes to the of∣fence of many good men: when as they pretented and abused the kyngs name to defend themselues agaynst their enemies. If any man were of them suspected to be their ene∣mie, ither for that he had at any time spoken vnreue∣rently of them, or for any other cause, he was cast by and by into prison, was reported to be an enemie to the kyng and to the Realme. And because those their subtil flightes haue once had good successe and haue bene by them abused to the destruction of many, if God had not prouided for the same, they wold now put them in prac tise againe: & although there is not one of those which taketh our part, which would not willingly spend & be∣stowe all that he hath, & his life to, in the seruice of the kyng, yet notwithstanding they call e Rebelles & the
kynges enemies. There is I say, not one of vs, which would not most gladly, for the preseruation of our king, whom we alone & singularly loue, serue & reuerence as the only gift of God, spend & bestowe his life. There is none of vs which hath put him self in armour to requi∣er any thing of the Quéen or of the king of Nauar. We require no other kyng whom we may acknowledge & reuerence as our liedge Lord & Soueraigne. Neither do wee require to haue him and his authoritye in our hands. We desire not to haue tributes, customes, taxes, & other payments due to him to be made, to be eased & diminished: nay on the contrary part, we not only haue not refused to beare any burthen that hath ben layed vp pon vs, but do also now of our owne accord promise vn∣to the king to giue vnto him whatsoeuer he wil require so far forth as our goodes wil extend. The Cities which are blamed as Rebelles, haue not forsaken or changed their Soueraigne: they gladly acknowledge al obediēce to the kyng. They haue not put themselues in armoure against the King: such wickednes be farre from them: neither haue they sought by force to make the King and his authoritie subiect vnto them. But they & we haue put our selues in armour against the Guises, the Consta∣ble, and the Marshiall of S. Andrew, & that with such discre tion & modesty, that we séeke neither their bloud, goods, nor offices. Therfore they which shall say that we haue put our selues in Armour against the kyng, shall impu∣dently lie: or els those Suppliants attribute to them selues the kyngs name & dignitie. But they which shal counsell & perswade the king to giue vnto them his au∣thority, souldiers, & money, although warre were enter prised against him, shal truly one day make an accōpt of those their coūselles: & shall declare who hath caused the king & the Realme to contend: & who also hath spent the kings money contrary to the lawes of the Realme.
And I trust it will so fall out that the goodes which they haue taken out of the Kings treasury to mayntain warres, wilbe one day repayed againe out of their sub∣stance, both to the profite of the Kyng, and also to the ea∣sing and disburthening of the people. 11 Last of all they protest that they are ready to goe home to their owne priuate houses, yea to the vtmost partes of the world, if néede should require: and to the end we should not be ignorant, they assigne the time of their departure, saying: When these thinges are fulfilled and brought to passe, that is to say: When the Edict of January by their priuate authoritie is openly broken: when the reformed Religion is wholy abrogated, with the preaching of the word of God and the administrati∣on of Sacraments: when our consciences shalbe subiect to ye vexatiō of straunge doctrine: whē al they yt haue im braced the reformed Religiō shalbe put to silēce & made subiect to the furor & outragions madnes of their ene∣mies: & being in daūger of their liues if they liue other∣wise than they would haue them: and (to vse their owne wordes) if they shall liue without offence, that is to say, if they will come to Masse, and to other popish ceremo∣nies, this they call to liue without offence. These are the conditions which we may looke for at their handes. This is their discréete counsaile. ¶ But let vs now procéede a little farther, and let my petition be ioyned and compared with theirs, which I now make, as followeth. I require the obseruation of the Edict of January: they on the contrary part, would haue the same aboli∣shed. They desire the subuersion & ruine of many No∣ble families, and of others also: I desire that al ye kings subiects of what estte or condition soeuer they be of, should be in safty, & stil inioye their goodes & liuinges, and to be deliuered from all iniury violence, and oppres∣sion. They goe about to kyll and destroye all those
of the reformed Religion: I séeke to preserue them, vntill the Kyng shall come to ryper age to iudge and determine of the whole matter as shall séeme best vnto him: and in the meane time I desire that both parts may liue quietly: that the papistes may enioy their liuings & reuenewes with safety. They séeke to deale by open vi∣olence, not caryng to begin ciuill warre, séeking by for∣rayne ayd to destroy vs, spending the kings treasure to the destruction both of the king, and also of the realme, wherby we are constrayned to defend our selues. I ney∣ther desire warres, neither do I spend the kinges trea∣sure, neither do I séeke the helpe of straungers: nay I re fused them alwais hitherto, when they haue offered me their seruice, & so wil I doe still, except I be thereunto greatly constrayned by these authours of warres. I de∣sire to haue armour put of on both partes, & do promise, that all those which are of my part shalbe obedient, and that loue and the reuerence which we owe to the king, shal more preuail with vs thā force of armes, for whose preseruation we are ready to spend all that we haue. They desire that we may be counted rebells and open enemies, our cause not heard: yea they séeke our bloud, our offices, our goods, and our consciences. We neyther séeke their bloud, their offices, their goods, nor their con∣sciences. This only we séeke for at their hands, to whō wée will be bound, that they and wée will go home eue∣ry man to his own house, according to the tenor of those conditions which we haue more copiously declared in ye Instrument which we sent to the King and Quéene con cerning this matter. Neyther can they complayne & say that they are hereby dishonored, séeing that we submit our selues to the same conditions. Our peticion is alike without any manner of inequalitie, we desire nothing but that which is indifferent for both partes: séeing that they thēselues came otherwise then they ought to haue come to the king: and were the causes of these troubles,
by their vntimely vsurping of armour. And they haue violently assaulted so many good men, that although our petitions are not alike and so indifferent, yet notwith∣standing it should be expedient for the peace & tranquil∣litie of the realme, to haue rather regard & consideration of many men than of a few, least the whole kingdome for these causes be brought into peril of ciuill warres. But, although there be no comparison betwéene these two peticions, séeing the one is iust and equal, but the o∣ther vniust and violent, the one seeking warres & horri∣ble murther, the other peace, and the generall profie of all men: yet notwithstanding the Quéene may iudge & determine of the whole matter. But and if shée cannot at this time fréely declare hir iudgement, eyther beinge stayed by violence, or else because shée will not for other causes offend them: yet notwithstanding this thing wée craue and request at her hands, séeing these times great ly requireth the same, namely: That their supplication and myne may be registred in the publike Commenta∣ries of the Senate: That the Edict of Ianuary maye bée obserued: and that both partes laying asyde their wea∣pons, may depart to their own houses, vntill the Kinge comming to ryper yeares, shalbe able to iudge and order the whole matter as it shall please him: or else till the Quéene with the aduise of hir counsaile shal determine of the same. The remedie appertayneth to both partes, neither cā any man complaine that hée receyueth any preiudice: & it is so easy to be done, ye whosoeuer shall refuse y• same, cannot deny himself to be an enemy to the king and the realme. Neither can it be but that they shalbe iudged of all men to be in the blame, which refuse the remedye so easie to be had, for so great misery and calamitie lyke too ensue. It shalbe iudged also who is a traytour and an o∣pen enemie to the king and the realme eyther he which
willingly offereth to vnarme himselfe: or he which had rather destroy all, than restore the King agayne to hys former liberty. But because ciuil warres haue alwayes euill successe, the soldiers minds and handes being not easie to bée re∣strayned: I protest before God and men, that I put my self in armour, and prepare my soldiers to battaill with great grief of mind: and doe hartely desire that so great calamities and miseries as are like to come by these ci∣uill warres might be auerted and appeased by my bloud only, if it might so please God. But bicause my reasona∣ble request is reiected, and séeing my aduersaries wil be Iudges in this cause, I protest agayn that my only pur∣pose and intent is, to restore the king and Quéene into their former liberty, and to bring the gouernement of y• kingdome to the Quéene, and to the king of Nauar: and to deliuer the greatest part of the people from the tyrā∣nie and oppression of such as haue vsurped the gouerne∣ment of the realme. I haue no regard to my owne pri∣uate commoditie or gayne in this cause. I am not led by ambition, by a desire to reuenge, or by couetousnesse, as knoweth the Lord, whose glory and truth I séeke to de∣fende, with the dignitie of the King, and peace and tran∣quillitie of the Realme. While the matter was thus canuassed too and fro by writing, and the Guises with their compartners bearing only an outward shew to the Quéene of reuerence, and séeking notwithstanding daily more and more to rule & gouerne the realme themselues, the Quéen by hir effe∣minat and timerouse nature, was very doubtful, being carefull for hir libertie & authoritie which shée had lost: and fearing also the ambition of the Guises and his adhe∣rents. And being afeard of their great power, she stood in doubt whether she should incline to them, or leane to the Prince of Conde. Notwithstanding shée wrote often
letters vnto him by faithfull messengers, and sometime she sent her mind by word of mouth, not daring to send by letters. Of some of ye which letters we haue here put downe the Coppies. I Sée such sights dayly to my great grief (my welbelo∣ued Cosin) that except I looked for helpe frō God, & dyd cōfort my self with ye trust which I haue in you, wherby I am perswaded that you wil presētly seke to preserue me, the realme, and the king my Son, I should be much more gréeued than I am. But I hope that all thinges shalbe very well ordered by vs, with the helpe of your good Counsel, to the frustrating of all their actions, and practises which séeke to destroy al thinges. But because I haue at large declared ye whole matter vnto this mes∣senger, I wil be here the more briefe. Only I besech you to credit that which he shall tell you, concerning al those things which I haue giuen him in charge to declare vn to you two. Your Cosin CATHARINE. Also this which foloweth is the copie of another of her letters. I giue you harty thankes (my deare Cosine) for that you so oftentymes certifie me of your affaires: and be∣cause I trust to sée you ere it be long face to face, and to talke with you my selfe, I wil not now write much vn∣to you. Only this I request of you, that you fully per∣swade your selfe, that I wil neuer forget those things, which you haue done for my sake. And if it fortune that I did before I shalbe able to acknowledge & recompēce so great a benefit, I wil giue my children charge to sup∣ply such lacke in mée, & to requite the same. I haue com∣maunded
this messenger to tell you many things. Thus much only I certify you of, that I do as I do, and behau my selfe as you knowe, to worke, if it might be, peace and concord, the which I knowe that you (my welbelo∣ued Cosin) desier no lesse than I. Salute I pray you in my name your wyfe, your wyues Mother, and your Uncle. Your deare and louing Cosin CATHARINE. Whereas the Quéene complaineth in these letters, that shée is in great sorrowe and greefe, and noteth also many authours of troubles, she speaketh of the Guises, and his fellowes: whom notwithstanding shée durst not openly resiste, neyther yet take part with the Prince of Conde. And whereas shée sayeth that shée trusteth it wil shortly come to passe that shée shall sée him face to face, the occasion was this: when nothing went forward nei∣ther by letters, nor yet by messengers sent from one to another, the Quene made peticion to the Prince of Con∣de that he would come & talke with the King of Nauar, to the intent they might haue mutuall conference of theCommu∣nication be twene the Quene the King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde. whole matter, and might deuise some way for peace and concorde. The Prince of Conde yelded to the request: the place and time, for their meting was appointed: namely the first of Iune. At which tyme the Quéene, the Kynge of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde met togither, in the Region of Beausse, in the mid way betwéene Paris, and Orleans. At this their méeting they commoned of many thinges, of the which we will speake hereafter, as they were publiquely put downe in writinge by the Prince of Conde. The Quene durst not graunt any thing to the Prince of Conde, neither did the king of Nauar, his bro∣ther, shew himself any whit tractable or frendly. Wher vpon they brake of and departed without any profite by their méeting and conference: their minds being therby
not a little exasperated, and grudge raysed against one another. The Quéene and the Kyng of Nauar, plainely denied to the Prince of Conde the remouing of the Gui∣ses and his adherents from the Court, and the obserua∣tion of the Edicte of Ianuary, throughout the whole Realme: the which two thinges were the principall poyntes of the petition of the Prince of Conde. Therfore the Prince of Conde, when he was retour∣nedLetters of the Prince of Conde to the Queene. againe to Orleans, and had told the whole matter to his confederats, sent letters to the Quéene the xi. day of Iune, certifying her, that according to her commaunde∣ment he had declared the whole matter to all those that were his adherents, & had conferred with them concer∣ning the finding out, and deuising wayes for peace and concord. Who, when they had wisely wayed and consi∣dered all thinges, gaue their sentence thus: That there could be no firme or certaine wayes for peace & concord deuised, so long as the contrary part their enemies, be∣set the King and her with souldiours; & ruled them both by violence: insomuch that not onely all hope to pacifie thinges is taken away therby, but also good occasion is offered vnto vs to feare, least all thinges wae much worse than they now be: séeing that they, vppon whom the Kyng and Quéene do wholely depend, do vnder the pretence of the Kings name & authoritie, séeke to work their willes, and do accuse men of those things whereof they themselues are most of all giltie. Therfore (sayth he) they earnestly desire of you, that you would not take it in euil part, if they abide in that their former prpose séeing they haue now put them selues in Armour to de∣fend them selues from the force of those enemies, least in very déede they, which haue declared them selues to be enemies, should be also Iudges of the cause in con∣trouersie. For it was neuer séene in any assembly that when any matter is obiected against many men, they
should by absence not be suffered to haue their cause to be iudged & examined. Is it méete that they shuld be ab∣sent, specially at that time when matters of so great waight come in question, as when they are burthened to be enemies to the glory of God, to the Kinges liberty & authority, & also to the common peace? Wheras they ar maintainers therof, & their accusers of such enimies. Wherfore, they say, except they may be permitted to come in presence to cléere them selues of these crimes, there is no other waye to be looked for than by force of Armes. Also wheras you said, being first taught of those ene∣mies, that it could not be that ye Edict of Ianuary should be obserued, the people being armed to break the same, it séemeth to them to be no lesse vnreasonable than the other. For what can be more vnreasonable than this, that the common sort of people should not only defend these opinions, without law to maintaine the same, but also being of all the Kynges subiectes the very rascall sort, should put on Armour both to breake the Kynges Edictes, and also to rule and gouerne the Kyng at their pleasure? Notwithstanding, this they know, that séeing that Edict was made and established by a notable and singular assembly of Noble, wise, and learned men, af∣ter that matters on both partes were wisely considered of, the Nobillitie of Fraunce will not suffer themselues to haue such ignominy, neither yet straungers to break the Kings Edicts, & to make new Edicts at their owne pleasure. These things being of her wisely considered, she may iudge whether it be méete that the consciences of the kyngs faithfull subiects should be tyed to the wils of factious men, and of the outragious multitude: or what concord is to be hoped for of them, which tooke a∣way all power of gouernement from the Quéene her selfe: and whether it be to be suffered that they shoulde
haue the Kinges power at their commaundement any longer, which séeke to appresse those that defend and mayntaine the Kings authoritie and his lawes. Final∣ly she may iudge whether it be more méete that they go home to their owne houses, or whether by their pre∣sence, they bring the kyngs State into perill: the which all men sée they will sooner do, than they will loose on iot of their wills. The which notwithstanding he sayth he trusteth to let with the helpe of God the mayntainer & defender of all right. And to conclude, séeing there was no other way to bréede peace and concord, than for the Guises and his adherents to depart from the Court, hée prayed the Quéene, that she would bring the same to passe, the necessity of ye time, greatly requiring the same. He wrote Letters also to his Brother the Kyng of Nauar, to this effect. ALTHOVGH, (saith he) I might long ago sée some part of those calamities, which I now sée to be immi∣nent: yet notwithstanding I may truly affirme this, that I now sée far greater miseries, than euer I feared would come to passe. For both the conscience and testi∣mony of the integrity of the reformed Churches, and al so, of the naturall and louing inclination that I haue séene to be in you, beside the testimony of all my actiōs, had perswaded me that you, (they which ar the authors of those troubles being compared with me, whom God hath so aduaunced to honour that I am your owne na∣turall brother) would rather follow the loue of brother∣ly coniunction, than the subtill perswasions of those which neuer sought for any thing but their owne ad∣uauncement, and your destruction. And truly I am not altogether without hope of the same, what occasion so euer at this time I haue to thinke to the contrary. And
for this cause alone I haue now written vnto you my letters, not so much with pen and inke as with teares distilling from mine eyes. For what can happen vnto me more lamentable & sor∣rowful, than to vnderstand that you should be a sworne enimie vnto him, which wold be the first that would ad∣uenture his body to defende you from harme: that you should go about to take away his life, which came of the same parents that you came of, & which will neuer re∣fuse most gladly to spend his life for your preseruation? Consider I pray you, & diligently wey with your selfe, whether there cā be ani thing, which ought to moue you to so great hatred against nature. If the matter bée for religion, there is no man that can better iudge thā you, whether it be méete & conuenient, to violat & breake the bonde of nature & humanitie for religion, which the ve∣ry Barbarians wil neuer doe. Although ye cannot imbrace and receiue all the points of our Religion, yet notwith∣standing I am fully perswaded of this, that your nature & disposition is such, that you do abhorre so great & horri ble cruelties committed against vs, so far you are from being the author & cause therof. If the matter concerne the Kings dignitie & authoritie, who is there, next after you and your children, to whom the gouernement more appertayneth, than vnto me? Iudge (I hartely pray you) who is most carefull for the state, whether he that offe∣reth all lawful condicions, to haue the matter quieted, or thei which had rather bring al things into present pe∣ril & daunger, than to forsake their armour which most vniusty they haue put on, and to followe peace which they haue vngodly forsaken. Iudge I beséeche you, if th matter came thereunto, that they had destroyed them whom they perceyue to resiste their ambition, in what state should the kingdome then stande, the kéeper & pro∣tector wherof you are, and of what power you should be
of, to defend and preserue the same. If the matter' con∣cerne your dignitie, you may call to mind what manner of persons they are, which scarce two yeres since, were not contented not only to take away your dignitie, but sought your life also. And whether they haue since that time chaunged their mindes, I cannot tell, time truely will reueale: but thus much I protest for my selfe, that the obedience which I owe vnto you, I will performe & shew while life doth last: vpon condicion that he may bée made equall with those, which are neither so néere vnto you by bloud, nor yet so borne to obey you, as hée is. Ne∣uerthelesse you shal graunt me leaue to be ignorant how they can be your friends, who are not content agayn to séeke to put your brother to death, except thye make you the minister and instrument of their hatred. But wey & consider that I haue spoken these things, not for myne own cause, but for the glory of Gods sake, for the loue of my countrey, and in respect of you: before you procéed a∣ny further to set vpon him, which by the bond of nature is no lesse carefull and louing vnto you, than you are to your self: for as by the leaue of God hée wil neuer cease to doe his dutie vnto you, euen so hée had rather suffer death, than to wishe those calamities which will follow this contention, which way soeuer the victory shall en∣cline. But and if the authours of these troubles, which ought to submit them selues to reason and equitie, doe prosecute their counsells, being not restrayned by you to whom God hath giuen authoritie: we trust (by the help of God, the defence of whose glory wée will séeke to the shedding of the last drop of our bloud) that you shall be∣hold that euent, which shall euidently declare vnto you the endes of all their counsails: and shal also certifie you how faythfull a harte not only I, but this whole assem∣bly also haue borne to you next vnto, God and the King and Quéene.
The Prince of Conde sent with his letters also the summe of his petitions briefly contayned in writing, in maner and forme following. I think (saith he) that these are conuenient and neces∣sary meanes and waies to auoyd the perturbations and troubles which hange ouer the realm: the which I pro∣pound by the leaue of the King and Queen, For so much as, before thei began their counsail, which were the first that put themselues in armour, and which as yet kéepe the Kinge in their custodie by force of armes, all thys whole realme began to enioy peace and tranquillitie, concerning religion: men of both sorts of religiō think∣ing themselues in very good case by the benefite of the Edicte made in the moneth of January last past, with ye aduise and consent of the Princes the kings kinsmen, of the Kings Counsaill, and by the consent of all the most notable men of all the kingdome: and experience will shewe that without the obseruation of that Edict, there cannot be peace and concord kept among the kings sub∣iectes. First of all I require this, that the same Edicte of January, according to the forme thereof, be obserued and kept without alteration of the same, vntill the de∣termination of another Parliament: or vntil such time as the King himself by lawfull age shalbe able to take vpon him the gouernement of the Realm, and to order the matter according to his owne discretion: to whome I and my Cōfederates doo yéeld ourselues in such wyse to obey, that if it should please the King to take from vs the benefite of the reformed Religion, we would also alter our purpose and obey. Secondly, that al violent actes on both partes cōmit∣ted since the time that they put themselues in armour, may be punished: and that whatsoeuer hath bene done and constituted since that time, may be quite abolished and taken away: because the mindes of the Kinge and
Quéene were and are captiued by the Guises. And because the cōming of the Guises, of the Consta∣ble, and of the Marshal of S. Andrewe, into the Court, and many of their déedes which they did, are the only causes of these tumults: I can sée no other way to bring peace and concord then to haue thē to depart from the Court. The which I desire, not for that, I for my owne parte beare vnto thē any euill will: but to the end the King, & Quéene may haue their liberty: that the Quéene may haue her authority in gouerning the kingdome: that the Edictes may be obserued: & that there may be some con sideration & regard had of mée, & of those which attend vpon me, & of all the reformed Churches, which other∣wise stand in great feare. I desire therfore yt the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshall of S. Andrew may laie aside their armour: and that they may go home to their owne Lordships, vntill the kinge come to more perfite age. And I promise that I and they which are with mée shall do the like. And to the end the matter may be sene to be spoken in good faith, I wil giue my Eldest Sonne in hostage, and al the rest of my children, to be most pre∣cious pledges of my faithfull meaning. These are the most equall and indifferent pledges, that I could deuise. And I protest that I will put away all causes of debate and enmity that appertayned to me and the Guises, for the kinge and Quéenes sake. The which Conditions, if they be reiected, I sai and affirme (the which also I haue oftentymes protested) that not I but they are the au∣thours of al those calamities and miseries, which by reason of all these Ciuill warres haue happened vnto mée, who haue reiec∣ted these conditions to the pre∣sent peril of the kingdome.
¶ The fyfth Booke of Commentaries concerning the state of the common wealth, and Religion in Fraunce vnder the raigne of King Charles the ninth. THESE petici∣ons and admonitiōs of the Prince of Conde, to cōcorde tooke no place, but were lightly regarded: whereby the matter daylye waxed worse & worse. The quene could neyther retaine her authoritie, neyther did shée care at the length to haue the same. And whereas at the first shée was drawne a∣way from the Prince of Conde, through feare, shée be∣came now through effeminate rashnes, and inconstan∣cy, a bitter enemye to him and his cause. The Kinge of Nauar, being vtterly blinded and beret of iudgement, was so inflamed with wrath, and greate indignation a∣gainst his brother, and his adherents, & also against the reformed Churches, as though he had neuer heard any thing concerning the truth, neyther yet had had experi∣ence of the mindes of the Guises. Therfore he was wholely led and caried by the Gui∣ses, whethersoeuer they would haue him: who, to make him more sure, on their side, insared him with harlots, and with other intiseing vaine pleasures, in the which
they perceiued the King of Nauar, to haue most delight.The begin∣ning of ci∣uill warres. He therefore fulfilling the minds of the Guises in euery point, stoutly thondred out the Kings authority against the Prince of Conde, and his fellowes. These were the first beginninges of this Ciuill warre: the kingedome and the Church of God being cast into great extremi∣ties▪ So greatly may the subtil deuises of vngodly men disturbe the societie of the godly: vnlesse the prouidence of God do gouern the euent, and pronide a prosperouse ende, amiddest so great outrage. There were certain letters brought in the kings name to the Prince of Conde & to his fellowes, the which pro∣mised peace vnto them after a sort vpon these cōdicions,The condi∣tions of peace offe∣red by the king to the faithfull. namely: If the Prince of Conde and his fellowes, accor∣ding to their former cōmaundement frō the king, wold out of hand vnarme themselues: and would yéeld vp in∣to the Kings power their cities. The which if thei wold doo, the Guises, the Constable, & the Martial of S. Andrewe, promised (as they had also done before) that they would go home to their houses. Also, that the King of Nauar should haue at his commaundement all maner of Artil∣lery, and should take and chuse out of the armye of the Prince of Conde, for the vse of the King and the realme, whatsoeuer séemed good vnto him. To these thinges if they would yéeld and graunt, the King would forgyue & pardon their offence in putting themselues in armour: and would leaue to euery man the frée vse of Religion, so that euery man should liue peaceably at home, with∣out receyuing of any hurt for Religion. This was don the twelueth day of June, the Martial Vielle and the aarle Villarius, being sent with ye letters for this matter. To these letters the Comparteners of the Prince of Conde made this aunswer. First, We render all hum∣bleThe petiti∣ons of the faythfull. thanks to your Maiestie, for that you seeme to haue so great a care and cōsideration for our peace and safety:
But whereas it is thought that the putting of our ar∣mour, would be a great cause of the same, it séemeth too vs otherwise, for yt you stand in néed of our ayd against those which séeke the destruction of you, of your realme, and of your faithful subietces. For by these meanes we may séeke to restore your Maiestie and your mother too that liberty & authority which ye had, before the Duke of Guise came into the Court. It séemeth vnto vs at this time, yt neyther you nor your mother are at libertie, as may be perceyued by the effects. This we request, that the Edict of January may be generally obserued & kept throughout the Realme: that in certayne places in the which there is most daunger of sedition, the faithful mai haue leaue to haue their Temples within the Cities, that the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshiall of S. An∣drew, may depart from the Court: and that they come not into the same agayn, nor haue any maner of gouern ment of the kingdom during the Kings minoritie. Also, that whatsoeuer hath ben done by the kings counsaile, from that time since the which the Guises haue kept the King and Quéen in their custody by force of armes, may be boyd and of none effect. Furthermore, wée request, that the Cardinall of Ferrar, a pruoker and mouer of warres, may forthwith depart the Realme, and spéede him to Rome: and that he certefie the Pope, that if hée will appoint a common counsell, either at Lions, Auini∣on, or Bezance, they were ready by the Kinges leaue to come to that Counsell. But whereas it is sayd that wée shall haue pardon for putting on armour, there séemeth to vs no cause why we should need any pardone. Since we haue not horne armour against the king but for the King: yea wée are sofarre fom deseruing blame herefore, that wee ra∣ther deserue all commendation, prayse, and rewarde: Which shall well appeare to the Kinge when hée com∣meth
to that rypenesse of yeares that he may iudge of our merites and well deseruing, vntill which time we desire that the writings of the Prince of Conde, and of the Triumuiri, might be registred in all the Courtes of Paris. Moreouer, it séemeth not necessary vnto vs thatTriumuiri are these three, Gui∣se, the Cō∣stable, and the Marshi all of Saint Andrew. any manner of artillerie should be taken awaye: onely it is necessary to bring to passe that the Triumuiri, which are the authours and causes of the war and these trou∣bles, do lay asyde their armour: for wée desire nothinge more than peace. As for the Cities which we haue for∣tified, we doe and will euer acknowledge them to be the Kings. And wée vtterly mislike that the Triumuiri sould bring into the Realme any forrain power. Wherefore we desire not that the armies of forrein Princes be brought into the realm: but that they would only be suerties for the performance of the Condicions. Therefore we desire the Emperour, the Princes Electors, the Quéenes of England and Scotland, the King of Spaine, the common wealth of Vennize, and the Switzers, to giue their warrantise and suertiship for the performance of these condiions. These thinges notwithstanding were attempted in vayne, mens myndes on both sydes béeing inflamed to warres. The Prince of Conde and those of his syde, tru∣sted to the goodnesse of their cause, howbeit they sought all that they coulde for peace and concorde, althoughe both in number and also in courage, they farre excéeded their aduersaries, perswading themselues to haue the victorye. The Guises and hys fellowes, greatly lea∣ned to the Kinges authoritie, and had in their custodye the Kinges treasure: So that what with their own sub∣till practises, and what with the helpe of the Kinge of Nauar, they brought many things to passe. For ye kings name and authority carieth with it such a maiestie and reuerence throughout the whole Realme of Fraunce, as
euer the name of a king hath done or may, in any King∣dome: the subiectes hauing in them, a certaine naturall loue, as it were ingraffed. By which name how greatly the Guises, haue preuailed, experience hath taughte. The Guises also were holpen by the Spaniards, by the Italians, and by the Swizers, whse helpe the Guises required, e∣uen whē they tooke their coūsaile first to begin warres. The Guises had also on their part the Citie of Paris, the Senate, the people, and many other great and mightie Cities: So that they were very strong on both partes, insomuch that all thinges considered, it was not easie to be dierned which was the stronger part. At this first beginning the Prince of Conde & his part, were both in number and courage far surpassing the Guises: but the Guises and his adherents excéeded the other part in pol∣licie and subtill sleightes. Notwithstanding God did so moderate and order the whole matter, least the victory one the on part being to great, bothe the Kingdome should be brought to great calamitie, & also the Church to extreame ruine and destruction. Herein therfore moste miraculously appeared the great prouidence of God, in afflicting his seruantes, and yet notwithstan∣ding sauing them from destruction: and in punishing the great outrage of the whole Kyngdome, and yet not vtterly ouerthrowing the same. The Guises therfore perceiued that they must néedes stop and represse the proceedings of the Prince of Conde and his aderents, with whom they had not ben equall if they had ioyned battaile: and also intended to shift of the couragious forwardnes of the Prince of Condes Ar∣me by subtill meanes, vntill they had the helpe of these Straungers whom they looked for: To bring y• which theyr purpose to passe, the vehement inclination of the Prince of Conde to peace, did greatly helpe them. While the fahfull were in good hope one while to
haue peace, another while to haue victory, by dayly ru∣mors, and the Cities being more negligently kept than they were wont to be, certaine of them were lost: as Angeu and Caloniū, and others, the which were at the first counted but small losses: but afterwardes great losses, as the faithfull found. Now séeing there ensued no frute of the communi∣cation had betwéene the Prince of Conde, the Quéene, & the King of Nauar, (as we haue before declered) both Armies prepare themselues to take their iourney. The Army of the Guises was neither very great in number, nor yet furnished wt many expertsouldiers. Ther were certaine bands of souldiers footemen, gathered out frō among the rascall sort of people of Paris, which were so rawe that they were faine to be taught euen the first principles of Martiall feates: and among thse were many popish Priestes, which had obtained leaue from the Pope & of the Bishoppes to go to the warre. And as for horsemen, they had scarse one whole army: ma∣ny of the Noble Captaines being with the Prince of Conde. The chiefest part of the Garisons of souldiers, which were appoynted to defend the strong holdes in diuers partes of the Realme, were called home to helpe the Guises: of the which a great number stale away secret∣ly to the Prince of Conde. The Armie of the Prince of Conde was the greater in number, the moste couragious, and the best ap∣poynted. The greatest and most principall part of the Nobillitie being very well appoynted and furnished both with courage and armour, and a great multitude of souldiers comming vnto him from all partes of the Realme almost: ye which was deuided into thrée parts. The first part consisted of Uascones, of the which Mon∣ure Grammuntiu was general. The secōd of Oscitanes,
& of the Inhabitants of Dolpheny, of whom Monsure Rohainus was Captaine. The third consisted of those Inhabitants of Fraūce, that are called Franci, in Latine, of which the Andelot was Captaine: who notwithstan ding was made the Captaine generall of all the foote∣men. Concerning field péeces or great Goonnes, the e∣nemie had great abundance, wherof the Prince of Con∣de had small stoore: which either he had taken at Orle∣ans, or els were cast of purpose for him. The common Counsell and consent of all men was to go to Paris with all their power, being the chiefe Mee tropolitane Citie, and the head of their enemies, and to assault the same. Notwithstanding, the Guises remoued their Armie from Paris: commaundement being first of all giuen by the Kyng of Nauar, that all those which professe the re∣formed Religion, should depart out of the Citie with in three dayes. And then they came to Stapulas, towardes Orleans. The Prince of Conde also remoued from Orleans, with all his Army, the twenty of June, to méete the e∣nemie. Then sent the Quéene Letters to the Prince of Conde, intreating and perswading him to peace and cō∣cord, vppon indifferent and reasonable conditions. The Prince of Conde alwayes desiring peace, sent Letters back againe, & was contented to come to Parley. Wher∣vpon truce was taken for sixe dayes. Then the King of Nauar wrote to his brother ye Prince of Conde more lo∣uingly than he was wont to do, & desired of him to haue for himselfe and his familie only a Citie lying neare to the riuer Loyer, called, Bogencia, which Citie was kept with Garrisons of the Prince of Conde: the which he de∣sired but vppon this condition, that if they did not con∣clude vppon peace, he would yéelde it into his handes a∣gaine. The Quéene also came into the army of the Gui∣ses,
& wrote to the Prince of Conde very louinge & frend∣lyThe Guises vnder the collour of peace seeke to deceiue the Prince of Conde. letters, desiringe him earnestly, to come and talke with her. By reason hereof it was commonly reported through out the whole army of the prince of Conde, that there should be peace: the Guises intending nothing lesse, but a farther mischife, as the euent afterward decla∣red. The Prince of Conde, in the tyme of the truce, tal∣ked oftentimes with the Quéene, and with his Brother the King of Nauar. Then the Prince of Conde, whē he had told his fellowes that the Quéene had promised him that the Guises and his adherentes should foorthwith depart to their owne houses, and vnarme themselues, vpon condition that he himselfe should come vnto her as a pleadge, for the con∣firming of the peace that should be concluded, when I say he had reported these things to his fellowes, he cre∣diting the same, perswaded his fellowes to giue him leaue to bring this thing to passe, that he might séeme, to leaue nothing vndone that might bréede peace and con∣cord. To the which they graunted, making this request in maner and forme followinge. Before the matter procede, let the Guises, the Consta∣ble Momorentius, and the Marshall of saint Andrewe, departe home to their owne houses: immediatly after the which departing, we desire that the Prince of Conde may remaine and abide in the handes of the Quene, and of his Brother the king of Nauar, as a hostage & pleadge of our faith: promising with one consent, that we will gladly, and readily obey al things that shalbe commaun∣ded vs to do, which concerne our obedience, and dutie to the kinge, the profite and commoditie of the Realme, and the conseruation of our liues and goodes: but speci∣ally for the glory of God, and the libertie of our consci∣ences. Then was this request, which the adherentes of the
Prince, of Conde had made, brought to the Quéene with letters: & ot of hand, the same night, al to soone, it was subscribed by ye Prince of Conde & the rest of his frends, and solemnly also subscribed by the King of Nauar, and sealed with the Kings seale: and then it was sent backe again with letters, by which the Quéene and the King of Nauar declared yt thei liked very wel of the condiciōs. This returne was made the fower and twentye day of June, being the last day of the truce taken: at which time notable occasion was offered to the Prince of Con∣de, to anoie, and gaule his enemies.The Guise go home to their houses, & the Prince of Conde became pledge. Notwithstanding he attempted no maner of force, because of the letters that came in the meane time. The sixe and twenty day following, the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshall of Saint Andrew, departed from their Campes. And by & by word was brought to the Prince of Conde, that those thrée, accordinge to the forme of the peticion, were departed from their armie home to their houses. When the Prince of Conde vnderstoode this, he came to the King of Nauar, to Baugence, with a fewe on∣ly attending vppon him. Wherevppon he was brought through the middest of the host, in al the hast to a village called Talsiac, wher the Quéene aboade: and betwene Baugence, & that Uil∣lage Talsiac, were placed certain Garrisons of soldiers. When he came to the Quéene, he was of her very lo∣uingelye entertained, and had many faire promises made him: and by request easely obtayned leaue of her, that certain of his fellowes might come vnto that place: both to the end they might salute her, and also that they might conferre and talke togither concerninge concordThe prac∣tise of the Guises to take the Prince of Conde. and peace. In the meane tyme woord was brought to the frendes, and fellowes of the Prince of Conde, that the Guises, the Constale, and the Marshall of Saint An∣drew, abode still at Chastellodune, which was not far dis∣tant
from Talsia where the Quéene and the Prince of Conde abode: and certaine letters also of the Dukeeof Guise to the Cardinall of Loraine his Brother, were ta∣ken by the way, and brought to them: Of which let∣ters this is the summe word for word as they were written. I send vnto you this messenger in all hast possible, to certefie you that all thinges were yesterday finished. AndThey meane the Queene, and the Kyng of Nauar. know you this also for certaine, that many are blinded and deceiued very much. Our Mother, and her brother, sweare that they will not forsake vs: and that they will followe no other Counsell than the Counsayle of such whom you know. To be short, the reformed Religion, if we behaue our selues wisely (as we mean to do) will haue a fall: Ye and our Admirall shall haue euill successe. All our power remayneth still whole, but theires is broken and dispersed: our Cities are rendred vp againe, without any maner of mencion of preaching or of the admini∣stration of Sacraments. This messenger which I send vn to you is trustie. There came also to the hands of the Prince of Conde by ye meanes of one of the kyng of Nauars houshold ser∣uaunts, a note in writing of the Duke of Guises, left with the Kyng of Nauar for a remembraunce: to this effect. Let there be no obligation made for Religion: See that the pledge be kept in any wise: Concerning the ren∣dering vp of the Cities, let there be no delay: Order the matter wisely: Suffer them in no wise to come any neerer to Orleans: Let vs be diligently certefied and admoni∣shed of all things. These forewarnings greatly troubled the Prince of Conde and his adherents: they sawe that he was fallen into the handes of his enemies: so that there was great daunger on euery side. Notwithstanding his friendes thinking it not good to delay the matter, and to suffer ye
Prince to be in perill, when they had giuen the Cap∣taines charge to be vigilant, and to haue their souldiers in a redines, came to the Queene. The principall wher∣ofThe nobles of the Prince of Cōdes side wēt to the Queene. were these, the Admirall, the Andelot, Monsuer Por∣cia, Monsuer Rochfocald, Monsuer Rohan, Monsuer Genluis, Monsuer Grammontius, Monsuer Soubizius, and Monsuer Piennius. These saluted the Quéene, and were very louingly entertayned of her: She gaue vnto them thankes, for their great diligence and paines for her and the kynges prifite at that time: insomuch that she sayd they had pre serued her life and the kyngs: ye which their merits de∣seruing honour, & pryce, the sayd, she wold neuer or get. Then they declared to the Quéene, with what fide∣litie they had serued the Kyng with their body & goods, vnder the Prince of Conde: they shewed vnto her the e∣quitie of their cause, which at that time was in contro∣uersie: and their earnest care also which they had forThe com∣municatiō betweene the queene and the Nobles. the preseruation of the kynges dignitie, and the peace & profite of the whole Realme. Whereuppon they most hartely prayed and beséeched the Quéene, that they might not preferre the immaginations of a few men, before those things which appertayned to the glory of God, and the safetie of the Realme: For God (saye they) will defend euery good cause, and seuerely punish all kind of wickednes, which are committed against the Kyngs Edicts, abusing the Kinges name therunto. For himselfe also the Prince of Conde protested, that it sée∣med very straūge vnto him, yt some shuld be had in such estimation, and no regard at all to be had of him, which was not only néere of kin to the king, whereas the o∣ther were straungers, and but seruants to the kyng, but also had offered all maner of indifferent conditions and submission. Wherefore he sayd it was now high time to prouide some remidies to resist and repell those
calamities at hand. The Quéene being before instructed concerning e∣uery thing what answere she should make, began, not to answere to those things which were spoken by the Prince of Conde, but to declare: That the number, pow∣er,The queen denieth the vse of the reformed Religion. and authority of those was very great which follow∣ed and imbraced the Church of Roome: and they haue the sword in their hands (sayth she) and are fully deter∣mined to defend that Religion, which all former kings haue receiued and imbraced: so that they meane this shalbe the principall condition among the rest, for con∣cord and peace: That there be no other Religion obserued & followed throughout the whole Realme, than the Catholique Religion of Roome. But the Prince of Conde in ye name of ye rest, replied, that they did not plead their owne priuate cause: but whatsoeuer had ben done by them vntill that day, was done first for the defence of the kynges libertie and au∣thoritie, and secondly for a common wealth: and here∣vppon they put themselues in armour at the first by the Quéenes commaundement: for the which cause, they did not care if they spent their goods & liues, so that the kyngs Edict might be obserued and kept, wherby eue∣ry man might haue leaue to vse the reformed Religiō, and the libertie of their conscience: without the benefite wherof, they thought them selues to be but dead. Insomuch, that if they in whom so great a number of faithfull did repose their trust for the handling of these matters, should so much ouershoote themselues, and for∣get their dutie, that they should agrée to those thinges which were so repugnant to the glory of God, and the common profite of all men, it could not be auoyded but that they should be counted of all men forsakers & con∣temners of the glory of God, of the kings dignitie and
safetie, & of the cōmon peace & tranquillity of ye realme. The which, rather then it should come to passe, shoulde cause them to forsake ye realm, before they would agrée to those so vniust and seuere conditions. And if their de∣parture out of the realme, might remedy the matter, he beséeched the Quéene, that there might be no regarde or consideration had of them but of publike peace and qui∣etnesse. The Prince of Conde had oftētimes vsed these words: Let there be no consideration had of me, I would gladly bring to passe that by my exile the kingdome might be in peace, and the vse of the reformed Religion restored. And the Quéene euen of purpose had entised and prouoked the Prince of Conde, shée hauing the Triumuiri, hir Schoole maisters, to vse these wordes. Therefore, the Quéene hauing féete occasion offered hir, answered, That shée had alwayes the Prince of Conde and the rest in as great estimation,The queen woulde haue the Prince of Conde & his friends banished, as became hir. But for somuch as the matter was come to this point, that suche remedies must be vsed as shée wished not, to her great grief, yet notwithstanding, be∣cause of the present necessitie, she said, she receiued that condition, namely, that they should forthwith depart the Realme, by whose absence the myndes of the Bishopps would be the better pacified, and so the Realme should be at peace and quietnes. And shée would (she said) make generally and particularly to euery man such assurance for their peace and safetie, as they could desire. The Prince of Conde and his fellowes wonderinge greatly at these wordes of the Quéen, which they looked not for, said at the length, that they had respecte vnto o∣thers as wel as to themselues, whose aduise thei would haue. But the Quéene prosecuted hir former talke say∣ing, that so the common wealth should be greatly profi∣ted: and there are some saith shée, that threaten to pro∣long the kings minoritie, vntill hée come to the age of
one and twenty, if so be néede should require to resiste their violēce, she was persuaded (she said) that the Prince of Conde and the rest of his friends, would come and help the King, although he were neuer so far of. Thus they made an end for this day. And the Quéen came to Talsiac. The day following there came a Mes∣senger betymes in the morning to the Prince of Conde, from the Quéene, with short letters, which made men∣tion of the communication had the daye before, & of the concluding of the same: for the which cause she sayd shée would haue him come vnto hir. Then the Prince of Cō∣de and his fellowes, came to the Quéene: and when hée had talked with her a while, séeing that the time of hys aboad with her was not limited: and séeing also that hée could bring nothing to passe as he would, he prayed the Quéene that he and his fellowes might haue leaue to retourne back againe to their armie: for so much as also hée perceyued that those perleyings wanted not the accu∣stomed treasons of his aduersaries. And thus ye PrinceThe Prince of Conde retourned to his army of Conde the same day retourned agayne to his armie: who very ioyfully receyued him, notwithstandinge the soldiers was almost displeased, that the Prince of Conde came into so great peril, with the common consent of all the Nobles: saying that those parleyes should be néede∣full no more: and that the pollicie of the aduersaries, was not perceyued and seene, who go about to detract & delay the the tyme, to the end they may increase their power with forreyne helpe, to set vppon vs, whom they now feare. We for slow (say they) the aduantage when it is offered: Where we had rather suffer any extremi∣ty, than to haue these delayes. Let vs set vpon the ene∣mie, and contende no more with wordes, but with the dynte of sworde. And in very déede, if the Prince of Conde had brought hys armie at the first to Paris, being so well appoynted,
and of so great courage, there had ben great hope of vic∣tory. But these delayes, through parleying, dyd both abate the number and also the courage of the soldiours: where as the enemie thereby greatly increased his power. The Guises hearing of this, retourned with all spéedThe Guises remoue their army frō Bogen∣cia, & take Blesa, and Towers. to their hoaste, and were not a little gréeued that the Prince of Conde was so escaped their handes. And be∣cause they thought it necessary, they remoued their host secretly in the night from Baugence, leauing there only certayne garrisons of Souldiours to defende the same. The day following they assaulted Blais, being a Noble Citie, which wanted sufficient power to defende the same, because the enemie came vnlooked for: This they tooke, and put a great number of men to the sworde. From thence they went to Towers, and sought to haue the same rendered vnto them: the which when they had taken by surrender, they spoyled: & horrible slaugh∣ter was committed by the Papistes in the same towne agaynst the faythfull. Men and women without anye respect of age were drowned in the Riuer by shipfulls. And diuers also were beheaded. These sodayne, and vnlooked for rumours, stayed the Prince of Conde: also the great and huge stoare of raine which fell in that Region, being of it selfe very déepe and foule, made the Prince of Conde to alter his purpose and to leaue following the enemie: For there was no ioyning of battayle by reason of the foulnesse and dyrti∣nesse of the Countrey, the tyme rather seruing to assalt and besiege Cities. Wherefore, hée determined to re∣serue his power, vntill better occasions were offered:The Prince of Conde returneth to Orleans with his▪ army. and so retourned to Orleans agayne with hys whole Armye. About this tyme wel néere, the Aumal, brother to the Duke of Guise, assalted Roan in Normandie, and battered
a very strong and well fenced Castell, commonly called the Castle of Saint Catherin, with great store of ordi∣naunce: but he preuailed not, but had euill successe, the City being stoutly defended by the soldiers in the town, Moruilleirs a noble man, being their Captaine. There∣fore the sixtéene day of the seege, the Duke Aumale with out his purpose, remoued his hoste from Rhoane, andRoan besie ged in vain by the Au∣male. departed, with losse of a great nomber of his Soldiers at this séege. At Lyons, and about the vtmost regions, as Dolpheny, Burgundy, and the prouince of Langres, the faithful were diuersly vered and troubled. In Burgundie, the losse of Chalon (which in old time was called Cabilo) was the oc∣casion that many other Townes also were lost: Tauua∣nies the vicegerent of that prouince, hauing alwaies, at euery occasion an armie ready and appointed to fighte. Matisco was kept and defended by the garrison of sol∣diers of Lions, whose Captaine was Mombrun. This Mombrun. geuing to the Soldiers in the night a watch word or signe to depart, stale away by ship and lefte the City, and came to Lyons. Then Tauan, easely tooke the Citie of Matisco, being quite voide of defence. Herevp∣pon all Burgundie, yéelded to the Pope. In Prouince, which is a Region nere vnto the Medi∣taran Sea, the faithfull were very euill intreated and murthered. Before the first motions of this Ciuil war, there was stirred vp a greuouse sedition, the chiefe au∣thor and Captaine whereof was one Flacean, a despe∣rate person, who had gotten vnto him a band of wicked and lewde men: the which sedition, notwithstandinge, was easely repressed by Monsuer Cursol, whō the King sent for the same purpose, and by the helpe of the refor∣med churches, notwithstanding that Monsuer Somme∣riue, the gouerners Sonne of Prouince, and many No∣ble men, and diuers other in authority, for bicause of the
Guises, assisted those lewde persones. Neuerthelesse, the Gouerner of Prouince, Counte de Tende of Sauoy, openly maintained the faithfull and being oftentymes assaul∣ted by his Sonne, came in great peril of his life. Ther∣fore Monsuer Sommeriue, so soone as he heard that warrs should begin, fortyfied the Cities of greatest trust, as Marseile, Aiigues, and others, gathered togither so great an armie as he could, and euery where euell intreated the faithfull. Thus the matter daily waxing woorse and woorse, and both partes being bent to battaile, the faith∣full also gathered an Armie, with no small nomber of soldiers and captained▪ but they had small store of great goonnes, and of cities, out of which they were excluded by the subtil practises of the papistes. Their Captaines were these, Monsuer Cardet, Monsuer Bari, Monsuer Pa∣nard, and Monsuer Mouans, a very good and expert cap∣taine. These marching forth with their armies came to Pertus, and beséeged the same, and for want of greate goonnes, they intended to vndermind the citie. Notwith standing when they heard of the comming of their ene∣mies, which in dede were mani mo in nomber, they rai∣sed their séege, and came to Cesteron, which at that time they themselues possessed. But while Monsuer Somme∣riue, intended to follow and pursue them, behold hée got a new occasion to commit great wickednesse. There was at Auinion (which was a towne belonging to the Popes iurisdiction or territory, and of great wealth) a certain man called Fabricius Cerbello of Bononia, béeing Gouernour of the same towne, expert in the warres, & the Bishop of Romes Nephew, and a mortall enimye to the reformed religion. This man intreated Monsuer Sommeriue by his letters, that, for so much as he had al∣ready an army prepared, he would come out of hand to Orenge (which is a Noble citie, and the Lordship or seig∣norie of the house of Nassau) to the whiche there came
dayly a great multitude of Huguenotes, who vnlesse they were oppressed euen at the very first, not only Auinion, which bordered vpon the same, should be endammaged, but also all Prouence, should thereby receiue great detri∣ment. Therefore by this mans aduise and counsel▪ Mon sieur Sommeriue marched with his armie toward Orenge, and had this occasion offered vnto him, easely to assault the same. Monsieur Parpalia of Auinion, Lord chief Iustice of the Parliament of Orenge, returning from Lions, was taken at Bourg, which is a towne in Languedoc, néere vnOrenge as∣saulted & takē by the papistes. to the riuer called the Rosne, the inhabitants of the same towne being sworne enemies to the reformed religiō. Therefore, to deliuer and redéeme this Parpalia, the in∣habitants of Orenge, and the borderers thereabouts, lea∣uing a small garrison to kéepe the Citie, came in battail array to Bourg. Whereupon the army of Monsieur So∣meriue, being ayded with many of Dolpheny and Auiniō, whose Captain was Monsieur Suze, a notable enemy to the reformed Religion, besieged the Citie of Orenge, be∣ing voyd of men to defend the same: battered the walles thereof with ordinance, the which being shaken downe, they easely obtayned the Citie. After the taking wher∣of the furiouse and outragiouse soldier, exercised al ma∣ner of crueltie vpon the poore inhabitantes. For besyde the accustomed cruelty vsed in warres, and at the ray∣sing & ouerthrowing of cities, as rapines, forcing of wo∣men, & the deflowring of virgins, they vsed a new kind of torture▪ as by casting downe the prisoners frō Tur∣rets & other high places, the soldiers in the meane time watching the fall, that they might receyue them vppon the toppes of their speares, and points of their swoords. They vsed also to hange vp men with their héeles vp∣ward, boaring holes through their féete for the thouges and tye ropes to hold by. And after this they burnt and
destroyed the chiefest & principal buildings in the city. The victorie being in this wise gotten, the army by and by marched to Cesteron, which we saide before the faithfull possessed: and determined to giue the assault vp∣pon the Citie. Notwithstanding after certayne dayes, they hearing of the comming of the army of Monsieur Sorez and Mones, with other necessary aydes & helpes, thei raysed their sieg & departed without their purpose. The losse and destructiō of the citie of Orenge brought great terrour and feare vpon all that Region, and vpon the Inhabitants there abouts: but especially to all Dol∣pheny: Monsieur de Suze (of whom mencion is made be∣fore) abyding still also about that Region after the de∣parture of Monsieur Sommeriue, with a prepared army, playing the mortall enemie, and was of great might & The army of Suze in Dolpheny greatly an∣oyed the faithfull. power, both by the helpe of the inhabitants of the same countrey, of whom he had gathered togither a great ar∣my by his own authoritie and also by the ayde of Mon∣sieur Fabricius, gouernour of Auinion. Where vppon hée tooke the Cities bordering thereabouts, some yéelding vp themselues without assault, and some being cōssray∣ned thereunto by siege, as Pierlot, Mornac, and diuers o∣ther little townes. (All the villages in that Region are walled round about, because of their often and accusto∣med warres) and in the territorie of Auinion, (whiche men call the Countye of Venais) being a very frutefull soyle, he wan many little Townes. For in that Coun∣tye the faithfull held many of them. And if hée had marched with his army toward Dolphe∣ny, he had woon with litle ado, diuers Cities, being slen∣derly fortefied: all men quaking for feare, and the cities almost being quite voyd of men to defende themselues. For at that time the faythefull were gone to winne the citie of Puj, in the Region of Vellay. Notwithstanding at Lions was M. Adretze, at yt instāt gouerner of the city.
This man by his singular diligence and indeuour, hauing gathered together from diuers places an Army of men, came from Lions to Montiil, a noble Citie of Dolpheny: at whose commaundement suldiers came to him frō diuers places. For at that time his name was of such authority throughout all those Regions, that he might rule and gouerne as he listed himselfe, al those places in the which the faithfull abode, as the Prouin∣ces of Lions, Dolpheny, and Languedos. Monsuer de Suze hauing gotten a great Armie, went to besiege the City of Vauriac in the Countie of Venais, but being the more bold by reason of the successe that he had at Orenge, hee was carelesse and rechlesse in his busines. Therfore hée incamped him selfe néere vnto the Citie, and willed the Citizens to yeeld vp the same vnto him. In the meane time, the souldiour being carelesse talked of the spoyle, and of the pray, assuring himselfe of the same: and the Captaines euen as if they already had gotten the victo∣ry, began to deuide the spoyle among them selues. Also Monsuer de Suze him selfe, sate wholely vnarmed in his tent playing at the Dyce after hee had dyned, and boasted and triumphed greatly of the praye before the victory. And when the Scouts of the Army cryed out that the enemies were come, Monsuer de Suze made a iest and scorne of the matter, saying that they went a∣bout in vaine to deliuer the citie out of their hand: not∣withstanding he gaue commaundement to certaine vn∣der captaynes which were with him, to make better enquiry what the matter was, and to commaund the souldiers to arme them selues. But hée in the meane time followed his play, till euery man began to crie, that the enemy which had ambushed themselues on the other side of the hyll, which lay betwéene them, was come. Therfore at the length he arose, and commaun∣ded the souldiers to set them selues in battayle araye:
hée him selfe tooke vnto him his Armour: and had scarse∣ly put on his brestplate, when euery man began to crie that the enemy had giuen the onset vpon the first froont of the battayle, which was now constrayned to retire and flée. He therfore in all hast, without his helme mounted on horsebacke, set the souldiers in their araye, ran vp and downe, and cried out like a mad man so that all were now on a roare, and at their wittes end. Yet neuerthelesse many of them stoode stoutly vnto the bat∣taile, so that the sight began to wax fierce on both parts. Notwithstanding the faithfull being vnder the conduct and charge of Monsuer de Adretze preuayled, and flew a great number of their enemies. Then the souldiers of Monsuer de Suze turned their backes and fled before the faithfull. And Monsuer de Suze him selfe being beset with a certaine troupe of horsemen, escaped by flight, but very hardly. Thus when the faythfull had gotten the victory, with losse of a fewe of their souldiers, wher as on the enemies side two thousand were slaine, they tooke and caried away their tents and artillary. They tooke allso some of their enemies prisoners, and had it not ben that they wanted horsemen, fewe of them had escaped, the souldiers were so sore moued to wrath by the remembraunce of the destruction of Orenge. After this, when Monsure de Adretze, had fortefied Uuriac (which hee had now valiantly defended to the ouerthrowe of the enemie) he went forward, and tooke diuers townes, which had yeelded them selues to Mon∣suer de Suze: and then he came to Auinion, the souldi∣ersThe actes of Monsuer de Adretze in Dolphe∣ny, and in the Coun∣tie of Ve∣nais. of Monsuer de Suze, fléeing from the same with all spéede. There is a certaine towne in the County of Venais of no great fame, called Mornac, yet notwithstandinge by reason of the cituation of the same, and also of a Ca∣stell belonging thereunto, it is very hard to be woone.
This towne also Monsuer de Adretze obtayned: but the Castell, the Garrison of souldiers appoynted to kéepe the same by Monsuer de Suze, held, with two hundered townesmen also. Yet notwithstanding at the length, partly by force, and partly by surrender, he enioyed the Castell, vpon condition that the souldiers should escape with life. But so soone as he was come into the Castell, the men of Orenge which were in the Army, cried out saying that all those souldiers, which were dismist with life, were at the winning of Orenge, and many of them were noted to be great shewers of crueltie at that time. The Inhabitants of Mornac also shewed what iniu∣ie they had done vnto them, and how they had broken thei faith and promise after they had yéelded vp vnto them the citie. Then said Monsuer de Adretze: As they haue handeled others so let them bee handeled them∣selues. Then were they caried into the Castell againe, from the top wherof, to requite the crueltie which they had shewed towardes the men of Orenge, they were cast downe headlong: The like execution was done at Pier∣lat, when the souldiers of Monsuer de Adretze had taken a very strong holde that appertayned to the same. And from hence forth this kind of punishment was vsed eue ry where among the enemies. But while these men of whom we spake before, were cast downe bedlong from the Castell of Mornac, there happened a thing worthy to be remembred. One being cast downe from the Ca∣stell, fell by the way by a wilde figge trée which grewe to the banke of the Castell, and caught hold of the same: the which when the lokers on sawe, they greatly won∣dered. But some to cause him to fall shot at him: Not∣withstanding by the earnest intreatie of certaine capi∣taynes, Monsuer de Adretze graunted vnto him his life. This happened in the Moneth of Iuly. And thus the name of Monsuer de Adretze was a terrour to all those
that dwelt there aboutes. Now the Prince of Conde (as we sayd before) being retourned backe againe with his Army to Orleans, the Guises and his adherents hauing gotten Bla and Tow∣ers, and all that Region besides, shewed all the cruel∣tie that they could against the faithfull. The Marshall of S. Andrewe, went with some partThe Mar∣shiall of S. Andrew winneth Poictiers. of the Army to Poictiers: and the same being but slen∣derly fortefied, he wan. After the surrender whereof the souldiers shewed great extremitie, murthering, spoyling, rauishing, and carying away mens wiues. There came also, into the host of the Guises great aidThe Ger∣manes and Swisers aid the Guises. from the Swisers, and shortly after that there came an Armie of footemen and horsemen of Germaynes vnder the conduct and charge of the Rheingraue, and the Roken∣dolphe. Aud they looked for ayde out of Spaine, and Gas∣coygne. In the meane time, the Guises vsed other meanes and wayes to helpe and defend themselues. For by theThe decree of the Se∣nate of Pa∣ris, against the men of Orleans. decrée and ordinance of the Senate of Paris, they which had put them selues in Armoure at Orleans, were pro∣claymed to haue put on the same against the Kyng and the Realme, and that therfore they were Rebelles, and giltie of Treason, and ought to die, and to haue open warre pronounced against them. Also that they ought to be depriued of such dignities as they enioyed by the Kyng. Furthermore that they should be made an open shame and a perpetuall ignominie that neither they themselues, nor any of their posterity euer after might beare any publique office vnder the King. And last of al that their goods should be confiscate to ye King. But they excepted the Prince of Conde, as though he had bin con∣strained to do that which he had done against his will.
In like maner the Guises, sendinge letters to all places but especially into Germany, openly accused the Prince of Conde and his adherents, to be the authors and deē∣ders of newe and monstrouse opinions: that by this meanes they might make the Germanes, whose helpe both they and the Prince of Conde wanted, to take their parte. The Prince of Conde was hindered many waies. For beside the greuouse sickenesse of the pestilence atA greeuous pestilence at Oleans. Orleans, which daily wasted his armie, his power was greatly also diminished by the losse of Cities, and by the increase of his enemies. Also by reason of the delaies of doubtfull thinges in chaunce, and by the threatnings of the enemie, which so triumphed of their good lucke at the first, & finally through the daunger of the pestilence, a greate nomber of his Soldiers went a side, and many quight forsooke him. Then were fastinges and prayers solemnly proclaimed to be in the Church, to the which the Prince of Conde came oftentimes in his owne per∣son. He exhorted also his soldiers to be of good courage: and was very carefull for the preseruation of Orleans. and he sent Monsuer de Subize, a noble and wise man, to Lyons, to be Lifetenant of the same, because Monsuer de Adretze séemed to be to rash hardy, and aduenterouse in his doings. And he sent letters oftentimes, willinge that there should be diligent héede and care had of Lyons, Dolpheny and Languedoc. Also because the enemies power daylyThe Prince of Conde craueth helpe of the queene of England and of the Germane Princes. increased, by the meanes, of forreine aids, and because they were the more stout and bould vpon hope of newe aide, the Prince of Conde, sent Monsuer de Stuard a Scot with letters to the Quéene of England, requiringe at her handes ayde, in his owne name and in the name of his fellowes. And he wrote also diuers letters to the princes of Germainy, that were protestants, in the which
he craued help at their hands the Andelot himselfe be ing sent for the same purpose the more spedily to bring the matter to passe. The helpers in this matter, were said to be the Lantgraue Hessus, the County Pallatine, and the Duke of Bipont. About this time the Prince of Conde published a wri∣tinge, by which he ment to put awaye those rumores which were spred abrode of him and of his frendes, by the Guises, as though they had bin the authors and defen∣ders of new and monsterouse opinions. The libell pub∣lished was to this effecte following. Because (saieth he) we heare daily that our aduersaries accordinge to their accostomed maner oh lying, and maliciouse dealinge a∣gainst vs, do in euery place slaunder, and speake euill of al our doinges, one while laying to our charge that we are Atheistes, and Anabaptistes: that by this meanes they might withdraw from vs their good willes & care, which séeke with vs to defend and mainetaine the true and pure worshippe of God, by the doctrine of the pro∣phetes and Apostles: we thought good ouer & aboue the former declarations of our cause to propounde a briefe summe of our faith. By which faith we woorshippe and cal vpon the liuing God, in the name of his only Sonne our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ: abiding in his feare & seruice, by the ministering of his woord and holy Sa∣craments, that is to say by the institucion of Baptisme, and of his holy supper. To be short, we condescend to al the articles of the primitiue Church, as to the only rules of our saluation, being grounded vpon the bookes of ye Prophets & Apostles: as it is set forth more at large in the confession of our faith, confirmed with the whole consent of al the reformed churches within this realme: the copie whereof we send out into al forrain Nations, to take away those detestable and wicked sclaunders and lyes, by which the enemies both of God, and of thys
our realm, being voyd of al shame, haue sought in their libelles & sealed letters, to sclaunder, backbyte and de∣fame vs. Wherefore we humbly pray and beséeche all those that loue the pure and sincere doctrine of the Gos∣pell, and which are the faithfull seruaunts of God, yea & we require them in the name of the liuing God, that they first of all set before their eyes the flowing strea∣mes of innocent bloud that hath bene shed throughout this realme, crying both from heauen and from earth for vengeance. And we require all such that they helpe and ayde vs, and that they ioyne with vs in this cause, which is not our cause alone, but also the cause of all the faithfull, to represse and asswage their cruell tyrannie, which goe about to take from vs the perfect and frée li∣bertie of our consciences, the benefit wherof was graū∣ted vnto vs, by our soueraign and leige Lord the Kings Maiestie, and by the consent of all the states of ye realm: we being perswaded that we linked togyther in one religion, and in one mind, the most mighty and eternal God, will stretch forth his gloriouse hande to saue hys Church, and will also blesse our labour and indeuour, to the glory of his, and to the inlarging of the kingdom of his sonne Iesus Christ: to whom with the father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory world without end. The Prince of Conde also made answer to the Ordi∣nanceThe aun∣swer of the Prince of Conde & his friends to the De∣cree of the Senat of Paris. and decrée of the Senat of Paris, by the which his Adherentes were condemned of treason: First of al re∣fusing all those of the College, as the Iudges and Se∣natours, to be men vnméete for this cause: and writing the causes of their appeale, he sent the same vnto them. Their answer was in manner and forme following. Although I and my friends and fellowes haue suffi∣ciently declared the equitie of our cause, which hath con∣strayned vs to put our selues in armour, namely the li∣bertie
and authoritie of the King, and the obseruation of the Kings Edictes for the maintenance of the libertie of our consciences, & the peace of the reformed churches: Yet notwithstanding, séeing the open and sworne ene∣mies of the glory of God, and of the common wealth, doo dayly publish and send abroad new sclaunders and infa∣mies, to the obscuring of my innocency and the innocēcy also of my fellowes: we thinke it moste necessary and méet, that if wicked and vngodly men will not cease too withstand the trueth and all equitie, no more should we be weary to defende and maintayne the same trueth. For so much as therefore the XXUI. day of Iuly, there was an ordinance and decrée of Condemnation, establi∣shed in the Senat of Paris, by which they make those to be gilty of Rebelliō, which haue borne armour to main∣tayne the authoritie of the King and his estates, and a∣gainst the tyrannie of the Guises and his adherents: wée thinke it necessary that the Iustice of the sayde decrée, should be declared and set forth, not onely to the inhabi∣tants of this Realme, but also to other forreyne Nati∣ons, and for an euerlasting remembrance to be cōmit∣ted, to all posterities. For, it wilbe an example worthy to be remembred, in the which men may behold and sée into what Laberinthes of blind & peruerse iudgements the enemies of God and his Church do fall: and are so mad and blind, that for truth they mayntaine falsehode, iudging them to be sedicious, who, to the vttermoste of their power, séeke the peace and tranquillity of the common wealth: and pronouncing them to be Rebels, who, laying aside all care and consideration of them selues, do both hazarde their goods and their liues to mayntaine the obedience belonging to the Kyng, and the due and lawfull authoritie of the kynges Edictes. And to the end the same proclamation of Rebelliō, may euidently appeare to be vnlawfull and vnist, and r∣ther
a sclaunder of the enemie than the sentence of the Iudge: behold (sayth he) I and my fellowes, ouer and aboue the former declarations of our innocencie do pub∣lish these things in maner and forme following, First of all, whereas I am excluded out of that nom∣ber, that are counted rebelles, the singuler loue & care that I haue for the Kinges maiestie and dignitie, wyll not suffer me, not to accounte my selfe a partaker and sustainer of that wound and hurie, which is done vnto those men, whom I know, neuer to haue had any other respecte and consideration, then the preseruation of the Kinges maiestie, and of the whole Realme. And I af∣firme that I thinke my selfe so little gratefied hereby, that I thinke they haue done vnto me great iniury, in that they haue gon about to except and seperate me, frō so honest & godly a cōpany of the kinges louinge & faith full subiectes. Therfore I being perswaded before God & men, that their Innocencie is such, yt no one iot of dis∣obedience or rebellion can be iustly imputed to them or mée, intend to ioyne my selfe, and to be in the same con∣dition with them, whose cause and mind is all one, who are also of the same religion, of the same lyfe that I am of, and are also no lesse careful than I to mainetain and aduaunce the true woorship of God, in this realme. And as I can not nor ought to be disliked of thē, at whose cō∣maūdements I haue iustly put my selfe in armour: euē so I ought not, neither wil I seperate my self frō them, who at my entreatie haue armed thēselues with me, & are of the same will, & mind that I am of. Furthermore I haue sufficient experience of those wonted subtilties in my aduersaries, in so much that I may easely vnder∣stād what they go about by making exception of me. As also may euidently appeare by those letters & rescripts sent to the Liuetenaunt of the prouinces, in the which letters I my selfe amonge others am comprehended.
But to the end it maye appeare, that they rather ought to be counted Rebelles, which obiecte rebellion vnto vs, that is to saie, that they are Rebelles in dde, which were the first that put them selues in Armoure to breake the authoritie of the Kinges Edictes: and not we, which to hinder their mischeuous attempts armed our selues: we wil briefly repeat those things which ar more at large setforth in our former declaratiōs. Al mē know ye Edit of Ianuary brought such peace & trāquilli ty to the whole realme, that the state of the kyngdome (being before tossed and tormoyled with tempestious waues of diuers troubles) séemed to haue attayned at the length to the most quiet hauen of peace and tran∣quillitie, when as the Duke of Guise commiting a most horrible slaughter at Vassi openly declared, that he intē∣ded nothing but open warre against ye Kings dignitie, & against the peace & tranquillitie of the whole Realme. The which thing (as méete it was) I could not take in good part, for that I know my self to be bound by ye bond of consanguinitie to mayntayne the Kyngs Crowne & dignitie, which the Guises of late went about to deface. For this séemed vnto me to be very lewde, that a sub iect durst be so bold, so openlyto cōtemne the law of his Prince, & that such a law as was made & cōfirmed by al the states of the Realme in sollempne Courte of Par∣liament. And although I of my owne aucthoritie had thē iust occasiō offered me to withstād so bold an enter∣prise against the king & his lawes: yet notwithstanding I did moderate & stay my selfe vntil such time as I had expresse commaundement to take the matter in hand. And here I beséech the Quéene to call to her re∣membrance, how that when she was at Saint Germans she was certified of the whole purpose, counsayle, and intent of the Guises: as, that shée should bée put beside her authoritie, and that her most faythfull and trustie
seruants that were about her should bée put from her, to the end that when they had gotten the gouernement of the Realme, they might rule and order all thinges at their owne pleasure. Of the which matter when she vnderstoode, and of the League also which the Spanish▪ Ambassadours in∣truded, she was wonderfully troubled and gréeued: in∣somuch that for this cause she intreated me that I wold with all spéede gather together so great a power as I could to hinder the same. The which request I faithful∣ly accomplished, hauinge both a consideration to the Quéenes commaundement, and also of my dutie to∣wardes the Kyng and the Realme. This was the be∣ginning of all those things which I haue prosecuted e∣uer since that time, setting my self against those whom the Quéene iudged to be our enemies. And here also let her call to minde those, whom at that time shee coulde name one by one. But when the Guises by their conspiracies both at Paris and els where, had openly bewrayed to all men, that thing, which before was setretly in their mindes: the Quéene againe both by her letters and also by mes∣sengers confirmed that her former charge and com∣maundement giuen vnto mée, which was, that I shuld withstand the violence of the Guises and his adherents. And here I pray and most humbly beséech her, that so farre forth as the faith and word of a Quéene ought to stand firme, she would set before her eyes, euen those things which she wrote vnto me with her owne hand, ye which I am now constrayned to publish abrode for all men to behold, that in her letters also my innocencie maye bee séene. For I must néedes assure my selfe of this, that shée cannot chuse but be mindfull of those thinges: which she wrote vnto me from Fontainbleau▪ in the Moneth of March, commending the Kyng and her
selfe also vnto mée in these woordes: I commend vnto you▪ the Mother and her children: and of that also which shée wrote vnto me with her owne hand by Monsuer Boca∣uan at what time the power of the Guises was at Paris, that I would not vnarme my selfe before my aduersa∣ries had done the like, affirming also that euery man might sée to what end their conspiracie tended. Let hir also remember, how oftentimes she hath sée∣med, and hath signified also the same by letters, to ac∣cept and like very well of my doinges: which she sayd she would put the Kyng in mind of, that when he came to lawfull age, he might reward me according to my well deseruing. To this purpose it serueth which shée spake to the Admirall a few dayes before he should de∣part from the Court, namely, that she knew him to bée so faithfull and obedient to the Kyng and to her, that hée would indeuoure himselfe all that he could, to deliuer them from the oppression of the Guises. Insomuch that of late she wrote vnto him by Monsuer Rembouill, that she thought him to be so faythfull a seruant to the King, and so carefull for the Kynges crowne and dignitie, that she would vse his aduise and counsayle, to pacefie the present troubles. To be short, her behauiour to∣wardes me and my fellowes, when we and shée were together at Baugence, do so playnely proue her consent and agréement in this matter, that it shall be néedelesse to repeate many other arguments to proue this thing. For there before seuen Noble men, shée speaking of our dutifull obedience, protested vnto vs that she did acknowledge that we by our déedes had preserued her life and the Kynges. These thinges considered, haue our aduersaries any reason, nay, haue they any coniecture of Rebellion against vs? By whose aucthoritie, shall we be sayd to be Rebelles? Shall we be sayd to be Re∣belles by the Kyng and Quéenes authoritie, who haue
giuen vs expresse cōmaundements to arme our selues, who flée vnto vs for succour in these perilles, who by their will, letters and messages like of our doings, giue vs thankes, and approue the same, as profitable for the preseruasion of this Realme? Furthermore all men know, that those our enemies haue abused the Kyng & Quéenes names, whose willes also they haue captiued vnto them▪ The which is the only cause why I and my fellowes haue hitherto testified, and as yet also do vn∣fainedly protest: That we will not receiue any Edicts, Rescripts, or Decrées comming forth in the Kynges name, so long as he enioyeth not his libertie. For pro∣bation wherof this example may serue, namely: That the Quéene complayned vnto vs oftentimes in hir let∣ters, that she could not therfore graunt vnto vs our re∣questes, because the contrary part was mightier, and the people armed. And although the Kinges name, since the Moneth of Aprill last past hath ben so abused: yet notwithstanding the matter thereby hath the more playnely appeared: but most playnely by those letters which the Quéene sent by Monsure de Villars, and Mō∣sure Vieilleuill the xxiiy. day of May: In the which shée wrote, that shée deliuered the Kyng into other mens handes: vnderstanding by these woordes other mens handes, our aduersaries. Whereuppon it followeth that this sentence of Rebellion, and all other thinges done in the Kynges name, ought to be iudged to be done by our enemies: séeing the Kyng is in their handes, as ap∣peareth by the testimony of the Quéene. Let men iudge therfore what sentence that is against the condemned, being pronounced by those which are both aduersaries and Iudges. But let vs sée what great fault of Rebelli∣on that is which is layed to our charge, and why it is ob iected to vs: Because (say they) they will not vnarme them selues. If this be the fault, I demaund what they are to
be called, which comming to the Court armed, although they had no enemies in Armes, yet notwithstanding would not vnarme them selues at the commaundemēt of the Kyng and Quéene: and which continew in the same boldnes and presumption still? But who is hée, which at the commaundement of the enemie will laye aside the sword which he hath drawne to fight? What doth the enemy els in commaunding me to vnarme my selfe, than to will me to commit my goods to the spoile, and my life to crueltie, and also to receiue the lawe at the handes of an outlawe? Is not that to breake the fence with the which God hath inclosed his Church: that being destitute of fence and inunition, men may fall in to the handes of their cruell and fierce enemies? Fur∣thermore all men know very well that I alwayes of∣fered to laye aside my Armour, so soone as my enemies vnarming them selues, had restored the Kyng to his former libertie. Was it not méete that they which were the first that put them selues in Armour, and that without commaū∣dement and aucthoritie, and against the expresse Edicts and commaundements of the Kyng and Quéene, should bée the first in like maner that shoulde vnarme them selues, rather than they which by their example put on Armoure, that is to saye, by the commaunde∣ment of the Kyng and Quéene to preserue them, and also to defend the Edictes from the oppression and vio∣lence of others. To be short, let all my actes done vntill this day be examined: and it shalbe found that my aun∣sweres, my declarations, conditions, and all my actions are testimonies of my innocencie. What condition of peace agréeable to reason and e∣quitie haue I aany time refused, nay rather, I and my fellowes haue desired the same? How often tymes haue I refused straungers least they should enter into thys
Realme? Haue I not signified the equitie of my cause to forreyne Princes that haue ben in league with thys Realme, and desired them that they would be meanes to take vp and pacefie these controuersies? With what modesty haue I behaued my selfe in those Cities, which were in my handes? Was there euer any signe shew∣ed of violence, or vniust dealing? Whereas the enimies assaulting the Kings Cities, and taking away the bene∣fite of the Kings Edictes concerning Religion, did all things with barbarouse crueltie, in so much that they filled the streates of the Cities with deade bodies, and caused the earth to flowe with innocent bloud. Let men therefore iudge by the effectes, who they bee that are worthy to be counted gilty of Rebellion: Am I and my fellowes, which haue armed our selues to defende and mayntayne the Kings Lawes made by solemne acte of Parliament so to be counted: or our enemies? who put∣ting themselues in armoure without the Kings autho∣ritie, haue broken the Edictes; spoiled Cities, & brought the Kings subiects to the slaughter: and taking awaye the Kinges Edictes, and specially that notable and wor∣thy Edict of Ianuary, haue made newe Edictes them∣selues? Therefore, if all the partes of this cause be vpright∣ly wayed, it shalbe found, that I and my fellowes are falsly accused of Rebellion, of those which are thēselues rebelles in déed: and of sedition by those which haue ben themselues since the dayes of King Henry, the causes of all those troubles which haue afflicted the Realme: also of treason by those, which go about to oppresse the king, depraue the Kings Edictes, and abuse his name and au∣thoritie, to enriche them selues, to his ruine and decaye. They, euen they, are gilty of diuine treason against the maiestie of the liuing God, whose actions haue alwais declared that Ambition is their GOD, Couetousnesse
their Religion, and worldly Pleasures their felicitie: who haue proclaymed open warre agaynst the sonne of God, and agaynst the professours of his word: who play the Anabaptistes, rebaptizing infantes again: who haue their houses full of rapines, and their handes defiled with innocent bloud. And they are gilty of humane trea son, which contemne the Kings lawes, kéepe the Kinge as a captiue beset with armed men on euery syde, and which seeke the destruction of the King and the Realm. And to conclude, they are gilty of Treason, which haue encouraged and brought the whole Realme to wicked∣nesse, and to oppresse the libertie of the Gospell, and which doe bind the Kinges subiectes vnto them in ser∣uice by an othe. Those outragiouse kindes of wickednesse, and horri∣ble actes do crye that the Guises and his fellowes are re∣belles, seditiouse, and gilty both of Diuine and humane treason. Contrarywyse, it is euident, that they are the true and faithfull subiectes of the King, which stoutely withstand their rebellions, seditions, and wicked prac∣tises, to ouerthrow the Kings authoritie, and the state of the Realme. Of the which matter, beside the Argu∣ments which I haue alleadged, this also may be a testi∣mony, That they haue ouerthrowne the Law and Go∣uernement of this Realme, and that in the Senate of Paris, whose helpe thei haue abused in this false and per∣niciouse sentence of Rebellion. And truely they could not haue found more wicked and corrupt mē, and more seruiseable to their mindes: who either had their offices by fauor of the Guises, or else hoped to come to some pre∣ferment by them: and many of the chiefe of them haue conspired with the Guises, the lamentable successe wher∣of wée féele at this day. And truly we must néedes con∣fesse, that among all the calamities with the which God hath afflicted this realme, this one is the greatest, that
this Senat which ought to be the place of Iustice, the refuge and Sanctuary of the oppressed, and the brydel & punishment of vice is so declined from his right & natu rall vse, that it looseth the raynes and openeth the gate to all Iniustice, violence, and to all vnbrideled wicked∣nesse. And for probation hereof, I do not only bring in ye manifold iniuries, which they haue done to diuers, the complaintes, the cryes, and the bloud of so many oppres sed, condemned, and slayne innocents by them: but spe∣cially I bring forth this false and peruerse iudgement, which thei haue denounced against vs: which is an iniu∣ry done to a great number of men, whose lyfe & actions haue alwaye testified the reuerent obedience which we wishe might be giuen to the King. But, to the end those vniust Iudges might leaue nothing vndone, they pro∣nounced this sentence, the cause not heard, no matters discussed and the reasons of iustification not vnderstood: also they being refused, and the causes of the refusall or appeale being declared, yet neuerthelesse they persisted in their purpose: that all men might knowe how, that in the Senat of Paris there ar no other Iudges, but prepo∣sterouse opinions, corruptions, and hatreds: that there are no other lawes, than the contempt & open violating of the Kings Lawes & Edictes, and of his approued cu∣stomes. And here I appeale vnto you which beare the name of Iudges: What is it to deale vniustly & corrupt∣ly, if this be not so to deale▪ For where is there any forme of Iustice obserued? where are the reasons, with the which they that are gilty are conuinced? where is y• auncient & approued custome, that one Iudge, in one & the selfesame cause, ought not to be Iudge, & also plain∣tiue? Wherfore haue you made your selues Iudges of those men, which haue refused you to be their Iudges? hauing so many reasons mouing thē therunto, as there ar argumēts of iniustice in you. And to speak truly, are
ye not iustly and vpon good and sufficient cause refused, which haue thrust out of your society all those which yée thought would not condescend & agrée to your conspira∣cies? that is to say, yée which by that your Edict, put theOf this E∣dict ther is mencion made in the 4. book going be∣fore. sword into the hande of the furiouse and mad people, a∣gainst the law of God, ye law of man, your own lawes, and against the whole peace & tranquillitie of ye realm? Who haue proclaymed the Ministers of the reformed Churches, to be open enemies, and traytors to ye King: whom notwithstanding the King had receyued into his fauour, and which also vpon this condicion, were sworn to the King. You truly, which are growne to such boldnesse, that by your Deputies Monsieur de Fay and Monsieur Cham∣bo, that ye durst say vnto the king, that these words con∣cerning the enterance into peace & concord, séemed won derfull vnto you and perniciouse: and that ye would ne∣uer allow these reasons cōcerning the making of peace betwéene mée & my aduersaries: to take away all doubt, that ye were to me and to my fellowes mortall & sworn enemies. But what néedeth many wordes? Let men cō∣sider the Metropolitane Citie of the kingdome in the which ye dwell: let men consider the horrible cruelties, which the people dayly commit before your eyes, with your consent, will, and prouocation. Let men consider the greatest part of you, of the which many (to the ende ye may the better shew your selues to haue cast awaye Iustice, and rather to vse violence and force, than ye law) are become of Iudges and Councellers or Senators, soldiers: and haue chaunged your pennes into swordes, and your scarlet gownes into armour: ye shewe your selues to be warlike Captaines, and are openly séene in armour, setting forward this kinde of wickednesse very far vnméete for your calling. Let all these things be considered. But and if rebells
cannot iudge of rebellion, and open enemies of peace & tranquillitie of sedition, also if the breakers of the kings lawes, cannot iudge of traytours, if (I say) they which are condemned themselues, ought not to condemne o∣thers: ye cannot deny but that those whom ye haue con∣demned, haue iust and vndoubted reasons, not onely to refuse you, but also to haue you punished, accordinge to your wickednesses committed. Therfore al these things being iustly wayed in equall ballance, shall euidently appeare to all those, which shall bring to the discerning of this cause an vpright iudgement without preiudice: & although nothing be brought to defend my innocēcy & ye innocēcy of my fellowes against this vniust iudgmēt, yet notwithstanding the matter is so apparant & plain, that it speaketh for it selfe, and plainlye conuinceth the false and impudent sclaunders of the Iudges our aduer saries. And this thing I leaue to all men to consider of, what iust cause I haue to be gréeued, séeing yt I haue al∣wayes faythefully obeyed the commaundements of the King and Quéene for their defence, and haue done so much, as a man of my estate, degrée, and calling, might doo, for the peace and profite of the whole Realme: and now to be recompenced with these rewardes, as to haue my seruise done to y• king called in question, & my obedience coūted Sedition. This thing is not only gre∣uouse vnto me, but altogither intollerable. And al∣though they cannot touch me with that note of infamy which they lay vnto my charge: yet notwithstandinge I professe and acknowledge, that I haue a great desier to defend my estimation and credit, and the estimation of my fellowes: and will séeke by all meanes possible, that our innocencie may appeare not only to our contrey men, but also to people of forreine nations, and that it may be remembred among all psterities. And because I perceaue, that by so vniust a sentence pronounced a∣gainst
me and my fellowes, and by the breaking of the lawes and auncient customes of Fraunce, the way to at∣taine iustice is stopt against me, that I can haue no hope to looke for the obseruation of the kinges Edictes, and therefore not to declare and shewe forth my innocency as I would: for these causes I am compelled to take the sworde in hand, as the only and last refuge. The which séeinge I haue taken into my handes, both at the com∣maundement of the King and Quéene, and also for my office and callinges sake, which I am of in this Realme: I protest that I am in the same mind, that I wil neuer lay away the same, vntill such time as my soueraigne Lord the King be of all men peaceably obeyed, his E∣dictes obserued, & my innocency & the innocēcy also of the rest of my fellowes, be made euident & plain to all men. The glory of God, & my duty perswade me here∣vnto, & I cannot chuse, but publish the same. Therefore I and my fellowes, proteste before God him selfe, before the kings maiesty, & before al people & nations, to whom the knowledge of these things may come, that we are most obedient, loyall, and faithful subiects & seruants of the kings maiesty, our soueraine and léege Lord: and that we do beare our armoure, not againste him, but against his aduersaries and enemies. Whom we call Rebels, seditiouse, and Traitoures, be∣cause they haue peruered the lawes, and institutions of the Realme, broken the Kinges Edictes, impudently violated the authority of the estates of the Realme, and besides this they haue thrust thēselues into the Kings counsaile, beinge forbidden before by the decrée of the states, after which time they troubled and vexed many faithfull and good men, of the Kinges priuie Counsaile: And also because they hauing taken the King into their handes, do depriue him of his liberty, do abuse his name & authoritie, to satisfie their insatiable, couetouse and
cruell desiers, and do dayly make conspiracies and con∣sultations, both for the kepinge of that which they haue vsurped, & also to destroy the greatest part of the Kings true and faithfull subiectes, & specially for this cause, yt they may banish the pure & sincere preaching of ye Gos∣pell out of Fraunce, and may quight destroy the louers & professors of the truth. Therefore, only againste those men, and for those causes especially I and my fellowes, proteste that we haue taken the swerde in hand, and that constrained by extreme necessitie: seing that we haue no other way to defend & maintain the King, the authortie of the Kings Edictes, the firmity of the Kinges dignity, the state of the whole Realme, the goodes and liues of many of the Kinges subiectes, and the pure woorshiping of God and the King, established by Edictes throughout the whole Realme. The waight of which thinges do so touch our mindes, that when we considered the horrible calami∣tie and destruction, which through murders, bloudshed, rapines, and such kinde of mischieues, is like to come vpon the whole realme if they go forward as they haue begon for the space of these fyue monethes, we haue de∣termined for the auoyding of such euilles to shunne no perill, and for the safetie of the Kinges subiects, and the tranquility of the Realme, to aduenture our liues, and loose our goodes. And as for that wicked and false iudge∣ment of Rebellion we feare it not at all, but do account the same a false slaunder, impudently deuised and pub∣lished by our aduersaries. And truly séeing we do oppose and set our selues against the same, we protest that we do not in any point withstand the Kinges will, nor the ordinance and decrée of the Parliment lawfully made: but the robbery, oppression, & open violence, which our aduersaries shew against our liues and goodes. Wher∣fore, I pray and beséech not only all the inhabitantes of this Realme, which are willing to yelde all obedience
vnto the King, but also all forreine Princes, which loue equyty and right, to ioyne with me againste those that vse violence, iniury, and oppression against the King, be ing yet a Childe. Whose vertues appearing in this his tender age, do put vs in good hope, that when he shall come to his ripe & perfite age he wil giue harty thanks, to the ayders and assisters of him, in his great necessi∣tyes. And specially, I pray & beseech all forrein GermansHe dehor∣teth the Germaines which came vnder the charge of the Ro∣kendolfe, and the Rhengraue from bea∣ring ar∣mour a∣gainst the King. and Swysers, which are come already, and are daily loked for to come to helpe my aduersaries, that they will call to their remembraunce that good name, renowne, and equity, which their Elders had alwaies in estimation and reuerence, least they do that which shall afterward turne to their reproch & shame, because they shal fight in the defence of an euil and vniust cause, against a good and iuste cause: for the Kinges enemies, againste the Kings faithfull subiectes: for forreine Prnces, agaynst a Prince that is the Kings neare kinsman: for Papistes and main tainers of the Church of Rome, against those which professe the sincere truth of the Gospel. And here I call the consciences of all those straungers, before the iudgement seate of God, which professe purity of the Gospel, that they take héede that they be not helpers of our aduersaries to expell and banish the Gospell out of the Realme, and all the godly and Christian professors of the same. I also pray them, to note and marke the pur pose of my aduersaries, who, although they pretend the name of rebellion, and go aboute to lay the same to me and to my fellowes charge, yet notwithstanding seke to suppresse the Gospell being contrary to their ambition and cruelty: and that therefore I am molested by them because I séeke to defend and mainetaine the libertie of the Gospell graunted by the Kinges Edicte. Therefore those forreiners which imbrace with vs the pure and sincere doctrine of the Gospell, ought not to giue to my
aduersaries occasion to laugh them to scorne: as though they could bring to passe by their money (which they al∣ready boast of) that they which had defended the Gospel in their owne countrey, should come to warre againste the Gospell in Fraunce. I admonish them also to haue farther regard to the matter, and to feare, that if those enemies of the truth destroye the professoures of the truth of the gospel in France, they will also war against the inhabitants of Rheyne: to the end thei by the league made with the Pope and other forreyne Princes, maye set vppon them also beinge in their houses, professinge the same doctrine that we do. And although for my part I haue refrayned vntill this day to séeke the helpe & ayd of straungers: yet notwithstanding séeing my aduersa∣ries haue begon to call straungers to assiste thē in their euill cause, I protest that I will not let hereafter to vse their helpe, to defend my cause, because the cōseruation of the king standeth thervpon. And because this warre, which dayly increaseth more & more, cannot choose but bring great calamities with it. I and my fellowes pro∣test before God and men, that we are not the causes of those calamities: but they which haue stirred vp & cau∣sed these garboiles, that is to say my enemies, that they may beare the blame of all the euills like to ensue. Fi∣nally, I will and desire that the league whiche I haue made with the Princes, Péeres, Nobles, and with all those that follow me, and shall follow me, may be esta∣blished & confirmed by this my writing. To the which my fellowes I promise and vow, that séeing it hath plea sed God to aduaunce me to so great honor, as to make me the Captain and principall of that league, and to be a deliuerer of the reformed churches, liuing vnder the Kings Edictes, from the iniuries and violence of the e∣nemies, I wilbe the first that will spend my lyfe & goods, to maintayne the pure worship of God, to defende the
true professours and followers thereof, & to restore the King to his former libertie and authoritie, and his E∣dictes and the lawes of the Realme to their proper dig∣nitie. In like manner I pray and beséeche all my Confe∣derates, that they abyde in the same mind, courage, and constancy that I am of, in this so godly and commenda∣ble a purpose, hauing alwayes respect vnto the vpright∣nesse of our cause, & reposing all their trust in the power of God: being fully perswaded of this, that fighting for the glory of God, for the preseruation of his Church and for the conseruation of the King and the Realme, God the mighty Lord of hoastes will stretch forth his migh∣ty hand to helpe. Whom I most humbly beséeche to take vpon him the patrociny and defence of our cause, and to enter into the Throne of his iudgement: before whom I shew and reueale the horrible blasphemies which our aduersaries haue breathed out against his Maiestie: the cruelties which thei shewed vpon his poore afflicted mē∣bers: the innocent bloud of so many of his seruauntes that hath ben shed: and the bloudy and mischeuouse coun sailes, against his glory and the lyfe and safetie of hys Saincts: so that hée taking his people vnder his protec∣tion, would shew his power, Iustice and wisdome, both in destroying his aduersaries, and also in blessing those, which séeke to defend his people: whereby all the world may know that hée is a refuge for the afflicted in time of trouble, a deliuerer of his Church, and an enemie an Iudge of his enemies. About this time also, the Prince of Condes fellowes sent letters to the Emperour Ferdinande, to whom they declared their cause, and rendered a reason of all theyr dooings, and frustrated the rumors of their aduersaries: praying him that hee would be carefull to defende thys cause: and also that hée would call backe the Germanes,
that were gone to helpe the Guises. And although (saye they) the reportes of the troubles which were in France were euery where spred abroad, and were come also to the Emperours eares by letters sent from both partes: yet notwithstandinge the Prince of Conde sent to the Emperoure, (whom he vnderstoode should come to an honorable assembly) the causes of all his actions, that ye Emperour himselfe might certefie the whole assembly of the same: seeing so great and waighty matters were obiected against him by his aduersaries: the Prince of Conde thinking that it became him, in a matter of so great waight, to shewe the causes of all his dooings to all men and to the Emperour himself, being of so highe calling, that he might leaue to the whole world euident testimony of his innocency. To bring the which matter to passe he may be glad that he hath gotten so good occa∣sion, to craue helpe to be ayded in this iust cause, for the preseruation of the yong King of France, being of suche age that the same of itselfe requireth, and ought to ob∣tayne helpe. It is no new thing neyther wanteth it exāples, that Kyngs in their minoritie and infance haue receyued the Kyngdome of Fraunce: as appeareth by the late times of Charles the sixt, and the eight, and of others. In whose time of minoritie we do not read that there was any contention about the gouernement of the Realme: because the Princes which were the Kynges kinsmen, left alwayes the gouernement of the Realme to thein,By the states ye must vn∣derstand the Nobi∣litie, the Clergy, & the Tempo . which were elected and created by the States of the Realme of Fraunce, to whom the gouernement of the Realme was committed so long as the King cōtinuing in his minoritie, which was vntill he came to the age of fouretéene yeares. The which order of gouernement in the Kyngs Ne∣age, hath ben alwayes so approued, that Kyngs haue
warely prouided in their Testaments, that if they should disceace before their Sonnes were come to their perfect age to gouerne the Realme, then the States should prouide for the same gouernement. The which doth sufficiently declare that this kind of gouernement, doth in no poynt deminish the Kynges aucthoritie or power (whom whosoeuer resisteth, resisteth the ordi∣naunce of God,) but is rather necessary to preserue and defend them, so long as they are vnméete to take vppon them any such gouernement, through the defect and im∣becillitie of Nature. But when the Kyng shall come to the age of foure∣téene yeres, that vicary or substituted gouernemēt doth cease, and all things do so retourne to the Kyng, that whatsoeuer he shall will or decrée, shall be ratified. In the dayes of Charles the sixt, after he had raigned many yeres, and that it pleased GOD for the sinnes of the people, to depriue him of his witte and sen∣ces: and when the time came that the Realme must of necessitie be gouerned, there arose a certaine contenti∣on among the Princes that were the Kyngs kinsmen, about the same gouernement. but this was neuer heard of that a forreyne Prince, would euer intrude him selfe into the gouernement of the Realme, and that, against the will, ordinance, and decrée of the States: as doth now the Duke of Guise at the first, with force of armes, and afterwardes vnder the coullour and name of the Kyng of Nauar: corrupting and breaking all Lawes, constitutions, and customes, that by all meanes possi∣ble he might satisfie his ambicious minde, and get the gouernement of the Realme into his handes. And (say they) most renowmed Emperour, you must not thinke that he is moued to do these things for the loue he beareth to any Religion: but doth only make Religion a cleake, to fulfill his ambicious desire: but
vnder this pretence, he hath drawne a great part of the people vnto him, whom he hath so stirred to outrage & crueltie, promising that they shall escape vnpunished whatsoeuer they do, that now the mad and franticke people throughout the whole Realme of Fraunce, do no∣thing els but kill, spoyle, and shew al maner of violence. After the death of Henry the second, and Fraunces the se∣cond, Kynges of Fraunce, it was expedient according to the auncient vse of the lawes, that the States of Fraūce should be called together, and that in the greater num∣ber because Charles our Kyng was of tender yeres.The true cause of the first warres. Then the States, as it was méete, made certayne lawes and statutes, the which should only stand in force and strength duringe this time of the Kynges minority, according to the institution and maner of our elders. The which is the only foundatiō of those things which haue happened since that time, to the which all those things ought to be referred and brought as to thePower spe∣call consti tutions in the Kyngs minority. toutchstone, that they may be discerned whether they be good or euill. Those lawes and constitutions were deuided into foure principall heades, 1 The first concerned the custodie and protection of the Kyng, and the Gouernour of the Realme. 2 The second concerned those which should be of the Kyngs Counsell for that time. 3 The third concerned prouision for warre, and all maner of Artillary. 4 The fourth concerned Religion, and the staying of such troubles as might ensue by occasion therof. As touching the first, vppon great causes and rea∣sonsThe first. wise, waighed and considered, the States or whole body of the Realme haue decréed that the Quéene the Kyngs mother, shal haue not only the charge and custo∣die of the Kynges maiestie her sonne, but the gouer∣ment also of the Realme, in her owne person, and the
same not to be put ouer to any other without her con∣sent, will, and pleasure. And this decrée of the States was confirmed and approued, by Princes the Kynges kinsmen. Also the States decréed that the Queene Mother should be by them so directed, that she by her wise orde∣ring and disposing of thinges, should discharge the great debt which remained to be paied after the death of king Henry and Fraunces: and so the people to be disburthe∣ned from such great exactions and payments, as they had aforetime payed: And that she for her part should endeuour her selfe to bring all thinges to their former state and condition, and that the people might liue eue∣ry where in peace and tranquillitie. The second principall poynt, was concerning theThe secōd. Kynges Counsaile: The which the States desired to haue furnished with men that were vertuous, wise, & carefull for the Kyng and the Realme. Therfore they thought good that the Kynges Counsayle should consist, of such men, as were not sworne to any forreyne Prince or power: as Cardinalles, Bishoppes, Abbats, & all such which they call Ecclesiasticall persons: both for that they ought to followe their ordinary and pro∣per office and calling: and also for the oth which they haue sworne and vowed to the Bishoppes of Rome con∣cerning temporall obedience, which haue ben often∣times enemies to the Bishoppes of Fraunce. Therfore they prohibite and disalow any of them to be of the Kynges Counsayle: or that there shoulde come vnto that Counsell two bretherne or more toge∣ther, according to the example of other Parliaments. Notwithstāding here thei except those which are Prin∣ces and the Kyngs kinsmen; to whom it appertaineth without limitation of number, by right to bée of the Kyngs Counsayle, except the States haue any thing to
obiect against them to the contrary. Also they forbid such to be of the Kyngs Counsaile as haue had the ouer∣sight, vse, and disposing of the Kyngs treasure, vntill such time as they haue made their accompts. And last of all, bicause the Kinges Counsailers are bound, to make account to the King of their iuste and lawfull counsaile, and also to preserue and maintayne the Kinges treasure: and when the Kinges treasurie hath smal store of money in it, not to receiue of ye King, or to suffer to be giuen to any, great and large gyftes: the states do appoint and determine, that all such giftes shalbe reuoked: and that so many as haue receyued such gyftes be constrained to restore them backe againe: and in the meane tyme not to be of the Kinges counsaile. Upon this second point dependeth the occasion of the uill warre and sedition, which at this day shaketh and violently assalteth the whole Realme of Fraunce: the Guises, the Constable, the Marshall of Santandre, percey∣uing that they by thys meanes should not only be exclu ded out of the Kinges counsaile, but also be constrayned to restore those giftes againe which they haue receyued of the Kinges, & thereby greatly in riched themselues. And so they haue ioyned themselues, and cōspired togy∣ther, specially to hinder and frustrate that decrée. It is no new thing, that giftes which Kings haue bestowed, contrary to the lawes appointed, should be nothing re∣garded, not only of the States, which are chiefe in au∣thoritie in the tyme of the Kings nonage, but also of the ordinary Iudges of the exchecker, by whose indgemēts, the Kinges afore tyme haue ben put to great expences in gyftes, contrary to the lawes of the realme. Of these thinges we haue many examples: as of the Constable Clisson in the dayes of Charles the vi. who was depryued of his office, because he had gayned by the seruyce of the King to the valew of sixtene thousand pound. But there
is greater and more vehement cause at this tyme, why they which are bound by the decrée of the states, should be called to giue an account of that which they haue re∣ceyued: and seing that now there is found in the kinges Treasurie the sūme of 330000, poundes (which was ne∣uer séene before) and yet the people at this present are more burthened with exactions and tributes, than euer they were before. And it is manifest that King Frauncis the first of that name, which had diuers warres for the space of thrée and thirty yeares, & paied for his discharge a great summe of money, and toke not so great and so many tributes of the people, lefte notwithstanding in his treasury a greate masse of money. Therefore the states demaunde the cause of so great expence. And be∣cause it is likely that they were spenders and wasters, whose dutye it was to husband and increase the same: the States vppon verie good consideration do desier to haue an account, that restitution and allowance may be made of such vnmeasurable expences. The which truly is the verie cause why those thrée haue brought the Realme of Fraunce into these troubles, to ouerthrowe those decrées of the states: that the same may appeare most true which we saide before, namely, that they con∣spire, not for religiōs sake, but for because they are co∣uetously and ambitiously minded, which Religion not∣withstanding they take for a cloake, to couer and hyde their wickednesse withall The third principall point of their costitutions isThe third this: The States would haue it in their power and au∣thoritie during the tyme of the Kinges minoritie, to or∣der and appoint warres: and at their pleasure to com∣maund the subiectes to arme themselues. Because be∣fore they take warres in hand, they should vnderstand the causes thereof, and by what meanes they might be appeased. Therfore also they would haue this authori∣tie,
that they which haue prouoked the people to Ciuyll warre, might be made knowne to be the authoures of all the calamities and detrements which come by these warres. The fourth principal point is that which concernethThe fourth Religion: by which the states haue decréed that there must be a difference made betwene the cause of Religi∣on, and the cause of sedition: in so much that for Religi∣ons sake no man ought to be condemned as a seditiouse person aud a Rebell. Therefore they thinke it lawfull for the kings subiects to haue liberty to take which re∣ligion the ilist, that is to say, eyther the cōmon Romish Religion, or els the Religion reformed according to the Gospell, and to cleaue to none other: and that all vio∣lence, eyther pryuate or publique, against eyther parte, ought to be prohibited: and that the Ciuill magistrates should prouide Temples for the ministers of the refor∣med Religion to haue their diuine seruice in: and that no man should receiue any maner of violēce or harme, for vsing the benefit hereof. But because those constitu∣tions manifestly touched the Guises, the Constable, & the Marshall of Saint Andre: the Guises, for that there were two Cardinals of them which were chosen to be of the Kings Counsaile, also the Duke of Guise, and the Duke de Aumal: also because the Duke of Guise, and the Cardi∣nall of Lorraine his Brother, were the Kinges treasu∣rers: And they touched the Constable and the Marshall of Saint Andrew, because they by the same meanes, were come to great aboundance and wealth. For these cau∣ses they haue sought by all meanes possible, to adnihil∣late and disanull these Lawes. In the meane time, the Quéene the Kings Mother, as she hath ben alwaies in al her doinges wyse and cir∣cumspecte (the which she declared when she had full li∣berty, and was not Ruled by other mens power and vi∣olence)
indeuoured her selfe to make an vnity and con∣cord betweene the Churches by frendly and quyet con∣ference. To the which Conference and Disputacion came all the chiefe Prelates of France, and many Doctors out of the vniuersitie of Paris, many Moonkes also which were sent from Rome, and the Cardinall of Ferrer the Popes Legate: and beside all these, twelue Ministers of the Gospell: both partes hoping it would come to passe by this friendly conference, that they should come to some concord and agréement. The which was greatly hinde∣red and let by the Cardinall of Lorraine, by whom, after certaine principall pointes of the Cōfession of Ausburge were dissēblingly imbraced, ye Assembly was dissolued. Then the Guises tooke other practises in hande, and per∣swaded the Quéene and the King of Nauar, to sende for the Iudges and Counsellers of all the Parliamentes of the Realme; that they with the Princes and the Kinges Counsaile might giue their aduice for the present neces∣sitie: And to this Counsaill they sent suche as they had bound vnto them afore time by one benefite or other: that by this meanes they might abolishe that which the States had decréed. The which notwithstanding by the prouidence of God, fell out otherwyse than they looked for. And to the end they might the more craftely bring their purpose to passe, they departed from the Court.▪ But before they should go, to the ende they might leaue nothing vndone that might serue to worke their wills, they subtilly practised to carry with them the Duke of Orleans our Kings brother, that if their deuises had not had good successe, they might haue had one with them of the Kings linage whose name they might abuse▪ This thing was plainly proued by diuers arguments, and cō∣fessed also by the Duke of Orleans himselfe, who stayed the matter.
Here it may please you to consider at what time, and by what meanes the Guises began to be iniuriouse, and to shewe violence to the Quéene, out of whose lap shée being a widow, and in great trouble, they went about to take her sonne. Afterward the Guises departed not on∣ly from the Court, but also to the vtmost partes and li∣mites of the Realm, and came to Sauern. And there they fayned to like of the Confession made at Ausburge be∣fore one of the Princes of the Empire, that by theis meanes they might insinuate themselues into the num ber of the Princes of the Empire, the which as known to your highnesse, we touch by the way. But their de∣parture out of France, caused all men to hope for peace & concorde, which was euery where receyued by the ru∣mour of their absence. For in all places, euery man of what religiō soeuer he wereof, liued peaceably, without any offence committed for the diuersitie of Religion: all men receyuing that religion which liked him best. And ye word of God was preached in diuer places, ma∣ny ioyfully imbracing the same, & if a few had made any stour or businesse for Religiō, they by and by were ease∣ly suppressed. About this time there was an assembly of Iudges and Counsellers, which sate in the Court that belongeth toThese things are touched before. the Princes and to the Kings priuy Counsaill: amonge whom was the Constable, and the Mashall of S. Andrew, who wayted for new troubles. The Bourgeses or cho∣sen men for the states, declared that there was nothing in those things which the States had decréed to be alte∣red, but must stand wholy vpon their determination & liking: and they sayd that before they began with any other matter, they must séeke to purge and to reforme the Kings Counsaill. On the contrary part, they which were to be thrust out of the Kings counsail by the same decree of the States, bare themselues so bold vppon that
assembly, that they perswaded themselues to escape vn∣punished, notwithstanding all that the▪ States could do: Who neuerthelesse when they vnderstood the power & authoritie which belōged to the States, would not giue their consent to doo any thing contrary to their decrees. And although many of them openly declared, that they fauoured the Guises and his fellowes, yet notwithstan∣ding there was an Edicte made, called the Edicte of Ia∣nuary, because it was made the 18. day of Ianuary: by the which Edict liberty and leaue was graunted for the word of God to be openly preached▪ as it was decreed by the States. Notwithstanding with this exception, So that it were done without the walles of the Citie: and that the Churches dedicated to the vses of the Church of Rome were not vsurped. The Magistrate being com∣maunded to take an othe of the Ministers of the gospel, that they should preache the word of God purely, since∣rity, & quietly without any sedition: as is more at large declared in that Edict, which was confirmed by the de∣crees of the States. And although that same Edicte was suspected of the men of the reformed Churches, least when they were out of the Cities, and vnared, and farre from their houses to helpe themselues, they should easely be made a pray for their enemies: (as it came afterward to passe in deed) yet notwithstanding because they would not be importunate and troublesome to the Queene, to ye King of Nauar, to the Princes, & to the whole assembly, they agreed thereunto, vpon this condicion, That they should deale vprightly and in good fayth: the which also the whole assembly promised vnto them. And then euery man sware to obserue and keepe the Edict, faithfully & truly: and the men of more noble calling sware agayne before the Queene, that they would not craue pardon for those which had violated or broken that Edict.
The Ministers of the Gospel after their othe, had au∣thoritie giuen them by the Magistrat, to preache in all Prouinces: they had also places for the preaching of the word; and for the administration of Sacraments graū∣ted vnto them in the of the Cities, & al things else peaceably, and without any umult. Our aduersa∣ries enuying that all things went forwarde so well, sought daylye newe occasions to moue troubles. At the length their Captaynes, the Constable, and the Mar∣shall of S. Andrew, thinking it good to delay the tyme no leager, wrote letters to the Duke of Guise, to come with ayde and a power of man to the Court and hauing got∣ten the King of Naar, on their syde, there was great hope that they should haue all things at their pleasure. Then the Duke of Guise comming with a great Ar∣mie of footemen, and a troope of horsemen, made hast toward the Courte: and by the waye as he came, hée uelly handeled the reformed Churches, which peace∣ablely vsed the benefite of the Edict at Vassi, setting so∣denly vpon a great number of the faithful, which were gathered togither to heare the word of God, he slew mā, woman and child, without all pitie or mercy. Thus beginning his busines, he went forward on his iourney without feare, and came to Nantuil the house of his territory or Lordship: whether the Constable and the Marshiall of Santandre came. And when they had de∣liberated of the matter, and had opened the causes of their complaynts, some of them bewayling the decaye of their aucthoritie and rule which thei had in the daies of Kyng Fraunces the second: other some repining that they must make their accompt according to the decrée of the States: at the length they determined to arme them selues. And thus of their owne priuate authority they put them selues in Armes, to mayntaine their ambition and couetousnes, which notwithstandinge
they couer with the cloake of Religion: they came to the Kyng and Quéene with an Army of men, and made them subiect to their power, and tooke vppon them the gouernement: subtillie foreséeing that there was no better way to make the people to take their part, than vnder the pretence of Religion and the name of the Kyng: & so to abolish the Lawes and constitutions of the States, and the Edict it selfe. Therfore from that time forward, hauing gotten Paris into their hand, and brought the Kyng captiue thi∣ther, they left no kind of mortall crueltie vnshewed, no one corner of the Realme was frée from the Ciuill warres which they had stirred vp: insomuch that the lamentable remembraunce of things past, and of the great destruction like to come, would make a man to tremble. Nothwithstanding the Quéene being certified of these thinges, was very carefull to let and stay their purpose, and to frustrate their deuises: sent for the Prince of Conde to come to Monceaulx: and prayed him to resist the violent force and crueltie of these men by force of Armes: and for this cause she appoynted him to be Captaine generall, and named certaine men vn∣to him, whose helpe and furtherance he might vse. But the Prince of Conde delaying the matter for feare of tumults and vproares, was preuented with the expedition and hast of his enemies: who had so got∣ten the Kyng and Quéene into their handes, that they abused their willes at their owne pleasure: deludinge and abusing also the facillitie and sufferance of the king of Nauar, they séeke thereby coullers to hide their tir∣ranie. The which sufferaunce notwithstanding of the king of Nauar, although his full consent were ioyned ther∣with, as it ought not by any meanes to restraine or de∣ceiue the king of his libertie, euen so it can be of no force
to excuse the vnbrideled ambition and presumption of the Guises. For in giuing authority the simple and bare ratefying is not sufficient, but the ciuill lawes do shew that it is néedefull to haue expresse commaundement. Furthermore the Kyng of Nanar hath not this au∣thoritie to rule and gouerne the Realme, without the Quéene: and neither of them haue any such authoritie that they can set ouer the same to any other without the consent of the States. Moreouer as touching the tractation of warre and artillerie, the Quéene her selfe during the time of the Kynges nonage, can do nothing, as of her owne autho∣ritie: séeing this thing pertayneth to the States: who notwithstanding haue not decréed and appoynted this warre, but the Guises, which haue caused the same to be in euery corner of the Realme. Is there any man in the whole Realme that can or ought to take vnto him such power and authoritie, as to gather Armies of men and to moue warre to the detrement and hurt of the Kyng and the Realme, as the Duke of Guise now doth? And this is the seruice that the Triumuiri, namely the Duke of Guise, the Marshiall of Saint Andrew, and the Constable do to the Kyng their soueraigne Lord, in this his tender age, in the which he is subiect to many iniu∣ries: that is to say, their wicked actes, by which they go about to ouerthrowe the Kyng with the kingdome. Which are the causes (O Emperour) that we put our selues in Armour, and haue chosen the Prince of Conde to be our Captaine: who shewed him selfe willinger to take so notable a matter in hand, being moued the run∣to by no lesse good will toward the King and the realme than we were. The Quéene also her selfe both perswaded and com∣maunded him to take this warre in hand, to deliuer her from that iniury which both she and the king sustay∣ned:
as appeareth by her expresse wordes in letters to be séene, the Coppies wherof we haue sent vnto thée (O Emperour.) Notwithstanding al this, the Prince of Conde, which was the last which put himself in armes, and that at the commaundement of the Quéene, neuer ceased to séeke peace and concord, offering all indifferēt and reasonable conditions that might be, as, That hée would put of his Armour, depart from the Court, and would go also, if néede were, out of the Realme, so that his aduersaries would do the like, and that the Edict of Ianuary might be obserued. Also he prayed and doth pray and beséeth by his let∣ters, al Christian Princes that are in League and ami∣tie with Fraunce, to be meanes for the making of peace and concord: and with them all Noble Princes of the Empire, whose godly and commendable indeuours for peace and concord were notwithstanding hindered by the Guises: who in the meane time sought by al meanes possible to be ayded by straungers. And it is manifest that the Prince of Conde, hath sought so many waies to establish peace and concord, as they haue sought by all meanes possible to hinder the same: as may appeare by the last Parley betwene the Quéen & the prince of Conde, at Baugence, they séeking by Trea∣son to circumuent the Prince of Conde. Wherefore, by the demonstration and knowledge of al these thinges, both the trueth and equity of our cause, and of the Prince of Conde, and also the falsehood, treche∣ry, and vniust dealing of our aduersaries may appeare: as is more at large set forth in those writinges publi∣shed concerning this matter. Of the which matters, be∣cause thou art certified alreadie (most noble Emperour) we will at this tyme be no longer tediouse vnto thée. This one thing the Prince of Conde requesteth at your highnes hand, that you will take into your custody the
crowne of our yong King from those thrée priuate per∣sones which haue brought him into so great daunger, and to restraine them of their willes: séeing it is many∣fest that these thrée priuate persones, the one of them a straūger, the other two not comparable to the Prince of Conde in no condition, haue caused Ciuill warres, to the destruction of the Realme. And aboue all thinges this he requesteth, yt you would deliuer the King, the Quéene, and the Realm from their presumption, tiran∣ny, and falsehoode, and that you would helpe the states of the Realme to their authoritie, and the Kinges Sub∣iectes to peace, and to the benefite of the Kings Edictes. Also because vnder the couller of defendinge the King, the Rokendolfe, and the Rhengraue haue brought troupes of horsemen out of Germanie into Fraunce: notwithstan∣ding meaning to helpe our aduersaries, whereby there cannot chuse but ensue great hurte to the King and to the realme: the Prince of Conde humbly beséecheth you, that by your commaundement and by the commaunde∣mentes of your noble Princes, they may with all spede be called backe againe, and may be seuerely & straight∣ly charged not to beare armoure against vs: and also that hereafter it be lawful for none within the limmits of the empire to musture either horsemen or footemen, to serue the Guises, which vse not, but abuse the Kinges name and authoritie. The which dede (most noble Emperour) shal become you very wel, since God hath made you a refuge for the afflicted in time of trouble: and a helpe for Kings, espe∣cially when they are in daunger of men, by reason of their tender yeares. Defend therefore our Kinge, oure Quéene his mother, the Kingdome, and the lawes and states of the Realme from the tyrrannie of the Trium∣uiri. Concerning the vayne assaulte that was giuen to
Cesteron a Towne in Prouance, by Monsuer Sommeriue,The assault geuen to Cesteron. a Captain on the Papistes side, we haue spoken before. Yet notwithstanding they came to the same place again the xxvi day of August with a greater armie, & with al maner of artillery better appointed, carying with them from Marsiles certain great fielde péeces. Therefore the Citie began to be battered with greater force of ordi∣nance than it was before. Thē word was brought that Monsuer Monbrun, came with an Army of men to rayse the siege, (his Army contained a thousand footemen, and two hundred horsemen) Monsuer de Suze, hearing of this, went out to méete him with a company of wel ap∣pointed Souldiers, and geuing the on set vppon Mon∣suer Monbrun, he slew an hundred and fiftie of his Soul∣diers, and put the rest to flight. Monsuer Monbrun also himselfe fledde, leauing behinde him two field péeces,The Army of Monsuer Monbrun put to flight. which afterward came into the handes of Monsuer de Suze. At the cōmaundement of Baron des Adretz, Mon∣suer Monbrun came to Cesteron, minding with the ayd & rescue of mōsuer de Adretz, which on ye other part had in∣uaded the County of Vena, both to remoue the siege from Cesteron, and also with the greater force to assault Prouance. Against the men of Auinion which went a∣bout to resist hym, Baron des Adretz preuailed, and had the victory, geuing vnto thē the ouerthrow at a village called Orgo. Notwithstanding when Baron des Adretz heard, that Monsuer Monbrun was put to flight, he re∣tourned into Dolpheny. New, Monsuer Someriue and his Souldiers at the returne, and good successe of Monsuer de Suze and his men, were not a little incouraged, in so much yt with greater force & vehemency they began to assault the city, & whē by battery they had made a great breach in the wals, ye soldiers began with great violce to enter therat: who notwithstanding were cōstrained to retire again, many of thē being sain by the faithfull.
But when their vitualles were wel nigh spent, and that they were dayly oppressed more and more with pe∣nury and scarsitie, Monsuer Senaz the lifetenaunt of the Towne, Monsuer Mouens, whose helpe he greatly v∣sed, began to consider concerning the yéelding vp of the Citie: and placing certaine Souldiers in the breach of the wall to kepe the Citie, accordinge to the custome of warres, they in the night without noyse, caried out a great multitude of the Townsmen, with Wemen and Children, and aged persones, at a certaine place, to the which the enemy could scarcely come, being let with a riuer and a hill which lay betwene them. The enemyes scoutes, were wary of the noyse, and gaue intelligence thereof vnto the Army: but rather thinkinge that some came to helpe them, than that the faithfull went out of the City, suspected nothinge, and therefore held them∣selues still in their tentes. Thus Monsuer Mouens and a great multitude of people escaped the peril. But Mon suer Someriue, being certyfied of the whole matter by the Papistes of the Towne entered into the Citye: and there slew all that he found in the Citye both Papistes and Protestantes without respecte of persones. Mon∣suer Mouens caried the people which he brought out of Cester, most miraculously through diuers places, which were possessed by the enemy, & yet notwithstanding es∣caped their handes, and came at the last, to Gratianople a Citie in Dolpheny. And so all Prouans, when the faithfull were ouercome, yelded to the Papistes: by whom all kind of cruelty, beside the custome of warre, was com∣mitted in Cityes and Townes, as at Marsiles, and at Aijques, and in that whole Region. Many Women al∣so in those Cityes, were so outragious, & best lyke cru∣ell▪ contrary to their kind, that it is almost incredible to be tould. These, when they had gathered themselues to gyther to a sufficient nomber, would in the night, as if
they had bin dronke or out of their wittes go vp & down the Citie, searching, and ransackinge the houses of the faithfull: and when they had founde a woman, they ledGreat wic∣kednes cō∣mitted in Prouance against the faithfull. her and scourged her through the Citie vntill she came to the common place of slaughter which they had prepa∣red for the purpose: and then hanged her vp by the féete, the which being done they draue vp a wedge or wodden pin into the body through the shame and secrete part of the woman, and so slewe her: an acte most horrible and shamefull to be eyther spoken or heard. Euery where robbery, rapine and spoyle was committed: the Senate in the meane tyme not only suffering these thinges to escape vnpunished, but also approuing the same. Upon the Territorie of Lions, there bordereth a Re∣gion called Forestes, the chief Citie wherof is Monbriso. Therefore the inhabitants of Forrestes hauing Monsuer Monselas their Captayne, anoyed the men of Lions all yt they could: Wherevppon the men of Lions hauinge the Baron des Adretz the Generall, came with an army to suppresse them: and being entered in that Region, theyThe horri∣ble slaugh∣ter at Mō∣briso by Adretz. besieged the head Citie Monbriso: and the Townesmen refusing to yéeld vp the Citie, being encouraged to fight by their Captaine Monselas, at the length their city was battered downe and taken by force: then the souldioure that got the victorie shewed such crueltie, that ye streats of the citie were couered with dead carcasses: Baron des Adretz himselfe vehemently encouraging the souldier to murder. There remayned a fortresse in the citie, into the which Monsieure Monselas with certayne of the chief citizens sled. The same notwithstanding being shortly after taken, partly by force, & partly by surrender, Mon sieur des Adretz, after hée had vewed all places of the ca∣stle, sent in certayne souldiours, to murder and spoyle: who presently tooke Monsieur Monselas, and his souldi∣ours that were with him, and cast them downe hedlong
from the top of the houlde. The which cruell kynde of death made many to mislike of Baron des Adretz, & the rather because hee had giuen his faith (as it is reported) to Monselas, and to others with him to saue their liues. Thus the citie Monbriso was sacked and rased, and the whole Region therabout spoyled. And Baron des Adretz returned againe to Lyons, in the moneth of August. About this tyme in the Region of Languedoc, there was much businesse. The inhabitants of Tolouze at the prouocation and setting on of Monsieur Monlace, often∣times assaulted the citie of Montauban, into the whiche we sayd before many of the faithfull fledde from diuers places: but by the singular Industrie, vertue, and con∣stancy of the men of Montauban, the inhabitants of To∣louze preuayled nothing at all. Notwithstandinge the faithfull were thrust out of Pezenac, and out of certaine other Townes by Monsieur Ioyse, Liefetenant of Lan∣guedoc. But Monsieur Sommeriue had very good successe in his affaires in Prouance, as wée declared before, the which gaue courage to the papistes to set vppon ye faith∣full that were in Languedoc. Therefore Monsieur Ioyse,Cōspiracy against Lāguedoc. Liefetenant of Languedoc, Monsieur Sommeriue, Fabrici∣us of Auinion, and Monsieur de Suze with others, consul∣ted among themselues, & determined to make so great a power, as thei were able, and to ioyne togither in one with as much spéede as they could, to ouercome ye faith∣full in Languedoc. All Prouance belonged to the charge of Monsieur Sommeriue, to whom, because of his victorie and late good successe of warre, many came from diuers places, Monsieur Fabricius had a great armye which came vnto him, some being Italians, and some comming out of the Townes & territorie of Uenais. And a great number attended and followed Monsieur de Suze out of Dolpheny. But Monsieur Ioyse was of greater power thā the reste, who had out of the mighty cities Tolouze and
Narbon both a great number of Souldiers, and also all manner of artillerie and other necessaries for the war. These also were ayded by the men of Auuernoys, & they had hope to receyue helpe of the Spanish borderers, from whom came diuers bandes, whose Captain was Petru Lapia, a notable theefe, who came from the Mountaynes of Pyrren. But the faythfull had many wel fenced and fortefied Cities▪ land and ground enough, with sufficient store of cattell. Notwithstanding in men and other necessaries for warre, their enemies were mightier. In so muche that the Papistes perswading themselues to haue the victory thought it best to ioyne battayle out of hande. Monsieur Ioyse setting vpon the faythfull on the one side, and the men of Prounce and of Auernoys on the other side. Therefore while great armies were a prouidinge euery where, Monsieur Ioyse Liefetenant of Languedov, first of all remoued with his army, with Monsieur For∣quenoz Lieftenāt of Narbon. Their armies cōtained se∣uen thousand footemen, and a thousand horsemen: they had sir great Canons, and many other small péeces. They pitched their Tentes the fourth day of Septem∣berMonsieur Ioyse besie ged Mont∣pellier. at a Uillage called Lates, being a myle from Mont∣pellier. In this place he aboade lookinge for his fellowes, thinking himselfe so sure to winne Montpellier, that thei deuided the spoyles among them▪ as if they had already wonne the Citie. Thither came the Bishop of Montpellier. whose name was Pelisser. This man being sometime well accounted of among learned men, and one that knew the trueth, but now hauing forsaken the same, became a notable e∣nemie, bought and sold Montpellier, to certayne Mar∣chaunts which only wayted vpon him for the pray. At Montpellier beside the ordinarie and accustomed Garrison of the Towne, there were certayne rescuing
armies belonging to the churches, contayning the num ber of eight hundred horsemen, whose Captain was Ia∣cobus Bellodine, borne of a noble house, who afterwarde was called Acierus according to the name of the terri∣torie of his Lordship, and did very notable seruice in the ciuill warres following: and also twelue Enseignes of footemen. After they vnderstood that the enemie had encamped himselfe, they intended to breake out vppon them the same day, to the ende they might take a better vewe of them: and so they came néerer the enemie with twoo hundred horsemen, and fiue hundred Gonners, vnder the charge and conducte of Monsieur Ays of Nismes. The enemie being ware of their comming, rushed out of their tentes to méete them with all spéede: and thus the battaile began to waxe hot on both parts, the men of Montpellier fighting with such a courage, that they constrayned the proude enemy to retire and flée backe euen to their tents: from whence they dischar∣ging certaine great péeces, but in vaine, the faithfull re∣tourned safe into the Citie againe, with losse of two of their men only, whereas on the other part there were slayne 100. For this good beginning, and happie successe, the faithfull caused publique and sollemne thanks to be gi∣uen vnto God: the which being done they prouided di∣ligently for the safetie and fortefying of the Citie: and at the commaundement of Monsuer Bellodine, the Su∣burbes, in the which there were certaine great Chur∣ches, and great stoore of houses, were with the diligent labour of the people throwne downe. And after this there were certaine Skirmishes dayly betwéene both partes, the Protestantes most commonly hauinge the victory: Insomuch that Monsuer Ioyse was discouraged from befieging the Citie, before he had more helpe and
aide from his fellowes: Notwithstanding because hée would not in the meane while spend the time in vaine, he intended to assault a Castell which is in the Ile of Maguelon. For in that part, bordering vppon the Sea coast, there is a certaine Fen or Marshe, which the Sea at certaine times ouerfloweth, being of a great compasse both in length and breath, in the which also there is a certaine Ileland lying out in length almost thrée miles: and vppon this Ileland there standeth a Castell both of great antiquitie, and also of sufficient force, the which at that time the faithfull held. Therfore Monsuer Ioyse tooke shipping and in his shippes great store of Ordi∣naunce, with the which hee so battered the Castell, that the kéepers thereof for want of helpe yéelded, and deliuered the same into his handes. The men of Montpellier in the meane time not know ing of the yéelding vp of Maguelon intended to go with all the power they were able to make out of ye Citie, & to set vpō their enemies camp being busied in ye besieging of ye Castell. Therfore they went out of the Citie to the number of eight hundered horsemen, and twelue En∣signes of footemen, leauing behind them a Garrison to kéepe the Citie, carying with them also certaine fielde péeces. And they had not gone farre, but they met with ye Campe of Monsure Ioyse, whether hee was retourned with al his men from the siege of Maguelon, and al that day was spent betwéene them only with discharginge shot one at another, Monsuer Ioyse woondering at the boldnes and courage of the men of Montpellier. And while he was in a certaine Manner Place, or ferme, sitting at supper with certaine of his Captains, and talking of the helpe and aide which he looked for, at which time they assured them selues of the victory, it came to passe that a certaine pellet which came out of
the shot of the Protestants, fell vppon the toppe of the house in the which he sate, and shaking the house, it be∣rayed the whole table at the which he supt with dust, & made their eares to ring with the cracke and rashing rent of the house. Then all of them began to feare and tremble, doubting least the house would fall vppon their heades. Then Petrus Lapas that spanish théese, of whom we spake before, being merily disposed, cried to Monsuer Joyse in the Spanish tongue, saying: Behold Mon sure Ioyse the keyes, which Montpellier offereth vnto thee: de∣riding hereby his security. The same day being the xiii. day of September, Baron des Adretz came out of Dol∣pheny with eight hundred well appoynted horsemen, to the Protestants Campe of Montpellier: by the rumor of whose comming, Monsure Ioyse and the rest of his soul∣diers, were not onely greatly afeard, but also much of∣fended with the delay of their fellowes. Then Mon∣sure des Adretz, when he had found out the situation of their Campe, minded to besiege them. First therfore he got betwéene them and the Marsh or fenne, & thē did so beset or inclose them on euery side round about with men and ordinance, that they could by no meanes escape, nor yet by any way attaine to ayy vittailes. And the mindes of the Papistes, which had conceiued that the Protestants were many mo in num ber than they were, (as they were in déede) were so dis∣couraged and amazed, that they durst by no meanes set vppon their enemies, nor yet aduenture any waye to escape. But now when the souldiers of Montpellier, were throughly incouraged by the aide of Adretz to the bat∣taile, and that their enemies on the other part were quight discouraged, behold Baron de Adretz tolde the Captaines that he must néedes depart from thence that night, for so woord was brought vnto him from Lions.
And entering into the Citie of Montpellier by the break of the day, he commaunded the Aldermen of the towne to giue vnto him 15000. Frankes. Who for feare of forceA Franke is a peece of French coyne in value ij. s. ij. d. q. and sedition gaue vnto him so much money: after the receipt wherof he departed out of the Citie: minding no doubt to play the false Judas and Apostata, which af∣terward came to passe. Thus the siege being broken vp, word was brought to Montpellier that Monsure Sommeriue, and Monsure de Suze, were come with a great Armie, and that they went about to make a Bridge to come ouer the Riuer called the Rosne, and that on the other part the power of ye men of Auuergnoys came to ye teritory of Seuenas, vnder the charge and conduct of the Graun Prier. Word hereof also came to the Campe of Monsure Joyse, who whenThis great Prier was brother to the Cardi∣nall of Lo∣raine. they vnderstoode that they were deliuered from the pe∣rill, of the siege and that there had happened so soden a change they were excéedingly cōforted and reuiued, as commonly it happeneth to men that haue escaped great daunger. This rumour therfore dayly increasing more and more, the men of Montpellier sawe that it was necessa ry for them to learne and know, both what power the enemie of Fraunce had, because he was nere and peril∣lous, and also how farre & which way he minded to go, & whether there were any way to stop him. Therfore by the common aduise of the Captaines, Monsure Grill, Monsure Bari, Monsure Bulargues, men very expert in the warre, went to Nisines the twentie day of Septem∣ber with fiue hundred horsemen, and thrée hundred foote men, leauing the rest of their army behind thē to kéepe the Citie: Who in the meane time suffered not the e∣nemy, which lay néere the citie to be in quiet, comming out oftentimes euen to their Camp, and skirmishings with them.
Now Monsieur Bulargues being a man expert and payn∣full in warlike affaires, was put in trust to vewe the Town of Sangiles, whether the enemie minded to come, and to sée whether the Towne were sufficiently forte∣fied to defende it selfe, and what garrison it had: who cō∣ming thyther, saw that the Citie was indifferently for∣tefied: and was certefied by the inhabitants of Sangiles, that they had ben summoned by the enemie to yéelde vp the citie: and while monsieur Bulargues was there, the e∣nemie summoned them agayn with the same comman∣dements, saying that monsieur Sommeriue and monsieur de Suze, required them to yéeld vp vnto them forthwith the citie, vnlesse they would suffer and abyde all manner of extremity and cruelty, if the same were wonne by force of battery. So monsieur Burlargues leauing twenty of his men at Sangiles, they scarse hauing in their own gar rison in the towne so many more good & able souldiers and incouraging the townsmen with promise that out of hand they should haue more ayde, he returned to Nis∣mes: & conferring with his fellowes, he had charge com∣mitted vnto him to conduct to the Towne of Sangilles two hundred Gonners. And monsieur Grill and Bars pro∣mised that they would follow with the reste of the foote∣men and horsemen. In the meane time word was brought to Sangiles, that the enemie was come with a great army, contay∣ning six thousand footemen, and eight hundred horsemē, hauing with them also thrée great Canons, & that they intended to make a bridge ouer the riuer called ye rosne, and so besiege the towne of Sangiles. The proud & boa∣sting Souldiour approched to the walles of the citie, who notwithstanding were driuen backe agayne by those ye kept the walles with gonnes. Then the enemies began to batter the walles with their great Canons, and to set ladders to the walles to scale them. They of the towne
séeing this, called vpon their Captaines to make al spéed to defende them: for they were gréeued at the proude wordes of the papistes which bragged as if they had al∣ready wonne the towne. And oftentimes the souldiers of monsieur Sommeriue would crye out to the townes mē saying: Say vnto thy God, Judge me O God: for that psalm was made a common ryme. Therefore monsieur Bular∣gues remoued in the night to goe from Nismes with hys two hundred gonners, and troupe of horsemen, which we sayd were appointed to ayde those of Sangilles: hys fellowes followed after, notwithstanding with not so much spéede: and thereupon hée sent vnto them to make more haste from Estegell, where they taried their com∣ming. In the way to Nismes from Sangiles, there aryseth e∣uen at the first a little hil, which lying out in length, ma∣keth an euen playne, and then assendeth agayn with an other hill betwéene both which hilles there are certaine small valleyes: and then againe that playne or leuell (at the entrie whereof the towne of Sangiles is situate) is bounded with the Riuer of Rosne for the space of fower and twenty furlonges, and so extendeth it selfe to the Castle called ye Fourques, which lyeth ouer against ye city of Arles, the riuer of Rosne, running betwene them: on the other part there lyeth a very large Iland, and excée∣ding frutefull, which, in the vulgar tonge is called Ca∣margua; corruptly, as it is thought, of Campus Marius, be∣cause Marius aboade there while he warred against the people of Denmarke: or else of the Gréeke worde wythChaimai∣ergon the proper name of Camargua the which the people of Phocis, that built the citie Massi∣lia in Prouance, called the same, which Gréeke worde is, , signifying the goodnesse and fertility of the ground. By this meanes following, there was a bridge made by monsieur Sommeriue and his men. First they tooke cer∣tayne
Shippes, and tyed them syde to syde with ropes crosse the Riuer, vpon which then they layed bourdes & plankes, and so the whole armie of monsieur Sommeriue went ouer to the other shoare of Languedoc. For the ry∣uer called the Rosne, diuidteh Prouance and Languedoc a∣sunder. Monsieur Bulargues therefore looking for his sol∣diours at Estegel, there came ryding out of the armie of monsieur Sommeriue ten horsemen, not ware of monsieur Bulargues, at whose commaundement eight of thē were presentlye hemde in: the other twoo, with great feare fled backe agayne to the armie, and made report that a great number of their enemies lay hid in the valleyes besyde Estegell. Therefore monsieur Sommeriue cōmaun∣ded the horsemen to set themselues in aray, and euery one to marche from thence, and the footemen to arme themselues with spéede. Then monsieur Bulargues ha∣uing placed certaine scoutes vpō the top of the hill which lay betwéene them and their enemies (for from thence they might easely behold the whole armie vppon the le∣uell) was by them tolde that the horsemen of monsieur Sommeriue, were comming towardes them in battayle aray. Here monsieur Bulargues, being like to be ouercom easely by the greater number of his enemies, deuised a way out of hand, and brought all his souldiers out of the valleyes and set them vpon the top of the hill to make ye greater shew to terrifie his enemies. Whose pollitique deuise had good successe: for so soone as the enemie sawe them vppon the top of the hill, they suspected that it was a trayne made to beguile them: imagining also, that so small a nūber durst not come so nighe, except they were sure of more ayde, and that therefore they shewed them selues, because they would allure them forwarde vntill they had gotten the aduantage of ye place, and then with a great number to ioyne battayle with them. Thē they stayed euen right ouer against them, and so keeping a
while their battaile aray, they retourned backe agayne to their campe. In the meane time some were sent againe to accele∣rate and hasten the comming of Monsure Grill, and Bari, who at the last came with the rest of the Army: which being ioynd with those that were before with Monsure Bulargues, made the whole Army to be in number one thousand, fiue hundred of them horsemen, and the other fiue hundred being footemen: and for the space of cer∣taine howers they abode there still in battayle aray in the sight of the Army of Monsure Sommeriue: which Army when Monsure Bulargues perceyued to be quiet, they came to the towne of Sangiles, that as it was ap∣pointed, they might both aid the Citie and also retourne out of hand to Nismes. Therfore Monsure Bulargues leauing his fellowes hard by the towne, sent into the towne two hundred goonners, and shortly exhorted them and the souldiers that were in the towne to play the men, promising vn∣to them that he would not be long from them. And then going out of the Citie he perceyued that the enemy had raysed their siege, & therfore he ran in hast to sée which waye they were gon. And he sawe the Army going to∣wardes the Rosne, as though they fled away. Then hée ran and told this thing ioyfully to his fellowes, that thei might sée the discomfited enemy fléeing away: and ther∣fore he sayde that they must not neglecte this occasion which God had offered them: for God fighteth for his: be therfore saith he of good courage, and let vs pursue the enemy. And thus talking a while with his souldi∣ers, many of them because they were a few in number refused so to do, (for he had with him only a hundred & A wonder∣full victory gotten by Monsieur Bulargues. twentie horsemen.) Then he sayd, Let him that loueth me followe me: And so setting spoures to his horse, he and so many as were with him pursued after the enemie,
vntill he came within thrée hundred paces of them: at the sight wherof the horsemen of Monsure Sommeriue fled by and by before the footemen, which were appoyn∣ted to kepe the ordinance. Monsure Bulargues making no stay put forth his horse and began to skirmish: and after the discharging of two small péeces, the horsemen of Monsure Sommeriue, lea∣ning their great ordinance, tourned their backes, and brake through the raye of the footemen, & so the whole Army began to flée. Then Monsure Bulargues with the rest of his fellowes began to crie, The victory, and killed whom soeuer they met, though they made no resistāce, and so they made a great slaughter. And by reason of the comming of more aide to Monsure Bulargues, there was the greater slaughter made, euery where some sle∣ing and some pursuing and ouercomming. Notwithstanding they which came last delaying the time, because they beléeued not the same to be true which Monsure Bulargues told them, many horsemen of Monsure Sommeriue, which were on the other part of y• Army, and had the better horses, escaped by flight ouer the Bridge and among these were monsure Sommeriue, and monsure de Suze, who breaking the Bridge for feare least their enemies should followe after them, caused a great number the more of their men to be slayne: Ther fore the scattered souldiers, ran vp and downe, to and fro, séeking how to escape, but found no way. Wherup∣pon many cast themselues into ye Riuer called ye Rosne, that they might swimme ouer to the other side: not∣withstanding many perished in the water. It is said that monsieur Sommeriue lost of his men be∣sideGreat slaughter of the Pa∣pistes. those that were drownde foure thousand at the least: and of the faithfull but one onely, and the same was slayne by one of his fellowes vnwares. And in this skirmish, the most wicked murtherers and spoy∣lers
of the people of GOD were slayne, of which the greatest part of that Army did consist. The faithfull then caried away their tents, and all other moueables, of which there was great stoore: thrée great field péeces and a great number of Calleuers: they found also cer∣taineLetters found. letters in the cariadge of monsieur Sommeriue, and monsieur de Suze, by which it appeared that they were fully perswaded to haue the victory, and determined al∣so to make hauoc and spoile of the Churches in Langue∣doc. But monsieur Sommeriue and the rest that were es∣caped, to excuse this their effeminate consterantion and feare, afterwardes pretended: That they thought that Baron des Adretze had bencome with an Army from Lions and Dolpheny: and that beside the credible suspiti∣on, the great boldnes of monsieur Bulargues, and certaine red Ensignes like to the Ensignes of Baron des Adretz made them to beléeue more firmly their conceiued opi∣nion. So that of so great a number, there were not ma∣ny that retourned backe againe into Prouance, and to A∣, and that without the spoyles of Languedoc. While these thinges thus came to passe at Sangiles, monsieur Beaudisne and the townesmen also were great ly carefull and occupied in fortefying Montpellier, and in prouiding all thinges necessary for the same. Not∣withstandig the souldiers of monsieur Joyse boldly went about to inuade them: and after consultation, they went about to ouerthrow a Mill which the townesmen great ly occupied, being about halfe a myle distant from Montpellier: notwithstanding in vaine, being driuen a∣waye by those that kept the Towne, and some of them flayne, among whom was Petrus Lapia the Spanish théefe. Then newes was brought concerning the slaughter of the Papistes at Sangiles: the which as it dismayed Monsieur Joyse, and his men, so it greatly confirmed and
incouraged the inhabitants of Montpellier. Whervp∣pon they caused a sollemne assembly to be made to giue thanks vnto God, the which being done, monsuer Beau∣disne gaue commaundement that fiers should be made vppon the toppes of euery house (for at Montpellier eue∣ry house hath a tower built higher than it selfe of stone, and open in the top) both to put the enemies in minde of the vitory, and also to discourage them quight. And there were so many fiers made throughout the Citie, that it seemed to be on a light fier. Monsuer Grill taking his handes of men returned towardes Montpellier, and was come to a little Town called Lunell, being in the midway betwene Montpellier and Nismes. This was well enough knowen to the ene∣my, but not vnderstoode of monsuer Beaudisne, monsuer Grill not thinking it necessary, to giue intelligence here of to the inhabitants of Montpellier, and because of the fame of the late victorie he conducted his Souldiers out of order, and carelesly. When monsuer Joyse vnderstoode of the comming of monsuer Grill, he chose out the moste seruisable men in his whole Army, and went out of his campe by the breake of y• day, making a shew as though he would go toward the sea, but casting about again▪ he toke his iourney toward Lunell. The which when the watchmen that were in the Towers saw, they admonished monsuer Beaudisne, there of: who suspectinge where about monsuer Joyse went, he armed and appointed souldiers so fast as he could went out of the City and marched forward in hast: and when he was come to his iournyes end, he found his fellowes disperst, out of their array, and fléeing, monsuer Joyse fo∣lowing full fast. Then there began a whot skirmish be∣twene them. But at the first méeting the Souldyers of Montpellier being the stronger part, monsuer Joyse began to retire till he came to an Oliue groue behind him, and
there he and his men planted themselues, and skirmi∣shed whotly with their gunes, by which thy had now the vantage: for their gonners were foote men, and the place into the which they had gotten, was both very san dy, and also full of trées: at the last monsuer Joyse entered into a vineyard, & so returned back again to his campe▪ The dead bodies of both partes that were found in the fieldes were a hundered and fiftie, of which the greater part were Protestantes. This was done the third day after the victory of Sangiles. Notwithstanding monsuer Joyse hauing no hope to be ayded from Prouans and Auuergnoys▪ thought it not best to attempte any farther, for that he was more lyke to be in perill of his enemies than to anoy them. Therefore packing and trussing vp his bagge and baggage, he mar∣ched his armye to Lates, the third of October, hauinge thus spent in vaine all the moneth with losse of C C C. of his men at the foresaid skirmyshes. And the souldiers disdaining, & almost ready seditiouy to fall vpon mon∣sieur Joyse, bycause they wanted their wages vnder the couller of the spoyles of Montpellier, (for that was pro∣mised them for their seruice) they sacked and spoyled by the sufferance of monsieur Joyse a litle Towne called Flo∣rence, in the territorie of monsieur Cursoll. Where vpon this iest was made of them, They fauou∣redMontpellier a towne of Surgery & phisike. of purpose Montpellier, bicause they Wanted Surgeans, that they might spoile and sacke Florence, but not Florence in Italy. From thence they went to Villeneufue, and there tari∣ing certain daies, they minded to go to Agde▪ which bor dereth vpon the Sea to assault the same. This Agde was kept by the Garrison of montpellier, monsieur Senglar hauing charge of the same. There were sent also from ye borders of Blitter a hundred hargabuzeres to ayd those of Agde▪ To assult this Agde monsieur Joyse planted his
ordinance and began to baer te walles, and at the length mae a breach in the same forty paes brode, at the which monsieur Joyse and his men seking to enter, the Townes men valyantly desended themselues, and gaue them the repulse▪ & slew at this skimish. CCCC. of them at the east, among which were the Captaines and chiefe men of the Army. When nsieur Joyse sawe that he could not puayle▪ & was certifed by his scouts, that the men of Mtpellier prepared thēselues to raise the siege, he remoued his campe from thence: and had scarsly▪ passed ouer the riuer, when as the men of mont pellier, came to Agde, and being certified that the enemie was n, they went the riuer▪ and began to pursu after: & monsieur  in pursuing, with CCC. footemē which had for saken the army, & went to the hill countrey to rob & spoile, these he with a certain troupe of horsemen sew: and then he retorned to montpellier againe with two ensignes, and a very grea spil▪ The rest of the Army cae to Narbon with monsieur oyse and . These were the euentes and exploytes of both partes, in Languedoc. But for all this▪ the Guise▪ and his compartners, cea∣sed not to procde in their former wicked purpose. For Poictiers being wonne (as we said befoe by the marshall of Santand, the army was conducted with all the pow∣er that might be made, to assault and winne Burges in Berry, being a citie of great force and ner to Orleans. Mosieur de Iuoy, a man of noble birth, was gouernour of this citie vnder the Prince of Conde, & had vnder his charge a well appointed garrisō conteining to the nom∣ber of ten engsignes of footemen▪ & CC. horsemen. Now all the cities of Berr being rendered vp, and the whole Region almost being spoiled, Burges was also besieged the . day of August, with a verie stronge Army. In the which Army there were thrée thousand horsemen, and
fiuetéene hundered footemen: and they had with themThe besie∣ging of Burges in Beri. very many great gunnes. The King and the Queeue, & the King of Nauar, almost followed the Campe. The citie being shaken and hattered very sore with their great gunnes, they made at the length great breaches in the walles▪ the souldiers of the Guise lustely geuinge the assault. Notwithstandinge they of the Towne lyke taule Souldiers▪ manly defended themselues▪ and gaue their enemies the repulse: also dayly they brake forth of the citie, to the great anoyance and hurte of the enemy. But whilest there were sending from Paris more men both horsemen and foote men to ayde the Guise▪ and grea∣ter gunnes also▪ with store of shot and poulder▪ the Ad∣mirall remoued from Orleans with a bande of well ap∣pointed souldiers, and set vppon them at Chasteaudun as they were going with the forsaid prouision. And he slew many of them, tooke their great gunnes, and caried a∣way all their artillery▪ But for want of horses and ca∣riage to cary away the great gunnes, the Admirall gaue commaundement to ouer charge the great gunnes with poulder, and so to shake them in péeres, and to fier the poulder that remayned. Notwithstanding, the same day, monsieur de Iuoy, either for want of ayde and vittayles; as he afterwardes excu∣sed himselfe, or else by treason, as the souldiours for the most part commonly reported, tooke truce with the Gui¦ses about the yéelding vp of the ciie vpon these condici∣ons: namely, that monsieur de Iuoy, his Captaynes, hys souldiours, and all in the towne, shoulde escape with their liues and goods, and be left to the libertie of their consciences: and to be in no perill of harme for bearing armour, or for their religion▪ Furthermore▪ that all his army should ioyne with the Kings power, and so be vn∣der the kings protection, and vnder the protection of the King of Nauar▪ and of all his Prince▪ also that mōsieur
de Iuoy his Captayes, & noble men, should haue leat to salute the King. And, because monsieur de Iuoy sayde, that hée had made an othe to the Prince of Conde, preten ding ye obedice of the King, it was agréed that he shold haue leaue (his souldiers remayning in the mean time with the Kinges power) to goe to the Prince of Conde: and comming backe agayne from him, should signifie vnto the King his whole mynde and conscience: as whe∣ther hée and his fellowes could find in their hartes to be sworne to the King without any exception or condition: if not, hee shold haue leau to go home to his house with∣out perill of any manner of harm, eyther to him, or too any of his Captaynes or souldiers, vpon this condition, that they should neuer after beare armour against the king or enter into any citie which was kept against his Maiestie. And finally, it was gréed, that whatsoeuer monsieur de Iuoy at the commaundement of the Prince of Conde, had taken out of the Kings treasury, or from the Church, to this warre, should neuer be lay∣d to his charge, or to the charge of any of his deputies, or substituts: and that the Decrées of the Senat of Pa∣ris, or of any other Court, against these things should bée ayde. Upon these conditions the Citie was rendered vp, possessed by the Guises souldiours, and the Garrison of monsieur de Iuoy brought out of the Towne to the Guise▪ army. Then monsieur de Iuoy went towarde Orleans sending a messenger before him to signife the whole matter to the Prince of Conde, and to declare the cause of his comming: Who, when he vnderstood that de Iuoy mad request to be discharged of his othe, he sent him word that hée should not approche néere the Ciie: willing him to consider what it is to make an othe to God and to Religion: certyfying him herewith that he would not be an instrument and partaker of his trea∣son
and falshehood. And so monsieur de Iuoy retourned to the Guise army agayne, the which hée followed after∣wardes, almost during all that warre, and certayne o∣ther Captaynes and souldiours with him. Notwithstā∣ding the greatest parte, by the sufferance of the Guise, were dismis: and returned to Orlens vnder the cōduct of Damplerre. Therfore al that region, euen to , yéelded to the Guise: the faithfull being euerywhere cru∣elly handled, to whom notwithstanding a certain town called Montargis was a present refuge, by the benefite of the Duchesse of Ferrer called Rnee, the daughter of Lodowic the xii. King of Fraunce: the Duke of Guise be∣ing greatly offended thereat, and threatening the Du∣chesse whom notwithstanding hée fauoured as his moo∣ther in Law, and the Kings daughter. The Duke of Guise hauing gotten the victorie, remo∣ued from Varon the eleuenth day of September, & came to : the chief Citie in Normandie, which we sayde before, Duke de Aumall besieged in vayne. But now itThe besie∣ging of Roan in Normādy. was more strongly besieged, both with a mightyer ar∣my, and also with more valeant and expert Captaynes: and was so assaulted that notwithanding the manhood, & strong defence of Countie Momtgomery and his souldi∣ours in the towne, the Guise obtayned both the Castell of Sancatharine, and also the Citie. Notwithstandinge, Countie Momgomery and a great number of souldiours with him tooke shippe, and escaped. Great murther was committed in the Citie, and the same throughly sacked. And among others that were put to death in the Citie, Augustine Marlorat was one, being a Minister of gods word in the reformed Church of Roan, whom they han∣ged openly vpon a payre of Gallowes: yea the profes∣sors of the Gospell in euery corner of the Citie went to the pot. In the tyme that the Citie was besieged, the King of
Naar, as he was leaning vpon his Tene, or makinge water agaynst the same, with his backe towarde theThe death of the king of Nauar. towne, was shot in the shoulder with a small pellot: & being sore wounded, was caryed from thence by the ry∣uer of Sin to Paris: and there within fewe dayes after, being weary of his lyfe through extréeme payne, despe∣rately dyed: The Quéene, the King of Nauars wyfe, be∣ing very carefull for his health: who shewed hirselfe al∣wayethe Queen of Nauar a vertuouse Lady. very modest and constant, both in doing her duty with all obedience, notwithstanding his euill dispositiō towardes harlots, and also in firme abyding in y• truth: being also very carefull for the vertuouse education of her children, but specially for the trayninge vp of her sonne in the reformed Religion, whom the Guises went about to nussell in all kind of wickednesse. Therefore the Prince of Conde wrote letters of com∣fort vnt hir: certefying her, that a great many at Orle∣ans were sore agréeued for the death of hi husbande. This therefore was the ende of the Kinge of Nauarr, who after that hée had forsakē the defence of the trueth, was the cause of many troubles▪ being so muche more hurtfull to the church, as hée might haue ben profitable, if it had not ben the purpose of God to declare that hée himselfe is the only authour, builder, preeruer and de∣fender of his church, and not man, how noble so euer h be: for herein standeth the glory of God. The Prince of Conde had oftentimes intreated the Quéene of England, while there was some hope that peace might be had by intreaty▪ that her hignnes would be a helpe to him therin: but at the length, the matter being brought to be tryed by force of armes, as we shewed before, hée required of her highnesse, money and ouldiours to maintayne warre. Therfore about this time, when there was a rumor spred abrode of the comming of the Germans, and of the
ide out of England, to helpe the Prince of Conde, thereA writing published by the Queene of England concerning the helpe she sent to the Prince of Conde. was a writing published in the name of the Quéene of England, (who also had sent Ambassadours to the king about the same pacification: but they little profited, yea, & returned almost without any answere) In the which she both layed to the Guises charges that they were the authors and causes of all the warre, and also affirmed that she would take vppon her, as it became her, the de∣fence of the Kynges cause: And also that all Christian Realmes and Princes, ought both to be moued to com∣passion and pitie, at the afflicted and troubled state of Fraunce at this time, and to moue thom to haue a deepe consideration and care to prouide remedies, by which not only the Kyng a child, the Quéene his mother, and all the Kynges sonnes her children, and so all the people of Fraunce, may be deliuered and frée from present trou∣ble: but also to euell and rent vp by the rootes, so great a mischiefe, least the same should spred it self to other na∣tions: Notwithstanding (sayth she) there is no man to whom this common care doth more specially appertain than vnto me: which being both of my selfe inclined to care, and also confirmed and prouoked thereunto by the iudgements of my Counsaylers, haue hitherto gone a∣bout by all meanes, to do the best I could, to stoppe and preuent the first beginnings of the great mischiefe like to ensue. And why I ought thus to do, both the commi∣seration and pitie of the kyng, my welbeloued brother, a child, and my neighbour: of the Quéene his Mother, of all the Kynges children, and of so great a people: and also the present perill of conueying the same warre ouer the Sea vnto as (all men of sound iudgement, ey∣ther hare, or ls where, both beholding and talking of these things, and also praysing this care, of it selfe very commendable) may sufficiently declare, and shew my mind in this matter worthy of commendation: Not∣withstanding
it séemeth reasonable to setforth in open writing how and after what maner I haue behaue my selfe herein: that all men my sée how I haue delt with my neighbours, and how I meane to deale hereaf∣ter. First, all men might sée how greatly euen since the beginning of my raigne, I haue desired, that eueryShe mea∣neth▪ Cal∣lice. Christian might enioye prate and concord: when as be∣cause of the same I haue willingly departed from my right, and haue let go some part of my auncient Domi∣nion for a time: when as otherwise they for whose sake I haue receiued this losse, recouered and receiued by and by all that was taken from them. And yet notwithstan∣ding▪ all men remember and know in how short tyme after, and for what iust and manifest causes I am con∣strained, seeing that I am offered great iniury and vio∣lence,Shee mea∣neth the Scottish Queene. to proclayme also my selfe, open warre: both to deliuer me and my kyngdome from perill, and also to frée my neighbours which fled vnto me for succour, frō open tirrany. In the which matter notwithstanding how vprightly I haue delt, all men may sée: first by ex∣hortations to abstayne from warre: then by open de∣claration that I mynded to deliuer my selfe and mine from violence and wrong: after that, by all maner of good gouernement and disposing of matters: and last of all by the very and end of the thing it selfe. After the pacification of those troubles, to the end I might leaue nothing vndone to make true and assured peace & concord▪ I made a firme and euerlasting League with the Quéene of Scots my welbeloued Sister, and my neere neighbour. In the which matter; how sincere∣ly and truly I haue behaued my selfe, God knoweth, & sundry benefites and gifts whith I bestowed vppon the Guises, Uncles to the Quéene of Scottes, and vppon their seruants, may sufficiently declare my great good will
herein: beside the mutuall and fréendly communication also which I had wt the same Quéen of Scots. But amōg these deliberations, and communications concerning peace, beside the lacke which I had of the fruite of peace. I am also constrayned to haue a study and care for those new troubles in the kingdome of Fraunce, raysed vp by those, which haue alwayes shewed themselues to be e∣nemies towards me: and what they haue done to make new suspicions betwéene me and the Quéene of Scottes, for the same Quéene of Scottes sake, I haue alwayes hi∣therto kept silence. At the beginning, when I knew well enough, if these troubles should prenaile, it would not only come to passe amidest the Ciuill dissentions, that the kyngdome of Fraunce should come into great perill of destruction as now it is: but also that other Christian Realmes, & especially my owne Realme should fall into the same perill, both for the néerenes of the places, and also be∣cause the authors of those troubles are my enemies: I vsed all meanes that I could, both by Letters & also by Ambassages, that there might some wayes be taken for peace and concord betwéene both partes. Notwithstan∣ding one part refused the same; and bursted forth into open violence and mortall warre, yet I ceased not from my purpose and good intent. But when I sawe, that the desire of crueltie dayly more and more enereased, and that euery where bloud∣shed, & butcherly murther was committed: and (which was most perillons) that the young Kyng and his Mo∣ther were sodenly besieged, and came into their handes without aide and succour, and that he was so forced by them, that he would suffer his authoritie to be abused, to the murthering of his poore and innocent people, to the besieging and spoyling of his Noble Cities, to the breaking of good and wholesome Edictes, to the iniury
of the Kynges kinsmen and Nobles, and to the ruine & destruction of the Kynges faithfull seruants, beside an infinite number of wickednesses mo: and all, to satisfie their willes and mindes, which determined to breake the Kynges Edictes, without punnishment: which Edictes were made by thē States of the Realme, for the preseruation of peace and tranquillitie, and for the safetie of the Kyngs Maiestie: When also I perceiued that they went about and had already put in practise to ouerthrowe and destroye the Religion, and the profes∣sors and followers of the same: I thought it good and most necessary for these causes, to prouide out of hand a more effectuall and forceable remedy, that the authors of these troubles, might at the last he constrayned, to come to peace and concord, vppon reasonable conditi∣ons: least the whole Kyngdome of Fraunce, through the vnbrideled and outragious willes of a fewe, should bée brought into so great perill. And for these causes I sent some of my Counsayle Ambassadours into Fraunce, wise, graue, and experi∣ensed men, and addicted to neyther part: that in the ex∣tremitie of these matters, there might bee a remedy found out, whereby their Kyng and soueraigne Lorde might be obeyed, and the peace and tranquillitie of the Realme mayntayned. Notwithstanding this my labor and good indeuour, was not thankfully taken, neyther could I haue any answere frō the yong Kyng, nor from his Mother the Quéene, being made a feard by that part which was the cause of all these troubles. Whilest therfore I was carefully busied about these thinges, and had no other care than for the profite of the Kyng, my welbeloued brother, without condemning of either part: I was other wise delt withall than I loo∣ked for. Wherby appeared that their will and minde was, which so often times denied the bearing of those
things, which were propounded by me and mine at my commaundement, for peace and concordes sake. For al my Marchaunts of London and of other partes of my Realme, which came into certaine places of Brittaine, only about their Marchandize, and were preparing to retourne home againe, were taken, and robbed and di∣spoyled of all their goodes: and they which sought to de∣fend them selues, were cxuelly slayne, their shippes & Marchandize taken, by the Magistratrs of those places whereunto they arriued: and that for no other cause, but for that they were reported to be Huguenotes By the which woord, although it séemed strange to those poore Marchaunts and Marriners, who knew not what it ment, it sufficiently appeared from whom they recey∣ued commaundement to doe these thinges, and what they would do more, if time and occasion would suffer. This was no small rapine or light spoyle, but of great waight: it was not done sodenly or marage, but by ye common Magistrate, vpon the commaundement of the Gouernour of those partes, and that by great contenci∣on with my subiectes. The matter being complayned of to those that should haue reformed the same, nothing was done: but to make a mendes, one of my messengers comming homwards with letters of my Ambassadour was robbed: the which also escaped vnpunished with∣out any farther examination. Wherby I perceiue, that the Kyng, or Quéene his Mother, or rather the Kyng of Nauar, do rather want authoritie than good will. And certainely it is manifest both by this and by an infinite sort of other arguments, in what state and condition ye young Kyng standeth: when as he maye not preserue his people and houshold, establish his lawes and Edicts, nor giue no iust answere to other Princes and Nati∣ons. By which, and by other wicked deuises, practised against me and my Realme, it appeareth to all men of
sound iudgement, how greatly that violence, (which is now vsed in Fraunce by the Guises and his fellowes) doth toutch not only Fraunce, but also mée, and my whole Realme, more than any other Prince. Therfore, forsomuch as the dignity and authoritie of the Kyng and the Queene his Mother, & of his Coun∣sellers louers of peace, cannot at this time so much pre∣uaile, as to haue abillitie and leaue to rule and gouern, or to do any thing els appertaining either to their own people, or to other Nations, or to their owne proper persons: séeing also the Kynges tender age, and the Quéene his Mother are so circumuented and snared, that they must condescend and agrée to whatsoeuer the Guises will haue them: as may testifie those great de∣structions and manifold calamities, which the authors of these troubles haue brought, in besieging, assaulting, and sacking the Kynges Cities and Townes, and in shedding the innocent bloud of his subiects: also, séeing they haue caused ciuill warre that they might abolish and extinguish in euery place the reformed Religion, & do séeke to make mortall warre in euery part of the whole world: furthermore séeing they are the authors and fautors of these pitifull and lamentable troubles & are noted so to be of all men, who, if they might haue time and oportunitie, would séeke by all meanes possi∣ble, to violate and diminish the state and dignitie of my Realme: and to conclude, séeing of late also they haue openly gone about to cōtend with me by force of armes, (but by the grace and goodnes of God were disapoynted of their purpose) and do yet diligently séeke the same, & also to aduaunce them selues to my incōmoditie: shall I suffer and beare with those sworne and mortall ene∣mies to peace and concord? Shall I suffer the bloud of my neighbours to be cruelly shed, if by any maner of meanes I might let the same? Shall I suffer the young
Kyng my welbeloued brother, to bee besieged and in great perill, and not to be counted vnthankful and mer∣cilesse? Shall I as vnwise and negligent haue no con∣sideration or regard to my mortal enemies, and to their practise. Therfore for these iust, euident and necessary causes of the Kynges subiects, requiring my helpe and aide in these tempestes and calamities: I commaunded many of my subiectes, to be armed both by Sea and land, to deliuer the subiectes of my welbeloued brother the Kyng of Fraunce, from tirrany, Rapine, murther, and destruction: and to kéepe certaine Cities, bordering vpon the sea coast and more néere vnto vs, in saftie from those enemies, least the peace made betwéene me and my brother the Kyng being broken, they might the more easely warre against my Realme. To prouide for the which thinges tyme calleth vpon me. For I haue the testimony of a good conscience, and do protest that I in these thinges do vse such sinceritye and integrity, that I séeke and iusue christian peace, as I ought: and I doubt not, but that the protection and de∣fence of innocent bloud is acceptable vnto God: & wilbe taken in verye good parte, of my wel beloued Brother, when he shall come vnto that age, that he shall be able with equity to Iudge of these matters. It wil serue also for the lawful protection and preseruation of me and of my people. And to be short, by the great goodnes of God, it shal∣be an occasion of more firme and sure peace, betwéene me and my well beloued Brother the King of Fraunce: that eyther of vs may peaceably vse our libertys. And this one thing also I most earnestly say and affirme, to my beloued Brother the King of Fraunce, to the Quene his mother, to the King of Nauar, and to all his faithfull Counsaylers and seruantes. That I, whatsoeuer any mallicious person hereafter shall report, will deale in
this matter with such sincerity and integritye, as both the thing it selfe and the tyme shall require: and will v∣surpe nothing to my selfe, nor offer iniury and violence to any one of his subiectes. And this I protest before God, his Angelles, and before all men in the vniuersall world, that my full mind, & intent is, in these extreame and perillouse times, to deliuer the subiectes of my bro∣ther the Kyng of Fraunce, from the destruction lyke to come by these Ciuil warres: séeing that I imbrace the peace and concord made betwéene me and my Brother the Kinge, I will omitte no occasion to set him in hys former lyberty, and to restore peace and tranquilitye to his people. The which shall come to passe, when it shall please God to giue a better mind to the authors of these troubles, and to make them content with that which is their owne, that they may both kepe them within the li∣mites of their duty, & also as good subiectes to be louers of peace. The which at this time ought specially to be sought for, namely, rather peace and concord, by the con sent and agrement of the Christian Princes and states, than to sturre vp lamentable warre among Christians, by fier and swerd. About this time there was a certaine writinge ofLetters of the Princes of Germa∣ny, to the Germaynes which wer in the army of the Gui∣ses▪ all the Princes of Germany that were protestantes, sent to those armies of horsemen and footemen, which seruid the Guise vnder the conduct and charge of the Rokendolph to this effect following: All the Princes Electores, pro∣testants, of the sacred Empire, will and commaund this thinge to be notified and declared to all the Germaines, which serue the Duke of Guise vnder the conducte of the Rokendolph▪ being by him dereyued: which Guise abusing the age and authority of the king of France, would abuse your handes and power to be instrumentes, to ertyrpe and destroy all those which professe the Gospell. And al∣though the horrible murthers & cruelties of the Duke
of Guise, of his Brother the Cardinall, and of the rest of his fellowes, haue ben openly shewed vppon al Christi∣ans louers of the truth, yet notwithstāding, you (which we heard of to our great griefe) are ready to helpe & aide the Duke of Guise. And besides this it is euidently kno∣wen to all men, that ye Rokendolph your Captaine is ba∣nished discredited, and openly proclaymed a traitour, by the publique iudgement, and solemne decrée of the Em∣perour, and of al ye states of the Empire, for his false be∣traying of the Germanes into the handes of the Turke: notwithstandinge ye beinge deceyued by their wonted guiles, and subtill wordes, haue agréed to go with him into France, and at this time also are ready to obey him, and to do whatsoeuer he will haue you: whereby it is plaine that ye wil forsake al christian faith and charity, and loue of vertue and praise, for the Duke of Guise, and for the Rokendolph your captaines sake: such an example gyuen hereby as hath not bin heard of heretofore amōg the Germanes. For these causes, we will and commaund you, being admonished by this writing, and do exhorte & earnestly require all and euery of you, which haue anie regard to your good name and fame, and haue hitherto bin deceiued by the fraud and subtilty of the Rokendolph, that ye take héede and haue regard to the great infamie and reproch which you shall sustaine hereafter: that you forsake out of hand your Captaine the Rokendolph, and the Army of the Duke of Guise: whose principal purpose and intent is, to roote out and destroy Christians, whom we mind to defend with all our might and power. And therefore whatsoeuer he be that shal refuse to obey this our commaundement, let him be well assured that hée shal haue the same punishment of ignominy and shame that the Rokendolph hath: Let all men knowe this for a suertie. ¶These letters greatly troubled the mindes of the
Germanes, of which the greatest part of the Guises armie consisted: but the vnder Captaines and Centurions be∣ing corrupted for the most part with money, they litle or nothing preuailed. Notwithstandinge a fewe vnder the charge and conduct of Countie Waldech forsakinge the Guises armie, came to Orleans to the Prince of Con∣de. The Duke of Guise hauing good successe in his busi∣nes according to his mind, and contrariwise the Prince of Conde, comminge daylye more and more into far∣therQuillebe∣douius. extremity, many forsoke the prince of Conde, amōg which were many noble men: who, by the Guises com∣maundement, were peaceably receyued, notwithstan∣ding with the reprochful name of Quillebedouius, which signifieth a Trayterous coward. These startawaies had the Kings letters of warrant giuen to euery one of them, in maner and forme as followeth. Thomas. R. or J. B. or els such a one, hath declared vn∣toThe Kings letters pa∣tents graū∣ted to those that started away from the Prince of Conde and the frutes there of. vs that he was perswaded to put himself in armour, thinking it to be done vpon his allegance and obedience towards vs, bicause he was tolde that we & the Quene my Mother were captiued: and to this end he hath fol∣lowed those which haue taken many of our Cities. And for these causes he is condemned by the sentence of our Iudges to dye, and his goods allready brought into our treasury and his house straightly watched and warded, to the which he dare not come but by our gratious be∣nefit and helpe, the which he moste humbly requireth. We therefore vppon consideration of his mind and pur pose, which he saith, and of the which we are certyfied also, shalbe to liue euer hereafter in our obedience: and also to the end we may gratefie the requestes of certain of our faithfull seruantes: For these causes, and for dy∣uers other great and waighty causes also mouinge vs
herevnto, we haue permitted and graūted, and by these presentes do permi and graunt to the sayde T. R. al∣though he hath borne armour, and hath contributed mo∣ney to ayde those which as enemies haue armed them∣selues in this our Realme against vs, and for the esta∣blishing of the new Religion, or hath otherwyse holpen and furthered seditious persons with their aduise and counsaile, and hath gone to besiege Cities without and contrary to my will and pleasure: that it may notwith∣standing be lawful for him to go home to his house, and peaceably to enioy his goodes: and for none of all those faultes to be in no perell hereafter by any maner of meanes, eyther for wearing armour, or for Religion: commaundinge that all sentences pronounced againste him for these causes to be voyde and of none effect: and that his goodes & substance which hath bin brought into our treasury, be giuen & restored to him again: and com∣manding also the watch & ward about his house to cease, whatsoeuer hath bin ordeyned and decréed in our Par∣lements for this matter, notwithstanding. Also that it shal not be nedefull for the said T. R. our suppliant, to haue any other argument or proofe to declare our will and pleasure herin, but these our letters only. Notwith standing prouided that he be no author of seditions, of rapines, or of spoyling of Churches, nor that he secretly conuey to our enemis either money or armour: and also vpon this condition that he liue euer hereafter, Catho∣licly, and come not to the seruice or rytes of the new Re∣ligion: & that he neuer hereafter beare armour against vs, nor do ayde and assiste those that are our enemyes, any maner of way. But as by these meanes snares were layed to trap & entangle the simple and héedelesse sort (as shortly after appeared in many when they were come home) so there was no staye of excommunications thoondered out at
Paris. at Tbolouze, and at Bordeaulx, and in other places where the papistes ruled, against such as were counted Huguenotes: strayt charge being geuen to al mē to detect such persones: the payne appointed, threatened to suche as should conceale any such so suspected, and a rewarde promised to him that would detect any such person: the Kings Attorney being commaunded to inquire and nd out such causes, and to bring them with all spéede before the Senate. Then after the publishing of those letters of warrant from the King, whereof we spake before, the Senate or Parliament of Paris decréed, that all those men which came from Burges, Poytiers, Meaulx, Roane, Lions, and from other Cities which were kepte by the Prince of Conde, to Paris, should be taken: and that they should be punished according to the prescript of ye Kings Edicte, which commaundeth al men of the new Religi∣on to goe out of Paris, notwithstandinge that they had gotten the Kinges letters of warrant, and had made a Catholique confession (as they terme it) of their fayth. Roane being wonne, as we declared before, the army of the Guise came to Paris about the beginning of No∣uember,The Guise tetourneth to Paris. the rumour increasing more and more concer∣ning the ayde of the Germanes and of the Englishe men, which should come to the Priuce of Conde very short∣ly. Therefore Roan being fortified agayne, & the breaches of the walles being builded vp, and a Garrison left in ye towne, the Duke of Guise retourned backe agayn withThe Guise cōmeth to Paris. his armie to Paris. In ye meane tyme came the armies out of Germanie to Orleans, sent by ye protestant Princes vnder the conduct and charge of the Marshall of Hes∣sen. They were thirtéen enseignes of horsemen, con∣tayningAyde com∣meth from the Princes of Germa∣ny to the Prince of Conde. in iust number 2600, and eleuen enseignes of footemen, contayning thrée thousand souldiours. Then the Prince of Conde, when hée had gathered togyther an
armye, mynded to remoue from Orleans and to goe to Paris. But before his departure from thence, hée publi∣shed a writing, in the which he cleareth himselfe from being the author of the first motions, and of the ciuill warre, deryuing and laying the same vpon the Guises & his fellowes: and protesteth that dutie moueth him too enter into warre, to deliuer the Kinge and the whole Realme from those iniuries and violence. This which followeth is the summe of his letter. I haue hitherto sufficiently (sayeth he) by many wri∣tingsAnother writing of the Prince of Conde. published and sent abroad, euidently declared, that the Guises, the Constable, and the Marshiall of S. Andrew, are the authours, and the first and true causes of those troubles, which we sée at this tyme to be so hote & outra giouse in the Realme: because they tooke disdayne, that they should be remoued from the gouernement whiche they vsurped in the dayes of King Fraunces the seconde, and were offended at the decrée of the States of the Realme, in which thei are commaunded to make an ac∣compt of the excéeding number of giftes which they had receyued in the former Kings dayes, and of the ordering and bestowing of the Kings money: greatly refusinge, not onely to be deliuered from this account, but also v∣sing their former subtilties, to enriche and set vp them selues by the ruine and decay of others. After that I shewed the diuers Counselles and secret deliberations had, they couering their conspiracies with the cloake of Religion, and how they began to arme them selues by their owne prinate authoritie, contrary to the expresse commaundements of the Quéene, and the Decrée of the States, breaking the common peace: how they contem∣ning the Quéenes authoritie, & the decree of the States, by which they were commaunded to goe home to their owne houses, came with an army ofmen and tooke the
King and Quéene into their handes perforce, with so much grief to the King, that hée declared the same with teares openly. I haue also declared, and will euer eui∣dently declare that I haue for iust and necessary causes, and by the expresse commaundements of the Quéen her selfe, (as may appeare by letters sealed with her owne hand) armed my selfe: and haue ben nominated and e∣lected by her to take vpon me the defence of this cause: as can testifie Monsure Jarnac, Monsure Soubize, and mō∣sieur Pordillan, to whō shée expresly declared, that it was her will that the Kings faithfull subiectes should obeye mée, and that they should at my commaundement with∣stand the counselles and practises of the Kinges aduer∣saries, to restrayne their licenciouse willes. And as for me, if I should not take the sword in hand, the King and Quéenes Maiesties, and the Realme cannot choose but be ruled by the wills of the aduersaries, whom experi∣ence hath shewed of late to be the tyraunts of Fraunce. And now, although I haue the testimonie of a good con∣science towardes God and the Quéen, who hath power and authoritie to gouerne the Realme: and although I haue already declared all my actions and the trueth of my cause, by diuers writings: yet neuerthelesse, because my aduersaries, according to their wonted wicked cu∣stome, do send abroad into forreyne nations many false reportes and sclaunders in writing, impudently burthe∣ning mée with false lyes, making mée the authour and cause of all these troubles. I which desire to haue a good name and report among all Christian Princes & No∣bles, and among the Kinges faythfull subiectes, & which desire to kéepe my honor and dignity: thought good, after many other to publishe this writing also. To the ende all men may vnderstand, how carefully euen vntill this present daye, I haue laboured & sought by al meanes possible to mitigat and pacefie those trou∣bles
raysed by their wickednesse: not onely because I know what great destruction will come thereby, but al∣so because I haue a singular care and desire, both to sta∣blish the Kings authoritie and dignitie, the safetie and preseruation of the Kings faithfull subiectes, the liberty of their consciences, and also the peace and tranquillitie of this Realme, in the which I was borne. And I am fully perswaded, that the only demonstration of ye which I haue done and will doe, shall proue those my aduersa∣ries, lyers and sclaunderers, & shall bring to passe, that neuer hereafter any indifferent man shall giue credit to the like. First of all, euery man may behold and see, how I alone in the beginning of this our Kings raigne, pro∣cured peace and tranquillitie, and sought to put away al occasions of seditions and troubles: for the which cause, I had much ill will and displeasure in the dayes of KingOf this mē cion was made in the second booke of cōmētaries Fraunces. II. but I haue forgiuen that iniury. Since that time hitherto, those enemies of God, the King, and pu∣blike peace, were offended with the decrées of ye States, and with the forme of Gouernement, which they then perceyued to be contrary to their ambition: when as they had determined to peruerte all things, & to enlarge their power and tyranny: to the which end and purpose they conspired with straungers: the which conspiracye is more perniciouse and detestable, than was the cōspi∣racie of the Triumuiri of Rome, as now appeareth by the lamentable effects thereof: but I, on the contrary part, to quench that burning fyrebrand of troubles, haue left nothing vndone that I could doo. Neyther dyd I regarde the goodnesse of my cause, nor the wickednesse of my ad∣uersaries cause (when as they armed them selues of their owne priuate authoritie, to ouerthrow the Edicte made by the consent and aduise of the States) neyther did I so estéeme of my place and dignitie, that I woulde put my selfe in armour, without the expresse comman∣dement
of the Quéen: yet in the beginning I of my own accorde offered to vnarme my selfe agayne, so that my enemies would doe the same, and that the Edicte so so∣lemly made by the Decrée of the States, might be tho∣roughly kept: as may appeare by my writinge concer∣ning this matter. The which conditions seemed to all men very indifferent and reasonable, sauinge to them selues. Furthermore, to the ende we might the better and more safely enter into peace and concord, I sought diligently that many Christian Princes might be admo nished of this matter, and I entreated them by letters and by Ambassadours that they would be meanes to pa∣cefie the same, and to take away all occasions of greater dissentions. But my aduersaries euen at the same time, when al things might haue ben brought to some quietnesse, wēt about to take away all hope of concord, and sought for the nonce to exasperat and prouoke our mindes to dis∣pleasure by new cruelties shewed vpon our bretheren: making more carefull prouision to warre against mée and myne, than doth the forreyn enemie, when hée in∣uadeth the boundes and limites of the Realme. Beside this they suffered not the Ambassadours of the Princes of Germany, which were now cōming forwarde in their iourney, to doe their office about the pacification: but sought to procure the Italian, the Spaniard, & the Switzer to ayde them in their warre: and because a certaine No∣ble man of Fraunce called Gonor, did disallowe the com∣ming of forreyne power into the Realme, they abused him with iniuriouse wordes openly among the Kinges counsaill. Whereby it may appeare to all indifferent men of sound iudgement, what I and my aduersaries haue sought for: and whether I could in this time of the Kings minoritie, deuise more profitable meanes and wayes, to auoid these gréeuouse troubles: and also whe∣ther
they can doe more than they haue done, to increase the same. For they haue gone about to bring in newe, harde, and violent lawes, playne contrary to the Kings Edicte, made by the consent of the whole Realme, and agréeing with the Spanish Inquisition, which is the ruyne and ouerthrow of peace and tranquillitie: that thereby they might not onely bring in an infinite heape of trou∣bles, but also the confusion of all things. The which al∣so I my selfe by publishing a writing contrarye to the same, shewed how much it was disagréeing from al rea∣son and indifferency. But what soeuer I could shew vn∣to the Quéene, they had her in such bondage and capti∣uitie, by force and subtiltie, that they made her an in∣strument and meane to doe what soeuer they woulde themselues. Notwithstanding shée perceyuinge what great inconuenience would come by warre thought, she might do much good if she could bring the matter to par∣ley. Therefore, the Quéene, my brother the Kinge of Nauar, and I met togither in the midway betwene Pa∣ris and Orleans. Then I made declaration vnto them of two things, which I sayd were the causes of troubles, the which causes being taken away, the effectes, that is to say, great troubles shall with them be remoued also. To take away the causes, I sayd, the first was: That the Guise, the Constable, and the Marshal of Santandre, who had broken the peace by arming of them selues by their owne priuate authoritie, and had forceably dealt with the Kyng and Quéene, and also had broken the kyngs Edict of January, might go home to their owne houses and might be forbidden to be of the Kynges Counsell,The condi∣tions offe∣red by the Prince of Conde, at the first par ley. during this time of his minoritie: And I my selfe, though I were of the Kyngs bloud, and of much higher degrée than they, promised to do the like. The second was, I sayd, that the Edict of January might be fully obserued, and that according to the tenor
therof, the vse of Religion might bee frée for all men throughout the whole Realme. To these two▪ neither the Quéene nor my brother would agrée. Affirminge that it was not lawfull for those being the Kynges ser∣uants, to depart from the young King being in such ex∣tremitie as he was: the request, they said, was neither indifferent nor profitable for the Realme. Moreouer they sayd there could not be two Religi∣ons together in one Realme, and therfore the Edict of January could not bee suffered, because they of the Church of Rome were so many in number & so sharpe set to mayntaine their Religion▪ that if they should not haue their willes, greated troubles would dayly arise▪ To this I replied againe saying, that it was neyther indifferent nor profitable for the Realme, for them to abide with the Kyng, which had both abused the Kyngs age and dignitie, and also had brought him & the whole Realme into great perill, and vnhonestly broken the Kyngs Edict. And concerning the Edict of January, I sayd, what could be more vnseemely than for a few pri∣uate men, so little to regard the Kynges dignitie, that they durst breake the Kynges Edict, to obserue & kéepe the which, they themselues were sworne: by the bene∣fite of which Edict, not only Paris, but also the whole kingdome enioyed peace. Also I said it was a very euell example, for the people to be armed to breake the kings Edictes, and was the ready way to make them euer af∣ter more disobedient: also that the Religious were not so contrary, that the Christian name should not euery where be retayned: As for that Religion which I and my fellowes imbrace, it is the true and reformed Re∣ligion, which is also receiued and imbraced of great Nations, and pourged from Romish Idolatries and su∣perstitions. And to make the matter more plaine, what say you to the late example of the Emperour Charles the
fifth, who after he had assayed to establish in Germany that Religion which he him selfe approued, and coulde not bring it to passe, thought it to be the best waye, al∣though he had gotten the victory by force of Armes, to let euery man vse what Religion he would, for quiet∣nes sake. What shoulde I néede to repeate many other examples, when as experience teacheth vs, that this is a necessary remedy to kéepe the people of this Realme, in peace: To let them haue the vse of what Religion they like best. But for all that I could saye or do in that Parley, the Quéene durst not go from that which was prescribed vnto her to speake. So that the Armies were prepared on both partes againe: Then we entered into parley againe: by which they went a∣bout very subtilly to betray me: First, I yeelded vnto my brother the King of Nauar the Towne of Baugence, the which he ment to vse for him and his family during the time of intreaty for peare, which I had good hope to obtaine by the meanes of the Quéenes letters. Then I did put my selfe into my enemies hands; minding ther∣by to winne peace. The Guises and his fellowes fayned a departure away, but they were not far of, but had in∣camped themselues within the compasse of thrée miles minding to oppresse me, as appeared afterwardes by their Letters which came to my handes. At y• length I and certaine of my fellowes came in parley and conference with the Quéene At the first we were denied to haue the liberty of our consciences. We straight way affirmed that the libertie of our consciēce was to vs the most precious thing of all and the chiefest thing that we desired: and added this also, that if the departure of a few, would be an occasion of peace, and of the libertie of Religion, we our selues woulde wil∣lingly go into crile, euen to the vtmost partes of the world. The Queene tooke our offer, and liked of the cō∣dition:
and when she had made a long protestation of hir good will toward vs, she perswaded vs to prepare our selues to take our iourney, and she would send vnto me whether soeuer I wold appoynt ten thousand Crowns, promising there withall that my exile shoulde not bee long. But when I was certified of the platforme and snare which the Guises had made for me, at ye intreatie of my fellowes I made hast backe againe to my Armie. Then thē Quéene before my departure required of vs an aunswere, the which we referred to the common counsell and aduise of my fellowes: affirming notwith∣standing for our selues, that we were ready, not only to go into exile. but also to suffer any maner of extremi∣tie willingly for a common wealth. But afterward I had taken deliberation and consul∣tedThe reasōs that staied the Prince of Con de from go∣ing into exile. with my fellowes, they aunswered: That except I would forsake God, the Kyng, and my Countrey, I could not nor ought to go to any other place: declaring vnto me that the auncient and approued Lawes and constitutions of the Realme were, that when the king by reason of his younge and tender yeres cannot take vppon him the Gouernement of the Realme, the Prin∣ces that were the Kinges néere kinsmen, with the coū∣sell and aduise of the States should prouide a forme ofThe forme of the go∣uernement of the Realme in Kinges mi∣noritie. Gouernement. The which during the time of the kings ninoritie, ought to abide firme and immutable, At the first begining of this kings raigne, the States, (whose authoritie hath brideled alway their ambition, which would abuse the tender age and facility of kings) decréed with the consent of the Princes the Kings kins∣men, That the gouernement of the King and the realm should be committed to the Quéene: and that shée shold discharge and pay that debt which the Kings aūcetours had left the Crowne in, and should also mayntayne the peace and tranquillitie of the Realme of Fraunce, Di∣uers
other things and they decréed more particularly, concerning such as had taken any othe to serue forreyn power, whethe they should be of the Kinges Counsell or no: and whether twoo bretheren at once, excepte the Princes the Kings kinsmen, should be of the same coun sell: concerning also an account to be made by suche as had the trust of treasure committed vnto them in the former Kings dayes: and diuers other things they de∣créed as is to be séene in my former declarations in wri∣ting published. But amongst all other it was decréed by the Quéene, that matters concerning Religion, should be established, for peace and vnities sake. First of all therefore the matter was handeled by Disputation at Possit but in vayne. Then the Queene caused an assem∣bly to be made of the Princes the Kings kinsmen, of the Kings Counsellers, and of certaine, choosen out of all Parliamentes of the Realme, that they might make an Edict concerning this matter. Then there was an E∣dict made in the Kings Counsel: to the which they were all sworne (and they also which at this day haue broken the same) and which was published and confirmed, ac∣cording to custome, throughout all Courtes in ye realm: by the benefite whereof the Realme in euery place sée∣med to be at peace. Notwithstanding this, thrée priuate men offended with the Kinges Counsell, and inflamed with their owne desires, because they knewe that they were bound to obey their Decrées, aud to giue vp their accountes: conspired togyther how they might remoue the Quéene from her authoritie: gathered an army of men togyther, without the cōmaundement of yt Quéen, contrary to the authoritie and decrées of the States: de∣nyed to go home to their owne Prouinces, at the com∣maundement of the Quéen, and to vnarme themselues: came armed to the Kinge, and so tooke him: stirred vp warre, and put the king to great expences: not only en∣tered
into the kings Counsel, from which they were se∣cluded by the Decrées of the States, but also did put in and put out such as it pleased thē: and finally they brake the kings Edict solemly made and confirmed by the ad∣uise and determination of the States, & from the time that they armed them selues, they haue not suffered the same to be kept, without the which notwithstanding, it it not possible that the publique peace should stande. By which their wicked actes and presumption, they haue broken the authoritie of Magistrates and Lawes, & haue playnly declared themselues to be enemies to God, to the king, to the Realme, and to cōmon peace. For these causes my friends sayd vnto me (considering my state and calling in the Realme) that it was not meete that I shold gyue place vnto them, which by violence had gone about already to confound all thinges: Neyther that I should forsake the cause which was not perticuler, but generally belonging to all men: and that I should resist open force and tyrāny, and restore libertie of conscience to the men of the reformed Churches, by the benefite of the kings Edicte, after so great and so longe affliction, whereby they sayd I should preserue the authoritie and dignitie of the king and the Estates. For these causes the greatest part of Noble men and Gentlemen, vppon conscience of their dutie, knowing that they were bound hereunto both by diuine and also by mans lawe, haue followed me: and with these the greatest part of ye kings subiectes, and his most noble Cities, haue voluntarily ioyned themselues with me: and rather by diuine than humane reason, haue elected and created mée with one voyce and consent, for this cause to be their Captayne. The which office, I being of the kings bloud, and natu∣rally bound to the Crowne of Fraunce, haue taken vpon mée, and haue sworne to maintayne the glory of God, & the dignity and conseruation of the king & the Realme:
hauing also entered into league with them, in respecte whereof I haue bound my selfe vnto them, and cannot be discharged of my othe againe, without the solemne consent of my fellowes, to whom I haue giuē my faith. And whereas I offered to the Quéene to become a ba∣nished man, vpon this condicion: If by the departing of vs fewe, the common peace, and libertie of Religion might bee ob∣tayned: it is manifest, that my departure shall open a gap to more miserable destruction, and therefore there is no cause why I should be bound by that my promise. If I should departe the realme, I should leaue the King in this his nonage in perill of the ambition and violēce of straungers: and the Crowne of the which I am by nature a defender and protector, in hasard of lying in ye dust. Agayne, it cannot be, that the Kinges subiectes should be in the more securitie through my departure, whē this one thing is manifest, that ye Shepeheard beeing away▪ the Woulfe maye the more easely destroye the flocke. Can I thinke that so great a multitude, can be sent out of the realm, without their great hurt, and without the great destruction of the whole realme? Therefore, for my duties sake, to do the which I am bound both by na∣ture, and also by my othe, I cannot, neyther ought I, to depart out of the Realme, specially in these perillouse tymes: vnlesse I would incurre the faulte of a fugitiue and startaway. For as touching the reasons which my aduersaries bring, to couer their wickednesse, and to diswade me from the defence of so iust a cause, they are so weake & of so small waight, that no man will estéeme them, but those which are affectionate vnto them. For, whereas they say, that from that time hitherto, the Quéene hath altered her purpose, disalowed the Edicte, and allowed their bearing of armour, and had giuen hir authoritie to the King of Nauarre, to rule and order the whole matter: it is nothing.
First, bycause it is more probable and agreable to reason, that whatsoeuer the King, the Quéene, and the viceroy, determined and decréed, when they had full li∣bertie, and when the kingdome was in peace, is more firme and sure, than that which they approue and con∣firme in these troublesome tymes, when they are after a sort constrayned by force of Armes. Secondly the Quéene cannot alow the gathering to∣gyther of domesticall and forein Armyes of men, and the beginning of warre, contrary to the auncient cus∣tome of the lawes of Fraunce, and the late decrée of the states, and that for so euil an end & purpose, as to breake the Kinges Edicte, & the decrée aforesaid, made solemly by the Quenes cōmandement: but she must also ouer∣throw the foundation, vppon which her authoritie stan∣deth, which by that meanes should be of no force. Ney∣ther can she of her selfe, put ouer to another her autho∣rity, and power to gouerne, bycause it commeth not vn∣to her by natural right, but is giuen vnto her by the be∣nefite and consent of another. Moreouer touchinge the king of Nauarre, whether hée be Viceroy or Legat, he hath no such authority, that he may commaund the Guises, or any other to gather togyther armies of men, and that without the commaundement of the Quene, or ye kings lawfull Counsaile chosen by the states. The which was not obserued when the Quéene gaue them commaun∣dement to put of their armour. Neyther is it of greater waight or force, that the Quéene, since that tyme, hath approued the bearing of armour and the musteringe of souldiers: bycause in those matters it cānot be sufficient to haue only a bare allowing or approuing, in the which a sure and expresse commaundement is required. To conclude, admit the Kinges Counsaile were such as it ought to be, by the decrée of the States, and that there were ioyned therwith the authoritie of the Quéene and
of the Kinge of Nauar: God forbid that any man, how great soeuer his authority be, in the tyme of the Kinges nonage, might gather an army, proclayme warre, and put the power of the King and the Realme into ye hands of a subiect be he neuer so faithfull, without the wil and consent of the States first had: and specially when the purpose is so euill, and that the Kinges▪ Edict should be broken. These thinges of me considered, I haue deter∣mined, not to forsake my king in his young age, and my Countrey and Religion, all which requyre my helpe. Therefore I haue brought my army more neare my e∣nemies, my souldiers being very willing and couragi∣ous to set vppon the enemy, and to ioyne battaile. But our enemies which haue so often triumphed ouer vs & scorned vs, haue found no better way, than to packe and steale away secretly in the night. Therefore forsaking to ioyn battail with vs, thei came to Blais a town with∣out any Garrison, vnlooked for, & besieged the same: and when they had won it they shewed al maner of cruelty: and since that tyme they haue spoyled, & as yet do spoile cruelly many of the Cities of this Realme. And as for the Quéene, though she know the goodnes of our cause, and that I haue done nothing but by her commaunde∣ment: yet neuerthelesse, bycause she is more a fraide of the power and subtill practises of our aduersaries, than she trusteth to the good successe of oure parte, mindeth to giue her selfe wholy vnto them, anddoth more open∣ly and vehemently fauour them: as may plainly appear by these effectes. Therefore shée gaue her selfe wholy to the Cardinal of Lorrayn, who at that tyme was with her, to be gouerned by him: although shée knewe well enough the couetousnes, ambition, & cruell mind which is in him and in the rest of that stocke, which haue bin the causes of most greuous troubles in the Realme of Fraunce▪ since that tyme that they haue borne any rule.
Therfore the Cardinall left nothing vndone that might hinder peace, as may appeare by hys letters which by chaunce came to our handes. Moreouer bicause the Germanes (which came to ayde them vnder the conducte and charge of the Rkendolph & the Rheingraue) vnderstanding some what of our cause, refused to warre against vs, they deuysed a new prac∣tise, and brought the King and Quene into their Army, to couller hereby al that they had done. Neither do they omit any subtiltie or crafte to allure straungers to ayde them: and yet notwithstanding they deryde and scorne the Germanes and their Religion, as though they for the gredines of money came into Fraunce to subuert and o∣uerthrow the Gospel which before in their owne coun∣trey they had defended with perill of their lyues, And they impudently lyed and fained vnto them to bring the confession of Ausburge into France: which they said they had done long a go, if so be I had not bin a let vnto them. Besides these thinges they obiect against me & mine most shameful slaunders, saying that, we are Rebelles, destroyers of the worshippe of GOD, vsurpers of the Kinges Crowne, possessores of the Kinges Cities, and treasure, Heretiques, Anabaptistes, & Atheictes, without any Religion or faith. With these and diuers other like crimes they do so fasty sclaunder vs, that we appeale to the consciences of our aduersaries, if they haue any con∣science at all. But by the grace of God we haue a firme and sure testimony of our Religion, that is to saye, the confession of the reformed Churches, so euidently decla∣red and offered to the King, to the Quéene, to the Kinge of Nauar, to the Princes the Kinges kinsmen, and to al the kinges Counsaile, as they can testify which now go about to suppresse the same, and sealed with my hand & with the handes of a great nomber besides, which also we doubt not to seale with our own bloud. The which,
as it ought o stoppe the aduersaries mouth, so also it ought to soppe their eares to whom our aduersaries are not afeard to sclaunder and backebyte vs. But and if the life and manners of both partes, if the effects of our Religion be compared with our aduersa∣ries, although I will not altogether excuse our selues frō many sins, yet notwithstanding this I say: that our life, by he grace of god, is not defiled with blasphemies, wt whordome, with impieties, & with horrible lustes a∣gainst nature, as the life of many of our aduersaries is, which notwithstanding call them selues Catholiques, & glory in those filthy crimes. As for Heresie, and Anabap∣tisme, we are so farre from them, as it is manifest that our aduersaries are giltie in them, and haue ben by vs proued so to be. Can they cléere them selues of Anabap∣tisme, which haue rebaptized those infants that were baptized in the reformed Church, which is an herisie in all times reprobaled, and condemned also by the De∣crees, and constitutions of Counselles? And as for the worship of God we haue not abolished the same, for the defence whereof we are ready to spend our liues, desi∣ring uothing more than to haue the same purged in the Realme of Fraunce, by the puritie and truth of the Gos∣pell from so many superstitions: and also that it would please God to illuminate our King with the pure know ledge of his word, to blesse the Scepter of his youth, and also to deliuer him from all corrupt Tutors & masters. But how shamefull a thing is this, for the Cardinall of Loraine to make as though he loued the confession of Ausburge, the which he vtterly refused to allow in the disputation of Possi. And it may appeare what loue hée and the rest of them beare toward that confession, by y• horrible murther committed at Vssi. As for the Cities which they say we possesse, they haue not hitherto diso∣beyed the kyng, neyther will they hereafter, so long as
they obey my commaundements. And whereas they o∣bey not our aduersaries, the cause is, least they being at their commaundement should be vtterly destroyed. The Kynges money also is kept from their hands, least they hauing the same, should spend it vppon warre a∣gainst the Kyngs subiectes. But whereas they say that I go about to vsurpe the Crowne of : acti∣ons of my life past, frée from ambition and , and my handes pure from innocent bloud, do so playnely proue this to be a false lie, that I am fully per∣swaded, that no man of sound iudgement will approue the same. When as ou the contrary par al men know, by what and how many meanes my aduersaries haue gone about to trouble and molest al the whole Realme, by ambition and couetousnes: and haue so inriched thē∣selues, that they haue made a plaine and ready way to et the Crowne. To put away the suspicion whereof they can neuer bring sufficient reasons, the effectes of their desires being so manifest, the euents also so la∣mentable, that they shall neuer be able by any maner of meanes to hide them. All men sée, since the time that they haue had the gouernement in their handes, they haue brought the Realme into so great troubles, that it was neuer in so miserable an estate, being brought all most to ruine & extreame destruction: the King brought into great debt, and his subiect oppressed with tributs and customes. There is yet another exquisit lie deuised by the same Cardinall: For he is not afeard to giue out to diuers straungers by his letters, that the Kyng and Quéen hauing established and confirmed the assurance of the common faith, do giue pardon to all thse that will put of their Armour, go home to their owne hou∣ses, and liue there without offence. But none of al these thinges are contayned and set downe in the forme of a∣ny Edict or Rescript: for they are but deceitfull baites
and snares to intangle men with all, and so are they to be counted. Dayly many men are both cast into prison and also put to death, and that for no other fault, but on∣ly because they professed the reformed Religion, which they make The cause of Sedition, of Conspiracie, of vnlaw∣full assemblies, and of the breaking both of Gods lawe and mans lawe. And being not contented with so great bloud shed, knowing that many haue escaped the crueltie of their Decrées: they haue caused the Bishoppes & their Popish officers, to publish and thunder out Excommu∣nications, giuing charge that they which knew any of the Kynges officers, which came either to the publique or priuate sermons of the reformed Churches, to the ad∣ministration of the Lordes Supper, to their prayers, or to any other rite or ceremony, contrary to the church of Roome: or if they knew any that did either eate or drinke with those preachers, that they should within three dayes after disclose their names. And of late also they haue published a Decrée, In the which they com∣maunded and do commaund▪ That so many as are come from Orleans, Lions, Burges, Roane, Poictiers, and from o∣ther Cities which are kept at my commaundement, to Paris, and that all men or women of the reformed Re∣ligion, should be taken and punished accordinge to the forme of the Edict, what Priuiledge soeuer to the con∣trary they were able to bring. Whereuppon many were taken by the force of those decrées & put to death, which came home to their houses vppon trust of the Kyngs Letters of warrant. Whereby it may euident∣ly appeare, how falsely they haue made report to Prin∣ces of other Nations of the securitie that men should haue, if so be vppon trust thei would put them selues in their handes. And because certaine Princes knowing the goodnes of our cause, and the vniust dealing of our aduersaries,
haue sent vnto mee aide to auoyde those miserable cala∣mities at hand, they make exclamation, to discredit me and my cause, that I bring forreyne ayd and power in∣to the Realme. But what I dyd before I tooke thys re∣medie in hande, many Princes know, whom I entrea∣ted to be meanes to make a pacification, and who cā te∣stifie that their Legates were hindered herein. Also, séeing they haue replenished the whole Realme with straungers, as with Spaniardes, Switzers, Germanes, and with Italians, to the ende they might execute their tyrā∣nie: how shamelesse be they to reproche and discredite me in saying that I bring forreyn power into ye realm? And I protest, that as I was constrained to take this re∣medie in hand, so I haue determined euer hereafter, to séeke by all lawfull meanes and wayes, to deliuer the Church of God, the King, the Countrey, and my self frō this oppression. But whereas they haue euery where published abroade the Decrée of rebellion against me and myne, which they haue caused to bée made, sure cause not knowne nor heard, by certayne seditiouse persones, which displacing certayne good men out of their roomes, take vpon them the name, and countenance of Senatours of Paris: I haue appealed from them, and shewed in wri ting the causes of my appeale. And to the ende their fraude and deceit may appeare the more impudent, they haue exempted me from the number of those whom fal∣sly they cal rebelles. Howbeit, if this good and iust cause may be called rebellion, I my selfe aboue all the reste, ought to be burthened with the same: séeing that I ac∣count my selfe to be their Captayne, and haue taken v∣pon me the defence of that cause, & haue called those that attende vpon me, to shewe their obedience to the King, at the commaundement of the Queene, and doo as yet retayne them with me to this ende. And I affirme, that
there can be greater iniury done vnto me, than to be se∣parated from so honest and faithfull a company, in whō I do note so great fidelitie and obedience toward ye king in this so present a necessitie, that I think that the same their dutifull obedience wilbe commended amonge all posterities for euer. This therefore is the summe of those things, which I haue don vnto this day, the which I haue with great simplicitie, and without all cooller de∣clared. And I pray all those that loue the trueth, moste earnestly, which shall reade this writing, that they will vprightly and without all preiudice waigh the matter: and to Iudge not by the words, but by the actions. God for his mercies sake, order and direct the whole matter to the glory of his name, to the peace of the Church▪ to ye tranquillitie of the Realme, & to the confusion of those his enimies, which are the authours of these troubles. This writing being published abroad, and all maner of warlike prouision being prepared, the Prince of Con∣de (as we sayde before) remoued with his armie from Orleans, and conducted the same by the Countrey of Be∣ausse toward Paris. And as hée went, hée besieged a town called Pluiers, which was kept with seuen Enseignes of footemen, and at the length, when hee had sore batte∣red the same with his ordinaunce, he had it deliuered vp vnto him. Then he tooke twoo of their principall Cap∣taines, and caused them to be put to death, as for the reste of the common soldiers he spared them. After this many Townes yéelded vnto him, as Escampes, la Ferte, Dordan, and others, which hée receyued into his seruice vpon trust. Also he minded to besiege the Citie of Cor∣beil, which the Guises kept and mayntayned with a great garrison of souldiours. This Citie is of great forte, br∣dering vpon the riuer of Sein, by which ryuer great pro∣uision and store of vittailes, were caryed to Paris.
And while he was making al things ready for the siege, word was brought vnto him of the death of his brother the King of Nauar. Whose office of Uiceroy, he percey∣uing that he ought to haue by order during this tyme of the Kings minoritie, and then hoping to moderate and end al things by peace, he left of his purpose of besieging Corbei and comming néerer Paris he pitched his campe at Arcel▪ the first day of Decēber. Therfore the Queen sending letters vnto him, desired to conferre and talke with him: not purposing neuerthelesse (as the euent de∣clared) to conclude concorde and peace, but onely to de∣lay and differre the time, and to diminishe the force of ye Prince of Conde his armye, vntill the armies came out of Spayne and Gascoyne, which were dayly looked for: this was done by the subtill practises of the Guises. But be∣cause the Prince of Conde was not at that tyme very well at ease, the Admirall went firste to talke with the Quéene, passing ouer the ryuer of Seyn by the port An∣gloyse. In the meane tyme the Constable came to the Prince of Conde for a pledge. But this iourney was in vayne, the Quéene saying, that she would neuer agrée, that the reformed Religion should be vsed in any parte of the Realme. Then was the parley appointed againe in a more conuenient place, éere vnto the suburbes of S. Mrceau, in a certayne Mill. At which méeting, the Prince of Conde propounded these condicions of peace: First, that the vse of the reformed religion might be frée in those Cities, in the which it was before the warre be∣gan: and that the faithful might liue peaceably in other places, and that they might goe vnto such Townes, as they knew the reformed Religion to bée vsed in: also, that there might be diligent héed taken, that they sustai∣ned no manner of perill for enioying the benefite of re∣ligion. Secondly, that it might be lawfull for all men of the reformed Religion, to enioy their goods, offices, &
dignities, but specially their religion in what part of the Realme soeuer they dwelt: and that all sentences and iudgements of any Court pronounced against them for religion be voyd and of none effect: that they which for religions sake were fled the realme, or hauing before fled were now come home againe, might enioye y• same benefite, and might haue leaue at their retourne to en∣ioy all that they had: that euery Noble man might haue libertie to vse the reformed Religion in his house: and also that it might be lawfull for euery one of the Kings Counsell to haue the same religion in or about ye Court, so long as he shall there giue his attendance. Thirdly, that the King himselfe might ratefie and allow y• warre which they had mayntayned, and what soeuer they had spent of the Kings money to mayntayne the same: that there might be a cōmon and generall Counsell appoin∣ted in some conuenient place within this six monethes, in the which neyther the Pope, nor any other for hym might beare any rule: Or, if it might not be generall: yt then it might onely consist of our countrey men, leaue being graunted to euery one to come thyther, that both armies whether they were domesticall or forreyne, might depart home, euery man to his owne house: and that it would please the King to account the Prince of Conde his army, as his owne, the which he protested hée gathered togyther to serue and obeye him: And finally, that for the establishing of this concord, it would please the King and Quéene to gyue their fayth, and that eue∣ry one of the Kings Counsell, and Gouernour of any Prouince within the Realme, might in lyke manner sweare to obserue and kéepe this peace. These were the special condicions which the Prince of Conde required, which were for certayne dayes sent abroad into diuers places, the Guises for the nonce prac∣tising
with the Quéen subtillie, so to doo, that they might haue the better hope of the ayde which was comminge, and also that the Prince of Conde beginning now in the winter, might fall into greater straytes. For the Duke of Guise went about at no time to séeke peace & concord, fully perswading and assuring himselfe to haue the vic∣torie of the Prince of Conde and his. And herevpon it is reported that the Duke of Guise sayd to the Quéen whē shée went about to make peace, If I thought that you would make any certayne and firme pacification with the Prince of Conde, I would neuer agree to the same. To the which the Quéene made aunswere agayne, that shée ne∣uer ment it. This therefore was the aunswer that was made in the kings name, to the peticions of the Prince of Con∣de. First, the libertie of religiō was graunted, but with so many exceptions, that it was no libertie at all. For the king denyed any of his Counsell to vse the reformed religion in his Court: hée depriued the Cities of warre which were in the vtmost partes of the Realme, of the benefite of the Edict: among which also hée put in Lions, being no citie of warre: Hée also exempted Paris, & the whole Territory of the same, from the vse of the refor∣med Religion: commaunding the armye of the Prince of Conde to breake vp, and to depart home, but the Army of the Duke of Guise, which was called the Kings power, to remayne at the kinges pleasure as it was hée denyed also leaue, for those that had forsaken the Realme to come home agayne, hauing not already enioyed that benefite: Hée would not haue the Decrées and sentences pronounced, to bée quite frustrated, but for a tyme suspended: He denyed any Protestantes too enioye his office, sauing the Prince of Conde: And final∣ly, he refused to allow that expence of his money vppon the warre.
Uppon this answere, the Prince of Conde was out of all hope to haue peace. The Guise would not go out of the Citie of Paris, mynding by delay to weaken the pow er of the Prince of Conde. While these thinges had this successe on both partes, the Guises, because they would loose no time, went about to make Monsieur Genly, a Noble man, whose Brother was Monsieur de Iuoy (which had forsaken the Prince of Conde, after the yéel∣ding vp of Burges) to take their part also. Monsieur Gen∣ly therfore, being earnestly trauailed withall, fell from the Prince of Conde to the contrary part, and was re∣ceiued into Paris: Whose departure made the Prince of Conde to alter his former purpose, because he knew that he being one that had knowne al his secret and pri∣uie Counsel, would now bewray the same to the Guises.The Prince of Conde remoued from Paris to Ioyne to him the Englishmē So that when he should haue approched néerer Paris, & haue besieged the Citie, he altered his purpose, and re∣mouing his Campe, went from Paris with his whole power, going through Normandy, myndinge to ioyne him selfe to the English men, who were now come to the Hauen le Grace, being a Citie which bordered vppon the sea coast: that then he might be the better able to ioyne battayle with the Guises. IN the meane time there came Armies of Souldi ers out of Gascoyne and Spaine to aide the Guises: the com ming of these men grealy incouraged the Guises, for they were in number xxxii. Ensignes of tall and well expe∣riencedThe Duke of Guise se keth to stay the Prince of Conde frō ioyninge himselfe with the Englishmē souldiers. Therefore now he fully determined to pursue the Prince of Conde, before he ioyned vnto his Armie the English men, which were sent, with great stoore of money also to aide him, by the Quéene of Eng∣land, least by the comming of that money he shoulde bée greatly holpen to mayntaine warre: for he hoped that the Germanes at length, wanting their paye (because the Prince was bare of money) wold come vnto him. Ther
fore to kéepe the Prince of Conde and the English men a∣sunder, the Duke of Guise remoued with his whole Ar∣mie and power from Paris, and making great hast hée come to a towne in Normandy, which is called the Te∣ritory or playn of Dreux, where also the Prince of Con∣de stayed, and both Armies pitched their Campes with in two French Leagues, one of another. The Guise had chosen a very conuenient place to incampe hym selue on, both for the néerenes of the towne of Dreux, which was kept with their Garrisons, and also because there were villages and woddes hard by them, to flée vnto if néede were. Betwéene both the Armies there ran a pleasant long playne, hauing but a little valley only, which lay on the side of them. THE PRINCE OF CONDE, when he sawe that his enemies were approched so néere, after consultati∣on with his fellowes, determined to ioyne battayle with them, leauing the euent to the prouidence of God. Notwithstanding the Duke of Guise had a great num∣ber of footemen more on his part than the Prince of Conde had: For he had XXVI. thousand footemen, where as the other had scarcely XI. thousand footemen. But of horsemen the Prince of Conde had IIII. thousand, where as the Duke of Guise had but III. thousand. THE Prince of Conde intending to ioyne battayle with his enemies, earely in the morning by the breakeAnno 1572 Decem. 19. of the daye, set his souldiers in their arraye: the horse∣men in the first front, which was deuided into diuers rankes: In the first ranke or vauntgard he placed Mon∣sieur Cure with a foure square troupe of shot on horse, contayning sixe Cornets, vppon eche side of the which vauntgard, were two winges of Launces, one wing of Frenchmen vnder the charge of Monsieur Moue, and Monsieur Auerill, and the other wing of Germanes. After
the French winge, which was vppon the left hand of the battaile, came the Prince of Conde and Rochfo∣caut, with a Troupe of Launces, to the number of 230.If that (ge tle Reader) thou loke in the prin∣ted battai∣les, and de∣scriptions of the skir∣mishes of the Ciuill warres of Fraunce, this shalbe much more plaine vnto thee: for in them thou shalt haue a liuely vew. After the second wing came the Prince of Porcian, and the Admirall, hauing the charge of two Giddons of Launces, to the number of 120. Then followed them a very strong square battaile of footemen Germanes, con∣tayning twelue Ensignes: hauing a little before them 500. shot on horse. Then was there a very great Squa∣dron of Frenchmen, contayning 23. Ensignes, placed to kéepe the great Ordinance, which were also garded with a wing of horsemen Germanes, on eyther side. And thus the Prince of Conde marched forward with his whole Armie, to encounter with his enemie: who also had his men in a readinesse. First the Guise with a very huge Troupe of Launces garded the corner or poynt of the Squadron of the first Armie, which was on his right hand, contayning fourtene Ensignes of footemen Spa∣niardes, and the poynt of the second Squadron, which was on his left hand; contayning 22. Ensignes of tall Frenchmen, hauing planted before them against the enemie 14. feeld péeces of Ordinance. Then the Mar∣shal of Santandre hauing sixe Giddons of Launces, came with the poynt of the third Squadron, which contay∣ned a seuen Ensignes of footemen Germanes: At the o∣ther poynt of the which Germanes there were also fiue Giddons of horsemen, vnder ye charge of Monsieur Dan uille. Betwéene which fiue Giddons and the 12. Giddōs of the Constable, were placed two great Squadrons, the one contayning 22. Ensignes of footemen Switzers, ha∣uing planted before them eight péeces of Ordinaunce, & the other contayning 17. Ensignes of Brittons & French men. So that in all on the Guises part there were fyue Squadrons of foote men. Euery Squadron is a battaile in proporcion foure square: so that betwéene euery
Squadron from poynt to poynt, sauing betwéene the two last, there were Giddons of horsemen at Armes, to gard them. This battayle had his proporcion in length: but the Battayle of the Prince of Conde not so much in length, but more in breadth. Whereuppon against the Constable, the Admirall was opposite at one end, against Danuille, the Prince of Conde: but against the other end, which was the first Army, where the Guise, and the Marshall of Santandre were, there was none opposite. The Armies on both parts being placed as you heare, the Prince of Cōde, first of all commaunded his whole Armie to make their prayers vnto God, the which be∣ing done, he roade round about the Army, exhorted his souldiers to be of good courage, and then commaunded to sound the Trompet to battayle. Then Monsieur Curee, Captain of the vaunfgard, notThe first battaile in the which the Consta ble was ta∣ken, and the Swisers dispersed and slaine. staying till the great peeces, which were bent against him were discharged, with the rest of his troupe dis∣charged his shot at the Swisers▪ after whom followed the Prince of Conde, and at the first encounter so charged the horsemen of the Swisers (whereof Monsieur Danuille had the conduct) that he both put them to the chase, and also brake into the squadron of the Swisers: Rochfoucant in the meane tyme standing stil, and keping his ray. At the first the Swisers, that were the footemen, both by the force of the great gunnes, and also by their owne artil∣lery, withstoode the first charge giuen by the Prince: notwithstanding by the often shot discharged by ye hors∣men they were constrayned to breake their arraye and to retire before the Launces, who also brake vppon thē, and caused them to forsake their great ordinance: the Princes souldiers sleying and killing so much as possi∣bly they could. The Admirall also preuailed almost no lesse against the Constable: and hauinge with him the
troupes of the Germanes; they skirmished with the horse men of Monsieur Danuill, which came againe to rescue the Constable, and greately anoyed them with the hayle of their shot. The Prince of Conde hauing destroied and put to flight the Swisers, encountered then with the next Army of french men, and breakinge their ray, ouer ran them and put them to flight. In the meane tyme there was a sore battaile betwene the Admirall and the Con∣stable, both partes quighting themselues, very valeant∣ly. Notwithstanding the Constables side being not able to make their part good, the Constable himself also being sore wounded in the head with an arming swerd, and in other partes of the body with diuers shot, and taken in plaine fight, they fled away, the Prince and the Admi∣rall, pursuing the chase. The Prince hauing so good successe, had good hope to haue the victori, for the greatest part of the enimies ar∣my, was eyther slaine or put to flight, the great gunnes belongyng to the second Army taken, and the Constable also as is a foresaid. The horsemen of the Prince of Condes parte, beingThe second battaile. occupied, almost euerye one, in pursuinge the enemye, the Armies of the Germane and French footemen of the Princes side lay open & naked before the Guise & Mon∣sieur Danuille. The which when Monsieur Danuille per∣ceyued, he vaunced all the power he was able to make thither ward, of whose cōming, so sone as the Germanes were ware, they disordred themselues and fled to a vil∣lage hard by called Bleinuill, without any maner of resis∣tance. Then the Princes armye of French footemen being left alone, a very great troupe of horsemen charged thēThe third battaile. sore: and being discouraged and made a feard euen at the first onset, they turned all their backes and fled. Where fore a great nomber of them were slaine in chase: wyth
losse of a fewe of the Guis horsemen only. Thus the Princes footemen being disperf & slayne, the Guises by the mutable chaunce of war, had good hope to foyle the Prince of Conde. For almost all the horse∣men of the Prince of Condes side were wholy occupyed in chasing and killing the remnante of the Switsers and Frenchmē: Whereby also it must néedes be yt they were greatly disordered and out of ray. Wherefore MonsieurThe Prince of Conde taken priso∣ner. Danuille the Constables Sonne, aduaunced his power of horsemen, to encounter with the Prince of Conde & the rest. Who being vnable so match with their enemies be gan to flée, & the other followed the chase. And ye Prince himselfe séeking to escape through a wood hard by, had his horse slaine vnder him with a shot: and for lacke of a fresh horse to shift him, he fell into the handes of Mon∣sieur Danuille, and was taken prisoner. The Admirall séeinge in euery place his men fléeinge a∣way, (ye Germane horsemē also fléeing by hapes hard by, according to their maner, to charge their gunnes, & thenThe fourth battaile. to return againe with one force to anoy the enemy: the which maner of fight, bycause many vnderstoode not, & suspecting that the Germanes fled, were afrayde:) and perceyuing also that they were quight discouraged by∣cause the Prince of Conde was taken, was much trou∣bled and greued in mind. He saw also to his great grief, thrée great troupes of horsemen, which the Guises, very pollitiquely and prudently had reseruid euen till the ve∣ry pinch came, (in ye which was the Marshall of Santan∣dre, Duke Daumale, Monsieur Niuene and other noble men which he spedily dispatched to the chase, he himself tarying still behind to sée the end: the Admirall, I saye, séeinge these thinges made hast out of hand to recouer the Germane and French horsmen, and when the French men saw that the Germanes returned out of the woode a∣gaine in their array with their Harguebutes charged,
they receyued such courage and boldnes, that valeantly together they bid battayle to their enemies again: both partes fighting with lyke courage: Notwithstandinge the Guises part reculed by little and little: and ye battaile had bin more whot, (the minds of the Princes souldiers being fierce,) if so be the night had not caused the weried souldiers to stay and cease. Therefore the retract was blowne on both partes▪ and both armies retyred to their campes. The Admirall for want of horses, left behynde him fower fielde péeces. In this last battaile, the Marshal Santandre was taken, and being wounded in the head with a shot dyed in the fielde, and was dispoyled: this man was of very wicked disposition, and the cause of the troubles of Fraunce. In this battaile also were slain Monsieur Mōbrun the Con∣stables Sonne, Monsieur Piennes, Moncharne, and one of the Guises called the Graund prior: ther were sore woun∣ded the two Brosses, Monsieur Giury, Annebauld, and di∣uers others which notwithstanding lyued: But D'au∣mall, and the Duke of Neuers, being sore wounded dyed, and many others which were wounded and slayne: Ma∣ny also noble men that were Papistes were taken pry∣soners, as the Lord Rotchford, Beauuais, & diuers other Gentlemen to the nomber of 100. Of the Protestants side, Monsieur de Mouy, and diuers other Noblemen, and Captaines were eyther taken or slaine. God did so moderate this great battaile, that neither part could be saide eyther to conquere, or to be conquered: thus orde∣red and appointed by God, lest so great a Kingdome de∣nided in it selfe, should come to vtter ruine and destruc∣tion. The Prince of Conde also the fator and defender of the cause of the faithful, was taken. And of the papistes, the Constable was taken and the Marshall of Santandre slayne. And as of the Papistes side many Swisers and
Frenchmen were slayne, so many Protestantes were slayne also by the Papistes. The greater number of horsemen were slayne by the Guises part, and of 22. En∣signes, there were but a few left. But for all this, the Prince of Conde found more lacke of his men though they were the smaller number than did the Guise. THE Admirall, who now in the absence of the Prince of Conde had the whole gouernment of the Pro∣testāts, was very carefull for the preseruation of his Armie. Therfore when he had gathered together so much as he could, the remaynder of his horsemen and footemen, and had increased and furnished his armie a∣gaine, which was not a little weakened by the losse of the footemen, he came to Orleans, differring his purpose to ioyne with the Englishmen because it was now winter vntill a more conuenient time. And the Constable was also brought with the rest of the Captiues to Orleans.
The syxt Booke of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the common wealth of Fraunce vnder the Raigne of Charles the ninth. THE Duke of Guise mynding to repayer his decay∣ed armie, came with the same to Paris, & then appoynted new troupes of horsemen, new Cap∣taynes also in the stéede of such as were wanting, with a great number of common souldiers. And to the end he might make the Kyng and the people thinke the losse of his men to be the lesse, he sayd that he had gotten the victory: and hoping to drawe many in these troublesome times from the Prince of Condes part, he brought to passe that there was an Edict made and published in the Kynges name, promising vnto thē peace and securitie which had and would forsake the Admirall and come vnto him. The Edict was to this effect. The Kyng being moued, both with the due ad∣uiseThe Kings Edict. and counsayle of his Counsaylers and also by his inclinable and naturall goodnes hath sought euen vntill this day, all meanes & wayes possible to appease these troubles in his Realme, and to bring his subiectes to their accustomed peace and tranquillitie: and to bring to passe that they which without his commaundement
haue rashly put them selues in Armes, might vnarme them selues againe. The which his Maiesties good will he hath declared by many tokens, writing Letters to to all places of his Realme, and séeking a reconciliatiō againe by parleys and conference at sundry times with the chiefest of their Captaines: the which, touching di∣uers both with remorse of their offences, and with the loue and desire of obedience which they owe vnto their naturall Prince, hath done some good, insomuch that many haue retourned from their wicked purpose, and thewed themselues since, good and faithfull subiectes. Yet notwithstanding that remedy could not so much preuaile as he hoped for: albeit he left nothing vndone that might preserue them, and that might bring peace and concord, the Quéene his mother also, with certaine of the Princes that were of Royall bloud, and indued with no lesse good wil riding to and fro at sundry times, to conferre and talke with them, and to declare vnto them her true intent and meaning, to bring them into her fauour againe by pardoning their offences. But they continuing still in their former euell enterprise, God would haue the matter come to the very extreame and last remedy, that is to say, by bidding battayle a∣gainst those which haue so obstinatly gone forward: the triumphant victory wherof, it hath pleased the same most holy and righteous god to giue vnto him, by which he hoped to receiue that fruite, which so greatly a long time he had wished for, namely, their retourne and ac∣knowledging of their faultes, which had erred and gone astraye: at which time they shall vnderstand, that al∣though their offences are great, yet he is ready to im∣brace them with the armes of mercy, and to receiue thē into his fauour againe: for the which cause he thought good to signifie the same to all men. And because he desi∣reth nothing more than the reconciliation of his sub∣iects,
and would vse this victory to the Glory of God, & to the peace and tranquillitie of the Realme, & to shewe his naturall clemency and goodnes in the beginning of his raigne: he willeth and cōmaundeth all his subiects what condition, state, or degrée soeuer they be of, which without his will and commaundement, haue put them selues in Armour, taken Cities, incamped them selues against him, haue bene at any battayle or skirmish, or had done any other thing against him, to vnarme them selues againe, to leaue those places and assemblies, to shew their obedience, and to renounce their company & fellowship, In so doing they shall sustayne neyther losse nor perill, in body or goodes, for bearing Armour, nor for their conscience, what soeuer hath bene heretofore decréed notwithstanding: but shall be receiued with all their families into his fauour and protection. So that, euer hereafter they shall liue obediently and quietly, Catholiquely, and without offence. And vppon this conditi∣on also, that they shall within sixtene dayes after the publication of these Letters, put of their armoure, and depart from those places and assemblies prohibited and forbidden. Whatsoeuer he be that shall do otherwise, & shal fauour, support, and mayntayne his obstinate sub∣iectes, he straytely chargeth and commaundeth his Magistrates and officers, seuerally to execute vppon hym such punishmentes as by the Lawes are appoyn∣ted. ¶ The Duke of Guise vsed these letters, which were published vnder the Kynges name, to the intent hée might entangle and snare his enemies by all manner of meanes possible. After the besieging of Burges, the Duke of Nemours with certaine troupes of horsemen, came at the cōman∣dement of the Duke of Guise, into Burgundy, that ioyning
the inhabitantes of Dolpheny and of Auernois with Monsieur Tauuanes, Liefetenant of Burgundy, he might assay to winne Lions, and Dolpheny. And at the very first assay, he wan Vienna, a noble Citie néere vnto the Rosne,Nemours winneth Vienna. and bordering also vpon Lions, by the meanes of the pa pistes which were in the towne. The souldiours were cōducted by Monsieur Mogeron, who, after the surrender of the Towne, committed great murder and rapine. The losse of Vienna was very hurtful to Lions, ye passage being shut vp into Dolpheny and Languedoc. Then Ne∣mours picking out so many souldiours out of his owne men, and out of the Burgundians, and Indwellers of Au∣uergnois, and of Forest as would make an army, remo∣ued with the same néere Lions, to besiege the Citie. The Liefetenant of Lions (as we sayd before) was MonsieurSoubize Liefetenāt of Lions. Soubize, a very wyse man, who with great diligence, prosperously prouided for the fortyfying of the Citie. Notwithstanding Nemours dyd not incampe him selfe hard by the Citie after the manner of besieging: but ta∣king the suburbes and places bordering thereaboutes, sought to kéepe them from vittailes and other necessary prouision: Notwithstanding the Townes men diuers tymes brake forth vpon the enemie, and lightly skirmi∣shed with them. But for all this, the enemie at the length was in hope to winne the Citie: yet their hope was frustrated to their owne dammage and hurt. There came into the handes of Nemours a certayne inhabitant of Lions, of a reasonable good wit, and at that time, of some estimati∣on and countenance. This man declared vnto Nemours certayne meanes and wayes to obtayne Lions: promi∣sing vnto him, that if he might be sent thither, he would prepare and make an easie enterance for him into the Citie: For (sayeth he) I when I am in Lions, am appoin∣ted to watche and kéepe the citie, ioyning diuers other of
the Garrison with me, can open the Gate vnto you, and can let in such a sufficient multitude of souldiers, as cō∣ming vnlooked for, may easely take the Citie: Onely set me at libertie and gyue me leaue to goe into the citie, & gyue me my reward when I haue brought it to passe. Nemours tooke his offer, and after fayre promises made hée set him frée, and bad him go to Lions. Hée, when hée was come into the Citie, declared the whole matter toNemours deceiued of his purpose Monsieur Soubize, gouernour of the citie: who cōman∣ded the man to kéepe the matter secrete, and also to flat∣ter Nemours in hope thereof still. Therefore he appoin∣ted Nemours the tyme and place, where and when hée should come to the Citie: watch wordes were giuen: and the matter was so appointed, that Nemours had great hope to haue his purpose. Wherevpon he commaunded a great number of harquebusiers and certayne troupes of horsemen, when the tyme was come, to go before, and hée himselfe followed after with his whole army. In the meane time Monsier Soubize had very wel for∣tified the Citie in euery place and corner: the which be∣ing done, he commaunded him to go toe the Gate of the citie, whom Nemours had put in trust for the treason, & the watchmen about the gate to be very hush and silent without any manner of noyse, as if they were a sléepe: and then to giue the watchword. The souldiours of Ne∣mours hearing the watchword, came with all spéed, and were let into the Citie: And whē thrée hundred of them or there abouts were entered, the warders of the gate, perceyuing that the whole army of the enimies follow∣ed after a pace, they discharged with all spéede a great péece of Ordinance against those that were without. Whereby Nemours perceyuing that he was betrayed, fled backe agayne with the reste of his armye so fast as hée conld: then the Townesmen fell vpon those that were entered the Citie, and slew them, very fewe esca∣ping
their handes. After this, Nemours went his way, and would neuer more come so néere Lions to besiege the same. Notwithstanding they had after this certayn small skirmishes betwéene them. Agaynst the comming of Nemours, Mōsier des Adretz had gathered togither out of all Dolpheny, so many soul∣diours as he could, to helpe the men of Lions, and he con∣ducted 1500. footemen, with a very small troupe of horsemen. The reporte hereof caused Nemours to take a newe deuise in hande: and because he vnderstoode that the army of footemen of Monsieur des Adretz, wanted horsemen to garde and defend them, hée determined to set vpon him with his horsemen. Wherefore, not farre from Beaupere he met with Monsieur des Adretz and his men: and skirmishing with them, troubled them sore, & had slain a great nomber of them, if so be both the opor∣tunity of the place, & also the mālines of M. de Adretz, in conducting his mē, had not holpen thē. So yt notwith∣standing the greatest part escaped & few were lacking. Notwithstandinge for this cause the inhabitants from Vienna all a long the ryuer Rosne, were greatly a∣feard: and greatly also the newes hereof dismaied Tur∣non, although it was strongly fortified with Garrisons of Souldiers. And about this tyme the inhabitantes of Nonay sought to winne the Citie of Sanstephen, beinge a very Noble and famouse Citie in the Territory of Viuaretz: and this was the occasion: there is in the coun∣trey of Forrest a Citie called Sanstephen, nere vnto No∣nay, where dyuers kindes of weapons and artillery (the place being very conuenient for the same) are made by Copper Smithes. of which there are there great store.The win∣ning of Sanste∣phen and Nonays. The men of Nonay, being desierouse both to haue wea∣pones, and also the spoyle of the City, which was of rea∣sonable wealth, by the aduise and counsayle of their go∣uernour, they intended to winne the same: Imageninge
that by reason of the nearenes of Nemours, and of Mon∣sieur Caumont, a man of greate power in that Region, and of diuers other noblemen which dwelt about them, they were secure and careles, and might therefore more easely be opprest. And in déed it came to passe according to their imagination. For the greatest part of souldiers, and almost al the young men and boyes in the Towne, hauinge the gouernour of the Towne their Captaine, went out of Nonay: and trauailing all the nighte wyth great spede, through woodes and secret places, were ve∣ry early at the Citie of Sainstephen. And so soone as the Porters and Warders of the gates had carelesly, suspecting nothing lesse thā the comming of the enemie, opened the gates of the Citie, they vio∣lently rushed in, and oppressed and slew a great number of the Townesmen, as they were making of them rea∣dy to arme and defend them selues. Their purpose was to retourne back agayne to Nonay with as much spéede as possibly they could, when they had gotten them ar∣mour and weapons and taken the spoyle of the Citie. But when by the example of their Gouernour, the sol∣diours gaue themselues to spoyling of houses, and spent the time in vayne vppon dalliance with women, they gaue great occasion o Monsure Caumout, which was not farre from them to worke their destruction. For he be∣ing certified of their delay and securitie, gathered togy∣ther by and by so great a multitude as he could from the places: thereaboutes, alarme being sounded in euery streat and corner. Therefore the men of Nonay béeing busied in their pray, in so much that they neyther remē∣bered to departe, nor yit suspected the comming of their enemies in so great number, were sodeynly hemde in with a great number of souldiours which came vnder the charge of Monsieur Caumout: and falling into their handes, were slayn for the most part of them with their
Gouernour, and the rest fled. And when Monsieur Caumont vnderstood the mat∣ter, hée marched with his army, taking with him certein fielde péeces, towards Nonay, and finding the same voyd of any garrison, and greatly amased with much feare & Nonay cru∣elly spoiled grief: after hée had battered the walles, at the length, tooke the Citie. And then shewed extréeme crueltie, kil∣ling rashly both Papist and Protestant togyther, with women also and children: which murther most cruelly continued for the space of two dayes. But when it was reported that Monsieur des Adretz was comming by Turnon, with a very great hoaste, Monsieur Caumont re∣moued in the night: and causing great silēce to be kept throughout all his armye, he stale away secretly. And what soeuer the souldiour at his departure could not carry away, that hee spoyled, as corne and wyne, & such like, casting the corne abroad in the streates, knockinge out the heades of Toonnes of wyne, and setting fier on diuers places of the Citie. I my selfe (which haue writ∣ten these things) am also an eye witnesse of this horri∣ble crueltie, being present at the same, and carying yet, and shall do while I liue, certayne markes by woundes in my body, to remember the same. Nonay being desolated with this horrible murther, Monsieur Sainmartin a Captaine, Liefetenant of the Region of Viuaretz, came within few dayes after with a garrison of souldiers, and repayred the broken walls, and fortified the same so well as hée could. Monsieur des Adretz hauing gathered an army, ente∣red into consultaciō about the besieging of Vienna, whe∣ther Nemours was come with the greatest part of hys army: and remoued his army which hée had taken out of Dolpheny and Languedoc, to Uienna, myndinge to be∣siege a citie in ye vtmost partes of Viuaretz called Saincte Columbe, but he bare at that time a false and trayterouse
mynde, as experience afterward declared. Therefore after certaine small skirmishes, they ente∣red into parley with Nemours: and Monsieur des Adretz was let into Uienna: and comming out from thence a∣gayn, shewed manifest tokens that his mind was alte∣red. And he agréed wt Nemours to yéelde vnto him forth∣with Roman and Ualentia cities of Dolpheny. Therefore he remoued his army from Vienna, and appointed Ne∣mours to be at Roman that day, where he himselfe had gi∣uen his fayth at the self same time to be: and he himselfe went to view and win other cities. When his other fel∣low captayn vnderstood of this, as Cardet, Lieftenant of Ualentia, Blacon, Bari, Mouens, and others, they admo∣nished Monsieur Cursol of the same: and they with ye help of Mouents tooke Monsieur des Adretz while he was at Valencia, thei hauing sitt occasion offered them therunto. And then the subtil lying in wayt of Nemours being de∣tected and bewrayed, who came with his souldiers at ye day appointed to Romane, he returned agayne to Vienna disappointed of his purpose. And so the treason of Baron des Adretz being discouered, he was brought to the citie of Nemaus, in the prouince of Languedoc: but because of the benefite of peace which was concluded by an Edict, he escaped present and deserued death. In the meane time the Duke of Guise, hauing augmē∣ted his army, and prouided all things necessary for war, remoued from Paris, and went to besiege Orleans, in theThe Admi rall goeth into Nor∣mandy. moneth of Ianuary. The Admirall was gone from Or∣leans, with the greatest part of his army, and with al the troupes of Germane horsemen to ioyne with the English men, leauing to kepe and defend Orleans, his brother theThe siege of Orlean▪ Andelot with the other part of the army. For the Admi∣rall stood in great néed of money: Of the which when the Guise vnderstood, he sought all yt he could, to draw away the Germanes from tking part with ye Prince of Conde:
& because they were discouraged from the Guises, be∣cause he warred against religion; and because the faith∣full contended for no other cause, than to deliuer ye King from captiuitie, and to defende the Edicte which concer∣ned the reformed religion: the Guise affirmed and pro∣tested that hée neyther mayntayned warre against Re∣ligion, nor kept the Kinge nor any of his Captyues. And for this cause he procured the Kings letters, in the which the King and Quéene declared to the Marshall of Hessen, and to the Germanes which ayded the Prince of Cōde vnder hys conduct, that neyther of them were cap∣tiues. This is the summe of their letters. In consideration of the great frendship and vnity, which hath bin heretofore betwene the Germane, Prin∣ces,The Kings letters to win from the Prince the Ger∣manes. and the Kinges of France our auncetoures, and in respect of the mutuall loue, which the one hath alwaies shewed towardes the other, to the profit and commodi∣ty of both parties: it could not but séeme wonderful and straunge vnto vs, that certaine of those Princes of Ger∣many, our frendes should ayde and helpe our subiectes, which haue lifted vp the swerd against vs, and haue se∣ditiously brought our Realme into great troubles. But we thinke that it commeth hereof, that those seditious persons haue deceiued the Princes with a false couller and pretence, making them beleeue that we are capti∣ued: and that they for the duty and obedience which they owe vnto vs, haue gone about, to deliuer vs from the same. In the which opinion, euen at this day also they go about to perswade and retaine both the Captaines and also the Souldies of those Germanes, whom for the cause and pretence aforesaide, they haue broughte into this Realme: of whose goodnesse and estimation we are so perswaded that we doubt not but that they will for very grefe and sorow, be offended that they haue bene so
deceyued. For these causes we signifye & declare to the Marshall Hess, the Captaine generall of those Germanes, and to the vnder Captains and souldiers, that we were neuer kept by any maner of violence, nor Captiued a∣ny maner of waye. But haue alwayes enioyed bothe the fredome of our bodyes & mindes: and haue euer foūd those our subiectes which are accused in this behalfe, to be most louing, faythfull and obedient. Furthermor we haue not cōmaūded or giuē leaue to those our seditious Subiectes to put themselues in armoure, and to ioyne with for reyne Nations: as we think now the Marshall Hess himself well perceyued, so soone as he cam into the Realme, both by the late successe of the battaile, & also by the infinite nomber, of murders, rapines, and spoyles, which that seditiouse sort do dayly commit against our poore subiectes: whereby there cannot be a more firme and certain argument to declare what the purpose and mind of those seditious persones, is: In so much that we must néedes perswade our selues, that those Souldiers of Germany, by the admonition of these our letters, will be certified of the truth, and beware of that errour with the which those seditious persones go aboute to blinde them. In so doing they shal both win ame to thēselues, and also deserue wel at our handes, but especially main taine and defend the glory of God. To these letters subscribed Alexandre the Kinges brother Duke of Orleans, Henry Borbon Prince of Na∣uar, Charles Cardinall Borbon, Lodowicke Borbon Duke of Monpenseir, Fraunces Burbon countie de Alphine, and Charles Borbon Prince Rochsurion, ye xxiiii. day of Ianu∣arie. After this the Duke of Guise beséeged Orleans wyth a great host of men, and with aboundance of great guns: which he planted against that of the Citie, by which the Riuer of Loire ran, the middest of
the same: by reason whereof the Guise perswaded hym∣selfe the more easely to win the same: For on the other side of the Citie, the ground lay leuell and playne, which was very vnméete to incampe vppon: and besides this the Citie had very stronge fortes and Towers on that parte to defend it selfe. At the first therefore he toe the Suburbes called Porterell, and the Germaine footemen that were set to kepe the same fled away: at the recey∣uing of whom into the Citie ther were a great nomber of Gascoynes and inhabitantes of Languedoc slaine which made the Citizens sore afraide. After this the Guise bent his ordinance for the battery against the citie, and gaue a very whot assault to the same. In the meane time th Andelot, though he was sore troubled with a quartern ague, toke great paynes in forteing and defending the Citie. At the length, by treasn the Guise got the tower which standeth vppon the bridge foote, by which the townesmen might haue bin greatly anoyed if so be they had not beat downe a great part of the bridge from the same, at the commaundement of the Andelot: the Iland being very well fortified and defended. ¶ Whyle these thinges were thus in hand at Orleans, the Admirall was in Normandy, and had ioyned himself to the Englishe men▪ whereby his army was not only much encreased, but also he receyued a great summe of money: whereby the Germanes were not a little encou∣raged. The Duke of Guise dayly, more and more vrged the men of Orleans, and sought newe wayes to worke theyrPultrotset from Lions to the: Ad∣mirall. destruction. But behold as the Guise mused and deised with himselfe to worke mischiefe, there came a certain Souldier from Lions, called Pultrot Merae, carying let∣ters of Monsieur Soubize to the Admirall, being of body great, taull, and strong, but in courage and stomacke, a very coward.
This Pultrot, when he had deliuered his letters to the Admirall, declared vuto him that he knew an easie way to discomfite the Guises army, yea if néede were to kill the Guise himselfe: shewinge himselfe very ready and willing to bring the same to passe. The Admirall wondered at the boldnesse of the man, being to him a mere straunger: and also had no great trust in him at the first: Notwithstanding bycause he was commended vnto him by Monsieur Soubize, he graunted vnto hym according to his owne request leaue to be a spye, and se∣cret beholder of the Guises doinges, and commaunded him also to certifie him thereof so soone as he could: deri∣ding and little regarding that his immagination concer ning the killing of the Guise. First of all therefore the Admirall gaue vnto Merae for to play the spye, twen∣ty french Crownes: after the receyte whereof, he went to the Guise in his campe at Orleans: and made protesta∣cion vnto him that he was very sory that he had borne armour against the king, crauing pardon for his offence of the Guise, and promising uer after to shewe himselfe a true and faithfull subiecte towardes the King. The Guise hearing this, very louingly receyued and entertai∣ned Pultrot Merae. Then from the Guise he went to the Admirall againe, shewing vnto him how well he had sped, and receyued of him againe a hundred crownes to by him a Horse. Therefore he retourned againe to the Guises campe with a better horse, and tarying there cer∣dayes, he earnestly studyed in himselfe how hee myght bring to passe to slay the Duke of Guise: and he made the more spéede to finish his purpose, bicause he saw the Ci∣tie of Orleans lyke to come in perill. Wherefore when he had fully determined with himselfe what hee would do, he began to deuise with himselfe, whether he were best to kill hym when he had many men or fewe about him. When he had fully resolued himselfe how and af∣ter
what maner he would accomplishe this enterprise, he came to the Guise, as he was vewing the strength of the Towne and the maner of his siege, and wayted vp∣pon him according as he had done before. At the length the Guise being weary mounted on his horse intending to go home to his house, with two men only waightingPultrot kil∣leth the Guise. vppon him, and Merae followed him also. And when the Guise and the rest were come ouer a certain Ferry, not far from his house, Merae suffred the Guise to ride about six or seuē paces before him, and then discharged at the shoulder of the Guise a pistolet, which he had charged be∣before with thre pellettes. With the which hee being sore wounded, within a fewe dayes after he dyed: But Merae, so soone as he had done the déed set rres to his horse, and fled with spéede. And riding al the night from place to place, the night being very foule and tempesti∣ous, (as it is commonly in the winter) he came againe to the same place from whence he had ed the daye be∣fore which was at a Uillage called Oliuet nere vnto thePultrot ta∣ken, Riuer Ler, the which village was the appointed place for the Army of the Switsers. And runninge vppon the Switsers vnawares, was by their outcry bewrayed: Not withstanding he fled again, but was taken within few miles of the Guise campe. Now the death of the Guise for certaine dayes was kept from the knowledge of the men of Orleans, the cap∣taines slacking neuer a whit lesse the siege yt the Guise had begon. Notwithstanding the army being herewith much discouraged▪ and the Queene, and the Prince of Conde geuing commaundement that truce might be ta∣ken on both partes, they raysed their siéege and depar∣ted. Then a peace was intreated, the Constable faithfully,Peace takē. as it might séeme, promising the same to the men of Or∣leans. Therefore there was oftentymes mutuall confe∣rence
betwéene both partes, & frée communication had also euen among the common Souldiers. In the meane time the Admirall prospered very well and had good successe in Normandy: and hauing wonneCane in Normandi wonne. Cane a noble Citie in Normandy, and hauing great store and aboundance of money, had no doubt brought grea∣ter things to passe within a short tyme, if the peace had not bin a stay vnto him. Therefore the peace was now in question betwéene the Quéene and the Prince of Conde, the Constable ear∣nestly soliciting the same by his letters. The Quéene although she sawe her parte to be in worst cace, two of her principall Captaines being destroyed, and the third taken: and on the contrary part, although the Prince of Conde were taken, yet that the rest of the Captaines flo∣rished and preuayled, although I saye she sawe these things: yet notwithstanding she dissembling with a dou∣ble hart, made the Prince of Conde beleue and hope for greate matters, and made him bende vnto her will so much as she could. Therfore certain cōditions of peace were propounded to the Prince of Conde, but not indif∣ferent: in the which conditions many thinges were dis∣cided concerning the Edict of Ianuary: by which Edicte the Prince of Conde would haue had the peace formed and framed. Then the Quene, the Prince of Conde, the Constable, and the Andelot came togyther to Parley in a certaine Ileland called Boum, neare to Orleans, the Admi∣rall which at that tyme was in Normandy being aduer∣tised of the same. And after much communication to and fro, the peace was at the last concluded, the xiii. day of March in manner and forme following.
ALL men see and knowe with what troubles, sediti∣ons, and tumultes this our kingdome, for certayne yeres, by the iust iudgement of God, hath ben tormoyled and tossed, our subiectes being the occasion and cause therof, through the diuersitie of opinions concerning religion. To prouide a remedie for the which, there haue ben hy∣therto had many conuocations of the most singular and wyse men of the whole realme, by whose aduise and coun saile, many Edictes and decrees haue ben made, as the ne∣cessity of the tyme required: meaninge thereby to pre∣uent a mischief, and stop greater inconueniences like to ensue. Neuerthelesse the iniquitie of tyme by little and little hath so preuayled, and the Lorde by his secrete and iust iudgement, prouoked by our sinnes and wickednes, hath not restrayned but suffered those outragiouse trou bles to haue their course: and that so far forth, that an in∣finite sorte of murders, bloudshed, rapine, spoyle and de∣struction of Cities haue come thereof: beside the viola∣ting of temples, the ioyning of battayles, and an infinite number of mischeeues mo in diuers places. In so muche that if this mischief proceed any further, seeing there are so many straungers in our Realme, and more dayly lyke to come, we may playnly see and beholde the ineuitable ruyne and destruction of the whole Realme: beside the great losse of so many Princes and noble men, and vale∣aunt Captaynes, already made by the authours of these troubles, which Noble men, vnder the mighty hande of God, are the onely strength and true defence and prote∣ction of this our Crowne. The which things we haue di∣ligently considered, and deuised alwaies and remedies to helpe in time: yet notwithstanding seeing we see that all the inconueniences whiche come of this warre, doe re∣downde to the diminution and detriment of this our realm, and haue felt by experience, to our great hurt and losse, that this remedy is not sufficient for this purpose, we haue thought that there can be no better way, thā first of all for vs to flee vnto the infinite grace and goodnesse
of our Lord God, & by his help to seeke for peaceable & quiet remedies, to cure the soarenesse of this great and mischeuous disease, in the eyes of man almost incurable: to bring the willes of our subiects to vnitie and concord, and to the acknowledging of that obedience and duety which belongeth vnto vs, being speedy remedies to kepe our subiectes in peace: trusting that the frute of a gene∣rall or nationall Counsell will bring suche assured peace and certayne tranquillity, to the honor and glory of God, that wee shall haue all great cause to ioye in the same. In the which matter we wil haue the good and whole∣some Counsayle of the Queene, our most louing and re∣uerend mother, of our most louing Cosynes the Cardi∣nall of Borbon, of the Prince of Conde, of the Duke of Monpensier, and of the Prince Rochsuryon, of the Prin∣ces that are of the Kings bloud, of our beloued Cosines also the Cardinall Guise, Duke de Aumall, Momorenci∣us the Constable, of the Duke Estamp, of the Marishalls Brissac, and Burdillon, of the Lords the Andelots, and of other peeres of the Realme, and men of the Kings coun∣sail: All the which, with one consent and mynde haue thought meete and necessary that these thinges follow∣ing should bee ordayned and decreed, for the common wealth and profit of our realme: the which wee will and commaund to abyde firme and immutable, that is to say. THAT all noble men hereafter, hauing the rule and go uernement of Prouinces, may peaceably and with the li∣bertye of their consciences liue in those houses in the which they shall dwell, with their families and seruaunts, and enioy the vse of the reformed religion, so called, with out any impediment or trouble. And it shalbe lawefull for all noble men and their families, what iurisdiction so∣euer they haue, to vse the same religion at home and in their houses, so that they dwell not in those villages and townes that are subiect to the greater Iurisdiction. In which places they cannot haue the vse of the Religion,
without the leaue and licence of the higher powers. VVe appoint to euery Office, Senate, or Court, whose first ap∣peale belongeth vnto the higher courts, a citie, at the peti ciō of the mē of reformed religion, to the which citie the men of those offices and Courtes may come and haue the vse of the reformed religion, and no otherwyse nor a∣ny where else. Notwithstanding all men may liue euery where peaceably at home, without any perill or harme for the vse of religion and their cōscience. Furthermore, all men in those cities, in the which that religion was ex∣ercised the vii. day of this moneth of March, beside those cities which shalbe specially appointed to euery Court, shall haue leaue to vse the administration of that religi∣on still, in one or two Cities, which shalbe appointed vn∣to them. Notwithstanding it shall not be lawfull for the men of the reformed religion, to occupie the churches of the Catholiques and priests: whom we will and com∣maunde to be restoared from this tyme forwarde to the full enioyinge of all their Goods, Houses, Landes, Possessions, and Profytes, whatsoeuer: that they may enioye the same as they did before these troubles were begon: that they maye vse their diuine seruice in those places where they were wont, without interruption or trouble of any man. VVe will also and commaunde, that the citie and Court of Paris bee free from the whole vse of that Religion. Notwithstanding whatsoeuer he be of the reformed Religion that hath any house, or reue∣newe in the citie of Paris, or within any part of the same, may freely come and goe therevnto, and shalbe in no pe∣rill of harme for any thing past or to come concerninge Religion. All Cities shalbe brought agayne to their for∣mer and wonted entercourse of bying and selling: and al Straungers shall forthwith be sent out of the Realme. And to the end we may the better quiet and stay the mindes of our subiectes, we will and commaund, that all men be vnder our protection, patrociny, and defence, & that thei be restored to their offices and reuenewes, what
state, degree or condition soeuer they bee of: notwith∣standing the statutes, ordinaunces, and decrees, made since the discease of our deare Father Henry of happie memory, for Religion, or for the Armour which our wel∣beloued Cosen the Prince of Conde hath borne, or any other at his commaundement. The which statutes and decrees we commaund to be voyde and of none effecte least through them, they, their children, executors, heyres, or assignes, should be stayed hereafter from the vse and possession of their goodes and dignities. Bee it therfore sufficiently prouided by these our letters, and let all men be out of doubt, that we set and restore them to the possessions of all their goodes and landes, which they now haue or had heretofore. AND least any man should stand in doubt of the faith and true meaning of our cosen the Prince of Con∣de, we say and affirme that we do take and accompt him for our welbeloued cosen, and for a louing subiect, and faithfull seruant in all our affayres: In the which nom∣ber of faithfull subiects wee esteeme and accompt al the Peeres, Lordes and Nobles, and all the inhabitants of the Cities, Townes, and Villages within this Realmes, which haue taken part with our said cosen, and haue serued in these tumultes of Ciuill warre, in any maner of place within this Realme: Thinking that those things which our subiects haue done, haue proceeded frō good intent meaning, and for their dutie and obedience sake. Fur∣thermore, wee will and commaund, that the Prince of Conde our welbeloued cosen, be fully discharged of all accompts for such sommes of money as he hath himself (or any other at his commaundement) taken out of the Treasury: and to be free also from making an accompt of such money as he hath taken out of Cities, or corpo∣rat Townes, or from Ecclesiasticall persons: or for the coyning of money, the casting of great Goonnes, the making of Goonpoulder, the fortefying of Cities, or for the pulling downe of Edifices or buildings at the Prince
of Condes cōmaundement to build vp any fort or hold: Of all which thinges we discharge and fully acquite both him and all others at that time vnder his seruice, by these our Letters and Edict, by vs subscribed and sealed. And so many as were taken either in warre, or for Religions sake, or which are kept in durance for any other cause, wee dismisse and set at libertie by these presents. Such notwithstanding excepted, as are theeues and murthe∣rers, to whom the benefit of this Edict shall not apper∣taine. AND because wee specially and aboue all thinges wish, that all these causes of these troubles may be cut of, and all mens mindes truely reconciled and pacified, that by this consent and agreement, the obedience due vnto vs may be confirmed, wee will and commaund also these thinges following. First, that all iniuries and offences which haue growne by iniquitie of the time and by the occasions comming therof, and that all othes thinges sprong vp by these tu∣multes, may be extinguished, forgotten, and buried vn∣der foote, euen as if they had neuer bene. VVe denie and forbid also vppon payne of death, all our subiects, what state, condition or degree so euer they be of, to prouoke one another with contumelious woordes, and to stirre vp anger by enuie of thinges past: but do exhort them, rather to behaue them selues louing ly one towardes another as bretherne and fellowe Citi∣zens: him that shall otherwise do, wee will and com∣maund too bee executed forthwith without any further examination or iudgement, according to the seueritie of our Edict. For the which cause, to the end all scruple maye bee quite taken away, those our subiects, shall shake of and reiect the making of any manner of Leagues or parta∣kinges, eyther within this Realme, or without: neither shall they make hereafter any conuocatiōs, moysterings of men, nor collections of money, otherwise than they
are permitted to do, by this our Edict, and that without Armour. The which we straitely forbid them to do, vn∣lesse they will incurre the punishment, for breaking this Edict. And we will and commaund, that this our Edict, be sollemnely proclaimed throughout the whole realme, and that it be also put downe in the Court Roolles, and diligently obserued and kept of all men. THIS we com∣maund by our authoritie to abide firme and irreuoca∣ble for euer. THE XIII. day of the same Moneth, Poltrot Merae, the same whom we sayd before had killed the Duke of Guise, was examined, and after examination confessed him selfe to be giltie of the death of the Guise: and for the same was by the iudgement of the Senate of Paris, con demned, to be drawne in peeces with fower horses. This is a most cruell kind of death, which hath bene euer of olde time vsed vppon Traytors. The maner of the death was this. They tied to the wrest of ech arme a strong rope, and likewise to the small of both his legges: and then the other endes of the same roopes being fastened to foure great horses, the horses wers made to drawe two of them against the other two til they had rent his lims one frō another. This kind of death Poltrot suffe∣red. After this his deathe there was a Libell set out concerninge his examination, and published and reported also among the Germanes in the Admiralles Campe, that Merae, appealed the Admirall to bee the author of his wicked déede, and Theodore Beza and a cer taine other Minister, which he named not, to be prouo∣kers of him thereunto, and the Countie Rochefoucaut, as accessary to the same. To this accusation the Admirall answered, and affirmed the same to bee false, saying, that either Maerae had made no such accusation at all, or els if he had made it, that then he did it falsely, being prouoked thereunto eyther for feare, or for hope. For
probation wherof he alleaged the rash and sodayne pu∣nishment of Merae, which was so spéedy that hee had not leaue to come before the Iudges, according to order of Law, & to haue ye accused present before the accuser. Now concerning the peace, it was reported of eue∣ry where, euery one reioyced because of the same, yea the naming of peace was pleasant in the eares of all men, euery one hoping that so great troubles and cala∣mities were now at an end. Notwithstanding the Pro∣testants greatly mruelled what the Prince of Conde ment to agrée vnto those slended conditions, séeinge the principal heads of their enemyes were destroied, some taken, and the ost discouraged: whereas on the contrary part the Prince of Conde had now the lawfull gouernment of the Realme, and many couragions cap∣taines to take his part: whereby they were like to haue etter successe than euer they had. Moreouer the Admirall in Nondy, and Monsie Cusol in Languedoc prospered very well: notwithstan∣ding by letters sent to him from the King, and from the Prince of Conde, concerning the Edicte: and to Monsieur Cursol also, which was then besieging of the Castell of Pyle, they vnarmed themselues, & imbraced the peace. And the Edicte was there by and by ed, and in al Townes also where the Protestants inhabited. The Catholiques also were suffered fréely to go vnto their Cities, and enioyed all thinges to them appertayning according to the benefit of the Kinges Edict. Notwith∣standinge at Bourdeux and Tholoze the Papistes made much a do about the receiuing of the Kinges Edicte, in so much that the Protestants durst not go home to their houses, but were faine to make often complaintes here of to the Kinge. The English men by the sufferance of the Prince of Conde kept the Portele Grace which is a Citie bordering
vppon the Sea in the edge of Normandy: who refusing for certain causes of couenant betwéene them to go out of the Citie, the Kinges armye remoued to besiege the same, the Prince of Conde also himselfe being present with a great part of his army: at the which the English men greatly marueiled, thinking that he requited them not as they had deserued. Notwithstandinge at theyr Quéenes commaundement they departed from thence, vppon certaine conditions: a League being made be∣twéene the King of France & the Quéene of Eng∣land. Both Armies also of the Germanes went home & almost in euery place men wholy vnarmed themselues: notwithstanding certain of the Guises armye and of the Prince of Condes also wer reserued stil in their armour for another purpose as shalbe hereaf∣ter declared. The end of the second part.
¶ The thirde parte of Commen∣taries, Conteyning the whole discourse of the ciuill warres of Fraunce, vnder the raigne of CHARLES the nynth. Translated out of Latin into Englishe, by Thomas Tymme, Mini∣ster. Seene and allowed. Imprinted at London, by Frances Coldock. And are to be sold at his shop in Pawles churchyard at the signe of the greene Dragon. 1574.
The Table for the third part. A ABbay of Saint Florent burnt. page. 201 Actes in the time of the Kyngs progresse. 46 Admirall, accused by the Cardinall of Loraine. 11 Admiralls purgation. 13 Admiral cleered of the Guises death by the Kings sentence. 47 Affaires of the lowe Conntrey. 77 Agreement betweene the king and the Duke of Orleans. 40 Amanzi slaine. 131 Answere of the faithfull to the oth which they should take. 124 Andelot commeth to the Prince of Conde with a great armie. 174 Andelot passeth ouer the Riuer of Loyer. 176 Andelot ioyneth with the Admi∣rall. 176 B Battaile woone by the Protestants at Auuergnoys. 107 Battaile in the which the Prince of Conde was slaine. 208 Brotherhoodes of the Papistes. 43 Brissiac slaine 215 Boysuerd slaine. 175 C Cardinall accuseth the Admirall. 11 Cardinall taketh foolishe and ain journeyes. 70 Cardinall of Loraine practiseth too take the principall protestās. 118 Cardinall of Loraine practiseth too take the Prince of conde. 121 Cardinall Sastillion fleeth into England. 162 Church of Lions diuersly vexed. 50 Chartres besieged. 108 Charite, besieged and taken. 221 Cities and Townes which tooke part with the Protestants. 107 Cities yeelded to the Prince of Con de. 174 Cipiere cruelly slaine. 119 Conference betweene the Nobles, and the Duches of Parme. 86 Conspiracie of the Papistes to de∣stroy the Gospell. 92 Constable slaine. 102 Countie Panpadon slaine. 215 Counsell of Trent traueileth to hi der the Gospell. 23 Congregatiou of the Protestants at Pamiz 37 Craftie disposition of the Queene Mother. 11 D Death of the Prince of Condes wife. 41 Death of Chels Sonne to Kyng Philip. 162 Death of the Lord of Morueile. 227 Death of the Duke of Deuxpons. page. 223. Declaration of Rossilion gaue a great ouerthrow to the Edict. 50 Descriptiō of the Dukes camp. 223. Descriptiō of the princes army. 224 Discipline appointed by the Prince of Conde. 164. &. 165. Duches of Parme causeth an assem∣bly of states. 83. Duke of Alba commeth into Flaū∣ders with the Spaniards. 94. Duke of Aniou marcheth toward Loraine. 106. Duke of Aniou put to the worse in fight. 193. Duke of Deuxpons promiseth aide to the Prince. 197. E Edict wrested by the Anuil. 5.
Edict falsely interpreted. 27. Edict enterpreted. 45. Edict against the Gospel. 106. &. 177 Edict collerably made by the Ca∣tholiques. 112. Edict not obserued. 115. Edict of peace. 300. England a fuccor to Fraunce. 109. Endreau reuolteth. 212. F Fortresse built at Lions 49. G Germans take both partes. 196. Gouernment of D'anuil ouer the Churches of Languedoc. 3. Gospell begynneth to florishe in launders. 77. Guyses seke to disturb the peace. 20 I. Impunitie for the murder done at Towers. 69 Images in Flanders go to wrack. 85 Iniuries done to the Protestantes pag. 60. &. 113. Interdiction of Sermons. 48. K Kinges progresse with the causes thereof. 38. King commeth to Lions. 48. King commeth to Languedoc. 74. King Philip certified of the increse of the Protestantes in the Lowe countrey. 79. King and Queene remoue to Pa∣ris. 97. L Letters of the king to the Prince of Conde. 67. Letters of the Prince to the Kng page. 98. &. 132. Letters of the papistes intercepted page. 130. Letters of the Queene of Nauar o the Kinge. 168. to the Queene mother. 169. and to the Cardinal of Borbon. 173 Lettes of the Queene of Nauar o the Queene of England. 187. Letters pattens from the Pope. 184. Lord Boccard dyeth. 216. Luzig surrendered. 241. M Messenger sent by the Prince of Cō de taken. 162. Merindol apointed for the exercise of the reformed religion. 73 Monsuer Cure slaine. 44. Monsuer Saltane displaced oute of his office, and Monsuer Lossay succedeth him. 50. Mons. Cochay taken and many of his men slaine. 197. Mons Mouens, and his souldiours slaine. 186. Motton commaunded to be han∣ged by the Anuil. 6. Murders most horrible. 119. Musters of Souldier 130. N Niort besieged. 237. Noyers wonne. 198. O Oth of the prince of Nauar. 212. Oth collerably made. 130. Order of gods fruice in Nemaux. P Papistes brag of abolishing the E∣dict. 10. Petition made by the Prince of Conde 98. Peace concluded. 110. Peace requested by the protestan∣tes. 232. Poictiers besieged. 242. Pey battered 244. Pince of Conde intised from the
defence of the Gospell. 33. Prince of Conde escapeth the Pa∣pistes snares. 40. Prince of Conde complayneth of iniuries. 54. Prince of Orange commeth to An∣werpe. 87. Prince of Conde marcheth to Lo∣raine. 105. Prince of Conde flyeth to Noyere pag. 121. &. 164 Prince of Conde in great peril. 131. Prince of Conde seketh to encoun∣ter with Mompensier. 190 Prince of Orange seeketh to ioyne with the Prince of Conde. 195. Preaching forbidden, 48. Practise o stcale away the prince of Nauar 167 Proclamations for the obseruation of the Edict 68 Pultrot deareth the Admirall. 14 Protestantes commaunded too re∣turne to Monachisme. 52 Q Queen of France encourageth the fouldiours. 224 R Reconciliation betwene the Guises and the Chastillion 47 Restraint of Synode. 51 Rochell to be besie∣ged 130 S Sanser besieged 202 Sermons preached. 217 Slaughter of the Parisians at Saint Dionyse. 102 Slaughter of the faythfull at Tow ers 53 Slaughter of the thful. 41 Slaughter of 10. thoūsande prote∣stants in the space of 3. monthes, in the tyme of peace Spye sent to vewe Noyers, taken. pag. 122 State of the common wealth, after peace was taken 1 State of the Church of Orleans. 1 State of the Church of Lions. 2 State of the Church in Dolpheny. 3 State of the Churche in, Burgondy and Prouance 3 State of the Church of Venais. 7 State of the Church of Orange. 8 State of the Church of Paris. 8 State of the church of Peardy. 8 State of the Church of Brittayne & Normandy. 8 State of the Churches of Gascoyne and Guian. 9 State of the protestantes in the se∣cond warre 100 State of the Churches in the lowe Countrey, after the comming of the Duke of Alba. 102 Supplication of the Nobles of the low Conntrey 82 Succour of the Pope. 224 Strosius men slayne. 224 Suburbes of Rochereul thrise assal∣ted 253 Subtill practises of the papistes a∣gainst the Gospell. 25 T Troubles at Lions 116 Troubles at Paris 117 Tyranny of the Duke of Alba. 196 V Valencia beseeged 89 Valencia surrenuered. 91 Violence done to the Protestantes. pag. 60 W VVatch and warde at Hauens and Bridges 114 FINIS.
The vii. Booke of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the common wealth of Fraunce vnder the Raigne of Charles the ninth. ALTHOVGH that France was now (asThe state of the com mō wealth & of the church af∣ter peace was taken▪ it wer, very desirous to be at rest; after so gret broils of that greuous, and lamē∣table warre: yet heauy oc∣casions of newe troubles, séemed to bée offerd euerie day, and the hartes of the Papistes were espied by manifest tokens and talke, to wax more spightfull. New hauen a town lying on the sea cost of Normandy, being receyued againe of the English men, part of the Kings army was quight, discharged, and part of it was chosen to lye in garrison, in those Cities, which were holden of the Protestantes in the time of warre: and for this purpose also, were taken some of the Prince of CondiesThe state of the chur ch at Orlc∣aunce. bandes, especially those who in the tyme of seruice had forsaken the Prince, and gon to the Duke of Guise. The state of all the Churches being scatered throughout all the prouinces of the Kingedome was such as here fol∣loweth. Monsieur Sipier a noble man, had again, by the kings commaundement, the gouernmente of the Church, at
Orleans: and the Citie it selfe was fortified with a very greuous and troublesome garrison. Notwithstanding the Church florished there, both in great nomber of the faithful and also good plenty of learned men: there was a schoole ordeyned for the vse of the reformed Church, and beawtyfied with most excellent Doctoures & Tea∣chers: but amongst the wrongs and verations that they of the Garrisons did dayly woorke, the Protestantes of Orleans were greatly encouraged, by reason they of Chastillō dwelt so neare them, the Cardinal Odet Chast il∣loOdet Cardi nall of Cha stillon. also very frankly and liberally helping with money, the néedes and wantes both of their Church and schole. The Marshall de Vielleuille came to Lions, and the Protestants at his commaundement forthwith layingthe state of the church at Lions. a side their armour, whilest (as he said) he went about to put the Edict in execution, he fenseth the Citie with a strong Garrison, and by force of the Kings letters, stai∣eth the building of the Church, which the faithfull had begun, being thrust out of the Papistes churches which before in the time of warre they had vsed. And yet, they of Lions were not in worst case, for the Protestantes there did both quietly lyue amongst themselues: and al∣so enioyed, fréely and without restrainte the vse of the reformed religion, certaine places being by the Kinges maiesties graunt, for that purpose appointed. All which time Petrus Uiretu a Godly and eloquent man, togy∣therPetrus Vire us. with his most excellent fellowlabourers, did very profitablye trauaile in that congregation, which was greatly frequented and furnished with men of all sorts and degrées so that to the Godly it yelded a ioyful and pleasant spectacle but to the Papistes, a heauie and la∣mentable sight. The gouernment of the Countrey of Dolpheny fel into the handes of Monsieur Mogron, and Gordes and garrisons of souldiers were placed in the chiefe townes
therof, as in Ualence, Grenoble, Roman, Uienne, Montillon,the state of the church in Dolphe∣ny. notwithstanding they did not long beare the wrongfull dealing of the Souldiers, especially in that part of the Countrey which was ruled by Monsuer Gordes, for they procured vnto themselues his fauour by gyftes, and so by that meanes were delyuered from the Garrisons. But the congregations in Burgundy were euel entrea∣ted, by Monsieur Tauennes and the Counsaile of Diion.the state of the church in Burgun dy and Pro uance. But chiefely towardes the Countrey of Prouance, they were very cruelly handled, for there the Papistes were so impudently imboldned, & as it were fleshed through the impunitie and libertie of the spoyles they had com∣mitted in the tyme of warre, that the Protestantes be∣ing vtterly discouraged, with the often tydinges of the iniuries and murthers that were there committed, durste not once to repaire home to their owne houses, although they did not openly practise their Religion. But yet at the length by the Kinges commaundement, they were suffered to returne home, and diuers punish∣mentes executed vppon such, as had bene woorkers of mischiefe there, as in place conuenient, we wil more at large declare. The Constable had procured the gouernment of thethe gouern ment of M. Anuil ouer the Chur∣ches in Lan guedoc. Prouince of Languedoc, (ouer which hee was chiefe ru∣ler) to be committed ouer to his Sonne Monsieur An∣uille, with exceding straight and sharp commission: For the men of that Countey, had manfully and couragious∣lye behaued themselues all the time of the former war. Monsuer Anuille therefore imparting the matter to the counsel of Tholouze, and hauing their aduise how to be∣haue himselfe in the exploit of all his affaires, went to the other parts of this Prouince with more stomacke and courage: and to those Cities which in the tyme of warre were holden by the Protestantes, he came with ranged and warlike armies, as though he had ment to
haue encountred with some enemie. By his commaun∣dement also there was watch and ward appointed at euery gate, and flagges set out vpon the battlementes of the walles, lyke as the manner is in Cities that be vanquished by force. Moreouer he very straightly com∣maunded the Protestantes, that they should bring all their armour to the common halles of euery Citie, and charged his owne men, that they should ransacke all the houses of the faithfull. At Nemaux, he caused one to be beaten with cudgelles, bycause he had brought in hys armour, somewhat to late: and vnder colour and cloke of that example, did very haynously sclaunder before the King, the whole company of the faithful in Langue∣doc, as obstinate and stubborne. And deuidinge Garri∣sons of Souldiers into euery Citie, where any congre∣gationAlbanoys was, surueyed and vewed them hymselfe, and with certain troupes of Horsemen, whom he had re∣claymed to his owne lure, and made fit for his owne pitch, did spoile and waste all thinges wheresoeuer he came. The Souldiers that were in Garrison, and also they which waited vppon the Anuille began very cruel∣ly to rage against the whole families of the faythfull, e∣uen as though they had bin taken captiue in war: nei∣ther did they abstaine from robberies, and rauishing of Uirgines but did scotfrée and without checke commit horrible murders, the Anuille being in the meane tyme wholy giuen ouer to the filthy loue of whores, & beastly excesse of that good and gentle wyne of Languedoc: and for these two causes, he went diuers times to Auinion, and there did compell (a sight truly almost of incredible impudencie) his owne wyfe, a noble woman of the wor thy & honorable house of the Duke of Bullion to salute, & entertain, at her owne table an whore of that towne, a wydowe, whom, he being taken with her bewty had caused to run headlong after filthy gayne. And whereas
fhere was an order appointed by the Profestants inThe order of calling vppon god his name in Nemaux the Court of Nemaux, that before they tooke any thing in hand thereshould be prayers made vnto God, whose aide and helpe in administring iustice, ought to be cra∣ued and sought for: the Anuille commaundeth that that custome should be fortwith layde aside, and when the chiefe Justice had said vnto him, who then shall teach vs true Justice, if the righteous and iust God, be not called vppon? He made aunswere, that if he, or any of his, had anye care or regard of that inuocation or cal∣ling vpon Gods name, yet not withstanding it was not the Kinges pleasure, to lay any such burden vpon them, who did little set by any such customes and rytes, as that was: and so at the commaundement of the Anuille the inuocation of Gods name was vtterly banished out of the Court of Nemaux. Through the vnreasonable outrage of this furious raging president, ther were diuers iniuries and dama∣ges wrought againste the Protestantes, eyther vnder coloure of the Edict, or els by playne and open force. Of the which these thinges that follow being taken out of, almost an infinit nomber of other may be sufficient ex∣amples. The Kinges Edicte of peace did giue frée liber∣ty to exercise the reformed Religion in all those CitiesThe Edict violently corrected by the An∣uille. in which it had bin practised the vii. day of March (as it was prouided by flat & expres wordes of the v. braunch of the Edicte) besides other Cities, that were seueral∣ly to be appointed, throughout all and euery one of the Prouinces. Against this did the Auuille set this interpre acion, So that it be thought Lawfull by the chiefe Lordes of those places. And so by these meanes, he hindered the vse of the reformed religion in many places: and euery wher scatered and dispersed abrode the congregations. And although by the expresse tenure and forme of the Edicte, liberty of Religion and conscience was graun∣ted
to all and in all places of the Kingdome: yet he did so curtall and weaken the lihertie of the Edicte, that he did not only compell those which were newly come out of the Cloisters and Abbies, or els had forsaken some o∣ther Popish Rites, in the tyme of warre: but also those who long a go, had left that kind of life and were entred into some better trade of lyuinge, to take againe their former lyfe of monkish supersticion and to put awaye their wiues if they had maried any: or els to depart out of the boundes and limites of his Prouince. And by these meanes he plucked away many of the ministers of Godes woord from their congregations, and droue them out of al the Countrey, where he ruled. A notable example of this extremitie was shew ed in Moton the minister of the congregation. Who hauing long be∣fore forsaken all kynde of Monkery, had maried a wife in honest and lawfull matrimonie: and laboured ver frutefully there in that Church. To him straight com∣maundement was giuen, eyther quight to forsake hys wife and leaue the ministery, and then to take vpon him h is former kind of lyfe, or els to depart out of the coast of Languedoc within thre daies: who when he had made answer, that he was content to depart, for that he was so commaunded, and hauing prouided al thinges neces∣sarie for his familie, and being set forward on his iour∣ney, as he passed by Monfrin (a little towne of Langue∣doc by the way that leades to Auinion) he went to visit the congregation ther, and was requested by the elders of that Church, that according to the custome he would preach a sermon to the people. Moton was content, andMonsieur Anuille cō maundeth Moton to be hanged. preached. The matter was signified vnto Mōscur Anuil who by and by cōmaunded the chiefe executioner, forth∣with to hang vp Moton, as guilty of breaking the kings Edicte, for that he had preached contrary to his forbid∣ding. Wherfore Moton was violently apprehended (the
earefull Protestante of the Church of Monfrin stan∣ding round about him) and being haled and drawen out of his wiue armes, that pitifully cryed out, was bound vnto an almon trée. Where after that he had comforted his wife, and protested, that he did willingly seale there with his bloud ye truth of his doctrine, for which vnwor thely he was so troubled, he was strangled to death by the cōmon hangman. All which time while this was in doing, Mōsuer Anll lay carelesly at Auiniō wallowing in the filthye pleasures of whoores and wyne. The churches of Languedoc did complaine of these iniryes to the Kings maiesty and the Quéene his mother. The like did the Prince of Conde being desired there vnto by them of Languedoc but all was in vain. For the Consta∣ble was a careful maintainer of his lonnes mischiefes, and so wrought, that all the complaintes that were put vp against his sonne were voyd and to no purpose, in so much that they which complayned were in perill and daunger▪ Whereby it came to passe that he congrega∣tions in Languedoc, which had any thinge at all borne out the bruntes of the former warre, were very hardly dealt withall, and felt that peace was more greuous then warres: and many of them thorough the cruell go∣uernment of that president, were scatered abrode. In the Countie of Venas, beinge parte of the Popes Dominion, a very frutful soile and a cōmodious coun∣trey:the state of the church of Venais. the Protestants by the Popes commaundement were erceding cruelly entreated, and the goodes of all them forfaited that did professe the reformed Religion: neither could the kings Edict case thē by anie meanes, notwithstanding both the Kinge and the Quéene were iuers tymes sued to by supplations. Wherefore the greatest part of the Protestantes of Uenais, being spoi∣led of their goodes, went to Dolphiney and Orenge: where the vse of the reformed Religion was fréelye allowed,
both by warrant of the Kinges Edict, and also throughThe state of the chur ches of O∣range. sufferance, and fauour of the Prince of Ornge. The vse of the reformed religion, was banished, out of Paris, by especial commaundement, of the Edict. Not withstandinge the Protestantes of Paris, that were re∣tournedThe state of the churches of Paris. home, began to deuise and consult among them selues▪ for the renewing and gathering togyther again, of the congregation. Wherefore straglinge abrode in sendry companies, they enioyed the preaching of Gods word: but alwayes, there resorted but a small nomber togyther in one company, least they should be accused, and condemned as breakers and violaters of the kings decrées. And yet although the Parliment of Paris, was very sore offended, and moued against the faithfull, and the Guises spies and promouters, also were very busie, and left nothing, that might be done, vntried: not with∣standing through the pollicie, and wisdome of the Mar∣shall Momorency, who was President there, a certaine kind of peace and quietnes, was kept, which was (as it were) sauced and entermingles, nowe and than, with bitter and greuous vexations. In Picardie, the Prince of Condies Prouince, the proThe state of the chur ches of Pi∣cardie. testantes through the faithfull and diligent trauaile of the President: liued, almost in euery pointe, according to the order prescribed in the Edict Heuerthelesse very few congregations were in that countrey: both bicause the people of themselues were much giuen to popishe ceremonies, and also they were stirred vp againste the protestantes that were there, by dyuers of the Noble men. Moreouer in Britannie, chiefly by the meanes of theThe chur∣ches of Brit tanny and Normandy Andelot who held a great part of that countrey, by hys wyfe which was Heire of the countye of Lauall: and in Normaudy there were some Churches that liued quiet∣ly, and yet many tymes were in great feare,
Amongst the Gascoignes (for at Burdeux the thief Ci∣tyThe Chur∣ches of Gas coigne and of al Guian was a famous church,) the Santones, the men of Poic∣tures and other countries of the prouince of Guian (wher were very many congregations, the protestantes were diuersly molested and wronged by the Liuetenantes, Monsieur Monluc,) Mousieur de Beri, Monsieur de Lude, and Monsieur de la Taride. And yet the Quéene of Nauar hauing the chief rule, almost ouer al those coun∣tries, being a very godly & christian woman, did what possible she could do, that al things ther might be don in peaceable quietnes, and according to the order appoin∣ted in the Edict. She had also in the Dominion of Bear∣ne (it is a Countrye on this side the Mountaines Pyra∣naeis,The Chur∣ches in the dominion of Bearne. and part of the kingdome of Nauar, where she rai∣ned in soueraign and princely aucthority) graunted frée libertie of the reformed Religiō: but as then she gouer∣ned her subiectes, according to the prescripte order of the French Edict. There was to be séene, the churches lyue in perfecte peace vnder a good and Godly Prin∣cesse. In the Countrey of Mets which had bin long beforeThe Chur∣ches in the Cuntrey of Metz. kept by the Kinges Garrison, the Church did enioy the benefit of the Edict: and many of the Captaines of the Garrison, and the Souldiers themselues did frequent the Sermons. They had also at that tyme their Leufte∣nant Monsienr Auancie, enclyninge to and fauouringe their procedinges very much. The Churches that were in those Cities of PredmontThe Chur∣ches of Pie mont. which were holden by the French king, and those in the Marquesdome of Salus, defended themselues by the war∣rant of the Edict. Thus al the Churches dispersed through the whole kingdome of Franec, were in diuers states and condici∣ons, and the greatest part of them enioyed the benefite of the peace taken, but euill fauoredly, and all through
default of the common Courtes and of those that were appointed comissioners for the execution of the Edicte, and others the Lieftenantes of the prouinces. The pa∣pists had raised and bruted a rumor abrod, that the kingThe Papists brag of a∣bolishing the Edict. beinge in his nonage and enforced by necessitie of the time, had made that Edict, but for a certaine space: but when he attained vnto more ripe and discreet yeares, he would vtterly roote out and pluck vp the séedes of that new Religion, and bring home againe his Subiectes to an vniformitie of one Religion. And this forsooth was the will and pleasure of the King, his Mother the Quéene, and almost of al other the Péers and Nobles of the Realme: and that they of the new religion should eyther consent vnto this order▪ or els be vtterly destroi∣ed by the King: or at least be spoiled of thei Godes, and banished out of all partes of the Kingdome. So that by the voice of the papistes, the faithfull had graunted vn∣to thē but (as it were) the loane of the Edict for a very short space and at their pleasure, and that to, with many great troubles and iniuries. In so much that a man might perceiue, very much to be taken from the former Edict made in January, and the peace graunted by thean. D. 1563. benefit therof, greatly diminished. Notwithstāding the rage and troubles of that moste cruell and vnnaturall war being pacified, the churches were miraculusly pre∣serued in the tyme of truce, and by dispersing of some congregations, others wore wonderfully augmented. It was easely perceyued how the Guises were enfla∣med against the protestantes, and highly effended, thatThe fetches of the Gui∣ses to dis∣turbe the peace. ye vse of their religiō, was after a certain fort graunted vnto them in France and that by warrant of the kings Edict: but yet there were many thinges, which stayed them, that they burst not out into open war: for the pre∣sent and vrgent state of thinges that had moued the Quéene to make peace would not suffer anye newe
broiles or troubles to be raised againe. They perceyued also, that they could not frame her mind to their pitch, although she were of her selfe froward inough against the protestantes, and very fauorable to them and theirThe craftie wi of the Quene the Kings mo∣ther. partes. For the Queene greatly feared new tumultes, and did therfore faine to be very careful, both to main∣taine the Edict, and also to sée it put in execution for the protestants sake: whom she flattered very subtilly, and against her stomacke, especiallye the Prince of Conde: whom of all other, she chiefly, by all meanes and waies possible, desired to win and draw vnto her. To these lettes also was added the extreme difficul∣tie and almost impossibilitie, of takinge any new mat∣ter or exploite in hand, so hastely (as it wer) in the neck of so great wars but newly ended, Frances the Duke of Guise being murdered, the chiefe and most expert Cap∣taines dead: finally the Constable hymselfe, a man of a most spightful and cankered stomack against the Pro∣testantes, was afraid and trembled at the remēbrance of the bloudy slaughters that were before committed: and was very loth to fight againe a fresh any new bat∣tailes. Wherefore they take another way, and deuysed new fetches and sleightes to compasse that, which by o∣pen force they could not atchieue. Of which deuises the Cardinall of Lorraine an olde enemie of the reformed Churches, had coined great store and put them foorth to be practised. The Counsaile at Trent that had bin often before re∣newed by great diligence: was now again summoned. Thither went the Cardinal of Lorraine, in the name ofThe Cardi∣nals sharp accusation against the Admirall. all the Popishe Prelates of Fraunce, hauinge before he tooke his iourney, by the helpe and counsaile of some of the counsailours of Paris, deuised, and protested a gre∣nous and sharpe accusation againste the Admirall: as though he had commaunded Merae to kill the Duke of
Guise, and giuen him money for that purpose. Mere was now already dispached out of the waye with extreame punnishment, (as we haue before declared) and a wry∣ting published abrode in the tyme of war of his exami∣nation: wherein the Admirall was called the aucthor, and procurer of that murder. The Admirall (as also is exprest in the former booke) had made aunswere to that wryting: in which his aunswere he first requested that Merae might bee kept a liue, to the entent the accuser mighte appeare face to face with the accused, accor∣dinge to order of Lawe, and iustice. But after that ex∣ecution was done vppon Merae, he complained that the same was done in such poste haste, to the end (all meanes to purge himselfe by the accuser, beinge taken from him:) preiudicat and hurtfull opinions of false ac∣cusations, mighte be conceyued against him. But the Cardinall laboured by all meanes possible, vnder pre∣tence of that accusation, to procure hatred againste the Admirall: and had replenyshed many mennes mindes with displeasure and malice against him: alwaies lay∣ing abrode, and shewing the horror and vnwoorthines of that murther, so shamefully committed by treason vppon so woorthy and noble a man. And besides a great number that were welwillers and followers of the dead Duke, he stirred vp the harts of forrein Princes against him: and wrote to the Em∣perour Ferdinando of the same matter: and to diuers o∣ther Princes of Germany. And this was the cause and beginning of many and great troubles▪ The Kinge of Spaine also, being moued thereunto by the often letters of the Cardinal, did write vnto the King, that there was no peace to be obserued and kept with such betrayinge Traitores, that had defiled themselues with the bloud of a man so notable and famouse. The Admirall wrote to the King & to the Quéene his mother, and as much as
he can purgeth himselfe, and shifteth of his accusations, complaininge that they were but iniuries offered vnto him by the Cardinall of Lorreine: and publisheth abrode for his owne defence, a certaine writinge, as hereafter followeth. Those thinges (saith he) which I aunswered to theThe Admi∣rall publi∣sheth a wri ting, wher in hee clea∣reth him∣selfe. accusation of Merae, in my former writing gyuen vp to the Queene, the Kinges mother, and published abroade throughout the whole kingdome, ought to be sufficient to discharge and free me of all kinde of blame, with all men of wisdome and discreation, and not before them only which haue had triall and knowledge howe I haue led my lyfe heretofore: but with them also which knowe and vnderstand, howe naturall and vnfayned, the hewe and colour of truth is: and how simplye and plainly she vseth to tell her tale. Especially seeinge I did so earnestly request, that my accuser Merae might be reserued, to ap∣peare against me. VVhich certainly I would neuer haue done, had I not bin therto moued by an assured & cleare conscience of my iust cause and innocencie. This my re∣quest was not in vaine, nor to cloke the matter: for I did not aske it by violence forcibly: nor yet for a fashion, slightly, but only for this one end and purpose: that the truthe mighte be knowen and made manifeste to all the world. But this request beeinge denied me, I did verely thinke with my selfe, and esteeme all the iudgementes that the parliamente of Paris had giuen againste me, as void and of none effect: vvhose entent was (as by the has∣ty and spedy execution of my aduersary it did appeare) to pres me with false and preiudicial surmises, al meanes of reprouing & conuincing mine accuser being quight cut of. I haue therefore done that which my duty requy∣red: and requested that the matter might be handled and knowen according to order of law. And whereas besides the letters, I sēt to the Quene of this matter I haue new∣published this writing abroad, I haue not done it with
out great and waighty cause, and the aduise and coun∣saile of wyse and pollitique men. For by that my request, I was in good hope to haue stayed the spedy expedition of the execution: which, the Iudges being very sore bent against me, did hasten and helpe forward all that they could. Also by this meanes I thought (the end of the broiles and troubles that were then being vncertaine) to haue satisfied the desires of many men, which desired to know the matter: especially of forreiners and straungers, amongst whom I was euill spoken of, by infamous Li∣belles and false malicious sclaunders: vntill such time as I hauing my aduersarie before me, might haue better oc∣casion more clearely to purge my selfe. Moreouer I did know for a certainty, not only that Merae had vtterly de∣nyed and renounced his former accusation against me, whereby it was manifeste that he did that which he did by plaine force and threatninges: but also that his priuy and secret confessions were in my ememies handes, by which e did declare me to be innocent and guiltles of the matter. All other accusations therefore, wherewith Merae did charge me (and yet if he had flatly and without all doubt pronounced me as guiltie, my aunswer all men know might be ready▪ that, forasmuch as I could not bee suffered to talke with him, all these thinges which are obiected against me, were violently extorted and wrin∣ged out of him, eyther in hope to escape death, or els to moderate and lessen the torment and furie of his pun∣nishment) I hold and take as forged and faigned: seeing that it may appeare by the testimony of many good and very worthy men, that Merae had often tymes said, that he had declared before the Iudges, that I was cleare and free from all maner blame in that matter: and that whenThe words of Merae. he was drawen and had to execution, he expresly and o∣penly said, that those accusations against me, were writ∣ten and penned downe by my enemies, before them on∣ly, who had left no way in this cause vntried, that might seeme to further my accusation, and for their sakes, in
winning of whose fauour, (al men might see) they had set their consciences to sale. vvhich thinge certain letters may easely proue (which when occasion shall serue I can bring forth) that were written from the appointed com∣missioners to the parlament the vi. and xv. day of March for the hastening of the execution of Merae: in which these woordes were written. That the Keepers of Merae were corrupted: and that therfore his death was not lon∣ger to be deferred: for that he would cal back againe that which he had said. But I vnderstand, that some do take occasion to coygne and forge a sclaunder against me, be∣cause I confessed in my former writing, that I had giuen a certain summe of money to Merae. vvhich thinge, al∣though I did then and there sufficiently aunswere, and thereby shewed that I dealt plainly and truly: when as I declared the whole matter simply without any manner dissembling: yet notwithstauding, I will playnly and sin∣cerely lay forth the cause of the giuinge of that money, and therby euidently proue, that it is but a meere and malicious surinise, whatsoeuer in this matter is objected against me▪ and chiefely that I may satisfie them that are trayned in Marshall affaires and do exercise that kind of lyfe. For I am not ignorant that this matter, which came to passe through the occasion of warre, and in the Campes of troublesome warriours: can not easely bee knowen and vnderstood in the peaceable Courtes of quiet laweyers. And yet I could this way easely make▪ manifest my integrity and innocencie, but the testimo∣ny of my owne conscience, shall suffise me before God and men, the double and contrary aunsweres of Merae in his examinations, his mind stroken and amazed with the terrour and feare of death, the hope of lyfe which he conceyued of the Iudges promyse, if he would accuse me (which hope hee helde still euen vnto the laste houre of death: and of mine owne part, the request which I made to haue mine accuser to appeare face to face, and my pro testation of my innocencye if that were not graunted:
the perplexed and headlong affectiō of the Iudges long before by me refused as incompetente. To be short, the astonied vnquietnes and waueringe inconstancy of my accuser, do manifestly and sufficiently declare my vn∣guiltines and innocency: neither truly would I haue dif∣ferred so long to haue shewed my purpose and intent, wherefore I gaue this money, vnlesse (that hauing writ∣ten to the Queene, and testified vnto her my innocency) I had thought my enemyes would not haue made such post and headlong hast with the execution, as they did: vvhich although it was done for euill will, and contrarye to all reason and equitie: yet could they not haue gotten a more manifest testimony of my guiltles vprightnesse then that, which they themselues thereby did giue mee: especially, bycause it was necessarie that he should haue bin kept a liue, not only for that I was accused of the killing of the Duke of Guise: but also for a greater and farre more waightye accusation as though I should haue gone about to haue murdered the King. VVherby it ap peareth how shameles those surmises were of the crimes laid to my charge. But let that passe, and let vs come to shew the end, wherfore I gaue that money to Merae: least that amongst Strangers, geuing credit to rumours and tales, the good cause of an harmeles and innocent man be oppressed, the matter being neither known nor made manifest. And first of all, where Merae saith that he offered me his helpe in this mattr: it is euen so. For when he had (beinge commended vnto me by Monsieur Subize his letters as I haue more at large declared in my former writing) lustely and frankly profered me his seruice, I de∣maunded of him, in what thing he could stand me in best stead: He aunswered, that hee had great acquaintance with the Aumale, for that hee had serued in tymes past vnder him in Picardy, of whom, if he could finde him in the Dukes Campe, he would easely know all the Dukes ententes and purposes, and that he would forthwith cer∣tifye
me of them, but if the Aumale were not there, yet he was so well knowen of a great nomber of Captaines and souldiers that serued vnder the Duke, that hee did not doubt, but that he should haue both easy and also safe passage into their Campe. The which certainly did make me suspect him, when I saw him offer himselfe in such a brauery (and I said as much to Monsieur Gran∣mont who was then presente there with mee, declaringeMonsieur Granmon vnto him that I had knowen him not passing iii. or iiii. dayes, and that only by the letters of Monsieur Subize.) Notwithstanding I gaue him at that tyme, xx. crounes, that I might haue a triall of him. For such as are skilfull in feates of warre, know what spies and scoutes may do,Scoutes. and that money in such a case is not to be spared: & they who know me, can testifie thet I set but little by money when such occasion is offered. And this was the first and chiefe cause why I gaue him that money: the which truly I counted as caste away. For there was nothing I lesse lo∣ked for, then for Merae, when as sodeinly there came vn∣toMonsieur Tranuie. me, ying at Neuuille, Monsieur Tranuie a noble man, who said he was come vnto mee at the commaun∣dement of the Andelot my Brother, to bring a certaine fellow vnto me, that was newly come frō the Guises cāpe. And although I looked not for him (for I was very of∣ten troubled with such matters) yet I talked with hym, and asked him of diuers small and light matters: in the which he seemed to aunswere mee very readily and cunningly: wherfore I enquired further of him whether the Duke knew of my departure from Orleance, & whe∣ther I vould go. He answered, that the Duke knew not the certain day when I would set forward: but he knew certainly, sixe dayes ago, that I meant to go to Norman∣die, and had so prouided for the matter already, that I was sure to find many lettes and stayes in my iourney. And for this cause there was commaundement gyuen to the Marshal of Vieleuill and the Coūty of Ringraue, that they should cause all the Townes both great and small to bee fortified: that they should so woorke, that
there might bee enemies for me in euery place that I could not lay siege to any Towne, for that I lacke both footemen and ordinance: that the Duke himselfe would see that all the Horses that could bee gotten should bee brought to Paris, and that hee would prouide all such Horses as should bee needefull for the cariage of the gunnes, that he would bring the matter about, that hee would bringe three orfoure thousande shotte on horse besides his light horsemen, and men at armes, that hee would followe mee so hard, and trace me so neerely, that I should haue no opportunitie to ioygne with the aide of Normandie, no, not so much leysure to rest me, finally, that besides, that the Germain horsemen waxed faint & weary, he would driue me into such straights and distres, that eyther he would make them to come vnto him, or els (which was more) would cause them bend their force against mee. And bycause I feared that most of all other, I told Merae that it was conuenient he went againe to the Gui∣ses campe, & to certifie me what the Duke meant to do. To which he aunswered, that he was ready and willing to do it: but he wanted a horse for that purpose: and tru∣ly (quoth I) I would to God I had one to giue thee, But to say the truth, I haue not one left: to which he replied, that hee could quickly buie one if so be hee had money: Marie (quoth I) I will giue thee money with a good will, so that thou bring me certain and true tidinges what the Duke meanes to do: thou shalt want for no money, only make diligēt enquirie whether the Duke meane, to pur∣sue me or no, & if he attempt any thing against Orleans see thou carriest word of it to my brother the Andelot. After this talke, I gaue him 100▪ crowns: and hee forth∣with, not once salutinge my brother the Andelot (al∣though he passed through the Suburbs of Orleans,) came to a Towne called Nun. And this was the cause why I gaue him the 100. crowns. Moreouer I protest, that when he began to talke with me of killinge the Duke: I made
him no aunswere, as though I had eyther allowed or dis∣allowed the facte: for I little cared whether hee eyther would, or could do it And when I gaue him the hundred crownes, I protest, I did it, for no other end and purpose, but only that he might spedely certifie me, whether the Duke ment to pursue me or no. And why I should feare this thing, there were both waighty and manifest causes which I will not sticke to set forth here perticularly. I could not be ignorant that the Duke knew of my iour∣ney, for I was constrained, to prouide and take order for it, in a great assembly of horsemen eyght dayes before I departed, neyther could I set forward any sooner, bicause the Germaine Horsemen, were faine to leaue their car∣riages and other necessaries behinde them, and surely I had very much a do to bring that matter to an end, bee∣ing a thing neyther heard of, nor practised amongst the Germanes. And that the Duke of Guise knewe of this, it is past all peraduenture: for there were diuers that re∣mayned amongst our horsemens bandes, to entice and moue the Germans to defection and slyding away from vs to the Guises: in so much that some of them were in such case and so mynded, that the Marshall of Hesse and others their chief Captaynes began to mistrust them. Moreouer, besides that I was admonished by Mere, I dyd also know for a certaintie, that ther was cōmaundement geuen throughout all Normandie, that all manner stops,The Mar∣shal Hesse. lettes, and hinderances that might any waye trouble our armie should be practised against vs. And for the more assurance of this matter, there came certaine letters into my handes, wherein was contayned very straight charge for the accomplishement thereof, and for the furnishing of the Cities with victualls (as afterwards we vnderstood to haue bin done in many places) & that the Milles shold bee so spoyled of their furniture, that they should not grynd, and that in euery place, they should set vpon mee with all their force and power. VVherefore, all the Ci∣ties being takē before hand, and the wayes where I shold
passe stopped: it was impossible for me to get to the sea side, to receyue money out of England, for which I lon∣ged very sore to paye the Germaine horsemen their wa∣ges. The which thing as soone as they once knew, there was great daunger that sedition should haue ben stirred vp amongst the souldiours, in so much that they feared not to talke and mutter of it in their common and open communications. VVherefore, if the Duke had attem∣pted to haue skirmished but with the straglers and tayll of our armie, it was likely that we should haue bin great∣ly endamaged by him and shamefully foyled: but sure it was past all peraduenture, that he might so haue hyn∣dered and troubled vs that we should neuer haue gotten to the sea coast: wherein did consist (as farre as mannes reason could reach) the whole and only hope of all pre∣sent aid, namely of monie, without the which I could not haue payd the Germaine horsemen their wages, where∣vppon without doubt would haue followed a most mise∣rable calamitie and ouerthrow of all my affayres, especi∣ally being thereby not of abilitie to encounter or ioyne battaile any more with my enemyes. For after we had bin past the plaine of Neufburge, the waye was so vne∣uen and discōmodius, that 500. harguebuzeres did com∣pell ten thousand horsemen most shamefully to fly and the best remedy that I could wish, to ridde vs out of o great distresse, was that I might haue both oportunitie and occasion to ioygne battaile, which neyther I could haue done, without very excedinge greate and gruous losse and danger, being beset on euery side and as it were hedged in with fensed and fortified cities, to which our e∣nemies had free recourse and passage. There was also an other let of great waight and importance, and that was that the Villages and Townes were so desert, wast, and so forsaken of all men, and the families in that countrey so scatered and dispersed abrode, that very hardly there could be gathered togyther the nomber of fiftie horse∣men. All which difficulties and lettes the Duke and his
Captaines knew full well, which made mee to iudge that he would rather set forward towardes Normandy to pur sue me, then to attempt the siege of Orleans. For if so be my armie had bin once destroyed: it was very likely that Orleance should soone haue come to ruine and wrack, but if my armye had bin safe and preserued, there was good hope, yea although Orleans had bin won, to haue maintained and gon forward with the war. These things I haue here more particularly declared and set forth, to the intent I might shewe to them that haue any expe∣rience in these matters, whether it had bin expediente and fit for me to haue spared my money in such an ex∣tremitie, wherein it was necessary to know what way the Duke ment to worke, and for this purpose I had hyred very many, who receiued of mee good round summes of money and yet do not make their bragges and vauntes thereof. And whereas I amongst all these distresses and daungers that I knewe to be certaine, did aduenture vp∣pon that iourney, I was truly against my will compelled therevnto, by the extreame perill and hazarde I should haue bin in, if I had bin forsaken of the Germane horse∣men through want of money. To these foresaid causes that I haue shewed why I gaue this money, I may ad also this, that Mrae was wont (as it is to be proued by the tes∣temonie of diuers and sundrie men) long before, to talke of the murthering of the Guse, and yet it appeareth by his owne sayinge, that I neuer spake vnto him or had any knowledge of him, before the time that he brought Monsieur Subize his letters vnto me. VVhere vppon I may truly conclude, that it is neyther true nor like to be true, that I should be the author of that thinge which he long before had conceiued and purposed in his mind. Moreouer where as Merae was very nere of kinne to M. Rainold (whom the Duke had caused to be slaine) it was likely that he was enflamed and stirred vp againste the Guise, by some priuate quarell and speciall hatred. And as I haue declared beefore: euen so of a truth the case
standes. vvhereby me thinke it is euident and plain that they who perswade themselues that I was the author and procurer of this murther, (besides that they vse very fonde and childishe reasons to proue the same) do not know my nature, for if so be I had charged him to doo any more then that I haue before declared, I would not feare to confesse it with like franknes and boldnes. And truly, I would gladly aske this question of them: whe∣ther they imgin, that there was any other cause why I should cause my other answer to be published, then that I desired the matter might be vnderstanded of all men. And it there were any thing else, why should I dissem∣ble? why should I cloake it? why should I not confesse it: who euer was a more deadly and open enemie vnto mee, than the Duke of Guise? for what other cause did he be∣siege Orleans, but that he might vtterly destroy and cast awaye mee, my wyfe and children, and whatsoeuer else I held as deare and precious vnto mee? yea there are men of great credite, that can and will testifie, that he vsed of∣ten to bragge and make his vaunts, that whensoeuer the Citie were taken, he would spare none, neyther man, wo∣man, yong nor old. Neyther needeth any man to doubt, that amongest all them that were in the battayle at Dreux, it was he I sought for, and chiefely he with whom I wished to meete. And certaine it is, that if I myselfe could haue discharged anie shot at him, I would ful glad ly haue done it: yea truely, if I had ben Captain ouer ten thousand gunners, I would haue charged them that they should euery one haue leueled and shot at him alone. To be short, I would haue left no deuise that might stande with the law of armes, vntried: so that I might by any meanes deliuer my selfe from an enemie so spightfull and deadly against mee and myne, & all good men. And last of all, I protest before God and his Aungelles, that I commaunded nothing else, but that which I haue decla∣red in these my writings. If there be any man that desi∣teth
to knowe more, let him repaire too mee, and I will make him aunswer. Whilest these things happened in Fraunce, the Po∣pish Prelates sat still at Trent, labouring very diligent∣ly to prouide and establish the estate of Poperie, with a long rable of Decrées: the exact rehearsall whereof (be∣ingThe trauell of the Coū cell of Trent to hinder and stop religiō in Fraunce. at large already set out in a booke for that purpose) shall not be néedfull to be brought in here in these oure Commentaries, especially for that our onely purpose & intent is, briefly to shew the estate and condicion of the faithfull in Fraunce, and how thei were troubled & vexed in the time of Truce, and how afterward they were en¦forced to breake out into open warre. The Councell of Trent therefore did very carefully trauell in maintay∣ning and defending the Popes authoritie and dignitie in the kingdome of Fraunce: and this matter, as a thing of greatest waight and importance, was thorowly and most earnestly laboured of all sides. And the great and large reuenew that came out of Fraunce (whiche thing did chiefely enflame ye zeale of those reuerend Fathers) and the great daunger and present hazard they were in, to loose them, if the reformed Religion had preuayled, did make them busily to besturre them, and to take the matter in hand. There was present at the Councell the Cardinall of Lorraine, hauing great knowledge and experiēce in the affaires of Fraunce, and a subtill and sleighty old coyg∣ner of new fetches, and besides that, the matter for hys owne cause stood him vppon: he was also incensed with an outragious hatred and malice against the men of the reformed religion, and chiefly against the trueth it self, which he both knew and renounced. At his request and setting on, they began to consult how they might vtter∣ly deface and roote vpp the reformed Religion out of
Fraunce: the readiest and fittest waye for that matter that they could deuise was, that there should be a league made betwixt the King of Spayne and the King of Frāce: and that the King of Spayne, (because it was a thing of great difficultie and could not without much a doe bée brought to passe) should helpe the French Kinge at all tymes with such ayde as should be néedfull: and that all wayes and meanes should be sought to abolish and dis∣annull the Edict wherin was graunted the libertie and vse of the reformed Religion. This league which was made for the rooting out of true religion, the holy fathers of the Councell of Trent dyd call the Sacred and holye League. The Cardinall of Lorayne doth promise all pos∣sible diligence and trauaill in this matter: and that hée will perswade the King to finish the league, and as for the Quéene, being of herselfe prone & enclining to their parte, and the consents of the Nobles, he accounted him selfe sure of them. As the Cardinall (a most bitter enemie to the refor∣med Religion) did what possible he could for the accom∣plishement of these matters in the Councell at Trent: the enemies of the Gospell were not idell at home in Fraunce, in defacing and putting downe the Edicte: and the Quéene was not onely euery day more wayward & disliking of the reformed religion, but was also very fu∣riously incensed against it: and dyd by all meanes shée could denise, goe about to engraffe and so we hatred and malice in the tender mind of the yong King against re∣ligion: that then he might proclayme perpetuall and e∣uerlasting warre against al the reformed Churches in Fraunce. The Constable Momorencie was also very forward in this matter, and was very maliciously bent againste the truth, bicause he purchased so great infamy and dis∣honour in the former warres. So that the Edict had in
France enemies both many in nomber, and greate inThe King being of the age of 14. yeares i declared to be of ful & lawfull ag power and authoritie. About this time the Kinge being of the age of xiiii. yeres was declared to be of ful & law∣full age by the decrées and iudgemente (as the maner was) of all the high Courtes of parliament, and within few dayes after, was according to the custome solemly crowned, and all such estates as had to do with the ad∣ministration of the Realme as vicegerents and protec∣tours and such other, were displaced very profitablie & fitly, both to make their cōfederacy, & also to raise & stir vp newe broiles and troubles, which otherwise they could not haue done, without the authoritie and assent of those estates. All the noble men being thus encensed againste theThe sutil and craftie deuises of the aduer∣saris a∣gainst Reli∣gion. reformed religion, yet nothing was attempted against it by open force and warlike manner: neyther could they haue done it without great daunger, consideinge the Estate of thinges at that present time. Wherefore this was the wily and craftie fetch of the Cardinall of Lorreine, that nothing should be done openly againste the Edict: but that they should by litle and little assay it, and as it were vndermine it priuily till the time were come, wherein they might set forth and declare that sa∣cred league, and that they might by the Kinges authori∣ty vtterly ouerthrow & destroy the Edict. In the meane tyme the people should be borne in hand and made be∣leue, that the Edict as concerninge Religion was not perpetuall, but at pleasure and for a space, till such time as the Kinge might conuenientlye bringe the whole Realme to one only vniformitie of Religion. And that the King especially and his Brother might be enflamed against the reformed Religion. And last of all that no occasion that might séem to make for the accomplishing of these matters, should be let passe, but that al waies & meanes that might in any wyse▪ further them should
be practised warely and with great discretion and pol∣licie. The deuises that were vsed were these. It was tal∣ked openly abrode, and that very much among the cour∣tiers, that it was the Kinges and the Queene his Mo∣thers will and pleasure, that the Edicte should be dyli∣gently obserued and executed, and in the meane tyme by the Cardinalles deuise and the Quéenes commaun∣dement, ther were priuie and secret commaundements sent out to certaine picked and chosen men for this pur∣pose, that they should not feare to violate and breake the Edicte in any thing, whereof they had occasion offered them. And if so bee that any of the Protestantes that were wronged contrary to the prescripte order of the Edicte, did complaine thereof, (as verie manye did) at lēgth with great sute hauing leaue to shew their griefs and wronges, they alwayes receyued this aunswere: that it was the Kinges will and commaundement that his Edict for and concerning Religion, should be euery where obserued and kepte, and that whosoeuer were found guiltie of the breach and violating thereof should be greuously punnished: and as this was his pleasure, so they were bidden to take héede least that they them∣selues who did so much complaine of wronges and iniu ries done vnto them, had first transgressed against the Edicte, and then malicioufly and falsely accused others for it. So by this meanes a great nōber of such as com∣playned were feared and shaken of with threateninges and angry wordes, and many of them also were throw∣en into prisons and clapt fast into yrns, as authoures of false accusations and workers of sedition & trouble. And if so be I should go about to repeate here perticu∣lar examples of such matters, it were but in vaine, be∣ing the office rather of a iust and full historie then ap∣pertaining to our purpose, which in writing these short
& brife Commentaries, we haue taken in hande. But notwithstāding all this, those that were appointed by ye protestāts, sued still that their matters might be had in question and examined, and at length obtayned it, and Commissioners, choise fellowes appointed for the pur∣pose: in so much that the matter was so handeled, that new deuises and fetches were brought in to oppresse & entangle ye trueth: so that, what soeuer was brought in by ye protestāts against their enemies, was either iud∣ged manifestly false, or else not so euident true, that the offender thereby should be punished: and if so be a Pa∣pist had ben conuinced and found gilty, by and by there was one speciall cause or other deuised, whereby it was proued that, that which was done, was done accordinge to law and equitie: yea and the capitall and chief faults were turned vpon ye protestāts heads against whō they had ben commited: whereby there was quarrels piked and occasion taken to enterprete and expound the Edict at the pleasure and liking of the Papistes, so that here∣by the faythful were euery day more and more afflicted through the factions & inclinations of the people, wax∣ing euery day more cruell and hautie, by reason of so great impunitie and winking at mischief. When the Cardinall of Loraine was returned homeviolent and false inter∣p̄tations of the Edict set orth by the Kings commaun∣dement. into Fraunce from the Councell of Trent, the Papistes were marueloufly thereby encouraged and emboldend to attempt and enterprise new matters: but they had their lesson giuen very subtilie by the craftie Cardinal, to cloake and dissemble their intent and purpose of abo∣lishing the Edict. And yet they were not content that they which were offenders went scotfrée without pu∣nishment: but they also stayed for the Kings letters & warrants, whereby their impunitie should not endam∣mage or be hurtful vnto them, and that thei might haue licence to offend hereafter worse then they had don be∣fore,
and that by warrant of the Kinges will and com∣maundement. There were therefore new interpreta∣tions of the Edict solemnely published, which should be of the same force and vertu that the Edict for Religion was, as hereafter shalbe declared. The Prince of Conde being oftē moued & requested by the protestants, had diuers times cōplayned both to the King and the Quéene his mother, declaring that the E∣dict was many wayes violated and broken, and thereby the faithfull gréeuously wronged and spoyled. But al∣wayes against all the Princes complaintes, was holdē out as a buckler of defence, the Kings pleasure & mynd for the expounding and interpretation of the Edict: and that this his pleasure might be more manifest and bet∣ter knowen, all the Kings Counsell was commaunded to repaire to Paris, and certayne of the chief of the par∣liament of Paris with them. To this assembly also the Prince of Conde was commaunded to come, accompa∣nied with diuers of the Noble men that were profes∣sours of the reformed religiō. Which done, euery man spake his mynd, and the Papistes voyces being more in number and preuaylinge, there was a Decrée enacted, wherein was comprised (vnder the name and auctori∣tie of the King) the interpretation of the Edicte in this forme: VVhereas we haue endeuoured to prouide remedies for those broyles and troubles which haue many wayes shaken and afflicted our kingdoe, and haue for that purpose giuē out and graunted our Edict of peace, wher∣in was graunted to those our subiectes that professe the new Religion, free libertie and licence too exercise the same: we doo now eftsones wil and commaund that it be holden and accompted as firme, and ratified of all oure leege people and subiectes. For our purpose and intent was thereby to giue vnto those our subiectes the benefite
and commoditie of peace and quietnesse: the which our Edict we doe promise in the faith and honor of a King, shalbe kept and obserued as farre foorth and as longe, as it shall seeme good and expedient. For wee knowe what authoritie and power we haue receyued from aboue of God, which we do meane to vse with all moderation and integritie, to the profite and commoditie of our sub∣iectes: of which (as we haue next to the glorye of God) chiefest care and regarde: so doe wee wishe that it may be aduaunced and furthered by that our Edict. And ther fore whereas we vnderstand that there are certain things comprised therein very generally, which beeing eyther wrong vnderstood, or not rightly executed, haue gyuen occasions of great troubles, & are like hereafter to breed greater inconueniences and broyles, if they be not spede∣ly prouided for: which we are fully purposed to doe. VVherefore, for these considerations our pleasure is (to the intent we may aunswere and satisfie the iust com∣playntes of all our subiectes) to giue a full and playne de∣claration of our mynd, as concerning certayne clauses of the Edict, which be now in controuersie and diuersly ta∣ken. And because that all things may be done in better order for the profit and common vtilitie of our subiects, (for which we are most carefull) we haue consulted with the wisest and greatest of our Counsell: by whose aduise we haue here set foorth a more full and exprese declara tion of our pleasure concerning the Edicte, the which we will and commaund to bee established and ratified: not that we meane to take any thing from the Edict, but too enterpret it according to our will and meaning to whom it appertayneth so to doe, least that such clauses as bee doubtfull, breed contention and strife. To the first Article which is. That al noble men that were of chief authority might liue quietly without trou∣ble or molestation in their mantions & dwelling places, & to enioy togither with their families & subiectes free
bertie of conscience, & the peaceable vse of the religion which they terme reformed, this exception is to be added in the way of interpretaion. It shall not be lawfull to be done or practised in any places that were either bought or takē frō the Ecclesiasticall liuings, or in any which wer holdē of the church, to which we forbid the vse of the re formed Religion, both publiquely and priuately. For there were dyuers of ye church liuings yt were sold at ye Kinges cōmaundement, & were by yt meanes holden & possessed of the Protestantes, who vsed the benefite of the Edicte for the administration of Religion in those places, to the great griefe of the Papistes. There were also diuers that had great and fat benifices, brought to the knowledge and profession of the reformed religion, but chiefely one of great reputation the Cardinal Chas∣tillon a man endewed with many goodly church liuings and was Archebishop of Aeges: and many other of the noblest houses in France. Who if they once had gotten by the Edicte libertie of Religion, it was very likely, that it should haue ben spred and sowen abrode far and wide in diuers places. For many places where those benefises lay, had preuiledges of great authority, and very large and ample dominion & rule: so the Papistes by this interpretation were well eased, to the greate hinderance & discomodity of the faithful. To the first ar∣ticle of the Edict wherin was. Be it fre and lawful for al cities, in which that religiō was vsed the vii. day of march (besides other Cities that are perticularly to be set out & appointed in euery Prouince) stil to haue and enioy the vse thereof. There was added a newe interpretation. That those Cities were vnderstood & meant, which were kept and holden in warlike maner, and in which the re∣formed religion had bin publiquely and openly practi∣sed, at the day beefore assigned. So by that meanes there were certaine Cytyes barred and shutte out
from the vse of their religion. To the sixt article where∣in was mēcioned, That the citie & the whole prouince of Paris should be free and cleare from the vse of that re∣ligion. There was added a more straight restraint and prohibition, That it was not lawfull for any that dwelte within the Citie or precinct of the Prouince of Paris, to goe to any Cities licensed by the king of the prouinces neere adioyning, to exercise that Religion, vnlesse they dyd dwell in them: neyther shall it bee lawfull for any such persons to haue any māsion place or dwelling with∣in the limites of the Citie or prouince of Paris. This re∣straint was manifestly knowen to be annexed for no o∣ther purpose, but only in despight and hatred of certain Senatours and Aldermen of Paris, worthie Patrones of the truth, and other worthy and famous men, that thereby they might bee constrained to leaue Paris, and remoue to other places. And where as in the fourth article mention is made, That all men might liue quietly in euery place, with∣out any trouble or daunger for the freedome and vse of their Religion and conscience: it was restrayned with a very straight exception: That none, neyther man nor woman were accompted in that number which ey∣ther in, or after the tyme of warre had forsaken eyther Abbayes, Nunries or other religiouse houses: and these were streightly commaunded, eyther to returne agayne to the places of Religion they came from, and if they were maried to forsake their wiues, or else forthwith to depart the Realme. So that by this meanes many fa∣milies (but with greater discommoditie and wrong of a more number) were eased and helped: to the whiche both yong men and maydes that were in tymes paste thrust and shut vp into Abbayes, were now retourned, being endewed with a more pure and syncere knowe∣ledge of the trueth, and sued by the lawe for their patri∣monie and partes left by their parents. But by this ex∣ception,
all libertie and licence to sue and pleade for their owne was taken from them, and they either com pelled to reenter the Cloysters they had forsaken, or else enforced to depart out of the Realme. And by this meanes there were many occasions gyuen of diuers great and gréeuous iniuries, as for example: That hor∣rible & accursed murther committed by M. d' Anuille, (as we haue before declared) vppon A. Motton, a mi∣nister of the woord of God: which detestable facte was cloaked and defended vnder pretence of this Inter pre∣tation. Furthermore the vse of the religion which was ter∣med by a common name, The administration of religi∣on, was maruetlously abated and diminished by a new deuised interpretation. That it should not be lawfull for any man to be a minister of that religion, but for such as were borne there (that is) bred within any of the Pro∣uinces of the kingdome of Fraunce. So that by this fetch diuers of the Churches were bereft and spoyled of their good Pastors and Doctours, as namely the Congrega∣tion at Lions, of that learned and eloquent man Petrus Viretus, who dyd very effectually and faithfully trauel, in aduauncing and spreading abroad the Gospel in that most famous and populous Citie and mart Towne of all Fraunce, to the great griefe and hart sore of the Pa∣pistes, for whose cause especially they had procured this exposition of the Edict. Wherefore he departing thence went first to the Countrie of Orange, and afterwardes at the Quéene of Nauarres commaundment, he came to Bearn, to confirme and set in order the Churches and Congregations that were there. The Papistes now began to mocke and laughe in their sléeues, to sée this Declaration gyuen out by the King, and published abroad in open writing, whereby it was made manifest, what an ouerthrow was gyuen to
the Edict: and being in a brauery and al vpon the hoigh set day, and appointed the time, and that with threat∣nings, when as it should be vtterly abolished and quite done awaye: and warrantinge them selues vppon this beginning, they euery day more & more without checke violated the Edict. There be also new deuises put in practise, whereby they might entyce and allure the Prince of Conde fromNew sleights put in pra∣ctise to en∣tice the Prince of Conde frō the refor∣med Reli∣gion. the reformed Religion. This fetch was practised before by the Cardinal of Loreine against the king of Nauarre, and had preuayled, & therefore he thought good to proue and trie once againe against the Prince, thinking with himselfe that hée might as easely and with the same de∣uises wherewith he had ouercome the king of Nauar, winne also vnto him the Prince of Conde: the Quéene of her selfe was ready and desirous to take this matter in hande, & many other meanes there were that séemed (as it were) to profer their helpe for the accomplishmēt thereof. The Prince of himselfe was of a myld and soft disposition, desirous of peace, and euen glutted with the lothsomenesse of the former warres, and being altogi∣ther bent to kéepe and maintain peace, did from his hart abhorre and detest strife and contentious troubles. Wherefore hée was much and often at the Court, and very familiar both with the King and the Quéene hys mother. The Guises also of set purpose séemed not too come so often to the Court, nor to be in such fauour with the Quéene as they were wont to bée, and all for the Princes sake: to win whom, there was no fetch, no de∣uise, no subtiltie left vntried. The Quéene her selfe v∣sed very often and louingly, to shew the deare good will she bare to the Prince: and told him that of her self and for her part she dyd fauour and loue him: that it was & should be both the Kings and her will & mind to estéeme and loue (as right & reason required) the Princes their
néere kinsmen in their degrée and place: that there was good cause, why there should bee more néere and deae friendship betwixt her and him aboue all others: that he should not thinke that any thing had or might hereaf∣ter happen that should stay or sack the true and perfect good will she bare him: so that he would doe his dutie, & let no occasiō slip, that might aduaunce and enlarge the glory and honour of hers & his. And many other trayns were intermingled with this talke, whereof that subtil and alluring woman thorough her courtly trickes and baytes had great store. Beside this, there were more particular promises made: and that olde forged deuise was renewed of the yéelding and gyuing vp of the Ile of Sardina: which had ben diuers tymes before that of∣fered to the King of Nauarre and was now agayne pro∣mied to the Prince by the Quéen, and that in the name of the King of Spayne. And that it should not be thought that the matter were but triffled withall in wordes, ther were many great gifts bestowed vpon the Prince and his Children. Mariage also was attempted that there might be a more sure band and coniunction of a∣mitie amongst them. The Marishall of Saint Andrew, a man of excéeding great wealth, being slayne in the bat∣tayle of Dreux, had left behind him one onely daughter, who was heire of all those goodly and ample possessions. To her (beinge almost mariageable) the Quéene went about to couple the Prince of Condies eldest sonne, who was then called the Duke of Augnien, the mother of the gentle woman, doing all she could to bring that mari∣age to passe: And although the honour and nobilitie of the two howfes were nothing like equall: yet the Mar∣shialles daughter had great aboundance of ritchesse on her side, which surely is the thing that striketh the strok and beareth greatest sway in marriage matters now in these our dayes wherein men are altogyther gyuen
to get wealth and riches. The Prince himself was not very vnwilling, and therefore kept company very fami liarly with the widowe the Marshialles wife, and great curteousie was exercised betwixte them. The Mar∣shalles wyfe gaue vnto the Prince of Conde a very fruit∣full and beautifull place called the Territory of Ualeri: and the Marishiall him selfe had bestowed there for the trimming and beawtifying of it, much rickes which King Henry had giuen him in giftes and rewardes: this place dyd shée giue vnto the Prince, withall the right, Title, and possessions thereto belonging, the Quéen ra∣tifying and allowing the matter very well: wherefore euery man looked euery day when that mariage should be solemnized. And who in the Courte then but the Prince of Conde: who (as the nature of man is to slyde and fall through ill companie from exercise and vertu∣ouse trauaill to pleasure and idlenesse) began (contrary to the institution of the reformed religion and good con∣uersation) to gyue himself to the wanton desire and lust of women, and tasting very licentiously of the baytes & snaring traynes that were layde for him, séemed euery day more and more carelesse of that good and vertuouse Matrone his wife, who was of the howse and family of Roye, and waxed cold and faynt in the profession and de∣fence of the reformed religion, to the great grief & feare of all good men, but to the great ioy of the papistes, who made their vaunts and crackes saying, that the Prince would daunce the same daunce that his brother the king of Nauarre had lead defore him. And surely there was great likelihood of most lamentable and sorrowfull de∣cay and ruine, had not the mercyfull prouidence of god, speedely preuented it, as hereafter in his place shal bee declared. In the vttermost part of the prouince of Languedoc in the way as they go to the mountaines Pyrenes, there is
a Citie called Paniez, a very rich and populous towne: This towne was kept and holden by the Protestants in the time of warre, but after that Truce was taken and peace concluded, and that Monsieur de Anuill (as wee haue before declared) was come into Languedoc, and had euen wearied all the cities thereof with his outragious and vnruly garrisons: the Inhabitāts of Paniez foresée∣ing their own daūger by other mennes harmes, wrote vnto Monsieur de Anuille, desiring him that hée woulde not presse and charge them with néedlesse garrisons, whereof there should be no need nor vse, séeing that they were and would be ready prest to obey all his commaū dements: and did purpose truly & faythefully to mayn∣tayne and kéepe the peace. Monsieur de Anuill was ther∣by more earnest and hte, and did straightly charge the Consuls of the Citie (for so they in that Countrey do cal their chief Officers) that they should leaue of their sute and enterprise, otherwise they should be sure to smart for the common peoples faultes, wherewith they being terrified, made answere that they were ready to obeye him in whatsoeuer it pleased him to lay vpon them, and calling the commons togither to an assembly, did bitter∣ly and very sharply rebuke them for their stubburnes. But the commons on the other side protested, that it was agaynst all law and right, and that it was done con trary to the tenor and forme of the peace concluded, that they would rather complayne to the King of the tyran∣ny of th President. Finally, that they would not for any cause commit themselues, their goods, their wyues and children into the handes of the Lieuetenant, being (as he was) so sore incensed and angrye against them. But whilest wordes went too and fro amongest them, there begā a whot contention betwixt the Magistrates and the commons. The people being set on a furie, cha∣sed away the Magistrates, and forthwith fortified and
ensed the citie, and no entrance would be graunted to M. de Anuilles garrison. Who cōplaining to ye King of the matter receyued commission from him to punnishe the offenders very seuerely, with commaundement al∣so that the Townsmen should receiue in the Garrison. The King also sent thither Monsieur  a no∣ble man with charge, that they should eyther receyue such Garrison as the Lieuftenant the Anuill should ap∣point: or els to be greuously punnished who comming thither to the Citie was forthwith receiued in by the Citizens, who declared vnto him that they had not com∣mitted that fact in way of rebellion, but were ready to obey the King their chiefe soueraigne Lord and gouer∣nour: that it happened through the rashe and hasty dea∣ling of the Magistrats, that the commons being moued and stirred vp with feare of further harme to ensue, had behaued themselues otherwyse against them, then be∣came them: finally that they did willingly and gladly submit them selues, their children and goodes, to the Kinges will and pleasure. So vppon this M. Ram∣ being entered the Citie, certified M. de Anuill of the Townsmennes minds, who straight waies com∣ming thither accompanied and garded with certaine bandes of horsmen and footemen was very reuerentlie and humbly receyued of the Citizens. But he was no sooner entered the Towne but he immediatly began to vse and handle them as enemies. The Citie was spoy∣led of all her priuiledges, the walles razed, the NobleThe spoyle & wasting of the con∣gregation at Paniez by d'An∣uille. men diuersly fined and punnisht, many of them behea∣ded, their Minister hāged, their goodes giuen ouer to ye Souldiours for a pray and a spoyle, the furiouse Soul∣diers were let loose vppon the honest matrones and Uirgines of the Citie, to the number of 800. Citisens were banished: to be short that worthy Citie was vtter∣ly wasted, spoiled & made desolate of the greatest parte
of her inhabitantes, by the cruell and detestable villany of the Anuill. Aboute this tyme, there came newes abrode of the Kinges prograce, throughout the whole Realme and forsooth there was a cause of this prograce deuised: andThe Kings progresse & causes ther∣of. that was, that it stoode the Kinge vppon, to take a sur∣uey and a vew of his whole kingedome, that he in his owne person might heare and receaue the complaintes of his subiectes, and with present remedy help and ease their gréeed mindes, and that with his presence hee might confirme and encourage euery on to do his duty. And though this cause was pretended, yet the Quéens had another fetch & purpose in her head. (Whereof the Cardinall of Lorraine both knew, and was also authour and first inuenter of it, although for other causes hee was not in this prograce,) the marke she shot at (as it is reported of diuers that were more thorowly acquainted with the matter) was (the King himselfe as it being ig∣norant of it) that ye sacred league with ye King of Spaine which was begon in the Counsaile of Trent, might bee ratified and confirmed: and that in the meane season the tender mind of the youug king, might be, by all meanes possible prouoked and stirred vp against the reformed Religion and al thinges were of set purpose so ordered in euery Citie where the Kinge should come, that the Protestantes might complaime as long as they would but al should be in vain and to no purpose: yea and they themselues rather accompted and taken for the causers and authours of troubles, then obtain any thing where by to redresse their wronges and iniuries. Whilest preparation was made for this iourney, there came a cōmaundement from the King to all those Cities that were holden of the Protestantes in the time of warre. VVhere as now after pacification of all former trou∣bles,
ther is nothing that we more wish and desire than that peace and quietnes may be restored in al partes and quarters of our kingdome: wee do now will and com∣maund (to the intent all occasion of new broiles may be remoued and quight taken away: that all such muniti∣ons, fortifications, and bulwarkes, as were made and built in the tyme of warre for the defence of your Cities, bee quight defaced and taken away: that all our subiectes hereafter may quietly and without feare of further dan∣ger, kepe and maintain our peace: especially for that our faith and promise sufficiently declared in our Edicte ought to be to all true and faithfull subiectes, in seede of a sure wall and sheild of defence &c. So by this meanes all kind of munition and forti∣fications was defaced in diuers Cities, as in Orleans, Mountaubane, valence, and diuers other of the most fa∣mous Cities in France to the great discommoditie andMontaubā destruction of the whole Realme. And that chiefely in , a moste necessarie and profitable Citie to the whole countrey yea and that in the moste daungerous times of the Kinges and kingdome, especially in the tyme of Charles the vii. the Englishmen were conquerers farre and neare, and when all Normandy and Paris the Metropollitane Citie of the Realme were wnne and vanquished, togither with the Countries to them adioyning & all the Kingdome in an vprore with enemyes, then was Orleans a chiefe and special place of succour and refuge both for the King and all his. Not∣withstanding these Cities were defaced and marked with the tokens and blemishes of Rebellion, for that in tyme of trouble they had preserued a nomber of good and true subiectes, especially Orleans was shamefully spoiled, and made almoste a poore simple Oraunge or Uillage: and a Castle builte (at the gate it leades to Paris) to gouerne and kepe vnder the Citizens, and a very cruell Carrison of Souldiours placed there. And
yet for all this the administration of Religion was not left of there. Like crueltie was exercised vpon Montau∣bane,Montaubā bycause they had manfully and couragiously de∣fended themselues against the assaultes and inuasions of them of Tholouze. Aboute this tyme by the adise and consent of theagrements made bet∣wene the King & his brother the Duke of Orleans Quéene and the counsaile, order was taken in certaine graue and waighty matters, betwixt the King and his Brother. The Dukedome of Orleans was by olde vse and custome of inheritance, alwaies giuen to the Kings eldest Brother. But bycause many contentions, and controuersies did commonly arise betwéene the Kings of France, and their second Brothers Dukes of Orleans: for diuers considerations of the cōmodities of that City and countrey, it was thought good and profitable, both for the King and the Kingdome, that that Dukedome should be taken from the Kinges Brother. Wherefore the two Brethren agreeing themselues, Alexander▪ the Duke of Orleans yéelded and gaue vp his Dukedome to the King, and had of him for it the Dukedome of An∣iou, and the Title of Viceroy generall ouer all the pro∣uinces of Fraunce was gyuen him, and had also a yerely stipend of an hundreth thousand Crownes, which after∣ward was largely augmented. Thus was Orleans ta∣ken from the Kinges brother and hée very liberally re∣compensed for it. We spake before of the Prince of Conde, and how the Papistes laboured by all meanes possible to entice him from the reformed Religion. And surely they had madeThe Prince of Conde eseapeth the papists snares and baytes. a great breach & wyde entrie to their purpose, thorough the to much licentiousnes of the Court that the Princ vsed, and the great hope of large gayne that was offred him on all sides. But as they were in the midst of their iolitie and triumphing, as though they had quight van∣quished and reclaimed him to their lure, he manfully &
luckely escaped all their traynes: and by this occasion, as the Prince did thus gyue himselfe to all pleasure and loosenesse of liuing, his wife (a most godly and chast ma∣trone) tooke sorrow and inward thought at hir hushāds imtemperate and disordered conuersacion, and thereby (with other causes) fell gréeuously sicke, and stryuing & wrestling long with her disease in great sorrowe and lāguishing of mynd, at length departed out of this trou∣blesome world: but before her death, she had very wise∣ly and wittely admonished her husbande, to looke wellThe death of the prin ces wife. about him, and to remember what dutie, the knowledge he had of Christian religion, and the dignitie and place that God had called him to, did require of him. The death and this counsell of his wife (of whose singular, deare, and chast loue in his greatest extremities and di∣stresse he had alwayes had sufficient proufe and triall) did so moue and stirre him, that waying and pondering his estate and calling more néerely and wisely, euer af∣ter hée tooke vnto him a myraculous and most valeant courage, and diligently and willingly obeyed and hear∣kened to the counsell of such as were good and godly, and wexed euery day more and more earnest and zelous in the study of true godlynesse & pietie. And yit at the first, his wifes death seemed to giue great occasion to further and aduaunce the papistes wishe and desire: for it was common then in euery mans mouth, that the Prince of Conde should marrie with the Quéene of Scotland, a ve∣ryfaire and beautiful woman: and that then the Prince and the Guises should be all one. But hee vsing and obey∣ing better aduise, did manfully and valiauntly cōtemne and despife all those vayne baytes and enticing allure∣ments, and afterward married the Dukes sister of Lon gueuille, a famouse and worthy man. In the meane time newes came out of all quarters ofThe slaugh ters of the faithfull. the cruell slaughters that the papistes committed vpon
the protestants, which if I should goe about to tehearse, it would be a thing of an infinite and endlesse labour, & nothing appertaining to our purpose: for there was ac∣compt made (as is euident and to be séene in the commō registers) of an hundreth and thirtie great slaughters committed in diuers places vpon the faythfull since the publishing of the Edict. But there was no mencion (I warrant you) nor talke of punishment: wherefore the Papistes were by this loose and negligente impunitie more and more encouraged to al vnnaturall and outra∣gious crueltie. The men of Mayne, vnder the conduct and leading of their Bishop (who had waged Souldiours for that purpose) made horrible hauocke and spoile in many pla ces vppon the Protestantes both man, woman, & child, without all respect of yeares younge or old. Many com∣plaintes and supplication were put vp to the kinge, and the faithfull company of that Countrey set out a wry∣ting openly, wherein they declared the horror and ab∣homination of those mischieuous factes, with example of such▪ furie & crueltie as was not erst hard of amongst the Frenchmen. Such sauage and cruell madnes had. (by reason of impunitie) enflamed the Bishops mind wyth hatred against Religion. Wherefore through all the Cuntrey of Maynes in euery Towne and Citie, great cruelty was exercised at the Bishops cōmaundemente, as God willing shall one day be more plainly seene in a full and large discourse of these matters. At Creuan (a Towne of Burgundy a place appointed by the Kinges commaundement, to preah the woord of God in) when as there was gathered togyther from di∣uers places of that Prouince a greate nomber of men, wemen, old men and children, altogyther naked and vn armed, to heare a Sermon▪ the Papistes that dwelt in the Towne assembling togyther, ranne violently and
rushed with force vppon the Protestants. And as they began to kill and murther them, there was by and by a great vprore and tumult raysed: on the contrary parte, the papistes were sodenly amased, and fearing least the aide of the Protestantes neare adioyninge and of other noble men professoures of the reformed Religion had bin there, craftely lefte of their enterprise: and so by that meanes the faithfull escaped. Notwithstandinge many of them as they stroue to get home to their hou∣ses, were slaine at the first brunt: so the Papistes in Burgundy, what by the sufferance of their Lieftenaunt, by the setting on of the Counsaile, and through the help and ayde of Mosieur Begat▪ a seditious and factious Counsailour waxed more and more bould and insolent against the Protestantes. Moreouer there assembled (vnder coulour of gathering togither the states of eue∣ry Prouince) certaine companies which they termed the Confraternities, or Brotherhoodes of the holy Ghost: toBrother hodes of the papiste. the intent to proclaime and denounce euerlastinge and perpetuall warre against the Hugunotes, and vnder pre tence of these assemblies, many things were haynously & seditiously committed. Wherfore the Prince of Conde complayned of these misorders to the King. Where vp∣pon these conuenticles by the Kinges Interdicte were forbidden and prohibited: but all in vaine for the letters wanted that piuie signet: whereby (by the Cardinalles subtiltie and other Papistes of great estimation) such letters were knowen as it were of any wayghty mat∣ter or importance. Monsieur▪ Begat▪ the counsailour had alwaies very ryfe in his communication the greate re∣nowne of the Spanish Kinge: whereat many men mar∣ueiled to see such a fellow borne with all, and to be in fauour with the people, who in open assembles would so frankely set out and bag of the fame and glory of a forreine Prince, and such a one as might the easier an∣oy them by reason hee was so neare adioyning vnto
them: yea certaine Orations that he had made of that matter, were at the Cardinall Granuillans commaun∣ded printed at Andwerpe and published abrode. Where∣fore the people encouraged by the example of Monsieur Begat, began to talke of the Spanish Kings name, and to boast and vaunt themselues of his fauour: and the Pa∣pistes in euery place mingled and enterlarded the Ca∣tholique authority and power of Spain with the affaires of Fraunce, as though the King of Spaine had had the or∣dering of Religion there, and the gouernment and mo∣deration of the Kinges Edict. Monsieur Curee (who as we haue beefore declared,Monsieur Cure that famous & valeant cap taine is slaine. had valiantly behaued himselfe in the vauntgard of the battayle of Dreux vnder the Prince of Conde) was by the Kings commaundement ruler and gouernour ouer the Prouince of Vendosme: a man much giuen to the stu die and embracing of the reformed religion, and there∣fore greatly hated of al the papists, in so much, that the filthy bloudsuckers encouraged by the impunitie of the haucke made vpon the faithful of Macine, and hauing their handes red and dyed, with the bloud of the misera∣ble subiectes, began nowe to conspire the death of their head and ruler: and laying snares and ambushementes for him, set vpon him suspecting no such thing, and cru∣elly flue him. Monsieur Curee his wyfe and his brotherAnd yet scaped vn∣punished. complained of the matter to the King, declaringe what an horrible villany was committed vpon the person of the Kinges Lieuftenant: and after they had taryed and wayted at the Court sir whole wéekes, at the last wyth great sute & much a do they obtayned, that the murther should be brought in question and examination. Wher∣vpon the doers of the déed were accused, and apprehen∣ded, and when the case was proued by so many certaine and euident argumentes, that euerye man thought it should haue proceded on & be put in further execution,
& that no man could withstand it: behold sodenly those hainous and trayterous murtherers were deliuered & dispatched out of hand by the Kings commaundment: & he that apprehended them & sent them to ward, was cō∣maunded to apeare and that vnder payn of sharpe pun∣nishment, to giue accompte of his doinges (for hee was charged to haue done more then his commission would beare him in,) his house was made flat with the groūd, and he him selfe appeared, and was throwen into pri∣son, and very hardly at length got out again. The mur∣therers (as though they had done well) were not onely pardoned and forgiuen, but had also great rewardes for their wel doinges and offices also bestowed vpon them. A notable surely and an euill example, of contemning and ouerthrowing of Iustyce. There came out also about this tyme the Kings let∣ters contayning certeyne newe exceptions against theMo inter∣pretations of the E∣dict. Edict: That it shold not be lawful for any Ministers of the reformed (they terme it new) Religion, to dwel or in∣habite in any other place, then in suche as were in euery prouince appointed for the hearing of sermons, for this purpose, that they might not visite and comfort the sick, nor take any héed or care of the housholdes and families of the faythfull: And that it should not be lawfull for a∣ny of that profession to be schoolemaisters or keepe any open schoole for to bring vp or teache yonge children. And this was the old fetch of the Cardinall of Lorraine, that taking away all discipline, the puritie of doctrine should vtterly decay: and that all knowledge of good learning and liberall Sciences being banished, the stu∣dy and desire of trueth might be darkened with the dus∣kie and lothsome clowds of barbarous and sauage igno∣rance. A practise vsed in tymes paste by Iulian the Apo∣state, and now put in vre agayne by the Cardinall, a good and cunning scholler in suche matters, and worthie of
such a maister, whereby he might declare him selfe an open and manifest enemie to al humanitie and pure do∣ctrine. Notwithstanding there were causes and matter pretended that in shew were very godly as: That it was so enacted, to the end all things might bee done in good order, and least that the greater part of his subiectes bee∣ing thereby stirred vp, might gyue occasions of new trou bles: not that it was the Kings pleasure to chaunge or al∣ter any thing in the Edict, but that this was the very plain exposition of his Maiesties pleasure, which he commaū∣deth and willeth to be receyued and kepte of all his sub∣iectes. The King (as we said before) vnder coulor to suruayThe Kings progresse. and vewe his Realme, came to Paris, and from thence he first went to Troye, a noble and famouse citie of Cam∣paigne, thence he remoued to Lions, and so along through Dolpheny, Prouance and Languedoc towardes Baonne, a Citie of Guian, situat vpon the Sea coaste, and next adioyning to Spayne, that there the Sacred league might be made and established, as hereafter we will shewe in place conuenient. It were a long and tedious matter to rehearse here what was done in euery Citie, what complayntes andThe sūme of all that was don in the time of the Kinges Progresse. supplicacions were put vp to the Kinge, what iniuries done to the protestants, and what sleightes and deuises were forged and practised to enflame and encense the yong King against Religion: that must be done hereaf∣ter by some more large and perfect historie. But wee, because we meane but to drawe out briefe and shorte notes of the warres, will briefly (setting apart all long discourses of so large and copiouse matter) set forth the summe of that was done in this progresse. The papists spared no sleightes, no forgerie, no lies, no saucie ma∣lapartes, no impdencie nor any kinde of malicious & spyghtfull wickednes, whereby they might by any way
procure hatred and enuie against the protest and and their cause. I seaunder no man, for I am bond by reason & order of this my enterprise, to say ye trueth, I will not spare to speak it: From euery quarter came great flockes of the faithefull complayninge of their wronges: supplications were offered vp, but when any satisfaction was to be made to their complaintes, they were so posted ouer from this man to that man, from this place to that place: that whilest the executiō of law and equitie was prolonged and differred, Iustice was quight gone and fled from amongst them. We haue spoken before of the accusation commencedThe Admi∣rall adiud∣ged free of the Dukes murther by the kings own iudgement against the Admirall, as though he had ben authour of the Duke of Guises death, and of his aunswer there too. But because the matter séemed likely to bréede further trouble, and that it was such as might hinder and dis∣quiet his progresse, both partes being so earnestly bent to wrath and reuengement: the King thought it best to decide and take vp the matter before he procéeded any further on his iourney. Wherefore at Molins, the chief Citie of the Dukedome of Bourbone, the Admirall wasThe Guises and the Chastillon are charged to be re∣conciled. declared by the Kings decrée, free and cleare from that accusation, and that he ought not in any poynt to bee charged therewith, and commaundement was giuen that the matter should on both sides be buried in the darke graue of euerlasting forgetfulnesse and oblii on, and be troden vnder foote, as though it had neuer bene done. The Guises also & they of Chastillon were charged to lay aside all hatred and grudge and to be reconciled, and euerafter become friendes and louers. This com∣maundement was obeyed and receyued of both sides, whereby the wound was stopped & couered for a while, but not thorowly healed. Notwithstanding the Cardinal of Lorayne was here by, sinely beguiled and defeated of his purpose, thinking
by this to haue had iust occasion (as the Spanish Kinge br agged in his letters) both to haue displaced the Ad∣mirall, and also vnder a faire shew of this cause to haue violated and broken the peace. The Prince of Conde, the Admirall, the Andelot and other of the chief Nobles that were professors of the re∣formed Religion went not with the King on this iour∣ney. The Cardinall also of Lorrayne taryed behinde in Fraunce, as we shall hereafter declare. After this, the King came to Lions with a very greatThe Kings comminge to Lions and what he did there. trayne, and was Royally and sumptuously receyued of the Townesmen of both Religions. Here they had de∣termined to frame and put in practise many conceyptes and deuises: for that, if they could ouerthrow and sup∣presse ye congregatign that was here, being of all other the chief and most famouse, they shold the easier deface and destroy others that were lesse. For the state of that most florishing & populous church did gréeue the Arche∣papistes at the very hartes. Wherefore they thought it behouable and very expedient, by all wayes possible, to oppresse and disquiet it. Yet contrary to their purpose and meaning, they taryed but a small tyme there, by reason the plage raged so cruelly, that through the stub∣borne wilfulnes of the Quéene that meant to haue stay∣ed the Court longer there, the plague came euen into hir owne chamber, and dispatched one of the Noble wo∣men of her own trayne out of the way. Wherefore, tho∣rough feare of the pestilence, the Courte remoued from Lions to Rossilon, a territorie belonging to the howse of Tarnon, their howses being very stately garnished be fore with the Kings owne prouision and furniture: and yet the papistes were not idell at Lions, although their aboade there was both short and daungerous. For theAn enter∣diction for Ser∣mones. chief men of the reformed Religion were charged to ab∣stayne and not to resort any more to Sermons or other
assemblies. And that this might the better bee done in all places where the Court should passe, there came out a commaundement from the King, forbidding That the reformed religiō should bee exercised in any place where the king should passe, or in any place where he lay, as lōg as he made his aboade there, and that it should not be pra ctised at any tyme hereafter in any of the kinges howses and pallaces, (the cause also was added) least the Catho∣liques, being greeued and offended with it, new troubles should arise. There was also a p̄face adioined, That, the same was omitted in the Edict, wherunto the king would all men should vnderstand, he ment not by this interpre∣tation to adde any thing. So thus they vsed the name of the Edict, where in déed they endeuored to ouerthrowe and abolishe it. A fortresse also by the Kings commaundement wasA fortresse built at Lyons. begonne to be built at Lions, to kéepe in subiection and ouerlooke the Townesmen, vpon the hill of S. Sebastian, in the highest part of the Citie, & the garrison augmen∣ted with a new supplie of fresh souldiers, whereby the protestantes were manifestly marked with the note of rebellion. Wée declared before how the Citie of Lions in the be ginning of the former warre, was kept and fortified with a garrison of the protestantes: and how Monsieur Saltan, a noble man, had as then the gouernment & rule ouer the Citie, who being very earnestly requested of the faythfull, that he would in the Kings name goe for∣ward in the administration of their common wealth: notwithstanding refused to do it, and leauing Lions, got him quietly home to his owne howse. By his defaulte and negligence the Duke of Guise when he liued, would say, that Lions was taken of the protestants, and many complaintes and accusations as touching that matter, were put vp against him, by the chiefe of the popish No∣bilitie,
and certayn Italians were suborned to accuse him before the King for betraying Lions into the protestāts handes. To these complaintes Monsieur Saltan maketh aunswere and albeit he had sufficiently proued them to be but méere surmises and false sclaunders, and was al∣so quited and discharged by the Kings own Iudgement, of that accusation: yet notwithstanding no punishment (although he complayned diuers tymes to the Kinge therof) was executed vpon these wrongful sclaūderers. Moreouer, intreatie was made with him by Interpre∣ters in the Kinges name, that he would gyue ouer hisMonfieur Saltane re∣moued frō the gouern ment of Ly ons & mon suer Lossay succeded him. Presidentship: wherefore beeing nothing desirous of glorie and authoritie, willingly gaue place and resigned his office, in whose roome was placed Monsieur Lossay, a man of very craftie and deceiptful disposition, and excée∣ding hautie and proud. For it is almost impossible to be told with what intollerable pompe and excessiue pride he vaunted and boasted himselfe, and how great impu∣nitie and carelesnesse in offending against ye protestāts was graunted to the papists by him. The particular dis∣course whereof (as I haue often sayde before) doth not appertayn vnto our purpose: for so should we take vponThe sundry troubles of the church at Lions. vs an other mannes charge, and our Commentaries which we purposed to make but short and briefe, would growe vnto a great and large volume. About the fourth day of August a new interpretati∣on of the Edict was enacted, and called the declaration of Religion, wherein firste was placed a preface at the first vew very goodly. That it was the Kinges will and pleasure, that his E∣dictThe decla∣claration of Rossillon a great ouer∣throw to the Edict. of and for religion should be straightly kept and ob∣serued euery where, that they that should be guilty of the contrary should be punished: that law and iustice should bee ministred vnto all men indifferentlye and without partialitie, and that his maiestie did suruey and visit his
Realme and Prouinces, to thentent he might meet with, and prouide for al such confusions and disorders as were in the common wealth. But whereas he is giuen to vnder stand that the libertie that hee had graunted out for the vse of religion, did dayly minister occasions of strife and contentiō, he was ready to prouide remedy for that mis∣chiefe. And to the entent, that here after no doubtfull or double vnderstanding of the Edict which was made and set forth by his authoritie, be left stil vncertaine: and for that the declaration of his owne and very true meaning, doth onely appertaine vnto him selfe: for these causes he hath thought good to set it forth in open writing. And whereas (saith hee) we do license our noble men to exer∣cise their new religion freely, wee will that it be so vnder∣stood that this benefit do reach to themselues only and their families: and that this was our entent and purpose: the very forme and tenure of the wordes therein, do suf∣ficiently proue. VVherefore wee forbid and prohibit all and euery of our noble men, to giue any licence to any o∣ther whosoeuer do vse the benefit of the Edict, vnlesle he bee of the nomber of his or their subiectes: and that who so shall do to the contrarie, him or them we take and de∣nounce as Traitours to our maiestie and do appoint for them such punnishment as is due and fit for traitours & rebelles. VVe also will and commaund, that none of the new religion shall (as they were accustomed) gather togi∣ther or sommon any assemblies or conuenticles in wayeRestraine of Sinodes. of Sinodes any more hereafter, and that who so fayleth herein, be punished accordinge to the greatnes and esti∣mation of his fault. And where as very many treading vnder foote the holy ordinaunces of Religious houses, haue forsaken their former lyues of priesthood and mo∣nachisme, either in the time of the former wars and trou bles, or els after the pacification of them, & contemning the vow of religious chastitie, haue throwen themselues headlong into the state of most detestable and accursed mariage, we will and commaund, that all such men be by
imprisonment enforced and cōpelled to forsake and re∣nounceProtestāts cōmanded to returne to Mona∣chisme. their wiues, and the women likewise their hus∣bandes, and so to returne to their former kind of life. or els to be punished with perpetual exile and banishment, and within the space of ii. monethes to depart the boūds and limites of our Realmes and Dominions The neglec toures therof by this our sentence we adiudge (if hee be a man) to the gallie there to remaine for euer a gallie slaue, (if a woman) to perpetuall imprisonment: and this our declaration we will and commaunde to bee established and in as full force and authoritie as the Edicte it selfe. The protestants were greatly endamaged by these exceptions, for they who were scatered abroad through the Prouinces and could not conueniently repayre to those Cities that were appointed for preachinge, were by the first article forbidden to resort to any other pla∣ces to heare sermons: for thei that sought or resorted to any such place were both in great danger as thei went, and were also charged to be violaters of the Edict. Yea the noble men themselues were in great perill & trou∣ble. And where the assembling of Sinodes and collecti∣ons of money were forbidden, there were all meanes and waies of bringing any thing to passe taken awaie, and the authority of discipline quight defaced▪ which be∣ing maintained by Counsaile, was the chiefe and grea∣test instrumente whereby the Church was preserued. The ministerye also was almost destroied, all thinges that made for the reliefe & sustenance of the ministers, being by these exceptions taken awaye. For the vse a∣mongst the Protestantes was to contribute and giue their money togither, wherewt their ministers liued & were mainteined. And as for the cōmaundment wher∣by they were enforced to returne to Monkerie, and the disannulling and destruction of such mariadges as they
had cōtracted, euery mā may sée how daūgerous & hurt full they were and of all men to be detested and abhor∣red: so full farst and stuft are the papistes budgettes with sleightes and subtilties to ouerthrow religion. Whiles these exceptions and breaches of the Edicte were by the papistes (vnder pretēce of the Kings name) forged and inuented, others of their side, committed di∣uersThe great slaughter of the faith full at Tours. actes of extréeme outrage and boldnesse in vi∣olating it. In Towers. a famouse town of Fraunce, there was a Congregation, beautified and furnished with a great number of faythful Christians. But because they had not libertie by the Edict to practise ye reformed re∣ligion within the Citie it self, there was a place appoin ted for them by the Kings commaundement, at the cas∣tel next to the citie, called Loray: whether when the congregation had one day resorted to heare a Sermon, and great number of all ages and sortes of men & wo∣men were there, sodeynly they (suspectinge no suche thing) heard a great shout and outcrye of the papistes, who rushing, burst in vpon them with weapon and ar∣mour: and besetting all the passages round about, flew violently vpon the naked and vnarmed Assemblie, and murthered and slew all they met with. And many of them as they sled stragling here and there were slayn: many also were sore wounded both men and women, and their Minister thrust thorough, euen in the very pulpit. Like crueltie also and fury was exercised with∣in the Citie with all maner rapines, pillage, slaughters and hauockes that might be. The brute and rumour of this so great villanie and mischief, amazed and feared all the Congregations round about them, and cōming to the Prince of Condes eares, it maruelously moued & stirred vp his mynd, with the often remembrance of so many mischieues committed against them by the pa∣pistes without checke or controlement: the shamefull
and cruell violating and wresting of the Edict, did grée∣uously vexe him. Wherfore he complaineth of the mat∣ter to the King, and the Queen in diuers letters, wher∣of some were set out in print, which we meane here to repeat, bycause they conteyned in them the whole mat∣ter of all the rest. Whereas I haue diligently and thorowly wayed & The Prince of Conde complai∣neth of these iniu∣ries. considered of the last aunswere I receyued from the Quéene concerning my letters I sent to her, wherein I admonished her of such things as séemed to be prepa∣red for the disquieting and disturbing of the whole Realme and publique profit thereof, whose euil begin∣nings being full fraught with horrible murthers and slaughters past, and augmented with shameful hauock and robberies which are but newly committed, & that without all manner punishment, do foretell and warn vs of very greeuous troubles hanging ouer our heades and like to ensue: and when I had with good héed and aduise pondered eche poynt and article of all her aun∣sweres, and especially that which cōteigned the causes of the Interpretation of Rosillon: And doe now perceiue that this mischief doth not onely steale vpon vs by little and little, but violently doth inuade and ouerflowe vs, and all through the disobedience and contentious facti∣ons of the Kings officers, and the great indignation & disdaine, that a great number of his subiectes haue con∣ceyued agaynst him: which surely doth arise and spring of this, because that whereas they sée the Edicte viola∣ted, and are dayly oppressed and afflicted with all man∣ner rapines, slaughters, and all other kind of outrage & violence: & yet can get no redresse nor remedie of their griefes by the law, but are driuen to suche a pinche and desperation of mynd, that I cā not but greatly feare the daunger of tumultes and insurrections: and that they will endeuour themselues through indignation of the
iniuries don vnto them heretofore) by force to put awai violence, and by armour and weapon to defende them∣selues (vnlesse very spéedy remedie be had). For, and vppon these considerations I haue thought it my dutie, to certifie the King and Quéene thereof: as becommeth a good subiect and trustie seruaunt to doe, which desi∣reth by all meanes and wayes possible too auoyde and turne away so great and present daunger and perill. Neyther (sayeth he) is there any cause why I should feare that I shalbe accompted and taken of their Maie∣sties, as one that is to importune and vnreasonable, not regarding eyther tyme or person: albeit I haue diuers tymes troubled them already with these matters, espe∣cially séeing it standeth me vpoon my honor and hone∣stie: and the present and vrgent necessitie of thinges, doth so earnestly require me to do it, that vnlesse I will become both guilty and worthi punishment for so great and common calamities, I can not passe so waighty a businesse in silence. Wherefore I most humbly beséech your Maiesties that you will not take it in euill parte, that I am come by letters to entreat for them, that are without all law and Iustice most shamefully spoyled & slayne, contrary to your highnesse pleasures declared in your Edict. And for that they could not by any other meanes obtayne remedie and redresse of their wrongs, they are come vnto me for succour, thinking that in re∣spect of my néere kynred to your Maiestie, & the place whereunto I am called in this realme, I might obtayn for them that ease and reliefe of their griefes, which o∣therwise they could not get. Neyther could I my selfe for these causes and for the obedience I owe to youre Grace, refuse to declare and shew vnto your Maiestie with all humble modestie & reuerence, these so great miseries and calamities. For all your highnesse Sub∣iectes haue felt what great profit and vtility hath come
to the whole Realme, through your Maiesties Edict of peace: the which notwithstanding is so defaced and al∣tered from his first forme, that no man hath any care once to acknowledge, much lesse to obserue and execute it. And although your Grace haue diuers tymes plain∣ly declared and exprest, that it was your will and plea∣sure that it should be obserued and kept inuiolably of al men: yet notwithstandinge, certayne disordered per∣sons, that séeke to abolish and deface the reformed reli∣gion, haue so preuayled, that certayne interpretations of ye Edict are set forth in your Maiesties name, whose prefaces are very notable and good: but if a man but of meane iudgement doe marke the ende of them, he shall perceyue that they bee nothinge else, but deuises and meanes inuented onely to weaken and take away the libertie of the Edicte, and now of late at Rossillon, when as no man was with your Maiestie that would mayn∣tayne the cause and right of the protestants, there was a Declaration set out, by which the Edict is so rent and defaced, that it is not credible that it should longe conti∣new, for thus it hath. The Edict sayth, Be it lawfull for all noble men ha∣uing chief authoritie, their families, and those of their iurisdictiō that wil, of their own accord to vse and exer∣cise the reformed religion freely and without molestati∣on. But the interpretation sayeth, That al suche places are exempted from this libertie, as were eyther solde or taken by the kings commaundement from the church liuing: neyther should such that had any Church reue∣newes, enioye that benefite. Further, the Edict sayeth, That libertie of religion was not only graunted to the noble men and their fami∣lies, but also to as many of their subiectes as would wil∣lingly resort vnto it. But the Declaration of Rossillon sayeth further, Neyther shall the Noble men suffer or
permit any which is not their subiect to come or resort to any sermons or assemblies. And that who so doth to the contrary, shall for the firste tyme bee fyned at 500. Crownes, and for the second tyme loose and forfeite all their howses and Castels, wherein any suche sermons or assemblies shalbe had or kept. Which rigour and seueritie (as it is manifest) can neuer be obserued and kept, séeing that many of ye No∣ble men do not know all their subiectes, and few of the subiects one another, whereby it may chaunce, that one may come to a Noble mans howse, and yet be neyther one of his subiectes, nor knowne of him, who thinkes & takes him for his owne subiect: and yet notwithstan∣ding should by these meanes be enforced to pay a great fyne, and lose also his house wherein the assemblie was gathered togyther. The like dannger also should he in∣curre if one of his neighbours did but come to sée howe he did. Which thing would not onely hinder and trou∣ble, but also bring to miserable thraldome and slauerie the mutuall and friendly societie of men, the chiefe and surest bond of true friendship, and the stay and rocke of all common wealthes and Monarchies. The Edict saith, That there shall be a Citie choosen out and appointed for the administration of the refor∣med Religion in euery Prouince or presidentship, and other places of Iudgement, from which it was lawfull to appeale to the high Courtes of Parliament, but this last point was neuer yet put in execution, neither coulde it be graunted to the protestants: although they both ear∣nestly sued for it: and the promise it selfe was confir∣med, by the expresse commaundement of the Kings let∣ters, and certaine Cities named to be chosen as fittest and most profitable for that purpose. Also where accor∣ding to the order of the Edict, there ought to haue bene a place appoynted for the vse of the reformed Religion
within the suburbes of those Cities that were named, it was appointed in other inconuenient places. xx. or. xxv. leagues of. Whervpon followed diuers slaughters and seditions in many places. Notwithstanding thys Article of the Edict was altogether broken and viola∣ted, wherof I doe not thinke your Maiestie causer, ney∣ther any of them, who without preiudice to eyther part do wishe that the Edict might be truely and incorrupt∣ly obserued, but rather I iudge your presidentes and o∣ther officers to be procurers of it, who of a preposterus and disordered zeale and loue they beare to the popishe Religion, could not bridle their owne outragious lust, but suffered themselues to be carried headlong by their affections, to the breach of the Edict and spoyle of them that professe the reformed Religion. The Edict saith, That liberite and free vse of the re∣formed Religion is graunted and permitted to all Cities wherein it was exercised the▪ vii. of March, 1562. besides those Cities that were to be chosen and appointed in e∣uery Prouince: and this shoulde be done in one or two seuerall places of those Cities, accordyng as the King thought good to appoint. But the interpretation doth permit none to enioy this, but those Cities only, which were holden by force in the time of warre, and so, many are defrauded of that liberty, in which the vse of the re∣formed Religion was kepte at the tyme appoynted, namely the. vii, day of March, 1562, both before and in the time of the late troubles. Diuers other places also were spoyled of this frée vse of their Religion, who not∣withstanding had it the. vii. of March at the earnest en∣treatie not onely of certaine Nobles who were méere Lordes of those places: but also of suche as were one∣ly gouernours substituted and put in truste by your highnesse grace and fauour, which is nothing else but a lat breach of the Edict.
The Edict without any distinction or difference gy∣ueth frée libertie of Religion to All men in euery place, but by the interpretation of Rossillon al they (he or she) who came from any abbeyes or Nunryes, are debar∣red from his fréedome, & compelled to returne to their Cloysters, and there to liue according to the Canons of popishe traditions: and yet the preface of that interpre∣tation saith, it was not made to derogate any thing frō the Edict: the wordes of the exception be these. That all Priestes and all other men or women that haue receiued the orders of Monachisme, and forsaking that estate haue maryed wyfes, eyther in the time of the former broyles or after the pacification therof, be compelled to forsake and renounce those Mariges, and to returne to their former kynde of liuing, and therein to lyue ac∣cordyng to the rules and orders appoynted or them. Which thing, besides that it dothe manifestly violate the Edict, whiche permitteth euery man to liue accor∣ding to his own conscience, doth flatly repugne & stand against the commandement of almightie God, who is author and fautor of Matrimonie. It woulde also bréed great strife and dissention in the Monasteries and re∣ligious houses. In the declaration of Rosillō is also adioyned an in∣terdict and prohibition of Synodes, not onely contrarie to the Edict, but also flat against diuers others of your Maiesties letters and commaundementes. For al∣thoughe the Edict doe not expresely make mention of them, nether doth flaly forbyd them, & yet doth graunt the vse of such religion as is reformed, it muste néedes follow that it doth permit them, especially for that they doo appertaine to that religion, and are not onely as ac∣cidents and things belonging to it, but are also the ve∣ry maintayners, and (as it were) the synewes where∣with that religiō is gouerned. This kind of Synodes the
auncient fathers in olde tyme dyd vs very often, be∣fore generall Councels were knowen. And surely the vse of them is so necessarie bothe for the rooting vp of Heresies and corruptions of liuing, whiche doe dayy créepe into the Churche and also to epe awaye and de∣barre al wicked and vngracius persons from the com∣munitie of the Sacramenes and other godly ceremo∣nies, that without them it is impossible euer to vnto anye true and sincere puritie, either of life or doc∣trine, and yet we doe not meane that any vnlawfull or to high authoritie should be practised in them. Neither is there anye thing that we more earnestly desire then that your Maiestie woulde appoynte certaine men at your graces discretion, to be presente with vs at those our Synodes: and so shoulde all suspicion of false and cauilling opinions be quite taken away. Besides these violent wrestings and breaches of theThe gre∣ous ini∣ries cōmit∣ted against the Protes∣tantes. Edict which are the only cause of all sedition: those that did make and frame them, haue perswaded your high∣nes that it was necessarie for the better obseruation of them, to appoint and set downe penalties for all such as did violate them, and yet made proestation in their pre faces that those interpretatiōs were not made to der∣gate any thing from the Edict, where as it is most ma∣nifest that no more effectuall and forcible way could be inuented quight to abolish and ouerthrow it. Confisca∣tion and losse of goodes, house, and land, is appointed for them as though they were rebelles and traitoures to your grace. Whereby it is euident, that these fellowes which do abuse your maiesties name and authority, are most wickedly bent to destroy your highnes subiectes, and vtterly to deface and raze the noblest and most ho∣norable families of your kingdome, to the great decay and ruine of your faithfull and loyall subiectes, which when they haue done, it will be to late to repent. And
as for my self and all other of the reformed religion, we are so fully perswaded of your maiesties goodnesse and clemencie towardes vs, that we do not thinke it to bee your wil and pleasure that such sharpe and seuere pun∣nishmentes should be executed vpon vs. But such is the wilfull and outragious lust of many your graces Lieuf tenantes and officers, that they bestowe wholy al their traaile and diligence both of body and mind to se these clauses and interpretations obserued, and only endeuo∣ring themselues to destroy vs, will, and doe thinke this occasion good enough, by examination of our doinges to trouble and endaunger vs. If so bee they can but espie ye protestants resorting to make their praiers to God, or els to heare his holy woord in any other places then those that be appointed for them: or if they go to any o∣ther Noble mannes house then his, whose subiectes and seruantes they be. Which certainly doth make no∣thinge either with or against the duty they owe to your maiestie, or the cōmon & publique vtility of the Realme. But when as they sée before their faces, slaughters, sedi∣tions and most daungerous and amentable occasions of new tumults and breach of peace, then they turne their backes and winke at them, & in such manner deale with vs that they had rather graunt commission of en∣quirie out against them that were spoyled and are plain tife, then once to make proffer that they are willing to administer Iustice equally to all men, for the restraint of the cruell rage of so bloudy murtherers, who (as it is manifest by the impunitie of all outrages cōmittd vp∣pon vs▪) are defended, maintained, and set on by them, as thoughe we were abhorred & detested of your high∣nesse, and not in the nomber of your faithfull subiectes. And how true this is, dayly examples do make to eui∣dent. Newes commeth euery day of slaughters and se∣ditions out of all quarters of your kingdome, but no
word of ani punishment executed for them. And besides infinite murthers and hauocke made in other Prouin∣ces vppon the faithfull, your maiestie may behold those which were cōmitted at Creuan, in Maynes, in Prouance, in Aquitaigne, in Puy: and that lately done at Tours. For which wee neuer to this day could procure any kind of redresse may so vnpossible it is to ge remedy, that in di∣uers places commandement was giuen, that such mat ters should not come in question and trial, yea which is more, the commissioners did sit against those that were spoiled, which thinge did not only greuously trouble thē that had sustained damage and iniurie: but did also en∣courage and enbolden the hartes of the seditious. And diuers other that might haue bin repressed with litle la∣bour, were by this example animated, and hartened to perseuer in all kind of violence and rapine. Wherefore ii. great dangers are herein to be looked for and feared, the one is, that if your maiestie doe not spéedily méete with these outrages, but suffer them to range and spred abroad further, it is very lykely that when you would redresse them, then you shall not be able: the other is, your afflicted and persecuted subiectes shalbe driuen in to such distres and desperation of mind, that when they shall perceiue all right & iustice to be taken from them, by treachery of your officers, flat against your maies∣ties pleasure, they wil of themselues, defende them∣selues from wrong, and also reuenge the iniuries. And yet I speake not this as though I knew not, that your maiestie had commaunded comissions should bee graunted out, both for examination and correction of such spoiles, which on thing doth sufficiently proue that it is your graces wil and pleasure that the Edict should be kept and obserued. But I beséeche your maiestie to consider, was there euer any remedye of anye com∣plaint
whatsoeuer onward out by them to whom you haue committed the correction and punishment of ma∣lefactors? Your highnes Presidents and Lieuftenants, whose charge aud office is to redres and restrain such disorders, and are for that purpose garded with Garri∣sons of Souldiours, at the cost and charge of those ouer whom they gouerne, do abuse that aide giuen them to maintaine Iustice, alwaies to the fauour of one part of your subiectes, and vtter destruction of the other. And if so be it chaunce now and then that they go to any place to sit vpon any such matters, there is nothinge done ac∣cording to Iustice, but the catholiques defaultes and of∣fences cloked and couered: and as for the examination to be had there, it is eyther quight omitted, or els done in hugger mugger and corners that no man can know of it. But if any complaints be brought to your maiesty of those whom disdainfully and spightfully they cal Hu∣guenots, foorth with in post hast, before commission bée giuen out for the trial of the matter, ther is iudgement awardēd against them, not once waying the accusation whether it be true or false, and they condemned either to lose their liues, or els their goodes, and their houses to be beaten downe flat to the ground, as doth appeare by this example. For when as Monsieur de la Taride only moued by a vayne and vncertayne rumor, had written not vnto your Maiestie, but to a priuate friend, as con∣cerning a certayne commotion which he thought was at Montauban, ye report hereof was scant crept abroad, when straightway commaundment was geuen to raze and beate downe the walles of that Citie. And like sen tences to this were executed in diuers places, especial∣ly where the number of protestants was thought to be great, as of late in Ualence and Sisteron: but no suche thing don in those townes wher the Catholiques beare rule, althought it be playne & manifestly knowne, that
many seditions haue ben raysed by and through them. And very slender was the trauayle and labor that was bestowed in the examination of Monsieur Cures death, although he was your Maiesties Lieuetenant, and re∣presented your owne person. For when his bretheren & executors did sue for punishment of the murderers, they very hardly in sixe long wéekes obtayned a Com∣mission to haue their matter examined: which thing doth plainly bewray in what estate and estimation wée stand. And agayne on the other side, we knowe what commission the Duke Monpensier had to be executed vp∣pon Monsieur Cagier, who had done nothing in the ea∣minatiō of Monsieur Cures death, but that which the cō∣missioners appointed for that purpose had commaun∣ded him: and yet notwithstanding was charged eyther to appeare presently vppon sight of the Attachement sent for him, or else that his howse should be made equal and euen with the ground. Which thing importeth no∣thing else but the vtter subuersion of Iustice, and ma∣nifestation of their gréedy desire they haue to vioate & breake the Edict, by al wayes and meanes possible, but secially by thrée: By parciall administration of Iu∣stice: By vniust and vnequall tolleration and sufferāce of mischief: and lastly, By deadly and cankred hatered against all thse that professe the reformed Religion. And this last is that wherewith both the chief doers in this matter (who ought chiefly to seeke the obseruation of the Edict) are caried headlong: and also the common people, who (through impunitie of mischiefe and suffe∣rance of the noble men) ar waxen shamelesse in al ind of tyrannie and crueltie. For when they perceyue the Iustices and Iudges of Law and equitie, so haynously offended agaynst vs, that when we haue any matter be fore them that doth concerne both our safegarde and re∣esse of wrongs done vnto vs, we finde them a sléepe &
loth to ease our griees, but to be both ready and careful in all things that are to procéede against vs: yea and too condemne vs, not once hearing our cause: they do here∣by take occasion proudly to triumphe ouer vs, and con∣spire against vs. Of these iniuries (after long and wea∣ry sufferance) the afflicted company of the faithfull, haue complayned to your Graces Presidents and other your Officers, and to certayne who are néere about your Highnesse, but can receyue no other aunswere but that your Maiesties whole care and studie is, to content and satisfie both partes, and that the Catholiques do no lesse complayne of the protestantes, then thei of them: which in very déede is nothing else but to suffer euery man to be hurt and wronged without Law and Iustice, and to giue the Catholiques large reynes and full swing to do all things that their cankered hatred against the fayth∣full doe driue them to, and fréely to kill & murther them without eyther feare of punishment or daunger, least that they shold at any tyme (perceyuing that they were suffered too bee iniured of euerye man with oute all lawe and equitie) take armour, and so by force defend them from that violence which by lawe they could not auoyde. We sée this also happen diuers tymes and oftener than néedeth, that your Graces Iustices in stéede of ad∣ministring Lawe and right to those that haue proued their causes, doe vse to coūteruayle their iniuries done vntothē, with some other offences that thei haue cōmit∣ted: or else cause some rumour to be spread abroade, of some euill fact or other, done by the protestantes, wher∣with thei vse to stop the plaintifes mouthes, and so send them home in as euill case as they came, without any redresse of their wrongs. And yet it is well knowen, that the Protestantes crimes be not so haynouse but that they may be easely redressed: as to goe to another
place to heare Gods woord then your Maiestie hath ap∣poynted, or not to haue restored and set vp agayne po∣pish religion in certayn places. But far vnlike to these be the offences of the papistes cruell and sauage bloud∣suckers, who haue filled ai places with rapines & horri∣ble murthers: so that we do not doubt but God wil one day haue mercie vppon his poore afflicted people, and heare the gronings, sighes and lamentable cryes of his, that do flye to him only for succour and refuge, and can obtayne redresse no where else, all right and Iustice be∣ing taken away from them, by such as haue most barba rously (contrary to their Kings commaundement) spoi∣led and wasted all things with vnknowen and almoste incredible rage and crueltie: vpon whose accurfed and detestable factes haue followed to the number of 140. lamētable murthers since the publication of the Edict, and yet not two of them, eyther punished or like to bee punished. And now I trust your maiestie doth perceiue, that these be some causes why both I and other of the refor∣med religion do say, that the Edict is violated, and wée our seles euill handled, besides many things that are done against vs by the greatest part of your graces pre∣sidentes, and all because we are of a contrary religion to them, and infinite other deuises which they dayly (as it is manifest) do practise against vs: all which I leaue vnto your maiestie, to consider how disagréeing & hurte∣ful they be to publique peace and tranquility. And these things I haue thought good to signifie to your highnesse least I should séeme to haue omitted any one iot of that Loiall obedience I owe to the same▪ most hūbly beséech∣ing your maiestie to take in good parte, and patiently to ponder and consider of these things, which I do with al dutifull modestie and humble reuerence declare vnto your grace, O noble King, and say that it is vnpossible
that true and stedfast peace be kept in this Realme, tho rough the often declaration of your highnesse pleasure therin, vnlesse the Edict be truly and incorruptly obser∣ued and executed in all pointes, and all interpretations therto adioyned quight disanulled and taken away: yea and all disorders, seditions, and slaughters committed by either part after the publishinge of the Edict sharply and equally punnished: & lastly that the loose sufferance, and corrupt collusion of Magistrates and Iustices, bee ouerlooked and corrected. And vnlesse this be don, I can not sée how an vniuersal and firme during peace can be maintained in your maiesties Realmes. But contrary wyse I perceiue and foresée that they who haue suffered so great iniuries with out all remedie, are so wearied, and as it were tyred with long sufferance, & being now in desperation & past hope of redresse, wil indeuour to defend themselues from wrong & iniury by force, which must néedes be occasion of great troubles. When these letters of the Princes were brought to the King, and the indignation that hée and other pro∣fessoures of the reformed religion had conceyued was knowen, the very necessity of the tyme enforced them to make some showe of redresse and correction of these misorders. For the king being now far in his progresse from Paris, the chiefe & Metropolitane City, the Quéene greatly feared least the Prince of Conde should attemptThe Kings letters to the Prince of Conde. some new troubles. Wherefore the Kinge writeth to the Prince very louingly, declaringe that de doeth lyke and allow of his care for the obseruation of peace, and saieth that he wisheth nothing more hartely, then that law and Iustice should be equall without partiality mi∣nistred to all his subiectes, and that this was his chiefe and only desire. And whereas he had set foorth diuers interpretations of the Edicte, hée saieth hée was forced therto by dyuers and sundry vrgent and most waighty
causes, and that they do greatly make for the vse & pub∣lique profit and comoditie of his subiects▪ and yet he be∣léeueth so well of the Prince, that hée iudgeth hée neuer once so much as meant or thought to gouerne and rule him and his doinges at his owne pleasure: and if so bée any of his Iustices & officers had offended in any thing, he would so punnish them, that all men should knowe that it was hys will and pleasure, that the Edicte should be executed iustly and sincerely in all places, and that all his subiectes should haue Iustice & equitie shew ed them without respect of religion. Also he trusted that he (who ought to haue speciall regard for the good and safe estate of the Kingdome) would so trauaile and la∣bour, that no new broiles should bee raised by thē of the reformed religion that complained of their wrongs, se∣ing it is fit that they should not reuenge themselues of such iniuries as they say are doue vnto them, but ra∣ther commit the charge and orderinge of those matters to him, being chief Lord and gouernour ouer both them and their causes, and that vnlesse they did so, they should purchase vnto themselues most greuous and seuere pu nishment: only hee willed him to take héede that none were falsly accused, and that that which they obiected a gainst others might not rightly and worthely be layde to their own charge. Lastely he let him to vnderstand, that it was his only, chiefe, & most desired with to haue peace kept and maintayned, accordinge to the order ta∣ken in the Edict, which as he had oftentymes declared in woorde, so like wise he would fulfil and expresse it in déedes. About this time there came out newe Proclamati∣onsNew proclamatiōs for the obserua tion of the Edict. from the King, wherin all men were very straict∣ly charged to obserue and kepe all orders prescribed in the Edict, and greuous and great punishment appoyn∣ted both for suche as did violate and neglecte the same:
and also for all such Magistrates as did winke at them that shoulde offende therein. He declareth also that it is his will and pleasure that all his subiectes should lyue quietly together, and therefore dothe appoint the Edict and the declarations that he had made thereof, to be a rule and square to order their doynges by, whiche he straitly charged and commaunded all men to doe: least they shoulde to late repent them for so abusing his cle∣mencie, and at length proue his force and power to their owne destruction. Shortlye after this the Mashall of Vielleville wasThe pun∣nishment appointed for the mur ther done at Tours made frus∣trate. sent to Tours to sée execution done vpon those seditious persons that had committed that slaughter lately done there, but the matter was so handled that all was in vain for whē the Marshal (saying he wold do according to his commission) had begonne to rippe vp the matter, Monsieur Chauigny a wicked and desperate man was suborned, who by open force resisting the Marshals do∣inge, did so worke that nothing could be done, faringe as thoughe if the matter shoulde haue bene stirred any more, it woulde haue bred a further and greater trouble, sing the greatest and best part of the Towns∣men was thereby so hainously moued and enflamed. Wherfore the Mashall returned to the Court leauyng the matter as he founde it, and when he had giuen ac∣compt of all his procéedings there, Chauigny was very liberally rewarded of the Quéene, as one that had done a thing both fit and profitable for that presente tyme: yea greae offices were bestowed vppon him, as to be Embassador to foraine Princes and kingdomes. The Cardinall of Loraine (as we saide before) went not with the King, in this progresse to Baion: which he did as the ende of the thing proued, for two considera∣tions: first that this league which he him selfe had de∣uised might more safely be kept close: secondly least the
Protestantes and the Prince of Conde (for that he was by them adiudged to be a man very prone therto) shuld attempt to stirre vp any new broyles in this the Kings absence. Wherfore being garded with a great number of his seruauntes and retainers, he taried sometyme atThe fond and foolish iornes of the Cardy∣nall. Mendon, and sometime at Nanteuill houses of his, bée∣ing neare Paris, to the entent he mighte more straitly and circumspectly ouerlooke the protestantes doinges. And vpon a time he was determined to go to Paris, ei∣ther to deuise some new fetche, or else according to hys olde custome to confirme and strengthen the papistes, and with a greater traine of men then he was wont to haue, to amaze and discorage the protestantes. Moun∣sier Memorencie the chiefe Marshall had the charge and gouernment of the citie, who hearing of this, did forth∣with aduertise the Cardinal, that it was very daunge∣rous for him to come thither in suche diuersitye of mindes, the King also being so farre absent from them: it shalbe therfore good (saith hée) that you do not come ac companied with such a traine, but if you shall attempt the cōtrary I will according to my office, do that which I thinke shalbe expedient. The Cardinall taking this aunswere in very euill part, and being besides that incensed against him with an olde ngraffed grudge hee bare the house of Me∣morencie approcheth the Citie with a greater compa∣nie then before he purposed to bring with him: the Mar shall méeteth him by the way, and demaundeth of the Cardinals men, at whole commaundement they bare armour, and whether they knew not that it was contra ry to the Kings commaundement for any man so to do: and they excusing their doings with the Cardinals com maundement, were cōmaunded forthwith to disarme themselues, and to be caried to prison, there to be puni∣shed according to the order taken by the Kinge for that
matter: at which they were so amased, that euery one shifted for himselfe, and straglinge, were scattered all abroade. The Cardinall séeing his men thus discoura∣ged and dispersed, tooke his héeles & crept into a Mar∣chaunts howse thereby, whom he knewe well, & thin∣king himselfe not halfe safe there, caused the wall of the next house adioyning to be broken down, that he might flie further from them. And thus was his goodly iour∣ney disgraced with great laughters of others, & muche shame to himselfe: yea it was commonly talked of, and Iesters and Rymers made songes and ballades of it soffingly, saying, that the Cardinal of Lorraine ran a∣way from his men into corners, and berayed him selfe for feare. And this forsooth was the prudent and poly∣tique care that hee had to obserue and mayntayne the peace. Wherefore he returned backe into Lorrayne, in a great chafe: and least he should séeme idell, hée began a freshe agayne his sute to the states of the Kingdome, desiring to be accounted and acknowledged as one of ye Péeres of the Realme. And after that, gathered togy∣ther a great number of Souldiours, and pursued Mon∣sieur Salsede a Spaniard, an old Seruaunt of his, for that he had not in certayne points obeyed his commaunde∣ment. But he eing Capteyne (by the kings cōmaund∣ment) of a garrison that kept the Towne where hée re∣mayned, was safe enough from all that the Cardinall & his armie could do vnto him: such was the fonde & sha∣mefull ende of this angrie souldierlike Cardinall. The Marshall of Burdillo went before (the Kyngethe bloudy suruay that the Mar∣shial of Burdillo made tho∣rough out all Guian. comming aft▪ to view and suruaye the Prouince of Guian, and in eury place where he came made declara∣tion of the Kings pleasure as concerning the obserua∣tion of the Edict, and all was done in the Kings name: for they greatly feared troubles and cōmotions there, bycause the Protestantes of that Prouince had ben ve∣ry
sharpely perfecuted, & were both many in number, and also very ready to defend themselues. Notwithstan ding al this great a do for the keping of peace, Monsieur Riuier, a man knowen to be a protestant, was murthe∣red in his owne house, by a company of bluddie ruffians that came vnder colour of friendship to visit him. But the Marshell of Burdillo was openly reported to be the auctour of this murther, both because he bare deadly ha tred long before to Monsieur Riuier, and also for that hée tooke him to be a fit man, and as it were, a ring leader amongst the rest of the faithfull, to attempt any kynde of vprore. The Kings Maiestie hauing gone thorough all that part of Dolphine, which adioyneth to the riner of Rosne, came to Valence and Montille, and being Royally and nobly receyued there, went thence to Orange, where he har very many gréeuous complayntes of the desolate and oppressed Citisens, and did viewe the great ruines and lamentable hauockes that were made there. And thnce he remoued to Auinion, and had there all kyndes of pleasures that could be deuised to delight his mynd, both by the Citizens, and other Lordly Italians that were abyding there at their maisters the Popes com∣maundement: and euery man did herein what possible hee could, and all for the fauoure of the Quéene, who endeuoured al her studie and diligence to entangle and snare the Kings tender yong mynd, with such pleasant ānd delightfull baytes, neyther dyd they omit to vse the filthy loue of Maydes and Uirgins to entrappe him. The yong Prince of Bearn, the Quéene of Nauarres sonne, accompanied the King in all this long progresse, but his good mother the Quéene dyd looke carefully to him and kept him from those poysoned hookes & netts. After this the king came to Prouance, and hauing séen Arelat and Aijques two famous Cities, he remoued to
Marselles and was there very triumphantly receyued and greatly delighted with pagentes and shewes that were vpon the water. At which tyme the congregati∣ons of the faithful that dwelt there had peace, and liued quietly throughe the good and politike gouernmente of Monsier Morsau their ruler, both a prudent and godly Counsellour and a valiant and stout captain, who was sent thither from the Parliament of Paris at the Kings commaundement with certaine other counsellours, to redresse the disorders and enormities wherewith that prouince did then swarme. Wherefore as soone as he came thither, he deposed the Senate of Aijques for that they wincked at and fauoured the outrages there com∣mitted which done he began to search out the offenders themselues, wherefore manye of them fled away, and some escaped punishment by fauour of the noble men, other some and that a good number were sharpely pu∣nished, the Papistes fretting and chafing at it all in vaine, for it was manifest and openlye knowen that that Citie stoode in néede of seuere and strait reformati∣on, yea & the seditious townsmen would openly threa∣ten to set open their gates to the Spanishe King their neighbour, if so be that the reformed religion dyd take place there. Wherefore the Quéene burst not openly disalowe those executions done vpon the Papistes, but woulde rather when the Protestantes came to com∣plaine to hir, praise them and make as thoughe she liked very well of them, and all to shewe what desire she had that lawe and Iustice shoulde be administred to euery man equally without partialitie. At the earnest & im∣portunate sute of the Protestantes, one place wasMerindol a place ap∣pointed for the refor∣med religi∣on. chosen oute of all that Prouince, for the assemblyes, to haue the vse and administration of the reformed Re∣ligion▪ but it was inconuenient by reason of the vneue∣nesse and crookednesse of the way to Merindoll: Not∣withstanding
by the great prouidence of God, it came to passe that the same place which a little before had re∣ceyued the trueth of the Gospell in the darke and dusky dayes of papistrye, and had suffered much calamity for that cause, should by the Kings Edict be made a recepta∣cle and mansion place for the Gospell and the faythfull, and thereby made very famouse and noble. Therefore the faythfull came out of all places of Prouance to Merin dol, hauing frée libertie to heare the word of God. After this, the King came to Ainion, that frm thenceThe kinge commeth to Langue do. he might goe into Languedock. And as he traueiled, he was very princely receyued of euery Citye wheretho∣rough he passed, and had very large and stately gyftes gyuen vnto him: of the which to make relation, pertay∣neth not to our purpose. When the King was come to Nemaux, there came thyther a great multitude of protestants, making great mone and lamentation, in so much that the crying and pitiefull voyce of the people came to the house wher the King lodged: who might heare them crying and calling for Iustice of their soueraigne Lorde, and requiring of the Christian King the libertie of the reformed Religi∣on. This noyse of wéeping and crying was so great and so shrill in the Kings eares, that the mynd of the yonge King at the hearing of the same, was somwhat abashed, and straightway demaunded what the matter was: the standers by dissembled and excused the matter: but hée with angry moode aunswered and sayde, I sée that my people are euill entreated: and turning to the Quéne sayd, How chaunce this people are not satisfied? I will Lady (sayeth he) that this my people haue Iustice Not∣withstandinge they by and by put in his head, that they were seditiouse people, which were wont after that fa∣shion to do all things with tumult: And then this mul∣titude being dryuen away with violence by the Kinges
Garde, the Elders & gouernours of their Church were called for: and being come, they were sharply reproued that thei had suffered the vnruly multitude to come thi∣ther in such tumultuouse order: and were commaunded to deliuer their grief in wryting to the Maister of Re∣questes, and to come to Montpellier to receyue an an∣swere according to the same. The like complayntes al∣so were made by the men of Montpellier, when the king came thyther: but they with the men of Nismes were sent to Blitters: and after this the churches of Blitters, & those thereaboutes, making the lyke complayntes, de∣string reformation, had the lyke successe, they being pu of from day to day, and from one place to another: The Constable being sore offended that so many cōplaintes should be made against his sonne d' Anuile. And beside the infinite verations of d' Anuille which he brought v∣pon them, the Senat of Tholoze left nothing vndone to make the cause of the reformed churches odiouse be∣fore the Kinge. These were the mendes made for so great iniuries, and this was the profit that ensued the Kings iourney. THE new yeare brought with it a certeine rumouran. do. 1566 of the Kings progresse into Baione, which was kept secret vntill this present tyme. Therefore consultation being had of the matter with the chiefest of the Senate of Tholoze, the king passing through Guian, & comming to euery citie, came at the last to Baione, in the moneth of Iuly. Thither to her brother the king came Elizabeth wife to King Phillip of Spayne, and was very pompously re∣ceyued of the whole Courte. But the cause why Phillip her husband came not thyther with her, notwithstan∣ding that the same place bordered vpon his kingdome, was (as it is reported) that the league concerning the
destroying of the reformed religion, might the more se∣cretly be confirmed. Others attribute the cause of his absence to ambition▪ for that he would not séeme in any thing to séeke to the King of Fraunce. Notwithstanding by the comming of Elizabeth, that holy league (as they termed it) was ratifed and established, by which was ment, as is aforesaide, to banish and abandon the refor∣med religion. And to the ende the Realme of Fraunce might be an vtter enemy to the professours of that reli∣gion, the king of Spayn promised vnto the king of Frāce, so great power and ayde as he could: the lyke promyse also made the king of France to the king of Spayne: both of thē promisinge one to the other to embrace & obserue the doctrine of Rome, with the rites & cerimonies ther∣of, and to do all that they could to remoue & take away all lettes and impediments to the same: and so to take the next occasions offered to bring this matter to passe. After the confirmation of this league to the ruin of the Church, there followed lamentable effectes. But not∣withstanding the secret conclusion of this matter, the prince of Conde and all the Noble men of the reforme Religion vnderstoode the same, whose deathes hereby were sought. Thus when the king had viewed all the Region of Guian he returned back agayne into that part of Frāce, called by the Frenchmen Francys, towarde the later ende of this yeare. IN this yeare and in the next following, there was. do. 1566 truce taken betwene the Churches, and the faithfull had some reste and breathing tyme, notwithstandinge not without sustayning diuers iniuries. Yea, there wer snaring baytes layed, and priuy platformes practised agaynst the Admirall and the Andelot which were es∣pied, manifestly reuealed, and brought before the king:
but in vayne. The kings longe looked for occasions to put their league in execution. It shall not be from our purpose, if we note certayneThe affairs of the low Countrey▪ thinges concerning the affaires of the lowe Countrey called Belgio▪ aboute this time, for matters concerning religion: both for that the cause is all one, and also by∣cause the same Countrey bordereth vpon Fraunce: not∣withstanding obseruing the order of time we will in∣serte those thinges whiche specially appertaine to oure history. Therefore ye shall vnderstande that this noble and plentifnll countrey was exercised and muche troubled aboute this time with diuers and sondrye contentious conflictes, for religions sake: Wherby we haue diuers examples set forth vnto vs of the wonderfull prouidce of God, in ordering and framing of his Churche, quite contrary to humaine reason, that is to say, whereby we may plainly perceiue that the Church is not the work∣manship of man. But seeing we are in hande with the affaires and actes of the low Countrey, let vs first com∣pare the state thereof, with the condition of the Church of Fraunce. As both Churches are in mighye Monar∣chies, so ad they for their aduersaries mighty Monar∣chies, being vexed with the furies of Cardinals: both of them in the beginning very small, but in the end, great and mighty both troubled, with great conflictes. Amidest the cruell tormentes, and bloudy murthersThe begin∣ning & en∣ of the church of Flaun∣ders. of the Inquisition of the newe Byshops: the number of suche as acknowledged and professed the truthe of the Gospell wonderfully increased: Insomuche that at the length, by the example of the Frenchmen, who by the Kings fauour, had gotten some libertie to vse the refor∣md religion, the matter beganne to be handeled more freely and openly, a certaine forme of confession of their faith and religion being published.
But the Cardinall Granuel on the contrary part: a∣gainst the mindes of those Noble men which were ap∣poynted by King Philip, went about earnestly to af∣flict Andwerpe with the Inquisition of the newe By∣shops, which notwithstanding was exempted from the burthen of the same, by speciall priuiledge. After thys he being complayned of by those Noble men, was put quit out of his authoritie, and sent for by the Kings let∣ters to come out of Flaunders. But he he had so proui∣ded before his departure, and the King was so affected at the instante sute of the Spanshe Inquisitors, that their Inquisition was the more seuerelye executed in Flaunders: yea all things were done in the absence of Granuel, as he would haue them. And among all other Cities, at Andwerpe great crueltie was shewed against the faythfull, one of the Ministers of the reformed reli∣gion called Christopher Smith, being cruelly slayne, the people so much disdayning thereat, that they were lyke to cause a daungerouse tumult. This was in the yeare of our Lord M. D. lxiiii. at what tyme the kingdome of Fraunce was greatly vexed, and depriued of the benefite of the Kings Edict. Notwithstanding the Churches of the low countrey dayly more and more encreased: many of the noble mē imbracing and professing the truth, whiche euen vntill that time had bene enimies to the same: Insomuch that certaine Noble men, set on fire with the loue of ye truth notwithstanding ye they sawe themselues to be in great perill of the Inquisitors therefore, determined to make a league among themselues, That they would endeuor themselues all that they coulde by all lawfull meanes, to helpe one another for the auoyding of perill, and to certifie one another of the attemptes of ye aduersaries. Thus when they had made this agréement, they went aboute to ioyne and wyn vnto them others that were
inflamed and bent against the reformed religion: Inso∣much that a man might sée openly a great many noble men with the greatest part of the people, both to detest Popish superstitious, and also receiue and embrace the reformed religion. But in the meane time the thunder clappes of the new Byshops made suche a stoure, that the faythfull beyng no more so subiecte to iniuries as they were before, it was to be doubted, least while they went aboute to resiste the violent force and crueltie of the Inquisitors, great vexations and troubles woulde arise. At this time the Duches of Parme, vnder the KyngKing Phi∣lip certified of the in∣crease of the protes∣tantes in the lowe countrey. had she gouernment of the whole region. Therfore she at the Admonition of the rulers of those partes, foresée∣ing the perill to come, by their aduise and authoritie, sent Egmond to Philip Kinge of Spaine, to declare vnto him the great perill and daunger which hoong ouer the whole low countrey of Flaunders: and to certifie him that so great troubles coulde not be preuented, vnlesse both the seueritie of the Edictes, and also the bouldnes of ertaine men outragiously abusing and violating thē were restrayned: yea, and that all sortes of men were so sore offended thereat, that vnlesse there were some spéedy remedye out of hande prouided, there was great perill of great troubles and garboyles. To this Egmond the King gaue a gentle answere, saying that he had a care for the affaires of the lowe Countrey: and that he would endeuour himselfe, that all things might be done there peaceably and orderly. Then he commaunded the Duches f Parme, to take order as necessitie required, with the aduise and Coun∣saile of good and wise men, by which she might prouide for so great inconueniences, and yet retaine safe the ca∣tholie Religion. The Duches of Perme when she had receyued the Kinges commaundement by Egmond, shee
by the aduise of the rulers, caused a solemn assembly, in the which there were thrée Byshops, thrée learned Di∣uines, thrée Canons Lawers, & thrée skilful Ciuillians, to whō shée committed the ordering of the whole mat∣ter. They then deuised and put downe an order: & tooke such paines for the Inquisition, that the same could not be more conueniently established. For though ye forme of wordes were chaunged, yet the matter it selfe was more seuerely ratifyed & confirmed: the terrible worde of Inquisition, being mittigated by calling the same, a visitation: In stéede of burning they vsed hanging, as we will hereafter declare more at large. Notwithstanding it did not satisfie Granuell, and the Spanish inquisitoures, as though this kind of most cru ell death had not bin sufficient: they being such kinde of men as were accustomed to shewe open cruelty, with∣out shame. They brought the matter therefore before the King: they said that there was a way made to the v er subuersion of Religion▪ askinge whether the inge should be afrayd to make open profession of his Religi∣on. Moreouer by their meanes the Popes legates per∣swaded with the King by threatninges, shewinge that not only the name of the Catholiques should decay, but also that he himselfe should be vtterly ouerthrowen, ex∣cepte he sought with all spéede to deface and vtterly to destroy, euen the least remnantes and reliques of the new Religion in the lowe Countrey: the which coul not be done without the benefite of the inquisition. Therefore King Philip reiecting that order of gouerne∣ment which the Duches had takē by the aduise of those graue and learned men, of whom we spake before, sent at the length letters vnto the saide Duches of Parme, That the Inquisition should be stablished throughout al the lowe Countrey of Flaunders, that the inquisitours should haue certain counsellers out of the chiefe senate
ioyned to them to euery prouince, by whose helpe they might be furthered in doing of their office: that the aun∣cient Edictes might euery where be obserued and kepte: that Bishoppes should be consecrated in all places: that the decreese of the counsaile of Trident should be euery where proclaimed: and that by all manner of meanes, the Doctrine of the Gospell and the professoures thereof should in all places be persecuted and afflicted. This came forth in the yeare of our Lord M. D. L. X. U. and in the moneth of December. These letters of the King being made openly know∣en by the commaundemente of the Duches of Parme, made the Catholiques not a little ioyfull, but greatly discomfited the mindes of the protestantes: but special∣ly the nobles, and those of the richer sorte, which sawe that their goods were sought for. For what could be free from the outragiouse cruelty of the inquisitours, seing they had to help them the Kinges Edictes, the Quéenes artillery, the Kinges prisones, and their owne executio∣ners? When as the noble men could not escape their tirannye. Therefore the Nobles and all the inhabi∣tauntes of the lowe Countrey were brought into great perill. Amidst this so great feare and maze of all that dwelt in that region, certaine of the noble men, séeing that the ruyne of the Gospell which they had professed, besides the calamitie of the whole countrey, and their peculiar destruction was at hand, deuised a waye in so great ex∣tremity to rid themselues out of perill, namely to de∣fend themselues against the rigour & tiranny of the in∣quisitours, so far as the Kinges dignitye and authoritye would giue them leaue. Thus when they had entred in to league, and solemly confirmed the same with an oth, they sought such wayes and meanes as séemed best vn∣to them to withstand that calamity like to ensue. To
this league thrée hundreth Noble men had giuen their consent: who determined and agréed that it was the best way to go to the Duches of Parme, and to shew vnto her the present daunger, that she might according to her du∣ty prouyde a remedy for the same. But bycause they con sidered that if they should make any mention of religi∣on, it would giue occasion to the inquisitours to execute their tyranny first of all vpon them, they thought it best and most necessary to auoyde the force and rygor of the Edictes and the Inquisition, if they pretended onely the libertie and ancient priuileges of their countrey. This way pleased the most part: but some feared the seueri∣tie of the Inquisition, from the which the Kyng himself was not free: howbeit the most parte of them thoughte it vnreasonable, that the lawes and liberty of the coun∣trey shoulde be violated and broken, and such tyrannie executed vpō their bodyes▪ goods, and consciences, wher∣b would followe the vtter ruyne and subuersion of the whole Countrey. Therefore thrée hundred Noble men almost agréed together in this confederacie at Brussels the third day ofa. do. 156 Aprill in the yéere of our Lorde M. D. LXUI. and by a Noble man whose name was Brederod, they offered a Supplication to the Duches of Parme: In the which, after they had protested their reuerence, obedience, andThe suppli∣cation of the nobles of the con∣federacy. singular loue which they ought vnto the King, & to the Duches of Parme, the Kings vicegerent, by dyuers and sondry reasons they made their petition. That the In∣quisition might be taken away: that the Kings Edictes concerning Religion mighte be suspended, vntill suche time as the King and the states of the Realme, had de∣liberated and determined concerning the same, and thē they protested that they would in euery poynte doe the duetie and office of faithfull Subiectes, saying, that if there were not a remedy prouided for these thinges in
time, the ruyne of y• countrey woulde followe. To this the Duches of Parme made answere, That she woulde doe any thing that she was able, that was either good or profitable for the common wealth: that she would en∣deuour her selfe to bring to passe, that the Inquisitours and officers vnder the King, should wisely behaue them selues, and not deale with any according to the seuerity of the Edictes: and that she woulde wythin sixe mone∣thes vnderstande the Kings pleasure concerning these things. Then shée wrote letters to the Gouernours of the Prouinces, willing them not to execute ye Kings lawes with seueritie, vntill suche time as they were farther certified of the Kings will and pleasure: She sent also to the King the Lorde Montign, and the Marques of Berge Noble men. In the meane time the Church of the faithfull increased, and were ioyfull that they were for some while deliuered from tyranny, & the cruel slaugh∣ter, hoping at the length to enioy peace and quietnesse. On the contrary part the catholikes were euill apayd, earing that hereby they shuld haue euill successe. Ther fore they came oftē times to the Duches of Parme, and declared vnto her that she went about to bring her selfe and the whole Countrey into extreame perill, if so be these men of the newe Religion so greatly preuayled with her▪ many other pernicious perswasions also they vsed to this effect. The Duches of Parme being led by them, called allThe Du∣ches of Par me causeth▪ an assem∣bly of States. the States together, choosing out suche men, as séemed vnto them fitte for their turne, and not such as shoulde haue bene of that assembly by order and course of euery citie. And before euery man had vttered his iudgement as the order of suche assemblyes requireth, they made a lawe, which they called the Moderatiō of the Edicts, and then were commaunded to subscribe to the same, and o
confirme it with an oath. The summe of this Mode∣ration was this. That all such as followed the newe re∣ligion▪ or did by any maner of meanes fauour or allow the same should be seuerely pūnished: yt hanging should be the death for suche offenders, and not burning: that also the punishments of proscriptions and banishment shuld be executed vpon those that professed the new re∣ligion, according to the Kings former Edictes. There∣fore, nowe the matter séemed to be in worse case than before, bycause these thinges were giuen forthe in the Kinges name, and commaunded by the solemn au∣thoritie of the States. And thus the petition of the No∣bles seemed to be satisfied. It is sayde, that these things were done without the Kings consent and knowledge. The Rumor of this Edicte being in all places, the gréene wound which before was scarcely salued, began to ware sore againe, and the people began to complaine a freshe, perceyuing that great calamities were like to fll vpon them. Notwithstanding great was the num∣ber of such as professed the reformed religiō, and t day∣ly increased: howbeit they were faye to haue the vse of their religion priuily and in priuate houses. But at the length the people waxing zealous in this cause, that which before was done in secrete began to be publikely and openly exercised, in so muche that Sermones were made in publike places that all men might resort ther∣vto that woulde: nothing fearing the late made Mo∣deration, whiche notwithstanding in some places was seuerely executed, many by this occasiō feelyng ye smart of the Inquisition. In the very vtmost partes and borders of Flaunders, first the protestants began to come togyther openly inSerones. lockes, and in congregations, to heare the word of god: then straytway at Antwerpe: after that diuers other ci∣ties and townes following their example, did the lyke.
This was toward the latter end of the moneth of Iune At the first, the people assembled them selues togyther without the Cities, notwithstanding in such number, that a man might see continuall passage of people be∣twéene the fieldes and euery Citie. In the beginninge, they came togither vnarmed: but when they vnderstood that their méeting waxed daungerouse, and that the In quisitours began to playe their part, they caried wyth them at the first swordes, but afterwardes, more strong and better weapons, to defend themselues as they pas∣sed from their houses into the fieldes. At Antwerpe the Magistrates of the citie gaue leaue to the protestants, to arme themselues so long as they were out of the ci∣tie in the fields, but in no wyse to beare the same with∣in the citie: to the which the protestants willingly graū ted. This was the beginning of publike sermons in the Churches of the lowe country, to the which there came many thousandes of men, the Inquisitours in ye meane tyme seeking the pray, and making great complayntes to the Duches of Parme. And after that the Gospell had ben quietly preached for the space of certain weekes, beholde there ensued a great tempest and wracke among the Images and I∣dollesImages in Flaunders went to wracke of the Papistes. And first of all they wer thrown downe and beaten to péeces, in the vtmoste partes of Flandres: after that, in diuers places of Flaundres, the people making such a spoyle among them, as if the Ma∣gistrates had commaunded the same. The Magistrats were so amazed and abashed hereat, that although they followed the Catholike religion, yet notwithstanding they set to their handes & furthered the pulling down, defacing and breaking the Images. At Gend, a fayre Towne, by the sufferance of the fearfull Pretor, all the Images and other ornaments v∣sed in popishe seruice, were defaced and spoyled in eue∣ry
Church. The like was done at Lire in Brabant. At Antwerpe the Magistrat kept himself out of sight, while the people ran vp and downe from churche to church, & spoyled the Images that were therin. If any man condemne this rashe zeale of the people, voyd of reason, let him there withall weigh the singular Iudgement of God against those Idols, with the which the world being blinded, had so many wayes dishonou∣red his Maiestie. The Duchesse of Parme being carefull, & not know∣ing what to doe in these extremities, fearing least ther would ensue greater troubles, thought good to pacifie & content the people with fayre promises: and to make those Noble men that professed the reformed religion, meanes to represse those troubles. Therfore when she had sent for them to Brussels, she desired them to ende∣uour themselues to staye the tumule of the people: to reiecte all false conceyued opinions, to bee perswaded that the King would vse all meanes and ways for their peace and tranquillitie: promising vnto them leaue to haue their Sermons in such places as they had them beThe confe∣rence be∣tweene the nobles, & the Duches of Parme. fore: and that shée would geue commaundement to the Magistrates and Gouernours of euery citie, to appoint places for the Protestantes, to the which they might quietly resort to the hearing & administration of their Religion▪ that the profession of religion should be hurt∣full to no man, so that he brake not the common peace, as in spoyling of Temples, and such like. To this the Noble men dyd condescend and agree: wherevpon the Conditions were solemply confirmed betwéene both partes with an othe, and ingrossed, and sealed with the Kings seale. Commaundement was gyuen to all Gouernours and Magistrates, solemly to proclayme this agréement, and to do all thinges accor∣ding to the tenure thereof. There was made also an E∣dict,
by which all men were forbidden to do any iniury, eyther by word or déed for Religion, vppon payne of se∣uere punishment. Upon this commaundement the go∣uernours of euery circuite or shyer, appoynted oute places for the exercising of the reformed religion suffe∣red churches to be buylded for the same purpose: & wil∣led both partes to stay themselues vnder their protec∣tion. This was about the Moneth of August. The Religion and the professours therof séemed now to be in good cace, reporte euerywhere being made, that the King was fully purposed to giue licence to the inha¦bitants of the low Countrey to vse the reformed Reli∣gion. But the myndes of the Catholiques were not yet quieted: wherevpon they sought daily new occasions of tumulte, being full of enuy for the breakinge downe of their Images. Wherefore there arose now again new troubles. And at Andwerpe specially there were great con∣tentions: and as though the enemy had bin at hand the gates were shutte vp, and continuall watche and ward thereat. Thither therefore at the commaundement of the Duchesse of Parme, came William Nassau Prince of Orange to gouerne the Citie in the Kinges name, be∣ingThe Prince of Orange commeth to Ant∣werpe. at such great contention. And calling vnto him by two and two the Churches of the Protestantes which consisted of Wallonnes and Fleminges, he did deliberate with them concerning the best remedies to bring peace and tranquility to both partes, as wel to the catholikes as to the Protestantes▪ After which deliberation, they concluded vpon certaine articles, and confirmed them: which afterward were published & proclaimed in ma∣ner and forme following. It shall not be lawfull for those of the reformed Re∣ligion, to disturbe by any manner of meanes the admi∣nistration of the Catholique Religion of Roome, or to
take away such places as are appointed for the vse ther∣of, but shal content themselues with those places which are allotted to them: to the which places they shall re∣sorte vppon the dayes appointed, as vppon the Sonday and other holy dayes or, if there be no holy dayes, vppon the Wednesday. I shl not be lawfull for them to haue any other Ministers, than such as be borne within the Dominion and circuit of the lowe Countrey, and shalbe sworne to obey both the ciuill and temporall gouerne∣ment so long as they shall there remaine. It shall not be lawfull for those of the forenamed Religion, when they go to their Sermones, to cary any other weapons or armour than swoords: but to obey lawes, & to walke as it shall become good and faithfull subiectes. It shalnot be lawfull for Preachers of eyther part, in their Ser∣mons to vse any seditiouse or iniuriouse woords, which shall appertaine to the refuting of erroures, or the cor∣ruption of manners. These thinges we will and com∣maund to be obserued vntil such time as we vnderstād the kings pleasure farther. And if so be it shal please the King to appoint otherwyse, than it shall be lawfull for those of the reformed Religion to forsake the Realme wyth their lyues and goods. After the proclamation hereof, it séemed to bringe peace to diuers other Cityes, and to abolish quight the remembraunce of other troubles: but yet for all this, the men of the reformed religion were not frée and at such perfect peace as they iudged themselues to be. For the papistes which inclined to the Cardinall Granuellan and the inquisitours side, toke occasion by the foresaide casting downe of Images to worke their mischeuouse intent Therefore taking a courage amidest that great and sodame feare & maze, the greatest part of the kings officers, went about to bring in question the throwing downe of the Images, as done againste all order and
the publique authority of Magistrats. They refused al∣so the letters of the Duches of Parme, as to helpe any thing at all the offenders herein. Therefore gatheringe togyther a great number of Souldiers to serue their turne, they toke many in all places of the protestantes, and cast them into prison: and after examination, put them to death. After this also Norcam Manques of Berge, a nota∣ble enemy to the reformed Religion, came with foure bandes of horsmen, & v. Ensignes of footmen, & mindingValleucia besieged. to besiéege Ualencia, toke as he came a Towne called Sainctaman, and committed their most cruell tyrannye, as rapine, murther, and the defiling of Uirgins, beside most horrible kindes of torment then practised. Thys was done in the moneth of Nouember. By these cruell actes of the papistes, which threat∣ned extreame destruction, the protestants sawe that it was now hygh time to prouide for themselues. There∣fore dyuers practised sondry wayes & meanes for theyr defence: but God altering and orderinge all thinges by his prouidence, would not suffer thē to come to good ef∣fect. Great was the multitude of people, and great was their courage: but they wanted Counsayle and Cap∣taynes to guyde them. There were sufficient men e∣nough, which could haue gouerned them and conducted them both with wisdome and pollicie: agayn the num∣ber of Noblemen was not smal that fauoured that side, who, if they had taken parte with them, there had bene good hope of victory, and to haue had more quiet gouern ment. But such as were of highest calling, standing stil as lookers on, and séeking neyther to defende nor to re∣sist the one nor the other, all good occasion to bring any thing happely to passe, was lost: The whiche brought great ruine to the protestantes of the lowe Countrey, and great calamity to those noble men themselues: So
hard & perillouse a thing it is for a man to séeke to serue two maisters so cōtrary the one to the other. The grea test part of the Nobilitie professed the reformed religi∣on: and yet there was scarse one of them, which came at any tyme to the sermons of that Religion. Where∣fore we must néedes confesse that our sinnes haue cau∣sed the Lord not to finish that good worke which he had begonne. Herevpon came the pitiefull calamitie of the churches of the low countrey. The Protestantes therefore were both destitute of counsaile, and also of a goide, but the Catholiques wā∣ted neyther of them both. Wherefore their cities were dayly fortified with garrisons, and they besieged as is sayd before, Valencia, which was quight voyde and de∣stitute of any Captayne. There came diuers bandes of Souldiours also, as scattered shéepe, to ayde the Prote∣stants at Valēcia, and that with good courage: and while they vainly looked for a Captayne, the greatest part cō∣ueyed themselues away. Therefore al this mouth was spent with diuers troubles, and diuers cities of the pro testantes were wonne, and the inhabitants therof put to flight. Antwerpe being vnder the authoritie and gouerne∣ment of the prince of Orange was not pertaker of those troubles that other places felt. But the foolish men be∣ing weary of peace and ease, and as though there were not at Antwerpe troublesome heades ynough, they sent for Matthus Illyricus, and for Flaccus Spangenberge and other to contende with the men of the reformed religi∣on, about the Supper of the Lord, and the presence in the Sacrament. All things growing daylye from euill to woorse, the Protestantes offered vp at diuers tymes Supplicati∣ons to the Magistrates, to whom most humbly and re∣uerently they committed themselues and their cause:
promising vnto them a great summe of money, vppon condition that they might be in safety. Also, when dy∣uers of the Princes of Germany had sought to intreat the matter, and could not obtayne that which they wis∣shed, Brederode and certayn noble men confederat with him, offered vp a Supplication the eight day of Febru∣ary, which consisted of these speciall poyntes, That the agreement made betweene him and the Duches of Parme, in the moneth of August, might be obserued and kept: that the libertie of Religion might be graunted: and that the sol∣diours gathered togither (contrary to the forme of the othe) might be dismist. To this, within a while after, the Du chesse of Parma made answere, That shee neuer ment to graunt the publique administration of the Religion, nor the vse of Sermons, Sacraments, and Consistories: and as fos the interpretation of the agreemēt, that (saith shee) dependeth vpon mee. Concerning the Request, to haue the souldiours dismist, all men may see whereunto that tendeth. VVherefore (sayeth shee) I pray and com maund euery man vppon payne of the Kinges displea∣sure, to goe home to his owne house. This aunswere made Brederode and his fellowes to doubt, & to feare the calamitie lyke to ensue. And when they had taryed in vayne thirtéene dayes at Antwenpe, they got them home to Uian, a towne in the borders of Holland: and thyther strayghtway a great many fled. The reste of the moneth of February, was spente with diuers troubles, the faithfull Protestants beinge dayly anoyed and vexed more and more, with proscrip∣tions banishments, and such lyke. All this while was continued the siege of Valence, which at the laste by the letters of the Duches of Parma, wherein shée promysedValence surrendred all clemeney and fauour, was surrendered to Noircarm the xxiii. day of March. After the which it cannot be ex∣pressed what great cruelty was showē vpon the towns∣men:
the chief both of the Citie, and also of the Church, were taken prisoners: and among these two ministers, the one called Guido Bresse, & the other Peregrine Grage, and certayne other honest Citizens were put to death: for that they had Sermones in the Citie without the Kings will and pleasure, and had also vsed the admini∣stration of Sacramentes. In the middest of these gar∣boyles, it was reported that Fraunces de Tolede Duke of Alba was comming with a great army, to ouercome and subdue all the lowe Countrey, otherwyse called Belgio. IN this yéere also▪ the Churches of Fraunce were not aan. do. 1567 little troubled, occasion being taken of the cruel mur∣therThe last cō spiracy of the Catho∣liqnes con∣cerning the ruine of the Church of Fraunce. committed in the lowe Countrey, the whiche the Cardinall of Loraine thoughte fitte for his purpose to af∣flict and destroy the Churches of Fraunce, with the help of the Duke of Alba, of whose comming he was truely certifyed by the letters of Granuellan. The same Cardi∣nall also procured the Popes letters, and the letters of King Philip, to the Quéene, putting her in minde therby of her promyse, of the holy league. Therfore this yéere they mynded to worke the vtter ruyne and destruction of the Churches of Fraunce. So that they hauing theyr consultations at Marches, and at Monseaux, (at whiche places the King and Quéene moste commonly aboade) determined to prouide out of hande bandes of souldiers, and to require the helpe and ayde of the Switzers: all the which they determined to do vnder the collonr, that the Duke of Alba with the Spaniardes ment to giue some attempte againste the Realme of Frannce, or that they mynded to defende Callice against the Quéene of Eng∣land. They sought also other meanes and waies to qua∣rell and contende with the Protestantes, mynding to deale with them as giltie of the Edictes broken, and to examine those which had done anye thing contrarye to
the Edicte, specially againste that which was made at Rossillon: that is to saye, which had gone to anye other places to beare Sermons than to those which were ap∣poynted them by the Kings commaundement: or if the Noble men had entertayned any other to the hearyng of the sayd Sermons, beside those that were within the compasse of their Iurisdiction: and suche like offences. As these transgressions had anexed vnto them the pain and punishment of exile, so their purpose was to seeke a reformation of these things, by seuere putting the same punishmentes in execution, according to the tenour of the Edict. But least they might séeme to haue no regard to the Counsaile of the Duke of Alba, which was: It is bet∣ter to haue one Salmons heade, than the heades of a thousand Frogges: they went about to snare and catch those No∣ble men, which imbraced the reformed religion, as the Prince of Conde, the Admirall, the Andelot, the Roch∣foucault, and other Noble men. And this séemed a pre∣sent waye to bring the same to passe, if so be the Kinge sent for them, as standing in néede to haue their aduise in those thinges that concerned the gouernment of the Realme. Nowe if they should haue refused to come vn∣to the King, than had he good and iust cause to complaine of them, as none of his friendes. And if so be they shuld haue neede to vse any force, they had at hande two and twentie Giddons of horsemen, and certaine Switsers also, of which they had already gotten six thousand. In the meane time the Prince of Conde, the Admiral and diuers other Noble men of the reformed religion, were verye carefull. For beside these flying rumours, bothe the dayly newes of the comming of the Duke of Alba, and of the ayde of the Switzers, and also the ma∣nifest preparation of horsemen, with the euident state of all things else, caused them to haue a great care. For
concerning that Holy League, made betwéene the kinge of Fraunce and Spayne, to destroy the religiō. The prince of Conde was fully certifyed by the Prince Rochsuryon, the Prince of Condes néere kinsman, and of the Kynges bloude, of the house of Borbou: who a little before hys death exhorted the Prince of Conde to prouide remedye in time for so greate troubles. The Noble men afore∣sayde, being very carefull and withall vncertain what to doe, fearing least if they should obey the kinges com∣maundement (whose name they perceiued their aduer∣saries to abuse) they shoulde sodainely be oppressed: or leaste they shoulde be accused of rebellion, if so be they sought meanes to restite the force of their aduersaries: they determined (I say) to séeke all wayes and meanes to appease and quallify these troubles, and to certifie the King plainely of their will and mynde herein. In the meane time bycause they perceyued their enemyes to be in a readynesse, they sente diuers mesiangers to the reformed Churches within the Realme to prepare thē∣selues, and to haue a diligent consideration of all theyr actions. They certified diuers of the princes of Germa∣ny concerning their affaires, requiring aide of them if neede should require: This was in the monethes of Iu∣ly and August, of this yeare. The Spanishe armies aryued at Nice, a Citie of the Duke of Sauoy, mynding to passe through Pedemont, Sa∣uoy,The com∣ming of the spanish army with the Duke of Alba. and the Countie of Burgundy: where the Prince of Orange hadde occasion offered him to finishe notable ex∣ploytes, if he would haue taken his time, but as he dyd in the lowe Countrey so did he nowe, leaste he myghte séeme to attempt any thing against the king: but with∣in a while after he was very homely requighted by the Duke of Alba. Philbert Duke of Sanoy, required of the inhabitantes of Bernoy, a great parte of the territory which they had
sometyme taken from his Dominion, by war: and the matter between them was oftentimes solemnly deba∣ted in an assembly of the Switzers, the men of Bernoys af∣firming that the same Region was giuen vnto them by the Lawe of Armes, and that they had lawfully re∣ceiued the same. Notwithstanding at the same time when the Spa∣nishe armyes were loked for which came with ye Duke of Alba, the men of Bernoys communed with the Duke of Sauoy, and agréed with him vpon certain conditions, and graunted vnto him the thrée Dominions or Lord∣ships that were next to Geneua▪ By reasō of this agrée∣ment, the administration and vse of the reformed reli∣gion was vsed in those Dominions, euen as the men of Bernoys themselues would desire. Concerning the purpose and connfaile of the Prince of Conde, of the Admirall, and of others of the reformed religion, we haue spoken before. The Prince of Conde therefore, by dyuers messengers prayed and intreated the Kinge concerninge the séeking of a reformation for those troubles, which were lyke shortly to ensue. Decla∣ring vnto him that the comming of the Swirsors into the Realme againe was so perillouse, that it would cause the people seditiously to rise. The Admirall went often tymes to the Constable his vncle, and talked with the Quéene, whom he knew to be at Chantilly, the Consta∣bles house, and fréely declared vnto her, that if the faith∣full were so handled, wherby they had iust cause to sus∣pect that war was a preparing for him, they could not any longer be kept in peace. Notwithstandinge the Quéene and the Costable pretended a notable cause why it was néedefull to haue the aide of forreiners: for, say they, the Spaniardes beare an olde grudge and ha∣tred against the realme of Fraunce: so that we haue good cause to feare, least they hauing occasion set vppon vs:
but the King will reforme all thinges so, for the faith∣fulles sake, that all men shall sée, that he will deale vp∣rightly and iustly towardes all men. After this also the Queen made these promises in her letters to the prince of Conde. Notwithstanding there came sixe thousand Switsers, in the beginning of September:: and a greate number of horsemen were armed and prepared. And the Prince of Conde was fully certified, that the Duke of Alba which was already come to Belgio, had moued the King of Fraunce in the name of King Phillip, to go forward with the holy league, and withall had perswaded him to take present occasion to bring his purpose to passe. At this time the Cardinall of Lorraine was with the King, and a great number of his adherentes also. Notwith∣standing all thinges waxing dayly woorse and woorse, the Prince of Conde, and the rest of the péeres and No∣bles which professed the reformed religion, sawe that ther was no longer stay to be made, but that they must of necessity, when they could do no good by their letters, come before the king themselues, and declare vnto him the present daunger. Wherfore they appointed the day to go vnto the King: and because they might the more effectually declare the matter before the King, and also escape the perill and lyinge in waye of the Cardinall, they determined to go with the greater number, & that armed to defend themselues. Therefore a hundred and twenty noble men, hauing the Prince of Conde theyr Captaine, came to Mnceaux, to talke with the King, and to offer vp vnto him a supplication in the name of all the faithfull: the suine whereof was this: That for so much as the King had made an Edict, to kepe his sub∣iectes in peace and concorde, which was necessary both for them and his Realme, they most humbly beséeched him that the same might bee better obseruid and kepte
than it had bin aforetyme. And forso much as vntill that same day they had made the same complaintes afore in vain, and that often times, they now at that time trus∣ted, séeing there were so manifest perill of such greate troubles at hand, that he would effectually declare, that he made account of the faithfull as of the rest of his sub∣iectes: who being abused and iniuried, haue no other re∣fuge to flée vnto in their extreame calamities, than to his grace, their soueraigne Lord and King. The Cardinall of Lorraine vnderstoode of the com∣ming of the prince of Conde with the rest of the nobles, declared vnto the King and Quéene, what great perill and daunger it was vnto their persons, for the Prince of Conde to come vnto them with so greate a power of men, intending he sayde, nothing else than to take the king, his mother, and his whole family, yt then he might doe what him lyst. The King and Quéene beyng made afearde wythThe King & Quene remoue to Paris. these rumors, remoued to Paris, being garded with the bandes of the Switzers. The Prince of Conde being sory for this feare of the King and Quéene, stayed at Rozoi, a village therabout: to the which place the Marshall Momorencius was sent declaring vnto him the causes of his comming, saying yt he was very sory, that he was fallen into so great suspi∣tion. To whom the Prince deliuered a Supplication, and prayed him to deliuer the same to the King, and to certifie him of his whole intent and meaning. Then he came to Clay, whether the Kinge sente vnto him the Chauncellour Hospitall, the Marshall Vielleuil, & Mor∣uilliers: to whome when he had more at large declared the cause of his comming, he sent letters agayne to the King, in the which he protested his fayth and reuerent mynde which he bare towarde the King: refuted the sclaunders of his Aduersaries, by which they wente a∣bout
to make hym hated of the King, declared also that he was readye to render all obedience to the King, for whose sake he sayd he woulde spende his life and goods,Letters of the Prince to the king notwithstandyng, he sayde, he sawe wicked and vngod∣ly men abusing both the Kinges name, and also his age and will: whome alone he thought to be the causers of all these troubles, and therefore woulde gyue place to none of them vnlesse he ment to shewe himselfe a tray∣tor to hys King and Countrey. The Prince of Conde al∣so declared his reasons more particularlye, and put downe this in writing as the summe of all his petiti∣ons: First, That accordyng to the firste forme of the Edicte, all other interpretations and exceptions taken awaye, the faythfull maye enioye their Religion: and that all the Kinges Subiectes what Religion soeuer they be of may, accordyng to their degree and callyng bea office vnder the King: and bycause both the people and the Nobles haue bene oppressed with tributes, vve desire (saythe hée) that it maye please the Kynge to ease vs of the same. After this he remoued from Clay, to the Towne of Sandionyse, bycause the same beyng néere vnto Paris, he might the more conueniently haue conference with the King. But all was in vayne: the Cardinall of Lorayne inflaming the mindes of the King and Quéene against the Prince of Conde, and agaynst the cause of the faith∣full. But bycause the Prince of Conde woulde, if itThe last pe tition of the Prince of Conde. myghte possible be, bring somewhat to passe, he made this last request of the King, That it would please him to haue some consideration of peace, and mens consci∣ences: and that all thinges hereafter might be ordered, not at the pleasure of their aduersaries, but by the Kings will, but by a firme and infalliable Edict. But the Papistes thinking the Protestantes to be quite done, and out of harte, with vnaduised rashnesse,
rushed to warre again, the Constable very immodestly and contrary to his gray heares behauing himselfe at Paris, euen as thoughe already they had gotten the vic∣tory. Therefore besyde the Souldiours which they had al∣readye gotten and prepared, there was choosyng and mustering of men at Paris, and manye were preste to the warre: in so much that a man might thinke that the Prince of Conde woulde easily now be oppres∣sed and ouercome, hauyng so fewe men wyth him: notwithstanding within fewe dayes a great number came to him oute of all partes of the Realme: and the faithfull in all quarters ar∣med and prepared themselues.
The. viii. Booke of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the common wealth of Fraunce vnder the Raigne of Charles the ninth. WAR being thus a fresh begonne, all men wayted and looked for new thinges to comeThe state of the faith full in the beginning of this se∣cond war. to passe. Notwithstāding these affayres of warre, in dyuers places had diuers successe. The Catholiques had many mo Ci∣ties and Armies of souldiours, than the Protestants had: how∣beit they agayne far excéeded the other in courage, and boldnesse, being as men, after long oppression by iniu∣ries, brought into prill of their lyues and goodes. The Protestantes had but a few cities in their possession. Lions, a towne of notable force, ell from them, which, by the diligence of the Gouernour of the Towne, was out of hand very strongly fortified with new garrisons of men. Then went the faythfull to wracke, being rob∣bed, spoyled, and murthered: the souldiour & the townes∣man furiously running vp and downe the Citie, & ran∣sacking the houses of the faythfull: their Temples wer set on fire, which were very costly builded in two con∣uenient places, yea the honest Citizens went to wrack in euery corner of the citie. Howbeit, many escaped by
the meanes of the castell of Sansebastian, the which not∣withstanding was appoynted for the destruction of the faythfull, but the kéeper was their friend. Geneua was their Sanctuarie and refuge in this extréeme tyme of trouble. Notwithstanding diuers Cities tooke parte with theThe Cities & townes that tooke part with the protes∣tantes. Nobles of the reformed Religion: as in Dolpheny, Ua∣lencia, Vienna, Roman, and Montill. In Languedoc, Ne∣maux, Montpellier, (notwithstanding the papistes held the Castell of S. Peter, but afterwards were dryuen out of the same by Monsieur Mouents) Castra-Albien, & certaine Cities also of Rhodes, of Seuenas, and of the ter∣ritorie of Viaretz: also by the industrie of Uicount Bu∣rinquet, they had Montaulban and all that bordered vp∣pon the same. Moreouer, Orleans and the Cities and townes therunto adioyning, was possessed by the Pro∣testantes, and so was Rochell. In al partes of the realm thoe was some number or other of Protestantes: but they were banished out of the Cities, whiche made the army of the Prince of Conde to be the greater. The misdemeanour and cruelty of the inhabitantes of Lions, made the protestants in other places that wer more mighty in power to aryse. Therfore diuers mur∣thers were committed in diuers places: and because the Catholiques had burned the churches of the prote∣stants, they in lyke manner burned their Churches to requite their crueltie. In so much that in all those cities which the protestantes possessed, there was not almost a church to be found which thei had not burned, spoyled, and beaten down to the ground: the people crying, that all the remnaunts of superstition must bee so taken a∣way, that afterward there may be no remembrance or signe thereof to be found. While this businesse and garboyle was abroade in diuers places, at Paris, the papists were very extréeme
and cruell agaynst such as they could but suspecte to bée fauourers of the reformed religion. All men therefore were set vpon warre and tumult. In the meane tyme the prince of Conde wayted for his souldiours at Sandio∣nyse and waxed dayly more strong with new ayde. The Constable being verily persuaded that he should oppresse & ouercome the prince of Conde, marched with all the power he was able to make from Paris, takinge with him great gonnes, bragging & boastinge that the prince of Conde had none such to put him in perill with∣all: but his bragges and boastes had euill successe. Forthe slaugh rer of the Parisians at Sandio∣yse. after that the Parisians had discharged their great shot, and that the battayle began to waxe whote, they being not able to abyde the charge of the Prince of Conde and his souldiours, though they were the smaller number began at the first to retire, and afterwards, when their araye was brokē, to quayle and to flée, séeking to reco∣uer the gates of the Citie so fast as they could. In this battayle the Constable was sore wounded with a shot, & his horse also, and falling to the grounde, was wounded agayne: and then was spéedely caryed away by certayn horsmen to Paris: after the which within certayn dayesThe Cōsta ble woun∣ded to the death. after he dyed. This man had liued fiue kinges raignes, being of great authoritie in Fraunce many yeres, ye he was the second person in the realme: he was also a faythfull and trusty seruaunt to the King, being wyse & circumspect to auoyde the daunger of his enemies, vn∣till such time as he ioyned himselfe vnto them, for the hatred of Religion. Concerning the calamitie of the churches of Belgio, we spake before. After therefore that the people wereThe state of the chur ches of the low coun∣trey after the com∣ming of Duke de Alba. in good hope by reason of the authoritie and promises of the Noble men that were of the Confederacy, they re∣ceyued notwithstanding at length the aunswere of the
Noble men which séemed to bee of greatest power in these matters, That it séemed good vnto them to com∣mit the whole matter to Maximilian the Emperour, and the Princes of the Empyre, whereby they should be sure to enioye the libertie of the confession of Ausburg. But Valence being left destitute of ayde, and therefore cruelly spoyled, and the whole countrey being desolat, that, their purpose was frustrate. For the protestantes fledd out from all places of the borders of Belgio, by heapes: also the Ministers & chiefe Gouerners of the church of Antwerp, yea and the Prince of Orange him∣selfe, leauing his sonne at Louayne, fled out of the coun∣trey, and that in good tyme, as the pitiefull deathes of Counte Egmond and Horne afterwarde declared: of the which we will speake anon. A great parte of the Pro∣testantes of the low Countrey fled into Englande, and part into Germany, and into Cleueland, the Quene of En∣land, the princes of Germany, but specially the Countye Palatyne, graunting vnto them Cities to dwell in. God thus prouided for his people, who is always a continu∣all preseruer and vphoulder of his Church, the whiche, when horrible destruction cōmeth, he buildeth vp with out the helpe of man. The Duke of Alba therefore came into Belgio, other∣wyse called the Lowe Countrey, where he placed in di∣uers Cities, garrisons of Spayniardes: and then proclai∣med the Kings Edicte concerninge the establishing of the Inquisition, by whiche hée willed and commaun∣ded the reformed religion to be altered and ordered. Then also he ordeyned a new senate, consisting of twelue men, comonly called the Bloudy Counsaile, which should sit vppon all matters concerning lyfe and death. He displaced also dyuers Magistrates, and set others in their roome. After this he tooke a great number and cast them into prison, hauing no regard or consideration of
them what Religion soeuer they professed: to such as were fled the countrey, he appointed a day for their re∣turn, and before the day was fully expired, he adiudged their goodes to be confiscate. Howbeit in the beginning he dissembled this cruelty, and made the people beléeue that whatsoeuer had bin done before tyme for religion should be pardoned by the Kings Edict. And thus were County Egmond, & Horne, Noble men brought & caught in the snare. And when sharp lawes wer made con∣cerning the inquisition, the inquisitoures were not idle, but played their part, and cast a great number into pry∣son: Infantes whych had bin baptised before in the re∣formed Churches, were constrained to be rebaptised: Women whose husbandes were fled for religion, were constrained to be maried agayn to new husbandes: and at the commaundement of the Duke de Alba, many of them were forced to mary with his soulders. Now, the Spanish souldier began to pray and spoile in euery City. Also, when the dissembled clemency of Duke de Alba, shewed at the first, had drawen a great many home to their houses againe, the Bloudy Senate, was set a worke: some were beheaded, some hanged, and some had their tungues first of all cutte out of their heades, and then a bodkin thrust through their lippes: these la∣mentable sightes were dayly to be sene, but specially at Brusselles and at Antwerp. Diuers Noblemen also were partakers of these punishmentes, as the Battemburges which were Bretheren of a noble house, and were cru∣elly put to death: but these had more cōpany, for heapes were brought at once to the place of execution. And at the same time, County Egmond, and County Horne, no∣ble men, and such as afore time had borne great offices, and done to their King and Countrey good seruice, wer also with this bitter reward of cruel tyranny requited: and after they were beheaded, their heades were set vp
on forkes. County Horne, all the tyme of his imprison∣ment, and euen in death, shewed a singuler zeale of re∣ligion. It was reported that the Duke of Alba bare to∣wardes both of these an olde grudge, but specially to∣wardes the County Egmond for that which he had done in the affaires of France, & not for religions sake, which neyther of them at any tyme had professed. These thinges were done in the yeare of our Lord, 1568: the which we haue heere inserted, though as yet we are not come to that yeare, to the ende the reader might the better vnderstande the order of all the actes and affaires of the lowe Countrey. After the foresayde slaughter of the Parrisians, there courage was somwhat quailed, that they durst no more so boldly set vpon the Prince of Conde. But the Prince of Conde, when he had soughte and intreated peace by messengers sent vnto the King, and coulde not obtaine the same, and beyng as yet vnable to giue any greater enterprise, sent into Germany for aid to the princes. For there were prepared great Armies both of horsemen and footemen Germanes, their generall Captaine being Csimire Duke of Bauire & son of Frederike county Pala∣tine. And bycause the prince of Conde wanted great or∣dinaunce, the princes of their owne proper charge pro∣uided reasonable store of great gunnes for him. At theThe Prince of Conde marcheth to Lorain. length the prince went himself with his army, to méete the Germanes, that, ioyning with them in time, he might haue occasion to bring notable thinges to passe. Goinge therefore from Sandionise, he marched towardes Lor∣raine, being the ready way into Germany. The prince being absent, the Catholikes armyes, which men com∣monly called the Kings armie, had the more libertie to increase their power: to whom, beside their domesti∣call ayde, came certaine bandes of horsemen and foote men out of Italy. The Catholikes chefetaine General,
was Alexander Duke of Anion a yong mā, & the kings brother: but he had vnder him to guide him dyuers ex∣pert Captaines, as Mons. Martigues, , Lessay, and others. They wanted greatly the Marshall Brissac, who dyed before the troubles of this seconde warre, and to whom, the charge of the warre was principally committed. The Kinges brother hauing gathered his whole Ar∣mie together determined to marche also towarde Lo∣raine,The Duke of Aniou marcheth towarde Loraine. that he mighte either staye the Prince of Conde, from ioyning with the Germans, or else by meanes or other might anoy him: and to the ende also he mighte ioyne with those Germans which came to ayde him, vn∣der the charge and conduct of Captaine Saxon & Baden. Thus for space of certaine dayes, whilest one of them laye in wayte for another, there was nothing done but certaine small skirmishes made, the kings brother al∣wayes refusing to ioyne battaile. While these things thus procéeded on both parts by martiall affayres, the Catholiques soughte also to pre∣uaileThe Kings Edict a∣gainst the faithfull. by Edicts, and with thundering threates. Ther∣fore the vse of the reformed religion was forbydden in all places of the Realme: all Ministers were commaū∣ded to depart the Realme within fiuetene dayes, vpon paine of death: notwithstanding leaue was graunted to such to abide still at home, as coulde be contented to forsake the exercise of the reformed religion: agayne, it did not appoint any manner of punishment for any di∣uersitie of opinion concerning Religion, so that ye hol∣ders of them did kéepe their conscience secrete to them∣selues, and did not publishe the saide opinions abroade, nor ioyne with the fauourers of the Prince of Conde: also all suche as bare anye office, and fauoured not the Catholike religion were commaūded to forsake their offices▪ and to liue as other priuate Subiectes.
And straite after this, the Senate of Paris sent oute decrées by which they condemned the most parte of the nobles, as guiltie of treason, but specially the Admiral. Whose office was taken from him and giuen to Mons. Martigues, a very wicked and vngodlye man, but yet a valiant Captaine. The Armies pursued one another at Lorain, while they wayted for the comming of the Germaine horsmē. And the Kinges brothers Armie was dayly increased with newe aide: to whome within a while after the Cermanes came and ioyned themselues: they were in number a thousand and CC. horsemen. But all thys while, whiche continued the space of two monethes, there was no notable attempte gyuen: the more was behinde against winter. By the sufferance and fauour of the Quéene of Na∣uar, there were armies prest out of the Region of Foix (which is within the dominion of the Quéene of Na∣uar, and adioyning to the mountaines Pirenei) and they came to Montanbane: where other Armies also by the industry of Vicount Burniguet, and other noble men, were gathered together out of the Territory therea∣boutes. After this, by the diligent trauaile of Monsiuer Monents, Monbrune, Ponsenac, and of other Noble cap∣taines, there were diuers other bandes of souldiours, footemen gathered out from among suche as were ba∣nished out of Prouance, Forests, Bourgondy, Dolpheny, and out of Languedoc: the which were minded to go toge∣ther and to ioyne with the Prince of Conde. And when they were in Auuergne, the Noble men of that region,A battayle in Auuerg∣ne, the pro testants ha uing the victory. at the Kings commaundement, and by the furtherance of the Liuetenant, went about with all the power they were able to make too staye the Armyes of the protes∣tantes. Wherupon, they méeting together ioyned bat∣taile at Cognac, a village, néere vnto the towne of Gai∣nat.
The faithfull vnderstanding of the lying in waite of their Aduersaries, at the first drew backe: Then be∣ing incouraged by their Captaynes, but speciallye by Mons. Mouents, they did not onely encounter with the enemie, but also caused them to flée, and slewe a greate number of them: at which time the foresaide Gannat, was a conuenient place of refuge for them. Bicause the protestants wanted great gunnes, and were lothe to linger their iourney taken in hande, they left Gannat, & as they went, to wrecke their anger, they set fire on the house of Haulltefull, a noble man, and one of the chiefe of the Catholiques, who was also slayne among the rest of the common souldiers, Mons. Peze∣nac, of the protestantes side, was very sore wounded in that battaile, in so much that he shortly after-died. This happened the. viii. of Ianuarye. After this, the protes∣tantes Armye passed peaceably on their Iourney, and came into the midest of Fraunce. And while they way∣ted for the comming of the Prince of Conde with the whole armie, they through the incouraging of Mouent wan a Noble Citie called Blays. The protestants in Dolpheny were often times skir∣mished withall, by Baron des Adrctz that traytour and Apostata, but to small purpose. THe Duke of Aniou, lingering and delaying to ioynean. do. 1568 battaile, the Prince of Conde ioyned himselfe with the aide that Casimire brought out of Germany, and then sought all occasions to encounter with the enemy. And for this cause he determined to besiege Chartres a noble and faire Citie in the region of Belloge, beyng rl. Myles from Paris. He began to besiege this Citie about the ende of February: at what tyme he battered the wallsChartres besieged. of the citie with the great gonnes that came out of Ger many: the citie was neyther well fortified nor yet well gouerned by any skilfull Captayn: for the chief gouer∣nour
of the citie was the County Daulphin, of the Kings linage, and of the house of Borbon, being a very yonge man, and the sonne of Monpensier. Therefore the King and Quéene were sore afrayd least this noble citie shold be wonne: and Monpensier being very carefull for his Sonne as well as for the citie, made great mone to the Quéene. Then the Quéen sent messengers to ye prince of Conde to intreat peace, promising vnto him, that if he himselfe would, the same should bée confirmed out of hand. The Prince of Conde, although nowe hée was in the way to preuayle greatly agaynst his enemies, this noble citie being almost wonne, yet notwithstanding, reioysing more at this newes of peace, very modestly aunswered the Quéen, That there was nothing more deare vnto him than peace, for the which cause also hée was constrayned to take this warre in hande. And to the ende hée might appeare to speake in good fayth, hée brake vp the siege. The Quéene being glad at this be∣ginning, sente word agayne to the Prince of Conde, to appoint what conditions of peace he would, that the King might consider what was néedefull to be don both for his dignitie, and also for the safetie of the Realme. Shée desired also truce for certayn dayes. This was a notable fetch of the Quéene, both to deliuer the city frō perill, and also disarme the Prince of Conde, as the ende afterward proued. Then the prince of Conde propoun∣ded the conditions of peace: namely, that According to the tenour of the Edict made in Anno 1562. the vse of the reformed religion should be receiued and imbraced: that all added interpretations should be taken away: that men might enioye the peace of consciēce: and that such as should hereafter offer any iniury to the protestantes might not escape vnpunished. This being done, there was some contention about certayne particular pointes of the prince of Condes peti∣tions:
notwithstanding at the last Peace was concludedPeace con∣cluded and the summe of the kings Edict according to the forme of those conditions which he had put downe: and the same was confirmed by this Edict of the King. The King to prouide for his kingdome, which hath bene hytherto ouerwhelmed with troubles, and as yet is not free from the same, with the aduise and consente of his mother, brethren, and of his priuie Counsayle, after wise and diligent deliberation had of all thinges, hath thus decreed and appoynted: and therewithall straytly charged and commaunded the same to be faythfully ob∣serued of euery one. And first of all, he willeth and com∣maundeth that the former Edicte of pacyfication made in anno M. D. LXVIII. abyde firme in his full strength and vertue: and that the men of the reformed religion, so called, vse and enioye the benefite therof: and that all interpretations added to the same, be voyd and frustrat: also that the same exception which so straytly byndeth the noble men in their libertie of vsing the reformed re∣ligion, be quight taken away. Furthermore, his maiesties pleasure is that the noble men which inhabite Prouance enioy the same benefite, and that Merindoll only be re∣serued to the whole lieuetenantship. That it be lawefull for all men of that reformed religion to retourne home to their houses, and to enioy their goodes, landes, and te∣nements. That the bearing of armoure, nor any thinge else that hath ben done at the commaundement of the Prince of Conde, or in his name bee called hereafter in question Also, that all Edictes, arestes, sentences, and de∣crees made agaynst those whiche haue done any of the sayd things, be abrogated and quit taken away: that nei∣ther the Sentences themselues, nor yet their executions be iniuriouse to them or to their children. Moreouer, his maiesty professeth that he doth esteme and make account of the prince of Conde, as of his nere kinsman and faythfull seruaunt and subiectes: and also
all those for his good and faythfull subiectes vniuersal∣ly and particularly, which ayded him in this warre. Also that he doth forgyue him all that money which he hath eyther taken out of the kings treasure, or else out of the Church goods: and in such wise that no man neuer here∣after shall demaund any thing of him or of them which haue spente the same. In lyke mauner he pardoneth the coyning of money, the making of artillery, of gonpow∣der, and of other munition for the warre. Also it is the kings pleasure that those things which haue ben taken out of the reuenewes of farmes or of Cities, from the be∣ginning of this warre, vntill the day of proclamation of this Edict, which he willeth to be proclaymed in the Se∣nate of Paris the third day after the making of the same, and in al other Parliaments within eight dayes. And he commaundeth al Lieuefenants of euery Prouince, to see that this Edict bee proclaymed with all speede in euery place, least any man should pretende ignorance. He also commaundeth euery Parliament too proclayme this E∣dict out of hand, and too Register the same without de∣lay. Notwithstanding his pleasure is, that Paris and the liberties of the same, shalbe free from the exercise of the reformed Religion so called, according to the tenour of the former Edict. Furthermore, he straytly chargeth and commaundeth all those of the reformed religion by and by after the proclamation of this Edict to vnarme them selues, to render vp and restore those Cities whiche they holde, and all such artillery as they haue: and that al cap∣tiues taken in warre, or for religion, bee speedely deliue∣red after the proclamation if this Edicte. And to the end the occasions of all troubles may bee taken away, he willeth and commaundeth that the re∣membraunce of all those thinges done for the warres, or for Religions sake be for euer forgotten: and that no man be so hardie as to prouoke his neighbour by woord or deede for these thinges, vpppon paine of death, or to contend and dispute together about the same: but too
liue togither louingly & quietly as it becōmeth friends, and neighbours. Also he commaundeth the men of the sayd Religion presently to breake and fossake all maner of Leagues and couenants, which they haue made either within or without the Realme: neuer to make the like hereafter, nor to gather any collections and summes of money. It shall not be lawfull for them, to gather toge∣ther any other assemblies, than such as are permitted by the former Edict, and that without armour: It shall not be lawfull for them by any maner of meanes, either in woord or deede to trouble Churchmen, but to suffer thē to haue the vse of their goods and landes, peaceable. To conclude he willeth and commaundeth all his subiectes faithfully to obserue & keepe these things, vppon paine of his highnes displeasure: and also that this Edict bee sollemly proclaymed according to custome. This Edict came forth the xxiij. day of the Moneth of March in the yere of oue Lord. M. D. LXUIII. This was the end of this second warre, which conti∣nued for the space of halfe a yere, namely, from the Mo∣neth of October to March. In the which there was no∣thing done worthy to be remembred, sauing only that Edict of peace, of the which we haue made mencion be∣fore. The which was a notable platforme deuised byThe deceit of the Ca∣tholiks by this Edict. the Cardinall of Loraine, to disarme the Prince of Con∣de and the Protestants, and to send away the aid which came out of Germany, which hee knew could not after∣ward easely be gotten into Fraunce againe, because the Prince had spent his money alreadie, about the affaires past. And yet notwithstanding let all posterities know that the Catholiques had confirmed this Edict by an othe: which they obserued not, but boldly cast aside all reuerence of Gods holy name, the Kings faith, and all the bondes of humane societie: as shall appeare both by
that which we will more at large declare, and also by the lamentable effectes, which haue brought great de∣struction to this noble Realme. The Edict therfore being brought to the prince of Condes Campe, and there solemly proclaimed, euery man reioyced, desiring to sée their wiues, their children and their houshold: and specially they reioyced, because some libertie of Religion was graunted by the Edict. The prince of Cōde by and by dismist his Army: Casmire after thankes receiued of the prince for so great a bene∣fite, going homeward with his armie: whom the prince very honorably brought▪ on his way. Then he hauing a few attending on him went into Picardy. And sending diuers letters vnto the faithfull commaunded them, ac cording to the tenor of the Edict to deliuer vp out of hand the Cities which they held, and the most part of them did so. The King also dismist the Germanes, and certaine bandes or̄ French men: the rest of the armies he commaunded to abide in armour, and appoynted the horsemen a day of payment. But contrary to that which was looked for, these thinges were done, the faithfull being very heauy to sée such lamentable beginnings: nothing lesse than peace séeming to bee meant. For there was great silence eue∣ry where of the Edict which was in very few places proclaymed. They which went home to their houses, were either not suffered to enter into the Cities by the commaundement of the gouernours in diuers places: or els such as had leaue to enter into the Cities, wereGreate in∣iures done to the Pro∣testants. commaunded to lay downe their armour at the gates of of the Citie: and being entred into their houses were so straitly dealt withall, that they might not come out of their houses nor salute one another without leaue: So that it was better dwelling without the Cities than within.
These thinges troubled the faithfull and encreased suspicions, they fearing some new garboyle▪ both for that there were great garrisons maintained in euery Citie, and also because the Kings armies almost remai∣ned whole. Many therfore standing in feare durst not enter into the Cities, but aboade in villages and Coun∣trey townes▪ of the which notwithstanding a great ma ny were there taken and put to death, by the townes∣men. Therfore they began to straye abrode by heapes through the fieldes and villages: not daring to come within the kenning of any Citie, being feared by other mens harmes: howbeit commaundements came forth willing them to haue leaue to enter into the Cities ac∣cording to the benifite of the Edict. The Protestants which held any Cities, at the first sight of the princes letters surrendered them vp. Not∣withstanding diuers vnderstanding of this straunge dealinge, were more slow in deliuering vp their Citie. But by the example of the men of Orleans, and by the second letters of the prince of Conde, the Inhabitants of Dolpheny gaue vp their Cities: and after them diuers other Cities did the like also. In the which Cities gar∣risons of the Catholiques were presently placed. Now∣beit there were certaine Cities which resisted, as Ca∣stelalbiat, Miliac, Aubenac, Priuac, and diuers others which were very well reserued: as shalbe hereafter de clared. Rochel also refused to receiue any such garrison, pleading for the same their anncient priuiledge, graun∣ted to them by the Kynges of old time. The like also did the men of Sanserre. At the Kings commaundement, bothe Cities andVVatch & ward at hauens & bridges. hauens, and all other passages by water were stopte and fortefyed. And commandement was geuen to the warders to loke dilligently to their busines, & to looke carefully to the protestantes: which beinge knowne
brought greate suspicion. There was allso a Rescript sent abroade the xix. daie of Maye in the Kinges name, to this effect, Where as I vnderstande that many which professe the new Re∣ligion, hauing no regarde to the leaue geuē vnto thē to repayre to theire Cities, do wander abroade in ye fields by heapes, to the greate hurte & discōmodity of many, pretendinge that they shoulde disobeye my cōmaunde∣ment if they shoulde vnarme them selues at the gates of the Citty: I protest that it is my will that it be law∣fullViolation▪ of the E∣dict. for them to go into the Cities without breakinge my ordinance of laying downe theire weapons at the gate, and also to dwell safely in those Cities according to the prescript of the edicte. Wherefore I commaunde that those vagrant personnes which walke vp & down through the fieldes, be admonished quietly to goe vnto theire Cities, and to repayr to theire owne houses. Yf they shall refuse so to do, I wil that the Magistrates gatheringe together suche ayde as they shall thinke cō∣uenient, set vpon them as open breakers of the peace, and to put them to the swerde. The Issue of this decla∣red that it was a praye and bayte to snare the Prote∣stants with all. And contrary to the expresse woordes of the Edicte, not one man that had borne office vnder the Kinge,Violations of the E∣dict beinge of the reformed Religion, was restored to the same againe, & suche as complained hereof were caste into prison. The prince of Conde also had no passage in∣to Picardy, of the which notwithstanding he was Liefe tenant, and Senarpont his deputy was remoued from his office. Allso the houses of Noble men of the refor∣med Religion nere adioyning to any Citty, were com∣mitted to the charge and ouersighte of others, as to bo∣cald, to Martingue, to Guian, to Esternay, and to Foissi. Who by the Industry and meanes of the Cardinall
of Lorayne was chosen into the order of Nobility who littell before was accused of thefte and homiide, all mē wonderinge at this so sodeine a chaunge. The Senate of Tholoz had earnestly withstoode the proclamatiō of the Edicte: and Rapine the prince of Cōdes seruant, which was sent with the Kinges letters of trust to Tholoz, to signify to the Senate the Kinges cō maundement concerninge the proclayminge of the ∣dicte, they of the Senate cōdemned, as a Seditious per∣sone and put his necke to the axe. The prince of Conde makinge earnest complaint hereof to the Kinge, at the laste by the Kinges commaundinge letters sent the fourth tyme, they proclaimed the same addinge this ex∣ception, Serteine Clauses reserued which are contayned in the secrete exposition of the Senate. The lyke was done, almost about the same time, in the latter ende of the Moneth of Maye, at Lions: two c trary predictes beinge proclaymed in one daye: which was a notable ieste. for with the Edicte of pacification there was another proclaymed, by which commaunde∣ments were geuen to the Lefetenant to persecute the faithfull with the swerde, which were not entered in∣to the cities. More ouer, when the Inhabitants of the Churche of Lions made request vnto the Kinge that they might haue liberty to exercise the reformed Religiō: answere was geuen them, that the Kinge would not haue the administrati of that Religion in the city, but woulde shortly appint thē a place without the citye. But, notTroubles t Lions. only the liberty of the Religion was taken from them, but also leaue to go home to theire owne houses. Yea bloudy murther & Rapines were cōmitted throughout the city of Liōs, ye people she winge theire outragiouse madnes euen vpon the very houses of the faithfull. At Paris, by the comminge of the Kinges letters, the
Garrisons of warders and wachemē were increased:Troubles at Paris. & in diuers places throughout the city vpon the bridges watchmē were set to warde: the people also had leaue to arme them selues: whereby it manifestly appered that the deathe of protestants with in the city was con∣spired. In the meane tyme the popishe Prelates in theireSermones. Sermones, on the other parte encouraged theire mē to warre, but specially the Iesuites, of which there were greate nōbers in euery principall city of the Realme: these were pestiferouse Locustes procedinge out of the bottomles pyt, and sent abroade to be troublesome vnto men in his laste age: These I saye in theire Sermo∣nes tohght that there ought to be no faith kepte with hereiques, nor any agrement made: that it was a godly and meritoriouse dede, to laye violent hādes vpō suche vngodly men: and that al Christian people ought to arme them selues against them. Beside this, they brought also examples of suche as were killed by the Leuites, at the cōmaundement of Moses: of those which had woorshipped the golden Cale, & of Iehu, which by dissimulation shut vp the Preistes of Baale and shewe them. Thus the people beinge styrred vp and pricked forward, boath with the vngodly persuasions of suche preachers, and also with the wordes of mighty men, were dayly more & more inflamed to uror & madnes. Moreouer it was geuē for the that it was the Kings will and pleasure, that the Huguenotes shoulde be vt∣terly destroyed: and that it woulde please him very well if the Catholikes would do what they coulde too hinder the execution of the Edicte: and also that all his subiectes might be brought to one vniformity of Re∣ligion. Whereby the people were prouoked a freshe, & sought nothinge more than to arme thē selues again the faithful, who were now as naked mē, by ye meanes
of the Edicte. Thus the people were brought to tumult, and not only by the meanes aforesayd▪ but also by societies and cōfraternities made in diuers places, which they called the Confraternities of the holy Ghost▪ By these Fraterni∣ties, which confirmed and moderated by consistories, did they prouide money and souldiers for the warre. Therfore whē a great number of men were gathered togither at Diuinion for this confraternitie, the com∣mon sort of people, began to cast forth sedicious words, threatening the faithfull that they should haue only thrée monethes vse of their goods to liue by, after that haruest and grape gathering was done: affirming that the Kyng himselfe if he would should not alter there purpose: and, if he once sought to hinder it, they would make a Moonke their King. Therfore the raynes of impudent boldnes being losed, all things began to war out of order throughout the whole Realme. The faith∣full wanted both armour and Cities: all passage both by hill and dale, by water and by land were restrained: the Catholiques were very strong in each condition, with all thinges in a readines for the warre: so that the faithful being thus hmmed in on euery side, might continually loke for nothing but sodaine death and de∣struction. And in déede al meanes & waies were sought to bring this thing to passe: and as the Cardinall sought diligentPractise of the Cardi∣nal to take the princi∣pall profes sors of the Religion. ly to bring this to effect, so wanted he no necessary ser∣uants and wayters to fulfill his commaundements, throughout all partes of the Realme. Also, to the end his purpose might haue the better successe, he thought good to followe the counsaile of the Duke of Alba, (with whom he consulted oftentimes by messengers) which was: That the principall heades of those that professed the said Religion should bee taken, and then
the rest would bee tamed well inough. Wherfore hée sought diligently by al waies possible to take the prince of Conde, the Admirall, the Andelot, and Cardinall Odet his brother, Rochfoucalt, and diuers other noble men of the reformed Religion. In the meane time notwith¦standing very louing and fréendly letters were sent to the prince of Conde in the Kyng and Quéenes names. But so great libertie, wherof we spake before, being giuen to the furious and outragious people, was not Idell. It would abhor any Christian mind to heare the declaration of so many horrible murthers, which hap∣penedHorrible murthers. in so short a time: I meane not, to repeate al if I would, I cannot. Straite after the proclamation of the Edict. the people of Ambian: a faire citie in Picardie▪ as∣sembled themselues togither and conspiring the death of the faithfull slew of them, to the number of a hun∣dered and forty▪ At Altisiodor, (otherwise called Auxer) a citie of Borgondy which was rendered vp by the faith∣full, there were fiftie slayne, and their dead bodies cast openly into cannells of the streates▪ At Rhane, at Or∣leans, at Bery, at Sanleonard, and at diuers other cities horrible murthers were committed, vppon the faithful as they went to their churches to diuine seruice.Cipiere cru∣elly slaine. Also Monsure Cipiere the sonne of County de Tande, Lieuetenant of Prouance, a young man, about the age of twentie yeres, was also cruelly slaine at Forū-Iuly a citie of Prouance. It was reported that commaundemēt came from the court that this Monsure Cipiere should be slaine. The manner of this slaughter was this. Monsure Cipiere, was retorned from Nice, whether he went to sée how the Duke of Sauoy his kinsman did, of whom he was very honorably entertayned: but whē he came nere to the towne of Forum-Iuly, he perceiued that some laye in a bushe in the wood hard by for him: wheruppon he fled with all spéede into the citie with
his whole traine, which were in number thirtie and fiue. Then they which lay in waite being three hunde∣red armed men, hauing Baron de Arsi their captaine, en tered also into the citie: and crying Toxcin, or Alleyum, a great number of people were gathered togither by & by, to the number of a thousand and two hundred. who beset the house in the which Cipiere was, round about. But the Consulls and Magistrates of the citie being carefull for Monsure Cipiere, made intreatie to the peo ple, and at the length brought to passe that Baron de Ar si promised that he would depart with the whole mul∣titude, if so be Cipiere would yéeld vnto them his men & armour. The which being graunted, he departed: but the people were scarse gone out of sight when Baron de Arci retourned with all his souldiers againe, beset the house, and then slew all Cipieres men. But when they could not find Cipiere among the slaine carcasses, 'Baron de Arsi, sent for the consulles, demaūded of them where Cipiere was (for the consulles had caried him away to another place) and promised that if they would tell him where he was, hée would saue his life, for he him selfe (he sayd) was carefull for him. But so soone as Cipiere was deliuered vnto him, hee stabbed him in with his Dagger: And thus the young man with many woūds was slaine, and the dead carcasse much deformed with diuers hacks and cuttes. In the same Moneth also one of Monsure Cipieres seruants was slaine in the day time before the Castell of Lower at Paris. I am ashamed truely to repeate all that I could, con∣cerning the butcherly murthers cōmitted. The whole Realme was replenished with sobbing sighes, and pi∣tifull teares of widowes, and fatherlesse children: No place was frée from bloudshed: yea, widowes, before the bloude of their slaine husbandes was through cold, were pertakers also of the same Cup. Honest young,
women, before their husbandes faces were defyled andTen thou∣sand pro∣testantes slain with in the com passe of three Mo∣nethes. forced: and afterwardes caryed away from their hus∣bandes, by the rude and ruffianly Souldiers. Within the space of lesse than thrée Monethes, ther were more than ten thousand Protestants slaine, as hath bin well approued by iuste accountes: where as in the former warre there were scarse fyue hundered slaine in sixe monethes space. This was the goodly end of the peace made and confirmed by the Catholikes. The remem∣berance wherof deserueth to be cronacled for euer, that all posterities may sée and knowe, with what deceites, with what falshood, treachery, treason, furor, and bru∣tish madnesse, all humanitie set aside, Antichrist, abu∣sing the outragious furyes of Kinges, and Nations, goeth about to establishe his kingdome. These things were done in the Monethes of Aprill, May and Iune. These great calamities caused the Prince of Conde to complayne oftentymes by his letters vnto the king,The prince of Conde remoueth to Noyers. but he receyued nothing againe but bare wordes with∣out effecte: and he was dayly admonished, both by mes∣sengers, and also by the nearenesse of the kings Garri∣sons to looke to himselfe. Whereupon, after notice gy∣uen to the King by his letters, he came to Noyers wyth his wife and children, which is a little towne in Burgun dy. And the Admirall being beset with garrisons round about, where he was, remoued to Tanlay whiche was within the libertie of his brother the Andelot, and néere to the Castell of Noyers. The Andelot was in Brittain. The Cardinall of Lorraine was sore offended and gréeued that he fayled of his purpose in takinge of the prince of Conde, and the Admiral, which might haue benThe Card▪ of Lorrain practiseth to take the Prince of Conde. done so easely and conueniently. But he ment to assaye agayne by other meanes, thinking it best to sée what he could doe, by plain force: notwithstanding so craftely and couertly, that his lying in wayte might not be per∣ceyued.
Therefore he sent some to Noyers, to measure the altitute or height of the castle, minding this way too take the prince of Conde and the Admiral, who came of∣tentymes thyther to conferre with the prince. And the Spye which was sent to Noyers, was wonderfully ta∣kenThe Spye taken. by the seruaunts of the Prince of Conde, as hereaf∣ter shalbe declared. Moreouer, to weary the prince of Conde, there came letters vnto him in the Kings name, straytly chargyng him to make payment of a great sūme of money, which the king had payed to the Germane horsemen that were souldiours vnder the prince of Conde. The summe a∣mounted90000. Frankes, is in our coin foure score and eight∣teen thou∣sand and nyne hun∣dred, and seuen and thirtye poundes ten shil∣lings. to 900000. Franks, which was exacted of the faythfull beside the great expences of the warres: for payment of the which the prince of Conde and diuers o∣ther Noble men stood bound to the king. Notwithstan∣ding the King signified vnto him, that he vnderstood not the sayde money was required of all those of the refor∣med religion: but only of those which had borne armor vnder his conducts. And this was vrged agayne with new letters. To the which letters of the king, the prince of Conde made aunswere, that in this matter he was greatly vr∣ged, and to much burthened, complayning of the subtill dealing of his aduersaries: in that they went about too offer vnto him and to all the reste of the reformed Reli∣gion, open and manifest iniuries. The Edictes (sayeth he) are by them broken: the faythfull are worse entrea∣ted than if they were straungers, and the most wicked creatures in the whole earth: they are neyther in saue∣tie in their owne houses, nor in the fields. My house is garded with garrisons of souldiours, which was neuer séene before, that any of the princes (the Kinges kinse∣men) should be so handeled. Moreouer of late, a certayn Spye was takē, which came to take the measure of the
height of the Castel of Noyers▪ wher I lye, that I might sodenly, and ere I was ware, béé taken. And vaunte is made abroad by the Catholiques, that after Haruest & Grape gathering, there shal not be left one Huguenote in Fraunce, without excepting of women and children: yea, they presume so farre, that they dare saye, that if so be your bighnesse wil haue peace, they will make them a new King of a Monke. Furthermore, by the sufferāce of the Lieuetenants of the prouinces, there are many conuenticles and brotherhoodes, which they call Confra ternities of the Holy Ghost: by which many thinges are wrought contrary to the peace. Wherefore, among so many iniuries, I beséech your Maiestie and all other Christians, to way and consider, I haue and do behaue my selfe, and not only. I, but also all that are of my profession. Therefore, if your Ma∣iestiè suffer the Edicte (so violently in the sight of all men) to be broken, and the offendours to escape vn∣punished, it cannot be, but there will ensue moste grée∣uouse troubles. This letter was sent by Theligny, a noble man, whom he commaunded to declare diuers other particular mat ters which I meane not heare to repeate. About this tyme the King sent to the Lieuetenantes of euery prouince a certain forme of an Othe, according to the which the professours of the reformed Religion, (but specially the Noble mē) should be caused to swear. To this the Noble men made excuse and sayd, That by this peculiar othe they should haue great iniury done vnto them, as though thei were not to be counted in the number of the rest of the Kings subiectes: whiche also was done contrary to the expresse wordes of the Edict, in the which as the prince of Conde is acknowledged too be the Kings faythfull kinsman, and seruaunte, so are they expressely called the Kings faythfull seruaunts.
Therfore thei beséeched the kinge, ye they might not bée constrayned hereunto more than other men: if al other men of the contrary religion, were vrged so to sweare, they would not refuse, they sayd, to doe the like, séeinge they could not doe to much in shewinge their obedience to the King. And because this Othe was published in writing, it shall not be amisse to set downe the same accordinge to the very tenour thereof, that all men may sée howe the aduersaries of the trueth go about to abuse the name of God to bring their owne willes to passe. Ye may readeVictor Vti∣censis lib. 3 pers. Afric. of the like in the African History in Hunrich Wandallet tyme, practised by him agaynst the Christians. The protestantes sayde, that because in the forme of that othe exhibited vnto them, the Catholiques (so cal∣led)the answer of the faith full. were not comprehended, they playnly perecyued, that their fidelitie and obedience past, and to come, was now called in questiō: and that the security of the kings protection was to them vncertayne. Also they sayd, sée∣ing they were fully perswaded, that the Kings Maiesty had spoken nothing vnto them hytherto, but ye whiche was true and vnfayned without all dissimulation, they could not nor would thinke that the same forme of the othe offered vnto them, was knowne to the Kinge, but rather deuised by some notable enemy both to him, and also to the publique peace of all mē. But neuerthelesse, because we desire this one thing (say they) aboue all the reste, namely, to shewe our true and sincere obedience, which we owe to our King, and naturall Prince Char∣les the ninth, we modestly & humbly desire to make our aunswere to that othe: praying & beséeching the Kings Maiestie, that before he procéede any further in establi∣shing the forme of the same othe, it maye please him to consider these our petitions, whiche with all reuerence and submission of mynde wée propose in manner and forme following.
The Forme of the Oathe. VVe proteste before God, and sweare by his name, That wee acknowledge King Charles the nynth, too be our soueraigne Lord, and naturall King. The Answere. We will neuer doubt or stay, to sweare, in so good and iust a cause: but we most humbly beséech our king so to iudge of vs as he hath himselfe spoken of vs in his Edict. For our conscience beareth vs witnesse, that we neuer had any thing in our mindes contrary to ye form and meaning of this Oathe. Oathe. And are ready, to giue vnto him, all honor, obedience, and Submission. Answer▪ To this, we wil most gladly, and willingly sweare, séeing that this exception can not be denyed vs, That according to the tenor of hys Edictes, we haue graun∣ted to vs, the libertie of our consciences & the vse of the reformed religion. Oathe. And that we will neuer beare armour, but at his ex∣presse commaundementes, as shall appeare vnto vs by his owne letters: And that we will neither consent vn∣to them, nor helpe them with Counsaile, with Money, with vittailes, or with any other necessary thing which may arme them against vs. Answer. To this also we willingly swere, for seing we haue two Edictes of pacification, for certaine and plaine de∣monstrations vnto vs of his wil and meaning, we wil account all other commaundements contrary to those two Edictes, for false and counterfaite. And we will, neuer bear armor, neither haue we so don at any time vnlesse we haue bene plainely constrained to defende
our selues from the iniuries and oppression of those mē, whiche breaking the commaundementes of his maie∣sties Edictes, haue gone about to oppresse vs contrary to his will. Oathe. Neither will we make anye collections of Money, vn∣der the collour of anye occasion, withoute his expresse commaundement. Answere. We trust that in this braunche, the Money whiche necessarily we gather for ye releuing of our Ministers, the poore, and for the repairing of oure Churches, and for other necessarye vses, is not comprehended. The which being gathered we sweare, beyng ordinarilye called, that we will not vse them deceytully to anye o∣ther ende, Oathe. VVe will not haue any secrete Counsailes, nor priuie leagues, neither wil we consent vnto them, but contrari∣wise we promise and sweare that we will certifie hym or his officers faithfully of all those things, which shall be practised against his Maiestie, against the tranquilitie of the Realme, or against anye that are neere vnto hys Maiestie. Answer. By the order of this Article (whosoeuer was the au∣thor of the same) we séeme to be accused: as though we had hytherto behaued oure selues otherwise than wée ought to haue done: the which certainly we wil neuer confesse: For the Kinges Edictes of pacification will not suffer vs so to do, séeing it hath pleased his Maiesty by them, to acknowledge vs for suche manner of men as in déede we are, namely for his lawfull and faithfull Subiectes. This being added, we will sweare, that we will with the helpe of God, constantly retain vnto the death, this Article of the Oathe. Oathe. VVe pray and besech with all reuerence and submis∣sion of mind his Maiestie, that it may please him to ex∣tende towardes vs his accustomed clemencie and good∣nesse▪:
and to accounte vs for his faithfull and obedient seruaunts and to kepe vs vnder his protection, to whom next vnder God we flee vnto. Answer▪ As we neuer doubted of the clemencie and goodnes of oure King, whom we haue acknowledged and do ac∣knowledge for our naturall Prince and supreme Lord next vnto God: so are we ready most humbly to praye and beséeche him▪ to cotinue the same his good wil vn∣to vs▪ his most obedient and faithfull subiectes. Not∣withstanding if it may be spoken with his highnes fa∣uour and leaue, we haue no néede to crae his fauour and pardon for the time paste: seyng, by the goodnesse of God our consciences doe beare vs witnesse, that we haue neither done nor thought any thing against hys Maiestie: and therefore we trust hat this is not so ment or spoken. Oathe. To whom we will pray vncessantly, for the conserua∣tion of his life and dignitie, and for the happy estate of the Queene his mother, and of his brethren. Answer. We haue, and alwayes will, God willing, make our prayers from the bottome of our hart vnto the Lorde. And we gyue thankes vnto the Kyng, that it pleaseth him to think better of vs than our aduersaries do: who both by their wordes & writings, report vs to be wic∣ked, and call our prayers, blasphemies. Oathe. And we do submit our selues willingly to all rygor of paynes and punishments, if there shal happen any trou∣bles or tumultes through our default, in this Citie, (Ex∣pessing the name of the Citie) for the defence whereof, vnder the Kinges authoritie, and at the commaunde∣ment of his Ministers, we will willingly spende and be∣stow our liues and goods. Answ To this Article we answere with all reuerence: This being so generally put downe, experience hathe
taught vs, that it will be a ready way and fitte occasion for them, of whose mindes we haue had of late to large testimonies, to kill vs at their pleasure, either by pre∣tēding iudgement, or else by some seditious tumult: of which things, they are skilfull workemen. Therefore as euery one of vs would willingly sweare vnto these things, so we most hartely pray and beséech the Kings Maiestie, to sée diligently that we maye haue Iustice more truely ministered vnto vs than hitherto it hathe bene: and that according to the prescript of the Edicts. Againe if any of vs be founde to offende against any of the Edictes, let him be punished according to order of lawe by some vpright and vncorrupted iudge: and let not the offence of one man condemne the whole mul∣titude. Oathe. And if it please his Maiesty that we shall dwell peace∣bally and quietly vnder his protection in our cities, al disentions taken away, we protest that we will neuer de∣parte out of the same, what extremity or losse soeuer we abyde: but do promise that we will with harte minde, hande, and with all that euer we haue, ioyne with our ci∣tizens, to the obeyinge of them, and to the defence of our cities, towarde the which we will all wayes beare a true loue and faithfull harte. Answer. We cannot with a good conscience imbrace this Arti∣cle as it is put downe. because it bringeth that in doubt which is euidently graunted vnto vs, by the Edictes: that is to saye, that by them the Kinges Maiesty doth account vs for his faithfull and true seruants, as by the grace of God we haue bene hytherto, and will be euer hereafter. Insomuch that we cannot doubte but that we are vnder his protection, beinge in those Cities of his dominion in the wich we were borne, or do dwell, seinge that we are ready to persiste and abyde in his o∣bedience.
Therefore we are so farre from doubtinge of his wil and meaninge, that we rather geue hym immortall thankes, & do beseche hym to continew the same towar des vs still: and specially to be fauorable vnto vs in the liberty of our consciences, and in the administration of our Religion. Without the vse of the wich, we are not only ready to forsake our Cities, but also our lyues: where as contrarywyse, graunting the same vnto vs, which is more dere, by right, vnto vs than oure lyfe, namely the obseruation of his Edictes, we will most gladly sweare and promise to kepe these thinges. Oathe. And also a true and sincere good will towardes the Ca¦tholikes, vntill it shall please God to ende al troubles: to bringe the which thinge to passe, we trust, that this recō∣cilliation will make a happy and properouse waye. Answer. As concerninge that loue which by nature we owe vnto all men, the Religion which we professe teacheth vs neuer to forget the same: and the rather we ought to shewe it towardes them because they are our Coun∣trey men: to whome we ought to do good for euell: the which we promise to do so much as we are able. But where as weare required to enter into a sounde & per∣fecte reconcilliation with them, we besech his Maiesty to enioyne the Catholiques to the same oathe: and spe∣cially to prouide yt theire seditiouse preachers, which are ye principal causes of these troubles, may cease to go forward, as of late they haue begoon. And that they may be punished except they obay according to the tenore of the Edictes. To conclude, yf it please his Maiesty that his Edictes may be obserued, with al sincerity and vprightnes (as we trust it is his pleasure, and that the execution thereof resteth in his officers handes, which hyther too they haue bene very neglegent in) we are ready to sweare, without any exception, what soeuer a good prince can requyre of his subiectes.
This was the oathe, and this was also the answer ofThe coule∣red deceit in this oth. the faithfull. They were woorkemanly deuises made by theire craftes masters, with which many might haue ben snared, singe there was n mencion made of Religion: that by this meanes the noble men beinge woon with hope of peace, and bounde with an oathe, the waie might be the more easy to bringe theire matters to passe. Whereas the men of Rochell (as we sayd before) pre∣tendingRochel cō maunded to be besie ged. theire priuiledge, had excused themselues, to be frée from receiuing any Garrisonnes of Soldiers, the Kinge hauinge often tymes threatened them by his letters, armies of footemen and horsemen were prepa∣red out of hande to beséege the city. Monsieur de Anuil, and Monluce , receiued the like cōmaun∣ment to beséege Montauban. Notwithstandinge Da∣nuil was very much busied in diuers places of his Lie∣fetenantship. Ther were also in euery Prouines pressinges andMusters of Souldiers. moysterings of soldiers but only of the catholikes side: and they were suche as were counted able men. These were commaunded to prouide them Armoure, and to be ready at the firste call. Also diuers & sondry reportes were brought daily to the prince of Conde: as, That the faithfull congregation at Blais going to heare a Ser∣mon at the place which the Kinge had appointed them, was almost , to the nomber of▪ 200. Beside this there were letters founde out in diuersLetters of the Catho∣likes soūd out. places, which greatly bewrayed the secrete Counsailes and deuises of the catholikes: and theire practising of the holy League with diuers other cōspiracies. Therefore al things grew dayly to farther mischefe: and rumors were euery where of new murthers, also the proude threateninges of ye catholikes, as in sayinge that the faithefull shoulde enioy theire goods but one
Moneth, were manifest signes of warres. But among all other murthers the deathe of Amanzi a noble and modest man, greued very muche the prince of Conde & Amanzi, a noble man slaine. the rest of the faithfull. This Amanzi, was slaine at his own doores as he stood there, houlding a yong daughter of his in his hand. He was a man of comly personage, tall & greate, and no lesse beautified with giftes of the minde, of singuler modesty and humanity, & so welbe∣loued of all men, that a mā woulde haue thought it vn∣possible that, so amiable a man shoulde haue foūde any enemy. There came newes also to the Prince of Conde, thatThe Prince of Conde in greate perill. the Armies which were sente to beséege Rochell, were called backe agayne, & were sent to take hym at Noirst and that fowertene Cornets of horsemen, with fower∣tene Ensignes of footemē were comminge to that parte of Borgondy. The comminge allso of Theligni from the Courte with the Kinges Answer (which was notwith∣standinge seasoned with maruellouse fayer and swete woordes) fore shewed sorrowfull newes. Therfore the Prince of Conde hanging doubtful and not kowing what to do, and being also certified by day∣ly messengers in how great perill he stoode, requested the Countes of ; that shée would go vnto the Kyng on his behalfe, and declaring vnto him these thinges, would also beséech him, That his promises, so sollemly confirmed by his othe, by his Edict, and by his letters might not be broken: being so much the more iniurious, because all these counsailes are practised vn der the couler of his name, although hee doubteth not of his true and sincere meaning. But the Countesse of Roteline was scarsy departed, when the Prince of Conde was admonished by messen∣gers againe, That except with all spéede he did looke vn to him selfe, he would afterward repent his delaye: for
that the armies of the enemies approched so fast: and that he could not without great perill escape the hands of the garrisons which were so nie. Againe they told him, that it was certainely reported that the purpose of his aduersaries was, to take him, and the Admi∣rall. Therfore when the Prince of Conde had consulted with the Admirall, they perceiuing that they had no longer time to tary, they commended the successe of al thinges to the prouidence of God, and tooke with them their wiues and their children, and fled the xxij. daye of August: the same day the Prince of Condes letters be∣ing deliuered to the Kyng: in the which he declared vn∣to him the cause of his departure, and complained also of the iniuries offered vnto him. I AM SORY (saith he) most Christian King, that in all my letters which I haue sent vnto you since theLetters of the Prince of Conde sent to the Kyng. proclimation of the Edict, you haue found nothing but complaints and lamentations of your subiects, and yet I am constrained too write of the same vnto you still. For if euer any subiect had iust cause to complaine and lament to his Prince and soueraigne Lord: then I and the rest of my bretherne haue cause so to do: who, a long time, haue ben abused and oppressed miserably with all kind of iniuries and violence▪ The which they haue borne ye more paciētly, because they haue thought, that time at the last would ease them of all their euils: and because they wold let passe al occasions that might renue the wounds of former warres: although▪ by the goodnes of God, they might haue repelled those iniu∣ries many wayes. The causes wherof, we know, O King, are not to bee imputed vnto you, who of your selfe are so well inclined and disposed, that you are an vtter enemie to such waies. The which you haue often
times declared vnto me by your letters, and also by the communication which you had of late with your Mo∣ther the Quéene, by which you declared how odious the renuing of troubles was vnto you: when as you re∣quested her to séeke to pacefie all thinges, and to bring to passe that the ciuil warres might be no more begon, which could not chuse but bring in time, extréeme de∣struction. But we impute the cause of these troubles to the Cardinall of Loraine, and to his fellowes, your ad∣uersaries, and enemies to your Crowne and dignitie: by whose wicked counsaile and familiaritie which they haue with the Kyng of Spaeine; dissentions and hartbur∣nings haue ben continued these sixe yeres among your subiectes, and are miserably fostered and increased by murthers, which are dayly committed euery where at their becke, vppon those which refuse to ioyne with them. Wherin they do openly abuse your Maiesty, that they may make your selfe the instrument of the dete∣stable destruction of your Realme: and they do also ob∣scure your Maiesties fame, while they go about to con∣straine you to violate the warrant of your faith openly giuen and confirmed by your othe: that this one thing might be to all your subiectes, and to all forreine Na∣tions an example, neuer to credite your faith hereafter whatsoeuer by woordes you shall professe: the which how perilous and pernicious a thing it is for the conser uation of your state, do ye not sée? For what shall they say which haue heard of our prompt and readie obediēce which we haue shewed towards you, in disarming our selues, and in dismissing our armies with all spéede, go ing home to our houses voyde of armour, and discoue∣ring our naked brestes to the sharpe swordes of our ad∣uersaries, and all vnder trust & warrant of your faith? Shall your faith be said to be a net and share to intan∣gle and slay your better sort of subiects, and shal their
faithfull obedience be thus tried? How long shall an ar∣mie at your cost and charge bee waged to gard and de∣fend your enemies, but to woorke the destruction of your good and faithfull subiects? What shall they saye which vnderstand of the peace made? Surely, they wil say that we could not sléepe safe in our owne houses: & that to saue our liues we are constrained with our wife and children to flée from house to house. I was no sooner come to this place in Burgandy, but there were diuers spies sent to vew the walles therof and the altitude of the Castell. And now, because our aduersaries would not faile to bring their mischeuous purpose to passe, they haue sent hither the chiefest part of their power, to hem vs in, and to set vppon vs: Insomuch that wée are constrained to depart from hence, and too wander vp & downe vntill God shall appoint a place of refuge: and all to auoyde the brutish madnes, the furies, and cruelties of the Cardinall and his compartners, ene∣mies to the Crowne of Fraunce. Can there be found in any monument of histories, and Cronicles an example of so great falshode, and such detestable trechery, execu∣ted vnder the pretenced name of the Kyng? Will you suffer your faith, your promise, and name to be so abu∣sed by them: and your subiects which serue you faith∣fully and truely, to be so violently oppressed? Shall an vnchast priest, a Tiger, and a cruell Tirant▪ with a ra ble of such as he him selfe is, rule you and the rest of your Princes, & the Péeres and Nobles of the realme? How long shall your pacience suffer such Iauelles too abuse your authoritie and name, and make you the au∣thor of your owne destruction? How long shall they bée counted for faithfull subiects and seruants which séeke for your Crowne to deuide the same with straungers? And how long shall they be counted for Rebelles, and Traytors, which willingly submit themselues to that
obedience which they owe vnto you, and desire only to liue peaceably vnder your protection? I might be more tediouse vnto you, (most Christian King) if I would speake all that I might to this effect: the which, séeing thei are more particularly declared in the Supplication which I haue sent to your highnesse by this bearer, I refer my selfe to the same: and I shall most humbly pray and beséeche your Maiestie, to accept, to consider, and to way the same, as procéeding frō him, who seeketh so much the preseruation of youre dignitie and Royall estate, as the Cardinall and his fellowes are mortall enemies to the same: yea, as procéeding frō him who only wisheth to liue and dye in that naturall subiection and loyall obedience which hée oweth vnto you. Therefore the Prince of Conde sent with these let∣ters a Supplication, which although it be long and te∣diouse, yet notwithstāding because it declareth the cau∣ses and reasons of great and gréeuouse complaints, and sheweth also the necessitie of the warre which he tooke in hand the third tyme, we will not let to put down the same in order. And thus the Prince of Conde began. Although I neuer doubted (most Christian King) of your Maiesties singular good will, to haue your Edicts of pacification obserued: because it is the only and most present remedy to establish the peace and tranquillitie of your Realme: séeing also your Maiesty hath often∣tymes signified vnto mée howe greatly the same was gréeued for that you could not prouide remedies for all things as you wold: yet neuerthelesse when I had read ouer and diligently perused those aunswers that were brought vnto me in your name to the letters which I gaue to Theligny, to deliuer to your grace, and also whē I had heard those things which your Grace willed him
to declare vnto me by word of mouth: I could not, ney∣ther can I choose, but giue most harty thankes vnto god that your Maiestie perseuereth in that good mynde, and no lesse thankes to your highnesse also for the same. And thus I replye agayne to certaine principall points of your aunsweres with all reuerence, modestie, and submission. And first of all, I replye to the aunswere of the fyrste and second principall poynt of my letters: whiche are these: There are many of the reformed religion, whiche haue not taken my parte, nor alowed of my Counsayles: but contrarywyse, there are some of them, because they knew that the sword was not taken in hand for religions sake, whiche haue obeyed you and your Officers in all places. I pray and beséeche your Maiesty, to remember and call to mynd, that when you had intelligence of my true meaning, and of the very purpose and intent of suche as followed me, your maiestie by due aduice and delibera∣tion, declared by an Edict made in the yeare M. D. lxii. That whatsoeuer I and they whiche followed me, had done, we had done the same to shew our obedience, and to maintayn your dignitie, acknowledging me for your deare and faithfull kinsman, subiect. and seruaunt, and all myne for your faithfull and lawefull subiectes and seruaunts. In this therefore there is manifest repug∣nancie and contrarietie: because, if I and myne haue borne armour for ani other cause than for the obedience sake which we owe vnto your Maiestie and for the pre∣seruation of the same, then no doubt we should worth∣ly be found gilty, both of rebellion and treason. But as we can by no meanes be perswaded that your maiestie would be so manifestly contrary to your selfe, so also I affirme that it may easely appeare that these aunswers were forged and deuised by the Cardinall of Lorayne &
his fellows, to discharge that poyson which a long time hath lyen in their stomakes, and also to make your ma∣iesties faithfull and louing subiectes to be suspected of treason and rebellion. Of the which crimes, séeing wee are in no point to be conuinced by the goodnesse of God, we are ready rather to dye, than to suffer the same fals∣ly to be imputed to vs by the Cardinall and his fellow∣es: but we wil proue that the matter is far otherwise than they haue falsely and sclaunderously reported the same vnto you. In the meane time I beséeche your Ma∣iestie to consider with what shewe of trueth can these things be spoken, when as I, and others of my brethren were of late admonished of the counsaile had at Baione with the King of Spayne, to the vtter destroying and ba∣nishing of all those, which professe the reformed religi∣on within the Realme: if the wayes and meanes, by which I and the Admiral, vnder the couller of comming to talke with you at ye Castel of Vincen, should haue fal∣len into the handes of our aduersaries: of the new mu∣sterings of men at Paris: of the letters of Duke de Al∣ba to you, in which you were put in mynde of the holy league: Truly it is not likely that we would haue ta∣ried the comming of the SwitZers armies, or the Spani∣ardes, if we had ment any harme. Can it be denied, but that we haue sought all meanes & wayes possible, that might be for peace? Can it be obiected vnto vs, that at any time from the first beginning of these troubles, we haue required any other thinge of your Maiestie, than the libertie of our consciences, and the conseruation of our liues goods, and dignities? Sauing that among o∣ther thinges, when I was at Saindionyse, I required of your Maiestie that you would haue some consideration to ease, not onely the Nobilitie, but also the communal∣tie of those intollerable burthens laied vpon them▪ And your aunswere being knowne to this our petition, wée
haue not since that time spoken one worde of the same. When we had about vs great power, that if we would haue abused the same, we had not bene able to bee resi∣sted, did we then enlarge our petitions? When you of∣fered vnto vs your faith, did not we imbrace the same, making no further request? Was there any other mat ter propounded in the tractatiō of peace, than the liber∣tie of our consciences? Did wee not put our liues, oure goodes, and dignities into your handes vppon truste of your promise? Were not we content with the obserua∣tion of the Edict only? Doth the Edicte of pacification comprehend any other thing, then that which appertai∣neth to the conscience? If therefore you haue not tried our mindes in receyuinge the conditions of the peace propounded, and in shewing our selues so tractable: if the sclaunders concerning the violating of your digni∣tie, be not sufficiently refuted (as in déede they be in the iudgement of all indifferent men) yet notwithstanding you haue certain and euident arguments of our prōpt∣nesse and obedience, when as so redily we vnarmed our selues at your commaundments, and carefully dismist our Armies. Notwithstanding the which sure and vn∣doubted signe of obediēce, we could receiue no other be∣nefite then that which was contrary to your promises: in so much that your Edictes may séeme to be snares & trappes onely to entangle vs withall, that is to saye, that by the false colour and pretence of peace, we might receiue that iniurie, which by open warre we could ne∣uer sustayne. Concerninge the fourth principall pointe, which is: That your Maiesty hathe willed and commaunded nothinge more, than the obseruation of the Edicte, after the troubles of warres were appeased, without anye mā∣ner of impediment: and haue allwayes cōmaunded your officers to defende your subiectes all alike withoute re∣specte
of any Religion, and quietly to gouern thē with∣out offeringe of them any iniury. I marueile (truly) that the Cardinall of Loraine and his fellows which haue framed these answeres, remē∣ber not that many letters were taken in the tyme of these troubles, by which you commanded your Lieute∣nants, your parliamēts, and other of your officers, that they shoulde do cleane contrary to those thinges which were contayned in the Edicte: Let them remember what was aunswered to the writinge sealed in your name by your Secretaries, to the States of Langue∣doc: let them remember what aunswere was made to the parliament of Tholoz, against the fower bloudy decréese, by the same commaunded to be put in execu∣tion, for you saide in your letters, that this thinge plea∣sed you well, and woulde alwais be acceptable vnto you, that you greately desired that they woulde deale euer after in that manner, hauinge altogether regarde and respecte to the rescriptes and commaundements, by you allready, or hereafter to be graunted for Reli∣gions sake: and in suche wise, that all the men of our Religion, and they which by any manner of meanes ayde and assist vs shoulde bee counted as Rebelles. And, to make the matter more plaine by reasons, Is there any City which enioyed the reformed Religion after the proclamation of the Edicte? Naye, is there any City in the which there were any nomber of the faithfull that hathe not had the streates thereof de∣filed with theire bloud? Haue they not in the chiefe ci∣ties, as at Paris & Lions, soulde the goods of the faith∣full by porte sale? Was not Lomen, one of your priuy counsaile, much abused, first his house spoiled, then, hee himselfe greately oppressed with diuers iniuries, and afterwardes caste into prison, notwithstanding that he earnestly intreated you to haue some consideration
of him. Is ther any place founde with in your whole Realme, in the which the faithfull at any time till this daie might dwell or slepe in safety? And if any by some miracle escaped the cruel and bloudy handes of our Ad∣uersaries the former troubles, yet they were caste into prisone, where many starued for lacke of foode, & many as yet remayne in prisone, and are cruelly intreated, as at Lions, at Pny, at Tholez, and in diuers other places. And since the tyme of the Edicte, haue there not some bene cast into prison, at Cannat, Altisiodore (or Auxer) at Tholoz, and at Belu? And when your letters are delyue∣red vnto them the Iudges make answer that they haue commaundement to deliuer none out of prisone that are in for Religion. What City is it since the peace cō∣cluded, that hathe geuen leaue to the faythefull peace ably to enioy theire houses therein, and in the which they haue not bene abused, spoiled, and in diuers places slaine? Moreouer, is there any one of the reformed Re ligion which hathe not bene in the stelde with me, that is restoared againe to his office from the which before he was depriued? And yet notwithstandinge it was contained in the Edicte proclaymed in your name, that so many of the reformed Religion as had ben depriued from theire offices, shoulde bée restoared to thē againe. Are not all they banished from your Courte which are suspected for Religion? And to come from the lowest to the highest. What authority haue I in my Lefetenāt∣ship? what authority hath the Admiral in ye admiralty? what authority hath ye Andelot in his general captain∣shippe of the foolmen? Why was Bochauē put by his Lieftenantship? But if the Cardinal go about to make a distinction or differēce, betwene those which hare Ar∣more with me in the feelde, and those which aboade still at home, why was Mornilliere, and Senarpont, who, as all men knowe, taried still at home, and came not in
the fielde, banished and depriued of theire Lefetenant ships? Can there be any thinge more contrary to your Edicte thā these thinges? We are sory for these things not because of Ambition, but because we are counted disobedient and breakers of your Edictes: and also be∣cause we are out of hope, to be accounted and handeled as your faithfull seruants & as we deserue, forsomuch as the law is in theire handes, whom we know to be earnest stekers of troubles. And because in the sayde principall pointe, it is sayde, It cannot be founde in any place of the Realme, yf any thinge haue bene done contrary to the Edicte, but that the same hathe bene by and by prouided for and reme∣died. I cannot choose but marueile with that face the Cardinall & his fellowes can defend this thing. Can it be denied but that after the proclamatiō of the Edicte of peace, there were an infinite sorte of iniuries and murthers committed, of which so many complaints haue bene made to your maiesty? Can it be truly sayde that there hath bene any remedy had, (and muche lesse, that there hath bene any punishmēt) for these thinges? And to proue this thinge, leste I shoulde be tediouse to your Maiesty in expressinge all thinges, I will repeate amonge so many the cheefest, which are not tollerable amonge the heathen and barbarians. And amoungest all other the cruell murther of Amboyse, in the which there were a hundered and sortye slayne, of all ages, estates, and sorts of men and women. If you be remembred, when you could beare with so, cruell a fact, you sent thither Marshall Cosse, who, whē he had found out the authors of so great murthers and had apprehended them, sent worde thereof vnto you. Then the Cardinall of Loraine, like a patrone of theues and murtherers, maintained their cause, and sayde to al your Counsaile, that there ought to be a considerati∣on
had of those men, which were moued of a zeale to do as they had done: that is to say with such a zeale as his brother Frances Duke of Guise had declared aforetyme in the horrible slaughter at Vasse. And in deede the mat∣ter was so handled, by the labour and trauaile of ye said Cardinall, that the prison doores were set open, & those abhominable murderers deliuered. And to the ende it might appéere what small dislyke they had of that deed, they brought to passe, that whatsoeuer the men of Am∣boys required, was graunted. But specially they obtai∣ned. That no manner of vse of the reformed Religion shoulde be had at Amboys, nor within thrée leagues of the same. The like happened at Auxer, where after the peace made were slaine, a hundred and fiftie: where also an infinite sort of mischeues mo were committed: as the taking away of the money which we had proui∣ded to pay the Germans their wages: and the impriso∣ning and killing of many of those, which were put in trust to carry the same. Thyther Monpenser and diuers others were sent to examin the matter: but what was done to reforme this great disorder. Was not the cruell murther of Cipierre with six and thirtie men mo shewed vnto you, Baron Arci also na∣med to be the author of the murther? and what other reformation followed them that whiche was wont to be? And yet notwithstanding the Cardinall saith that all things haue bene prouided for. But we affirme, which also is moste true, that there is no reformation prouided any where for any disordered wickednesse, & wicked disorder. But if there hath bene any reformati∣on at all among so manye cruelties, Murders, Robbe∣ries, forcings of women, Rauishings of virgins, and a∣mong so many wickednesses of all sortes, commited at Troy, at Orleans, Lions, Valence, Amiens, Theloz, and in Maine, we must then néedes confesse that we haue cō∣playned
without cause. But if it be true, shall the Car∣dinall of Loraine constraine vs to confesse, that Iustice is there, where iniustice and impunitie doth beare the sway? Shall he make vs beléeue that the Sunne shy∣neth at midnight, and the Moone at noontyde? It maye therfore be said, O King, that your Cities are places of refuge for theues & murderers, despoyled of their true and natiue Citizens, full of errors and disolute persons voyde of all order, and depriued of Iustice, and all shew of equitie. To the nynth point, where you proteste, That you haue appointed watch and ward in the ports, bridges, & passages to no other ende, than to keepe your subiectes within the boundes of peace and concorde, to defende the good from the practises of the euill, and to restraine the force of the wicked. In déede I acknowledge your sincere and perfect good will: but to the ende you maye know howe im pudently they abuse your name, I be∣séeche you to commaunde them to exhibite vnto you a forme and paterne of the commaundementes, which are giuen to those Warders, that they maye order the whole matter after their owne wils, preferibyng the same to be done in stéede of your commaundemente. And by those commaundements you shall plainly per∣ceiue, that those warders and souldiers were appoin∣ted to no other ende, than to vexe and oppresse by all meanes the professors of the reformed Religion: and therefore, as they abuse your name▪ so also they abuse your will most impudently: as the effectes like and a∣gréeing with these commaundementes do sufficiently declare: in the writing of the which commaundemen∣tes I do note the style of the Cardinall of Loraine. But as touching that which you say in the. xi. branch, That your Maiestie, ought to haue no confideration of appointed garrisons, when the aduauncement of your
dignitie is in question: and that the Queenes houses, & the houses and landes of other noble men also, haue gar∣risons also set to ouersee them: I pray and beséeche you most Christian King, to perswade your selfe that there is no man to whom I giue place in shewing my readi∣nesse and good will to obey your Maiestie. If therefore it were profitable vnto your Maiesty, to appoint Gar∣risons to ouersée and watch my house, I would estéeme it for greate honour to spende, not onely my house and landes, but also my life, to obey you. And where as gar∣risons are appointed ouer the Quéenes houses, & ouer the houses of other Noble men, it is done for another consideration. Moreouer I had great iniurie done to me, when I was denied to haue passage into my owne Lieutenantship and circute: the which cannot iustly be done except I were guiltie of Treason, or of some such detestable crime. For wheras I am moued in yt thyr∣tene branche, Not to credit the rumors of neither part, that truely is very daungerous: for those things which are reported of vs, can be proued by no maner of effecte or déede: as for those things which are reported of the ca∣tholikes, they are euidētly proued by déedes. For wher∣as you protest that you neuer allowed those Confrater∣nities of the holy Ghost, but counted them manifest vio∣lations of your Edicte: I will not hyde from you what happened of late in this matter: About the eigh∣tene day of Iuly last paste, there was an open conuen∣ticle of thrée thousande men at Diuion, in the which Ian Begat a Counseller of the Parliament of Diuion, wyth Fio, Raimond, and Malleroy his fellowes, and with the two sonnes of Tauuans (because he himselfe being let with sicknesse could not be there) made a long oration to the whole assembly, shewing howe necessary it was for euery man to be vigilant, least they were oppressed by false Princes which went aboute to rule the Kyng.
Therefore he exhorted euerye one to prouide Armour Money, great horse, Gunnes, and all manner of Artil∣lerie: for the which cause, a Treasurie should be made, that therin money might be gathered together for the defence of the Fraternitie. And for collecting of this mo∣ney, was appointed the Abbot Bussier: and when he had exhorted & perswaded that assembly with many words to be contributors to the Treasurye, he commaunded all that were present to holde vp their hands, vpon that condition, that if warre were moued, euery man shuld to ye vttermost of his power séeke to bring those things to passe which were deliberated & deuised by the Con∣sistory appointed to this ende, without hauing any re∣garde or consideration of Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Wife, Children or Kinsfolkes. And when one of those which were present by and by demaunded of him whether your Maiestie would allowe the doing of these things: Begat, made answere that you had alrea∣die confirmed these things with your letters: and that Tauuans had giuen letters vnto his Secretarie, for the better credit whereof, he himselfe being sicke, had sent thither bothe his sonnes to iustifie the same, vntill he could be present himselfe: which he trusted woulde be shortlye. Also he added further, that if your Maiestie should not allow of the same, it were no great matter, because there were others to whom they might safely trust and leane: saying moreouer, that they oughte to haue regarde to those letters, whiche your Maiestie should write to Tauuans or to the Parliament concer∣ning the obseruation of the Edicte, bycause there was betwene your Grace and them, a speciall and secrete manner of talke, which was not of all men vnderstood. Tauuans also sent letters to the men of Creuan, whiche were deliuered vnto them the seuen and twenty daye of Iuly: by which his letters he exhorted them to vse
the like societie or brotherhood: promising vnto them that he would bring to passe that your highnesse should confirme and allow the same. The like confraternitie was begonne at Maine, ma∣ny noble men entering into that societie, being Catho∣likes, as Baron Uasse, Tuarsi, Surchi, and manye others which were either presente themselues, or else confir∣med that societie by their substitutes, whom they sent thither with letters. The like are also to be founde in diuers other places of your Realme. And to the end all men mighte be the more encouraged herevnto, they which were presente at these assemblyes, were tolde, that your highnesse had allowed them by your letters: and to other some which were more subtil, it was said, That the Cardinall of Loraine wonlde bring to passe that you shoulde allowe all those their doings. These things, O king are contrary to your Edict. If they will excuse themselues and say, that they had special and necessary occasions offered them thus to do, as by your speciall commaundement, of the which al∣so you wrote vnto me, that there should be musters of men in euery prouince, especially of such as were able men: I saye that these societies go beyonde that Com∣mission, and are nothing agréeable with your cōmaun∣dement. I saye also that the same deuise to haue a de∣scription and vew taken of your people, hath giuen oc∣casions to those pernicious assemblies to assaulte your dignitie: beside that it is done contrarye to the lawes of your auncetors, which were euer ware and circum∣spect to kéepe secret to themselues the number of their power. But as touching the sixtene braunch, where you say, That I know that your Maiestie hath writtē to the Se∣nate of Tholoz, concerning the rapine there cōmitted. In dede I wil not deny but yt I knew of the sending of
your letters, to the men of Tholoz, in the whiche you sayd, that you had séene many decrées giuen forthe by them expresly against Rapine, in the time of troubles: and that you thought, that they had done all things vp∣pon iust groundes and considerations. Whervpō they conclude that the same sentence or decrée is so confyr∣med by you: the which is false: séeyng the same decrée against Rapine, was giuen forth the thirtéene daye of Aprill, and therefore after the Edict made and proclai∣med. As touching the eyghtene braunch, where you say, That you are verye sorye, that iustice is not truely and purely ministered as you desire and would haue it: the which you could not hitherto remedy, bycause the men of the reformed Religion, had not so fully obserued the Edict as they ought, all the Cities which they helde, be∣ing not rendered vp, when as your Maiestie your selfe had first of all giuen them an example of the obserua∣tion of the Edict. I would gladly demaund of the Cardinall of Loraine and his fellowes, whether I forsoke and rendred vp Orle∣ans, by and by, yea or no, and whether at my commaun∣dement the like was done at Auxer, at Suessi, and in di∣uers other places in these parts: and as touching those cities which were farther of, I demaund whether I sent not certaine with my letters to commaund them to sollowe my example in yéelding vp themselues? But to be short, if I haue pretermitted no thing which was my dutie to do, and which I was able to do, can it bée truely said that I haue kept my authoritie still ouer those Cities which are not surrendered? To whome therefore maye you iustly impute the cause, but to the Cardinall of Loraine, who is the the very cause of all vi∣olence committed, at Orleans, at Suessi, at Ualence, at Ci∣steron, at Auxer, and at Saint Spirit the which cities be∣ing
cruelly vexed, haue notwithstanding shewed the principall part of obedience. Was this way to cause o∣ther cities to surrender, and to lay aside their armour? Was the staying of the proclamacion of the Edict, the waye, too make the same too bee obserued? Should not the Edict haue ben proclaimed, before the men of the reformed Religion had ben punished for not obser∣uation of the same? But they are so farre from desiring the obseruation of the Edict according to the prescript of your will, that we haue found some of their letters, cleane contrary too the same, an example and coppie wherof we haue sent vnto you: the letters them selues are in the hands of the Quéene of Nauar, being writtē by the two Capitolles of Tholoz (the Magistrate of a towne is so called) to their fellowes, saying that your Maiestie was sory that the Edict was not proclaimed at Tholoz, because thereby the surrender of the Rebel∣lious Cities would be delayed: and therfore it was ne∣cessary for the commen profit of all men, that the pro∣clamation should bee made in the Parliament out of hand: notwithstanding without any maner of solem∣nitie in the proclaiming therof, and with those excepti∣ons which the Court shall thinke méete. But some wil replie and say, that we must not haue regard to a fewe sedicious persons: truly, we would with all our hartes make no account of them, if so be their sedicious coun∣sailes were not effectually commaūded and yours re∣iected. For it is most true, that you were faine so send commaundement foure seuerall times before your E∣dict would be proclaimed: and then it was not so oolo∣rably and fraudulently, as maliciously and spitefully done: adioyning to the woords of the Edict, contrary to the expresse forme therof, this sentence, is con∣tayned in the secret and priuie Commentaries of the Senate, by the which words it is plaine that they haue inserted
exceptions cleane contrary to the Edict. Whereby it may euidently appeare, that they are more carefull to defend and enlarge their owne dignitie, than the pre∣seruation of your Maiestie and authoritie: As though their honour did depend vppon any other than vppon you: and although they had any other authoritie to de∣fend than that which appertayneth vnto you. The which they shall not do, so long as I can find any waye to hinder, them. And yet notwithstanding their Rebelli on and boldnes is so farre from reproofe, that you haue written your letters, at the sute of some, to approue & maintaine the exceptions and delayes in proclaiming your Edict. Moreouer, where as you say in the former braūch, That your Maiestie hath in nothing broken your promise, I pray you hartely giue me leaue to say, that neither I nor any one of the reformed Religion, haue felt as yet any frute or profit by this peace, and haue enioyed none of those thinges which you haue promised vnto vs: but haue felt the oppression & violence shewed to vs ward since the peace made, to be a great deale more than the hurt and detrement which we receiued by open warre: Insomuch that in respect of our selues, wee may truly say: The time of warre, was to vs the time of peace: and the time now of pretended peace, is to vs the time of most cruell warre. Concerning the last braunch, where you saye, That it is very vnresonable and farre from the dutie of a good subiect, to go about to abrogate the authoritie of your Maiestie, but that you might when perill is like to ensue and for the auoyding of the destruction of one of your chiefe Cities, to alter and change the places appoynted for preaching of Sermons: and that you are fully per∣swaded that the reasons and considerations were such, why that libertie was taken from Lions, that I also wold
haue approued them, if I had bene of your counsayle. I most hartely beséech your Maiestie to thinke, that I would neuer so much forget my self and my dutie, that I would but once haue a thought to deminish your dig∣nitie: but contrariwise I protest that I would moste gladly spend my life to séeke all meanes and waies that might enlarge the same. Let your Maiestie call to mind also, that this libertie of Lions is a matter of great waight, which also was so greatly debated among vs, when the peace was in question. And it is wel knowne that the same matter hath bene handeled heretofore in your counsaile at Sangerman, when the making of the Edict of Ianuary was in hand: at which time were present the most principall of your priuie counsaile, & the chiefest men out of all your Courtes within this Realme of both sortes of Religion: by whom, after long disputation it was concluded, that in the bordring Cities, as in Mets, Bolone, Callece, Ardes, and in such other like places, there shuld be a preaching place, with in those cities, to auoyd all occasions of lying in wait & of treason. Notwithstanding the Cardinall of Loraine and his fellowes, will persuade, if they can, that they which séeke and require the precise obseruation of aun∣cient constitutions, and of the Edicts, would abrogate your Maiesties authoritie: and that they and their fel∣lowes, séeke to maintaine and enlarge the same, when as in deede they would haue it quight abolished. Furthermore it is contained in the former braunch, That your Maiestie was sory that your subiects would not perswade themselues of that securitie and peace, which they should receiue from you, and that they wold not obey you as it became them: Truly I protest that there is nothing more gréeuous vnto me than that I cannot be with you, and obey and serue you alone, as I haue alwaies wished, and do also at this present most
earnestly desire: But I pray and beséech you consider, that if spies be dayly sent vnto me to vew my doinges, and my house, to sée if they can hurt me by any maner of meanes, what peace and securitie should I haue if I were with you, when my enemy hath in his owne hād the ordering of your power and authoritie. Therfore if it be certaine, (as I neither ought, nor can doubt) that it is your will, that your Edicts should be obserued, and that the publique peace which you haue graunted and confirmed with an othe, should also be of all men im∣braced: but contrary to your highnes pleasure, your subiects are cruelly slaine, and murthered, throughout your whole kyngdome, & that fréely without redresse: Againe if flat against your Maiesties commaundemēt, Leagues be concluded, Societies and Fraternities assem∣bled, souldiers mustered, armour and harnesse made readie, money leuied, and all other things that belong to open and manifest warre be prepared: if for law and Iustice, Rapine and iniustice raigne, and your Maiesty (with contempt of all estates) disobeyed, and that which is more compelled to violate and breake your publique promise made to all your subiects: vppon whom I say shall al these tormoyles be fathered, but vpon the Car∣dinal of Loraine author & mainteiner of al dissentions & disorders which do so furiously rage thorow all this Realme? And although your Maiestie and all those that are not wedded to the Cardinall do know this mat¦ter to be so as I haue said: yet because it tendeth to the defacing & ouerthrow of your graces honour (in main∣tenance wherof I am more earnest because I perceiue the Cardinall hath long ago purposed to ouerthrow it) he doth accuse both me and all other of the reformed re∣ligion, and would with his wiles charge vs with trea∣son and rebellion, whereof hée him selfe is guiltie. Wherefore, séeing we cannot suffer so great iniurie
any longer, we are determined to dissemble no further in so great and so waightie matters: for our longe and almost incredible patience and sufferance of wronges, doth but puffe vp the Cardinall, and make him to croe ouer vs. And therefore to be short, I beséeche yeur high∣nesse to consider what marke he shot at, when he & hys familie made claime and title to the Dukedome of An∣iou, and the Countie of Prouance, what he ment so curi∣ously to searche out his petigrée, whereby he purposed to proue that he was of the bloud Royall of the lawefull Kings of France, and that our Auncetours had wronge∣fully taken the Crowne from his house, and vsurped it▪ likewise, I humbly desre your Grace to marke for what end and purpose they vsed such outrage and tyrā∣me in the time of King Fraunces the second, to destroy & raze out the houses of Burbon, Momorencie, and Chastil∣lon, whose destruction they had sworne and vowed long before, with al other the Princes and Noble mē, which they thought would set themselues to withstande their wicked attemptes: and that this was their intent, their dooinges of late sufficiently proued. For as soone as it was talked abroad that the Quéen (your highnesse mo∣ther) was not like to liue here any longer, foorthwith they tooke counsel and deuised how to murther the Car∣dinall of Burbon, the Chauncelour, the Marshalles, and diuers other Noble men of your Counsaill: and sente moreouer letters thoroughout the whole kingdome too their friendes to raise vp and gather togither souldiers to destroy all such as did in any respect disallow of their dinges. But because this enprise could not be done vnder pretence of Religion (for with that cloake they vse to hide all their mischiefs) because they whose bloud they sought, professed the same religion that they dyd: they deuised a new snare to entray them in, and charge them as earnest fauourers of the protestantes, & there∣fore
to be expedient, yea and necessarie to dispatch them out of the way, for so might they with lesse laboure de∣stroy the protestantes them selues. Wherefore, they terme them Neuters, and say that they are worse and more hurtfull then the Huguenotes. And if so bee the Cardinall could (which God forbid) bring his purpose to effect both against the princes and Noble men of the reformed religiō & also against them which professe the Romish religion, and yet fauour not their procéedings, (whom they call Neuters, because they loue peace and hate trouble and dissention) is there any that eyther would or could defend your maiestie from their cruell handes? Is there any that could stay them frō rending your Crown of your Graces head, which they say your progenitours haue vsurped vnlawfully against their auncetours? Can your Maiestie require a more liuely representation or sufficient proofe of the Cardinals sau∣cie ambitious boldnesse, then that he shewed, when hée tooke yoūr grace and your highnesse mother the Quéen wéeping and lamenting, as captiues & prisoners with open force of armes from Fountainblean to Melune, & from thence in tumultuouse hast to Paris: and caused your Maiesties entrance into that famouse Citie to bée as dishonorable to your highnesse as it was wont to bée honorable and glorious to your noble progenitours. Which his doinges haue ben the onely and true causes of the former wars & other dissentions that haue euer since raged thoroughout your Maiesties Realme. And may it not be easely proued, how gréeuous your graces authoritie hath ben alwaies to the Cardinall, and how continuallie he hath repyned at it, and done what possi∣ble he could to draw your faithfull and loyall subiectes from their duefifull obedience towards your maiestie, as may appeare in that his sute wherein he sought too haue Fraunces, Duke of Guyse, made one of the Princes of the Empire, and got for that purpose a warrant frō
the Emperour, which he would haue proclaimed tho∣rough all your Kingdome, had not Monsieur Ausant & Monsieur Halsede staied him, who, although they wer of one religion with him, yet could they no longer dissem∣ble or see so great inurie done to youre highnesse: as though your maiestie could not protecte and defendea Cardinall as well as other your subiectes, vnlesse he fled to the Emperour for succour, by whom or of whom he hath, I am sure nothing, vnlesse it be a cankred Im∣periall, and not a true French hart towardes your ma∣iestie: whereof he gaue sufficient profe in the Councell of Trent, where in stéede that according to his duetie, he ought to haue kept and mainteined those prerogatiues that tyme out of mind haue ben giuen and graunted to the Kings of Fraunce your auncetours: He I saye, in steed of this his loyall duetie, called them in doubt and question, séeking by all meanes to chalenge and claym them for the Spanish King. Wherein hée hath both done great iniurie to your maiestie and the wole kingdome: and also sought thereby to bring your Grace in feare, and to stand in awe of him by reason he is in such fauor and estimation with the king of Spayne, to whom he cō∣municateth all the affaires of this realme. There was neuer any deuise inuented or practised, neither in the first or second warres, whereof Kinge Phillip hath not ben both an authour and fautour, whose chief desire is, to sée the greatest part of your Nobilitie destroyed, that he might the easier conquer your kingdome. For sure∣ly, there is no more effectuall meanes to bring that his purpose to passe, then to set vs togither by the eares by sowing of strife and dissention. And to what other end an those Confraternities and brother hoodes (as they call them) of the Holy Goste bee referred then to this. For some of the Noble men which are admitted into that fellowship, are so wedded vnto it, that they vtterly for∣get
their dutie, and doo conspire with them the death of such noble men as professe the reformed religiō: whose desire is to liue quietly with them in the bande of bro∣therly loue as becometh good subiects vnder one prince, and friends alied togither either in kinred or affinitie. And who I beséeche your maiestie, hath ben the author of these holy brotherhoods, but the Cardinall? who hath promised to procure your warrant for them, notwith∣standing your highnesse hath declared them to be hurte∣full and preiudiciall to your honour, and therefore to be disallowed? And what shall we thinke of his sendinge abroad through all the whole kingdome, wherin he wil∣led that no mā should either giue credit to or obey your Maiesties commaundements, vnlesse the letters which were sent were signed with speciall signet? and surely, through this his dooing, no commission that euer came out from your grace for the obseruation of the Edicte was in any poinct obeyed and executed: so that we may both iustly and truly say, that he & none but he hath ben auctour of these broyles and tumultes. Furthermore, who did hinder the publishing of the Edict? and who doth sty the execution of it? who emboldened the Par∣liament of Tolouze, to rage so tyrannically as they dyd? And who but he and his confederates hath driuen your Maiestie into such streight distresse, that you are com∣pelled to violate your publique promise made and so∣lemlie confirmed by othe, and thereby to haue your cre∣dit and honor crackt amongst all forreyne nations? yea we are able to proue how he himselfe wrote letters to your Maiesties mother and had the Amales hand sub∣scribed vnto them, letting hi to vnderstād, that he could not staye the conclusion of the peace (whereto necessi∣tie drane them) notwithstāding he would so work that it should neuer be kept. By whose meanes is iustice & equitie banished out of this realme, and most fithy and
dissolute libertie of factions and seditions brought in with all kinde of trayterous murthering of those that will not yéeld to their tyrannie. Who is it that sendeth ruffians and desperat persons euery day, yea euē home to my owne house to murther both me and the Admi∣rall? and this haue two (whom I haue taken) confessed. Who entised certaine Knights of S. Michaels order, & other Captaines to murther the Admirall, who (God be thanked) had warninge geuen by them that should haue done the deed? Who procured Monsieur Sipierre to e slaine and to the number of fiue and thirtie Noble men with him, but he? For his Brother the Duke of Guise would commonly boaste of it a moneth and more before it was done: and being done, he himselfe had the first tydings of it. Yea who but he or his men flue Mon∣sieur Amanze, sitting at his owne doore with his younge daughter in his armes, who had offended neyther part, but liued quietly with all men of both Religions? Ne∣uerthelesse, when his Nephew the Duke of Lorayn had aduertised him, that it were expedient for him, that hée absented himselfe from your Grace, because many dyd beare him deadly hatred: & because he, ruling al things at his owne pleasure, should be charged as authour and causer of al the troubles and miseries that had, or shold endammage the common weale of the kingdome: Hée made him aunswere, That he ruled not at all, and that he made not his aboad with your Maiestie, but because he did not knowe any other place wherein hee could bée more safe and fre from daunger. Whereby it is eui∣dnt, that for his uegard onely, your highnesse Armie is maintayn t your excéeding great charges, whiche must néedes bring with it a very daungerous and mis∣chéeuous end. For if so be the sauetie and strength of a king doth consist vppon the good will and loue of his ub ectes, what cause can be inuented whereby hée shoulde
enforce your Maiestie to take armour against those whose onely desire is to shewe the liege and loyall obe∣dience they owe to your maiestie? But he thinkes the pretence and shew of your name and aucthoritie suffi∣cient to hide and cloake his mischeuous doinges, in so much he spared not of late to saye, that your highnesse gaue him this answere: That shortly men would haue gathered in their hay and corne, and haue made an end of their vinetage: that the Riuers would be so highe with showers of raine, that men could not passe ouer the sayd Riuers: that your treasurie should shortly bee enriched with tributes: and that then warre should bée proclaymed against those of the reformed religion: but in the meane tyme the chief maintainers thereof were to be dispatcht out of the way. Yea such is the impudē∣cie of the man that he is not ashamed to bragge that the Quéene hath complayning wise found faulte with him, That their purpose of our destructiō was not brought to effect, notwithstāding the feast of San Ian was past, in which tyme he had promised to rid the greatest parte of vs out of the way. And as yet, none were dispatched but onely Monsieur Sipierre: whereunto hée made an∣swere, That he had done the best he could, to kéepe pro∣mise: but all would not serue, because the Noble men were alwayes spéedely enformed of al his deuises: not∣withstanding he was in good hope to compasse the mat∣ter and in the meane season it was expedient that your maiestie (O Christian king) should féed vs with vayne hope and gentle letters till they might spye out fit occa∣sion and oportunitie to accomplishe their desires. And what other can your grace conceiue of that sūme of money whiche they procured Ian Baptist to sende to you? was not the vsurie beyond all reason to giue a hundreth for an hundreth? do they not by this their money shewe what good will and loue they beare your
highnesse? wherefore can any man say that we of the reformed Religion do without vrgent and great cause assaulte the Cardinall of Loraine? howe long shall he with subtill trecheries abuse your Maiestie, and make you beléeue that we séeke not him but you? seyng we protest before God that we desire to haue no man but him onely and his confederates: and why we o so we haue declared both iust & necessarie causes. How long shall credit be giuen to his olde Iuglings and lyes? I most hartily beseche the Quéenes Maiestie to remem∣ber his former talke at Chantelliere, where she tolde the Constable and the Admirall, that the Cardinall was borne to sowe strife & discention wheresoeuer he was, and that he, was the chiefe and onelye cause of all the broyles and factions that were fostred through out all the Realme. Let hir cal to hir minde the purpose of that wise and prudent king Henrie, who perceiuing the am∣bitions and wicked dispositions of the Cardinall and al his brethren, was fully bente a little before he dyed to haue banished them all from his Court to Loraine. But here note the iudgement that the Emperour Maximili∣anus that nowe is, gaue of him when he wrote to your Maiestie. That all the warres and dissentions that trou∣ble the state of Christians, were both begon and maintained by a couple of Cardinals, the Cardinal Granuellā and him of Loraine: notwithstanding al this he abideth with your Maiestie, a great armie is maintained to gard and de∣fende him, that subtill Serpente at your charges is maintained to sucke your owne bloud, who tarieth for nothing but onely to spie out fit occasion and oportuni∣tie to spit out his venemous poysō against your grace. What blyndnesse hath bewitched vs that straungers and forreyners can sée the destruction that hangs ouer our heades and yet we cannot perceiue it, hauing it a∣mongst vs as it were in our lappes? Is there any man
so ignoraunt that doth not sée him practise his olde and Ineterate treacheries to the entent he mighte thrust out and depose the lawful & true hiee frō the crowne, and then giue it to a straunger? what doth he make of Religion but a cloke and a veyle to couer his villanie? Can any man thinke that he setteth by or beareth any zeale to that Religion, which he willingly of his owne accord would haue forsaken, and in stead of it haue em∣braced the confession of Ausburge, onely vpon this con∣dition that Francis the Duke of Guise might be chosen one of the Princes electors of the Empire. If any man say vnto him that it is very perilous & likely that the Spanishe King triumphing at our destruction, will to our grea griefe set vppon and inuade the Kingdome, such is his shamlesse impudencie, that he will not stick to say openly that the Quéene doth not muche care for that, bycause she loueth her daughters as well as her sonnes. And although God would graunt your Maie∣stie both might and power to pacifie all controuersies amongest vs for Religion, yet surely there is no hope euer to extinguishe the engraffed grudges and hatred that the Cardinall and his companions do dayly sowe amongst your subiectes. For what salue, what remedie can be deuised for that woūd, which through murthers and spoyles is made euerie daye more and more incu∣rable? Is there any hope to reconcile your subiecs and set them at one againe, whose stmacke are with these furious and bloudy cruelties, set on fire with inquenh able flame of hatred? Nay sure it is past all doubt that these olde displeasures and hatefull harthurnings will last from one generatiō to another, and passe from one to another eu by succession and heritage as lands and ubstance doe, yea it is to be feared that the same mi∣serie and destruction will ouer whelm vs that hathe fallen vpon the Quéene of Scots, throughe the wicked
and diuelishe counsell of the Cardinall. If we sée the Cōmons to rie vp and ebell for custome and tribut of salte and for vnreasonable taxes that there Princes lay vpon them (which causes be vnlawfull and fediti∣ous) what then shall they doe that haue iust and neces∣sarie causes to alledge forthemselues, who are not on∣ly spoyled and bereed of there goods but also of there consciences, dignitie, honor and life: that by this meane he might more easle compasse his long desired wishe to depose your Maiestie and hathe for this purpose full craftely raised ciuill broyles as more fitte for his pur∣pose then foreme warres. Is there anye iniurie that can driue a man sooner into desperation then when he séeth his conscience, his honor, honestie, and life affaul∣ted? wherfore if I (whom it hath pleased God to place in néere degrée of bld to your Grace & am besides that natural coniunction bound by other great occasions to be carefull for the preseruation of your honor and dig∣nitie:) together with the Admirall, one of your chiefe and most nole officers and many other Noble men who are your highnes naturall liege and loyall sub∣iectes doe sée the enemie euen before your gates, shall not we hazarde and spende both life and goods to chase him away? shall we be such traitors both to our selues and our Couey, that when we sée the atter mani∣ we shall hold our tounges and suffer our enemyes furiouy withoute rsistance to iade v? shall we your Princes and subiectes so behaue our selues that it may worthily and iustly another day be cast in oure téeth and sayd, That we without regarde of our allegiance which by he w promised to your Grace, ue suffed our lawful Prince and appoyned by God of his throne: shall we suffer our selues to b noted with such repoche of periurie and trecherie as to haue séene the scepter and Crowne of ur countrey
rent from the right and true heire and giuen to an vs∣urping straunger? but admitte the Cardinals doings tende not to the vtter destruction of your Maiestie, yet no man can denie but that councell which he giueth vn to your grace is not only disordered and vniust but also very pernicious and intollerable. There is nothing more acceptable before God, or that draweth néerer too his diuine puritie, then for a Kyng to gouerne his subiects and people with Iustice and equitie: againe there is nothing more beseeming the office and dutie of a King, then to loue, promote, and further peace and tranquillitie, and to defend his sub∣iects committed to his charge from all calamities and anoy. What hath bene the cause that so many common welthes haue ben preserued in florishing estate so lōg, but only the peaceable and quiet gouernment of the commons without any violence or iniuries? But a∣mongst all those counselles which that wicked Cardi∣nall hath and doth giue to your Maiestie, can one word bee found that did or doth tend too the maintenance of peace and quietnes? Nay rather at your graces great cost and charge, he maintaineth an armie, that there by he may engender and norish suspicions in your Ma∣iesties brest, against those who couet nothing so much as to shew the dutifull obedience they owe to your high nes. Is it not thorough him that you suffer those to bée slaine, murthered, and spoyled of all they haue, whom your maiestie is bound by your dutie too defend and shield from all harme and distresse? To be short is there any thing so cōtrary to Iustice and equitie, as to winke at these infinite murthers, and intollerable iniuries, which by the Cardinalles procurement and allowance do so gréeuously aflict this whole kingdome, and are by them and his fellowes falsely fathered to be your Ma∣iesties procéedings.
Wherfore, séeing this is euident and plaine (as in deede it can not be denied) that it gréeueth your Maiesty (as you haue often written to the Admirall and me) to be bereaued of lawfull and due obedience, and to haue Iustice defiled and corrupted, and haue theruppon de∣sired your mother that all things might be done quietly without any kind of tumult, and that the Edict might be obserued, and all occasions eschewed that might pro cure ciuill warres, againe being the extréeme destructi on of your kingdome: if I say your Maiestie haue done all these things, and notwithstanding your faithfull & true subiects do perceiue that the Cardinall (who hath conspired our death) hath as it were violently and frau duntly possessed your authoritie, and abusing the same, doth charge your host and souldiers (contrari to the publique warrant graunted to vs) to take both me and the Admirall by treason, and ambushe: and doth also en force your Maiestie to do al thinges contrary to the du∣tie of a good and gracious Kyng, to the entent he might weaken and slaken the good will and loue of your sub∣iectes: Wese him also rule and gouerne the whole cō∣mon wealth according to his owne filthy lust, & to bring all thinges to such narrow streites, that euery mans hart is ready to flame out with euerlasting fire of dead ly hatred, by reason of so many horible murthers yt es∣caped al vnpunished & scotfrée: séeing therfore that these thinges are so manifest what els can your subiects doe in this extréeme desperation, but to suppresse that wic∣ked Cardinall, author and beginner of all mischiefe. And surely the cause that vrgeth them to séeke this re∣medie is both iust and lawfull, séeing they can not suf∣fer any man to raigne ouer them but your Maiestie: & sée moreouer your dignitie and Crowne their religion, honour goods, and liues, to bee in the handes of their deadly enemies, nor haue, nor can haue any protection
wherewith to shield them selues from such iniuries as openly are both threatned and offered them. How can they either hope or suffer any longer, foreséeing in their mindes that terrible and blustering tempest of trou∣bles that is like to ensue? Wherof they haue full many a time aduertised your Maiestie, & setting before your graces eyes the fearefull & lamentable state of things haue very often most humbly craued remedie at your handes. These are the causes (O Kyng) that haue enforced me and the Admirall, and diuers others of your sub∣iectes (who had rather to hazard their liues and die va∣liantly, and honorably, then to suffer so great iniurie & villanie to be wrought against your Maiestie and the whole Realme) after long and earnest sute for other lawfull meanes, to take this thing vppon vs. Wher∣fore we all desiring, and crauing, the helpe and aide of all Princes & Noble men, confederate to succour your Maiestie in these extréeme daungers, do protest before God, and all the world, that this is our only entent & desire to haue, The Cardinall of Loraine and his fellowes, and that it is they only whom we seeke, as the very rootes, causes, and maintayners of all trouble and mischiefe: Which threaten destruction & desolation to this king∣dome, and to pursue them as periured robbers, viola∣ters of peace & chiefe and deadly enemies of all good or∣ders and quietnes. Wherefore let no man hereafter marueile, if I and my fellowes refuse to obey any thing that shalbe ordeyned in your Maiesties counsell where in the Cardinall is present, not that wee will disobe∣them as come from your highnes, but as coygned and framed by the Cardinall and his companions, whome we vtterly refuse & renounce both in publique affaires that concerne the common wealth, and also in priuate matters that only touch vs, to the entent wee bee not
charged with the troubles that may arise hereof, but he rather who is the authour and father of them, the Car∣dinall I meane and his adherents. These letters and this supplication therefore béeingThe Prince of Conde goeth to Noyers. deliuered to the King, the prince of Conde went to Noi∣ers with his wyfe great with childe, and with his childrē also, of which, some were in their tender infancie. The Admirall also caried with him his whole familie, & his brother the Andelots wife, with her Sonne, which was then of the age of two yeares: with this weake Army the Prince of Conde went to Noyers, but not without great perill of the garrisons of souldioures wich were at hande. Notwithstanding the Prince of Conde, what with his owne men, and what with the housholde ser∣uaunts, of the Admirall, and certaine other Noble mē, which came to ayde them, had an hundred and fifty hors∣men to garde his trayne. But being in great perill and necessitie, found out a remedie, though full of daunger & aduenture. Therefore, because the Hauens, Portes, Bridges, and passages were warded with garrisons of souldiours, so that they could not passe, thei determined to goe ouer the Riuer of Loyer. This Riuer is in all places for the most part so déepe, that a shippe may passe by the same: Notwithstanding, because the force of the streame fretteth & worketh vp great heapes of sandes oftentimes, there is in certain places the lesse plenty of water. By reason hereof, they found by and by a shal∣low foorde: ouer the which when an horse had safely passed, the whole multitude followed in like manner. The which passage was wonderfull, séeing the very same place within two dayes after was so depe, that no man might in the same manner passe ouer againe. The selfe same day certain armies of footemen whiche we sayd were sent for to leaue the siege of Rochell, and to come to take the Prince of Conde, came to Sangodon,
a village almost thrée miles distant from that parte of the Riuer, ouer the whiche the Prince of Conde had passed. Therefore when the Prince of Conde had a cléere passage, he made the more spéede in his iorney to∣wardes, the house of the Rouchfaucalt in the territorie of Santonge, shoonning all Townes and places, where he knew Garrisons of Souldioures to bee set: and hée wrote letters to Marshall Vielleuil, which was then at Poyctiers, and to Monsieur Monluce, Lieuetenant of Gui∣an, signifying vnto them, that his purpose was to go to the house of Rochefocault, only to leaue his family in sa∣fetie, and there to abyde himselfe, vntill such time as hée had receyued an aunswere of his letters (of which wée spake before) from the king. About this time also, the aduersaries lay in wayteThe Cardi nall Cha∣stillō flee∣eth into England. to take the Cardinall Odet Chastillon, abydinge in the territorie of Bellouac: of which he being certified, fled, and in fléeing, was chased by souldiours, till he came to the Sea: In so much that he was constrayned to leaue the greatest part of his cariage behind him, and to take Ship to passe ouer into England. It was also commonly reported about this tyme,The death of Charles sonne to King Phi∣lip. that Charles, Sonne to King Philip of Spayne, was dead. The causes were by diuers men diuersly reported: but that which was most credible, is, That the Inquisitors (suspecting him of certain things concerning religion) {pro}uoked & stirred vp ye displeasure of the Father against the Sonne, that he might depriue himselfe of his onely Sonne, and of the lawfull heyre of Spayn. Shortly after this also, newes was brought concerning the death of Elizabeth, wyfe to Philip Kinge of Spayne, and Sister to Charles King of Fraunce. Furthermore, the Duke of Alba, dayly more & more
played the tyrant in Flaunders, straining no courtesie at the shedding of innocent bloud: wherevpon the prince of Orange being moued partely to discharge his dutie, being one of the Princes of the Empire, and partely for the loue which hée bare to his Countrey, caused a great Army to be in a readinesse, that hée might with∣stand the cruell tyrannie of the said Duke of Alba. He had to ayde him, great numbers of horsemen & footemen, which came out of Germany, out of Fraunce, and also out of the low Coūtrey. County Ldowike also his brother, a valeāt captain, came wt a great number of good souldiours to ioyne with him. COME LORD IESV, COME QVICKLY.
The. ix. Booke of Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion and of the common wealth of Fraunce vnder the Raigne of Charles the ninth. THus beganne the third ciuill war in Fraūce being more notable than the others goyng before, both for the great attēptsAnno Do∣mini. 1568. in the mo∣neth of Au gust. and enterprises, and also for the continuance of the same, for it troubled the Noble Realme of Fraūce for the space of two yeres. Therefore when newes was brought to the Courte of the departure of the Prince of Conde, there was openThe state and condi∣tion of both parts. prouision made on both partes for the warre: but both their conditions were not alike. For the Papistes had Cities, Artillery money, and all maner of prouision be∣longing to warre, they had also the Kings name, autho∣ritie, and power, by which they preuailed more than by any other meane. But as for the Prince of Conde and the Protestantes they had almost nothing, but the good∣nese of their cause, and couragious mindes to defende themelues, who, though to the perill of ye losse of theyr lyues and goods, were almost desperate to defende the same: Moreouer they which should haue bene helpers and furtherers of their cause, were hemde in and shut
p throughout the whole Realme: in so muche that it was marueile that the Prince of Conde was able to holde warre, and to withstand his enemies, in so great extreamitie. There were great and vrgent cases of newe contention, ▪as the dipleasure taken for the brea∣king of the oath solemnlye made, the breaking of the Kings promise and common peace, and the meitable necessitie of defending their consciences and liues. But the Papistes beyng forward enough of themselues t destroy the godly, were pricked forward by the bloudy uriousnesse of the Cardinall of Loraine. Therefore, by the Kings commaundment (for vn∣der this name the Papistes did what they would) the Armies that were dismit, were nowe called backe a∣gaine, newe choyse and mustes of men were had, and they were all commaunded to be at Staples the. x. day of September. The whol ordering and charge of the warre was committed t Alexander Duke of Angewe, ye Kings brother, being but a young man: notwithstan∣ding he had ioyned with him certaine valiant captaines as we sayde before. Then were baytes and nares sub∣tily layde, and in the Kinges name the gouernours of the Prouinces published a decrée, as thus: The Kyng commaundeth that all the men of the reformed Religi∣onThe Kings▪ Decree. be vnder his protection, no lesse than anye other of his subiectes: that they may haue leaue to complaine of iniuries done to them: that they may haue remedies prouided out of hande, as it is meete and conuenient, for their defence: and that all Magistrates should be vigilant to defend them. In the meane tyme he that caryed the Prince of Condes letters to the King, after the deliuerie of them,The messē∣er sent frō the Prince of Conde ▪ was taken, and committed prisoner to a certaine noble man, and no answere made to the letters. The Prince of Conde, when he had stayed in the
house of Rochfoucant certaine dayes, wente wyth hys whole retinew to Rochel, of whose inhabitantes he was very louingly receiued. And thether came vnto him the inhabitantes of Xantonge, of Poictou, of Perigueux, of Engolmoys, and a great number of noble men of the Re∣gions thereaboutes, which embraced the reformed re∣ligion: and as for the common sort of people, they came vnto him out of all those quarters, by beapes. The C∣ties also called Sainctes, Tifauge, and Montagu, offered themselues vnto him. But for all this, he sente letters to diuers partes of the Realme, requiring ay of hys fellowes, and forsomuch as the Protestantes were ex∣pulsed almost euery Citie, it seemed good vnto him that they shoulde come with all spéede to hi to Rochel, and then hauing greater power, to ioy battaile wyth the enemie. Notwithstanding in many places by the won∣derfull prouidence of God, there were diuers places of refuge reserued throughout the whole Realme, as to the men of Francoys, Sanferre, and Uezelay: to the men of Languedoe, Montalban, Castrealby, and Milliaulde, to the men of Dolpheny, which at that time were in great pe∣rill, the Cities of Uiuaretze were reserued, as Albenac, Priuac, and many others. But before the Prince of Conde began any warre, he published a certaine solemne declaration of the causes of the same: In manner and forme, as followeth. I protest before God and his Angels, and before this holy assembly, that as (I also declared in my last letters which I sent vnto the King my Lord) intend to do nothing a∣gainst his Maiestie, which may either hurt his person or dignitie: but taking him for my Kinge and supreme Lorde, next vnder God, by him so appoynted, I protest that whatsoeuer I doe, is for no other cause, but to keepe and defende the liberties of our consciences, the free vse of the reformed Religion, our lyues, honours and goods,
from the tyrannie and oppression of the Cardinall of Loraine and his fellowes▪ the whiche tyrannie they haue alwayes hytherto shewed, and minde still to vse towards the men of the reformed Religion, contrary to our kings will, whiche he hath openly declared by publique Edicts and decrees, thereby breaking the common peace and tranquiitie. And for this cause, to the end I may defend their lyues, honours, goods, and the libertie of their con∣sences, which professe the reformed religion, I affire that I wyll spende bothe my lyfe and whatso euer ese God hath giuen vnto me: And bcause there came souldiers daye by daye vnto him, and that all things mighte be done orderly▪ he ap∣poynted a certaine forme of discipline to be vsed amongDiscipline appointed by the Prince of Conde. his souldiers, the which we thought good here to inserte as worthy remembrance. For the performance where∣of this was the forme of the oath that was ministred vnto them. Ye sweare and promise by the name of the liuing God, that ye, for the causes declared by the Prince of Conde, wyll gyue your liues, bodyes, and goods to be at the com∣maundement of the same Prince of Conde, whom ye ac∣knowledge to be the captayne of this Armie: Ye sweare and promise, willingly to obey all those things, whyche eyther he or his deputies shall commaunde, and faithful∣ly to obserue and keepe the order of discipline which he hath appointed to the gouerning of his armie. And that till suche tyme, as they whiche are enemyes to the com∣mon peace, be openly punished by order of law, for their murthers roberes, spoyles, and oppressions, whiche they haue committed agaynst the Kynges will and againste the peace, towardes the professors of the reformed Reli∣gion within the Realme: that we at the lengthe maye eniya the freedome of our consciences, the securitie of ourdyues and goods, peacably vnder the Kynges obe∣dience.
But this was the description and forme of the Dis∣cipline prescribed. BECAVSE Order, as it is profita∣ble to all men, sort is necessary for the louers of the re∣formedA descrip on of te disciplin of warre. Religion: I which am lawfully called to this warre, haue thought good with the aduise and confent of the Nobles, Captaynes, and of other expert & wyse men, to ordaye and to giue all to vnderstande, That if there be any man which will not obeye these things, there is no place for him in our armye. I will therefore that euery man faythfully obserue and kéepe them. First, whosoeuer shall come to this Army, shall declare and giue his name within sixe dayes, and shall weare accoding to the forme of the othe appoynted: the which except they doe, their horse and armour shal∣be taken from them and giuen to their accuser. And when he hath giuen his name, he shall gyue attendance and de to his charge, whether it be to watch and ward day or night, or whatsoeuer else: if not, then he shal for∣ayte his armour. No man shall forsake his Enseigne and goe to another Enseigne, without the sufferance & leaue of his Captain: he that shall do otherwise, shalbe punished according to his offence. And because no man shall pleade ignorance, let them which are lately come to our army, be certified of this decrée. It shalbe lawful for the souldiour to aske leaue of his Captayne: if it be denied▪ I will that he come to me, and I will order the matter at my discretion. I will also that the othe be mi∣nistred euery Moneth. And to the ende the names of such as be lacking may be knowne, I will that the hils and Scroules of the names be brought vnto mee  and that thre be none in the Army which kéepe backe hys name, or which is not alowed by the testimony of some other. He which shalbe found gilty herein the third day after the publishing of this writing, shall suffer death. Furthermore, I will and appointe that there bee in ei
uery Giddon of horsemen one hundreth, and of euery Enseigne of footemen CC. and euery Captayne to haue vnder him his vndercaptaynes, & other officers. That no man presume to attempt any thing against the ene∣mie, wiihout the commaundement of his Superiours: if the Captayne shalbe found culpable herein, then hee shalbe banished his office: if the Souldiour, his armour shalbe taken from him and then he expelled the hoaste. That no man forsake his Enseigne: and that suche as are found robbing and spoyling, be seuerely punished as théeues, and their armour and horse gyuen to their accusers. And because this warre differeth from the o∣ther warres that haue bene heretofore, I will that th spoyles be caryed all to one place, for the common pro∣fite and wealth of the whole Army. If any shall pilpher or purloyn frō his fellow, he shal be punished as a theef: and he that shall apprehend and detecte such a one, shal∣be well rewarded. The spoyles which shalbe taken at the yéelding vp of any Citie, shall to the gene∣ral vse of the whole army. And nothing shalbe counted for spoile but that which may be proued so to be, by sure arguments and testimenies, otherwise it shalbe accoū∣ted for rapine and theft. I will also that there be no va∣grant and vnprofitable members in the Army. Three footemen shall haue onely one Page attendinge vppon them, who also shall followe his Maisters Enseigne: if he be found otherwise, he shalbe hanged. It shall not be lawfull for any footeman to haue horses, asses, or other cattell, but onely for Captaynes and such like officers: prouided notwithstāding that they abuse not this liber∣tie. If any man shall take away the cattie that belonge to husband men for tillage, he shall suffer death. More∣ouer, I will that there be no braule nor contencion mo∣ed, specially that one man fight not with an other: yf any shall so do, he shall dye. If there happen to bee any
offence, et the Captaynes be , there may be some order taken and peace . I that all priuie grudge and maice be layde asyde, and if any man refuse to be reconciled, I commaund that Captaynes be admonished thereof, yt all sawfull wayes may be sought for reconciliation. That no man take a∣ny other lodging thā yt which shal be appointed to him. If he be a Captayne that shale fasty herein, hée shall loose his office, but if he be but a common souldiour, hée shal loose his armoure or horse, beside other punishmēts at my discretion. And I will that all officers diligently come togither to the appointed place of méeting for the Army, that they may foresée and prouide whatsoeuer shalbe necessary for euery occasion. That no mā steale away the vittayle and prouision belonging to the Ar∣my, vpon payne of death▪ And least any man may plead lawfully ignorance, I will that these Martiall decrées be proclaymed euery wéeke throughout the whole Ar∣my, in some cōuenient place or other. Let these things be diligently obserued and kept generally. They which abused the Kings name feared least the Quéene of Nauarre should goe to the Prince of CondeA practis to draw a∣way the Prince of Nauar frō the Prince of Conde. with the yong Prince her sonne. Therefore Monsieur Losse was fent to steale away the Prince, but in vayne. For the good and Christian Quéene of Nauar, when she had made all things ready, and had gathered certeyne bandes of men out of her dominion, came with hir son to the Prince of Conde. Then they practised by other meanes to stay her, least she should ioyne her self with the Prince of Conde, writing vnto her sugred letters, to winne her from the reformed Religion. With these letters was sent Monsieur Motte to perswade her, and to assure her of the Kinge and Quéenes good will. But the Quéene of Nauar persisting in her former purpose, sent letters to the King, to the Quéene, to the Duks of
Aniou, and to the Cardinall of Borbon: In the which be∣cause she doth plainly she we the reasons of hir purpose, it shall not be amisse to repeate the summe of them. When (saith she) I receyued your letters, I was rea dy to take my iorney, hearing the rumor of so great alteLetters of the Quene of Nauar to the Kinge. ration, the which notwithstanding was not vnlike to come, our aduersaries beeinge so outragious that their madnesse could not but take awaye from vs all hope of peace, which was offred vnto vs (most Christian king) by your Edict of patification: the which notwithstāding was not only euill obserued & kept, but plainly broken also by the subtil meanes of the Cardinal of Lorain: who notwithstanding your promises which you haue made to your miserable subiectes, hath not ceased, both by let∣ters to the parliaments, and also to all those whose help he thought hee might haue, to frustrate and adnihillate the force and effect of the Edict: & abusing our patience after he had made a way to an infinite sort of murthers, he presumed to procéede farther, and sought to preuaile against the Princes your neare kinsmen: of the which we haue a manifest example in my brother the Prince of Conde, who was so furiously assaulted, that hee was constrained, to craue aide of his kinsmen. And bycause my Sonne and I are so neare of bloud vnto him, wée could not chuse but offer vnto him that kindnesse, which the Law of nature requireth. Wée know sufficiently your mind, which you haue declared both by woord and writinge, which is to haue at our handes obedience, the which we are ready to yéeld vnto you, euen to hea∣ding of the laste drop of our bloud. And furthermore we know most Christian king, that your naturall goodnes is wholy enclned to preserue vs and not to destroy vs. Seing therfore wée sée such practises against vs, is ther any man which, knowing you to be a faithfull and iuste king, and séeing notwithstanding such contrary actions
so manifest against your promises, will not Iudge that these things are done withour your commaundement, and that by the cankered malice and spight of the Cardi∣nall of Loraine: Therefore I pray and beséech you (most Christiā King) to take it in good part ye I was gone frō home, to serue our God & you also, which are our King and supreme Lord, and of our owne bloud: Wée setting our selues, as vtter enemies, against their practises, so much as wée may, which presumptuously go aboute to oppresse vs. And I pray you to certifie your selfe, that wee haue not put oure selues in armour but onely for these thrée causes least they should vtterly destroye vs, as they haue gone about As touching mine owe part, I say ye the Cardinal hath done great iniurie vnto you, in that he hath gone about to chaunge his power and au∣thoritie into violence, séeking to take away my Sonne from me perforce, that he might be brought vnto you: as though your onely commaundement could not suffi∣ciently preuayle both with him and me. But we saye and affirms (O king) and beséeche you so to thinke, that we are your most louing and obedient seruaunts: in so much that whensoeuer it shall please you to trye vs, & to compare our fayth with the falshood of the Cardinall and his fellowes, I beléeue you shall finde more trueth and trust in my déedes, than you shall finde faythfulnes in his wordes. The which also we will alwayes per∣forme with all willingnesse of mynd But to the Quéene the Kings mother, she wrote af∣terLetters of the Quene of Nauar to the Quene Mother. this manner: I protest (sayeth shée) O Quéene, before God and men, that nothing hath ben, is, nor shal be hereafter more déere to me, than the loue of God, the King, my Countrey, and my own bloude. The whiche haue ben so effectuall in me, that Monsieur la Mott, whō you sent vnto me with letters, founde mée gone from home, with full purpose and intent to spend and bestow
my life, goodes, and all that I haue, for their sakes. But I pay you O Quéene, if these my letters be ouer tedi∣ouse vnto you, that you would impute it to the necessi∣tie of the time, which hath brought me into such extre∣mities, that I cannot choose but be long in repeating of them: meaning thereby to declare vnto you my pur∣pose, and to set before your eyes my whole mynde: in the which you may haue a liuely view of those things, the which I know, are after a contrary maner layd to my charge. But I pray you, gyue me leaue to repeate the whole matter from that tyme, in the which ye Guises shewed themselues to be enemies to the peace and tran quillitie of the whole realme: at what time they flatte∣red the King my husband disceased with fayre wordes, making him beléeue that he should recouer his kingdō. You know with what kinde of men he was then beset on euery syde, to my great griese, and to your griee, I dare say also: for I knew it then of your own mth. I pray you remember how faythfull you haue alwayes found me, when as for the cōmon wealth of the realm▪ I almost forsooke my husband and my children. I pray you also remember what talke you haue had with me, and what a trust you séemed to haue in me, when I de∣parted from you from Fontainbleau. From that time, I protest that I haue ben the same woman still. And I pray you remember how faithfully I obeyed your let∣ters which you sent vnto me when I was at Vendosme. Remember what I did after that in Guiā, to obey your commaundements. Then I lost the King my husband, that I might be partaker of the common chaunce & ca∣lamity of widowes. I wil not repeate euery particular iniury that hath ben don to me, seeing that I meane to speak of them all generally. And I protest againe, that the desire I haue to obey god, & the loue which I owe to my kinolkes and countrey, haue so possessed my mind, yt I haue almost no respect or consideration of my self.
Let me come therfore to ye time of ye extréeme troubles, thē renued again, when the Cardinal of Lorain brought vs into such straites, as you & al men know. In ye mean time I, by their malice & subtill practises, aboad vnprof table in my own dominiō, who sought al that thei could to intangle me. And what I thē did, you are so wel cer∣tified of y• same, that I shal not néed to make ani farther rehearsal therof. Therefore to come to this my present state, at what time I sée the Edicts of my King, not only brokē, but also quight contemned & set at naught, his au thoritie despised, his kingly promises not regarded: all which come to passe by the wicked practises of the Car∣dinal of Loraine: whom I can not so well point out O Quéene, as he is knowne vnto you. And beside the bar∣barouse cruelty which he and the reste of his fellowes haue shewed, the boldnes of those homicides increaseth insomuch that thei dare giue attēpts against ye princes of the Kings bloud, which are no lesse ornaments vnto him, than are the braunches to the trée, of ye which not∣withstanding they séeke to dispoyle the King. It is not zeale of Religion that moueth them. God prosper you, O Quéene, you knowe well enough that when you were sick of late, the Cardinal of Borbō my brother es∣caped not altogither the snares which thei laid for him: and yetnotwithstāding he is a Catholike. It is therfore the bloud and house of Borbon, that doth so gréeue them: as they haue euidently declared by persecuting my bro∣ther the Prince of Conde & his children: whose defence my Sonne and I will neuer neglect. Neyther do I for∣get the practise of Monsieur Lossae against my Sonne: the which was done by the tirannicall counsaile of the Cardinal of Lorain and his fellowes. I know, O Quene, it wil come to passe that many which shal heare my let∣ters, will say that they are written by the forme & cop∣py of those, which are dayly brought vnto you from dy∣uers places, & that they come not from me. But I pray
you to consider, that we which professe the reformed re∣ligion, vse not only one argument, but also almoste one forme of words: and also that it cannot be but that true and sincere fidelitie muste come from so noble a house, as the house of Borbon is. There are thrée reasōs which haue broughte me hether. The firste is, the obedience which I owe vnto god, séeyng that I sée, the Cardinal of Loraine goyng aboute with the reste of his fellowes, to destroye those which serue the Lorde, and embrace the true religion. The seconde is the obedience of my king, that I may best owe my lyfe and goods, for the obserua∣tion of the Edict of pacifiation, made by the kings will and consent: and least this Fraunce our Countrey, the mother and Nource of so many good men shoulde be vt∣terly destroyed wt hir childrē. The third is, consangui∣nitie: the which, as I haue saide▪ calleth vs to helpe our brother the Prince of Conde all that we can: whom we sée manifestly to be afflicted and assaulted, by thē which are in y• authoritie with you & the King, which they lit∣tle deserue: who blinde your eyes, least you shoulde sée their euill dealing, and stop your eares, least ye shoulde heare our complaintes. But I wold to God, O Quene, that your eyes and eares, beyng at the laste opened, ye may both sée and heare, what good will and loue euerye one of vs beareth to your Maiesties. But nowe as con∣cerning those letters whiche you sente vnto me, I per∣ceyue by them very well, howe greatly you are incen∣sed against me. Wherefore by this Messenger I haue sent vnto you my mind more at large, whom I haue cō maunded to signifie vnto you in my name, howe neces∣sarie it is for you, if you meane to keepe your authority, to seperate them from you which séeke to diminish the same, and to destroy those also which loue you. Iudge of vs rightly, and put a dfference betwéene the good and the euill, and perswade your selfe this one thing of me,
that I haue a singular care and desire to preserue peace, the whiche is so firme in me, that the Cardinall of Lo∣rayne and his fellowes can neuer take the same from me. For the establishing of the which peace if I myght anye thing preuaile, I woulde thinke my selfe moste happie. Hir letters to the Cardinall of Borbon were more vehement, to whom, after discourse made of hir letters sente to the King and Queene, and of the occasion of hir Iourney, she wrote in manner and forme follow∣ing. How long (sayeth shée) wil you be suffragane to the Cardinall of Lorrayne? shall hée make you ashamed of your brother, sisters, and kinsfolkes, and harden your harte agaynst them? Truly if you wil not be moued for their sakes which are so néere of your bloud, but wil bée an ennemie to the reformed Religion: yet remember what destruction he went about to bring vpon you, the Quene being sicke. After ye which, for a while you wer ware and tooke héede, least you should fall into the lyke perill, but quickly you forgot the same ageyn, you were so blinded with the perswasions of the Cardinall: be∣cause you are seperated from vs by religion, shall ther∣fore the bonde of consanguinitie and nature be broken? Take héede, take héed what you doe. They séeke for the death of your naturall brother: whose defence if you séeke not, I and my Sonne will doe it our selues. But if you cannot defende him by force of armes, shew your good will otherwise. For these haue allured vs, God, the King, and Consanguinitie. The Quéene of Nauar came to Cogn with hir Ar∣mies, whether the Prince of Conde went from Rochell to meete hir, with a greate number of Noble men. A great number of men came dayly out of the hither part of Guian, to the Prince of Conde. But it was maruaile
that the Papistes did not stop their passage, seyng that they had great Armies of men in a readinesse, and had alreadie stopt vp all passage by water. In the meane time the Duke of Aniou was at Orle∣ans, gathering his dispersed Armie together: but there arising a contention betwéene the chiefe captaines, he was much hindred: and the Prince of Conde therby had the better occasion to procéede in his affaires. At the rumor of the comming of the Queene of Na∣uars Armies the Citie of San Iand Angely, a wel fencedCities yeel∣ded to the Prince of Conde. & copios Citie in the territorie of Xantonge, the strong Castell of Blay, and diuers other Cities yelded themsel∣ues to the Prince of Conde, as Fntenay, and Sainmex∣ant, in the territorie of Poictou. When the Prince of Conde wente from Noyers, th Andelot was in Britaine. And beyng certified of his de∣parture, he gathered together a greate number of soul∣diers, oute of Brittanie, Normandy, Touraine, and oute of the countreys thereaboutes: the Noble men of the re∣formedThe Ande lot cōmeth to the Prince of Conde with a great Army. religion taking greate paines therein. So that within a few dayes they gathered togither to the num∣ber of one thousand and a halfe of horsemen, and more than two thousand and a halfe of footemen. And to come to ioyne himselfe wyth the Prince of Conde, he mynded to passe ouer the ryuer of Loyre. Now the purpose of the Andelot was to take a certain towne called Saulmur, néere vnto the ryuer of Loyre, that he & the Protestants the, & euer after might haue the more easie passage ouer ye riuer. This thing Duke Mopensier (one of the Princes the kings néere kinsman and one of the house of Borbon) feared, and therefore hauing the chiefe gouernment in those partes, he gaue commaun∣dement to Martiques Lieuftenaunt of Brittanie, a man very expert in the warres, to win Saulmur. The Andelot, little mistrusting that the enemye was
so nigh, deuided his army into thrée partes, that they might be the better vittailed by the villages & townes. One part was conducted by Monsieur Boisuerd, a very good Captaine. The Andelot taried at a village called Saintmalin, there to take his dinner. In the meane time, a Monsieur Boysuerd chiefe Captaine of that army, was conducting his souldiers to the riuer of Loyre, there met him a younge man wonderfully dismayd and abashed, and when he perceyued that Monsieur Boysuerd and the rest of his souldiers were protestantes, he told Boisuerd that Monsieur Martyques was come with a great ar∣my of men, the greatnesse whereof, he said, had made him sore afraide. Monsieur Boysuerd regarded not this newes, vntill he sawe certaine troupes of horsmen, and then he sought with all spéede to defend himselfe, and sought to make out of hand bulwarkes and trenches be¦twéene him and the enemy beside the riuer: this was a good remedy, but he could not haue his purpose, the ene∣my marched so fast ne▪ Then Monsieur Boysuerd with all spéede sent woord to the Andelot, of the comminge of Martiques: but before Boisuerd could set his men in their array, Martiques rushed vpon him with a great troupe of horsemen, dispersed his souldiers, and made greate slaughter of them in the chase. For that they had not suf¦ficientBoysuerd slayne. store of horsmen, Monsieur Boisuerd also himself was slaine: many of the chiefe Captaines also were ta∣ken, and many slaine. Notwithstanding Monsieur Mar∣tiques marched forward with his army toward Saulmur, with fiue hundred horsemen, and ten ensignes of foote∣men. The Andelot for all this supposed to haue the vic∣tory, becausé his enemies were fewer in nomber, as he thought: but when he vnderstood that Boisuerd was slain and a great sort of hys souldiers also, and that Monsieur Martiques had a strong army deuided into diuers parts, when also he perceyued that hys armye had gotten the
vantage of ground of him, he shonned them, and chose more conuenient ground: suffering Martigues to pas by hym toward Saulmur, many of the souldyours of the Andelot, not knowing what the meaning hereof should be yéelding vnto him, Then the Andelot gathering togi ther his men pursued wt all spéede Monsieur Martigues: the which when he perceiued he rode the faster & tooke Saulmur, which was then kept by the Garrisons of the papistes: leauing behind them the spoile which they had taken from the Souldiers of the Andelot. Now the bridges being stopte vp and cut awaye theThe Ande∣lot passeth ouer the forde of Loyre. Andelot was driuen to séeke other wayes to passe ouer the riuer of Lire: he sought therfore to go ouer at some shallow forde or other: but he could not by reason of the wynter floudes, which had caused the riuer to bee déepe in those places where otherwise there is little or no wa ter at all. Notwithstanding at the last he found a place so shallow and fléete, that his horsemen, footemen, Or∣dinance, waggons, and his whole army passed ouer the riuer without perill being moste wonderfull and the lyke seldome heard of before. After this their safe passage they gaue thankes vntoThe Ande∣lot ioyneth with the Admirall. God, & sang altogither the 73. Psalm. beginning thus: IN IVKY IS GOD KNOWNE, HIS NAME IS GREAT IN ISRAEL. And thus as they went fore∣ward on their iorney, they sawe certayne troupes of horsemen on that syde of the ryuer: against whom, whē the Andelot had sent certayne troupes of horsemen, he put them to flight, and slew some of them. After this, they passing quietly on their iorney came at ye last into the countrey of Poictou, & tooke a certayne Towne called Tuars by surrender. & then ioyned them selues with the Admiral which came to méete them. Af∣ter this coniunction of both armies, they tooke a noble Citie called Partenay, the Citizens willingly yéeldinge
▪ sauing certayne popis priestes, who sée∣king to rest, were slayne. Then they iointly, and togither, besteged a noble Ci∣tie called Engolesme: but when they had assaulted the same certaine dayes, and were out of hope to winne it, they tooke at the last a certayne yong man whiche was sent at the eaest intraty of the townesmen to Mon∣pensier, to crue ayde at his hands, by which yong man they learned in what great necessitie the town was in. Thereupon the Admirall gaue a new assault to the o∣ther side of the Town, & by battery made such breaches in the same, that the Townsmen being voyd of al hope to defend themselues, came straightway to compositiō with the Admirall for the surrender of the Towne. So that this Citie came into the power of the Prince of Conde. And strayt after this, that Noble Citie Niort came into his handes. In so muche that it maye séeme wonderful that so many Noble Cities in so short while hauing so néere vnto them great ayde of the Catholikes to defend them, shoulde be taken. These things happe∣ned in the moneth of September. Toward the ende of this Moneth, a great Army be∣ing gathered togither at Orleans, ye Kings Edictes were théenderedout, in one of the which Edictes, the vse and administration of the reformed religiō was quight ta∣ken away and forbidden. It contayned this summe. Knowe all men, that the Kinges our Aunetours of happy memory, to the end they might shew themseluesAn Edict prohibi∣ting the vse of the reformed religion▪ to be Christians, and true defenders of the church, haue vsed all lawfull ways and meanes to preserue the same Church, and to take awaye the diuisions of Religion, sprong vp by secrete sermons, and by seattering abroad of rprobate bookes. And after the vnfortunate disceasse of ou Father King Henry, there were certayne Noble men, stirre vp by the Ministers of this newe opinion,
which withdrew themselues and moued controuer, and that vpon no zeale of religion, but moued by ambi∣tion to haue the gouernement of this Realme, vnder King Frances our brother, albeit that he himselfe was of sufficient yeres by the lawes of this Realme, and was able enough to gouern, both for that he had autho∣ritie and wisdome enough, and also was ruled & coun∣sayled by the vertuouse and wise counsayle of ye Quéen his mother▪ & of other singular Noble men which were still about him after the death of his Father king Hen∣ry. who directed him in the steppes of oure Father: as playnly appeared all the time of his raigne. Who had no doubt brought the kingdome into that former State and condition, in the which he founde it, if the Lord had lent him longer life: notwithstanding the state of the Kingdome was then troubled by certaine noble men, who when they durst not openly bewray their myndes concerning the getting of the kingdome vnto them▪ by the industery of their Ministers of this ewe learning, they caused the tumult of Ambyse, vnder the collour of offering vp a supplication, with a confession of faith to our brother the King: who, although he knewe them to be the authors of that mischiefe, yet notwithstandyng with greate clemencie, following the example of oure heauenlye Father, he pardoned all his subiectes by an Edicte, which had straied from faith and truth, & would come into the righte waye agayne, thinking hereby to preuaile more, than by the Rigor of punishments. And by another Edict he lefte those vnder the power of Ec∣clesiasticall lawes which would not come into the right way: which Ecclesiasticall power, is no bloudy power, so that men breake not the common peace. Notwith∣standing for all this the Kings expectation was frystra∣ted by the secrete conspiracies▪ of those Noble men, which went about to moue warre vnder the collour of
Religion, and to trouble the Realme. And when he vn∣derstoode the whole matter throughly, he was constrai∣ned to come to Orleans with an Armie of men, to pre∣nent and prouide for things in time, for the which cause he called all the States of the Realme together. In the whiche place he dyed, and I beyng of younger yeares,The Kinge was xii ye old when his broth Frances dyed. and therefore lesse able to take vpon me the gouernmēt of so great a kingdome, was by the prouidence of God appoynted to succéede him. And the conuenient and ne∣essarie helpe which God left vnto v, namely the coū∣saile of the Quéene my mother in the gouernmente of our Realme was greatly let and hynded, through the contempt of this our young and tender yeares, by those Noble men, which nexte to oure owne brenthren, are most néere of bloud vnto vs: and yet notwithstanding thus they haue disagréed and contended with oure mo∣ther. And to make themselues the more stronge, they ha taken vpon them the defence of that newe opini∣on, by whose fauour and trauaile, the same is wonder∣fully spred abroad & increased. To prouids a remedie for ye which matter so soone as we were anointed, we com∣maunded our Princes, our priuie Counsaile; and al the Counsellers of the Senate of Paris, to come to Sanger∣mane: and by their counsaile and aduise we made an Edicte, in the which we cleane forbad the vse and admi∣nistration of the reformed religiō, or any other contra∣rie to that which was receyued in the Catholike church by our Elders, after the receiuing of the Christiā faith. But because the fautors and maintainers of that newe opinion, sawe that their ambitious counsailes and pur∣pose were greatly let and hyndered by this Edict, they would not suffer the same to be obserued and kept: but in all places styrred vp such as embraced that new opi∣nion, by whom the making of that our Edict mighte be frustrated. And vnder the collour of those troubles,
which by their meanes were raised dayly throughoute the whole Realme, they pretended that the Edict could be obserued by no manner of meanes: and they were the authors that an assemblye of exquisite and learned men was made out of all Parliaments, which myghte declare their Iudgementes concerning the ordering of religion, and that by them an Edict might be made: an by this meanes, they beyng moste mightie and of grea∣test authoritie, and hauing made whome they lysted to be of our counsaile, they obteyned their purpose, name∣ly, That there should be libertie graunted for the exer∣cising of two religions, the whiche was confirmed by the Edict of Ianuary: the which Edict the Quéene our Mother suffered against ir will (which was euer god∣ly) to take place, as dyd also our Cosyn the Cardinall of Borban, the Cardinall of Turnn, the Duke Moorencie the Constanble, the Marshall of Santandrae, and also the chiefest of our officers, which oure Father and brother left vnto v: wo at that time toulde the Quéene, that it would be the lesse to suffer the same religi∣on, seing the vse ther of should not be within the cities: and bicause there was good hope it would come to passe that when we should come to our full and perfect age, we shoulde amend and reforme the same by our auth∣ritie and power royall. Therefore the Quéene our mo∣ther went forwarde with singular faith and constancie to retaine and kepe vs, our brethren, and Sister, in the catholike, and Apostolike doctrine of Rome, which oure auncetours embraced & receyued for a thousand yéeres ago and more, and in those dayes florished and brought notable things to passe: in consideration whereof we, and all our subiectes are greatly bounde to our mother the Quéene. And although those men of the newe reli∣gion should be sufficiently satisfied and contented wyth that Edict of Ianuarye, if they had not another purpose
and meaning than the libertie of their consciences: yet notwithstanding they being not content with that our sufferance, shortly after the Proclamation of that Edict openly declared their peruerse myndes, of their owne priuate authoritie bearing armour against vs, takyng our cities and holdes, bringing forraine straungers in∣to this our Realme, and lyke mortall and sworne ene∣myes, ioyning battaile with vs at Dreux, in the which it pleased God to giue vnto vs the victory, hauing com∣passion on his people our subiectes. To the ende also we might wynne our rebellious subiects with clemencie, and might them to our obedience, hoping that it would come to passe that God at the length, when we shoulde come to more full and ripe age, woulde restore obedience and concorde to hys Churche, we graunted vnto them another Edict, in the whiche we graunted them some libertie to vse their religion. And although from that time forwarde we had manye ecrées accor∣ding to their owne fantasie concerning publique peace, to the ende we might put them out of all feare and sus∣picion: yet notwithstanding they did very lycensiously breake them: howbeit we made our Edicte for theyr peace and tranquilities sake, the which althoughe we might haue reuoked as beyng onely made but for a cer∣taine time, yet notwithstanding we saithfully haue ob∣serued and kept the same, and haue giuen them no oc∣casion to beare Armour against vs. The which notwithstanding they haue done of late, and haue come vnto vs with force of armes, pretending afterward that they came in that maner, to offer vnto vs a supplication for the preseruation of their religion. Notwithstanding they haue openly bid vs battal, in so much that they haue besieged our principal City Paris, and haue done all that they can to win the same. Yet for al this, we séeking to spare the bloud of our nobility,
and the liues also of the rest of our miserable subiectes, and indeuouring to win them by clemency, haue graun ted vnto them, (they crauing at our handes peace) the same Edicte, they certainely promisinge, that they wil faithfully obserue & kepe the same, and wil neuer here∣after trouble our Realme. Who neuerthelesse brake that same their promise, and refused to surrender vnto vs Rochell, Montalbon, and dyuers other Cities in Lan∣guedoc, kept still bandes of Souldiers in sundry partes of the Realme, brought in straungers, and killed many of our catholique & faithfull subiectes: & all because (as they said) certaine of their side were slain: for the exami∣nation & punishment wherof we gaue cōmaundement. But séeing wée sée them so oftemtymes to abuse our clemency and goodnesse, and can doubt no more of theyr wicked counsaile and purpose, which is to appoint an o∣ther soueraign, and to destroy him whom God hath ap∣pointed: and by this meanes to draw from vs our sub∣iectes: for these and diuers other greate and wayghty causes, wt the aduise, iudgement, & cōsent of our mother. Brethren, of our Princes, and of our priyue counsaile. vve haue & do inhibite & forbid by an Edict irreuocable & euerlasting, al men of what state, conditiō, or degre so euer they be of throghout our whole realme, to vse any o ther religiō thā the catholique relig ō of Rome, which our aūcetours haue imbraced, & which we following their ex ample do as yet hold & kepe. Also we straightli cōmaūd and charge that all the ministers of that religion do de∣part and auoide out of this our Realme, with in fiuetene dayes after the proclaiming of this Edict. These thinges we commaunde, vppon paine of death, and confiscation of the offenders goodes. Notwithstanding we wil not that the men of the reformed religion so called, be vexed and sifted in their consciences for their religion, so that they frequent & vse no other religion than that which is
Catholique and of Rome. Hopinge that it will come to passe at the last, both by the instinct of Goddes holy spi∣ril, and also by the diligence of the prelates of ye church, that all our subiectes shall imbrace and receiue one re∣ligion. And we do fréely pardon and forgiue euery one which with in twentye dayes after the publication of these our letters shal put of his armour, and liue peace∣ably as it becommeth faithful subiectes, whatsoeuer he or they haue committed heretofore against vs, and our familye: all the which, if they will obey, we take vnder our protection: & do forbid our officers to do vnto them any harme. Also we will that all dissentions, betwéene whomsoeuer they be, whether they be common, or pry∣uate, beburied in silence: and that no iniury be done to a ny, eyther in woord or déed. Whatsoeuer he be that doth contrary here vnto, he shalbe punished as a rebell. But when twenty dayes are expired, we wil shewe against the obstinate all manner of seuerity and rigor by lawe: and will shewe vnto them no manner of fauour. Wée wil and commaund that this Edict be published and pro claimed euery where, and thē straightly obserued, and that we bee certified from day to day of all thinges con∣cerning the same. Wherevnto, ye that be our offycers, looke diligently. There was also another Edict made forbidding all those that professed the reformed religion, to haue any manner of office committed vnto them: whether they had liued peaceably at home all the time of the Ciuill warres, or whether they had born armour to take part with the Prince of Conde. These Edictes were first of all by the Senate of Pa∣ris, then by all other Courtes of the realme very ioyful∣ly receiued, and no lesse carefully published and proclai∣med the same day, al solemne rites being diligently ob serued, as though the kingdom after so long and so ma∣ny
vexations and troubles of warre, had nowe peace. There came also from the Pope letters patentes, byLetters pa∣tes from the Pope. which the King had libertie graunted vnto him to take out and to sell of the Ecclesiasticall lyuinges and goods, so much as should be worth vnto him yerely fyue hun∣dred thousand Crownes, to mayntayne warre agaynst the heretiques, that they might eyther bee vtterly de∣stroied, or else be brought to the obedience of the church of Rome. But first in the beginning of his letters, hee spake largely concerning the great boldnesse of hereti∣ques, and of their wicked counayles, which they had & haue with the Germanes and Englishmen. The Prince of Conde about this tyme put Monsieur Aciere in trust to gather an army of men togyther: too whom there came a great nōber of Protestants which were by the papistes molested and thrust out of theyr houses, or which could not be in sufficiēt safety in their houses, out of Langedoc & Dolpheny: and a mā might sée great heapes of men, women, childrē, and old folks, leauing their houses, and fléeinge to those Cities that were in the territorie of Uiaretze and Seuenas, whiche are also in Languedoc, & were kept by the Protestants. Notwithstanding Monsieur Aciere gathered out from among these no small number of warlyke souldiurs, which he mynded to conducte to the Prince of Conde to Rochel. He had also of the men of Dolpheny seuen hun∣dred and fyue Enseignes of footemen, and two Giddons of horsemen. The Captaynes ouer these▪ were Mon∣sieur Monbrune, Monsieur Ancon, Monsieur , Monsieur Viriy, Monsieur Blacon, Monsieur Mirabell, Monsieur Celard, and Monsieur Orose: all whiche were come of noble stocke. Out of Languedoc he had fyue hndred and thrée Enseignes of footemen, and Giddeons of horsemen. And among those were nū∣bered
the men of Uiuaretz, which were also of Langue∣doc, of which there were xiii. Enseignes of footmen, vn∣der the charge of Monsieur Pierregord: and one Gid∣don of horsemen vnder the conduct of Monsieur Toras. The Captaynes ouer the reste, were Monsieur Beau∣disne brother to Monsieur Aciere, Monsieur Ambri, Mō∣sieur Lmosson, Monsieur Burlargues, and Monsieur Es∣pondillan. And Acieres bande contayned twoo hundred well appointed horsemen. Monsieur Mouents had gathe red out of the Prouancialles ten Enseignes of footemen: and Monsieur Uallouore, a Giddon contayning a hun∣dred horsemen. The place appointed for all these bādes to méet was at Ales, a town of Languedoc in the territo∣rie of Seuenats: and the time of their comming togyther was the xxv. day of September, But the men of Dol∣pheny could not come into Languedocke, but they muste néedes passe ouer the ryuer called the Rosne, the whiche was very hard to doo, both for that the same was very swift and déepe, and also because the ennemie had stopt the passages by the bridges. But for all this, Monsieur Meuents, by his singular industrie and trauaill, within ower and twēty howres builded and raysed vp a strōg Bulwarke ouer against Uiuarets: and so the Armies were caryed ouer by shipp out of Dolpheny, to the other side of the Ryuer. After this, all the Armies met togy∣ther at Ales, and with great spéed, when they had passed the territorie of Seuenats, and Rhodez, Monsieur Aciere the xxiiii. day of October, passed ouer the ryuer Dordōne at Solliac with his whole Army, and so came into Guiā: Monsieur Monluc the Lieuetenant, daring not aduen∣ture vpon him to resist. The rumour being spred abroad of the comminge of Monsieur Acier, Duke Monpensier, whiche a little be∣fore was in the territorie of Poictou, minded to stop his passage, with fower thousand horsemen, and with forty
Enseignes of well appoynted Souldioures, footemen. Therefore taking long iorneys, he came with speede to a Citie called Perigueux, néere vnto the which Monsieur Acier had brought his army, to a little Towne called Sainctastier: where Monpensier set vppon the heade and tayle of Monsieur Acieres army, with twoo seuerall bandes: but by and by Acier gaue him the repulse: who fearing least the enemie would goe to inuade the other bandes which were distributed among the villages, he by and by gaue warning to Monsieur Mouentes and to Monsieur Pierregorde to kéepe their Souldiours with in their Campes, and said that he would come by and by with the reste of the army. This aduise pleased the cap∣taynes very well, auing onely Monsieur Mouents, who vaunsing his Enseignes willed them to followe him. Monsieur Pierregorde & the reste of the Captaynes fea∣ring least by this destruction of the bandes, ther should be a way made to the enemie to anoy them, and prote∣sting that the whole blame hereof should rest on him, they also with their bandes marched forward. But they were not scarsly gone out of the village, when they saw Duke Monpensier comming with a great army of hors∣men. Then with spéed he prepared himselfe, and choose out fyue hundred harquebuziers to be in the first front, who straytway discharged a great peale of shot against the launces on horse: but they presently charging their launces, ran with such violence vppon them, that they brake the ray of Mouents souldiours, & so ensued a sore skirmishe: and when they had resisted a while, the whole army of Mouents tourned their backes and fled: the two Captaynes also themselues being slayne, na∣melyMouents and his souldiers slaine. Pierregorde, and Mouents, and the reste whiche fled, were for the most part slayne by the Inhabitantes of those quarters: notwithstanding many escaped and
ame to Monsieur Acier in safety. In this skirm ishe there were slayne and wanting of Monsieur Aciers sol∣diers sie hundred: and of Monpensiers side, certaine horsemen of great name. After this, Monpensier gaue no other attempt, but re∣tourned to the Citie Perigeux: and Monsieur Acier, whē he had gathered togither all his souldiers, and the rem∣nant of the souldiours of Mouenes, came the next day to a village called Aulbeterre. The Prince of Conde hearing of the comminge of Monsieur Acier, after he had wonne Engolesme, prepa∣red himselfe to take his iorney, and to méete him. The Quéene of Nauarre in the meane tyme dealt very substantially at Rochel, and had appointed certain Shippes to kéepe the hauens mouth belonginge to the same: and also to the end shée might haue the more easie passage into England, which was a great friend and fur therer of the Protestants cause. Therefore the Quéene of Nauarre sente letters toLettees of the Quene o Nauar to the Quene of England the Quéene of Englande, by Mousieur Shastiller, a No∣ble man, whom shée had made Generall of that Nauy: and when shée had declared the causes of the warre be∣gonne, shée commended her self and her cause vnto her, as followeth. Beside the great good will and desire (moste Noble Quéene) which I always had to abyde in your fauoure, there is also at this day occasion offered, the which tru∣ly would greatly accuse me, if I shoulde not by letters declare vnto you, what causes haue led mée & my chil∣dren (whom God hath lent vnto me) hyther. And my faulte should be so much the greater, by how much hée, according to his infinit goodnes, hath bestowed so many and so great benefits vpō you, and hath geuen vnto you such a zeale for the aduauncement of his glory, namely
to you O Quéene, whom he hath choosen to be a ngu∣lar Nource of his Church. By good right therefore are those things referred and brought before you, which doo appertayne to this defence of the trueth & of the church of God. And truly, as I know that you vnderstand the generall state of our affaires, most noble Quéene, so I pray and beseeche you, perswade your selfe, that there are thrée causes (of the which the least ought to be suffi∣cient) which haue constrayned me to forsake my owne Dominion, and to come hyther. The first cause therfore, is RELIGION, the which would haue ben oppressed in this our Realme of Frāce, by the olde and barbarouse tyrannie of the Cardinall of Lorrayne, and of those which take his part, that I should (no doubt) haue ben ashamed of my selfe and myne, and to haue had my name reckoned among the faythfull, if so be, to withstand this error and horror, and to defend the trueth, I had not sought all meanes possible, both by my goods, and also with perill of my lyfe: and except al∣so my Sonne and I had ioyned our selues with this so honorable a company of Princes and Nobles: All the which are with me determined and fully purposed, by the helpe of the lord God of hoastes, not to spare in thys cause by any maner of meanes, neither lyfe nor goods, nor any thing else which God had lent vnto vs. The seconde cause, whiche also dependeth vpon the first, is, our obedience to the King: bicause the ruyne of religion, is also the ruyne of the King: for the preserua∣tion whereof we are straitly bounde. And bicause my sonne and I haue obtained at the hands of God this ho∣nour and dignitie, that we are so néere of bloude to the King, this also, most Noble Quéene, hath constrayned vs to make haste, and to set oure selues against those, which abusing our Kings name and facillitie, doe make him the author of his owne detrement and harme, and
(althoughe of himselfe he is moste faithfull and sure of his promises) the breaker of his faith and promises: and that by those subtill meanes and wayes, whiche they haue deuised to breake the Edicte of pacification. The which Edict, as it caused & maintayned peace betweene the king, and his good and faithfull subiectes, so long as it was obserued and kepte, so the same beyng broken, calleth and prouoketh the fidelitie of the subiectes to la∣mentable and pitifull warre, & so coacted and constray∣ned, that there is neuer a one of vs, whiche is not vio∣lently and againste his will drawne therevnto. The thirde cause, moste Noble Quéene, is peculiar to my Sonne and me, namely, for that we sée the olde and sworne enemyes to God and to our socke and kynred, with deadly and impudent hatred, to go about and séeke to rase and vtterly to destroy vs and our familie: whē as also, my brother the Prince of Conde, to auoyde the practises and conspiracies againste him and his, was constrained with his wife and children, to séeke a place of refuge and securitie, the mother great with childe, & the children being in so pitifull a cace, that I cannot re∣peate the same without teares: besyde this also that I was certifyed & knew the same for a suertie, that some were appoynted to steale and violently to carry away my sonne from me. With these reasons and causes we beyng moued, could not chuse but come together, to the ende that we beyng ioyned in one, mighte lyue and dye together: as also the bonde of consanguinitie wyth the which we are mutually knit together, dothe bynde vs herevnto, that it dothe commaunde vs to doe no lesse. These are the thrée causes (O Quéene) which haue vr∣ged me to take the sworde in hande. We doe not (as the good catholiques lay to our charge) warre against God and oure King: we thanke God for it, there is no suche treason to be layde to our charge but are faithfull ser∣uauntes
and subiectes both to God and oure King. Of the which I moste humbly pray and beséeche you to be certifyed and persuaded, and to assist vs with your aide and fauour. In the meane time the mother and hir chil∣dren commend themselues to your Maiestie, to whom thei wishe most happy preseruation. This letter was written the xv. of October. Certainly England did greatly fauour the cause of theEngland a succour to Fraunce. faythfull, as may appeare by the second demonstration of their good will in time of extreame perill, binding the Frenchemen vnto them for euer by the great benefits and good turnes bestowed vppon them. For they gaue liberally to such as were exiles and banished mē places to dwell in, and very much comforted & succoured the poore, néedy, and oppressed, in these tumultes and gar∣boyles of ciuill warres. But to returne to our former purpose. The Prince of Conde ioyned himself with the ArmyThe Prince of Conde seeketh to encounter with Mon∣pensier. of Monsieur Acier, the first day of Nouember at Aul∣beterre: and then out of hand they consulted concerninge the pursuing of Monpensier: of which when they had a∣gréed, they tooke certain troupes of horsemen of the first Armie, and the greatest parte of harquebuziers whiche came out of Languedoc, and then the Admirall went to∣ward a certain village called Bertrizi, where it was re∣ported the enemie aboade: but when they had diligent∣ly enquired out the matter, it was founde that hée was departed from thence with great spéed: and so with losse of that iorney the Admirall retourned backe agayn to  to the Prince of Conde. To whom, when hée was come agayn, they determined and decréed togither to séeke all occasions of battail: and s straightway they pursue Monpensier: who with great expedition trauei∣led toward the Duke of Aniou. For the Duke of An∣iou, with the reste of the army, was at Chastelleraud in
the territorie of Poictou, who had also with him greate store of great Gunnes. Therefore the Admirall wyth the first Army pursued Monpensier, who was not farre from the Duke of Aniou: in so muche that the Duke of Aniou béeing moued with so greate celeritie, remoued his Campe néerer the Citie, and more strongly encam∣ped himself & his souldiers: the Admirall not bidding him battaile, but extending his army and displayng his Ensignes in great quantitie of ground. Notwithstan∣ding this day there was nothing don. The day follow∣ing he marched his army more néere, but first of all he gaue knowledge thereof to the Prince of Conde, who sending before him his footemen, came vnto him with the troupes of horsemen of the seconde Army: but as he was comming, on from the Admirall met hym, and tolde him that he coulde not cause the Duke of Aniou to ioyne battaile with him, bycause he had incāped his souldiers within certaine valleys inuironed with hils, and also by reason of a thicke myste, which was so fog∣gie that one of them coulde scarsly discerne and knowe another. Therfore this day also was spent with charge and discharge of thundering shotte one agaynste ano∣ther. The Prince of Conde had taken a very strong castle, called Cauigny, by surrender, which was situate near to the riuer of Vienna: This castel he battered downe to the hard ground, bycause it should not afterward stand the enemy in any stéede. Then the Prince of Conde, to the end he might entice the lingering Duke of Aniou to battail, after delibera∣tion had of the matter, retired backe agayne with the Admirall and went asyde, passing ouer the riuer agayn. In the meane tyme Monsieur Bocard was comming to the Prince of Conde with the rest of the army, and with good stoae of great Ordinance, when he had takē Pont,
a strong and well fenced citie. The Duke of Aniou vn∣derstanding of this, determined to set vpon Monsieur Bocard, he being yet a good way of from the Prince of Conde: and passing ouer the riuer of Uienua, he came to a certain Towne called Pamprui, where Monpensier ta∣ried for him with the first army. The Prince of Conde also was mynded to ioyne himselfe with Monsieur Bo∣card, that if it were possible, by this occasion hee might procure and allure the Duke of Anion to battaile. Therfore the Prince of Conde came to that place the xvii. of November, & was no farther then half a league from Monpensiers camp. And by and by ther was a smal skirmish betwéen them, which was but short by reason yt night approched. The Duke of Aniou was frō thence aboute a league. Monpensier as though he had encamped himselfe, made certaine fiers to deceiue the enemy, and in the dead tyme of the night came towardes the Duke of Aniou at Iazenail. By the breake of the day the Admirall sent Monsieur Briguemauld with certaine Troupes of Horsemen as scoutes to view the coste: and hee himselfe aboade there still, the Prince of Conde being not far from him. Then Monsieur Briguemauld, when he came to the place frō whence the enemy was fled, found certain tentes emp∣ty, and horses tyed, with cariage which they had left be∣hinde them, and riding a little farther, he might discern the enemy going forward: then he sent Monsieur la Loe with twenty Horsemen to take a better and more cer∣taine viewe of them: who, when he had ridden more neare gaue knowledge to Briguemauld, that they were their enemies, who straighte way with the rest of the horsemen rode against them: at the sighte where of the Souldiers of Monpensier were so terrefied that thei for∣soke their cariage, and fled towarde Mongontour, hee leauinge his purpose to ioyne with the Duke of Aniou.
And it séemed now that they had occasion offered them to giue notable attemptes, if so be the Admirall had not altered his purpose, fearinge least the Prince of Conde on the other part should be troubled with the Duke of Aniou, because hee hard oftentymes the sounde of the gonnes. For the Prince of Conde fought with ye Duke of Aniou, with whom hee skirmished diuers tymes, e∣uen at his campe. Notwithstanding this was not doneThe Duke of Angwe put to the worse. without sheadinge of bloud: six hundred of the Duke of Anious Souldiers being wanting, and of them fiueteen captains. And if they had not bene preuented by night, it was to be feared, least the battaile had bin more blou dy by the rescue of the Admirall. The next day again the Prince of Conde came with his whole power to the same place, but in vain. The Duke of Aniou marched with his army to Poic∣tiers, and the Prince of Conde with his army to a towne called Mirebell, within foure miles of Poictiers, which straight way was yelded to the Prince of Conde: where he taried eyght dayes. Then the Admiral, when he hard that certain bands of Souldiers taried at the citie Pontauzane, tooke all his horsemen both with lawnce and shotte, and trauailed in the night, & set vppon the whole Legion, of the which the Brissac was Captaine, and slewe thrée hundred of them. There was also the greatest part of the enemyes horsemen, whom he durst not set vpon, both for that he knew not where the Prince of Conde was, and also be∣cause there were great showers of rayne which muche anoyed them. Therefore returning backe againe they met with the Prince of Conde who on the other parte went to pursue the enemy. And thus for the space of certain monethes the time was spent with skirmishes of horsemen. For this was the pollicie of the chiefe Captaines of
the Duke of Aniou, to deferre ioyning of battaile, ther∣byThe Duke of Aniou by Pollicy delayeth to loyne bat∣taile. Due Dau ma in Loraine. to alaye the force of the Prince of Condes Army, that his power being deminished by delay, which the Prince of Conde could not easily repaire againe, they mighte so at the last oppresse him. While these things were thus wroughte in Guian, the Duke de Aumall was with another Armye in Lo∣raine: mynding there to reseyne the Germanes whyche were loked for to come and aide the Papistes: and al∣so to stop the passage of such as should come to ayde the Protestantes, as we will declare when we come to the same. While the Prince of Conde was at Mirebell, there came a Messenger from the Quéene to the Prince of Conde, who in the Quéenes name exhorted and perswa∣ded him to peace. To this the Prince of Conde made an∣swere before a great multitude, yt he was cōstrained to take the sworde in hande to resist those iniuries offered vnto him, and not to enterprise any thing againste the Kings Maiestie: I and my friends (sayth he) séeke onely to inuade the Cardinall of Loraine and hys fellowes, from whose tyrannie we will deliuer our consciences, our liues, and our goods: for they are open and sworne enemyes to the King and the Realme. All men know how greatly I haue wished & sought for peace, as of late may appeare by my tractable facil∣litie. But, sayth he bicause the king is compassed about & beset with his enemies I meane godwilling, to make my petitions before the King himself. And so with this answere the Messenger was dismist: whom fame re∣ported to be sent onely as a Spie, to vewe what power he had, and also to feede hym wyth the vayne hope of peace, that thereby they myghte make hym the more secure. Concerninge the prince of Orange wée spake some∣what
before. Therfore, when he had gathered togetherPrince of Orange in the lowe countrey. great bandes of Souldies, some oute of Germauie, some out of the low Countrey, and some out of Fraunce, and when Mons. Genly a Noble man had brought vnto hym for ayde a great Army of Frenchmen out of Picardy: e passed ouer the ryuer of Mense, and came into Belgio, otherwise called the lowe Countrey: where he taryed certayne monethes, and made onely certain small skir∣mishes with the Duke of Albas souldiers, and toke ō the Papistes a fewe small Townes. And hauing no oc∣casions offered him to giue any notable attempe, thePrince of Orenge se∣keth to ioyn with the Prince of Conde. Duke of Alba hauing the chiefe Townes in possession, toward the ende of the Moneth of Nouember, he came by Liege to Picardy: and so came to Saint Remi, and R∣bemont with his whole Armye, mynding (as it was re∣ported) to ioyne with the Prince of Conde. By reason of the cōming of the Prince of Orange all the Cities ther∣aboutes were afrayde, and Paris it selfe also trembled: neyther had they anye hope of ayde and strength, the Duke of Aniou, beyng in the Region of Poictou, and the Aumall in Loraine, sufficiently occupied. For thys matter the Cardinall of Loraine so prouided, that what they coulde not doe by might, that they brought to passe by fraude and deceyte: and soughte to drawe awaye the myndes of the Germanes, by whom the chiefe strength of the Army consisted. And they had the better occasion offered them to bring their purpose to passe, bycause the myndes of the Germanes were offended by nonpay∣ment of their wages. One Schomberg, which had accesse to the Prince of Oranges Campe, by the meanes of the chiefe Captaine, (whome they call the Marshall of the Army) to whom he was of kinne, soughte to bring thys thing to passe. Therefore when the Prince of Orange was mynded to March furder into Fraunce, the Armies of the Germanes refused, & required with angry moode
to be paied for y• time past their wages. The captaines made excuse that they made no promyse to the Prince of Orange to come to warre in Fraunce, & that they could not so doe, bycause they were the Kings friendes. And thus the myndes of the Captaines beyng distracted, the whole armie was dispersed also: the Germans saying, that they would after so much loste labour, returne into their owne countrey. The French men also by reason of this distraction went dayly away by heapes. And by∣cause there was no passage into Fraunce by that parte, the Prince of Orange with certain French Captaines, mynded to returne into Germany againe, with the rem∣nant of the armie, that he might oyne himself with the Duke of Deuxpons, whiche made prouision to ayde the Protestantes. The Duke of Alba beinge encouraged wyth thisTiranny of the Duke of Alba. successe, pursued and persecuted the remnant of ye faith∣full throughout all the lowe Countrey: and laying new taes and tributes vppon the people, hee prouided also new kindes of torment, bringing those forth to executi∣on, whom before he had put in prysō. Euery where hor∣rible and cruel murthering sightes were to be séen: but specially at Tornay and Ualencia, where fifty Citizens, to the terrible feare of all the rest, were executed by ye common hangman. Concerning the Duke D'aumall we haue spoken be∣fore,The Ger∣mane take both parts. and haue shewed for what causes hee was in Lo∣rayne: for the papistes to destroy the truth of the Gospel went about to win Germany to take part with them, pro mising to the Germanes great rewards of money, which is a oble peswader, and can bring mighty thinges to passe Besie this also they vsed false perswasions, say∣ing that they dd not warre against religion, which the King maintained by his Edicte, but rather against Re∣belles, which without the Kinges commaundemente
haue put themselues in armour to trouble the state, the people for the most part beinge drawen to mischeuous sedition, vnder the prefence of religion. On the contrary part the Quéene of Nauar and the Prince of Conde, vrged and declared to ye Princes, that the Gospell was specially assaulted, and that with their accustomed guiles they went about to couer their wic∣kednesse, and the breaking of the Edict: for that all menDuke of Deuxpous promiseth to helpe the Prince of Cond might sée both by the breaking of the Edict, and also by the manyfest denouncinge of warre againste the truth by those laste Edictes, published in the moneth of Sep∣tember, that they are mere sclaunders of the papistes. Therefore Wolphang Duke of Deuxpous knowing and wysely waying the cause of the faithful, promised helpe liberally to the Prince of Conde, and did so in déede, as wee will here after declare. In the meane tyme, while Duke Daumall wayted for the comming of certain Germanes to serue the king, he heard say that there were certain bandes of the faith full in the territory of Strausburg. Their Captaine was Monsieur Cochay of Dolpheny, a good warrier: he had charge of eyght Ensignes of footemen, and of certaine troupes of horsmen, which he had gathered oute of the remnants of the men of Dolpheny, of Lions, and from a∣mong the remnante of the Borgondians: and he trauay∣led this way, bycause there was no other passage to the Prince of Conde, all other wayes beyng sopt vp. The Duke D'aumall went with his power thyther, and bée∣ing prepared to fight, met with the bandes of footemen and horsemen, trauailing without order or raye. ThenMon sieur Cochao ta∣ken & ma∣ny of his men slaine. Mon. Cochay, beyng thervnto constrayned, sought to de∣fende himselfe against the Aumall, as tyme and place would suffer him, and that manfully. Notwithstanding the Aumall, thoughe to the losse and spoyle of manye of his men, gat at the last the victory: and toke Monsieur
Cochay and certaine of his Captaines, and slewe of hys men. 120. The reste of the armie which were gone be∣fore Mons. Cochay, and met not with the enemy, escaped in safetie, without any sight of the enemy. Then Mons. Cochay was brought to Ments: & beyng within a while after brought for the of the Citie, as thoughe he shoulde haue bene exchaunged, was slaine without the Citie. Noyers a Towne of Burgundy, from whence we saidNoyers wonne. before the Prince of Conde was gone, was notwithstan dinge kepte in the Prince of Condes name with a small Garrison. Aboute this tyme this towne was besieged and wonne by Monsieur Barbezieux: the souldiers with in the towne hauing very valeantly defended thēselues so long as possibly they could. The Castle also was yéel∣ded vp on these conditions, that the Souldiours should passe in safety with their lyues, and carrye away wyth them bag and baggage, and that Monsieur Barbezieux should giue his aith for the performance hereof. But these conditions were kept in no pointe. For so soone as the gates were set open, they cruelly slewe the Towns∣men so faste as they met them, only a fewe after they were ransacked & spoyled, escaped: all manner of house∣hold stuffe was giuen to the souldier for a praye, but the rest was caryed to Troy. The Germanes which were vnder the Kinges paye, were by this time come ouer the riuer of Rhein, wel ny to Mogunce, about the latter end of December. There were of them fiue thousand and sixe hundred horsmen: whose principal captains were these Philbert, Marques of Bade, Diere Hess, Leuineng, Countie Rhingraue, and Bassompere. Duke D'aumall was so proude of this news that openly he threatned the Duke of Deuxpons and his Region. Notwithstanding the Duke prouided so well for the matter, that this threateninges turned to bare wordes, and nothing else.
But let vs come now to the affaires and exploites of Poictou: After those skirmishes by horsemen agaynst the Duke of Aniou, wée saide that the Prince of Conde tooke the towne of Mirebell, and there aboade: and the Duke of Aniou at Poictiers. Within certaine dayes af∣ter the Prince of Conde brought forth his armies, and wonne the castle of Champiniac in the territory of Mō∣penser: and after this he tooke the Castle of Sauuigniae, and beat downe the same to the ground. In the meane time the Duke of Anious army being increased and fortified with fresh bandes of Souldiers, both horsemen and footemen, which were brought vnto him by Monsieur Ioyse, Lieuetenant of Languedoc, hée determined to besiege Mirebell, because it would stand him in good stéede being so néere Poictiers, the Prince of Conde being gone with his army to the same. And when by battery he had made the towne sautable, the souldi∣ers being not able to defende the same any longer, for want of vittaile & other prouision, they surrendered the same: howbeit the Souldious that were in the Castell, stood still in the defence thereof. But the Duke of An∣iou, leauing there the Lieuetenant of Poictou called Mō sieur Lude to besiege the same, went with the rest of his army to a towne called Lodun, which was kept by Mō∣sieur Acier. Who being summoned by a Heralt to sur∣render the same at the commaundement of the Duke of Aniou, aunswered that the citie was committed vn∣to him by the Prince of Nauar, the kings general Pre∣sident of Guian: to whom agayne he sayd he would re∣store the same, & to none other, & if any man would goe about to take the same by force, he wold by force again make resistance, and if he could, giue him the repulse. And then hee certified the Prince of Conde of euerye thing as it fell out. In the meane tyme the Castell of Mirebell was taken, certayne souldiers being let into the same vnder the coulour of parley.
The Duke of Aniou hearing the aunswer of Mon∣sieur Acier, brought his army neerer the citie. The prince of Conde also came thither, in so much that both armies being in their battayle araye, and their Ensignes dis∣played might sée one another very plaine. Then they discharged shot one at another with their great gonns, spending all that day with shot and certaine small skir∣mishes: and when the night came, both partes encam∣ped themselues. This was done the sixtéene day of De∣cember. The xvii. & xviii. dayes following, were spente as the other day before. The xix. day the Duke of Aniou, toward the euening gaue place, and went to Chinon, the Princes souldiours pursuing the armie: at which time there were on the Princes syde two hundred Switzers slayne, and on the Dukes side thrée Ensignes of footemen. About this time the cold of the winter wared verye eager: in so much that it was wonderfull that the Ar∣mies would lye in the fieldes vnder the colde ayer▪ but such was the burning heat of hatred, that many of both Armies, by reason of the extreme cold, fel into greuous diseases of the which many dyed. Therefore both Armies for this tyme of winter re∣tired. The Duke of Aniou brought his Armie to Poi∣ctiers, to Salmure, to Chinon, & other places thereabouts: and the Prince of Conde brought his armie to Tuars, & to Montriuibellay: And he made Monsieur de Iuoy, which in the time of the first ciuill warre, was Lieuetenant of Burges, Lieuetenant of Lodune. And these were the exploites of this yere. Notwithstanding the troublesomnesse of the tyme & an D. 1569. the coldnesse of the winter, these garboyles of warre were not quite ceassed: So that this yéere also was spēt and ouerpassed with lamentable troubles. There was sent into Gascoyne Monsieur de Pilles, &
man very expert in the warres, which shold make new collections and Moisters of souldiours, and carry them with hym. For there, what with the aid of the town of Mōtaul∣bane, & what with the help of the armies, of the which ye Uicountes had the charge, the faithful were of no smal power: yea, they had also many townes in their posses∣sion: although the inhabitants of Toloze and Monsieur Monluce went about still to anoye them. So soone as Monsieur Pilles was come thyther, he tooke the towns of Beegerac and Saintfoy by surrender: and when he had gathered togither banes of horsemen and footmen, hée retourned to the Prince of Conde. And by the waye as he retourned by that place in the which (as we said be∣fore) Monsieur de Mouents & his men wer ouerthrowē, he wounded and flew many of the inhabitants of that place, because they had destroyed suche as at that time fled through their villages for succour. The Prince of Condes bandes wan and spoiled Saint florent, a very rich Abbay néer vnto Salmure, which wasthe Abbay of Saintflo rent won & spoyled. garded with two hundred Souldiours: but when they had slaine the souldiours because they stood stoutly in ye defence therof, they set fire on the Abbay. Countie Brissac, one of the Duke of Anious Captains, and a very expert yong man in the warres, goinge out of Salmure, came sodenly vpon a troupe of horsemen, be∣ing in number 100. vnder the conduct of Monsieur Bor∣sauld, part wherof he flew, and part he put to flight. The same also came sodeynly and vnlooked for vppon Countie Momgomery in the village of la Motte: in so much that Momgomery was constrayned to flée into a Castle hard by: but his brother Corminuille with certain others were taken. For want of vittailes, the Prince of Condes Armye went from Tuarz and from Montrebell: and one Army
came to Partenay, and the other to Niort. Thither came also the Quéene of Nauarre, to consult with the Prince of Conde and with other Noble men there, concerninge diuers things. And among all other this was decreed, That for so much as the papists to maintain this war, did pluck away and sell the land of Churchmen, accor∣ding to the prescript of the Popes letters patents, whe∣ther they were Catholiques or protestants, the Quéen of Nauar & the Prince of Conde also should doo the like in those places which they held and kept. To bring this thing to passe, letters wer giuē forth in ye names of the prince of Nauarre, of the Prince of Conde, of the Admi∣rall, of the Andelot, and of the Rochfoucault: By whiche letters certaine mē were commaunded to sell the land of Ecclesiasticall persones, and to assure and warrant the byers in their names, quietly to enioy the same. By this meanes, within a short time, they had gotten a great masse of money. And on the contrary part the Kinges Edictes, of the which we spake before, were executed with great rigor against Religion. All the moueable goods of the fayth∣full at the first which were taken in spoyle & reserued by the Magistrate were openly sold: their landes were made to paye great fynes and subsidies, to mainteyne Garrisons and souldiours: Garrisons were set to keepe Noble mens housholdes: and the landes of the faithful by the commaundement of the Kings letters, were ap∣pointed to be solde. The Prince of Conde gaue an attempt against La∣signan, being a very strong Castle, being come thyther with the greatest part of his armyes: but fayling of his purpose he departed againe from thence. Sanser a Citie in Burgundy was besiéeged by the ca∣tholiques,Sancer besieged. whose captaine was Martinenge an Italian. To this siege came Monsieur Nemours, bringing with
him thrée thousand footemen, at the least, and certayne troupes of horsemen: all which he broughte out of Pro∣uance to ayde Martinenge in the seige. The Generall ouer these was Countie Tende Lieftenant of Prouance. Wyth these also there came certayne Armies oute of Dolpheny, vnder the charge and conducte of Baron des Adretz: whom we sayde before forsooke the faithfull in the first warre. The Townsmen valiantly for certain Monethes defended themselues, and by diuers erupti∣ons vpon the enemies and skirmishes with them, they had slaine manye of them, and broken manye of their great gunnes. Therefore Martinenge when he had wearyed in vayne his souldiers with the extreme coulde of winter he toke vp his caryage, raised the seige, and departed a∣way secretly in the nighte. Then the warders & watch∣men of the Citie, suspecting that the enemyes fled, gaue knowledge thereof to the chiefe Captaynes in the Ci∣tie, who goyng forth by the breake of the day with cer∣taine souldiers slewe many straglers that lingered be∣hinde the armie without order or raye. After this, coun∣tie de Tende went to the Duke of Aniou: and Baron de Adretz taking Nemours with him, went to the Duke D'aumall: This was about the beginning of Februa∣rie. The King was nowe at Mets: and before he came thether he had forbidden the Protestants to vse the re∣formed religion vpon paine of death. The power of Duke D'aumall beyng greatlye en∣creased with newe and freshe ayde, he determined to encounter with the bandes of French souldiers, which wayted for the Armies of the Duke of Deuxpons: and came to Sauerne a towne belonging to the Bishoppe of Strasburge, which fauoured him, and there he stopped al the passage ouer the ryuer against the enemie. But he could not there abide, beyng repulsed I put to flighte by
the Frenchmē his enemyes. These French bands that put him to light, were such as had fled out of the hither part of Fraunce thither, & partly which were left of the Armie of the prince of Orange. Aboute this time Mons∣Genly dyed at Bergasiber in the Dominion of Deuxpous, and bycause he was generall of those Armyes, Mons. de Moy a Noble man and a good Captaine was chosen in his stéede. While Duke D'aumall behaued himselfe thus about the borders of Loraine, there came to the Duke of An∣iou, two thousand and two hundred Germane horsemen, conducted by the Rheingrane, & Bassompierre. He him∣selfe when he had payed the rest of the armie their wa∣ges, went with all his power towarde the Territorye of Engolmoys: mynding to wyn Engolesme a verye fayre and copious Citie. But bycause the passage to the ry∣uer of Charente, woulde be a necessarie helpe for him, be mynded to kepe the bridge. And therefore he commaū∣ded Mons. Riuiere to go and take the Citie & the Castell of Irnac, which bordereth vpon the ryuer of Charente. Thys was the occasion of a great and lamentable bat∣taile. The Prince of Conde beyng certified of the purpose of the Duke of Aniou, came to Niort with his main bat∣taile the first daye of Marche: and from thence he came by the Towne of Sanlan Angely, the Citie of Saintes. The Admirall went with the Uauntgarde to Cognac: and the next daye after being the fourth day of Marche, he with his brother the Andelot brought all the horsemē of the Uauntgarde both with lawnce and shot to larnac, and with them two Canons & two dimi Canons. Then straight way the Admiral beseiged the castell of Iarnac, bycause Mons. Riuiere by and by at the discouery of them left the citie and went into the castell. But the roaring Canon shot did so shake the castell gates and the walles
thereof, that Mons. Riuiere desired parley: and the next day after vpon condition that he and his suldiers shuld escape with theyr lyues, he surrendered the Castell. Leauing therefore to defende that place the Uicount de Montanmoy with his Legiō, the Admirall and the An∣delot dparted to viewe & espie the force of the enemies, bicause they were said not to be far of. The sixte daye of this moneth the Prince of Conde with the Admirall and the Andelot, taking with them all the horsemen of the vauntgarde and maine battaile sauing certaine troupes whiche taryed behynde at Iar∣nac with Briguemauld, came to Beauuoire, besyde the ry∣uer of Mate; where the Duke of Aniou was with hys armie. So soone as the prince of Conde sawe him he set his army in aray, and commaunded certaine drummes to stricke vp behynde a lyttle hill harde by them in co∣uert, as if an Armye of footemen had bene there. Not∣withstandyng all that daye was spent wyth certayn small skirmishes. The Duke of Aniou beyng driuen frō thnce, which is a place of passage ouer ye ryuer, sought another way: and certayne miles beyonde Engolesme, he passed ouer the ryuer Charente with hys whole armie: and in hys iourney he sodenly gaue assault vpon the citie of Mele, and on the castell of Ruffec, slewe the garrisons & tok the same: and after this also he toke y surrender th citie of Chasteau neufe, and there passed ouer the riuer. ▪ Report hereof being brought to the Prince of Conde, he perceiued well that there was no lingering of time, he went therfore with his maine battaile from Saintes to Cognac: and the Admirall came with ye vaunt garde o Iarnac. The eleuenth day of this moneth the Duke of Aniou hauing commaunded a strong bridge to be made at Chasteuneuf, came neare in the meane tyme vnto Cognac with the greatest part of his armies, makinge a
countenunce as though he would presently besiege the Citie: The princes of Nauar and of Coude were then at Cognac, their Armies being distributed & lodged among the Uillages there aboutes. Then by and by they sente word to the Admirall commaundinge him to come vnto them with al spéede. The Admiral, bicause it was nede∣full for them to be at Iarnac, sente his brother the An∣delot to the princes, to the ende they might both vnder∣stand the necessitie of his abiding still, and also to de∣liberate with them what was néedeful to be done. The Andelot was not so sne gone, but the Duke of Aniou with his whole army which was at Cognac, rushed with great violence, mindinge to recouer and get the bridge of Iarnac. But beinge forced to retire by the Admiral, they turned their backes: and many of them, and of the other part also, at this conict were slaine. In the meane time the prince of Conde deliberating of the matter, minded on the day followinge to remoue his army: and he on ye xii. day came to Iarnac, & the Ad∣mirall remoued to Bassac. And the same day the Admi∣rall came with the Uauntgard before Chasteauneuf, to viewe the place. He knew that the enemy had made a∣nother Bridge of woode neare vnto the stone Bridge of Ghasteaunf that he might passe and repasse ouer them with his whol army, the more spéedely. And then hée eturned to Bassac againe: leauing there certain bandes for defence till he came backe againe. But bycause of the incōmodiousnes of the place, which caused the army to be dispersed abroade, the prince of Conde sent to the Admirall willing him to be with hym day earely in the morning, and to bring wyth hi all his bandes, and his ordinance: and to sée that the horsemen were with him euen at the breake of the day. So soone as ye Admiral had receiued the message, he sent word that night to euery captaine hereof. But many of
them were so slacke that they had the nexte day in the morning scarsly taken their iorney by nine of the clock. The Admirall taryed their comminge at the Riuer to kepe the same with certaine bandes of Harguabu∣ziers. In the meane tyme the Catholiques Campe passed ouer the riuer of Charente all the night with as great spéede as myght be: and were come before Bassac in the sight of the prince of Conde. But bycause the said prince lacked the Lord Pluueaus horsemen and his regi∣men of footemen, leaft (as you haue heard) behinde and were nowe comminge, he had no intent as yet to fight. The morrow after being the xiii. of March, the prince with his horsmen that were already arryued, presented himselfe in the morning in order of battaile before the enemy aboue the Uillage of Bassac. When all was ar∣ryued, the said prince returned with the battaile, & drue to Matt neare Saint Iean de Angelie, which the Ad∣mirall did also, leauing behinde to direct the retracte, the Lord de la Noue, who retiring a reasonable pase and yet not far of, was charged with a great hoste of horsmen, which forced him to take the charge, and chased hym to Bassac, where the Admirall was ready to resist, and repulsed the catholiques vnto the other side of the Uil∣lage. In the meane while certayne troupes of shot of the Catholiques entered the said village, & sought to skir∣mishe with the Admirall, who likewise droue them out of the village: Notwithstanding they were reléeued by the reste of the Campe that folowed at hand, and retur∣ned to the village. The Lord Admirall séeing that the Catholiques were so nye, sent a Gentleman with spéede to the Prince, to aduertise him that the whole campe of the cōtrary side was there and almost at his héeles: so that, séeinge no
meane to retire without fightinge, desired him to ad∣uaunce such powers as he had of the battaile. Imme∣diatly the prince reculed till he was very néere the Ad∣miral, ringing himselfs in battaile at the foote of a hillThe batail in which the Prince of Conde Was slaine. on the left hand. The Admirall was in battaile raye on the right hand along a little Coppies lookings towarde Bassac. He had about him the Lord Pluueaus regimen of fiue Enseignes of footemē, who made a long skirmish: and séeing that the Catholiques in ye meane while were readie to charge him, comming betwéene the Prince & him, turned his face right vpon them, and with certain Cornets which were with him, pressed vppon them so whotly, that he brought to the ground a great number, and so passed further. At the same instant the Prince (when hée had mads his praiers vnto God) went to battail wt great corage: vpon whō rushed a great Squadron of Reisters or Ger∣manes, and set vpon him on the syde: at which charge his horse was killed and fell vppon him, and his horsemen put to the chase, whom the Catholiques pursued. Albeit as they passed further, a French Gentleman, named the Lord of S. Iean, knew the Prince of Conde, and also the Lord de Argence: both which promised him to saue his life, or else to leaue theirs in aduenture. Where vp∣pon, as an Archer being descended on foote to helpe to shifte the prince of Conde from vnder his horse, and had set him on his féete, one named Montesquion (who was thought to be the captain of the garde to the Kings bro∣ther) knowing the Prince, shot him thorough the head with a pistolet: the shot entering behinde, & came forth vnder his eye: of which he presently dyed. They which were present were very sore offended for this deed: but specially they which had giuen vnto him their faith to saue his lyfe. This was the ende of the Prince of Conde, a Noble
Prince▪ who hath left behind him a gloriouse name a∣mong the French mē: yea & among those that were his enemies for euer. There was in this prince a singular loe toward the gospell, a desire most feruēt to aduaūce the glory of God, to further the dignitie of his prince, & to maintayne the libertie and peace of his countrey. For the which his enemies brought him into great pe∣rill: and sought by all meanes possible, to quenche that burning zeale in him toward the Gospel. But he decla∣red himself wise and valeant▪ in ouer passiug those trou∣bles, and also constant in the trueth of the Gospel: who, for the same hath forsaken great dignities and princely honor, and hath consecrated himselfe wholy vnto God: and who, as he hath for the gospel of God, for the digni∣tie of the king, and for the libertie of his countrey spent his life: euen so, séeing he hath for these causes spēt it, he hath in the foyle got the victorie of his enemies, and be∣ing dead, triumpheth ouer death and is yet aliue. A my∣racle which all godly and christian men throughout all posterities, will euer embrace. In this battaile there were two hundred of the faith full slayne, & fortie noble men taken prisoners: among whom was the bastard sonne of the King of Nauar, the Lord de la Noue, whose horse was slayne at the firste charge, the lord of Teligni, de la Balbe, de Soubize, and de Loue: also the Lord Stuard a Scot▪ and Chastelher portāt, who after they were takē, were stabbed with daggers and murthered. On the Catholiques side were slayne, the County de la Miraude, the lord de Monsaletz, the Ba rons of Ingrande and Prunay, with many other. After this battaile, one part of the horsemen drew to S. Iean de Angely, with the Admirall, the L. Andelot, the Countie de la Rochefocault, and Monsieur de Acier: the o∣ther part tooke their way to Coignac. In this Encounter the prince had no other footemē,
than the Lord Pluneaux regiment heretofore mēcioned: all the rest of his footemen was retired by his commaū∣demēt to Iarnac, as being not of mynd to fight that day. There was made at Iarnac a bridge of boates to passe the Riuer Charente in time of néed: ouer which the foot∣men séeing the ouerthrow, passed ouer to the other syde of the riuer, & so then brake it in péeces for feare of pur∣sutes, & soretired to Coignac, where were the princes of Nauarre and Anguyen. The artillery brought from Coy∣gnac, was brought thyther agayne, hauing made not great way. The said princes of Nauar and Anguyen (now prince of Cōde) departed from Coygnac the next morning, with such horsemen as were retyred vnto thē. And the same day they arriued at Sainctes in Sainctonge, leauing their footemen at Coygnac, to maintayne warre agaynst the Catholiques: Who the morrowe after being the fiue∣téene of March, presented themselues in battayll before Coygnac with horsemen and footemen, making counte∣nance to besiege it. There was a great skirmish vpō them on the parks side thereto adioyning, by meane of a silly made by the Lord Baudine: In which encounter were left dead in the same place two hundred bodies, and great numbers hurt▪ whiche made the Catholiques to retire the same day, retourning to Iarnac. In the meane while the Admirall vnderstanding that the princes were retired to Sainctes, went thyther too them: and with the horsemen of their trayn, he brought them to S. Iean de Angely, and from thence to Thonie∣Charante. Now, the army of the faithfull were in great sorrow, when the Quéene of Nauarre came to them, because of the death of the Prince of Conde: who vsed these persua sions and exhortations to quiet their minds.
Whereas (fayth shée) the prince of Cynde hath spent his life valiantly for the defence of so good a cause▪ which also in his lyfe time he rōstantly defended the hath left behind him to his fellow souldiers, an example of Con∣stancie, for them to defend Gods trueth, the Kings dig∣nitie, and the libertie of their Countrey: against whiche wicked men rebell: Our good and iust cause is not dead with the Prince of Conde: neither ought the minds and courage of so good men, to quayle and faynt by any ma∣ner of meanes: God hath so prouided for his cause, that he had raysed vp Defenders thereof in the▪ Prince of Condes place, to succede him. Those▪ and many other comfortable persuasions the Quéene of Nauarre vsed to encourage the moorning Army: and then retourned to Rochell. The prince of Conde thus taken away, and his death no small losse to them of the religion, the Kings▪brother knowing the princes of Nauarre and d'Anguyen▪ were passed the ryuer of Botoune, determined to follow them, and in that purpose departed from Iarnac and came to Dampierre where he passed the ryuer: he lodged his ar∣mie within halfe a league of S. Iean d'Angely; of purpose to execute a certaine enterprise within the sayd towne, by meane of the captaine of the Castell. In the meane while the Princes Armye passed Charante, as well at Thonye Charante, as at Tallibourgh, kéeping the boates alwayes on their side. The Kings brother vnderstanding the sayde armye was passed ouer Charante, and also that his enterprise vpon the towne of S. Iean d'Angely, was so discouered, as he coulde not commit it to safe execution, returned from whence he came, that is, to Iarnac, Chastoau-neuf, and places about Angoulesme, attending his opportuni∣tie to effect an attempt which he had conspired vpō that
towne, and that by meane of the captaine of the Parke, which was also discouered, as hereafter shall follow. The Princes being now on the other side of the ry∣uer Charente, begā to suruey their forces, viewing first their horsemen, and then their foot in order as here∣after shal be shewed. All the horsemen were sent for in one day into two places: The prince of Nauar and the L. Admirall mustred the battaile, and ye d' Andelot with the Countie Rochefoucaut, the vauntgarde. There were viewed and enhabled aboute. iiii. thousande horsemen, well mounted and armed, with valiante disposition to follow the cause to a good end. It was openly read there to all the horsemen, that the prince of Nauarre▪ declared himselfe chiefe of the armie, with promise not to leaueThe oathe of the Prince of Nauar. the campe till a good and happye peace, and muche lesse to spare his life and goods in that behalfe. This béeyng published, the horsemen likewise protested by othe not to depart the armie without his leaue, nor forbeare life liuing in the assistance of the quarell. l'Endureau captaine of a hundred light horsemen, af∣terl'Endure∣au reuoltes she last conflicte, reuolted, and tooke parte with the Countie du Lude, gouernor of Poytou. He was greuous, (after his reuolte) to the Protestantes in a number of heauie euils, as in pilling and robbing them wythoute respect, and also vnder shadow of his white Cassakins, wherwith he yet disgnised his people: He toke the cas∣tell of Montaagu in base Poytou, yeelding to the garri∣son no other mercie than by the edge of the sworde. He made manye incursions into Poytou, and anoyed them with such generall perill, that the princes (to ouercome him this troupes) dispatched thither the Lord de la Ro∣cheard with vii. cornettes of horsemen, and the regi∣ments of footemen of the L. la Mousson, Saint Magrin, & Montamma, whose strength and trauell was to small purpose, bicause the enemye had a speciall saüetie in
hys singular swiftnesse, as knowyng well the straites and compasse of that countrey. The princes being at Sainctes, got intelligence of the enterprise whiche the Kings brother mente to execute within Angoulesme, and therevpon (knowing also that he was vpon his waye thyther, dispatched to intercepte that purpose) the Coūtie Montgomery with ten cornets of horsemen, ouer and besides the regimen of footemen of the Lord Montbrun and Mirabel sent thither all rea∣die. The Montgomery, the better to execute his charge, in the beginning of Aprill, sommoned the sayd ten cor∣nets of horsemen to be before him at Pons, the monday being the fourth of April in the euening. At his cōming, he founde onely. vi. cornets with whom he departed af∣ter some expectation for the other whiche were not yet come: he trauailed all that night, and the next morning was receyued within the towne of Angoulesme without any let or impediment by the way: the other fower cor∣nets comming somwhat late to Pons, hasted on the way after their copanie, albeit as they were neere Chasteau∣neuf, neither fearing nor for séeing any perill, they were charged by a great troup of horsemē layd of purpose in ambh to intercept thē▪ & so pursued as the chase came to Coygnac, from whence they returned and found safe∣tie in the swiftnesse of their horsses. At this encounter the L. de Chaumont, captaine of one of the sayde cornets with certaine other common souldiers were takē pri∣soners, and about. xxx. or. xl. slaine. The Countie Montgomery was no sooner within An∣goulesme, than he begā to deuise and prouide for the safe∣tie of the towne: wherein for his first pollicie, he sur∣ueyed the wardes and warders of the towne: And by∣cause that those which afore made the view and search of the towne, passed not by the Parke (which is a newe building ioyned to the towne) which cut of all aduertis∣ment
of any thing done there: the place it selfe also not vnapt to receiue companyes, foysted in by night with∣out knowledge to them of the towne: The said Mont∣gomery made pierce the walles, and open the gates of that syde towardes the parke, so that alwayes after the searchers of the towne passed and visited the gardes of the same. He remoued also the Captaine of the sayde Parke to auoyde treason, with order that euery nyght the warders of that place should be changed. The Duke de Roauois beinge led prisoner (as you haue heard) to Rochell, and there continuing til the moneth of Ianuary, was deliuered vpon this promis to pay within thre mo nethes after twentie thousand frankes to raunsome, or in default of eyther the time or summe, to returne pry∣soner to Rochell. Hee failed and therefore was sommo∣ned to make good his worde, which he refused, clearing himselfe by the death of the prince of Conde, to whom, as he had giuen his faith, so his death acquited his pro∣mise▪ The Kinges brother kepte still about Angoulesme, al be it vnderstandinge of the precise direction of the Montgomery, gaue ouer his further attempt, and depar ted from thence the xii. of Aprill, taking his way to Pe∣rigueux, and passing by Aubeterre, he tooke the castle by composition▪ for whose garde the L. of the place did en∣tertaine about a hundered men, who enduring only cer tayne shot of the cannon, yéelded themselues (their liues saued:) wherein notwithstanding they were abused, for that dyuers were killed, and the L. of the place arested as prisoner: from Aubeterre he drue to Mucedan a town of Perigueux, afore the which, as the Lord de Montlue attended him wt his forces: so the army being arryued, they began to batter with such furie, as a breach was spéedely enforced. There were within the towne seuen or eyght score popular Souldiours, who dispairing ey∣ther to fill up the breach, or to kepe it longer, in respect
chiefly of their small nombers, abandoned the Towne and closed themselues within the castle being sufficient ly strong: the catholikes being within the towne, bent their batterye against the castle, where they had no soo∣ner battered a breache, than they cryed to the assaulte. They within susteined the first assault, and likewise ii. others in the necke of it, repulsing at last the catholiks, wherof a great nomber left their dead bodies in paune: then the Kings borther (vnder their word of assurance) came to Parle with them, wherein he so preuailed, as they yéelded, reseruing only their liues, which notwith standinge were violently taken away from them all without exception▪ contrarye to his faith and woorde of honour: hee loste at these assaultes a great company of souldiours, with sundry Lords and captaynes of choice:Brissac slaine. amongest which was the countie Brissac striken with a harquebush shot in the left chéek: he was a gallant gen∣tleman and of great hope amongest the people, of xxv. yeares of age when he died, and of great calling & func∣tion in France. For first he was Knight of the order, cap taine of fiftie men at armes of the Kinges allowance, Colonell general ouer the french footemen in the Kinges campe, and gouerned also in this iorney a regimen of xl. ensignes of footeman: his brother succéeded him in most of his charges, sauinge the estate of Colonell generall which was giuen to the Lorde of Strossie: there dyed atConte P padon slaine. that slege the contie Pompaden: with many other to the number of v. or vi. hundred. Mucedan being taken in this moneth of Aprill▪ the Kinges brother toke way againe to Angoulmois, & the Lorde of Montluc returned to his gouernemente, and charge. The Princes horsmen being thus viewed and mus∣tered, they would also suruey their footemen, in which businesse the d' Andelot was chiefly vsed, and theréfore
immediatly dispatched, to the end he might puruse the garrisons in euery towne of their obedience: he began his first trauaile in this charge vppon the end of Aprill, following the garrisons and mustring them in his own presence. In the beginninge of May, hee returned to Sainctes, féeling himselfe somewhat sicke, the same gro∣wing so vpō him as he dyed the Sarterday the seuenth of the same 1569. to the lamentable griefe and displea∣sure of the whole army, as being noted a most wyse and valeant Gentleman, called commonly the knight with out feare: his office of generall Colonell of the Frenche footemen was giuen to the Lord d' Acyer▪ his company of men of armes since his death hath bin gouerned by the Lord of Beauuais, his Lieuftenant. It was thought he was poysoned, and the phisitions that viewed his bo dy were of the same opinion. Immediately after, in the same moneth and at the same place dyed the Lord of Boccarde, hauing lyne longThe Lord Boccarde dead. sicke, he was of no lesse councell in matters of consul∣tation, than of courage in the execution, his estate of the great Maister of the artillerie was giuen to the Lorde Ianlis his sonne in law, with his cornet of horsemen. And nowe, to ouerslip nothing that was executed in this last April, ther eis in the mountayns of Daulphyne a Castell nere to Bryanson, wherein the King keepes an ordinarie dead pay of certeyn numbers of souldiours: A Captein called Colombyn borne in Grenoble, vnderstā ding by certain of the borough of Oysans, that most part of the sayd dead pay men were issued out of thir charge, toke the sayde Castel, and finding no resistaunce other than the very captaine of the place, who yéelded beyng hurt with a shotte, he made him selfe Lord of it, where neglecting one first and most necessarie policie in a vic∣tor, he rather laboured to deface the images, thā to fur∣nish place y• with conuenient prouision, which being not
vnmarked of certein euill neighbours, purlewing vpō the Castle, they forthwith enuironed him with a siege▪ and so cut off his vittaill, whereof they knew the castle had but slender store. Their siege continuing about xv. dayes, enforced him at last to render the place vpon cō∣position and onely reseruation of lyfe, whiche notwith∣standing was not kept, for that all his souldiours were cut in péeces, and he only led on liue to Grenoble. After the generall view and muster of the Princes footemen, the Lord de Pilles (returned nowe from Gas∣coygne) was sent to sease vpon the Ile of Medoc, a riche Ile lying betwene Rochell and Bordeaux, conteyning in length about xvi. or xvii. leagues, and 4. or 5. leagues in breadth: he prouided necessary boates to passe the riuer of Gironde, and embarking himselfe with two thousand footemen, discended into the sayde Ile, and tooke hauen without any let: he made himselfe maister of the yle vpon the sodaine and vnlooked for, finding great foyson of riches, wherwith he and his souldiours loaded them∣selues plentifully. By meane of this yle he besieged Bourg a towne in Berdelois, but being spéedely called back by the princes, he raysed his siege and came agayne to the Campe: At this siege died of a shot in his shoulder, the Lord Ualphe uiere, Lieuetenant to the late Lord d' Andelot, of his re∣giment of footemen, whose regiment was translated to the Lord of Rouray, a gentleman of Fraunce. This was vpon the end of May. The Kinges Brother being now retourned into the countrey of Angoulmois, and after he had somwhat re∣léeued his army on that side to Villebois, sent to sommō∣the town of Angoulesme, by a trompet, wherein he was refused, and so tooke way towardes Berry to ioyne his force witht the Duke de Aumall being in the sayd coun∣trey: the Count Montgomery charged vpon the tayle of
his campe, and discomfited certen of them. The Lady Marquise of Rottelin, vnderstāding of the death of the prince of Conde hir sonne in law, put her v∣pon the way to come to Rochell, where was the widow princesse her daughter: shée passed to S. Iean de Angely, & so to Thony vpon Boutonne, where the said princesse met her, and so returned into Fraunce without her daughter, whom shée purposed to haue with her. But the princes excused her vpon hir children, which were then at Ro∣chel, whether she also returned: it was thought the La∣dy Marquise came to entreate a peace, which was not so, because her occasion was onely as is aforesayde▪ this was in the end of May▪ 1569. In the firste kindling of these warres, the Princes hauing true intelligence of diuers nūbers of strangers entered the Realm for the strength of the Catholiques, determined also to fortifie their army by ye like mean. And therefore, knowing that the prince Wolfgange, the Duke de deux Pons, had erected great numbers of men of armes, as well on foote as on horsebacke, the better to defend his owne countreys, sent to him with request to yéeld them succours in their so vrgent and extréeme necessitie, both with his army presently in poynt, & also such other powers as he might possibly leuye, whervn∣to the sayd Duke condescended with promise to reléeue them with al his forces, which albeit at that tyme were not fully assembled, yet he forgot not within short tyme after, to put an army in readinesse to come into France: whereof the Duke de Aumale (lying in Lorayne) béeing enformed by speciall Intelligencers, dispatched forth∣with a Gentleman of his, by whom he aduertised the Duke of the common brute that passed of the diligence he vsed in the leuyes of men of warre in Almayne, and all to assist the conspiracies of such as arme themselues against the Crowne of Fraunce, with displayed warre
against the King, which for his parte as he neyther had nor woulde beléeue, so looking néerer into his magnifi∣cence and partes of a Prince, he iudged him of no incli∣nation to fauour rebells against their soueraigne ma∣iestie, considering withall, the auncient respect of ami∣tie so long continued betwéen the house of the electors of the countie Palatines of Rhine, & the scepter of France: Albeit, his maiestie desiring to vnderstand an absolute truth, gaue him speciall charge to dispatch this speciall Messanger, he also hauing authoritie of his Maiestie to withstande the entrie of any straungers to reléeue the enterprise of the said rebelles, which he hoped to accom∣plish, or else to leaue his life in the charge. The Duke forbare to answere spedily, vntyll his ar∣my were fully in poynt, albeit after that he had recey∣ued hys Riestres, he begā to marche towards the county of Burgogne, and as he lay vpon the frontiers of France, tarrying for his Launceknyghtes, hee aunswered the d'Aumales letter, which he sent forthwith to the Kinge: In the beginning he layd afore him howe in the yéeres afore, many Reistermaisters passing through his Duchy without leaue, gréeued so his Countrey, that the conti∣nuall complaintes of his people forced him to draw in∣to companies of armed men, as well on horsebacke as on foote, to withstand further offence to his people. And that nowe in respecte his cousins and dearely beloued Princes of Nauar and Conde, haue lamentably impar∣ted with him the vniust quarell, vrged vppon them, as well to enforce their lyues and goods, as to depriue the exercise of their Religion, contrary to the Kings fayth and playn proetstation of his Edictes: and that not only they, but all the Nobilitie and others, professinge the same religion, haue, and doo endure miserable oppressi∣ons, as estraunged from their owne houses, thruste out of their charges and offices, their possessions & wealths,
confliked into the Kings hands: lastly, that there be rai∣sed huge companies of men of warr ayded with sundry sortes of straungers to cut them in péeces, as in other tymes of open hostilitie: in these respects togither with their earnest motion and request for succours, and last∣ly vpon an vpright view and consideration of their pre∣sent calamitie, he could, nor ought do no lesse than ayde them. And for their partes, the better to auouche their integrities in refusing all attempts, aspiring preiudici∣ally to the crown of France, (as ye d' Aumalles letters did smisterly suggest) the said princes haue protested by letters, which he kéepeth sealed with their own hands, that if (at his being in France) he sée or knowe any in∣clination in them to conspire in any sorte agaynst the crown, that he would not only draw awai his succours, but conuert them to the enemie and contrary side, the rather to reuenge their disloyaltie: whiche makes hym iudge of the princes side, & beleeue that they are not on∣ly far from the slaunderous impositions of their ene∣mies, but also of vnfained desire, rather to reast quietly in their houses, than follow so hard & doubtful a warre, whereunto they haue ben drawen of force as to defend the violent oppression of their malicious ennemies: hée alledged besides, that when his Cosin the Duke Casi∣mir erected his army in Almaign in ye like cause, he was also vntruly informed (as of purpose to draw him from succouring the Prince of Conde) that it was against the Maiestie royall that the said Prince did conspire, which notwithstanding was found otherwayes, as appeareth by his maiesties Edictes of peace, both first and last, ap∣prouing alwayes the actions of the said Prince, as done for the seruice of his Maiestie. And to take awaye all suspicion, he declared, that besides that, his meaninge and purpose was to succoure the saide Princes of Na∣uarre and Conde, his enterpryse in comminge intoo
Fraunce, stretched also to relieue the little ones of the Religion, dispersed into their seuerall miseries, to whō of very duty (being a Christian Prince) he could doe no lesse than offer and lend his hande to leade them to Ie∣sus Christ. And to the end his maiestie may vnfainedly resolue in ye integrety of his purpose, & that he vndertakes not this iorney to spoyl his subiects or make pray of their weal∣thes, or for any other perticular profit, he protested that if his maiestie would graunt them a safe vse of their re∣ligion with a frée exercise of the same without limita∣tion and distinctiō of persons and places, together with assurance of their goods, honours, charges, and estates, he would not onely returne and dismisse his armye, but also defray the whole charges of the same and the sayde Reistremaisters in their passage, amounting in all to a∣boue a hundred thousand crownes, protesting for ende, that if (in refusing his iuste and reasonable offers) the quarell doo aggrauate by his comming into Fraunce, to wype his handes in innocencie of al imputations here∣after, and the faulte to be layde vppon the authors and chiefe Councellers of the warre, beyng about his ma∣iestie. The Duke hauing now receiued his Launceknigh∣tes, entered into Fraunce, and passyng by Bourgongue, came to Charyte, beyng coasted sundrye tymes both be∣hinde and before by the armies of the Dukes d' AumallCharite besieged and taken. and Nemors, without attempting any thing vpon hym: he arriued without let before Charyte, the. xvi. of Maye, which he battred so vehemently that he enforced forth∣with a breache, in the meane while the Lorde of Mouy, passing ouer Loere a little aboue the sayd towne, wyth thrée hundred harquebuziers, won ye suburbes towards the bridge, the same so occupying and amazing thē that were besieged, that the Duke entred the breache, and
put the whole garrison to the sworde: this towne was taken in good time, bycause that if it had lingred neuer so little, the Duke. d' Aumall being verye néere wyth succours, had endaungered the enterprise. The towne was no sooner taken, then he was discouered not far of with. xviii. hundred horsemen, who comming to shorte to withstande the Dukes entrie, returned in hope to hinder the Duke to ioyne with the Princes Armye, by meanes that he mette and assembled with the Kinges brothers power, who knit together for this purpose in the countrey of Berry. In the ende of May, the Princes informed of the ap∣proche of the Duke de deux Pons, and the taking of Cha∣ryte, began to marche to ioyne with his armye, and lea∣uing the Lorde de la Noue, to gouerne in the countreys of Poycton and Sainctonge, tooke their waye by Angoul∣mois, directly to Perigueux, and as they passed thorowe that countrey, the Lord of Chaumontes lyght horsemen, with certaine companyes of footemen, toke the towne of Noutron belonging to the Quéene of Nauar, wherin were killed about foure score men that defended it: this was the seuenth of Iune. 1569. The morrow after the sayde Princes dispatched the Countie Montgomery into Gasoyne, to commaunde ouer the army of the Uicounts, who otherwayes would not agrée, as not acknowleging one aboue another: he toke his way by Solliac, where he passed the riuer of Dordone, and so beneath Cadenat, he passed also ouer Lot & came to Montauban without any let. They of the town of Perigueux, fearing the comming of the Princes army, desired the Lord Montluc to sende them succours, to whome he dispatched immediatly the knight Montluc his sonne wyth. xii. Ensignes of foote∣men, wyth the which he entred the towne the fourth of Iune.
In this meane while the Princes armye kepte the waye drawyng to Lymosyn, and the Duke de deux Pons hasted by great iorneys to ioyne with them, passyng the ryuer of Viene two leagues aboue Limoges. The catho∣likes had sent thither two. C. shot to defend the passage, who were all cut in pieces by the Lorde de Mouy, the ix. of this moneth, on which day the princes army arri∣ued at Chalus a towne in Lymosyn, departing the nexte day to ioyne with the armye of the Duke de deux Pons in a village within two leagues of Chalus belonging to the Lord de Escars, Gouernour of the said countrey. The Lord Admirall accompanied with two hundred horsemen, went where the duke was to salute him: theThe Duke de Deux Pons dead. Duke enduring certayne fittes of an ague not manye dayes afore, and not cured as yet, dyed the xi. of thys moneth. 1569. in a village thrée leagues from Lymoges: a fore his death, he called before hym the chiefe and prin∣cipals of his army, with whō he cōmunicated in many pointes, but chiefly in persuasion and request to pursue the purpose of their comming into Fraunce, leauing for their generall leader in his place, the Countie Wolrard de Mansfeld, afore his Lieuetenant Generall: his body was caryed to the Towne of Angoulesme, to be there huryed. In the army of the said late Duke, were xxviii. cor∣netsDescripti∣on of the Dukes Campe. of horsemen, conteining viii. thousand and v. hun∣dreth Reistres, whereof were Colonels, Hans Bucq. Reig∣nold Grac, Henry d'Estam, and Hans de Theres: sixe thou∣sand Launceknightes will armed on foote, and for the most part pikemen, deuided into xxvii. Ensignes, wher of were Colonels, the Lord de Grauillar, and the Lorde Guteryn Gansgorffe baron of Grelezee, besides ii. M. horse∣men and ten Ensignes of foote men of Frenche men, whereof was Colonell (touching the footemen) one of the sonnes of the Lord de Bricquemau. There were also in
the said army diuers personages of highe estate, as the prince of Orange, his Sonne, the Countes Lodouike and Henry de Nassau, his Bretherne, the Lord d' Moruilliers. the Marques of Renell, the Lordes of Mouy and Ester∣ney, besides many others: there were also xix. péeces of artillery, & they either main péeces, or field péeces, with others somewhat lesse, whereof he left two of the greadescription of the prin∣ces army. test at Charitie. There were in the princes army about thirtene thousand harguebuzers, besides pikes, where∣of were great nombers, aboute iiii. thousand horsemen, sixe cannons and two mean péeces. The Kinges brother now hauing receiued from theSnccours from the Pope▪ Pope two thousand horsemen, and foure thousand foote men Italians vnder the conduit of the countie de Saint Fiour, came to Lymoges with his army, fronting alwais as néere as he could the Almaignes, but not medlinge with them. About this time the Quéene Mother accompanyedthe Quene mother en courageth the Souldi∣ours. withe the Cardinalls of Bourbon and Loraine, came to Lymoges, and there desirous to sée in battaile the army of the Duke her son, she visited the▪ battayls and squa∣drons of his horsemen one after an other, perswadinge them to omitte no dutie, to continue their seruice to his maiestie, and so departed the campe, and went to Limo∣ges, where she remained certain daies, and then retired to the courte. The same day the Lord la Loue marshall of the prin ces campe with his regiment of horsemen, was sent to Aesse vppon Vienne, to garde the passage, whereof the Kinges brother hauing intelligence, came the next day beeinge the eleuenth of Iune, and encamped with in a league of the said Aesse, makinge out the same day cer∣taine nombers of shot to vndertake the skirmishe, who being repulsed, taried not long there, but retourned to the campe: the twelfth day arriued at the said Aesse, the
footemen of the vauntegarde of the Princes, and thither came also other supplies of shotte from the Catholiques campe, and that in great nombers: they at the first com∣ming repulsed certaine shotte which were with in the Subburbes on the other side Vienne, albeit they were forthwith reskued, and the other driuen to retire, ye skir∣mish endured long & whot, deuouring of the catholique side about CC. men, and of the Princes part only xx. or thirtie. Within two dayes after the Princes army marched toward S. Tirier la perche, in ye said countrey of Limosin, of purpose to refresh there the Launceknights, weried with so long trauaile: the Kinges brother followed thē, albeit so far of, as it was the xxii. of Iune afore he came néere the Princes, and then lodged thrée leagues from the said S. Tirier, where the said princes were, who sent for their armye as well footemen as horsemen to come and campe ther. The twentie thrée of the same moneth he aduaūced more néere them, lodging within a league and an halfe of S. Tirier in a village called la Roche, the same arguing to the Princes, that he would giue them battaile the next morrow, whereof they attended to sée if he would come any néerer, which he did not, albeit the princes sent for their army to be ready at the first shew of the day, who accordingly marched in good order to the said place de la Roche, where forthwith they bestowed themselues in squares: the forlorne hope were appoyn∣ted to marche both on the right and lefte hand, they of the right hand were led by the lord de Pilles, whose regi∣ment made the first winge, the others of the lefte hand were guided by the Lord de Rouray: the Lord de Mouy, with his regiment of horsemen kept the left hand, and the lord de Bricqueman▪ and de la Loue with theyr regi∣mentes of horsemen, the right hand making the winge of the vauntegarde: the Launceknightes were ringed
in two battailes, the one a vauntgarde and the other a battell: the vauntgarde caried. viii. field péeces whyche were planted before their battell. The skirmishe began of ye Lord of Pilles side against the Lord de Strossi, who with two thousand shot was be∣hinde a close pale, and sent thether for the defence of the passage, he had a greate aduantage vppon the Lorde de Pilles, bycause his harquebushears shot in couert from behynde the sayd close pale, and the sayd Lorde de Pilles was opē and in a high place. Besides, the Lord of Strossi had to backe him in tyme of néede foure Cornettes of Italians, who séeyng that the forlorne hope of the Lorde de Pilles, coulde not discharge their péeces by reason of the raine, charged so hotly vpon him, as they forced him to retire a hundreth pase within y• woode▪ killing at that charge about ten of his souldiours, albeit being rescued by two Cornets of light horsemen of the Captaynes la Motte and Brilliam, Gascones, repulsed wyth equall vio∣lence the Italians, & put them to flighte, in which meane while, the said forlorne hope renued more hotly ye skir∣mishe, and yet did neither hurte nor amaze greatly the sayd Lord Strossi, which caused the Admirall to draw thi∣therward, who assone as he had surueted the place, cau∣sed to come to him the shot led by the Lord de Rouray. They began to skirmishe on the lette hand againste the Lorde de Strossi, beating him on the side: with con∣straint at last to habandon his shade and recule: wher∣vpon the Captaines la Motte and Brilliam, with ma∣nie other companies of horsemen, gaue vpon his trou∣pes, and put them to the chase, wherein the lorde Strossi was taken and led to the Admirall, who caused the vic∣torie to be pursued to a little ryuer running fast by, andThe Lorde Strossi takē many souldiers followed the fortune of this chase euen within the tentes of the Catholikes camp, and hard to their ensignes.
On the left hand the lorde de Mouy offred to charge certaine Cornets of Italian horsmen, who refused to a∣bide him, and so he returned backe. It rayned so vehemently that there coulde be no vse of anye haruebushe▪ so that without anye other thing done, the army retired: the Strossi loste and left dead onStrossies men flame▪ the place about fiue or sixe hundred: Amongst others of accompt was slaine his Lieuetenant, called the Lord de Sainct Loup, with thirtie aswell Captaines in chiefe, as Lieuetenantes and ensigne bearers, whose Targets remained also vpon the place: Ofthem of the Religion were slaine and hurt of all sortes onely fiftie, whereof were two Captaynes of footemen called Peyrol and la Merie Dauphynois, this was the. xxv. of Iune. 1569. The morow after, foure hundreth Italian horsemen, wyth certayne Pikemen of the men of Armes of the Duke de Nemors, came to sée if the Princes army were discamped as the Kinges brother was aduertised, as they approched néere the campe, they were discouered by the watche, and so hotly set vpon, as they were en∣forced to retire out of order, some slaine and some takē prisoners. The. xxvii. of this moneth, the sayde Princes armye were driuen to discamp for want of vittailes, drawing toward Perigueux, to reléeue themselues. The lorde de Moruillier, comen out of Almayne asThe death of e lord of Moruill. you haue heard with the late Duke of Deux Pons, was sicke in this time at Angoulesme, of a hotte Ague, the same pressyng him so sore, that within few dayes he dy∣ed in the sayd towne. The Countie du Lude gouernour of Poyctou, hauing assembled certaine troupes aswel of Touraine, & Aniou, as of Poyctou, departed from the Towne of Poyctiers,The siege of Niort. and the twelfth of thys moneth of Iune, planted hys seige before Nyort, wherein was gouernour the lorde
de la Brosse. The first daye of the siege the lorde de Pluuean, wythThe Lord pluneau succours it. his Regiment of footemen, and hys companye of lyghte horsemen, entred the Town in despite of the Lorde de Lude, who notwythstanding those succoures, began his batterie the next mornyng on the side of the Toure de la Pigalle, and followed it forthwyth wyth an assaulte: whiche was so valiantlye repulsed, that, he séeynge the breache filled vp with suche spéede, remoued his batte∣rie, and forced a breach in an other place, albeit he durst not make it good with an assault, but vnderstanding of supplies of succour at hande raysed, his seige the xxii. of the moneth of Iune. He had foure Canons and two meane péeces: Com∣ming againe to Poyctiers, he lefte within S. Meseut, the lorde de Anuony, maister of the Campe of the Regi∣ment of the late Countie Brissac, wyth such companies as he had wyth the said Regiment, wyth two Canons, two field peeces and certaine other munitions, leadyng the rest to Poyctiers. At this siege, the lord de Pluueau was lightly hurte with a shotte, and soone healed againe: Of the du Ludes syde were slaine the Captaynes Flogeat, Gorbon a Gen∣tleman of Sainctonge, Fresouet la Marche, the Captayne Colonel of the sayd Regiment, the maister of the mines, and Morlou guider of the artillerie cariage, with a great number of footemen. The Lord of Teligni was sent for to go to the reskue of Nyort, with foure cornets of Reisters, with certayne other cornets of Frenchmen, and the regiment of footmē of the Lord Bricquimi the yonger. Notwithstanding, afore he came there, the siege was raised, wherevppon they went to the saide S. Mesent, to intercept the artil∣lerie: which in the ende they abandoned, as hereafter shalbe noted.
The Princes armie being in ye countrey of Perigueux was still pursued, but farre off, by the catholiques, kée∣ping on the left hand: The Princes entred by composi∣tion within the towne of Branthome, thei tooke also two Castles in the sayd Countrey, the one belonging to the Bishop of Perigueux, and therfore commonly called the Bishops castle: the other called la Chapelle, in which wer killed about two hundred and thrée score men, with like number of the popular sorte withdrawne thyther, and thereabout. Upon the beginning of Iuly, the Princes army de∣parted from the countrey of Perigueux, drawing to Con∣fluence or Confolance, a little towne vpon Uienne. Neare vnto the which is a Castle called Chabaucy, then in que∣stion betwéene the Uidame of Chartres and the Lord de Montluc: within the castle was a companie of footmen, whose Captaine refused to open the gates to the vittai∣lers of the Princes army, and therefore the vauntgard came and besieged them, and the same day battered and tooke the Castle by assault, putting the souldiours to the sword: The Captayne onely was taken, who promised for his raunsom twenty thousand Frankes, and with∣all to cause to be sent home▪ M. Pierre Viret, minister of the gospel, taken prisoner in the territories of ye Quéen of Nauarre. The castle after it was taken the sixth day of Iuly, was burnt to the ground. Within two dayes after the Lorde de Mouy entered by composition the towne of S. Genays in Poictou. One chéefe couenaunt in the composition was, that the Towne promised to pay ten thousand Franks, so that their goods were not put to the pillage or spoyle, wherein they were duely dealt withall, as they also payd truely their money. You haue heard how the Kings brother pursued the princes Camp into Perigeux, who now séeing (as it sée∣med) into their seueral purposes, turned away, and pas∣sing
by Lymosin and Berry, came into Touraine. Being at Loches, he licenced a great number of his horsmen to recreate themselues abroad vntill the first of October, by which occasion his camp so diminished, as he had not about him of the French nation aboue a thousand e or xii. C. horsemen, and very few footemen: almost all the Captaines went to relieue & increase ther companies. The princes being aduertised, that the town of Cha∣stelleraut conteyned not aboue thrée score souldioures in garde, dispatched thither the Lord de la Loue with his re giment of horsemen, and a company of Harquebuziers on horsebacke: At his first comming hée sommoned the towne, which withont much resistance, was rendered vnto him, reseruing onely that their goods should not be sacked, nor any the inhabitants hurt, vpon which agrée ment the gates were opened, and the Lorde de la Loue entered at one gate, and the lord Uilliers Knight of the order, and Gouernour of the Towne▪ issued out of ano∣ther. Upon the end of this moneth, the Lord de Sansac, with iiii. or v. M. footemen and certaine horsemen of the Catholiques, besieged the towne of Charite, he battered it so vehemently, that within small tyme hee made a breach, and sodeinly marched to the assault, from whēce he was repulsed with the losse of v. C. men, the reste re∣tiring from the assault to the artillerie, whereof one of small experience let fall his match within a cask of cā∣non pouder, which in a moment flusht vp suche a gene∣ral flame and fire, that it burned a great number of the said souldiours, and blew one on the other side the riuer of Loere vpon the grauel, and so burned him to death in euery mans sight. They that defended the town, made great resistance, and gréeued many of the Catholiques by their sallies whiche they made out of the Towne: whereupon the Lord de Sansac (not able to force them) was constrained to raise his séege, hearing withal, that
the Princes had prouided to succour them with thrée or fower thousand horsmen, which notwithstanding was rather incertayn, than a true report. After the takinge of the Castle of Chabaney the prin∣ces army tooke way to Luzignan, a strong castle, and (as it is said) builded louge since by Mellusigne: the garde of this castle were two hundreth souldiours vnder ye Lord de guron, captaine and kéeper of the same, who, beinge sommoned to render it, refused, by reason whereof it was besiéeged the fourtéenth daye of the sayde moneth, when the battery began very furiously with sixe Can∣nons on that side to the parke, they within beinge sore shaken with the cannons, and almost iiii. score of their souldiours slayne, a breache being beaten open and flat, and the regiment of footeme in order of battayle ready to offer the assault, began to faint in hart, demaundinge Parley, and immediatly rendered the place vnder this cōposition, yt the said Lord Guron with the Lord de Clu∣seaux, should depart with bag and baggage, and ye Soul∣diours with their liues and only sword & dagger: wyth∣in the castell were found foure canons, two fiéelde pée∣ces, with great store of munition: and as some say, huge summes of money. They established there▪ as gouernor the lord de Mirambeau, a gentleman of the countrey of Sainctong, with vi. hundreth harquebusheares to garde it. The Baron of Adretz, who had bin at the D'aumals camp, and sene his ensignes but euill folowed in respect of his slender nombers of men in his regiment, tooke way to Dauphine, very slenderly accompanyed, without displaying any banner. Against his returne the lorde de Gordes gouernour there, had put in readynesse two En∣signes of footemen to send into Languedoc, whereof hée presented the conduction to the saide Baron of Adretz, who refusinge such charge, the expedition was vsed by
Captaine Mestrall, who led them thyther vppon the be∣ginning of Iuly. About this tyme the Quéene of Nauar, the Prince her Sonne, the Prince of Conde, the lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen with others that accompanied them, pre∣sented a request to the king, entreating an assured peace of the present troubles, which for the importance of the matter is heare contayned in euery singular word and point as followeth. Sir, it is a thing no lesse strange, than almost incre∣dible,The protes tants re∣quest to the king for peace. that amongest so many people put vnder your o∣bedience by the resolute will and prouision of God, as a blessed pawne and witnesse of his bountifull regard to∣wardes you, and the same contending in ordinary vaūt to be so dearely inclyned to the vpright procéedinge of your affaires, and preseruation of your crowne, ther is not one no not on amongst so many nombers, that once offereth to put himselfe in indeuour to quench or quali∣fie this vnnaturall fier, so burninge dayly with in your Realme, as there lackes little of the vtter confusion of the same: It is also no lesse true than the other maruei∣lous, that of the contrary, infinite nombers do trauaile infinitely, not only to kindle that which is already burst into flame, but also by sōdry sortes of artificial sleghts, do study to entertaine, aggrauate and increase it. And albeit it ought first rather to moue from such,To whom the trou∣bles ought to be im∣puted. who of a galantnesse of stomacke, and to satisfie some particuler respecte in themselues, haue incensed these troubles against the wil of your maiestie, making both peace and warre at their pleasure: then from those, who besides, they are iustely assayled & pursued in their con∣sciences, honours lyues and liuelyhoodes, haue no other purpose & meaning, than to defend their lyues againste such heauie and violente tyrannies, lothing alwayes troubles and emotions, & louing with a singular zeale
both peace it selfe, and suche as labour to entertaine it: yet the Quéene of Nauarre, the Prince her sonne, the Prince of Conde, with the Lordes, Knightes, and Gen∣tlemen that accompanye them, moued (afore the rest) with a naturall bonde and affection to your Maiestie, and preseruation of your Crowne and Realme, neither can nor will suspende or deferre any longer, to searche and apply for their partes (as alwayes they haue done) suche moste proper and conuenient remedies, as they thought most apt to warant & defend this your realme from a lamentable subuersiō, where with it both hath bene, and is presently threatned: And as in respect to establishe a peace and publike tranquilitie, they haue hetherto more forwardly enclined then the rest, happe∣ning by that meanes into such straunge perils and ad∣uentures, as if God had not kepte an eye vppon them, there had nowe remayned but a lamentable remem∣brance of their generall confusion: so these things well considered with their seueral circumstances, they haue small reason of hope, and lesse cause of expectation to ef∣fect that which so earnestly they desire, if God (the in∣cliner of all hartes) change not the myndes of their e∣nimyes that gouerne you, and giue them a disposition to desire and embrace peace. The sayd Princes, Lords, Knightes with others parties to this humble request, persuading rather y• in place to allow this their franke and liberall will, with their duetifull indeuor to ad∣uaunce a perfect vnitie and peace amongest your sub∣iectes, they shall be charged with slaunders and sinister interpretatiō of their godly purpose, as heretofore they haue bene vsed by those who neither hate nor feare any thing more than to sée this reconcilment. And as the sayde Princes with the other parties to this motion, haue neither had nor holden any thing in more deare regard, than the publication to your maie∣stie
from time to time of their actions and procéedings, the same as impressions and witnesses of their singu∣lar desire to liue and die in the naturall bedience and awe of your maiestie, and withall to make knwne a∣fore the whole face of the world, both howe farre theyr hartes & willes be from the slaundrous impositions of the Cardinall of Loraine and his adherentes (pensiona∣rie ministers and naturall enemyes to your Crowne) and also that by their forces (whervnto they haue bene drawne wyth their great euill will and griefe) they in∣tende no other than to maintaine their religion, lyues, honors, and such portions of goods as God hath appoin∣ted to their shares in this world: Euen so they persuade that such considerations, neither can nor ought to hin∣der their vttermost enduoure to pursue and purchase the effect of so blessed & necessary a peace to this realme and yéelding withall vnayned testimonie of the hum∣ble and reuerente respecte they owe to your maiestie, which they had long ere this put in practise and proofe, were not that their enemyes would thinke & persuade others to beléeue, that the onely necessitie of their case haue induced them to it, séeing first their vntrue persua∣sion to your maiestie, that there were no leuies of men of warre in Almaigne for the succours of the Princes: Secondly, that if any such were, yet the Realme was of sufficient meane and force to withstande their entrie: Thirdly, if they dyd enter, it was impossible to ioyne with the princes in respect of so many déepe riuers and passages of daunger betwene the one and other camp: Fourthlye, albeit their armyes dyd knitte and ioyne, yet, (the princes pouertie considered) the charges could not be long defrayed, nor the plentifully long conten∣ted: séemyng by these reasons to attende & temporise, till they had bothe ioyned and payed their sayd forces, & assembled others whiche were dispersed, and (as the
world knoweth) of such nūbers and facultie, as besides their habilitie to resist easily their enemies, they wan∣ted neither waye nor meane to execute any wicked at∣tempt if they had had any will, as is suggested and im∣posed vpon them: If then in the former troubles, the late prince of Conde, with the Lords, knights, & gentle∣men of his part, receyued the conditions of peace con∣cernyng onely the matter of religion & libertie of theyr consciences, and that immediatly after the death of the Duke of Guyse and Marshall Saint Andre, and the late Constable of Fraunce taken prisoner, being thrée princi∣pall leaders of the armye: if also in the laste rising, as soone as was offered to the sayd prince and other Lords and gentlemen of his company the reestablishment of the exercise of religion, notwithstanding their greate troupes and strength of straungers ioyned with them, and vpon the very point to assaulte the towne of Char∣tres in the view and face of the enemyes campe, which was for the most disordered, if at the onely sounde and pronouncing of peace made by a Trumpet sent vnder the name of your maiestie, the sayde prince did not one∣ly forbeare y• assault, but also raised forthwith his siege and retired his army, reping notwithstanding of so rea∣die obedience, but a bloudy peace and promise full of in∣fidelitie: if also during the same sturre, the morrow af∣ter the battaile at Sainct Denys: where both the prince had the better, and the Constable principall leader of the army was slaine. The sayde Prince dispatched to your maiestie the Lord de Theliguy, aswell to warne you of the ruine and desolation threatning from the instaunt your Realme if the straungers were suffered to enter houering there vpon the frontiers, as also to mediate and sollicite in meanes and remedyes to knit an abso∣lute peace only in the cause of religion if (in short) your Edicts haue bene alwayes published, and the peace ac∣corded,
at suche tymes as they of the religion, (if they would haue abused the opinion of your purpose) might in respect of their forces, persuade and beléeue, that as∣well in all your parleyes and treaties of peace, there was no other mention than of the matter of religion, as also that their enemyes haue not bene brought to it but by necessitie, being vnable by open force to mayn∣taine any longer against them: in what conscience or with what face, or countenance, may it be sayd yt these troubles moue & continue for the matter and cause of religion. And yit neuerthelesse the more to choke and conuince the Cardinall of Lorraine and other his adherentes, of their lies and slaunderous impositions which they pu∣blish daily: the said Princes, Lordes, Knightes, gentle∣men and others of their companies forgetting the infi∣delitie and all disloyall attemptes heretofore conspired agaynst them, declare and protest this daye both before God and your Maiestie, that what so euer hath ben don or offered to them in euill from the beginninge to thys houre, thei neither haue nor wil once impute it to your Maiestie, as knowing your nature to be nothing tou∣ched with such iniust seuerities, whereof you haue gy∣uen so many publique experiences, that there is nowe no cause of doubte: neyther haue or do they thinke to chaunge or diminish in any respect their duetye and na∣turall regard which they haue alwayes bent to the true aduauncement of your greatnesse and Royall estate: wherein, and also in so many effectes aforesaid, if it bée both knowne and séene, that they entertayne no other purpose nor meaning, than (vnder the obedience and authoritie of your Edictes) to serue God according too his will, and as they are instructed by his holy woorde, with desire to be maintayned with equall care as your other subiectes, in their honours, liues, and goods, they
are now ready to giue such further manifest proofe and witnesse, as their most enemies shall haue least cause henceforth to doubt them: And that neither to enter in∣to any iustification of their actions passed, as their in∣ncencie and iustice of their cause béeing sufficientlye known to your maiestie, and all other Kings, princes, and potentates what straungers so euer they be, if they be not of the faction and partie of Spaine: & much lesse to séeke to capitulate with your maiestie, knowing (god be praysed) what is the dutie of good and faythfull sub∣iectes to their soueraigne Prince and naturall Lorde. But (Sir) in respect of the large peny worthes and cō∣mon marchandise which heretofore hath bene made of the faith and word of your maiestie, which, aboue all, ought to be holy, sacred, & inuiolable, and withall, with what vnséeming boldnesse your authoritie and name hath ben abused, to the extréeme peri of all your people of the reformed profession: it néed not séeme straunge if the said Princes with their consociates doe humbly be∣séeche you to declare by an Edict solemn, perpetual, and irreuocable, your resolute will in a libertie & exercise of their Religion, to the ende, that by the same, suche as heretofore at two seuerall times both rashly and with all impunitie haue infringed and violated your former constitution in that cause, may by this thirde, be more brideled and restrayned, wherein because such as were not able to endure the vnitie and vniuersall rest, main∣tayned amongst your people, by the good obseruation of your Edictes, haue taken occasion to alter and corrupt them by new constructions and modifications, contra∣ry to the true substāce of the same and sincere meaning of your maiestie. And that also the sayde Princes with the reste of their faction, confesse to haue borne a most iust iudgement of God in more sortes of afflictions in tyme of peace, than when it was open▪ warre, as in con
senting too easely to the treatises of peace whiche haue ben made, the same prouiding a generall contentment on all sides, that God should be serued onely in certayn places of the Realme, and by certain persons as though (in a sound conscience) there belonged no other thing to the seruice of God. They most humbly beséeche your maiestie, to accord and graunt generally to all your subiectes of what qua∣litie and condicion so euer, frée vse of the sayd Religion in all Cities, villages, and boroughes, & all other places and corners of your Realm and countreys within your obedience and protection, without any exception, reser∣uacion, modification, or restraint of persons, tymes, or places: and that with suerties, necessary in so hyghe a cause: and besides to ordeyne and enioyne to make ma∣nifest profession of the one or other religion, to the ende to cut of hereafter all meanes and occasions to many, who abusing such benefite and grace, are flipt into A∣theisme and carnall libertie, and who, standing vpon no exercise and profession of religion, desire nothing more, than to sée an vniuersall confusion in this Realme, and all order, pollicie, and Ecclesiasticall discipline reuersed and abolished, a thing so daungerous, as not to be tolle∣rated in any Christian state. And because (Sir) wée doubt not at al, that those who hetherunto haue pitched the foundation of their deuises vppon slaunderous re∣proches, impudently published to make vs hatefull, euē to such as (God be praysd) be frée from the seruitude & tyrannie of Antichrist, will not sticke to impose vppon vs an inciuie obstinacy, rather to defend (without rea∣son) that we haue once resolued to beléeue touching the Articles of Christian religion, than to correct or retract our erroures. We declare and protest (as herevnto we haue done) that if in any pointe of the confession of faith heretofore
presented to your maiestie by the reformed Churches of your Realme, it may be founde by the word of God comprehended in the Canonical bookes of the holy scrip¦ture, that we swarue from the doctrine of the prophets and apostles, we will forthwith lend our handes, and giue place to such as will instruct vs better in the word of GOD (if we erre in any article) than we haue bene from the beginning: for which cause, and the better to effect so happie a purpose, we desier nothing more, than a conuocation of a counsell frée and generall, and lawful ly called, wherein as euery one may haue hearing and scope to reduce his reasons at large, so the same to be eyther confirmed, or conuinced by ye only woord of God, the true meane vsed in al times of antiquitie vpon like ocasion By which meane (Sir) also it is not to be doub ted, that God (by his speciall grace) will not vnseale the eyes of your maiestie, and so giue you spéedye and true sight into the hartes and willes of your subiects, recon∣ciled and knit with an indissoluble bond, & your Realme returned into his first estate, beawty and dignitie, to the shame and confusion of yours and our cōmon enemies, who by their subtill and priuie intelligences wyth the house of Spayne, haue with sinister pollicyes translated the late storme and tempeste of the lowe Countreys to your Realme, and almost thundered it vpon the type of your crowne: humbly desiringe your maiesty to enter precise consideration and iudgement, whether it be bet∣ter to expecte, of two armies already assembled within your realme, a firy and bloudy victory, yéeldinge equall frute to the conquerour, and he that is ouercome, or else to employe them togyther in the seruice of your maies∣tyes affayres, in so many goodly occasions presently of∣fered, importing no lesse the rest and aduauncement of your crowne and realme, than any that euer happened in your tyme, returning also by that meane, the storme
to the place from whence it came: wherin the said prin∣ces, Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen, with all the rest of their companyes, be vnfaynedly resolued, (as in all o∣ther thynges, tendinge to the greatnesse of your Noble estate) to employ their liues, goods, wt al other meanes wherewith God had endued them, euen to the last drop of their bloud, acknowledging in this world no other so ueraintie or principalitie than yours, in whose obedy∣ence and subiection they o desire to liue and dye. The same being also such and al that a soueraigne and natu∣rall Prince is to exspect or desire of his faithfull louing subiects and seruants. This request thus deuised and written, the Princes sent a trumpet to the catholikes camp to obtayne passe∣port for a Gentleman to go to his maiestie, which be∣ing refused, the Admiral found meanes to send a coppie of it to the Marshall Montmorancy, to present to the King, who about the xix. of Iulye following returned a messenger to the Admirall, to let him knowe that he had presented the requeste to his maiesty, who would not looke on it, sayinge, he would neyther heare nor sée any thing comming from him, afore he had put himselfe in obedience and fauour of his maiestie, who then assured him to receiue and embrace him, when, and as often, as he would put himselfe in endeuour. To this message by letter, the Admirall aunswered the. xxvi. of the same moneth, that séeinge his maiestye would not receyue the said request, he could not other∣wyse chuse, than leaue the matter to the iudgement of al christian Princes not touched with passion or partial affection, whither they vsed not indeuour to come vnder the dutifull obedience of his maiestie or not, labouringe for their part by all their possible meanes to quench the manifold calamities houering to ouerwhelme ye whole realme, and so sette themselues within the fauour and
grace of the King. But now, séeinge that there be some will not spare the vniuersall destruction of the realme, onely to rauishe their lyues and erercyse of theyr reli∣gion, they would looke more neare than afore for the remedy. The Kinges brother being at Lohes, had aduertise∣ment of the sieege of Luzignan, dispatching with all dili∣genceLuzig. ren∣dered. the Duke of Guyse, to get within Poictiers, as well to hinder the taking of the towne, as to turne the siéege from Luzignan, notwithstanding he was ther no sooner than the castell was rendered. The Duke of Guise arriued at Poytiers with the Mar quise du Meine his brother, on Fryday xxii. of Iuly, en∣tring by the Bridge Anioubert with his companies, which were about fiftéene hundreth horsemen, amōgst whom were foure hundreth Italians, gouerned by the lord Paule Sforce, brother to the Counte de Sainct Fiour, and one Cornet of Reisters. These succoures assured greatly them within the Towne, who otherwayes might happely haue trēbled at the comming of the Princes campe. There were within Poyctiers (afore the Guyses com∣ming)Lordes & Captains within po tyers. the Counte du Lude, his thrée brethren, de Chastel liers, de Sautere, and de Briançon, the Lordes de Ruffec, de la Riuiere, Boisequin, de Ferraques, d' Argence, de Rouet, & other lordes and Knights of the Order, and Captaynes of horsemen with part of their companies. There were also of footemen, the companies of the Captaynes Pas∣sac, la-Prade, la Vacherie, d' Arsac, le Lis, Bois-vert, Boneau, Boulande Iarrie, with certaine other, besides vi. compa∣nies of footemen raysed by the inhabitants of the town. The generall number of Catholike Souldiours of all sortes, as well footemen as horsemen straungers, as townesmen during this siéege (whereof shall be spoken hereafter) were v. or vi. thousand mē: they had vi. péeces
of Artillerie, as two or thrée meanes, and certeyn less péeces in the Castell. The Princes, after the rendering of Luzignan, and afore they besieged Poyctiers, tooke Monstruel, Bonyn, Bouché, Sansay, Viuone, with other little Castelles about Poyctiers, thereby to hold the Catholiques more strayt. In which meane while the princes horssemen made or∣dinarie roades, euen to the gates of Poyctiers, burninge many Abbayes, Priories, and Temples. The 24. day the said horsemen, as wel French as Al∣lemans, presented thēselues in battayl before the town, on that side which is aboue the Abbay of S. Cyprie, vn∣till very néere S. Benoit, being deuided into two great hostes: Certeyn horsemen of the town issued out at the gate toward the bridge Anioubert, with certayn num∣bers of shot on foote, who without any thing dooinge, re∣tired into the towne, and the horsemen of the Religion into their seuerall quarters. The 25. day of the same moneth, the Princes foot mē and horsemen presented agayne before the town about noone. The footemen gaue a hoat charge vppon the sūb∣urbes de la Cueille, where the Capteyne Bois-vert with hsi companie, lodged behind a little trench, (makinge negligent watch) were sodenly set vpon, and the moste part killed: the rest being forced to retyre more lowe to the suburbs S. Ladre, were valiantly followed by them of the religion, euen to the postes and houses ioyning to the gate of the suburbes: There began a hoat skirmish which lasted almost fyue houres, vntill the night deuy∣ded them: they of the religion being come but to make a first view of the state of the towne, retiring with losse of very few of their people. The 26. day being tuesday, the Princes beset ye townPoicti esieged. on al sides, pitching their tentes in the medow beneath Hostel-dieu néere to a milne, where they made foorth∣with
a bridge vpon the Ryuer of Clyn, to passe on both sides the towne as need required: the same day, certayn principals of the army viewed the Towne on all sides, beginning the next day to batter the defenes of the ca∣stell with certayn culuerines and other meaner péeces. There was no other thing worthy of report done thys month, but making and filling of baskettes, deuidinge of quarters, disposing the campe, casting trenches, dit∣ches, and digging of earth to couer and shroude the shot. The batterie began the Monday being the first of Au∣gustBattry a∣gainst Poy∣ters. on the right side of the Tower of the Bridge An∣ioubert, and the wall fast by, planting viii. or ix. péeces f battery vpō the rock or hil right against the said bridge, aboue and betwéene the suburbes of Pympaneau and S. Sornyn, which continued thrée dayes: the reason was, that otherwayes the said tower might gréeue the army and other batteries: they forbare not also to prouoke skirmishe, wherein they that kept the Suburbes be∣yond the bridge, as Captaynes Arsach, and Bonneau, with their companie were forced to leaue the sayd sub∣urbes. Assoone as the said suburbes were abandoned, there was brought down two Canons to beat the foote of the wall, piercing of purpose to make it a house to serue for baskets of earth, the same being perceyued by them in the towne, forthwith discharged certaine volues of the cannon against it, to make it fall, & so enforced the sayd two cannons to be haled away: in the meane while the protestantes laboured to win the suburbes of Rochreul, garded by the Captaine la Uacherie, skirmishing conti∣nually within a vyne, lying directly betwene the sayde suburbes and the castle, where was hoat warre with∣out intermission. The v. of August the sayd captaine la Vacherie, as he maintained the skirmish, was shot tho∣rough the head with a harquebush, whereof hée dyed in
the fielde. I haue noted before, that the L. de Aunoux, maister of the campe of the regiment of the late Counte Brissac was left within S. Mesen by the counte du Lude, since his returne from Nyort, who now by commaundment from the Duke of Guyse, coolled out iiii. or v. hundred of the best souldiours in his companies to come to the suc∣cours of Poictiers, sendinge the residue with his cariage to Pertnay, where was the captaine Allard, and so he a∣riued at Poyctiers, about two houres after midnight the sixt of August. The batterie hauing ceassed at the bridge Anioubert, from the iiii. of this month, began againe the vii. of the same, albeit not on that syde, but agaynst a towre of theBattery a∣gainst Poie bridge S. Cyprian next to the suburbes, by meane wher∣of they within were inforced to descende and leaue the sayd towre, and entrenche themselues vpon the bridge with vessels and hogsheads, and other such like things, the Protestants from that tyme afterward, being vn∣able to greue them within the Abbay of S. Cyprian, as they did afore: The company of Captaine Reynaut was ordayned for the garde of this Towre and quarter. After the defences of this tower were raysed, the Princes remoued their péeces to the righte side of the wall of the Abbots meade, thinking that place moste weake of all the towne, and to that effect they planted their canons the nynth of this moneth to make a breach bestowing others in other places to batter the flanke & side, hauing the day before set vp in this quarter vpon the ryuer of Clyn a bridge of pypes and boordes tyed to∣gither with great cables. The batterie was so vehement and fierse, that in small time they had enforced two great breaches, the one neare the other, skowring such defences as anoyed them by reasō of a tower and mylue which were there
by: they within laboured to fill vp their breaches, albeit with great difficultie and distresse, as not able to shewe themselues within the Abbottes meade without great peryll, bycause the hylles gouerned all the sayde me∣dow. The breaches thus battered, the Protestants were of mynde to assault them, bestowing (for this purpose) their people in squares and winges, and shewed thē sel∣ues vpon the hilles in very good order. They first sent certaine Captaines and Souldiers to viewe the breaches, who brought reporte, that they could not be entred without great perill the rather by∣cause the bridge which they had erected vpon Clyn (ouer the which they must passe to go to the breach) was nei∣ther conuenient for the matter, nor sufficient to beare the souldiours that should passe ouer it, neyther coulde the horsemen (what distresse or néede so euer chaunced) goe to the succours of the footemen within the saide Ab∣bots meade if it happened that they were charged by the horsemen of the Catholikes. Besides, they wythin had planted a counter batterie of thrée or foure Can∣nons fast by Carmes, which discharging right vpon the breaches, might muche endaunger them that offred the assault: these were the causes that nothing was done that day. Captaine Caluerat beyng in a tower neare the breache, and goyng to sée it, was killed the same daye, in the nyght the Catholikes discended to the ryuer, and cut the cordes of the bridge before mentioned and brake it, vsing this pollicie to couer and disguise their enterprise▪ they brought down great volues and noyse of Harque∣bushot, bestowing them against the body of the watche beyng neare the artillery, to the ende they shoulde be neither heard nor séene whilest they breake the bridge. These things hanging thus in traine afore Poyctyers, the King, and Quéene mother accompanyed wyth the
Cardinals of Bourbon and Lorarne, came to Amboise, & from thence to Towars whether the kings brother came to them: there they deliberated vpon meanes to suc∣cour Poyctiers, and to that ende was dispatched spéedely the knight Montluc with v. C. harquebusiers on horse∣backe, to get (if he could) within Poyctiers, albeit he was so discouered in the way that his enterprise quailed and he returned to the campe: The king sent for yeLorde de Sancsac lying before the siege of La Charite to come to him with all hys forces: he procured also a spéedy leuy within Paris of twentie enseignes of footemen and cer∣taine horsemen, dispatching speciall letters to all the Nobilitie of Fraunce, to repaire spéedely to hym to the Camp, which he was determined to follow in person, and that vpon payn of confiscation of bodyes and goods, or to be declared within the daunger of contempte, he raysed also his arrear bankes in many prouinces, who forthwith came to hym in the sayde country of Tourain, in effecte he assembled wyth wonderfull diligence, as muche succours as he coulde for the rescue of Poyctiers. There were certaine Cornets whiche ordinarily vsed to beate the stréetes and wayes within halfe a league of Chastelleraut, amongst whom were specially, the lord of Boniuets companyes, sonne to the Lord of Creuecur, and of the baron of Numburg a Normande: which being knowen to the garrison of the sayde Chastelleraut, toge∣ther with the certaine place where the sayd lord Boniuet was wonte to come, the tenth of August two or thrée hundreth horsemen with certaine shot of the Captaine Norman, made a sally vpon them, and toke the sayde L. Boniuet with his company in a village néere to Liguers▪ where they entred withoute let, as kéeping negligente garde, and were founde layde and lodged after ye french maner, the Lorde Boniuet was prisoner, and almost all the rest of his company either killed or taken. About the
same time the Marquis of Rancon an Italian, was takē néere to Myrebeau as he bayted, and was led prisoner to Nyort. The lord of Tarrides gouernour for the King in Quercy, maintayned war all this while in Bern, a coun∣try belonging to the Quéene of Nauar, hauing almost brought all the country vnder his authoritie: wherfore the countie Montgomery, sent (as is saide) into Gaseoyne, assembled the forces of the ii. vicountes to apply spéede∣ly to the succours and rescue of the Citie of Nauarre in Bearn, besieged by the said Lord of Tarrides: he deuided his iorney into such diligence and spéede, as about the 7. of August he was very néere Nauarreis, at whose so so∣daine comming, the Lord Tarrides raised his siege, and retyred into a towne there ioyning, where the Mont∣gomery besieged and toke him with his brother and the lord de S. Colombe and of Negre-pelisse, with many other great lordes and knightes of the order, and captaines to the number of. xxx. The Lord of Tarrides lost his artil∣lerie with a great number of his horsemen & footemen: The countie Montgomery, (by meane of this discomfeit) restored the whole country of Bearn to the obedience of the Quéene of Nauarre. Touching the siéege of Poictiers, they within were in greate amaze with the breaches made in the Abbottes meade, the rather bycause they could not defend them, whervpō entring into counsail, they found it most best and necessarye to stem the ryuer of Clyn, to the ende to make it runne ouer his cannell, and so drowne the said meade: this counsaile was put in spéedy execution, and plantinge stakes and pales proper for the purpose be∣neath the arches of the bridge of Rochereul, they dāmed the riuer, so that in a moment the mead was all ouer∣flowen with water about thrée cubites high, the same so troubling the protestants, as it driue them from their determinations, notwithstanding after they had consi∣dred
wel of the subtilty, they began as in a couuter polli cye, to beate the pales, and giue vent to the water, and therefore the next morning discharged so many shottes of artillery against the said waterworke, as the water retyred and left the meade drye, which the catholiques the night following restored and countergarded in this order: they cast behind the said damme vnder the arches a very thicke wall, fastening certayne fléeces or balles: woll to the pales to receyue and dampe the cannon shot, which made the water swell and ouerflow more highe than afore: Notwithstanding the catholiques were clo∣sed very nere and straight, yet made they many sallies vpon the Protestantes, who skowred them back again euen to the verye posternes of their Citie, not without great losse to the one and other side: Amongst these sal∣lies they made one of such a sodaine the xii. of this mo∣neth that they tooke a cornet of Reistres, and caried them without let into the towne. In this moneth the town of Orillac in Auuergne▪ was taken by night by the L. de la Roche, and Bessonniere, pro∣fessoures of the religion in that countrey, accompanied onely with seuen or eyght score men. This was their meane and pollicie: there is in the saide Orillac, a gate of quarrie in the wall towardes the ryuer, which the in habitauntes of the place caused to ramme and wall vp, leauinge onely a posterne so straighte, that one person could scarcely enter. This posterne was cloased with two portes or gates of wood, the one within and the other without the town: the saide Lord of la Roche and Bessonniere came to ye gate without the postern and with a great yron instrument made a hoale or creuish, by the which they cast in about a hundreth poundes of cannon pouder betwéen the said two gates, and then closing vp the said hoale or creuish, and making vnder the said first gate a train to the same
pouder, they put fire to it, which forthwith flushed with in the saide two gates, and blewe them both vp, the one caried forty pace of, and throwen vppon a house within the towne, and the other inforced with the violence and strength of the pouder, rushed against a wall without the towne, and brake a breach containing his own com∣passe, by which thei entered the town, wherein was no other garde than of the inhabitantes, whereof they kil∣led a hundreth or sixe score resisting them in armoure. The Lord of S. Heraut gouernour of the countrey, ap∣peared certaine dayes after afore the towne thinkinge to recouer it, but finding such warme resistance hee re∣turned forthwith to S. Floure. The longe continuance of this stéege afore Poyc∣tiers, brought the Catholiques in a great necessitie and want of vittailes, aswell for men as horses, and aboue al, forrage was so scant with them, that thei were driuē for to turne abroade parte of their horses to the vynes, medowes, landes, and other voyde places of the towne, whereof the Princes hauing vnderstanding by certain stragling souldiours issuing out of the towne, determi∣ned to breake the mylne in the bottome of the medowe néere to the port de Tyson. And for this purpose planted ouer ii. Canons in that quarter, which they discharged against the sayd mylne, and after retyred them as beyng discouered and anoyed by the Catholikes: who pinched now with an extreme want of vittailes, determined to thrust out of the town a great number of vnprofitable persons, which as they beganne to execute the. xvi. of this moneth, so the Pro∣testantes (to pine and sterue the towne more) driue thē backe with force, to enter the towne againe. For want of pouder and bollets, the batterie ceased for a time, wherof, the Princes hauing receyued a new prouision from Rochell, renued also the batterie the. xx.
of August on that side towardes the Abbottes meade, where the breach being forced, they sent in the euening to surueye it by certaine numbers of Souldiers, wher∣of. xvi. or. xvii. entred by y• breach into the sayd medow, from whence (beyng discouered by the watch in S. Pe∣ters steple who ronge the alarum bell) they were con∣strained to retire with spéede. The night following the protestants builded a bridge vpon Clyn towardes the suburbes of S. Sornyns, to passe to the Byshops meade, stretching towardes the tem∣ples of S. Rudegonde and S. Sulpiee: the bridge was made of quarreis of wood, hurdles, pypes, earth and plankes of oke very large, also well fastened and ioyned wyth nailes, cables, and cordes, that the cannon mighte well passe ouer it, and of suche breadth that. viii. or. ix. men might walke a fronte. They made another of the same matter and fashion, and set it likewise vppon the ryuer about. xl. pase distant frō the other. These bridges thus made and erected, they bestowed manye baskets wyth earth, aswell neare the first bridge, as on the other side that which was within the Byshops meade, drawing to the suburbes of S. Sornyn neare the sayd bridges, part of their artillery beating the defenses of y• wall, which are before and right against the sayde temples: Those defenses thus beaten and skowred, the batterie began the morow after being the. xxiii. of August, in that place and the bishops mead. The catholikes labored to their best to repaire their breaches, and had no assaulte that daye: The Lorde of Briancon, brother to the countie Du lude, goyng the same day to view a platforme neare to Carmes, to supply some special want with hys aduise, had his head striken from his shoulders with a bollet: Likewyse the Lorde a' Aunoux, stryuing the same daye to driue the protestantes from a Tower which they oc∣cupyed neare the breache of the Abbottes meade, was
striken in the head with a harquebush, whereof he dyed shortly after. The Lorde of Prunaye also beyng amongst his soul∣diers at the breache, had his lefte legge taken awaye with a Cannon and so dyed. Of the Protestantes syde were killed the Lorde of Chanay called Frauncis du Fay and one of the Marshals of the campe of the vauntgard hurt with a musket in the arme, broken in two partes. The foure and twentie of this moneth in the mor∣ning, the Princes renewed eftsones the batterie with twelue or. xiiii. péeces against the wall before the sayde Temples, the same beyng of such vehement furie, that their was discharged that daye more than seuen hun∣dreth shottes of Cannon, which beat a large breach be∣fore thrée of the clocke in the afternoone, and the Pro∣testantes ringed in battell vpon the toppe of the hilles towardes the suburbes, ready to gyue the assault, which they entended forthwith to do by the Abbots meade, as hauing disposed most part of their armye on that syde: The Catholikes were busie to reléeue their breaches with beds, faggots, and other matters apt to fill vp. The Duke of Guyse beyng at the one breach and the countie Du-lude at the other, seyng the enemye prepa∣red strongly and spedely to the assault, rong the alarum bell of the towne, to the ende that euery one myghte re∣tire into his quarter. There was a captaine of the pro∣testantes, who beyng followed with ten or twelue and couered onely with his target, ranne ouer one of the bridges within the Byshops meade, and came euen to to the little corner or arme of the ryuer that toucheth ye wall, and so viewed the breache, whiche he reported to the Admirall not to be sufficiently assaultable, as well bycause the ruyne and breakings of the wal were falne within the towne and had not filled vp the ryuer which runneth at the foote of the wall, as also that they with∣in
had raised great trenches and rampiers, whereupon the army retyred in the euening without any assaulte: This daye Captaine Gascourt Knighte of Malta, was slaine with a cannon, beyng sent by the Guyse, to viewe the breache, and consider what was necessary to de∣fend it. The morrow beyng the xxv. of Angust, the Princes armye was eftsones ringed in order as thoughe they would goe to the assault, the breaches were once again viewed, as well that within the Abbots meade as the o∣ther at S. Radegonde, by certaine Captaynes and soul∣diours, who in their returne reported the perillous e∣state of the same, The same day the Protestantes bestowed certeyne shot of artillery as well against the Bridge Anioubert, as Rochereul, wherein were beaten certaine holes or creuisses to auoyde the water out of ye Abbots mead: the same being filled and stopped againe the same euening by the Catholiques. The rest of this August passed without any great effectes, sauing certain light batteries to purge the wa∣ters and raze the milne of Tyson, togither with certeyn sallies made sometime by the bridge Achard. It was thought that the sicknesse of the Admirall and the Lord de Acier was the cause why there were no more at∣tempts aduaunced. The first of September the princes determined to winne the suburbes of Rochereul, to the ende by that meane the sooner to ridde the waters. And bicause they would cut off from such as kept the said suburbes al suc cours and reléefe from the towne, they bent firste cer∣teyne Canons against the towre of the bridge of Roche∣reul, discharging vpō it aboue an hundreth voleis, which battered a great part of it, winning in the end the vyne whereof is spoken before, which houered and valted on
highe ouer the streat of the suburbs. This was almost the chiefest place of skirmishe, since, & during the siege. The morrow, they battered the defenses of the Ca∣stle and Rochereul bridge, pitching also newe batteries vnder the Nut trées neare the riuer, betwéene the way that goeth to Hostel-dieu, at the parting of the suburbes drawing to the meadow towards Chastelleraut. The Saterday the iii. of September, the battery be∣gan in the morning against the wall and gate of the sub urbes, which by two of the clock in the after noone had throwen open a wyde breach, whereupō the protestāts did spéedely ring themselues in battaill, as well on high de la Cueil (where lay a piece that gouerned the Offices of the Castell) as beneath the sayde Hostel-dieu, and in thrée squares neare the Nut trées of the place, where ye batterie was made. The Catholiques restored the brea∣ches as much as they could, with vessels, wood, earth, & rampiers: and there were the Captaines Passac, Nozie∣res, the Lorde of Montaill, and Carbonieres, with others, prepared to susteyne the assaulte. They had bestowed about foure hundreth harquebuziers in the Towers, galleries, and offices of the Castell, which flanked all a∣long as they should come to the assaulte. All which not∣withstanding, the Protestants about thrée of the clocke in the afternoone came to the assault, the Lorde de Pilles with his regimēt was the formost, being folowed withThree as∣saults giuē to the sub∣urbes of Roell. diuers other regimentes of the French footemen, who valiauntly came vpon the breach, and stood till they had bestowed diuerse blowes with their Curtillaxes: albe∣it, they were constrained to turne face in respecte of the flankers, which gréeued them greatly. Immediatly fol∣lowed the second assault giuen by certeyne numbers of horsemen descended on foote with diuers footemen, and they like wise repulsed. These first assaultes being performed by the French
men, the Lansknechts would néeds followe with a third, which albeit was performed with such courage, as they fought valiauntly vpon the breache, yet séeing the pre∣sent defense, and general daunger to mayntain it long, they reculed and retired euery one into his quarter. In these assaultes the Protestants lost an hundreth or sixe score souldieurs, with certaine numbers hurt. The Lord de Pilles was hurt in the thigh with a small shot, wherof he was spéedely cured. The Lorde Brique∣maux Sonne, Colonell of the footemen, was also hurte with a harquebush, whereof after certain dayes, dyed. The Lord de S. Marie Dolphinoys, with others of mark were also killed. On the Catholiques part were killed, Captain Passac, and the Lorde de Montall, with a good number of footmen. Before these assaultes, the Catholiques sent two mē to the King and his brother for succours, with charge to reueale the estate of the towne and penurie of vittails. The Kings brother hauing assembled as much force as he could, came to la Haye, and to Port de Pilles, determi∣ning to beset Chastelleraut, to the end to drawe the siege from Poytiers: and therefore made to march his vaunt∣garde right to Chastelleraut, lodging the monday, being the v. of Septēber, a quarter of a league from the town The morrow after, his horsemen and part of his foote∣men presented in order of battaill before the towne to view it, all that day being spent in skirmishinge on the other side the riuer of Vienne. The towne was gouerned by the Lorde de la Louë, Marshall of the Campe of the vauntgarde to the prin∣ces: He had first for the defence of it, his owne compa∣nie of light horsemen, and then the Lordes of Ualauoire, Bressay la Motte, and de Royesses, with vii. companies of footemen, and captayn Normantes companie of harque∣busiers on horsebacke.
The suburbes defaced by fier, was no place for the catholikes to lodge in, so that they were constrained to encampe further off, which they began to do the same day they viewed the Towne. The artillery brought by the Swizers, arriued at midnight, and immediatly appro ches were made, and the Cannons ringed in batterye in two seuerall places, beating notwithstanding al one breach. It beganne the wednesday the vii. of the sayde moneth, very early neare ye gate S. Catherine, betwéene a tower of the said gate, and an other tower more near drawing to the temple S. Iean. Such was the furie of the battery as by two of the clocke in the after noone, a breach was forced of thrée or foure score foote wyde: the chaunce fell vppon the Italians, to giue the assault, which they did being backed & followed with certain French∣men. They mounted vpon the breach: wher, albeit theyAssault of Italians. presented xvii. Ensignes, yet found they such sharp and spéedy repulse, as they were enforced in a moment to turne their faces, receyuing great losse by the vaulte of the said gate, wherein were bestowed vi. score harque∣buzears well appointed. The Italians lost at this assault v. of their Ensignes, which the Protestants tooke from them by force. After this the assault (and the catholikes retired from the breach) Captaine Bernier d' Auphinoys, came to suc∣cour the towne wyth foure hundreth harquebuzears, be ing backt with the horsemen of the Princes uauntgard led by the L. de la Loue and Teligny. The Italians were so crushed at this assault as they had no will to make it good again, neyther was any other thing worthy of me∣mory done that day. The same day, the siéege of Poitiers raised to come to xeskue Ch. stellerant, marching no further that daye than thrée leagues, by reason one of the cannons misca∣ried and was leste on the place. The morrow after the
army approched within halfe a league of Chastellerant, which made the catholikes raise their siéege, and retire to Port de Pille, hauing loste in this siéege fiue hundreth menne, and almost all Italians, whereof the Colonell Fabiano de Rome was one. The nexte morninge the Princes vauntgard pursued the catholikes, cuttinge of from the taile of their campe about two hundreth foote∣men, and killed them all. The same day, the Lorde de Sanzay entred Poytiers with. x. or xii. companyes of footemen, almost all Italians, and two hundreth horsemen. Immediatly after whose comming the Duke of Guise and the Marques du Meine his brother, accompanied with xv. hundreth horsemen, departed the Towne to relieue themselues with freshe aire. The morrow after, being the x. of September, be∣gan a skirmish on the hither side the said Port de Pille, a∣gainst two thousand harquebuzears which ye catholikes had left ther within the trenches. They were at laste enforced to passe spéedily ouer Creuse, leauing about iiii. or v. hundreth of their company dead on the place. The Princes armie drewe to la Haye, to passe the sayd Ry∣uer the next morning, being the xi. day of the sayd mo∣neth. There was no worthy matter performed other than certaine light skirmishes. The monday followinge, the Princes army ready ringed in battaile very early, presented afore the catho∣likes to giu them battaile: Albeit, bycause there was betwéene the two Armies a little Ryuer with maryse shoares, which neyther the Princes could passe them∣selues, nor yet cōuey ouer their artillery, after the two armies had long remained one within view of another, they retired into their seueral quarters. The princes army, for want of vittailes, and seing with all the Catholiques had small disposition to fighte, passed againe ouer Creuse, and also Vienne, the twelth of
September, retiring so to Faye la Vineuse in Poyctou, of purpose chiefly to refresh them. The catholiques drewe to Chynon, expecting not only forses to be brought from many places in France, but also such companyes of men of armyes as had leaue till the first of October as hath bin saide. The Prince of Orange departed frō Faye to returne into Almaigne with a very small company, he passed by Charyte and Uezelay, and from thence by manye coun∣treyes withoute anye let till he came into Almaigne. The brute went that he vndertooke his iourney to hast certaine succours of Reistres. As the Admirall laye at Fay vineuse, there was one Dominike Dalbe a Gascoine, executed by sentence the xxi. of this moneth. These were the causes proued against hym: First, that he beyng of the Admirals chamber, & sent by him to the Duke de deux Pons with letters, as well from the sayde Admirall hys maister as other Princes, was taken at Brissac, a Countrey in the Mar∣ches vpon the ende of May last, by the Lorde la Riuiere, Captaine of the Garde to the Catholikes, and being by him earnestly sollicited, he reuealed to the Quéene mo∣ther, Duke d'Aniow hir sonne, and Cardinall of Loraine his iourney with the purpose, with further promyse, that vnder colour to go and deliuer to the sayde Duke his letters of charge, to espie hys campe, and sounde his secrete determinations, and so being presented frō that tyme with an hundred crownes, and an estate or office roomth in the chamber of the sayd Duke d'Aniow, he put him on the way to effect his promyse touching the view and report of the Dukes campe, from whome hauing spéedie dispatche, he returned to the sayd la Riuiere, and imparted his full expedition, not forgetting to describe at large what he had learned of the state of the Dukes campe. Secondlye, he was instantly persuaded and pur∣sued
as well by one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the Duke d'Aniow, as by the sayde la Riuiere, to kill by poy∣son or other wayes the sayd Lord Admirall: whiche he might be bolde to do (say they) without feare of the Ad∣mirals children, who also shoulde be rooted vp to the vt∣termost of their race, neither néede he stande vpon any dreadfull respect of any his friendes or kinsmen, séeyng they assured him that no one of them shoulde euer be well receiued or welcomed to the court, as first ye Mar∣shall Montmorancy his Cosine shoulde be committed to prison, where he should neuer come out with honor, and that of the rest of the sayde Mashals brethren, there shoulde not remaine one. Finally, the (rather to allure him to such an horrible acte) they sealed their last offer with a dampnable promise of xxx. thousand crownes in recompence, and. xxx. thousand Frankes of perpetuitie oute of the towne of Paris, besides the fauourable good will (all dayes of hys life) as well of the Quéene mo∣ther, Duke d'Aniow, as Cardinall of Loraine, and the whole court. Dalbe yéelded so farre to their murderous enticementes, as he gaue his word and promise to kill the Admirall: Wherevpon was deliuered him by the sayde la Riuiere certayne white pouder, whiche was knowen afterwardes to be eyther Reagar, or Arsenicke, with a large pasporte from the sayde Kinges Brother, wherewith he departed and came to the Lord Admsrall his maister at the siege of Poyctiers, his long aboade in the Catholikes campe, together with other suspicious circumstaunces appearing at his arriuall, persuaded a ielous iudgement of his dealing, and therevpon was committed to prison, his processe pursued and ended, & sentence lastly pronounced in these termes. Iudgement pronounced the. xx. of September 1569. in the councel established by the Prince of Nauarre and Conde present, and assisted with the Printe of O∣range,
the Countie Wolrard de Mansfelde, Lieuetenant generall of the Almaignes, vnder the sayd Princes, the Counties Lodouike and Henry de Nassau brethren, Me∣nard de Chomber Marshall of the Almaignes camp, Hans Boucq, Renard Gracco, Henry Destam, Hans de Theres, Colonels of the Reistres, Guieryn Gangolf Baron of Gre∣lesee, Colonell of a regiment of Launceknightes, The∣odore Wegger professor of the law, and Embassadour frō the Duke de Deux ponts, with many other lords, knigh∣tes, Colonels and Keistremaisters of Almaigne, the Lord of Corras Councellour to the King in the Parliamente of Tholouse, and Chaunceller to the Quéene of Nauarre and the armye, the Lorde of Francourt, Bricquemau, de Mouy, de la Noue, de Renty, de Soubize, de Mirambeau, de la Caze, de Puch-perdillan, de Biron, de Lestrange, with manye other Lordes, Gentlemen and Captaynes of Fraunce. Séeing the processe made by the commissaries depu∣ted by the said Princes of Nauarre and Conde, againste Dominique Dalbe, groome of the chamber to the L. Gas∣pard Counte de Coligny, lord of Chastillon, and Admirall of France, the iii. examinations of the sayd Dalbe afore the Prouost general of the campe, and two other afore the Commissioners assigned for that purpose: lassly, the confessions of the said Dalbe relterated viii▪ seueral times, wherein he acknowledgeth to haue hen instant∣ly sollicited, vrged and pressed by la Riuiere, Captayne of the garde, and one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the Kings brother, to practise and procure the death of the sayd L. Admirall, eyther by sword or poyson, which hée promised to the sayd la Riuiere, to effect with poyson on∣ly, receyuing (to that end of the said la Riuiere) certayne money, and poison in forme of white powder, which he hath shewed since to the said Prouost and Commissio∣ners, séeing also the verification and proofe of the sayde
poyson tryed by Phisicions and Apotecaries assembled at la Haye in Touraine, the xiii. of this moneth togyther with a very large pasport graunted to the saide Dalbe the 30. of the last moneth by the Kings brother, lying thē at Plessis les Tours: and nowe (for due punishment and reuenge to such a traiterous and detestable attempt, so often acknowledged, as well in his priuate confessions, as publike assembly, the said councell hath and doth con dempne the said Dalbe to be deliuered into the hands of the executioner of high Iustice, who tying him vppon a hurdell, with a halter about his necke, shall drawe hym thorow the stréetes & corners accustomed of this towne de Fay la Vineuse, with this inscription in parchement about his body: This is Dominike Dalbe, traytour to the cause of God, his Countrey, and Maister: trayling him first to the lodging gate of the sayd Lord Admiral, and there with no other garments than his shirte, the halter re∣mayning still about his necke, holding in his hande a torche of burning waxe, shall demaund pardon of God, the King, the law, and the Lorde Admirall, confessinge there that wickedly, disloyally, and trayterously he had professed promised, and practised to kill (by poyson) the said L. Admirall his maister, and at the same instant & in his presence the said poyson which he confessed to bée giuen vnto him by the said la Riuiere, to be cast into the fire and burned. All which being done, he shall be ledde (keeping still the inscription about his body) to the place of publike execution and ther to be hanged and strang∣led on a gallowes set vp for that purpose. And that also humble sute be made to the King to do iustice vpon the sayd la Riuiere and Laurence, with their complices, and withall (if his maiestie be of mind) to verifie more am∣ple their said conspiracie with the said Dalbe (the same notwithstanding resembling a sufficient trueth against them by his voluntary confession) to procéede agaynst
them with punishment due to so horrible a fact, and the same both to terrifie hereafter others of like villanious humour, and also to remaine to all nations as a Presi∣dent of the noble nature and disposition of Fraunce, in abhorring such traytrous attemptes, declaring the said la Riuiere and Laurence, with all other sectes and sortes of traytours (kéeping schole and open shoppe to poyson persons of name and vertue) to be traytours, villayns, and men vnworthy of honour, either in them selues or their posteritie to the 4. generatiō. Lastly, it is iudged, that afore the execution of iudgement, the sayde Dalbe shalbe put on the racke, to the ende to confesse further practises with his said confederates, with other things contayned in interrogatories gyuen to the Prouost. This sentence thus pronounced, the morrow after be∣ing the xxi. of September, the rack was vsed according∣ly, where he confirmed his former confession, and so the same day the sentence was put in execution. Whilest the Kings brother kepte at Chynon in the Countrey of Touraine, whether he was retired (as is sayd) great numbers of men of warre flocked to hym from many partes of the Realme, togyther with the horsemen to whom he gaue libertie for recreation, and the xx. enseignes of footemen Parisiens, wherof we spake before: these forces assembled, he made march his vaūt∣gard out of Chynon the sixe and twenty of this moneth, vnder the conduct of the Lord Montpensier, himselfe fol∣lowing with the battayle, lodging neere Lodune, the princes campe drue towardes Partney, the xxix. of this moneth, whom the Catholiques followed néere to pro∣uoke them to battayll, as in respect of the aduantage & fauour of certayn townes which they held thereabout: eyther the camp was within the view of other, & both of equall desire to gayne Mont-gontour, vsing like dili∣gence the rather to obtayne it: For which cause the Ad∣mirall
made his footemen aduaunce all night, his horse∣men being in poynt of battell the last daye of Septem∣ber, in the very first discouery of the morning, vppon a playne wythin a league of the town of Mont-gontour. There the Admirall sente the Lorde de La-loue and de La-noue with seuen cornets of horsemen, and Cap∣taine Normauts herquebuzears on horsebacke to Mont∣gontour to know if the Kinges brother were there, who finding no body returned with spéedy report to ye Admi∣rall accordingly, who made marche forthwith the foote∣men of the battel, then the artillery and so the footemen of the vauntgard, as wel French as Almaines, folowing them himselfe with the horsmen of both the one and the other Nation: Hée left in the taile the Lord de Mony with charge to gouerne the retract with fiue cornets of French horsmen, two cornets of Reistres, and a company of harquebushears on horsebacke of Captain Montar∣naunt a prouinciall: The catholikes coasted them very near, expecting their artillery, which was not yet come. The Admirall passed ouer a little Riuer halfe a league from Mongontour, very vneasie to marche ouer, by rea∣son of a marrish a long the brink of it, the same making it impossible on all partes, sauing in a little straight or gutter beneath certaine houses a long the highe waye, there lacked no more but the Lord of Mouy & his troup: whom the catholikes with xl. cornets of horsmen char∣ged, togyther with a voley of canons discharged also vp∣pon them. It was thought this charge was giuen by the Lord de Tauannes gouernour for the King in Burgon: it was withstanded a little by the Lord de Mouy, who vn∣able to sustaine it thorowly, in respect of the multitude, retired: the Admirall seing his perill, gaue backe with the horsmen, and returned (with no lesse fury) the charge vppon them that had laide it vpon the Lord de Mouy, who in the mean tyme retired with ye rest of his troupe
with the losse of some fewe, amongst the which was the Lord de Entrichaut, ensign bearer to the Lord S. Auban Dauphynois: the artillery was by this at Mont-gontour, and the footemen of the battaile very neare, who séeing that charge, turned backe to the fight, as also the Lorde de la Noue, and la Loue with their cornets, all that daye passed in skirmishing without offer of other charge. The Catholikes shotte vehemently, which albeit an noyed much the Admirall: yet he lefte not the fiéeld till night, and then retired with those of the Religion to Mont-gontour, and the catholikes encamped vppon the place. The next morrow being saterday, and first day of the moneth of October, the said army issued out of Mont gontour, and lodged in the Uillages thereabout: leauing the Lord de Mouy with his regiment of horsemen, and two regimentes of footemen, within the towne to gard the passage. There were certaine lighy skirmishes, al∣eit neither of long fight, nor much losse: they moued by certaine disordered shot of the catholiques who thought to winne the Suburbs on their side, but being repulsed, their purpose was also intercepted, and they forced to returne without any other thing doing. The Kinges Brother seeinge that syde closed from him▪ and that he could not easily wade the riuer of Viue, (the fame beinge his onely impediment to followe the Princes Campe) determined to passe aboue the head of the riuer in a Uillage beneath Mirebean. In the meane while the Princes, hauing bin at Niort, to sée ye Quéene of Nauar, returned to the campe the second of October, where they drewe into counsayle, with resolution to take the way to Partney and Niorte, and giue battayle to the Catholikes if they assayled them in the way, som∣moning (for this purpose) the whole army to be ready by the dawning of the day: and euery Colonell and Cap∣taine
to labour accordingly in his charge. The Catholikes were also of opinion to go to Nyort, and besiege it, and by that meanes to prouoke the prin∣ces to battell. The Princes campe (according to the or∣der resolute aforesayd) was in a perfect readinesse, rin∣ged in battels and squares, pitching the nexte morning ye third of October, vpō a little hill néere to Mont-gon∣tour, well disposed (as is aforesayd) to giue battell if the enemye aduaunced, who also began to appéere and dis∣couer on the left hand vpon another round hill, from the bottom whereof they might easily discerne the dispositi∣on of the Princes armye, which when he had well vie∣wed, he retired his marche as though he ment to draw directly to Nyort, vsing notwithstanding suche order as his rings and companyes néere together. The Admiral bearing an eye to their doings, espied their pollicie and purpose of procéeding, wherein as he suspected that thei shot at his aduauntage, as labouring to win way vpon him, made descend forthwith the Princes armye from the hill where it was setled, of purpose to gaine and oc∣cupie the plain afore them, whervpon the Catholiques, in place to march forward, commaunded a sodain stay, holding their pikes vprighte, & ringing them in square and mean battels, turned face to their vauntgard, win∣ning by that meanes, the hill from whence the princes army were but now descended. And being maisters in this forte of the hill, aboue the opinion and expectation of the Admirall, began to dispose thēselues to the shock. And at the first descending from the hill, they ordered & ringed their footemen in the valley or side of the foote of the said hill, not without great discretion & iudgement, kéeping by that meanes their footemen in couert, & de∣fended from the storme of the artillerie, which dischar∣ged vehemently as well on the one as other side. In the meane while the Kings brother dressed and disposed
two batteries, not sparing his body to trauell from one battell & square to another, with persuasion to the soul∣diours, to haue good hart: the like also dyd the Princes, visiting in person euery ranke aswell of horsemen as footemen, whose pleasant aspect, & specially in the prince of Nauarre gaue cause of singular courage to the souldi∣ours, whose stomakes, besides they were firmely setled in the goodnesse of the cause, yet they séemed to redouble in desire, the rather at the gracious view and persuasi∣ons of the yong Prince. Immediatly after two of the clock in the afternoone, the vauntgarde of the Catholy∣ques went to the charge with a square and wing of 18. cornets of Reisters and great numbers of horsemen, as well French as Italian, who charged altogyther so violently vpon the Lord de Mouy, and de la Loue, that they were enforced to endure and take the charge, reti∣ring thorow the battel of the Lanceknights which grée∣ued them sore, notwithstanding the Admirall supplyed the charge, and gaue with such furie vpon the Catholke Reisters, that he cut great numbers of them in péeces, and immediatly with the remainder of his horsmen of the Uauntgard, repulsed with force the vauntgarde of the enemie: whereupon was raised a crye on the Admi rals side, Uictory, victory, the same sounding with such noyse of comfort in the eares of the maine battell, that diuers ranne thither to follow the victorie: when loe ye Catholique mayne battell aduaunced, bending directly vpon the Princes battell, where they were in person. To the Catholiquas battell ioyned a wing of horsemen which came from the vauntgarde. At the beginninge, the battell of the Princes sustayned the charge, albeit, finding and féeling their owne weaknesse, as being not able to fight togyther (as the Catholiques did) were en∣forced to disorder and fel out of aray, the horsmen of the vauntgarde dispersed héere and there without order, &
not drawne as yet into any safe pollicie or gard of war, followed also the others, whereby both the Frenche and Almaine footemen were left naked, whereof the French men were first forced to breake aray, and then the Pa∣pistes horsemen on the one side, and the Suyzers on the other side, began to buckle with the Launceknightes, who séeing themselues enuironed on all sides, neyther present helpe, nor cause of further hope, the rather for that the artillery was planted euen at their féete, let fal their pykes and prostrat themselues vpon their knées, amongst whom rushed with no small fury the horsmen and certayne Swizers▪ vsing butchers mercy, & cut them all in péeces. The Counte Mansfeld and Lodowike re∣tired alwayes in order of battell: a thing worthy to bee noted in so generall disorder, hauing about them xiii. cornets of Reisters, which had not followed the others, with whom they gathered togyther certayn cornets of Frenchmen, and so retired and neuer were charged. After the ouerthrow and spoyle of the Launceknights, the Kings brother pursued the victory half a league and no further, and so encamped in the playn of Cron wher the battell was gyuen: he was farre stronger in horsse∣men and footmen than the Princes, who had not aboue vi. thousand horsemen of all sortes, as well straungers as others: viii. thousand footmen French, and most har quebuziers: and lastly, thrée thousand launceknights. In this battaile the Princes lost their launceknightes, a thousand or xii. hundred French footemen, and about an hundred horses, vi. Canons, two Coluerines, & three little field pieces. The lord de Autricour Captayne of a hundred light horsemen, a very foreward and galland Gentleman was there killed: the lorde de Acier and la Noue taken prisoners, and the lorde Admirall lightly hurt in the chéeke: In the Catholiques army were viii. or ix. thousand horsemen, and xvi. or xviii. thousand foot∣men
with great store of artillery. They lost few foote∣men because they fought not, so that their greatest losse consisted in horsemen, which, what with the chaunce of that day, & the encounter before touched, grew to great numbers, with diuers of no small estate, as the Counte Mansfield, and the Ringraue, the Marques of Baden, the yong Counte Cieremont Daulphinoys, with many other Lordes and Knightes of the Order: the Duke of Guyse, and the Ringraues brother hurt. The retraite of the Princes and their army was to Partenay, about vii. leagues frō the place of the battell, where, as they arriued the night folowing at midnight, so the next morning the iiii. of this moneth, they depar∣ted from thence with the Admirall, Counte Mansfelde, the Counte Lodowike and Henry de Nassau bretheren, with other great numbers of Lordes, Gentlemen, and Capteynes: cōming the same day to Nyort, where they found the Queene of Nauarre, remayning there euer since they departed: In the meane time they layde the wayes and quarters by the Marshals of the campe, to the ende the dispersed sorte might eftsoones resorte to their Enseignes, which was performed the same daye by the most part of the horssemen. Notwithstanding this laste successe & losse at Mont∣gontour, dyd both gréeue and amaze the princes, yet they were not vnmindfull to reassemble their forces, wher∣of the most part of the horsemen was forthwith vnder their stāderds, which the footmē could not do with such spéede in respect of their long retrait, and therefore the vauntgarde of the battell were disposed seuerally into sondry quarters & villages néere to Nyort, by the which meane the Frenche footemen, who (in respecte of theyr good order) were not much distressed in this conflict, re∣sorted readily to their Ensignes and companies. In the
meane while the Prince deliberated in the said town vpon the sequell of their affaires, to whome albeit the losse seemed great, yet considering that in a generall ca∣lamitie euery one hath his fortune, they couered theyr present gréete (and as the necessitie of their state requi∣red) with ioyfull countenaunce they assured tsoones the remaynder, of their dispersed companyes: In the euening the Quéene of Nauarre departing from Nyort, wente to Rochereul, and the Princes the nexte morning toke their way to Saintonge, leauing within Nyort both to make head against the catholikes, & let them to passe further, the Lord of Mouy with his regimen of horsemē and. ii. regimens of footemen, beside the ordinarie gar∣rison, being perhaps. iii. hundred shot. Such was the brute and heauy noyse of this battell, that many cōpanies of the Princes armie, as wel foote∣men as horsemen bestowed in seuerall charges in sun∣dry castles and townes, as well in Poyctou as Touraine, determined to leaue their garrisons, as not able to en∣dure a spéedy siege, in respect they were weake within themselues, and also had small hope to be succoured in sufficient time. As they which were wythin Chauigny vppon Vien at Rochose, Captayne Belon within the Castle de Angle with Chesnebrule his ensign bearer, which was at Pru ly, together with captaine Teil, captaine of the Castle of Cleruaut, with his cornet of shot on horsebacke, departed and abandoned their seueral charges, taking their way to Charyte: captaine Lornay gouernour of Chastelleraut, assone as the sege was raised, left the towne the vii. of October at xi. of the clocke before noone with hys owne company of footemen, and two others, wherof one was vnder captaine Mors, beyng in all about thrée hūdred footemen, and two hundred horsemen, and tooke theyr way towardes Charyte, passing by la blanc in Berry, and
from thence came to Bourgdien, a towne belonging to the Byshop of Bourges, and heretofore taken by skaling by the Lord de Bournay: there they ioyned with the rest aforesayde, and also the Lorde Bricquemau the Elder, who taried there with his companyes in respec of hys sicknesse. In the meane while, the kings brother following his victorie, came to Partnay, which he founde desolate, di∣recting his way from thence to Nyort to besiege it: cer∣taine forerunners of his campe were come alreadye to the gates to terrifie those that were within the towne. At this alarum the Lord de Mouy with certaine horse∣men issued spéedely oute of towne, who were no sooner without the gates, than the other were retired almose out of sight, whervpō he returned, and being one of the las to gouerne the retraite, as he was at point to enter the towne, one Montreuell (yelded to him not long afore vnder colour of religion) discharged a Pistolet vpō him, and hurt him sore in the head, flying immediatly well mounted vpon the selfe same horse which the Lorde de Mouy had giuen him: who notwithstanding hys hurte, determined not to depar the towne, albeit being speci∣cially aduised by his friendes to be caryed where hys hurt may bée cured, he left Nyort the seuenth day of Oc∣tober, and came to Sainctes, and from thence he was ca∣ried to Rchell, where within fewe dayes after he died, to the griefe of the armie: for he was of stayed councell in any cause of estate, of great spéede and iustice in ex∣ecution and of long experience in maters of warre, as witnesse his actes as well in the battaile of Dreux, as other places of worthy memory: the rest appointed vn∣der him within Nyort, left also the towne together with the Lorde de l Brosse, gouerner there, retiring with. iii. hundred shot to Rochell. This was the same Lorde de la Brosse, who with the ayde of the Lorde de Pluuau made
head agaynste the Countie de Lude at the siege afore∣sayde. The Kings brother finding the towne forsaken, en∣tred without let: whether also came very shortly after, the King▪ the Quéene mother, and Cardinall of Lorain, being then néere Chynon: they began there to deuise and deliberate vppon their present bunesse, accompting it of speciall purpose, to recouer the Castle of Lusignan, wherein was gouernor the Lord de Mirambeau, & that afore the Protestants had either renued their strength or well assured their present companyes: In this minde they dispatched forthwith certein to summon the castle, who so preuayled with perswasions to the gouernour, that easily inoughe he gau vp the Castle onelye with lyues and goods saued: certein dayes afore the battell, there were bestowed in this holde fiue Cannons which discended to the catholikes by couenaunt: this was. iiii. or ue dayes after the battell of Mnt-gontour. Nyrt beyng thus abondone, the Princes wente to S. Iean de Angely, the, ix. of this moneth, and so to Sainctes, and bi∣cause they gathered, that the catholikes woulde besiege it, they determined to man it with greate numbers of men of warre, causyng to enter forthwith the horsemē of the Lord de la Motte, with crtein footemen: likewise captaine la Mures companye beyng of the regimen of the Lord de Uirie: At that time was gouernour the L. de Oryoll, a gentleman of Sainctonge, who after was con∣tent to giue order to the pollicie and state of the towne, leauing the consideration of matters of warre to the Lord de Pilles, whome the Prince established there for that purpose, and who as yet was not fully cured of the hurt in his thigh, receyued at the siege of Poyctiers. He with the Souldiour, and the rest of the inhabitantes, resolued to defende the Towne, and endure the siege. The morow after, the Princes came to Sainctes, & there
made their armie passe ouer Charante. The . of the said moneth, the lord of Montbrun and Myrabell departed from the Campe to go into Langue¦doc, a iourney pretended longe time before, so that they might leade thither their regiments, and for this cause at the siege of Poictiers, as is aforesaid, the Lord de Pon∣tais Marshall of the Princes Campe, as well in their owne name as for other Colonelles, Captains and Gen∣tlemen of Daulphine, were sutors for leaue to go for a certaine time into Daulphine, and the more to enforce their motion▪ they shewed how long they had followed the campe, and that their Souldioures wearied with so continuall warre▪ stoode in néede to be reléeued with the freshe aire and fellowshippe of their Countrey, and lastly as their generall feare to be so euill wintered as the yeare before, dryue diuers numbers to retire with∣out order to the townes holden by the Religion in Ui∣uares, where they had sure aboade, so if they be not some what reléeued of their long and lothsome trauayle al∣waies in a campe, it is also to be feared that by litle and little they do not abandon their Ensignes, & leaue their Colonelles in the fiéeldes without Souldiours: The same being already reuealed vnto them by certain numbers of their soldioures, they could do no lesse than cōmend their sute with humble request in themselues for leaue and liberty to depart, now that the siéege of Poyctiers is raised: The Princes aunswered that they could not or∣der their request and satisfie the time togyther, bicause they were as yet vncertaine what would bée the ende and issue of the siéege, and therefore they thought it con∣uenient that they taried till the ende of the moneth of September, hoping (after thei had sene the resolute pro¦céedinges of the catholiques) to bestowe their armye in garrisons to rest all winter: This aunswere qualified their requestes with expectation of the end of Septem∣ber.
When the army being returned from the countre of Touraine, and soiourning néere to Fay la Vineuse, their sute was eftsoones put vpon new earmes: for which cause the Gentlemen, Captaines, and Colonelles of those countrey men, assembled to deliberate vppon the moti∣on: some were of opinion to pursue in generall a leaue and libertie of the Princes, séeing their time of Septem ber is expired: But others Iudged the presente season most inconuenient to entreate for leaue, consideringe the state and disposition of the warre, euery day encly∣ing to battaile, where they were bound in duty to bée, nlesse they would deface the honoure of their actions passed. Which last opinion, so settled into the moste of them, that they resolued vniuersally both to mortifie their desire to go home, and also to giue ouer to attempt further leaue, attendinge eyther by battaile, or by some happy peace, to make themselues frée of the warre, and so returue and remaine quietly in their houses. And thus the Lord de Montbrun and Mirabell re∣mayned in the Campe vntill the tyme wherein they thought to execute their enterprise: wherein after they had communicated with the Lord de Verbele brother to the Bishop of Puy in Auuergne, and many other as we of Dauphine, as the countreys thereabout (as of purpose to haue their company in the voyage) they went to An goulesme, to the end to tary there for their furniture and strength. This being known in the campe, many came to An∣goulesme to assiste the voyage, so that they were in all, a∣bote foure hundred horsemen in verye good pointe to fight, with certaine nombers of shotte on horsebacke with the which the saide Lord de Montbrun, Mirabell, and Uerlibet, departed the fourtéenth day of the moneth of October, and taking their way by Perigueux, came to Solliac the Sonday the sixtéenth of October, about two
of the clocke at after noone. They thought there to passe Dordon, but it was so swelled by the great raines falne certaine dayes before, that it was not possible to wade ouer. By which difficulty they were constrained o stay there, sending for suche boates as they coulde inde, by which they began to ferry the same day and all the next nyghte, not with suche spéede (in respecte of their fewe beates) but certaine numbers were not yet passed in the morning. Which beyng espied of the Catholike gar∣risons thereby, and specially they of Sarba, sent out three skore horsemen with certaine footemen and Paisants, to viewe the number of such as were yet to passe, and what watch and garde they kept. Who with others to the nomber of two hundreth, seing neyther order vsed, nor any shot his matche kindled, fell vppon them, and discomfited them without resistance: many were slaine and the rest stripte into their shertes, and so sent ouer the passage to followe their companye: Some vsing a spéede aboue the rest in passing the daye before, the bet∣ter to refreshe them at their ease, were set vpon in the night within their lodgings, and led away prisoners by the Catholikes: Amongst whome were the Lorde d Quintell, a 'Dauphynos, Mormoiron de Uenesin, guide to the whole company, a Phisition called M. Mrle with thrée others: the Lorde de Sarraz a Gentleman of Ui∣uares, was taken by the same a little before, but forth∣with set at libertie. The noyse which the Catholikes made in charging them on the water side, gaue the Alarum to those that had already passed the ryuer, being in a Towne not far off, who falling forthwith into aray & order of defence, after they had taryed sometime to receyue them that escaped to their succours, began to marche towards A∣cyer. wherin they entered the next morning, and from thence without other let, they wente to Oyllac in Au∣uergne,
from whence they departed, as shal be hereafter declared. After Nyort was taken, the Kings brother determi∣ned i beséege the towne of S. Iean de Angely in Sainc∣onge, and for that same effect drue his armie & power on that side. The Lord of Byron, Marshall of his campe, a∣bout the. x. of October, accompanyed with certaine cor∣nets of horsemen, came to sommon the Towne for the King: to whome the garrison made an answere by the Lord de la Ramiere, that they ment not to surrender the Towne by other composition than a generall peace including the publike quiet and profit of the realme of Fraunce, wherevpon he returned. And captaine la Motte accompanyed with. xv. or xx. horsemen, went forthwith to skome and skoure the wayes within halfe a league aboute the towne, and specially of that side to Nyort, fin∣ding within a village certaine footemen of the Catho∣likes, whereof some wer slaine, some put o flight and v. or vi. taken and led prisoners into the towne. In the meane while they of the towne prepared for the siege, vsing great deuise and diligence in fortifying diuerse partes of it, some dyd beate downe parte of the suburbes of Aulnis and Tailleburg, to cut from the Ca∣tholikes all conueniente meanes to encampe there. Some filled vp the ditches in necessary places, in effect they left nothing imperfect which necessarily belonged to the fortification of the town, the better to endure the siege. The Lorde de Pilles gouernour there for the mat∣ters of warre (as is sayd) made a viewe of the footemē, which were a thousande or xi. hundred of all sortes, as well straungers as others▪ mmediatly after this mus∣ter, the Lorde de Personne arriued there with xxx. or. xl. horsemen, and then (bycause they would omit nothing tending to the defence of the Towne) they beganne to make fire workes, with other artificiall Engines to▪
annoye the enimyes. About the. xiiii. daye of this moneth, the Kings bro∣ther planted hys siege before Sainct Iean de Angely, a∣bout thrée of the clocke in the after noone. The Lorde of Gouas regimen with certaine other, was lodged in the Suburbes of Aulnys: dealing not that day with the su∣burbes of Taillebourg, as fearing they coulde not enter but with great perill. They within the towne had for∣saken his Suburbe, bycause they would not put theyr men to the hazarde in keeping it: Albet, th Catho∣likes forbare not to sease vpon it the next day, and lodge within it. The Protestants fortifyed the Fort or place of defence without the gate d' Aulnis, and filling it with earth, rammed vp the gate, omitting nothing necessary either to force or pollicie, wherein, to enorce a generll diligence in their fortification, Proclamations were pronounced thorow the towne, that all people, as well men women as children, able or apte to trauell, should labour and worke at the rampiers, and that euery one shoulde haue alwayes before his dore, three or foure sackes full of dong, to be employed in necessarie places. According to these commaundementes, there was a common assistence at the rampiers, as well of straun∣gers, as people of the town, by whom was performed a wonderfull indeuour. As soone as the Catholikes had made them selues Lordes of the Suburbes aforesayde, the Protestantes made a sallie with fortie horsmē, by the gate de Matta, and set vpon the Suburbes of Aulnis, where they killed foure or fyue men, and then fell on skouring the wayes towardes Nyort▪ tyll the place of execution, where they founde an Italian on horsebacke, and broughte him into the towne. About the eythtéenth day of this moneth, the Pro∣testantes made another sally by the gate d' Aulnis, and
issuing out aboue the forte, they discended within the ditche by a ladder: there were of this faction (and conduc ted by captaine la Motte, (Cl. Souldiours with white shirtes aboue their garmentes, who charging so happi∣ly vppon the Suburbes d'Aulnis, found the catholiques playing at cardes, and so without any watch to discouer them, they killed about three score or foure score Soul∣dioures, and then retired vppon the false trenche of the ditche by the helpe of their haquehusheares, which were vppon the fort of the gate. They wanne in this exploite two footemen Ensignes. xl. or l. harquebusheares, cer∣taine Morrions, corcelets, and pollares of stéele, whiche they caried into the town, loosing not aboue two or thrée of their company. The Catholiques in the meane whyle drue néere their artillery which they planted so aptly in a vyne to∣wards Nyort, as it mighr beate as well the gate of Ny∣ort, as the bulwarke of the port d'Aulnis, and also the tower betwéene the two gates. Their battery whiche they bestowed there, was foure Canons and a Colue∣rine. Afore they discharged any batterie, they demaun∣ded to parley, and for that cause would that the lorde of Pilles should haue come forth of the towne vppon their faith, which the protestants thought not conuenient for their safetie: albeit, in his place, they sente out of the Towne la Riuiere, who was not sooner without, than the Canon began to beat, which caused him to cutte off his further procéeding with spéedy returne. Thus the batterie began the xxii. daye of October, beating the Tower of the Towne neare to the porte de Aulnis, and continued all the day, and towarde night it enforced a breach of fortie or fiftie pase wide, wherevp∣pon the catholiques sent one of their companie to view it, who being come to the brink of the ditch, and discoue∣ring him selfe to suruey the breach, was killed with a
shot: so that that day passed without assault or any other speciall attempt or acte. In the night the Protestantes with great diligence repaire their breache, & let downe to the ditch certeyne labourers and Souldiours, to ryd away the ruine and broken stuffe of the Wall falne in∣to it. These labourers and souldiours afore they came out of the ditche, they set vp a pretie wall of a mannes height, to make the place lesse accessible. Besides, the protestants kéeping still a carefull mynd of their town and estate, considered diligently where, and howe they might be annoyed by the batterie planted in the vyne, which had there remained about eight dayes, withoute discharge of Canon: wherevpon they cast a trench wel flanked behind the breach, vpon the which they bestow∣ed certeyne Uessells and hoghesheades to pauise their shot. In the effecte, the breache was so supplied, as the place was stronger than afore. From this battery, the morrow after came certeyne thunders of Canon ageinst the fort of the Port d'Aul∣nis: and likewise thrée or foure discharges agaynste the port of Nyort, not forbearing notwithstāding their first battery. But séeing this battery brought forth smal ef∣fecte (not many dayes after) they bestowed in place of the canons, fiue coluerines. Remouing the sayd Canons to the entrey of the sub∣urbes d'Aulnis, both directly before and also so néere the sayd Fort, that onely the ditch was between thē. From thence began a vehement battery against the said fort, as well by these Canons as the Coluerins planted in their place, which bestowed certeyne bollettes flankes wyse, within the sayd breache euen to the Castell The battery continued all the daye, all that night▪ and all the next morrow of one violent furye without ceassing, so that both the Fort and the Portall (by which is the or∣dinarie entrie into the Towne) were almost beaten to
pouder. In the meane whyle, the protestants made a couert way betweene the Fort and the gate, to the ende, that the ruine falling from the gate, should not annoye nor hinder the entry of the Fort. After this long and vehement batterie, the Lorde de Guitiniers demaunded to speake with the Protestants, and vnder the honour and vertue of their word, entred the Towne the foure and twenty day of this moneth, about two of the Clocke in the afternoone. He laboured to induce them to render the towne, but the L. de Pilles remayned constant in his first answere, that ther could no other price buy the Town, than an assured peace, to the profite and quiet of the Realme. Wherevppon the Lord de Guitinieres retourned againe and came to the campe without other effect of his purpose. Hée was no sooner out of the said Town, then the ca∣tholiques rushed fiercely to the assault so vnlooked for, that the protestants doubted of their sauetie, the rather bycause the assaulte was maynteyned as well at the breache of the Fort as on the right and lefte side of it within the ditche, the better to come to the gate of the Towne which they had battered (as you haue heard). And for their more easie comming to the breache of the Fort, they had prouided great numbers of pyonners to beare sackes ful of earth and cast them vpon the breach: who besides turning vp the earth, threw stones against the protestants, by which they greatly gréeued diuerse of them. They presented vpon the breach vi▪ target men followed with a good number of shot, who albeit ventu red farre to enforce the protestants, yet (being repulsed) they retyred without any great effectes. This assaulte lasted from thrée of the clocke in ye afternoone til night, during the which was great wast of shot and pouder by the protestantes in sustayning so hoat assault: in the
night they fortified and repayred their breaches as wel as they could, as they also forbare not to do euen in the tyme of the battery, filling them vp as fast as they wer made with sackes of dung. In this night also they en∣trenched them selues within the Forte, whereby the breaches, the morrow after, were put in defence. Albeit, the Lord de Sansac (after the siege of Charité) was sent for to go into Tourayne to ioyne with the Ca∣tholiques camp, as is said, yet (whether it were by coū∣termaundement or other speciall occasion) hee sturred not from where he was: And yet in the same month of October, he besieged the Town of Noyers in Bourgogne, the which without great resistance he tooke by composi∣tion, the same notwithstandinge not obserued, bycause forty of the souldiours that defended it, being ledde to Troy in Champaigne, and afore they entered into prison, were cut in péeces by the people. After he had taken Noyers, he determined to besiege Vizeley in Borgoigne, gouerned at that tyme by the lorde de Sarazin. There was for the garde of it only two com panies of footemen vnder Captayne Rybaupierre, & the yong Lord de Sarazin with two cornets of horssemen of the Lord de Blosset, aud of Belanseau, with certayn num∣bers of Gentlemen retired thither to ayde the siege. The lord de Sansac had to furnishe this siege about. xxii. enseignes of footmē, wherof ye L. de Foyssy was Colonell often cornets of horsmen, foure canons & ii. Culuerins. Hée arryued with his horsemen to suruey the towne the sixt of October, retyring at night to lodge at Aqui∣ens and S. Pere, villages scituate at the hill foote, vpon the toppe whereof standes the Citie. The eleuenth of the same moneth he made approche with thrée of his companies of footemen, at the gate du Barle, otherwise called S. Stephen: certaine of ye Towne▪ but specially the nobility that were there, issued out,
and repulsed presently the said thrée Ensignes, whereof two were put to disorder and flight afore they could get to Aquiens, where they ment to make their retrait. In the chase were killed about sixe and forty, and as many hurt, all the Captaynes, Lieuftenauntes, Ensigne bea∣rers, and Sergeauntes of these two companyes, were there killed, sauing thrée which wer led prisoners with∣in the towne: the third company hid themselues within a tuft of vines, from whence (being not discouered) they retyred in the night to Aquiens. Notwithstanding this charge and chase, the Lord de Sansac marched with hys campe the Saterday, the eyght of this moneth, and to∣wardes the euening inuironed the Towne, the same euening hée approched his artillery, which the tenth day following in the morning began to batter a Tower of the side of the gate du Barle, right against the watring place, the same continuing so vehemētly two full , that at the econd dayes end, a corner of the Tower fell to the earth: The Wednesday the twelfth day he remo∣ued foure of his péeces of the side of S Pere, thunderinge a new battery against the gate called the wicket, aboue the which eyght Ensignes of footmen came and pitched the thirtéenth of this moneth, remaininge there till the whole army discampped. The fouretéenth day he remo∣ued also two of his péeces, and planted them agaynst a Tower called the Columbes, to the end (with more ease) to batter the said wicket, against the which the batterye endured till the next daye. When hauinge now beaten two breaches, hée gaue the assaulte to them both at one instaunt, offering to scale on that side of the Cordeliers: His assaultes were resisted, and his people so repulsed, that they were out of hart eftsoones to returne: & there∣fore the night following, aboute midnight, he raised hys séege, and retired to Auallon, hauing lost at the assaultes and in the tyme of their sieege thrée or foure hundreth
men as wel footemen as horsmen: Of the Protestants side, there were slaine and hurt, onely ten men, whereof the Lord Sarazin was killed with the canon, beinge in the first Tower that they battered, whom the Lord de Blossar succéeded in place and charge, chosen by the com∣mon voice and opinion of the multitude, in respècte of his vertue and wisdome in defence of the Towne. The Lord of Sansac raised not his siéege for other purpose thā to prouide other Canones, all his others being either crackt or burst in these batteries. The Princes being at Sainctes, assoone as they were enformed of the siéege of S. Iean d' Angely determined to go into Gascoygne with two or thrée thousand harque∣bushears on foote, and all their horsmen, leauing the re∣meinder of their footemen to aide the Townes where∣in were Garrisons: they had two principall reasons to induce them to this iourney, as to drawe the siege from S. Iean de Angely esteeming the campe woulde followe them, and also to ioyne with the Uicountes forces, o∣uer whome (as is sayde) the Montgomery commaun∣ded. They departed from Sanctonge aboute the begin∣ning of the siege, and with their horsemen as well Frenche as Almayns, (who after this voyage had sent their cariage to Rochll, and sho ton foote, wherof some were led by the Lorde de Rouray) tooke their waye to∣wardes Montauban: And bycause the Ryuer of Dor∣donne, (by which they must passe) was not at that tyme passeable without vessels, the Lorde de la Bessonniere (by whose meanes as is afore sayde the Towne of Oryllac was taken) departed wyth a hundred horses, and ga∣thering together as manye boates as he coulde fynde a long Dordonne, caused them to be brought to Argentall, to the ende the Princes army stayed not at the passage there, albeit comming thether aboute the. xxv. of thys moneth, they were constrained to staye there almoste
eight dayes afore their whole armye coulde passe. In which meane while certaine of their army summoned the Towne of Sourd in Auergne to be rendred to the Princes, to the obedience and vse of the King. Where∣vnto as they refused at the first: so, considering the con∣dition of their owne state, with the present force of the enemye, yéelded vpon couenaunt to set open the gates and paye sixe thousande Frankes, not to be committed to pillage: the Lorde of Montbrun and Mirabell beyng come to Oryllac (as is sayd) their compayes lodged with∣in a league of the towne in a village called Arpaion, to rest their horses which were weary wyth long trauail, where there Lorde de Montbrun fell sicke of a continu∣all ague, the same partly causing the aboade and staye of the armye, albeit féeling by the course of his sickenesse, that he was not able to make presente departure from thence, imparted the same with the Lorde Mirabell, to the ende the voyage lingred no longer, wherevpon the Lorde Mirabell with foure hundred horsemen put himselfe on the way the. 24. of the same moneth to per∣forme his iourney into Languedoc: he had (amongst o∣thers) in his company the Lord Foulques, who not ma∣nie dayes before came to the said Oryllac with lx. horse∣men, of purpose to accompany the Lord Mirabell: their departure was neyther so secrete, nor their iourney so surely conueyed, but the Papistes which were in cer∣taine townes and Castels aboute Oryllac, were speede∣ly aduertised, who commaunded the townes men of euery village to sounde the Alarum bell, to the ende to warne and discouer the place they passed by, and so set vpon and discomfyt them. According to this charge the Tocsain was sounded at the same instante that the Lorde Mirabell and his troupe discended from the hill two leagues from Oryllac, wherevpon the garrison of Roilliac (hauyng séene the troup passe by them in negli∣gent
order, and leauing withal their own charge, made no small spéede by a crosse waye a thwart the hill, and set vppon them sodainely in the village where the Toc∣sain was sounded, and the same in suche subtill season and sorte, as afore they were discryed they killed sixe or seuen of the Mirabels company and so retired, lea∣ding with them certaine prisoners: the troup notwith∣standing mounted aboue the village, where being rin∣ged and drawen into battell order, they discouered in the tops of the hils concours of people from all parts to intercept them in a straite by whiche they should passe, their guides (besides) bringing them further increase of feare & daunger by general flocking of the popular sort to set vpon them in that straite, wherevpon they were constrained to turne backe, and retyre to their quarter of Orpaion, and there to consult of a safe meane to passe. The Lorde Uerbelet, in the meane while remayned at Oryllac, as gouernor in Auergne vnder the Princes, according to the authoritie giuen him at his departure from the Campe. Within fewe dayes after his com∣ming to the town, and being acknowledged of the gar∣rison as their gouernour, ordeyned that thrée hundreth Harquebusears on foote, and thrée hundreth pykemen shoulde be entertayned for the garde of the towne: for whose pay he leuied of the inhabitáts a loane of
Lord de S. Heran sayd he was come thither to bestow garrison in the Castell: the gentlewoman aunswered, that this errand was without néed, because that as the place was already furnished, so her husbande (as shee thought) would not admit any newe numbers, where∣with as she offered to haue shut the gate, and returne into the Castle, the Lord S. Heran thrust so rudely at the gate, that the Gentlewoman being thrown to ye groūd, he entred the gate by force vpon her, by whose skrike or crye, one of the houshold seruaunts descended spéedely, and séeing his mistresse vpon the ground, discharged his pistoiet, and hurt the Lord S. Heran in the arme, who also fearinge further perill, flong out of the posterne, which immediatly was shut vpon him: albeit, he caused all, or most of his troupe to remaine still afore the sayd Castell, to withstand that no man should enter till hée sent new forces from S. Flour, whether as he spéedely repaired, so he dispatched from thence certain numbers of footemen to ioyne with the troupe he had left afore the Castle, with charge not to departe till it were ta∣ken: M. de Sallians, to whom both the place and charge belonged, lay very sicke, who in respecte of his small strength, hauing not aboue sixe souldiours, and withall doubting spéedy surcours, made no great resistance, but yéelded the Castle by composition to haue onely their lyues saued, which albeit was faithfully promised, yet trayterously performed, because both her husband was killed, and she led prisoner to S. Floure, charged to be the onely cause of the lord of S. Hierans hurt. The taking of the towne of Oryllac, (whereof is spo∣ken before) amazed greatly them of Auergne wherefore hauing gathered people from many partes, determined to besiege it, afore they within could haue meane to for∣tifie themselues. And for this purpose, the Lord Rocne∣onne Gouernour of Puy and the graund Prir of A∣uergne,
with their regiment of footemen, came to Mar zillas in Roargnes, attding ther (as it was said) certain cānons which should be sent from Rhodes to batter O∣ryllac. In the meane while also the Lord de Saint Herā with no lesse diligence aduaunsed at S. Flour, the other forces and also the Nobilitie of Auergne, whom he sum∣moned speedely to repayre thither. Albeit hearing in the heat of his diligence, of the princes comming to Argen∣tall; he let fall his enterprise. The men of Auergne fearing the princes would sease vpon the low countrey called la Lymagne, and there to winter, in respect of the generall fertilitie of that place, drew in troupes of paysants and cōmunalties into the straites of the mountaines, by which they imagined the army should passe, and there hewing down great num∣bers of trées, bestowed them athwart the high waies to trouble the passage of the horsemen. The rest of the countrey were bestowed by the lord de Saint Heran, in townes and Castles, to the ende they should not be sodenly taken: the princes beguyled their opinion as not passing that way, but directed their io ney ouer Dordone and so into Quercy, and beneath Ca∣denat, passed the riuer of Lot, and so from thence arriued at Montauban, in Nouember. 1569. The Lord de Mirabell and Foulques▪ (hauing remai∣ned about Oryllac, nee the charge they had neare to Rolliat) tooke way about this tyme with their troupes to ende their voyage: who passing the Riuer of Lot be∣neath Cadenat, and after they had trauersed the moun∣taines of Rouarges and Sauennes, arriued without let a Priuas and Aulbenas, townes in Viuarez, holden by those of the Religion. The siege continued all this whyle afore S. Iean de Angely, where the King, the Quéene mother, and Car∣dinall of Lorraine were in persone. The morrowe after
that the breache of the Fort was assaulted, the Kinge procured the protestantes to be commoned withall, to the ende to render the Towne by composition: Wher∣in they vsed this persuasion, the rather to entice them, that his Maiestie had determined to erect a puissant ar∣my to make war in Allemaigne, wherein as they might steade that seruice in special turne, so his Maiestie was carefull not to spill men of such experience and value, & otherwayes, if they would not embrace his Maiesties offer and composition, he would thunder vpon them all his forces till he had won the Towne. They answered as before, that they would not render the town till ther were a peace assured to the profit and quiet of ye whole Reae: whereupon the King required to speake with the Lord de Personne, as well in the causes concerninge the Towne, as to send him to the princes in the meane and matter of peace: Whereunto the protestants con∣descended, and sent out of the Towne the Lorde de Per∣sonne, receyuing in his pleadge and hostage the Lord de Guiteniers. After the King had conferred with the Lord de Personne, they grew to capitulations as followed: First, that if the Lord de Pilles were not succoured within ten dayes, to render the Towne to the Kinge their liues and goodes saued. 2 That for the assurance of this, there shuld bée deli∣uered in hostage two Knightes of the order, & they to be sent either to Rochell or Angoulesme, at the protestants choice. 3 That during this space of the x. dayes, truce should be betwéene them, with charge that neither they should fortifie in the towne, nor they without vpon their tren∣ches, nor yet approche the walles of the towne. 4 Lastely, that in the meane while the Lord de Per∣sonne should go to the Princes with a Gentleman of his Maiestie, to treate of peace. According to the which the
saide L. de Personne with the Kinges Gentleman went to the Princes, in the Gentlemans place the Lorde de Guitiniers was sent out of the towne to the campe. They which the princes lefte (as you haue heard) at Sainctes, to defend the towne, maintained their charge till now. And hearing that Sainct Iean d' Angely was in parley, and at point to yéeld, fearing with all, that it was their lotte and turne to be besiéeged next: They forsooke the towne & retired to the other Garrisons which were thereaboute: wherein the Kinge forgot not to embrace the oportunitie, sending forthwith certaine companies to sease vppon it, to the end, that by that meane the way might be cloased from them of the Religion, beinge at Angoulesme and Coygnac, to go or come to Rochell: Like∣wyse they of Rochell shoulde be bard to sende succoures to them. The Lorde of Bricquemau, laye all this while in the towne of Borg dieu in Berry, (as hath bin said) by rea∣son of his sicknesse: During whose aboade there, hys troupes made ordinarye warre vppon the Garrison of Chasteau-roux, vpon Indre, wherin the Lord of the place retained thrée companies of footmen for the catholikes. Ther were often incursions and enterviewes betwéen them: the same continuing almost sixe wéekes, in which time were killed of the one and other side, almoste two hundreth men. After the saide Lorde Bricquemau was restored to health, he retired in this moneth of Nouem∣ber with his troupes to Charite. During the siéege of S. Iean d' Angely, the Towne of Nimes in Languedoc was taken by the Religion the fiuetéenth of this moneth, and by this meane: there is a mylne in the towne neare to the walles, and to make it grynde, there comes a spring or fountaine not farre of, through a sluse or creuishe in ye wall dressed with grates or barres of yron: They of the Religion in that Coun∣trey
practised intelligence with the miller, by whose aide they pluckt vp by night the said yron grate, and so conueyed into the towne by that creuish and channel, a∣bout a hundreth souldioures, who hid themselues with∣in the myll, attending the houre to execute their enter∣prise, in the meane while they sent from Priuas and Au benas two hundreth horsemen, and euery one a harque∣bushear behind him, who being in good point afore the gates of the Towne at the houre appointed, they with∣in ye mil issued out, & got to the gate, which with certain engines and instrumentes apt to countermyne ye lock, they set open, and so the companies without, entred and made themselues Lords of the town: the Lord of S. An dre gouernour there, considering of his presente perill, thought to saue himselfe in the castell, albeit as he lept out of a window he brake his leg and so was taken, dy∣ing within two dayes after▪ there were slaine in the towne at this entry about a hundreth or sixe score men and within fewe dayes certaine ministers of Iustice: Incontinently arriued at Nimes, the L. de S. Romaine brother to the Lord de S. Chaumont, sent thither by the Princes to gouerne in their absence the Countrey of Languedocke he had with him in companie a great num ber of horfemen, besides many that came to him, as the Lorde de Foulques, with the troupes whiche he brought from the Campe. In the meane while they of the Ca∣stell denied to render, making maruelous defence, not∣withstāding they were but few in number: there were sundry attempts in vayne to winne them, with certain mynes sorting to no effecte, and yet after certayne mo∣nethes, the Castell was put into the handes of them of the Towne. And now, touchinge the siege of S. Iean de Angely, it hath ben sayd that the lord de Pilles promised to render the towne, if he were not reskewed within ten dayes:
which being passed, and he void of succours, the Lord of Byron summoned him to his promisse, to whom the lord de Pilles aunswered, that albeit he beléeued that eyther they had stayed the lord de Personne there, or else wher, or at least had not sente him to the Princes, yet if they would enlarge his tearme, he would render the town, whereupon they gaue him two dayes more, within the which he dispatched forth of the towne by the port Mat∣ta a Gentleman to go to Angoulesme and prouide suc∣cours. In the meane while, the thursday the xvii. day of Nouember the Lord de Guitiniers entered the Towne with certain Captaines and Marshalls or harbengers for lodging, with intent to take possession of the towne, whereof Guytiniers gaue this manifest inkling in say∣ing to the Lord de Pilles, that as that night he gaue the watch their charge, so it should fall to his lot to do it the next day. The gentleman sent to Angoulesme for succours, vsed such diligence as the L. de S. Seuerin accompanied with l. or lx. gentlemen or horseback, entered without let S. Iean d' Angely by the port Matta, the fryday beinge the xviii. of this moneth, which as it chaunced contrary to the generall opinion of the Catholiques, so it amazed most of all the lord de Guitiniers, thinking nothing lesse than to go out of the towne againe: albeit séeing in the fryday morning certaine numbers of straunge gentle∣men mustering in cōpanies about the town, he chaun∣ged his opinion and was forthwith put out of the town with such as entred with him notwithstanding the cō∣ming of these succours: the Lorde de Biron commoned with the lord de Pilles at the gate of Nyort, whom as hée summoned to performe his promise to the King in yéel∣ding the town: the day of conuention being expyred, so lord de Pilles told him that he had receyued succoures, & therefore discharged of his promise to render the town,
wherein the lord Byrō caueled with him in that his res∣kue came not from the princes, with perswasion also, that he should not stand so muche on the helpe of foure or fyue horses come to him, and therupon caused too bée read alowde the capitulations agréed vppon betwéene them. The lorde de Pilles was constant in his opinion, alleadging that of what value or numbers so euer hys succours were, they were such as both suffised his néed and contented him, charging them vpon the instant to drawe backe from the walles. Immediatly the battery began of fresh, as wel vpon the old breach which was v∣pon the fort or towre of the wall, as agaynst the fort of the gate d' Aulnis, and also against the Castell, agaynst which were bent thrée cannons: this batterie brought downe to the earth the Castell gate, from whiche, they went vppon a bastion or platforme of earth before the Castell: this being well noted of the protestantes, they made another passage within the ditch, beneth the first, and neare to that bastyon of earth, they made an ope∣ning or window in the wall of the towne, without the which and within the ditch, they set vpp a close pale or couert to flanke the Castell. In the meane while the ca∣tholikes growing cold in their batterie, and yet conti∣nuing it eyght dayes, beate downe a part of a towre of the Castel of that side to the suburbes of Tailebourg, cal∣led the hangmans Towre, togither with a great ruine of the walles from the Castell to the old breath. During this batterie, the protestantes made a sally with fifty or forty horsmen, and thrée or foure hundreth footemen by the gate Nyort, vpon the which thei erected a bridge of wood to discende to the ditch. The horsemen of this sally were led by Captayne la Motte, who charged vppon two cornets of horssemen which were in garde of that syde to Nyort, whereof cer∣tayne were killed, and some lost their standerds, & one
of their enseigne bearers led hurt into the town, wher of he dyed foorthwith: the footemen were gouerned by diuers Captaynes, who, charging the papistes in their trenches, made them forsake them, and loose their Cul∣uerynes, which were forthwith choked aud fyre put in fyue or sixe barrels of powder. They tooke also in this disaray an enseigne of the footemen▪ with many other armes and armours of the Catholiques, carying all in∣to the Town, whether they retyred assoone as they had effected their enterpryse: they killed in this sally about thirty or fortie catholiques, and loosing but one of theyr owne which was hurt in the retrayte, besides him that set the powder on fyre, who was a little singed. Not many dayes after this sally, the catholiques re∣moued their canons planted in the entry of the suburbs d' Aulnis, and pitched them vpon the brinke of the ditch on the right side of the castell, very neare the battered fort of the gate. There were in this battery six canons, beating as well within the entry of the said forte, as a∣gainst the wal from it to the castel which was also bea∣ten with the other thrée canons aforesaid. The colue∣rinnes ceased not also to thunder as well flankerwyse as to the olde breache. This batterie was of such violent force, that in thrée daies and an half (which was the space it endured) there wer discharged aboue xv. or xvi. hūdreth shot of canons, and many killed that laboured to relieue the breach. In which vehement extremitie, the Lord de Pilles, sent out by the Port Matta, the same Gentleman, whom he v∣sed afore in the supplye of succoures, by whose second di∣ligence, the Lord de S. Auban, a Gentleman of Daul∣phine accompanied with xl. horsmen enterprised to come to the reliefe and succour of the sayde towne: who (not∣withstandinge) was so encountered in the way, as hée was forced to retire with the losse of thrée of his people,
and also the Gentleman his guide. The xxix. day of Nouember, Sebastian Luxenburge, counte de Martiques, knight of the order, Captayne of fifty men at armes, and Lieuftenaunte generall to the King in his Dutchie and countrey of Britaine, being at the battery, was stroken in the head with a harquebu∣shot, whereof he dyed, to the generall griefe of the Pa∣pistes. In the beginning of December, about ix. of the clock in the morninge, the Catholiques demaunded to parley with the Lord de Pilles, wherevnto he listened with lesse difficulty, in respect he was not furnished with muniti∣on of warre for one assault more if it had bin offred; ney ther had he hope to be so spéedily succoured as his perill required: which was the cause that the ii. of this month, after hée had established extréeme actes and prouisions for the Gard of the said towne, he was enforced to ren∣der it vppon the couenantes following. 1 That the Protestants should depart the town their goodes saued, with their horses and armour and banner displayed. 2 That they should not beare armes for the generall cause of Religion in foure monethes after. 3 That their whole companies, as well Straungers as inhabitaunts, might retire whither they would in al surety. 4 That they should be safe conducted to their place of suerty where so euer it were, by the Lorde de Byron: according to which composition, the morrow after, the iii. of this moneth, S Iean de Angely was yéelded into the handes of the Lord de Guitiniers. The lord de Pilles de∣parting the same day about noone, by the Port de Mat∣ta with eyght hundreth footmen of all sortes, and about C. horsmen▪ taking his way towardes Angoulesme. Not withstanding, the conduct and presence of the saide lord
de Byron, the most part of the footemen were spoiled and dyuerse slaine, and the baggage of the horsemen taken against their promysse of faith. During this siéege, died in the towne about a hundreth Souldiours and certain numbers of labourers: of the catholikes side, without the towne, dyed aswell of the hand of the enemye as by diseases, about two thousand, amongst which were ma∣ny great lordes, Gentlemen and Captaines slayne, as the great maister of ye artillery, whose office was giuen to the saide lord de Biron: the gouernment of the towne was giuen to the lord de Guitiniers, and for the garde of it, the King bestowed eight companies of footemen. The same day the King, ye Quéene mother, the Cardynall of Loraine wyth dyuers great lordes of the Courte, entred the towne, and visited as wel the forte of the gate Aul∣nis, and the castell, as the first breach of the tower on the wall, and so returned to their places, where they were lodged afore. Certaine of the Catholikes (immediatly after the towne was giuen ouer) wente towardes the yles of Marans and Marennes, holden of long by them of the religion, from whence they were now withdrawen by speciall commaundemente from Rochell, whereby the Catholikes entred and seased vpon them wythoute re∣sistance. In this tyme were executed in Fraunce certayne iudgements diffinitiue, pronounced afore against those of the reformed Religion, whose processes were begon and pursued by the Kinges procurers from the begyn∣ning of the warres, aswell against such as were out of the Realme, as those that maintayned parte with the Princes. The first sort forsooke the Realme immediat∣ly after the second peace, as being denyed to enter their houses & goods contrary to the couenaunts of the same▪ and lesse able to liue (withoute mortall perill to theyr
persons) in the townes of their proper habitation, be∣ing filled with garrisons of the contrary factiō, as hath bene touched in the beginning of these discourses: the other sort, (forsed estsoones to fal into armes) were knit and tyed to the army of the Princes, to resist the volun∣tary infringers of the peace, and coniured enemyes to the whole Realme: both the one and other were procée∣ded against by personall adiornements in three shorte dayes, and for defaulte of apparance their goods were seased to the Kings vse, and gouerned by speciall Com∣missioners of sequestration: many ydle officers busied themselues to effect the execution of their goods: in ma∣ny prouinces the sayde iudgements dyd suspend & hang vntill after the battell of Montgontour, whē they awar∣ded generall and spéedy processe against all men by de∣faultes, procéeding to execution in Effigie and adiudica∣tion of their goods to the King, wherein (suche was the liberal zeale of the iudges) that they executed by Effigie such as were dead long time before. It hath bene sayd before that the Lord de Sansac lefte the siege of Uezeley by reason his Cannons miscaryed: and now hauing got newe prouision of Artillery to the number of twelue or thirtéene péeces, and beyng wyth∣all aduertised by certaine of the Towne of Vezeley that the Lorde de Traues, with a great part of the Nobilitie present at the firste siege, were departed and lefte the Towne, came to besiege it of freshe: He battered still the tower of the Port du Barle, righte against the wate∣ring place: soone after he remoued his batterie to that fide of the gray Fryers, following with so vehement an assaulte, that they came to hande strokes vppon the breaches, albeit he was repulsed. During thys siege, Albert de la Chasse a Bourgeys of the town, wrote let∣ters to the Catholikes, reuealing the particular state of the Towne: He threw his letters ouer the wall in∣to
a fielde where the Catholikes came and found them: and as he was going to the Wall with a letter, readye to conueye to the enemie, he was taken with the facte, and charging a scholemaister, as partie to his treason, were both hanged forthwith. The batterie was such, as thee wer spent aboue thrée thousand and fiue hundreth shottes of canon, and al not able to force the Protestantes, whiche made the Lorde Sansac raise his siege the. xvii. of December. 1569. loosing in this siege about. xv. hundreth men, amongst whome the Lord de Foyssy, Colonell of his footemen was hurte to death with a shot vppon the trenches. Within the Towne, amongst others, M. Iaques Perrin, a Minister, was killed with a Canon. The warre dyd still aggrauate in diuerse places of the Realme, contrary to the opinion of such as thought it should haue ben qualified & vtterly quēched by ye bat∣taile at Montgontour. They of Charyte (whereof hathe bene spoken before) strēgthened themselues with great numbers of men of warre come with the Lord de Bric∣quemau and Borry, with their retinue: they maintayned ordinarie warre against the garrisons of the catholikes thereaboutes, making many enterprises, and one win∣ning of another. The Lorde de Lespau a gentleman of Berry, and one called la Rose, Sergeant maior to Sanserre, attempted an enterprise vpon the Towne of Bourges in Berry, by meane of intelligence with a Souldiour of the towne, called Vrsin Pallus, to whome was promised a greate summe of money, with a bill for the assurance, payable within two moneths after he had satisfied hys promise: This enterprise had bene of long practised, and for the execution of it, the parties to the practise, imparted it with the Lord de Bricquemau, de Guercy (Liuetenant to the Lord Admirall, ouer his men of Armes, and gouer∣nour
at the present of Charite for the Kinge, vnder the princes) to the Lord de Borry. Barō of Reury, des Essarz, with others Lordes and Captaynes in those quarters: Who vnderstanding the enterprise at large wyth the meanes to execute it, iudged with it as a thing very cō∣uenient to be pursued. This Vrsin Pallus in the meane while reuealed it to the Lord de la Charstre gouernour of the towne of Bour∣ges and countrey of Berry, and also to Captaine Martyn kéeper of the tower of Bourges, who aduised hym to en∣tertayne the enterprise and assure to them of Charite. day, place and meane to effect it, who likewise applyed himselfe to their instructions. In the meane while the said Gouernour of Charstres omitting no preparatiue fitte to welcome them, deuy∣sed gynnes of fire & traines of pouder within ye ditches of the place assigned: he bestowed also two grates, the one at the entry of the little Forte, and the other at the dore or false port by which they enter into the great to∣wer: bringing lastly into the towne dyuerse horsemen and footemen Italians, for their better suerty and de∣fence. The day and houre speciall for this purpose, was as∣signed by the said Pallus, on S. Thomas night, the on and twenteth of December at two of the clock at after mid∣nighte, whiche they of Charite fayled not to obserue in poynt. And bycause they were dispersed in diuerse pla∣ces, the place of generall méeting was at Baugy, a castle taken before by tht Barron of Reury, about six leagues from Bourges. There met about a thousande or twelue hundreth harquebushears on foote of the troupes of the Lorde Borry and Loruaye, with thrée cornets of horsemē guyded by the Lorde Bricquemau, all which in very good poynt obserued both the houre and place asseigned cal∣led la Grange Francois half a league from Bourges, where
where likewise met thē the saide Vrsin Pallus▪ assuring thē still of the facilitie of the enterprise, & that he could bring thē to ye great tower without daūger, wherunto (to couer all cause of doubte) he offered to be their first leader. They of the Religion vnder the saith of his worde, made march first and formost, with him the Lorde de Lespau, accompanyed with twelue, aswell Captaines as souldiers, and entred by a wicket toward the fort of ye false port, where they pitched ladders to enter with∣in the false porte, which was siue foote aboue grounde. After him entred the Baron Reury with fiue & twenty men, and then the Lord de Sarts with fifty souldiers to sustaine the first? but as his troupe entred, the cordes of the grate were cut, when they also within applyed their seuerall engines to vse and put fire to the traines and at the instant the artillery bestowed in flanks thū∣dred vppon them that were to enter, as also Captaine Martyn, with his nūber of armed mē, charged such as were vnhappely entred, who séeing themselues & their enterprise betrayed, deuised and labored for their safe∣tie aswell as they could: some lept from the wall down some gat oute of the grate, the same being somewhat hyer because Buysiere, stewarde to the late Lord de Au∣tricour was inclosed vnder it, being notwithstandyng taken from thence by his company, who not able other wise to effect their enterpryse, were constrayned to re∣tyre. They killed of them of the Religion twelue or four∣tene aswell Captaines as Souldiers, & almost as ma∣ny kepte prisoners within the towne, besides suche as were hurt, the Lord de Lespau, the Baron of Reurye, de Lessartes, des Milles, with certaine other were taken within the grosse tower. After this, they of Bourges fearing the courses that
they of the religion made euen to their gates, aduerti∣sed the king of their necessitie, who succoured thē spede∣ly with fixe cornets of horsemen, which had bene before at the siege of S. Ian d' Angely, they arryued at Bour∣ges vpon the ende of December. The Princes being come to Montauban, (as is said) executed the cause of their comming adioyning to their armie the forces of the two Uicountes and Montgo∣merie. In this time the King sente backe to Poyctyers, the Duke de Aumall, with thrée Canons, and one coluerine guyded by the Lord de Gouas and his regiment of foote∣men: And so bestowing his garrisons to winter (ly∣censing afore the Italian to go home) his Maiesty came to the Towne of Angiers. After these long vexations and troubles, all men be gan to desire, peace, the which, as it was greatly de∣sired of the faithfull, so there were manifest reasons, why the Catholiques should desire the same. For al∣though the losse and ruine of the faithfull was more hard to be recouered: Notwithstanding they that were staine of the Papistes side were not the lesser number. And their spoyles made knowne too many in diuers places, caused them to feare the desolation and calami∣ties to come the more, if warre should be taken in hand againe: which séemed to such as wisely beheld al things not hard to be renued of the Princes part: séeing a∣mong great difficulties they had both renued warres with encredible spéede, and also made them with grea∣ter force then before: the stirred mindes of the subiects being daungerous weapons. But all being weary of the continuall troubles wished for peace and quietnes: and would the kyngdome take weapon against it selfe to her owne destruction? It was sayd that the Kyng was enclined to peace, and yet angry for his former
losses, and moued with the letters of the Emperour & the Princes of Germany concerning a mariadge to bée made betwéene him and Maximilian the Emperours daughter: vnto whom the Emperour would not con∣sent but vppon condition of peace. And so the matter beinge handled of both partes for certaine monethes, at the length in the moneth of August with the great ex∣pectation and prayers of all men, peace was concluded: and by the Edict all men of both Religions were com∣maunded to liue quietly thorow the whole Realme. Which Edict after our long and lamentable vnquiet∣nes, it shalbe good to set forth, in maner and forme fol∣lowing. VVheras (saith the King) we perceiue that the trou∣blesThe Edict of peace. of warre, which were spread abrode before this time and also now, did threaten present ruine and destructi∣on to our realme and subiects: to preuent so great a mis∣chiefe, and to bring our kyngdome to her former tran∣quilitie and quietnes, by the aduise and consent of our sister, our bretheren and such as were specially chosen to be of our counsel, I thought good to decree and establish these things that followe, with a perpetuall and irreuo∣cable Edict: which we will commaund all our subiectes faithfully to obserue and keepe for euer. 1 First of all, that after these troubles and tumults of warres, all things that hetherto haue ben doon of both parts be quite forgottē, & also whatsoeuer was brought to passe by reason therof: and that it shall not be lawful for any to moue any strife or controuersie, or any waies to be troublesome for the same either publikely or pri∣uatly in any publique place or els where. 2 VVe straitly forbid and charge, that no man ripConcord. vp a fresh, those thinges done and past: or doe offend one another with woord or deede: or that they do dis∣pute or contend, about any thing done and past: but ra∣ther that they liue togither peaceably and quietly as it
becōmeth Citizens and friends. Then ye which shall do otherwise we will accompt as breakers of the common peace. 3 VVe will that the Catholique and Romish Reli∣gion,. be presently restored to those places of our realme, out of the which it hath bene banished: and that all thinges belonging to the Ministers therof, which haue bene taken away, be restored againe, and that they may quietly enioye with their Religion, their goods and landes. 4 And least there be any occasion of controuersie & The . dissension left hereafter, we will, that men liue peaceably and quietly in all places of our Realme, and that they sustaine no perill or hurt for Religions sake, or that they be molested and troubled any where, so that they liue ac cording too the prescript of our Edicts. 5 It shalbe lawfull for all Noble men, whether theyNoble men that are of . dwell within the Realme or without, to vse the reformed Religion, in one place only of the iurisdiction: and the same also to appertaine to their seruants, and to all o∣thers of their iurisdiction that will come to the same: so long as they or any of their seruants are present. I will that they signifie vnto our Lieftenants, what place they will chuse before they vse the same, according to the be∣nefit of the sayd Edict. 6 VVe also permit such Noblemen as are of inferiorNoble men of cal∣ling. calling, to vse for them selues and their families only, the reformed Religion. And if so bee there resort any of their friends to their houses to the number of ten to ce∣lebrate Baptisme, or for any other busines, our wil is not that they should be in any peril for the same, so that the exceede not the number of ten. 7 And this we graunt to the Queene of Nauarre, ourThe Queene of . Aunt, that beside the benefit generally graunted to all those that are in chiefe authoritie, it shalbe lawfull for her within her Duchy of Albrel, Armiguac, Foix, & of Bigorre, (so that it be but within one speciall place of
euery of those Lordships) to haue the free vse of the said Religion: that whosoeuer will, shall go vnto that place without al perill or harme, the said Queen being absent, to heare and see the administration of the foresayd Reli gion. 8 VVe do also appoynt these Cities to euery Liefte∣tenantship,All . by name, (The which cataloge for breuities sake we do omit as not necessary.) 9 And furthermore we do permit and suffer by thesePlaces . presents, that the vse of the reformed Religion shall con tinue in all those places, in the which it shalbe found to haue bene vsed the first day of this moneth of August. 10 But we seuerely forbid the administration and vse of that Religion, either in ministering the Sacraments, in preaching the word, in discipline, or in open chate∣chising and instructing of children, o bee in any other places, than in those in which wee haue permitted the same to be. 11 VVe will also that this Religion be in no wise ex∣ercisedThe Kinges Cour▪ within our Court, nor within two miles of the same. 12 Neither is it our pleasure that the same ReligionParis should be exercised at Paris nor within the liberties of the same: nor in any place within ten miles of the Citie.of the . 13 At the Buriall of the dead, I commaund my Lieu∣tenants of my Cities, and all other my officers, to suffer the men of the sayde religion, to haue leaue to vse those places, which they haue already or shall hereafter pro∣uide for the same: notwithstanding so, that whē any of them shall die, the Lieutenant may haue warning, who shall giue his seruaunts commaundement to attende & followe the coorse, which shalbe broughte forth in the night, and that with ten persons of his friendes & kins∣folkes onely following the deade corpes to the funerall: least there should be any tmult by these occasions. 14 It shall not be lawfull for the men of the said reli∣gion▪ to Marry within the degrees of Consanguinitie by
my lawes forbidden. 15 I will that all poore people, and sicke persons with∣outHospitals and Colleges. respect, be receiued into hospitals, and colledges. 16 And least any man shoulde doubt of my good in∣tentThe good will of the king to∣ward he prin∣ce of Conde and the rest. and meaning towardes the Queene of Nauar my Aunte, the Prince of Conde, and towarde the Prince of Nauar: I plainely affirme that I acknowledge and take them for my faithfull kinsfolkes, subiects and seruantes. 17 As also I protest that I account and take all those Noble men for my true and louing subiectes, and all o∣thers whatsoeuer, which haue followed my saide kins∣folkes, or by any maner of meanes haue ayded them. 18 I do also account the Duke of Deuxpons and hisThe Duke of Sweburge & other Princes. childrē, the Prince of Orange, the coūty Lodouic & his brethren, the countie VVolrade Mansfeld, and al other strangers, which haue ayded my kinsfolkes, for my good neighbors and friendes. 19 I will and commaund that my said Aunte and myThe Queene of . Cosyns, & all others which haue done any thing at their commaundement, be free from making of any account, of all that money which by thē, or by any other at their commaundement, hath bene taken out of our treasury, out of our cities, and out of the sale of our Churchlands: so that she or they giue vnto me a bill of their accounts made. I do also pardon & forgiue whatsoeuer hath bene about the affaires in the warre, as the mustering of soul∣diers, the coyning of money, the casting of great gūnes, and such like prouision: the besieging of Cities, the bat∣tering down of the walles: the entering into league with straungers, the bringing of them into my Realme: and to be short, I pardon and forgiue all those things which haue bene done and committed, both in this last war & in the warres before time, and that so certainely, as if I did perticularly name them by name. 20 Notwithstanding I will that the men of the sayd Religion do forthwith after the proclayming of this E∣dict, breake and let fall those leagues, into the which they
haue entred either within or without the Realme: nei∣ther shall they make collections of money, musterings of men, or any other assemblyes, than suche, as shalbe a∣lowed of vs: excepte they meane to suffer the punish∣ment of rebels and traitours. 21 I will also that all Prouinces Cities, and townes, & Priuiledges of Cities. all other places, doe enioy those offices and priuiledges, which they haue enioyed, before these tumultes of wars. 22 And to the ende all occasions of complaintes andOffices. quarrels may be quite taken away, we will that all fauo∣rers of that Religion, without respect, may be in autho∣ritie, and be pertakers of all manner of offices, as well as other men, also that they may lawfully be present at all assemblyes, Counsels, and consultations, depending vp∣pon those offices: and in no wise to be put frō the said offices after the proclamation of this Edict. 23 VVe will and cōmaunde that the men of the saidPayments to be indifferent. Religion, be not oppressed more than the catholiques, but to beare all a like one burthen according to the con∣sideration had of their goods. And because of the great burthens which the men of the sayd religiō haue borne, we will that they be not subiect to the payment of the tributes of Cities, which shall be hereafter vppon consi∣deration of those things which haue bene done hereto∣fore. Notwithstanding they shall be tributary vnto vs at our commaundement, as well as the Catholiques. 24 VVe will and commaunde that all they, whicheDeliuery of prisoners. because of these warrs are kept in prison, be set at liber∣tie, and that without any manner of raunsome. 25 If any controuersies happen to be for those raun∣somes,Raunsomes. and that the prisoners goods be taken awaye for the same: we will that the parties so disagreing and con∣tending do repaire to our brother the Duke of Aniou, who shall order and ende the matter. 26 VVe will and commaunde that all men of the re∣formedAll vnder the Kings protec∣on. religion be vnder our protectiō, and may peace∣ably enioy their offices and dignities: notwythstanding
we will not that their Lieutenāts & the deputies belōg∣ing vnto thē, be restored vnto those offices, because we haue otherwise prouided: notwithstanding they shall haue our pay for the same. 27 The booties and spoyles not taken in wars, whichMouables re∣stored. as yet shall remaine, shalbe restored to their owners a∣gain, the buyers hauing their money gyuen to them a∣gaine, in such quantitie as was put down in the regester of the Court. Thus would we haue all moueables resto∣red againe. 28 Also we will and commaunde that all owners mayReuenewes. receiue the reuenewes of their lands peaceably this yere and we abrogate all sentences to the contrary. 29 VVe will and commaunde that the houses, Ca∣stles,Of houses, ca∣stles & cities Cities, and other places of the men of the reformed Religion, be free from Garrisons of souldiers, and that they be in the same state & condition in the which they were before the beginning of these tumultes. 30 VVe will and commaunde that the Prince of O∣range,Princes of Nassau. and the countie Lodouic his brother, be really re∣stored to all their dominions which are within the bor∣ders of our Realme: and that the dominion of Orange be in the same state and case, in the which it was before the troubles of warres, according to the prescript of the graunt, made King Henry our Father, and other Kings our Auncetors: commaunding also that al instruments, Dedes, & writings, belonging to the same be forthwith restored. 31 VVe will also, that all writinges and euidences ofWritings of Landes. any landes bee presently restored too all men which are owners of the same of what Religion soeuer they be. 32 And to the end the remembrance ▪of all troublesIudgementes. past, may so much as may be, quite and cleane forgottē: VVe will and commaund iudgements against the men of the said religion, pronounced since the death of King Henry our father, for because of warres or Religion, whi ther the sayd sentences or iudgements concerne death,
or losse of goodes, to be voyd and of none effect, and to be rased out of the Regesters of all Courtes: and that all goods, with the ground of houses ouerthrowne, and the appertenances, be restored to their owners. 33 In like maner we abrogate all sentences in contro∣uersie, during the time of this warre, gotten and obtainedAbrogation of Sentences▪ against the men of the said Religion, in what cause soe∣uer it be: and we will that the controuersies bee in the same state, in the which they were before the beginning of these tumultes▪ 34 VVe will and commaund the men of the said re∣ligion,Obseruaaion of dollitique Lawes. to obserue and keepe all pollitique lawes of our Realme, as that which concerneth holy dayes and fa∣sting dayes, on the one, to do no worke, and on the other to eate no flesh. 35 And to the end all men may haue the lawe withoutInstice equal ly ministred. suspicion of hatred or fauour, we will that such contro∣uersies as haue bene already moued, or shalbe moued hereafter betweene the men of cōtrary Religion, be first of all brought before the ordinary Iudges: and if any appeale be made in the higher Parliaments: in respect of the Parliament of Paris which consisteth of seuen Courtes, then the men of the reformed Religion may if they will, refuse foure of the Iudges or Senators, and yet shew no cause of their refusal: howbeit the law is against it, which will not suffer any man to challenge or refuse a Senator without he shew some lawfull cause. And it shal also be lawful for them to refuse any other Senator, shew ing, according to custome lawfull causes. 36 As touching the controuersies, of which the ap∣pealeAppeales frō Parliaments▪ is to be made to the Parliament of Tholoz, except the parties shall chuse another Parliament to decide the controuersie, it shalbe lawfull for them to appeale to our Masters of Requestes in the Pallace of Paris, who shall define and decide all controuersies in high Court. 38 In the Parliament of Rhoane, of Aijgues, of Brit∣taine,Refusall of Iudges. and of Granople, it shalbe lawfull for them too
refuse sixe Iudges or Senatours: that is to saye three in eche Court. And in Burdeaux, foure in euery courte. 38 It shall also be lawful for the catholikes, to require that all they which haue bene at any time depriued of their offices, may not know or vnderstand their contro∣uersies, withoute expressing of any farther cause: and withall they shall haue leaue to make exception against any other counsellers, according to the custome. 39 And bicause so many haue bene offended in theFoure Citties graunted for Securities sake. time of these warres, that they cannot easily forget the iniuries done vnto them, which we woulde gladly haue thē to do: to the end therefore all occasions of troubles may be taken cleane away, we giue vnto the men of the reformed religion, the Cities of Rochel, Montaubane, Cognac, and Charite to keepe: In the which they maye dwell which woulde not returne home so quickely for feare of troubles. And for the safetie of the said Cities, the Prince of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde our wel∣beloued kinsmen, and twentie Noble men more of that side, will stand bound vnto vs, and will be sworne vnto vs to saue them from all perill, and to kepe them to our vse, and also at two yeeres ende to restore them agayne without any delay. In the meane time the vse of the ca∣tholique Religion shall abyde in those Cities, and all Churchmen and catholiques shal peaceably enioy their goods and landes. 40 Furthermore vvee will and commaunde that soConcerning this Edict. soone as this Edict is proclaymed in the two camps, that all men by and by lay aside their armor & weapons and neuer after to arme themselues again without our con∣sent, and the consent of our deare brother the Duke of Aniou. 41 VVe wil that there be free traffyke in all places ofTrafike. our Realme after the proclamation of this our Edict. 42 And to the ende this our Edict maye not be bro∣ken,Punishments for breaking this Edict. we commaund those which shall haue charge to see the execution of this our Edict, that they cause the Ma∣gistrates
of euery citie, of both religions, to sweare, that they will diligently looke to the obseruation of this E∣dict. And if any offence be committed against the same we protest that we will punishe the Magistrates them∣selues, except they bring such offenders before vs. 43 Moreouer to the ende all our officers may plain∣lyDisanulling of all former Edictes. vnderstand our will and meaning, & to the end there may hereafter no ambiguitie or scruple by the pretence of the former Edictes we protest that we do abrogate & disanull all other Edictes, rescriptes, decrees, interpretati∣ons, sentences of parliamentes, and priuy commentaries contrary to this our Edict concerning religion: and do commaund them all to be voyde frustrate and of none effecte. And we plainely declare that we would haue all men faithfully to obserue and keepe this our Edict. 44 And for the more sure confirmation of this ourThe othe of Magistrates. will and meaning, we commaund that all our officers and Magistrates of Cities, be made to sweare faithfully and truly to obserue and keepe this our Edict. 45 Finally, we will and commaund that all CourtesSolem procla∣mation of this Edict. of Parliament take the same othe, and that without de∣lay they proclaime this Edict solemly so soone as it shall come to their handes. And also that so soone as it shall be proclaymed in both Camps, the forreine souldiours on both partes be dismist. Also we commaund the Lief tenants of euery Prouince to see that this Edict be forth with proclaymed throughout all their Circuits. The E∣dict being once proclaymed, if any man put himselfe in armor seditiously, let him be well assured that hee shall loose his life, without all hope of pardon or fauour, Know all men for a suretie that this our Edict shall a∣bide firme and irrcuocable among all our subiects: for the obseruation wherof I charge them to loke diligent∣ly. This Edict thus made, was by and by proclaymed at Paris and in both Campes: both partes vnarmed
them selues, the straunger was dismist: and the Pro∣testants came from diuers places after long and piti∣full tariance to their owne desolate houses: but yet not quight and cleane healed of the woundes of the iniuries and hatred conceiued. ¶ But thou O God, most mightie, the Gouernour and pre∣seruer of thy Church, restore and build vp the decayed Kingdome, after so long calamities of Ciuill dissentions, and desolations of warres: that at the last (O Lorde) Thy Church may attaine to rest and peace. Yea come Lord Iesu, come quickly. ¶ FINIS. Imprinted at London, by Henry Middelton: for Frauncis Coldocke, and are to be sold at his shoppe in Powles Church∣yard, at the signe of the Greene Dragon. Anno 1574.
The tenth Booke treating of the furious outrages of Fraunce, vvith the slaugh∣ter of the Admirall, and diuers other Noble and excellent men, committed the. 24. August. ANNO. 1572. IT vvere to be vvished that the memorie of the freshe slaughters, & of that butcherly mur∣thering that hath lately bin cōmitted in a man∣ner in all the townes of Fraunce, were vtterly put out of the mindes of men: for so great dis∣honour and so great infamie hath thereby stai∣ned the whole French nation, that the moste part of them are nowe ashamed of their owne countrey, defiled with two most filthy spottes, falsehod and crueltie, of the which, whether hath bin the greater, it is hard to say. But forasmuch as there flée euery where abroade Pamphlets written by flatterers of the Courte, and men corruptly hired for reward, which doe moste shamefully set out things fained and falsely imagined, in stead of truth, I thought my selfe bound to do this seruice to posteri∣tie, to put ye matter in writing as it was truely done in déede, being well enabled to haue knowledge thereof, both by mine owne calamitie, and by those that with their owne eyes be∣held a great part of the same slaughters. In the yeare of our Lorde. 1561. when there séemed to bée some perill of troubles to arise by reason of the multitude of such as embraced the Religion (which they call reformed) for before that time the vsuall manner of punishing such as durst professe that Religion, was besides losse and forfeiture of all their goods to the Kings vse, to burne their bodies) at the re∣quest of the great Lordes and Nobilitie, there was holden an assemblie of the estates in the Kings house at Saint Germaines in Lay, neare to the towne of Paris, at which assemblie, in pre∣sence, and with the royall assente of King Charles the ninthe, which now raigneth, it was decreed, that from thencefoorth it should not be preiudiciall to any man to professe the said Re∣ligion, and that it should bée léefull for them to haue publike metings and preachings for the exercise thereof, but in the
suburbs of townes only. At this assemblie, Francis Duke of Guise, being descended of the house of Loraine, & at that time Grandmaister of the kings houshold, was not present. But when he was enformed of this decrée, he boyled with incredible sorrowe and anger, and within fewe dayes after, at a little towne in Champaigne called Vassey, while the professors of the said Religion were there at a Sermon, he accompanied with a band of souldiers, set vppon them, and siewe men and women, to the number of two hundreth. There was among these of the Religiō (for so hereafter ac∣cording to the vsuall phrase of the frenche tong we intende to call them) Lewes of Burbon of the bloud royall, commonly cal∣led Prince of Conde, after the name of a certaine towne, a man of great power, by reason of his kinred to the king. Ther∣fore when the Duke of Guise most vehemently striued against that lawe, and as much as in him lay, did vtterly ouerthrowe it, and troubled the common quiet thereby stablished, Gaspar de Coligni Admirall of Fraunce, and Francis d' Andelot his brother, Captaine of the Fantarie, and other Princes, Noble men and Gentlemen of the same Religion, come daily by heapes to the Prince of Conde, to complaine of the outrageous boldnesse and vntemperate violence of the Duke of Guise. At that time Ca∣therine de Medices Pope Clements brothers daughter, and mo∣ther of king Charles borne in Florence, a citie of Italie, had the go∣uernance of the Realme in the kings minoritie. For though by the lawe of Fraunce, neither the inheritance nor the admi∣nistration of the Realme is graunted to women, yet through the cowardly negligence of Anthonie king of Nauarre, the sayde Gatherine de Medices the kinges mother, against the custome of the Realme, was ioyned with him in that office of protector∣ship. She fearing the presumption and fierce pride of the Gui∣sians, wrote to the Prince of Conde with hir owne hand: which letters are yet remayning, and at the assemblie of the Prin∣ces of Germanie at Franckeford, holden vnder Ferdinande the Em∣peroure, were produced and opēly read about ten yeares past: wherein shée earnestly besought him, in so great hardnesse and distresse not to forsake hir, but to account both the mother and
the children, that is, both hir self and the king, and the kyngs brethren, committed to his faith and natural kindnesse, & that he should with al spéede, prouide for their common safetie: as∣suring him, that she would so imprint in the kinges mind his trauel taken in that behalf, that he should neuer be loser by it. Within few daies after, ye Duke of Guise well knowing howe great authoritie the name of the king would carie in France, and to the intēt that he would not séeme to attempt any thing rather of his own head than by the priuitie of the king, & ha∣uing atteined fitte partners to ioyne with him in these enter∣prises, he got the king into his power. Which thing being knowen abrode, & many hard incombrances ther vpon sodain∣ly rising, & a great part of the nobilitie of France maruelously troubled with it, the Prince of Conde by aduise of his friends, thought it best for him to take certaine towns & furnish them with garrisons: which was ye beginning of ye first ciuil warre. For the Prince of Conde alleaged the cause of his taking ar∣mour, to be the defence of the kings Edict, wherin cōsisted the safetie of the common weale, and that it could not be repealed without most assured vndoing of the nation of Fraunce, & de∣struction of the nobilitie, by reason of the excéeding great mul∣titude of those that dayly ioyned themselues to that Religion. Of which number suche as being of noble birthe, were in power, dignitie, wealth, and credite aboue the rest, thought it not méete for them to suffer the punishmentes and crueltie ac∣customed to be extended vpon the professors thereof: beside that, they helde them discontented that the Duke of Guise a newe come, a straunger translated from the forestes of Loraine into Fraunce, did take vppon him in Fraunce so great cou∣rage and so high dominion and power. Thereto was added the Quéenes mothers singular care (as was reported) for cō∣seruation of peace, and repressing the rage of the Guisians. Upō whiche opinion it is certayne that aboue twentie thousande men hauing regarde onely to the Quéenes inclination, ioy∣ned themselues to the side of those of the Religion, and to the defence of their profession, which at that time had beūeged the force of the kinges power▪ After certaine battailes and many losses on both paris, & the Duke of Guise slaine, within a yéere
peace was made with this cōdition, that they of the Religion should haue frée libertie thereof, and should haue assemblies & preachings for the exercise of the same in certaine places. This peace continued in force, but not in all places, during fiue yeares: for in the moste townes and iurisdictions, the of∣ficers that were affectionate to the Romishe side, whom they commonly call Catholikes, did all the displeasures they could to those of the Religion. Therfore, whē Ferdinando Aluares de Toledo, commōly called Duke of Alua, was leading an armie not farre from the frontiers of Fraunce, against those of the lowe countrey which embraced the reformed Religiō, against the will of the king of Spaine, the Quéene mother, caused to be leuied and brought into Fraunce sixe thousand Switzers for a defence, as she caused it to be bruted, but as the successe hathe proued, for this intent, that the Prince of Conde, the Admirall and other Noble men of the Religion, if they escaped the trea∣sons prepared for them, and listed to defende themselues by force, and trie it by battaile, might bée sodeinlye oppressed ere they were prouided. For the courtiers whiche then had the managing of these matters, did not at that time wel trust the souldiers of Fraunce. Many things pertaining to the course of that time, and the renewing of the warre, must here for hast to our present purpose be necessarily omitted. When the warre had endured about sixe monethes, peace was made with the same conditions that wée haue aboue re∣hearsed, that all men should haue frée libertie to followe and professe the Religiō reformed▪ For this was euer one and the last condition vpon all the warres. But within fewe dayes or monethes after, it was plainly vnderstoode, that the same peace was full of guile and treason, and finally, that it was no peace, but most cruel warre cloaked vnder the name of peace. For forthwith al those towns which they of the Religion had yelded vp, were possessed and strengthened with garrisons of souldiers of the contrary side, sauing onely one towne on the sea ceast of Xantoigne commonly called Rochell. For the men of that towne about two hundreth yeares past, had yelded them∣selues to the kinges power & allegeance, with this condition, that they should neuer be constrayned against their will to re∣ceiue
any garrison souldiers. Also the Prince of Conde and the Admirall, were aduertised, that there was treason agayne prepared to entrappe them by Tauaignes, a man giuen to mur∣ther and mischiefe, which had lately bin made Marshall of Fraunce, and that if they did not spedely auoyde the same, it should shortly come to passe, that they should be deceiued and taken by him, and deliuered vp to the crueltie of their aduer∣saries. Upon the receit of these aduertisementes, they imme∣diatly make haste to Rochell, carying with them their wiues & yong children, which was the beginning of the thirde ciuill warre, the most sharpe and miserable of all the rest. There was at that time in the court, Charles Cardinall of Loraine, bro∣ther to the Duke of Guise, whiche (as is aboue saide) was slayne in the first warre, one accompted most subtill and craf∣tie of all the rest, but of a terrible, cruell and troublesome dis∣position, so as he was thought intollerable euen at Rome it selfe. This man, they of the reformed Religion reported to be the most sharpe and hatefull enimie of their profession, and him they abhorred aboue all other for the crueltie of his na∣ture, and named him the firebrand of all ciuill flames. He at the beginning of the third ciuill warre, persuaded the king to publishe an Edict, that no man professe any Religion but the Romishe or Popishe, and that whosoeuer would embrace any other, should be cōpted as traytours. In that same Edict prin∣ted at Paris, this sentence was expressely conteined, and for the strangenesse of the matter, and for that it stayned the kyngs name with the most dishonorable spot of periurie and breache of faith, it was in other impressions afterward omitted. And it was further then declared, that albeit the king had in many Edictes before that time permitted the fréedome of Religion, yet his meaning euer was to reteine and cause to be reteined of all men, the onely Romishe or Popishe Religion within his Realme. After many ouerthrowes on both partes giuen and recey∣ued, wheras the end of this third warre was thought likely to be the harder, by reason of the breach of faith in the yéeres be∣fore, and on the other side the state of the Realme by reason of the wast that the Cities were brought vnto, and the extreme
pouertie of the meane people and his husbandmi, did require some treatie of composition, the king sent messengers to the Admirall, to signifie vnto him in the kinges name, that the king himselfe had at length founde out a moste sure waye of peace and concorde, namely, that the armies of both parties ioyned togither, should go into the lowe countrey against the Duke of Alua, which had bin the authour of the late calami∣ties in Fraunce. He signified further, that he had great causes of querels against the king of Spayne, and this principally, that he had inuaded and helde by force, sodenly slaying all the soul∣diers there, an Islande of the newe found world, called Florida, which had bin taken by the French and kept vnder his domi∣nion: and likewyse the Marquesdome of Finall, the inhabi∣tantes whereof had but a litle time before yelded themselues to the kinges subiection and allegeance. He saide that the most stedfast band of concord should be that forein warre, and that there could no other better meane be deuised to drowne the memorie of the former dissentions in eternall forgetfulnesse. To the performance herof, he said it was a matter of most apte opportunitie, that Lodouic Counte of Nassaw, brother to the Prince of Aurange, had bin now two yéeres in the Admi∣ralles camp, to whom the Admirall gaue principall credit in all things, and that by him and his fellowes of the lowe coun∣trey & other, whom he vnderstoode to fauour his part, it might easily be brought to passe that certaine Cities might be sur∣prised, and thereby great aduantage be attained to the atchie∣uing of the warre. The Admiral hearing these things was maruellously trou∣bled. For albeit he doubted not of the kings fidelitie, yet ther∣withall many thinges fell into his minde to be considered: as the power of the Cardinall & the rest of the Guisians, who were well knowne to haue bin at all times most affectionate to the king of Spayne For the Duke of Guise had lefte a sonne, a very yong man called Henry, to whom the Quéene had giuen al the offices and places of honor that his father had borne before, being vnfit therto by age, and against the ancient lawes and customes, and also through the traiterous infidelitie of cer∣taine of the kinges counsaylers, whom she knewe for their af∣fection
to Popishe Religion to be moste addicted to the Spa∣nish king, and that diuers of them had great yéerely pensions of him, and did disclose vnto him the affaires of the Realme. He remembred howe hereby it came to passe, that the same kinges Embassadour (which among strange nations séemed vtterly incredible) was admitted into the priuie Counsell of Fraunce, and that one Biragio a Lumbard, and (as it is reported) a traytour to his owne countrey, otherwise altogither vnlear∣ned, and specially ignorant of the ciuill lawe, was yet for the subtiltie of his witte aduanced to so ḡreat honour, that he exe∣cuted the Chauncellers office, Michaell Hospitall being displa∣ced, a man knowen to be such a one, as there was not in all degrées of mē any either more wise, or more learned, or more zelously louing his countrey. Herewithall he considered the slaunderous cauillations of his aduersaries, to whom hereby might seme an occasion giuen, as if the Admirall were of a troublesome nature, and could not abide any quietnesse, nor could long reste at home without some tumultuous stirre. Herevnto the messengers replied as they were able, & there∣withall alleaged this cause of so sodaine hatred against the Spanishe king, that one Albenie late returned out of Spaine, had infourmed the king & the Quéene mother for certaintie, that king Philip a few monethes before, had poysoned his wife the French kings sister, and had spred rumors of hir through∣out all Spaine, such as for the honour of many persones are méete not to be disclosed. But nothing moued the Admirall so much as the cherefull earnestnesse of Lodouic of Nassaw, who assone as he was aduertised of that purpose of the king, omit∣ted nothing that he thought might serue to encourage the Ad∣mirall therevnto. The Admirall perswaded hereby, nothing fearyng the in∣fidelitie of those of the Courte, gaue his mynde to hearken to composition. And so was the thyrde ciuill warre ended, and the peace concluded with the same conditions that were be∣fore, that euery man should haue frée libertie to vse and pro∣fesse the Religion. Within few moneths after this, diuers princes of Germa∣nie,
that fauoured the Religion refourmed, and among those the thrée Electors, the Palsgraue, the Duke of Saxonie, and the Marques of Brandeburge, sent their Embassadours into France to the king, to gratulate vnto him for the newe reconciliation of his subiectes. And bicause they accompted it greatly to be∣houe themselues that the same concorde should remaine sted∣fast and of long continuance, they promised, that if any would for that cause procure trouble, or make warre vppon him, ei∣ther within his own dominiōs, or without, they and their fol∣lowers should be ready to defend him. To this embassage the king first by wordes, & afterwarde by a booke subscribed with his own hand, answered and gaue his faith, that he would for euer most sacredly and faithfully obserue his Edict of pacifica∣tion. Hereby so much the more willingly the Admirall suf∣fered him selfe to be drawne to the said purposes for the lowe countrey, although oftentimes calling to minde the nature of the Quéene mother, he vsed to saye to diuers, and specially to Theligny, to whome he afterwarde maried his daughter, that he greatly suspected the rolling wit of that woman. For (saith he) so soone as she hath brought vs into that preparatiō against the lowe countrey, she will leaue vs in the midst. Neuerthelesse, the Counte of Nassaw, writeth to his bro∣ther, and they conferring their aduises together, sent messen∣gers to the king, that if it please him to deale with the matter of the lowe countrey, they will shortly so doe, that he shall by their many and great seruices, well perceiue their affection and deuotion towarde him. The king writeth againe to them in most louing termes, saying that their message most highly pleased him, and he gaue to them both his harty thankes. About the same time Maximilian the Emperour, pitying the estate of ye prince of Aurange (as he said) treated by his Embas∣sadours with the king of Spaine, and had in manner obtey∣ned, that the Prince should haue all his goodes restored vnto him, but with this condition, that hée should haue no house within the territorie of the lowe countrie, but settling his re∣fidence and dwelling elsewhere, he should fréely enioy all his reuenewes. Which matter being reported to the French king, he immediatly sent messengers to the prince of Aurange,
willing him to looke for nothing by that dealing of the Empe∣rour, saying that it was but a fraude and guilefull deuise in∣tended for this purpose, only to breake vp his leuying of soul∣diers that he had begon in Germanie: and assuring him, that if he would credite and followe him, he would giue him aide suf∣ficient to recouer his estate. The Prince of Aurenge perswaded by these promises of king Charles continued his musters, and determined a whyle to beare the charges though they were heauie to him, whyle such things as were necessarie for the warre, were in prepa∣ring. In the meanetime Lodouic in disguised apparel went to Paris to the king. Forasmuch as the season of the yéere by this time séemed not commodious to leuie an armie, for the win∣ter was at hande, by assent they deferred the matter till the next Sommer. These thinges thus hanging, the Prince of Aurenge his cap∣taines by Sea, did oftentimes set vn the Spaniards and Por∣tingals & such ships as they tooke ty brought into the hauen of Rochel, which then was in the power of the Prince of Condees part: and there they openly vttered and solde their prizes to the men of the towne and other merchantes of France, wher∣vpon the Embassadour of Spaine made often complaintes to the kinges priuie Cousell. And forasmuch as they thought it very auaileable to this enterprise, that Elizabeth Quéene of Englād, might be brought into league with them, the king committed the dealing in that matter to the Admirall. For a few monethes before, the king had with moste swete alluring letters, gottē him to the Court, where he was most honorably enterteined: and to take from him all occasion of distrust vpon his aduersaries, or of other∣wise suspecting of the kinges or Quéene mothers affection to∣wardes him, first, all the Guisians of a set purpose departed the Court. Then the king gaue the Admirall free libertie to take with him what companie and with what furniture he would: and bicause it was thought that he had more confidence in the Marshall Cosse, than in the rest, therefore the king commaun∣ded the saide Marshall to be euer at hand with the Admirall, & to assiste him in the kings name if any nede were.
The matter of the league with Englande, the Admirall so diligently and industriously handled, that within shorte space after by Embassadours sent, and by faithe giuen and receiued, and othes solemnely taken on both parts, it was confirmed. Concerning the procurement of other leagues and amities, such as might séeme to further the enterprise of the low coun∣trey, the Admiral also trauelled in the Kings name, and by his commaundement, and had in a maner brought al these things to an end. And of all those leagues, the first and principall cō∣dition was, that the libertie of Religion shoulde continue, and that the king should most diligently and sincerely obserue this Edict of pacification. Though these things séemed to be handled secretly, yet by the letters both of Biragio the vicechancellor, of whome we made mention before, and of Moruilliers whom for his hypocri∣ticall leanesse children commonly called the Chimera or bugge of ye Court, & by aduertisement of Cardinal de Pelue, a mā most fit either to inuent or execute any treason, they were caried to ye B. of Rome, who by aduise of his Cardinals, sent by & by one of their number, called Alexandrine, in the midst of most sharp winter into France, with these instructiōs, to persuade ye king to enter into the societie of the league of Trent, whereof the first & principall article was, that the confederats should ioyn their powers & make war against ye Turkes & Heretikes, meaning by the name of heretikes, al those Princes that did permit the vse of the reformed Religion within their dominions. The Cardinall Alexandrine was honorably receiued in the Court, but yet dismissed without atchieuing his purpose. For so was it bruted among the people, and commonly beléeued throughout Fraunce: albeit he himselfe secretly séemed to re∣turne very mery and chéereful to the Pope: and as it is repor∣ted, did somtime say that he receiued such answere of the king as was néedeful not to be published, & that the King & Quéene mother had largely satisfied him. Forasmuch as it was thought a matter greatly auayling to the enterprise of the lowe countrey, to sende certaine shippes into the English Seas, that if any ayde should be sent into the lowe Countrey to the Duke of Alua out of Spayne, it might
so be stopped, Strozzi and the Baron de la Garde were appoyn∣ted for that purpose, to whome the King gaue in commaunde∣mente to rigge forth certayne Shippes of Burdeaux and Rochell, well armed and well appoynted, and to prouide with al spéede all things néedefull for those Shippes. The Ambassadour of Spayne somewhat moued with this preparation, made di∣uers complaintes to the Kings Councell on the behalfe of the King his master, and yet neuer receiued any other aunswere but that the King thoughte it not likely, and that he woulde sende Commissioners to Burdeaux and to Rochell, with letters and commaundemente that there shoulde be no preparation made to the Sea, and if any had bene made, it should be enqui∣red of. What instructions were secretly and closely vnder hande giuen to these two Captaines of that nauie, we do not certainely knowe. But this no man can doubt of, but that they had commission to distresse all such Ships wherein any Spa∣nishe Souldiers should be transported into the lowe countrie, and that all this preparation to the sea was ordayned against the Spanishe King and the Duke of of Alua. And moreouer that the Admirall at the same time receiued commaundement from the King, to sende Espials vnto Per an Islande of the newe founde worlde, most plentifull of gold aboue all the other, nowe béeing in the Spaniardes dominiō, to learne if there were any good enterprise to be attempted or atchieued for the getting of it. Which matter was commit∣ted to a certaine Gentleman, one of the Admiralles trayne, who went thyther accompanyed with a certayne Portingall, a man most skilfull of those Nauigations, whome the Admi∣ral had ioyned with him by the Kings commaundemente, and is not yet returned. Nowe it cannot be expressed howe many and howe great tokens of most louing minde the King at that time shewed to the Admirall, and to the Counte Rochfoucault, and to Thelig∣ny, and to the rest of the chief noblemen of the Religion. First all such things as in the former warres had bene taken away in the Townes, Fermes, and Castles of the Admirall and d'Andelot, the Kyng caused to bée sought oute and restored. If there were any other whome the Kyng vnderstoode to
be beloued and estéemed of the Admirall, or to haue attained any speciall honour in the saide late warres, those he liberally benefited and rewarded. To the Admirall himselfe he com∣maunded one daye to be giuen a hundred thousand pounds of his owne treasure in recompence of his former losses. When his brother the Cardinall Chastilliō, endowed with many great and welthy benefices, was departed his life, the king gaue him the fruites of one whole yéere. Also the king wrote to Philibert Duke of Sauoy, that he should do him a moste acceptable plea∣sure, if he did not onely deale more gently with those that in the former warres had ayded those of the Religion, but also would vse clemencie and mildnesse toward all other that pro∣fessed the same Religion within his dominions. And for that there was old enmitie betwene the Guisians & the Admirall, whereby it was to be doubted that perillous cō∣tentions would arise in the Realme of France, the king wil∣led it to be signified to them both in his name, that they should for his sake and the common weales, giue ouer those displea∣sures, and he prescribed them a certaine fourme of reconcilia∣tion and agréement, the same whereof the foundations had bin layed almoste sixe yéeres before in the towne of Molins, wher the king calling to him ye greatest estates of his realme, after consultation and deliberation had vpon the matter, pro∣nounced the admirall not guiltie of the death of the Duke of Guise, wherewith he was charged by the yong Duke of Guise and his kinsmen: and so the king by the aduise of his Coun∣sell had ended that controuersie. Furthermore, the Cardinal of Loraine (who as we haue said was the very forger of all the former warres) to take away al ielousie of new practises, was departed to Rome and tooke with him his familiar friend the late created Cardinall Peluey, one reputed a moste subtill and craftie persone, vnder pretence of going to the election of a newe Pope in place of the old Pope then lately deceassed. But there was none greater and more assured token of pu∣blike peace and quietnesse than this, that the king purposed to giue his sister Margaret, in mariage to the Prince Henry, the sonne of the Quéene of Nauarre, which Prince had in the last
warre defended the cause of the Religion, and bin soueraigne of their armie. Which mariage the king declared, that it shuld be the moste streight bond of ciuill concorde, and the most as∣sured testimonie of his good will to those of the Religion. Yea, and also bicause it was alleaged that the said Prince Henry was restrained in conscience, so as he might not marrie the Lady Margaret being of a contrarie Religion, a Catholike and giuen to the rites of the Romishe Church, the king for answere said that he would discharge hir of the Popes lawes, and notwithstanding the crying out of all his courtiers to the contrary, he permitted him, that without all ceremonies, in the porch of the great church of Paris the mariage should be ce∣lebrate in such a forme as the ministers of the reformed Chur∣che mislyked not. Which thing being by reporte and letters spread throughe the world, it n not be expressed how much it made the harts of those of the religion assured and out of care, and how it cast out all feare and ielosies out of their minds, what a confidence it brought them of the Kings good will toward them. Finally, how muche it reioyced foreine Princes and states that fauo∣red the same Religion. But the Admirals minde was muche more stablished by a letter which about the same time Thelig∣ny brought him with the Kings own hand and sealed, wherein was conteined, that whatsoeuer the Admiral should do for the matter of the intended warre of the lowe countrey, the Kyng would allowe and ratifie the same, as done by his owne com∣maūdemēt. About that time Lodouic of Nassaw with ye Quene of Nauarre a Lady most zelously affected to the Religion, came to the Frenche Court. The league was made betwene King Charles and the Prince of Aurenge, and the articles thereof put in writing. The mariage was appointed to be holden in the towne of Paris. For which cause the Quene of Nauarre during those few dayes repaired thether to prouide things for the so∣lemnitie of the wedding. For the same cause the King sente to the Admirall one Cauaignes, a man of an excellent sharp witte whome for the Admirals sake the King had aduanced to great honor, requiring the Admirall to go before to Paris, as well for the saide preparation, as also for the matter of the war of the
lowe countrey, promising that he himselfe woulde within few dayes followe after him: assuring him that there was nowe no cause for him to feare the threatnings and mad outrages of the Parisians. For in as much as the same towne is aboue all other giuen to superstitions, and is with seditious prea∣chings of Monkes and Friers dayly enflamed to crueltie, it is harde to expresse howe bitterly they hated the Admirall and the professors of that Religion. Whereto was added a griefe of their minde conceiued certaine dayes before, by reason of a certaine stone crosse gilted and builte after the manner of a spire stéeple, commonly called Gastignes crosse, whiche the Admirall with great earnest fute obteyned of the King to be ouerthrowne: for he alleaged, that being erected in the midst of the rage of the ciuill warre, as it were in trumphe to the reproche of one of the Religion, it was a monument of ciuill dissention, and so a matter offensiue to peace and concorde. The King well knowing the deadly hate of the Parisians to the Admirall, wrote his letters to Marcell the prouost of the Marchaunts (which is the highest dignitie in Paris with sharp thretnings if ther shuld be raised any stir or trouble by reason of the Admirals comming. To the same effect also the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother, and the Quéene mother wrote to the same Marcell and the rest of the Magistrates of Paris, so that nowe there séemed vtterly no occasion lefte for the Admirall to feare or distrust. And within few dayes after, the King sent Briquemault a man of great vertue and estimation, to the Ad∣mirall, with the same instructions, saying that the matter of the low cuntrey could not wel be delt in without his presence. The Admirall persuaded by thus many meanes, and filled with good hope and courage, determined to go to Paris, where so soone as he was ariued, and had ben honorably and louing∣ly entertained of the King and his brethren, and the Quéene mother, and consultation entred among them about the pre∣paration for the lowe countrey, he declared to the King at large, howe the Duke of Alua was in leuying of great power, and preparing an armie, and that if the King should dissemble his purpose, it woulde come to passe that many thereby would shewe themselues slower and slacker to the enterprises, and
that nowe were offered great meanes to do good, whiche if he let slippe, he should not easily recouer the like againe hereaf∣ter. And therefore it was best to take the aduantage of this op∣portunitie. A fewe dayes before, Lodouic of Nassaw went secretely into the frontiers of the lowe countrey, and toke with him as part∣ners of his iourney and priuie to his councell, thrée Frenchmē of great credite with the Admirall, namely Saucourt, la Noue, and Genlis, to whome the King hadde giuen in charge to sée if they coulde by any meanes attempt and possesse any townes bordering vpon his Realme. They gathering diuers other Gentlemen into their companie, wente spéedily into the lowe countrey, the Admirall not knowing of it. Who as soone as he vnderstoode of their going thither, wrote vnto them that he much maruelled what they ment, saying that he well knewe there coulde be no power gotten readie before fortie days end, and that they should be well aduised to do nothing rashly, nor to ouerthrowe with hast their deuises that séemed not ripe to be executed. The Countie of Nassaw inflamed with the sight and desire of his countrey, and fearing the mutablenesse of the King, did first at the sodaine set vpon Valentiennes, but being repulsed by the Spanishe Souldiers that were in garrison in the Castell, he hastily departed to Montz and toke the town, being a place very strong by nature and well furnished with all things ne∣cessarie for the warre. Which thing being by report and Mes∣sangers spread abroade into the lowe countrey, and caried in∣to Fraunce and Germanie, bothe encouraged all them of the Religion with great hope, and also séemed to haue now plain∣ly and openly deciphered and disclosed the mynd of the French King. Moreouer Genlis returning to Paris, when he had made report to the King of all the matter as it had procéeded, easily obtayned of him, that by his assente he might leuie certaine bandes of footemen and horssemen of Fraunce, and carie them to succoure Montz. But by the way when he was entred into ye bounds of the low countrie, hauing with him to the number of 4000. footemen, and about 400. horssemen, they were be∣set by the Duke of Alua, and the most parte of them distressed:
whiche thing was well knowne to haue bene wrought by the meanes of the Guisians, whiche by dayly messages and letters, aduertised the Duke of Alua of their purpose and preparation. Which falsehood of theirs, many moste affectionate to the Ro∣mish Religion were highly offended with, bicause a great nū∣ber were addicted to ye same Romish Religion in that cōpanie. With this losse, and with the rescue of the towne of Valenti∣ennes, ye King semed to be much troubled, for he feared least his counsels being disclosed to the Spanish King, would at length bréede some cause of querell and warre. Howbeit, when he be∣gan to remember, that a great part of his secretes was alrea∣die reuealed to the Duke of Alua, he oftentimes resolued to vt∣ter his minde plainly, and to make open warre. But he was withdrawne from that purpose by certaine men whiche the Admirall had long before conceiued, that they woulde so doe. Howbeit, he gaue the Admirall libertie to sende what soeuer he thought meete to further the Prince of Aurenge his enter∣prise, and as great supply either of footemen or of horssemen as he could to the armie which the Prince of Aurenge had leuied in Germanie. When the Admiral for that cause had made re∣quest that he might leuie thirtie troupes of horssemen, and as many ensignes of footemen, he easily obtayned it. For the entertainement of these footmen it behoued to haue money, wherfore at the request of the Admirall, the King cal∣led for his Tresurer and cōmaunded him to deliuer to the Ad∣mirall so muche money as the Admirall should thinke méete, and charged him, that he should not in any wise after the vsu∣all maner of the accompts of finances, write the causes of the receipt, but onely set it downe in this forme: This summe of money was payde to the Admirall suche a daye by the Kings commaundement, for certaine causes which the King hath cō∣maunded not to be written: and to this warrant the King subscribed with his owne hand. Also the King wrote to Monducet his Embassadoure in the lowe countrey, to trauell as earnestly as he could, for their de∣liuerance, that were taken at the ouerthrow of Genlis, whiche commaundement it is sayde that Monducet did most faithful∣ly and diligently execute.
Not long before this, Ioane Quéene of Nauarre aboue men∣tioned, died in the Court at Paris, of a sodaine sicknesse, béeing about the age of fortie and thrée yeres, where as the suspition was great that she dyed of poyson, and hir body being for that cause opened by the Phisitions, there were no tokens of poy∣son espied. But shortely after, by the detection of one A. P. it hath ben founde that she was poysoned with a venomed smell of a payre of perfumed gloues, dressed by one Renat the Kings Apothicarie, an Italian, that hath a shop at Paris vpon S. Mi∣chaels bridge, neare vnto the Pallace: which could not be espi∣ed by the Phisitions whiche did not open the heade nor loked into the brayne. It is well knowne that the same man aboute certaine yeres past, for the same intent gaue to Lewes Prince of Conde a poisoned Pomander, which the Prince left with one le Grosse his Surgion: le Grosse delighted with the same, was by little and little poysoned therwith, and so swelled, that he hardly escaped with his life. By hir death, the Kingdome came to the Prince Henrie hir sonne, to whome as is abouesaide, the Kings sister was pro∣mised and contracted. Thinges being as it séemed throughout al France in most peacible estate, and the concord of all degrées well stablished, the day was appointed for the mariage of the King of Nauar, which day all they that fancied the Religion estéemed so much the more ioyfull to them, bicause they sawe the King wonder∣fully bent thereunto, and all good men iudged the same a most assured plege and establishment of ciuill concorde, wheras on the contrarie part, the Guisians and other enimies of common quietnesse greatly abhorred the same mariage, When the day came, the mariage was with royall pompe solemnized before the great Churche of Paris, and a certaine forme of wordes so framed, as disagréed with the Religion of neither side, was by the Kings commaundement pronounced by the Cardinall of Bubon the King of Nauars vncle: and so the matrimonie celebrate with great ioye of the King and all good men, the bryde was with great traine and pompe led into the Church to heare Masse, and in the meane time the brydgrome who mislyked these ceremonies, togither with Henrie Prince
of Conde, sonne of Lewes, and the Admirall, and other noble mē of the same Religion, walked without the Churche dore, way∣ting for the Brides returne. While these thinges were in doing at Paris, Strozzi, who as we haue sayde, had the charge of the Kings power at the Sea, houering vpon the coast of Rochel, did now and then send of his Captains and Souldiers into the towne, vnder colour of buy∣ing things necessarie: & sometime he came thither also himself. The like was done at y• same time in an other part of France, by the horsmen of Gonzague Duke of Niuers neare to the town of la Charite, whiche hath a bridge ouer the Ryuer of Loyre, and remained till that time in the power of those of the Religion, by reason of the great number of them there inhabiting. This troupe was of those horssemen whiche the King hath accusto∣med to kéepe in ordinarie wages in euery countrey, whereof the moste parte were Italians, countrimen to their Captaine Lewes Gonzague, to whome the Quéene mother had giuen the daughter and heire of the Duke of Niuers in mariage. They requested of the townesmen, that they might make their mus∣ters within the towne, saying that they had receiued warrant from the King so to do, and shewed the Kings letters therfore. At Lions the gouernour of the towne, commaunded a viewe to be taken of all those that professed the Religion, and their names to be written in a boke and brought vnto him: which boke shortely after, according to the successe, was called the bloudie boke. After the mariage ended at Paris, whiche was the time that the Admirall had appointed to returne to his owne house, he moued the King concerning his departure. But so great was the preparation of playes, so greate was the magnificence of banquets and shewes, and the King so earnestly bent to those matters, that he had no leysure, not only for waightie affaires but also not so much as to take his naturall sleepe. For in the French Court, Dauncings, Maskings, stageplayes (wherein the King excéedingly delighteth) are cōmonly vsed in the night time: and so the time that is fittest for counsell and matters of gouernance, is by reason of nightly riottous sitting vp, of necessitie consumed in sléepe. So great also is the familiaritie
men and the women of the Quéene mothers trayne, and so greate libertie of sporting, entertainement and talking togy∣ther, as to foreine nations may séeme incredible, and be thou∣ght of al honest persons a matter not very conuenient for pre∣seruation of noble yong Ladies chastitie. Moreouer, if there come any Pandor or bawde out of Italie, or any Scholmaster of shamefull and filthy lust, he winneth in shorte time maruel∣lous fauour and credite. And such a multitude is there begon to be of Italians, commonly throughout all Fraunce, specially in the Court, since the Administration of the Realme was cō∣mitted to the Quéene mother, that many do commonly call it Fraunce-Italian, and some terme it a Colonie and some a common sinke of Italie. These madnesses of the Court, were the cause that the Ad∣miral could not haue accesse to the Kings speach, nor entrance to deale in waightie matters. But when they that were sente from the reformed Churches to complaine of iniuries commō∣ly done to those of the Religion, vnderstoode of the Admirals purpose to depart, they did with all spéede deliuer to him their bookes and petitions, and besought him, not to depart from the Court till he had dealt in the cause of the Churches, and dely∣uered their petitions to the King and his Counsell. For this cause the Admirall resolued to deferre his going for a while, till he might treat with the Kings Counsell concerning those requests: for the King had promised him that he would shortly entend those matters, & be present with the Counsel himselfe. Besides this delay, there was an other matter that stayed him. There was owing to the Rutters of Germanie, which had serued on the part of the Religion in the last warre, great summes of money for their wages, in whiche matter the Ad∣mirall trauelled with incredible earnestnesse and care. Concerning all these affaires, the Admirall (as he determi∣ned before) hauing accesse and opportunitie for that purpose, moued the Kings priie Counsell the 22. of August, which was the fifte daye after the King of Nauarres mariage, and spente much time in that treatie. About noone, when he was in retur∣ning home from the Counsell, with a greate companie of noblemen and Gentlemen, beholde, a Harquebuzier out of
a window of a house néere adioyning, shot ye Admiral with two bullets of leade through both the armes. When the Admirall felte himselfe wounded, nothing at all amazed, but with the same countenance that he was accustomed, he sayde, throughe yonder windowe it was done: goe sée who are in the house: What manner of trecherie is this? Then he sente a certaine gentleman of his company to the King to declare it vnto him. The King at that time was playing at tennise with the duke of Guise. Assone as he heard of the Admirals hurt, he was mar∣uellously moued as it séemed, and threw away his racket that he played with on the grounde, and taking with him his bro∣ther in lawe the King of Nauarre he retired into his Castle. The Gentlemen that were with the Admirall, brake into the house frō whence he receiued his hurt, there they found on∣ly one woman, the kéeper of the house, and shortely after also a boy, his lackey that had done the déede, and therewithall they founde the harquebuze lying vpon the table in that Chamber from whence the noyse was heard: him that shot they founde not, for he in great hast was runne away out at the back gate, and getting on horssebacke, whiche he hadde wayting for him readie sadled at the dore, he rode a great pace to S. Anthonies gate, where he had a fresh horsse tarying for him, if néed were, and an other at Marcels gate. Then by the Kings commaun∣dement a great number rode out in post into all parts to pur∣sue him: but for that he was slipped into bywayes, and recey∣ued into a certaine Castle, they could not ouertake him. At the sute of the King of Nauar, and the Prince of Conde & other, the King by and by gaue commission for enquirie to be made of the matter, and cōmitted the examining thereof to thrée chosen persons of the Parliament of Paris, Thuan & Mor∣sant and Viol a Counseller. Firste, it was founde that the same house belonged to a Priest a Canon of S. Germaine, whose name is Villemure, whiche had bene the Duke of Guises scholemaster in his youth, and still continued a retayner towarde him. Then the womā which we sayd was found in the house, being taken & brought before them, confessed that a fewe dayes before, there came to hir one Challey somtime a master d'hostel of the Duke of Guises
house, and nowe of the Kings Courte, and commaunded hir to make muche of the man that had done this deede, and to lodge him in the same bed & Chamber where Villemure was wonte to lye, for that he was his friende and very familiar acquain∣tance, and that Villemure would be very glad of it. The name of him that shot was very diligently kept secret. Some saye it was Manreuet, which in the thirde ciuill war tratorously slew his Captaine monsieur de Mouy, a moste valiante and noble Gentleman, and straightway fled into the enimies campe. Some say it was Bondot, one of the archers of ye Kings guard. When the womans confession was brought to the King, he immediatly called Monsieur de Nance, Captaine of his guarde, and commaunded him to apprehend Challey and bring him to him. Challey assoone as he heard the stroke of the péece, fled in∣to the Kings Castle called the Louure, and hid him in the duke of Guises chamber, from whence he conueyed himselfe awaye assoone as he had heard of the kings commaundement. When de Nance was informed of his departure, he aunswered that Challey was a Gentleman of good worship, and there was no doubt but when neede were he would appeare before the King and the Magistrates. While these things were doing, and the Admirals wounde in dressing, Theligny went by his cōmaundement to the king, and moste humbly besought him in the name of his father in lawe, that his Maiestie would voutsafe to come vnto him, for that his life séemed to be in perill, and that he hadde certaine things to say, greatly importing to the Kings safetie, which he well knewe that none in his Realme durst declare to his ma∣iestie. The King courteously answered that he would willing∣ly go to him, and within a little while after he sette forwarde. The Quéene mother went with him, and the Duke of Aniow, the Duke of Monpensier, a most affectionate subiect to the church of Rome, the Count de Rhetz, the Queene mothers great fami∣liar, Chauigny and Entragny, whiche afterwarde were chiefe ringleaders in the butcherie of Paris. When the King had louingly saluted the Admirall as he was wont to do, and had gently asked him some questions cō∣cerning his hurt and the state of his health, and the Admirall
had answered with such a milde and quiet countenaunce, that all they that were present wondered at his temperance and patience, the King being much moued (as it séemed) sayd, The hurt my Admirall is done to thée, but the dishonour to me: but by the death of God (saith he) I swear I wil so seuerely re∣uenge bothe the hurte and the dishonor, that it shall neuer be forgotten. He asked him also howe he liked of the Iudges that he had chosen, to whome he had giuen commission for ex∣amining the matter. The Admirall answered that he coulde not but very well like of those that his maiestie had allowed of, yet he besought him if he thought it good, that Cauagnes mighte be called to counsell with them, albeit that it was no hard matter to find out, for it was no doubt (sayde he) that this good turne was done him by the Duke of Guise, the reuenge whereof he referred to God. This onely he most heartily and humbly besought of his royall maiestie, that the facte might be duely enquired vpon. The King answered that he would take earnest care of it, and reuenge that iniurie with no lesse seue∣ritie than if it had bin done to himselfe. Then the Kings bre∣thren and their mother withdrawing themselues a while, the Admirall as it was afterwarde knowne by his owne report, began to aduise the King to haue in memorie those things that he had ofte tolde him of the daungerous intentions of certain persons: and he tolde him, that though he himselfe had recei∣ued a great wounde, yet there was no lesse hanging ouer the Kings heade: and that long ago there was treason in practi∣zing against his life, which if he would doe wisely he shoulde auoyde betimes. Further he sayd, that though so soone as God should take him to himselfe out of this life, he doubted not but that his fame should be brought into sundrie slaunders by en∣uious persons, and such as ought him euil wil by reason of the late warres, neuerthelesse he had oftentimes disclosed vnto the King the authors of the dissentions, and opened the causes thereof, and that od was his witnesse of his moste faithfull heart to the King a the common weale, and that he had ne∣uer holden any thg dearer than his countrey and the pub∣like safetie. The King after such answere ade here vnto, as he thought
best, spake aloude, and heartily entreated the Admirall to suf∣fer himselfe to be remoued into his Castle of Louure, for that he thought some perill, least there shoulde arise some sedition a∣mong the commons alreadie in disorder, or any stirre in that madde and troublesome Citie. Wherto this speech of the king tended could not then be vnderstoode. For though the commu∣naltie of Paris, hath euer bene accompted the most foolishe and madde of all other, yet is it euer most easily appeased, not on∣ly with the comming and presence of the King, but also wyth the very sounde of his name. The Admirall most humbly and largely thanked the King, and made his excuse vpon the cū∣sell of the Phisitions, whiche feared that shaking woulde en∣crease his payne, and therefore had taken order that he should not be stirred out of his place. Then the Count de Rhetz tur∣ning to certaine Gentlemen of the Admirals friendes, sayde, I would the Admirall would follow the Kings counsell, for it is to he feared that some suche stirmay aryse in the towne, as ye king shal not easily be able to appease. Which speach being vttered, although no man did yet suspecte whereto that aduise tended, yet the Admirall and his friendes thought it good to re∣quest of the King to assigne vnto him certaine of the souldiers of the guarde for his safetie. The King answered that he verie well liked of that deuise, and that he was fully determined to prouide aswell for the Admirals safetie as for his owne, and that he would preserue the Admirall as the ball of his eye, and that he had in admiration the constancie and fortitude of the man, and that he neuer before that time beleeued that there could be so great valiātnesse of courage in any mortal person. Therewith the Duke of Aniow the Kings brother comman∣ded Cossin Captaine of the Kings guarde, to place a certaine band of souldiers to warde the Admiralles gate. There coulde hardly a man be founde more hatefull against the Admiralles part, nor more affected to the Guisians, than this Cossin, whiche the successe playnly proued, as hereafter shall appeare. The Duke of Aniow further added, that he thought it should be good for the Admirall, if moe of his friendes and familiars that lodged in the Fauxburges did drawe▪ nearer aboute him: and forthewith he commaunded the Kings herbingers to
warne those to whome they hadde before assigned lodgings in that streat, to remoue from thence, and to place the Admirals fiendes in their roomes. Which counsell was suche, as none coulde possibly be deuised more fit for those things that follo∣wed. For those whiche might haue by flight escaped out of the suburbes were nowe holden fast inough, being enclosed not only within the walles of the towne, but also within the com∣passe of one narrowe streat. The nexte day after, the Under∣masters of the streates commonly called Quartermen, sur∣ueyed al the vittailing houses and Innes from house to house, and all the names of those of the Religion, togither with the place of euery of their lodgings they put in bokes, and wyth speede deliuered ouer the same bokes to those of whome they had receyued that commaundemente. After noone the Quéene mother led out the King, the Duke of Aniow, Gonzague, Tauaignes, the Counte de Rhetz called Gondi, into hir gardens called Tegliers. This place bicause it was somewhat farre from resort, she thought most fit for this their laste consultation. There she shewed them, howe those whome they hadde long bene in waite for, were nowe sure in hold, & the Admirall lay in his bed maymed of both his armes and could not stir, the King of Nauar and Prince of Conde were fast lodged in the Castle, the gates were kept shut all nyghte, and watches placed, so as they were so snared that they coulde no way escape, and the captaines thus taken, it was not to be feared that any of the Religion woulde from thenceforth stir any more. Now was a notable opportunitie (saide she) offred to dispatch the matter. For all the chiefe Captaines were fast closed vp in Paris, and the rest in other townes were all vnar∣med and vnprepared, and that there were scarcely to be found tenne enimies to a thousande Catholikes: that the Parisians were in armour, and were able to make thréescore thousande chosen fighting men, and that within the space of one houre al the enimis may be slayne, and the whole name and race of those wicked mē be vtterly rooted out. On the other side (saith she) if the King do not take the aduantage of the fitnesse of this time, it is no doubt but that if the Admiral recouer his health, al France will shortly be on fire with the fourth ciuill warre.
The Quéenes opinion was allowed. Howbeit it was thou∣ght best, partely for his age, and partly for the affinities sake, that the King of Nauars life should be saued. As for the Prince of Conde, it was doubted whether it were best to spare him for his age, or to put him to death for hatred of his fathers name. But herein the opinion of Gonzague toke place, that he should with feare of death and torment, be drawne from the Religi∣on. So that counsell brake vp, with appoyntment that the matter should be put in execution the nexte night earely afore day, and that the ordering and doing of all shoulde be commit∣ted to the Duke of Guise. The Admirall being enformed of stirre and noyse of Ar∣mour, and threatnings hearde euery where throughout the town, and preparation of many things perteyning to tumult, sent word thereof to the King: who answered, that there was no cause for the Admirall to feare, for all was done by his cō∣maundement, and not euery where, but in certayne places, and that there were certayne appoynted by him to be in ar∣mour, least the people shoulde rise and make any stirre in the towne. When the Duke of Guise thought all things readie enough, he called to him the abouesayde Marcell, and charged him that he should a little after midnight assemble togither the masters of the streates, whom they call Diziners, into the townhouse, for he had certaine strange and speciall matters in charge frō the King, which his pleasure was to haue declared vnto them. They all assembled bytime. Carron the newe Prouost of mer∣chauntes, guarded with certaine Guisians, and among the rest Entragne and Pnygallard, made the declaration: He sayde that the Kings meaning was to destroy all the Rebels whiche had in these late yeres borne armes against his Maiestie, & to roote out the race of those wicked men, it was nowe very fitly hap∣ned that the chieftaines and ringleaders of them were fast en∣closed within the walles of the towne, as in a pryson, and that the same night they should first beginne with them, and after∣warde for the rest assoone as possibly might be, throughout all partes of the Realme the King would take order: and the to∣ken to set vpon them, should be giuen, not with a trumpet, but
with tocksein or ringing of the great bel of the Palace, which they knewe to be accustomed onely in great cases: and the marke for them to be knowne from other, should be a white linnen cloth hanged about their lefte arme, and a white cosse pinned vppon their cappes. In the meane time the Duke of Guise made priuie therevnto the captains of the Kings guard, both Gascoignes, Frenchmen, and Switzers, and bad them be ready to go to it with good courage. Shortly after, the Duke of Guise and the bastard sonne of King Henry commonly called the Cheuaier, with a great band of armed men following thē, went to the Admirals house, which Cossin kept besieged with Harquebuziers placed in orde on both sides of the streat. The Admirall aduertised of the stirre and the noyse of the armour, although he had scarcely ten persons in his house able to beare harnesse, and in his Chamber onely two Surgions, one Preacher and one or two seruitors, yet could not be made afrayde, trusting (as he oft rehearsed) vpon the ings good wil toward him, approued by so many and so great meanes of as∣suraunce, hauing also cōfidence that the cmmonaltie of Paris if they once vnderstode the King to mike of their mad furie, how much soeuer they wer in ourage, yet so sone as they saw Cossin warding the gate, they woulde be appeased. He repea∣ted also the othe for kéeping of the peace, so oft openly sworne by the King and his brethren and their mother, and entred in publike recordes, the league lately made with the Quéene of Englande for the same cause, the articles of treatie couenan∣ted with the Prince of Aurenge, the King faithe giuen to the Princes of Germanie, some townes attempted and some takē in the lowe countey by the Kings commaundement, the ma∣riage of the Kings siser solnized but sixe days before, whiche it was not like that he would suffer to be defiled with bloude, siually the iudgement of foraine nations and of pasteritie, shame and the honor and constancie of a Prince, publike faith, and the sacred respecte of the lawe of nations, all which it see∣med monstrous and iucredible that the ing could assnt to be stained with so outrageous a cruel déede. Cossin when he saw the noblemen drawe neare▪ knocked at the gate, which as is abouesaide, he was commaunded by the
Duke of Aniw to kéepe. Wherevpon many applyed the olde prouerbe, A goodly guarde to make the Woolfe keeper of the shéepe. When he was entred without in manner any difficul∣tie, he caried in with him a great companie of armed men, and after those followed the great Lords. Such as Cossin found at the entrie of and within the porch of the house, he slewe with a partisan that he had in his hand▪ Which when the Admiral vnderstoode, he caused those that were about him to lifte him out of his bd, & casting on a nightgown vpon him, he rose vp∣right on his feete, he bad his friendes and seruants to flee and make shift for themselues, and to take no more care for him, for he sayde that he was readie with most willing heart to rē∣der into the handes of God, now calling for it againe, the spi∣rit that he had lent him to vse for a time: and sayde that this violent crueltie was prepared not so much for his destruction, as for the dishonoring of Christe and the tormenting of so ma∣ny Churches, the defence of which Churches he had at the pe∣tition of all godly men with his many daungers and calami∣ties sustained. In the meane time there came vp the staires into the hier part of the house, on Benuese a Germaine, brought vp in the house of the Duke of Guise, and to whome it is sayde, that the Cardinall of Loraine had giuen one of his bastard daughters in mariage: and with him came Cossin the Gascoine, Attin a Pi∣carde a retainer and familiar of the Duke d'Aumal, one that a fewe yeres before sought to murder d'Andelot by treason, and also one Hamfort an Auernois, all weaponed with swordes and targets, and armed with shirts of maile. When they were broken into the Admiralles chamber, Benuese came to him, and bending his drawne sworde vpon him, said, Art not thou the Admirall? he with a quiet and con∣stant countenance, (as we haue since vnderstode by thēselues) answered, I am so called. And then seeing the sworde drawne vpon him, he sayde, yong man, consider my age and the weake case that I am now in. But the fellowe after blaspheming God, fyrste thrust his sworde into the Admiralles breste, and then also stroke him vpō the head, and Attin shot him through ye brest with a pistol. Whē th Admiral was with this wound
not yet throughly deade, Benuese gaue him the thirde wounde vpon the thygh, and so he fell down for deade. When the duke of Guise, which stayed in the courte with the other noblemen, heard this, he cried out alowde, hast thou done Benuese? he an∣swered, I haue done. Then said the Duke of Guise, our Cheue∣lier (meaning King Henries bastard abouesaide) vnlesse he sée it with his eyes will not beléeue it: throw him down at the win∣dow. Then Benuese with the helpe of his fellowes toke vp the Admirals body and threwe it downe through the windowe. When by reason of the wound in his head, and his face coue∣red with bloud they could not well discerne him, the Duke of Guise knéeled down on the ground and wiped him with a nap∣kin and sayde, now I know him, it is he. And therewithal go∣ing out at the gate with the rest of the Lordes, he cryed out to the multitude in armour, saying: my companions we haue had a good lucky beginning: now let vs go forward to the rest, for it is the Kings commaundement: which words he did ofte re∣peat aloud, saying: Thus the King cōmaundeth: This is the Kings wil, this is his pleasure. And then he cōmaunded ye tokē to be giuen by ringing tocksein with ye great bel of the palace, & alarme to be raysed, and he caused it to be published, that the conspiratours wers in armour and about to kill the King. Then a certaine Italian of Gonzagues band, cut off the Admi∣rals head, & sent it preserued with spices to Rome to the Pope and the Cardinall of Loreine. Other cut off his hands, and other his secrete partes. Then the common laborers and rascalles thrée days togither dragged the deade bodie thus mangled and berayed with bloude and filth, through the streates, and after∣ward drewe it out of the towne to the common gallowes, and hanged it vp with a rope by the féete. In the meane time, those of the noblemens bands brake in∣to all the Chambers of the Admiralles house, and such as they found either in their beds, or hidden, they mangled them with many wounds, and so slaughtered them. Of that number were two yong children, Pages, of honorable birth. Ther was also the Count Rochfoucault, which for the excellent pleasantnesse of his wit, and for his valiantnesse was hiely beloued of Kyng Henry, and so séemed for the same cause also to be beloued of
the King. Him was de Nance abouesaide commaunded to kyll, but he refusing it for their olde acquaintance and familiaritie: one Laberge an Auernois offred himselfe to the King to do it, but with this condition, that the King shoulde giue him the Cap∣tainship of horssemen which Count Rochfoucault had. There was also slayne Theligny the Admirals sonne in lawe, a yong man of singular towardnesse both of wit and courage, to whō the King these many yeres had both in words & countenance made shew of so gret good wil, as that no mā was thought to be more highly in his fauor. He crying out, that it was now grie∣uous to him to liue, for that he had euer commended to his fa∣ther in law the faithfulnesse of the King, refused not the death offered him. And many other most flourishing yong noblemen and Gentlemen were euery where butcherly murthered in that streat. Then the noblemens bandes, and Cossins soulders wente ransacking from house to house: and the Admiralles house and all the other houses were all sacked and spoyled, euē in like manner as is vsed to be done by souldiers gréedy of pray in a towne taken by assault: and many by this robberie, were of beggers sodeinly become rich men. For the Duke of Guise, the duke of Monpensier, the Cheualier king Henries bastard, Gonzague, Tauaignes, & the other great Lords, did with the re∣ward of ye spoyle & bootie encourage the multitude to ye slaugh∣ter, and cryed out aloude that this was the Kings will. So al the rest of the day from morning to euening, the rascall multi∣tude, encouraged by spoyle and robberie, ran with their blou∣die swordes raging throughout all the towne: they spared not the aged, nor women, nor the verie babes: In ioye and try∣umph they threw the slaine bodies out at the windowes, so as there was not in manner any one streate or lane, that séemed not strawed with murthered carcases. While these things were thus a doing in the towne, the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, whome the King had lodged in his owne Castle of the Louure, were by the Kings cō∣maundement sent for and conueyed vnto him. But their com∣pany, their seruitours of their Chambers, their friendes retai∣ning to them, their scholemasters, and those that had the brin∣ging vp of them, crying out aloude to the Kings fidelitie for
succour, were thrust out of the Chambers, and by the Kyngs guarde of Switzers hewed in pieces and slaughtered in the Kings owne sight. But of that number of persons slayne, no mans case was so much lamented of many, as Monsieur de Pil∣les, in whome it is harde to expresse whether there were more godly zeale in Religion, or prowesse in warre. Whereby ha∣uing in the late yeres, specially in the defence of the towne of S. Iohn d'Angeli, whiche the King then besieged, gotten great honour of Cheualrie, he was thought very well beloued and highly estéemed of the King. Him and Leranne the sonne of O∣dou, by the Frenche Kings commaundement (which was not then vnderstoode whereto it tended) the King of Nauarre hadde stayed in a Wardrobe adioyning to his owne chamber, and caused▪ them to lodge there all night. A little asore daye, hearing of the running of men, and noyse of armour, and cries and killings, they rose in hast, and immediately de Nance whō we haue before spoken of, came to them, and commaunded them in the Kings name to come downe into the court, and to leaue their weapons behinde them, and lastly to depart out of the Castle. When de Pilles saw himself thrust out among the multitude of the murthering souldiers, and behelde the bodies of them that were slayn, he cryed out with a very loude voyce that the King might wel heare him, protesting vpon the kings fidelitie, and deteūing his trayterous infidelitie, and there∣with he toke off a riche cloake which he wore, and gaue it to one of his acquaintance, saying: take here this token of Pilles▪ & hereafter remember Pilles moste vnworthily and shamefully slayn. Oh my good Monsieur de Pilles, sayd the other, I am none of them: I thanke you for your cloake, but I will not receiue it with that condition, and so refused to take the cloake: and immediatly de Pilles was thrust through by one of the guarde with a partisan and dyed And this ende had this most valiant and noble Gentleman. And then his body was throwne into the quarrey with the rest, which when they that passed by dyd beholde, the souldiers cryed out, there they be that made as∣sault vpon vs, and woulde haue killed the King. Leranne bee∣ing thrust through with a sworde, escaped and ranne into the Quéene of Nauarres Chamber, and was by hir kept and pre∣serued
from the violence of those that pursued him. Shortly after, she obtayned his pardon of hir brother, and commit∣ting him to hir own Phisitions, who restored hym bothe to life and health. While these things were in doing at Paris, Strozzi. which (as we haue aforesayd) was come with al his power to Rochel, sent a great number of his Souldiers into the towne, vnder co∣loure of a banket to be made to his friendes in the Castle cal∣led la Cheine: but by reason of the iealosie and watches of the townes men, by whome he sawe his treason was espied, he went awaye without his purpose. But they of la Charité, which as we haue before shewed, were trapped by the Italian horssemen, taking lesse heede to the salfe keeping of their towne, were a little before nyght, surprized, and within fewe dayes after put to the sworde. The next day following, where any that had hidden them∣selues in corners at Paris coulde be founde out, the slaughter was renewed: also common laborers and porters, and other of the most rascals of the people & desperate villaines, to haue the spoyle of their cloathes, stripped the dead bodies stark na∣ked and threwe them into the Ryuer of Seane The profit of all the robberies and spoyles came all for the moste parte to the handes of these laborers and the Souldiers, and to the Kings treasurie came very litle or nothing. The onely gaine that came to him, was that whiche might be made of the vacati∣ons (as they terme them) of offices, & of places of Magistates, Captaines and other romes of charge, whereof yet he gaue a great part freely away to diuers of the Court. For the Ad∣miralles office he gaue to the Marques de Villers, the Chan∣cellorship of Nauarre, after the murther of Francourt, he by and by gaue Henry Memne de Malassise, which had béene the truch∣man and messanger in the treatie of the last peace: the office of the master of the Finances after the slaugheer of Prunes he gaue to Villequier: the office of President des aides when Plateau was slayne he gaue to de Nully: the other offices he solde as his manner is, to such as gaue readie maney for them. For it hath bin ye custome now lately of certen kings of Fraūce (such as amōg forein nations hath not bin heard of) to put to sale al
the profits, rights, and benefits of the crowne, and to kéepe an open market for money, of all iudiciall offices, and of all the roomes belonging to his tresure and finances, according to a rate of price set vpon euery one of them: and there is not in manner one in all Fraunce, that doth not openly iustifie that he bought his office for readie money, and that no man ought to maruell if he desire to fill vp the emptie hole of his stocke againe. And therefore Iustice is through all Fraunce vsually bought for money, and though there be neuer so many mur∣ders committed, yet is there no processe awarded to enquire thereof, till present coyne be payde to the rakehels & scribes. This butcherly slaughter of Paris thus performed, and foure hundred houses (as is abouesayde) sacked, immediatly messen∣gers were sent in post into all the partes of the Realme, with oft shifting their horsses for hast, to commaunde all other Ci∣ties in the Kings name to followe the example of Paris, and to cause to be killed as many as they had among them of the re∣formed Religion. These commaundements it is wonderfull to tell how rea∣dily and cherefully the greatest part of the Cities of Fraunce did obey and execute. But the King, fearing (as it was likely) the dishonour of false treacherie and periurie, sent letters to the gouernours of his Prouinces, and also spéedie messangers into England, Germanie, and Switzerland, to declare in his name, that there was a great commotion and seditious stirre happened at Paris, which he was very sorie for: that the Duke of Guise had raysed the people, and with armed men made as∣sault vpon the band that was assigned to the Admirall for his guard, and had broken into the house and slayn the Admirall & al his companie and houshold seruants, and that the King had hardly kept safe from those daungers his owne Castle of the Louure, where he kept himselfe close with his mother and hys brethren: the true copie of which letters is hereafter inserted. But the same most mightie, and by the consent of all nations commonly called the most Christian King, within two dayes after came into the Parliament, accompanied with a greate trayne of his brethren and other Princes. The Counsell be∣ing assembled, he sitting in his throne, began to speake vnto
them, he declared that he was certified, that the Admirall with certaine of his complices had conspired his death, and had in∣tended the like purpose against his brethren, the Quéene his mother, and the King of Nauarre, and that for this cause he had commaunded his friendes to slay the sayde Admirall and all his cōfederates, & so to preuent the treason of his enimies. This his testification and declaration, the King commaun∣ded to be written and entred in the recordes of Parliament, and that it shoulde be proclaymed by the heraldes, and publi∣shed by Printers. And he willed a booke to be set forth to this effect, that the slaughter of the Admirall and his adherentes was done by the Kings commaundement, for so was his ma∣iesties expresse pleasure, bicause they had conspired to kil him and his brethren, and the Quéene his mother and the Kyng of Nauarre. And farther, that the King did forbid that from thenceforthe there should be no moe assemblies holden, nor preachings vsed of the Religion. After the Kinges oratiō ended, Christopher Thuane Presidēt of that Parliamēt, a man very notable for his light brain and his cruell heart, did with very large wordes congratulate vn∣to the King, that he had now with guile and subtiltie ouercom these his enimies, whome he could neuer vanquishe by armes and battell, saying that therein the King had most fully very∣fied the olde saying of Lewes the eleuenth his progenitor King of Fraunce, which was wont to say that he knew neuer a la∣tine sentence but this one, Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare, He that can not skil to dissemble, can not skil to be a King. But Pibrace, the aduocate of the Fināces, made a short oration, the summe whereof was to this effecte, that although the King hadde iust and great cause to be displeased, yet he thought it more agrée∣able with his maiesties clemencie and goodnesse, to make an ende of the slaughters and common spoyle, and not to suffer such outrages to be any longer committed without iudiciall procéeding in the cause: and besought his maiestie that from thenceforth it would please him to vse the lawe, which is well knowne to be the onely stablishment of kingdomes and Em∣pires: and that there had bene already giuen to the commo∣naltie too perillous an example to followe. An arrest of Par∣liamēt
with the Kings royall assent being made to that effect, there were immediately Haroldes and trumpeters sent roūd about all the towne, and an Edict proclaimed in the Kings name, that from thenceforth the slaughters and common but∣cherly murtherings should ceasse, and that all persons should abstainc from pillage and robberie. This being knowne, there were diuers speaches vsed of this matter throughout the town, and specially of learned mē. The most part sayd, that they had read many histories, but in all memorie of all ages they neuer heard of any such thing as this. They cōpared this case with the horrible doings of King Mithridates, which with one messenger and with the aduertise∣ment of one letter, caused a hundreth and fiftie thousand Ro∣maines to be slaine. Some cōpared it with the doing of Peter of Arragone, which slewe eight thousand Frenchmen in Sicile, which Isle they had surprised in his absence. But yet this dif∣ference appeared betwene those cases and this: that those Kings had exercised their crueltie vpon foreins and strangers: but this King had done his outrage vpon his owne subiectes, being yelded not so much to his power, as to his faith and cre∣dit. Those Kings were bound by no promise, but such as was giuen to the strangers themselues: this King was with newe made league bound to the kings and Princes his neighbors to kepe the peace that he had sworne. Those kings vsed no guile∣full meanes vnworthie for the maiestie of a King, to deceyue: this king for a baite and allurement abused the mariage of his owne sister, and in a manner besprinkled hir wedding robe with bloud. Which dishonor and indignitie no posteritie of all ages can forget. Some againe discoursed, that though this cruell aduise semed to many Courtiers to haue bene profita∣ble, yet not onely the honor of a King, but also the estimation and good fame of the whole nation was against that shewe of profit. They alleaged how Aristides did openly in the audience of all the people, reiect the counsell of Themistocles cōcerning the burning of the Lacedemonians nauie, although it must needes haue followed, that the power of the Lacedemonians their enimies should therby haue bene vtterly weakened▪ Fu∣ Camillus receyued not the children of the chief Lords of the
Phalice, betrayed to him by their schoolemaister, but stripped him naked and deliuered him to be whipped home with rods by the same children. Pausanias hath left it reported, that the posteritie of Philip of Macedon fell into most great calamities, for this cause, that he was wont to set light by the reuerend conscience of an oth and his faith giuen in leagues. Some ci∣ted the lawe of the twelue tables: Si patronus clienti fraudem fa∣cit, sacer esto. If the patrone or soueraigne defraude his client or vassall, be he out of protection. They disputed also, that like faith as the vassal oweth to his Lord, the Lord oweth also to his vassall: and for what causes and for what fellonies the vassal loseth his tenancie, for the same causes and fellonies the Lord loseth his seigniorie. Some said that the right hand in auncient time was called the pledge of the faith of a King, and that this if a King shall despise, there is no communion of right with him, and he is no more to be accounted a king, nei∣ther of his owne subiects nor of straungers. Kingly vertues in tymes past haue bene reported to be these, iustice, gentlenesse and clemencie: but crueltie and outrage haue euer bene dis∣praised both in all persons and specially in princes. Scipio hath in all ages bene praysed, who was wont to say, that he had ra∣ther saue one citizen than kill a thousand enimies: whiche sentence Antoninus the Emperor, surnamed Pius, the kinde or vertuous, did oft repeate. It was a most shamefull byworde of yong Tyberius to be called clay tempered with bloud. They sayd also, that kings haue power of life and death ouer their subiects, but not without hearing the cause, and iudicial procc∣ding: that there cannot be alleaged a greater authoritie, than the Dictators had at Rome, in whome was the soueraigne power of peace and warre, of life and death, and without ap∣peale, yet was it not lawfull for them to execute a citizen his cause vnheard. Only théeues and murderers take away mens liues without order of lawe and hearing their cause. Who can doubt (said they) but that this so great outrage, so great shea∣ding of Christiā bloud is the frute of the curssed life of the cour∣tiers? For (said they) now throughout al Fraunce whoredom & loose leudnesse of life are so frée & vsual, ye now the most part of the women of Fraunce séeme to be in manner common:
and▪ the wicked blasphemies and continuall execrations and dishonorings of Gods most holye name and maie∣stie, are suche as God can not longer beare: And true it is, though incredible among forein Nations, that the Catholikes of France haue prescribed themselues this for a special mark to be knowne from other men, that at euery thirde word they blasphemously sweare by the head, death, bloud, and bellie of God: and wonderfull it is, that the King himselfe is so muche delighted in this custome of swearing and blaspheming: and this as it were a pestilent infection is spred abroade and com∣mon among the very plowmē and peysants, so as none amōg them nowe speaketh thrée wordes without moste filthy blas∣pheming and horrible execration of God. Who can longer beare the vile vnchastities, the bawdes and Ruffians of the Court? Finally, very nature it selfe doth nowe as it were ex∣postulate with God for his so long sufferance and for bearing, and the very earth can no longer beare these monsters. Nowe as touching the Admirals supposed conspiracie, who can thinke it likely that he shoulde enterprise any suche thing within the walles of Paris? For in the Court there is continu∣ally watching and warding a garrison of the Kings: and at the entrie of his Castle the guards of Gascoines, Scottes and Switzers, are continually attending: and the King himselfe both alwayes before, and specially at that time, by reason of his sisters mariage, had a great trayn of Princes, great Lords noblemen and Gentlemen about him. Moreouer it was well knowne, that in Paris within thrée houres space might be as∣sembled and put in armour threescore thousand chosen armed men, specially against the Admirall, whome no man is igno∣rant that the Parisians most deadly hated: beside that, the noble yong men that came thither with the King of Nuar and the Prince of Conde by reson of the mariage, and brought with them their wiues, their sisters and their kinswomen, thought at that time vpon nothing but vpon triumph and exercises of pastime, and gay furniture of apparel and ornaments. Final∣ly, at whither of these two times can it be likely that the Ad∣mirall attempted this conspiracie? was it before he was hurt? why? at that time he founde the King his most louing, or at
least his most liberall and bountifull good Lord: neither could he hope euer to haue a more fauorable soueraigne in France. Was it then after he was hurte? as though forsoth he lying sore of two so great woundes, aged, maimed of both his arms, the one whereof the Phisitiōs cōsulted whether it were to be cut off, accompanied with thrée hundreth yong men, would set vpon thréescore thousande armed men, or in so small a time coulde lay the plot for so great, and so long and so haynous a facte: for he lyued scarce fortie houres after his hurt, in which time he was enioyned by the Phisitions to forbeare talke. Againe, if he had bene detected of any suche crime, was he not committed to Cossin and to his kéeping, and so enuironed, all the wayes beset about him, and so in the Kings power, that if it had pleased ye King he might at all times in a momēt be ca∣ried to pryson? why was not orderly enquirie an iudiciall procéeding vsed according to the custome and lawes and gene∣rall right of nations, and witnesses produced according to the forme of lawe? but be it that the Admirall and a fewe other of his confederates and followers had conspired, why yet pro∣céeded the outragious crueltie vpon the reste that were inno∣cent, why vpon ancient matrones, why vpon noble Ladies & yong Gentlewomen and virgins that came thither for the ho∣nor of the wedding? why were so manye women greate with childe, against the lawes of all nations and of na∣ture, before their deliuery thrown into the Ryuer? why were so many aged persons, many that lay sicke in their beds, ma∣ny gownemen, many Counsellers, Aduocates, Proctors, Phi∣sitions, many singularly learned professors and teachers of good artes, and among the rest Petrus Ramus that renoed man throughout the worlde, many yong students, executed without hearing, without pleading their cause, without sen∣tence of condemnation? moreouer, if the Admirall had aine the thrée brethren, who doubteth but that all coueys, al Ci∣ties, all Parliaments, finally, all sortes and degrées of men would haue spéedily taken armour and easily haue destroyed all of the Religion, hauing them enclosed within their towns, and hauing iust cause to render to all foreine nations fr their common slaughters and killing of them? As to that whiche
toucheth the King of , what cā be imagined more absurd and vnlikely? had not the Admirall him foure yeares in his power▪ Did not he professe the same Religion that the Admi∣rall did, which of those the Religion, which of them I say (as Cassius was wont to reason) should haue gained or recey∣ued profit by the killing of the King of Nauarre? did not the Ca∣tholikes hate him? and the Admirall coulde not hope to haue any man more friendly to him, nor by any other mās meanes to haue reuēge of his iniurie. Lastly, in their houses that were slaine, what armour, what weapons were found, by which cō∣iectures iudges vse to be lead to trace out a facte? These mat∣ters wyse men throughout the towne of Paris commonly mut∣tered. But now to retourne to our purpose. At such tyme as the Kings prhibition abouesayd was proclaimed at Paris, not only in other townes, as at Orleance, Angiers, Viaron, Troys and Auxerre, the like butcheries and slaughters were vsed, but also in the towne of Paris it selfe, in the verye gaoles that are ordeyned for the kéeping of prisoners, if anye had escaped the crueltie of the day before, they were now tumultuously slayne by the raging and outraging multitude, in which number were thrée Gen∣tlemen of greate reputation, captaine Monins a man very fa∣mous in marciall prowesse, Lomen the Kings secretarie, a man of greate estimation for his long seruice in the Courte, and Chappes a lawyer neare fourscore yeare olde, a man of greate renowne in the Courte of Paris. And bycause we haue made mention of Angiers, we thinke it good not to omitte the case of Masson de Riuers. This mā was a pastor of the church, and estéemed a singular man both in vertuousnesse of life, and in excellence of wit and learning, and was the first that had layd the foundacion of the Churche at Paris. As sone as the slaughter was begon at Paris, Monsorel a most cruell enimie of the Religion, was tente to Angiers in post to preuente al other that might carie tidings of the murdering. As sone as he came into ye towne, he caused himself to be brought to Massons house. There he met Massons wife in the entrie, and gētly saluted hir, and after the maner of Fraunce, specially of the Court, he kis∣sed hir, and asked hi where hir husband was, she answered,
that he was walking in the garden, and by and by she brought Monsorell to hir husbande, who gently embraced Masson and sayde vnto him: Canst thou tell why I am come hither? it is to kyll thée by the Kings cōmaundement at this very instant time, for so hath the King commaunded, as thou mayste per∣ceiue by these letters, and therewith he shewed him his dagge ready charged. Masson answered that he was not guiltie of a∣ny crime, howbeit this one thing only he besought him, to giue him space to call to the mercie of God, and to commende his spirit into Gods hande. Which prayer as soone as he had en∣ded in fewe wordes, he méekely receiued the death offered by the other, and was shot through with a pellet, and dyed. Now to returne to Paris▪ the Admirals body being hanged vp by the héeles vpon the common gallowes of Paris, as is a∣foresayde, the Parisians went thither by heapes to sée it. And the Quéene mother to féede hir eyes with that spectacle, had a mynde also to goe thither, and she caryed with hir the King and both hir other sonnes. But the next night following, the body was conueyed away, and (as it is thought) buried. About that time, where as many of the Court secretly muttered that the King shoulde by this facte incurre dishonour, not onely a∣mong foreine nations, but also with all posteritie in time to come for euer, Moruillier, of whome we haue made mention before, one that is accompted the principall lewde practiser & wicked sycophant of all Fraunce, and the firste authour and chiefe meane of bringing the Iesuites into Fraunce, came to the Quéene mother and tolde hir that it was best that some of those that were lately taken seyng and hyding themselues, should for manner sake be brought to open iudgement, and af∣ter the accustomed manner should be enquired vpon, that they might be condemned by the sentence of certayne Iudges pic∣ked out for that purpose, and so openly executed in sight of the people. There were called to coūsel here vpon Birage, Liege. Thuan and Beleure. They not only allowed Moruilliers opini∣on, but also gaue aduise, that a man of hey made in figure for the Admirall (for his bodye, as we haue sayde, coulde not be founde) shoulde be dragged by the Boureau thorough the streates, his armes and ensignes of honoure broken,
his memorie cōdemned, his castels and ermes rased, his chil∣drē pronounced in famous, vnoble, and intestable, and all the trees in his woods to be hewē down to the heigth of sixe foote. There was among those that were apprehended, one Cauai∣gnes, maister of Requests to the King, and Briquemault, of whome we haue before spoken. This Briquemalt had spente his time in seruice in the old warres in the tyme of King Frauncis and King Henry, and was for the warre accompted a man of greate experience among the best now liuing, and was neare about thréescore and ten yeares olde. As sone as they were caried into prison, there were presented vnto them all, the tormenter and the hangman, and they were threat∣ned with torture and tearing their bodies in pieces, vnlesse they woulde presentlye subscribe with their owne hand, that they were of counsell with the Admirall to kill the King and his brethrē, and the Quéene mother, and the King of Nauarre. They all cryed out that they were readye to suffer deathe most willingly forasmuche as the Kings pleasure was it shuld be so: but so greate torture they coulde not beare, and there∣fore humbly besought his royall goodnesse and clemencie too pardon them that torment, and yet trusting vpon the mercie of God, they hoped that they shoulde suffer exceeding greate paynes, rather than staine themselues with so greate shame, or confesse an vntrue crime against themselues. They that were first assigned their iudges, hearing their cries and defen∣ses, and fearing the iudgemente of the world, said plainly, that they would not drawe vpon themselues most assured infamie for condemning them. Therefore there were newe iudges ap∣pointed in their places, to them was adioyned such a tormen∣ter and notarie, as were thoughte fittest for the purpose. And so Briquemault and Cauaignes were quickly condemned by a shadowed forme of lawe, and led to the gibbet▪ standing in the principall strete of the towne, and in sight of many thousands of men gazing at them. To this spectacle the Queene mother ledde the King and hir other sonnes, and hir sonne in lawe the King of Nauarre. It was thought cōmodious for playing of this last acte, that Briquemault should in hearing of all the people aske pardon
pardon of the King, and for that purpose there were some suborned to put him in mind, that if he wold, he might easily purchase his life, for the King was of nature ful of clemen∣cie and mercie, and if he would aske pardon of his maiestie with confessing his offence, he shoulde easily obtaine it. He answered with a valiant and bolde courage, that it was not his parte but the Kings to aske pardon of God for his faulte, and that he woulde neuer craue forgiueesse of that offence whereof he well knewe himselfe and hadde God so witnesse that he was cleare and innocent. Neuerthelesse, he esought God to forgiue the King this faulte. So were these two excellent and famous men with halters fastened aout their neckes throwne by the hangman from the lad∣der and hanged, and therewithall also the man of strawe made for figure of the Admirall, was tyed faste and hanged with them, after a preposterous order of lawe, whereby the Admirall was first slayne and then condemned. But whereas in a manner in all townes there were great slaughters committed, yet was there none more hor∣rible nor more outrageous than the butcherly murther at Lions. So sone as the letters from the court were brought to Mandelot gouernour of the towne: first, by a cryer and he caused to be proclaimed, that all the professors of the Religion shoulde appeare presently before him at his house. They without all delay repayred to him. As sone as they were come, he commaunded them al to suffer them∣selues to be led to pryson by suche officers as shoulde be as∣signed them. They obeyed his worde and followed the offi∣cers that led them. By reason of the great multitude, they sorted them into sundry prysons. Then Mandelot willed the common executioner to be commaunded in his name to take some to helpe him, and to kyll those that were in pry∣son. The executioner answered, that he vsed not to execute the lawe vpon any but suche as were condemned, and in publike and open places, and therefore willed him to seeke an other slaughterman if he woulde. Mandelot thus refuse by the executioner, commaunded the garrison Souldiers of
the Castle to do it. The Souldiers answered that it was a∣gainst their honour, to vse weapon vpon men bounde and lying supplyant before them. If they had raysed any rebel∣liō, or had offended or prouoked them, they sayd they would most readily haue fought with them. Being thus refused by them also, at the lat he committed the matter to the wa∣termen and butchers. Those fellowes being lette into the prysons, went to it with chopping kniues and butchers ax∣es. Such as they faunde prostrate at their féete, piteously holding vp their handes to heauen, crying vpon the mercie of God and men, they did for sport cut off their fingers and the toppes of their handes, and throughout the whole town was heard suche a cye and lamentable howling of women and children, that innumerable people, euen suche as were zelously giuen euen to the Popishe Religion, did detest that crueltie, and iudged that not men, but outrageous sauage beases in shape of men were entred into the prysons. It is well knowne, that a great number of honest women in the towne great with childe, were so flighted with the horrour of it, that they were deliuered before their time. And out of the Courte of the goale called the Archbyshops pryson, the bloude was séene in the broade day light, to the great aor∣ring and feare of many that behelde it, runne warme▪ and smoking into the nexte streats of the town, and so down in∣to the Ryuer of Sene. There was in that same Archbyshops pryson an aged man called Francis Collut, a Marchaunt of cappes, and two yong men his sonnes, whome he had euer caused diligently to e taught and instructed in Religion. Whē he saw ye butchers come toward him with their Axes, he began to exhort his children not to refuse the death offred by Gd. For (sayd he) it is the perpetual destenie of religiō, & that often such sacrices do betide in Christiā Churches, & Christians in al ages haue euer in & for euer to the worlds end so shalbe as shepe amōg wolues, doues among Hawks, & sacrifices among priests. Thē the old father embraced h two yong sonnes, & lying flat on the ground with thē, crying aloud vpō the mercy of God, was with mny wounds oth
he & his sonnes slaughtered by those butchers: & long tyme afterward their thrée bodies hard knit togither, yelded a pi∣teous spectacle to many that behelde them. In the meane time Mandelot in iest and scorne (as it séemed) caused to be proclaimed by the cryer, that no man should committe any laughter in the town, & that if any would detecte the doers of any such slaughter, he would giue him a hūdreth crowns in reward for his information. And frō that time they ceas∣sed not to kil, to rob & to spoyle. The next day after, which was the first of September, the greatest part of the deade bodies were thrown into the riuer of Sene and the rest of thē Mandelot, to féede & glut his eyes & heart with bloud, caused to be caried by boat to the other side of the water, & there to be thrown down vpō the grene grasse near vnto the Abbey called Esne. There the people of Lions, specially the Italians, of whome by reason of the Marte there is great store in the towne, satisfied their eyes a while, & did such spites as they could to those heapes of carcases, & so exercised their cruel∣tie not vpon the lyuing onely, but also vpon the deade. And there hapned one thing which for the abhominable crueltie is not to be omitted. There came to that spectacle certaine Apothecaries, & amōg those bodies they perceiued some ve∣ry fat ones, by & by they went to the butchers, & told them yt they did vse to make certē special medicines of mās greace, that they might make and profit therof. Which as sone as the butchers vnderstoode, they ran to the heapes & chose out the fattest, and launced them with their kniues, and pulled out the fat, and solde it for money to the Apothecaries. While these thinges were doing at Lions, the King being enformed that diuers of the religion had left their wiues & children, and were fled out of the other townes, and lurked some in the woods, and some among their friendes such as toke pitie on them, he practised with aire wordes to allure ad cal them home againe. He sent to euery part messāgers & letters, affirming that he was highly displesed with those slaughters & horrible butcheries, & that he would that suche crueltie shuld be seuerely punished: & if the Admiral with a
few of his confederates had entred into any secrete practise, it was no reason, that so many innocents should beare the punishment due to a fewe. Many swetely beguiled wyth these wordes of the King and with the letters of the gouer∣nours, retired home againe to their dwellings and houses, specially they of Rhoan. Diepe, and Tholouse. There were scant two dayes passed when they were againe commaunded to pryson, where they were all shutte vp. Then were mur∣derers a newe appoynted of the most base and rascall of the people, to torment them with all kinde of torture, and then to slay them. And throughout the whole realme of France for thirtie dayes togither there was no ende of killing, slay∣ing and robbing, so that at this day there are about a hun∣dreth thousande little babes, widowes and children, that were wel borne, that nowe fatherlesse and motherlesse liue wandering and in beggerie. About this time the King cau∣sed to be proclaymed, that such as had any office or place of charge, vnlesse they would spedily return to the Catholike, apostolike and Romish Church, should giue ouer those their temporall roomes. There was no towne nor any so small a village or hamlet wherein all the professors of the Reli∣gion were compelled either to goe to Masse, or presently to take the sworde into their bosomes: and in many places it happened that such as being amazed with the sodainenesse of the matter had abiured their Religion, yet notwithstan∣ding were afterwarde slayne. And while these things were still in doing, yet the King in the meane while sent abroade his letters and messages into all partes, and caused to be proclaimed with trumpet, that his pleasure was that the Edictes of pacification shuld be obserued: and although they coulde not haue fréedome to vse and exercise their Religion in open places, yet they should haue libertie permitted them to retaine and professe it within their owne houses, and that no man should with or disturbe the goodes and possessions of those of the Religion. And the same Kyng which but fewe dayes before, hadde
by letters directed to all the gouernours of his Prouinces signified that his cousin the Admirall was slaine by the Duke of Guise to his great sorrow, and that himselfe was in great daunger, the same Kyng I say, nowe caused it wyth sounde of trumpet to be proclaimed, that the traiterous and wicked Admirall was slayne by his will and commaunde∣ment. He that in fewe dayes before had by new authoritie confirmed the libertie of Religion permitted by his Edicts of pacification, the same Kyng did now not onely take from the professors thereof their offices and honours, but also prescribed them in precise forme of wordes, a forme of abiuring and detesting their Re∣ligion. Which things least any man should doubt of, we shal hereaf∣ter set downe the very true copies of the said Let∣ters, Edicts & Ab∣iurations.
THE KINGS LETTERS, to the Gouernours of Burgundie, vvhereby he chargeth those of the house of Guise, for the murther committed vpon the Admiralles person, and for the sedition vvhich hapned at Pa∣ris, and commaundeth that the Edicte of Pacifica∣tion shoulde be kept and reteyned. COVSIN, YOV HAVE PERCEY∣ued what I wrote vnto you yesterdaye, concer∣ning my Cousin the Admiralles wounding, and howe readie I was to doe my endeuour to search out the truth of the deed, and to punishe it, wher∣in nothing was lefte vndone or forgotten. But it happened since, that they of the house of Guise, and other Lordes and Gentlemen their adherentes (whereof there bee no small number in this Citie) when they certaynly knewe that the Admiralles friendes woulde proceede to the reuenge of his hurt, and bycause they were suspected to be the authours thereof, were so stirred vp this laste nyght, that a great and lamentable sedition arose thereof, in so muche that the Guarde by mee appoynted for his defence about his house, was sette vpon, and hee himselfe wyth certaine of his Gentlemen slayne, and hauock of other made in diuers places of the Citie: whiche was handled wyth suche a rage, that I coulde not vse the remedie that I woulde, but hadde muche a doe to employ my Guardes and other defence for the safetie of my selfe and my brethren within the Castle of Louure,
to giue order hereafter for the appeasing of this sedition, whiche is at this houre well appeased thankes be to God, and came to passe by a particular and priuate quarell of long time fostered be∣twixte those two houses. VVhereof when I foresawe that there woulde succeede some mischieuous purpose, I did what I coulde possibly to appease it, as all men knowe. And yet hereby the E∣dicte of Pacification is not broken, whiche I will to bee kepte as straightly as euer it was, as I haue giuen to vnderstande in all pla∣ces throughout my Realme. And bycause it is greatly to be fea∣red, that suche an execution might stirre vp my subiectes, one a∣gainst an other, and cause greate murthers through the Cities of my Realme, whereby I shoulde bee greatly grieued, I praye you cause to be published and vnderstoode in all places of your go∣uernement, that euery person abyde and continue in the safegard of his owne house, and to take no weapons in bande, nor one to hurt an other vpon payne of death: commaunding them to kepe and diligently to obserue our Edict of Pacification. And to make the offenders and resisters, and such as would disobey and breake our will, to be punished, you shall assemble out of hande as great force as you can, as well of your friendes as of them that bee ap∣poynted by me and others, aduertising the Captains of Castles and Cities in your gouernement, to take heede to the safegarde and preseruation of the sayde places, so that no faulte ensue on their behalfe, aduertising me also so soone as you can, what order you haue giuen herein, and how all things haue passed within the cir∣cuite of your gouernement. Herevpon I pray God to keepe you, Cousin, in his holy safegard. At Paris the. xxiiij. of August. Signed Charles, and vnder∣neath, Brulard.
ANOTHER LETTER FROM THE KING to the Lorde of Prye, his Lieutenant generall in Touraine, vpon the same matter that the former Letter was. MOnsieur de Prie, you haue vnderstoode howe my cousin the Admirall was hurt the last day, and in what readinesse I was to do as much as in me lay, for the tryall of the fact, and to cause so great and spedie iustice to be done as should be an example through∣out all my Realme, wherin nothing was omitted. Since it is so hap∣pened, that my cousins of the house of Guise, and other Lords and Gentlemen their adherents, which are no smal partie in this towne, as all men know, hauing gotten certaine intelligence that the frien∣des of my sayd cousin the Admirall intended to pursue and execute vpon them the reuenge of this hurte, for that they had them in su∣spicion to be the cause and occasion therof, haue made such a stirre this night passed, that among them on both partes hath bene raised a greate and lamentable tumulte: the Garde that was set about the Lorde Admirals house, was distressed, himselfe slayne in his house with diuers other Gentlemen, as also great slaughter hath bene made of other in sundrie places and quarters of this towne: which hath bene done with such furie, that it was impossible for me to giue such remedie as was to be wished, I hauing enough to do to employe my Garde and other forces to keepe my selfe in safetie in the Castle of Louure, to the end to giue order for the appeasing of the whole vp∣roare, which at this houre (thankes be to God) is well quenched, for that the same happened by the particular quarrell that hath of long tyme bene betwene those twoo houses, whereof alwayes hauing some doubt that some vnhappie effecte woulde ensue, I haue (as is well knowne to all men) before this tyme done all that I coulde for to appease it, nothing in this last fact tending too the breache of my Edict of Pacification, which contrarywise I will in all things to bee mainteyned, as at any time heretofore, as I do giue it to vnderstand thorowout my Realme. And forasmuch as it is greatly to be seared that this may stirre vp and cause my subiectes to rise one against ano∣ther, and to commit greate slaughters in the townes of my Realme, whereof I would bee maruelously sorie, I pray you that immediatly vpon the receyte hereof, ye cause to be published and done to vnder∣stande in all places of your charge, that euery man as well in towne
as in countrey, remaine in reste and suretie in his house, and do not take armes one against another, on payn of death: And that more di∣ligently than at any time hertofore, ye cause the last Edict of Pacifi∣catiō to be kepte and carefully mainteyned and obserued. To the in∣tent abouesayd, and to punish such as shal do to the cōtrary, & to di∣stresse all such as shal rise & dysobey our pleasure, ye shal immediatly assemble al the strength that ye are able, as well of your friends being of our allowance as others, aduertising the gouernors, and captaines of townes and Castels within your charge, that they take good heed to the suretie and safe keeping of their peeces, in such sort as there ensue no default, informing me with speede of suche order as you shal take therin, and how all things shall proceede within the com∣passe of your authoritie. I haue here with me my brother the King of Nauarre, and my cousin the Prince of Conde, to take suche hap as my self. I pray the creator, Monsieur de Prie, to holde you in his holy safegarde. From Paris this. xxiiij. of August. Thus signed Charles, and vnderneth Pinart. These letters are all of one argument as the for∣mer be, and written all in one forme, and al one day to Monsieur de Prye the Lieutenant of Touraine. THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE OFFI∣cers of Burges, vpon the same matter that the former were. OVr louing and faithfull, wee doubt not but by this tyme you knowe of the sedition which to our greate griefe happened in Paris afewe dayes sithens, wherin my cousin the Admirall, and cer∣taine others of his side were slaine, and a greate murder committed vpon diuerse in many places of this Citie. And least the newes there∣of should change the quiet estate, wherin Burges hath hitherto bene maintained since the Edict of Pacification, if remedie were not fore∣seene, it is the cause that wee writ this letter presently vntoo you, wherby wee commaund and expressely ordeyne that euerie one of you according to his charge do see that no commotion or insurre∣ction bee against the inhabitants of the sayd Citie, nor that no mur∣der be committed, as it is to be feared, by those which pretend too breake the Edict of Pacification, and thereby would execute a re∣uenge of their long and priuate grudge, too our incredible vexation and anguishe of minde. For this cause it is your part to giue to vn∣derstand
and publishe throughout that Citie of ours and other pla∣ces pertaining to it, that euery one should quietly and peacibly kepe their houses, without taking weapons in hande, and offending one the other, vpon payne of death, and well and diligently to kepe our Edict of Pacification. And if any goe about to contrarie this our in∣tent and minde, to cause them to be punished and rigorously chasti∣sed by penalties imposed on such offendours in our ordinances, ha∣uing a watchfull and diligent eye to the safegarde of that our Citie, in such sort that no inconuenience arise in your seruice towards vs, as you would haue vs to knowe, that you are our loyal and obedient subiectes. Giuen at Paris the. xxvij. of August 1572. Thus signed, Charles, and belowe, De Neuf-ville. A LETTER OF THE TREASORER OF the leagues of the Switzers, written by the Kings commaundement vnto the sayd Leagues, of the same argument that the former letters were. NOble Seigniours, Monsieur de la Fontaine, Ambassador for the King, your assured and perfect friend and confederate, and I his Treasorer in this countrey, hauing commaundement of his maiestie too communicate with you, as with them whome be accompteth his chiefe and sure friends, of a chaunce which lately happened in the Citie of Paris, his owne person and court then being there, whereof he receyued so much more griefe and displeasure, bycause it befell on such a time as he least feared, or loked for such a thing. The mat∣ter is this. On the xxij. day of August last, the Admirall as he went from Louure, was with an harquebuze shot hurte in the hande and arme, whereof when his maiestie was aduertised, he commaun∣ded incontinent that search and punishment were had of the offen∣dour, and the authors of such a mischiefe: whervntoo when he had readilie layde his hande by his officiers, and committed the inhabi∣tantes of the house, where the harquebuze was shot, to prison, they which were the cause firste of the mischiefe (as it maye easily bee presupposed) bycause they woulde preuente the inquisition ther∣of, heaping one transgression vpon another, on the. xxiij. and xxiiij. of the sayd moneth assembled a great troupe of people in the
night, and moued the people of Paris to a verie great sedition, who in a rage set vpon the Admirals lodging, and enforcing the Garde which his Maiestie had set for the Admirals suretie and keping, slew him with certaine other gentlemen in his companie, as the like also was committed vpon others in the Citie, the matter growing in the verie same instant to such an oage and commotion, that whereas his Maiestie had thought to prouide remedy for appeasing therof, he had much a doe with all his Gardes to keepe his house at Louure, where he lodged with the two Queenes, his mother and the Spouse, the Lords his brethrē, the King of Nauarre and other Princes. Think therefore ye noble Seigniours, in what a perplexitie this yong and courageous King now standeth, who, as a man may saye, hath helde in his hande thornes in steade of a Scepter euer since his comming to the Crowne, for the greate troubles which haue almost euer since beene in his Realme, and therefore by the good and wise counsell and assistāce of the Queene his mother and the Lords his brethren, thought to enioy and establishe a more sure repose in his Realme, and a more happie gouernement for himselfe and his subiectes, after he had taken away (as he thought) al occasions of dissentions amōgst his subiectes by the meanes of his Edicts of Pacifications, and of the mariage of the King of Nauarre to the Ladie his sister, and the Prince of Conde to Madame de Neuers. Besides all this, to the intent no∣thing should be lefte vndone that mighte serue for the quieting of al things, and especially for the Admirals safegard, his Maiestie as euery man knoweth, hath done his induour to the vttermost, to appease and reconcile his principall and most daungerous enimies vnto him. And so God the true iudge of the Kings Maiesties good and pure intent, brought to passe, that the peoples rage being quieted within a few houres, euery one went home too his house, and the king had speciall regard to nothing more than to see nothing attempted or in∣nouated contrarie to his Edicts of Pacification, and the repose of his subiectes aswel of the one Religion, as of the other. And for that pur∣pose hath sent to diuerse of his Gouernours and Officers in his pro∣uinces, to loke diligētly to the obsering of his Edictes, with expresse commaundement to olde their handes there, that euerie one might perceyue that the chaunce at Paris happened for some priuate qua∣rell, and not for any purpose to alter his Edicts, which his Maiestie wil in no wise suffer. VVhich is the principal thing, noble Seigniours,
that his Maiestie hath commaunded vs on his parte to assure you, and to let you vnderstand the daungers that depende ouer him and his neyghbours, not so much for this seditiō, for he trusteth in God that shall growe no further, and his Maiestie wil kepe his Realme in as good repose as it hath bene since his last Edict of Pacification, but for the greate mustering and assembling men of warre in many pla∣ces, specially in the lowe countreyes, where it is yet vncertaine on which side God will giue the victorie, nor whither the conqueror will employ his force, after his conquest. VVherefore his Maiestie prayeth you, continuing the good loue and intelligence which hath always bene betwixt the Crowne of Fraunce and his allied and con∣federate friendes the Seigniours of the Leagues, too haue good re∣garde to him, and his Realme, in case that neede shall require, as he wil haue to you and your prosperous estate, if it bee requisite, em∣ploying in the meane whyle your greate and singular wisdome to the perseruation of the vnion of the Nation in League, which is the one∣ly cause to make you, not onely able to send succour to your friends, but also maintaine your selues in estimation, that you may be a ter∣rour to your neighbours, how great so euer they be, his maiestie pro∣mising you in all occurrentes as much friendship, fauour and assi∣stance, as you can desire, and to be as entier and perfect a friend, as e∣uer your nation had any. A DECLARATION OF THE KING CON∣cerning the occasion of the Admirals death and his adherents and com∣plices, happened in the Citie of Paris the. 24 of August. 1572. Imprinted at Paris by Iohn Dallier Stacioner, dwelling vpon S. Michaels bridge, at the signe of the white Rose: by the Kings licence. BY THE KING. HIs Maiestie desiring to haue all Seigniours, Gentlemen, and o∣ther his subiects, vnderstand the cause of the murder of the Ad∣mirall and his adherentes and complices, which lately happened in this Citie of Paris the xxiiij. day of this present moneth of August, least the sayd deede shuld be otherwise disguised and reported than it was in deede: his Maiestie therfore declareth that which was done, was by his expresse commaundement, and for no cause of Re∣ligion, nor breaking his edictes of pacification, which he alwayes in∣tended, and stil mindeth and intendeth to obserue and keepe: yea it
was rather done too withstand and preuent a most detestable and curssed conspiracie begon by the sayd Admirall the chiefe captaine thereof, and his sayd adherents and complices, against the kings per∣son, his estate, the Queene his mother and the Princes his brethren, the King of Nauarre, and other Lordes about him. VVhereof his Maiestie by this declaration and ordinaunce giueth to vnderstand to all Gentlemen and others of the Religion which they pretend refor∣med, that he mindeth and purposeth that they shall liue vnder his protection, with their wiues and children in their houses in as much safegarde as they did before, folowing the benefite of the former E∣dictes of Pacification, most expressely commaunding and ordaining, that all Gouernours and Lieutenants generall in euerie of his coun∣treyes and Prouinces, and other Iustices and Officers to whom it ap∣pertaineth, do not attempt nor suffer too bee attempted any thing in what sort so euer, vpon the persons and goodes of them of the Religion, their wiues, children, and families, on paine of death a∣gainst the faultie and culpable in this behalfe. And neuerthelesse too withstande the troubles, slaunders, suspicions, and desiances that may come by sermons and assemblies, aswell in the houses of the sayde Gentlemen, as in other places, as it is suffred by the sayde Edictes of Pacification: it is expressely forbidden, and inhibited by his Maie∣stie to all Gentlemen and others of the sayd Religion, to haue no assemblies for any cause at all, vntill his Maiestie hath prouided and appointed otherwise for the tranquillitie of his Realme, vpon paine of disobedience and confiscation of bodie and goods. It is also ex∣pressely forbidden vnder the paine aforesayd, that for the foresayd occasions, none shall take or retaine any prisoners, or take raunsome of them, and that incontinently they certifie the gouernours of e∣uerie pruince, and the Lieutenante generall, of the name and qua∣litie of euerie such prisoner, whome his Maiestie hath appoynted shall bee released and set at libertie, except they bee of the chiefe of the late conspiracie, or such as haue made some practise or deuise for them, or had intelligence thereof: and they shall aduertise his Maiestie of such, to knowe his further pleasure. It is also ordayned, that from hencefoth none shall take or arrest any pisoner for that cause, without his Maiesties commaundement or his Officers, nor that none be suffred to roame abroade in the fieldes, to take vp dogs, Catell, Beefes, Kine, or other beastes, goods, fruites, graine, nor any
thing else, nor too hurt the labourers by word or deede, but too let them alone about their worke and calling, in peace and safetie. At Paris the. xxviij. of August. 1572. Signed, Charles, and vnderneath, Fizes. THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE OFFICERS of Burges, of the same argument that the former declaration was. OVr trustie and welbeloued, wee considering that vnder the co∣lour of the death of the Admiral, and his adherents and com∣plices, certaine Gentlemen, and others our subiectes, professing the Religion called Refourmed, might rise and assemble together to the preiudice and hinderance of the tranquillitie which we haue alwayes desired should be in our Realme the doyng of the sayd murder being counterfeited and giuen out otherwise than it was. VVe haue there∣fore made a declaration and ordinance, which we send you, willing you to publishe the same incontinently by sounde of Trumpet, and setting the same vp in such places of your Iurisdiction, where cryes and Proclamations are vsually made, to the end that euery one might knowe it. And although we haue alwayes bene diligent obseruers of our Edicts of Pacification, yet seing the troubles and seditions which might arise amongst our subiects by the occasion of the sayd murder, as well of the Admirall as of his companions, we commaunde you, and ordeyne, that you particularly forbid the principals of the Reli∣gion, pretended refourmed, within your Iurisdiction, that they haue no sermons nor assemblies either in their houses, or in any other pla∣ces, to take away all doubt and suspition which might bee concey∣ued agaynst them. And likewise that you aduertise such as dwell in the Cities of your Iurisdiction, what you iudge meet to be done, too the intent they myght in this poynt follow our mind, and kepe them quiet in their houses, as they may doo by the benefite of our Edict of Pacification, and there they shall bee vnder our protection and safe∣garde: but if they will not so retyre themselues after you haue gi∣uen them warning, then shall you set on them with all strength and force, aswell by the prouostes of the Marishals and their Ar∣chers, as others which you can-gather toogether by Bell ring∣ing or otherwise, so that you hewe them all too peces as enimies o our Crowne. Besides, what commaundements so euer wee haue
sent by worde of mouth eyther to you, or others in our Realme, whē we were in feare, vpon iuste occasion, knowing the conspiracie that the Admirall had begon of some mischaunce that might fall vnto vs, we haue and do reuoke, willing you and others that no such thing be executed, for such is our pleasure. Giuen at Paris the. xxx. of August 1572. Thus signed, Charles, and vnderneath, De Neuf-ville. Publi∣shed in iudgement. REMEMBRAVNCES AND INSTRVCTIONS sent by the King to the Counte of Charny his general Lieutenant in Bur∣gundie, of the same argument. THe King considering the commotion lately happened in Paris, wherin the L. Admirall Chastilion with other Gentlemen of his side were slaine, bicause they had mischeuously conspired to set vpon the Kings maiesties person, the Queene his mother, the Princes his brethren, the King of Nauarre, and other Princes and Lordes neare about them, and vpon his estate: and least they of the Religion called refourmed, not knowing the true causes of the sayde rebellion, shuld arise and put them selues in armes as they haue done in the troubles that be passed, and deuise new practises & fetches against the weale of his Maiestie and tranquillitie of his Realme, if he should not cause the truth of the matter to bee knowne to all Gentlemen and others his subiects of the same religion how it passed, and what his pleasure and mind is in their behalfes. And thinking that for remedie hereof it is verie needefull for the Gouernours of the Prouinces in his Realme to go rounde about their gouernementes: for this occasion he willeth that the Counte of Charnie greate Esquire of Fraunce, and his Maiesties Lieutenant generall for the gouernement of Bur∣gundie, shall go diligently through all Cities and places of the sayde gouernements, and as he arriueth in euery place, he shall deuise tho best wayes that he can to make peace, vnion and quietnesse amongst the Kings subiectes as well of the one Religion as of the other. And to bring it the better about, he shall gently call before him in open or priuate place as he shal see best cause for his Maiesties seruice herein, the Gentlemen of the places, and the Burgeses of the Cities of his gouernement, that be of the Religion, and shal declare vnto them, & cause them to vnderstand the truth of the sayd commotion, least any
haue misreported it too them, otherwise than it was in deede. And shall tell them, that vnder the colour of the L. Admirals hurte, wher∣fore his Maiestie would haue caused iustice to be done according to the good order that he had appointed, the sayd Admirall and Gen∣tlemen of his Religion which were in the Citie with him, without looking for the executiō of the sayd Iustice, had made a mischeuous, vnhappie, and detestable conspiracie against the Kings Maiesties per∣son, the Queene his mother, the Lordes his brethren, the King of Nauarre, and other Princes and Lords with them, and against the whole estate, euen as certaine of the chiefe and adherents of the sayd conspiracie (acknowledging their fault) haue confessed. VVherfore his Maiestie was constrayned (to his greate griefe) to resiste and pre∣uent so mischieuous, pernicious and abhominable a purpose. And that which he suffered to bee done on Sunday the. xxiiij. of August vpon the Admiral and his complices, was not for any Religion, nor to goe against the Edict of Pacification, he entending neuerthelesse that they of the Religion should still liue and abyde in al libertie and safetie, with their wiues, children and families in their houses, as he hath and will mainteyne them, if they be content to liue quietly vn∣der his obedience as he desireth▪ For the which cause he willeth, that the Counte Charnye shall offer and giue to them his letters of safe∣garde in good and authentyke forme, which shall bee of as good force and vertue, as if they should come or be taken from his owne Maiestie: and by the authoritie of them, they shall bee preserued from all wrongs, violences, and oppressions: enioyning and forbid∣ding most expressely all his catholike subiects whatsoeuer they are, to attempt nothing, vpon the persons, goods, or families of anye of the Religion which kepe themselues quietly in their houses, on paine of death. And if any be so rashe, or euil aduised, to do against this In∣iunction, or too violate the safegard promysed, his Maiestie wil∣leth that readie and rigorous punishment bee done, too the intent that their example may serue too holde in others not too doe the like: which is the true and onely meanes of assurance that his Ma∣iestie can giue to them of the Religion, with his worde and promise which he giueth them too bee their good and benigne Prince, prote∣ctor and preseruer of them and of all that toucheth them, so long as they liue and continue vnder his obedience without doing or enter∣prising any thing against his will and seruice. And bycause his Maie∣stie
hath often knowne that the enterprises and consultations taken in hand by them of the Religion against his seruice, haue bene con∣cluded amongs them at assemblies at sermons which Gentlemen had libertie to cause to bee made in their houses and Lordships, therfore my L. of Charnye shall particularly giue too vnderstand to Gentle∣men which were wont too haue such sermons, that his Maiestie in consideration that nothing hath more moued and set on the Catholi∣kes against those of the Religion than such preachings and assem∣blies, and if they continue it is certaine that it wil bee a cause too en∣crease and mainteine the said commotions, desireth that they should cause them to cease off vntil he hath otherwise prouided and appoin∣ted, and that they applie themselues herevnto as a thing greatly ser∣uing the effect of his intention, which is, gently to bring his sayd sub∣iects to a true and perfect amitie, vnion and concord one with ano∣ther, committing all diuisions and partialities to obliuiō. And bycause this may seme hard at the beginning, my L▪ of Charnye shal cause it to bee faire and gently spoken to them, least they enter intoo some straunge coniecture or suspition. For so his sayd Maiestie would pro∣ceede in all true sinceritie towardes them which conforme themsel∣ues to his will and obedience, wherin he exhorteth them to liue, with all the best perswasions that he can, and shall assure them in so doing to be surely maintayned and preserued as his other subiects the Ca∣tholikes, as his Maiestie would that he should do. And too the intent his sayd subiects the Catholikes should knowe howe to vse and be∣haue them selues herein, my L. of Charnie shall tel thē, that his maie∣sties pleasure neither is nor hath bene that any wrong or oppression should be done to them of the saide religion, which like good and loyall subiects will gently kepe themselues vnder his obedience. De∣claring vnto the sayd Catholikes, that if they forget themselues and burt those of the religion which in such sort behaue themselues to∣ward his maiestie, and those also which for that end haue receiued of his maiestie or of my L. of Charnie letters of safeconduite, he will cause them to be punished and chastised in the fielde, as trangressours of his commaundementes, without any hope of grace, pardon, or re∣mission. VVhich the said L. of Charnie shal expresse and declare vnto thē, with as plaine words as is possible, & cause it also to be as streight∣ly executed. And after that following his Maiesties intent, he hath pa∣cified them by this meanes, which is the waye that his maiestie best
liketh of, and searched the direction to assure a tranquillitie betwixt the subiectes and to set some assuraunce betwixt the one and the o∣ther, such as shall conforme themselues herein to his sayde maiesties will, he will comfort, and make them the beste and most gentle inter∣tainement that he possibly can. But if any of the Religion become selfe willed and stubborne to his Maiestie, without hauing regarde to his sayde warnings, and shall assemble in armes together, making practises and deuises against the weale of his seruice, then the L. of Charnye shall run vpon thē, and hew thē in pieces before they haue power to fortifie thē selues and ioyne together. And therfore he shal assemble as muche force as he can, as well of the ordinarie, as of other men of warre, Souldiers, Footemen of the garrisons, and in∣habitants of the Catholikes within the Cities of his gouernement, and shall besiege them which holde and make themselues strong in Cities about of his gouernement, so that the victorie and authoritie may remayne in his maiestie. At Paris the. xxx. of August. 1572. Signed, Charles, and vnderneath, Brulard. THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE LORDE of Gwich, wherby it may plainely be perceyued, how they would search out all them of the Religion which had anye charge in hand during the troubles. MY L. of Gwiche, I vnderstand that the. iij. brethren Daggonels, and one Porcher the host at the signe of the Aduenture, Mos∣soner, Crispine, and Captaine Grise, which were the principall of the faction in Burgundie, and were the cause of the taking and reco∣uering of the Citie of Mascon in the late troubles, and of all the de∣cay which happened in that countrey, bee kept prisoners in Mas∣con. And bycause I vnderstande they hope to escape out by ransome (which I would in no wise should be done) I ordeyne and commaūd that you kepe them safe, for as much as I hope by their meanes to dis∣couer a great many things which greatly touch the weale of my ser∣uice. And if there be any other prisoners of the new religion in Mas∣con, which haue bene factious, you shal likewise kepe thē, so that they escape not by paying ransome, for I would not for any thing in the world that there shuld be taking of rasome among my subiects. And thus my L. of Gwich I pray God kepe you in his holy tuitiō. VVrittē
at Paris the. xiiij. of September. 1572. Signed, Charles, and vnde∣neath, Brulard. THE KINGS LETTERS TO MONSIEVR DE Gordes his Lieutenant generall in Daulphine, wherein e sendeth him worde, that the best proof of his doings is the accusations and complain∣tes of them of the Religion against him, wherevnto be should haue care to answere. MOnsieur de Gordes, by your letters of the first of this moneth I perceyued the order which you appointed in your Gouerne∣ment since the aduertisement which you had of the execution of the Admirall and his adherentes: and since I am sure you forgot nothing which you thought might serue for your assuraunce of those places wherof you had occasion to doubt. And to the intent you shoulde haue the more meanes to make your selfe knowne, I haue prepared that the souldiers of Corsica which I had appointed to go into Pro∣uince, should returne to you, and therevpon haue written too my Cousin the Counte of Tende, who will not faile to send them vntoo you, or as much as there is no neede of them now in that countrey. He should also send you word of the tyme of their departing, to the ende that you might haue leysure to prouide to receyue them, and appoint their places where they should be in garrison. I haue seen that which you writ too mee concerning the continuall payment in Daulphine, what is due for the last yeare, wherevpon I will aduise of the state of my fines the meanes that may be, and according ther∣vnto there shall be no fault, but they shall be prouided for. For the re∣paration of the Bridge of Grenoble, they of the same place must de∣uise the meanes wherby they should best helpe them elues therein, and when they haue aduertised me, I will appoint them necessarie prouision. Touching the souldiers appointed or the Baron of A∣dresse, bycause the occasion why I appointed them to be leuied now easeth, I haue written to him to send them backe and dismisse them againe: wherfore there is no neede to make prouision for their main∣enance, nor likewise to tell you any thing else concerning the an∣sweres which you haue made too the remembrances which they of the Religion haue presented against you. For your doings are well knowne and playne vnto mee, and therevpon I will take no better
proofe than their accusation. VVherfore you shall put your selfe to no more paine on that side. Moreouer I haue herewith sent you a copie of the declaration which I made of the Admirals death and his adherents, and made to be vnderstoode that it should be obserued and followed, and that all murders, sackings, and violences should cease. Neuerthelesse I haue heard complaints of diuerse places that such extraordinary wayes continue, which is a thing, that doth much displease mee. By the meanes whereof I aduise you, in doing this charge once againe put vntoo you, that you giue order throughout your gouernement to cause all hostilitie, force, and violence to cease, and that the sayd declaration be straightly obserued and kept, with punishing those that withstand, so rigorously, that the demonstra∣tion thereof may serue for an example, seyng my intent is that they should be punished as behoueth, and to marke them which wincke or dissemble therat. This present letter shall serue also for an aduise of the receipt of those letters which you wrote the. 5. of this present, wherby you send me word that you receyued no message by word of mouth from me, but only letters of the. xxij. xxiiij. and. xxviij. of the moneth passed, whereof put your selfe to no further paie, for that charge was only for such as thē were neere about me, which is al that I haue at this tyme to say vnto you. Praying herevpon the Creator to kepe you in his holy and worthy tuicion. VVritten at Paris the. xiiij. day of September. Signed, Charles, and beneath, Fizes. And aboue.To M. de Gordes knight. THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE DVKE of Guise, his Lieutenant generall in Champaigne and in Prie. COusin, although in all my former letters I haue giuen you too vnderstand well inough how much I desire that al my subiects, as wel of the nobilitie as others which professe the new Religiō, and quietly vse them selues in your gouernement, should by you bee maintayned and preserued in all suretie vnder my protection and safegard, without giuing them any hinderance by trouble in their persons, goods, and families: yet neuerthelesse I haue beene aduerti∣ed that in certaine places of my Realme there haue bene many sac∣kings and pillings done by such as dwell in the houes of them of the sayd new Religion, as well in the fieldes as in the Cities, vnder co∣lou
of the commotion which happened in my Citie of Paris the xxiiij. day of August last, a thing beyond all measure displeasant and disagreable vnto me, and for the which I would haue prouision and remedie. VVherfore I pray you, Cousin, that aboue all things as you desire that I should knowe the good affection you beare to the good weal of my seruice, you take that matter next your hart too perserue and maintaine within your gouernment according too that which I haue so playnely told and written too you heretofore, that all suche of the newe Religion which behaue them selues quietly, take no wrong or violence, whether it bee for the preseruation of their goodes or persons, no more than too my Catholike subiectes. And where any wrong or outrage shal bee offered them against my will, as I haue before declared, so doe I nowe by these presentes declare, I will and intend that you shal make some euident and notorious pu∣nishment of such as are herein culpable, so that their correction may serue for an example to al other, that I may see my self throughly o∣beyd herein as I would be, and my cōmaundements receyued amōgst all my subiects in another sorte than they haue bene heretofore. As∣suring you cousin, that the beste newes that I shall receyue from you, shal be to heare say that you chastise those well, of whome I am dis∣obeyed. And thus cousin, I praye God too kepe you in his holy tui∣tion. VVritten from Paris the. xxviij. of September. 1572. Signed, Charles, and vnderneath, Brulard. REMEMBRANCES SENT BY THE KING too all gouernours, and Lieutenantes of his Prouinces, too put out and remoue all those of the Religion from their estates and char∣ges, although they would abiure the same, sauing suh as haue but small estates and offices, to whom his Maiestie permitteth continuāce, on condition that they abiure the said religion according to the forme of abiuration sent for that purpose. THe King considering how much his officers and Magistrates of Iustice, and such as haue the administration and dealing of his Fynes and payments, which be of the newe Religion, are suspect & hated, and put his catholike subiects in greate mistrust if they should presently execise their offices after these freshe commotions, for
cause that the sayde offices be in their handes that now kepe them: therfore least the people should therby be brought to a newe occasiō of stirre, and they of the new religiō be in daunger or hazard of their own persons, although they woulde abiure their sayd new religiō, & professe the holye faith and catholike Religiō of Rome: his maiestie desiring to auoyde the new mischiefes & troubles which may come, hath aduised to discharge the said officers frō the exercise of the said offices, vntill he shall otherwise appoint. And yet neuerthelesse, in the meane while, if the sayd officers bee obediente vnto his will, and liue quietly in their houses without attempting, practising or aking any thing in hande against his seruice, they shall receyue thir wa∣ges, and they that will resigne their sayde offices too Catholike per∣sons, and come too his maiestie, shall bee verie honorably prouided for. And as touching other small offices without wages, which can not bee troublesome, as Notaries, sergeants, and suche where the officers haue none authoritie, which cannot bee so odious nor mi∣strustfull to the people as the other, his Maiestie is aduised, that such small officers which will abiure the sayd newe Religion, and professe the fayth Catholike, Apostolike, and Romishe, and therin liue con∣tinually hereafter, shall continue in the exercise and enioying of their estates: but they that will continue in their newe opinion, shal de∣part from their offices, vntill his Maiestie hath otherwise prouided. And this is for the greate mischiefe and inconuenience that may be∣tyde them, if they shoulde exercise their sayd estates, bycause of the greate mistrust and suspition which the Catholikes haue conceyued of them of the newe Religion. Neuerthelesse his Maiestie well considering that the moste part of the sayde officers haue none o∣ther way too liue, but the exercise of their sayd offices, willeth that they shall bee in choyse too resigne to Catholike and capable per∣sons, and then too come too him for that effect, and he will graunt them the greatest fauour and moderation of his treasorie that is pos∣sible. The which resolution and pleasure of his Maiestie, he willeth to be declared to the sayd officers of the new pretended opinion, as wel by gouernours and Lieutenants general of his Prouinces, as by thē of his Courtes of Parliamēt, of the chamber of his accomptes, of the Court of his aydes, them of his great Counsel, of the Treasorie of Fraunce, the Generals of his Fynes, his Baylifes, Seneshals, Pro∣osts, Iudges or their Lieutenants, and uery one of them as shall▪
appertaine. And to this intēt his maiestie willeth and intendeth that euery one of thē in their calling shal send particularly & part for e∣uery of the sayd officers of the new Religiō, which be of their incor∣poratiō, charge and lurisdictiō, & shal admonish thē in this behalf to conforme them selues to his maiesties mind: and if any of thē in au∣thoritie, bicause of their sayd estates wil returne to the bosome of the Catholike & Romish church, it shall be sayd to thē that his maiestie liketh verie well of it, and that hee taketh a greate and singular affe∣ction therein, and that it shall giue him the greater assurance and cre∣dit of their good will, and that his Maiestie will not bar them from his seruice hereafter, but will prouide for them as their behauiour shall deserue. And notwithstanding, for the reasons abouesayd, he willeth that they shal cease from the exercise of their estates and of∣fices, vntil he otherwise appointeth. And bycause that in many places of the Realme they haue proceded by waye of seasing the goods of them of the newe Religion which bee deade or absente, and hide themselues: and sometimes of those which be in their owne houses, although hi Maiestie gaue to vnderstande by his declaration of the xxviij. of August last, that he would and intēded that they of the new Religion should enioy their goods, neuerthelesse, to the intent there should be no doubt of his purpose, and that no mistrust might arise thervpon, he declareth, willeth, and itendeth againe, that according to his declaration of the. xxviij. of August, they of the newe Religion which be lyuing, whether they be present or absent, and be not cul∣pable or charged with the last conspiration, or to haue attempted a∣gainst his Maiestie or his estate, since his Edict of Pacification, shall be restored to their houses, and put in possession of all and singular their goodes moueable or vnmoueble. And that the wydowes and heyres of them that bee dead, may and shall succede them, and apprehend all and singular their goodes, and that they shall bee maynteyned in them, and kepte vnder the protection and safegard of his Maiestie, so that no hurte shall bee done or sayd vn∣to them in any maner of wyse or sort. VVilling for this purpose that all necessarie suretie shall be giuen them: and that all officers, Magi∣strates, Maiors and others which haue publike charge, shall mayn∣tayne them in al safetie, forbidding al persons, of what estate, qualitie or condition so euer they be, not to hurt them in person or goodes vpon payne of death. And neuerthelesse his Maiestie willeth, that
they of the newe opinion shall submit themselues, and promise vpon paine to be declared rebelles and traitours too his Maiestie, that they shall hereafter liue vnder his obedience, without attempting any thing too the contrarie, or taking their parts that do attempt against his Maiestie and estate, or things against his ordinances: and too ac∣knowledge none but his Maiestie or such as he shall appoint vnder him to haue authoritie to commaund them. And if they kno  any that shal enterprise against his Maiestie & seruice, to reueale thē in∣continent to him and his officers, as good and faithfull subiects. And to take away all doubte and suspicion as wel from the nobilitie as others, bycause that in the declaration of the. xxiiij. of the last mo∣neth, these wordes are contained (Except they bee those of the chiefe, which had commaundement for those of the newe opinin, or those which made practises and deuises for them, or those which might haue had intelli∣gence of the sayd conspiracie.) His Maiestie declareth that he meaneth not of things done and past during the troubles which were before the Edict of Pacification in August. 1570. and that there shall be no inquisition thereof, and none shall bee troubled in goods or person therfore (but for that respect they shal inioy the benefit of the Edict of Pacification) but that the sayd wordes extend only to those which be found to be giltie or accessarie to the last conspiracie done against his Maiestie and estate, and that other which are imprisoned, shall be set at libertie. And as touching them which will make profession of their faith, and returne to the Catholike Religion, his Maiestie desi∣reth that his gouernours and officers shall excyte and conforte them as much as they can, too that effect, and execution of that good will: and that their friendes and kinsfolkes should also bee exhorted too doe the like for their parte. And if any should hurt them in goods or body, his Maiestie willeth readie and speedie execution too bee done on them. And too the intent that they maye followe the fourme which hath bene kept, in professing the faith which they doe make that returne to the Apostolike and Romishe Church, there is sent herewith a memorie thereof. From Paris the. xxij. day of Sep∣tember. 1572. Signed, Charles, And beneath, Pinart.
THE FOVRME OF ABIVRATION OF HE∣resie, and confession of faith, which they which haue swarued from the faith, and pretende to be receyued into the church, ought to make. THIS IS THE ABIVRATION VVHICH they caused al of the Religiō to make in Fraunce, to saue their li∣ues. Printed at Paris by Nicolas Roffet, dwelling in the new streat of our Ladie, at the signe of the Mower: with the Kings Priui∣lege. FIrst, they whiche haue swarued from the fayth, and desire too re∣turne intoo the compasse of our holye mother Church, ought too present themselues to their Curates or vicars to bee instructed of that which they ought to doe: that done, they shal bee sent vnto the reuerend Byshop of the dioces or his Chauncellour or officiall, too make the sayd Abiuration and confession in maner and former fol∣lowing: IN. borne at. &c. in the dioces of. &c. and dwelling. &c. acknow∣ledging by the grace of God the true faith Catholike and Apostolike from the which I haue through my fault gone astray and separated my self since &c. and desirous to returne to the flocke of Christes true shepefold, which is the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romish Church, confesse to haue abiured and cursed all the errours and heresie of the Lutherians, Caluinistes, and Hugonotes, and all other heresie whatsoeuer wherwith I haue heretofore bene diffamed or touched: and I agree to the fayth of our holy mother the Church, and desire you in the name of God, of his sonne Iesus Christ, and of the glo∣rious Virgin his mother Marie, and of all the Sainctes of Paradise, that it would please you to receyue me into the flocke and shepefold of Gods people, which liue vnder the obedience of the Pope orday∣ned our Sauiour Iesus Christs vicar in the sayd Church, submitting my self paciently to abyde and willingly to do the penance which it shal please you to enioyne me for the absolution of my faults com∣mitted, whilest I was in the foresayd sectes, wherof I aske and require pardon of God, and of his sayd Church, and of you (that be appoyn∣ted my pastor by God the Creator) absolution, with such penance as you shal iudge to be holsome for the satisfaction of my sinnes & of∣fences. And to the intent you should knowe that I haue and do make
this abiuration frō my heart, I confesse moreouer before God & you, that I beleeue that which is contayned in the Simbole or Creede of the Apostles, and Athanasius, and other confessions of saith made & approued by the whole councels of the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romish church: that is: I beleeue in one only God, the father almigh∣tie, Creator of Heauen and Earth, and of all things visible and inuisi∣ble, and in one L. our Lord Iesus Christ, the only sonne ongendred by God the father before the constitucion of the world, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, engendred not created, Con∣substantiall with the Father by whom all things were made, who for vs mē, and for our saluation, descended from heauen &c. as in the be∣lief of morning prayer. I beleeue likewise, acknowledge and confesse al that which is contayned in the bookes as well in the olde as of the newe testament, approued by the sayd holye and Apostolike church of Rome, according to the sense and interpretation of the holy Do∣ctours receyued by the same, reiecting al other interpretation as false and erroneous. I acknowledge the seuen Sacramentes of the sayde Catholike, Apostolike and Romish church, that they were instituted by our L. Iesus Christ, and that they be necessarie for the saluation of mankind, although that al of them are not of necessitie to be conser∣red too all, that is to saye: I confesse that the sayde seuen Sacramen∣tes are these, Baptisme, Confirmation, Eucharist▪ which is the Sa∣crament of the altar, Pennce, extreme vnction, Order, and Mariage, and that the sayde Sacraments confer grace, and that of them, Baptisme, Confirmation, & Order, can not be reiterated without sa∣crilege. That the sayde Sacraments haue the effect which the sayde church teacheth, and that the forme and vsage wherwith they be mi∣nistred too christians, is holye and necessarie. I acknowledge also that the holye Masse is a sacrifice and oblation of the verye bodie and bloud of our sauiour Iesus Christ vnder the forme of bread and wyne mingled with water, whiche substances of bread and wyne vnder the sayde formes (are in the Masse by the wordes whiche serue for consecration, sayd and pronounced by the Priest) transubstanciated and transformed intoo the substance of the sayde bodye and bloud of Iesus Christ. Notwithstanding that the qua∣lities and accidentes remayne in the sayde formes after the sayde consecration, and that the Masse is holesome and profitable as well for the quicke as the deade. I acknowledge and confesse the
concomitāce, that is to say, that in receiuing the body of Iesus Christ vnder the forme of bread alone, I likewise receiue the blood of Iesus Christ. I confesse that Prayer and intercssion of Sainctes for the quicke and the dead is holie, good and hethfull for Christians, and is not contrarye (for any respect) to the glorie of God. That pray∣ers made in the Churche for the faythfull which are dead, do pro∣fit them for the remission of their sinnes, and lessening of their pai∣nes incurred for the same. That there is a Purgatorie where the soules abyding are succoured by the prayers of the faythfull. I con∣fesse that we muste honor and call vpon the sainctes which raigne with Iesus Christ, and that they make intercession for vs to God, and that their Reliques re to be worshipped. That the commaundemēts and traditions of the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romishe Churche as well they which pertaine to the forme and ceremonies of diuine r∣uice, and to assist the same, which I thinke bee too drawe Christian people to piie and turning to their God, as fasting, absteyning from meates, obseruation of holy dayes, and ecclesiasticall pollicie, accor∣ding to the tradition of the Apostles and holye Fathers continued since the primitiue Church till this time, and afterwards brought in∣to the Church by the ordinances of councels receyued in the same of long and auncient time, or of late, be good and holy, to the whiche I wil and ought too obey as prescribed and appointed by the holye ghost, the author and directer of that which serueth for the keping of christian religion, and of the catholike, Apostolike, and Romaine church. I beleeue also and accepte all the articles of originall sinne, and of Iustification. I affirme assuredly that we ought too haue and kepe the images of Iesus Christ, of his holye mother, and all other saincts, and do honor and reuerēce vnto thē. I confesse the power of indulgence and pardōs to be left in the church by Iesus Christ, & the vse of thē to be very heathful, as also I cōfesse the church of Rome to be the mother and chief of al churches, and cōducted by the holy Ghost: and that other pretended particular inspirations against the same, come of the suggestion of the Deuill, the Prince of dien∣tion, which woulde separate the vnion of the mysticall body of the sauiour of the worlde. Finally, I promise straightly too kepe all that was ordained at the last general councel of Trēt, and promise to God and you, neuer more to depart from the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romaine Church: and if I do (which God forbid) I submit my selfe
to the penalties of the canons of the sayd Church, made, ordeyned, & appointed against them which fall backe intoo Apostasie. The which Abiuration and Confession I haue subscribed. THE KINGS LETTERS TO M. DE GVISE and other Lieutenantes and Gouernors of his Prouinces, by the which he wholly abolisheth and subuerteth al the Edictes of Pacification, and willeth that onely the Romish Religion should take place in his Realme. THe King knowing that the declaration which he made vpon the occasions which lately chaced in the Citie of Paris, the remem∣brances and instructions of his will which he sent roud about to all Gouernours of his Prouinces and Lieutenants generall therin, and particular letters to the Seneshals, and his Courts of Parliament, and other officers and Ministers of Iustice cā not hitherto staye the course of murders and robberies done in the most part of the cities of this Realme, to his Maiesties great displeasure: hath aduised for a more singular remedie, to send all the sayd Gouernours into euery of their charges and gouernements, assoring him selfe, that according to the qualitie and power which they haue of his Maiestie, they can well followe and obserue his intent, the which more fully to declare, his Maiestie hath caused his letters patentes to be dispatched, which shall be deliuered them. Besides the contentes wherof M. de Guise the go∣uernour, and Lieutenāt generall for his Maiestie in Champaigne and Brye, shall call before him the gentlemen of the newe Religion aby∣ding within his gouernement, and shal tell them that the Kings will and intent is to preserue them, their wyues, children and families, and to maintaine them in possession of their goods, so that on their parte they liue quietly, and render to his maiestie obedience and fidelitie as they ought: in which doing the King also will defende them, that they shall not be molested or troubled by way of Iustice or otherwise in their persons and goods, by reason of things done during the trou∣bles, & before the Edict of Pacificatiō of August. 1570. And after∣wardes he shal louingly admonish thē to cōtinue no longer in the er∣rour of the new opinions, and to returne to the Catholike Religion, reconciling themselues to the Catholike Romish Church, vnder the doctrine and obedience wherof, Kings his predecessors and their sub∣iects haue alwayes holily lyued, and this Realme hath bene carefully
conducted and mainteyned: Shewing too them the mischiefes and calamities which haue happened in this Realme, since thse newe opinions haue entred intoo mens spirites. Howe manye murders haue bene caused by such which haue fallen from the right waye holden by their Auncestors? First they made them separate them∣selues fom the churche, then from their nexe of kinred, and also to be estranged from the seruice of their king, as a man may see since his raigne. And although the authors and heades of that side, would haue couered their doings vnder the title of Religion and cōscience: yet their deedes and workes haue shewen wel inough that the name of religion was but a visarde to couer their driftes and disobedience, and vnder that pretence too assemble and subborne people, and too make and compel them to sweare in the cause vnder the title of dis∣obedience, and by suche wayes to turne them from the naturall af∣fection whiche they owe to the King, and consequently from his o∣bedience, being notorious that what commaundement so euer the King could make to them of the newe Religion, they haue not since his raigne obeyed him otherwise than pleased their heads. And con∣trariwise, when their sayd heads commaunded them to arise and take to their weapons, too set vpon Cities, to burne churches, too sacke and pill, to trouble the Realme and fill it with bloud and fire, they which went so astray to followe them, forget all trust and duetie of good subiects, to execute and obey their commaundements. VVhich things if the gentlemen wil wel consider, they shall easely iudge how vnhappie and miserable their condition shall bee, if they continue longer therein. For they may well thinke of them selues, that the King being taught by experience of so greate a daunger, from the which it hath pleased God too preserue him and his estate, and ha∣uing proued the mischiefes and calamities which this Realme hath suffered by the enterprises of the heads of this cause, their adhe∣rentes and complices, that he wil neuer willingly bee serued with any gentlemen of his subiects that be of any other religion than the Catholike, in the which also the King, following his predecessors, wil liue and die. He willeth also to take away al mistrust amōgst his sub∣iects, and to quench the rising of discordes and seditions, that all they of whom he is serued in honorable places, and specially the gentlemē which desire to be accōpted his good and lawfull subiects, and would obtaine his fauour, and be employed in charges of his seruice, accor∣ding
to their degrees and qualities, to make profession hereafter too liue in the same Religion that he doth: hauing tryed that discords and ciuil warres will not cease in a state where there be many Reli∣gions, and that it is not possible for a King too maintaine in his Re∣alme diuersities in religion, but that he shall leese the good will and beneuolence of his subiectes, yea and they which are of a contraie Religion to his, desire nothing in their hart more than the change of the King and of his estate. For the reason abouesayde, the Duke of Guise, to bring the matter to this passe, shall take paines to persuade the nobilitie and others infected with the sayde newe opinion, to re∣turne of themselues, and of their owne frewil, to the Catholike Reli∣gion, and to abiure and renounce the new without any more expresse commaundement from the King. For how so euer it be, his maiestie is resolued to make his subiects liue in his Religion, and neuer to suf∣fer what so euer may betyde, that there shall bee any other forme or exercise of religion in his Realme than the catholike. The said Duke of Guise shal cōmunicate with the principal officers and magistrates, hauing the principall charge and administration of iustice in cities of his gouernement, his Maiesties declaration, to the intent they should knowe his minde, and the good end wherevnto he tendeth for the vniting and quietnesse of his subiects, to the intent the sayde M. de Guise and the sayde officers and Magistrates, should with one con∣corde, intelligence and correspondence proceede too the effect abou sayd, so that fruit and quietnesse may thereof ensue, such as his Ma∣iestie desireth, not only for himself, but for the whole Realme. The Baylifes and stuardes which are not in religiō accordingly qualified, shal within one moneth resigne their offices to gentlemen capable, and of the qualitie required by the Edict, which may keepe and exer∣cise the same. And too the intent this should bee done, his Maiestie doth nowe presently declare them depriued after the sayde moneth, if they do not then resigne, that they shall haue no occasion or colour of excuse to delay their resignations, and yet permitteth them in the meane whyle to resigne without any fine paying. Al Baylifes & stuar∣des shal be resident at their offices vpon paine of losse of the same, and if they can not so be, then they shal be bound to resigne. Al Archby∣shops and Bishops shal likewise bee resident in their dioces, and such as for age and other disposition of person can not preach the word of God, nor edifie the people, and do other functios appetaining too
their charge and dignitie, shal be bounde to take a conductor to com∣fort them, and to employ them selues to the duetie of their charge. To the which conductour they shal appoint an honest and reasona∣ble pension according to the fruites and ruenue of their liuing. Also persons and vicars shall be resident at their benefices, or else shall bee admonished to resigne them to such as will be resident, and doe their duetie. Archbyshops and Byshops shal take information of thē which holde abbeyes, prioryes, and other benefices in their dioces, of what qualitie so euer they are, and how they do their duetie in the admi∣nistration of them, wherevpon they shall make processe by worde vnto the Gouernours, which shal sende them to the King to prouide therin as reason shall moue him. They shall cpell the curates actual∣ly to abide at the places of their benefices, or else shal appoint other in their steades according to the disposition of the Canons. At Paris the iij. day of Nouember. 1572. Signed, Charles. LETTERS OF M. DE GORDS THE KINGS Lieutenant in Daulphine, too certaine of the Religion in his gouer∣nement, wherby he exhorteth them too come backe againe too the Re∣ligion of Rome, and howe the King is determined too suffer none other. SIr I am sufficiently aduertised of your behauior, but you shuld re∣member what aduertisements I haue before sent you too returne too the Catholike Religion of your selfe, which is the best holde & stay that you can chose for your preseruation and health, putting frō you all those which persuade you to the contrary, who woulde abyde to see any commotion or disorder rather than abate any poynt of their opinion. And by this meanes you shall make euident too the King, the wil which you say you haue to obey his Maiestie, counsai∣ling you for as much as I desire your well doing, that this is the best for you to do, without loking for any more open commaundemēt: otherwise assure your self, there can but euil come of it, and that his Maiestie would be obeyed. And thus I pray God to aduise you and giue you his holye grace. From Grenoble the sixt of December. 1572. Your entire good friend, Gordes.
THE ANSVVERE OF THE GENTLEMEN, Capitaines, Burgeses, and other being in the towne of Rochell, too the commaundementes that haue bene giuen them in the name of the King, to receyue garrisons. WE the Gentlemen, Capitaines, Burgeses and other nowe being in this towne of Rochell, doe giue answere too you Moun∣sier N▪ and to such commaundementes as you giue vs in the name of his Maiestie, that wee can not acknowledge that that which is signi∣fied vnto vs, and the Proclamation which you require that we shuld cause to be published, do proceede from his Maiestie. And thereof we call to witnesse his Maiestie himself, his letters of the. xxij. and. xxiiij. of August, his owne signet, and the publishing of the same letters, by the which his sayd Maiestie layeth all the fault of all the trouble late∣ly happened, and of the cruell slaughter done at Paris, vpon those of the house of Guise, protesting that he had enough to doe too keepe himselfe safe within his Castell of Louure with those of his Garde. And we shall neuer suffer our selues to be persuaded that so foule an enterprise and so barbarous a slaughter hath at any tyme entred into the mind of his Maiestie, much lesse that the same hath bene done by his expresse commaundement, as the paper importeth which you haue exhibited vnto vs, nor that his maiestie hath bene so ill adui∣sed, as himself to cut of his owne armes, or too dsile the sacred wed∣ding of. Madame his owne sister with the sheding of so much noble and innocent bloud, and with the shame of so cruell a fact to disteine the nation of Fraunce and the bloud royall which hath heretofore e∣uer among all nations borne the name of franke and courteous: nor that he hath had minde to deliuer matter to writers to set forth a tra∣gicall historie, such as antiquitie hath neuer heard speake of the like, and such as posteritie can not reporte without horror. But that it was first layd at Rome, and afterward hatched at Paris, by the authors of all the troubles of Fraunce. And howsoeuer it be, wee are readie too maintaine that out of the mouth of his Maiestie doth not proceede hote and cold, white and black, and that he doth not nowe say one thing and by and by an other, as he should doe if the paper that you present vnto vs had passed from him, protesting that he will inuiola∣bly keepe his Edict, and immediatly breaking the same in declaring that he commaunded those murders too bee committed, hauing also
made protestation before, that it is too his greate griefe, and done by the outrage and violence of those of Guise against whome he was not able to make speedie resistance in tyme as his Maiestie desired. And in this quarell, wee the Gentlemen, Capitaines, and other that make you this answere, are readie to trie it by combat man to man, or otherwise, to maintaine the honour of our King against all those that so pophane holye things, and as much as in them lyeth doe by such wordes and titles vilainously defile the excellence of his Maiestie and of the noble Princes of his bloude. VVhich wee maye right well coniecture and estimate, by the slaughters that are yet in doing, as well in the towne of Paris as else where, vpon so manye noblemen, gentlemen and other, men, women and children, and vpon a greate number of yong scholars (the maintenance vnder God, of Realmes and common weales in time to come) and by many other barbarous, vnnaturall and vnmanly actes generally committed. VVe think ther∣fore and iudge that herein treason is enterprised against the person of his Maistie and of my Lords his brethren, and that the Guisians meane to inuade the Crowne of the Realme as they haue of long tyme practised: and how so euer it be, we say that his Maiestie is for∣ced by the power that they haue taken vpon them and vsurped by meane of the rebellious stirre of the commons of Paris. As for that which they saye that the Admirall and those of the Religion had conspired against the Kings Maiestie and his brethren, these be alle∣gations of as greate truth and of as good likelyhoode, as their maner of proceeding in Iustice hath bene orderly, beginning at execution before examination of the fact. But it is now no neede to tarrie for tyme too discouer it, for the matter is plain to bee seen with eye and groped with hand, and all those of the Romishe Religion that haue remaining any droppe of nature of man, doe confesse it and holde downe their heads for shame, cursing both with hart and mouth the cruel executers of this abhominable enterprise, and the wicked di∣sturbers of common quiet, which can yet no more suffer, than they hetherto haue done, that this poore Realme shoulde long enioye the benefite of that peace, which the King alone next vnder God had wisely caused to be made and to bee accordingly obserued, whereof this Realme began to feele the good taste, to the greate contente∣ment of all persons, except the enimies of peace and of this Realme, namely the Guisians. Finally, when his Maiestie being out of their
handes and power shall declare what is his pleasure, wee will ende∣uour vs to obey him in all things, wherin our consciences, which are dedicate to God alone, shall not be wounded, in which case wee will rather forsake the earth than heauen, and our frayle and transitorie houses rather than the heauenly mansions. But hetherto, the lawe of nature, and the duetie that we owe to our naturall Prince, to the pre∣seruation of his Crowne, and to the safetie of our lyues, oure wiues and children, doth commaund vs to stand vpon our garde, and not to put vs in the mercie of those that haue receyued the same bloudy commission from the Guisians vnder the pretended name of the King, to vse vs in the same manner as they haue wickedly, tritorous∣ly and vnnaturally done to those about his Maiestie, and as it were vnder his wings and vnder the skirtes of his robe, which the traitors strangers haue stained with the true French bloud, without that his Maiestie hath bene able to remedie it, nor too staye their cursed at∣emptes: so much lesse is he able now so farre off to defend vs as he would, which his Maiesties good wil being knowne vnto vs, doth arme vs for our defence, and for the safe∣garde of our liues, and of the priuileges which he hath giuen vs, vntil such tyme as he shall be able by himself to defend vs against his eni∣mies and ours. FINIS.
