22340 99842052 6675
A YORKSHIRE Tragedy. Not so New as Lamentable and true. Acted by his Maiesties Players at the Globe. VVritten by VV. Shakspeare. AT LONDON Printed by R. B. for Thomas Pauier and are to bee sold at his shop on Cornhill, neere to the exchange. 1608.
ALL'S ONE, OR, One of the foure Plaies in one, called a York-shire Tragedy: as it was plaid by the Kings Maiesties Plaiers. Enter Oliuer and Ralph, two seruingmen. Oliu. SIrrah Raph, my yong Mistrisse is in such a pit∣tifull passionate humor for the long absence of her loue, Raph. Why can you blame her, why, apples han∣ging longer on the tree then when they are ripe, makes so many fallings. viz Madde wenches because they are not gathered in time, are faine to drop of them selues, and then tis Common you know for e∣uery man to take em vp. Oliu. Mass thou saiest true, Tis common indeede, but sirah, is neither our young maister returned, nor our fellow Sam come from London? Ralph. Neither of either, as the Puritan bawde saies. Slidd I heare Sam, Sam's come, her's Tarry, come, yfaith now my nose itches for news Oliue, and so doe's mine elbowe.
Sam calls within, where are you there? Sam. Boy look you walk my horse with discretion, I haue rid him simply, I warrand his skin sticks to his back with very heate, if a should catch cold & get the Cough of the Lunges I were well serued, were I not? What Raph and Oliuer. Am. Honest fellow Sam welcome yfaith, what tricks hast thou brought from London. Furnisht with things from London. Sa. You see I am hangd after the truest fashion, three hats, and two glasses, bobbing vpon em, two rebato wyers vpon my brest, a capcase by my side, a brush at my back, an Almanack in my pocket, & three bal∣lats in my Codpeece, naie I am the true picture of a Common seruingman. Oliuer Ile sweare thou art, Thou maist set vp when thou wilt, Ther's many a one begins with lesse I can tel thee that proues a rich man ere he dyes, but whats the news from London Sam. Ralph. I thats well sed, whats the newes from Lon∣don Sirrah. My young mistresse keeps such a puling for hir loue. Sam. Why? the more foole shee, I, the more ninny hammer shee. Oli. Why Sam why? Sam. Why hees married to another Long agoe▪ Ambo. I faith ye I est. Sam. Why, did you not know that till now? why, hees married, beates his wife, and has two or three children by her: for you must note that any woman beares the more when she is beaten. Raph. I thats true for shee beares the blowes.
Oliu. Sirrah Sam, I would not for two years wages, my yong mistres knew so much, sheed run vpon the lefte hand of her wit, and nere be here owne woman agen. Sam. And I think she was blest in her Cradle, that he neuer came in her bed, why hee has consumed al, pawnd his lands, and made his vniuersitie brother stand in waxe for him, Thers a fine phrase for a scriue∣ner, puh he owes more then his skins worth. Oli. Is't possible. Sa. Nay Ile tell you moreouer he calls his wife whore as familiarly as one would cal Mal & Dol, and his chil∣dren bastards as naturally as can bee, but what haue we heere, I thought twas somwhat puld downe my breeches: I quite forgot my two potingsticks, these came from London, now any thing is good heer that comes from London. Oli. I, farre fetcht you know: Sam. But speak in your conscience yfaith, haue not we as good potingsticks ith Cuntry as need to be put ith fire, The mind of a thing is all, The mind of a thing's all, and as thou saidst eene now, farre fetcht is the best thinges for Ladies. Oliu. I, and for waiting gentle women to. Sam. But Ralph, what, is our beer sower this thunder? Oli▪ No no it holds countenance yet. Sam▪ Why then follow me, Ile teach you the finest humor to be drunk in, I learnd it at London last week. Am▪ I faith lets heare it, lets heare it. Sam- The brauest humor, twold do a man good to
bee drunck in't, they call it knighting in London, when they drink vpon their knees. Am. Faith that's excellent. Come follow me, Ile giue you all the degrees ont in order. Exeunt. Enter wife. Wife. What will become of vs? all will awaie, my husband neuer ceases in expence, Both to consume his credit and his house? And tis set downe by heauens iust decree, That Ryotts child must needs be beggery, Are these the vertues that his youth did promise, Dice, and voluptuous meetings, midnight Reuels, Taking his bed with surfetts. Ill beseeming The auncient honor of his howse and name: And this not all: but that which killes me most, When he recounts his Losses and false fortunes, The weaknes of his state soe much deiected, Not as a man repentant: but halfe madd: His fortunes cannot answere his expence: sits and sullenly lockes vp his Armes, Forgetting heauen looks downward, which makes him Appeare soe dreadfull, that he frights my heart, Walks heauyly, as if his soule were earth: Not penitent for those his sinnes are past: But vext, his mony cannot make them last. A fearefull melancholie vngodly sorrow. Oh yonder he comes, now in despight of ills Ile speake to him, and I will heare him speake, And do my best to driue it from his heart.
Enter Husband. Hus. Poxe oth Last throw, it made Fiue hundred Angels vanish from my sight, Ime damnd, Ime damnd: the Angels haue forsook me Nay tis certainely true: for he that has no coyne Is damnd in this world: hee's gon, hee's gon. Wi. Deere husband. Hus. Oh! most punishment of all I haue a wife, Wi. I doe intreat you as you loue your soule, Tell me the cause of this your discontent. Hus. A vengeance strip thee naked, thou art cause, Effect, quality, property▪ thou, thou, thou. Exit. Wife. Bad, turnd to worse? both beggery of the soule, as of the bodie. And so much vnlike him selfe at first, As if some vexed spirit Had got his form vpon him. Enter Husband againe. He comes agen: He saies I am the cause, I never yet Spoke lesse then wordes of duty, and of loue. Hus. If mariage be honourable, then Cuckolds are honourable, for they cannot be made without marri∣age. Foole: what meant I to marry to get beggars? now must my eldest sonne be a knaue or nothing, he cannot liue vppot'h foole, for he wil haue no land to maintaine him: that morgage sits like a snaffle vpon mine inheritance, and makes me chaw vpon Iron. My second sonne must be a promooter, and my third a theefe, or an vnderputter, a slaue pander.
Oh beggery, beggery, to what base vses dost thou put a man. I think the Deuill scornes to be a bawde. He beares himselfe more proudly, has more care on's credit. Base slauish abiect filthie pouertie. Wi. Good sir; by all our vowes I doe beseech you, Show me the true cause of your discontent? Hus. Mony, mony, mony, and thou must supply me. Wi. Alas, I am the lest cause of your discontent, Yet what is mine, either in rings or Iewels Vse to your own desire, but I beseech you, As y'are a gentleman by many bloods, Though I my selfe be out of your respect Thinke on the state of these three louely boies You haue bin father to. Hu. Puh Bastards, bastards, bastards, begot in tricks, begot in tricks. Wi. Heauen knowes how those words wrong me? but I maie, dure these griefes among a thousand more. O, call to mind your lands already morgadge, Your selfe woond into debts, your hopefull brother, At the vniuersitie in bonds for you Like to be ceasd vpon. And Hu, Ha done thou harlot, Whome though for fashion sake I married, I neuer could abide? thinkst thou thy wordes Shall kill my pleasures, fal of to thy friends, Thou and thy bastards begg: I will not bate
A whit in humor? midnight still I loue you, And reuel in your Company; Curbd in, Shall it be said in all societies, That I broke custome, that I flagd in monie, No, those thy iewels, I will play as freely As when my state was fullest. Wi. Be it so. H- Nay I protest, and take that for an earnest, spurns her I will for euer hould thee in contempt, And neuer touch the sheets that couer thee, But be diuorst in bed till thou consent, Thy dowry shall be sold to giue new life Vnto those pleasures which I most affect Wi. Sir doe but turne a gentle eye on me, And what the law shall giue me leaue to do You shall command. Hu. Look it be done, shal I want dust & like a slaue weare nothing in my pockets but my hands To fil them vp with nailes. holding his hands in his pockets. Oh much against my blood, let it be done, I was neuer made to be a looker on: A bawde to dice? Ile shake the drabbs my selfe And make em yeeld, I saie look it be done. Wi. I take my leaue it shall. Exit. Hu. Speedily, speedily, I hate the very howre I chose a wife a trouble trouble, three children like three euils hang vpon me, fie, fie, fie, strumpet, & bastards, strum∣pet and bastards. Enter three Gentlemen heering him. 1 Gent. Still doe those loathsome thoughts Iare on
your tongue. Your selfe to staine the honour of your wife, Nobly discended, those whom men call mad Endanger others; but hee's more then mad That wounds himselfe, whose owne wordes do pro∣claym Scandalls vniust, to soile his better name: It is not fit I pray forsake it. 2 Gen. Good sir, let modestie reproue you. 3. Gen. Let honest kindnes sway so much with you. Hu, God den, I thanke you sir, how do you, adeiue, Ime glad to see you, farewel Instructions, Admoniti∣ons. Exeun Gent▪ Enter a seruant. Hu. How now sirra what wud you, Ser. Only to certifie you sir, that my mistris was met by the way, by thē who were sent for her vp to Londō by her honorable vnkle, your worships late gardian. Hus So sir, then she is gon and so may you be: But let her looke that the thing be done she wots of: or hel wil stand more pleasāt thē her house at home. Enter a Gentle man. Gen. Well or ill met I care not. Hus. No nor I. Gen. I am come with confidence to chide you. Hu. Who me? chide me? doo't finely then: let it not moue me, for if thou chidst me angry I shall strike. Gen. Strike thine owne follie, for it is they Deserue to be wel beaten, we are now in priuate, Ther's none but thou and I? thou'rt fond & peeuish, An vncleane ryoter, thy landes and Credit
Lie now both sick of a consumption I am sorry for thee: that man spends with shame That with his ritches does consume his name: And such art thou. Hus. Peace. Gent. No thou shalt heare me further: Thy fathers and forefathers worthy honors, Which were our country monuments: our grace, Follies in thee begin now to deface: The spring time of thy youth did fairely promise such a most fruitfull summer to thy friends It scarce can enter into mens beliefes, Such dearth should hang on thee, wee that see it, Are sorry to beleeue it: in thy change, This voice into all places wil be hurld: thou and the deuill has deceaued the world. Hus. Ile not indure thee. Gent. but of all the worst: Thy vertuous wife right honourably allied Thou hast proclaimed a strumpet. Hus. Nay then I know thee, Thou art her champion thou, her priuat friend, The partie you wot on. Gent. Oh ignoble thought. I am past my patient bloode, shall I stand idle and see my reputation toucht to death. Hu. Ta's galde you this, has it. Gent. No monster, I will proue My thoughts did only tend to vertuous loue, Loue of her vertues? there it goes:
Gent. Base spirit, To laie thy hate vpon the fruitfull They fight and the Husbands hurt▪ Honor of thine own bed. Hu▪ Oh, Ge. Woult thou yeeld it yet? Hu. Sir, Sir, I haue not done with you, Gent. I hope nor nere shall doe. Fight agen. Hu. Haue you got tricks are you in cunning with me. Gent. No plaine and right. He needs no cunning that for truth doth fight. Husband falls downe. Hu. Hard fortune, am I leueld with the ground? Gent. Now sir you lie at mercy, Hu. I you slaue. Ge. Alas that hate should bring vs to our graue: You see my sword's not thirsty for your life, I am sorrier for your woonde then your selfe, Y'are of a vertuous house, show vertuous deeds Tis not your honour, tis your folly bleedes, Much good has bin expected in your life, Cancell not all mens hopes, you haue a wife Kind and obedient: heape not wrongfull shame On her your posterity, let only sin be sore, And by this fall, rise neuer to fall more▪ And so I leaue you. Exit▪ Hu. Has the dogg left me then After his tooth hath left me? oh my hart Would faine leape after him, reuenge I saye, Ime mad to be reueng'd, my strumpet wife:
It is thy quarrel that rips thus my flesh, And makes my brest spit blood, but thou shalt bleed: Vanquisht? got downe? vnable eene to speak? Surely tis want of mony makes men weake, I? twas that orethrew me, Id'e nere bin downe els. Exi Enter wife in a riding suite with a seruingman. Seru. Faith mistris If it might not bee presumtion In me to tell you so, for his excuse You had smal reason, knowing his abuse, Wi. I grant I had, but alasse, Whie should our faults at home be spred abroad: Tis griefe enough within dores: At first sight Myne Vncle could run ore his prodigall life As perfectly, as if his serious eye Had nombred all his follies: Knew of his morgadg'd lands, his friends in bonds, himselfe withered with debts: And in that minute Had I added his vsage and vnkindnes, Twould haue confounded euery thought of good: Where now, fathering his ryots one his youth, Which time and tame experience will shake off, gessing his kindnes to me (as I smoothd him With all the skill I had) though his deserts Are in forme vglier then an vnshapte Bear. Hee's reddy to prefer him to some office And place at Court, A good and sure reliefe To al his stooping fortunes twil be a meanes I hope, To make new league between vs, and redeeme His vertues with his landes. Ser I should think so mistris. If he should not now
be kinde to you and loue you, and cherish you vp, I should thinke the deuill himselfe kept open house in him. Wi. I doubt not but he will now, pre the leaue me, I think I heare him comming. Ser. I am gone. Exit. Wife. By this good meanes I shal preserue my lāds, And free my husband out of vserers hands: Now ther is no neede of sale, my Vncle's kind I hope, if ought, this will content his minde, Here comes my husband. Enter Husband. Hu. Now, are you come, wher's the mony, lets see the mony, is the rubbish sold, those wiseakers your lands, why when, the mony, where ist, powr't down, down with it, downe with it, I say powr't oth ground lets see't, lets see't. Wi. Good sir, keep but-in patience and I hope My words shall like you well, I bring you better Comfort then the sale of my Dowrie. Hu▪ Hah whats that? Wi. Pray do not fright me sir, but vouchsafe me hea∣ing, my Vncle glad of your kindnes to mee & milde vsage▪ for soe I made it to him? has in pitty of your declining fortunes, prouided A place for you at Court of worth & credit, which so much ouerioyd me Hu. Out on thee filth, ouer and ouerioyd. spurns her When Ime in torments? Thou pollitick whore, subtiller then nine Deuils, was this thy iourney to Nuncke, to set downe the historie
of me, of my state and fortunes: Shall I that Dedicated my selfe to pleasure, be nowe confind in seruice to crouch and stand like an old man ith hams, my hat off, I that neuer could abide to vncover my head ith Church, base slut, this fruite beares thy complaints. Wife. Oh heauen knowes, That my complaintes were praises, and best wordes of you, and your estate: onely my friends, Knew of your morgagde Landes, and were possest Of euery accident before I came. If thou suspect it but a plot in me To keepe my dowrie, or for mine owne good or my poore childrens: (though it sutes a mother To show a naturall care in their reliefs, Yet ile forget my selfe to calme your blood: Consume it, as your pleasure counsels you, And all I wishe, eene Clemency affoords: giue mee but comely looks and modest wordes. Hu. Money whore, money, or Ile- Enters a seruant very hastily. What the deuel? how now? thy hasty news? to his man Se. Maie it please you sir. Seruant in a feare Hu. What? maie I not looke vpon my dagger? Speake villaine, or I will execute the pointe on thee: quick, short. Ser. Why sir a gentlemā from the Vniuersity staies below to speake with you. Hu. From the Vniuersity? so, Vniuersity That long word runs through mee. Exeunt.
Wi. Was euer wife so wretchedlie beset, Wif. alone Had not this newes stept in between, the point Had offered violence to my brest. That which some women call greate misery Would show but little heere: would scarce be seene Amongst my miseries: I maie Compare For wretched fortunes with all wiues that are, Nothing will please him; vntill all benothing. He calls it slauery to be preferd. A place of credit, a base seruitude. What shall become of me, and my poore children, Two here, and one at nurse, my prettie beggers, I see how ruine with a palsie hand Begins to shake the auncient seat to dust: the heauy weight of sorrow, drawes my liddes Ouer my dankishe eies: I can scarce see, Thus griefe will laste, it wakes and sleeps with mee. Enter the Husband with the master of the Colledge. Hu. Please you draw neer sir, y'are exceeding wel∣come. Ma. Thats my doubt, I fear, I come not to be wel∣come. Hus. yes howsoeuer. Ma. Tis not my fashion Sir to dwell in long circū∣stance, but to be plain, and effectuall, therefore to the purpose. The cause of my setting forth was pittious and la:+mentable, that hopefull young gentleman your bro∣ther, whose vertues we all loue deerelie through your
default, and vnnaturall negligence lies in bond exe∣cuted for your debt, a prisoner all, his studies amazed his hope strook dead, and the pride of his youth muf∣fled in theis dark clowds of oppression. Hus. Hum, vm vm. Mr. Oh, you haue kild the towardest hope of all our vniuesitie: wherefore without repentance and a∣mends, expect pandorus and suddain Iudgements to fall grieuosly vpon you, your brother a man who pro∣fited in his diuine Imployments mighte haue made ten thousand soules fit for heauen, now by your care∣lesse courses caste in prison which you must answere for, and assure your spirit it wil come home at length. Hu. Oh god oh. Mr. Wisemen think ill of you, others speake ill of you, no man loues you, nay euen those whome ho∣nesty condemnes, condemne you: and take this from the vertuous affection I beare your brother, neuer looke for prosperous hower, good thought, quiet sleepes, contented walkes, nor anything that makes man perfect til you redeem him, what is your ans how will yov bestow him, vpon desperate miye, or better hopes? I suffer, till I heare your answer. Hu. Sir you haue much wrought with mee, I feele you in my soule, you are your artes master. I neuer had sence til now; your sillables haue cleft me Both for your words and pains I thank you: I cannot but acknowledge grieuous wronges done to my bro∣ther, mighty, mighty, mighty wrongs. Within there,
Enter a seruingman. Sir Hu. Fil me a bowle of wine. Alas poore brother, Brus'd with an execution for my sake Exit seruant for wine. Mr. A bruse indeed makes many a mortall Sore till the graue cure em Enter with wine. Hu. Sir I begin to you, y'aue chid your welcome: Mr. I could haue wisht it better for your sake, I pledge you sir, to the kind man in prison. Hu. Let it be soe? Now Sir if you so please Drink both. To spend but a fewe minuts in a walke about my grounds below, my man heere shall attend you: I doubt not but by that time to be furnisht of a sufficient answere, and therein my brother fully satis∣fied. Mr. Good sir in that, the Angells would be pleasd, And the worlds murmures calmd, and I should saye I set forth then vpon a lucky daie. Exit. Hu. Oh thou confused man, thy pleasant sins haue  hee thy damnation has beggerd thee, that heauen should say we must not sin, and yet made wo∣men: giues our sences waie to finde pleasure, which being found confounds vs, why shold we know those things so mch misuse vs—oh would vertue had been forbidden, wee should then haue prooued all vertu∣ous, for tis our bloude to loue what we are forbidden, had not drunkennes byn forbidden what man wold
haue been foole to a beast, and Zany to a swine to show tricks in the mire, what is there in three dice to make a man draw thrice three thousand acres into the compasse of a round little table, & with the gentlemans palsy in the hand shake out his poste∣ritie, thieues or beggars: tis done, I ha don't yfaith: terrible horrible misery.—how well was I left, very well, very wel. My Lands shewed like a full moone about mee, but nowe the moon's ith last quarter, wayning, waining, And I am mad to think that moone was mine: Mine and my fathers, and my forefathers generati∣ons, generations: downe goes the howse of vs, down, downe; it sincks: Now is the name a beggar, begs in me that name which hundreds of yeeres has made this shiere famous: in me, and my posterity runs out. In my seede fiue are made miserable besides my selfe, my ryot is now my brothers iaylor, my wiues sighing, my three boyes penurie, and mine own con∣fusion: Teares his haire▪ Why sit my haires vpon my cursed head? Will not this poyson scatter them? oh my brothers In execution among deuells that stretch him: & make him giue. And I in want, not able for to lyue. Nor to redeeme him, Divines and dying men may talke of hell, But in my heart her seuerall torments dwell, Slauery and mysery. Who in this case would not take vp mony vpon his soule, pawn his saluation, liue at interest:
I that did euer in aboundance dwell, for me to want, exceeds the throwes of hel. Enters his little sonne with a top and a scourge. Son. What aile you father, are you not well, I can∣not scourge my top as long as you stand so: you take vp all the roome with your wide legs, puh you can∣not make mee afeard with this, I feare no vizards, nor bugbeares. Husb, takes vp the childe by the skirts of his long coate in one hand and drawes his dag∣ger with th'other. Hu. Vp sir, for heer thou hast no inheritance left. Sonne. Oh what will you do father, I am your white boie. Hu. Thou shalt be my red boie, take that. strikes him Son: Oh you hurt me father. Hu. My eldest beggar: thou shalt not liue to aske an vsurer bread, to crie at a great mans gate, or followe good your honour by a Couch, no, nor your brother  harity to braine you. Son. How shall I learne now my heads broke? Hu. Bleed bleed rather then beg beg? stabs him. be not thy names disgrace: Spurne thou thy fortunes first if they be base: Come view thy second brother: fates, My childrens bloud shall spin into your faces, you shall see. How Confidently we scorne beggery? Exit with his Sonne.
Enter a maide with a child in her armes, the mo∣ther by her a sleepe. M. Sleep sweet babe sorrow makes thy mother sleep, It boades small good when heauines falls so deepe, Hush prettie boy thy hopes might haue been better, Tis lost at Dice what ancient honour won, Hard when the father plaies awaie the Sonne: No thing but misery serues in this house. ruine and desolation oh Enter husband with the boie bleeding. Hu: Whore, giue me that boy, Striues with her for the child. M. Oh help, help, out alas, murder murder, Hus. Are you gossiping, prating sturdy queane, Ile breake your clamor with your neck down staires: Tumble, tumble, headlong, Throws her down. So, the surest waie to charme a womans tongue Is break hir neck, a pollitician did it. Son. Mother, mother, I am kild mother. Ha, whose that cride oh me my children: W. wakes. both, both, both; bloudy, bloudy. catches vp the yongest. Hu. Strumpet let go the boy, let go the beggar. Wi. Oh my sweet husband, Hus. Filth, harlot. Wi. Oh what will you doe deare husband, Hus. Gine me the bastard, Wi. Your owne sweet boy, Hu. There are too many beggars. Wi. Good my hus-band, Hu. Doest thou preuent me still?
Wi. Oh god▪ Stabs at the child in hir armes. Hus. Haue at his hart Wi. Oh my deare boy, gets it from hir. Hu. Brat thou shalt not liue to shame thy howse, Wi. Oh heauen shee's hurt and sinks downe. Hu. And perish now begon, Ther's whores enow, and want wold make thee one. Enter a lusty seruant. Ser. Oh Sir what deeds are these? Hus. Base slaue my vassail: Comst thou between my fury to question me Ser: Were you the Deuil I would hold you sir, Hu. Hould me? presumption, Ile vndoe thee for't, Ser. Sbloud you haue vndone vs all sir, Hu. Tug at thy master, Ser. Tug at a Monster. Hus. Haue I no power, shall my slaue fetter me? Ser. Nay then the Deuil wrastles, I am thowne, Hu: Oh villane now Ile tug thee, ouer comes him. now Ile teare thee, set quick spurres to my vassaile, bruize him, trample him, so, I think thou wilt not folow me in hast My horse stands reddy sadled, away, away, Now to my brat at nursse, my sucking begger: Fates, Ile not leaue you one to trample one. The Master meets him. Ma. How ist with you sir me thinks you looke of a distracted colour. Hu. Who I sir, tis but your fancie, Please you walke in Sir, and Ile soone resolue you,
I want one small parte to make vp the som, And then my brother shall rest satisfied, Mr. I shall be glad to see it, sir Ile attend you. Exeu. Ser Oh I am scarce able to heaue vp my selfe: H'as so bruizd me with his diuelish waight, And torne my flesh with his bloud-hasty spurre A man before of easie constitution Till now hells power supplied; to his soules wrong, Oh how damnation can make weake men strong. Enter Master, and two seruants. Ser. Oh the most pitteous deed sir since you came. Mr. A deadly greeting: has he somde vp theis To satisfie his brother? heer's an other: And by the bleeding infants, the dead mother. Wi. Oh oh. Mr. Surgeons, Surgeons, she recouers life One of his men al faint and bloudied. 1. Seru. Follow, our murderous master has took horse To kill his child at nurse, oh follow quickly. Mr. I am the readiest, it shal be my charge To raise the towne vpon him Exit Mr and seruant 1 Ser. Good sir do follow him. Wi. Oh my children. 1. Ser. How is it with my most afflicted Mistris? Wi. Why, do I now recouer? why half liue? To see my children bleede before mine eies. A sight able to kill a mothers brest Without an executioner, what art thou māgled too? 1▪ Ser, I thinking to preuent what his quicke mis∣chiefes had so soone acted; came and rusht vpon him
We strugled, but a fowler strength then his Ore threw me with his armes, then did he bruize me And rent my flesh, and robd me of my haire Like a man mad in execution Made me vnfit to rise and follow him. Wi. What is it has beguild him of all grace? And stole awaie humanity from his brest? To slaie his children, purpos'd to kill his wife, And spoile his saruants. Enters two seruants. Ambo sir, Please you leaue this most accursed place, a surgeon waites within. Wi. Willing to leaue it, Tis guiltie of sweete bloud, innocent bloud, Murder has tooke this chamber with ful hands, And wil nere out as long as the honse stands. Exeunt Enter Husband as being thrown off his horse, And falls: Hu. Oh stumbling Iade the spauin ouertake thee, the fiftie diseases stop thee, Oh, I am sorely bruisde, plague founder thee, Thou runst at ease and pleasure, hart, of chance to Throw me now within a flight oth Towne, In such plaine euen ground, sfot, a man may dice vp∣on't, and throw awaie the Medowes, filthy beast. Crie within Follow, follow, follow. Hus. Ha? I hear sounds of men; like hew and crie: vp, vp, and struggle to thy horse, make on
Dispatch that little begger and all's done. Kni. Heere, this waie, this waye: Hus. At my backe? oh, What fate haue I, my limbes deny mee go, My will is bated, beggery claimes a parte. Oh could I here reach to the infants heart. Enter M. of the Colledge, 3. Gentlemen, and others with Holberds. Finde him. All. Heere, heere, yonder, yonder. Mr. Vnnaturall, flintie, more then barbarous: The Scithians in their marble hearted fates, Could not haue acted more remorselesse deeds In their relentlesse natures, then these of thine: Was this the answear I long waited on, The satisfaction for thy prisoned brother? Hus. Why, he can haue no more on's then our skins, And some of em want but fleaing. 1. Gen. Great sinnes haue made him impudent: Mr. H'as shed so much bloud that he cannot 2. Ge. Away with him, bear him a long to the Iustices: A gentleman of woorship dwels at hand, There shall his deeds be blazd: Hus. Why all the better, My glory tis to haue my action knowne, I grieue for nothing, but I mist of one: Mr. Ther's little of a father in that griefe: Beare him away. Exeunt.
Enters a knight with two or three Gentlemen. Knig. Endangered so his wife? murdered his chil∣dren? 4. Gen. So the Cry comes. Kni, I am sorry I ere knew him, That euer he took life and naturall being From such an honoured stock, and fair discent; Til this black minut without staine or blemish▪ 4 Gent. Here come the men. Enter the master of the colledge and the rest, with the prisoner. Kni. The serpent of his house? Ime sorry for this time that I am in place of iustice. Mr. Please you Sir. Kni. Doe not repeate it twice I know too muche, would it had nere byn thought on: Sir I bleede for you. 4 Gent. Your fathers sorrows are aliue in me: What made you shew such monstrous crueltie▪  a worde Sir, I hane cousumd all, plaid awaie long acre, And I thought it the charitablest deed I could doe To cussen beggery: and knock my house oth head. Kni. Oh in a cooler bloud you will repent it. Hus. I repent now, that ones left vnkild, My brat at nurse. Oh I would ful fain haue weand him Knigh. Well, I doe not think but in to morrowes iudgement. The terror will sit closer to your soule,
When the dread thought of death remembers you to further which, take this sad voice from me: Neuer was act plaid more vnnaturally. Hus. I thank you Sir. Kni. Goe leade him to the Iayle, Where iustice claimes all, there must pitty faile. Hus. Come come, awaie with me. Exit prisoner. Mr. Sir, you deserue the worship of your place, Would all did so: in you the law is grace, Kni It is my wish it should be so, Ruinous man, the desolation of his howse, the blot Vpon his predecessors honord name: That man is neerest shame that is past shame. Exit. Enter Husband with the officers, The Maister and gen∣tlemen as going by his house. Hu▪ I am right against my howse, seat of my Ance∣stors: I heare my wif's aliue; but much endangered: Let me intreat to speak with her before the prison gripe me. Enter his wife brought in a chaire. Gent. See heer she comes of her selfe, Wi. Oh my sweete Hus-band, my deere distressed husband, now in the hands of vnrelenting lawes, My greatest sorrow, my extremest bleeding, Now my soule bleeds. Hu. How now? kind to me? did I not wound thee, left thee for dead. Wife. Tut farre greater wounds did my brest feele, Vnkindnes strikes a deeper wound then steele,
You haue been still vnkinde to mee: Hus. Faith, and so I thinke I haue: I did my murthers roughly out of hand, Desperate and suddaine, but thou hast deuiz'd A fine way now to kill me, thou hast ginen mine eies Seauen woonds a peece; now glides the deuill from mee, departes at euery ioynt, heaues vp my nailes▪ Oh catch him new torments, that were near inuēted, Binde him one thousand more you blessed Angells In that pit bottomlesse, let him not rise To make men act vnnaturall tragedies To spred into a father, and in furie, Make him his childrens executioners: Murder his wife, his seruants, and who not? For that man's darke, where heauen is quite forgot. Wi. Oh my repentant husband. Hus. My deere soull, whom I too much haue wrongd, For death I die, and for this haue I longd. Wi. Thou sholdst not (be assurde) for these faults die, If the law cold forgiue assoone as I, hat sight is yonder? Children laid out. Wi. Oh our two bleeding boyes laid forth vpon the thresholde. Hu▪ Heer's weight enough to make a heart-string crack Oh were it lawfull that your prettie soules Might looke from heauen into your fathers eyes, Then should you see the penitent glasses melt, And both your murthers shoote vpon my cheekes, But you are playing in the Angells lappes, And will not looke on me,
Who void of grace, kild you in beggery. Oh that I might my wishes now attaine, I should then wish you liuing were againe: Though I did begge with you, which thing I feard, Oh twas the enemy my eyes so bleard. Oh would you could pray heauen me to forgine▪ That will vnto my end repentant liue. Wi. It makes me eene forget all other sorrowes and leaue parte with this. Come will you goe, Hus. Ile kisse the bloud I spilt and then I goe: my soull is bloudied, well may my lippes be so. Farewell deere wife, now thou and I must parte, I of thy wrongs repeut me with my harte. Wi. Oh staye thou shalt not goe: Hus. That's but in vaine, you see it must be so. Farewell ye bloudie ashes of my boyes, My punishments are their eternall ioyes. Let euery father looke into my deedes, And then their heirs may prosper while mine bleeds. Wi. More wretched am I now in this distresse, Exeunt then former sorrows made me. Husband with hol Mr. Oh kinde wife be comforted, One ioy is yet vnmurdered: You haue a boy at nursse your ioy's in him. Wi: Dearer then all is my poore husbands life: Heauen giue my body strength, which yet is faint With much expence of bloud, and I will kueele, Sue for his life, nomber vp all my friends, To plead for pardon my deare husbands life. Mr: Was it in man to woond so kinde a creature?
Ile euer praise a woman for thy sake, I must returne with griefe my answer's set: I shall bring newes weies heauier then the debt: Two brothers: one in bond lies ouerthrowne This, on a deadlier execution. FINIS.
