22970 99842011 6634
A SHORT RVLE OF GOOD LIFE. To direct the deuout Chri∣stian in a regular and orderly course. Newly set forth according to the Authors direction, before his death. Set me downe (O Lord) a law in thy way. Ps. 118. I said (O Lord) that it is my portion and al my riches, to keepe thy law. Ibid. At S. Omers, by IOHN HEIGHAM An. 1622.
THE PREFACE TO the Reader. WHen that great seruāt of God, S. Benet, had in most ser∣uent and deuout prayers, eel∣ded vp his soule vnto God: two of his religious followers (as reporteth S. Gregorie) be∣ing ignorant altogether of his death, although in places far distant, had the like vision. They saw out of their godly
Fathers cele, directly to∣wards the East▪ a most beau∣tifull way, adorned with gor∣geous Tapestry, and shining with a multitude of innume∣rable lampes, to proceed euen vnto heauen. At the toppe wherof there standing, a no∣table person in a venerable habite, and demaunding of them whose way it was which they behelde, they answered they knew not. But he incon∣tinently said vnto them these wrdes. Haec est via qua di∣lectu Domino coelum Be∣nedictus ascendit. This is the way, by the which Gods wel-beloued seruaunt Bene∣dict, went vp to heauen, meaning thereby (as S. Ber∣nard noteth) the holie Rule of a religious life, instituted
and practised by the same Saint, by which not hee alone was passed, as by a most readie and pleasant way to heauen, but whosoeuer of his followers would trauell by the same, should with like securitie, ar∣riue to the end of a most hap∣pie iourney. The Author of this little Booke (gentle Reader) I no∣thing doubt, but is verie well knowne vnto thee, as also for his learning, pietie, zeale, cha∣ritie, fortitude, & other rare and singular qualities, but speciallie for his pretious death, he is renowned in the world abroad: neither needeth there any extraordinarie visi∣on, but the sound and cer∣taine Doctrine of the Catho∣like Church, is sufficient to
perswade, that he is a most glorious Saint in heauen: hee being such an one as hath con∣fessed a good confession before many wtnesses, and made (as Saint Iohn saith) his gar∣ments white with the blood of the immaculae Lambe. But because thou shouldest not be ignorant, of the way by which this valiant Champi∣on of Christ, arriued vnto so happie a Countrey, he him∣selfe hath left behinde him for thy benefite, and euen amongst the least of his fruitfull la∣bours, for the good of soules, had designed to publish vnto the world, the description of this most gainefull voyage to heauen; be-decked with the most preious ornaments of all Christian vertues, and with
the most pleasant and comfor∣table brightnesse of notable rules of spirituall life: euery one of which, may be as it were a Lanterne vnto thy feete, and a continuall Light vnto thy steppes. This therefore doe I nowe (deuout Reader) present vnto thy sight, affirming vnto thee, that which thou thy selfe wilt not denie, as being both true and manifest: that, Haec est via qua dilectus Domino N. caelum intrauit, This is the way by which the wel-beloued seruant of God N. went vp into heauen. For in what estate soeuer he liued in this worlde, hee ranne the way of Christian perfection, in an ordinarie course of a secular life,
from his very infancie he was a spectacle to all that knewe him in the state of Religion, the which he imbraced from his childehood; he was a rare example of religious perfecti∣on and discipline: and finally in his manie seueral and most cruell conflicts with the ene∣mies of Christ, he sheweth how stronge and vnconque∣red the loue of God is, whose burning heate neuer so manie waters or gustes of moste mayne floudes, may either quench or smother: and whose power the most power-able thing of all, which is Death, can not ouercome. Thou therefore (my deare brother) heholding, according to the exortation of this vi∣ctorious triumpher, see thou
imitate his faith. Fashion thy life and manners according to these deuoute rules, which are a most perfect mirour of his godlie life: & in so doing, thou mayest hapilie attaine thy self to the like crowne of glorie. For though Martirdome be a most speciall gifte of God, and he freelie bestoweth it where hee liketh, neyther is it an or∣dinarie rewarde due vnto ne∣uer so great merites of neuer so holie personages, and it is to his excellent power a moste easie thinge, subitò honestare pauperem, euen from the middest of a sinnefull life, to exalt vnto Martirdome: yet is there a certaine disposition in those which are chosen to so high a dignitie ordinarilie required of God, which is
first to haue killed their pas∣sions, before they be killed by persecutors; first to haue beene exercised in a spirituall conflict of mortification, be∣fore they be tried in the for∣nace of Christian confession; first to haue become the towne, butchers, before they be deli∣uered to the hangmans sham∣bles. Otherwise (as our Sauiour saieth) Qui amat animam suam perdet eam: Who so loueth his life or soule disordi∣nately shall loose it, and neuer be able to stand in that com∣batte, wherein not flesh and bloud, not pride, ambition, and vaine glory, not malice and rancour; but a mortified inde, and a resigned heart into Gods handes, obtaineth the victory.
Which disposition and ready preparation for this so happy a crowne, was most perfectly found in this our Authour: whereupon iusued, that he might truely ay with holy. I. B. Elegit sus∣pendium anima mea, & mortem ossa mea. Desperaui nequaquam, vltra iam vi∣uam. My soule bath made choice of hanging, and my bones of death. I am become desperate, I will now liue no longer: because long before he had hanged vp his soule by perfect estranging of it from earthly affections, and keeping it fixed and ioyned to God; thence did it pooceed, that his earthly boes, abhorred not that death which was to be suffered for Christ. And be∣cause
he had wihdrawne his hopes from the base desires of this life, therefore did e contemne this life for the loue of this heauenlie life, and he thought he had liued long enough, when he might die to liue for euer. Enioy therefore these rules deuout Reader, and ioyfullie treade the pathes of this most pleasant way to heauen: and if by the compendious com∣moditie thereof thou shalt see thy iorney toward thy euer∣lasting countrie to be forwar∣ded; giue glorie vnto God, and vnto this his faithfull ser∣uaunt; and assiste with thy deuoute prayers those which haue beene meanes to prepare it for thee. Yet doe I aduise thee of two
especiall thines: first, that whereas in these Rules thou∣shalt sometimes reade, that thou must doe this or that; thou must not vnderstand that worde (must) as though thou wert bound to the per∣formance of any thinge there expressed, but onely that those actions doe belong vnto the exercise of perfection without anie further bond, then either the lawe of God, or holie church do impose. Secondlie, that before thou begin to practise these Rules, containing in them great per∣fection, thou acquaint thy selfe with an other Booke entituled The Exercise of a Christian life, or such other∣like, lest thou attempt to builde a great house with
slender foundation: and climing to the toppe of a high ladder; without pas∣sing by the middle steppes, at vnawares thou receiue a fall. Vale.
A SHORT RVLE OF GOD LIFE. THE FIRST CHAPTER of the foundations of a Good life. The first foundation. THE first foun∣dation of a good life is, often and seriously to con∣sider for what end and purpose I was crea∣ted, and what Gods designe∣ment was, when he made mee of nothing, and that not to haue a being only, as a stone, nor withall a bare
kinde of life or growing, as a plant or tree, nor more∣ouer a power of sence or feeling only as a brut beast, but a creature to his owne likenes, indued with reason vnderstanding and freewil. Also why he now preserueth me in this health, state and calling. Finally why he rede∣med me with his owne bloud, bestowed so infinite benefites vppon me, and still continueth his mercy towards me. The end of man. The end of my being thus made, redeemed, preserued, and so much benefited by God, is this and no other: that I should in this life ser∣ue him, with my whole bo∣dy, soule and substance, and
with what else soeuer is mi∣e, and in the next life enioy im for euer in heauen. Rules that follow of this foundation. Was made of nothing by God, and receiued body and soule from him, and therfore am I only his, not mine owne, neither can I so binde or giue my selfe to y creature, but that I ought ore to serue, loue and obey God, then any creature in this world. Secondly I committe a de of theft, and do God geat wrong, so often as I ploy any part of my body soule, to any other ende thē to his seruice, for which only I was created.
Thirdly, for this do I liue, and for no other ende, but for this, doe all creatures serue me, and when I turne the least thing whereof God hath giuen me the vse or possessing▪ to any other ende then the seruice of God, doe God wrong, and abuse his creatures. The second foundation. Seeing I was made to serue God in this life, and to enioye him in the next, the seruice of God, and the saluation of mine owne sou∣le, is the most weighty and important busines, and the most necessary matter wher∣in I must employ my bodie, minde, time, and labour: and all other affaires are so farre foorth to be esteemed of me
waighty or light, as they more or lesse tend to the fur∣therance of this principall & most earnest busines. For what auaileth it a man to gaine the whole world, and loose his owne soule? Rules that follow of this foundation. FIrst what diligence, la∣bour, or cost, I would emploie in any other tem∣porall matter of credit▪ liuing, or life, all that I am bound to employ in the ser∣uice of God, and the salua∣tion of my soule: and so much more, as the weight or worth of my soule, passeth al other things. Secondly I ought to think the seruice of God, and sal∣uation
of my soule my prin∣cipall busines in this world, and to make it my ordinary study and chiefe occupation, and day and night to keepe my minde so fixed vpon it, that in euery actiō I stil haue it before mine eies, as the onely marke I shoote at. the third foundation. I Cannot serue God in this world, nor go about to enioye him in the next, but that Gods enemies and mine, will repine and seeke-to hinder me: which ene∣mies are three: the Worlde, the Flesh, and the Deuill. Wherefore I must resolue my selfe, and sett it downe as a thing vndouted, that my whole life must be a conti∣nuall combate with these
aduersaries: whom I must assuredly perswade my selfe to lie hourely in waite for me, to seeke their aduantage. And that their malice is so vnplacable, and their hatred against me so rooted in thē, that I must neuer looke to haue one hower secure from their assaultes: but that they will rom time to time, so long as there is breath in my body, still labour to make me forsake and offend God, alure me to their ser∣uice, and drawe me to my damnation. Rules following of this foundation. I Must prepare my body and mind to all patience, and thinke it no newes to
be tempted, but a point an∣nexed necessarily to my profession, and therfore ne∣uer must I be wearied with the difficultie, considering the malice and wickednesse of mine aduersaries, and my professed enmitie with thē. Secondly I must alway stand vpon my guarde, and be very watchfull in euery action, seeing that what∣soeuer I doe, they wil seeke to peruert it, and make it offensiue to God, euen my very best indeuours. Thirdly I must neuer looke to befree from some trouble or other, but knowing my life to be a perpetuall warfare, I must rather comefort my slfe with hope of a glorious
crowne for my victories, then of any long or assured peace with mine enemies. The fourth foundation. The thing which these enemies endeuour for to drawe me vnto, is, sinne and offence of God: which is so odious, hatefull, and abho∣minable, that God doth more detest and dislike it, then he did the cruell vsa∣ge, the woundes, the tor∣mentes, and the death it selfe, that for vs he suffe∣red of the Iewes, and it maketh our soules more vgly, then the plague▪ lepro∣sy, or any other moste fil∣thy disease doth the body. Rules following this foundation. SO carefull as I woulde
bee not to wounde, tor∣ment, or murther Christ, so carefull must I bee, not to commit any mortall sinne against him, yea and much more, seeing that he hateh sinne more then death, ha∣uing voluntarily suffered the one, and yet neuer com∣mitted the other. Secondly when I am tēp∣ted with any sinne, let me examine my selfe, whether I would buy the fulfilling of mine appetite, with being a leaper or full of the plague, or with death pre∣sently to ensue after it: if not, then much lesse ought I to buy it with the leprosie, losse, and death of my soule, which is of far more worth then my body.
The fift foundation. Being Gods creature made to serue him in this life: my body, soule, and goods, and all things any way appertaining vnto me, are but lent, or onely let me for this end, and I am only as bailiffe, tenaunt or officer, to demaine or gouene these thinges to his best seruice: and ther∣fore when the time of my stewardship is expired, I shall be summoned by Death to appeare before my Land-lorde, who with most rigorous iustice will demaunde account of euery thing and creature of his, that hath beene to my vse, yea of all that I haue recei∣ued, promised, omitted,
committed, lost and robbed: and as I can then discharge this account, so shall I be either crowned in eternall ioy, or condemned to perpe∣tuall damnation. Rules following of this foundation. FIrst, I must vse all thinges in this life as an other bodies goods, for which I must be accountable to the vtter-most farthing. Secondly, the more I haue, the greater and harder wil be mine account of the good vse thereof, and therefore the more waryought I to be, in disposing of it. Thirdly, let mee often cō∣sider what bodily, ghostly, and internall giftes of God I
haue receiued, what in bap∣tisme and at other times I haue promised: how profi∣table and necessary good workes I haue omitted: how many grieuous and hei∣nous sinnes I haue commit∣ted: how often I haue lost the grace of God, & my right to heauen: finally how much honour, and how many sou∣les I haue robbed from God: and these things being well perused, let mee seeke to make that recompence and satisfaction for them, which I would wish to haue made when death shall summon me before my heauenly iudge, to giue vp a most strict account of them. The fruit of these founda∣tions consisteth in often cō∣sidering
them, as most ne∣cessary pointes, and as it were the verie first princi∣ples of good life, vpon the vnderstanding and practising whereof, depēdeth my pro∣gresse in vertue: and therfore I must very often rade them and examine my selfe, whe∣ther my minde and actions be answerable vnto them. Howe we ought to be affected towards God. THE SECOND Chapter. First of the consideration of Gods presence. THese foundations bee∣ing laide, it behoueth mee further to descende to
the notice of my duety to God, my neighbour, and my selfe. And first concerning my dueie vnto God, a very fitte meane I can vse to please him is, to beare alwaie in minde his presence. For sure it is that as God, hee is euery where in substance, power and presence, and in him I liue, moue, and I am, as the scripture saith, because he worketh with me in all my deedes, thoughts and wor∣des: In so much that as the beame of the sun, the heat of the fire, or wettnes of the water, so depend I of God: and should he withdrawe himselfe from mee but one moment, I should forthwith turne into nothing, and
therfore it is a very forcible meanes for my good, to doe all things as if I did see God visibly woorking and coope∣rating with me in euery ac∣tion, as in truth he doth, and knowinge that what woor∣des, thoughtes, or deedes soeuer passe me, and what part of my body or minde soeuer I vse, Gods concourse and helpe therunto, is more then mine owne, I must be a fraid to vse them in any such thing wherein I might offend him: but rather seeke to doe all things so that they be worthy of his presence, helpe, and assistance in them. And if I can get a custome or habitte to remember still the presence and assistance of God (as by vse easely I may)
I shall with due regrd, reue∣rence, and consideration, abstaine from such beha∣uiour, as I thinke may any waie bee offensiue vnto him I shall also get a great facility in turning my minde and heart to him, and in talking often with him by short and sweet praiers, which are the fewell of deuotion. Other affectō is that we ought to haue vnto God Secondly I must endeuour to kindle in my selfe, these affections towardes God. The First Affection. FIrst, of a sincere and ten∣der loue of him, as the fountaine of all beautie and fellicity, of which loue I may gesse by these signes.
By often thinking, and an earnest desire of God. By sorrow of his absence, and contentment, in consi∣deration of his presence. By my diligence in perfor∣ming without delay or te∣diousnesse, that which plea∣seth best my Sauiour, and by finding such cōfort in doing it, that it grieues me when for thinges of lesse goodnes, I am enforced to deferre it. By withdrawing all disor∣dred loue from all creatures, and especially my selfe, and by louing nothing but in God, and for God. By seeking to encrease this loue by consideration of Gods goodnesse, & his dai∣lie benefites. By taking delight in Gods
seruice, or thinges tending therunto, not because I finde contentment in it, but be∣cause it is to Gods glory, to the which I would haue all thinges addressed. By taking tribulations, or troubles of body or mind patiently, yea and with ioie, knowing that they come by Gods permission, and think∣ing them as fauours which he affordeth to his dearest friends. The Second Affection. THe second affection is, a reuerent and dutifull feare of God, which I may gather by these signes. If when I remember the presence and Maiestie of
God, I frame both my body and minde to reuerence and honour him, with all humi∣litie and decencie: fearing least by any vnseemely and light behauiour, I should seeme to be contemptuous, and carelesse of my duty to∣wards him. If I finde great feare to doe any thing that may offend God, not onely mortally, but euen venially, & be with∣all verie watchfull to auoid the least offence, least my fralty which is great, should drawe me to it, and so to fur∣ther inconuenience. If I feare to bee banished from him, or forsakē for my sinnes, and endeuour what I may to preserue his loue and mercy towards me.
The Third Affection. THe third affection is, Zeale of Gods honour, and desire that hee should be duely serued and obeyed of all his creatures, of which I may iudge by these signes. First, if I finde a griefe in my selfe and am hartily sory, when I see or heare of other folkes faults, or thinke of mine owne, considering how by them, a base and wretched creature, disho∣noured and dispised his crea∣tor, in steed of him, seruing his professed enemies, the flesh, the world, & the diuel. The second signe is an earnest desire to helpe my neighbour, or mine owne soule out of sinne, by pray∣ing
for this effect, and refu∣sing no conuenient labour to accomplish the same, so that my Lord God bee no more, or at the least, lesse offended then before. The Fourth Affection. THe fourth affection is, to endeuour as neere as I can, to take occasion of euery thing that I heare, see, or think of, to praise God. As if the things were good, then to praise God that he gaue grace to doe them: And if the thinge were euill, to thanke God that either he preserued me or other, from them, or at the least hath not suffered me to continue still in thē, or to bee in his wrath condemed for them.
Also I must consider, and with my inward eye see God in euerie creature, how he worketh in all things to my benefitte, and weigh how in all ceatures, both within and without me, he sheweth his pesence, by keeping them in their beeing and course of nature: for with∣out him they would pre∣sently turne to nothing: and I must assure my selfe, that in all this, hee hath as well a regard to my good, as to others. And therefore all creatures must be as it were bookes to me to reade ther∣in, the lou presence, proui∣dence, and fatherly care that God hath ouer me.
The Fift Affection. THe fift affection is, to consider, that I being a Christian, and onely my faith and all mine actions proper thereunto, ought not onely to be different from the er∣roneous opinions, sects, and actions of infidels, but euen mine ordinarie actions, of eating, drinking, playing, working, and such like, ought to haue a marke and badge of christianitie, and some difference from the like thinges done by heath∣ens. And this marke which maketh christian and good workes, is a right and sin∣cere intention, which in euery principall action I ought to procure, so that it
bee done to the honour, gorie, and seruice of God, and agreeable to the rule of christian dutye, with that measure, temperance, and circumstance, which faith and reason requireth: per∣swading my selfe, that as wel in these actions done in this sorte, as in others that carry more shew of piety, God may be serued & honoured. And therfore it should be a great negligence and care∣lesnes in me, for want of directing mine intention (which by vse is easely got∣ten) to lose so many great merites, as in these ordinary actions I might daily and howerly gaine. The Sixt Affection. THe sixt Affection is, a
Perfect resignation of my selfe into Gods hands, with a full desire that he should vse me as it were most to his glorie, whether it were to my temporall comfort or no. And to bee as ready to serue him in mi∣sery, need, and affliction, as in prosperity and pleasure: thinking it my cheifest de∣lighte, to be vsed as God wil, and to haue his pleasure and prouidence fully ac∣complished in me, which is the end for which I was created, and for the which I doe now liue. To attaine this resigna∣tion, it is a very fitte way to debate and discourse with my selfe, what thing there is could happen vnto me,
though neuer so much a∣gainst my liking, which if it should fall out, would trou∣ble me, or make me loose that indifferency which I ought to haue, in most wil∣lingly yeeldinge my selfe to whatsoeuer God shall laye vppon me: And if I finde any thinge which I thinke I should not well digest, nor accept with due patience, let me endeuour to ouercome my selfe in it, and by praie and meditation▪ seeke to winne the difficulty therof, that there may be nothing which I would not willingly accept at Gods handes, how contrary soeuer it were to mine inclination. To which these considerations may helpe me.
First the ende I ayme at, is Gods glorie in this world, and his reward in the next, and therfore knowing that nothing, but my voluntarie sinne can barre me from this ende, what neede I much care by what meanes God will haue me to attaine it? for the meanes can last but a litle, and the end endureth for euer, and is so much the more comfortable, in that it hath beene atchiued with more discomfortable, toiles. Secondly God loueth mee more then I loue my selfe, and is so wise, that he best seeth what is fittest for me, all present & future circum∣stances considered: he is so mighty that what his wisdo∣me and loue shall conclude
for my good, his power can put in execution: and ther∣fore let me rather yeeld my selfe wholy to his prouiden∣ce, then mine owne desires. Thirdly whatsoeuer mo∣ueth me to feare or dislike any thing, which I could not frame my minde to beare, God seeth it as wel and farre better then I, yea and all other secret and vnkowen hazardes that are annexed to that thing: if therefore he knowing all these thinges, will neuerthelesse let it hap∣pen to me, I must assure my selfe, that it proceedeth of loue, and is for my greater good, and that he hauing laid a heauy burden vpon weake forces, will by his grace supply all my feares,
wants and frailties. The Seuenth Affection. THe seuenth affection is, gratitude and thank∣fulnes, which I ought to fin∣de in my selfe towards God, and feeling an earnest desire to doe any thing that might counteruaile, or in parte aunswere the excessiue loue that God, hath and howerly doth shew vnto me, and to let no litle good that I re∣ceiue thoughe neuer so ordi∣narie, passe without thankes to him, who euen in the least things is contented to serue me▪ and finally to make God my repose, and his remem∣brance my comfort, and to loath al earthly things as base and vnpleasant, in compari∣son
of him. Of my duety to my Superiours. THE THIRD Chapter. NExt my duty to God, it behoueth me to consi∣der my dueie to my Supe∣riours, whom I must accoūt as his Vicegerents, & substi∣tutes in the thinges wherein I am subiecte vnto them. And first to speake of those which are my supe∣riours in temporall thinges, in all pointes belonging to their charge, I am to yeeld them temporall duty, con∣tenting my selfe with their appointment, so farre as with iustice and equity they can command, and by Gods lawes I shall be bound to
yeeld vnto them. And for my spirituall su∣periours, whom I am to ac∣count as guides of my soule, a farre better part then the body. First I must procure that my choice be of ver∣tuous, graue, and mortified mē, who hauing their owne passions well subdued, may the better teach me how to bridle mine. And because it is the chiefe helpe and most profitable, if my choise bee good, and very dangerous if it be euill, I must make my choise with greate aduise and deliberation, vsing the counsaile of some other per∣sons of good and grounded iudgement in such things. When I haue a man of discretion and good gouer∣nement,
and experienced in directinge of soules, I must behaue my selfe towardes him in this sort. First, I must procure to loue him as a parent or fa∣ther, by which name such men in the Church of God are called, endeuouring to cary my selfe towards him, as dutifully (not onely in spirituall things, but also in those temporall wherin, I might iustly feare any sinne) as a well nurtured childe be∣haueth him selfe toward his naturall father: and seeking to make him take an affe∣ction and desire to direct me with great ioy, diligence and care, to all spirituall good. Secondlie, I must reue∣rence and honour him as the
Vincegerent of God, & con∣sider Christ in his person, and do my duety to him, as if in him I did see Christ, ta∣king heede of any such fami∣liarity or surlinesse, as may and vsually doth breed con∣tempt, and alwaies carrying my selfe with due respecte to his function and office, and hauing mine eye more bent vpon that, then either his person, calling or other temporall or spirituall quali∣ties. Thirdly, I must auoid such things as maie cause in me any vniust discontent∣mentes or dislike towards him: and therfore interprete his doings and sayinges in the best sort, not giuing rash iudgement of them, but ra∣ther seekinge to excuse his
faultes, if he haue any: and in my daily prayers to com∣mend him to God, and pray that God may graunt him grace, iudgemēt & discretiō, and the assistance of his spirit that thereby he may direct me, as is most for Gods glo∣rie, and my soules health. Fourthly, to obey him in al things wherin I see not any expresse sinne, taking his wordes when hee counsai∣leth, commandeth, or forbid∣deth me any thing, as the words of Christ; agreable to the saying of our Sauiour: He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that dispiseth you dispi∣seth me. Wherfore if he re∣prehend me I must take it pa∣tiently with desire of amēd∣mēt, & what he ēioineth me,
willingly must I performe▪ though it be against mine owne will, sense, or liking. To conclude, my obedien∣ce towardes him, or rather towardes Christs person in him, for whom in all things I obey, ought to be done with these conditions. Spee∣dely without delay. Volun∣tarily without constraint. Simply without questions or excuses. Contētedly with∣out murmuring or grudging. Stoutly without despaire or impatience. Constantly with perseuerance to the end. Humbly without pride. I ought also to perswade my self, that God of his great goodnes, by him will direct me in such thinges as apper∣taine to his direction, and
will put such things in his minde, as shall bee most for my benefite and good, and therefore must I resolue to laie my soule in his handes, and to frame my iudgement to his in all thinges, that hee shall thinke fitte for me to doe or omit, where I see no danger of sinne, perswading my selfe, that though the man be imperfect, yet God whose Vicegerent & instru∣ment he is, neither will, not can deceiue me. Of my duety towardes my neighbour. THE FOVRTH Chapter. AFter knowledge of my duety towards God & my Superiours, I must consi∣der
my duety towardes my neighbour, and the manner, how to behaue my selfe in his company & conuersatiō. First I must procure to re∣member, that my externall behauiour, my gate, my ge∣sture, my countenance, and my outward actions, be donne with grauitie, mode∣stie, and all decencie: that I be not light, vaine, or too lauish in mirth, not too au∣stere, or too much inclined to sadnesse, but with tempe∣rate modestie rather compo∣sed to mirth, than melan∣choly. Which external com∣position is necessary both for ediying our neighbour, who being vnable to iudge or en∣ter into our thoughts, iud∣geth of euery one according
to that where of his sense is witnesse. And next in respect of God, who being euery where present, requireth in vs behauiour worthy of his sight and company: & lastly, in respect of our owne soule, this care of externall decen∣cie being an approued mea∣nes to auoyde infinite veniall sinnes, and much more all mortall. Of externall composition there be three chiefe points. First the care of our coun∣tenance, gae, and gesture. Secondly of our voice and speech. Thirdly of our appa∣rell and other adherents. In countenance, I must auoide an vnstied kind of variety and often change, keeping, as neere as I mai,
one setled tenor therof, ra∣ther bent to smiling thē hea∣uinesse, and free from row∣ning▪ and such like vnseem∣lie distemper Neither ought I to aler my counenāce, but when reasonable and iust cause mooueth me to shew either mirth, sorrow, dislike, or compassion, or some other modest or temperat affectiō. My gate ought to bee gra∣ue, neither too swift nor too slow, but with a meane and sober pace: my gesture must be decent, free from affecta∣tion, or singularity, and from all shew of inward disquiet∣nes or vnordred passion, which though I cānot choo∣se but sometime feele, yet it good as much as I may to conceale it, because outward
signes do feede the inward distemper, and bewray to o∣thers my imperfections to my discredite, and their euel example. My voice neither ought to be verie loude, nor my laughter so vehement as to be heard a farre off, but both seemlie and modest, for ex∣cesse in the voice, and immo∣derate lowdne, are alwaies certaine signes of passion, & therefore ought to be vsed but vpon some extraordina∣rie necessity. My speech ought not to be so much, as to make me be noted for talkatiue, yea it is good to be rather sparing in wordes, and readier to heare, then to speake. But whē occasiō forceth to much
talke, I must speake delibera∣tely without rashenesse or le∣uity, auoiding ouer-many iests, especially bitter taunts and sharpe words. I must also take heed of affected speach and impertinent ceremonies, and vse such affability and conuenient complements, as common ciuility and vsuall curtesie requireth. Mine apparel must be free from lightnesse, or more gawdines thē fitteth my age, calling, or company. It must be decent, and comely, not too open, nor with vnusuall or newe fashioned dresses, that other graue persons of my quality and calling, (that are well thought of) do not vse: It must be hand∣some and cleane, and as
much as may bee without singularity, that therein the staiednes and seemely estate of my soule, may bee perceiued. Alwaies when I am to goe to any company, either of my dwelling place, or stran∣gers, I ought to forecast their disposition, and what talke or action is likely to be ten∣dered vnto me by their pre∣sence. If I feare detracting speeches, let mee arme my selfe not to seeme to approue them, yea rather to mislike them, and to turne the talke to some other matter, and so in all other kind of vnlaw∣full talke. Finallie let this for con∣uersation be my chiefe rule, alwaies to foresee and pro∣uide
my selfe against the oc∣casions, that by euerie com∣pany are likely to be offered me, and in the beginning to talke either for dispatch of necessarie businesse, if there be any, or for maintaining mutual loue and charity, if it be mery, or ordinary talke. This fore-sight of occa∣sions, and faults likely to be committed, is the principall remedy against all sinne, and therfore especially to be no∣ted and vsed. To conclude, the vertues necessary in conuersation, are modesty, decency, affability, meeknes, ciuility, & curtesy, shew of compassiō to others miseries, and of ioy at their welfare, and of readinesse to pleasure all, and vnwillinges
to displease any; and the wāt of any of these, where occa∣sion requireth, makeh con∣uersation faulty. The vices chiefly to be a∣uoided are, pride disdaineful∣nes, rudenes, frowardnes, wantone, or, lightnes, too much amiliarity, churlish∣nes, and offensiue speeches. Of my duety towardes my selfe. THE FIFTH Chapter. THe last point is to con∣sider my duty towards my selfe, & the care I ought to haue of mine owne par∣ticular. First I must procure that which before is mentioned, in all my actions to haue the
badge of christianity: that is a pure and sincere affection and intention, not seeking in any thinge my owne de∣light, pleasure, and content∣ment, more then may stand with the honour & glory of God, remembring that I am to serue him and not my selfe, more then is necessary to inable me for his better seruice, I being his more then mine owne. Secondly I must procure to foresee in euery action, at the lest in al the principal, to fore arme my selfe against those occasions of sinne which shal be offered in them: & where it lieth not in my power to auoide the occasion of any greate sinne, the more dan∣ger there is, and the greater
the sinne is that I am in daun∣ger of, so much the more pre∣paration must I vse to resist it, and the more earnestly aske for Gods grace. Thirdly I must haue care of my sences, as the meanes and entrance of temptatiōs. To which it is a principall helpe, not to bee easely drawen with euery noise or phansy to mooue my head or eyes, excepte there be good cause: nor to be sud∣daine in motion, or going hither and thither, without deliberation. I must also re∣member well, that the eie is neuer satisfied with seeing, nor the eares with hearing nouelties, and therfore must I needs bridle the vnmeasu∣rable appetite of both these
senses, by breaking of mine owne desires in that behalfe. Fourthly because confu∣sion, and an vnsetled kind of life, is the cause of many sinnes, and an enemy to all vertue, I must set downe with my selfe some certaine order in spendinge my time, alotting to euery hower in the day, some certaine thing to bee done in the same, so neere as possibly I may, or at the least to haue sometimes in the morning, euening, & afternoone, certainely de∣uoted to some good exrci∣se, which I must (though not by vow) after a sort binde my selfe vnto, when things of greater weight do not call me from them. Also to keepe due times of ri∣sing,
meales, and going to bed, and all other ordinary ti∣mes: the obseruation wher∣of is most necessary for a re∣gular & vertuous order of lif. Fithly it is a moste neces∣sary rule of good life, not onely to keepe order in my temporall and spirituall acti∣ons, but also to perseuer and continue in one order, ha∣uing once set it downe with sound aduise. For the nature of man being apt to change, we are giuen still to nouel∣ties, seeking newe waies to perfection, and confirming or habituating our selues in none: wherefore (except ne∣cessity, charity, or greater spirituall good doe require) I must not flit from one exer∣cise to another, from one
ghostly father to another, from on forme of behauiour to another, but first plante a good plat-forme with ma∣ture aduise, and then resolue and fully determine to con∣tinue in the same. Sixtlie I must not cumber my mind with many spiritual or externall exercises at once, nor labour my selfe to much at the first, for my force being distracted to many offices, is the lesse able to performe any of them, and is easily o∣uer-labored without profit: wherfor I must not thinke to get all vertues at once, or cut off all imperfections to∣gether, but hauing a generall resolution to gette vertue, and leaue all vice, begin with some one, endeuouring to
endeuouring to breake my self of some one fault, which I am most inclined vnto, and procuring to get the cōtrarie vertue: for the care of auoi∣ding one offence, will make me take heed of all the rest. Seuēthly mās nature beeing so corrupted, that without continuall violence & force, it cannot attaine to vertu, or leaue vice, wherunto it is much inclined, I must assure myself that care & watchful∣nes is euer necessary: and be∣cause I am apte to fall, I must often renue my good purpo∣ses, which for that it is a ma∣teriall point, it will be good to sette downe with my selfe these rules. First to appoint and set downe with my selfe, that
euery morning one of my first thoughts shal bee of the good purposes I haue made, which must not be many, but some one or two particu∣ler and principall points that I see most necessary for me, and to set downe also in the morning, at what times in the day I will remember the same, as at seruice, at dinner, at euensong, or such like ti∣mes, for the care to remem∣ber them at some certaine ti∣mes, wil make me stilmind∣ful of them, and so readier to performe them. Secondly to examine my selfe twice in a day, whether I haue broken them since the morning or no: and if I haue, then to be soe for it, and begin againe to fortify my
selfe better against the next occasion. Thirdly because I can ne∣uer goe on in vertu without falling, I must euery mor∣ning, or at least euery holi∣day, thinke with my selfe that hitherto I haue done no∣thing, and that, by Gods grace, that day I will beginne a freshe, as though it were the first day that euer I began to do any good thing. Fourthly to celebrate the daie of my conuersion euery yeare as a solemne day, and as the day of my birth, wher∣in I was brought forth and dedicated to God, and ther∣in, and in some other princi∣pal feaes in the yeare, to to calle to minde the first fer∣uour, deuotion, and zeale,
that God did then giue mee, and this I ought to doe very often a other times also. Eightly, I must not make smale account of little sin∣nes, not bee careles in com∣mitting thē, but alwaies carry that minde, that I would not offende God willingly, euen in the least veniall sinnes for any thing: and I must neuer thinke any thing little, wher∣with so high a maiesty is of∣fended. For one that careth not to committ little sinnes, giueth the diuell a great ad∣uantage, to drawe him into greater. Ninthly, as I must take heed of pampering my body too much, & ought to take some ordinarie corporall punish∣mēt, as of fasting, discipline,
haire-cloth, or the like: fo on the other side, I must haue care of my health, & so tem∣per all my spirituall exercises and bodily afflictions with discretion, that I maie conti∣nue in them stil, & not make my selfe vnable to perseuer long, by the vndiscreet gree∣dines of a short time, and to vse discretion▪ these obserua∣tions will auaile. First, before God to thinke whether dooing this or that, I may be able to continue my vndertaken course in his ser∣uice, my body, force, health, and other cares, comber, or businesses considered. Secondly, to aske counsaile of spiritual men, long practi∣sed in spirituall affaires. Thirdly, to reade spirituall
bookes, intreating of that which I designe to doe. Fourthly, to pray that God with his light and grace, would lighten my hart, to knowe and performe that which is fittest for me, and most to his glory. An order how to spende euery day. THE SIXTE Chapter. IN time of health howers of going to bed and ri∣sing, may be either nine and fiue, or tenne and sixe, or ac∣cording to the strength or weaknes of euery mans bo∣dy, so they be certaine. After I am vp for a good prety space, it is good not to talke, but at the least for
halfe a quarter of an houre to busy my mind in praier & meditation, and then to talke if need be: because my busi∣nes with God being greater than with any man, it is fitt that hee should first be tal∣ked with of matters concer∣ning my soule, and thē others of worldly things, I must procure to goe neat∣lie and handsome in my at∣tire, agreablie to my calling▪ and to auoide all kind of in∣decency which breedeth dis∣like and contempt, & dooth rather offend, than please God: when I am ready I must goe to my praiers appointed. And before I set my selfe to pray, I must call to minde what I promised to doe for anie at that time, or what
other necessary busines I haue thē to dispatch, & I must keepe touch i my wordes in the least thinges, & cut off occasions of being interrup∣ted as nere as I may. In praier I must obserue these thinges. In the first beginning, I am to consider the presence of God and of his Saints. Secondly, for the better procuring of attētion, to take my good Angell, or some o∣ther Saint, as it were, to say with me. Thirdly, I must thinke a few, well saide, better then many hastiely shufled ouer. It is good sometime to omitt some vocall praiers, and to spend the time in meditation of some part of Christes passion, or of his life, or of
mine owne sinnes, as the booke of meditation giueth notice. After praier, on woorking daies, I must go presently a∣bout some woork or exercise that may be of some profitte, and of all other things, take heede of idlenes the mother of all vices. Towardes eleuen (if com∣pany & other more weighty causes will permit) I may say my beades, and call to mind how I haue spent the mor∣ning, asking God grace to spend the afternoone better. Dinner times, on flesh daies, may be eleuen: on fa∣sting daies, towards twelue of the clocke: When I am called to dinner, I must thinke for what ende I am
to eate, that is to helpe na∣ture, and not to content mine owne appetite. I must learne my little children (if I haue any) to say some short grace, or at the least, I must say grace to my selfe: and when I am set, before I lay hande to my trencher, I many pause a while, and in my mind desi∣re God to giue me tempe∣rance, and mindulnes of his presence. At meales I must neither bee too curious or doubtful of what I eate, neither too precise in the quantitie fine∣nes, or coursnes of the meate, but of that which God hath sent, take a cōpetent meale, measurable to my neede, & not hurtfull to my health.
After dinner I must thāke God for his gifts, remem∣bring that he hath fed me for this end, that I shoulde be more able to serue him, and doe my duety▪ and when I retire to my chamber, it is good to say some short pra∣yer of thankesgiuing, desi∣ring God to make mee thankfull for all his benefits. I must remember that ma∣ny haue wanted that which I haue had, and woulde haue beene glad of my leauings: and therfore I ought to haue care and regard of the poore, procuring somethinge for them, & some times goeing my selfe to see them serued, considering Christ in their persons. If I haue straungers I may
keep them company, & talke friendly & merily with them as occasion shall serue, direc∣ting my behauiour agreable to my former rules of con∣uersation, and hauing this in∣tention in my talke, that a∣mity and loue may bee main∣tained, and all breach & vn∣kindnes auoided. I must, if time and place will permit me, be alwaies doing some profitable thin∣ge, to auoide slouth, dire∣cting mine intention in all my exercises to this end, that I may auoide idlenes, and temptations, and bestowe my time in good sort to Gods glorie. After dinner, I must call to mind, whether I haue any promise to performe, or any
other busines to do that is not ordinary: that I neither forget the thinge, nor time appointed for it. About three of the clocke in winter, and foue in som∣mer, I may go to Euensong, and vse the same order of my morning ptaier. It is good for me sometimes to goe a∣bout the roomes of the hou∣se, and to see that they be kept cleane, and handsome, thinking that God is deligh∣ted in cleanenesse, both bo∣dily and ghostly, & detesteth sluttishnesse, as a thinge which he permitteth as a pu∣nishment of sinne, and one of the scourges of hell. A little before supper, it will be good to read some parte of some good booke,
procuring to take some be∣nefitte by it▪ and continuing in one book vntil I haue read it ouer, and then begin some new: and if I haue any booke that I would oftē read, I may take some time from my worke, or the holy daies▪ to reade a part thereof: but the time before supper, it is good to spend in continuing that which I haue begun, and when one is ended, to begin an other: When company hindereth me from doing these things at their due ti∣mes, I need not be much troubled for omitting the rest, so that my praiers be saied: but in such occuants in steed of that I should haue done▪ I must seeke to make my conuersatiō meritorious,
by hauing a good intention, and often renuing of the sa∣me, and by watchfulnes to auoid all offence of God, lea∣uing him in one exercise, to serue him in an other, as he apointeth occasiōs to fal out. Supper time maie be sixe, & drinking times on fasting daies, seauen of the clocke. When I am called to supper I must remember what my intention ought to be, and to take the same course that is prescrd for dinner. After supper, I may talke as occasion shall serue, or walk for my health, or read some pleasant, yet profitable booke, as Catholik histories, or such like. Towards the howre of going to bed, I mue exam∣ne
my selfe, first whether my promises, or appointments concerninge extraordinary things and busines, be per∣formed: if I haue forgotten any necessary thing, I must take order to remember it, that I forget it not the se∣cond time. This done, I must examine my conscience touching the thoughtes, wordes, & deedes of that day, & especially con∣cerning the purposes that I haue made in the morninge, and how I haue obserued these rules, and what faultes I haue committed of any moment. After I haue examined my conscience, and saied my prayers, it is good to ab∣staine from talke that nighte
(vnlesse some iuste occasion require the contrary) that my mind may bee free from idle thoughtes, when I goe to sleepe. When I lie downe to rest, my intention must not bee so much for sloth, and con∣tentment of the body, a for necessity of keepinge my health, & that I may rise fit∣ter to serue God. Also when I lie downe, I may imagin to lie by the pi∣lar, crosse, maunger, or some such place, where Christ was present, that when I wake in the morning he may bee the first that shall come into my mind. Before I sleepe, I must say some short thinge to com∣mende my selfe to God, my
good Angell, and some other Saints, and purpose by their helpe when the time of ri∣sing cometh, not to suffer my selfe to be ouercome with floth, but as though Christ called me, spedily to rise. I must also then sett downe where vpon I will thinke as soone as I awake, that God may haue the first fruits of my thoughts, for which the diuell layeth gre∣ate wayte. On holy daies. I Must rise one howre, or halfe an houre, sooner then on other daies: And if it be a day of receiuing, my first thought must bee to thinke what a happy bāquet I am to goe vnto, desiring
God to giue me due prepara∣tion. I must seeke to say my prayers that day both more, and with greater deuotion, and especially after the com∣munion. In steed of my work, I must bestowe those daies in rea∣ding good bookes, hearing sermons, and such like godly exercises, not lightly running ouer thē, thinking it enough to haue read or heard good things, but pawsing vpō such thinges as moue my affectiō, and pinting them wel in my mind and memory. Because I am like to be troubled with cōpany more those daies thē others. I must endeuour to recompence in this sort. First by often lifting vp my hart to God in talke.
Secondly, by striuing against occasions of euill speech, and by not yeldinge to speake of other folkes faultes. Third∣ly, in seekinge when occasiō serueth to helpe those I talke with by mine example or wordes, And finally to make my talke agreeable to the ru∣les of conuersation. On principall Feastes, it is conuenient to prepare my selfe before hand for them, & to liue a day or two before, as it were in expectation of them, desiring the presence and solemnity of that day, wherein God doth most a∣boundantly bestowe his gra∣ces: that hauing heretofore bene slacke in his seruice, I may that day beginne of newe, to take hart and cou∣rage,
to amend my life by the helpe and prayers of that Saint, or by the meritte and benefitte of that action of Christ, the holy day shall, be. For Confession and Recei∣uinge. EVery sonday; and high feast, and all the festiual daies of Christ, our Lady, the Apostles, and such other principall holy daies, I must prepare my selfe the day be∣fore to receiue. On Saterdaie at night, or on the eue if occasion serue, I must go to confession, and withall diligence, the neerer the time commeth of recea∣uing, the more wary must I be of my behauiour▪ I must
go to confession twice in a weeke, Wednesday and Sa∣terday at night, when there commeth not a great holy day, or some other day: When I want meanes to goe to confession, I must not∣withstanding at my vsuall ti∣mes prepare my selfe, and to almighty God make euen in wordes the same confession, that I would to my ghostly father: for though it bee not a Sactament without absolu∣tion of a true Prest, yet is it a godly thing, & good to keep me in vre, and my conscience in awe▪ Euery yeare twice, once about Christmas, if I may, vpon Newyeers day, or Epi∣phany, and another time a¦bout S. Mary Magdalens day.
I must make a generall con∣fession of the halfe yeare last past: & so from time to time, taking those two times es∣peciallie to renewe my selfe, & to remember Gods good∣nesse towardes me, and to beginne with newe feruor more earnestly to serue him, as my duety and his benefits require. I must also compare one time with an other, and see whether I goe forward or backwards in Gods seruice, and endeuour euery halfe yeare, to gaine some ground of my selfe, and to amend some one imperfection. When I make my gene∣rall confession, if I haue one certaine ghostly father, I must yeild vp an account of my conscience concerning thse
points following. First how I find my selfe affected in Gods serce, and whether I finde a conentment and de∣light therein, or rather a te∣diousnes and dulnes. Secondlie, what praiers I vse to saie, and howe much time I spende therein, and what taste, or trouble I feele in the same. Thirdly, what temptations and passions I am most trou∣bled withal, & what meanes I doe vse to resist them. Fourthlie, what imperfe∣ctions I am most prone vnto, what vertu I cheifly labour to attaine, and which I haue most facility to practise. Fiftly, what mortification I doe vse to break mine own will, and what other chai∣sement
to mortify my body. Sixtly, what desire I finde in my self, to amend my for∣mer faultes, and to begin a better course. Seauenthly, how I find my selfe for my resignation of mind to Gods will, and for suffering and losse, punish∣ment, sicknes, or disgrace that he should lay vpon me. Lastly, how my health is aggreable to my exercises, and whether I find not my body or mind ouercharged with too much praier, pen∣ance, or such other actions of deuotion. These thinges are conuenient to be vtte∣red, that the pastour kno∣wing the estate, disease, for∣ce, or weakenes of his shee∣pe, may be the abler dis∣creetly
to direct it. Euery weeeke. IN the beginning of the weeke, I must foresee what holy daies there are in the same, that I may the bet∣ter prepare my selfe for thē. Also in the beginning of the weeke, I must thinke whe∣ther I haue any extraordinary business, temporall or spiri∣tuall to doe, that hauing a foresight of it, I may remem∣ber it and prouide the better for it. When I reade my ru∣les, I may omitte the reading of other bookes, vnlesse lei∣sure serue me to doe both. I must twice a weeke at the least, go see into the offices of the house, and suruey the houshold booke: but if I haue
the gouernemēt of it wholy in mine owne handes, I must doe it oftener, hauinge re∣garde that wase & lauishing be auoided, frugality vsed, and behauing my selfe in the demeaning of temporal thin∣ges, rather as a stewarde or bailife of an others goods, then an owner of mine own, seing that in truth I must at my dyg day be liable to God, how I haue spent euery farthing. I must uery weeke read some part of this rule of good life, so deuiding it, that at the moneths ende I may haue read al seeking to print these spirituall directions in my mind, and endeuouring to put them in daily practise.
Of Rules in sickenesse. THE SEAVENTH Chapter. IF my sicknesse be great, I neede not vse any vo∣call praiers at all, more then in the morning to commend my selfe to God with a and Aue, and Creede: or if I cannot well say so much, now and then I must call vpon God with short prai∣ers, as Lord Iesus saue me: Lorde strengthen me: Lord grant me patience, and such like. In sicknesse when I can beare it, it will be good so∣metimes, to haue a part of some good booke read vnto me, but yet not much, for feare▪ of hurting my health.
As in health I ought to be obedient to my superiours & by diligent obseruation of my rules, to shew my duety towardes God: so in my sickenes I must be conten∣ted to be ruled by the phisi∣tions, and such as haue cae of me in thinges belonging to my bodily health, & must perswade my selfe, that in that time, one chiefe rule I haue to obserue, is to be pa∣tient and tractable, which in such case counteruaileth the merite of all my vsuall exer∣cises. I must also assure my selfe, that I doe God good seruice, when I doe any ne∣cessarie thing, and take any conuenient recreation, that may further my health. I must take heede of be∣ing
testy or froward, which sicknes for the most part doth cause, thinking that how much paine soeuer I suffer, Christ suffered far more for my sake, and farre more had I suffered long since in Hell, if God had dealte with me as I diserued. So soone as I fall sicke, I must procure that I be con∣fessed, and if my sicknes con∣tinue long I must keepe my custome of receiuing, at the lest euery eight daies, though I must not think that I am then bound to so much pre∣paration or praier, as when my body was in good health. If I see my disease dange∣rous, and haue cause to feare deathe, I must procure to haue some good body with
me too put me oftē in mind of God, of the Passion of Christ, and seeke to haue my viaticum▪ and other Sa∣craments, and preparations of Gods Church. It is good also to haue my will ready before I fall to any extremi∣ty, and a certaine order sette downe, for all temporall matters, that I be not cum∣bred with then when it standeth me most vpon to looke to my soue. Of the care of Seruants. THE EIGHT Chapter. I Must see that they lie not out in the nights, but that I knowe what becometh of them: I must not keepe such as are great swearers, or gi∣uen
to any great or noto∣rious vice, vnles there be great likelyhood, & certaine hope of their amendment. I must procure by what meane conueniētly I may, that they may haue necessary instruc∣tiō in matters apertaining to the saluation of their soules. I must take special heed of any secret meetings, messa∣ges, or more then ordinary liking, betwixt the men and the women of my family. I must see that the men haue no haunte of womē to their chambers, least lewdnesse bee cloaked vnder some o∣ther pretence. I must haue great regard, that my chiefest officiers and mē of most account be trusty persons, of good life and ex∣ample,
because the rest will follow as they shal lead thē. I must seeke as much as may be, that my seruants be not idle, nor suffered to vse any great gaming, sor by the one they shal fall into lewed life, by the other into swe∣aring, vnthritines, robbing and such vices. I must see that they haue their wages at due times, least for want they fall into bad courses. When they doe not thir dueties, I must re∣buke them, agreablie to the quality of their fault, and not winke at great matters, lest they wax carelesse, and bould to do the like again yet must my rebukes be ēpered with grauity and mildnes.
Of the care of my children. THE NINTH Chapter. I Must thinke that my chil∣dren, so longe as they are vnder age and in my power or custody, ought to be kept as my selfe; I hauinge in this time to answere for them. I must take heed they come not amongest such seruantes as are like to teach them to sweare, or any other vice, and I must giue speciall warning that none doe it. I must set honest & sound persons to gouerne thē, that may also teach them vertue and goodnes, yet not trusting too much to my seruants care but that I my self haue a spe∣ciall eie ouer them, and take
an account what they doe. I must vse them to deu∣tion by little and little, not cloying them with too much at once, but rather seeking to make them take a delight in it▪ I must teach them their, Pater noste. Aue, and Creed, and other good praiers, and make them perfecte in the tenne Commaundementes, and those of the church, and the points of faith, especially those that heretikes denie. I mut keepe them alwaies occupied in some profitable thing, allotting them accor∣ding to their age, more or lesse time to play: I must of∣ten speak to them of the Pas∣sion of Christ, and of the li∣ues of Saintes. I muste on the one side
breake them from their wils, and punishe them as they de∣serue, yet remembring also that they are young, and not keeping them in too much subiection, which may breed in them base and seruile mindes, and make their loue lesse towardes me: and I ne∣uer ought to beate any childe in mine anger. I must procure that they bee taught such exercises and qualities, as are fit for those of their degree, and yet haue a chiefe care, that good and honest persons be about them. I must not vse them to vaine dresses and costlie ap∣paell, but rather often shew them the vanity thereof: yet must they not bee kept too
straite in that or any other thing, that they are after∣warde to haue, lest they be∣ing too much bard from it, make them too eager of it, when they come to enioy it at their owne will. I must vse them to giue almes, to make much of the poore, and to vse reuerence to aged persons, and spiri∣tuall men, and praise often the true religion and vertu of their parentes, and aunce∣stours in their hearing, that it may moue them to imitate their good workes. I must tell them often of the Ab∣bies, and the vertue of the olde Monkes and Friers, and other Priestes, and religious men and women, and of the truth and honesty of the old
time, & the iniquity of ours. I must vse them to read good bookes, that are fittest for their capacity, and see them kept from vaine bookes of loue, heresy, and such like I must harten them often as they grow in yeares to suf∣fer aduersity, and to digest grief, especially in Gods cause & a good quarel, telling them the examples of others, and how good a thing patience and constancie is. When they are fit to goe to schoole, I must procure that they haue discreete and calme teachers, and such as are not cholericke, hasty, or curst, lest they take dislike and tediousnes in learning & they must be rather wonne vnto it by praise and emula∣tion
of others, then by bea∣ting and stripes▪ I must see that they be taught such ciui∣lity, curtesy, & complemen∣tes, as their degree, and the time requireth: & frame them as much as may be, to be gē∣tle, humble, & affable euē to the meanest, rebuking them for angrie and sharp wordes, or disdainful behauiour, euen to their inferiours. I must be times as age will permitte them, inure them in confession, and often vse of the Sacramētes, the onely remedy for their vnstaied and greene wittes. I muste not let the boies and girles be much together, especially out of sight, after eighte and nine yeares age, least they fal to vnhappines. Likewise my
daughters, must not be much amongest the men, nor my sonnes amōgest the women. When they come to such age as they must of force bee in many companies, I must procure some sounde and honest persons to bee for the most part with them, to in∣forme me of their courses. I must make them in any wise to beware of lewd conuersa∣tion, which is the ouer∣throwe of youth, and ther∣fore cause this pointe to bee beaten into them by good & zealous men. I must neuer assure or marry them, vntill they bee of suf∣ficient age to make their choice, and frame their like∣inge: neither force them to any match least they curse me
all their liues after, as it often happeneth. Of Temptation. THE TENTH Chapter. FIrst I must learne to know when I am temp∣ted, for if I can find my temp∣taion▪ I may reckon it halfe ouercome. For if I haue feare of God, or care of my soule, I cannot but arme my selfe earnestly to resist, knowing that temptation proceedeth from an enemy, to whome I haue resolued by Gods gra∣ce neuer to consent, what misery or trouble soeuer I endure, How to know temptations and good motions. IT is alwaies a spirituall
desolation originall and pro∣ceeding from the diuell, whē it darkeneth and disqueteth the mind, awaketh and stir∣reth vppe our passions, when it draweth to externall and earthlie solaces, leauing in the mind a tediousnes and vnwillingnes to praier and other workes of deuotion. Also when it diminisheth our affiance and trust in God, and diueth to a kinde of dis∣paire of Gods mercy, or per∣seuering in his seruice, ma∣king it seeme an irkesome & impossible thing, & mouing vs to forsake it: and when I finde my self troubled in this sort, I must assure my selfe without all doubt, that I am tempted by the duell, and therefore arme my selfe to
resist him, by doing that which those temptati dis∣swade me from. On the other side, com∣forte that is caused by Gods spiritt, is knowen by these signes: it incenseth the mind by a quiet & calme motion, to the loue of God, without any inclination to any creatu∣res loue, more then for Gods only glory, and it breedeth a kind of inward light and brightnes, wherby for the time the mind seeth after a most effectuall sort, the ne∣cessity, profit, and true com∣fort that is in Gods seruice, and conceiueth a contempt and dislike of worldly de∣lightes, & tasteth that which is the greatest felicity in this life, that is so assured and per∣fect
contentmēt in beeing in God grace, and seeking to please him, that it then iud∣geth no contentement in the world like or cōparable vnto it, as in truth there is none. Also true spirituall com∣forte bringeth a delighe and desire to thinke of the bene∣fittes of God, the ioes of Heauen, the comfort of me∣ditation & talking with God. Finally it confirmeth our faith, quickneth our hope, and increaseth charity, and leaueth the mind with a sweet taste of ioy, quiet and free from all cumbers. Somtimes the diuel trans∣formeth him self into an An∣gell of light, and at the first when he knoweth our good desires and purposes, he see∣meth
to sooth vs in them, & to set vs forward towardes the performance thereof, but in the end he draweth vs to his biasse, and by corrupting our intention, or by peruer∣ting the maner, time, or other circumstance of the due exe∣cutions, maketh the whole action worthles and faulty, though other wise vertuous in it selfe. There must be great heed taken in the beginning, mid∣dle, and ende of our though∣tes: for when either at the last it tendeth to apparent sinne, or withdraweth from the greater good▪ or tendeth to courses of lesse merit, or more daunger then wee are in, or if it disquiet the min∣de, or beeaue it of the
woned calme and loue of vertue, it is a signe that the diuel was the beginner of it, whose property is to hinder good & withdraw vs to euil. When in any suggestion I find the serpent by his sting, that is the diuell, by the wic∣ked ende he mooueth me vnto, it is good to vntwist & reuerse his motion, and to looke backwarde euen vnto the beginning, and to marke what plausible coulour he first pretented, that the next time I may the better espie his cunning, subtill dealing, and driftes. Howe to behaue our selues in time of Temptations. IN the time of my desola∣tion and disquiet of mind, I must not enter into any de∣liberation,
or goe about to alter any thing concerninge the state of my soule, or pur∣posed course of life, but per∣seuete in my former resolu∣tions, made in time of my good & quiet estate, wherin I was free from passion, and better able to iudge of thin∣ges conuenient to my good: yet may I and ought I resolue vpon such helpes, as are fit to resist and repell my dscon∣tented thoughtes (so they be not preiudicial to my former purposes) as praier, penan∣ce, confession and such like remedies. In temptations and trou∣bles of mind, I must remem∣bre that afore time I haue had the like, and they haue in fine passed, leauinge me
very glad and ioyfull when I resisted them, and sorrowfull when I yeeld too much vnto them, and therfore I muste thinke that these also will passe after a while, & I shall feele the like ioy in hauing resisted and ouercome them And in the meane time I must with patience endure the cumber and trouble of them, assuring my selfe, that God therwith is highly plea∣sed▪ and the ennemy most ef∣fectuallie subdued. Neither the multitude, coninuance, nor badnesse of any thought must breed any scruple or disquiet in me. For not to haue them, is not in my power, but onely not to consent vnto them: and so long as with deliberation
I haue not consented, nor willingly, or with delight staied in them, I haue not, sin∣ned any more then if I had onely had them in a dreame. If before I had euill thoughtes, I had a resolue mind neuer to yeeld to any mortall sinne: and afterward when I remember my selfe, and marke that I was in a bad thought, I still finde the same resolution, it is a signe that in the time of my di∣straction and bad imagina∣tion, I did not willingly con∣sent or offend in them: nei∣ther is it like but my mind being so well affected, I should haue easilie remem∣bred directlie and without doubt, if I had yeelded far∣ther then I ought.
Desolations are permitted of God for three causes. First, for a punishement of our sinnes, remisnes, & cold∣nes in Gods seruice. Secondly, to trie whether we be true seruants of God, or onely hierlinges, that are willing to labour no longer then they receiue the hire & stipend of present comfort and delight. Thirdly to assure vs that it passeth the reach and com∣passe of our ability, either to attaine or to maintaine in vs the feruour of deuotion, the intensiue loue of God, the a∣boundance of godlie teares, and other spirituall graces & comfortes, which wee must acknowledge to proceede of Gods gratuity & meere libe∣rality,
not of our owne force or desert. It is good while I feele the sweetnes of Gods visitation and presence, to fortifie my selfe against the desolations that will ensue, and remem∣bring those that are past, to thinke that all troubles, will as well passe, as comfortes, and that our whole life, is but a continuall succession and mixture of sorrow and ioy, the one alwaies ouertaking the other, & neither of them continuing long togeher: And therfore I must settle my mind in a kinde of indif∣ferency vnto them both, as it shal please God to send them. First, to know it a thing that cōmeth from my mor∣tall enemy, and tendeth to
my eternall destruction. To looke for temptations before hād, and not to think them nouelties, but necessary sequels of our enimity and hostility with the diuell, with whom we must neuer be friends. To resist them stoutly at the first, and to crush the ser∣pent in the head, for nothing maketh the Diuel to become so furious and violent, or to redouble his suggestions, as to perceaue the soule dis∣maide with his temptations, or not expecting by the con∣fidence in Gods helpe and mercy, an assured victory. To beare patiētly the mul∣titude & continuance of thē, assuring my self that they wil haue an end ere long.
To think on the ioy I shall haue for ot consenting vnto them, and the crowne of glory I shall enioy. To remember how often I haue been as grieuously an∣noied with the like, and yet by Gods helpe haue giuē the diuell the foile. Not to striue with vnclea∣ne temptations, but to turne my minde to thinke of other matters, and to change the place, or worke, to find some waie to put me out of those phantasies. To resist vices, by practising and doing acts of the cōtrary vertues. To arme my selfe, before hande, by getting those ver∣tues which are opposite to such vices as I am most incli∣ned
vnto. For in those doth the Diuell alway seeke his aduantage to ouerthrow: me. In grieuous affaults to o∣pen them to my ghostlie fa∣ther, & going to confession, therby to obtaine by meanes of the Sacrament, more abi∣lity to resist. In extreame troubles to vse some bodily chastisment▪ to call for helpe of our Bles∣sed Lady, my good Angell & the assistance and praiers of other Saintes: especially to humble my selfe in the sight of God acknowledging mine owne weaknesse and wholy relying vpon his helpe, and earnestly in woord and hart calling for his assistaunce, and firmly trusting in his mercy, yea and offering my selfe (so
as he forsake me not) to suf∣fer these and all other temp∣tations whatsoeuer it shall please God to permitte, euen so long a he shal think good: for of all other thinges this most ouercōmeth the Diuel, when hee seeth we turne his euill motions and troubles, to so great meritte & victory of ourselues. A Praier in Temptation. O Mercifull Iesu, the o∣nely refuge of desolte and afflicted soules: O Iesu that hast made me and redee∣med me, in whom all things are possible vnto me, and without whom I am able to doe nothing, thou seest who I am, that her prostrate my praiers, & poure out my hart vnto thee: what I would
haue, and what is fit for me, thou knowest: my soule is buried in flesh and bloud, and would be faine dissol∣ued, and come vnto thee. I am vrged against my wil, and violentlie drawen to thinke that which from my heart I deteste, and to haue in mind the poison and bane of my soule. O Lord thou knowest my mould and making, for thy hands haue framed me, and with fleash and skinne thou hast cloathed me: and loe this flesh which thou hast giuen me, draweth me to my ruine, and fighteth a∣gainst the spirit: if thou hel∣pest not, I am ouercome: if thou forsakest me, I must nee∣des faint, why doest thou sette me contrarie vnto thee,
and makest mee grieuous and a burden vnto my selfe? Dddest thou create me to cast me away? Didst thou redeeme me to damne me for euer? It had beene good for me neuer to haue beene borne, if I were borne to perish▪ O most mercifull fa∣ther, where are thy olde and wonted mercies? Where is thy graions sweetnes and loue? How long shall mine enemy reioice ouer me, and humble my life vppon earth, & place me in darcknes like the deade of the world? What am I O Lorde, that thou settest me to fight all alone against so mighty, subtile, and cruell enemies, that neuer cease to bid me a perpetuall battaile? O Lorde
why doest thou shewe thy might against a leafe, that is tossed wih euery winde, and persecutest a dry stuble? wilt thou therfore damne the woke of thy handes? wilt thou throw me rō thy face, and ake hy holy spirit from me▪ Aasle O Lord whither shal I goe from thy face? or whiher shall I flie from thy spiit? whither shall I fly from thee incensed, but to thee appeased? whiher from thee as iust, but vnto thee as mer∣cifull? doe with me Lord that which is good in thine eies, for thou wilt doe all thinges in righteous iudgemēt. Onely remember that I am flesh & bloud, fraile of my selfe and impotent to resist, shew thy selfe a Sauiour vnto me, and
either take away mine ene∣mies, or grant me grace that without wound or fault, by thee & with thee, I may ouer∣come thē sweet Iesus, Amen. Consideratiōs to settle the mind in the course of vertue. THE XI. CHAPTER. The first consideration, how weighty a thing the busines of mans soule is. WHosoeuer being desirous to take dew care of his soule, cōmencing a spirituall course, first must cōsider, that he hath takē such a busines in hand that for the importāce, necessity, and profit therof it surmounteth all other traffic∣kes, trades and affaires of the worlde, yea and to which
only all other busines ough to be addressed: for therein our manage is about the sal∣uation of our soule, our chief iewell and treasure: of which if in the short passage of our brittle and vncertaine life, we take not that due care that we ought, for a whole eternity after, we shall euermore repent and be sory for it, and yet neuer haue the like opportunity againe to help it. Secondly, the better to conceiue the moment and weight of this busines, let vs consider what men vse to doe for their bodily health. For we see they make so principall a reckning of it, that they spare no cost nor toile, nor leaue any thing
vnattempted that may auaile them to attaine it. They suf∣fer them selues to be laun∣ced, wounded, pined, burnt with red hoat irons, besides diuers other extreame to∣ments, onely for this end. How much greater miseries ought we to endure? How much greater paine and di∣ligence ought we to imploy for this health of our soule? which is to suruiue when the body is dead, rotten, and de∣uoured with wormes: and to suruiue in such sort, that it must be perpetually tormen∣ted in hell with intollerable torments, or enioy endles felicity in heauen. And ther∣fore of howe much greater worth and weight wee thin∣ke the soule, and the eter∣nall
saluation or damnation therof, then the momentary health or sickenes of our body, so much greater accoūt and esteeme ought we to make of the busines of our soule, then of any other worldly or bodily affaire whatsoeuer. For what auaileth it a man (saith Christ) to gaine the whole worlde and make wracke of his owne soule? If therefore we keepe diuese men for diuers offices about our body, and many thou∣sands to liue by seruing and prouiding things for euery part therof: If we spend so much time in feeding, refres∣hing, and reposing of the same If the greatest portion of our reuenewes, (be they
neuer so large) be consu∣med, in the meates, pompe, sportes and pleasures thereof: How much more ought we to seeke as many helpes, ser∣uices, and purueiers for our soule, for whoe only sake our body was giuen, and of whose good the welfare of the body only proceedeth? Thirdly, the necessity and poise of this care of our soule, may be gathered of this, that all other matters are inreaed with men, or some other creatures: but this busines of our soule is with God him selfe, who by how much he s nobler and wor∣thier than any of his creatu∣res, so much more is the weight of this matter, that can not be dealt with any
without him, and so much more diligence ought there to be imployed therein, espe∣cially in this time, wherein God is still ready to farther our endeuours in this behalfe, where as when time is ex∣pired, condemne he may for our negligence, or reward vs for our carefulnes, but not helpe vs any more to alter the estate of our soule, be it neuer so badde, or mi∣serable. Fourthly, we may gather how material and important this matter is, by the life of Christ and his Saintes, who withdrawing thē selues from all other worldly affaires, thought it worke enough to attend to this businesse of their soule; and whosoeuer
are now solemnized and ho∣noured in Gods Church, they are honored only in this that they haue with a glorious Conclusion, happily and con∣stantly accomplished this bu∣sines to Gods glory, and their owne saluation. And who so considers the intolle∣rable torments of Martyres, the extreame austerity, shar∣pe life, and penance of Con∣fessours, the painefull ago∣nies, and conflicts of Virgins, the rough stormes and trou∣bles of all Gods Saintes, and doth remember withall that they vndertook them for no other respect, but onely for the better bringing this bu∣sinesse of their soule to an end, it wil soone apeare how weighty a thinge, and how
pretious the saluation of the soule is, which they did think not too deere bought with all the miseries, sorrowes, and paines, that this worlde coulde afford. Let vs also con∣sider that what soeuer mo∣ued thē to such care and ear∣nestnes in this behalfe, hath no lesse place doubtlesse in vs than in thē, seeing that our soule is as deere bought, as much worth, created to as great glory as theirs: the dan∣ger of our saluation rather more than any way lesse than theirs. God hath as much right in vs as in them, and we as many titles of bond and duetie to serue him as they. Finally we are assaulted by the same ennemies, enuiron∣ned with the like hazzardes,
and subiect to as many, yea more occasions of sinne, and allurements to damnation than they. Who therefore seeh not that we ar in euery respect to account the care of our soules as important and necessary to vs, as euer it hath beene to any: Wherefore, let not the wise man glorie in his wisedome, nor the strong man in his might, nor the rich man in his riches, saith God by his Prophet Hiere 9. But let him that glorieth, glorie in this, that he knoweth me, for I am the only Lord that worketh mercy, iudgement, and iustice vpon the earth, & these thin∣ges please me, saith our Lord: as who woulde say, it is folie and vanitie to glory and re∣ioyce in any other thinge,
then in the knowledge and seruice of God, and procu∣ring mercie and milde iudge∣ment for our soule. How wee ought to arme our mindes against temptations that happen when we seek? earnestly to serue God. The second consideration. FIrst, seing this businesse of our soule is of so great moment, hee that earnestly goeth about the same, must offer him selfe vp vnto God, and bee most ready to en∣dure constantly all the daun∣gers, cumbers, and difficul∣ties that shall happen, and resolue neuer (by Gods gra∣ce) to be dismayed and bea∣ten
backe from his purpose, by any trouble or encoun∣ter what soeuer, knowing that glorious and honoura∣ble enterprises, can neuer be atchiued without many con∣tradictions. Wherefore let him perswade him selfe, that when he hath setled his min∣de seriously to follow this businesse, hell it selfe, and all the ennemies of God and mans soule will conspire a∣gainst him: the flesh to al∣lure him to the dilightes of the senses, & to recall him to the vomite of his abando∣ned pleasures: the world to intise him with pomps and vanities, with ministring oc∣casions of sinne, and pro∣uoking by euill examples: yea, if that will not serue, by
terrifying him with persecu∣tions, extortions, obloquies, slaunders, and torments, and with all kind of disgrace. Fi∣nally, the deuill (a professed enemy of all those that take care of their soules) will seek to entrappe him with a thou∣sande traines, passions, and subtile temptations, leauing nothing that hee thinketh may remooue a man from these endeuours tending to his saluation. Secondly, the case standing thus, let that saying of Scrip∣ture come to our mind, My sonne, comming to the ruice of God, stand in iustice and feare, and prepare thy soue, vnto temptation. Wherefore he that entereth into the way of life, must remember that
he is not come to a play, pa∣stime, or pleasure, but to a continuall rough battell and fight, against most vnplaca∣ble and spightfull enemies; and let him resolue him self, neuer in this worlde to look for quiet and peace, no not so much as for any truce for a time, but arme him self for a perpetual combate, and ra∣ther think of a multitude of happie victories (which by Gods grace he may obtaine) then of any repose or quiet∣nesse from the rage & assaul∣tes of his ennemies. Let him see and peruse the paterne of his capitains course, who frō his birth to his death, was in a restlesse battell, persecuted in his swadling clowtes by Herod, annoied the rest of his
infancy by banishment, wā∣dring and neede In the flow∣er of his age slaundered, ha∣ted, pursued, whipped cru∣cified, and most barbarously misused: In the same sort were all his Apostles, and all his principall souldiers hand∣led: for whom he loueth he chastiseth, and prooueth like golde in the fornace. And therefore no man must think it a new thing to be tempted and troubled, when hee once runneth a vertuous course, contrarie to the liking of his enemies. For the disciple is not aboue his master, nor the seruant aboue his Lorde, who as we see had the same intreaty. Thirdly, lest we should be agast and discouraged at
the expectation and feare of so many discomfortes; and the incessant malice of so spitefull ennemies, let vs re∣member the wordes of Eli∣zeus: that more stand with vs, then against vs. Against the corruption of nature we haue grace. Against the diuel wee haue God, who will ne∣uer suffer vs to be tempted aboue our force: Against the power of hell we haue the prayers of Saintes: Against the miseries of the body, the spiritual comfort of the min∣de, which God allotteth in such measure as our neces∣sitie requireth: and if there were nothing else, this were enough to make troubles welcome in this case, for that therby we purchase an ine∣stimable
glory for a short and passing combate, the comfort wherof nether eie hath seen, nor eare heard, nor heart con∣ceiued. And on the other side by the same, wee auoid other intolerable and externall tor∣ments of Hel, the least wher∣of, passeth all those that can be suffered in this worlde. And therfore is our chaunge most happy, that by the paine of a short life, auoide the mi∣sery of an eternall death, and deserue the vnspeakable hap∣pines of the life euerlasting. For this cause saith Saint Ia∣mes; Thinke you it all ioy (my brethren,) when you shall fal into diuers tēptatiōs, knowing that the triall of your faith worketh patience, and patien∣ce hath a perfect worke, that
you may bee perfect & intire, failing in nothing. Of the watchfulnesse and at∣tention required in the care of our soule. The third Consideration. SEing this weighty affai∣re of our soules health is hemmed in, and besette with so many and manifest perilles and troubles, it standeth vs vpō most watchully to take hed to euery thought, word, and dede tha passeth, lest through the number, & sub∣tility of our enemies traines, we be often intrapped: for it is hard to touch pitch, & not to be defiled, to liue in flesh a spirituall life▪ to conuerse in the worlde, without world∣le affctions. Wherefore as
a Legate that is to deliuer his embassage befor a great pre∣sence of Peers and Nobles, hath not only regarde to his matter, but also to his words, voyce & actions, that all be sutable to the weight of his message: So we hauing to worke this exploite of our soule befor the eyes of those that lay waite to take vs in any trippe, ought to bee very warye, euen in our least thoughts & deedes, for feare that we offend the presence of God, and giue occasion of triumphe and vicory to our deadly foes. And for this saieth the scripture, keepe thy selfe very watchfully. Secondly, to attaine this diligent and attentiue care to all our actions, let vs con∣sider
what men vse to doe, that carry great treasure by places haunted by theeues, how warily they see to their way, how often they looke about them, how many ti∣mes they prepare thēselues, some times to fight, and o∣therwhiles to runne away: Likwise how warily he wal∣keth, and how carefull he is neuer to stumble nor fall, that carieth in each hande a thinne glasse of liquor verie pretious, through stony and rough places: And when wee haue marked these mēs carefulnes in these inferiour matters, let vs remēber, that much more respect is ne∣cessary in vs, whose treasure is more pretious then any worldlie iewelles, & yet doe
we carry it in earthen and fraile vessels, in the middest of so many theeues, as there are passions, and disordered appetites in vs, as there are Diuels in waire for vs, and as there are stumbling stones, & occasions of sinne sette round about vs. To procure this at∣tention, the most effectuall helpes are these. First, to thinke how care∣full we should be to doe all thinges wel, if this presēt day were the last that euer we should liue in this worlde (as peraduenture it may be) and that at the end thereof, we were to bee conuented be∣fore a most seuere and igou∣rous iudge, who according to the deserts of that daies actions, should passe the sen∣tence
of life or death vpō vs. Secondly, to remēber that God is in his owne substance, power, and true presence, in euery place, and seeth both our outward and inward ac∣tions, more then we our sel∣ues, and therfore let vs seeke in euery thing so to behaue our selues, that we feare not to haue God a witnesse and behoulder of all that wee doe, thinke, or say, and let vs aske him grace to doe nothing vnworthy his sight. Thirdly, we must consider the carlesnes of our life past, remembring how often we haue fought against God, with his owne weapons, and abused the force that he hath afforded, in euery part of our body and mind, & therefore
as S. Paul Warneth, as we haue exhibited our mēbers to serue vncleanes and iniquity, to ini∣quitie: So now let vs exhi∣bite our members to serue iu∣stice vnto sanctification. Fourthly, to procure this attention, it is good oftenti∣mes in the day when we are about our ordinarie actions, to vse some shorte praiers or some one verse of a Psalme, or any other shorte petition of Gods grace, aide, and as∣sistance: for these short pray∣ers, are fewell of deuotion, causes of attention, foode of the soule, preparations a∣gainst temptations, and assu∣red helpes to attaine anie vertues: therefore it is good to vse them in lieu of sighes, & in the beginning of euerie
chiefe action, directing therin our intention and action, to Gods glory and seruice, and our good. Of the necessity of perseuerāce in continuing watchfull ouer our selues. The last consideration. FIrst seeing the sūme and complemēt of al verue consisteth in the cōtinuance and progresse in it: perseue∣rance of all other things, is most necessary in this busi∣nes: to the better ataining wherof, these considerations may preuaile. First, to consider by who∣se instinct and motion I be∣ganne to take speciall care of my soule, and I shall find that being a thing contrary
to the inclination of flesh & bloud, and aboue the reach of nature, to resolue vpon so painfull and wary a course, in hope of a reward and ioy that faith doth promise, that I say God onely, and no o∣ther was the author and mo∣uer of my heart vnto it, and therfore vnlesse I meane di∣rectly to resist God, and run a contrary course to that which he prescribeth, I must resolue my selfe to perseuer to the end in that which I haue happely begunne. Secondly, the ende of this enterprise was to serue God, to bewaile my former sinns, and to worke by Gods helpe the salaion of mine owne soule: and when I resolued vpon these meanes, I was in
a state free from passion, and as wll able to choose thin∣ge conuenient, a I could be any other time, & wholy bent to do that thing which was for my greatest good. Wherfore seing I can neuer ayme at a better end, nor be in better plighte to make a sounder che, my surest way is to perseuer stil in my resolution to the end, neuer altering my designemēt, vn∣lesse it be o a better, and fur∣ther my course. Thirdly, I must cōside who he is, that that would make me forsake it: For if God mo∣ued me vno it, doubtles it is the Dull would remoue me from it: for God cannot be cntrary to him selfe, nei∣ther vseth he to alter our
mindes but only from euil to good, or frō good to better: therefore vnles I meane to yeeld wittingly vnto the Di∣uel, and to follow mine ene∣mies counsaile vnto mine owne perdition, I must per∣seuer vnto the end: For with what pretext soeuer the Di∣uel seeketh to couer his mo∣tion, sure it is, that his drifte is, to drawe me from God and goodnesse, and to damne my soule for how can he in∣tend any thing to my good, that beareth me such a can∣cred malice, that hee careth not to encrease his owne paine, so that he may worke me any spiritual, yea or cor∣poral harme? Fourthly▪ I must print that saying of Christ in my mind, He that perseuereth vnto the
end shalbe saued. For not he that beginneth, nor he that continueth for a moneth, or a yeare, or a shorte time, but onely he that perseuereth to the very end of his life, shall be saued Werfore the same cause that mooued me to be∣ginne, ought also to mooue me to continue, that the me∣rit and crowne of my good resolution be not cut off by any want of perseuerance. Let not the cries of mine e∣nemies moue me: let me with S. Paul say, the world is crucified to me, and I to the world: and with Dauid, it is good for me to cleaue vnto God. Finally let me imitat the exāple of Christ that perse∣uered ō the cross vnto death for my sake, though oftē cal∣led
vpon to come downe. Fiftly, I must consider that in what state soeuer of gra∣ce or merit of damnation, I begin the next life, I must & shall vndoubtedly perseuere in it, according to the word of Salomon; whersoeuer the tree faleth, there shall it be to∣wards south or north, that is, towards heauen or hell: for both the paine of this conti∣nueth for euer, and the ioy of the other after it is once begunne (for it may bee de∣ferred for a time by the pai∣nes of purgatory,) is also euerlasting. If therefore I will perseuer in heauen, let me perseuer in the way that leadeth vnto it, and neuer forsake the paine∣fulnes of it till, the iourneis
end. The passions of this life are not condigne or compa∣table to the fuue glory: and it is extreame folly for auoi∣ding a short and transitory paine, to hazard the losse of euerlasting ioy, and put my selfe in perill of pepetuall bondage, in farre more ex∣treame and endls torment. The sinners perseuer still in wickednes, and seruice of the Diull. The wordlinges perseuer in pursuing vanities & following the world, yea and that with most seruile toile and base drudgery, and not without many bodily, and ghostly harmes, how much more ought a true ser∣uant of God perseuer in his seruice, and not seeme by forsaking him in the way, to
condemne him for a worse master then the world or the Diuel, whom many thousan∣des serue to the end, to their owne damnation. Let me remember that the first Angell, for want of per∣seuerance became a Diuell. Adam for want of the same, was thrust out of paradise, and Iudas of an Apostle, be∣came a prey of hell Finally, there be many thousands in hell fire burning▪ that began very good courses, and for a time went forward in the same, and yet in the end for want of perseuerance were damned for euer. What good a soule looseth by mortall sinne. 1. The grace of the holy Ghost. 2. The friendship and fa∣miliaritie
with God. 3. Al moral vertues infused, and of Gods spirit. 4. The inheritance of the kingdome of heauen. 5. The portion of Gods children, and patronage of his fatherly prouidēce which he hath ouer the iust. 6. The peace & quietnes of a good, and cleare conscience. 7. Many comfortes and vi∣sitations of the holy Ghost. 8. The fruite and merit of our former life, during the state of sinne. 9. The merit and satisfa∣ction of our present actions, albeit in the mean time they dispose to Gods grace, and sa∣tisfie the precepts of God, and the Church. 10. A great portion of the
communion of Saintes, and of the participation of the good workes and praiers of the whole Church. And fi∣nally of the fruit, and part of the merite of Christs passion. What misery the soul gaineth by mortall sinne. 1. Condemnation to eter∣nall paine. 2. To be quite cancelled out of the booke of life. 3. To become of the child of God, the thrall of the Di∣uell. 4. To be chaunged from the Temple of the holie ghost, into a denne of thee∣ue a nest of vipers, a sincke of corruption.
How a soule is prepared to iu∣stification by degrees. Faith setteth before our eyes God as a iuste Iudge. Angry with the bad▪ Mercfull to the repētāt. Of this faith by the gift of Gods spirit ai∣seth a feare by cōsideration of Gods iu∣stice & of our owne sinnes. This feare is comforted by hope groun∣ded in Gods mer∣cy and the merites of Christ. Of this hope aiseth loue and charitie vnto Christ. For louing vs without desert Redming vs with so many tor∣ments.
Of this loue followes sor∣rowe for of∣fending Christ of whom we haue bin so mercifully. Created, Redeemed, Sanctified, Called to his faith. Of this sorrow a∣riseth a firme pur∣pose to a∣uoyde all sin, which God aboue all thinges dete∣steth. The diuil aboue al thinges de∣sireth. Aboue all thin∣ges hurteth the soule Of deuotion to Saints, and how our conuersation may be in heauen, as Saint Paul saith it should. FIrst (after a special de∣uotion towardes our B.
Lady, whom aboue all pure creatures we ought conti∣nually to affect and reue∣rence) we must procure to haue a kind of reuerent fa∣miliarity with our good An∣gel, whō we ought to make reckning of, as a most vndi∣uided and peculiar friend, who is vnto vs, as a nurse vnto a childe, a shepheard vnto a wandering lambe, a guide of our waie, a gardian of our persons, a counsellor in doubts, a comforter in troubles, a patron in our nee∣des, and an assured friend in all our afflictions. We must therefore loue him as our friend, honour him as our superiour, thanke him for his censure finally, vse him as one to whom we
may boldly both impart our comfortes, and vtter our de∣solations When wee sleepe he wa cheh ouer vs, when we wake he attendth on vs, wheresoeuer we be he gar∣deth vs, whithersoeuer we goe he assteth vs, and what∣soeuer we doe▪ he hath still an eye to succour vs. We must therfore often cōmend our selues and our busines vnto him, often aske his ad∣uise, & with our inward eare often harken what he saieth within vs. We must account him as an ordinary and assu∣red friend, eurmore readie at our call to affoord his pre∣sent helpe, and to beare vs company in all necessities. Because our nature is de∣lighted▪ and holpe with va∣rity,
we may euery day in the weeke vse the patronage of diuers Saints, according to the order of our Letanies. On Sunday the blessed Trinitie, our Lady, and the nine quires of Angells, espe∣cially the three Archangells there named, Michael, Ga∣briel, and Raphael. On monday, S. Iohn Bap∣tist, with all the Patriarches and Prophets. On Tuesday S. Peter with the rest of the Apostles, E∣uangelistes, and Disciples of Christ, and all the holy In∣nocents. On Wednesday S. Steuen with all the holy Martirs. On Thursday S. Siluester, with al the holy Bishops, Confessors, and Doctors.
On Friday S. Benedict with all the holie Priestes, Leui∣tes, Monks, Eremites, & Re∣ligious men. On Saturday S. Mary Mag∣dalen, with all the holy Vir∣gins and Widowes. Wee must euery day in the morning, so soone as we a∣wake, commend our body, soule, & affaires to God, and our patrnes of that day. In euery principal action, wee must commend our sel∣ues to some one of them, de∣siring their helpes and asistā∣ce. Wee must ofen in the day thinke what guestes wee haue bidden that day into our soule, and seeke to make it a sitte receipt for so hono∣rable a company. We must seeke to imitate
that vertue, which in these Saints most shined, who are patones of that day; As in our blessed Lady & the An∣gels, obedience and chaitie: In the Pariarchs and Pro∣phets, tempeance▪ hope and holinesse. In the Apostles & Euangelists, zeale of soules, and of the honour of God In the Martyres patience and constancie. In the Bishops & Doctours, watchfulnesse o∣uer our charge, and zeale of Gods truth, and sobrietie In the religious Fathers, pe∣nance, contempt of the world, discretion and auste∣ritie. In the Virgns, and wi∣dowes, the subduing of our appetites, purity of heart and chastitie.
An other exercise of deuotion to Saints. IF I will keepe my minde continually attentiue in goodnes, and goe in conti∣nual awe of offending▪ I may take this course. I must in euery roome of the house where I dwell, imagin in so∣me decent place therof, a throne or chaire of estate, & dedcate the same and the whole oome to some Saint, that whensoeuer I enter into it, I enter as it were into a chappell or church that is de∣uoted o such a Saint, and thereoe in minde doe that reuerēce that is due to them. And thus hauing in euery roome setled seuerall Sain∣es, and in minde consecra∣ed the same vnto them, and
decked it with such furnitu∣re as is fitte for such an inha∣bitant, the same house will bee to me in a maner a Para∣dise, and the consideration of the Saincts presence, will be a continuall bridle to re∣straine me from rreueent demeanor, vnfitte for such a behoulder as there I aue placed, to be a witness and aider of mine actions: But to helpe my memory, and to a∣uid confusion. First, it is good to appoint in euery roome, some cer∣taine and deerminac place, where I meane to conceyue the Saintes presence. Secondly, to choose some cetaine & determinat aint, and when I haue once deo∣ted the place to one Saint,
not to chaunge, but still to keepe the same, for easier habituating my memorie. Thirdly, in those roomes wherein I am most conuer∣sant, I may place two, three, or moe, as the roome will minister cōnueniency to fra∣me their places for the better conceiuing and remembring of them. Fourthly, I must place such Saints in the roome as are fittest to be patterns & exā∣ples vnto me in that action, for which that roome princi∣pally seueth; As in the di∣ning chāber or palour, saints of spare and regular diet, of sober and vertuous conuersa∣ion. In the bd chamber, Saints giuen to short sleepe and watchfulnesse. In the
Chappell, Sainte giuen to much prayer and deuotion, and so in other roomes. Fiftly, I may in steede of Saintes, place some misterie of Christs life or passion: as the last supper in the dining chamber: and such like. Sixtly, not only in the house, but also in the wall∣kes, gardens, and orchards about the house may I doe the same: and so make my walkes as it were short pil∣grimages, to visit such Saints as are patrones of the place I goe vnto. Seuēthly, it is not good to place Saints in al the roomes in one day, but first to con∣sider well in euery roome the fittest place for that pur∣pose, and then to begin one
day with one or two, & the the next day with two more, that they may bee the easher imrinted in my memory. Eightly, it is good in some roomes to place austere, mournefull and rigorous Saints, conceiuing them in attire sutable to their auste∣itie and dolefull profession while they were aliue, that when I find my selfe too la∣uish in mirth, or too much inclined to pleasure, the cō∣pany & presence of that au∣stere example, may temper my disposition And likewise in steede of these Saintes I may place so∣me lamentable history of the olde or new Testament, or some representatiō of death, hell, or iudgement. Likewise
in other roomes, to place some glorious faire, & com∣fortable Saintes, histories, or figures, with all sutable to ioy, that may serue me in time of my heauines to alay my sorrowes: and the like in feare, hope, presumption, despaire, and such other pas∣sions, but especially in those which I finde my selfe most inclined vnto. Ninthly, I must take hee∣de that I make not this ex∣ercise a toile, but rather a spi∣rituall recreation, and ther∣fore I must not be too eager to doe all things on a sud∣daine, but get the habit and custome of it by litle & litle, for so wil it proue an exercise of wonderful profit, easines, and contentment.
An other exercise to take occa∣sion of Gods creatures, to serue and remember God, and to attaine vertue. FIrst, concerning persons I may allote to euery man & woman of the house where I liue a Saint, so that euery one of the company shall with his presence bring me in memory of his Saint, and whatsoeuer I doe with any of them, I shall alwaies carry a respect to his Saint, and be affraid to offend. Secondly, euery one shall represent vnto me some ver∣tue or some vice: so that whē I see them, I may in one re∣member and practise humi∣lity; in an other patience, modesty, obedience and such like: or on the other side, re∣member
and take heed of swearing, anger and such like faultes, and be sory that euer I offended in them. Thirdly, I may take occa∣sion of other creatures to re∣member Gods mercies, as by mon, the selling of Christ: by meate, his last supper: by waer, the water of his eies and side, and washing of his Disciples feete: by drinking, his esell and gall: by wood, his Crosse and thornes: by stone, his graue: and so in all other pointes of Christs life and passion, and in all o∣ther thinges, the considera∣tion wherof may mooue me to goodnesse: as by fire to re∣mēber hel, by ashes death, by light that discouereth things that darcknes did hide, the
finall iudgement and day of generall descouery, and by the beauty of the elements, & by the pleasure & comfort of other creature, heauen. This exercise must not be ordinary vnles it be the first point, but now & then vsed to recollect the mind after long distraction. Certaine Iaculatory praiers▪ GRatious Lord, & sweet Sauiour, giue me a pure intēion, a cleane hart, and a regard to thy glory in all mine actions. Iesu possesse my mind with thy presence, and rauish it with thy loue, that my de∣light may be to be imbraced in the armes of thy protectiō. Iesu be thou igt vnto mine eies, musicke to mine
eares, sweetnesse to my tast, & contentment to my heart. Iesu I giue thee my bodie, my soule, my substance, my same, my friends, my liberty and life, dispose of me and all that is mine, as shalbe most to thy glory. Iesu I am not mine but thi∣ne, claime me as thy right, keepe me as thy charge, loue me as thy childe. Iesu fight for me when I am assaulted, heale me when I am wounded, reuiue me when I am spiritually killed, receiue me when I fly, & let me neuer be quite cōfoūded. Iesu giue me patience in trouble, humility in comfort, constancy in temptations, & victory against my ghostli enemies.
Iesu giue me modesty in countenance, grauity in my behauiour, deliberation in my speeches, purity in my thoughts, rigtheousnes in my actions. Iesu be my sunne in the day, my food at the table, my repose in the night, my cloa∣thing in nakednes, & my suc∣cour in all my needs. Iesu let thy bloud runne in my mind as a water of life, to clense the filth of my sin∣nes, and to bring forth the fruit of life euerlaing. Iesu stay min inclinations from bearing down my sou∣le: bridle mine appetites with thy grace: and quenche in me the fire of all vnlaw∣full desires. Iesu keepe mine eies from
vaine sights, mine eares from hearing euill speeches, my tongue from talking vnlaw∣full things, my sences from euery kind of disorder. Iesu make my wil pliable to thy pleasure, and resigned wholy to thy prouidence. & grant me perfect contētmēt in that which thou allottest. O Lord make me strong a∣gainst all occasions of sinne, and steedfast in not yeelding to euil▪ yea rather to die then to offend thee. Iesu make me ready to pleasure al, loth to offēd any, gentle in speaking, courteous in cōersation, louing to my friends, and charitable to mine enemies. Iesu forsake me not lest I perish, leaue me not to mine
owne weakenes, lest I fall without recouery. Iesu graunt me an earnest desire to amend my faultes, to renew my good purposes, to pe forme my good inten∣tions, and to begin a fresh in thy seruice. Iesu direct mine intētions, correct my errours, erect my infirmities, protect my good endeuours. Iesu alay my passions and make me able to master thē, that they neuer drawe me beyond the rule of reason and piety. Iesu make me humble to my Superiours, frēdly to my equals, chariable to my infe∣riours, and carefull to yeeld due respect to all sorts. Iesu grant me sorrow for
my sinnes, thankulnes for thy benefits, feare of thy iudgements, loue of thy mercies, and mindfulnes of thy presence. Amen. A praier before we settle our selues to our deuotions. O Moste gratious Iesu, giue mee leaue to pre∣sente my selfe before thy di∣uine maiesty, and to poure out my vnworthy praiers vnto thee in sight of all the glorious court of heauē Be∣hould O Lord, not in my me∣rites, but in the multitude of thy mercies I nowe come to make manifest my neces∣sities, and to vtter my griees vnto thee. I come as a poore and needy wretch, vnto a God of infinite glory. I come as a worme of the earth,
vnto my soueraigne maker, and creator. I come as a guil∣ty and heinous offendour, vnto a most iust and seuere iudg I am not worthy to lift vp mine ees to heauē, much lesse to open my mouth in thy glorious presence, or pre∣sume to take with a Lorde and King of such maiesty, being my selfe but slime and ashes. But O father of mer∣cies, and God of all comfort, thou promisest that who as∣keth shal receiue, who knoc∣keth shalbe let in, who see∣keth shal find. Thou inuitest the greatest sinners, and re∣fusest not to yeeld thy assi∣stance to any that will vse it. Gran me therfor grace now to pray vnto thee, as my duety and thy desert requi∣reth,
Graunt me a pure in∣tention, a feruēt deuotion, an attētiue mind, that I bee not carried away with imperti∣nēt thoughtes, nor any other distraction, but with humble heart, firme hope and perfect charity I may effectually pray vnto thee, and aske of thee that which thou seest most for thy glory & my good to graunt, sweet Iesus, Amen, An other. O Gratious Iesu, helpe mee to pray worthely, that thou maist mercifully graunt my petitions, keepe my thoughtes from wande∣ring, restraine my imagina∣tions, & preserue my ences from being distracted. De∣fend O Lord my weak hart from all ghostlie assaultes,
and so fixe my mind vpon thee, that I be not carried a∣way from consideration of thy presence: graunt me di∣stinctly to pronoūce my wor∣des, attentiuely to apply my thoughtes, and to be wholy rauished and posessed with zeale and true deuotion. O Lord graunt me to aske for∣giuenes with deep cōtrition and full purpose of amede∣ment: graunt me to craue thy benefits with harty thanke∣fulnesse, and gratitude for those which I haue receiued. Grant me to pray for my self, with perfect resignatiō vnto thy will, and for others with true charity  sincere af∣fection. Afford O Lord, such comfort to my soule, as thou seest fitte for me, and by the
assistaūce of thy spirit inspie thy good motions into me, that I may feele them forci∣bly, accept them thankfully, and fulfill them effectually. Finally I hūbly beseech thee of thy mercy and goodnes, that I may deuoutly spend this time of praier, endeuou∣ring with thy Angels and Saints to praise thee; with true repentant sinners to ap∣pease thee, and with all thy creatures dutifully to serue thee, sweet Iesus, Amen. A short meditation of mans miserie. WHat was I O Lord? What am I? What shall I be? I was nothing, I am now nothing worth▪ & am in haz∣zard to be wose than no∣thing I was conceiued in ori∣ginall
sinne, I may hereafter feele the eternall smart of sinne. I was in my mother, a loathsome substance. I am in the world, a sacke of corrup∣tion, I shal bee in my graue, a prey of vermine. When I was nothing, I was without hope to be saued, or feare to be damned: I am now in a doubtfull hope of the one, and in manifest daunger of the other I shal be ether hap∣py by the successe of my ho∣pe, or most miserable by the effect of my daunger. I was so that I coulde not then bee damned; I am now so, that I can scarce be saued. What I haue beene I know, to wit, a wretched sinner: what I am, I cānot say, being vncertaine of Gods grace. What I shall
be I am ignorāt, being dout∣full of my perseuerance O Lorde erect my former weaknesse, correct my pre∣sent sinfulnesse, direct my fu∣ture frailtie: Direct it (O Lorde) from passed euill in present good, to uure re∣ward, sweete Iesus, Amen. AN EPISTLE OF A RELIGIOV PRIEST vnto his Father. Exhorting him to the perfect forsaking of the world. To the worshipfull his verie good father, R. S. his due∣tifulle sonne R. S. wis∣heth all happines. IN children of for∣mer ages, it hath binne
thought so behouefull a point of duety to their pa∣rents, in presence, by serui∣ceable offices; in absence, by other effectual significations, to yeelde proofe of their thankfull mindes, that ney∣ther any child could omit it, without touch of vngrateful∣nes, nor the paent foreare it, without iust displeasure. But nowe we are fallen into such calamitie of times, and the violence of heresie hath so crossed the course, both of vertue and nature, that their engraffd lawes (neuer in∣fringed by the most sauage and bruite creatues) cannot' of Gods people without pe∣rill be oberued. I am not of so vnnaturall a kinde, of so wilde education, or so vn∣christian a spirite, as not to
remember the roote out of which I branched, or to for∣get my secondary maker, and author of my being: It is not the carelesnesse of a cold affection, nor the want of a due and reuerēt respect, that hath made me such a stranger to my natiue home, and so slacke in defraying the debt of a thankefull minde, but onely the iniquity of our dayes, that maketh my pre∣sence perillous, and the dis∣charge of my duety an occa∣sion of daunger. I was loath to enforce an vnwelcome courtesie vppon any, or by seeming officious, to become offensiue, deeming it better, to let time digest the feare, that my returne into the realme had bred in my kind∣red,
than abruptly to intru∣de my selfe, to purchase their anger, whose good will I so highly esteemed. I neuer doubted, but that the be∣leefe, which to all my frien∣des by descent and pedigree, is in maner hereditary, fra∣med in them a right perswa∣sion of my present callinge, not suffering them to mea∣sure their censures of me, by the vgly termes and o∣dious Epithees, where with heresy hath sought to discre∣dite my function, but rather by the reuerence of so wor∣thy a Sacrament, and the sa∣cred doom of al former ages. Yet because I might very ea∣silie perceiue by apparant coniectures, that many were more willinge to heare of me, then from me, and rea∣dier
to praise, than to vse my indeuours, I haue hitherto bridled my desire to see thē, with th care and ialousie of their safetie, and banishing my selfe from the sent of my cradle in my owne coūtrey, I haue liued like a forreiner, finding among strangers, that, which in my neeest bloud I presumed not to seeke. But nowe, conside∣ring that delay may haue qualified feare, and knowing my person onely to import danger to others, and my perswasion to none but to my selfe: I thought it highe time to vtter my sincere and duetifull minde, and to open a vent to my zealous affe∣ction, which I haue so long smothered and suppressed in silence. For not onely the
originall law of nature writ∣ten in all childrens harts, and deriued from the bowelles and breasts of their mothers, is a continual soliciter, vrging me in your behalfe, but the soueraigne decree enacted by the Father of heauen, ratified by his Sonne, and daily re∣peated by instinct of the holy Ghost, bindeth euery childe in the due of Christianity, to tender the estate & welfare of his parents, & is a motiue, that alloweth no excuse, but of necessitie presseth to per∣formance of duety. Nature by grace is not abolished, but perfited, not murdred, but manured neither are her im∣pressions quite rased, or an∣nulled, but suted to the co∣lours of faith & vertue. And her affections be so forci∣ble,
that euen in hell where ancour and dispight chiefly reigneth, and all feeling of goodns is ouerwhelmed in malice, they moud the rich gluon by expeience of his owne misery, to cary the lesse enuy to his kindred: how much more in the church of God, wher grace quickneth, charitie enflameth▪ and ntu∣res good inclinations a ae∣tered by supernaturall gfts, ought the duy of piety to preuaile? And who, but more merciles then damned crea∣tures, could see their dearest friends plunged in the like perill, and not to bee woun∣ded with deepe remorce of ther lamentable and immi∣nent hazardes? If in behol∣ding a mortall ennemy wroung and tortured with
deadly pangs the roughest heart softeneth with some sorow. If the most frozen & fierce mind cannot but thaw & melt with pitty, euē when it seeth the worst miscreant suffer his deserud torments: how much lesse can the heart of a childe, consider those that bred him into this worlde, to be in the fall to far more bitter extremities, and not bleed with griee of their vncomfortable case? Surely for my owne part, al∣though I chalenge not the prerogatiue of the best dis∣position, yet I am not of so harsh & currish an humour, but that it is a continual cor∣siue, and crosse vnto me, that whereas my endeuours haue reclaimed many from the brinke of perdition, I
haue bin least able to employ them, where they were most due, and barred from affor∣ding to my dearest friends, that which hath bin eager∣ly sought, and beneficially obtained of meere strangers. Who hath more interest in the grape, then he that plan∣ted the vine? who more right to the crop, then he that sowed the corne? or how can the childe owe so great ser∣uice to any, as to him whom he is endetted vnto for his very life and being? With yong Tobias I haue rauel∣led farre, and brought home a freight of spirituall sub∣staunce to enrich you, and medicinable receits, against your ghostly maladies. I haue with Esau, after long toile in pursuing a painefull chase,
returned with such prey as you were wont to loue, de∣siing therby to procure your blessing. I haue in this gene∣rall famine of al true & chri∣stian foode, with Ioseph pre∣pared abundāce of the bread of Angells, for the repast of your soule. And now my de∣sire is, that my drugges may cure you, my Prey delight you, and my prouision feed you, by whom I haue beene cured, delighted, and fed my selfe, that your curtesies may in part be couneruailed, and my duety in some sorte per∣formed. Despise not (good sir) the youth of your sonne, nether deeme that God mea∣sureth his indouments by number of yeee. Hoary sē∣ses are ofen cowched vnder greene lockes, and some are
riper in the Spring, then o∣thers in the Autūne of their age. God chose not I say him selfe, nor his eldest sonne, but yong Dauid to conquer Golias, & to rule his people. Not the most aged person, but Daniel the most innocent infant deliuered Suzanna frō the iniquitie of the Iudges: and Christ at twelue yeeres of age, was founde in the temple, questioninge with the gauest Doctours. A true Elias can conceiue, that a lit∣tle cloude may cast a large & abundāt shower▪ & the scrip∣ture teacheth vs, that God re∣uealeth to little ones, that which he conceaeth from the wisest Sages. His trueth is not abased by the minoity of the speaker, who out of the muthes of infants and
sucklings can perfite his prai∣ses. Timothy was young, and yet a principal pastour. S. Iohn not olde, and yet an A∣postle; yea, & the Anges by appearing in youthfull sem∣blaunces giue vs a pregnant proofe, that many glorious giftes may be shrowed vnder tender shapes. Al which I al∣ledge, not to claime any pri∣uiledge surmoūting the rate of vsual abilities, but to auoi∣de al touch of presumptiō in aduising my elders, seeing that it hath the warrant of Scripture, the testimony of exāples, & sufficient grounds both in grace & nature. Ther is diuersity in the degrees of our carnal consanguinitie, & the preeminēce appertaineth to you, as superiour ouer your childes body. Yet if you
consider our alliaunce in the chiefe portion, I meane our soule, which discerneth man from inferiour creatures, we are of equal proximity to our heauēly father, both descen∣ded of the same parent, and no other distance in our de∣grees, but that you are the elder brother. In this sense dooth the Scripture say; Call not any Father vpō earth, for one is your father which is in heauen. Seeing therefore that your superiority is foun∣ded vpon flesh and bloud, which are in a manner but the barke & rhine of a man, and our equality vppon the soule, which is mans maine substaunce, thinke it I pray you, no dishonour to your person, if with all humilitie
I offer my aduise vnto you. One man can not be perfect in all faculties, neither is it a disgrace to the Goldsmith, if hee be ignoraunt of the Mil∣lers trade. Many are deepe Lawyers, and yet shallowe Diuines, many very deliuer in feates of the bodie and cu∣rious in externall comple∣ments, yet little experimen∣ted in matters of their soule, and farre to seek in religious actions. I haue studied and practised these many yeeres spiritual phisick, acquainting my selfe with the beating & temper of euery pulse, and traueling in the scrutiny of the maladies and medicines incident vnto soules. If ther∣fore I profer you the fruits of my long studies, and make you a present of my profes∣sion,
I hope you will constre it rather as a duetifull part, than anie point of presump∣tion. He may be a father to the soule, that is a sonne to the body, and requite the benefit of his temporall life, by reuiuing his parent from a spirituall death. And to this effect said Christ these words: My mother, and brethren are they, that doe the wil of my father which is in heauen: Vpon which place S. Iohn Climacus, shewing to what kindred a Christian ought chiefly to rely▪ draweth this discouse. Let him be thy fa∣ther, that both can, and will, lay his labour to disburden thee of thy packe of sinnes. Let holy compūction be thy mother, to depure thee from
thy ordure and filth. Let him be thy brother, that will be both thy partner and compe∣ditor to passe and perfite thy race towardes heauen. Take the memory of death for thy perpetual phere, and vnse∣parable spouse. Let thy chil∣drē bee bitter sighs of a sor∣rowfull heart, and possesse thy body as thy bondman. Fasten thy friendshippe with the Angelicall powers, with which if thou closest in fa∣miliar affiaunce, they will be patrones vnto thee in thy fi∣nall passage. This (saieth he) is the ge∣neration and kindred of tho∣se that seeke God. Such a fa∣ther as this Saint speaketh of, may you haue of your owne sonn, to enter you far∣ther in the fore recited affi∣nity
Of which happily it was a significāt presage, aboding the future euent, that euen from my infancy you were wont in merriment, to call me father. R. which is the customary stile now allotted to my present estate. Now therfore to ioine issue, and to come to the principal drift of my discourse, most humbly and earnestly I am to beseech you, that both in respect of the honour of God, your duety to his church, the comfort of your children, and the redresse of your owne soule, you would seriously cōsider the tearmes you stand in, and weigh your selfe in a Christian ballance, taking for your counterpose the iudgements of GOD.
Take heede in time, that the woord Thecel, writtē of old against Baltazar, & interpre∣ted by Daniel. (Dan. 5.) be not verified in you, whose expositiō was. You haue been poised in the scale, & found of too light weight. Remember that you are in the waining, and the date of your pilgri∣mage is wel neer expired, & now it behooueth you to look towards your countrey. Your force languisheth, your senses impaire, and your bo∣die droupeth, and on euerie side the ruinous cottage of your faint and feeble flesh, threatneth fal. And hauing so many herbingers of death to premonish your end, how cā you but prepare forso dread∣ful a strāger? The young may die quickely, but the old can
not liue long. The yoūg mās life by casualty may be abri∣ged, but the old mans by no phisicke can be long adiour∣ned: & therfore if geen yea∣res sometimes must think of the graue, the thoughtes of sere age should continually dwel in the same. The prero∣gatiue of infancie, is innocē∣cy▪ of childhood, reuerence, of manhood, maturitie, & of age, wisdom. And seeing that the cheife properties of wis∣dome are, to be mindfull of things passed, careful of thin∣ges present, & prouident of thinges to come, vse now the priuiledg of natures talēt to the benefitte of your sou∣le, and procure hereafter to be wise in well doing, and wachsull in foresight of fu∣ture
harmes. To serue the world you are now vnable, and though you were able, you haue litle cause to be willing, seeing that it neuer gaue you but an vnhappy welcom, a hurtful entertain∣ment, & now doth abandon you with an vnfortunat far∣wel▪ You haue long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring you nothing forth, but a crop of cares, and affliction of spirit: rewarding your la∣bours with remorse, and af∣fording for your gaine, eter∣nall domages. It is now more then a seasonable time, to alter the course of so vnthri∣uing a husbandry, and to en∣ter into the filde of Gods Church, in which, sowing the seeds of repētant sorow, & watering them with the
teares of humble contrition, you may reape a more bene∣ficiall haruest, and gather the fruites of euerlasting com∣forte. Remember I pray you, that your spring is spent, and your summer ouerpast: you are now ariued to the fall of the leafe, yea and win∣ter colours haue alreadie stai∣ned your hoarie head. Be not carelesse (saieth S. Au∣sten) though our louing Lord bear long with offenders, for the longer he staieth, not fin∣ding amendement, the sorer wil he scourge when hee co∣mes to iudgement; and his patiēce in so long expecting, is onely to lend vs respite to repent, not any way to en∣large vs leisure to sinne. He that is tossed with variety of stormes, and cannot come to
his desired port, maketh not much way, but is much tur∣moiled; so hee that hath pas∣sed many yeeres, and purcha∣sed litle profite, hath had a long beeing, but a short life, for life is more to bee mea∣sured by merites, than by nūber of daies, seeing  most men by many daies, doe but procure many deathes, and others in a short space attai∣ne the life of infinit ages. What is the body without the soule but a corupt carca∣se? & what the soule without God, but a sepulchre of sin∣ne? If God bee the way, the life, and the trueth, he that goeth without him, strayeth, hee that liueth without him dieth, and hee that is not taught by him, erreth. Well saieth saint Austen, that God
is our true and chiefest life, from whom the reuolting is falling, to whome the retur∣ning is rising, in whom the staying is sure standing. God is he, from whom to depart, is to die, to whom to repaire is to reuiue, in whom to dwel is to liue. Be not you therefore of those, that be∣ginne not to lue, vntill they bee ready to die, and then af∣ter a oes desert, come to craue of God a frends enter∣tainment. Some thinke to snatch heauen in a moment, which the best scarce attei∣ned in the mountenance of many yeeres, and when they haue glutted thē selues with worldly d lites, they would iumpe from Diues his diet, to Lazarus croune, and from the seruice of Satan, to the
solace of a Saint. But be you well assured that God is not so penuious of rendes, as to hold him selfe & his king∣dome salable, for the refuse and reuersion of their liues, who haue sacrificed the prin∣cipall therof to his enimies, and their owne bruishe ap∣petites, then onely ceasing o offend, when habilitie o of∣fending it taken from them. True it is, that a theefe may be saued vpon the crosse, and mercy found at the laste gas∣pe. But well saieth S. Au∣gustine, that though it be possible, yet is it scarce cre∣dible, that his death should find fauour, whose whole life hath earned wrath: and that his repentance should be accepted, that more for feare of heil, and loue of him
selfe, then for loue of God or lothsomnes of sinn, crieth for mercy. Wherefore good Sir, make no longer delaies, but being so neere the brea∣king vp of your mortal hou∣se, take time before extremi∣tie, to satisfie Gods Iustice. Though you suffered the bud to the blasted, and the flower to fade: though you permitted the fruit to perish, and the leaues to drie vp: yea though you let the boughes wither, and the body of your tree growe to decaie, yet alas keepe life in the roote, for feare least the whole be∣come fuell for hell fire. For surely where soeuer the tree falleth, there shall it be, whe∣ther it be to south or north, heauen or hell: and such sap as it bringeth, such fruite
shal it euer beare. Death hath already filed from you, the better part of your naturall fores, and hath left you now to the lees and remissailes of your wearish & dying daies: the remainder whereof, as it cannot be long, so doth it warne you speedilie to ran∣some your former losses. For what is age but the calendes of death? & what importeth your present weaknes, but an earnest of your aproaching dissolution? You are now im∣pathed in your finall voiage, and not far of from the stint and period of your course: & therfore be not dispurueied of such appartenances as are behoofull in so perplexed & perillous a iorney. Death in it selfe is very fearefull, but much more terrible in regard
of the iudgement that it sō∣moneth vs vnto. If you were laied on your departing bed, burdened with the heauy loade of your former trespas∣ses, & goared with the sting and pricke of a frestred cons∣cience: If you felt the cramp of death wresting your hart stringes, and ready to make the rufull diuorce betwene body & soule: If you lay pan∣ting for breath, and suiming in a colde and fatall sweate, wearied with strugling a∣gainst your deadly panges: O how much would you giue for an hower of repentance? at what rate would you va∣lew a daies, contrition? Then worldes would be worthles in respecte of a litle respitte. A shorte truce would seeme more pretious, then the trea∣sures
of Empires, nothing would be so much esteemed as a trice of time, which now by monthes & yeeres, is la∣uishly mispent. O how deep∣ly would it wound your hart, when lookinge backe into your life, you considered faults committed, and confessed, manie good workes omitted, and not recouered, your seruice to God promised, and not per∣formed? How inconsolable were your case, our frends being fled, your senses frigh∣ted, your thoughts amazed, your memory decaied, your whole minde agast, and no part able to performe that it should, but onely your guilty conscience pestred with sin∣ne, that would continually vpbraid you with most bit∣ter
accusations. What would you thinke when stripped out of you: mortall weede, and turned both out of the seruice and hows roome of this world. you were forced to enter into vncouth and strange pathes, and with vn∣knowen and vgly compan, to be conuented before a most seuere iudge, carying in your owne conscience your inditement written, and a perfit register of all your mis∣deeds? When you should see him prepared  the sē∣tence vpon you, against whō you had transgressed, and the same to be your vmpier, whom by so many offences you had made your enimie? When not onely the diuels, but euen the Angels should
pleade against you, and your selfe, maugre your will, be your sharpest appeacher. What would you do in these dreadful exigents, when you saw that gastly dungeon and huge gulfe of hell, breaking out with most fearfull fla∣mes? When you saw the we∣ping & gnashing ofteeth the rage of those hellish mōsters, the horrour of the place, the rigour of the paine, the ter∣rour of the company, & the eternity of all these punish∣ments? Wuld you thē think them wise, that would delay in so weighty matters, and idly play away the time al∣lotted to preuēt these Intol∣lerable calamities? Would you then account it secure, to nurse in your bosom so many srpēts as sinnes, or to foster
in your soule so manie mali∣cious accuser, as mortall faults? Would you not then thinke one life too litle, to doe penance for so many ini∣quities, euery one wherof were enough to cast you into those euerlasting vnspeakea∣ble torments? Why then do you not at the least deuote that small remnant and sur∣plusage of these your latter daies, procuring to make an attonement with God, and to free your conscience from such corruption, as by your schisme and fall hath crept into it. Those verie eyes that read this discourse, and that vey vnderstanding that con∣ceiueth it, shalbe cited and certaine winesses of the re∣hearsed things In your owne
body shall you experience those deadly agonie, and in your soule shal you feelingly find those terrible feares, yea and your present estate is in danger of the deepest har∣mes, if you doe not the soo∣ner recouer your selfe into the fold and family of Gods Church. What haue you got∣ten by being so lōg customer to the world, but false ware sutable to the shoppe of such a marchant, whose trafick is toile, whose welth trash, and whose gaine miserie? What interest haue you reaped, that may equall your detre∣ments in grace and vertew? or what could you finde in a vale of teares, parageable to the fauour of God, with the losse whereof you were con∣tented to buy it? You cannot
be now inueigled with the passions of youth, which ma∣king a partiall estimate of things, sette no distance be∣tweene counterfeit and cur∣rant. For they ar now worne out of force by tract of time, or fallen in reproofe by triall of their follie. It cannot be feare that leadeth you amis∣se, seeing it were too vnfit∣ting a thing, that the crauant cowardice of fleshe and blood, should daunte the prowesse of an intelligent person, who by his wisdome cannot but discerne, how much more cause there is to feare God, then man, and to stand in more awe of perpetuall, then temporal penalties. If it be an vngoū∣ded presūption of the mercy of God, and the hope of his
assistance at the last plunge, (the ordinary lure of the De∣uell to reclaime sinners from the pursuite of vertue) it is to palpable a collusiō to mis∣leade a sound & sensed man, howsoeuer. it preuaile with sicke & affected iudgements. Who would rely etenal af∣faires vpon the gliding slip∣perines and running streame of our vncertain life? Or who but one of distempered wits, would offer fraud to the dis∣cipherer of al thoughts, with whome dissemble wee may to our cost, but to deceiue him it is impossible? Shal we esteeme it cunning to robbe the time from him, and be∣stow it on his enemies, who keepeth tale of the least mi∣nutes of our life, and wil exa∣mine in the end how each
momēt hath been emploied? It i a preposterous pollicy in any wise conceit, to fight a∣gainst God ill our weapons bee blunted, our forces con∣sumed, our limmes impotēt, and our breath spent, & then when we fall for faintnes, & haue fought our selues al∣most dead, to presume of his mercy: the wounds both of his sacred body, so often rub∣bed renued by our sinnes, and euery parcel of our own so sundry and diuerse waies abused, being so many whet∣stones and inceniues to edg and exasperate his reuenge against vs. It were a strange peece of art, and a very exor∣bitant course, while the ship∣pe is sound, the Pilote well, the Sailers strōg, the gale fa∣uouable,
and the Sea calme to lie idle at rode, burning so seasonable weaher: and when the shippe leaked, the Pilot were sick, the Mainers saint, the stormes boisterous, and the Sea a turmoile of outragious surges, then to lanch foorth, to hoise vp sai∣les, & to set out for a voiage into farr countries. Yet such is the skill of these euening repenters, who though in the soundnesse of health, and in the perfit vse of reason, they can not resolue to cut the gables, and weigh the anc∣kers that withhold thē from God, neuerthelesse they feed them selues with a strong perswasion, that when their senses a astonied, their witts distracted, their vnderstan∣ding dusked, and both the
body and minde racked and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortall sick∣nes▪ then forsooth, will they think of the weightiest mat∣ters, & become sodaine Sain∣tes, when they are scarce able behaue themselues like reso∣nable creatures. If neither the canon ciuil, nor commō law allowth, that a mā perished in iudgement should make any testament or bequeste of his temporall substaunce, being then presumed to be lesse then a man: how can he that is amated with the in∣ward gaboils of an vnsetled consciēce, distrained with the wringing fites of his dying flesh, mained in al his habili∣ties, & circled in wih so strā∣ge encōbrances, bee thought of due discretion to dispose
of his chiefest iewell (which is his soule) to dispatch the whole menage of all eter∣nity, and of the treasures of heauen, in so stormy & short a spurt. No no, they that wil loiter in seed time, & begin only to sowe, when others reap: They that will riot out their health, and cast their ac∣countes when they can scar∣cely speake. They that will slumber out the day, & enter their iorny when the light doth faile them; let them blame their owne folly, if they die in debt, and eternall beggars, and sall headlong into the lapse of endlesse per∣dition. Let such harken to▪ S. Cipriās lesson Let (saieth he) the grieuousnesse of our sore, be the measure of our sor∣rowe. Let a deepe wounde,
haue deep and diligent cue. Let no mans contrition, bee lesse thē his crime. Thinkest thou that our Lord can be so soone appeased, whom with perfidious words thou hast denied, whom lesse then thy patrimony thou hast estee∣med, whose temple with sa∣crilegious corruption thou hast defiled? Thinkest thou easely to recouer his fauour, whome thou hast auouched not to be thy Master? We must rather most instātly in∣treat, we must passe the day in mourning, the night in watching and weeping, our whole time in painfull lamē∣ting. We must fall prostrate vpon the groūd hūbling our selues in sack-cloth & ashes. And hauing lost the garment of Christ, we should be vn∣vnwilling
to be clothed with any other, haung fased our stomackes with the iand of the Deuell, wee should now desire to fast from all earthly food. We should ply good workes, to purge our offen∣ces: wee should be liberall in almes, to auoid the death of our soules, that Christ may receiue, that the persecutour would haue spoiled: neither ought that patrmony to be kept or fansied, with which a man hath bene ensnared and vanquished. Not euery short sigh will bee a suffi∣cient satisfaction, nor euery knocke a warrant to get in. Many cry Lord Lord, and are not accepted. The foolish Virgin knocked, and were not admitted. Iudas had so∣me sorow, and yet died des∣perate.
Forslowe not, saieth the holy Ghost, to be conuer∣ted vnto God. and linger not off from day to day; for so∣dainly will his wrath come, and in the time of reueng he wil destroy thee. Let no man seiourne long in sinfull secu∣ritie, nor post ouer his repen∣tance till feare, enforce him vnto it: Lette vs frame our premises, as wee would find our conclusion, & endeuour to liue, as we are desirous to die. Shall we offer the maine crop to the Diuel, & set God to gleane the reproofe of his haruest? Shall wee gorge the Duil with our fairest fruits, and turne God to feede on the filthy scraps of his lea∣uings? How great a foly were it, when a man pineth away in a perillous lāguor, to pro∣uide
gorgeous apparell, to bespeak sūptuous furniture, & take order for the rearing of stately buildings, & neuer thinking of his owne reco∣uery, to let the discase take roote within him? Were it not the lik vanity, for a Prin∣ce to dote so farre vppon his subiect, as neglecting his own regaltie, to busie him selfe wholy in aduancing his ser∣uant? Thus saith S. Chriso∣stome do they that whē their soule hath surfeited with all kind of sinne, & is drenched in the depth of infinit disea∣ses, without any regard ther∣of, labour their wits in set∣ting forth her garment, and in pampering the body with all possible delights And wheras the soule should ha∣ue the soueraignitie, and the
body follow the sway of her direction, seruile senses, and lawlesse appetites doe rule her as superiours, and she is made a vassall in her owne dominions. What is there, sayth S. Augustine, in thy meanest necessaries, that thou wouldest not haue good? Thou wouldest haue a good house, good furniture. good aparel good fare, good cattell, and not so much but thy hose, and thy shos thou wilt seek to haue good? One∣ly thy life and poore soule, thy principal charge & of all other things the most wor∣thy to be best, thou art con∣tent should be nought, & ly cankering and rusting in all kind of euelles. O vnspeaka∣ble blindnes! Can we prefer our shoes before our soule,
refusing to weare an euell shoe, and not careing to cary an vgly and deformed soule? Alas let vs not set so litle by that, which God prised so much. Let vs not rate our sel∣ues at so base a peniworth, being in truth of so peerles dignity. If the soule be such, that not all the gold & trea∣sure of the world, nor any thing of lesse worth the the blood and life of almighty God, was able to buy it. If not all the deinties that wit can deuise, or heauen and earth afford, but onely Gods owne pretious body, was by hm deemed a repst fitte to feed it: If not all the creatures of this, no nor milliōs of new worldes, if so many more were created▪ but onely the illimitable goodnesse, and
maiestie of God can satisfie the desire, and fill the com∣pass and capacity of it, who but of lame iudgment, or peruerse will, yea who but of an incredulous mind and pittiles spirit, could set more by his soule, or be contented to suffer so noble a paragon, so many monethes and yee∣res, to lie chanlled in or∣dure, and mired in all sinne? Can we not see our sicke, but we allow him a Phisician; our horse diseased, but wee send for a leach; nor our garment torne, but we will haue one to mēd it? And cā wee so much maligne our soule as to let it die for want of cure, & seeing it mangled with so many vices, neuer seeke any to restoe it to the
wonted integrity? Is our ser∣uant neerer, our beast more pretious, and our coate dee∣rer than our owne soule? If any should call vs Epicures, Atheists, rebels vnto God, or murderers of soules, wee would take it for an intolle∣rable reproach, and think it a most disgraceful and oppro∣brious calumniation. But to liue like Epicures, to sinn like Atheists, to struggle against Gods callinges, and like vio∣lent rebels to scorne his com∣mandements: yea, and with daily and damnable woun∣des, barbarously to stab our infortuate soules, this wee account no contumely, wee reckon for no discredite, yea rather wee register it in the aunt of our chiefest praises. O yee sones of men, how
long wil you carrie this hea∣uie hart, aliking vanity, and seeking lies? howe long will children loue the follies of insancie, and sinners unne carelesse and wilfull to their ruine? Will you keepe you chicken from the kite, your lambe from the wolfe, your fawne from the hound. Dare you not suffer a spider in your bosome, or a toade to come neare you, and can you nestle in your soule so many vipers as vices, & permit it to be so long chewed and wea∣ried with the poisoned iaw∣es and tuskes of the Diuel? And is our soule so vaine a substance, as to bee had in so litle esteem? Had Christ made ship wrack of his wisdom, or was he in a rage of passion,
when he became a wande∣ring pilgrime, exiling him selfe from the comfortes of his God-head, and passing three & thirty yeeres in pai∣ne & penuy for the behoof of our soules? Was he surpri∣zed with a rauing fit, when in the tragedy of his passion so bloodily inflicted, and so patiently accepted, hee made his body as a cloud, to resol∣ue into showers of innocent bloud, and suffered the dee∣rest veines of his hart to be launced, to giue full issue to the price of our soules re∣demption? Or if Christ did not erre, nor deeme amisse, when it pleased him to re∣deeme vs with so excessiue a ransome, then what should wee iudge of our monstrous abuse, that sell our soules to
the Diuel for euery vaine de∣light, and rather aduenture the hazard thereof, then of a seelie pittance of worldly pelse? O that a creature of so incomparable a price, should be in the demaine of so vn∣naturall keepers? and that which is in it self so gracious and amiable, that the Angels and Saints delight to behold it (as S. Chrisostom saieth) should by sinne be fashioned into so lothsom & disguised shapes, as to become a hor∣rour to heauen, and a sutely pheere for the fowlest fends? Alas, if the care of our owne harmes moue vs no more, but that we can stil be so bar∣barous to the better portion of our selues, lett vs at the least feare to iniurie an
other party, very careful and ieallous ouer it: who wil ne∣uer endure so deepe an im∣peachment of his interest to passe vnreuenged. We must remember, that our soule is not onely a part of vs, but al∣so the temple, the paradise, & spouse of almightie God, by him in baptisme garnisht, stored & ēdowed with most gratious ornamēts. And how thinke you he can brook, to see his temple prophaned, & turned into a den of Diuels? his paradise displanted, & al∣tered into a wildernesse of serpentes? his spouse deflou∣red, and become an adulte∣resse to his vtter ennemies? Durst we offer such vsage to our Princes, yea or to our Far∣mers daughter? woulde not fere of the lawe, & popular
shame, disturne vs frō it? And shal not the reuerēd▪ Maiestie of almighty God, & the vnt∣bated iustice of his angry sword, terrifie vs frō offering the like to his owne spouse? Doe we think God, either so impotent that he cannot, so base and sottish that hee will not, or so weake witted that he knoweth not howe to wreak himself vppon so con∣tēptuous & daring offenders? Will he so neglect and loose his honor▪ which of al things hee claimeth as his chief pe∣culiar? Will he that for the soules sake keepeth a recko∣ning of our very hairs, which are but the excrementes of her earthly weede, see him∣self so much wronged in the principall, & passe it without
remonstrance of his iust in∣dignation? O deere sir, remē∣ber that the scripture ter∣meth it a thing full of hor∣rour to fal into the hands of God, who is able to crush the prowd spirites of the obsti∣nate, & to make his enemies the footestole of his feet. Wrastle no longer against the cries of your owne cons∣cience, and the forcible ins∣piratiōs that God dooth send you. Embrace his mercy be∣fore the time of rigour, and returne to his Church, iest hee debar you his kingdo∣me. He cā not haue God for his father, that refuseth to professe the catholick church for his mother: neither cā he atchieue to the church triū∣phant in heauen, that is not a member of the church mili∣tant
here in earth. You haue bene alas too lōg an alāt in the tabernacles of sinners, & straied too ar frō the fold of Gods flock. Turn now the biaze of your heart towards the sanctuary of sal∣uation, & the City of refuge, seeking to recompence your wādering steps troddē in er∣rour, with a swift gate, & zea∣lous progresse to christiā per∣fectiō. The ful of your spring tide is now falē, & the strea∣me of your life runneth at a low ebbe. Your tired ship be∣ginneth to leak & grateth of∣ten vpon the grauell of your graue, & therfore it as heigh time for you to strike saile, and to putt into harbour, lest remaining inthe scope of the wicked winde and weather of this time, some
vnexpected gust, and sodaine storme, dash you vpothe roks of eternall ruine. Tēder the pittiful estate of your poore soule, & be hereafter more feareful of hel than of perse∣cution, & more eager of hea∣uen thē of worldly repose. If God the Father had been the inditer, the Sōne the sender, the holy Ghost the scribe, that had written this letter: if hee had dipped his pen in the woūdes of our Sauiour, & vsed his precious bloud in lieu of inke: If one of the hig∣hest Seraphins, formed into a visible personage, had come in most solemne embassy to to deliuer it vnto you, do you not think, that it would haue strained your hart, & wonne your thoughtes to fulfill the contents, & alter your course
according to the tenour the of? Doubtlesse I suppose you will not deny it. Then (good sir) let it now take the same effect, seeing that difference had been in the ceremonies, and not in the substaunce: & that very God, that in those three persons should haue then inuited you to your cō∣uersion, saieth of such as I am (though most vnworthy) Hee that heareth you heareth me, and hee that despiseth you despiseth mee. I exhort you therefore as the vicegerent of God, and I humbly request you as a dutifull childe, that you would surrender your assent, and yeeld your soule a happy captiue to Gods mercifull inspirations, pro∣ceeding from an infinit loue, and tending to your assured
good. I haue expressed not onely mine owne, but the earnest dese of your other children, whose humble wishes are here writtē with my pen: for it is a generall fore, that sitteth at all our heartes, whome it hath plea∣sed God to shrowd vnder his mercifull winge, to see our dearest Father (to whō both nature hath bound, and your merites fastened our affec∣tions) to be dismēbred from the body, to which we are vnited, & to bee in hazard of a farther and more greeous separation. O good Sir, shall so many of your brāches en∣ioy the quickning sap & frie of Gods Church, and daylie shooting vp higher towardes heauē, bring forth the flow∣ers and fruites of saluation,
and you that are the roote of vs al e barren and fruit∣lesse stil couered in earth, and buried in flesh and blood? Shall the birdes of he uen, I meane the Angells, sing and build vpon your boughes, & the stemme be deuoured by the worme of conscience, & pestered with the vermine that Schisime ngendereth? Shal the beames bee bright, and the sunne eclipsed? The brookes cleere, & the head∣spring tobled? Your lot hath no such affinity with the na∣ture of a Phoenix, that you should reape your of-spring of your owne ruines? You are not so tied to the straites of a Pellican, as to reuiue your yssue with murtheing your selfe, neither are we a generation of vipers▪
that cannot come to life, but by our parents destruction. Yea rather it is the thing we haue chiefly in request, that wee may be as neere linked in spirituall, as we are n car∣nal consanguinity, and liuing with you in the compas of one Church, we may to our vnspeakable comfort, enioy in heauen your desired com∣pany. Disblame me good sir, if zeale of your recouery, haue caried me beyond the limits of a letter. So impor∣tant a truth, cannot be too much auerred, not too many hooks baited to draw a soule out of the pudle of Schisme. The misery therof is so great if it fall, the rewarde so ex∣cessiue if it stād, so malicious the ennemies that assault it, and so iust the Iudge that
must proceede vppon it, that to raise it from the lapse, and to fortifie it from recidiua∣tion, no number of helpes can be more than needfull, nor any perswasions more vehement then necessary. Howsoeuer therfore the soft gales of your morning plea∣sures lulled you in slumbing fittes: how souer the vioent heates of noone, might a∣wake your affections: yet nowe in the coole & calme of the euening, retire to a Christian rest, and close vp the day of your life with a clere sun-set, that leauing all darknes behind you, and carying in your conscience te light of grace, you may escape the horrour of an e∣ternall night, and passe from a mortal day, to an cuerla∣sting-morrowe.
Thus et∣soones commending vnto you my bounden duety, and humbly desiring that my sin∣cere affection may finde excuse of my boldnes, I will surcease. This 22. of October 1598. Your most dutifull and louing sonne. R. S. Approbatione Bartholo∣mei Petri Lintrens. S. T. Doctor, & in Vniuersitate Duacena Professor.
