24219 99837823 2167
A godlye and learned trea∣tise, wherin is proued the true iu∣stificacion of a Christian manne to come frely of the mercy of god in Christ, without the deseruyng of man by his merites: and also how good workes oughte to bee done & what be true good works in dede. Wherunto is ioyned a cō¦ference betwene the law and the gospel, very profitable for al men to exercise them∣selues therin. ☞ Esay. xliii. ☞ I, euen I am he only, who for myn owne selfes sake doe awaye thyne offēces and forget thy synnes, so that I wil ne∣uer thynke vpon them.
✚ To the reader. IT was trulye and wiselie saied of the poete, that one witnes, whiche hathe seen the thinge with his eyes, is more to be set bye, then tene of reporte. For in dede in thinges ye be subiect to senses, as euerie sēse hathe certeine of thē peculiar to him, and by some bye meanes cō∣men with other: so eche of them, in things properly apperteyning to them, performe their functions more suerly. As most certeynlye iudgeth the smel of odors, the eye of colors, and the eare of voices, thogh the eare also can iudge of colors by relation of others, and the eye can perceaue the differēce
of voices set out in geometrycall proportions, or of musicians by wryting expressed. For clearer is the water at the springe, then far∣ther of in the ryuer. but wherunto serueth this: Herunto gentle rea∣der. We see in these owre dayes, in which, after longe and horrible darknes of gods true knowledge, which lighteneth euerye mā that commeth in to the worlde, ye lyke to haue chaunced amonge vs be∣twene the worldlyngs and mes∣sengers of god, whiche, because they were not of the world, could not be fauored in the worlde, as dyd happen among ye Israelites, when so euer god of his infinite mercye raised vnto them any pro∣phete, good prince or other pro∣motor of hys glory. For as then ye worlde lacked not that spoured forward on ther syde, bothe emōg the commons thorow simplicitie
and of the learned sorte by malice blinded: so led god in his aray a∣gainst the worlde learned for lear¦ned and simple againste ye simple man. For by Christ they sayed, yt the ruder sorte folowed him and not the princes and learned: and yet we knowe that Nicodeme, a price of ye pharisies, resorted to hī, and Gamaliel doctor of the lawe and Pauls schoole master, drewe some what nye to him, & Ioseph, the Centurion and ye Eunuche of Candia cloue to him, and wer eue∣rye one of them, for their talētes, setters oute of that fayth, yt was preached in his name. But in them we perceaue this difference, as in ye seruaūtes of god at these days, that amonge those, that embrace the trueth, some only knowe that theyr enemyes part is false, some know ye trueth, but not so through¦ly that thei se the foundation and
groūd thereof, which is graūted yet vnto sōe other. Wherfore, me semeth they maye not vnaptly be called, the fyrst two hearing wit∣nesses, thother seinge. For as they are seuerall giftes, to perceaue yt error, to holde the truthe, and to knowe yt: so maie the one be with owte the other, as other distincte gyfts of god be. But to my pur∣pose, where as the indeuors of them all, tending to the instruc∣tion of others, are thankfully to be accepted, and the spirite to be extincted in none: so what ye lat∣ter sort doeth to the same end di∣ligently, me semeth yt is worthye not to cōme owte to the hādes of manie, but with some special note vnto the reader, to make hym for his farther commoditie the more attent in reding it. For though the saylable wyne nede no yue bough, because it wil in tyme gett chey∣men,
and well abyde theyre slowe commynge: so yet, seynge the late knowinge of the spiritual workes hinder most the reader, and not it¦selfe, as abydinge still good in yt¦selfe, where as contrary wyse the seller and not the byer is hurt in euil wine thorow lacke of the yue bough, me thinketh this prouerbe shold nothing feare me frō cōmen¦ding this boke vnto the, except yt, wheras ye only cause why I print it is ye increase of thy godly know∣ledge, I cold in the same mynd be lothe of thy most profyte. Wher∣fore as I hope thou knowest the doctrine, wher of it is intyteled, to be ye chefe pointe and in maner the whole some of oure relygion, vtterly ransacking the kingdōe of ye deuil: So, yf I can iudge any thing therin, yt is handled in such exacte sorte, as to do the lyke fewe men wolde, and fewer colde. So
that me semeth, yt maye worthely be sayed: diuers lerned men haue hetherto, to oure greate comfort, shot at this mark, and some came nye ye wight, but this hath hit the pricke. I meane for clear vtteryng of the matter to our more perfite vnder standing, and to the plaine and brefe dissoluing, which both are geuen but vnto few, of al such scruples, as well that rise to the symple Christian in wayeng this doctrine, as also that are other∣wayes by the malycious sugges∣tion and craft of the truthes subtil enemyes inuented and forged: & to be short he hath done the whol so distinctlie, referringe al things to their peculier places, by theyr difference playnely separated: yt in him, if in any man againe, ap∣peareth that rare vertue, of which the wise man Socrates, as his di∣uyne scholer plato sheweth, set
such store, that when he met with such an one, he wold make of him as of halfe a god. I meane to di∣stinct thinges, which gifte he tru∣ly sayed was the principal waye to come in questyons to the fyn∣ding oute of truth. In which ver∣tu this autor not only passeth the olde wryters, touching this ma∣ter, which wrotte not so clearly, as oure age of certeine articles, be¦cause they were not so sore darke∣ned as a lytle before oure tyme, yt they shold so much nede to la∣boure in them: but also surmoū∣teth the most part, that hath lear∣nedly wrytten at this dayes ther∣of, so that I maye in maner saye of him and them, as a learned man sayed in comparing the two wor∣thy philosophers, Plato and A∣ristotel, together: that is to wit, yt the one set forth of his profoūd knoweledge but lytle in manye
elegant wordes, & the other much in fewe. Wherfore gentyl reader, if thou woldest gladly knowe the booke for the doctrynes sake, dou∣ble thy diligēce in reading yt at∣tentli, playeng as the good iudge wolde in matters criminall: who if he gaue halfe an eare to an eare witnes, would geue the whole to an eye witnes. For as thou coldst not but profyte much thereby, yf yt were but a meane woorke: so must thou much more profit yt beinge as it is: seyng a thing ons well don is twise done. VALE.
The contentes of the boke. ☞ The. 1. Chapter. ☞ The autors intent in iustifica∣cion. ☞ The. 2. Chapter. ☞ The significations & descrip∣tion of the terme, iustifieng. ☞ The. 3. Chapter. ☞ Who is the mediatour & how he delyuereth vs. ☞ The. 4. Chapter. ☞ That Christ taketh away our synnes, and that so we are recōci∣led to god, proued by the scripture ☞ The. 5. Chapter. ☞ Christe beareth our synnes, when his iustice is made oures, which is don by faith on our side. ☞ The. 6. Chapter. ☞ That the maner of iustifica∣cion is on our behalfe by faith.
☞ The. 7. Chapter. ☞ These sayenges: we are iusti∣fyed by the grace of god, or by christes merites, or by faith: be all one. ☞ The. 8. Chapter ☞ By fayth onelye are we iusti∣fied: which terme, onelye, is not of mans braine inuented. ☞ The. 9. Chapter. ☞ Iustification is taken from al maner of works, whether they be of the lawe, or of grace. ☞ The. 10. Chapter. ☞ Faith iustifieth not in yt it is a worke, but in that it trusteth to yt mercye of god through Christ. ☞ The. 11. Chapter. ☞ That no man is iustyfyed by works, whether they go before or after iustificacion, is proued by the nature of works. ☞ The. 12. Chapter. ☞ The nature of iustifycacyon
argueth, that faith and not works iustifie. ☞ The. 13. Chapter. ☞ Faith is not without workes, but what place they haue in the churche, and whence they spryng in vs. ☞ The. 14. Chapter. ☞ That we doe not wel, tyl god dwell in vs to worke good works in vs, and how rightwysenes is a¦scribed to workes. ☞ The. 15. Chapter. ☞ How gods workes in vs are called ours, but so yt we can chal∣lenge naught for them, but for an other cause. ☞ The. 16. Chapter. ☞ The. 2. sortes of men, that the Apostles had to do with, which make them seme to varie in iustifi¦cacyon. ☞ The. 17. Chapter. ☞ The termes, rewardes or me∣rites,
examined by the scripture. ☞ The. 18. Chapter. ☞ The rule to measure good works, that thei may be good in¦dede, and not of our good in∣tent onelye. ☞ The. 19. Chapter. ☞ The exposition of the. 10. com∣maundementes, which are the ly∣mites of our good works. ☞ The. 20. Chapter. ☞ That ye lord requyreth naught els of vs but the workes of the. x. commaundementes. ☞ The. 21. Chapter. ☞ That the foresayd proprietes of good workes are requysite in¦dede to workes, is declared more playnlye by the scripture. ☞ The. 22. Chapter. ☞ The conclusion or peroration, FINIS.
A godlye and learned trea∣tise, wherin is proued ye true iu∣stificacion of a Christian manne to come frely of the mercy of god in Christ, without the deseruyng of man by his merites: and also how good workes oughte to bee done & what be true good works in dede. Wherunto is ioyned a cō¦ference betwene the law and the gospel, very profitable for al men to exercise them∣selues therein. ☞ Esay. xliii. ☞ I, euen I am he only, who for myne owne selfes sake doe awaye thyne offēces and forget thy synnes, so that I wyll ne∣uer thynke vpon them.
The authors intent and pur¦pose in thys matter of iustificacyon. The. 1. Chapter. PUrposing playnly & brefe∣ly to speake of the true iu∣stifying of a Christian mā, and aswell of vpright true good workes, as the maner and fourme therof: I mynde not to tell what disputaciōs mē haue had of the same, but what God (who cannot lye) hath vttered & spoken therof in his worde. This matter of iustificacion I thought to serue my turne: First beecause that Iohn the Apostle and Euā∣gelist, whom I now haue in hād doth in maner treate wholy ther¦of. Upon whom I was perswa∣ded to make the better declaraci∣on,
if I aforehande out of all the scripture set a short Summe of iu¦stificacion and of good workes. Secondly, beecause that in oure fayth and religion there is no∣thyng, wherof we may be igno∣rante with greater hurte, or that with greater profit may be kno∣wen, perceaued and vnderstand, then euen the maner of iustificaci¦on and of good workes. For iusti¦ficacion is the surest ground and establishment of our life & well∣fare. Thirdly, because this matter (beyng els playne and euydent) is now in our dayes, thorow the many folde darke mystes▪ of con∣tencious men, vtterly confused & cleane tossed out of order. For, cō¦cerning iustificacion, diuerse and sondrye men haue straunge and nyce opinions. Some saye styl, that the faythfull are iustifyed
thorowe the onelye belefe in the Lorde Iesus Christ, whiche is a trueth in dede. Other there be, that refuse & condemne thys as an erroneous opynyon, but with great arrogā∣cye ascribe their iustificacyon vn¦to mens works. Some referre iu¦stificacion to faith and workes a lyke. And some there be, that vn∣to fayth ascrybe the begynnynge of iustificacion, and the finishīge or perfourmaunce thereof vnto workes. Yet haue I not recyted the myndes and opinions of all. But forasmuche as there is such contencion among the learned, the peoples consciences are ther∣by vexed, troubled and sore tēp∣ted. Wherefore to establishe the Christian verite, and for an intro¦duction into the holy and godlye gospell of Iohn: I mynde to col∣leete
& gather together a shorte Summe of the iustificacion of a Christyan manne, and concer∣nyng good workes. Nether will I here bring forth eny thinge at all, which I do not declare and proue wyth sensible playne testi∣monies of gods scripture: yea and as touchinge iustificacion and good workes, I wil collecte & conferre together nothing els, but the most euident witnesses of the scripture. So that without the order and homelie vnpainted oracion, ther shalbe nothig mine: nether wil I compte any thinge mine own but trye & proue al∣together by gods word. And doutles in the most waigh¦tie maters of our Reli¦gion, we ought e∣uen so to vse our selfes.
¶ Afore al things it shalbe nedefull, to sette forth a sure description, exposicion and significacion of this terme iustifieng. The. 2. Chapter. TO iustifie, or this terme, Iustifie is in the scriptu∣re taken sondrie waies. For somtyme it signifieth to ascribe honour and right vnto god, to yelde vnto him: stowtlie & boldly to confesse, that he one∣lie is rightuous, but we oure sel∣ues synners and vniust. Thus is it red: And all the people and the Luke. 7. publicanes, that heard him, iusti∣fied god, and were baptised & the baptisine of Ihon.
More ouer, it signifieth asmuch, as to defende and spare himself, and to set forth himselfe for iust and ryghteous. For so the Lorde vseth it whan he rebuketh ye Pha¦risees, Luke. 16. saying vnto thē. Ye are they, that iustifie youre¦selues Luke. 16. beefore men, but god kno∣weth your hartes. Notwithstanding in this our present matter, I vse thys terme (Iustifie) as the custome is in causes iudicial and belonging to the law. And so doeth it betoken asmuche, as to pronounce hym iust and righteous, that is, to dis¦charge from punyshment, and by sentence to cleare and quite him free, whiche is accused and re∣quired to haue execucion. Againe contrary vnto thys doth the scrip¦ture now set that, whyche is cal∣led to pollute or stayne: that is, by sentence to pronounce one de∣filed,
vngodly, vnrighteous and worthye to bee plaged, and so to geue hym ouer to be punished. For it is red thus: If there be Deu. 25. a strife betwene men, they shall come to the law: and let ye iudges geue sentence betwene them, and iustifie the rightuous, and con∣demne the vngodly. What canne thys be els, but euen asmuche as to saye: Let them discharge and quite free the rightuous, & iudge the vnrightuous to be punished. For Esaye in the fift Chapter sai¦eth Esay. 5. yet more playnlye thus: they iustifie the vngodly for rewards sake, but condemne the iust cause of the ryghteous. Which is euen asmuch to say as: the righteous doe not they de clare to be righteous, neyther de∣lyuer they hym from the vilanye and wrong of the vniust: but take rewardes and giftes, and leaue
him to the wilfulnes of violent oppressours. Here vnto serueth it that is writte in the prouerbes of Salomon the 17. chapter: The Pro. 17. lorde hateth aswel him that iusti∣fieth the vngodlie, as him that cōdemneth the innocēt. Item that, out of the. 12. of Matthew: Out of thy wordes thou shalt be iusti¦fied, Math. 12. and out of thy wordes thou shalte be condemned. Of the worde Iustifie, cōmeth the worde iustificacion or iusti∣fieng. Iustifica∣cion. And the same is a iudicial terme in the scripture. For iusti∣ficacion is the declaracion of the iudge, who pronounceth sentence for the accused: that is, dischar∣geth and quyteth him free from ye accusaciō and threatned punish∣ment. Iustificaciō therfore is no∣thing els, but a discharge, dely∣ueraunce and restitucion from death to life.
Herof is rightuousnes called a discharge and pardon frō syn∣ne: And they be the rightuous, whose synnes are forgeuen, and which, beyng a quyted frō death, are become hieres of eternal life. The Apostle Paul therfore, more Iustifica∣cion is re∣mission & redēpcion. then in one place, doth expounde Iustificaciō, by ye name of redēp∣cion & remission of synnes: For ye which cause he setteth them both together, yt one maie be vnderstā∣ded bi āother. For in yt Acts of ye Apostles he saieth: Be it knowē vnto you therfore, ye men & bre∣thren, Actes. 13. yt thorow this mā (namely Christ) is preached vnto you for∣geuenes of synnes, and that by him all, that beleue, are iustified frō al things, frō which you could not be iustified by the lawe of Moses. And to ye Romanes he Roma. 4. saieth: euen as Dauid also descry¦beth the saluacion of that man,
vnto whom god imputeth righte ousnes wythout workes. Blessed Psal. 32. are they (saieth he) whose vnrigh¦teousnesses are forgeuen, and whose synnes are couered. Bles∣sed is that man, vnto whom the Lorde wyll not impute synne. Behold now, how he ioyneth and knytteth iustificacion, bles∣sedfulnes (or saluacion) and re∣myssyon of synnes together. So doeth Esaye also in maner wyth Esay. 53. more playne wordes in the. 53. Chapter, saying: my ryghtuous seruaunte shall with his know∣ledge (or with the knowledge of him) iustifie the multitude: for he shall beare away theyr synnes. For thys last: he shal beare away their sinnes: doeth in maner ex∣pound that, whych goeth before∣wyth hys knowledge, or wyth the knowledge of hym, shal he iu¦stifie and deliuer the multitude.
Thus he declareth, that iustifica¦cyon is nothyng els but remyssi∣on of sinnes. For whan the lorde taketh away our wyckednes, he iu¦stifieth vs. To iustifye therefore and to beare synne away, to delyuer frō synne or to forgeue synne, is all one matter. So that we lack now no more but to say: iustyfycacion is the remission of synnes & the discharge from damnacyon, the deliuerance, I saye, and forgeue∣nes of synne: yea euen the recea∣uing vp of a sinner into the grace of god, and inherytaunce of lyfe. Wherfore whan the questyon is The forme fashiō and maner of ye mediacyon and iustifi¦cacion. asked concernyng the true iustifi¦cacyon of man: vndoubtedly it is demaunded, what that maye be, for whose sake or by whō sinners are discharged frō the threatned and deserued death, or by whose meanes our synnes are forgeuen
vs. Or: Wherein is the worlde reconcyled with god: And so in thes poynts consisteth the whole knowledge of our iustificacion, that whan we haue knowne the mediatour & redemer, the fourm and maner of the redempcion, ye fashion and meane also wherby the delyueraunce cōmeth vnto vs & is geuen vs: the iustificacion of a Christian mā may lykewise be vnderstande. ¶ Uvhat is to be held of ye mediator, as who he is: and the maner of iustifica∣cion, as howe he dely∣uereth vs. The. 3. Chapter. BUt to the intēt y• no darke nor doubtfull thing remayne in
eny mans mynde: I wil first de∣clare, what is to be holden of the Mediator or intercessor, & what the maner of iustificacion is. All this wil I set forth before mens eyes, yt euery one maie vewe & se it: Namelie, y• Christ Iesus is y• same, for whose sake the father is pacified and contented: In such forte, yt he imputeth not sinne vn∣to vs, but cōpteth vs righruous & iust. For Christ hath take our syn¦nes vpon him selfe, satisfied for them with his innocent death, & hath geuen vs his owne rightu∣ousnes. Then wil I shewe, how we becōe partakers of this righ∣tuousnes. For in this mater must speciall respect be had to these two poyntes: Namely, who is ye mediator & redemer of ye damned & how he hath delyuered thē: yt is, after what sorte we become pertakers of the redempcion and
iustificacion, or how the deliue∣rance extendeth to our commodi¦te and welfare. To speake of the fyrst, imagen thou nowe by thy self, that god, the righteous iudge of all, sitteth vpon hys iudycyall Throne, before whō stand al mē and before accused as vngodlye and vnfaythfull, stayned and de¦fyled wyth al vyces, and are con¦uicte of the same, by meāes wher¦of, the sentence of condemnacion is called for and required. The men haue vtterly nothing, wher∣by to excuse themselues, nether is there aught els to loke for, but that they altogether shalbe caried forth and hurled awaye to dam∣nacyon and eternall death. Ne∣uertheles in thys greatest and fi¦nal daunger, there appeareth to the most woofull mankynde, an exceadyng great hope: namelye the eternall sonne of god, who to
be arbiter & mediatoure betwene god and man, and to delyuer thē from destruction, that were con∣demned vnto death: tooke oure fleshe vpon hym, and became ve∣ry man, to the entente that he, be¦ynge tormented and sufferynge death, might also lade our sinnes vpon hym, and wyth hys inno∣cent death to take away our gyl∣tines, purginge our sinnes with his bloud, and making vs heires of eternall lyfe. Wyth thys ensample, I think it euidently inough vttered and declared, what the mediatour is and what is iustificacion. I sup∣pose also, euery man doeth well perceaue and vnderstande, that Chryst the mediatour, and the in carnacyon wyth the crosse of the Lord Iesu, is euē the same right principall poynt and only cause, wherby we are iustified & made
rightuous. But here might an vnreasona∣ble and vnequal hearer or reader crye against me and saie: Thou shuldst byde by thy promes, brin¦ginge forth gods scripture, and not ymagined ensamples. For at the first thou diddest promes a pure and syncere conference of ye scriptures: but now, forgettinge thy selfe, thou holdest the symple vp with bare ensampls. Answer. I am nothing at all ashamed, to speake after the propertie of the eternall maiestie of god. Now doth yt holy scripture yet set forth such sunilitudes and figures vn∣to vs. For it bringeth god in as a iudge, before whose presēce ther goeth forth a consumynge fyre, Before god is no man iusti∣fied. Psal. 5. and in whose sight the giltie is not excused. Here vnto serueth it that Dauid wryteth: For thou art the god, that hath no pleasure
in wickednes, nether shal eny e∣uell dwell with the. Such, as be foolishe, shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hatest al them that worke vanitie. Thou shalt de∣stroie them that speake lesyngs: the lorde will abhorre both the bloude thirstie and disceatfull man. This same Dauid likewise, remembryng the accusacyon and accused, sayeth moreouer: The Psa. 14. 53. lord loked down from heauen v∣pon the children of men, to see if there wer any, that would vnder¦stand, and seke after God. But they wer al gone out of the way, they altogether became abomina¦ble: there was none ye dyd good, no not one. And thys testymony of the Prophet Dauid is rehear∣sed againe of S. Paul in ye third chapter to the Romaynes. Roma. 3. Againe the same royal Prophete himselfe, making menciō of the
iudge, the iudgement and dāna∣cyon, sayeth thus: Entre not into Psal. 143. iudgement wyth thy seruaunt, O lord: for in thy syght shal no mā liuyng be iustified. Itē: if thou, Psal. 130. Lord, wilt be extreme to marke what is done amysse, O Lorde, who maye abyde it? Holy Iob Iob. 9. also sayeth: I knowe and am suer it is true, that a mā, compared vn¦to god, cannot be iustified. If he would argue with him, he might not answere him vnto one amōg a thousande. If I would iustifie my selfe, myne owne mouth shoulde con∣demne me &c. Thus in my forere cited ensample, I haue broughte forth nothyng, that is straunge, or not cōsonaunt to the scripture. As concerning the mediatoure & redemer, our Lord Iesus Christ, the maner also and measure of the Mediacyon and redempcion,
wherof I haue spoken somewhat afore: the scripture expresseth al¦together so playnly and perfect∣ly, yt doubtles whoso euer would denye the same, muste nedes be such an one, as hath neuer red the scripture. But for asmuch as the ryghte sure point of our iustificacyon ly¦eth in this, whiche I haue propo¦ned out of the scripture, that our Lorde Iesus Chryst, beeyng the mediatour, hath layed vpō him¦selfe the giltines of all suche, as were condemned, makyng satys∣factyon for them wyth hys own body vpon the tree of the crosse, and washyng them awaye wyth hys bloude: namelye, in that he hath iustifid, absolued and quite discharged vs, which were dam∣ned vnto death: And in that god, receauynge vs vnto grace, hath iudged and pronounced vs iuste
and rightuous for hys sake. Ther¦fore minde I now to confirme ye same, prouing and declaryng it wyth strong, sure and euydente testimonies of holy scripture. ¶ That Christe / our mediatour, hath taken vpon hym our synnes: and that there∣fore god hath receaued vs into grace, is proued oute of scrypture. The. 4. Chapter. ESay, the chefe among the most holy witnesses, in ye liii. chapter alone geuethe vs eyght testimonyes. The first is this: he onely hath taken Esa. 53. on him oure infirmites, & borne oure paynes.
And immediatly after: whereas he yet was wounded for our of∣fences, and smitten for oure wic¦kednes. This is euen asmuche, as if he said thus: we thorow our synnes deserued stripes and woundes, sicknesses and paynes: But all these hath ye lord laide vpon him, to discharge vs of those griefes. The seconde testimonye: For the punishment of our correction was layed vpon hym, and wyth his strypes are we healed. Lo, y• punishment, that belonged vnto vs, was layed vpon hym, & with his strypes are we made whole. The third: As for vs, we al haue gone astraie like shepe, euery one hath turned his owne waye, but the lorde hath heaped together vpon hym the iniquitie of vs. That is to saye: that Where∣as
no man might be saued by his own vertue, the Lorde, hauynge compassyon vpon the miserye of man, hath, of hys mere goodnes, geuen hys own sonne: that he ta∣kyng vpon hym the synnes of vs all, paying our raunsome and sa¦tisfyeng for vs, myght also make vs partakers of his rightwisnes. The fourth: He was cut of from the grounde of the liuing. Which punyshment did goe vpon hym for the transgression of my peo∣ple. The Lorde was vngilty, and therfore suffred he for our sinnes whyche he toke awaye. The fifte: Yet pleased it the lord thus to bruse hym with plages, and to smite him with infirmite: that whan he had made his soule (or lyfe) an offeryng for synne, he myght see a longe lastyng sede. The offeryng for synne, hath he here taken for the sufficient recō¦ciliacion
and obteyning of grace for all synnes. The sixte: for he shal beare a∣way their synnes. Herof doubt∣les is it thoughte, that Iohn the Baptist toke thys hys excellente sentence: beholde the lambe of Iohn. 1. god, that beareth or taketh away the synne of the world. Assuredli out of this place of the Prophete Esay, dyd holy S. Peter speake in hys Epistle, saying: which his 1. Peter. 2. own selfe bare our synnes in his body on the tree. The seuenth accordeth wyth the Sixte: who yet shall take or beare away the synnes of many: namely, of the whole multitude, doubtles euen of faythfull be∣leuers. The eyght testimonye conclu∣deth thys present matter: and he made ītercessiō for the misdoers. That is, he setteth hymselfe bet∣wene
god and men, in that he, ta∣king vpon him oure synnes, satis∣fied ye ustice of god forthe same, & hath made vs partakers of his owne rightuousnes. The second witnesse, holie S. Paul, ye electe vessel of god, spea∣keth Roma. 8. very playnly: Who shal laye eny thinge to the charge of gods Chosen? It is god that iustifieth: Who is he that can condemne? It is Christ which dyed, yea ra∣ther which is risen agayn: which is also on the right hand of god, and maketh intercession for vs. Here thou hearest, that we are iustified by the intercession and mediacion of our lorde Iesu. S. Paul saieth moreouer: For god was in Christ, and made agremēt 2. Cor. 9. betwene ye worlde & himselfe, & īputed not their synnes vnto thē. And immediatlye after he say∣eth: For he made him to be synne
for vs, which knew no synne: yt we by his meanes shuld be y• righ¦tuousnes, which before god is al∣lowed. Doubtles euen yt we (tho∣row him) hauynge porcion and feloshippe in gods true rightu∣ousnes, might altogether be repu¦ted & compted rightuous before god. Whervnto that also agreeth wherof ye same Paul maketh mē∣cion with these wordes: But are Roma. 3. iustified frelie by his grace, tho∣row ye Redempcion yt is in Christ Iesu, whom god hath set forth to be the obteyner of mercy, thorow faith in his bloud &c. Lykewyse to ye Galathians: Christ hath de∣lyuered vs frō ye curse of the law, Gal. 3. in asmuche as he becāe a curse for vs, that the blessinge of Abrahā might come among the Gentiles in Christ Iesu. Now let the thirde witnesse come forth, euen Ihon, the sonne of thonder, and dearlie beloued
disciple of the Lord, who in hys Epistle sayeth wyth expresse wordes after thys maner: & the bloud of Iesus Christ his sonne Iohn. 1. clenseth vs from all sinne. And af¦terwarde he saieth: and if any mā Iohn. 2, synne, we haue an aduocate with god, euen Iesus Chryst the righ¦teous, and he it is, that obteineth grace for our sines: not for oure onely, but also for the synnes of the whole worlde. If all trueth nowe shal stand in the mouth of two or three, then wil no man (I trust) from hence forth denye, that Iesus Chryste is our righteousnes, that we are iustified by the bloud of Iesus Chryste, that the death of ye lorde Iesus Chryst is it, by meanes whereof synners are delyuered from death, that our synnes are pardoned and forgeuen vs for Chrysts sake, and that in him we
are reconcyled with God the fa∣ther: who for the ryghtuousnesse sake of his anoynted, whyche he hath geuen vs, doeth compte vs ryghtuous, beyng of oure selues voyde of all ryghtuousnes. Vnto these very playne testy∣monyes, commeth thys also, that descended from the excellent glo¦ry out of heauen, euen the sētence of god vpon the Lorde Iesus, whan he went vp from the Bap∣tyme, wyth these wordes: Thys Math. 3. is my deare sonne, in whom I de¦lyte, and in whom I am pacyfy∣ed. And Paule to the Colossyans sayeth: for it pleased the father, yt Colos. 1. in hym shoulde dwell al fulnes, and by hym to reconcyle al thīgs vnto himselfe, and to set at peace by hym, thorow the bloud of his crosse, both thynges in heauen, and thynges in earth &c. To this
agreeth also that, which he saith to the Ephesians with these wor¦des: He (namely the father of oure lorde Iesu Christ) ordeyned Ephe. 1. vs before, thorow Iesus Christ, to be heires vnto himselfe, acor∣dinge to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherwith he hath ma∣de vs accepted thorow the belo∣ued: By whom we haue redemp∣cion thorow his bloud, euen the forgyuenes of synnes, acording to the riches of his grace &c. Out of al this I conclude, that a Christian man is iustified tho∣row Christ, and reconcyled with god the father: euen by him; who with his bloud hath clensed vs from synne, delyuered vs from ye power of the deuel & of darknes, restored vs vnto life with his owne death, and made vs heires with him in eternall life.
And for al this now, yet doth not the scripture speake against itself sayīg: A Christian man is iusti∣fied by ye grace of god: for Christ the anoynted of the lorde is the free gifte of god, and the fulnesse of all grace, for asmuche as Ihon saieth: We al, takynge out of the fulnes of Christ, haue receaued Iohn. 1. grace for grace. For the lawe was geuen by Moses, but grace and trueth commeth by Iesus Christ, who is full of grace and veritie. Christ beareth our synnes, and by his stripes we are healed, when his iustice is made ours: which is done by fayth on our side. The. 5. Chapter.
THis hitherto haue I spo¦ken in generall, concernīg the maner of iustificaciō: that is, howe and after  what sort the sentence of damnacyon, geuen of god vpō al mankynd, is hyndered: how thei, that were condemned, be delyue¦red, Howe we be made partakers of the righ¦tuousnes of Chryst. and reconcyled agayne with god thorowe Chryste. But yet haue I spoken nothīg of the lawe, howe the righteous∣nes of Chryst is become oures, or how we be partakers of this redempcyon. For there be many, whych, vn¦derstanding Chryste to be a me∣dyatour, doe not yet beleue, that he is also their mediatoure with god the father. And so the strēgth and vertue of the Mediacyon doeth not profyte them. Hereby maye we perceaue, that the ma∣ner of iustyficacyon is not fullie
fynished and perfourmed, whā we haue gottē onelie some know∣lege of the mediator and interces∣sor, vnlesse we also knowe, & be suere thorow faith, that Christ is our mediator, yea in euery poynt ours all together, & yt therfore al his giftes & goodes ar our owne. Therfore hereafter haue I no∣ted specially, how the Reconci∣liacion and iustificaciō, wrought by Iesus Christ, is become ours: And what it is, yt maketh vs par∣takers of the redempcion or righ∣tuousnes of Christ: so that now the Lorde Iesus hath not onelie suffred death, but dyed euen for vs, washed awai our sinnes with his bloud, iustified vs and made vs rightuous: Yea so hath he iu∣stified vs, that we now, beyng absolued from our sinnes, and de¦lyuered from damnacion, are as∣suredlie become inheritours of al
the goodes of Christ, namelie of true rightuousnes and eternall life. Her I speake openly, playn∣lie and symplie: We are become partakers of Christ by ōly faith, that is, by trust and belefe on ye By faith are we iu∣stified not by bare knowledge but by sted fast belefe in Christe. lorde Iesus Christ. And euen therfore is it, that the prophetes and Apostles haue sayde so eui∣dently, that men are iustified by faith: Item that Christ iustifieth thorow faith. For such saienges expresse this meanynge and vn∣derstandyng: namely, that Christ geueth vnto vs his owne rightu∣ousnes: that is, he forgeueth vs oure synnes, he delyuereth vs frō damnacion, and maketh vs par∣takers of eternall life: Not for eny worke or deseruyng of vs but of his owne pure grace & merite thorow faith: In whō we holde & beleue vs to be accepted, not for ours;elfes or for our owne works,
but for Christes sake. Whom the father of al grace and mercy hath geuen vs for a pledge and assu∣raūce, yt we shal lyue in his name. That the maner of reconciliacion through christe is on oure syde by faith. The 6. Chapter. IT is not my desyre to be cre∣dited herin, vnlesse I defende with very playne and euident scriptures yt, which I haue ta∣ken in hand. Now haue I say∣ed, that Christ iustifieth vs by faith: that is, thorow stedfast be¦lefe is the rightuousnes of Christ geuen vnto vs. This dyd the pro∣phet Esaye establishe before wt Esa. 53. sensible wordes, sayēge: my righ∣tuous
seruaunt (namely Christ ye lorde) shal with his knowlege, or with the knowlege of him, ius∣tifie the multitude. Beholde how he saieth, my rightuous seruaunt shal iustifie the multitude, church or congregacion, and that thorow ye knowlege of him. Now is it cer¦tayne and sure, that the knowlege of him signifieth the knowlege of Christ: euen ye science, no doubte, wherby true faith knoweth him, cōfesseth him, and poynteth vnto him. This is therfore the prophet Esays doctryne, or rather gods: that Christ thorow faith iusti∣fieth those that bee his. After Esaye doth the prophet Abacuc Abac. 2. speake, sayīge: The iust and righ∣tuous shal lyue in his faith and beleffe. Which sentence holie S. Paul Tim. 1. Gala. 3. Hebr. 10 vsed not onelye one tyme, to proue by this testimonye, as with it which is most euident, ye
all beleuers are iustified & made lyuing by faith. S. Ihon also, speaking of the lord in his gospel, Iohn. 1. sayeth thus: He came among his owne, & his owne receaued him not. But as many as receaued him, to them gaue he power to be the sonnes of god, euen them that beleued on his name. Loe now, what could more sensibly haue bene spoke? As many, as receaue Christ, are gods children: but thei that beleue, receaue Christ: therfore thorow beliefe become we vndoubtedlie the children of god, iust and rightuous, blessed and saued. And in the gospell of Ihō saieth our lord Iesus Christ himselfe: Verely, verelie I saie Iohn. 5. vnto you: He, that heareth my word, and beleueth on him that sent me, hath euerlasting life, and shal not come in to damnaciō, but is escaped from death vnto life.
And agayne: This is the will of him which sent me, that who soe∣uer Iohn. 6. seyth the sonne, and beleueth on him, haue euerlasting life, and I wil raise him vp at the last dai. Herof commeth it also, that this Apostle in his epistle saieth very euidētly: yf we receaue the wit∣nes of men, the witnesse of god 1. Iohn. 5. is greater. For this is ye witnesse of god, whiche he hath testified of his sonne: Who so beleueth on the sonne of god, hath gods witnesse in him. But who so be∣leueth not, hath made him a lyar, because he hath not beleued the witnes, which god hath testified in his sonne. And this is ye testi∣monye, that god hath geuen vs eternal life, and this life is in his sonne. Whoso hath the sonne of god, hath life: He that hath not ye sōne of god, hath not life.
Here we se clearlie, yt the sonne of god is had and possessed tho∣row faith: and in the sonne assu∣redlye rightuousnesse, all good things and eternal life. Therfore must it nedes be true, that we are iustified by faith. Now saieth ye Apostel Paul also very distinct∣lie: The rightuousnes of god is declared without the lawe, for as¦much Roma. 3. as it is allowed by ye testi∣monie of ye lawe & of ye prophets. The rightuousnes of God com∣meth by the faith of Iesus Christ vnto al and vpō al them, yt beleue. And in the tenth chapter: Christe Roma. 10. is ye end, or fulfilling, of ye lawe to iustifie al yt beleue. Finally while Paul & Silas laye at Philippis in prison for Christes name sake, and the keper of the prison as∣ked: Acte. 16. good syrs, what must I do to be saued? Thei answered him: Beleue in the Lord Iesus Christ,
so shalt both yu and thy housholde be saued. By this now I suppose it euidentlie ynough proued, that we be iustified by faith: Namely that vnto vs thorow faith is geuē rightuousnes, with the merites of Christ. Thes sayings: we are iustified by the grace of god, or by Christs merites, or by fayth, varie not. The. 7. Chapter. NEther can I thynke, that eny man, which is but a litle exercised in holie scripture, wil stomble or be offended at such kynd and maner of speche: We are ius∣tified thorow the grace of god, or
horow the merites of Christ, we are iustified by faith on the lorde Iesus: as though thei eny where dyd not agree, or ascrybed Iusti∣ficacion to vnlike thinges. For thei are all one in effecte, ascry∣bing iustificacion to the onelie mercie of god, to whom onelye the prophetes and Apostles di∣rected all their vnderstandinge & meditacion. These, as oft as thei loked behind thē to the fountaine and well spring of iustificacion, saide, that men are iustified tho∣row the grace of god. But whan thei had pondered & considered the mercy pledge, & him, by whō we are iustified, thei sayd: We ar made rightuous by Christ. And whan thei called to remembraūce it, wherby we become partakers of grace and of Christ, thei saide, that we are iustified by faith. Nether were thei for all this
careful, that their sayenges shuld not agree together and serue the mater: As some curious bodies Sharpe disputaci∣ons of this mater. do sharplie dispute: Namelie, whether faith be rightuousnes, or an instrument and meane to becōe partakers of rightuousnes: whether it be an instrument to receaue, or a thing where thorow rightuousnes is poured in as tho¦row a tonnell: Or whether it be the rightuousnes itselfe &c. After this sorte is mans vnderstanding occupied, but what auayleth it vnto true godlines? The holie A∣postles, who alwaie studied sim∣plicitie with playnesse, they di∣stinctly expresse and declare, that god, the grace of god, Christ and faith iustifieth. Itē that by grace, by christ and by faith we ar iusti∣fied. Which symplicitie I, myn∣dinge to folowe, leaue such sub∣tile curiositie vnto others.
By faith onely are we iustified, which terme, onely, is not of mans braine inuented. The 8. Chapter. ANd where as I haue all∣ready added there vnto: We are iustified onelie by faith for Christes sake, & not for our workes: the sāe haue I not lēt of myne own, but taken it out of the holie scrip∣ture. For the sonne of god, Iesus Christ, saieth in the gospell: Ex∣cepte ye eate the flesh of ye sonne Iohn. 6. of man and drinke his bloude, ye haue no life in you. Lo, the ōly eating of the flesh, and drinking of the bloude of Christ, maketh vs lyuinge: nether is there eny
thingels in ye whole world, that geueth life. Now what it is to eate the flesh of Christ, he decla∣reth immediatlie in ye same chap. sayeng: Verelie verely I saie vn∣to you: Who so beleueth on me, hath euerlasting life. Item: He, that cōmeth vnto me, shal not hō∣ger: And he that beleueth on me, shal neuer be a thirst. Here shuld he haue saide: He, that drynketh me, shal neuer thirste: but in the place of this word, drinke, he hath set, beleue. Therfore to eate and drynke here, is nothing els but to beleue. So then yf we beleue not that the sonne of god was gyuen for vs vnto death, we can neuer lyue: Ergo faith it is that maketh lyuinge. With this euangelist a∣greeth Paul also, saiēg: we know Gala. 2. that a man is not iustified by the dedes of the lawe, but by ye faith of Iesus Christ, And we haue
beleued on Iesus Christ, yt we might be iustified by the fayth of Christ, and not by the workes of the lawe. For in that he saieth: A man can not be iustified but by the faith of Christ, what geueth he with this sayenge els to vn∣derstand, but that a man must be iustified by the onelie faith of Christ or in Christ? For in Gene. Gene. 43. Ioseph saide vnto his brethren: loke that ye se not my face, except your yōgest brother be with you. And in the boke of Numerus, the Num. 11. people complayned, whyninge against god, and saienge: Oure eyes se nothing but this Manna. And in the same boke saieth Ba∣laam: Nume. 23. Must not I kepe that and speake it, which the lord hath put in my mouth? In Deuteronomy Deut. 10. saieth Moses also: And now Is∣rael, what doth ye lorde thy god requyre of the, but to feare the
lord thy god, and to walke in all his waies: And Paul himselfe to the Romaynes vseth ye same ma∣ner of speche whan he saieth: ther is no power but of god. Item in Roma. 13. ye first epistle to the Corinthiās: Euen so knoweth no mā what is in god, but the sprite of god. And 1. Cor. 2. againe: I shewed not my selfe forth amonge you, that I knewe eny thing, saue only Iesus christ, that was crucified. These, and such like sentences innumerable in the scripture, sig∣nifie nothing els, then yf thou shuldest saie: This onelie poynte shal open you the entraunce vnto me agayne, yf ye bring your yon∣geste brother with you: Oure eyes see but onlie Manna, and nothing els: Onelie that, which ye lorde committeth vnto me, maie I doe and speake: This onelie re∣quyreth the lorde of the, yt thou
loue him: All power is onely of god: Onelie gods sprite knoweth the thinges that are in god: I haue compted my selfe to knowe onely Christ, that was crucified. Seynge thē it is thus vndoub∣tedlie, and no man can denye it to be most euidently spoken also of Christ and Paul, namely, that no man is made lyuing, iust or righ∣tuous but by faith: It is much to be wōdred, that certayne famous men, which will be reputed to be syngularly lerned, braule & chyde so vehemētlie against vs, for that we saie, we are iustified onelye by faith. For Christ and Paul haue spo∣ken so afore. Why goe thei not to rebuke thē, yf thei thinke them to haue failed therein? We speake but as we haue learned out of thē: the sense & meaning of oure doc∣trine we finde in them.
For very childish is it, yt thei obiecte: Namely, that this word, onelie or alone, is not added of them. For this is euen one thing, as yf a scholar wolde thinke the scholmaster had not geuen him leue to go forth, whan he had as∣ked him: Syr geue ye me leue to go? And he made him answere, I geue: And dyd not expreslie saie after the cōmen maner: Yea. For either of both the saiēges geueth one vnderstāding. Euen so, whā thou saiest: we knowe that no mā is iustified but by faith: Or, we knowe that a mā is iustified one∣lie by faith: The saienges are all one, & meane one thing. And whā it is saied, that a man is iustified by faith not by workes, is it not euen asmuch, as to geue euident testimonye, that a mā is iustified onelie by faith? The Apostle sai¦eth: they are made rightuous Roma. 3.
frelie (or for naught) by his grace But howe can eny thinge be don frelie or for naught, that is done for rewarde or worker Doubtles yf we be iustified frelie thorow the grace of Christ, then is it not done by workes. For in the xi. chapter also saieth this Apostle: Yf it be of grace, thē is it not now of workes: for els grace then is nomore grace. but yf it be of wor∣kes, then is it now no grace: for els were deseruing then nomore deseruyng. Therfore in the most assured trueth we knowledge, & be stedfastly persuaded, that a Christian man is iustified by the helpe and mynistracion of onelie faith. Faith standeth or leaueth vpon the grace of god, and not vpon mans strength. But vnto god it ascribeth altogether, as I wil shortlie declare hereafter at large.
¶ Iustificacion is taken not onelie from workes of the law, but also from all maner of workes, as frō faith in yt it is a work. The. 9. Chapter. IN ye fore recyted cap. cōcludth the holy Apostle the whole ma∣ter of iustificacion, thus: We holde therfore, that a mā is iusti∣fied Roma. 3. by faith without the workes of ye lawe. And in ye fourth chapt. he declareth euidently, that righ∣tuousnes is imputed vnto vs by faith, not by workes (meanynge not onlie the workes of the lawe, but all maner of workes) acor∣dinge as he saieth also to the E∣phesians: By grace are ye saued thorow faith, & that not of youre Ephe. 2.
selues. It is the gift of god, and commeth not of workes, least eny man shulde boast himselfe. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Iesu vnto good works, which god ordeyned, yt we shulde walke in them. By grace (saieth he) are ye preserued or saued (assuredly ius∣tified) thorow faith. For faith apprehendeth & laieth sure holde vpon grace. And to the intēt that no body here shuld ascribe aught to the strength of man, he ad∣deth: And that not of youre sel∣ues. For nether grace nor faith commeth of you. What then? vpō yt he addeth immediatly: It is the gift of god (vndoubtedly that we are iustified, and also that we beleue) Yea he setteth yet one thing to it: Not of works, lest eny man shulde boast himselfe.
For in the prophet Ieremy also the lorde will not, that eny man Iere. 9. Esa. 65. glory or reioyse, saue onelie in his mercy. Yet ther folowth a cause: We ar his woorkemanship &c. Why wold erth & claye then lifte vp it selfe against the potter, of whom he hath, what he is & hath? And so this place doth euidently ascribe iustificacion vnto faith, & taketh it from workes. ¶ Faith iustifieth not in yt it is a worke, but in that it trusteth to the mercie of god thorow Christe. The 10. Chapter ALl this shalbe yet more playn, and more perfectly vnderstand and known, whan I shall shewe, that
this iustifieng faith holdeth and beleueth, yt we are accepted vnto the lord, not for our selues, or for our own works, but for Christes sake: That is, faith trusteth not vnto workes or deseruinges, but to the promes of god, and to the merites of Christ our lord. Ther∣fore whan Paul saieth to the Ro∣maines, Roma. 3. that Christ our lord is of god set forth vnto the world, to be ye mercy seate or reconcyler tho∣row faith in his bloud: he tea∣cheth and declareth euidently, yt faith trusteth vnto ye bloud, that is vnto the death, merites and re∣dempcion of Iesus Christ. And treating largelie and perfectly of this mater in the fourth chapter, he wryteth thus: Neuertheles it is not written onelie for him (na∣melie Abraham) that it was re∣kened vnto him for righteousnes, But also for vs, to whō it shalbe
so cōpted, yf we likewise beleue on him, that raised vp Iesus our lorde from the dead: which was delyuered vp for oure synnes, & raised againe for our iustificaciō. With these wordes he sheweth vs two thinges: The one, that faith is compted vnto vs for righ¦tuousnes: The other, that ye same faith leaneth and trusteth vpon the lorde Iesus Christ, who dyed for vs and was raised vp agayne. That is, faithfull beleuers cōpte themselues rightuous and iusti∣fied, because thei vnderstand by faith, that Christ dyed for them, to take a waie their synnes: And that he was afterward raised vp agayne, to make them lyuinge, for whom he had payed the rawn∣some, and reconcyled them. And in the tenth chapter of Roma. 10. this epistle, whan Paul holdeth and compareth the rightuousnes
of the lawe and the rightuousnes of faith together, the one against the other, he declareth playnlie, that the rightuousnes of the lawe trusteth vnto workes, but ye righ∣tuousnes of faith trusteth vnto Christ. For faith saieth thus: The worde is nere vnto the, euen in thy mouth and in thine hart. Then addeth he therto: This is ye word of faith which we preach, namelye: yf thou confesse Iesus with thy mouth, that he is the lorde, and beleuest in thine hart, that god raised him vp from the deed, thou shalt be saued. For to beleue with the hart, iustifieth: and to cōfesse with the mouth, sa∣ueth. For ye scripture saieth. Who soeuer beleueth on him, shall not Esai. 28. be confunded. Therfore is it no maruaill, that this Apostle, wry∣ting Philip. 3. to ye Philippiās, reputeth al
thinges but losse, for the excellē∣cy of y• knowlege of Iesus Christ, and iudgeth them but vyle: desy∣ringe to wynne Christ, and to be foūd in him, not to haue his owne rightuousnesse of the lawe, but rather that rightuousnes, which commeth by the faith of Iesus Christ. Which thīges afterwarde immediatlye he setteth in ye true knowledge of Christes death and resurrection. Here vnto (I suppose) serueth specially the very playne argu∣mente of this Apostle, whan he saieth: Yf the inheritaunce shuld Gala. 3. come by the lawe, thē were it not geuen by promes: But god gaue it frelie vnto Abrahā by promes. The worde of promes is this: In thy sede &c. For the saluacion set∣teth he vpon one onelie, and not in many. Now yf the inheritaūce and blessinge were set in many,
then shuld it be geuē for ye workes sake: But we all are blessed and saued in one, and by one. For as Roma. 5. the curse, by the synne of one, rea∣ched ouer all men vnto condem∣nacion: Euen so, by the rightu∣ousnes of one, reacheth the gifte or blessing vpon al men to ye iusti∣ficacion of life. For asmuch now as the blessing, rightuousnes and redempcion, is in the worde of trueth ascribed onlie vnto christ, and seeinge our faith is directed straight vpon him: euery faithful beleuer doth well vnderstande, ye he is accepted vnto god thorow Christ, not for his own self or for his workes sake. For god dyd chose and ordeyne vs before, be∣cause he wolde accepte vs for his Ephe. 1. owne children thorow Ihesus Christ in him selfe, acording to ye good pleasure of him selfe, to the praise of the  of his grace:
wherby he hath accepted vs in ye beloued, in whom we haue redēp¦cion thorow his bloud: namely ye forgeuenes of synnes, oute of the riches of his grace, which he hath poured vpon vs. Herevnto also belongeth it, that the Apostle sai¦eth: fayth commeth by hearynge Rom. 10. and hearyng cōmeth by the word of god. For immediatlye therevpon, doth the holy Apostle Paul adde out of the Psalme: Verelye their Psal. 19. sounde went out into all landes, and their wordes vnto the endes of the world. With all these most stronge testimonies of the scryp∣ture, I haue vndoutedly gotten the iustifying faith, confidence & trust: that we are reconciled and accepted vnto god, not by means of our selues or our own workes, either of the law of grace, but for Christ and  merites sake.
For faith standing fast, trusteth and leaneth vpon ye true promes of god, euen vpon the lord christ, and not vpon any of our workes. Therfore is iustificaciō referred vnto faith, because that what so∣euer belongeth to saluacion and rightuousnes, faith ascribeth it al to ye grace of god in Christe. And thus by the nature of iustifyinge faith, I haue shewed, that onely fayth iustifieth: now will I also declare out of the nature or pro∣pertie of mens workes, that they doe not iustifie. That no man is iustified by works, is proued by the nature of works, whether thei bee before or after iustificacion. The. 11. Chapter.
WHat the workes of mans nature be (namelie ye wor∣kes that are done by such, as are not yet regenerate) the lord him selfe in the gospell declareth, & saieth: That, whiche is borne of flesh, is flesh. Paul al∣so, Iohn. 1. speaking of the flesh, saith: To be fleshlie mynded (or the mynde Roma. 8. and wil of the fleshe) is death, & enemitie against god: for it, nāe¦lie the fleshe, and ye inclinacion of the fleshe, is not obedient to ye lawe of god, nether can be. For Ephe. 2. Deu. 27. Gala. 3. we all by nature are children of wrath. Now is euery one cur∣sed, that abydeth not in all thin∣ges, which are writtē in the boke of the lawe. So farre therfore, ar oure owne naturall woorkes frō iustifieng eny man, that they ra∣ther condemne. Moreouer of the workes of the lawe hath Paul the electe vessell
spokē thus: we know that whatso¦euer the law saieth, it saieth it vn∣to Roma. 2. such as are vnder ye lawe: that al mouthes maye be stopte, and that al the wholle world maie be detter vnto god, because that by the dedes of the lawe no fleshe is iustified in his sight. He saieth also els where: I refuse not the grace of god. For yf rightuous∣nes Gala. 2. come by the lawe, then dyed Christ in vayne. And yet more playnlie: Yf there had bene my∣nistred Gala. 3. a law, which coulde haue geuen life, then no doubte righ∣tuousnes shuld come by the lawe. But the scripture hath shut vp all vnder synne, that by faith in Ie∣sus Christ the promes might be geuen to those, that beleue. Now come we to the workes Workes of fayth and grace. of faith or of grace, which be cal∣led good works, & works of righ∣tuousnes. These (saie thei) these
iustifie. Answere. Yf thei be good workes, & workes of righ∣tuousnes, then must thei nedes be wrought by good and rightu∣ous people. Wherout it foloweth that the workes go after rightu∣ousnes, and not before iustifica∣cion: for thei are done by those, that be rightuous or iustified. Whefore yf thei first folowe af∣ter, then make thei no mā rightu∣ous: but faith it is that iustifieth. And such, as be rightuous thēsel∣ues, do worke rightuousnes or yt works of rightuousnes. For it is written: The rightuous shal liue Abac. 2. Rom. 1. Hebr. 10 a. 3. by his faith. And agayne: who so applyeth himselfe vnto rightu¦ousnes, the same is rightuous & iust. Thus is faith the groūd and iust occasiō of vertue, & goeth be∣fore the workes of rightuousnes, of faith and of grace, nether is it first made out of workes.
Yf thou be not satisfied here The vngod¦ly and ipo∣crites. with, thē let vs set this cōsidera∣cion before vs not after ye things, but after the personnes: Thus: Thei, that work or do the dedes, be either vngodly wicked people & ypocrytes, or els thei be godly, rightuous and holie frendes of god. No man (by the grace of god) will ascribe iustificacion to the workes of the vngodly and ypocrites, for asmuch as it is written: The lorde hateth the sa∣crifices Pro. 15. 21, of the vngodly. And a∣gayne: The ypocryts hope shall Iob. 8. come to naught, his confidence shalbe destroyed, & his trust shal be a spyders webbe, he shal leane vpō his house, but it shal not stād & he shall hold him fast by it, but yet shal it not endure. And before him (namelye beefore GOD) maie no ypocryte stand. As for ye
godlie (of whom it is written: Ye are whashē, ye are sanctified, ye 1. Cor. 6. are iustified by the name of the lorde Iesus, and by the sprete of god) thei ascrybe their vertue & rightuousnes vnto god and vnto The holy & regenerate gods sprete, by whom thei knowe thei are sanctified, and that they now maie do and perfourme ho∣lie and good workes. And also thei fele in their sanctified flesh, namelie in themselues, there re∣mayneth & worketh, thorow out their whole life, so greate weak∣nes and feblenes, that thei dare not ascrybe eny iustificacion not vnto the workes, that ar done by faith in holynesse. Herof might I bring forth many recordes. Yet will I alledge onelie two. First thē let Iob, the most faithful ser∣uaunt of god, come forth: For him Iob. 1. hath the godlie sentence cōmen∣ded and praised vnto vs, that he
was a perfecte & iust man, such one as feared god, and eschued euil and that there was none lyke him vpon erth. And yet the same man, being with so excellent a ti∣tell of rightuousnes commended vnto vs, doth saie: If I wil iusti∣fie myselfe, myne owne mouth Iob. 9. shal condemne me. Yf I will put forth myselfe for a perfecte mā, he shal proue me a wicked doer. And agayn: Yf I haue done wic∣kedly, Iob. 10. wo vnto me. And though I haue dōe rightuouslie, yet dare I not lifte vp my head. Therfore is it certayne, that this most holy and iust man dyd ascribe nothing to the frutes of his owne rightu∣ousnes, but trusted onely vpon ye mercy of god. Now let the other witnes come forth, euen Paul ye Apostel, who saieth with sensible wordes: I delyte in the lawe of god after the inwarde man: But Roma. 7.
in my membre I se another law, which rebellein against the law of my mynde and subdueth me to the lawe of synne, which is in my membres. The holie Apostle spea¦king of himselfe, and of all such as be regenerate, testifieth, that in them abyde stil yt remnauntes of the fleshe: by the nature, po∣wer and force wherof, it cōmeth to pas thorow out the wholle life of man, that thei also do the thing which they thēselues wolde not: And therfore are thei neuer able to attayne and come to true per∣fectnes, so long as thei lyue vpon erth and in this flesh. For asmuch then as it is so, e∣uery man seith wel, that iustifi∣cacion is not to be imputed vnto the workes of faith or of such as be regenerate, consydering that it must be athinge most pure and thorowly perfecte, wherby god
is pacified and pleased with vs. Yea the scripture geueth euident witnesse, that euē Abraham, the Abraham. father of all faithfull beleuers, was not iustified by the workes of faith. Herof then maie we be bolde to conclude, that we also by no workes of faith are iustified. For thus Paul argueth: yf Abra∣hā were iustified by workes, thē Roma. 4. hath he wherof to reioyce, but not with god. But what saieth ye scripture: Abraham beleued god, and it was compted vnto him for rightuousnes. To him that goeth aboute with workes, is the re∣warde not rekened of grace, but of duetie. To him that goeth not aboute with workes, but beleueth on him that iustifieth ye vngodly, is his faith cōpted for rightuous∣nes. Where as we now by the en∣sāple of Abrahā do cōclude, yt we must be iustified in such like pure
maner as he was, we speke it not of our owne ymaginaciō, but out of the wordes of S. Paul, that saieth: Neuertheles it is not writ¦ten Roma, 4, onelie for him, that it was re∣kened vnto him for righteousnes, but also for vs: to whom it shalbe so compted, yf we likewise beleue on him, that raised vp Iesus oure lorde from the deed. ¶ The nature of iustification argueth, that faith & not workes iustifie. The. 12. Chapter. NOw like as out of the na¦ture & propertie of faith and workes I haue she∣wed, that faith, and not works, doth iustifie: So
wil I now declare and proue the same by ye nature of iustificacion. The right propertie, natural ver∣tue and power of iustificaciō, is to pacifie, to stil and quiete the cō¦science, which heretofore, by the remembring and considering of synne and damnacion, was vexed and troubled. For Paul saieth: Because therfore that we be iusti¦fied & made rightuous by faith, we haue peace with god thorow Roma. 5. oure lorde Iesus Christ. As for mens workes, thei are neuer able so to comforte and pacifie an vn∣quyete conscience. For who hath at eny tyme persuaded himselfe, yt he with his owne workes hath satisfied the lawe of god, and is therfore absolued, discharged of his synnes, delyuered from dam∣nacion, and become rightuous & vndefyled? Specially seyēg that Salomō, the wisest among al mē, Pro. 20.
hath saide: Who can saie: My herte is cleane, I am innocent frō synne? Wherfore yf oure workes quiete not the conscience, then do not thei in eny wise iustifie a mā. But faith iustifieth and perfectly stilleth the conscience. And ther∣fore it iustifieth. For the lord hath saide in the gospell: Who so euer drynketh of this water (wherby Iohn, 4, vndoubtedly he dyd meane out∣ward thinges, and al mans help) shal thyrst againe: But who soe∣uer drynketh of the water that I geue him, shall neuer be more a thyrst: but the water, that I shal geue him, shalbe in him a well of water springing vp in to euerlas∣ting life. And againe: I am ye bred of life. He that cōmeth to me, shal not honger: And he that beleueth Iohn. 6. on me, shal neuer thyrst. Here thou seist, yt faith, which preasseth on forth directly vpon ye lorde Iesus, doth satisfie vs. For
faith vnderstādeth, yt Christ him selfe is the right fulnes & plen∣tiful sufficiēcie of heauēly goods, and that euen he gaue himselfe whollye for vs, and in all thinges became our owne: so yt now from hence forth an oppressed & afflic∣ted cōscience maie rest vpon him∣for in christ the sonne of god, full of grace & trueth, there is nether blemishe nor weaknesse. But in works, yea of most holie mē, ther is alwaie found feblenes and im∣perfection. And yf we wold now beholde the propertie & nature of him, before whose iudgmēt seate we shal stande, we shulde playnly fynd, yt we are iustified by ye my∣nistraciō & help of faith, & not of Holy men do not glo∣ry in works but in the mercy of ye Lorde. workes. For vndoubtedly ye hig∣hest & most rightuous of al hath respect ōly to such as are hūble of contrite hertes, & those assuredlie he iustifieth. But such as are proud & glorie ī their own merits
those he condemneth, and turneth himself from thē. Here vnto ser∣ueth ye parable or symilitude out of the gospel, concernyng the two that wente vp together in to the Luke. 18. temple to praie: Of whō the one boasted of his good workes, told what thei were, trusted vnto thē & set out himself for a rightuous and good man. As for the other, he trusted in the onelye mercy of god, & nothing at all in his owne merites, but cryed: O god, be mer¦cyfull vnto me synner. This man wente downe, out of the temple, iustified: but yt other, being wrapt and snared in synne, failed of his hope. Therfore in the prophet Ie∣remye hath the lorde geuen vs a right good counsail, & saide: Let Ieremi. 9. not ye wise man reioyce in his wis∣dome, nether the strong man in his strength, nor the riche man in his riches: but who so wilreioice,
let him reioyce in this, that he vn∣derstandeth & knoweth me. For I am the lorde yt do mercy, equi∣tie and rightuousnes vpon earth. This counsaill dyd the godlie A∣postle Paul folowe, saieng: God forbyd that I shulde reioyce, saue Gala. 6. onelye in the crosse of our lorde Iesus Christ, wherby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world: For in the gospell also the lorde said: whan ye haue done Luke. 17. all that is commaunded you, saie: we are vnprofitable seruauntes, we haue not done that we ought to do. Therfore the godlie praise yt grace of god, not bragginge of their owne merites, nether trus∣ting eny thing at all vnto them, The righte ousnes of fayth and workes a∣gree not to gether. but comforte them selues in the mercie of god. Finally, yf we now compare both the rightuousnesse (namelie of faith and of workes) the one
against the other, we maie easely perceaue that these beynge most vnlike maie not stand together. For as concernyng the rightuous∣nes of workes, the holie Apostle Paul hath spoken: Thorow the Roma. 3. Gala. 2. workes of the lawe shall no fleshe be iustified before god. But of ye rightuousnes of faith he saieth thus: Al thei are iustified that be∣leue. And in another place he sai¦eth: The rightuousnes of faith is Roma. 4. imputed of grace or fauour: but ye rightuousnes of works is not im∣puted of grace or fauour, but of dewti. And againe he saieth: Isra¦el, which folowed ye law of righ∣tuousnes, coulde not attayne to ye Rom. 9. law of rightuousnes: But ye Hei∣then which folowed not rightu∣ousnes, haue ouertakē rightuous∣nes, euen the rightuousnes which cōmeth of faith. And immediatly geueth he a reason of the fyrst
pointe, and addeth therto: Where¦fore? Euen because thei sought it not by faith, but as by the workes of the lawe: for thei stombled at the stombling stone. Therfore re∣mayneth it stil true and certayne, that the one rightuousnes ouer∣throweth the other: And therfore we that teach, a manne to be iusti¦fied by faith in the lorde Iesus, & not by workes, do not peruerte ye Christian faith, as our aduersa∣ries shamfully belye vs: But thei rather do ouerthrowe it, that by all meanes and waies mynishe ye honour of ye faith in Christ: main∣teinyng, that the churche or con∣gregacion of the faithfull ar, by the workes & merites of men, ab∣solued from synne, delyuered from damnacion, and ob∣teyne the inheritaūce of eternall life.
Faith is not with∣out works, and what place works haue in the church, and whence they spring in vs The. 13. Chapter WIth this disputation and talke, concernyng Christ, the lorde, who iustifieth vs by faith, not by works: Or concernynge faith, that iusti∣fieth without workes: Many wt∣out all doubte wil be sore offen∣ded, thinking that I set nothing by good workes, and that I leaue them no place of honour in the church. For thei sai: if good works helpe not a man to obtayne righ∣tuousnes, then are thei nothing worth, nether necessary in the church: And therfore is it in vayn
that good workes are so oft and many tymes mencid of in ho∣lie scripture: The stles also of the lorde, & the holy prophetes lose but their labour, in requiring vs to exercise and declare oure faith, praisyng god our father in heauen, with good workes. Why is the holy Apostle Iames so er∣nest Iacob. 2. to teach, that a man is iusti∣fied by workes, and not by faith onely? Yf faith onelye be suffi∣cient to obteyne saluacion, what els remayneth for vs to do, but euen to eat and drynke, and then to saie vnto god the iudge: I haue beleued thy gospel, therfore saue thy seruaunt? Thus is banished all vertue, good lyfe, and God∣lynes, And thus men exercise and applie them selues nomore to in∣nocēcie of life and good maners. Answere Thei that after this sorte take the mater so euell and cōplayne,
vnderstād nether the strength of faith, nor e true order of good workes. A as for vs, we do not hold, that faith is without good workes, whā we saie after the A∣postle: that faith iustifieth with out good workes. But we know∣lege and confesse, that faith iusti∣fieth with his owne strength, not with ye helpe & additiō of works. For Christ is mightie ynough of himselfe and of his owne power to iustifie the faithfull beleuers, nether nedeth he enye supplie or filling vp of our workes. Faith also is not without good workes, nether are Christian mēs works therfore in vaine or vnprofitable, because thei do not iustifie. For thei haue neuertheles a very ho∣nourable place and rowme in the holie church. And whā it is sayde in ye scripture (as it is oft) yt they iustifie, it is so spokē of them for
speciall causes. Which thing to ye intent it maie ye better & more per∣fectly be vnderstād, I will make somwhat deper rehersall of good workes, & bringe thē forth out of their owne fountayne and origi∣nal, declaring their certayne and vndoubted boundes, wherby all their nature & propertie maie per∣fectly be knowne. Vpon ye name or terme, I do not much passe. for (as euery man knoweth) there be euil and vnprofitable workes, workes of iniquitie & wickednes, ye doers wherof are called the workers of wickednes. The same workes also are called the workes of the fleshe and the workes of darknes. Agayne there be good workes, contrarie to the other, which the scripture calleth the works of re∣pētaunce, the frutes of the sprete and of light: such are the offices and dueties of frendship a loue, which wer cōmēded ī Tabitha, of
whom it is said, that she was full of good workes. Now whā we descrybe them, we saie: thei be such as are done by those, that ar borne a new, or re∣generate, Good workes out of the good sprete of god, by faith, & acording to gods word, to the praise and honour of god, to the honest bewtifulnes of life, and finallie to the profite & cōmoditie of ye neighbour. These are shorte wordes, and therefore peraduenture vnto some thei be ye darker and more hard to vnder∣stande: But yf the grace of god shewe vs light, thei shal, by the de¦claracion folowinge, be playnlie and easelie perceaued. No other fountayne of good workes can I shewe, then onelie god himselfe. For the prophet saith: All men are lyars, onelie god is true. And the lorde saieth in ye gospel: There Psal. 116. Math. 19. is no man good, but onelie god.
Therfore is it necessary, yt good workes springe not of man, who is a lyar, wicked and naught, but of god himselfe, of whom procea¦deth all that good is. Neuertheles it behoueth such men, as by the sprete of god and faith in the lorde Iesus are rege∣nerate, that thei hence forth work not their owne, namelie carnall workes, but the workes of god. For the works of those, that be re¦generate, growe and spryng of gods good sprete, dwelling with in them: which sprete, as the sap∣pe of life, geueth strength to the trees, that thei maie bring forth frute: Euē so makth he multituds of sondrie vertues to springe and growe oute of man, As the lorde himselfe testifieth and saieth: I am the vyne, ye are ye braunches. Iohn. 15. Like as ye braunche can not bring forth frute of it selfe, excepte it
abyde in the vyne: Euē so cā not ye also, vnlesse ye abyde in me. Whoso abydeth in me, and I in him, yt same bringeth much frute: for without me cā ye do nothing. And thus (I sai) ye good works, that be done, are done by faith. For faith is a gift of god, wher∣by we receaue Christ, & are iusti∣fied & made lyuynge, for asmuch as the scripture saieth: The iust shal lyue by his faith. And in an∣other hac. 2. place: Christ dwelleth in your hertes thorow faith. And as Ephe. 3. gayne: Now lyue not I (saieth Paul) but Christ lyueth in me, for that I lyue in the flesh, I lyue Gala. 2. in the faith of ye sonne of god, who loued me, & gaue himselfe for me. Lyuinge workes thē doth he, vn∣doubtedly euen thorow him, by whom he himselfe became alyue. And he, that is iustified, doth also works of rightuousnes, assuredly
euen thorow him, by whom he is become righteous. Which is thus much to say: the iust worketh righ¦teousnes thorow Christ, and righ¦tuosnes comprehēdeth the wholle summe of all vertues. And ther¦fore yt onelie god remayneth still the fountayne and originall of all good workes. Hereto serueth it also, that vnto god, who in the re∣generate worketh by his sprete in faith, holie scripture ascribeth ye workes of those yt be regenerate. ¶ That god is the worker of good works in vs, and that we do not wel til he dwell in vs, is shewed out of scrip∣ture, and how rightuous∣nes is ascribed to workes. The. 14. Chapter.
THis wil I now euidently declare with playne testi∣monies, taken out of the lawe of god, out of the ho¦lie prophetes, out of the most holie gospell, and of the e∣lecte Apostles of Ihesus Christ. For thus saieth Moses: The lord shal blesse the. And the lorde thy Deu. 30. god wil circumcise thine hert and the hert of thy sede, that yu maiest loue the lorde thy god with all thine hert and all thy soule, that thou maiest lyue. The prophete Esaie saieth: Lorde vnto vs thou Isa. 26. shalt prouyde peace, for thou also workest al our workes and deuy∣ces. In the gospell of Ihon oure Sauiour saieth thus: Who so Iohn. 3. doth the trueth, commeth to the light, that his workes maie be knowne, because thei are done in or by god. And agayne: Who so abydeth in me, & I in him, ye same Iohn. 15.
bringeth forth muche frute, for without me ye can do nothing. Item the holy Apostle Paul to the Philippians saieth: To you it Phil. 1. is geuen, not onely to beleue in Christ, but also to suffre for his sake. And yet more playnlie: It is Phil. 2. god that worketh in you both the will and the dede, acording to the good purpose of hys mynde, or because he hath delyte vnto you. Thus sayet also S. Iames one of Iacob. 1. the. xii. Apostles: Euery good gift and euery perfecte gift com∣meth downe from aboue, euen frō the father of lightes. Yea all par∣tes of the worke doth the holie A∣postle Peter ascrybe vnto god, saiēg: The god of all grace, which 1. Pet. 5. hath called vs to his eternall glo∣rie by (or in) Christ Iesu, shal his owne selfe (after that ye haue suffred a litle afflictiō) make you perfecte, setle, strength & stablish
you. For (as the Apostle Paul sai∣eth agayne) we are not sufficient 2. Cor. 3. of ourselues to thinke any good thyng, as of our selues: but if we be able vnto any thyng, the same commeth of god. Wherfore god a¦bideth still the onely fountaine of good workes, & euen he it is that worketh al good thynges in vs al. By this then that I haue broghte forth herein out of holy scripture, concerning ye true occasion of good workes, it is farthermore easye to be considered, how the scripture ascribeth righteousnes vnto wor∣kes, seyng that it is rendered vnto the grace of god, whan it is ascri∣bed vnto faith: and beyng ascry∣bed vnto workes, it is ascribed to the same grace of god. For gods grace it is (and therfore god hym¦selfe) yt in vs workth good works: and so is it the more conuenient, yt iustificacion be rather imputed to
the grace of god and vnto Christ, which worketh by vs. Herevnto had holy Augustine respect who in ye boke de gratia et libero arbi∣trio. Augusti∣nus. ca. 8. writeth thus: if eternall lif for recōpēce be geuē vnto good works, as ye scrypture openlie sai¦eth: for god shal geue vnto euery one acordīg to his dedes, how is grace ye eternal life: Yf grace bee not ascribed vnto workes, but ge¦uen frelie, as ye Apostle wryteth: To him yt goeth about wt works, is yt reward geuen not of grace or fauour but of dewtie, & agayne: The rēnaūt (saieth he) are saued Roma. 11. thorow ye electiō of grace. And im¦mediatly he addeth thervnto: if it cōe of grace, thē it is not of works els shold grace be no grace. How thē is grace eternal life beīg takē out of works? Or did not yt holy a¦postle nāe eternal life to be grace? Yea he named it so, which cā in no
wise be denied. Nether requireth it one of a sharpe vnderstanding, but onelie a diligent hearer. For whan he had sayde: the rewarde or stipend of synne is death, he added straight ther vnto: But the grace of god is eternall life in Christ Iesu our lorde. Therfore me thinketh, this question can in no wyse be resolued, vnlesse we vnderstād, that our good works, to the which eternal life is ascry∣bed, belōg also vnto the grace of god, because the lord Iesus saith: wtout me ye can do nothing. And whan the Apostle had saide: By grace are ye saued thorow faith, he addeth therto: And that not of yourselues, it is the gift of god, & commeth not of workes, lest eny man boast himselfe. This wryteth holye Augustine.
How the workes / that god worketh in vs, are cal∣led owres, but so that we can not bragge of thē or chal∣lenge awt for them, but must referre that to another cause. The. 15. Chapter. HEre vnto must adde also, that good works, though in very dede thei be properlie gods and ye frutes of faith and of the sprete, yet are thei called and be oures: that is to saie, workes of faithful beleuers: Partly, because god worketh them by vs, & vseth our mynistracion to fynishe them: Partli, because that thorow faith we be childrē of god, and therfore
ar becōe brethren & heires annex∣ed wt Christ. For by menes of this inheritaunce, al the woorkes and giftes of god begynne to be ours, not as straunge, but as speciallye our own. The scripture also ascri∣beth the same vnto vs, as vnto chil¦dren and to those that bē born free forasmuche as our sauioure in the gospell sayeth: the seruaunte aby∣deth not for euer in the house, but the sonne abideth for euer. Nowe as al wt is in the fathers house, is ye sonnes by titel & right of inheri∣taūce, although he hath not pur∣chaced it by his own trauail & po∣licie, but hath receaued it of the faitl liberalitie of his parētes: Euē  good workes, which ye fa∣ther worketh in & by vs, are also called and be oures, beecause we are ye heires and children of god. Now were it an exceading shame full thing, & a sure declaraciō of a very vnthākful mynde, yf ye sonne
not remēbring ye faithfulnes, & li∣beralitie of yt father, wold boast himselfe, yt he with his diligence, care & watching had gottē al these goods which he hath as heier. Therfore saieth S. Paul very godlie: What hast yu, that yu hast not receaued? Yf thou hast recea¦ued 1. Cor. 4. it, why thē braggest thou, as thogh thou haddest not receaued it? The holie martyr Ciprian had Ciprian. a very Christian an godly opiniō herof, for he was wonte to saie: It is not for vs to boast of eny thing, for asmuch as nothing is oure owne. Here vnto (as I sup∣pose) serueth it yt is red in Esaye∣doth the axe boast it selfe against him yt heweth with it? Or doth the sawe bragg against him that carieth it? Therfore out of the minde of scripture and after god hath Augustin ī his boke degra∣tia et libero arbitrio. ca. 7. shewed
his iudgment, declared and spo∣ken with these woordes: As sone Augusti∣nus. as grace is lent and geuen, oure merites begīne to be good, neuer¦theles thorow grace. For yf the same be with drawne, thē mā fal∣leth, and is not lifte vp, but thro¦wen downe thorow fre wil. Ther¦fore whan a man begynneth to haue good merites, he ought not to ascrybe that vnto himselfe, but vnto god, to whom it is spoken in the psalme: Thou art (or be thou) my help. O forsake me not &c. In that he saieth: forsake me not, he declareth, that yf he be forsaken, he is able of himselfe to no good thing. Hetherto hath Augustine she∣wed euidently ynough, that good workes are oures, and that neuer∣theles all perteyneth vnto grace. By meanes wherof, whan right∣wisnes is ascrybed to our workes,
it is trulye ascrybed vnto grace, out of the whiche good workes proceade. Others there be, that vndoo this knot thus, sayenge: that faithfull beleuers please god thorow Christ, who hath recon∣cyled them againe with god. And seyng thei please god, that do the workes: thē ye works which be dōe of such, as are reconcyled and in ye fauour of god, be also acceptable vnto him: Doubtles not for their own sake, or for yt thei be done by thē, but much rather because thei are wrought by the membres of Christ. Some are of this opiniō: Faith (saie thei) and workes are not seuered: for the rightuous ly∣ueth by faith, and he, that is righ∣tuous, worketh rightuousnesse. Nether is vncircūcisiō eny thing worth, nether auaileth circumci∣sion: but faith, that is strong in o∣peracion and worketh by loue.
Therfore by meanes of this vnses parable cōiunctiō & vnitie, yt is a∣scribed to ye one, which els in ve∣ry dede & properlie is the others. This matter also might be wel ex∣poūded & declared thus: Nameli In faith ther must respect be had to two thīgs: To ye recōciliaciō, & to obedience. To ye recōciliaciō, be¦cause we vnderstād by faith, that god is recōcyled & pacyfied to vs ward for Christs sake, by whō we ar accepted & in fauour wt god. To obediēce, because yt thei, which be reconcyled & receaued vnto grace do wholly geue thēselfes to him, by whō thei be reconcyled, & are desyrous to do his wil. Here ther fore maie it well be said, yt it is a two folde rightuousnes: one iusti¦fiēg & one harknyng or obeing. Of it, ye iustifieth, is Paul myndful, whā he saith: Because therfore yt Roma. 5. we be iustified by faith, we haue
peace wt god thorow our lord Ie∣sus christ, by whom also in faith we haue entran̄ce vnto this grace, wherin we stand. Of it also, that harkeneth, he maketh menciō, say∣ing: knowe ye not, ye vnto whō ye geue ouer yourselues as seruaūts to obey, his seruauntes ye be, to whō ye obey: whether it be synne vnto death, or obediēce vnto righ¦tuousnes? Properly now is iusty¦ficaciō ascribed vnto yt rightuous∣nes which iustifieth, & not vnto it yt is obediēt: for ye same cōmeth of ye other, & wt out ye other mighte not it be called rightuousnes. Moreo¦uer, this knot maye be losed thus. The most naturall work of fayth is purifieng or sanctifieng. For ye holy Apostle Peter saith exprese∣ly, thorow fayth ar ye heartes puri¦fied. Now in ye mater of sāctifiēg doth ye holy scripture declare two thynges: The first, that as manye of vs, as beeleue, are freelye sanc|
tified by the bloude of Ihesus Christ. For S. Peter saieth: we 1, Pet, 1, are electe thorow sanctifieng of the sprete, in the obedience and sprinklinge of the bloud of Iesus Christ. And yet more playnlie: Ye know, that ye are not redemed with trāsitory siluer or golde frō youre vayne conuersacion of the tradicions of the fathers: but wt the precious bloude of christ, as of the innocent vndefyled lambe. Paul also saieth: By the wil of god we are made holie, euē by the Heb, 10, offring of ye body of Iesus christ once for all. For (as it foloweth immediatly after) with one obla∣cion hath he made perfecte fore∣uer them, that are sanctified. The Apostle Ihon likewise testifieth the same, and saieth: The bloude of Iesus Christ, the sonne of god, 1, Iohn, 1, clenseth vs from all synne. And thus faith in the bloude of Iesus
Christ verelye and naturally sane¦tifieth or makth holy, by yt meanes of him that sayde: I sanctifie my self for them, that thei also maie Iohn. 17. be sanctified in the trueth. The second thing, that holye scripture declareth in the mater of sanctifiēg, is this: Namelie, that thei, which thorow faith are sanc∣tified with the bloud of Christ, do daily sanctifie them selues, & applie them vnto holynesse. And to this end, in my iudgment, doth a good parte of the exhortacions of the Apostles serue. Verely S. Peter 1. Pete. 1, saieth: Lyke as he which hath called you is holy, euen so be ye holye also in all your conuersa∣ciō, according as it is writtē: Be ye holy, for I am holye. And the holie Apostel Paul saieth: This is the wil of god, euen your sanc∣tificacion, 1, Thes. 4, that ye refrayne from whordome, & yt euery one knowe,
how to kep his vessel in holynesse and honour, not in fleshlie lust, as do the Heithen which knowe not god. And that no mā oppresse or defraude his brother in bargai¦nyng. Thus dyd Ihon also the A∣postle teach & saie: We are now gods children, and as yet it ap∣peareth not what we shalbe. But we know, yt whā he appeareth, we shalbe lyke him: for we shal se him as he is. And euery one that hath this hope in him, purifieth him∣selfe, like as he also is pure. Ther∣fore euē this our purifiēg, which is done by our care and diligēce, hath also the name of sanctifieng, not because of it selfe, but for the fyrst purifieng sake that goeth be¦fore: which yf it go not before, then is our sanctifienge nothinge worth. Againe, yf the same go be∣fore then must this also folow af∣ter. For right well & trulie saieth
S. Iames the Apostle: Faith, yf it haue no workes, is deed in it selfe. In it selfe, or for it selfe, I saie, that is: It alone, and frute¦ful with no good woorkes. For as the body wtout ye sprite is deed, so faith also wtout works is deed. Doubtles a lyuing body doeth & worketh somewhat, and serueth many: likewise faith, by deutie & offices of loue, must be profitable & cōmodious vnto many. Now yf faith do good to no man with godlie workes, thē is it an emptie ymaginacion & vayne name. As also the sanctifieng of mā, yf it do not breake forth & shew it selfe in holy words and workes, assured∣ly it is to be reputed false, feyned and full of ypocrisie. Besydes this, all that belongeth vnto true holynes in yt our sāctifieng, which appeareth in our workes, must be referred to the sanctifiēg done by
the bloud of christ, to the which most properlye apperteyneth the honour of sāctificaciō. Wherfore whan thou seist in holy scripture, that rightuousnes is ascribed vn∣to our workes, remēbre it is done for such causes as I hitherto haue shewed. For the sprete of the A∣postles cānot be against himself. ¶ The. 2. sorts of mē, that the Apostls had to do wt for iustificacion, which make thē seme to varie in assig∣nyng the cause of iusti∣ficacion, with their reconciliacion. The. 16. Chapter.
AND knowē it is, that the Apostles of the lorde dyd stryue with two sortes of people: the one sorte ascry¦bed rightuousnes and sal∣uacion to their own good works, which were done after the mesure and rule of gods lawe, & therfore they despyced Christ. For while thei wēte about to stablish, main∣teyne and set vp their owne righ∣tuousnes, thei were not obedient to ye rightuousnes of god. Against the vngodlie opyniō of these, dyd the holie Apostles teach (and spe∣cially S. Paul) that rightuous∣nes and life is obteyned by faith in the lorde Iesus, and not by our workes. The same Paul saieth to the Galathians: I refuse not the grace of god. For yf rightuousnes come by the law, then dyed christ in vayne. And agayne: Christ pro¦fiteth you nothing. And: ye are
gone quyte from Christ, and are fallen frō grace, yf ye wil be ius∣tified by the lawe. Against such also was kepte at Hierusalem the Counsail that Luke maketh men∣cion of in the Actes of the Apost∣les. There were agayne certayne other light & euell disposed peo∣ple, that abused suche doctryne of the Apostles to the libertye and sensualitie of the flesh: thinking it sufficient to saluacion, whan they beasted themselues of faith, although there were no good workes found in them. Therfore against those, as against the very pestilence and decaye of true Re∣ligion and gods seruice, dyd the same Apostles also stryue, and taught that the Christian fayth was not a vayne opyniō or frute∣lesse knowledge, but a lyuelie & stronge confidence, most fruteful
in good works. For Paul, writing against these, saieth vnto Titus: Thei saie thei knowe god, but wt Titu. 1. their dedes thei deny him, seinge they are abominable and disobe∣dient, & vnapte vnto euery good worke. And Peter the Apostle re∣buketh such dissemblers, but som what more darkly, whā he saieth: Herevnto geue all diligence, that 2. Pete. 1▪ in your faith ye mynistre vertue, in vertue knowlege, in knowlege tēperaūce in tēperaūce paciēce, in paciēce godlynes, in godlines bro¦therlye kyndnes in brotherly kind¦nes loue. For yf these thinges be amonge you & be plenteous, thei wil make you, yt ye nether shalbe ydle nor vnfrutefull in the know∣ledge of our lord Iesus christ. But he, yt lacketh these thinges, is blind and gropeth for the waie with his hands, and hath forgottē that he was pourged frō his olde synnes.
It is manifest also vnto euery man, that Ihon and Iames, ye ho∣ly Apostles of Christ, wrote her∣of: S. Iames most ernestlye de∣fēding that Abrahā was not ius∣tified by onelie faith (that is, by a vayne opynion) but by workes, vndoubtedlie euen by true faith. And yet with those, and such lyke exhortacions, wold not the faith∣full Apostles of Christ mynishe his grace and merites, & magnifie the merites of man: but rather wt∣stand the filthynes of such as ne∣uer rightly knew nor lerned the faithe of Christ, & made yet their boast ther of to the greate offence and hinderaunce of ye weake. For yf thei trulie had knowne it, they had vndoubtedliled a more sober life. Therfore whan the Apostles are ernesti prouoking vnto good workes, they prouoke vnto ye true faith in Christ, which is mightie
in operacion & worketh by loue: And yet neuertheles thei ascribe al thinges to the grace of God, yea euen the same workes which they requyre of the faithfull. And that I here teach the true vpright doctryne of faithe, all they shall affirme, that haue but a litle sear∣ched, tried and red the scriptures of the Apostles. Augustine also, a Augusti∣nus. true faithfull teacher of the Chri∣stian church, shall testifie, that I haue here inuented no new thing. For in his boke of grace and fre will the seuenth chapter, he wry∣teth thus: Such as haue not vn∣derstand what the Apostle saieth (we holde, that a man is iustified by faith without the workes of ye law) Haue thought him to affirme that faith is sufficiēt to a mā, al∣thoughe he lyue euyll and haue no workes: which thing god for∣byd the electe vessell shulde so
meane, who yet in another place whan he hath saide, in Christ Ie∣su auayleth nether circūcision nor vncircūcision, he addeth immedi∣atlye therto: But faith, whiche worketh by loue. Euen this is the same faith, that separateth gods beleuers from vncleane deuels. For thei also (as the Apostle Ia∣mes saieth) beleue and tremble, but no good thinge do thei. Ther∣fore haue they not that faith, out of the which ye iust lyueth: namely which worketh by loue, that god maye geue him lyfe acordinge to his workes. But for asmuch as good dedes are of god, of whō we haue not onelie faith but also loue: therfore the same teacher of the heithen named eternall lyfe it selfe, grace. This haue I alledged out of Augustine, & hetherto haue I o∣pened & declared, how the scrip∣ture
ascribeth rightuousnes vn∣to good workes, and that ye same doctryne is not against ye Apost∣les teaching and iudgmēt, which ascribeth rightuousnes vnto faith in Christ Iesus. But for asmuch as vpon this mater of ye rightuous¦nes of workes, there hangeth the questiō concernyng ye merites of good workes: I wil adde herevn∣to a lytle, touching the rewarde and merite of good workes: che∣felie to the intēt that no mā rash∣lye and vngodlye iudge of good workes, and so purchace himselfe to haue not good but rather euel merites. These termes / re∣wardes or merites, tryed by the scriptures and expounded how largely thei ar to be extēded. The. 17. Chapter.
MErite or deseruyng, as it is spokē of in ye schools, is no where found in ho¦ly scripture, and yet ther in is oft mencion made of the re¦warde. The scripture in this fo¦loweth oure maner and fashion of speakynge. And for asmuche as vnto such, as be oure freindes or that haue well deserued it at our hands, we geue rewards & giftes, as an hyre or wagies: Therefore after lyke maner of speche is it sayd, that god geueth his frendes eternall life to a reward, for their noble and excellent dedes & me∣rites. For thus we reade in Esaie: O happie are the rightuous, for they maie enioye ye frutes of their deuyces. But wo vnto the vngod¦lye and vniust, for he shalbe recō∣penced acordinge to his dedes. In the gospell the lorde saieth: Blessed are you, whā men reuyle
you, and persecute you, speake all maner of euel against you, & belie you for my sake. Reioyce and be glad, for great is your rewarde in heauen. The Apostle Paul also saith: Euery one shal receaue his rewarde acording to his laboure. But herein must not the worde (Rewarde) be violently forced, as yf ought were oures: for euen our merites themselues are no∣thing els but giftes of god. Ther∣fore like as holye Augustine in o∣ther doctrynes of our faith dyd euery where obserue and teach ye vniuersal mynde and vnderstan∣ding of the right canonical trueth and of the holie churche: Euen so he not onelie sheweth playnly the true meaning and vnderstāding, concernyng the merites of good De gra. et. lib. arbi. cap. 7. workes, but also with very dili∣gent cōference of the scripture he defendeth the same, and saieth
thus: Ihon, the forerunner of our lorde, saieth: A man can receaue nothing, excepte it be geuen him from aboue. Now yf thy good workes be the giftes of god, then doeth god crowne thy merites, not as thy merites, but as his own giftes. Now let vs cōsidere the merites of the Apostle Paul, that is, whether he obteyned thē of himself, or whether thei be the giftes of god. He saieth: I haue foughten a good fight, I haue en∣ded my course, I haue kept faith. Fyrst, yf good thoughts had not gone before these good dedes, thē shulde they be no good dedes. Marke therfore what he sayeth of the same thoughts: Not that we be able of ourselues to thinke eny good thyng, as of our selues, but al our abilitie is of god. Lette vs then beholde euery thing se∣uerall. He saieth: I haue foughtē
a good fight. Here I demaunde: with what strength fought he? with it that he had of himself, or with it that was geuen him from aboue? But god forbyd, that such an excellent teacher of the heithen shulde not haue knowne the lawe of god, whose voyce and worde standeth in Deuteronomie: Thou shalt not saie in thine hert: My strength and the power of my handes was able to bring this to passe: But remembre thou the lorde thy god. For it is he that ge∣ueth the strength and power to do it. And what profiteth a good battail, yf the victory folowe not after? And who geueth the vic∣tory, but euen he of whom he sai¦eth: god be thanked, whiche hath geuen vs the victory thorow our lorde Iesus Christ? And in ano∣ther place, whan he hath recyted the testymony out of the psalme:
for thy sake are we put to death al the daye long, we are compted as shepe apoynted to be slayne) he added therto and saide: But in al this we ouercome for his sake yt loued vs. It is not therfor by our selues that we ouercome, but by him which hath loued vs. And af∣terward he said: I haue ended my course. This spake he, yt sayde in another place: It lieth not in eny mans wil or runnyng, but in ye mercy of god. Which meanyng maie in no wise be peruerted, as to saie, that it lieth not in the mer∣cy of god, but in euery mans will or runnyng. For whosoeuer dare saie so, declareth euidently, that he speaketh against the Apostle. Finally, he saide: I haue kepte ye faith. This spake euen he, which in another place sayed: Mercye haue I obteyned, yt I shoulde be faithful. He said not: I obteyned
mercy because I was faithful, but that I shuld be faithfull: By this thē declareth he, that faith can not be had excepte god be mercyfull, and that faith is the gift of god. Which thing he techeth very eui∣dently and saieth: By grace are ye saued thorow faith, and that not of your selues, but it is ye gift of god. For thei might saie: Ther∣fore haue we receaued grace, be∣cause we beleued, ascrybinge so faith to themselues, and the gra∣ce vnto god. Therfore the Apostle whan he had saide thorow faith, he saieth: And that not of your¦selues, but it is the gift of god. Agayne: to the intent they shuld not saye, that with their workes they had merited suche a gift and rewarde, he added ther vnto im∣mediatly: not of workes, lest eny man shulde boast himselfe. Not that he denieth or minisheth good
workes, for he saieth: god shal re∣warde euery one acordyng to his workes: But because that workes proceade out of faith, & not faith out of workes. And therfore haue we the workes of rightuousnes euen of him, of whom faith itself cōmeth. The iust shall lyue by his faith. Out of S. Austine word bi word haue I alledged all this: which doubtlesse so perfectlye comprehendeth, and so cōstaunt∣ly with scriptures proueth & set∣teth forth, what so euer maye be sayd of ye merites of good works, that I suppose, there can nomore be spoken therto. For what could be more brefelye, more syncerly & more perfectly spoken, then that vnto good workes there is pre∣pared a rewarde, and that the sāe is nothinge els but grace: Yea the merites of sainctes are gods
gifts, which whā god crowneth, he crowneth his owne giftes? In all this therfore standeth sure the perpetual, vnfayling and vni∣uersall doctryne, that thei, which beleue, are iustified and saued by onely faith or grace of god. The rule of good workes to measure them by, that they maye bee good in dede, and not of oure own good intente and brayne onelye. The. 18. Chapter. WHerfore now come we a∣gayne to good workes, which yf they proceade not out of god by faith, they maye not be named good.
But yf they spring out of god thorow faith, then are thei ordred acording to ye rule of gods word. In ye descripcion therfore of good workes, I haue added therto and sayde, that, they are done by such as are regenerate, out of the good sprete of god, and acordinge to gods worde. For the workes that we ymagen of ourselues, they please not god. For he alloweth obedience: As for the good mea∣nyng and intent that groweth in us, he refuseth it. Which thinge I affirme and proute wih these testimonies of scripture: In Deu¦teronomye the lord commaūdeth euidētli with these words: ye shal not do, euery one that which he thinketh good. What so euer I commaunde you, that loke ye ob∣serue, to do therafter: Adde no∣thinge thereto, nether myny she aught there frō. Moreouer in the
storie of Samuel there standeth an ensample herof. For Saul the king of Israel, being cōmaunded to make a slayne offeringe of the Amalechites & al their substaūce, dyd, of a good intent & self chosen gods seruyce, reserue the fatteste oxen for a sacrifice vnto god. But the prophet Samuel saieth vnto him: hath the lord as greate plea∣sure in brent sacryfices and offe∣ringes, as whan the voyce of the 1. Reg. 15. lorde is obeyed? Behold, to obeye is better then sacrifice: & to herkē, is better thē the fatte of rammes. For rebellyon is as the synne of witchcraft, and stubburnes is as the wickednes of ydolatrie. Here in these few wordes thou hast a godly cōmendacion of self chosen relygion or gods seruice, and of workes that spring of our owne good meanynges and good intēntes. They, that despisynge &
refusing the lawe of god folowe their owne good intētes, are of ye trueth called witches, rebelles & ydolatoures. Although thei think them selues to be gods good ser∣uauntes, and feruent folowers of the tradicions of holye fathers, bishoppes, kynges and prynces: yet god, who can be no liar, saieth euidently, that the workes of such folkes doe nothyng dyffer from witchcraft, rebellion and ydola∣trie, which are the most horrible thinges, that cā be thought or de∣uysed. The lorde therfore in the gospel, out of the prophet Esay, condemneth and refuseth all such self chosen works, as proceade out of our owne good meanynges & intentes, whā he saieth: in vayne serue thei me, while thei teach the doctrynes & preceptes of mē. E∣uery plantyng, which my heauēly father hath not planted, shall be
rooted out. Let thē go, blynd thei are, & ye leaders of ye blynd. Here of came it no doubte, ye G. Paule so boldly & stowtly said, ye the cō∣maundmentes & statutes of men are not ōly cōtrarie to the trueth, but also very lyes. In another place he saieth: What so euer is not of faith, is synne. And agayn: Faith cōmeth of hearyng, & hea∣ring cōmeth by the word of god. Wherby it maie wel be gathered, yt the workes, which are not done out ye worde thorow faith, are so very naught, yt thei be also called sinne. To the Colossiās doth Paul most euidentlye reiecte the selfe pleasing gods seruice, ethelothres¦chian, which is expounded a su∣persticiō, & signifieth a self willed & selfchosē religiō & gods seruice. Wherfore out of all this it is playne, that we do not reiecte nor withstand vpright good workes,
whan we refuse the workes of monckes, freres & popish priests, whiche proceade of the election and good intent of man, without gods worde. For now is it more certayne, that they of a trueth are not good workes, which we yma∣gen of our selues, but onelye such as god hath commaunded vs. Which thing is yet more euident out of the wordes of S. Paul: We are created (saieth he) tho∣row Ihesus Christ, vnto good workes, to the which god ordey∣ned Eph. 2. vs before, yt we shulde walke in thē. Here setteth he two marks or euident tokēs of good workes. The first: we are created thorow Christ Iesus vnto good workes. A good worke then must be done by such one, as is created thorow Christ, or graffed in Christ Iesu. For yf the braunche abyd not in the vyne, it can not bring frute.
By faith are we graffed in to christ the vyne. The second: Thei must not be euery nor al maner of workes, but such as god ordeyned of olde, that we shulde walke ther in. What the same be, he hath ex∣pressed in his law, which is the wil of god. Herof is it, that the lorde in the gospel, beyng deman̄∣ded concernyng eternall life and true vertues, poynteth to the law and saieth: What is written in ye law? And, yf thou wilt entre in to life, kepe the commaundmentes. The ten cōmaundmentes then are the most sure and most perfecte fourme of good workes. Which thing, to the intent it maie be perfectly vn∣derstand, I will bre∣fely declare it all, as in a painted table.
The exposition of the. x. commaundmentes, which ar the limites and precinctes of our good workes. The. 19. Chapter. TO the fyrst cōmaundmēt thou must referre the fear of god, faith in god, and fynally most sure hope in trouble & aduersitie. Itē sufferaūce & vnmoueable vnshrin¦king stedfastnes. To the second, belōgeth the true, & to god accep∣table, vndefyled & syncere wor∣shipping: likewise ye refusing, de∣nyal & eschuyng of all supersticiō & peruerted gods seruyce. To the thirde: ye reuerencyng of ye power & maiestie of god, also cōfession, true inuocaciō of ye name of god & sanctifieng of yt same. In ye fourth is cōteyned the cōelie obseruaciō
of the cerimonies and rytes of ye church, ye preachīg of gods word, the commē praier, and al external mynistracions. To the fifth mai¦este thou referre feare and loue towardes father and mother, to∣wardes thy natyue countre and kynsfolkes: Item the right obe∣diēce that we owe to magistrats, and of al duties of a cyuile life & conuersacion. To the sixte thou shalt referre rightuousnes & iudg¦ment, the defence of wedowes & of the oppressed, afflicted, fren∣dles, Fatherles and Motherles children: benefites and innocen∣cye. To the seuenth maye be re∣ferred matrymonyall plight and trothe, the honest and godly brin∣gynge vp of children, diligence and exercise of clennesse, sober∣nes and temperauncie. To the eyght shalt thou referre equitye in bargaynyng, liberalitie, myld∣nesse:
and hospitalitie. To the nyenth: diligēt appliēg of trueth thorow out the whole life, to kepe faithfulnes & fydelitie in wordes and workes, to vse such wordes as are sober, honest and maye e∣difie. To the tenth, referre good and holy desyres, and finally all holye and honest thoughtes. This is now a very short sūme and fourme of good workes. But yf thou desyre yet a shorter, then harken vnto the Lorde himselfe, sayeng in the gospell: Thou shalt loue the lord thy god with all thy hert, with all thy soule, and with all thy mynde. This is the chefe and greatest comman̄dment. The second is lyke vnto it: thou shalt loue thy neghbour as thyselfe. Item what so euer ye wold men shulde do vnto you, do you the lyke vnto them.
That the lord re∣quyreth naught els of vs, but the workes of the. x. commaun∣dements, is proued out of scripture. The. 20. Chapter. AL faithful beleuers, which be desyrous to do good workes, must directe theyr eyes, hertes and myndes vnto these commaundmentes of the lorde: And that with so much the more diligence and sted fast∣nes, as they more euydently se, yt god in the lawe and in the pro∣phetes requireth nothing els, yea none other workes of those that are his. This maie I proue and
maynteyne with most euydent testimonies of the most principal prophetes. Moses in his fifth boke saieth thus: Now Israell, What requyreth the lord thy god of the, but that thou feare ye lorde thy god, and walke in his waies, and loue him, and serue the lorde thy god with al thy hert and with all thy soule. And that thou kepe the cōmaundmētes of the lorde, & his ordinaūces, which I cōmaūd the this daie? Kyng Dauid also asketh: Lorde, who shal dwell in thy tabernacle? And immediatly he answereth: Euen he yt leadeth an vncorrupte life, doing yt which is right, and other thinges cōtey∣ned in ye ten cōmaundmētes. Esay the prophet moueth the same que∣stion also, and saieth. Who is he among us, that is able to abyde the eternall heate? And he answ¦reth: Euē he yt leadeth a verteo
life, speaking that which is right, & doing the other thinges cōtey∣ned in ye x. cōmaundmentes. Iere∣mye in the. 22. chap. bringeth in euen the same thinges, & ernestly requyreth them, saienge: Thus the lord cōmaundeth: Kepe equi∣tie and rightuousnes, delyuer the oppressed from the power of the violent, do not greue nor oppresse the straunger, the fatherles nor the wedow, and shede no innocēt bloud in this place. And no other workes doth Ezechiel recyte tho∣row a long Registre in the eigh∣tenth chapter. In Osea the lorde saieth: I haue pleasure in mercy, and not in sacrifice: And in the knowlege of god, more then in burntoff ringes. Miche as also as∣keth what he shal do, and wt what workes he must recōcyle himselfe vnto god. And by gods reuelaciō he answereth: I will shewe the,
O man, what is good, and what the lord requyreth of the? Name∣ly, to do right, to haue pleasure in louing kyndnes, & to walke lowly before thy god. Lyke answere doth the prophet Zacharie geue Zach. 7. vnto those, that asked hym concer∣ning vertues & acceptable works. Thus saieth the lorde of hoostes: Execute true iudgmente, shewe mercy and louyng kyndnes euery man to his neghbour: do the we∣dowe, the fatherles, the straunger and poore no wrong. And let no man ymagen euel against his bro∣ther in his hert. Loue no false oothes, for these are the thinges Zach. 8. that I hate, saieth the lord. From this doctryne of the prophetes, disagreeth not the doctrine of the Euangelistes & Apostles: which euery where teacheth loue, righ∣teousnes and innocency, doubtles as the effecte & summe of al good
workes. This now so plentifully, and with so many testimonies of the scripture haue I vttered & de¦clared: to ye intent no man hence forth shulde either doubte or be ignoraunte, that those onelie are good workes, which be done our of the good sprete of god thorow faith, and acording to the scrip∣ture or word of god. ¶ That the sayed proprietes of good workes are re∣quisite ī dede to good works, is declared by the conferēs of the scriptures more plainlye. The. 21. Chapter.
YEt ther resteth somwhat which I muste adde vnto the ende of the descrypciō of good workes, namely to confirme and make it more playne wyth the conference and agreement of the scripture. I said that tyght good workes be done by such, as are regenerate, to the glorie of god, to the bewtifienge of life and to the edyfieng of the neyghbour. For vnto our good workes doth the lorde appoynte this end in Mathew, and saieth: So let your light shyne before mē y• thei maye se your good workes, & glorifie your father which is in heauē. Itē the Apostel Paul, ma∣ny tymes exhorting mē vnto good worckes, addeth therto a thyng, which might specially moue eny man, Namelie that wt their godly workes thei shulde do worshippe vnto ye doctryne of our sauiour &
redemer, in al thinges. Now like as a cōely & honourable apparel doth bewtifie the mā, so do right good works set fort, and garnish mās life wt great commendacion. And this is ye cause yt ye Apostles of Christ gaue so oft counsaill, to laye asyde ye olde man, & to put on the new, which is shapē & fashio∣ned after god: for therof cōmeth praise and honour vnto vs. We are called, & be in dede, ye seruaū∣tes and children of god, whose propertie and vertue appeareth in vs, to the praise and magnifiēg of his name. Moreouer, yf we do good, he increaceth his giftes in vs continually the longer ye more, considering he hath spoken: Vnto euery one, that hath, shallbe ge∣uen, Mat, 13, that he maye haue aboun∣daunce: But who so hath not, from him shalbe taken also euen that he hath. And herof it com∣meth,
that vnto such, as do well, god is gracious and mercyfull, replenishing thē with many (yea and with temporall) giftes, and finally endeweth them with eter∣nal life. For ye Apostle Paul spea¦keth euidently and plainlie: god shal geue vnto euery on acording to his dedes: Namelie praise & honour & immortalitie vnto those y• with pacience in good woorkes seke eternall life. And againe: Praise, honour and peace vnto all such as do good. Howbeit in all good workes the iust and godlye ar appoīted to kepe these boūds and lymites, that they will not seke their owne welth, but the glo¦rie and wil of god, and finally the commoditie and profite of their neghbour. For the Apostle Paul saieth: Lette no manne seke that which is his own, but let eueri mā . Cor. 10. seke yt which belōgeth to another:
Euen as I please all men in all thinges, not sekyng myne owne profit, but the prophet of many, that they myght be saued. Al god∣lie personnes therfore directe all their diligence, exercise & works to this end, that they maye edifie many: wherin they expresse and declare the nature of god, whose children they be. For he is encly∣ned and desyrous to shewe good∣vnto all creatures. And herof it commeth, that his children also are well doers. And in al thinges whatsoeuer thei take in hād, thei haue stil before their eyes (as the onelie marck of their life) a delyte and desyre to do good. The Conclusyon or peroration.
The. 22. Chapter. THus much at this tyme haue I done concernyng the propertie, nature, di∣sposicion, cause, end and operacion: that is, ye true & right fashion & measure of good works Out of ye which, I trust, this may chefelie be vnderstand, how the lorde ascribeth the name of righ∣tuousnes and Iustificacion to the good works of holy mē: And how god in scripture is sayde to geue rewarde: And that neuerthe¦les the right and principall doc∣tryne of our religion stādeth sure and vnmoued: Namelie, that we are iustified out of the grace of god for Christes sake by faith, & not by workes. Wherfore there remaineth now
nothing els, but that for the true faith in the lord Iesu, by ye which we are iustified, we fal downe at the lords fete with ernest praier, with feruent and deuoute cryeng & callyng vpon his name: in such forte that we put in practise thys talke and disputaciō had of good works: Namely, that as touching the faith, which we professe in the lorde Iesus Christe, we expresse, shewe forth and garnishe the same with right good workes: Remem∣bring the wordes of the lord Ihe∣sus Christ, who in his gospell sai¦eth: Not euerye one that saieth vnto me, Lorde, lorde, shall entre in to the kyngdome of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father, which is in heauen. Many shall saye to me in that daye: Lorde, lorde, haue not we
prophecied in thi name? haue not we cast out deuels in thy name? haue not we done manye mightye dedes in thy name? And then wil I knowlege vnto them: I neuer knew you, departe frō me ye wor∣kers of iniquitie. Therfore who so euer heareth of me these wor∣des, and doth the same, I wil lickē him vnto a wise mā, which buylte his house vpō a rocke. And a sho∣wer of rayne descended, and the floudes came, and the wyndes blew, and beat vpon that house, & it fel not, because it was groun∣ded on the rock. And euery one yt heareth of me these words, and doth them not, shalbe likened vn∣to a foolishe man, which buylte his house vpon sand. And a sho∣wer of rayne descended, and the floudes cāe, & the wyndes blew, and beat vpon that house, and it fell, and greate was the fall of it.
Wherfore let vs applie all oure diligence with holie feruent prai¦e, with true zeale and godlynes of oure mynde, that we also as ly∣uinge stones, beyng buylded vpō Christ the sure rock of lyfe, maye become a lyuinge house, which maie endure fast in al assaultes of manifolde tentacions: That we (I saie) beinge a spirituall habi∣tacion, and an holy priesthode, maie bring and offre vp to our Redemer & iustifier, Iesu Christ, spiritual & acceptable sacrifices: praise and thankes geuyng, al∣mes and oure own bodies, yea oure selues, fully, wholly, and all to∣gether. Amen.
Amirrour or glasse / wheryn al men may behold their own con∣demnacyon by the lawe of god: With a remedy for the same. The office of loue THe law is a doctrine that beddeth good and forbid deth euel as the commaū∣demētes specifie sayinge. Loue thy Lorde god with all thyne hart, with all thy soule, and Deut. 6. Mat. 22. with all thy mynde. This is the fyrst and great com¦maundment. The second is lyke vnto that: loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe. In these two com∣maundementes hange al the lawe and the prophetes.
¶ He, that loueth god, loueth his neyghbour. If a man say, I loue God, and yet hateth his brother, he is a liar. 1, Iohn. 4. He yt loueth not his brother whō he hath sene, how can he loue god Let euery man exa∣myne hys conscience by this rule whom he hath not sene. He yt loueth his neighbour as him selfe kepeth al ye cōmaundementes of god, what so euer ye wold that men should do to you, euen so do you to thē. For this is the lawe Math. 7. Rom. 13. and ye Prophets. He that loueth his neyghbour, fulfylleth yt lawe. All the lawe is fullfylled in Gala. 5. one worde, that is, loue thy neygh¦boure as thy selfe. ¶ He, that loueth god, kepeth all the commaūdmentes. He that loueth his neyghboure, kepeth all the commaundmentes Ro. 13. Gal, 5. 1. Ioh. 4. of god, and he that loueth God, loueth his neyghbour: ergo he, yt loueth God, kepeth all his com∣maundmentes.
¶ He that hath faith, loueth god and kepeth the cōmaund∣mentes. My father loueth you, because ye Iohn. 16. loue me and beleue that I came from God. He, that hath the faith, loueth god, and he that loueth God ke∣peth all hys cōmaūdemēts: ergo he that hathe the fayth kepeth all the commaundementes of God. He that kepeth one commaū∣dement of god kepeth all. For without faith it is impossible Heb. 11. to kepe any of the cōmaūdemētes of GOD, and he that hath the fayth kepeth all the commaunde∣mētes of god: ergo he that kepeth one cōmaundement of god kepeth them all. He that kepeth one comman∣demente of God, he kepeth all: ergo he that kepeth not al the cō∣maundmentes
of god, kepeth not one of them. The office of the lawe ¶ It is not in our power to kepe any of the commaundemen¦tes of god which wer geuen to shewe vs our synnes, and byd thinges im¦possible for vs. Without grace it is impossible to kepe any of the commaunde∣mentes of god, and grace is not in our power: ergo it is not in our power to kepe any of ye commaū∣dementes of god. By the law commeth the know¦ledge of synne. I knew not what synne ment, Rom. 3. Rom. 7. but thorow the lawe.
I had not knowen what lust d ment, excepte the lawe had sayde, thou shalt not lust: without the lawe synne was deed, that is, it moued me not, neyther wyst I that it was synne, which not with standinge was synne and forbyd¦den by the lawe. ¶ The lawe byddeth vs do that thinge, which is impossible for vs. It biddeth vs kepe the com∣maundementes The law is a scholema¦ster to brig vs to christ of god, & yet is it not in our power to kepe any of thē: ergo it biddeth vs do yt is im∣possible for vs. Thou wylt say, where to doeth God byd vs do yt is impossible for as? I answere, to make the knowe that thou arte but euel, & that there is no remedi to saue ye in thyne own hād, & that
thou mayst seke remedy at some other, for the lawe doth naught but condemne the. ¶ Of the Gospell. Like as the condemned man is ioyful to heare of pardon for hys fault: Euē so shalt thou heare for thye delyuerans the ioyfull nues of the gospell. THe gospell is as moch to say in our tonge, as good Iohn. 4. Luke, 2. Rom. 5. Rom. 4. 1. Pet. 1. Apoca. 1. He. 7. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 1. Gala. 5, 1. Ioh. 2 1. Tim. 2. tydynges, lyke as one of these are: Christe is ye sa∣uiour of the worlde. Christ is our sauiour. Christ died for vs. Christ dyed for our sines. Christ bought vs with his bloud. Christ washed vs with his bloud. Christ offered himselfe for vs. Christ bare our synnes on his backe. Christ came into this worlde to saue synners. Christ came in to this worlde to take away our synnes. Christ was
the price that was gyuen for vs & Gene. 5. Thes. 5. 1. Cor. 1. our synnes. Christe was made debt our for vs. Christ paied our debte, for he dyed for vs. Christ hath made satysfaction for vs & our synnes. Christ is our right∣wisenes. Christ is our satisfacciō. Christ is our redempcion. Christ is our goodnes. Christe hath pa∣cified the father of heauen. Christe is oures and al his. Chri∣ste hath deliuered vs frō the law, from the deuel, and from hel. The father of heuen hath forgeuen vs our synnes for Christes sake. Or suche lyke, whereyn is declared vnto vs the mercy of god. ¶ The nature of the lawe and the gospell. The lawe sheweth vs our syn∣ne. The Gospel sheweth vs reme∣die for it. The lawe sheweth vs our cōdemnacion. The gospel she∣wet vs oure redēpcyon. The lawe
is the lawe of Ire. The gospell is the word of grace. The lawe is the worde of despayre. The Gospel is the worde of comfort. The law is the worde of vnrest. The Gos∣pell is the worde of peace. ¶ A disputacion betwene the lawe and the gospel. The lawe saith, paye thy debt. The gospell sayth, Christ hathe payd it. The lawe sayeth, thou art a synner, despayre and thou shalt be damned. The gospel sayth, thy synnes are forgeuen the, be of good com∣forte, thou shalt be saued. The lawe sayth, make amendes for thy synnes. The gospell sayth, Christ hath made it for the. The lawe sayth, the father of heuen is wroth with the. The gospel saith, Christ hath pacifyed hym with his bloude.
The lawe saieth, where is thy ryghtwysenesse, goodnes and sa∣tisfaction: The gospell sayeth, Christ is thy ryghtwysenes thy goodnes and satisfaccion. The lawe sayth, thou art bounde and obliged to me, to the deuel and to hell. The gospel sayth, christ hath delyuered the from them all. ☞ Of faith. FAyth is to beleue god: lyke as Abraham beleued god, and yt was imputed vnto him for Gene. 15. ryghtwysenes. ¶ He, that beleueth God, be∣leueth 1, Iohn. 5. his word, and who so beleueth it not, bele∣ueth not him also. To beleue god, is to beleue his worde, and to recoūte it true, that he sayeth. He yt beleueth not goddes word he coūteth him false & a lyer, and beleueth not yt he maie & will ful∣fill
his worde: and so he denyeth both the might of god, and god hym selfe. ¶ Fayth is the gyfte of god and not in our power. Eeuery good thing is the gifte of god, faith is good: ergo fayth Iaco. 1. is the gifte of god. The gyfte of god is not in our power, fayth is the gyfte of god, ergo faith is not in our power. ¶ Without faith it is impos∣sible to please God, and that is done by fayth pleaseth him. Al that commeth not of faith is synne, for without fayth can no Rom. 14. Heb. 11. man please god. Besydes that, he that lacketh faith, he trusteth not god, he that trusteth not god, tru∣steth not his worde, he that tru∣steth not his word, holdeth him false and a lyar, he that holdeth him false and a lyar, he beleueth
not that he maye do that he pro∣mysed, and so denyeth he that he is god. And how can a man being of this facyon please hym: No maner of way, I suppose, though he dyd al the dedes that euer dyd man or angell. Ryght is the worde of god and al his works in fayth Lord thyne eyen loke to faith, that is as moch to say, as lord thou delyghtest in faith God loueth hym, that bele∣ueth in hym, howe can they then displease him? He that hath the faith is iust and good, and a good tre bereth good frute: ergo all y• is done in faith pleaseth GOD. Moreouer, he that hath the faith beleueth god: he that beleueth god, beleueth his worde: he that beleueth his worde, woreth well that he is true and faythfull, and maye not lye. But knoweth that he both may and will fullfyl hys
word. How can he then displease him? for thou cāst not do any gre¦ter honoure to god, then to counte him true. ¶ He, that hath the fayth, is cer∣teyne that he pleaseth god. For all that is done in fayth, pleaseth god. Fayth is a sure confidence of Heb. 11. thinges, which are hoped for, and a certeinte of thinges whiche are not sene. The sāe spirite certeneth our spirite, yt we are ye children of Rom. 8. god. Moreouer he ye hath ye fayth, wotteth well yt god wil fulfyl his worde: ergo faith is a surenes. A man is iustified by fayth. Abraham beleued god, and yt was imputed vnto hym for rght∣wysenes: Gene. 15. Roma. 3, we suppose therfore ye a man is iustified by faith, with∣out the dedes of the lawe. He, that worketh not but beleueth
on hym that iustifieth ye vngodly his faith is counted to hym for Rom. 4. Aba. 10. Gal. 2. rightwysenes. The iust man ly∣ueth by his faith. We knowe that a man is not iustified by the de∣des of the lawe, but by the faith of Iesu Christ. And we beleue in Iesu Christ, that we may be iusti¦fyed by the faith of Christ, & not by the dedes of the lawe. Of the faith of Christ. The faith of Christe is to be∣leue in him, that is to beleue his worde and to beleue that he wyll helpe the in al thy nede, and dely∣uer the from all euell. Thou wilt aske me what worde? I answere, the gospell. he ye beleueth ichrist shalbe saued He that beleueth the sone hath euerlastinge lyfe: verely verely I saye to you, he that beleueth in me hath euerlastyng life: This I 1, Iohn, 4. wryt vnto you, that beleue on the
name of the sonne of god, ye ye may knowe how that ye haue eternal lyfe. Thomas, because thou hast sene me therefore beleueste thou: Iohn. 20. happy are thei that haue not sene, and yet haue beleued in me. All the Propheres to hym beare wyt¦nes, Act. 10. that who so euer beeleueth in hym, shall haue remissyon of theyr synnes. What must I do y• I maie be saued? the Apostles an∣swered, beleue in the Lorde Ie∣sus Act. 16. Christe, and thou shalt be sa∣ued. If thou knowlege with thy mouth that Iesus is ye lorde: And Rom. 10 beleue with thyne harte that god raysed hym vp from death, thou shalt be saued. ¶ He that beleueth not in Christ Mar. 16 Iohn. 2. shal bee condemned. He that beleueth not shall be damned. He that beleueth not the sōne shal neuer se lyfe, but the ire of god abydeth hym. The holy
goost shall reproue the worlde of synne, because they beleue not in me. They, that beleue in Iesu Christ are the sonnes of god. Year al the sōnes of god because Gala. 3. ye beleue in Ihesu Christ ¶ He that beleueth that Christ is the sōne of god is saued. Peter sayde, thou arte Christe Mark, 16, the sonne of the lyuing god. Ihe∣sus answered and said vnto him, happy art thou Symon the sonne of Ionas, for flesh & bloud hath not opened to the that, but my fa∣ther that is in heauen. We haue beleued and knowe that thou arte Christ the sōne of the lyuing god. I beleue that thou arte Christ the Iohn, 6, Iohn, 11, sōne of god which shulde come in∣to the worlde. These thynges are wrytten, that Iohn, 1, ye might beleue yt Iesus is christ the sonne of God, and that ye in
belyuing mighte haue lyfe. I be∣leue yt Iesus is the sonne of god. Acte. 8. He that beleueth God, bele∣ueth the Gospel. He yt beleueth god, beleueth his worde, whiche is ye gospel: ergo Iohn, 4, he that beleueth god, beleueth ye gospel: As Christ is ye sauiour of the world, Christ is our sauiour. Apo. 1. Christ boughte vs wt his bloud. Christ washed vs wt his bloud, Christ offered hymselfe for vs. Christ bare our synnes on his owne back. &c. He that beleueth not the gos∣pel, beleueth not god. He, that beleueth not goddes He. 7. 8. 1. Pet. 2, word, beleueth not himself, for the gospel is goddes worde: ergo he yt beleueth not ye gospell, beleueth not god himself: & cōsetquēly thei that beleue not ye aboue wryttē & such other, beleue not god: He, yt beleueth the gospel, shalbe
saued. Go ye in to al the world & preche the gospel vnto euery crea¦ture, Mar. 16. he yt beleueth & is baptysed, shal be saued, but he that beleueth not, shall be condemned. A comparison betwene faith & vnfaithfulnes or incredulite. Faythe is the rote of al good. In∣credulyte is the rote of all euyll. Fayth maketh God and mā good frendes. Incredulite maketh thē foes. Faith bringeth god & mā to¦gether. Incredulite sundreth thē. Al that faith doth pleasyth god. Al that incredulyte doth displea∣seth god. Faythe onely maketh a man good and ryghtwyse. Incredulite only maketh hym vniust and euyl. Faithe maketh a man a mēbre of Christ. Incredu∣lite maketh him a mēbre of ye de∣uyl. Fayth maketh a mā ye inhery∣tour of heuē. Incredulite maketh
him inheritour of hell. Faith maketh a man the seruaunt of god. Incredulite maketh hym the seruaunte of the deuyll. Faith sheweth vs god to be a swete fa∣ther. Incredulite sheweth hym a terrible iudge. Faith holdth stiffe by the worde of god. Incredulite wauereth here and there. Fayth counteth & holdeth god to be true Incredulyte holdeth hym false & a lyar. Faith knoweth god. Incre∣dulite knoweth hym not. Fayth loueth both god and here neygh∣boure. Incredulite loueth nether nother. Faith only saueth vs. In∣credulite onelye condemneth vs. Faith extolleth god and his deds. Incredulite extolleth herself and her owne dedes. Of hope. HOpe is a trustye lokinge af∣ter the thinge, that is promy∣sed vs to come: as we hope
after euerlasting ioy, which christ Psal, 117, hath promysed vnto all that bee¦leue in him. We shulde put our hope and trust in god alonly. It is good to trust in god and Psal, 113, not in man. He yt trusteth in his owne harte is a fole. It is good to truste in god and not in prynces. They shalbe lyke vnto the images they make, & all that truste in thē. He yt trusteth i his own thoughts doth vngodly. Cursed be he that trusteth in man. Byd the rych mē of this world, that they trust not Hiere, 17, in theyr vnstable ryches, but that they trust in the lyuyng god. It is harde for them that truste in mo∣ney, to entre in to the kingdome of heauen. Moreouer we shulde trust in Mar, 10, him onely that may help vs: God only may helpe vs: ergo we shuld truste in hym onely, wel is them
that trust in god, and wo is them that trust not in him. Wel is the man that trusteth Hiere, 17, Sapi, 3. Psal, 5, in god, for god shal be his truste. He yt trusteth in hym shall vnder stonde the verytye. They shall al reioyce that trust in god, they shal euer be glade and he will de∣fende them. Of charite. CHarite is the loue of thy neyghboure. The rule of charite is this. do, as thou woldest be done to. For charitie holdeth al a lyfe, ye ryche, and the poore, the frende and the foe, the thankefull & vnthanke∣full, the kynseman and straun∣ger. ¶ A comparison bitwene fayth, hope and charite. Fayth cometh of the worde of God, hope cometh of faith, & cha∣rite spryngeth of them bothe.
Faythe beleueth the worde. Hope trusteth after that is pro∣mysed by the word. Charite doth good vnto her neyghbour thorow the loue, that it hath to god. Faith loketh to god & his word, Hope loketh vnto his gyfte & re∣ward. Charite loketh on her neigh¦boures profyte. Faith receaueth god. Hope receiueth his reward. Charite loueth her neyghbour wt a glad harte, & that wtout any re∣specte of rewarde. Fayth pertay∣neth to god onely, hope to his re∣ward & charite to her neyghbour. Of workes. NO maner of works make vs rightwise: we beleue yt a mā Gala, 2, shall be iustifyed wythout workes: No man is iustifyed by ye dedes of the law, but by ye fayth of Iesu Christ, and we beleue in Iesu Christ, that we may be iusti∣fied by the faith of Christe & not
by the dedes of the lawe. If right¦wysenes came by the lawe, then Gala, 3, dyed Christ in vaine. That no mā is iustified by the lawe, it is ma∣nifest: for a rightwise mā lyueth by his faythe, but the lawe is not of faythe. Moreouer syth Christe the maker of heuen and erth, and all that is therin, behoued to dye for vs, we are compelled to graūt that we were so far drowned and sūke in sinne, that nether our deds nor al the treasures that euer god made or mighte make, might haue holpen vs out of them: ergo no dedes nor woorkes maye make vs rightwyse. No workes make no vnrightwise. For yf am works made vs vnrightwise, then the cō∣trary workes shuld make vs right¦wyse. But it is proued that no workes can make vs ryght∣wyse: ergo no workes make vs vnrightwise.
¶ Workes make vs neyther good nor euyll. It is proued that no workes Nota. neyther make vs rightwyse nor vnrightwyse: ergo no works make vs neyther good nor euyll. For rightwise and good ar one thing, & vnrightwise & euil likewise one. ¶ Good workes make not a good man, nor euel workes an euyl mā, but a good man maketh good workes, and an euyl man euyl workes: Good frute maketh not the tre good nor euel frute the euell tre, but a good tre bereth good frute, & an euell tre euill frute. A good mā can not do euell workes nor an euel man good workes, for a good tre can not bear euil frute nor an euel tre good frute. A man is good ere he do good workes, and euel ere he doe euill: for tre ye is good er he beare good
frute, & euill ere it bere euel frute. ☞ Euery man is eyther good or euil, and his workes like wyse. Euery tree is eyther good or e∣uel: either make ye the tre good & the frute good also, or els mak the tre euel and the frute of it lyke∣wise euyll, For all frute trees are eyther good or euell. Eyther make ye the tre good and the frute good also, or els make ye tre euel and ye frute of it likewise euil. A good man is knowen by his workes: for a good man doth good works, & an euell euel workes: ye shal knowe thē by their fruyte, for a good tre bereth good frute, & an euel tre euel frute A man is lykened to the tre, and Mat, 7, his workes to the frute of ye tre. Beware of the false prophets, which cōe to you in shepes clothes but inwardelye they are raue∣nyng
wolues, ye shal knowe them by theyr frutes. None of our workes nether saue vs nor condemne vs. It is proued that no workes make vs nother rightwyse nor vn∣rightwyse, good nor euil, but first we ar good ere we do good works and euell ere we do euell workes: ergo no workes, neyther saue vs nor cōdemne vs. Thou wilt say, then maketh it no mater what we do. I answer, yes. For if thou do euel, it is a sure argument yt thou art euil and wantest the faith. If thou do good it is an argu∣mente that yu art good and hast ye By the fruite the tree is kno¦wen. faith, for a good tre bereth good frute, & an euil tre euel frute: yet good frute maketh not ye tre good, nor euell frute the tre euyll, so the mā is good ere he do good dedes & euel ere he do euel dedes. The man is the tre, his workes are the
frute, faith maketh the good tre, Incredulite the euel tre: such a tre such frute, such a mā such works. For all that is done in fayth plea∣seth god & are good workes. And al that is done wtout faith dispea∣seth god and are euyll workes. Who so euer beleueth or thyn∣keth to be saued by his works: de∣nieth that Christe is his sauiour. For how is he thy sauioure, if yu myghtest saue thyselfe by thy workes? or wherto shuld he dye for the, if any workes might haue saued the? Verely, thou shuldest haue dyed perpetually, yf Christ to delyuer the had not dyed for ye and chaūged thy perpetual death in to his owne deth. For thou ma∣dest the faute, and he suffered the payne, & that for the loue he had to the or euer yu wast borne, when thou haddest done nether good nor euel. Nowe syth he hath paid
thy debte, yu nedest not, no thou canste not, but shuldest be dam∣ned if his bloude were not: But syth he was punished for ye, thou shalt not be punished if thou trust in him. Fynallye, he hath delyue∣red the from thy condemnacion and al euel, and desyreth naught els of the, but yt thou wilt aknow∣ledge what he hath done for the and beare it in minde, and yt thou woldest helpe other for his sake, bothe in worde and dede, euen as he hath holpen the for naughte and without rewarde. O how re∣dy wolde we be to helpe other, if we knewe his goodnes and gen∣telnes towardes vs. He is good & a gentle lord, for he geueth vs fre∣ly. Let vs besech you yt ar Chri∣stians to folowe his fotesteppes, whōal the world ought to prayse and worship. Amen. ¶ He that thynketh to bee saued
by his workes calleth him selfe Christe. For he calleth him selfe his sa∣uioure, which pertayneth to christ only. What is a sauiour but he yt saueth? & he sayth I saue my self, which is as moch to say as I am Christ, for Christ only is the sa∣uyoure of the worlde. We shulde do no good workes for ye entent to get the inheritaūce of heuen or remissyon of synne. For who so euer beleueth to get the enheritaunce of heuen or re∣mission of synne thorowe works, he beleueth not to get yt for Chri∣stes sake. And thei that beleue not that theyr synnes ar forgeuen thē and yt they shal be saued for Chri∣stes sake, they beleue not the gos∣pel. For the Gospell sayth, you shalbe saued for Christes sake, synnes are forgyuen for Christes sake. He yt beleueth not ye gospel,
beleueth not god. So it foloweth that thei which beleue to be saued by their workes or to get remissiō of their synnes by their owne de∣des, beleue not god: but recount him as a lyer, and so vtterly deny hym to be god. Thou wilt saye, shall we then do no good dedes? I saye not so, but I say we shulde do no good workes for the entent to gette the inheritaunce of heuen or remissyon of synne. For if we beleue to gette vs heuen tho∣row good workes, thē we beleue not to get it thorowe the promise of god: if we thynke to get remis∣syon of our sinne so, the we beleue not that they are forgeuen vs for Christe, and so we counte God a lyar. For god sayth, you shal haue the inheritaunce of heuen for my sonnes sake, thy synnes are forge∣uen the for my sonnes sake: & you say it is not so, but I wyl wynne
it thorow my workes. So I con∣demne not good dedes: But I cō∣demne ye false truste in any works For al the works, that a mā put¦teth confidence in, are ther with povsoned and be∣come euyll. ¶ To god onely geue the glorye. A dialogue wher∣in is brefely declared the longe continuaunce of ye Gospel taught as well to the vngodly as to the godly: The cause of the destruc∣tion of the wicked: And also the office of the lawe, and the gospel. William. ¶ For asmuche as God hath constituted me a crea∣ture resonable, and endued me wt
an vnderstanding, I am natural∣lye desyrous to knowe what end I am created to. Gyles. Thā shal it be ne∣cessarie Iohn. 3. for you to haue faith. For he, that shal haue to do with God or with godlynes, muste fyrste of al beleue after ye holy scriptures. William. Than tel me what faith is, by those holy scriptures. Giles. After ye sai¦enge of saincte Paule, it is a sure Heb. 11. Gala, 4, certaynie of godly thinges which we trust vnto, & a grounded euy∣dence in the spirite of heauenlye causes that neuer were sene wt the eye. Wil. What suppose ye most ne∣cessari  Apo. 14. to direct me into this faith Gi. The eternal Testament or gospel of Iesu Christe. Rom. 1. Iohn, 14.  For that is the power of God vnto saluacion to al them that beleue. Wil. Whan was this gospell fyrste taught. Gil. Soone after the worldes be∣gyunynge, whan Adam had once Gene. 3. offended leste that he shuld haue fallen in vtter despaire & so haue
bene loste for euer more. Will. And hath the Gospel contynued euer syns, to the cōforte of man? Gil. Yea trulie, and oft sins that time hath ben confirmed by more earneste promises from age to age, tyll the meke Lambe came, which tok awaye the synnes of the worlde Gene. 22. Psal, 131, 1. Pet. 1, through the shedyng of his most innocent bloud. For the scripture saith, that his mercye was plen∣tuous from kyndred to kiudred, to them that feared the Lorde. Wil. Hath all men ben called to grace by that gospell of saluacion? Gil. Yea doubtles haue thei, yet haue thei not all thankfully receyued it. So wel was it tought of our fyrst fa∣ther Luke. 1. Mat. 22. Luke. 4. Ge. iiii. Adam to Cayn as to Abel. Sowel dyd Noe preache it to Cham as vnto Sem and Iaphet. So well dyd Abraham shewe yt to Ismael as vnto Isaac. So well Gene, 21 Moyses to Pharao as to ye people of Israel. Dauid to Ammon and
Absolon, as to Salomon & Na∣than. Helyas to Achab and Iesa∣bel, Exo. . 2. Reg. 13 3. Re. 18 as to the moste faithfull bele∣uers. No lesse dyd Christe open therof to Iudas, then to Peter, Iames and Ihon. And so forth Math. 10. Act. 8. Rom. 1. to the other Apostles and true preachers to this present daye. So that none can excuse thē selfes Wyl. Howe commeth it than to passe that so many are lost and styll yet dothe dalye perishe, through their conuersacion and lycencious ly∣uyng? Gyl. No faute can be ascri∣bed to the gospel, but to their vn∣thankful receiuing of the fruites therof, so frelye offred them. The disdaynfull spurnyng asyde Roma. 1. 2. Cor. 12. of that necessary health in christ, is cause of their decaye, and not the set ordynaunce of god, which willeth all men to be saued. Wil. If Adā thus receyued this Gospel, and so taught it to his posterite, it hath cōtinued much longer than
I supposed. Gil. The Gospel is as the lord is, euerlasting. For as witnesseth the apostle saint Iohn: In the begin∣ning Apo. 14. was the worde, & the worde was with god, and god was the Iohn, 1. worde. Wil. Than was not Mathew with the other Euangelistes, the fyrste wryter therof. Gil. No, god did wryte it firste in the natural herte of man, and so it remayned here styl, tyll Moses & the prophetes dyd leaue it in outewarde wry∣tynge to the peoples further eru∣dicion. For as saynt Paule saith: Al they eate frō the fyrste begin∣nynge of one spiritual meate, and drāke of one spiritual drinke, the harde Rocke folowing thē, which 1. Cor. 10. was Iesus Christ. And this is an euydent token, that one Gospell hath reygned among the people of God syns the worldes begyn∣nynge. Wil. But nowe tell me, what shal become of them, which haue
not, of all this longe season in the true feare of god, regarded his Roma. 1. holsome and swete promises. Gylles As they haue in theyr vnthank¦fulnes here bē left to them selues to worke all vngodlynes, & haue departed hence with a desperate conscience: so shal they at the later day bee condemned vnto eternall fyre, with the deuyl & al his aun∣gels. Mat. 22 Wil, Our mercyful redemer de∣fend vs from that maledicion. But what shal most spedeli bring me to the Gospel of helth? Gil. The meke knowledge of thy selfe,Luke. 3. The. 3. that thou art of nature the synful sone of Adam, iustlye condemned in his transgression, beesydes thine owne wicked doinges, & so loste for euer, were not the resurrectiō, which thou hast in Iesus christ. Willi. Shew me by what meane I may come to that knowlege. Gile. Seke first vnto the law, 1. Cor. 15. which the lord Iesus taught by Moyses. Willi. What
is the lawer Gil. The lawe is a godly Myrrour or glasse giuen vnto vs synners, that we therin shuld se & know our synnes, what we are & Iohn. 2.  what imperfection is in vs. Wiliā Doth the law then make vs rightuouse and good. Gilles No more thā the glasse makth him faire that lokth therin. For the Lawe demaundeth of vs rightuousnes, but it gyueth vs no power to do that, whych yt com∣maundeth. William What helpeth than the know∣ledge of ye Lawe, am I than ther∣by made free from my synne? Gilles No yt maketh no man quyte of his synne, but it gyueth an occasiō to ronne and call for helpe of Iesus Christ our lord, that he wold do that thynge which is impossyble to the lawe, yt is, to make vs pure and cleane. The glasse doth ne∣ther washe nor make fayre any mannes face, but it gyueth occa∣sion, eyther to seke for water, or
els some other thynge that maye make it fayre and cleane. Thus our sores once knowne by ye lawe and the daungers & perylles of the same considered, we are dry∣uen of necessite to seke remedy in the gospel. Willi. What is the Gospel? Gil. It is the power of god, whiche saueth al men that beleue in it. It promiseth vs a mercyfull god, it declareth vnto vs forgyuenes of our synnes and lyfe euerlastyng, through Iesus christ our sauiour. Willi. Doth the Gospel make vs righ∣tuous? Gil. Yea, for it promyseth vs that Iesus Christ is our owne, & that he dyed for our synnes, and dyd ryse againe for our ryghtu∣ousnes. Yf we haue Christ, than haue we forgeuenes of our sines, & euerlastynge lyfe. Willi. Doth the gos∣pel than teache none other salua∣cion, but that which is in Christ? Gilles No surely. He alone is the Lābe that taketh awaye the lynnes of ye
worlde. The false worshippers seke him in outwarde thynges, & neuer fynde hym: but seke thou hym in sprete and veritie, & thou shalte haue hym presente. Williā By this your hole protestacion, it shulde seme vnto me, that I am ordey∣ned of god to this ende: fyrste to a knowledge my selfe a wicked sin∣ner, than to aryse frō it through true repentaunce, and so to leade a newe lyfe after the Gospel, tyll such tyme as my eternall Father shal with saue to cal me from this corruptible māsiō, this forē lād, this vale of misery, thys castel of synne, & this habitacion of death, into y• eternal heritage of his sōne Iesus Christ. To whom with the holy gost be euerlasting praise, honoure and glorye, worlde wythoute ende. Amen,
