25052 99846923 11920
THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH. Exemplified in the liuing Speeches of Dying Christians. By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich. LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes for Iohn Marriot and Iohn Grismand, and are to bee sold at their Shops in Saint Dun∣stons Church yard, and in Pauls Alley at the Signe of the Gunne. 1622.
TO HIS DEARE AND LOVING MOTHER. I Honour Au∣gustine much for honouring his Mother so much after her death, whose name and example had otherwise lyen in ob∣scuritie. But I like better, and wish rather to follow the piety of Nazianzene, who gaue himselfe to the
performance of all Chri∣stian Offices to his louing Mother. God hath so blessed the former part of your life aboue the lot of most women, with two such able guides, as haue so sto∣red you with Spirituall and Temporall furniture, that you neede not the ayde of any your Chil∣dren. Neuerthelesse, Grace and Nature will bee ascending and expres∣sing themselues, though in weake seruices. REV∣BEN
when hee found but a fewe Flowres, must bring them to his Mo∣ther LEAH. ESAV when hee takes Uenison, gratifies his aged Father withall. SAMPSON findes home by the way and presents of it to his parents. Heere is a Posie gathered out of olde and new Gardens; this sauory meate hath God brought to hand, heere is sweete out of the strong. Let your soule eate and blesse.
The vse and fruit of them I wish to euery beleeuer, especially in age and sicke∣nesse: but the handsell and honor of them (if any be) to your selfe, whom the Law of God and Nature binds mee to honour aboue others. Long may you liue to blesse your Children with your daily Prayers, especially your sonnes in that worke which needes much watering. Yet euery good Christian in yeares cannot but desire to bee
forewarned against death approching, and that is the ayme of these endeuours. God prosper and blesse them as the former: and send mee my part in the benefit of these (as hee hath done of them) in the time of vse. Your Sonne in all dutie, desirous of the birth-right of your loue and blessing. SA: WARD.
THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH. THat which hath bin already spoken of the Life of Faith, is to the naturall man aboue all Faith. And yet if that bee all it can doe, then is all little better then no∣thing. Say it could fill the minde of man with all content, satiate
his life with all delight, and swee∣ten the bitternesse of all afflicti∣ons, yet if for all this, there lurke in his breast a secret and slauish feare of Death, the least peece of this leauen but in a corner of the pecke, is enough to sowre the whole lumpe of his ioyes: the least dram of this Coloquintida will marre the relish of all his sweetes: and make him crie out, There is death in the pot. And, Oh Death, how bitter is thy mention and memory? Aske Nature, and call to Philo∣sophy, and see if they can affoord any ayd▪ must they not confesse themselues heere quite posed and plunged? hath not death set & foy∣led their whole army: for pouer∣tie, shame; and sicknesse, and other such pettie Crosses, some poore cures, and lame shifts haue they found out: but when death comes
all their courage hath fayled, and all their rules haue left them in darke and desperate vncertainties. It is possible for Pharaoh with much a do to stand out the stormes of Haile, the swarme of Flies and Lice: but when once the crie of Death is in the houses, then is there no way but yeelding: his Enchaunters and Mountebancks could abide the crie of Frogs and other such vermine; but this Basi∣liske affrights them. Onely Faith takes it by the tayle, handles it, and turnes it into an harmlesse wand, yea into a rod budding with glory and immortalitie. Quartane agues are not so much the shame of Phisicke, as Death is of all naturall skill and valour. Death is Faiths euill. Faith onely professeth this Cure, vndertaketh and performeth it with the least touch of Christs hand: and that
as familiarly as the richest Balme doth the least cut of the finger. Faith turneth feares into hopes, sighings and groanings, into wish∣ings and longings, shaking and trembling into leaping and clap∣ping of hands. Alas, all troubles are but as Pig∣myesDr. Tayler. Tho. Hawkes. to this Gyant, who defies all the hoste of Infidels: holds them in bondage all the dayes of their liues: and makes their whole life no better then a liuing Death and dying life. Only Faith encounters this Gyant, singles him out for her chiefe prize, and grapples with him not as a match, but as with a vanquished vnderling: insulting ouer him as much as he doth ouer the sonnes of vnbeliefe: sets her foot vpon the necke of this King of feares, and so easily becomes Conquerour and Emperour of all pettie feares, which are therefore
onely fearefull, because they rend to Death; the last, the worst, the end and summe of all feared euils. Here, and here onely is the incom∣parable crowne of Faith: here on∣ly doth she euidently and eminent∣ly honour her followers, and diffe∣rence them from all others with a noble liuery of true magnanimitie and alacritie. It is true, if wee had windowes into the breasts of men, a diffe∣rence one might see in the inward bearing of aduersitie: but for the face and outside, both may seeme alike hardy, both may seeme alike resolute: But when it comes to the poynt of Death, then the speech, the behauiour, the coun∣tenance, palpably distinguish the dull patience perforce of the worldling from the cheerfull wel∣come of the Christian. Let Death put on her mildest vizards, come
in the habit of the greatest sicknes, to the stoutest Champion on his owne Downe bed, yet shall his heart tremble and his countenance waxe pale. Let her dresse her selfe like the cruellest Fury: Come with all her rackes, fires, strappadoes, wilde beasts, all her exquisite tor∣tures: Faith will set a woman, or a childe to make sport with her, to dare and to tyre her, and her tor∣mentors. Alas what doe they tell vs of their Socrates, their Cato, their Se∣neca, and a few such thinne exam∣ples which a breath will rehearse, a fewe lines containe their poore ragged handfull, to our Legions, whose names or number one may as soone reckon as the sand of the Sea shore: theirs a fewe choyce men of heroycall spirits trayned vp either in arts or armes: Our of the weakest sexes and sorts, onely
strong in the Faith: theirs either out of windy vaine-glory childish∣ly reckoning of a short death and a long fame, or out of blockish ig∣norance venturing vpon Death as Children and mad men vpon dan∣gers without feare or wit: Ours out of mature deliberation and firme beliefe in Christ: who hath drunke out of Deaths bitter Cup an eternall health to all mankind, taken the gall and poyson out of it, and made it a wholesome po∣tion of immortalitie. Faith heere proclaimes her challenge and bids nature or arte out of all their Soul∣diers or Schollers produce any one, who hauing free option to liue or die, and that vpon equall tearmes haue embraced Death: Whereas infinite of hers haue bin offered life with promotions, and yet would not bee deliuered expe∣cting a better resurrection.
If any shall challenge these for Thrasonicall flourishes, or Carpet vaunts, I appeale and call to wit∣nesse not the Cloud now, but the whole skye of witnesses, such I meane as haue dyed either in the Lord, or for the Lord, who in the very poynt and Article of Death haue liued, and expressed liuely testimonies of this their life, partly in their incredible sufferings, part∣ly in their admirable sayings. For their Acts and Monuments if they had all been penned, all the world would not haue conteined their Histories: the very summes would swell to large Volumes. The va∣lour of the Patients, the sauage∣nesse of the Persecutours, striuing together, till both exceeding na∣ture and beleefe, bred wonder and astonishment in beholders and Readers. Christians haue shewed as glorious power in the faith of
Martyrdome as in the faith of My∣racles. As for their last Speaches, and Apothegmes, pitie it is no better marke hath been taken, and memory preserued of them. The choyce and the prime I haue cul∣led out of ancient Stories, and lat∣ter Martyrologies, English, Dutch, and French. The profite and plea∣sure hath paid me for the labour of collecting, and the like gaine (I hope) shall quit the cost of thy rea∣ding. Sweetly & briefly they com∣prise and couch in them the foun∣dation, the marrow of large & ma∣nifold precepts, prescribed by the learned Diuines for preparation against Death. The Art of dyingBeza. Perbins. Hall. Byfield. well is easier learned by examples then by directions. These chalk the way more plainely, these encou∣rage more heartily, these perswade more powerfully, these chide vn∣beleefe with more authoritie: if
some worke not, others may: some will affect some, some ano∣ther. Read them ouer to a sicke or to a dying Christian, if they quic∣ken not, if they comfort not, it is because there is no life of Faith in them: if there be the least sparke, these will kindle it, cherish and maintaine it in the doore, in the valley, in the thought, in the act of Death.
The Liuing Speeches of Dying Christians. PART. 1. OLd Simeons Swannes Song, Lord let thy seruant depart in peace, &c. The good Theefe, the first Con∣fessor. Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome. Steuen the first Martyr, Lord Iesus receiue my Spirit, forgiue them &c. Peter the Apostle: None but Christ, Nothing but Christ. Andrew the Apostle: Welcome Oh Christ longed and looked for. I am the Scholler of him that did hang on thee, long haue I coueted to embrace thee, in whom I am that I am. Polycarpus to the Proconsull,
vrging him to deny Christ, I haue serued him 86 yeares, and hee hath not once hurt mee, and shall I now de∣ny him? When hee should haue been ty∣ed to the stake, he required to stand vntyed, saying: Let me alone (I pray you) for hee that gaue mee strength to come to this fire, will also giue me pa∣tience to abide in the same without your tying. Ignatius, I am the Wheat or Graine to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that I may bee pure Bread for my Masters tooth; Let Fire, Rackes, Pulleyes, yea and all the Torments of Hell come on mee, so I may winne Christ. Lucius to Vrbicius, a corrupt Iudge threaning death; I thanke you with all my heart, that free mee and release mee from wicked Gouernours, and send mee to my good God and lo∣uing Father, &c.
Pothnius Bishop of Lyons to the President asking him in the midst of torments what that Christ was, answered, If thou wert worthy, thou shouldest know. Cyprian, God Almighty be blessed for this Gaole deliuery. Ambrose to his Friends about him, I haue not so liued, that I am ashamed to liue longer, nor yet feare I Death, because I haue a good Lord. And the same to Calligon, Valen∣tinians Eunuch threatning death, Well doe you that which becomes an Eunuch, I will suffer that which be∣comes a Bishop. Augustine, Boughes fall off Trees, and Stones out of Buildings, and why should it seeme strange that mortall men dye? Theodosius, I thank God more for that I haue beene a member of Christ, then an Emperour of the world.
Hilarion, Soule, get thee out, thou hast seuentie yeares serued Christ, and art thou now loath to dye, or afrayd of Death? Vincentius, Rage, and doe the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee on worke to doe. Thou shalt see Gods Spirit strengthen the Tor∣mented more then the Deuill can doe the Tormentor. Iubentius and Maximinus, Wee are ready to lay off the last Garment the Flesh. Attalus answered to euery que∣stion, I am a Christian: being fired in an Iron Chaine, Behold, oh you Romans, this is to eat mans flesh, which you falsely obiect to vs Christians. Basill to Valens his Viceroy, offe∣ring him respite, No, I shall bee the same to morrow; I haue nothing to lose but a few Bookes, and my body is now so crazy, that one blow will ende my torment.
Gordius, To the Tyrant offering him promotion; Haue you any thing equall, or more worthy then the King∣dome of Heauen? Babilas dying in Prison, willed his Chaines should be buried with him; Now (saith he) will God wipe away all teares, and now I shall walke with God in the land of the Liuing. Barlaam, holding his hand in the flame ouer the Altar, sung that of the Psalmist: Thou teachest my hands to warre, and my fingers to fight. Iulitta: Wee Women receiued not onely flesh from men, but are bone of bone, and therefore ought to be as strong and constant as men in Christs cause. Amachus, Turne the other side also, Least raw flesh offend. The like Lawrence. Symeones, Thus to dye a Chri∣stian, is to liue, yea the chiefe good
and best end of a man. Marcus of Arethuse, hung vp in a basket, annoynted with hony, and so exposed to the stinging of Waspes, and Bees, to his persecu∣tours that stood and beheld him; How am I aduaunced, despising you that are below on earth. Pusices to Ananias an olde man trembling at Martyrdome: Shut thine eyes but a while, and thou shalt see Gods light. Bernard, Fense the heele voyd of Merite, with Prayer, that the Ser∣pent may not finde where to fasten his teeth. The second part. EDWARD the 6. King of Eng∣land, Bring me into thy Kingdom, free this Kingdome from Antichrist, and keepe thine Elect in it.
Cranmer Archbishop: Thrust∣ing his hand into the fire: Thou vnworthy hand (saith hee) shalt first burne, I will bee reuenged of thee for subscribing for feare of Death to that damned scrowle. Latimer Bishop: To one that tempted him to recant, and would not tell him his name: Well (saith he) Christ hath named thee in that saying, Get thee behinde mee Sathan; And being vrged to abiure, I will (saith hee) good people, I once sayd in a Sermon in King Edwards time confidently, that Antichrist was for euer expelled England, but God hath shewed mee it was but carnall confi∣dence. To Bishop Ridley, going before him to the Stake: Haue after as fast as I can follow: wee shall light such a candle by Gods grace in England this day, as I trust shall neuer hee put out againe.
To whom Bishop Ridley: Bee of good heart Brother, for God will ei∣ther asswage the fury of the flame, or else strengthen vs to abide it. Bishop Hooper; to one that ten∣dered a Pardon vpon recantation; If you loue my Soule away with it, if you loue my Soule away with it: one of the Commissioners prayed him to consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter; True (saith hee) but the death to come is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet; Oh Lord Christ I am hell, thou art Heauen, draw me to thee of thy mercy. Iohn Rogers, to one that told him hee would change his note at the fire; If I should trust in my selfe, I should so doe, but I haue determined to dye, and God is able to inable me. Being awakened, and bidden to make haste to Execution, Then (saith hee) shall I not need to tye my poynts.
Iohn Philpot, I will pay my vowes in thee O Smithfield. Thomas Bilney: I know by sense and Phylosophie, that fire is hote and burning painfull, but by faith I know it shall onely waste the stubble of my bodie, and purge my spirit of it cor∣ruption. Glouer to Augustine Brenner: He is come, He is come, meaning the Comforter Gods Spirit. Iohn Bradford: embracing the Reeds and Fagots sayd; Strayte is the way, and narrow is the gate, and few that finde it. And speaking to his fellow Martyr: Bee of good com∣fort Brother, for wee shall haue a merrie Supper with the Lord this night; if there be any way to heauen on Horsebacke, or in fiery Chariots, this is it. Lawrence Saunders: I was in prison till I got into prison, and now (sayes he kissing the Stake) welcome
the Crosse of Christ, welcome euer∣lasting life: my Sauiour began to mee in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pledge him? Iohn Lambert: None but Christ, none but Christ. Baynam, Behold you Papists that looke for myracles, I feele no more paine in the fire, then if I were in a bed of Downe, it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses. Hugh Lauerocke comforting Iohn A Pryce his fellow-Martyr, said vnto him: Bee of good comfort my Brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physition, he will cure thee of all thy blindnesse, and me of my lame∣nesse this day. William Hunter to his Mother, For a momentany payne I shall haue a crowne of life, & may not you be glad of that? To whom shee answered, I count my selfe happy that bare such a Champion for Christ: and thee as
well bestowed as any childe that euer I bare. Adam Damlip to his fellow∣prisoners, wondring at his cheere∣full Supping and behauiour after the message of his execution: Why (quoth hee) thinke you I haue beene so long in the Marshallsea, and haue not learned to dye? And when they told him his quarters should bee hanged vp; then (said he) shall I need take no thought for buriall. Priests wife to one offering her money, I am now going to a Coun∣trey where money beares no Mastery: when sentence was read; Now haue I gotten that which many a day I haue sought for. Kirby to Master Wingfield pitty∣ing him: Be at my burning, and you shall see, and say, there is a Souldier of Christ: I know fire, water, and sword are in his hands, that will not suffer them to seperate me from him.
Doctor Taylor; I shall this day deceiue the wormes in Hadley Church yard, and fetching a leape or two when hee came within two miles of Hadley, Now (saith hee) lacke I but two Stiles, and I am euen at my Fathers house. Walter Mill vrged to recant at the Stake; I am no chaffe, but corne, I will abide Wind and Flayle, by Gods grace. Bishop Farrar, to a Knights Son bemoaning his death: If you see me stirre in the fire, trust not my doctrine; And so hee stood holding vp his stumps, till one Grauell strooke him downe with a staffe. Rawlings to the Bishops: Raw∣lings you left mee, Rawlings you finde mee, and so by Gods grace I will dye. Iohn Ardley, If euery haire of my head were a man, it should suffer death in the Faith I now stand in.
The like Agges Stanley, and Willi∣am Sparrow. Thomas Hawkes, being desired to giue a signe, whether the fire was tollerable to be borne, promi∣sed it to his friends: and after all expectation was past, hee lift vp his hands halfe burned, and being on a light fire, with great reioy∣cing, striketh them three times to∣gether. Lawrence Ghest to his wife mee∣ting him with seauen children on her hand: Be not a blocke to me in the way, now I am in a good course, and neere the marke. The Lady Iane Grey requested by the Lieutenant of the Towre to write her Symbole in his book be∣fore her beheading, wrote this, Let the glassie condition of this life neuer deceiue thee, There is a time to bee borne, a time to die; But the day of death is better then the day of Birth.
Alice Driuer, when the chain was about her necke: Heere is a goodly Necker chiefe, God be blessed for it. Iohn Noyes kissing the stake: Bles∣sed bee the time that euer I was borne for this day. To his fellow Martyrs; We shal not lose our liues in this Fire, but change them for a better, and for coales haue pearles, &c. Iulius Palmer: To them that haue the minde linked to the body, as a theeues foot to a payre of stockes, it is hard to dye indeed; but if one bee able to separate soule and body, then by the helpe of Gods spirit it is no more ma∣stery for such a one, then for mee to drinke this Cup. Elizabeth Folkes, embracing the Stake; Farewell all the world, Fare∣well Faith, Farewell Hope, and wel∣come Loue. Roger Bernard, being threatned whipping, stocking, burning; an∣swered, I am no better then my master
Christ, and the Prophets, which your Fathers serued after such sort, and I for his names sake am content to suffer the like at your hands: so immediat∣ly he was condemned, and carried to the fire. Thomas Sampal, offred a pardon in the midst of the fire: Oh now I am thus far on my iourney, hinder me not to finish my race. Latimer Bishop, when they were about to set fire to him, and Bishop Ridley, with an amiable counte∣nance, said these words: God is faithfull which doth not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our strength. Bishop Ridley to Mistris Irish the Keepers wife, and other friends at Supper, I pray you be at my Wedding tomorrow, (at which wordes they weeping) I perceiue you are not so much my friends as I tooke you to be. Tankerfield, when hee had put one Legg into the fire. The Flesh
shrinkes and sayes, Thou foole, wilt thou burne and needest not? The spi∣rit sayes, Hell fire is sharper, and wilt thou aduenture that? The flesh saies, Wilt thou leaue thy Friends? The Spirit answers, Christ and his Saints society is better. The flesh saies, Wilt thou shorten thy life? The Spirit saies, It's nothing to an eternall life. Ioyce Lewis, When I beholde the ouglesome face of Death, I am afrayd, but when I consider Christes amiable Countenance, I take heart againe. The third part. IOHN HVS to a Countreyman that threwe a Faggot at his head: Oh holy Simplicitie, God send thee better light. You roste the Goose now, but a Swanne shall come after mee, and hee shall escape your Fire;
Hus a Goose in the Bohemian lan∣guage, and Luther a Swan. Hierom of Prague, Make the fire in my sight, for if I had feared it, I had neuer come hither: while it was ma∣king, he sung two Psalmes. Anonymus on his death-bed, Now Flegme doe thy dutie, and stop thou my vitall Artery. Now Death doe me that friendly office to rid me of paine, and hasten mee to happinesse: To a Friend of his that willed him to haue his thoughts on heauen: I am there already. Claudius Monerius being cauilled at by the Friers for eating a break∣fast before his execution. This I do that the flesh may answere the readi∣nes of the Spirit. Michaela Caignoela, a noble Ma∣tron, seeing her Iudges look out of the windowes, said to her fellow-Martyrs: These stay to suffer the tor∣ment of their Consciences, and are re∣serued
to iudgement, but wee are going to glory and happinesse. And to certaine poore women weeping, and crying, Oh Madam, wee shall neuer now haue more Almes, Yes hold you (saith shee) yet once more; and plucked off her Slippers, and such other of her apparell, as shee could with modestie spare from the fire. Iames Delos, to Monkes that cal∣led him proud Heretike; Alas, here I get nothing but shame, I expect indeed preferment hereafter. Madam la Glee, to one Chavique, that vpbraided her for denying the Faith; Your cursed faith is not worthy the name of Faith; she put on her Bracelets, For I goe (said she) to my Spouse. Marlorat to friends that called him deceiuer; If I haue seduced any, God hath seduced me, who cannot lye. Castilia Rupea, Though you
throw my body downe of this steepe hill, yet will my soule mount vpwards againe; your blasphemies more offend my minde, then your torments doe my body. Christopher Marshall of Ant∣werpe, I was from eternall a sheepe destined to the slaughter, and now I go to the Shambles, Gold must bee tried in the fire. Vidus Bressius, If Gods Spirit saith true, I shall straight rest from my labours, my soule is euen ta∣king her wings to slie to her resting place. The Duke of Wittemberg and Luneburgh, Many haue beene mine errours and defects in Gouernment, Lord pardon and couer all in Christ. Picus Mirandula, If Christes Death and our owne were euer in eye, how could wee sinne? Death is welcome, not as an end of trouble, but of sinne.
Martin Luther, Thee Oh Christ haue I taught, thee haue I trusted, thee haue I loued, into thy handes I commend my spirit. O ecolampadius to one asking if the light offended him not, I haue light enough here, laying his hand on his breast; And to the Ministers about him, Let the light of your liues shine as well as your Doctrine. Francisco Varlute, Paul and Pe∣ter were more honourable members of Christ then I, but I am a member; they had more store of grace then I, but I haue my measure, and therfore sure of my glory. Peter Berger, I see the Heauens open to receiue my Spirit; And be∣holding the multitude at the stake, Great is the Haruest, Lord send La∣bourers. Iohn Mallot a Souldior; Of∣ten haue wee hazarded our liues for the Emperour Charles the fifth, and
shall wee now shrinke to dye for the King of Kings? Let vs follow our Captaine. Iohn Fillula to his fellowes: By these Ladders we ascend the heauens, now begin wee to trample vnder seet, Sinne, the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill. Thomas Calberg, to the Fryers, willing him to repent at the last howre: I beleeue that I am one of those Workemen in Christs Vine∣yard, and shall presently receiue my penny. Robert Ogners, Sonne to his Fa∣ther and Mother at the stake with him: Beholde millions of Angells about vs, and the Heauens open to receiue vs. To a Fryer that ray∣led, Thy Cursings are Blessings: And to a Noble man that offe∣red him Life and Promotion: Doe you thinke mee such a foole, that I would change eternall things for
temporary: To the people, We suf∣fer as Christians, not as Theeues or Murderers. Constantine being carried with o∣ther Martyrs in a Dungcart to the place of Execution: Well (saith he) yet are we a precious odour, and sweet sauour to God in Christ. Fran: Sanromanus a Spaniard: Worke your pleasures on my bodie, which you haue in Chaynes your Cap∣tiue: but my soule is euen already in heauen through Faith and Hope, and vpon that Caesar himselfe hath no power. Ioan the Marshals wife of France to her Husband at the Stake with her: Bee of good cheere, our Wed∣ding was but a shadow, an earnest and Contract of that solemne and blessed Marriage, which the Lambe will now consummate. Anne Audebert of Orleance: Blessed bee God for this wedding gir∣dle
(meaning the Chaine) My first Marriage was on the Lordes day, and now my second to my Spouse and Lord CHRIST shall bee on the same. Iohn Bruger, to a Fryer offering him a wooden crosse at the Stake: No (saith hee) I haue another true Crosse imposed by Christ on me, which now I will take vp: I worship not the worke of mans hands, but the Sonne of God, I am content with him for my onely Aduocate. Martin Hyperius, Oh what a dif∣ference there is betwixt this and eter∣nall fire! who would shun this to leape into that? Augustine of Hannouia to a No∣ble man, perswading him to haue a care of his soule; So I will (saith he) for I presently will lay downe my body to saue my Conscience whole. Faninus an Italian kissed the Ap∣paritour that brought him word
of his Execution; To one remin∣ding him of his Children; I haue left them to an Able and Faithfull Guardian: To his friends weeping, That is well done, that you weepe for ioy with mee: And to one obiecting Christes agony and sadnesse to his cheerefulnesse: Yea (saith hee) Christ was sad, that I might be merry; He had my sinnes, and I haue his me∣rit and righteousnesse: And to the Fryers offering him a woodden Crucifix, Christ needes not the helpe of this piece to imprint him in my minde and heart, where hee hath his habitation. George Carpenter, All Bauaria is not so deare to mee as my wife and children, yet for Christes sake I will forsake them cheerfully. Adam Wallacke, a Scot, to a tempting Fryer, If an Angel should say that which thou doest, I would not listen to him: is the Fire ready?
I am ready; Let no man be offended, no Disciple is greater then his Ma∣ster. Iohn Burgon to his Iudges asking him, if hee would appeale to the high Court: Is it not enough that your handes are polluted with our Blood, but you will make more guiltie of it? Fredericke Anuill of Bearne, to the Fryers that willed him to call on the Virgin Mary; three times re∣peated, Thine O Lord is the King∣dome, thine is the power and glory for euer and euer; Let's fight, Let's fight. Auaunt Sathan, Auaunt. Godfrey Varal of Piedmont; Hang∣man doe thine office, my death will be fruitfull to my selfe and others. Halewine of Antwerp, and Har∣man of Amsterdam, to the Mark∣graue of Antwerpe, offering mit∣tigation of Torments vpon abiu∣ration, Wee are resolued these Mo∣mentany
afflictions are not worthy that exceeding weight of glory that shalbe reuealed. Peter and Nicholas Thiesse brethren, vsed the like speech. Annas Burgius in the middest of his torments: Lord forsake mee not, lest I forsake thee. Peter Clarke with the root of hi Tongue plucked out, pronounced audibly (to shew that none euer wanted a tongue to praise God) Blessed be the name of God, as of old Romanus the Martyr, mentioned in Prudentius. Godfrey de Hammele, to one that called him Heretique, No heretique but an vnprofitable seruant, yet wil∣ling to die for his Lord, and reckoning this death no death but a life. Bucer, No man by talke shall with∣draw my mind from Christ crucified, from heauen, & my speedy departure, vpon which my soule is fixed. When
one aduised him to arme himselfe against Sathans temptations; Hee hath nothing to doe with mee: God forbid but now my soule should be sure of sweet consolation. Tremelius, a Christian Iew, Let Christ liue, and Barrabas perish. Ferdinand Emperour: If mine Ancestors and Predecessors had not dyed, how should I haue beene Empe∣rour? I must that others may succeed mee. Frederick the third Elect. Palat. to his friends about him, wishing him recouery, I haue liued enough to you, let mee now liue to my selfe, and with my Lord Christ. Leonard Caesar: Oh Lord doe thou suffer with me, Lord support me and saue me. Windelmuta, to one that told her shee had not yet tasted how bitter Death was: No (said shee) neither euer shall I, for so much hath Christ
promised to all that keepe his word, neither will I forsake him for sweete life, or bitter death. Henry Voes, If I had ten heads, they should all off for Christ. God for∣bid I should reioyce in any thing saue in his Crosse. The Minister of Brisgo, This skinne which scarce cleaues to my bones, I must shortly haue layde off by necessitie, how much more willingly now for my Sauiour Christ. Adolphus Clarebachius: I be∣leeue there is not a merrier heart in the world at this instant, then mine is: Behold, you shall see mee dye by that Faith I haue liued. Alexander Cane: when a fooles Cappe was put on his head: Can I haue a greater Honour done me, then to bee serued as my Lord CHRIST before Herod? Lord,
seeing my Persecutors haue no mercy, haue thou mercy on mee, and receiue my soule. Almondus a Via, My body dyes, my Spirit liues. Gods Kingdome a∣bides euer. God hath now giuen mee the accomplishment of all my de∣sires. Giles Tilman, vrged to know what hee beleeued of Purgatory. Purgatorie and Hell I leaue to you, but my Hope is directly to goe into Paradise: Neither feare I this great pyle of Wood, whereof some might haue been spared to warme the poore, but will passe through it purged for my Sauiour. Peter Bruse: I thanke God, my bro∣ken legge suffered mee not to flye this Martyrdome. Marion the wife of Adrian, seeing the Coffin hooped with I∣ron, wherein shee was to bee bu∣ryed aliue. Haue you prouided this
Pasty-crust to bake my flesh in. Lewis Paschalis: Its a small mat∣ter to die once for Christ, if it might be, I could wish I might die a thousand deaths for him. Iohn Buisson: I shall now haue a double Gaole deliuery; one out of my sinnefull flesh, another from the loathsome Dungeon I haue long lyen in. Hugh Stallour to Iohn Pike his fel∣low Martyr; Yet a little while, and wee shall see one another before the Throne, and face of God. Levine de Blehere, To his friends that offered to rescue him by tu∣mult: Hinder not the Magistrates worke, nor my happinesse: Father, thou soresawest this Sacrifice from eternall: now accept of it, I pray thee. Christopher Fabrianus: First bitter, then sweet; first battell, the vi∣ctory when I am dead; euery drop of
my bloud shall preach Christ, and set foorth his praise. Francisce Soet: You depriue me of this life, and promote mee to a better, which is, as if you should rob mee of Counters, and furnish me with Gold. Guy de Bres: The ringing of my Chaine haue beene sweet Musicke in mine eares: my Prison an excellent Schoole, wherein Gods spirit hath bin my Teacher: all my former Discour∣ses were as a blinde mans of colours, in comparison of my present feeling. Oh what a precious Comforter is a good Conscience. Dionysius Peloquine, To the In∣quisitour telling him, his life was now in his owne handes. Then said hee, It were in an ill keeping. Christes Schoole hath taught mee to saue it by loosing it, and not by the gaine of a few dayes, or yeares, to lose Eternitie.
Lewis Marsake Knight, seeing his other brethren goe with Hal∣ters about their necks, which they offered not him because of his dig∣nity; Why I pray you (quoth hee) deny me not the Badge and ornament of so excellent an order, is not my cause the same with theirs? which obtay∣ning, hee marched valiantly to the Stake with them. Symon Laloeus to one Siluester his Executioner; Neuer saw I man in all my life whose comming was more wel∣come to mee then thine. So cheerfull was his death, that Syluester ama∣zed at it, left his office, became a Conuert and a Christian himselfe, went to Geneua for further instru∣ction in the Gospell. Kilian a Dutch Schoolemaster, to such as asked him if hee loued not his wife and children, Yes (said hee) if all the world were golde, and were mine to dispose of, I would giue it
to liue with them, though it were but in prison; yet my soule and Christ are dearer to me then all. Giles Verdict: Out of my A∣shes shall rise innumerable Christians, which Prophecy, God so verified by the effect, that it grewe a by∣word after his death, That his ashes flewe abroad all the Coun∣trey. Anthony Verdict brother to the former, condemned to bee eaten with Beastes, to preuent the like Prouerbe: sayd to his Father, Oh Father, how hath God enabled you, to haue two Sonnes honoured with Mar∣tyrdome. Iohn Barbevill, to Fryers that called him ignorant Asse: Well, admit I were so, yet shall my Bloud witnesse against such Balaams as you bee. Francisce Coluer, to his two Sons massacred together with himselfe:
Sheepe wee are for the slaughter; this is no new thing, let vs follow millions of Martyrs through temporall death, to eternall life. By all these which are but an handfull of Christs Campe Roy∣all, it sufficiently appeares they had their Faith fresh and liuely in the face of this graund enemy, and by Vertue of their Faith, their Spirits, Wits, and Tongues, vn∣troubled, vndismayed; insomuch that an auncient witnesse of the Christian Bishops, that they did more ambitiously desire the glory of Martyrdome, then others did Praelacies and Preferments. And a late mortall enemie of theirs, bade a vengeance on them, for hee thought they tooke delight in burning. What then shall wee gaine by them? I remember Ma∣ster Rough a Minister, comming
from the burning of one Austo, in Smithfield, being asked by Ma∣ster Farrar of Halifax, where he had beene, made answere, There where I would not but haue been, for one of my eyes, and would you knowe where? Forsooth I haue beene to learne the way: which soone after hee made good, by following him in the same place, in the same kinde of death. Now if one President made him so good a Scholler: What dul∣lards and non-proficients are we? if such a cloud of examples work not in vs a cheerefull abilitie to expect and encounter the same aduersary, so often foyled before our eyes. Yet least any should complaine, that examples with∣out Rules, are but a dumbe and lame helpe: I will annexe vnto them a payre of Funerall Ser∣mons, opening a couple of Seales
reuealed to Iohn in his second visi∣on: The first, affording vs sundry Meditations of Death and Hell; The second, of Heauen, & the hap∣pinesse of such as dye in the Lord, and rest vnder the Altar. The vse of them I chiefly dedi∣cate and commend to old sick per∣sons, such especially, as die of lin∣gring diseases, affoording them lei∣sure to peruse such themes, though I forbid none, but to all I say, Come and see.
THE LIFE OF FAITH in DEATH. REVEL. 6. 7. 8. . Come and see.And behold a pale horse, and his name that sate on him was Death, and Hell followed after him, and power was giuen vnto them, &c. COme and see. Were it some stately, some pleasing, yea or but some vaine sight such as Mordecay riding on the kings Horse in pompe with the Royall Furniture: or but a company of Players, riding through a Market,
A Drum, a Trumpet, or the least call would serue the turne, to draw vs out to the sight: But these be∣ing serious, yea to nature somwhat hideous and odious Voyces, like vnto Thunders, are giuen to the beasts to call beholders. The Cry∣er in the Wildernesse is willed to cry this Theme aloud in the deafe eares of men. A Boanerges with all the vehemency and contention of his voyce and affections, will bee too little, vnlesse God boare the eares, open the eyes, and per∣swade the hearts of men to Come and see. Yet is it but our folly to be so shye of this sight, for though it bee sad, yet is it of all the sights vnder the Sunne the most necessa∣ry, the most profitable; Though we turne away our faces and close our eyes, yet see it wee must, and see it wee shall, neuer the lesse, neuer the sooner, neuer the later.
Nay, the truth is, see it wee neuer shall, but with closed eyes. Thou tender faint-hearted man or wo∣man that art so loath to meete with a Corps or Beere, to see a skull, or any thing that minds thee of Death, shalt thou by this meanes protract or escape thy Death? No, let mee tell thee praeuision is the best preuention, and praemonition the best praemu∣nition. That which is common∣ly receiued of the Basiliske, is here no conceited Story, but a serious truth. He that sees it before he be seene of it, may auoyd the deadly poyson of it. Hee that sees it be∣fore it comes, shall not see it when it comes. Hee that mannageth an horse at an armed stake, fits him to rush into the maine Battell with∣out feare. And wouldest thou with Ioseph of Arimathaea, walke euery day a turne or two with
Death in thy Garden, and well foreacquaint thy selfe therewith∣all, thou shouldest haue, if not E∣nochs, yet euery true beleeuers Pri∣uiledge, not to see Death, not to taste of Death, viz. in that ougly forme, distastfull manner, which other the sonnes of Adam do, who because they will not see the face of it, must feele the sting of it. To dye well and cheerfully, is too bu∣sie a worke to be well done ex tem∣pore. The Foundation of Death must bee layde in life. Hee that meanes, and desires to dye well, must dye daily. Hee that would ende his dayes well, must spend them well, the one will helpe the other. The thoughts of thy end as the trayne of the Foule and Rudder of a Shipp will guide thy life, and a good Life will leade thee to a peaceable end, that thou shalt neither shame or feare to
dye. In a word, Platoes Phyloso∣phy in this, is true Diuinitie: that the best meane, and whole summe of a wise mans life, is the Com∣mentation of Death, not euery fleet and flitting flash, but frequent and fixed contemplations. Death is the knownest and vnknownest thing in the world: that of which men haue the most thoughts and fewest Meditations. Be there∣fore perswaded to Come and see: that is, come that thou mayest see. Come from other obiects, infinite and vaine spectacles, with which the eye is neuer glutted. Drawe neere and close to this that thou mayest see it throughly. Wipe off the Clay, Spittle, and Scales of thine eyes, that thou mayest cleer∣ly behold the nature, quality, and consequents of Death. No mor∣tall wight but hath some blushes of mortality, such as go and come,
but if they would suffer them to lodge in their mindes, they must needes stirre some affection, and leaue some impression in the me∣mory, and produce some effects in their liues. Socrates had a gift that hee could fasten his eyes ma∣ny howers on one obiect without change or wearinesse: Halfe so stayed a thought of ones mortali∣tie, might bring a man to immor∣talitie. It is not beautie seene, but looked on that wounds. I meet with a Story of one that gaue a young Prodigall a Ring with a Deaths head, with this condition, that he should one houre daily for seauen dayes together looke and thinke vpon it: which bred a strange alteration in his life, like that of Thesposius in Plutarke, or that more remarkable, of Waldus the rich Merchant in Lyons, who seeing one drop downe dead in
the streets before him, went home, repented, changed his life, studied the Scripture, and became a wor∣thy Preacher, Father, and Foun∣der of the Christians called Wal∣denses, or poore men of Lyons. In Conference and Confessions ma∣ny one hath acknowledged to my selfe the like: some that by dange∣rous sicknesse of their own, others that by feare of infection in times of the Plague, and generall Visita∣tion, others by the death of friends, as by shafts that haue fal∣len neere them, haue beene awake∣ned, affrighted, and occasioned to thinke deeply on their ends, to pro∣uide against their ends, to attend the Word, which hath proued the meane of their conuersion and sal∣uation. And this I thinke should bee enough to perswade young and olde, one and other to Come and see.
But what now are we come out to see? Behold, First the Seale opened. Secondly, the Horse issuing out. Thirdly, the Colour of the Horse. Fourthly, the Rider and his Fol∣lowers. Death and Hell. This horse is vnder seale. Seales wee vse commonly to confirme and conceale, to make things sure and to keepe things secret. And thus death as all Gods iudgements are said to bee sealed. Iob. 35. and that with a firmer seale then of the Medes and Persians: In which sence this Horse Zach. 4. issueth from betweene two brasen mountaines, that is Gods ineuitable, vnalter∣able Decree: hee rusheth not out, rangeth not abroad at the will of man or Satan, at hap or by blinde Destiny, but at the pleasure and by the appoyntment of the great
Master of these Gods horses, Iesus Christ, one of whose chiefe royal∣ties is to keepe the locke and key of Death and Hell, Reuel. 1. else would he be euer trampling vnder feete the sonnes of men. Looke how naturally, and continually the Sea would ouerwhelme the whole Earth, if the waues were not bounded by prouidence: So would this horse ouercome the In∣habitants of it, were hee not tyed short, and restrained by his, and our Lord. You see him heere li∣mited to the fourth part of the Earth, else had not one been left aliue: For all are sentenced, and haue deserued to dye, and it's fa∣uour that all dye not. In a word, men dye not by chance, course of Nature, influence of Starres, but then, and therefore because it is ap∣pointed. A million of Aethiopians perish in one day, in one battell,
2. Corinth. 14. not because all were borne vnder one aspect of Planets, but because such a slaughter was sealed of God. And though there be one way in, and twenty out of the world, yet all falls out as God determines and disposeth. That Christian which beleeues this, though hee may desire Dauids A∣rithmeticke to number his dayes aright, that is, to know the bre∣uity of them: yet will hee neuer study the blacke and senselesse Art of calculating his birth and death. None but fooles are curious and inquisitiue to know that, which is vnder Gods priuy Signet. We are all as Souldiers sent to Sea with Commission vnder seale, not to be opened till wee come to such and such a point. To guesse and con∣clude, we shall dye at such an age, in such a Climaterical yeere, what is it but to make a league with
Death, not vnlike to that frenzie Merchant that would make and strike vp matches of hundreds and thousands with parties absent as if they were present. A fond itching humour, and such as would for the most part (what euer wee thinke) doe vs hurt rather then good, if the day and houre were far off, it would breede securitie: if neere hand horror. Sicknesses are suffici∣ent summons and warnings. Marke such as sentenced by Iudges and Physitians fore-know their death, yet without speciall grace fore-fit themselues neuer the more care∣fully. Some deaths indeede (as some Clockes giue warning be∣fore they strike) which symp∣tomes and signes infallible: and so extraordinarily God giues to some Moses and Hezekiahs a presage, and hearts to prepare: but generall God hath seene
this the best for vs, that it should be for the generall most certaine, for the perticular most vncertaine, to him sealed, to vs concealed: of which hee would haue vs make these vses. First, for our bodily health not to bee too carefull, nor too care∣lesse: with all our Physicall dyet and miserable anxietie, wee can∣not adde one cubite to the length of our dayes, or measure of our health. Wee are all sealed vp no otherwise then the measure of our wealth, of our crosses and blessings, for the hauing or auoy∣ding of which: the meanes wee must vse without carking care, or cowardly feare, cheerefully rely∣ing on Christ, the Lord Keeper of the Seale, not wittingly and despe∣rately preuenting that sealed date by surfeits of toyle or pleasure, by wilfull neglect of dyet, con∣tempt
of Physicke, by griefe or by melancholy: nay, not by haste to glory with Cleombrotus the Hea∣then, or with hastie selfe-mur∣thering Christians, such as Augu∣stines times were full off: but with Iob patiently all the dayes of our life, during the terme of our sealed lease, till the very day and date ex∣pire, and appointed time of dismis∣sion, and dissolution come. And secondly for our soules pro∣uision, not to do as most that haue set dayes of truce and peace, and in which they hang vp their Ar∣mour a rusting, and their Beakons vnwatched: but as people that liue in perpetuall hazard of war, haue all things in a daily readinesse for seruice at halfe an howres war∣ning, vpon the least Alarum: Who would liue one howre in in∣fidelitie or irrepentance, least in that hee bee taken napping as the
foolish Virgins, and that rich foole that reckoned of many yeares, and had not one night to continue. Grant it were enough to repent and belieue the last day of life, yet how can a man be sure to doe that, vnlesse he doe it euery day: consi∣dering that euery day may for ought he knowes, be the last. The seale may be opened in a day and houre one least thinkes of it, as it is to most that dye. Lastly, when euer this Horse comes to fetch away vs, or any of ours children or friends: A be∣leeuer stamps not, and rages not, as mad Marshall Birom: murmures not, repincs not as the wild Irish men without hope: expostulates not with Destenie, as Alexander for his Hephestion: but with Aa∣ron, layes his hand on his heart and mouth for his sonnes suddaine Death, knowing what God hath
sealed, shall be and must bee. If the Dreames of a blind fatall necessity could quiet Heathens, how much more should a Christian be chear∣full at the disposall of a wise and louing keeper of the Seale. A mi∣nute sooner or later it shall not be, then hee hath fore-seene and fore∣sealed for thy especiall good, who hath times, and seasons, and seales in his ordination. Worthy was the speech and resolution of an vn∣derstanding Diuine. If Christ hath the key and seale of Death, then a figge for Death. This though it be an ordinary notion, yet well di∣gested, it is a singular stay to a be∣leeuer. The Seale being thus opened, Come and see the Creature that is∣sues forth. Behold an Horse, a fierce a strong, a warlike, a speedy Crea∣ture so described by God himself, Iob 39.
Looke therefore how easily Ie∣hu stamped Iezabell into peeces: and Tamberlaine his Troupes of Horse the Turkish Foot-men, or as the sturdie Steede dashes out the little Whappets braines, so easily doth Death with the least kicke and spurne of his Heele the haylest Complexion, the stoutest Constitution, tryumph∣ing like an Emperour ouer all sorts of people, treading in the neckes of Kings and Princes, as Iosua ouer them in Cane in∣sulting in the tearmes of Rabsha∣keh, Where is Hamath? the2. Kings 19. 15. Ezek. 32. Kings of Arphad, Iuah, and Se∣pharuaim? Elam, Meshech, and Tubal, whose feare was vpon the liuing, are they not descen∣ded into the graue? made their bedds in the slimy valley, and layd their Swordes vnder their heads? Where is Goliah with his brazen
Bootes? Hath wisedome deliue∣red, Strength rescued, or wealth ransomed any out of my fingers? For all their Confidence, haue they not gone to the King of Feare? How can it bee otherwise, seeing Death comes as an armed Horseman, vpon naked Footmen: no encountering, no resistance, no running away, no euasion by flight. This winged Pegasus, postes and speeds after men, easily giues them Law, fetches them vp againe, gal∣lops and swallowes the ground he goes, sets out after euery man as soone as he comes into the world, and playes with him, as the Cat with the Mouse, as the Grey hound with the Badger, somtimes hee followes faire and a farre off, lingers aloofe and out of sight: anon hee spurres after, and by and by is at the heeles in some sick∣nesse, and then it may bee giues
vs some breath againe, but in the end ouertakes vs, and is vpon vs with a Ierke, as the snare ouer the Fish, or the Foule. Absolom could not outride him: Pharaohs Cha∣riot wheeles fell off in this chase. Ionathan and Saul, swift as the E∣gles, strong as the Lyon, yet how were they slaine with the mighty? What then is the course the Chri∣stian takes? He neither foolishly thinkes to resist, or escape, nor yet cowardly swounds, or crauenly yeelds: but as a valiant Footman that espies an Horseman pursue him in a Champion, stayes not till he come vpon him, but addresseth himselfe for the encounter: so does a Christian in his best health and prosperity, put on his armour, get him the Helmet of Saluation, the Shield of Faith, and learneth the vse of them betimes, before he be vnapt to it in sicknesse or age
As the Parthians teach their verie Children to handle the Bow, the Scythians the Dart, the Germans the Speare: and so it comes to passe, that belieuers are not surpri∣zed, as worldlings often are, with milke but in their breasts, without Oyle in their Lamps, & all in vaine then fondly cry out to this Horse∣man to stay his stroake. As the rich Foole Gregorie relates of, who en∣treated Death to stay till the next morning, Truce but til to morrow, and I will bee ready for thee. A Christian wisely considereth, that hee hath no morrow, and there∣fore while it is called to day, is ready for this Horse, who neuer sets any certaine day of his com∣ming. Behold also the colour of this Horse , the color of the wi∣thering leafe, pale and wan: Sym∣bolizing and noting the effect hee
hath first vpon the liuing, whom hee appalles, as hee did Baltashar, whome all his Concubines and Courtiers could not cheere, nor all his wine in the bowles of the Tem∣ple fetch colour into his counte∣naunce. See wee not often Priso∣ners at the Barre wanne away, and dye as white as a cloth at the Sentence of death pronounced on them. Many gulls and gallants we may heare sometimes flight off Death with a iest, when they think it out of hearing, and some wish it and call for it, as Gaal for Abime∣lech, but when it comes in good earnest, they are not able to looke it in the face, with the bloud in their cheeks. Some foolishly set a face on the matter, on their death∣beds, lest neighbours should cen∣sure when they are gone for Co∣wards: hypocritically paynting their faces as Iezabel did, affronting
Iehu out of the windowe, God knowes with a cold heart, & if her paint had bin off, a pale face should one haue seen vnderneth it. Wher∣as Christians hauing a good mea∣sure of faith to warme them at the hart, change not their countenance nor haue their colour any whit a∣bated, but as is recorded of Mistris Ioyce Lewis at the stake, and sundry other Christians, euen of the fear∣fullest by nature and sex, looked as fresh and cheerely at the houre of death, as at their mariage. A second effect of this pale horse is after death, bereauing the bodies of all bloud and colour, making them liuelesse & wan carkases, and so layes them a rotting and moul∣dring among the wormes their si∣sters, till the fashion of them be vt∣terly altred, the beauty consumed, and shape turned into rottennesse. Oh how grieuous is this to such
Absaloms, Iezabels, and Rosamonds, haue set much by their painted sheathes and pampered Carkases, whose belly is their God, and yet their end must be corruption. Dust they were, and to dust they must returne. Fauour is deceitfull, and beautie is vanity, when the pale Horse comes, there is no remedy. Here only Faith hath an Antidote comforting her selfe with these sayings: This base and vile bodie of mine must bee thus serued, that it may bee transfigured and made conformable to the glorious Stan∣dart Christs body, more glorious then the Sunne in his brightest hew. It must thus bee sowne in pale ignomy, that it may rise in glorious beautie. VVhat if I lose a little Vermillion red mix∣ture of Fleame and Sanguine, shall I not recouer a radiant resplendant lustre? Can the Alchimist with
his Art, cause a dry withered floure to shew it selfe againe for a space, in it naturall verdant shape and colour: and cannot God that made mee first of Clay, and that Clay of nothing, reduce and refine the same after it hath beene in the Earth? as the Chynois doe the ma∣terialls of their curious dishes for many scores of yeares, that when it is throughly deficate, their po∣steritie may temper and frame some vessell of excellent seruice withall. Certainly my Redeemer liueth, and with these eyes I shall see him, as hee is most admirable to behold, and my selfe like vnto him in my degree. Ten thousand times more comely, then is heere possibly for to imagine, the most personable Creature that euer the Sunne saw: when the body shall bee enriched with those excellent Dowries of Impassibilitie, Cla∣ritie,
Subtiltie, Agilitie. Oh, but heeres yet a more feare∣full Spectacle behind, then all that hath yet come in sight. Hell, euen Hell it selfe in the worst sense, not the graue of the body, but of the soule. For Iohn sees here principal∣ly the Iudgement of the wicked, that were slaine for the contempt of the Gospell, by the pale Horse, for not yeelding to the White and his crowned Rider. And their wo∣full state is heere opposed to the happy condition of the Martyrs vnder the Altar. Well then, behold also, euen Hell the Page and follower of Death, attending him where e∣uer hee goes among the wicked sort. Whence it is that they are so often coupled in this Booke, Death and Hell. Looke as the Foxes wayt vpon Lyons, Carrion Crowes vpon armies, Gaolers or
Serieants for a prey: so diligently does the deuill on death for a boo∣ty. No fowler does more cunning∣ly stalk behind the Horse, or creep behinde brakes and hedges, to get his ayme at the shye Fowles. No Serieant hides his Mase, no Angler his hooke more warily: knowing that else Hel should neuer swallow so many. Alacke, alacke, we silly Fish see one another caught, and ierk't out of the Pond, but see not the fire and Frying panne into which they come. In this consists the Deuils chiefest policie, and our grossest simplicity, and euen this is the cause of our sottish and foolish liuing and dying. Oh that my head were a Foun∣taine of teares, to weepe for, and bewayle the stupiditie, yea the desperate madnesse of infinite sorts of people that rush vpon
Death, and chop into Hell blind∣ling. How bruitish and beastly are the preaemises and conclusion of the Epicure and his brood, Let vs eate and drinke▪ for to morrow we shall dye? Who knowes whe∣ther the soule of the beast descend, and mans ascend, who euer saw the one goe downeward and the other vpward, and then what mat∣ter if the life of the one differ not from the other? What need a man care whether hee bee a Sadduces Swine, an Epicures Horse, or himselfe? The one ma∣ny times hath lesse care, and more pleasure then the other, if Death be the last line, the full point, and finall cessation of the Creature. These ruits thanke Phylosophie that  taught them not to feare any such Hobgoblins spirits, or old Wines tales, as Hell. But such Phylosophie Socrates, Plato,
and the wiser sort euen of the Hea∣then haue hissed out of Schooles as belluine. Yea, the most sauage and vnlittered peoplè, the lesse soi∣led with Art, the more confidently doe they out of Natures instinct, and diuine impression, conclude of an eternall place of well and ill be∣ing after death for the soules of men. But these Monsters wilfully shut their eyes, deface and oblite∣rate these stamps, and principles of nature, and so dance hood-winke into perdition. Miserable it is to see how boldly and blindly they thinke and venture on Death: The∣ramenes, he writes Bookes in praise of Death, as the end of all calami∣ties. Augustus, hee dyes in a iest, calling for a Plaudite. Tiberius n dissimulation. Diogines hearing Antisthenes cry out in his paines, Who shall ease mee? offers him a nife to dispatch himselfe withal.
Caninus called to execution, bids his Fellow remember hee had the best of the Game. The Earle of Kildare seeing his Writ of Death brought in when hee was at sho∣uelboard, throwes his cast, with this in his mouth: Whatsoeuer that is, this is for a huddle. Little list would these blind bayards haue for such idle mirth, if their eyes were opened to see this fol∣lower of Death. How pittifull is the frenzie of those braue Spi∣rits, as they deeme and terme themselues (as much as they scorne pittie) our Duellists I meane, who as if they neuer had heard of Hell, are as Prodigall of their liues, as Cockes or Dogs are of theirs, powring them out vpon euerie drunken quarrell. I pittie not the losse or misse of such, good for little but to se in the front of a Battell, or t
stop breaches and Canons withal: but I pitty the losse of their soules, who serue themselues, as the Ie∣suite in Lancashire, followed by one that found his Gloue, with a desire to restore it to him: but pur∣sued inwardly with a guilty con∣science, leapes ouer an Hedge, plunges into a Marlepit behind it, vnseene and vnthought of, where∣in he was drowned. I maruell not, that they feare not a Rapier, or Pistoll, Who would not chuse it before a lingring and paineful sick∣nesse? Were it not for the after∣claps of Death? No Coward need feare the encounter of it alone in a single combat. But Death hath a Second, a Page tenne times more dreadful then himself, with whom we haue to begin, when we haue done with Death, which is but the beginning of sorrowes. Death is pale, but his follower is a blacke
Fellow, a terrible monster neuer e∣nough feared. In which respect, how lamentable also is the blind∣nesse of all selfe-murderers, who make Death the remedie of euery griefe, and cure of euery violent passion: If they finde themselues inwardly vexed, or perplexed in Conscience, they seeke Death as a present ease; not considering how they leape out of the smoake into the flame, out of the flame in∣to the fire, out of a curable mo∣mentany disturbance, into an end∣lesse inrecouerable woe, (without the extraordinary mercy of God) to which vsually the Deuill speeds them, that hee might get them in∣to his clutches, and so passe out of doubt, all meanes of preuention and euasion by Faith and Repen∣tance. Oh senseles Achitophell, how did thy wisedome fayle and befoole
thee, when thou settest thine house in order, and disposest of thy goods, forgettest thy soule, hang∣est thy selfe, which durst thou, or wouldest thou haue done, had but one belieuing thought of an eter∣nall fire come into thy head? How blockish is the manner of dying of many a Naball, who strucken with the feare of Death and Hell, become as insensate as stocks and stones, haue no mind nor power to thinke of one thing or other: Cannot abide to heare any men∣tion of the danger of that which they feare, whose senses the De∣uill bewitches and benumms, lest they should see and auoyde: such was Lewes the eleuenth, who straightlie charged his Seruants, that when they sawe him sicke, they should neuer once dare to name that bitter word Death in his eares. So doe Cowards
and Crauens shut their eyes, and chuse rather to feele blowes, then to see and shunne them. Little better is the common course that most people take. Scared some are with a confused, and preposte∣rous feare of Death, and flashes of Hell in their Consciences, and yet take no course to get pardon and Faith in CHRIST: but either taking it to bee some melancholly humour, send for merry compa∣nions to driue it away: or being giuen vp to hardnesse of heart and impenitencie, wilfully shake off all thoughts of repentance, shut their eyes and eares against all good ad∣uise, and desperately put all at ad∣uentures, and chop into the iawes of that roaring Lyon. Some of them ridiculously fearing Death, they knowe not why, more for the pangs of it (which often are lesse then of the Tooth-ake) then
for the Hell following: like fooles that feare the thunder Cracke, and not the Bolt; the Report of the Peece, and not the Bullet; the Serieants arrest, and not the Gao∣lers Imprisonment: Labour to e∣scape Death which they cannot, and Hell which they might. O∣thers of them scarred with some terrible apparisions, affrighted, as Cardinall Crescentius a little be∣fore his death, with a blacke Dog in his Chamber. A Presage and Preludium of Hell approaching: they crie out they are damned, the Deuill, the Deuill, doe they not see him, &c. And so Spira-like, de∣sperately and disconsolately de∣part in hellish horrour. Other of them a little wiser, and yet little the better for it, admit a colde thought or two, and it may bee a little parley about the matter, but when they haue fetched a sigh or
put all vpon a Lord haue mercie on them: trust it shall goe as well with them as with others, euen as God will haue it: and thinke they doe much if they send to a Minister to pray with them or for them: neuer giuing all dili∣gence to make their saluation sure, and to escape so great a condemna∣tion. Oh if wee could consider how fearefully such finde themselues deluded, when their soules a∣wake, worse then Ionas in the▪ Tempest, euen in a gulfe of fire and brimstone. How would it a∣waken and arouse vs to fore-see Death and Hell in their shapes, and to fore-appoint our selues throughlie, not against the first Death which wee cannot, but against the second wee may, if we get our part in the first resurrecti∣on.
This Text, mee thinkes speakes to euery sicke man bound on his bedde with the Cords of Death, as Dalilath to Sampson: vp and a∣rise, for the Philistims are at hand: Death is at the doore, and behind the doore, the Fiends waight to fetch away thy soule. Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glympse of Hell were enough to make a man not only turne Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monke, to liue after the strictest rule that can be. I am of beliefe, that Gods spirit cooperating a thorow me∣ditation of it, might be a meane to keep one from it. For a man to wish to haue a sight of it, or that one might come thence & make report of the vntolerable and vnutterable paines of it is superfluous, supersti∣tious: & if it should be granted, yet being not Gods ordinance and al∣lowance, it might goe without his
blessing, and doe one no good. Thy best course is well to ponder what wee that are Gods Ministers report of it, out of Moses, the Pro∣phets, Christ, and the Apostles de∣scriptions. And if God meane thee any good, our warning may doe thee some good. Popish wri∣ters are too bold in making Maps of Heauen and Hell, as if they had surueyed them and their regions, and inhabitants: but most I thinke are one the other hand to breefe and summarie in their meditations and writings. To paint it in it owne natiue colours is impossible, or by any contemplation to com∣prehend the horror of it. Shad∣dowes and parables the Scripture vseth, by which thou mayest and oughtest to helpe thy coniectures, and to worke on thy affections withall, after this or the like man∣ner.
Heere God hath allowed thee on his earth a pleasant habitation, commodiously situate in a good Ayre, richly decked with furni∣ture, compassed with delightfull Gardens, Orchards and Fieldes, where thou hast liberty to walke and ride at thy pleasure: How would it trouble thee to thinke of being layd vp all thy life in some streight and loathsome prison, by this consideration how ill thou wilt brooke to be cast into a dole∣full disconsolate Dungeon, to lye in vtter darkenesse, blacknesse of darkenesse in eternall chaines, in little ease for euer. Heere a great part of thy con∣tentment, is to liue among good Neighbours, with a louing wife, with cheerefull companions: and loath thou art at any time to bee long in the house of mourning, to bee among melancholy malecon∣tented,
complayning feeble or brawling people in Hospitals, or Bridwels, or Bedlams. How will then thine eares indure to be tyred with continuall howling, scritch∣ing and gnashing of teeth, to liue among Dogges, Enchanters, vn∣cleane Birds, reprobate Spirits, worse then so many Toades, Ty∣gers, or Serpents. Here if thy Father should in dis∣pleasure bid get thee out of sight, or thy Prince banish thee his court and presence, as Dauid did Absolon, for some offence, thou wouldest take it heauily: how shall thine eares tingle to heare God say, de∣part out of my presence, Goe thou cursed into the lake prepared for the Diuell and his Angels. Here thou shrinkest to thinke of the gout, collick, stone, or strangu∣rian, shiuerest to heare of the strap∣pado, the racke, or the Lawne, how
then wilt thou beare vniuersal tor∣tures in all the parts of thy body, exquisite anguish and paines, such as of which the pangs of child∣birth, burnings of materiall fire and brim stone, gnawings of chest∣wormes; drinkes of Gall and Wormwood are but shaddowes; and to which they are all but sports and fleabitings, euen to the torments thy body shall suffer for it sinnes against the Creator. But hast thou euer here in this world tasted of a troubled spirit, of the griefe and feares of a woun∣ded Conscience possessed with bitter things: strucken and pier∣ced with the venom of Gods ar∣rowes, feares of the Almighty: by these thou mayst make the best gesse how it wil fare with thy soule when God shall powre al the vials of his wrath into a vessell of his fury, and vexe the soule in his sore
displeasure, scourge thee with the rods of scorpions, make thee drunk with the gall of Aspes and Cocka∣trices, make thy mind heauy vnto the death, holding it euer in those Agonies, which made his owne Sonne sweate cloddes of water and blood. Oh how fearefull a thing is it to fall into the handes of God, who is a consuming fire. Thinke of it whiles there is hope, you that forget God, Heauen, and Hell, least you come there where there is no redemption, no hope of ease or end, which is that that makes Hell, Hell indeed: For if all these paines might haue an end, were it after million and millions of yeares, as many as there bee sands in the Sea shore, yet migh∣test thou nourish some miserable comfort of a release in the long runne: But this night hath no day, this Ague no intermission,
his death no death to end it withal. Here thou wouldest be loath to lye on the Racke from morning to night, to be wroung with the Col∣lick for a few dayes or hours, to be haunted with a Quartan from Mi∣chael to Easter: Oh then adde eter∣nity to insupportable torments, and let thine eares tingle, and thine hart melt to think of it. Were it not for hope in small pressures, wee say heart would burst: Oh then this word euer and euer, if thou couldest duly belieue and consider it, how would it breake that hard heart of thine, which knowes not how to repent, nor cares to preuent the wrath to come. What thinkest thou, are these things tales and fables, is Hell but a name and word, a scarbug for to keepe fooles in awe? Hath not God, thinkest thou, a day of recko∣ning, a prison and power to punish
Rebels and Traitors, or are not his punishments like to his Iustice, in∣finite and eternall? Know these things to be as true as God is truth, saue that they are short of the truth it selfe. Why dost thou not then take thy soule apart, and ruminate of these things by thy selfe, iudging thy selfe here, that thou mayst not bee condemned in the world to come. Art thou afraid of a me∣lancholy fit, and fearest thou not this gulfe, and whirlpoole, and sorrow? Art thou not loath to bee tormented before thy time, and fearest not to bee tormented time without end. I wonder how the soules of wicked men and vnbelie∣uers goe not out of their bodies, as the Diuels out of demoniaks, ren∣ding, raging, tearing and foaming. I wonder how any can dye in their wits, that die not in the faith of our Lord Christ. Verily if these things
moue thee not, thou art in a worse plight then Foelix and Baltashar; yea, the verie Diuels themselues, who belieue them; yea, quake and tremble to thinke of them. How faine would I snatch thy soule out of this fire? Vndoubtedlie know, that if this warning doe thee no good, it is because thou art of old, iustlie ordained to perish in thy impenetency, and to bee a fire-brand in these euerlasting flames. Now on the contrarie, if thou beest a vessell of mercie and honour, it will doe thee no hurt, but driue thee to Christ, in whom there is no condemna∣tion: who onelie is perfectlie able to saue and deliuer thee out of this Lake. If thou be est al∣readie in him, it will cause thee to reioyce in thy Lord and Sauiour, who hath deliuered thee from the feare of two such enemies that
now thou mayst with the Ostrich in Iob despise the horse and his ri∣der, and triumph by Faith ouer Hell and Death: O Death where is thy sting! Oh Hell where is thy victo∣rie! Death is to men as he comes attended: To Diues he comes fol∣lowed with Diuells, to carrie his soule to Hell: To Lazarus with troopes of Angels to conuey him to Abrahams bosome. So that we may in earnest say, that Death is the Atheists feare, and the Christi∣ans desire. Diogines could iesting∣ly call it, The Rich mans enemie, and the Poore mans friend. This, this is that which makes death so easie, so familiar and dreadlesse to a belieuer; he sees Death indeede, but Death is not Death without Hell follow him: and Hell he sees not, but onely as escaped and van∣quished, and therefore is said not to see Death. Now (sayes the be∣lieuer)
comes death and the Prince of this world with him, but he hath no part in mee: all the bitternesse and teares of death lye in the feare of Hell, which, thanks be to Christ hath nothing to do with me, nor I with it, and therefore I taste not of death: now comes Gods Sergeant pale death, whom I know I cannot auoyde: but this I know, he comes not to arrest me to carry me to pri∣son, but only to inuite me to a feast, attend and conuey me thither. Let such feare him as are in debt and danger, mine are all discharged and cancelled: he comes with his horse to take vp me behind him, and to fetch me to my fathers ioyes, to a Paradice as full of pleasures, as he carries the wicked to a prison full of paines. Pharaohs Baker and Butler were sent for out of prison, the one to promotion, the other to execution: hee that had the ill
Dreame, expected the Messenger with horror, the other longed for him with comfort. The latter is my case, therefore though I be rea∣sonably wel in this world, as a child at board, yet home is home, there∣fore will I waite till this pale horse comes, and bid him heartily wel∣come: and with him the Angels of my Father, who haue a charge to lay my body in a bed of rest, and to bestow my soule vnder the Al∣tar, as it followes in the next seale, which is so pleasing a vision, that we neede no voice or preface, such as we had in the former, inuiting vs to Come and see: the very excel∣lency of the obiect it self is of force enough to draw, and hold the eies of our minds vnto it.
The second Sermon. VERSE 9. And when hee had opened the first Seale, I saw vnder the Altar the Soules, &c. WHen Death hath bin viewed in the palest, and Hell in the blackest colors that may be, yet if wee haue Faith enough to see Soules in their White roabes vnder the Altar▪ there is comfort enough against the horror of both; e∣nough to enable the belieuer to despise and trample ouer them ooth. In the opening of this fifth Seale, I hope to finde more sollid
Antidotes, more liuely Cordialls, against the feare of Death, then in all the dead and drie precepts of Bellarmines doting Art of dying. For this part of the vision was shewed Iohn of purpose to sweeten the harshnesse of the former: that his spirit grieued and amazed with the sight of the calamities and mortalitie vnder the persecuting Butchers, rather then Emperours, might yet be relieued and refreshed with a sight of the blessed estate of such as died either in, or for the Lord. Wherein was proposed to his sight, and to our consideration these seuerals. First, the immortall subsistence of soules after their se∣peration from the body. Second∣ly, their sure and secure condition vnder the Altar. Thirdly, their dignity and felicitie clothed with white robes. Fourthly, their com∣pleate
happinesse at the last day, when the number of their brethe∣ren shall be accomplished. Of all these, Christ meant Iohn should take notice, and al beleeuers by his testimony to their full con∣solation. First, Iohn being in the spirit could see spirits, men indeed clad in flesh, can hardly imagine how a soule can haue existence out of the flesh. Eagles can see that which Owles cannot: so is that visible and credible to a spirituall man, which to a naturall is inuisible, in∣credible. And yet euen natures dimme eyes haue beene cleere e∣nough to see this truth. Nature I say, pure and meere nature, not only the Platonists and other lear∣ned ones, who resolutely conclu∣ded it, and aptly resembled it, to the distinct being of the waggoner after the breaking of the Coach:
the swimming out of the Mariner in the wreake of the ship, the cree∣ping of the snayle out of the shell, the worme out of the case: not vn∣to the learned Grecians, and ciuili∣zed Romans: But euen the rudest Scythians and vnlettered Sauages; yea, though there bee many Lan∣guages, and sundrie Dialects in the world, yet is, and hath this euer been the common voyce of them all, That soules die not with the body. And howeuer the bodies re∣surrection hath to them been a Problem and Paradoxe, yet is the soules eternitie an inbred instinct sucked from natures breast; or ra∣ther an indelible principle stamped in the soules of men by the finger of God. And indeed, to right rea∣son, what difficulty or absurdi∣tie is there in it. What lets mee to conceiue a being of it in the Ayre, in the Heauen, or in any other
place as well as in the compasse of my body, is not one substance as capable of it as another? Can it liue in the one, and not in ano∣ther? Hath it not, euen whiles it is in the bodie, thoughts, motiues, passions by it selfe, of it owne dif∣ferent from the body, many crosse and contrarie to the disposition of the body, chearefull ones when that is in paine or melancholie: Cholericke ones when that is flegmaticke. Doth it waite vpon the body for ioy, sorrow, anger, and the like? doth it not more often begin vnto it? Not to speake of Martyres innumerable, who haue beene exceedingly pleasant in the middest of torments, as if they had beene spirits without flesh. How many auncient stories and dailie examples haue wee of chereful minds in distempered,
pained, languishing dying bodies? Reason will then conclude, that the Soule may well be, and be sen∣sible after death without the body, which euen in the body can bee wel, when that is ill, cheerely when that is hurt, or sicke, grieued and troubled when that is in perfect temper and health. And on the contrary, small reason haue wee to thinke it sleepes out of the bodie, which neuer slumbers in the body, or that it is seazed by death out of the body, which neuer was ouer∣come by sleep, which is but deaths Image, and younger brother in the body, but euer was working and discoursing in the deepest and deadest sleepes of the body. Besides, is it likely God would enrich it with such noble and di∣uine dowries to bee salt onely to the bodie, to exhale with it as Bruits doe. The admirable inuen∣tion
of Arts, Letters, Engines, the strange fore-casts, prospects and presages of the vnderstan∣ding part, the infinite lodgings, the firme reteinings of the me∣morie, doe they not argue an immortalitie: Doe men ingraue curiously in Snow, Yce, or tran∣sient stuffe? What meanes the great anxie∣tie of men about their suruiuing name, if the minde perished with the bodie, if Death were the cessation of the man, and de∣struction of the whole substance. What should nature care for an ayery accident without a subiect, whereof no part of him should be sensible. What meanes the very feare of Death, if that were the end of all feares, and cares, and sorrowes, if nothing remained sensible, and capable of any
thing to bee feared. Lastly, the fresh vigor, the vn∣impayred abilitie, that nimble agilitie of the minde in sicknesse; yea, manie times the freer vse of the faculties of it in the confines, yea, in the act and Article of Death, then in former health, doe they not tell the body, the soule meanes not to fall with the car∣kase (which hath the name of falling) lyes not a dying with it, but errects it selfe, meanes onely to leaue it as an Inhabitant doth a ruinous House, or as a Musi∣tion layes downe a Lute whose strings are broken, a Carpen∣ter a worne instrument vnfit any longer for seruice and imploiment: and as a Guest makes haste out of his Inne, to his long home and place of abode. Loath I am to mingle Phi∣losophicall Cordialls with Di∣uine,
as water with wine, least my Consolations should bee flash and dilute: yet, euen these and such like arguments haue taught all Phylosophie (the brutish schoole of the Epicure excep∣ted) to see and acknowledge that the soule is not a vapour, but a spirit, not an accident, but a substance, and elder and more excellent sister to the body im∣mixt and seperable; a guest that dyes not with it, but diuerts out of it, intending to reuisite and reunite it againe vnto it▪ selfe. But Diuinitie certainely knowes all this to bee most certaine that it is a particle of diuine breath, inbreathed into the redde lome at the first, not arising out of it, but infused from heauen into it, and therefore may as wel exist without the clay after it, as it did before it: and when the dust returnes to
the dust, heauen goes to heauen, both to their originals, the soule first, because first and principall in euery action, the body after as an accessary and second, and so the day of death to the body, is the birth day of eternity to the soule. This vndying, and euer-liuing condition of the soule, throughly rowled in the minde, firmely em∣braced, and vndoubtedly appre∣hended by Faith, workes admira∣ble effects as in life, so in the ap∣proach of death. Seneca that saw it but through Clouds, cranies and creuises with yfs, and ands, yet professeth that when hee thought but a little of it, and some pleasant dreames of it, he loathed himselfe and all his trifling gratnes. But most diuinely, and resoluedly▪ Iu∣lius Palmer: He that hath his soule linked and tyed to the body, as a thiefes feete to a Clogge with
guyues and fetters, no maruell hee knowes not how to dye, is loath to endure a Diuision: but he that vseth, and can by Faith separate the spirit from the body, to him it is to drinke this: and with that drinkes off a Cup of Wine in his hand, and within a while after, as cheerefully drinks of Deaths cup in the sight of the same Witnesses. Euen Socrates himselfe sweetened his Cup of poyson, with this dis∣course of the soules immortalitie, to the amazement of the behol∣ders. Such Soules indeede as place all their felicitie to bee in a full fedde, and well complexio∣ned body, and to partake of the senses corporeall delights, hath not accustomed it selfe to it owne retyred delights of obstracted me∣ditations, knowes not how to bee merry without a play-fellow, no maruell though it bee as loath
to part with the body, as a croo∣ked deformed body to part with rich robes and gorgeous apparell, which were it onely ornaments. But such noble and regenerate spi∣rits as know their owne Dowries, haue inured themselues to subli∣mate contemplations, and to haue their conuersation in Heauen, whiles they were in the body: such I say, though they do not Cynical∣ly reuile the body as a Clog, a pri∣son, a lumpe of myre, &c. but know it to bee the Temple of the Holy Ghost, yet are they willing, yea and sigh to be vncloathed, to sowe it a while in the earth, being a dark and thick lanterne, hindering the cleare sight of it, till they may reassume it clarified, a spirituall, an Angelified body made apt and obsequious to all diuine seruices, to Celestiall Offices without wea∣rinesse, intermission, and such like
vanitie, which here it is subiect vn∣to: as willing as Dauid to lay a∣side Sauls cumbersome Armour, and to betake him to such as hee could better weeld and command at pleasure. This is the first and lowest helpe Faith hath to comfort the soule withall in the approach of Death; when the strong men buckle, the Keepers of the house faile, they waxe dimme that looke out at the windowes, when the whole outward man decayes: that the inner man ages not, faints not, languisheth not, but rather lifts vp the head, is more fresh then for∣merly, and excepts to bee vnbur∣dened, and to bee at libertie, freed from Corporeall tedious vn∣pleasing workes of sleeping, ea∣ting, drinking, and other meaner drudgery, that it may once come to higher and more spirituall im∣ployments
better suiting with it natiue condition: euen as the Ly∣on longeth to bee out of the grate, and the Eagle out of the cage, that they may haue their free scope and fuller libertie. Vnder the Altar. Now if this much reuiued Iohn (as no doubt it did) to see the Soules continuance after Death, how much more to see their safety and rest vnder the Altar: that is vnder Christs protection & custo∣dy, vnder the shadow of his wings. Who makes them gratefull to his Father, couers them from his wrath, safeguards them from all molestation, procures them abso∣lute quiet and security. The phrase alluding to the Altar in the Taber∣nacle, which gaue the Offerings grace and acceptation: and partly
to the safety of such as fled from the Auenger to the Altar. Christ is our Altar, and all the Soules of such as dye in his Faith, are as Stephan bequeathed to him: hee presents them to his Father, shel∣ters them from accusation and condemnation, gathers them as the Henne her Chickens vnder his wings, being fully able to keepe what is committed to him from all disquiet. Hee that could keepe the three young men in the Fur∣nace with whom he walked, yea their very garments from the violence of fire: The Israelites and their apparell in the wilder∣ness: Ionas in the Whales bel∣ly: how much more easily now hee sits at the hand of his Father in Maiestie and Glorie, can hee defend saued and glorified soules from all Externall and Internall Annoyance, and settle them in
absolute peace with him in his Pa∣radise, according to his frequent promise to such as ouercome, they shall sit with me vpon thrones. And long white Robes were giuen vnto euery one. If Iohn had seene soules at rest, though in poore and meane condi∣tion, yet were a corner of an house with peace to bee preferred to a wide Pallace with disquiet: A poore dyet with greene Herbes with quiet, to a feast with stalled oxen, and crammed fowles, sauced with bitter contention. But be∣hold, he sees not naked, beggerly, ragged soules, but adorned with white Robes; that is, endowed now, and glorified with perfect righteousnesse, puritie, clarity, dig∣tie, and festiuitie: of all which white apparell hath euer been an
Emblem and Symbole in Diuine and Humane Herauldry, a cloa∣thing of Princes in their great so∣lemnities of Coronation, triumphs and ouations, saies Eusebius: so was Herod arrayed in cloath of siluer, with which the Sunne beames meeting, made such a glister, as a∣mazed the people that styled him a God: so sayes Tertullian, were they woont to dignifie Seruants at their Manumissions with white Apparell, in token of their new li∣bertie and preferment. At feasts great persons were wont to change their guests ordinary clothes with a white Synthesis, a colour fit to expresse alacritie. Christians, the whole Easter weeke wore white apparell. All the graces the soules had heere in this their infancy of Regeneration, were but stayned and polluted clouts: their know∣ledge darke and obscured with ig∣norance,
their memories clouded with obliuion, their wills and affe∣ctions tempested with mutinies and perturbations, their habits of holi∣nes and charity, sullid with defects and infirmities, their delights duske and particoloured & spotted with mixture of sorrow: all their appa∣rell blacke & sad russet at the least; but there purer then the Christall, whiter then the Snowe, or then Fullers earth is able to make them. The Lillyes, and Salomon in all their Royaltie not like vnto the meanest of them. Call vs no more Marah, may they say, but Na∣omi. For fulnesse of beautie is con∣ferred vpon them, God becom∣ming fulnesse of claritie and light vnto the vnderstanding, without errour or darknesse, continuation of Eternitie to the memory with∣out forgetfulnesse, multitude of Peace to the Will and Affections
without disturbance or disorder: the superiour part of the Soule, pleasing it selfe in the blessed visi∣on of God, and the inferior satiate with the fruition of riuers of plea∣sures, & variety of monthly fruits. All this ioy increased by the aeme∣nity and magnificence of the place being Gods Palace, built and pre∣pared for eternitie, for the honour of his Maiestie, and habitation of his Saints, all shining like precious Iasper: enchanted by the full quire of Angels and communion of holy men, excellent when they were on earth, now perfected in their ver∣tues, and freed from frailties, neuer mourning, but euer singing and lauding their Creator with Alle∣luiahs without defatigation or sati∣etie: all this made vp and consum∣mate by the addition not of a num∣ber of yeares, but of eternitie vn∣countable, vnalterable: incompre∣hensible.
What are the chiefe mi∣series of this life, but the sordid apparell of the Soule, the blacke thoughts, the speckled phantasies, darke obliuion, royled, soyled af∣fections, all the habite of it squa∣lid, iagged, and tattered. Now then was Ioseph loath to change his pri∣son-ragges, or Hester her olde and meane Cloathes with stately and royall array? Promise a Childe a new Satin suit, and see whether hee will not long for it, and call for it; see whether hee will crie when you bid him lay off his Russets? Whence is it then that men dye so dully, so vnwillingly, so heauily? or whence can it bee, but because they doe not liuely and certainely beleeue, and expect these white Robes for their soules. When the beautie of a mans minde is heere obfuscate and defaced with me∣lancholly Tentations, and opake
Imaginations, with yellow chol∣ler, with pallid feare, with ruddy shame, with sable dispaire; oh what would he giue for a candid calme, and serene state of his mind? and when againe it pleaseth God to affoord him sunshine holidayes of ioy and tranquilitie, wherein his mind is clad, and decked with gol∣den, siluer, and precious ornaments of peace, meekenesse, temperance, patience, Oh what an Heauen would he thinke hee had heere on earth, if all his daies were but such dayes! whereas this a Christian may well assure himselfe of, that what euer grace doth here prepare and begin, there glory will absolue & perpetuate for matter of sancti∣ty, purity, & alacrity of the mind, typified in these white robes: yea further for matter of dignitie and tryumph, which then shall be most compleat, where they shall see
Christ at that day come in the glo∣ry of the Father with millions of his Angels descending & bringing down his heauenly Ierusalem, mee∣ting them halfe way in the clouds, and there auenging them of their enemies, sitting with them as asses∣sors vpon thrones, to iudge the An∣gels, & the world of wicked ones, & such as haue insulted ouer them on the earth, in which they shall then without any malignity of en∣uy, anger, or appetite of reuenge, take amirable and vnspeakeable content and comfort, yea reck on it as the accomplishment of their in∣choate glory, for which they are here said to long for, & groane vn∣der the Altar, till the number of all their brethren being consummate, God shal openly acquit & applaud them, condemne and confound their opposites. These, these are the only, stately, and Kingly dignities:
the meditations whereof are only∣able to beget and foster true heroi∣cal & Christian resolutions against the feare of Death and Hell, other∣wise vnuanquished. To conclude then, to the man that would both in health and sicknesse nourish euer in his breast vndaunted and more then conquering thoughts of these two enemies, instead of Bellarmines many friuolous and tedious rules: I prescribe but these two practises of Faith. The first is to worke in his minde a setled and vndoubted certaintie: and the second a liue∣ly and frequent representation of them. Were heauen nothing else but an hauen of rest, wee know how wel∣come the one is to a Sea-sick wea∣ther-beaten traueller, and may by that guesse how desireable the o∣ther should be to a soule that long hath beene tossed in the waues of
this world, sicke of owne sinfull imaginations, & tyred with exter∣nall tentations. The happiest soule that euer hath sayled ouer this Eu∣ripus, in the best ship, in the health∣fullest body that euer was, neuer had so calme a passage, but that it hath had cause enough often to wish it selfe on shoare. What with selfe groaning phantasies, and inie∣cted temptations, how little respit or rest is here to be found? Is there any Palace or Tower here so high or strong, that can keepe diseases from the body: how much lesse cares, sorrows, feares, and Sathans assaults from the Soule? Were there but such an Iland, as some haue dreamed of heere on earth, that might free our bodies or mindes from disquiet, but for the space of the moment of this life, how would people couet to dwell in it? In the times of the late
warres in Netherlands, how did the Boares forsake their Farmes, and flye into walled Cities for se∣curitie from dangers? What vio∣lence then should our heauenly Ierusalem suffer of our wishes and desires? were it but for the sweet and amiable name of peace where∣of it is denominated, hauing in∣deed the God of Peace for the King and Keeper of it: Wals ma∣ny Cubits high, into which no Ze∣nacherib can shoote an arrow, nor the Dragon Beast, nor the false Prophet to seduce or to accuse: strong gates and barres excluding all enemies and annoyances, and so affording perfect tranquility to all the Inhabitants, out of which they insult ten times more saferly, then the Iebusites ouer the blinde and lame, ouer the pale horse and his riders, Death and Hell. Consider and compare a little the simpli∣citie
of the worldling with the wisdom of the Christian, the hap∣py stabilitie of the one, with the wofull vncertaintie of the other at the time of their departure. Euen Foxes and Hares, and other such vermine fore-acquaint themselues with Muses, Thickes and Burroes, into which when they are chased and hunted, they may repaire for safety: but these fooles while they liue in health and prosperity, neuer thinke of the euill day, and when away they see they must goe, how vnshystable are they? Some of the meaner sort, they take care for their winding-sheet: or if richer, for a marble or painted sepulchre, which yet cannot preserue their bodies or names from putrifacti∣on: the superstitious sort to bee buryed in a Fryers Cowle, or vn∣der an Alter of stone: the despe∣rater sort, wishing the Mountaines
might couer them from the wrath of the Lambe. An harbour or re∣ceptacle for their soules they ne∣uer thinke of; whence it is that they are as loath to haue them tur∣ned out of their bodies, as Hagar and Ismael to be out of doores, and exposed to misery and dangers; or rather as Cain, to be cast as a Vaga∣bond out of Gods presence, fea∣ring lest euery one that met him next, should cut his throat for a cursed Caitiffe. And indeed what else can they looke for, but instant∣ly to bee deuoured of the roaring Lyon, that waites at the doore of Death, to fetch away their soules into the place where there is no night nor day. Onely the wise be∣leuer, he hath prouided a Sanctu∣ary, or Citie of refuge against time of danger, hath learned wisdome of the Conies, who though a little nation, yet wise and forecasting,
haue their refuge in the Rocks. Christ is the beleeuers Rocke, and his strong Tower, his Altar, and therfore he feares not what Death can doe vnto him. Christ hath as∣sured him on his word, that hee shall haue all, teares wiped away, and the Spirit secured him that he shall rest from his labors. In which regard he is so farre from lingring and hankering after a continuance in this Baca of teares, this wilder∣nes of feares, that he studies rather to enter into this rest, Cries out with Dauid, Wo is me that I dwell in, Meshek and Kedar, when I think of peace, there is warre at hand: With Ieremy, Woe is mee that I dwell with a contentious people. With Elias, I am weary of my life, an end good Lord. Or with bles∣sed Simeon, Now Lord let thy ser∣uant depart in peace, into that land of peace; heere I haue seene that
there is no peace to bee had: all here is vanity & vexation of spirit. For a minute of peace, moneths of vanity, for a dram of hony, pounds of aloes and gall. Soules here find no resting place for the soles of their feete, till they come to the mount Ararat, whither their works follow them, where their sorrowes leaue them. And so con∣clude with Vidus Bressius, Oh that my soule had I the wings of the Doue to flie and make haste to that mountain of God, and hill of tran∣quilitie and eternitie. Thus th'one dies howling, the other singing, be∣cause the one knowes he changeth for the better, the other for the worse: the one takes Death for a gulfe of sorrow, the other for a port of libertie and ease: the one because he is stript for a scourging; the other because hee layes off his clothes to go to bed after his toile.
If Queene Elizabeth whiles she was a prisoner in her sisters dayes could haue been fully assured, and had clearely foreseene her owne long; glorious, and prosperous reigne ensuing, would she haue wi∣shed her selfe a Milke-maid for the present? No, it had bin impossible. All our feares & doubts arise from infidelitie and the vncertaintie, or else from the deadnesse and dul∣nesse of our hopes. To put life into which, there can bee no better, no other help, then first to ground and root our Faith in Christ through the word and spirit: And then of ten to be setting before our eyes a state & condition happy aboue all that Cities, Kingdoms, Crownes, Pearles, and Iewels, Marriages, Feasts, and all other Metaphors and Parables of Scripture doe but shaddow out vnto vs. Which su∣pereminent and super aboundant
felicity, Paul that had been an eye witnes, not able to describe, much lesse to amplifie, summes it vp, An exceeding exceeding eternall weight of Glory. A superlatiue transcēdent phrase such as is not to be found in all the Rhetoricke of the Heathens, be∣cause they neuer wrote of such a Theame, nor with such a Spirit. If any of vs had but halfe the strength of Pauls Faith, or life of his hope, or chearefull fore-imaginations, which he had of this felicitie, woe could not but haue the same de∣sires, and longings for our dissolu∣tion and fruition of them. If we throughly beleeued and remem∣bred this to bee the state of our selues and dead friends, would we▪ or could we so feare for our selues, or mourne for them in Blackes, whiles they are in whites, as Iacob for Ioseph, thinking him deuoured
by some euill beast, when he was Lording it in Aegypt. No verily, but thinke of it, and looke for it we would with the same affections that Children do for their playes, Prentises their freedome, Spouses their mariage, Labourers their wa∣ges, Husbandmen their Haruest, Heyres their Inheritance, Princes their Kingdomes. Mongst many thousands, I chuse to instance and end with Monicah and Augustines examples▪ the mother vsing this speech to her sonne; All that I haue desired to liue to see, is that which I now see: thee my sonne a Christian. And now what doe I a∣ny longer in this base and impure world? And hee of his mother: What cause haue I to mourne for a mother, of whose happinesse I may be so well assured. When I awake, I shall be satisfied.
Write, O Christ, these Medita∣tions in our hearts, imprint these Patternes so fast in our memories, that wee may all the dayes of our liues haue frequent fore-thoughts of our appointed change, chiefely in that last and solemne day of our death, when the Prince of this world will be busie, and wee shall be weake, let thy Comforter then bring them to minde, that by faith we may ouercome, and hauing the Arke of thy Couenant in eye, cheerefully passe through the wa∣ters of Iorden, and so take possessi∣on of that land which flowes with all varietie of delights, without ei∣ther end or sacietie: euen so Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. FINIS.
