3565 99857613 23374
The Engl Gentlewom LONDON. Printed for Michaell Sparke and are to be. Sould, at the Blew Bible▪ in Greene Arbor. 1631. Will. Marshall
THE ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN, drawne out to the full Body: EXPRESSING▪ What Habilliments doe best attire her, What Ornaments doe best adorne her, What Complements doe best accom∣plish her. By RICHARD BRATHVVAIT Esq. Modestia, non forma. LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and T. FAVVCET, for Michaell Sparke, dwelling in Greene Arbor▪ 1631.
TO HER, VVHOSE TRVE LOVE TO VERTVE HATH HIGHLY ENNOBLED HERSELFE, RENOVVNED HER SEXE, Honoured her House: The Right Honourable, the Lady ARBELLA WENTVVORTH; The accomplishment of her Divinest wishes. MADAM; SOme moneths are past, since I made bold to recom∣mend to my Right Honorable LORD your Husband, an ENGLISH GENTLEMAN; whom hee was pleased, forth of his Noble disposi∣on, to receive into his Protection. Into whose most Honourable service hee was no sooner en∣tertained,
and upon due observance of his inte∣gritie approved; then upon approvement of his more piercive judgement, he became gene∣rally received. Out of these respects, my most Honourable Lady, I became so encouraged, as I have presumed to preferre unto your service an ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN, one of the same Countrey and Family, a deser∣ving sister of so generous a brother: Or (if you will) a pleasing Spouse to so gracious a Lover. Whom, if your Honour shall be but pleased to entertaine, (and your noble Candor is such, as she can expect nothing lesse) you shall finde excellently graced with sundry singular quali∣ties, beautified with many choice endowments▪ and so richly adorned with divers exquisite ornaments, as her attendance shall be no dero∣gation to your Honour, nor no touch to your unblemish'd Selfe, to retaine her in your favour. Sure I am, the sweetnesse of her temper, sorts and sutes well with the quality or disposition of your Honour: For shee Loves without any painted pretences to bee really vertuous, with∣out popular applause to be affably gracious, without any glorious glosse to bee sincerely zealous. Her Education hath so enabled her, as shee can converse with you of all places, de∣liver her judgement conceivingly of most per∣sons, and discourse most delightfully of all fashions. Shee hath beene so well Schooled in the Discipline of this Age, as shee onely de∣sires
to retaine in memory that forme which is least affected but most comely; to consort with such as may improve her Knowledge and practise of goodnesse by their company; to entertaine those for reall and individuate friends, who make actions of pietie expressivest characters of theyr amity. Diligent you shall ever finde her in her imployments, serious in her ad∣vice, temporate in her Discourse, discreet in her answers. Shee bestowes farre more time in eying the glasse of her life to rectifie her errors, if there bee any, then the glasse of her face in wiping of such outward staines as might ble∣mish her beautie. Neyther in preserving that, is shee altogether so remisse, as not to retaine that seemely grace in her feature, as may put her in remembrance of the unexpressive beauty and bounty of her Maker. Neate she goes usu∣ally in her attire, which she puts on with more care then cost. And to these shee addes such a well-seeming grace, as she bestowes more beau∣ty on them, then shee receives from them. Phantasticke habits or forraine fashions are so farre from taking her, as with a sleight but sweet contempt they are disvalued by her. She wonders how a wise state should employ so much time in inventing varietie of disguises to disfigure theyr Shape. This makes her desire rather to bee out of request with time, then with a civill and well-composed mind; whose honour it is to bee prized more by her owne
internall worth, then any outward weare. Constant shee is in her behaviour; wherein she affects little, but observes much. With a bash∣full admiration she smiles at these civilized si∣pring Dames, whose onely glory it is to affect a kind of reserved state; which, as they hold, consists principally in a minc'd speech, set looke, or ginger pace. Shee loves alwayes to bee her selfe, nor to entertaine ought which may estrange her from her selfe. So as, there is nothing in the whole posture of her Behaviour, but with a native gracefull propriety doth infi∣nitely become her. Take upon her to instruct others, shee will not, such is her Humilitie; al∣beit, every moving posture which comes from her, may be a line of direction unto others to follow her. Complement shee affects not, as the world takes it. The word in his owne native and unborrowed signification is good, and in that sence she admits it; but to be restrained to an inforced formality, shee cannot relish it. Whence it is, that she preferres the incompara∣ble Liberty of her mind, before the mutable formality of a Deluded age. Shee desires to be Compleat in the exercise of goodnesse; to im∣prove her Honour not by titles but a lovely and lively proficience, graced with a continuate practise in all vertues. She cannot indure this later introduc'd kind of Complement, which consists in Cringies, Congies, or supple salutes. A cheerefull modesty is her best Complement,
which shee ever weares about her as her chie∣fest ornament. Decency, shee affects in her Cloathes, affability in her Discourse; shee hath made a covenant with her eyes never to wan∣der, nor intentively to bestow themselves on any other object than the glory of her Maker. A proper personage is no such attractive mo∣tive to her eye, to make her loose her selfe. Whatsoever shee undertakes beseemes her, be∣cause shee affects naught but what naturally be∣comes her. Her beauty is her owne; and whatsoever else may better accomplish her. Her pathes are evenly vertuous; her desires truely religious; Piety is her practise; which shee expresseth so fully in every action; as the whole course of her well-disposed life is not so much as justly conscious of the least aspersion. So highly shee values her Estimation, as she will not engage it to suspition. Promises cannot tempt her, nor hope of advancement taint her. She wonders one should preferre a conceit of being great before a desire of appearing good. Protesting Lovers she holds for no better then deceiving Lures. Bee their vowes of seruice never so incessant, their assaults never so vio∣lent; her resolves have vow'd her constant. Hope of Profit cannot surprize her, nor thought of Pleasure vainely delude her. Esti∣mation she holds her highest grace; with which untainted shee purposeth to goe to her Grave. Shee knowes how to fancie; and in her shee
retaines what shee fancies most: A chast soule; this is that she loves, and with which she cheere∣fully lives. Shee was neuer yet acquainted with a passionate ah me; nor a carelesse folding of her armes, as if the thought of a prevailing Lover had wrought in her thoughts some violent Di∣stemper. So seriously doth she taske her selfe to imployment, as she never reserues so much time as to treate of so light a Subject. Yet shee unfainedly vowes, that if it be ever her fortune to make her choyce, her constant affection must never admit any Change. To be Generous in e∣very action, hath beene ever the height of her ambition. Howsoever she might boast of Des∣cent, her desire is to raise it by Desert. Shee holds, no family can bee truely Generous, un∣lesse it be nobly vertuous. Her life must ex∣presse the line from whence shee came. Shee scornes to entertaine one thought below her selfe. Or to detract from the glory of that house from whence she came. As the blood that streames through her veines was nobly Derived, so must it not by any action or affection drawne from the rule of her direction, become corrupted. For Honour, she admits it, but sel∣dome or never admires it; the Staires by which she meanes to clime to it, must be faire & firme, or she will never mount them. She rather ad∣mires the Ages folly; while shee observes how many hazard their high-priz'd liberty, for a vading glimpse of popular glory. Her desires
are higher seated, where they are onely to bee sated. A secure State consists not in styles but vertues, which are Honours surest stayes. There∣fore her highest Honour reflects on her Creator, wherein she is so farre from fearing, as shee is ever wishing more Corrivals. THIS is the GENTLEWOMAN whom I have presumed heere to present vnto your Ladiships seruice;Such, to your Honour, is her zealous affecti∣on, as shee makes it the sole Apologie of her Pre∣sumption: which shee weaves vp in this Dimensi∣on: whose sweete converse will at retired houres afford you choicest solace. Neyther, should you ranke her amongst the lowest of your me∣ney, will it displease her, such is her Humility: for she hath learned as well to obey as command. Nor will she spare for any paines, so her dili∣gence may please. Onely (Madam) be pleased to shine upon her with the gracious raies of your favour,To serve some GREAT ONES l've bene oftimes wood. to shrowd her bashfull endeavours un∣der the wings of your Honour; and entertaine her blushing approach with your benigne Cen∣sure.But HERS I'm vow'd, that is both GREAT and GOOD. So shall you finde a constant desire of re∣quitall in her; and engage Him, whose intimate Zeale to your Honour recommended her, Your Ladiships devoted servant: Richard Brathwait.
TO THE GENTLEVVOMAN READER. GENTLEVVOMEN: I Have heere presented vnto your view one of your owne Sexe; One, whose improved Educa∣tion will bee no blemish but a beautie to her Na∣tion. Peruse her, and I make little doubt, but you will so approve of her Behaviour, as you shall acknowledge her right worthy the title of a Sister. More shall you finde in her, by freely conversing with her, than in those YOVNG but loose ENGLISH GENTLEWOMEN, whose long mer∣cinarie Prostitution vpon the Stall, hath brought them out of Request, and made them grow too Stale, by being exposed to publike Sale. Ma∣ny Countries hath shee coasted, sundry Dangers
accoasted, Courts and Cities hath shee frequen∣ted, to returne home better freighted, and re-con∣vey the benefit of that fraught to this Iland, where shee was first bred and now arrived. Doe yee itch after Fashion? She is for you; yet not that, which the vanity of this Age admits; but what Modestie onely affects. She hath observ'd much in forraine Courts, which deserv'd rather Contempt than Imitation; this shee would not for a world intro∣duce into a well-govern'd State; so tender shee is of her Fame, as no place nor person shall derive from her the least staine. Whatsoever shee hath commended to be seene, is no lesse fully than faith∣fully showne, and with that temporate style drawne, as in every line some one precept of Vertue seemes to shine. Neither in this her strict or serious Ob∣servation of Times, doth shee resemble those La∣miae, who vse to take their eyes with them when they goe abroad, but lye them aside when they come home: No; so little doth shee favour her selfe, as shee preferres others Censures before her owne; and in no one particular so much expresseth her owne true glory, as in the constant practise of Humilitie. Hence it is, that shee is no curious pryer into others actions, nor too censrious a reproover of others Directios; being indeed, a TYRESIAS in the eying or descrying of others errors, an ARGUS in her owne. What is good and amiable in the eye of Vertue, she imbraceth with an affectionate tender; making it her highest honour, to promote the glory of her Maker. But least by being too serious, shee
might become tedious; she will not sticke to walke abroad with you into more pleasing groves or pa∣stures of Delight: where shee will converse with you of Love, and intermixe her Discourse with such time-beguiling Tales as varietie shall no lesse sharpen your attention, then the modesty of her Method beget admiration. Every Subiect she treats of, you shall finde so equally tempered with profit and delight; as the one shall no lesse benefit your minde, than the other solace your Eare. Shee can reprove without gall, blush without guilt, love without guile, live without gaine. Her gaine is to purchase vertue more followers; her guile, to de∣prive the world of her favourers; her guilt, to defeat all vitious pioners; her gall, to disrelish all Voluptuous practisers. She can discourse of Love without lightnesse; converse with Love without loosenesse; and consort with those shee loves with∣out leudnesse. She knowes how to retaine a seeme∣ly state without pride; to expresse her selfe praise∣worthy without selfe-praise; and in all her acti∣ons to make Vertue her highest prize. Humilitie, which is the princesse of Vertues, the conqueresse of Vices, the mirror of Virgins, and Crowne of Chri∣stians, shee so much honours, as shee values it above all humane glory: whence it is, that shee hath e∣ver reapt more spirituall profit by dis-esteeme then selfe-esteeme. Day by day shee recreates herselfe in her Garden of goodwill; and in her recreati∣on, shee makes this her soule-solacing Meditation: Who be they that neighbour neare me, and
whose weake estates stand in need of me? Con∣cluding with this charitable resolution: There is none so poore, but to my power I will relieve, so long as I live, for the honour of his Image whom I love. Shee devides her day into houres, her houres into holy taskes. Employment takes a∣way all occasions of distraction. Should she suffer a light or indisposed thought to worke upon her ima∣gination: or giue way to any such intruder to disturbe the peace of her inward house, she would en∣dure her selfe worse for many yeares; and inflict vpon her extravagant affections such a censure, as might deterre them thenceforth to wander. She distastes none more than these busie house-wives, who are ever running into discourse of others fami∣lies, but forget their owne. Neither holdes shee it sufficient to be onely an House-keeper; or Snayle-like to be still vnder roofe: she partakes therefore of the Pismire in providing, of the Sarreptan wid∣dow in disposing: holding ever an absent providence better then an improvident presence. She is no common frequenter of publique feasts, but if neigh∣bourhood require it, she will admit of it: wherein she demeanes her selfe so civilly, as there is no dis¦creete person but ioyes in her society. There is no∣thing must beget in her a distemper, having ever a tender eye o're her honour. In the report of others praises she is attentive, but deafe to her owne. Bee she in places of publique resort or privately retyr'd, she ever enioyes her selfe; neither can excesse of mirth transport her; or any crosse occurrent much
perplexe her. There is nought that aliens her mind more from those with whom shee consorts, than an immodest discourse, which shee interrupts with a discreet anger. Wheresoever she sets her rest, shee makes Vertue her guest, whom she entertaines with so sweet an embrace, as nothing can divide them: so firme and inviolable is the league that is be∣twixt them. She conceives no small delight in E∣ducating the young and unexperienced Damsels of your sexe: wherein she retaines an excellent facul∣ty and facility. It shall not be amisse therefore for you who have Daughters, to recommend them to her direction; whose government is such, as neither her too much indulgence shall spoile them; nor re∣straint dull them. Whatsoever she in many yeares hath learned (so desirous is shee to benefit where her Observations may afford profit) she is wil∣ling to impart; to the end shee may procure her mor servants, whom she religiously hath ever vow'd to serve. Long hath she beene a Learner, neyther is she asham'd to be so still. Onely for ver∣tues honour, is shee become a Teacher; that the Younger may be instructed by those that are El∣der; the vndisciplin'd by such as are riper. Ney∣ther shall you find her slow in performing, what she hath so perfectly learned. For her very Life is a continued line of Direction, being solely dedicated to a vertuous profession. St. Cyprian did sharpe∣ly reprove a rich woman, for comming into the Lords Temple without her Oblation: But this re∣proofe she would be loath iustly to incurre: there∣fore
she goes better prepar'd, that her portion of Glory may be sooner shar'd: having an Oblation in her hand, Devotion in her heart, and a Crowne of consolation in hope. You then, who love modesty, entertaine her; for she will sort well with your hu∣mour, and through her acquaintance improve your honour. For such who sacrifice the Morne to their Classe, the Afternoone to the Stage, and Evening to revelling; she holds no correspondence with them. These she holds for no employments; nor the Profes∣sors of them worthy her knowledge. They must not a∣buse time, that are commended to her trust. She is not so weary of time, neither doth she so disvalue it, as with such impertinences to consume it. Those like∣wise, who preferre Fashion before Decency, formal Punto'es before reall Formality, & will suffer thē∣selves to be deluded by Vanity; they must not be ad∣mitted into her family. She hath learned better things than to foole her selfe in a painted disguise, or to labor of that Vniversall disease, which the corrup∣tion of a full and flourishing State usually produceth. She hath learned with that better Sister, to chuse the better part. Constant be her purposes, content∣ment her desires, consonant her delights. Be it then your honour to be informed by her, seeing her in∣structions are equally mixt with profit and plea∣sure. Now if you obiect, that shee hath beene too flow in comming, seeing her GENTLEMAN so long since arrived; heare mine answer; and sus∣pend your Censure, by imputing this fault to our English Error. Where Venus is longer in trim∣ming,
than Mars in training. Many provisions were required by her, before the World were to be possessed of her. Much likewise expected from her, before the World had knowledge of her; this made her the longer to retire, that shee might pro∣fit the more in her returne. May you, Gentlewomen, bee the instance of it; so shall both the Author and his labour reioyce in it. To draw then to a Conclusion, lest my Portell rise too high for my building; as you are not to expect from her any guga-tyres, toyes, or trifles; love-sented gloves, amorous potions, perfumed pi∣ctures, or love-sicke pouders; so shee doubts not, but to finde in you an Eare, prompt to attention; a Tongue, cleare of invection; a Spirit, free from detraction? with an Heart apt to harbour affection. Now for the Volume, I had purposely made it more portable, that it might become your more so∣ciable follower; had not my observation told mee, that albeit amiablenesse consist in a lovely feature, the goodlinesse of a Gentlewoman rests in her comely Stature. Besides, this corresponded better with the Portraiture of the ENGLISH GENTLEMAN, her affianc'd Lover. For the Margin, I have not charg'd it with many Notes, lest you should neglect the Garment, by being taken too much with the border. Improve it to your best profite, and let GOD have the glorie of it.
An Abstract or Summarie of all such Principall points, Branches or Particulars, contayned in this Booke entituled, The English Gentlewoman. The prime Subjects whereof it treates. Apparell. Behaviour. Complement. Decencie. Estimation. Fancie. Gentilitie. Honour. 1. Argument. APPARELL. THe Necessitie of Apparell;Motto' vpon every Subject. Of the vse and abuse of Apparell;Comely not gaudy. Two meanes by which the vse may be inverted to abuse; That Appeareth most comely, which conferres on the Wearer most natiue beauty, and most honour on her Countrey.
2. Argument. BEHAVIOVR. BEhaviour reflects on three particulars;Loving mo∣desty, it ali∣ving beaty. How to behave her selfe in Company; How in Privacy; That Behaviour most approved, which is cleanest from affection freed. 3. Argument. COMPLEMENT. COmplement defined; how it may bee cor∣rupted,Civill Com∣plement, my best accom∣plishment. how refined; wherein it may bee admitted as mainely Consequent; wherein omitted as meerely impertinent; What Com∣plement gives best accomplishment. 4. Argument. DECENCY. DEcencie recommended as requisite in foure distinct Subjects;Virgin-De∣cency, is Ver∣tues Livery. Decency the attractivest motive of affection; the smoothest path that leades to perfection. 5. Argument. ESTIMATION. EStimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize;My prize, is her owne praise. how it may be discerned to be reall; how Superficiall; how it may bee impregnably pre∣served; how irreparably lost; The absolute end, whereto it chiefely aspires, and whein it cheerefully rests.
6. Argument. FANCIE. FAncy, is to be with Deliberation grounded;My Choice admits no Change. with Constancy reteined; Wanton Fancy is a wandring Frency; How it may be checked, if too wilde; how cheered, if too coole; an at∣temperament of both. 7. Argument. GENTILITIE. GEntility, is derived from our Ancestors to us,Desert crownes Dis∣cent. but soone blanched if not revived by us; Vertue the best Coat; a shamefast redde the best colour to deblazon that Coat; Gentility, is not knowne by what wee weare, but what we are; There are native Seedes of goodnesse sowne in generous blood by lineall Succession; How these may be ripened by instruction. 8. Argument. HONOVR. HOnour is painted, when it is not with vertue poudred;Honour is vertues Harbour. No cloath takes such deepe tin∣cture, as the cloath of Honour; Honourable personages should be Presidents of goodnesse; Vertue or Vice, whether soever takes hold first, retaines a deeper impression in Honour, than in a∣ny lower subject; That Vertue may receive the first impression, by meanes of an in-bred Noble disposition, seconded by helpes of Education; which reduc'd to habite, aspires to perfection.
A Compendious Table; where∣in the Principall points contained in this Booke, are with no lesse Brevity than Perspicuity, Propriety, than Facility couched. APPARELL. Observat. 1. OF the necessity of Apparell. Pag. 1. Primitive purity exempted vs from these necessities; Originall impuri∣ty subiected vs to these necessities. pag. 4. Apparell keepes the body warme two wayes: first by keeping in the naturall heate: 2. By keeping out accidentall cold. pag. 2. These benefits are inverted by phantasticke Fa∣shions late introduc'd: where attires are not made to keepe cold out, but to bring cold in. pag. 4. Of the Vse of Apparell. pag. 5. To make this vse good, Modesty must bee our guide, Vertuous thoughts our guard; so shall Hea∣ven be our goale. ibid. A memorable instance of a Religious woman; ex∣pressing what Divine vse shee made in the eying of er Apparell. ibid.
The habite of the minde may be best discerned by the carriage of the body; the Disposition of the bo∣dy, by the habite. Pag. 6. The Constancy of the Heathen, in retayning their ancient Countrey fashion; and immutably obser∣ving the habite of their owne Nation. ibid. Habite is to be used as an Ornament of Decen∣cie; without the least border or Edging of Va∣nitie. pag. 8. Directions, how to dispose the Senses; and that Reason must keepe Centinell, lest they become Sen∣suall. ibid. The preciousnesse of Time; whereof, a Moment is our portion; nor hath the Commandingst Empe∣rour a larger proportion. pag. 9. How contemptible a thing is Man, if he erect not his thoughts above man! ibid. Of the abuse of Apparell. ibid. More time spent how to abuse time, and cor∣rupt licencious youth; then how to addresse employ∣ment to qualifie the distractions of the one, or to rectifie the distempers of the other. pag. 10. This illustrated by instances in three severall pla∣es. Citty, Court, and Countrey: And accom∣modated, with Observations proper to every Sub∣iect. pag. 11. The Taske of a vertuous Mirror, and a true Lady of Honour, expressed; and to all Ladies, as a President of goodnesse, zealously recommended. pag. 12. The life of a meere Libertine instanced and dis∣played
with a relation of those desperate Conclusions to which she adheared. ibid. How the use of Apparell may be inverted to a∣buse: eyther by Delicacy, or Superfluity. pag. 13. Reproofe touching Apparell, originally occasio∣ned from foure respects: 1. Sumptuousnesse.— And that confirmed by a memorable example. 2. Softnesse. 3. Strangenesse. And that reproveable in thes 3. particulars. 4. Superfluousnesse.— Variety. Immensity. Vanity. All which are intervained with sundry instances of various delight. Pag. 14. & 15. A disswasion from Delicacy of Apparell, by re∣flecting on the Embleme of humane frailty, the modell of our mortality. Which continuate Subect is stored with a select variety of divine and humane observations. pag. 16. 17. 18. &c. Superfluity of Apparell condemned; the Fashi∣onmongers answered; clozing that Branch, with a devout Admonition from divine BASILE ex∣tracted, and usefully applyed. pag. 19. 20. 21. 22. That Apparell most comely, which conferres on the wearer, most native beauty, and most honour on her Countrey. pag. 23. Habit is a custome; yet it is our custome to
change our Habit. ibid. Each Countrey retaines a fashion of her owne, save our owne. ibid. Ours an extraction or confection of all, which makes us Ieered at by all. ibid. Phantasticke fashions are no motives of affection to discreet Lovers. pag. 24. Discretion will be more taken with Modesty, than Vanity; and Humility, than Vaine-glory. pag. 25. The World is our Stage, our Life an Act; The Tyring-house, where we bestow'd such care, cost and curiosity, must be shut up, when our Night ap∣proacheth, and strips us of these robes of our morta∣lity. Without Vertue, all humane glory is a vading beauty. ibid. BEHAVIOVR. Observat. 2. BEhaviour reflects on three particulars. Action. Pag. 28. Affection. Passion. Vertue is the life of Action, action the life of man. ibid. In this Subiect some are employed (but remissely) to the purpose. Others are employed to no purpose. Others sleepe out their mind in security. Others creepe and cringe into an Apish formality. None of these direct the bent of their actions, to the Ob∣iect
of true Glory. pag. 29. A womans honour is of higher esteeme than to be thus disvalued. Light occasions are many times grounds of deepe aspersions. Actions are to bee seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction, strengthened with instruction, least too much rash∣nesse bring the undertaker to destruction. ibid. A briefe Commemoration of divers noble women, who as they were honourable by descent, so were they memorable for desert. Paralels to the best men for conversation, though weake in sexe, nature and con∣dition. pag. 30. An exhortation to young Gentlewomen, to con∣forme themselves to such imitable patternes: con∣cluding with that excellent instruction addressed by St. HIEROM to that holy Virgin DEMETRIAS; commending nothing so much unto her as industry, the better to inure her in the practise of Pietie. pag. 31. Nothing requires more discretion than affection. pag. 32. One can never truely love and not be wise: which directly opposeth PLATO'S opinion. ibid. Nothing more impatient of delay than Love: Nothing of more different passion: with an exact relation of their distinct operation. pag. 32. 33. Love is neither to be too subtilly coloured, nor too simply discovered. If too hot, the violence of it is best rebated by absence; if too coole, it is to bee quickned with more frequent conference, and assi∣duate presence. pag. 34.
Passion never workes more fearefull effects, then when it streames from Iealousie: verified by a tra∣gicke Example in our owne Ile and time occurring, and to succeeding times surviving. pag. 35. 36. Remedies to appease anger, and every passionate distemper. pag. 37. The discommodities which arise from Passion; the benefits which redound from attempering it. pag. 38. 39. An usefull Exhortation, to this temperate Moderation. Pag. 40. How a Gentlewoman is to behave her selfe in Company. pag. 41. Modestie and Mildnesse hold sweetest correspon∣dence in all societies. pag. 42. Chastity is an inclosed Garden; and by no li∣centious foote to be entred. ibid. Other vices are discomfited by fight,☞ Aug. lib. de honestate mulieris. Lust onely defeated by flight. pag. 43. We may be in security, so long as wee are seque∣stred from society. ibid. We are to subiect affection to the soveraigntie of reason. pag. 44. How a Gentlewoman is to behave her selfe in Privacie. ibid. Patternes of singular devotion recommended to her imitation. pag. 45. 46. 47. Meditation being a Key to open the Morning, a locke to close the Evening, should bee a Gentle∣womans bosome companion. pag. 48. Gentlewomen, without much reservancie, are not
to frequent publike places of Society. Pag. 50. Instances of such, as being discreetly reserved, accommodated their persons to publike affaires, and became improved by them▪ pag. 51. 52. A iudicious recollection of such who intend time, and such who mispend time: clozing with the relati∣on of sundry fearefull Examples, to  loose livers from the like securenesse. pag. 53. 54. That Behaviour most approved, which is clarst from affectation freed. pag. 55. Vertues Habit and Behaviour is free and not affected; native and not traduced. pag. 57. An accurate distinction or dijudication betwixt an enforced and unaffected Behaviour. ibid. A Gentlewoman is so to behave her selfe, that too much curiosity taxe her not of pride, nor too much Maiesty of State. pag. 58. COMPLEMENT. Observat. 3. COmplement defined. Pag. 59. With what constancy the Ancient retained their forme of Complement. Pag. 60. Different garbes proper to distinct places▪ Pag. 61. A distinction betwixt reall and formall Com∣plement. ibid. A deserving commendation of sundry English Ladies, in their unaffected way of Complement. pag. 62.
How Complement may bee corrupted. Pag. 63. A description of amorous poems, with a iust re∣proofe of their inforced Hyperbolees. Pag. 64. 65. The Complement used by some great ones, were but meere Canting among Beggars. pag. 66. How Complement may be refined. ibid. Civility is the best and most refined Comple∣ment that may be. pag. 69. Civility is never ut of fashion: ever deserving admiration. pag 69. It is Society that gives us, or takes from us our Security. pag. 67. Wherein Complement may bee admitted, as mainely consequent. pag. 70. The Court is the Beacon of the State; the Seate or Schoole of Complement. pag. 71. As Courtiers are Objects to many Eyes; so should their Actions be Platformes to many Lives. Pag. 72. Corrivalship in a light Curtezans love, hath de∣prived many a hopefull Gentleman of his dearest life. ibid. In Contests of love, it is hard to determine whether the Agent or Patient suffer more. Page, 73. Wherein Complement may be omitted, as meere∣ly impertinent. ibid. Apish formalists, or Complementall actors dis∣esteeme those three principall faculties of the
Vnderstanding. Discourse. Distinction. Election. Singular Directions, how to acommodate them in all these. Pag. 75. What Complement gives best accomplish∣ment. page. 76. Sensuall Curtezans are their owne Furies. pag. 77. 78. A good Christian the compleatest Courtier: Vertue the Ornament, which gives Complement the best accomplishment. page, 79. DECENCY. Observat. 4. DEcency recommended as requisite, in fure distinct Subiects. GATE. LOOKE. SPEECH. HABIT. It is no hard thing to gather the disposition of our heart, by the dimension of our Gate.GATE. Pag. 82. Though our Feet bee heere below, our Faith should be above. ibid. No path of pleasure should draw us from those ioyes which last for ever. ibid. A wanton Eye is the truest Evidence of a wan∣dringLOOKE.
mind: Our Eye becomes the sence of sor∣row, because the sense of sinne. An Vncleane Eye the Messenger of an Vn∣cleane heart. pag. 85. Distinct Obiect proposed to Eyes diversly affe∣cted. pag. 85. 86 By looking upward, the more we looke, we shall like, the longer we live, we shall love. pag. 87. Without SpeechSPEECH▪ can no society subsist. pag. 88. Excellent rules for propriety of discourse. ibid. A deliberate apprehension begot by serious atten∣tion, is to goe ever before discourse. pag. 89. What Subiect suites best for a Gentlewomans dis∣course. ibid. A pleasant answer of mellifluous BERNARD, applyed to all forward Shee-church discoursers. pag. 90. Silence in a Woman, is a moving Rhetorioke. ibid. There is nothing which moves us more to pride it in sinne,HABIT. than that which was first given us to co∣ver our shame. pag. 91. Sumptuousnesse of the Habit deserves not so much reprehension, as Phantasticknesse of the Ha∣bit, in respect of the forme or fashion. pag. 92. Decency is a civill Gentlewomans choycest livery, which sets her frth before all embroidery. ibid. Time is too precious to be made a Pageant or Morrice on. ibid. A briefe but most usefull application of those
foure preceding Subiects. Pag. 94. Decency, the attractivest motive of Affection. ibid. Nothing convayes more affection to the heart, than Decency in the Obiect we affect. ibid. In this age, the best shot to be discharg'd is a Ta∣verne reckoning, the best Alarum carousing, and the most absolute March reeling. ibid. No Habit so decent, as what is native and pro∣perly habituate. pag. 95. Where Vertue is not directresse i our choyce, our inconstant minds are ever prone to change. pag. 96. Nothing should give us Content, but what is decent. ibid. Decency the smoothest path that leades to per∣fection. pag. 97. The onely way to be Compleat, is to be decent. ibid. An adumbration of that glory, reserved for those that affect Decency. pag. 98. A vertuous Exmplarie life crownes the Soule with eternall rest. ibid. ESTIMATION. Observat. 5. EStimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize. pag. 101. The losse of Estimation makes the richest Mer∣chant an irreparable Bankrupt. ibid.
Fame, the sweetest flower that ever grew neare the border of Time. pag. 102. A continuation of sundry eminent personages; puissant in armes, continent in desires; and abso∣lute Commanders of their owne affections. Pag. 103. 104. Greece and Rome were no lesse honoured for PENELOPES and LUCRETIA'S Con∣stancie; than for VLISSES wisedome, or COL∣LATINES loyalty. ibid. Portion may woe a Wordling; Proportion a youth∣full wanton; but it is vertue that wins the heart of discretion. pag. 105. A select improvement of our Albion Ladies. pag. 106. How Estimation may be disced to bee reall. ibid. Instructions of singular use for Maies, Wives, and Widdowes; illustrated with proper instances in each kinde. The way to win a Husband is not to woe him, but to be woo'd by him. Pag. 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112. &c. Mothers the fittingst Nurses of their owne children; seconded by examples in all ages. Pag. 108. 109. A Mistresse of a family many times taxed for her Handmaides delicacy: instanced and illustrated copiously. pag. 11. The lives of the dying, consist in the memory of the living. ibid. How Estimation may bee discerued to be super∣ficiall.
pag. 114. Many desire to appear  to the eye, what they are least in heart. ibid. The first occasion of kissing the lip: with a free reproofe of our late but too  introduc'd custome of kissing the cheeke; elegantly shaded in a Son∣net. pag. 114. 115. Discretion cannot approve of that for good, which selfe-opinion or singularity onely makes good. ibid. Those who dedicate themselves to the service of Vertue, preferre the pith before the rinde, sub∣stance before appearance. pag. ibid. A Caution to wanton Women. pag. 116. Sinnes may be without danger for a time, but never without feare. ibid. Superficiall Complementrs, are hypocriticall Courtiers. ibid. Directions how to be gratious Courtiers in the highest Court. pag. 117. How Estimation may be impregnably preserved. ibid. Of all arrowes, those which are darted by the spirit of zeale, wound the enemy most, and procure the Archer best rest: confirmed by sundry notable examples. pag. 118. 119. None can walke safely, that walkes not religious∣ly. ibid. A reflection upon the constancy and resolution of Heathens▪ remmended to the imitation of Christi∣an women. pag. 120.
Vertue cannot exercise her owne strength, nor expresse her owne worth without an Opposite. pag. 121. An instance in a noble Lady. ibid. A direction in the cloze. pag. 122. How Estimation may be irreparably lost. ibid. TheIlies hederae agiles horae conciunt. Ivie while it is winding, decayes the plant, with which it is wreathing. ibid. An instance of a Citie-Virago. pag. 123. An use of this instance. pag. 124. The absolute end, whereunto Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerefully rests. Pag. 125. This confirmed by sundry examples; and one most remarkeable of our owne. Pag. 125, 126. 127. An application to these Ladies of our owne. pag. 127. 128. FANCY. Observat. 6. FAncy, is to be with deliberation grounded. pag. 129. The Eye is Fancies harbinger, but the heart is her harbour, ibid. Directions for setling and disposing our affecti∣on. pag. 130. Loves purity is to be discussed, before it be enter∣tained. pag. 131. Not the rinde but the minde is Discretions Ada∣mant. Pag. 132.
The misery of jealousie deblazoned and exem∣plified. ibid. Singular resolves for a Coniugall State. Pag. 133, 134. Fancy is to be with constancy retained. Page, 135. Two memorable Mottoes recommmended. ibid. The waywardnesse of some women iustly repro∣ved, and how that humour may be rectified. pag. 136. The admirable puritie and efficacie of Love. pag. 137. Memorable examples of Coniugall Constancy and Continency. ibid. An exhortation tending to the imitation of such famous Presidents. ibid. Wanton Fancy is a wandring Frenzy. pag. 138. Wanton Love, seldome or never promiseth good successe. ibid. The incendiaries or foments of this inordinate passion, to xe particulars reduced, all which are in one distich included. pag. 139 The Odious and inhumane effects in all ages de∣rived from the violence of this Wanton fancie, or Wandring frenzie. Pag. 140. 141. Soveraigne receipts to cure this desperate mala∣die. ibid. What kind of affection deserves a Gentlewomans election. pag. 142. How Fancy may be checked, if too wilde; con∣firmed
by a Philosophicall demonstration or Physicall experiments ibid. A pleasant and pithy expostulation with fancy. ibid. A disswasion from too much credulity to the light protests of deceiving fancy: confirmed by a moderne example. Pag. 143. A Gentlewoman may with more safety suspect, than too rashly affect. ibid. A discreet resolution upon tearmes of affection, seconded with the promise of an assured blessing. pag. 144. The secret impression, and passionate expression of an unfortunate Lady in the relation of her misery. pag. 144. 145. It is not so hard to give comfortable counsell to the sorrowfull, as to finde a fit season when to give it. ibid. Consideration, a necessarie guide to affection. ibid. Repentance comes too late at Marri∣agenight. How Fancy may be cheered if too cold. pag. 146. The incomparable honour of a Virgin-conditi∣on. ibid. The hate of Incest with brute Beasts. pag. 147. The Bird of Love, the Embleme of a Lovers heart. pag. 149. Moneyes are inferiour pictures to true Lovers. ibid.
The absolute end of a coigall State. pag. 150▪ An attemperament of both thse indisposed Fan∣cies before mentioned. ibid. The difference betwixt a wise and wilde Love, consists in this: the one ever deliberates before it love; the other loves before it deliberate. Pag. 151. Necessarie Cautions for all kind-hearted Gentle∣women. pag. 152. The like for all coy or coole-affected Gentle∣women. pag. 153. A sweet attemperament of both these humours: with an apt Emblem explained and properly apply∣ed, to such, as are with either of these humours di∣stempered. pag. 154. 155. GENTILITY. Observat. 7. GEntility, is derived from our Ancestors to us, but soone blanched, if not revived by us. pag. 157. A perswasion to the imitation of our Ancestors vertues. pag. 158. There was nothing mortall about them but their bodies, and those were too fraile Cabonets for such rich eminences to lodge in: whereas, there is no∣thing but frailties about ours, for loose and licenti∣ous love to lie in. ibid. Those Odours deserve highest honours, that beautifie us living, and preserve our memory dying. ibid.
To see a light Lady descending from a noble Fa∣mily, is a Spectacle of more spreading infamy, than any Subiect of inferiour quality. pag. 159. Gentility, is not to be measured by antiquity of time, but precedency in worth. pag. 160. The reason why generous descents become so much corrupted; and vertuous Parents by vitious Children so frequently disparaged. ibid. & 161 Mothers, the naturallest Nurses: confirmed by precept, custome, and example. pag. ibid. *Su∣pra pag. 108. 109. An effectuall perswasion to that duty. ibid. & pag. 162. Vertue the best Coat. pag. ibid. Heraldry proves vertues Coat to bee the best, because deblazoned with least charge. ibid. Vertue is no admiring lover of ought that is be∣low her. pag. 162. 163. The misery of this age, in sumptuousnesse of attire. pag. ibid The honour of Humility. pag. 174. A glorious reproovall of modest Matrons. pag. 175. Sinnes prevention, is to prevent the Occasion. Pag. 176. Gentlewomen are to reflect more on their in∣ward worth, than on their outward weare. Pag. 176. It will not redound much to a Gentlewomans honour, to have observed the fashions of the time, but with a discreet Contempt or civill neglect of fa∣shion,
to have redeemed her time. pag. 177. Living actions of true Gentility, happy Pre∣cursors to the State of Glory. ibid. There are native seeds of goodnesse, sowne in generous bloods by lineall succession: variously instanced. pag. ibid. & 178. 179. Those who are with the choycest vertues endow∣ed, become oft times, most traduced. ibid. & 180. There is no one vertue which makes a Gentle∣woman more gracious in the eye of her beholder, than Modesty, the greatest advancer of many an∣cient family ibid. To be high borne and basely minded, is to in∣graft bastard slippes in a Noble stocke. ibid. High and Heroicke vertues become great Houses: confirmed by the resolution of a noble Lady, in reie∣cting the powerfull solicitancy of a Sensuall Suiter. ibid. and 181. Emulation of goodnesse in great Persons is ho∣nourable. ibid. How these native seeds of goodnesse may bee ripened by instruction, pag. 182. No Tutresses fitter to perfect this excellent worke in Gentlewomen, than those who were the secun∣darie instruments of their beeing: strengthened by example and reason. pag. 183. A select Choice and recommendation of sundry bookes of instruction, to the perusall of our English Gentlewoman. ibid. A briefe enumeration, serious discussion, and iudicious election, of sundry ancient Fathers, with
other morall Authors. pag. 184. English translations, the lights of Ladies, but Dampes of Schollers. pag. 187. Private Nurseries, houshold Academies. ibid. The first instruction takes the deepest Im∣pression; with an usefull application to every con∣dition. pag. 188. Necessarie directions highly conducing to the good report and repute of Maides and Matrons, ibid. The most precious things have ever the most pernitious Keepers. Nothing more precious, than a Virgins honour; it were a shame for the Mother for any base lucre, to prove a treacherous Keeper. pag. 189. The whole progresse of a Gentlewomans conver∣sation should be a continued line of direction: to which line he confines his observation. pag. 190. HONOVR. Observat. 8. PRomotion discovers what men be, but true Ho∣nour shewes what they should be. pag. 191. Honour is painted, when it is not with vertue poudred. pag. 192. Morall Philosophy, nor Christian Theory, could ever hold that for deserving greatnesse, which had not neare relation to goodnesse. ibid. Their memory cannot live long, who make Au∣thority a Sanctuary to wrong. pag. 193.
Vertue defined, and by it true Gentility with the honour of an ancient family expressed, pag. 194. An accurate connexion with a personall appli∣cation of the preceeding Subiects, to all Gentlewo∣men. pag. ibid. & 195. Be women never so eminent, they are but pain∣ted Trunkes, if vertue be not resident. pag. 196 Vertue should not onely be resident but president over all their actions. ibid. No Cloath takes such deepe tincture, as the cloath of Honour. ibid. No Pleasure can be constant, unlesse it afford in∣ward content. pag. 197. There is nothing asperseth a deeper staine upon the Cloath of Honour, than too much attention unto Sycophants. ibid. Soveraigne receipts against the poyson of flat∣tery; with a serious exhortation to the entertaine∣ment of humility, patience, constancy, and every ge∣nerous vertue. pag. ibid. & 198. 199. Violets though they grow low and neare the earth, smell sweetest: and Honour appeares the fullest of beauty, when she is humblest. pag. 198. Honour, if truly grounded, can looke in the face of terrour, and never be amated. ibid. She that makes vertue her object, cannot but make every Earthly thing her Subject. ibid. Honours imprezza and Pasture. ibid. Honours compleat armour, dresse, and portrai∣ture. Pag. 200
HER Description, with motives to her imita∣tation. ibid. A briefe but usefull application. pag. 201. Honourable Personages should be Presidents of goodnesse. Pag. ibid. LANDMARKES are usually erected for dire∣ction of the Mariner, and Magistrates elected for instruction of the inferiour. ibid. The world, a Maze of Misery, a vale of vanity? ibid. Man, a story of calamity, a statue of in∣felicitie. To be a Lady of Honour, is more than titu∣lar. Pag. 202. Three especiall Obiects, upon which Honourable personages are to reflect. Charitie. Pag. ibid. Chastitie. Humilitie. A most accurate and serious discourse on each particular Obiect. Pag. 202. 203. 204 The very last day to an honourable Christian, is every dayes memoriall. ibid. The actions of Noble Personages, like sweet odors, diffuse themselves by imitation to their followers. pag. 205. Those that are followers of their persons, will be followers likewise of their lives. ibid. Their private family is a familiar Nursery. ibid. Foule enormities must admit of no Priviledges: Eminent Persons are to bee their owne Censors.
ibid. An excellent application, by way of Exhortation to all such honourable Censors. pag. 205. 206. Vertues are more permanent Monuments, than Statues, stiles, trophees, or oboliskes. ibid. Vertue or Vice, whethersoever takes hold first, retaines a deeper impression in honour, than any lower Subiect. ibid. In these, whom Nobility of bloud hath advan∣ced, be ever some seeds or semblances of their Pro∣genitors retained. ibid. This conrmed by Philosophicall reason and ex∣ample; President and Precept. pag. 207 Great mindes are many times sicke of great mala∣ladies: how this by timely prevention may be seaso∣nably cured. pag. 208. The efficient cause, why Vertue or Vice, whe∣thersoever takes hold first, retaines a deeper im∣pression in Honour, than in any lower Subiect; illustrated by instance. ibid. First Motions have deepe impressions; first Noti∣ons firme retentions. Pag. 209. The greatest profit of Honourable personages, is to become Proficients in the practice of vertue; Their highest delight, to subdue their delights to the obedience of reason, for the love of vertue. ibid. The Corruption of time hath introduc'd that de∣formity of fashion, as it asperseth on our formall i∣mitators much imputation. ibid. Where Youth is initiated in affectation of State, it partakes in age of too much Pride. ibid.
The humour, temper, and danger of our Tame-Beasts, or State-Parasites. pag. 210 A reservancy of State in Pace, face, & every Posture, recommended by an insinuating Faune, to a Phantasticke Gallant. ibid. Sycophancy the ruine of many a Noble family. ibid. An election of honest and discreet followers. ibid. Gentlewomens lives, as they are lives to them∣selves, so should they be lights unto others. ibid. For Popular honour, Vice will but varnish it; it is Vertue that will richly enammell it. Singu∣lar motives to Mortification. ibid. pag. 211. That Vertue may receive the first impression, by meanes of an in-bred noble disposition, seconded by helpes of Education. ibid. A pleasant Epigram alluding to all humerous Ladies. Marg. pag. 212. A Choice recollection and expression of such ver∣tues as sort and suit with the condition of our noblest Ladies: with Cautions to attemper them in all ex∣treames: by an usefull reflection upon all the Senses; and those Commanding passions, which domineere most over the Senses. pag. 212. 213. A singular Meditation for recollection of our af∣fections. pag. 214. 215. Vice throwes her aspersions on no subiect, so much as on Honour. pag. 215. A fruitfull application to all young Gentlewo∣men, for regulating their dispositions, and how to make them true inheritrices of Honour.
pag. ibid. & 216. Vertue reduced to habit, aspires to perfection. pag. ibid. There is nothing under the heaven, that can sa∣tisfie a Soule created for heaven. ibid. Exquisite directions for Virgins, Wives, and Widdowes. pag. ibid. & 217. We are to esteeme no life sweeter, than when eve∣ry day improves us and makes us better. ibid. A divine Contemplation, reflecting upon our mutabilitie on Earth, our immortality in Heaven. pag. 218. A Revew of our Ladies Court and Citty solace. ibid. Recreations run in a Maze, while they lay their Scene of Mirth on Earth. ibid. A Twofold consideration full of sweet and select consolation. ibid. & 219. How happy many Eminent Personages had beene, had they never beene taken with this Shadow of happinesse. ibid. & 219. No passage to the Temple ofHONOR virtutis praemium, VIRTVS honoris pretium. Honour, but through the Temple of Vertue. ibid. If Gentlewomen desire to be great, let it be their height of ambition to aspire to honour in the Court of vertue. ibid. What a brave Saliquor State shall Gentle∣women enioy, when vigilancy, becomes Warden of their Cinque Ports. pag. 220. Perseverance, the Crowne of goodnesse. ibid. A constant resolution, the Diadem of a Christian
in her dissolution. pag. 221. A Character, entituled; A Gentlewoman; wherein such an One is described, whose desert answeres her descent; whose acti∣ons truely ennble her selfe: with a briefe touch or revew of all his Observations; Which are showne to be Obiects of her love, improvements of her life.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. The Necessity of Apparell; Of the Vse and Abuse of Apparell; Two meanes by which the Vse may be in∣uerted to Abuse; That Apparell most comely, which con∣ferres on the Wearer most natiue beauty, and most ho∣nour on her Countrey. APPARELL.APPAREL. HAD ADAM neuer com∣mitted sinne,Obseruat. 1. he had ne∣uer needed figge-leaues to couer his shame.The necessi¦ty of Apparel. Sin made him flye to the groue for shelter, and shame compelled him to play the artlesse Tay∣ler, and through meere necessity to make him a Couer. Well enough was he before that time attyred, albeit naked: and
so happily stated, as we are to imagine, that igno∣rance kept him not from the knowledge of his na∣kednesse, but that his Originall purity freed him from these necessities. But no sooner was the forbid∣den fruit tasted, then poore Adam became tainted, his nakednesse discouered; so as now for honour of modesty, he must of necessity betake himselfe to that science, whereto (being free till that time) he was ne∣uer bound Apprentice. His inhibited taste made him sensible (and therein more miserable) of what be∣fore he felt not. No distemperature of cold or heat could before that time annoy him. Now his failing in performing what he ought, brings him to a feeling of that he neuer knew. Now tender Eue, whose tem∣perate repose ministred her all content in a sweet and cheerefull Arbour, with all the varieties and de∣licacies of nature, feeles a shaking & shiuering in her ioynts: Such a strange distemper hath the tast of an Apple wrought in her. Shee must fit her selfe then to endure that with patience, which she procur'd to her selfe and second selfe, through disobedience; and put on what before she needed not, a Vaile to couer her Nakednesse, and subiect her selfe to these Neces∣sities. It is true, that Cloathing keeps the body warme two wayes: By keeping in the naturall heat of the body; and by keeping out the accidentall cold of the Ayre. All Creatures enter the world sheelded and shrouded, saue onely poore man, who enters lists naked. Tender and delicate hee is by nature; more subiect to preiudice by distemper, than any o¦ther Creature. Now to fence himselfe against all occurrents, and the better to endure all intemperate violence, the Diuine Prouidence hath accommoda∣ted it selfe to his Necessity, from the very first en∣trance of his infancy: yet were it fit, when hee re∣flects vpon himselfe thus decked and attired, to recal
to minde the prime occasion of these Necessities. So equally tempered was the Ayre where he first brea∣thed; so farre from the distemper of heat or cold freed; with such variety of all delights stored; as then in all happinesse he seem'd to be stated: but pre∣sently after his fall, began these to faile. That soyle, which before was naturally fruitfull, became wilde without manuring: Those Riuers, which before were purely relishing and delighitng, became mud∣dy, brackish, and distasting: Yea, that Ayre, which before was euer sweetly and temperately breathing, became vnseasonably scorching or freezing. Neces∣sity then hath prouided for Adam and his Collapsed posterity a Coat, to shroud them from the incle∣mency of all seasons. And whence came this necessi∣ty, but from sinne? To glory then in these necessities, is to glory in sinne. Which were, as if some graue Capitall offender, hauing committed high Treason against his Soueraigne, should, notwithstanding, out of a Princely Clemency be pardoned; yet with this condition, that hee should weare a Cord or Halter a∣bout his necke during his life, to put him in remem∣brance of his disloyalty and treason. In which Badge, this frontlesse Traytor should pride himselfe more, than if it were some ancient Crest of honour. Re∣flect then vpon the originall source of your sorrow, Eue, ye daughters of Eue. Ambition prompt her to sin, sin brought her to shame, shame to her shroud. Meere necessity compelled her to weare what before she knew not, and to prouide her selfe of that which before she needed not. How is it then, that these ragges of sinne, these robes of shame, should make you idolize your selues? How is it, that yee conuert that which was ordained for necessity, to feed the light-flaming fuell of licentious liberty? Was Ap∣parell first intended for keeping in naturall heat, and
keeping out accidentall cold? How comes it then that you weare these thinne Cobweb attires, which can neither preserue heat, nor repell cold? Of what an incurable cold would these Butterfly-habits pos∣sesse the wearer, were pride sensible of her selfe? Sure, these attires were not made to keepe cold out, but to bring cold in. No necessity, but meere vanity, introduced these Pye-coloured fopperies amongst vs. Vnuaile many of our light Curtezans, whose brothell practice hath reft them of the ornament of a woman, and you will finde a strange Metamor∣phosis; Venus armata turn'd to Venus calua. We say there is no good congruity in a proud heart and a beggers purse. Why should we then pride our selues in that which displayes our beggery? Before wee had cloathes, we wanted nothing; hauing cloathes, we stand in need of all things. Primitiue purity ex∣empted vs from these necessities; Originall impurity subiected vs to these necessities. Cold wee grew in Charity, cold in euery Christian duty; garments then stood wee in need of, to shroud vs against the tempest of a benummed Conscience. These habits then, it appeares, were ordained, at first, for neces∣sity to shield vs: Vanity had not then set inuention on worke, nor the age sent her Phantastickes abroad to trafficke with sorraine fashions. Winter made choyce of his garment to fit the season; so did Sum∣mer, without an affected singularity, fit him to a seasonable fashion. They stood not much either vp∣on colour or curious border; temperate heat they desired to retaine, intemperate to repell; cold to keepe out, naturall warmth to keepein. This was that, ancient times intended; this was all that they affected. Necessity enforced them to doe what they did; otherwise, I am perswaded, they had not beene, to this day, made. Those then that esteeme more of
Apparell, how gorgeous soeuer, than of a worke of Necessity, detract from their owne glory, to sute themselues in stuffes of vanity. THere is nothing in its owne nature so absolute∣ly good,The vse of Apparell. but it may be corrupted; what was at first intended for some good Vse, if peruerted, de∣clines into some apparant Abuse. Now Gentlewomen, (for to you I direct this discourse) would you ob∣serue the right vse, and diuert in no particular from the Ordinance of Apparell; Modesty must be your guide, vertuous thoughts your guard, so shall hea∣uen bee your goale. When the Roman Princes, in their Conquests, or triumphant honours, were with acclamations and vollies of salutes receiued, by the generall applause of the people extolled, and in their triumphall Ebr or Chayre of estate seated; there stood alwayes one behind them in their Throne, to pull them by the sleeue with this Memoriall; Re∣member thou art mortall. A more vsefull Memoriall you cannot haue, than these Robes you weare, of your owne frailty, nor a more effectuall motiue to humility. Had not sinne worne you out of Gods a∣uour, and reft you of your natiue splendour, you had neuer worne these habits, signals of your dis∣honour. I commend her for the good vse which she made of her Apparell, who neuer dyed her garment, but shee watred it with a teare, remembring what necessities her ambitious thoughts had brought her to: for by aspiring to know more than shee did, she became depriued of that excellent beauty which she had. Patternes likewise of modesty you may be, and herein singularly vsefull by your examples, vnto o∣thers of your sexe. Nor can you possibly expresse it better, then in obseruing that diuine precept, by lear∣ning
how to array your selues in comely apparell, with sham fastnesse and modesty, not with broided haire, or gold, or pearles, or costly apparell: But, as becommeth women that professe the feare of God. For euen after this manner in time past did the holy women, which trusted in God, tire themselues. Here is a prescript forme by way of direction; for your habit. Choicer ornaments you cannot haue to adorne you; nor any fashion that will better seeme you. Where you walke, you may enioy your selues freed from light eyes, gazing and admiring vanity: your very habit is your Testate to witnesse for you: loose thoughts nestle not in your bosome, nor doe wandring distractions surprise your breast: you haue learned to your highest solace, euen in euery motion, action, posture, gesture, to obserue modesty, as an ornament to honour. For, seeing that the very habit of the minde may bee best discerned and discouered by the state or carriage of the body, the disposition of the body by the habit; to auoyd scandall, and retaine that Christian opinion which e∣uery one ought to preserue, wee are to make choyce of that attire, which conferres most seeming graui∣ty on vs. This the very Heathen, whose best dire∣ction was morality, were carefull of: for in the vse of Apparell, they retained such constant course, as they held it the greatest blemish they could asperse vpon their Nation, to introduce any new or exo∣ticke fashion, either to effeminate the dispositions of their people, or to derogate from the honour of their memorable predecessours; whose modell was their direction in habit, and all other obseruable cu∣stomes. What a simple, honest Rusticity our An∣cestors retained in their weare, might bee easily di∣scerned, if wee should make recourse to one of their ancient Wardrobes; where antiquity may prescribe for many ages, and constancy second what antiquity
had introduc'd. Yea, so obseruant were former times of those fashions which preceding ages had recom∣mended to them, as they held it ominous to inno∣uate or bring in any new forme, euen in matters of indifferency. When Darius had altered the fashion of his Sword, which vsed to be Persian, into the forme of the Macedonian (in the yeere immediately before he fought with Alexander) the Chaldees or Sooth-sayers prophecied, that into what fashion as Darius had altered his Sword, time would reduce his State; and that the Persian glory was drawing to∣wards her last period, by subiecting her selfe to the Soueraignty of Macedon. Which prediction was soone confirmed by the next yeeres Conquest. But tell me, ye curious Dames, who hold it a derogation to your honour, to entertaine ought that is vulgar; whereto were Cloathes first ordained, but to couer that nakednesse which sinne brought, and to skreene that shame which the effect of sinne first wrought? The vse of Apparell is not to dignifie the wearer, or adde more beauty to the Creature. Sure I am, that a iudicious eye, who measures dignity by desert, scornes to preferre the Case before the Instrument, the Rinde before the Pith. Those who are worthy to be your Iudges, will determine your worth by what there is in you, not by what you weare on you. Let May-games and Morrices beautifie themselues with Anticke dressings, to captiuate the vulgar eye; your breeding hath beene better, your iudgements clearer, your obseruations wiser, than to stoope to such base Lures. Our life consists in the perfection or temperate infusion of naturall or radicall humour, or in the conseruation of naturall heat: to preserue this, to increase that, Nature hath prouided meanes inward and outward. To inuert the vse, is to per∣uert the Ordinance it selfe: So vse the outward, that
you darken not the inward; so dispose of the in∣ward, that it may rectifie the outward. Reflect on antiquity, yet no farther than may suit with the de∣cency of the age wherein you liue. I am not igno∣rant, how many fashions formerly vsed, would in this age deserue rather derision than approuement. And that the infancy of the world had many shapes, as then but onely in their Embrio or rather Concep∣tion, which succeeding times, accommodated by more exquisite artists, brought afterwards to per∣fection. Vse your habit as an ornament of decency; let it not haue the least Edging of vanity. Many Eyes are fixed on you, sundry motiues of imitation are deriued from you. Send not out one fruitlesse sigh for any phantasticke fashion which you see: they cannot be sighes of compassion, that are sent meerely out for fashion. Sigh rather that your Country should labour of so vaine a birth, as to preferre forraine inuentions before the ornament of a Maiden Ile, constant modesty. Spend not a fruit∣lesse houre in an vnprofitable garnish of corruption: Vse these outward dressings as if you did not vse them: Let them be rather your scorne than your pride; your contempt than content. Be those curious Cases of mortality decked or dawbed with neuer so much adulterate beauty, they cannot conferre vpon them∣selues one beameling of lasting glory. Looke vpon those poore bases of frailty, your feet, what a tinkling they make, to partake of a lasciuious meeting in pri∣uacy: Eye those rising mounts, your displayed breasts, with what shamelesse art they wooe the shamefaste passenger: View those wandring Lamps, how they roue abroad, as if they would flye out of their Lodges, and spheere themselues in some amorous Orbe. Call them home, lest Dina-like they lose themselues by straying, impeach their honour by
wandring, bring themselues woe by their lasciuious wooing. Affect no fashion that may beget in your generous bosomes a light thought; Contemne that fashion which detracts from the natiue beauty of the feature, or which brings it to that admiration of the Creature, as it makes it forgetfull of the Crea∣tor. O how contemptible a thing is man (the word may reflect equally vpon either sexe) if he erect not his thoughts aboue man! What a poore vse makes that miserable creature of his being here, who be∣stowes so much time in the Tyring house, as hee for∣gets what part he is to play on the Stage? O consi∣der the preciousnesse of time! it is all that may bee properly said ours. Neither can we terme that por∣tion of time which we call ours, yeares, or dayes, or houres. A moment is our portion, and the Com∣mandingst Emperour hath no larger proportion. Of which moment, whatsoeuer is past, is not now; and whatsoeuer is to come, is not yet. Eye then your Houre-glasse, vye in teares with graines of sand. Bestow not this little scantling, this moment shorter than nothing, in too curiously attiring of vanity, but in meditating of your owne frailty, and redeeming the time you haue lost in security. As Apparell was ordained for necessity; vse it with Chri∣stian ciuility. In obseruing this, you make the vse good, which shall hereafter redound to your grea∣ter gaine. O But the misery and leuity of this age is such,The Abuse of Apparell. as that becomes generally least affcted, which adornes vs most; that valued most, which beseemes vs least. Time was indeed, and may that time once re-shine vpon vs, when the onely flower to beloued of women, was a natiue red, which was shamefast∣nesse.
The face knew not then what painting was, whose adulterate shape takes now acquaintance from the Shop. Then were such women matter of scandall to Christian eyes, which vsed painting their skinne, powdring their hayre, darting their eye. Our Commerce with forraine Nations was not for fashions, feathers, and follies. There was distinction in our attires; differences of ranks and qualities; a ciuill obseruance of decent habits; which confer∣red no lesse glory on our Ile at home, than victori∣ous mannagements by the prowesse of our Inhabi∣tants, did abroad. If we reflect on them, wee must of necessity blush at our selues: seeing, what wee haue receiued for vse, we haue conuerted to abuse▪ That distinction which decency found out for ha∣bits viile and feminine, what commixture hath it found in latter times? What neare resemblance and relation hath womans to mans: suting their light feminine skirts with manlike doublets? Semiramis, that victorious Princesse, commanded all to weare Tyres vpon their heads, and to put vpon them wo∣mans apparell without distinction, that shee might reigne securely without exception: Thus the come∣ly habit of modesty became a pretended vaile to an vsurped Soueraignty. But these succeeding times haue tyred our women with tyres; translating them to a plume of Feathers. Fashion is now euer vn∣der saile: the Inuention euer teeming; Phantasticke Wits euer breeding. More time spent how to abuse time, and corrupt licentious youth, than how to ad∣dresse employment for the one, or to rectifie the di∣stempers of the other. Take a suruey of all degrees, and tell me what vniformity you finde in this par∣ticular. And to make instance in three seuerall pla∣ces (for to these all others may haue proper relation) take a more precise and punctuall perusall of City,
Court, and Countrey, and returne me a briefe of your Suruey. In the first, you shall finde many graue Ma∣trons, modest Maids, deuout Widdowes; but are these all? No; with these you shall finde a strange∣ly mixt generation. Some affecting nothing more than what is most nouell and phantasticke; Others enuying what they disdainfully see in others, which fashion rather than they will misse, they will not sticke to set their honour at sale: All, or most, true Biantines, carrying all their wealth about them. For the second, you shall find, amongst many other plants of promising growth and excellent proficience, sun∣dry sweet-sented sprigs of Cynnamon, whose rinde is worth all the body. No discourse can rellish their formall palate, but fashion; if Eues Kirtle should be now showne them, how they would geere their Grandam? For the last, though it be long ere they creepe into forme, hauing once attain'd it, they can take vpon them as vnbeseeming a State in a Coun∣trey Pew, as if they were Ladies for that yeare, and had beene bred in the Art of mincing since their childhood. But what are these, but such, whose ex∣pence of time is scarcely valued? Sacrificing more houres to their Looking-glasse, than they reserue minutes to lament their defects. Such, whose vertu∣ous thoughts neuer harbour the least conceit that may betray their honour, or depraue those more no∣ble parts wherewith they are indowed; scorne to drowne their better part in these dregs of sensuality. Vertue is their attendant, Honour their obiect, all inferiour delights their lowest subiects. Day by day haue these their taske imposed, that the poyson of sloath may be better auoyded: No day passeth without a line, no action without a limit: obser∣uing the course of that vertuous Mirror, of whom it is said:
In distinct houres she did diuide the day, To walke, to worke, to meditate, and pray. Much different from this pious resolution, was that Libertines impious conclusion, who held that none could bee frequently deuout in prayer, and fashionably decent in attire. Shee bestowed too much time on her Glasse, to reserue any for her Lampe. Pride had exiled her zeale; delicacy of ha∣bit, sanctity of heart. Her day might be easily diui∣ded: Shee bestowed the forenoone on her skinne, the afternoone on a Play, clozing her Euening Le∣cture with a reere supper: and this was her Christi∣an Taske. Miserable is the condition of that Crea∣ture, who, so her skin be sleake, cares not if her soule be rough. So her outward habit be pure and without blemish, values little her inward garnish. Such an one hath made a firme Contract with vanity, clo∣zing her contemptuous age with a fearefull Cata∣strophe. Thus farre haue we discoursed of the effect or abuse it selfe, wee are now to treat of those two sources, from whence these abuses properly arise; to wit, Delicacy in being more curious in our Choyce of Apparell than necessity or decency doth require; se∣condly, Superfluity, in storing more variety and change of rayments than either nature needs, or reason would admit, were shee not transported with a sensuall affection, by giuing way to what vnboun∣ded appetite requires. IN the search of any Minerall,How the vse of Apparell may be inuer∣ted to abuse. we are first to digge for the veine; and in the curing of any maleuo∣lent effect, we are duely and seriously to inquire the producing cause, that by stopping the Spring or source, wee may stay the violence of the streame. We are then to insist of those two precedent means,
by which the vse may bee inuerted to abuse; and that which of it selfe is approueable, if obserued with decency, becomes iustly reprehensible by corrupting so necessary and consequent an vse, either by de∣licacy, which weakens and effeminates the spirit, or by Superfluity, which euer darkens the beameling of reason with the Cloud of sense. Reproofe touching Apparell may bee occasioned from foure respects: First, when any one weareth Apparell aboue their degree, exceeding their estate in precious attire. Whence it is that Gregory saith; there be some who are of opinion, that the weare of precious or sumptuous Apparell is no sinne: Which if it were no fault, the diuine Word would neuer haue so punctu∣ally expressed, nor historically related, how the Rich man, who was tormented in hell, was cloathed with Purple and Silke. Whence we may note, that touching the matter or subiect of attire, humane cu∣riosity auaileth highly. The first stuffe or substance of our garments, was very meane; to wit, Skinne with Wooll. Whence it is we read, that God made Adam and his wife Coats of Skinnes, that is, of the Skinnes of dead beasts. Afterwards (see the grada∣tion of this vanity deriued from humane singulari∣ty) they came to Pure Wooll, because it was lighter than Skinnes. After that to rindes of trees, to wit, Flax. After that to the dung and ordure of Wormes, to wit, Ske. Lastly, to Gold and Siluer, and precious Stones. Which preciousnesse of attire highly displea∣seth God. For instance whereof (which the very Pagans themselues obserued) we read that the very first among the Romans, whoeuer wore Purple, was strucke with a Thunder-bolt, and so dyed suddenly, for a terror and mirror to all succeeding times, that none should attempt to lift himselfe proudly against
God in precious attire. The second point reprehensible is, Softnesse or De∣licacy of Apparell: Soft Cloathes introduce soft mindes. Delicacy in the habit, begets an effeminacy in the heart. Iohn Baptist, who was sanctified in his mo∣thers wombe, wore sharpe and rough garments. Whence wee are taught, that the true seruant of God is not to weare garments for beauty or de∣light, but to couer his nakednesse; not for State or Curiosity, but necessity and conuenience. Christ saith in his Gospell, They that are clad in soft ray∣ments, are in Kings houses. Whence appeareth a maine difference betwixt the seruants of Christ and of this world. The seruants of this world seeke de∣light, honour, and pleasure in their attire; whereas the seruants of Christ so highly value the gar∣ment of innocence, as they loath to staine it with outward vanities. It is their honour to put on Christ Iesus; other robes you may rob them of, and giue them occasion to ioy in your purchase. The third thing reproueable is, forraine Fashions: When we desire nothing more than to bring in some Outlandish habit different from our owne; in which respect (so Apishly-anticke is man) it be∣comes more affected than our owne. Against such the Lord threatneth,Zephan. 1. I will visit the Princes and the Kings children, and all such as are cloathed with strange Apparell. Which strange Apparell is after diuers fashions and inuentions, wholly vnknowne to our Ancestors. Which may appeare sufficiently to such, who within this 30, or 40, or 60 yeares neuer saw such cutting, caruing, nor indenting as they now see. The fourth thing reproueable is, Superfluity of Ap∣parell, expressed in these three particulars: first, in those who haue diuers changes and suits of Cloaths;
who had rather haue their garments eaten by moths, than they should couer the poore members of Christ. The naked cry, the needy cry, and shreekingly complaine vnto vs, how they misera∣bly labour and languish of hunger and cold. What auailes it them that wee haue such changes of ray∣ments neatly plaited and folded; rather than wee will supply them, they must be starued? How doe such rich Moath-wormes obserue the Doctrine of Christ, when he saith in his Gospell; Hee that hath two Coats let him giue one to him that hath none? Secondly, wee are to consider the Superfluity of such who will haue long garments, purposely to seeme greater: yet, which of these can adde one cu∣bit to his stature? This puts me in remembrance of a conceited story which I haue sometimes heard, of a diminutiue Gentleman, who demanding of his Tayler, what yards of Sattin would make him a Suite, being answered farre short in number of what he expected: with great indignation replied, Such an one of the Guard to my knowledge had thrice as much for a Suite, and I will second him. Which his Tayler with small importunacy conde∣scended to, making a Gargantn's Suite for this Ounce of mans flesh, reseruing to himselfe a large portion of shreads, purposely to forme a fitter proportion for his Ganimede shape. The third Superfluity ariseth from their vanity, who take delight in wearing great sleeues, misha∣pen Elephantine bodies, traines sweeping the earth, with huge poakes to shroud their phantasticke heads, as if they had committed some egregious fact which deserued that censure: for in the Easterne Countreyes it hath beene vsually obserued, that such light Women as had distained their honour, or laid a publike imputation on their name, by consenting
to any libidinous act, were to haue their heads sow'd vp in a poake, to proclaime their shame, and publish to the world the quality of their sinne. NOw to insist more punctually on that effemina∣tour both of youth and age,Delicacy of Apparell. Delicacy of Appa∣rell; I would haue our Daughters of Albion, reflect vpon themselues, those poore shells of corruption: what a trimming and tricking they bestow on their brittle houses. Petrarchs aduice was, that we should not be afraid though our out-houses, these structures of our bodies, were shaken, so our soules, the guests of our bodies, fared well. Whereas contrariwise, these, whose onely care is to delude the outward appea∣rance with a seeming faire, so they may preserue the varnish, disualue the foundation. O may this folly be a stranger to our Nation! To allay which fury, at temper which frenzy, I hold no receit more so∣ueraigne than to enter into a serious meditation of your frailty. As first to consider, what you were be∣fore your birth; secondly, what from your birth to your death; lastly, what after death. If you reflect vpon the first, you shall finde that you haue beene, what before you were not, afterwards were what now you are not, first made of vile matter (see the Embleme of humane nature) wrapped in a poore skinne, nourished in an obscure place, your Coate the second skinne, till you came to a sight of the Sunne, which you entertained with a shreek, imply∣ing your originall sinne. Thus attired, thus adorned came you to vs; what makes you then so vnmind∣full of that poore case wherein you came among vs? Hath beauty, popular applause, youthfull heate, or wealth taken from you the knowledge of your selues? Deriue your pedigree, and blush at your
matchlesse folly, that pride should so highly magni∣fie it selfe in dust, or glory most in that which brings with it the most shame. Why doe you walke with such haughty necks? why doe you extoll your selues so highly in these Tabernacles of earth? Attend and consider; you were but vilde corrupted seede at the first; and now fuller of pollution than at the first. Entring the world with a shreeke to expresse your ensuing shame, you became afterwards exposed to the miseries of this life and to sinne, in the end wormes and wormes meat shall you be in the graue. Why then  you proud, ye dusty shrines, yee ear∣then vessels; seeing your conception was impurity, birth misery, life penalty, death extremity? Why doe ye embellish and adorne your flesh with such port and grace, which within some few dayes wormes will deuoure in the graue? Meane time you neglect the incomparable beauty of your soules. For with what ornaments doe ye adorne them? With what sweet odors or spirituall graces doe ye perfume them? With what choyce Flowers of piety and de∣uotion doe ye trim them? What Habits doe ye pre∣pare for them, when they must bee presented before him who gaue them? How is it that ye so disesteeme the soule, preferring the flesh before her? For the Mistresse to play the Handmaid, the Handmaid the Mistresse, is a great abuse. There can be no successe in that family, where the houshold is mannaged so disorderly. O restraine your affections, limit your desires, beare an equall hand to the better part! The Building cannot stand vnlesse you remoue the rub∣bish from the foundation. The Soule in the body is like a Queene in her Palace. If you would then haue this little Common-wealth within you to flourish, you must with timely prouidence suppresse all facti∣ous and turbulent molesters of her peace: your pas∣sions,
especially those of vaine-glory, must bee re∣strained; motiues to humility cherished; chast thoughts embraced; all deuious and wandring Co∣gitations excluded; that the soule may peaceably enioy her selfe, and in her Palace liue secured. Where∣to if you obiect, that this is an hard lesson; you cannot despise the world nor hate the flesh; tell mee where are all those louers of the world, cherishers of the flesh, which not long since were among vs? Nothing now remaineth of them but dust and wormes. Consider diligently (for this considerati∣on will be a Counterpoize to all vaine-glory) what they now are, and what they haue beene. Women they were as you are: they haue eat, drunke, laugh∣ed, spent their dayes in iollity, and now in a mo∣ment gone downe to hell. Here their flesh is appor∣tioned to wormes, there their soules appointed to hell fire: till such time as being gathered together to that vnhappy society, they shall be rowled in e∣ternall burnings, as they were before partakers with them in their vices. For one punishment afflicteth, whom one loue of sinne affecteth. Tell mee, what profiteth them their vaine-glory, short ioy, world∣ly power, pleasure of the flesh, euill got wealth, a great family, and concupiscence arising carnally? Where now is their laughter? Where their iests? Where their boasting? Where their arrogance? From so great ioy, how great heauinesse? After such small pleasure, how great vnhappinesse? From so great ioy they are now fallen into great wretched∣nesse, grieuous calamity, vnsufferable torments. What hath befallen them, may befall you: being Earth of Earth, slime of slime: Of Earth you are, of Earth you liue, and to Earth you shall returne. Take this with you for an infallible position in these your Cottages of Corruption: If you follow the flesh,
you shall be punished in the flesh: if you be deligh∣ted in the flesh, you shall be tormented in the flesh: for by how much more your flesh is cockered in this world with all delicacy; by so much more shall your soules bee tormented in hell eternally. If you seeke curious and delicate rayments, for the beauty and brauery of your rayments shall the moath bee laid vnder you, and your Couering shall bee Wormes. And this shall suffice to haue beene spoken touching Delicacy of Apparell: we are now to descend briefly to the second branch, Superfluity; whereof we intend to discourse with that breuity, as the necessity of the Subiect, whereof wee treat, shall require, and the generality of this spreading malady may enforce. DIuine is that saying,Superfluity of Apparell. and well worthy your re∣tention: The couetous person before he gaine loseth himselfe, and before hee take ought is taken himselfe. He is no lesse wanting to himselfe in that which hee hath, than in that which hee hath not. Hee findes that hee lost not, possesseth that hee owes not, detaines that he ought not, and hates to restore what hee iniuriously enioyes. So vnbounded is the affection, or rather so depraued is the auariti∣ous mans inclination, as hee cannot containe his de∣sires within bounds, nor enter parley with reason, hauing once slaued his better part to the soueraignty of a seruile affection. This may appeare euen in this one particular. Food and rayment are a Christians riches: wherein he vseth that moderation, as hee makes that Apostolicall rule his Christian direction: Hauing food and rayment, I haue learned in all things to be contented. But how miserably is this golden rule inuerted, by our sensuall worldling? Competency must neither be their Cater in the one, nor Conue∣niency
their Tayler in the other. Their Table must labour of variety of dishes, and their Wardrobe of exchange of raiments. No reason more probable than this of their naked insides, which stand in need of these superfluous additaments. What myriads of indisposed houres consume these in beautifying rot∣ten tombes! How curious they are in suiting their bodies, how remisse in perferring their soules suit to their Maker! How much they are disquieted in their choyce, how much perplexed in their change, how irresolute what they shall weare, how forgetfull of what they were! This edging suits not, that pirle sorts not, this dressing likes not: off it must after all be fitted, and with a new Exchange, lesse seemely, but more gaudy suited. The fashion that was in prime request but yesterday, how it begins to dis∣rellish the wearer, as if it had lost the beauty by vn∣seasonable weather; thus is fashion fallen into a quo∣tidian Feuer: See our compleatest Fashionmongers, how much they tyre themselues with their attiring, how they trouble themselues with their trimming! It seemes wonderfull to me, that they are not whol∣ly crushed, with that onerous burthen with which they are pressed. What a shop of guga nifles hang vpon one backe? Here the remainder of a greater worke, the reliques of an ancient Mannor conuerted to a pearle Chaine. There the moity of an ill-hus∣banded demaine reduced to a Carknet. Long traines must sweepe away long acres: the Epidemicall va∣nity of this age doth exact it; and shee is held least worthy affecting, that doth least affect it. What; sayes my delicate Madam; Is it for one of my ranke or descent to affect what is vulgar? how then should I become popular? I confesse, we are all composed of one Earth, yet is there to bee pre∣supposed a difference in our birth. Were it fitting
that I should fall off, either from that delicacy which is generally approued, or that variety which is by our more generous formalists applauded? What auailes a mighty fortune to a miserable dis∣poser? Or braue meanes, where a base mind is the dispenser? Apparell must be with delicacy sorted, variety suited, or the dignity of the person, be it neuer so conspicuous, will be obscured. Admit, variety be meere superfluity, at worst it is but the ages vanity: which is such an vniuersall malady, as it pleads exemption without farr apology. Whereto I answer; it is true, the  labours of this disease: where the eye becomes a determiner of our worth, by the outward habit which wee weare: It reflects not on what is in vs, but what is on vs. She is not to be accounted a Court visitant, who restraines her selfe either in her choyce of deli∣acy, or variety of habit. What then? Shall a vitious or effeminate age depraue your iudgement? Or a corrupt time depriue you of iudgement? No; you haue more absolute perfections within you, than to be blemished with these imperfections which you too frequently carry about you. The more you dis∣play your pye-coloured flagge of vanity; the more Lures you throw out of loosest liberty; the more fo∣ments you vse of soule-soyling delicacy; the deeper Lodging you bespeake your selues in the Lake of e∣ternall misery. To such I onely speake, who, so they may furnish themselues of a dainty artist, to teach them how to dye well, make it the least of their care how to liue well. These who loue to dye their haire, but neuer change the dye of their corrupted heart; These will not sticke with frontlesse impudence to boulster their depraued liberty. They may be, with∣out controule, dispensers and disposers of their owne. This variety and delicacy wherein they expresse
themselues by an especiall marke of distinction from others, they deriue it from the affluence of their owne fortunes, and not from others: which being so iustly enioyed, and without iniury, admits no ex∣ception in all probability. Whereto I reply, with the words of a Diuine Father,Basil. Art not thou, whosoere thou bee, a Robber, who hast receiued goods as a Steward or dispenser; and entitlest thy selfe the impropriator or owner? for what faire glozes or pretences, soeuer, thou makest for thy selfe, to gil thy shame, or mince thy sinne, it is the bread of the needy, which thou with-holdest; the Coat of the naked which in thy Chest thou storest; the shooes of the barefoot, which with thee lye rotting; the coyne of the begger, which with thee lyes moulding. Away then with these Superfluous dressings; you see daily obiects of your charity, bring out your wardrobe, and cloath the naked. That which you so prodigally spent vpon your selues, conuert it to the more glorious attiring of your naked soules. See that your Kings daughter be all glorious within, that the King of Kings may take pleasure in her. Let not so precious an Image be defaced, so specious a Virgin defiled, so glorious a Creature dishonoured. Instead of Delicacy, decke your selues Modestly; instead of Superfluity, out of your variety communicate freely to others necessi∣ty. We are now to descend briefly to the last branch of this first Obseruation, declaring, how, That Appa∣rell is most comely, which conferres on the Wearer most natiue beauty, and most honour on her Coun∣trey. AS that is euer held most generous which is least affected,That Apparel most comely, which con∣ferres on the Wearer most natiue beauty, and most ho∣nour on her Countrey. most genuine which is least forced; so
there is nothing which confers more true glory on vs, then in displaying our owne Countries garbe by that we weare vpon vs. The Crowe in the fable was sharply taxed for her borrowed feathers: The fable, though it spoke of a Crow, the Morall pointed at a man. Habit (we say) is a Custome; why should it be our custome to change our Habit? With what constancy some other Nations obserue their natiue attyre, Histories both ancient and moderne will suf∣ficiently informe vs. Nothing is held more con∣temptible with them, than apishly to imitate foraign fashions: Prescription is their Tayler, antiquity their Tutor. Amongst the ancient Heathen, euen their very habit distinguish'd Widdowes from Ma∣trons, Matrons from Virgins. So as not onely sexes, states, conditions, yeeres, but euen linages, races, and families were remarkeably discouered. We vsually obserue such a fashion to be French, such an one Spa∣nish, another Italian, this Dutch, that Poland. Meane time where is the English? surely, some precious E∣lixir extracted out of all these. She will neither relye on her own inuētion, nor compose her selfe to the fa∣shion of any one particular Nation, but make her selfe an Epitomized confection of all. Thus becomes she not only a stranger to others, but to her selfe. It were to be wished, that as our Countrey is iealous of her owne inuention in contriuing, so shee were no lesse cautelous in her choice of wearing. Gregory the great thought that Angles did neerely symphonize with Angels, not so much in letter, as in fauour and fea∣ture: Were it not pitty that these should darken their beauty with vailes of deformity? Truth is, there is nothing which conferres more natiue beau∣ty on the wearer, than to be least affectiue in whatso∣euer she shall weare, Shee asperseth a great blemish on her better part, who tyes her selfe to that forma∣lity,
as she dare not put off the least trifle that shee weares, nor put on ought more than shee weares, lest she should lose the opinion of Compleat. There is a natiue modesty euen in attire as well as gesture, which better becomes, and would more fully ac∣complish her, if fashion were not such a pearle in her eye, as it keepes her from the sight of her owne va∣nity. I confesse, light heads will bee easily taken with such toyes: yea, I haue sometimes obserued a phantasticke dressing strike an amorous inconside∣rate Gooseling sooner into a passionate ah me, with a carelesse loue sicke wreathing of his enfolded armes, than some other more attractiue obiect could euer doe. But what is the purchase of one of these Green-wits worth? what benefit can a yong Gentlewo∣man reapin enioying him, who scarcely euer enioy'd himselfe? Meanes he may haue, but so meanely are they seconded by inward abilities, as his state seemes fiter to mannage him, than hee to marshall it. A long Locke he has got, and the art to frizle it; a Ring in a string, and the tricke to hadle it: for his dis∣course, to giue him his true Character, his silence ap∣proues him better; for his wit, hee may laugh at a conceit, and his conceit ne're the wiser; for his o∣ther parts, disclaiming his substance, I appeale to his picture. Now, Gentlewoman, tell me, doe you trim your selfe vp for this Popiniay? Would you haue the foole to weare you, after so many follies haue outworne you? Let modesty suit you, that a discreeter mate may chuse you. Be it your prime honour to make ci∣uility your director. This will incomparably more grace you, than any phantasticke attire, which, though it be get admiration, it clozeth alwayes with derision. You cannot possibly detract more from the renowne of your Country, where you receiued birth and education, than by too hot a quest or pursuit
afer Outlandish fashions.BEHAVIOR Play not the Dotterell, in this too apish and seruile Imitation; let other Coun∣tries admire your Constancy and Ciuility: while they reflect both on what you weare and what you are. Be it your glory to improue your Countryes fame. Many eyes are fixed on you, and many hearts will be taken with you, if they behold those two Orna∣ments, Modesty, and Humility, euer attending you: Discretion will be more taken and enamoured with these, than toyes and feathers. There is nothing so rough but may be polished; nor ought so outwardly faire but may be disfigured. Whereas the beauty of these two cannot by adulterate Art be more graced, by the aged furrowes of time become defaced, or by any outward Occurrent impaired. There are many beauteous and sumptuous Cases, whose Instruments are out of tune. These may please the eye, but they neither lend nor leaue a sweet accent in the Eare. May-buds of fading beauty; Fruits which common∣ly fall before they be ripe, and tender small sweetnesse to them that reape. These Baths of voluptuous de∣lights, chaste feet disdaine to approach. Vertue must either be suited with Consorts like her selfe, or they must giue her leaue solely to enioy her selfe. Be you Maids of honour to this maiden Princesse. Conse∣crate your day to vertuous actions, your night to vsefull recollections. Thinke how this World is your Stage, your Life an Act. The Tiring-house, where you bestow'd such care, cost and curiosity, must be shut vp, when your Night approacheth. Prepare Oyle for your virgin Lamps; marriage robes for your chaste soules; that aduancing the honour of your Countrey here on Earth, in your translation from hence, you may find a Countey in heauen.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Behauiour reflects on three particulars; How to be∣haue her selfe in Company; How in priuacy: That Behauiour most approued, which is clearest from affecta∣tion freed. BEHAVIOVR.BEHAVIOR BEhauior being an apt cō∣posure of the body in ar∣guments of discourse and Action,Obseruat. 2. expresseth euery person in so faire a Cha∣racter, that if his brest were transparant, hee could not be displayed fuller. Albeit, some loue to become so estranged or retired rather from the eye of the world, as they haue made it their
highest art and absolutest ayme, to shrowde them∣selues from the conceit or discussion of man: by en∣tring couenant or contract with Dissimulation, to ap∣peare least to the eye, what they are most in heart, Of this stampe was Tiberius, who gloried in nothing so much (neither indeede had hee many demeriting parts to glory in) as in cunningly cloaking his foule purposes with faire pretences, going inuisible, and deluding his Subiects anxious resolutions with a see∣ming good. Sometimes imminency of danger be∣getting an apprehension of feare, will produce this effect: whence it was, that Agrippina in Tacitus knowing her life to be attempted by Neo, knew well that her onely remedy was to take no notice of the treason. Neither is it rare to finde a staide looke, and a staid thought in one and the same sub∣iect. But for as much as this is held the seldomest erring Index, euer expressing innocent thoughts the best, and discouering disloyall thoughts the soonest, we are to proceed to such particulars as the Subiect principally reflects on: which are three; Action, Af∣fection, Passion:Behauiour re∣flects on three particulars. whereon we purpose so to insist, as what deserues approuement in each of these parti∣culars, may be by our Nobly disposed Gentlewomen cheerefully entertained, carefully retained, and to the improuement of their Fame, the choicest Odour, chie∣fest honour of true Nobility, employed. VErtue is the life of action,ACTION. action the life of man: without the former, all actions are fruitlesse: without the latter, all our dayes are vselesse. Now in this one subiect, it is strange to obserue what diuer∣sity of actiue dispositions wee shal finde. Some are employed to the purpose, but they are so remisse in their employment, as they lose the benefit of it.
Others are imployed to no purpose, making a pas∣sing of time a meere pastime, comming as farre short of one vsefull action at their death, as they were in∣capable of it at their birth▪ Others sleepe out their time in carelesse security: saluting the morning with a sacrifice to their Glasse: the Noone with a luscious repast; the Afternoone with a Play or a Pal∣let repose; the Euening with a wanton consort, ac∣coutred with a reere-banket, to belull the abused soule with the sleepe of an incessant surfet. Others haue crept into such an Apish formality; as they cannot for a world discourse of ought without some mimicke gesture or other, which, seeme it neuer so complete to them, appeares ridiculous to the be∣holder. This was Semprnia's error, for which she was generally taxed, before euer her honour was publikely tainted. What a tinkling you shall ob∣serue some to make with their feet, as if they were forthwith to dance a Morrice? They are euer in mo∣tion like Puppets, but in actions of goodnesse meere Punies. Their pace is a Pauin in the street; their looke a Lue to a lasciuious attempt; They expresse no∣thing by their gesture worthy the image they beare. Besides, who is he, whose iudgement will not taxe these of lightnesse, by these light and vnciuill ap∣pearances? A womans honour is of higher esteeme, than to be thus dis-valued. Light occasions are ma∣ny times grounds of deepe aspersions. Actions are to be seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction, strengthened with instruction, lest too much rash∣nesse bring the vndertaker to destruction. In the Maze or Labyrinth of this life, many be our cares, mighty be our feares, strong our assailants, weake our assistants, vnlesse we haue that brazen wall with∣in vs to fortifie vs against all occurrents, O then, let not the least action betray you to your enemy, for you
haue many; within you, for they are dangerous, because domesticall; without you, for they are strangers, and therefore doubtfull! Let your A∣ctions be your applausiuest Actors; The Scene of your life is short, so liue that your noble actions may pre∣serue your memory long. It was Seneca's counsell to his deare friend Lucilius, that whensoeuer he went about to doe any thing, hee should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman to bee in pre∣sence. To second his aduice, which may conferre on your glorious actions eternall praise, set alwayes be∣fore your eyes, as an imitable mirror, some good woman or other, before whom you may liue, as if she ey'd you, she view'd you. You may finde wo∣men, though weake in sexe and condition, yet pa∣rallels to men, for charity, chastity, piety, purity, and vertuous conuersation. Reui those ancient fa∣milies of Rom, and you shall finde those famous Ma∣trons, Octauia, Portia, Cacilia, Cornelia, make a Pa∣gan State seeme morally Christian. Nor were Nico∣strata, mother to Euander, Crina, Sappho, women lesse famous for Learning, than the other for blame∣lesse liuing. Neither haue our moderne times lesse flourished with feminine worthies, as might be illu∣strated with sundry eminent instances, if I would re∣lect vpon this Subiect: but this hath beene the Theame of sundry Panegyrick Poems, which makes me more sparing in it: Onely in your behalfe, and to your honour, let me retort their Criticke Censure, who draw from the very Etymon of your name an occasion of error. Women are woe to men; No, they're the way, To bring them homeward when they run astray. In a word, conforme your selues to such patternes as are imitable; imitate them in all such actions as are laudable; So liue, that none may haue occasion
to speake euilly of you, if they speake truly. The memory of Dorcas liueth still; Shee was full of good workes and almes which shee did. Yea, euen the very Coats and Garments which shee made, while she was liuing, were showne the Apostle as arguments of he industry, memorials of her piety. Hence it was that Saint Ierome, that excellent patterne of holy Disci∣pline, serious professor of Diuine Doctrine, counsel∣leth the holy Virgin Demetrias to eschew idlenesse: Exhorting her withall, that hauing done her prayers, shee should take in hand wooll and wea∣uing, after the commendable example of Dorcas, that by such change or variety of workes, the day might seeme lesse tedious, and the assaults of Satan lesse grieuous; concluding his deuout Exhortation, with this definite position. I speake generally, no rayment, ornament, or habit whatsoeuer, shall seeme precious in Christs sight, but that which thou makest thy selfe, either for thine owne pecu∣liar vse, or example of other Virgins, or to giue vn∣to thy Grand-mother, or thy Mother, no, though thou distribute all thy goods vnto the poore. See how strictly this holy Father proceeds with his re∣ligious Daughter! Yet was this Demetrias, to whom he addreed this his exhortation, a Noble Lady; not one, whom pouerty did enforce to actions of such ne∣cessity: but one honourably descended, richly en∣dowed, powerfully friended. Let this Lady be your Patterne, her action your direction, her obedience your instruction, that you may share with her in a peacefull dissolution. Entertaine no time without some deuout taske: reflect vpon the Noblenesse of your descent, ennoble it with excellence of de∣sert. For you must know true honour is not wonne, Vntill some honourable deed be done.
Waste not prodigally the precious Lampe of your life without some vertuous action that may purchase loue. Your time is lesse than a minute in respect of e∣ternity, employ that minute so, as it may eternize your memory. Let this bee your highest taske; to promote the honour of your Maker, esteeming all things else a slauish and seruile labour. THere is nothing which requires more discreti∣on,AFFECTION. than how to behaue or carry our selues while we are enthralled to affection. The Louer is euer blin∣ded (saith wise Plat) with affection towards his be∣loued. Reason is laid asleepe, while Sense becomes the master Wooer. Whence came that vsuall saying, One cannot loue and be wise. But I wholly oppose my selfe to their assertion, who seeme thus farre trans∣ported with the sensuall opinion of affection. My Te∣net is, One cannot truely loue, and not be wise. It is a Beldam frenzy and no fancy, which giues way to fu∣ry, and admits not reason to haue soueraignty. Yet in this Subiect, Gentlewomen, is your temper best tryed, your discretion most required, and your Pa∣tience, oft-times, most exercised. Looke therefore how you plant it, lest you bootlesly repent it, when it is misplaced. It is most certaine, there is nothing more impa∣tient of delay than loue, nor no wound more incu∣rable while we liue. There is no exemption, all haue a taste of this Potion, though it haue seuerall degrees of operation. Looke all about you; who so young that loues not? Or who so old, a comely feature moues not? Yet what different passions arise from one and the selfe-same Subiect? Heere, Gentlewomen, you shall see some of your Sexe so surprized with affection, as
it bursts out into violent extremes;BEHAVIOR their discourse is semi-breu'd with sighes, their talke with teares; they walke desperately forlorne, making Launds and desolate Groues their disconsoate Consorts. Their eyes are estrang'd from sleepe, their weakened ap∣petite from repast, their wearied limbs from repose. Melancholly is their sole melody; They haue made a Contract with griefe, till griefe bring them to their graue. And these poore wenches are much to be pittied, because their owne tender hearts brought them to this exigent; hauing either set their affecti∣ons, where they thought verily they might bee re∣quited and were not, or else where they receiued like seeming tender of affection, but afterwards reie∣cted, what they wished to effect they could not. So as, in time, if continuance of absence reduce them not to a better temper, they fall into a poore Maud∣lins distemper, by giuing raines to passion, till it e∣strange them from the soueraignty of reason. Where∣as others you shall see, though not such kind soules, nor halfe so passionate, yet more discreet in their Choyce, and in the passages of loue more tempe∣rate. These will not deigne to cast a loose looke vpon their beloued: but stand so punctually vpon their termes, as if they stood indifferent for their choyce, albeit constantly resolued neuer to admit of any change. These scorne to paint out their passions in plaints, or vtter their thoughts in sighes, or shed one dispassionate teare for an incompassionate Louer. Their Experience hath taught them better Notions: they wil seemingly fly to make them follow, and so take them by whom they are most taken. They can play with the flame, and neuer cinge their wings; looke loue in the face, and preserue their eyes; con∣uerse where they take delight, and colour their af∣fection with a seeming disdaine. These are they who
can walke in the Clouds to their intimatest friends: make their eyes strangers to their hearts, and con∣clude; nothing more foolish than Loue, if discoue∣red; nothing more wise, if artfully shadowed. But I neither approue the violence of the former, nor in∣difference of the latter. The one interlayeth affection with too much passion, the other with too much dissimulation. These were well to bee so allayed or attempered, as neither too much eagernesse taxe the discretion, nor too much remisnesse argue coole∣nesse of affection. For the former, I must tell them they giue great aduantage to an insulting Louer, to' entertaine Loue with such vehement ardour: it fares with these, as with hot duellists, who fight them∣selues out of breath, and so subiect their relenting force to the command of a better tempered enemy. For the latter, they hold constantly that position in arguments of Loue, as well as in other actions of their life; She knowes not how to liue, nor how to loue, that knowes not how to dissemble. I must tell these, Dissimulation sorts not well with affection: Lo∣uers seldome read Loues Polliticks. Let them ap∣peare what they are with that discreet temper, as they may deserue the embraces of a Noble Louer. In briefe, let such as are too hot in the quest of their desires, attemperate that heat with intermissions: such violence is best rebated by absence. Contrari∣wise, such as are too coole, let them quicken that ea∣sinesse with their more frequent conference, and assi∣duate presence. VVHat a furious and inconsiderate thing is Woman,PASSION when Passion distempers her? how much is her Behauiour altered, as if Iocasta were now to be peronated? True it is, some with a bite
of their lip, can snppresse an intended reuenge: and like dangerous Politicians, pleasingly entertaine time with one they mortally hate, till oportunity vsher reuenge, which they can act with as much hostility, as if that very moment were the Actor of their iniury. But this Passion neuer workes more tragicke of fearefull effects, than when it streames from Iealousie or Competition in the Subiect where they loue. Whereof wee haue variety of instances euen in our owne Iland, to omit Italy, which is a ve∣ry Theatre of Tragicke Conclusions in this kinde. It is not long since we had one matchlesse President of this stampe. It sometimes pleased a young Gen∣tlewoman, whose fortunes had swell'd her high, to settle her affection on a Gentleman of deseruing parts, which he entertained with a generous re∣quitall: nothing was omitted that might any way increase this respect, or second the height of their ioyes. Continuall resort and frequent made them inseparably one: No day so pleasing, as when they were together; No houre so tedious as when they were asunder. But how short is that moment of vading happinesse, which hath in it a rellish of lightnesse, and is not grounded on essentiall good∣nesse! Long had they not thus liued, and sociably loued, but the Gentlewoman conceiued some pri∣uate suspition, that her selfe was not sole soue∣raignesse of his heart, but that another was become sharer in his loue. Neither was this Competitrice, whom shee suspected, any other than her owne at∣tendant, whose Caskets shee secretly opened, where she found a Ring of especiall note, which shee had formerly bestowed on him. This confir∣med her Conceit, changed her reall loue into mortall hate; which shee seconded with this tra∣gicke act: Inuiting him one day to a Summer Ar∣bour,
where in former times they were vsually wont to repose, amidst of an amorous discourse, she casually fixt her eye vpon three Lennets, one whereof picking some priuet leaues purposely to build her neast, flew away, while the two which remained, louingly billed one with another: which she intentiuely obseruing, vsed these words; How tenderly and intimately doe those poore fooles mate it? Were it not pitty they should euer be diuided? Which words she had no sooner vttered, then the Shee-Lennet flew away, and left the Male alone, till an∣other returned: with whom the Hee-Lennet bil∣led, and amorously wooed as hee had done before. Which shee more seriously eying, O, quoth shee, How light these males are in their affection! This may seem to you an easie error, but were I Iudge of Birds, it should receiue due censure. Why Lady (replyed hee) These poore Birds doe but according to their kinde. Yea, but what doe ye kind men then, who ingage your loues, interest your selues, empawne your soules to bee constant where you professe loue, and performe nothing lesse than what you professe most. Nor would her long intended reuenge admit more liberty to her tongue; for with a passionate enterbreath shee clozed this speech with a fatall stabbe: leauing so much time to her vnfortunate and disasterous Louer, as to dis∣couer to one of that sorrowfull family the ground of her hate, the occasion of his fall, which hastned on the dolefull Scene of her Tragedy. Now to al∣lay or abate these passionate furies, there is no better meanes than to enter parley with reason; to chastise all such innouating motions as disquiet the inward repose of the mind; to vse the helpe of such whole∣some instructions, as may attemper the heat of those indisposed and inordinate passions. Anger, being an inflammation of blood about the heart, is such a fu∣ry,
as to giue way to it, is to disclaime reason: much wisedome is then required, mature aduice to bee v∣sed, all assistants of Art and Nature to be employed before this Adder can be charmed. For wee shall hardly see any one more forget themselues, than when they are surprized with this Passion. Some you shall obserue so amazed or entranced, as they become wholly silenced: They cannot vtter an articulate word to gaine a kingdome. Gladly would they ex∣presse their distaste, and menace reuenge, if their tongues would giue them leaue, but wrath hath tyed them to good behauiour. Others are so voluble of tongue, as nothing can passe them vntouch'd, to a∣sperse disgrace on such by whom they hold them∣selues wrong'd. If any infamy (which to that time lay buried) offer it selfe to their memory, how they ioy in the occasion of venting their malice on their persons, be their Calumny seconded with words of fowlest aspersion: Which sort of people the euerli∣uing Pindarus termes persons of vnbounded and vn∣brideled tongues. To remedy which enormities, take along with you these instructions: they will be∣nefit you much in the height and heat of your anger, and allay your passion when it rageth and riseth into hugest distemper. Forthwith, so soone as you shall perceiue your selues moued, restraine your passion; but if you cannot appease nor compose your inward Commotion, at least restraine your tongue, and in∣ioyne it silence, that if it speake no good, it may speake no euill, lest being loose and set at liberty, it vtter what wrath, and not reason dictates: More so∣ueraigne and peacefull it will bee for you to retire from society, make recourse to your Oratory, by re∣commending to your best Physician the cure of this infirmity. Vse likewise this Cordial salue to your cor∣roding soare; the receit is Diuine, if seasonably ap∣plyed,
and will minister you comfort when you are most distempered. So soone as your disquieted minds begin to expostulate with the quality of your wrongs, which your Enemy is apt to aggrauate and exasperate, purposely to hasten your precipitate re∣uenge; propose and set before you all the disgraces which possibly you can suffer, and conferre them with those that were aspersed on your Sauiour: this will prepare you to suffer, teach you to conquer: for Arrowes foreseene menace lesse danger. Likewise, when you consider the iniuries which are done you by others, you may reflect vpon the wrongs which are done by you vnto others: for the consideration of your owne infirmity, will ex∣act of you towards others an impunity. Weigh with your selues how much others suffer of you, how much God himselfe suffers of you, who, if he should haue inflicted reuenge for euery particular offence, you should haue perished long since. In a word, you your selues are frequently grieuous, and displeasing to your selues: Seeing then you are so distastefull vn∣to your selues, as you must of necessity suffer many in∣iuries and affronts from your selues, repine not at the sufferings which are inflicted by others on our selues. You are likewise to consider these discommodi∣ties which arise from this Passion; which will arme you with patience, if of your selues you haue any compassion. What auailes it to be reuenged, after our iniury be rceiued? Is your woūd by anothers wound to be cured? Or disgrace tendred, by rendring disgrace restored? Besides all this, see what hee obtaineth, who anger obeyeth: 1. He is depriued of the Crowne of glory, and reward of eternity: 2. He becomes a Minister and Instrument of the Deuill: 3. He destroyeth his owne soule, that he might hurt an others body:Greg. For a dispassionate or angry person
is like vnto him, who that he may kill his Asse, de∣stroyeth himselfe; or rather like him, who for huge debts which he is not able to discharge, is throwne into prison, and disdainefully refuseth any ones offer to pay his debt for him. For by him, who doth you wrong, is the debt which you owe to God, forgiuen, if with patience you suffer the iniury which is done. Whereas the angry person, who will bee his owne reuenger, telleth God how and in what sort he is to deale with him: that as he suffered not small disgra∣ces from another, so neither should small things be suffered in him by God. As it is written, With what measure you mete, the same shall be measured to you againe. Six other detriments or discommodities there bee which arise from the exorbitancy of this passion.Ibid. lib. 5. For by Anger is lost;Moral▪ cap. 31. first, Wisedome, while reason becomes blinded. Secondly, Righteousnesse: for the wrath of man worketh not the righteousnesse of God. Thirdly, Society, for the Acquaintance of one angry man, is pleasing vnto none. Be not, saith the Wise∣man, a companion with the angry man. Fourthly, Con∣cord: while peace is disturbed. Fifthly, the Light of Truth, because anger casteth the darkenesse of con∣fusion vpon the mind or vnderstanding, from whom God hideth the cheerefull beame of his Diuine knowledge. Sixthly, the Splendor of the holy spirit: vp∣on whom, saith the Prophet, shall my spirit rest, but vp∣on the humble and quiet? that is, vpon the meeke, mild, and compassionate. Thus you see what benefits may bee procured by attempering what discommodities incurred by fo∣string this Passion. Whereon I haue the rather insi∣sted, because I am not ignorant, how the strongest and constantest tempers haue beene, and may be di∣stempered and disparraged by it; much more you, whae mainest strength consists in the expression of
that Passion. At all times therefore vse a moderate re∣straint; in the prime of your yeares, when youth sends forth her first promising blossomes, behaue your selues mildly without bitternesse, humbly without haughtinesse, modestly without lightnesse, soberly without childishnesse. The Caske will re∣taine her first taste; the Wooll her first dye. If you shew too much way wardnesse in your youth, small good is to be expected in your age. As you tender your preferrement, seeme milde while you are maids, lest you proue scarecrowes to a young mans bed. Conforme your selues likewise to a nuptiall State, and preserue your honour without staine. Con∣test not with your head for preeminence: you came from him, not he from you, honour him then as he cherisheth the loue he conceiues in you. A domestick fury makes ill harmony in any family. The discord which was hatched and increased towards M. An∣thony by Fulua, was euer allayed and attempered by the moderation of Octauia. Be you all Octauia's; the rougher your crosse, the richer your Crowne. The more that iniuries presse you, the more shall your pa∣tience praise you. The Conflict is but short and mo∣mentanie, the Triumph glorious and impal'd with eternity. And thus much touching those three par∣ticulars, whereon your Behauior principally reflects; wee are now to descend to the next branch, which shall shew how a Gentlewoman of ranke and quality, (for to such onely is my discourse directed) is to be∣haue her selfe in Company. SOciety is the solace of the liuing, for to liue with∣out it, were a kinde of dying. Companions and friendly Associats are the Theeues of time. No houre can be so tedious, which two louing Consorts can∣not
passe ouer with delight, and spend without dis∣taste. Be the night neuer so darke, the place neuer so meane, the cheerefull beames of conceiuing con∣sorts will enlighten the one, and their affections mu∣tually planted, enliuen the other. What a Desert then were the world without friends? and how poselesse those friends without conceiuing mindes? and how weake those mindes, vnlesse vnited in equall bonds? So then, loue is the Cement of our life: life a load without loue. Now, Gentlewomen, you are to put on your vailes, and goe into Company. Which (I am perswaded) you cannot enter without a maiden∣blush, a modest tincture. Herein you are to be most cautelous, seeing no place can be more mortally dan∣gerous. Beware therefore with whom you consort,How to be∣haue her selfe in Company. as you tender your repute: for report will brute what you are, by the Company which you beare. Augustus being at a combat, discerned the inclinati∣ons of his two daughters, Iulia and Liuia, by the Company which frequented them: for graue Senators talked with Liuia, but riotous persons with Iulia. Would you preserue those precious odors of your good names? Consort with such whose names were neuer branded, conuerse with such, whose tongues for immodesty were neuer taxed. As by good words euill manners are corrected, so by euill words are good ones corrupted. Make no reside there, where the least occasion of lightnesse is ministred; auert your Eare when you heare it, but your heart especi∣ally, lest you harbour it. To enter into much dis∣course or familiarity with strangers, argues light∣nesse or indiscretion: what is spoken of Maids, may be properly applyed by an vsefull consequence to all women: They should be seene, and not heard: A Tra∣ueller sets himselfe best out by discourse, whereas their best setting out is silence. You shall haue ma∣ny
trifling questions asked, as much to purpose as if they said nothing: but a friuolous question deserues to be resolu'd by silence. For your Carriage, it should neither e too precise, nor too loose. These sempring made facs partake more of Chmbermaid than Gen∣tlewoman. Modesty and mildnesse hold sweetest cor∣respondence. You may possibly be wooed to inter∣change fauours: Rings or Ribonds are but trifles; yet trust me, they are no trifles that are aym'd at in those exchanges. Let nothing passe from you, that may any way impeach you, or giue others aduan∣tage ouer you. Your innocent credulity (I am resol∣ued) is as free from conceit of ill, as theirs, per∣haps, from intendment of good: but these inter∣courses of Courtesies are not to be admitted, lest by this familiarity, an Entry to affection bee opened, which before was closed. It is dangerous to enter parley with a beleagring enemy: it implyes want or weakenesse in the besieged. Chastity is an inclosed Garden, it should not be so much as assaulted, lest the report of her spotlesse beauty become soyled. Such Forts hold out best, which hold themselues least se∣cure, when they are securest. Nasica, when the Ro∣man Common-wealth was supposed to bee in most secure estate, because freed of their enemies, and strongly fenced by their friends, affirmed that though the Achaians and Carthaginians were both brought vnder the yoke of bondage, yet they were most in danger, because none were left, whom they might either feare for danger, or who should keepe them in awe. How subiect poore Women be to lapses, and recidi∣aions, being left their owne Guardians, daily ex∣perience can sufficiently discouer. Of which num∣ber, those alwayes proued weakest, who were con∣fidentest of their owne strength. Presumption is a
daring sinne, and euer brings out some vntimely birth, which viper-like depriues her vnhappy pa∣rent of life. I haue knowne diuers so resolute in their vndertakings, so presuming of their womanish strength, so constantly deuoted to a single life, as in publike consorts they held it their choycest merri∣ment to giue loue the affront, to discourse of affe∣ction with an imperious contempt, geere their a∣morous suiters out of Count'nance, and make a very Whirligig of loue. But marke the conclusion of these insulting spirits: they sport so long with loue, till they fall to loue in earnest. A moment makes them of Soueraigns Captiues, by slauing them to that de∣seruedly, which at first they entertained so disdain∣fully. The way then to preuent this malady, is to weane you from consorting with folly. What an excellent impregnable fortresse were Woman, did not her Windowes betray her to her enemy? But principally, when shee leaues her Chamber to walke on the publike Theatre; when shee throwes off her vaile, and giues attention to a merry tale; when she consorts with youthfull bloud, and either enters par∣ley, or admits of an enter-view with loue. It is most true what the sententious moral somtimes obserued: We may be in security, so long as we are sequestred from society. Then, and neuer till then, begins the infection to be dispersed, when the sound and sicke be∣gin to be promiscuously mixed. Tempt not Chastity; hazard not your Christian liberty. You shall encoun∣ter with many forward youths, who will most pun∣ctually tender their vselesse seruice to your sha∣dowes at the very first sight: doe not admit them, lest you prostitute your selues to their prostrate ser∣uice. Apelles found fault with Protogenes, in that he could not hold his hands from his Table. Whereas our Damsels may more iustly finde fault with their
youthfull Amorists, for that they cannot hold their hands from vnder the Table. It is impossible to come off faire with these light-fingred fooles. Your onely way is to rampire your chaste intentions with Diuine and Morall instructions, to stop the source, diuert the occasion, subiect affection to reason; so may you become Emperesses of that which hath some∣times tyrannized ouer Emperours: By this meanes shall euery place where you publikly resort, minister to you some obiect of inward comfort: By this meanes shall Company furnish you with precepts of chastity, inable you in the serious practice of piety, and sweetly conduct you to the port of glory. PRIVACY is the seat of Contemplation, though sometimes made the recluse of Tentation. From which there is granted no more exemption in the Cell, than in the Court. Heere is the Lawne where Melancholly drawes her line. Heere the minde be∣comes our Mate; Silence, our sweetest Conference: where the retired becomes either the best or worst friend to himselfe. There is none, who euer conuer∣sed with himselfe, or discanted solely with his owne humour, who can bee ignorant of those numerous slights or subtilties, which by that great Tempter (whose long exercise hath made him no lesse subtill in contriuing, than cruell in practising our ruine) are priuatey shadowed and shrowded, purposely to cir∣cumuent poore man, and leaue him deluded. Dioge∣nes, when he found a young man talking alone, de∣manded of him What he was doing? who answered, He was conuersing with himselfe: Take heed (quoth he) thou cnuersest not with thine enemy. To you, Gentlewo∣men, I direct my discourse,How to be∣haue her selfe in Priay. whose priuacy may ena∣ble you, if well employed, for better things than the
toyes, tyres, and trifles of this age. How many (the more our misery) bestow their priuate houres (which might be dedicated to Contemplation, or workes of piety and deuotion) vpon light-feather'd inuentions, amorous expostlations, or mining of some vnbe∣seeming fashions? How few enter into account with their owne hearts; or so cosecrate their houres to Gods honour, as they make Priuacy their soules har∣bour? The day they spend in visitations; how rare and tedious is one houre reserued for meditation? What a serious intercourse or sociable dialogue is betweene an amorous Mistresse and her Looking-glasse! The poynt or pendent of her feather wags out of a due posture; her Cheeke wants her true tincture; her captious Glasse presents to her quicke eye one error or other, which driues her into a mon∣struous distemper. Pride leaues no time for prayer. This is her CLOSET for LADIES, where shee fits and accommodates her selfe to Fashion, which is the period of her content, while purer ob∣iects are had in contempt. This is not the way to make Priuacy your mindes melody. These employ∣ments should sooner afflict than affect you, because they will sooner distract than direct you. Your spi∣rits will bee reuiued most, when these are valued least. Let me therefore recommend to your choyce, Patternes of more exquisite worth: such whose de∣uotion may be your direction, whose direction your instruction. Deuout mention is made of zealous Anna, who made recourse to the Temple, offring her incessant prayers, a viall of sweet odours, that she might con∣ceiue a sonne: of whom, to her succeeding memory, the Scripture recordeth, that after her teares so de∣uoutly shed, her prayers so sincerely offred, her re∣ligious vowes so faithfully performed, her counte∣nance
was no more altred; Piety begot in her diuine loue, faith in Gods promise made her beleeue, and zeale to Gods house caused her to perseuere: thus sighing she sought, seeking she obtained, and obtai∣ning she retained a gratefull memory of what she re∣ceiued. No lesse feruour shewed Ester in preferring the suite of her distressed Israelites; what perswa∣siue Oratory, what powerfull Rhetoricke, what in∣ducing reasos she vsed, to haue their vniust censure reuersed, their insupportable wrongs redressed, their agrieuances relieued, the incensed King appeased, and them to fauour restored? Shee wooed with teares in her eyes, faith in her heart, almes in her hand; Gods cause was the progresse of her course; shee desired nothing more then how to effect it, which was seconded with a successiue conclusion, be∣cause begun, continued, and ended with deuotion. The like zeale expressed Iudith for her besiedged B∣thulites; the loue of God had so inflamed her, as no feare of the enemy could amate her; faith armed her with resolution; constancy strengthned her against all opposition. Her armour was prayer, Bethulia's cure her care; holy desires her sole attendants; she enters her enemies pauilion with a zealous confi∣dence; implores the Diuine assistance in her entrance; and discomfits a daring foe with cautelous silence. Her sighes and teares were as the first and second raine; they brought successe to her thirsty soule, and a glo∣rious Conquest to her natiue soyle. No lesse are we to admire the wonderfull deuotion of that teare-swollen Magdelen, who with deuout loue sought her deare Spouse intombed, whose body with obse∣quious Odours she had embalmed before euer he was interred▪ Shee, when his Disciples were de∣parted, left not the Sepulchre of her sweet Master; still shee sate sorrowing and ighing, weeping long
and much, rising from her seat of sorrow, her grae of griefe; where he was, he is not; and where hee is, shee knowes not: with pios teares, watchfull eyes, weary wayes, shee reisits againe and againe the desert caues of his relinquish'd Sepulchre, ∣ping at last to haue the happinesse to behold, whom with so feruent a desire hee sought. Now once and againe had shee entred his desolate Tombe: but lit∣tle was all this to her that lou'd so much; The power or efficacy of euery good worke consists in Perseue∣rance. But obserue the comfortable effect of her ef∣fectuall loue! For as much as shee loued more than the rest, and louing wept more than the rest, and weeping sought more than the rest, and seeking per∣seuer'd, allowing her selfe no rest: therefore deserued she to finde, behold, and speake vnto him before the rest. And not onely so, but to become the very first messenger of his glorious resurrection to his Disci∣ples, according as her choyce Spouse had comman¦ded her, and by especiall Commission recommen∣ded to her. Goe, tell my Brethren that they goe into Ga∣lile, there they shall see me. Hence note the fruit of a deuout heart; the incomparable prerogatiue granted to Diuine loue! Naziazn in hi Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia, writeth, that shee was so giuen to prayer, that her knees seemed to cleaue to the earth, and to grow to the very ground, by reason of inces∣sancy or continuance in prayer. Gregory in his Dia∣logues writeth, that his Aunt Trasilla being dead, was found to haue her elbowes as hard as horne: which hardnesse shee got by leaning to a Deske, at which shee vsed to pray. Such as these deserue your imitation; for their Vertue, like sweet Odours, haue sent out a pleasant perfume. They prayed, and obtai∣ned what they prayd for; They liu'd and practis'd what they sought for; They dy'd and enioy'd what they so
long time sigh'd for. You are taught to Enter your Chambers and be still▪ Still, and yet stirring still. Still from the clamours and turbulent insults of the World; still from the mutinous motions and innoua∣tions of the flesh. But neuer still from warring, wrast∣ling, bickring and embattailing with the Leader of those treacherous associats, tyrannous assazinats. O should you consider what troopes of furious and im∣placable Enemies are euer lying in ambuscado for you; how many soule-tempting Syrens are warbling notes of ruine to delude you; what feares within you, what foes without you, what furies all about you; you would not suffer one graine of sand to drop through the Cruet, without a dropping eye; not one minute passe vndedicated to some good em∣ployment, to preuent the fury of such desperate as∣sailants. Make then your Chamber your priuate Theatre, wherein you may act some deuout Scene to Gods honour. Be still from the world, but stir∣ring towards God. Meditation, let it be your compa∣nion. It is the perfume of the memory; the soules rouzer from sinnes lethargy; the sweetest solace in straits of aduersity. Let it bee your key to open the Morning, your  to close the Euening. What an argument of indisction were it for one, amidst vari∣ety of choyce and delicious viands, to discourse of vanity, and suffer himselfe to famish in the presence of such plenty? This is your case, if amidst so many soule-solacing dainties of spirituall comforts, you diuert your eye, by fixing it on these Obiects of earth: and repose not your selues in those fragrant borders of Diuine Contemplation; which, by how much they are more frequent, by so much they be∣come more sweet and redolent. Surely, there is no∣thing that relisheth more sweetly, tasteth more daintily, with-draweth your mindes from the
world more speedily, strengtheneth you against the temptations of your enemy, excites or exerciseth you in euery spirituall duty, as the soule-rauishing Contemplation of the Supreme Deity. All other Ob∣iects are vanity. They may play vpon your fantasie, and so delude you; but being weakely grounded on pitty, they can neuer suffice you. Taske your selues then priuately, lest priuacy become your enemy. As mans extremity is Gods oportunity, so the Deuils oportunity is mans security. Let not a minute bee mis-spended, lest security become your attendant. Be it in the exercise of your Needle, or any other manuall employment: attemper that labour with some sweet meditation tending to Gods honour. Chuse rather with Penelope to weaue and vnweaue, than to giue Idlenesse the least leaue: Wanton Wooers are time-wasters. They make you idolize your selues, and consequently hazardize the state of your soules. Let not their Lip-salue so annoynt you, as it make you forgetfull of him that made you. Be you in your Chambers or priuate Closets; be you retired from the eyes of men; thinke how the eyes of God are on you. Doe not say, the walls encom∣passe mee, darkenesse o're-shadowes mee, the Cur∣taine of night secures me: These be the words of an Adulteresse: Therefore doe nothing priuately, which you would not doe publikely. There is no retire from the eyes of God. I haue heard of some, who for want of more amorous or attractiue Obiects abroad, haue furnished their priuate Chambers with wanton pictures, Aretine tables, Sibariticke stories. These were no obiects for Christian eyes: they conuay too inordinate an heat from the eye to the heart. Eye no obiect which may estrange you from thought of your Maker. Make euery day your Ephemerides. Let your morning imitate your purposes for the day, the
day second what your morning purposed, the Eue∣ning examine your mornings purpose, your dayes purchase. And so I descend to the next branch: how you are to behaue your selues in publike, which should be by so much more punctuall, for as much as the world is more Stoicall. VVOmen in sundry Countryes,This branch might seeme included in our former discourse of Company; but that reflected on persons, this on af∣faires. when they goe into any publike concourse or presse of people, vse to weare vayles, to imply that secret in∣screened beauty which best becomes a Woman, Bash∣full modesty. Which habit our owne Nation now in latter yeares hath obserued: which, howsoeuer the intention of the wearer appeare, deserues approue∣ment: because it expresseth in it selfe Modest shame∣fastnesse, a Womans chiefest Ornament. I second his opinion, who held it for diuers maine respects, a custome very irregular and vndecent, that Women should frequent places of publike resort, as Stage-playes, Wakes, solemne Feasts, and the like. It is Occasion that depraues vs; Company that corrupts vs. Hence it was, that some flourishing States, hauing eyed the inconueniences which arise from the vsuall resort of Women to Enterludes and other publike So∣lemnities, published an expresse inhibition against such free and frequent meetings. Had Hippodamia neuer wandred, shee had prou'd an Hypemnestra, and had neuer wantoned. Had Dinah neuer roaued, shee had prou'd a Diana, and had neuer beene rauished. Yet farre be it from me, to be so regularly strict, or Laconically seuere, as to exclude Womn from all pub∣like societies. Meetings they may haue, and im∣proue them, by a Ciuill and Morall vse of them, to their benefit. They may chat and conuerse with a modest freedome, so they doe not gossip it. For
these Shee-Elpenors, and Feminine Epicures, who sur∣fet out their time in an vnwomanly excesse, we ex∣clude them the pale of our Common-weale. Be they of what state soeuer, they are staines to their Sexe for euer. Especially such, who carouse it in deepe healths, reioyce at the colour of the wine, till it sparkle in their veines, inflame their bloods, and lay open a breach to the frailty of their Sexe. For preuention whereof, we reade that kinsmen kissed their kinswomen to know whether they drunke wine or no, and if they had, to bee punished by death, or banished into some Iland. Plutarch saith, that if the Matrons had any necessity to drinke wine, either because they were sicke or weake; the Senate was to giue them licence, and not then in Rome nei∣ther, but out of the City. Macrobius saith, that there were two Senators in Rome chiding, and the one called the others wife an Adulteresse, and the other his wife a Drun∣kard; and it was iudged, that to be a drunkard was more infamy. Truth is, they might ioyne hands as mates of one society, for I haue seldome seene any one subiect to Ebriety, preserue long vntainted the honour of their chastity. Now for publike Employments, I know all are not borne to be Deborahs, to beare virile spirits in feminine bodies. Yet, in chusing the better part, you may fit and accommodate your persons to publike affaires, well sorting and suting with your ranke and quality. Claudia and Priscilla were nobly descended, yet they publikely resorted, where they might be re∣ligiously instructed; and no lesse publikely instructed others in those principles wherein they were infor∣med. It is said of the Vestall Virgins, that they first learned what to doe; secondly, they did what they had learned; thirdly, they instructed others to doe
that which they had both done and learned. For this, the rich Saban Queene left her owne Region to heare the Wisdome of King Salomon. Surely, how∣soeuer some, no lesse properly than pregnantly, haue emblematiz'd Woman by a Snayle: because shee still carries her house about her, as is the property of a good House-keeper; yet in my iudgement (where∣in I ingenuously submit to others censure) a modest and well Behaued Woman may by her frequent or re∣sort to publike places, conferre no lesse benefit to such as obserue her behauiour, than occasion of profit to her priute family, where shee is Ouerseer. I haue seene some in these places of publike repaire, expresse such a well-seeming State without Apish formality, as euery action deserued imitation of such as were in their Company. Their Conceits were sweetly tempered without lightnesse; their iests sauory, yet without saltnesse; their discourse free without nicenesse; their answers milde without tartnese; their smile pleasing, mixt with bashfulnesse; their pace gracefull without too much actiuenesse; their whole posture delightfull with a seemely careles∣nesse. These are such mirrors of modesty, patternes of piety, as they would not for a world transgresse the bounds of Ciuility. These are Matrons in their houses, Models in publike places. Words spoken in sea∣son, are like apples of gold with pictures of siluer: So oportunatly are their words deliuered, so seasona∣bly vttered, with such vnaffected eloquence expres∣sed, wheresoeuer this sweet and well-tempered dis∣cretion is seated. Whereas others there be, whose indiscretion makes discouery of an Ocean of words, out a drop of reason. They speake much, but ex∣prsse little; their conceits are uer ballased with harshnesse; their iests oisted in with too much dul∣nesse; their discourse trimmed vp with too much
neanesse; their answers leauened with too much sowrenesse; their lookes promising too much light∣nesse, or vnloiable peruersenesse; their pace either too qicke or too slow in dispatch of businesse; their whole posture an indisposed frame of irregular ab∣surdities. But to draw in our sayles, touching the prosecution of this branch; our reproofe shall re∣flect vpon two sorts especially, whose deuious course drawne by an indirect line, may seeme to deserue re∣prehension worthily. The first are such, who giue too easie raines to liberty; making Pleasure their Vocation: as if they were created for no other end, than to dedicate the first fruits of the day to their Glasse; the residue to the Stage or Exchange. These, no sooner haue they layd their Artificiall Complexion on their adulterate faces, than they grow sicke for their Coach. They must visit such a Lady, or what, perchance, is worse, such a Lord. A minute now in their Chambers seemes a moneth. Shall wee display one of these in her colours? The Play-bills must be brought her by her Pentioner: her eye views and reuiewes, and out of her feminine iudgement culls out one from among them which shee will see, purposely to be seene. Much shee obserues not in it, onely she desires to be obserued at it. Her Behauiour in a Box, would make any one thinke shee were a Bee in a box; shee makes such a buzzing and rusling. This is her daily taske, till death enter the Stage and play his part; whom shee entertaines with such vnpreparednesse, as her extreme act presents obiects of infinite vnhappinesse: As it sometimes fared with a Gentlewoman of our owne Nation, who so daily bestowed the expence of her best houres vp∣on the Stage, as being surprized by sicknesse, euen vnto death, she became so deafe to such as admoni∣shed her of her end, as shee clozed her dying scene
with a vehement calling on Hieronim. So inap∣prehensiue was shee of death at her end, because she neuer meditated of death before her end. Now for the second sort, they are meere Antipodes to the for∣mer; These are onely for profit, as the other were for pleasure. These become so wedded to the world, as they afflict their spirits, macerate their bodies, e∣strange themselues from offices of Neighbourhood, to improue their reuenewes, by discouering their too much prouidence to the world. And these are commonly such, as are matcht to Schollers, whose contemplation hath taken them from the world, and recommended the mannagement of their estate to their wife. Now to both these sorts let me addresse my instruction: As I could not possibly approue of the former, because they made pleasure their businesse: so I cannot commend these, because they make not their businesse a pleasure. Let these take heed, that they incurre not that miserable insensibility, which I haue heard sometimes befell to a Worlding of their sexe: Who approaching neere her hauen, and entring now her last Conflict with Nature, was, by such as stood about her, earnestly moued to recommend her selfe to God, tender the welfare of her soule, and to make her saluation sure; thus briefly, but fearefully answered, and forthwith departed: I haue made it as sure as Law will make it.D Done Ti∣moris. Or as we read in a booke entituled The Gift of feare, how a Religious Diuine comming to a certaine Vsuresse, to aduise her of the state of her soule, and instruct her in the way to saluation, at such time as shee lay lan∣guishing in her bed of affliction; told her, how there were three thigs by her to bee necessarily performed, if euer shee hoped to be saued: First, she was to be contrite in heart; secondly, shee was to confesse her sinnes; thirdly, shee was to make
restitution according to her meanes. Whereto shee thus replyed; Two of those first I will doe willingly: but to doe the last, I shall hold it a difficulty; for should I make restitution, what would remain to raise my chil∣dren their portion? To which the Diuine answered; Without these three you cannot be saued. Yea but, quoth shee, Doe our Learned men and Scriptures say so? Ye surely, said the Diuine. And I will try (quoth she) whether they say true or no, for I will restore no∣thing. And so resoluing, fearefully dyed, fearing pouerty temporall, more than eternall, which shee was of necessity to suffer, (without Gods infinite in∣terceding mercy) for preferring the care of her po∣sterity, before the honour of her Maker. To be short, the former sort deserues reproofe, for making pleasure their vocation; the latter for barring businesse all recreation. A discreet temper will mode∣rate both these; the first, by holding pleasure a pa∣stime, and no businesse; the last, by applying a cure to an incessant care, and immixing some pleasure with businesse, to attemper it, lest it incline to heauinesse. Both which, equally concurring, are euer conferring to the labouring mind, inward quietnesse. COmplexion inclosed in a box, giues no tincture to the Cheeke, nor morall precepts vnapplyed, beauty to the minde. Thus farre haue we proceeded in directions of Behauiour; insisting on such remar∣kable obseruances, as might better enable you in each particular. Wee are now to lay before you, vp∣on serious discussion of the premizes,That Behauior most appro∣ued, which is clearest from affectation freed. how that Be∣hauiour is to be most approued, which is clearest from affectation freed. Apes are catcht in Desarts by imitation. Would not you be caught by indiscretion? Imitate nothing
seruilely, it detracts from your gentility. I haue noted some of our Chambermaids take vpon them such an vnbeseeming state, when they came to visit their poore friends in the Country, as they punctually re∣tain'd both gate and garb of their mincing Mistresses in the City. To their Parish-Church they repaire to be seene and showne; where if any of these ciuilized Iugs chance to be saluted by the way, hauing quite forgot both broome and mop, with a scornefull eye they will not sticke to returne this maiesticke an∣swer: We thanke you my good people. It is discretion that appropriates to euery peculiar degree their pro∣per distinction. Many things will beseeme the Mi∣stresse, which agree not with the quality of the Maid. But in no degree will that Behauiour seeme comely, which affectaion hath introduced, be it in Court, City, or Country. You shall see many, pur∣posely to couer some naturall blemish or deformity, practise that which makes them appeare farre more vnseemely. Here one indents with her lips to sem∣per, that shee may hide the want or greatnesse of her teeth. Another contracts with her Tayler, lest Nemesis should bee seene sitting on her shoulder. A third weares her Gowne with a carelesse loosenesse, to couer or colour her bodies crookednesse. This, with Fabulla, buyes an artfull Periwig to supply her art-fallen haire. That enazures her seered veines, embolsters her decayed brests, to purchase a sweet∣hart. What an affected state this generally-infected state assumes, purposely to gaine a popular esteeme? Suruey our streets, gaze on our windowes; you shall ee gazers to entertaine your eyes with variety of phantasticke Behauiours. But these are none of Vertues followers. Would you bee prayse-worthy? Vertue to her selfe is her chiefest prayse, her choy∣cest prize. There is nothing comparably precious to
a Continent soule. Affectation shee will not admit, for her habit; both her Habit and Behauiour are pro∣per and not enforced; natiue and not apishly intro∣duced. Shee cannot wooe a wanton Louer with a dissembled blush, nor promise more with an out∣ward presence, than shee resolues to admit with a spotlesse Conscience. Outward semblances, if light, shee holds apparant blemishes to her life. Her life, as it is a line to her selfe, so shee would haue it a light to others. Lacides, Prince of Argos, was accounted lasciuious onely for his sleeke lookes, and mincing gate. So Pompey, because hee vsed to scratch his head with one finger, albeit very Continent and modest. Beleeue it, though your Person be the Booke, your Behauiour is the Index. Which will require a large Comment, if it expresse it selfe in ought proba∣bly incontinent. Now, for as much as nothing bet∣ter seemes you, more commendably adornes you, or more absolutely accommodates you, than what is natiue and vnaffected, so it be by Education seasoned: be your owne Women; dis-value all apish formality; resort not to the Temple to take a patterne of some new fashion: modest discretion blusheth at such ser∣uile imitation. What you see in another, may be∣come them, which would not become another. The Asse in the fable seeing the dogge fawne and leap vp∣on his Master, thought it would beseeme him, but sorting not with his nature, it got him a beating for his labour. Now to distinguish betwixt an enforced and vn∣affected Behauiour, it is most easie; the very first blush will discouer the one by the other. You shall ob∣serue these who are tyed to affectation in this kinde, set their looke, gate, and whatsoeuer else may conferre a phantasticke grace on their vsurped Behauiour, so punctually, as if they had entred a solemne Con∣tract
with eye, face, hand, foot and all, to hold con∣stantly their dimension, to beget in the beholder a more setled admiration. Whereas contrariwise, these whose free, genuine, and generous demeanours ex∣presse themselues lesse strictly, but farre more come∣ly; scorne to tye their affections to these seruile re∣straints. They hold it farre more sutable with an I∣talian Pantomime, who professeth hope of profit vp∣on the Stage, to confine them to these regularities, than discreet Women, whose honour is their honest Behauiour: and whose praise it is, to bee exemplary to others in goodnesse, and not others Apes in imita∣ting their phantasticke fashions. To conclude then this Obseruation; as you are generous by birth, dote not on that which is most ridiculous on this Stage of earth. Approue your selues chaste Virgins, conti∣nent Wies, discreet Matrons, honourable Wid∣dowes, in your vertuous and modest demeanour. Preserue that eternally, which giues accomplishment to Gentility. Your Educations (as may be presuppo∣sed) haue so beautified you, as the garbe you retaine is most proper vnto you. The Hyaene is a dangerous beast: yet her subtilty and cruelty take life from af∣fectation and imitation. Desire you to bee so Behau'd, as others may admire you  In your choyce of Beha∣uiour, inure your selues to what is neatest, not what is newest. Inuention in subiects of this kinde, doth more harme than good. So behaue your selues, that too much curiosity may not taxe you of pride, nor too much maiesty of State: Modesty mixt with hu∣mility will temper both these, and make that Beha∣uiour which appeares in you, so well become you, as if it were borne with you, and not affectiuely deriued from others to you.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvomn. Argument. Complement defined; how it may be corrupted; how refined; wherein it may be admitted as mainely conse∣quent; wherein omitted as meerely imperti; what Complement giues best accomplishment. COMPLEMENT.Complement COMPLEMENT hath beene anciently defined,Obseruat. 3. and so succes∣siuely retained;Complement defined. a no lesse rea than formall accomplishment. Such as were more noby and freely educated, and had improued their bree∣ding by forraine Obser∣uations (so sweetly tem∣pered was the equall vnion and communion of their
affections) instructed others in what they had seene and obseru'd either at home or abroad, worthy imi∣tation or approuement. Nothing was admitted in those times publikely, but what was by the grauer Censors first discussed priuately. Iealous were the Pagans of forraine fashions: for, with such constan∣cy they retained their owne; as they seldome or ne∣uer itched after others. The Tyrian and Sidonian were so suspected of pride, through their effeminacy in attire, and other light fashions which they vsed, as they were held dangerous to commerce with. So purely did those poore beamelings of Nature reflect on her people; that formality was held palpable hy∣pocrisie, faire semblances and coole performances meere golden shadowes to delude others, but gull themselues most. Princes Courts were Princely Se∣minaries. Delicacy was there no Tutresse, nor effe∣minacy Gouernesse. If Alcibiades, albeit in Athens the beautifull'st, for natiue endowments the preg∣nant'st, and for dscent one of the noblest, introduce ought irregularly, or expresse any Complement which relisheth not of Ciuility; the author must suffer the censure of the City. It was very vsuall in former times, when any Embassie was addressed from one state vnto another, for the Senate or Councell, from whence any such Legate was sent, to schoole them in sundry particulars before they tooke their iourney or receiued their Commission: but in no caution were they more strict, than in expresse command that they should vse no other garbe, Complement, nor sa∣lute vpon their approach in forraine Courts, than what they had seene vsed and obserued at home. Thus their owne natiue fashion, became a note of distinction to euery Nation. Neither am I ignorant, how euen in one and the selfe-same Prouine, there may bee generally intro∣duced
a different or distinct garbe: which procee∣deth either from the Commerce and Confluence of people there resorting, and consequently improuing their Behauiour and Elocution by their mutuall confe∣rence; or from the Princes Court, where all State and Maiesty hath residence; or from the temperature of the Ayre, to which some haue attributed an especiall preeminence. Whereas, in desart and remote places, on which the beames of Ciuill society seldome re∣flect, wee shall finde nothing but barbarisme and vn∣sociable wildnesse. Education is the improuer of the one, and producer of the other. Wee shall euer see Complement shine most in places eminent. There are Obiects fit for such Subiects: Such as expect it, and bestow their whole dayes practice in exercise of it: These aspire to the nature or definition of no art more eagerly, than Complement, which they hold the ab∣solute ornament of Gentility. Howsoeuer, mainely repugnant be their Tenets touching the subsistence of Complement. Some haue held, it consisted in congies, cringes, and salutes; of which errour, I would this age wherein we liue, did not too much labour: others, meerely in a painted and superficiall discourse; wher∣in they so miserably tyed themselues to words, as they tyred the impatient hearers with foolish repe∣titions, friuolous extrauagancies; being, in a word, so affianced to the shadow, as they forgot the substance. The last, which were onely reall and complete Cour∣tiers, held a seemely gracefull presence, beautifide with a natiue comelinesse, the deseruingst Comple∣ment that could attend vs. Certainely, if we should exactly weigh the deriuation of the word, we could not imagine so meanely of it, as to consist meerely of words, or anticke workes. It was first intended to distinguish betwixt persons of ciuill and sauage
carriage: yea, to appropriate a title of preeminence to such, who exceeded others in grounds or pecepts of Morality; whose liues appeared as Lampes to enligh∣ten others, and consequently perpetuate the memory of themselues. Many noble and eminent Ladies are recorded both in diuine and humane writ to haue ex∣celled in this Complement of honour. These knew the definition of it, and moulded their conuersation to it: They knew what belonged to a posture of state; they could court it without apish curiosity; embrace loue with a reserued modesty; expresse themselues complete without singularity. Forraigne fashions they distasted; painted Rhetoricke they disrelished; re∣all Complement was all they affected. Loue they could without dissembling; discourse without affecting; shew curt'sie without congying; still retaining what was best beseeming. In the Court they resided to better it; not a straid looke could promise a looe Louer least hope of a purchase; nor Coynesse dishear∣ten a faithfull seruant from his affectionate purpose. They knew not what it was to protest in iest; to walke in the clouds; to domineere ouer their cap∣tiues, or entertaine many Suitors. They freed Com∣plement of dissimulation, made vertue their Load∣stone to affection; their actions were dedicated to good ends: by which meanes they made God and goodmen their friends. Nor doe I feare it, but that our flourishing Albion hath many such noble and complete Ladies; who so highly esteeme the true and natiue definition of Complement, as they preferre the substance before the shadow. Honour is their deerest tender, goodnesse their line, by which they daily draw neerer to perfection, their proper Centre. Thus farre for the Definition, wherein we haue the rather inlarged our discourse, that the Subiect whereof we treat, may be discouered in her owne nature; and
such as owe attendance to her, become better profi∣cients in their instructions deriued from her. Nei∣ther can we obserue what may really deserue your imitation, but by discerning the excellence of that whereof we treat by a true and proper definition▪ THere is nothing on earth so pure,How Comple∣ment may be corrupted. but abuse may corrupt it; nothing so good, but custome may depraue it. This may appeare in this one Subiect, which wee haue now in discourse. Former times were not so aded to fashions, as to esteeme nothing formall, but what was phantasticall. It was not then held the life of Complement, to haue the art to set a face, court a glasse, make a cringe or a ducke. Legges were held for vsefull supporters, but no Complemen∣tall postures. New-minted words made not their tongues more complete; nor an Outlandish Salute their Persons more admired. Virgin-modesty made resolution her Steletto to guard her honour. Plumes and Feathers were held light dressings for staid minds; suspicious trimmings for stale Maids. Actors might weare them in their presentments vpon the Stage, but modest Matrons were neuer allowed to weare them in the state. Women were admitted to haue Painters, but not to be their owne painters: Campaspe was pictured out in her colours by Apelles: Crotons fiue daughters liuely depictured by Zexes; yet these, without any helpe of art, still retained their owne natiue features. It was the Complement of that age to deliuer their minde freely without mincing, conuerse friendly without glozing; walke the street demurely without gazing. Wherein (with submission euer to graue iudgements) this latter age, in mine opinion, deserues iust reproofe. Edu∣cation is a second Nature, and this hath giuen that
freedome to women, as they may admit any oportu∣nity to entertaine time with their amorous seruants; redart wanton tales with light blushes; passe a whole afternoone in a Bay-window, in Congies, Courtsies, and other vselesse Complements. Flashes of wit are made beguilers of time; and these mixt now and then with such lasciuious passages, as modesty might iust∣ly hold it selfe abused to be so encountred. Alas! Who knowes not what secret traines are laid for credulous women, vnder these pretenced parlies? Doe you ob∣serue how their tongues are tipt with your prayses; how they honour your shadowes; admire the earth you tread on; adore the Ayre you breath on; and with their ayrie applauses so gild you, as in the end they palpably gull you; leauing you no lesse misera∣bly deluded, than themselues seased of what their sensuall quest pursued? Beware of that Complement which giues way to rob you of your choycest Orna∣ment. Egnatius, in Catulli, is brought out, shewing the whitenesse of his teeth: a poore subiect to raise an Encomiasticke poem. These are Theames for an amorous Muse: White teeth, rolling eyes, a beau∣tifull complexion (all exteriour and inferiour goods) being that which Euryala his Nurse praised, when she washed the feet of Vlysses, namely, gentle speech, and tender flesh. No lesse perswasiue by the elegan∣c of the one, than inuasiue by delicacy of the other. But all these ouward imbellishments giue but small accomplishment to the inward beauty. Wher good's a better attribute than faire. No be not these dainty subiects for a Complet youth to dis∣cant on? What Crochets and extemporall Con∣ceits are hatched out of an addle braine? The very shadow of Iulia's haire must not want the complea∣est honour, that either art can deuise, or cest erect. Not a Cooplet but must be poetically Complete; which
out of an amorous phrensie must with mounting Hy∣perboles be thus contemned. Skinne more pure than Ida's snow, Whiter farre than Moorish milke, Sweeter than Ambrosia too, Softer than the Paphian silke, Indian plumes or thistle-downe, Or May-blossoms newly blowne, Is my Mistresse Rosie-pale, Adding beauty to her vaile. An excellent peece of Complementall stuffe to catch a selfe-conceited one. Many you haue of your sexe, who are too attentiue auditors in the report of their owne prayses. Nothing can bee attributed to them, which they hold not properly due vnto them. Which conceit, many times, so transports them, as, Narcissus-like, they are taken with their owne sha∣dowes; doting on nothing more than these Encomi∣asticke bladders of their desertlesse praises. Let mee aduise you, whose discretion should bee farre from giuing light eare to such ayrie Tritons, to dis-rellish the oylie Complement of these amorous Sycophants. Much more vsefull and beneficiall it will be for you to retaine that modesty which appeared in Alphon∣sus Prince of Aragon's answer to a plausiue Orator; who hauing repeated a long Panegyricall Oration in his prayse, replyed; If that thou hast said, consent with truth, I thanke God for it; if not, I pray God grant mee grace that I may doe it. You shall encounter with some of these Complete Amorists, who will make a set speech to your loue, and sweeten euery period with the perfume of it. Others will hold it an ex∣traordinary grace to become Porters of your Misset, or holders of your Fanne, while you pinne on your Maske. Seruice, Obseruance, Deuotion be the Generall heads of their Complement. Other Doctrine they
haue none, either to instruct morally, or informe politically. Beleeue it, Gentlewomen, they are ill-spent houres, that are bestowed in conference with these Braine-wormes. Their friuolous discourse will exact from you some answer: which if you shape iustly to their dialect, there will be more vaine wind spent, than you can redeeme with many teares. Let no con∣ceit transport you aboue your selues; hold it for no Complement worthy your breeding, to trifle time in loue-toyes. They detract both from discretion and modesty, and oft-times endanger the ruine of the lat∣ter fearefully. This kinde of Complement with great ones, were but meere Canting among Beggars. Hee or shee are the Completest, who in arguments of dis∣course and action are discreetest. Full vessells giue the least sound. Such as hold Complement the sole sub∣iect of a glib tongue, actiue cringe, or artfull smile; are those onely Mimicks, or Buffouns of our age, whose Behauiours deserue farre more derision than applause. Thus you haue heard how Complement may be corrupted; wee now purpose, with as much pro∣priety and breuity as wee may, to shew you how it may be refined. To the end, that what is in its owne nature so commendable, may bee entertained with freedome of choyce, and retained without purpose to change. THe Vnicornes horne being dipt in water,How Comple∣ment may be efined. cleares and purifies it. It is the honour of the Physician to restore nature, after it bee decayed. It is the sole worke of that supreme Archytect to bring light out of darkenesse, that what was darke might bee enlighened; life out of death, that what was dead might bee enliuened; way out of error, that the er∣ring might bee directed; knowledge out of igno∣rance,
that the ignorant might be instructed; a salue out of sinne, that sinnes sore might bee cured; com∣fort out of affliction, that the afflicted might be com∣forted; hope out of despaire, that the desperate might bee succoured; a raising from falling, that their fall might be recouered; strength out of weak∣nesse, that his great worke might be glorified. Gold thrice tryed, becomes the purer and more refined: And Complement the most, when it is best accommo∣dated. True it is, that Society is either a Plague or a Perfume. It infects, where Consorts are ill-affected; but workes excellent effects, wher vertuous Con∣sorts are assembled. It is the sweetest note that one can sing, When Grace in Vertues key, turnes Natures string. Where two meeke men meet together, their con∣ference (saith mellifluous Bernard) is sweet and dele∣ctable: where one man is meeke, it is profitable: where neither, it proues pernicious and vncomfor∣table. It is Society that giues vs, or takes from vs our Security. Let me apply this vnto you, Gentlewomen, whose vertuous dispositions, (so sweetly hath na∣ture grac'd you) promise nothing lesse than feruo∣rous desires of being good. Would you haue that refined in you, which others corrupt, by inuerting the meanes? Or expresse that in her natiue Colours, which will beautifie you more than any artificiall or adulterate colours, whose painted Varnish is no soo∣ner made than melted? Make choyce of such for your Consorts, whose choyce may admit no change. Let no Company be affected by you, which may ha∣zard infecting of you. The World is growne a very Pest-house: timely preuention must be vsed, before the infection haue entred. You haue no such soue∣raigne receits to repell, as you haue to preuent. The infection of vice leaues a deeper spot or speckle on
the mind, than any disease doth on the body. The Blackmoore may sooner change his skin, the Leopard his spots, than a soule deepe dyed in the graine of in∣fection, can put off her habituate corruption. Be it then your principall care to make choyce of such bashfull Maids, modest Matrons, or reuerend Wid∣dowes, as hold it their best Complement to retaine the opinion of being Continent. Infamy hath wings as swift as fame. Shunne the occasion, lest you vnder∣goe the brand. Posthuma, because giuen to laughter, and something forward to talke with men, was su∣spected of her honesty; where being openly accu∣sed, she was acquitted by Spurius Minutius, with this caueat, to vse words sutable to her life. Ciuility, trust me, is the best and most refined Complement that may be. Courting in publike places, and vpon first sight, it affects not; for it partakes more of impudent than Complete. Be it of the City that argument of discourse be ministred, it can talke freely of it without min∣cing; or of the Court, it can addresse it selfe to that garbe in apt words without minting; or of the Countrey, in an home-spun phrase it can expresse whatsoeuer in the Countrey deserues most prayse. And all this in such a proper and familiar manner, as such who are tied to Complement, may aspire to it, but neuer attaine it. Hee that hath once tasted of the fountaine Clitorius, will neuer afterward drinke any wine. Surely, howsoeuer this ciuil and familiar forme of dialect may seeme but as pure running water in comparison of Complement, which, like Nectar, streames out in Conduits of delight to the humorous hearer: yet our discreet Complementer preferres the pure fountaine before the troubled riuer. It is true, that many fashions, which euen these later times haue introduc'd, deserue free admittance; yea, there is something yet in our Oae, that may be refined.
Yet in the acceptance of these, you are not to enter∣taine whatsoeuer these finer times haue brought forth. Where variety is affected, and the age to in∣constancy subiected, so as nothing but what is rare and new becomes esteemed: Either must our inuen∣tions be present and pregnant, our surueyes of for∣raine places serious and sollicitant, or we shall fall in∣to decay of fashion, or make old ones new, and so by antiquity gull our Nation. Truth is, though our tongues, hands, bodies, and legges be the same, our Elocution, action, gesture, and posture are not the same. Should the soule of Troilus, according to that erroneous transmgration of Pythagoras, passe into the body of one of or English Courtiers; or Hor∣tensius, (who was an Orator actie enough) into one of our English Lawyers; or Antigone (who was Complementall enough) into one of our English Cur∣tezans; they would finde strange Cottages to dwell in. What is now held Complete; a few yeares will bury in disgrace. Nothing then so refined, if on earth seated, which time will not raze, or more curious conceits disesteeme, or that vniuersall reduction to nothing dissolue. That Complement may seeme plea∣sing; such a fashion generally affecting; such a dres∣sing most Complete: yet are all these within short space couered with contempt. What you obserue then to be most ciuill in others, affect it; such an ha∣bit needs not to be refined, which cannot be bettered. Fashion is a kinde of frenzy; it admires that now, which it will laugh at hereafter, when brought to better temper. Ciuility is neuer out of fashion; it euer retaines such a seemely garbe, as it conferres a grace on the wearer, and enforceth admiration in the beholder. Age cannot deface it; Contempt disgrace it; nor grauity of iudgement (which is euer held a se∣rious Censor) disapproue it.
Be thus minded, and this Complement in you will be purely refined. You haue singular patternes to imitate, represent them in your liues, imitate them in your loues. The Corruption of the age, let it seize on ignoble spirits; whose education, as it neuer e∣quall'd yours, so let them strike short of those nobler indowments of yours: labour daily to become im∣proued, honour her that will make you honoured: let vertue be your crowne, who holds vanity a crime: So may you shew holinesse in your life, enioy happi∣nesse at your death, and leaue examples of goodnesse vnto others both in life and death. COurts & eminent places are held fittest Schooles for Complement.Wherein Com∣plement may be admitted, as mainely consequent. There the Cinnamon tree comes to best grouth; there her barke giues sweetest scent. Choice and select fashions are there in onely re∣quest; which oft-times like those Ephemerae, expire, after one dayes continuance: whatsoeuer is vulgar, is thence exploded; whatsoeuer nouell, generally applauded. Here be weekely Lectures of new Com∣plements; which receiue such acceptation, and leaue behinde them that impression, as what garbe soe∣uer they see vsed in Court publikely, is put in pre∣sent practise priuately; lest discontinuance should blemish so deseruing a quality. The Courts glosse may be compared to glasse, bright, but brittle; where Courtiers (saith one) are like Counters,Plutarch. which some∣time in account goe for a thousand pound, and pre∣sently before the Count be cast, but for a single pen∣ny. This too eager affection after Complement, be∣comes the consumption of many large hereditaments. Whereto it may be probably obiected, that euen dis∣tion inioynes euery one to accommodate himselfe to the fashion or condition of that place wherein he
liues. To which Obiection I easily condescend; for should a rusticke or boorish Behauiour accompany one who betakes himsefe to the Court, he might be sure to finde a Controuler in euery corner to reproue him; or some complete gallant or other, pittifully to geere and deride him. But to dote so on fashion, as to admire nothing more then a phantasticke dres∣sing, or some anticke Complement, which the cor∣ruption of an effeminate State hath brought in, de∣rogates more from discretion, then the strict obser∣uance of any fashion addes to her repute. This place should be the Beacon of the State; whose mounting Prospect surueyes these inferiour coasts which pay homage and fealty vnto her. The least obliquity there, is exemplary elsewhere. Piercingst iudge∣ments, as well as pregnantst wits should be there re∣sident. Not a wandring or indisposed haire, but giues occasion of obseruance to such as are neere. How requisite then is it for you, whose Nobler descents promise, yea, exact more of you, then inferiours, to expresse your selues best in these best discerning and deseruing places? You are women; modesty makes you completest: you are Noble women, desert accom∣panying your descent will make you noblest. You may, and conueniency requires it, retaine a Court∣ly garbe, reserue a well seeming State, and shew your selues liuely Emblemes of that place, wherein you liue: You may entertaine discourse, to allay the irkesomenesse of a tedious houre; bestow your selues in other pleasing recreations, which may no lesse re∣fresh the minde, than they conferre vigour and vi∣uacity to the body. You may be eminent starres, and expresse your glory in the resplendent beames of your vertues; so you suffer no blacke cloud of infa∣my to darken your precious names. She was a Princely Christian Courtier, who neuer approached
the Court, but shee meditated of the Court of heauen; neuer consorted with her Courtiers, but she contem∣plated those Citizens of heauen; nor euer entred the Presence-Chamber, but shee thought of the presence of her Maker, the King of heauen. Such Meditations are receits to cure all inordinate motions. Your Liues should be the lines to measure others actions. Vertue is gracious in euery subiect, but most in that, which the Prince or Princesse hath made gracious. Anci∣ently, the World was diuided into three parts, where∣of Europa was held the soule; properly, euery Poli∣tike State may be diuided into three Cantons, where∣of the Court is the Suune. You are Obiects to many Eyes; be your actions platformes to many liues. I can by no meanes approue that wooing and winning Complement (though most Courts too generally af∣fect it) which makes her sole Obiect, purchase of Seruants or Suitors. This garbe tastes more of Cur∣tezan than Courtier: it begets Corriuals, whose fatall Duello's end vsually in blood. Our owne State hath sometimes felt the misery of these tragicke euents; by suffering the losse of many generous and free-bred Sparkes; who, had not their Torches beene extin∣guished in their blood, might to this day haue sur∣uiued, to their Countries ioy and their owne fame. So great is the danger that lyes hid in affable Com∣plements, promising aspects, affectionate glances, as they leaue those who presumed of thir owne strength, holding themselues invulnerable, many times labouring of wounds incurable. Be you no such Basilisk; neuer promise a calme in your face, where you threaten a storme in your heart. Appeare what you are, lest Censure taxe you of inconstancy, by saying, you are not what you were. An open countenance and restrained bosome sort not-well to∣gether. Sute your discourse to your action; both to
a modest dispose of your affection. Throw abroad no loose Lures, wandring eyes, strayed lookes; these delude the Spectators much, but the Actors most. A iust reuenge! by striuing to take in others, they are taken by others. How dangerous doe wee hold it to be, in a time of infection, to take vp any thing, be it neuer so precious, which wee finde lost in the street? One of your loose lookes, be it darted with neuer so Complementall a state, is farre more infecti∣ous, and mortally dangerous. There is nothing that sounds more cheerefully to the eare, or leaues a swee∣ter accent; nothing that conueyes it selfe more spee∣dily to the heart, or affords fuller content for the time, than conceit of loue. It will immaze a per∣plexed wretch in a thousand extremes; whose ama∣zed thoughts stand so deepely ingaged to the Obiect of his affection; as hee will sustaine any labour, in hope of a trifling fauour. Such soueraignty beauty retaines, which, if discretion temper not, begets such an height of conceit in the party beloued; as it were hard to say, whether the Agent or Patient suf∣fer more. To you let mee returne, who stand fixed in so high an Orbe; as a gracefull Maiesty well be∣comes you, so let modesty grace that Maiesty; that demeaning your selues like Complete and gracious Courtiers on earth, you may become triumphant and glorious Courtiers in heauen. THis garbe,Wherein Com∣plement may be omitted, as meerely impertinent. as it suites not with all Persons, so sorts it not to all Places. For a Mechanicke to affect Complement, would as ill seeme him, as for a rough-hewen Satyre to play the Orator. It is an excel∣lent point of discretion, to fit ones selfe to the quali∣ty or condition of that place where he resides. That Vrbanity which becomes a Citizen, would rellish
of too much curiosity in a Country man. That Com∣plement which giues proper grace to a Courtier, would be get derision or contempt, being personated by a Merchant or his Factor. In affaires of State, is re∣quired a gracefull or Complete posture; which many times procures more reuerence in the person inter∣essed, than if that state were omitted. Whereas, in ordinary affaires of trafficke, it were indiscretion to represent any such state, or to vse any expression, ei∣ther by way of discourse or action, that were not fami∣liar. That person, who preferres Complement before profit; and will rather speake not to be vnderstood, than lose one polite-stollen phrase, which hee hath purchased by care onely, and vnderstands not, may account himselfe one among his bank-rupt brethren, before he breake. It is pittifull to heare what a rem∣nant of sustian, for want of better Complement, a Complete-Country-Gossip (for so shee holds her selfe) will vtter in one houre amongst her Pew-fel∣lowes. How shee will play the Schoole-Mistresse in precepts of Discipline and morall Behauiour! No∣thing so gracefull in another, which shee will not freely reproue; nothing so hatefull in her selfe, which shee will not confidently approue. Teach shee will, before shee be taught; and correct Forme it selfe, to bring Forme out of loue with it selfe. To which ma∣lady, none is more naturally subiect, than some La∣dies cashiered Gentlewoman, or one who hath plaid Schoole-Mistresse in the City, and for want of com∣petent pay, remoues her Campe into the Countrey; where shee brings enough of vanity into euery fa∣mily throughout the Parish. Shee will not sticke to instruct her young Pupils in strange points of forma∣lity, enioyning them not to aske their Parents bles∣sing without a Complement. These, as they were ne∣uer Mistresses of families, so they are generally igno∣rant
in employments of that kinde. Those three principall workes or faculties of the Vnderstanding, which might enable them to Discourse, Distinguish, and to Chuse, are so estranged from them, as their Discourse consists solely in arguments of vanity, their Distinction in meere shadowes of formality, their Choyce in subiects and Consorts of effeminacy. Eight things, saith Hippocrates, make ones flesh moyst and fat; the first, to be merry and liue at hearts ease; the second, to sleep much; the third, to lie in a soft bed; the fourth, to fare well; the fifth, to be wel apparelled and appointed; the sixth, to ride alwayes on horse-backe; the seuenth, to haue our wil; and the eighth, to be em∣ployed in Plaies & pastimes, & in such time-beguiling recreations, as yeeld contentment and pleasure. These are the onely receits in request with those Shee-Cen∣sors we now discourse of; and of whom it may bee said, as was sometimes spoken of one Margites, that he neuer plowed, nor digged, nor did any thing all his life long that might tend vnto goodnesse; and by necessary consequence wholly vnprofitable to the world. Who, howsoeuer they are lesse than Wo∣men at their worke, yet at their meat (so vnconfined is their appetite) they are more than men, and in their habit (so phantasticke is their conceit) neither wo∣men nor men. So as, were Diogenes to encounter one of these, hee might well expostulate the cause with her, as he did vpon like occasion with a youth too curiously and ffeminately drest: If thou goest to men, all this is but in vaine, if vnto women, it is wikd. But these wee hold altogether vnworthy of your more generous society; whose excellent breeding hath sufficienly accommodated you for City, Court, and Countrey; and so fully inform'd you how to d∣meane your selues in all affaires; as I make little doubt, but you know, wherein it may bee admitted,
as manely consequent; and wherein omitted as meere∣ly impertinent. I meane therefore to descend briefly to the last branch of this Obseruation; declaring, what Ornament giues Complement best beauty or accom∣plishment. IT is true, what the sonne of Sirach sometimes said; When a man hath dne his best,Ecc. 18. 6. he must beginne againe, and when he thinketh to come to an end, he must goe againe to his labour. There is nothing so exact, which may not admit of something to make it more perfect. We are to goe by stayres and steps to the height of any story. Vertues are the Staires, Perfection the Spire. But I must tell you,What Comple∣ment giues best accom∣plishe. Gentlewomen, the way for you to ascend, is first to descend: Complete you cannot bee, vnlesse you know how replte you are of misery. Humility is the staire that conducts you to this spire of glory. Your beauty may proclaime you faire; your discourse expresse a pregnancy of conceit; your behauiour con∣firme you outwardly complete. Yet there is some∣thing more than all this required, to make you abso¦lutely accomplished. All these outward becommings, bee they neuer so gracefull, are but reflections in a : quite vanished, so soone as the glasse is re∣med. Critol ballance was of precious temper, and well-deseruing estimation with Heires of Ho∣nour; who posed the goods of body and fortune in ale, and goods of the mind in the other: where he goods of the minde so farre weighed downe the other, as the heauen doth the earth and Seas. To ad a dance graefully; to marry your voyce to your instrument musically; to expresse your selues in proe and verse morally; are commendable qualities, and enrcing motiues of affection. Yet I must tell you, for the first, though it appeare by your feet to be
but a meere dimension, in the opinion of the Learned it is the Diuels procession: Where the Dance is the Circle, whose centre is the Deuil. Which may be re∣strained by a more easie or moderate glasse to such wanton and immodest Reuels, as haue ancienly been vsed in the Celebration of their prophane feasts by Pagans, and are to this day by Pagan-christians; who, to gaine applause from the Spectator, care not what shamelesse parts they play in the presence of their Maker. But what are these worth, being com∣pared with these inward Ornaments or beauties of your mind; which onely distinguish you from other creatures, and make you soueraignesses ouer the rest of Gods creatures? You haue that within you, which will best accomplish you. Let not that be cor∣rupted, by which your crooked wayes may be best corrected. Hold it no such necessary poynt of Com∣plement, to shew a kinde of maiesty in a Dance; and to preferre it before the Complement of a Religious taske. Those sensuall Curtezans, who are so deligh∣ted in songs, pipes, and earthly melody, shall in hell rore terribly and howle miserably: crying, as it is in the Apocalips; Woe, Woe, Woe. Woe shall euery one cry seuerally,Appoc. 8. for the reward they haue receiued in hell eternally, saying and sighing, Woe is mee that uer I was borne: for farre better had it beene for her, that shee had neuer beene borne. And againe; Cur∣sed be the wombe that bare me a sinner. After this, shall she cry out in her second Woe against her selfe and all the members of her owne body. Woe be vnto you my accursed feet, what euill haue you brought vpon me miserable wretch, who by your peruerse paths and wicked waies haue shut heauens gate of me? o vnto you my hands, why haue you depriued me by your sinfull touch, and sensual embrace of the Crown of glory; by your meanes am I brought to hell fire,
where I shall be tormented eternally? Woe vnto thee, thou cursed tongue, what mischiefe hast thou brought vpon me, by vttering words so scurrilous and filthy, and singing vnciuill songs so frequently? O ye cursed Eyes, who by your vnlawfull obiects of concupiscence, haue depriued me of Gods presence, and neuer shed one teare for your sinnes in token of repentance! Now begins your intollerable wee∣ping (ye teare-swolne eyes neuer dryed) before all the diuels and the damned. Woe vnto thee my heart, what hast thou put vpon me, who by thy lustfull thoughts and vnlawfull ioyes, hast depriued me of eternall ioyes? The third Woe, that she shall cry out, is this, saying: Woe vnto the bitternesse of my torments, for they are comfortlesse: woe vnto the multitude of them, for they are numberlesse: woe vn∣to the eternity of them, for they are endlesse. Would our wanton Curtezans, who sport it in their beds of luory, surfeit it in their delicacy, wanton it in the boome of security, and dedicate their whole time to sensuality, reflect vpon such a soueraigne salue or spirituall balme as this; they would draw backe their feet from the wayes of wantonnesse, and ex∣ercise them wholly in the pathes of righteousnesse. They would remoue their hands from vnchaste em∣braces, and inure them to the search of Scriptures. They would stop their mouthes from vttring ought , and teach their tongues to be Orators of modsty. They would turne their eyes from vani∣ty, and sixe them on the purest obiects of eternity. That so, instead of bitternesse of torments, they might taste the swnesse, of diuine comforts: instead of mul∣titu of torments, they might partake the number∣lesse number of Gods mercies: and instead of the eter∣nity of those torments, immortality with Gods Saints and Seruants.
Preuention is the life of policy; the way to auoid those, and enioy these, is to liue in your Court here on earth, where you are spheered, as in the presence of God and his heauenly Angels, where your hope is seated. Though your feet be here, your faith should be there: here your Campe, there your Court. Meane time, while you soiourne here, you are to hold a good Christian the completest Courtier: and that vertue is the ornament, which giues Complement the best ac∣complishment. Silken honour is like painted meate; it may feede the eye, but affords no nourishment. That Courtiers Coate giues a vading glosse, whose heart is not inwardly liu'd with grace. Let good∣nesse guide you in the way, and happinesse will crowne you in the end. Let your Complete armour be righteousnesse, your Complement lowlinesse; complete in nothing so much as holinesse; that in your con∣uoy from Earth, you may be endenized in heauen, naturall Citizens, angelicall Courtiers.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Decency recommended as requisite in foure distinct Subiects: Decency the attractiuest motiue of affection: the smoothest path that leads to perfection. DECENCY.DECENCY. DECENCY takes Dis∣cretion euer along with her to choose her fshi∣on. She accommodates her selfe to the place wherein she liues, the persons with whom she consorts, the ranke or quality shee partakes. Shee is too discreet to affect ought that may not seeme her: too constant to change her habit for
the inuention of any phantasticke wearer. What propriety shee expresseth in her whole posture or carriage, you shall easily perceiue, if you will but with a piercing eye, a serious suruey, reflect vpon her demeanour,Decency re∣commended as requisie in foure distinct subiects. in her Gate, Looke, Speech, Habit. Of which, distinctly, we purpose to intreat, in our En∣try to this Obseruation; that by these you may pro∣bably collect the excellency of her condition. THat,GATE. wherein we should expresse our selues the humblest, many times transports vs most, and proclaims vs proudest. It is no hard thing to ga∣ther the disposition of our heart, by the dimension of our gate. What a circular gesture wee shall obserue some vse in their pace, as if they were troubled with the vertigo! Others make a tinkling with their feet, and make discouery of their light thoughts, by their wanton gate. Others with a jetting and strutting pace, publish their hauty and selfe-conceited minde. Thus doe our Wantons (as if they had transparant bo∣dies) display their folly, and subiect themselues to the censure of leuity. This cannot Decency endure. When she sees Women, whose modesty should be the Ornament of their beauty, demeane themselues more like Actors than ciuill Professants, shee compassio∣nately suffers with them, and with choyce precepts of morall instruction (wherein she hath euer shewne her selfe a singular proficient) she labours to reclaime them. With amorous, but vertuous Rhetoricke, she wooes them, hooping by that meanes to winne them. Shee bids them looke backe to preceding times, yea those, on which that glorious light which shines in these Christian dayes, neuer refle∣cted. And there they shall finde Women highly cen∣sured, for that their outward carriage onely made
them suspected. A vaile couered their face, modesty measured out their pace; their Spectators were as so many Censors: Circumspect therefore were they of their carriage, lest they should become a scandall or blemish to their sexe. Their repaire to their Tem∣ples was decent, without any loose or light gesture; Entring their Temples, constant and setled was their behauiour. Quicke was their pace in dispatch of houshold affaires; but slow in their Epicureall vi∣sits or sensuall gossipings. They had not the art of i∣mitating such huing and mounting gates, as our light-spirited Dames now vse. They were not as then learn'd to pace: so far estrang'd were they from the very least conceit of vanity in this kinde. How much more should these purer times, where verity is taught and embraced, vanity so much tax'd and reproued, affect that most, which adornes and beau∣tifies most? Is it not palpable folly, to walke so hautily in these streets of our captiuity? Eye your feet, those bases of frailty, how they, who so proud∣ly strut on earth, are but earth, and approach daily nearer their earth. The Swan, when she prides her selfe in her whitenesse, reflects on her blacke feet, which brings downe her plumes, and allayes her selfe-con∣ceit with more humblenesse. What anticke Pageants shall wee behold in this suruey of Earth? With what Apish gestures they walke, which taxeth them of lightnesse? How like Colosso's others walke, which discouers their haughtinesse? how punctually these, as if they were Puppets drawn by an enforced motion? How phantastically those, as if their walke were a theatrall action? These vnstaid dimensions ar∣gue vnsetled dispositions. All is not well with them. For if one of the Spartan Ephori was to lose his place, because he obseru'd no Decency in his pace, how may we be opinion'd of such Women, whose yeeres exact
of them stayednesse, whose places retaine in them more peculiar reuerence, and whose descents inioyne them to a state-reseruance; when they, to gaine ob∣seruance, admit of any new, but vndecent posture? Deserue these approuement? No; discretion cannot prize them, nor iudgement prayse them, Vulgar opi∣nion, whose applause neuer receiues life from desert, may admire what is new, but discretion that onely which is neat. It is one thing to walke honestly as on the day, another thing to walke vnciuilly as on the night. Decency becomes the one; Deformity the other. Neither onely are modest women to be caute∣lous how they walke, but where they walke. Some places there be, whereto if they repaire, walke they neuer so Ciuilly, they cannot walke honestly. Those who value reputation, will not be seene there; for Honour is too deare a purchase to be set at sale. Such as frequent these places, haue exposed themselues to shame; and made an irreuocable Contract with sinne. They make choyce of the Twy-light, lest their paths should be discouered; and shrowd their distained actions with the able Curtaine of night, lest they should bee displayed. These, howsoeuer their feet walke softly, their hearts poste on swiftly, to seize on the voluptuous prey of folly. Farre be these wayes from your walkes, vertuous Ladies, whose modesty makes you honored of your Sexe. Though your feet be here below, let your faith be aboue. Let no path of pleasure draw you from those ioyes which last for euer. Though the world be your walke while you soiourne here; hea∣uen should be your ayme, that you may repose eter∣nally there. Liue deuoutly, walke demurely, professe constantly; that deuotion may instruct you, your wayes direct you, your profession conduct you to your heauenly Countrey. It is a probable argument,
that such an one hates her Countrey, where onely she is to become Citizen, who thinkes it to bee well with her here, where shee is a Pilgrim. Walke in this maze of your Pilgrimage, that after death you may enioy a lasting heritage. So shall you praise God in the gate, and after your Christian race finished, re∣ceiue a Crowne. IT is most true, that a wanton Eye is the truest e∣uidenceLOOKE. of a wandring and distracted minde. The Arabians prouerbe is elegant; Shut the windowes, that the house may giue light. It is death that enters in by the windowes. The House may be secured, if these be closed. Whence it was, that princely Prophet praid so earnestly: Lord turne away mine eyes from va∣nity. And hence appeares mans misery. That those Eyes, which should be the Cesternes of sorrow, lim∣beckes of contrition, should become the lodges of lust, and portals of our perdition. That those which were giuen vs for assistants and associates, should be∣come our assacinats. Our Eye is made the sense of sorrow, because the sense of sinne; yet more apt is she to giue way to sinne, then to finde one teare to rinse her sinne. An vncleane eye is the messenger of an vn∣cleane heart: confine the one, and it will be a means to rectifie the other. Many dangerous obiects will a wandring eye finde, whereon to vent the disposition of her corrupt heart. No place is exempted, no sub∣iect freed. The ambitious eye makes honour her obiect, wherewith the afflicts her selfe, both in aspiring to what she cannot enioy, as likewise in seeing another enioy that, whereto her selfe did aspire. The Cou∣tous makes wealth her obiect; which shee obtaines with toile, enioyes with feare, forgoes with griefe: for being got they load her, lou'd they oile her, lost
they gall her. The Enuious makes her Neighbours flourishing field, or fruitfull haruest, her obiect; she cannot but looke on it, looking pine and repine at it, and repining iustly consume her spirit with enuying it. The Lasciuious makes beauty her obiect, and with a leering looke, while she throweth out her lure to catch others, she becomes catcht her selfe. This obiect, be∣cause it reflects most on your sexe, let it be thus dis∣posed, that the inward eye of your soules may be on a superiour beauty fixed. Doe ye admire the come∣linesse of any creature? remoue your eye from that obiect, and bestow it on the contemplation of your Creator. Wormes and flyes, that haue laye dead all winter, by reflexe of the Sunne beames, are reuiued: so these flesh-flyes, who haue beene long time buried in these sensuall Obiects of earth, no sooner reflect on the Sunne of righteousnesse, than they become enliue∣ned and enlightened. Those filmes which darkened the eye of their mindes, are remoued, those thicke Cataracts of earthly vanities are dispersed and dis∣pelled, and a new light into a new heart infused. I know well, Gentlewomen, that your resort to places of eminent resort, cannot but minister to you variety of Obiects. Yea, euen where nothing but chaste thoughts, staid lookes, and zealous desires should harbour, are now and then loose thoughts, light lookes, and licentious desires in especiall ho∣nour. The meanes to preuent this malady, which like a spreading vlcer disperseth it selfe in euery soci∣ety, is neither willingly to take nor be taken. Dinah may be a proper Embleme for the eye; shee seldome strayes abroad, but shee is in danger of rauishing. Now to preserue purity of heart, you must obserue a vigilant discipline ouer euery sense. Where, if the eye, which is the light of the body, be not well dis∣posed, the rest of the senses cannot choose but be
much darkned. We say, that the want of one pecu∣liar sense supplies that defect with an higher degree of perfection in the rest. Sure I am, there is no one sense that more distempers the harmony of the mind, nor prospect of the Soule, then this window of the bo∣dy. It opens euer to the Raen, but seldome to the Doue. Rauing affections it easily conueyes to the heart; but Doue-like innocence it rarely retaines in the brest. As it is a member of the flesh, so be∣comes it a seruant of the flesh; apprehending with greedinesse, whatsoeuer may minister fuell to carnall concupiscence. This you shall easily correct, by fix∣ing her on that pure and absolute obiect, for which she was made. It is obserued by profest Oeulists (an obseruation right worthy a Christians serious consi∣deration) that whereas all creatures haue but foure Muscles to turn their eyes round about, man hath a fift to pull his eyes vp to heauen. Doe not then depresse your eyes, as if they were fixed on earth, nor turne them round, by gazing on the fruitlesse vanities of earth; but on heauen, your hauen after earth. In the Philosophers scale, the soule of a flye is of more ex∣cellence then the Sunne; in a Christian scale, the soule of man is infinitely more precious then all creatures vnder the Sunne. Preserue then the honour of a beautifull soule, which suffers infinitely when it is blemished with any soile. So order and dispose your lookes, as censure may not taxe you of lightnesse, nor an amorous glance impeach you of wantonnesse. Send not forth a tempting eye to take another; nor entertaine a tempting looke darting from another. Neither take not be taken. To become a prey to others, will slaue you; to make a prey of others, will transport you. Looke then vpward, where the more you looke you shall like, the longer you liue you shall loue.
VVIthout SpeechSPEECH. can no society subsist. By it we expresse what we are, as vessels disco∣uer themselues best by their sound. Discretion makes opportunity her anuile, whereon is wrought a sea∣sonable discourse. Otherwise, howsoeuer we speake much, we discourse little. That sage Stagiian deba∣ting of the conuenience and propriety of discourse before Alexander, maintained, that none were to be admitted to speake (by way of positiue direction) but either those that mannaged his warres, or his Philosophers which gouerned his house. This Opi∣nion tasted of too much strictnesse (will our women say) who assume to themselues a priuiledge in argu∣ments of discourse, be the argument neuer so course whereon they treat. Truth is, their tongues are held their defensiue armour; but in no particular de∣tract they more from their honour, than by giuing too free scope to that glibbery member. For to such as professe their ability at this weapon, may that say∣ing of Pandlphus be properly applied: They speake much ill, but they speake little well; they speake much, but doe little. Againe, They doe little well, but they doe much ill; they say well, but doe ill. They promise much, but doe little. What restraint is required in respect of the tongue, may appeare by that iuory guard or garrison with which it is impaled. See, how it is double warded, that it may with more reseruancy and better security be restrained! To giue liberty to the tongue to vtter what it list, is the argument of an indiscreet person, In much Speech there can ne∣uer want sinne, it either leaues some tincture of vain-glory, which discouers the proud heart, from whence it proceeded; or some taste of scurrility, which dis∣playes the wanton heart, from whence it streamed; or some violent and dispassionate heat, which pro∣claimes
a rancorous heart, from whence it issued. Whereas, a well-disposed mind will not speake be∣fore it conceiue; nor deliuer ought by way of ex∣pression, till it be prepared by a well-seasoned delibe∣ration. That Philosophers speech deserues retention; who seeing a silent guest at a publike feast, vsed these words; If thou beest wise, thou art a foole; if a foole, thou art wise in hlding thy peace. As discourse vsefully edi∣fying conferres a benefit to the hearer; so discourses fruitlesse and wandring, as they tyre the eare, so they taxe the discretion of the speaker. It was an excel∣lent precept of Ecclesiasticus:Eccles. 22. 8. . Thou that art young, speake, if need be, and yet scarcely when thou art twice as∣ked. Comprehend much in few words; in many bee as one that is ignorant: be as one that vnderstandeth, and yet hold thy tongue. The direction is generall, but to none more consequently vsefull than to young women; whose bashfull silence is an ornament to their Sexe. Volubility of tongue in these, argues either rude∣nesse of breeding, or boldnesse of expression. The former▪ may be reclaimed by a discreet Tutor, but the latter, being grounded on arrogancy of conceit, sel∣dome or neuer. It will be-seeme you, Gentlewomen, whose generous education hath estranged you from the first, and whose modest disposition hath wean'd you from the last; in publike consorts to ob∣serue rather than discourse. It suites not with her ho∣nour, for a young woman to be prolocutor. But especi∣ally, when either men are in presence, or ancient Ma∣trons, to whom shee owes a ciuill reuerence, it will become her to tip her tongue with silence. Touching the subiect of your discourse, when opportunity shall exact it of you, and without touch of immodesty expect it from you; make choyce of such arguments as may best improue your knowledge in houshold af∣faires, and other priuate employments. To discourse
of State-matters, will not become your auditory: nor to dispute of high poynts of Diuinity, will it sort well with women of your quality. These SeClarkes many times broach strange opinions, which, as they vnderstand them not themselues, so they la∣bour to intangle others of equall vnderstanding to themselues. That Diuine sentence, being made an indiuiduate consort to their memory, would re∣claime them from this errour, and free them from this opinionate censure; God forbid, that we should not be readier to learne than to teach. Women, as they are to be no Speakers in the Church, so neither are they to be disputers of controuersies of the Church. Holy Bernard pleasantly glanced at these, when on a time entring a Church, wherein the image of our Lady was erected, hee was saluted by the Image in this manner, Good morrow Bernard; which deuice hauing quickly discouered, perceiuing some person to bee purposely inclosed in it, he forthwith replyed: Your Ladiship hath forgot your selfe; Women should be no Spea∣kers in the Church. In one word, as modesty giues the best grace to your behauiour, so moderation of Speech to your discourse. Silence in a Woman is a mouing Rhetoricke, winning most, when in words it woo∣eth least. Now to giue Speech and Silence their di∣stinct attributes or personall Characters: wee may gather their seuerall tempers by the seueral effects deriued from them.Ambros. in lib. de offic. Greg. in mor. More shall we see fall into inne by Speech than Silence: Yea, whosoeuer intendeth himselfe to speake much, seldome obserues the course of doing what is iust. In the whole current of your discourse, let no light subiect haue any place with you this, as it proceeds from a corrupt and indisposed heart, so it corrupts the hearer. Likewise, beware of selfe-prayse; it ar∣gues you haue flow neighbours, or few deserts. Let not
calumny runne descant on your tongue: it discouers your passion too much; in the meane time, venting of your spleene affords no cure to your griefe, no salue to your sore. If oportunity giue your sexe argument of discourse; let it neither taste of affectatin, for that were seruile; nor touch vpon any wanton relation, for that were vnciuill; nor any State-politicall action, for the height of such a subiect, compar'd with your weakenesse, were vnequall. If you affect Rhetoricke, let it be with that familiarity expressed, as your pain∣nesse may witnesse for you, that you doe not affect it. This will make your Speech seeme gracious to the Hearer, conferre a natiue modesty on the Speaker, and free you of all preiudicate censure. THere is nothing which moues vs more to pride it in sinne,HABIT. than that which was first giuen vs to couer our shame. The fruit of a Tree made man a sin∣ner; and the leaues of a Tree gaue him a couer. In your Habit is your modesty best expressed; your di∣spositions best discouered. The Habit of the mind is discerned by the state or posture of the body; the condition or quality of the body by the Habit, which either addes or detracts from her beauty. As we can∣not probably imagine such to haue modest mindes, who haue immodest eyes; so can wee not properly say such women to be modest matrons or professors of piety, who in their attire shew arguments of their immodesty. It skils not much, for the quality of your habits, whether they be silken or wollen, so they bee ciuill and not wanton. For albeit, some haue affir∣med that all gorgeous attire is the attire of sinne, the quality of the person may seeme to extenuate the qua∣lity of that sinne. For noble and eminent persona∣ges were in all times admitted to weare them; and
to be distinguished by them: Neither indeed, is the sumptuousnes of the habit, so reprehensiue as the phan∣tasticknes of the habit respect of the form or fashion. It is this which derogates highly from the repute of a Christian, to see her affect variety & inconstancy of attire, more than euer did Pagan. There is nothing which introduceth more effeminacy into any flouri∣shing State, than vanity in habit. Where we may ob∣serue fashion, many times▪ so long affected, til all fashion become exiled. Surely, whatsoeuer our lighter dispo∣sed Curtezans thinke, it is Ciuility which adds most grace, Decency which expresseth best state, and com∣lines in attire which procures most loue. Other habits, as they display the mind of the wearer, so are they subiects of laughter or contempt to any discreet be∣holder. Time is too precious to be made a Pageant or Morrice on. These misconceiued ornaments are meer deformities to good minds. Vertuous and discreet Matrons would be loath to weare ought that might giue least scandall or offence to their sexe. Forraine fa∣shions are no baits to catch them, nor phantastick, ra∣ther phanaticke dressings to delude them. They can∣not eye that habit which deserues approuing, nor that attire which merits louing, where Ciuility is not pat∣tern. Decency is their choycest liberty, which sets thē forth aboue al Embroydery. There was an ancient Edict amongst the Romans, purposely to rid the State of all vselesse loyterers,Cic. in lib. de leg. that no Roman should goe through the streets of the City, vnlesse hee carried with him the badge or signall of that Trade where∣by he liued: insomuch, that Marc, Aurelius, spea∣king of the diligence of the Romans, giueth them this deseruing testimony, that all of them followed their labour. Now I marell, whether vpon due suruey of all those artizans, either Periwig, Gregorian-maker, or Tyre-woman, had any set place or proper vocati∣on,
or what badges they might beare to signifie their profession. Would not these new-found Artists haue beene rather derided than approued, geered than ap∣plauded? Sure, Rome was more ciuill than to giue way to so contagious an euill. Vesta had her maidens, so had Viriplaca her Matrons; but neither of their followers could admit of any new-minted fashions. That Lady City had neuer soueraniz'd ouer so many rich States, swelling Empires, victorious Princes, had shee exposed her selfe to such vanity, which had beene the greatest Eclypse to her spreading glory. To you let me bend my discourse, whose more ge∣nerous parts conferre more true beauty on them∣selues, than these outward fopperies can euer doe: doe not betray your names to suspition. The Chap∣let of fame is not reserued for wantons, nor such as sute themselues to the habit of lightnesse; for these adde one degree more to their sexes weakenesse: but for such women as array themselues in comly apparell,1 Tim. 2. 9, 10. with shamefastnesse and modesty, not with braided haire, or gold, or pearles, or costly apparell. But, as becommeth wo∣men that professe the feare of God. For euen after this manner in time past did the holy women,Pet. 3. 5. which trusted in god, tyre themselues. Here you haue a direct plat∣forme, how to attire your selues outwardly; suting your ciuill habit with variety of sweet graces in∣wardly▪ et not then these Spider-cauls delude you, discretion will laugh at them, modesty loath them, Decency contemne them. Loose bodies sort best with these adulterate beauties. Those, whose conuersation is in heauen, though they soiourne here on earth; Those, whose erected thoughts spheere them in an higher Orbe than this Circle of frailty; Those, whose spotlesse affections haue deuoted their best ser∣uice to goodnesse, and made Modesty the exact mold of all their actions, cannot endure to stoope to such
braine-sicke Lures. And such are you, whose gene∣rous descent, as it claymes precedence of others, so should your vertuous demeanour in these foure di∣stinct subiects, GATE, LOOKE, SPEECH, HABIT, improue your esteeme aboue others. In Gate, by walking humbly: in Looke, by disposing it demure∣ly; in Speech, by deliuering it moderately; in Habit, by attiring your selues modestly: all which, like foure choyce borders, perfumed with sweetest o∣dours, will beautifie those louely lodges of your soules with all Decency. Meane while, imprint these Diuine motions in your memory. And first for the first, hold this tenet; To walke, walking to meditate, meditating to make the subiect of it your Maker, is the best portion of the Creature; for the second, to fix your eye with that indifferency on the Creature, as it neuer auert your contemplatiue eye from your Creator; for the third, to direct your Speech to the benefit of the hearer, and to auoyd impertinences for conscience-sake farre more than censure; for the fourth and last, to make choyce of that Habit, whose Ciuility may doe you honour, and publish you ex∣amples of Decency to any discreet or temperate be∣holder. WHat is it that conueyes more affection to the heart,Decency the attractiuest motiue of af¦fection. than Decency in the obiect we affect? The Spouse in the Cantiales was blacke▪ but comely; and this gaue praise to her beauty. A strayd looke may more affection in a light heart, but in a vertuous minde it begets . Truth is, in this disordered age, where the be shot to be discharg'd is the Ta∣uerne bill, the best Alarum is the sounding of healths, and the most absolute March is reeling; discretion hath receiu'd such a maime, as affection is seldome
measured by what we are, but what we weare. Va∣nity hath set vp her Flagge; and more fresh-water souldiers desire to fight vnder her Banner, than the Ensigne of honour. But all this workes little vpon a constant and rightly-tempered disposition. Such an one plants there his loue, where with comfort hee may liue. Doe you thinke that a jetting Gate, a lee∣ring Looke, a glibbery Tongue, or gaudy Attire can moue affection in any one worthy your loue? Sure no; he deserues a light one for his choyce, who makes his choyce by one of these. To be an admirer of one of these, were to preferre in his choyce a May∣marrian before a Modest Matron. Now there are some fashions which become one incomparably more than another; the reason whereof may be im∣puted either to the natiue propriety of the party vsing that forme, habit, or complement; or else to the qua∣lity of the person, which makes the fashion vsed, infi∣nitely more gracious. For the first, you shall neuer see any thing imitated, but it seemes the imitator worst at the first. Habit will bring it into a second na∣ture; but till such time as custome hath matur'd it, many imperfections will vsually attend it. Whereas, whatsoeuer is naturally inbred in vs, will best be∣seeme and adorne vs; it needs no other face than what nature gaue it, and would generally become worse, were it neuer so little enforced. For the se∣cond, as in any Theatrall presentment, what becomes a Peere or Potentate, would not sort with the condi∣tion of any inferiour substitute; euery one must bee suited to the person he presents: So in the Theatre of state, distinct fashions both in Habit and Complement are to be retained, according to the place wherein he is ranked. Lucrece, no doubt, stamped a deeper impression of affection in the heart of her beholder, by addressing her selfe to houswiuery and purple-spinning,
than others could euer doe with their reere bankets and riotous spending. All are not of Aegy∣sus minde, who was taken with a Complement of lightnesse. This argued, that a youthfull heat had ra∣ther surpriz'd his amorous heart, than any discreet affection preferr'd him to his choyce. But how va∣ding is that loue, which is so lightly grounded? To what dangerous ouertures is it exposed? Where Vertue is not directrice in our choyce, our inconstant mindes are euer prone to change. Wee finde not what we expected; nor digest well what we for∣merly affected; All is out of square, because discreti∣on contriu'd not the building. To repaire this breach, and make the Obiect wee once entertained, euer beloued: Let nothing giue vs Content, but what is decent. This is the Habit, Gentlewomen, which will best become you to be woo'd in, and content a dis∣creet Suitor most to haue you wonne in. All others are neither worth viewing, wooing, weighing, nor wearing. Rich ewels, the more we looke on them, the more are wee taken with them. Such Iewels are modest women, whose countenance promiseth goodnesse, an enforced smile natiue bashfulnesse, e∣uery posture such tokens of Decency and comelinesse, as Caius Tarquinius in his Caia could conceiue no fuller happinesse. Shee, I say, who made wooll and purple her dayes taske, and this her constant im∣preze▪ Where thou art Cains, I am Caia. Conforme then you generous Dispositions to a Decency of fashi∣on, that you may attract to your selues and beget in o∣thers, motiues of affection.
FOuntaines runne by many winding and mazie Currents into one maine Riuer; Riuers by sun∣dry Channels into one maine Ocean.Decency the smoothest path that leads to per∣fection. Seuerall wayes direct passengers into one City; but one onely way guides man to the heauenly City. This way is Vertue, which like some choyce confection swee∣tens the difficulty of euery Occurrent that encoun∣ters her in her quest after Perfection, Of all those Cardinall Vertues, it is Temperance onely which seasons and giues them a vertuous rellish. Which Vertue dilates it selfe to seuerall branches; all which bud forth into one sauoury fruit or other. It is true, that hee who is euery way Complete, may bee properly styled an absolute man. But what is it which makes him Complete? It is not a scrude face, an artfull Cringe, or an Italionate ducke that deserues so exquisite a title. Another age will dis∣countenance these, and couer these Complete for∣malists with dust. No, Ladies; it is something that partakes of a more Diuine Nature, than a meere Complementall gesture. If you would aspire to perfection, obserue the meane, that you may at∣taine the end. Temperance you cannot embrace, if Decency be estranged from your choyce. If tempe∣rate, you cannot chuse but be decent: for it includes an absolute moderation of our desires in all sub∣iects. Come then, Gentlewomen, loue to be decent, and that will teach you the best Complement. You haue that in you, which diuinely employ'd, wil truly ennoble you. Your descent may giue you an higher ascent by way of precedency before others, but this you cannot ap∣propriate to your owne deserts, but that Nobility of
blood which is deriued to you by others. Labour to haue something of your owne, which you may challenge to be yours properly, without any helpe of an ancient pedigree; How well doth it seeme you, to expresse a ciuill decent state in all your a∣ctions? You are in the eyes of many, who precise∣ly obserue you, and desire to imitate whatsoeuer they note obseruable in you. You may then become excellent patternes vnto others, by retaining decen∣cy, and entertaining her for your follower. Shee will make you appeare gracious in their sight, whose iudgements are pure and vncorrupted; how∣soeuer our Corkie censurers traduce you, your fame cannot be blemished, nor the odour of those ver∣tues which so sweetly chafe and perfume you, decay∣ed. Decency attended you in your life, and the me∣mory of your vertues shall crowne you after death. Euen there,Aug Soliloq. Cap. XXXV. Where youth neuer ageth, life neuer endeth, beauty neuer fadeth, loue neuer faileth, health neuer vadeth, ioy neuer decreaseth, griefe is neuer felt, groanes are neuer heard, no obiect of sorrow to be seene, gladnesse euer to be found, no euill to be fear'd. Yea, the King shall take plea∣sure in your beauty, and at your end inuest you with endlesse glory. Prize not then the censure of sensuall man, for hee is wholly set on vanity; but fixe your eyes on him, who will cloath you with eternity. Let this be your Crowne of comfort, that many are im∣proued by your Example,Se. de vita baa. many weaned from sinne, many wonne to Sion. By sowing the seed of good∣nesse, that is, by giuing good examples, expres∣sed best by the effectuall workes of faith, you shall reape a glorious haruest, Actions of goodnesse shall liue in you, and cause all good men to loue you. Whereas, those are to be esteemed worst, who not onely vse things euilly in themselues, but likewise
towards others, For, of so many deaths is euery one worthy, as hee hath left examples of naughtinesse vnto posterity.Aug. Med. c. 4. Greg. in . Let vertues then bee the stayres to raise you; these will adde vnto your honour, seat you aboue the reach of Censure, and ioyne you indiuidually to your best Louer.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Estimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize; how it may be discrned to be reall; how superficiall; how it may be impregnably preserued; how irreparably lost; The abso∣lute end, whereto it chiefly aspires, and wherein it cheere∣fully rests. ESTIMATION.Estimation. ESTIMATION is a good opinion drawne from some probable grounds.Estimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize. An vnualua∣ble gemme, which eue∣ry wise Merchant, who tenders his honor, pre∣ferres before life. The losse of this makes him an irreparable Bank∣rupt. All persons ought to rate it high, because it is the value of them∣selues,
though none more dearely than those, in whom modesty and a more impressiue feare of dis∣grace vsually lodge. These, so cautelous are they of suspition, as they will not ingage their good names to purchase affection. Publike resorts, because they may corrupt, they auoyd; Priuacy they consort with, and in it conuerse with their owne thoughts, whe∣ther they haue in them ought that may betray them. They obserue what in others deserues approue∣ment, and this they imitate; with an vncorrupt eye they note others defects, which they make vse of as a aueat. Pure is their mold, but farre purer the tem∣per of their minde. Fame they hold the sweetest flower that euer grew neare the border of Time. Which, lest either it should wither for want of moi∣sture, or wanting warmth should lose its vigour, they bedew it with gracious affects, and renue it with zealous resolues, Descent, as they draw it from others, so would they improue it in themselues. An∣cient houses, now and then, stand in need of props and pillars; these would they haue supplyed with the Cardinall vertues. These are Emblemes of your selues (Noble La∣dies) who so highly tender your honour, as Estimati∣on on gaes you more than what your bloods gaue you. It is a Princely command of your affections, which mounts you to this height of goodnesse: distinguish∣ing betwixt lind loue, and discreet affction. Pleasure cannot make you so forgetfull of your honour, as to depriue you of that in a moment, which you shall neuer recouer. Vertue hath taken that seazure of you, as no light thought can seize on you, or dis∣possesse her of that claime shee hath in you Trea∣chrous Tarpeia's may be taken with gifts; but your honour is of too high an estimate to suffer the ast blemish for reward. You obserue what staine haue
laid, & do yet lie vpon may anciēt families by means of attainders in their Progenitors. Their bloods (say we) were corrupted, whereby their estates became confiscated, their houses from their lineall succes∣sours estranged, and they to lasting infamy exposed. Certainely, though not in so high degree (for these were Capitall) many familis haue receiued deepe stains from light actions, which neither time, though neuer so aged, could weare out, nor the liuing ex∣ploits of their noble successors wipe off. Vice hath euer beene of a deeper dye than vertue; and the me∣mory of the one commonly suruiues the fame of the other. Wounds, when they are healed, leaue their scarres behinde them: Paths retaine their prints. Your memory shall neither receiue life from that noble blood which sprinkles in you, no from any monumentall shrine which may hereafter couer you, but from those precious odours of your euer∣liuing vertues, which shall eternize you. These are of power to make such as long since dyed, and whose vnequall'd beauty is for many ages since to ashes turned, retaine a flourishing fame in the gratefull me∣mory of the liuing. Penelope for spending chaste her dayes, As worthy as Vlysses was of praise. A daily siege shee suffered, and in her Conquest e∣quall was shee to those victorious Peeres of Greece, who made Troy their triumph. Estimation was her highest prize. Suiters shee got, yet amidst these, was not her Vlysses forgot. Long absence had not estran∣ged her affection; youthfull consorts could not moue in her thoughts the least distraction; neither could opportunity induce her to giue way to any light a∣ction. Well might Greece then esteeme her Penelope of more lasting fame than any Pyramid that euer shee
erected. Her vnblemished esteeme was of farre pu∣rer stuffe than any iuory statue that could bee reared. Nor was Rome lesse beholden to her Lucrece, who set her honour at so high a price, as shee held death too light to redeeme such a prize. Though force, frights, foes, and furies gaz'd vpon her, These were no wounds but wonders to her honour. The presence of a Prince no lesse amorous than victorious, could not winne her; though with him price, prayer, and power did ioyntly wooe her. Well deseru'd such two modest Matrons the choice Em∣braces of two such heröicke Champions, as might e∣qual their cōstant Loues with the tender of their dea∣rest liues. And two our Histories afford, whom suc∣ceeding fame hath recorded eminent, because double Conquerours, both of Cities and of themselues: pui∣sant and continent. This noble testimonie we receiue of Scipio, that being a young man of twenty foure yeares of age, in the taking of a City in Spaine, hee repessed the flaming heat of his youthfull desires, when a beautifull maid was brought him, restoring her to a young man called Allutius, to whom shee was espoused, with a great reward. Right worthy was hee to conquer another, who could with such temper subdue himselfe: such good successe hath euer attended on these Morall vertues, though pro∣fessed by Pagans. The other Heröe was rightlyCap. Au∣gustus both in name and nature; and wherefoe're you looke, a victorious CAESAR. Cleopatra kneeled at his feet,Tit. Liu. lib 4. cap. XI. layd baits for his eyes; but in vaine; her beauties were beneath that Princes chastity. Absolute Commanders were these Heröicke Princes of their affections, yet a farre more singular argument of his composed disposition, and of Mo∣rall, if not Diuine, Mortification, shewed that young man SPVTIMIA in Valerius Maximus, whose
beauty did so incomparably become him, as it occa∣sioned many women to lust afer him: which this noble youth no sooner prrceiued, than hee purposely wounded his face, that by the scarre he sustained; his beauty might become more blemished, and conse∣quently all occasion of lusting after it, clearely re∣moued. Now (Gentlewomen) if you make Estimation your highest prize; if you preferre honour before pleasure, or what else is deare or tender; your fame will find wings to flye with. This will gaine you deseruing Suiters. Portion may wooe a worldling; Proporti∣on a youthfull Wanton; but it is Vertue that winnes the heart of discretion. Surely, I haue seldome knowne any make this e∣steeme of honour, and dye a contemptible begger. Such as haue beene prodigall of it, haue felt the mise∣ry of it; whereas, a chaste minde hath euer had something to succour and support it. Thus you see what this inward beauty is, which if you enioy, you sit farre aboue the reach of Calumny; age cannot taint it, nor youth tempt it. It is the Estimation with∣in you, that so confines you, as you hate that place which giues opportunity, that person which makes importunity his agent to lay siege to your Cha∣stity. Now wee are to descend to the second branch, wherein wee are to shew you how this Estimation, which is your highest prize, may be discerned to be reall; which is not gathered by the first appearance, but a serious and constant triall. IN Philosophy, a man begins with experience, and then with beleef but in Diuinity, wee must first beginne in faith, and then proceed to knowledge.
True it is, that the Sunne, Moone, and Starres be∣come subiect to vanity; yet charity bids me beleeue, that there are many beauteous and resplendent Stars in this our Firmament, many fresh fragrant Roses in this our inclosed Garden of Albion, who haue preseru'd their beauty without touch, their honour without taint. Where, if vanity did touch them, yet did it not so seize on them, as to disfigure or transforme them. You (noble Gentlewomen) are those Starres, whose glory can neuer be eclipsed, so long as your Estimation liues vnstained; you are those fragrant Ro∣ses, whose beauty cannot be tainted, so long as your stalke of honour growes vntouched. Now to the end that your lustre may not bee like to that of the Glowrme, nor rotten wood, which is meerely imagina∣ry, compared with that is reall;How Estima∣tion may be discerned to be reall. you are not to make faire and glorious pretences, purposely to gull the world, and cast a mist before the eyes of bleered iudgements. No, you are to be really, what you ap∣peare outwardly. These that walke in the Clouds, though they deceiue others much, yet they deceiue themselues most. Obserue then this rule of directi∣on; it will accomplish you more than any outward Ornament that Art can bestow on you; Be indeed what you desire te be thought. Are you Virgins? de∣dicate those inward Temples of yours to chastity; abstaine from all corrupt society; inure your hands to workes of piety, your tongues to words of mo∣desty. Let not a straid looke taxe you of lightnesse, nor a desire of gadding impeach you of wanton∣nesse. The way to winne an husband is not to wooe him, but to be woo'd by him. Let him come to you, not you to him. Profferd ware is not worth the buy∣ing. Your states are too pure, to bee set at sale; too happy, to be weary of them. So long as you liue as you are, so your mindes bee pure, you can∣not
possibly be poore. You haue that within you, will enrich you, so you conforme your mindes to your meanes. In the discourse of vertues, and true estimate of them,Salust. none was euer held more excellent than that which is found in chaste youth. You are Con∣querours in that, wherein the greatest Conquerours haue fail'd. Your chaste paths are not trac'd with wandring desires; your priuate Chambers arras'd with amorous passions; you spinne not out the te∣dious night in ah mee's. Your repast findes no hinde∣rance in digestion; your harmelesse repose no loue∣sicke distraction. Others you may command; by none commanded. Others will vow their seruice vnto you; while you are from all seruitude freed. Liue then worthy the freedome of so noble a Condi∣tion; for your Virgin state wants nothing that may enlarge her freedome. Againe, are you wiues? you haue attained an honourable state; and by it made partakers of that indiuiduate vnion, where one soule ruleth two hearts, and one heart dwelleth in two bo∣dies. You cannot suffer in that, wherein you haue not one share. Griefe by your Consort is allayed; ioy by partaking with him is augmented. You haue now taken vpon you to become Secretaries to others as well as your selues; but being one and the same with your selues, doe not betray their trust, to whose trust you haue recommended your selues. Imagine now (to recall to memory an ancient Cu∣stome) that you haue broken the axletree of your Coach at your doore; you must be no more straglers. These walking Burses and moueable Exchanges, sort not with the constancie of your Condition. You must now intend the growth and proficience of those Oliue branches about your table. Like a curious and continuate builder, you must euer addresse your selues to one worke or other. From their infancy to their
youth, from their youth to their maturer growth For the first, I know well that ditich to bee most true. A mother to be Nurse, that's great and faire, Is now held base: True Mothers they be rare. But farre was it from those ancient heröicke La∣dies, to thinke this to bee either a disgrace to their place, or a blemish to their beauty. Their names are by aged Annals memorized, and shall by these of ours be reuiued. Such were Cornelia, the mother of Gracchu, and Vetruria of Coriolanu; who became examples of goodnesse and chastity, Educating their children which they had brought vp from their own brests, with the milke of morality. The like did Portia the wife of Brutus; Clebula the daughter of Cleobulus, one of the seuen Sages of Greece; Sulpitia the wife of Calenus, who not onely instructed her children which she had tenderly nur∣sed, with excellent precepts while shee liued, but left sundry memorable instructions, as Legacies or Mo∣thers blessings to them, when she dyed. Hortensia, the excellent daughter of a most eloquent Orator, deser∣ued no lesse fame, for her motherly care in nursing and breeding, her ability in copious and serious dis∣coursing, her grauity in composing and digesting such golden sentences, as shee afterwards recom∣mended to the perusall of her suruiuing Children. Edsia borne at Alexandria, farre excelled others in profunditie of learning, and piety of liuing; shee was admired by such as liued in her time: perfor∣ming the office of a Nurse in her childrens infancy, of a Guardian in their minority, of a Sage Counsellour in their maturity. Paulina the wife of Seneca, as shee was excellently seasoned with the precepts of her husband, so shee surceas'd not from commending them to the pra∣ctice
of those children shee had by her husband. Whence it was, that Senca bemoaned the ignorance of his mother, for that shee had not so exactly ob∣serued the precepts of his Father. What shall I speak of Thean, the daughter of Metapontus? Phemone, who was first that euer composed heröicke verse? Corinathia, who exceeded the Poet Pindarus in her curious and artfull measures; and contending fiue seuerall times with him for the Garland? Argentaia Polli, the wife of Lucan: whom shee is reported to haue assisted in those his high and heroicke compo∣sures? Zenobia the Queene of Palmira, who learned both the Greeke and Latine tongue, and compiled an excellent History; approuing her selfe no lesse a con∣stant wife to her husband, then a nursing Mother to her children? Theodosia yonger daughter of the vertuous and victorious Theodosius; no lesse renow∣ned for her learning and other exquisite endow∣ments of minde, than by being inaugurated with an imperiall title, to which she was afterwards aduan∣ced. The Centons of Homer she composed, and into one volume reduced, which to her suruiuing glory were after published. Diodorus Logicus his fiue daugh∣ters, all which excelled in learning and chastity, and left memorials of their motherly care to their po∣sterity. These were tender Nurses, carefull Mothers, reue∣rend Matrons. Or to giue them that title which an∣tiquity hath bestowed on them; they were in so darke and cloudy a time, patternes of piety, presi∣dents of purity, champions of chastity, mirrours of modesty, iewels of integrity. Women (to vse Plu∣tarchs words) so deuoted to contemplating, as they conceiued no delight in dancing; yet could not con∣templation estrange them from performing such proper offices as did concerne them. They knew
what it was to obey; that it was not fit for an inferi∣our member to command the head, nor for them to so∣ueraignize ouer their husbands. What had sometimes beene taught them by their Mothers, they now care∣fully recommend to the serious reuiew of their Daughters. Wiues with obedience husbands should subdue,Sen. in Octau. For by this meanes they'le be subdu'd to you. Thus learned they the duty of a wife, before they aspired to that title: conforme your selues to their examples: the cloud which kept them from a full view of their condition, is in respect of you, disper∣sed; your eyes are cleared, not with any Pagan er∣rour filmed. Be then in this your Christian coniugall Pilgrimage so conformed, that as with increase of dayes, so with approement of deserts you may be firmed. Againe, are you widowes? you deserue much ho∣ur, if you be so indeed. This name both from the Greeke and Latine hath receiued one consonant Eti∣mology; depriued or destitute. Great difference then is there, betwixt those widowes who liue alone, and retire themselues from publike concourse, and those which frequent the company of men. For a widow to loue society, albeit her intentions relish nothing but sobriety, giues speedy wings to spreading infa∣my. Saint Hierom writing to Estachia, giues her this counsell; If thou shalt finde any question in Scrip∣ture, harder then thou canst well resolue; demand satisfaction from such an one, who is of a most ap∣proued life, ripe age; that by the integrity of his person, thou maist be secured from the least asper∣sion: for in popular concourse and Court-reorts there is no pace for widowes: for in such meetings she exposeth her honour to danger, which aboue all others she ought incomparably to tender. Yea, but
will you obiect: admit, our inheritance, family, for∣tunes, and all lye a bleeding? may we not make re∣course to publike Courts, for redresse of our publike wrongs? What of all this? Doe not complaine that you are desolate or alone, Modesty affecteth silence and secrecy; a chaste woman solitarinesse and priuacy. If you haue businesse with the Iudge of any Court, and you much feare the power of your aduersary, im∣ploy all your care to this end, that your faith may be grounded in those promises of Christ: Your Lord maketh intercession for you, rendring right iudge∣ment to the Orphane, and righteousnesse vnto the widow. This inestimable inheritance of Chastity is incom∣parably more to be esteemed, and with greater care preserued by Widowes then Wiues: albeit, by these neither to be neglected, but highly valued. Out of that ancient experience which time hath taught them, their owne obseruations inform'd them, and the reuerence of their condition put vpon them; they are to instruct others in the practice of piety; reclaime others from the pathes of folly, and with a vertuous conuoy guide them to glory. It would lesse become them to tricke and trimme themselues gau∣dily or gorgeously, then yong girles, whose beauty and outward ornament is the hope and anchor-hold of their preferment: for by these doe the husbands seeke, and hope in time to get what they seeke. Whereas, it were much more commendable for wi¦dowes neither to seeke them, nor being offred, to ac∣cept them: le enforced by necessity, or wonne by importunacy, or giuing way to their frailty, they make exchange of their happy estate for a continuate scene of misery. A widow ought to pray feruently, to exercise workes of deuotion frequently, that the benefit of her prayer redound to her effectually
and fruitfully; and not returne backe from the throne of God drily or emptily. For I would (according to Menanders opinion) haue a widow not onely to de∣meane her selfe chastely and honestly, but likewise to giue examples of her bamelesse life to such as heare her instructions attentiuely. For she ought to be as a Glasse to young Maids, wherein they may discerne their crimes. Now I hold her a chaste Widow, who though she haue opportunity to doe it, and be suited by im∣portunity vnto it, yet will not suffer her brest to harbour an vnchaste thought, or consent vnto it. In that Countrey where I was borne (saith Lud. Viues) we vsually terme such widowes the greatest associ∣ates and assistants of vices, whose too much delica∣cy in bringing vp their children, makes them oft∣times-depraued, and to all inordinate liberty addi∣cted. Wherefore, I approue well of their course, who recommend the care of their children to some dis∣creet and well-disposed person. For such is the too tender affection of mothers towards their children, and so much are they blinded with the loue of them, as they thinke they treat them too roughly, albeit they embrace them neuer so tenderly. Saint Hierome writing vnto Saluina, saith; The chastity of a woman is fraile and fading▪ like a flower quickly perishing and vading, with the least gust or blast of aduerse Fortune failing, if not falling: especially, where her age is apt for vice, and the au∣thority of her husband wants to afford her aduice; from whose assistance, her honour deriues her best succour and supportance. Who, if shee haue a great family, many things are required of her, and to bee found in her, to minister supply to the necessity of time, and vse of affaires, wherein she stands interes∣sed. Requisite therefore it were, that shee made
choyce of some one discreetly ripe both in yeares and inward gifts, by whose honest integrity her fa∣mily might bee better mannaged, with more dili∣gence attended, and to the woman lesse occasion of disgrace obiected. For I haue knowne very many women, who albeit they spent their daies continually within their owne doores, yet haue fallen into reproach either by some persons obseruing them, or of their owne families disposed by them; for suffering their seruants goe a∣broad to neatly, arguing thereby a neglect of their family: so as the handmaids pride brought her Mi∣stresse into suspition of contemning her honour. Sure it is, that an honest woman, whose fame is her highest prize, requires nothing else, desires no∣thing else, than to satisfie her husbands bequest, though dead: honouring him with a due Comme∣moration and admiration of his vertues: for the liues of those that dye, consist in the memory of those that liue. So did Anthonia the daughter of Marc. Autho∣nie, and wife to Drusus: leading all the remainder of her life with her stepmother, and retaining alwayes the remembrance of her dead husband. The like did Liuia, who left both her house and land, that shee might dwell vnder one roofe with Noemia: fearing, perhaps, lest the Maids of hr family growing oo lasciuiously wanton and inordinate, might by their lightnesse preiudice her honor, which she incompa∣rably valued aboue any treasure. See you not hereby our discourse (Gentlewomen) what excellent Lights darted out from those darke times! Estimation was their best portion; nothing of equall prize vnto it vertues were their choycest Ornaments, which they preseru'd with such constancy, as feare of death could not depriue them of them, though after death they had scarce the least glimpse of immortality.
Thus haue we traced ouer these three Conditions, which wee haue stored with precepts, strengthened with examples, sweetned with choycest sentences; that this reall Estimation, whereof we treat, might be discerned; and that Superficiall Esteeme, whereon we are now to insist, discouered. MAny desire to appeare most to the eye,How Estimati∣on may be dis∣cerned to be superficiall. what they are least in hert. They haue learned art∣fully to gull the world with apparances; and deceiue the time, wherein they are Maskers, with vizards and semblances. These can enforce a smile, to per∣swade you of their affability; counterfeit a blush, to paint out their modesty; walke alone, to exprese their loue to priuacy; keepe their houses, to publish them prouident purueyors for their family; receiue strangers, to demonstrate their loue to hospitality. Their speech is minced, their pace measured, their whole posture so cunningly composed, as one would imagine them terrstriall Saints at least, whereas they are nothing lesse than what they most appeare. Some you shall obserue so demure, as in their Sa∣lutes they forbeare to expresse that freedome of Curtsie, which ciuill custome exacts of them. Those true Troian Dames, to pacifie their incensed hus∣bands, could finde a lippe to procue them loue, and supple their contracted looke. Whereas, these ciui∣lized Dames, either out of a reseruancy of state, or desire to be obseru'd, scorne to be so familiarly de∣meaned; as if they renounced antiquity, and sought by all meanes, that such Customes as plead pre∣scription, might be reuersed. Their Lipp must be their Cheeke; which as it retaynes a better tincture, so many times a sweeter sauour.
At these, the Poet no lesse pleasingly than de∣seruedly glanced in this Sonnet: Tell me what is Beauty? Skin; Pure to th' eye, but poore within, What's a kisse of that pure faire? But Loues Lure, or Adons saire. Nectar-balme did Adon sippe Not from Venus cheeke but lippe. Why should then Loues beauty seeke, To change lippe vnto be cheeke? All which he elegantly clozeth in opposition to himselfe, with these continuate Stanza's: Cheeke shall I cheke, because I may not taste it? No; Nature rather; who to th' eye so plac'd it, As none can view it, but he must draw neare it; O make the Chart familiar, or else teare it! To purchase improuement of esteeme by these meanes, were to swimme against the streame. Dis∣cretion cannot approue of that for good, which selfe-opinion or singularity onely makes good. These are but Superficiall showes, which procure more con∣tempt than repute, more derision than ground of e∣steeme. It is not a ciuill habit, a demure looke, a staid gate that deserues this report, vnlesse all these be sconded with a resolued soule, and a religious heart. Those who dedicate themselues to the ruice of vertue, preferre the pith before the rinde, sub∣stance before appearance. What can bee safe, will these say with Lucretius, to any woman, if shee pro∣stitute
her honour, or make it common? Good wo∣men, as they labour to auoyd all occasion of scandall, so much more any act that may giue breath to candall. Ciuill they are in heart and habit; Con∣stant in the profession of vertue. For others, they imitate the Whoorish Woman, who wipes her mouth, and saith, Who seeth mee? So they carry themselues charily, they care not how little chastely. There is none lookes through the Chinke to see them, none in presence to heare them, freely therefore may they commit, what shall afterwards shame them. Let mee then direct my Speech to these whited walls, who make pretences their best attendants, immaske their Impudence with the Vayle of darke∣nesse, Tell mee, yee deluded daughters, is there any darkenesse so thicke and palpable, that the piercing eye of heauen cannot spye you thorow it? O, if yee hope by sinning secretly to sinne securely, you shall bee forced to say vnto your God, as Ahab said vnto ijah: Hast thou found mee, O mine Ene∣my? Nay, O God terrible and dreadfull, thou hast found mee. And then let mee aske you in the same termes that the young Gallant in Erasus asked his wanton Mistresse: Are you not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and before his holy Angels, which you are ashamed to doe in the sight of men? Sinnes may bee without danger for a time, but neuer without feare. Stand then as in the presence of God: re∣deeme the time you haue lost; loue that which you haue hitherto loath'd; loath that which you haue hitherto lou'd, Know that these Superficiall Com∣plementors, are hypocriticall Courtiers; these formall Damazens, profest Curtezans. You must not hold Religion to bee meere Complement. I will
not say, but the bleered eye of humane reason may bee taken with these; and conceiue them reall, which are onely Superficiall. But the All-seeing eye cannot be deceiued; hee sees not as man seeth. Neither distance of place, nor resemblance of that Obiect, whereon his eye is fixt, can cause him to mistake. Would you then be Courtiers grac'd in the high∣est Court? Throw away whatsoeuer is Superfici∣all; and entertaine what will make you Diuinely reall. It is not seeming goodnesse that will bring you to the fountaine of all goodnesse. The Figge-tree brought forth leaues, yet because it yeelded no fruit, it was cursed. Doe yee blossome? So doth euery Hypocrite. Doe yee bring forth fruits? So doth a Christian. What is it to purchase Estima∣tion on earth, and lose it in heauen? This will sleepe in dust, but that neuer. Your highest taske should bee how to promote Gods honour, and to esteeme all things else a slauish and seruile la∣bour. Thus by seeming what you are, and really expressing what you seeme, you shall purchase that esteeme with God and good men, which is reall, by shunning ostentation, which would set such a vading glosse on all your actions, as they will seeme meerely Superficiall. A Discreet Commander will take no lesse care in manning and mannaging the Fort hee hath wonne,How Estima∣tion may be impregnably peserued. than in winning it. It is a constant maxime; there is no lesse difficulty in keeping than getting. Some are more able to get a victory, than skilfull to vse it; Others haue more art to vse it, than courage to atchieue; few or none so accomplish'd, as propiti¦ously to winne it, and prudently to weare it.
We are now to suppose, that you (vertuous Ladies) to whom we addresse this Labour, are victoriously seated in the fort of honour, where beauty cannot be panted, but it must be attempted. But so con∣stantly gracious are your resolues, that though it be assaulted, it can neuer be soiled; attempted but ne∣uer attainted. This you desire, and to this you hope to aspire. In the Port or entrance of euery Castle, City, or Cittadell, there vseth some Percullas to be in readinesse, to frustrate the Enemies assault, and keepe him from entry. The like must you prepare, if you desire to haue your honour secured, your daring ene∣mie repelled, and a glorious conquest purchased. And what must this Spirituall Engine be, but a religi∣ous Constancy, to resist temptation; and all the bet∣ter to subdue it, to shunne the occasion? I doe not admit of any Paries ouer your wals, they giue new breath to the beleaguer, and oftimes makes a prey of the beleagured. If the assault be hot, deuotion best fortifies the hold. One Christian aspiration breathes comfort to the besiedged, and promiseth re∣liefe when she is most streightned. Of all arrowes these which are darted by the spirit of zeale, wound the enemy most, and procure the archer best rest. And that in all assaults whatsoeuer, plotted or practised by so malicious a Tempter. Lactantius sheweth,Lactant. lib 2 diuin. ins. ca. 16. that in his dayes, among ma∣ny other examples of the weakenesse of Idolatry, in the presence of Christianitie, a silly Seruingman that was a Christian, following his Master into a certaine Temple of Idols; the gods cried out, That could be well done, as long as that Christian was intresence.. l. 5. de praep. Euang. The like recordeth Eusebius of Diclesian, the Emperour, who going to Apollo for an Oracele; receiued answer; That the iust men were the cause that he could say nothing. Which iust men Apollo's Priest in∣terpreed
to be meant ironically of Christians: and thereupon Dioclesian began his most cruell and fierce persecution in Fusebi dayes. Sozones also wri∣teth, that Iulian th' Apostata endeuouring with ma∣ny sacrifices and coniurations to draw an answer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daph∣ne, in the Suburbs of Antioch: vnderstood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S. Babylas the Martyr, that lay neere to the place, were the impediment why that god could not speake, And thereupon, Iu∣lian presently caused the same body to bee remoued. And finally, hereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifi∣ces coniurations, and other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scof∣fing Lucian; Exeant Christiani; Let Christians depart:Lucian. in Alx. for that, while they were present, nothing could be well accomplished. Hence collect the force of a Christians presence; it extinguisheth the flame of a Pagan sacrifice. Zea∣lous thoughts, feruent desires, deuout affections will suffer no diabolicall assault to surprize you. Christian constancy will so arme you; pious motions so in∣flame you; thoughts of heauen so transport you, contempt of the world so weane you; as no obiect of delight can draw you from contemplating him that made you. It will not bee amisse, if now and then you reflect on the constancy and resolution of ancient Heathens, who so highly prized their ho∣nour, as it was their highest scorne to gi way to an iniurious vsurper. Camnia wife to Synattus suruiues to this day, as a Mirror of feminine constancy; whom one Synoris, a man of greater authority than hee, loued; and ma∣king no small meanes to obtaine her loue, yet all in vaine, he supposed the readiest way for the effecting his desires, to bee the murdering of her husband:
which hee performed. This act of horror was no sooner executed, and by the robe of his authority shrouded, than he renued his suit, to which she see∣mingly assented: but being solemnly come into the Temple of Diana, for celebrating those Nuptiall rites, shee had a sweet Potion ready, which shee dranke to Synoris: wherewith they were both poy∣soned, to reuenge her husbands death. Chiomara, wife of Orgiagon, a petty king of that Prouince, vp∣on discomfiture of the Gallo-Graecians, being rauished by a Roman Captaine, gaue a memorable example of Coniugall vertue; for shee cut off the fellowes head from his shoulders, Flor. lib. 2. cap. 11. and escaping from her guard, brought it to her Lord and husband. More than fe∣minine was the resolution of Epicharia, a Libertine of Rome, who made priuy to a conspiracy against Nero, to free her natue mother of such a Monster, would not disclose the plotters thereof, though tormented with exquisitest tortures. Neere resemblance had Leëna's name with her Leonine nature, who being Conspirator against the Tyrant Hyppea, and nothing agast at the death of her friends▪ (though torne with extrememe torments) would not reueale her part∣ners, but bit in sunder her owne tongue, and spit it in the Tyrants face. Or to instance you in subiects lesse Tragicall, but for constancy euery way equall. Armenia, a noble Lady, being bidden to King Cy∣rus wedding, went thither with her husband. At night, when they were returned home, her husband asked her, how shee liked the Bridegroome; whe∣ther shee thought him to bee a faire and beautifull Prince or no? Truth, sayes shee, I know not: for all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes vpon none other, but thy∣selfe. An excellent Commandresse was this Lady of her affections; and no lesse imitable was shee, whom we are to instance next; for her modest and bashfull
couering of her husbands infirmities. One of Hiero's enemies reproaching him with a stinking breath; went home and questioned his wife, why shee told him not thereof: who answered, She thought all men had the same sauour. Without question, there is nothing that addes more true glory to a woman, or better preserues her esteeme, than to retaine a constancy in the quality or disposition of her estate. Be she young or old, let her fame liue euer fresh; and like greene Baye, most flourishing, when the winter of duersiy is most nipping. Vertue cannot exercise her owne strength, nor expresse her owne worth without an Opposite. Spices send forth the sweetest smell, when they are most bruised; and Palmes spread the broadest, when they are soarest pressed. Resolution without an assai∣lant, would, in time, become effeminate. Yet, I must tell you, it is dangerous to tempt either youth or age with motiues of fancy, or to giue least way to a promising opportunity. You shall finde secret assaci∣nates enough to vndermine you, you need little to become your owne betrayers. I haue heard of a noble Lady in my time, whose descent and desert equally proclaime her worth, so tender of the esteeme of her honour, as shee held it scarce safe to receiue any Letter from a great Perso∣nage, whose reputation was touched by rumour. This was the way to preserue her honour impregna∣bly, and to reare it aboue the reach of Calumny. Neither are you to be cautelous onely of your Esti∣mation in subiects of loue and affection; but euen in your domesticke affaires, which trench vpon your prouidence or expence. Your discretions in these are brought to the Stage. Let not profusenesse draw you to spend, where honest prouidence bids you pare; nor niggrdlinesse cause you to spare, where
reputation bids you spend. She deserues not to be gouernesse of an house, who wants discretion to moderate her expence. Let her reflect vpon her pro∣geny, intend her charge, and prouide for her family. A good wife is compared to a wise Merchant, who brings his trafficke from a farre. Now, a wise Mer∣chant will not haue his Oare in euery mans Boate, but will seriously addresse his care to his owne. Bu∣sie women would make ill Sayles, and worse house∣wiues; straglers will neuer become good house∣keepers. To cloze this branch: so compose your affections at home and abroad, as prouidence may expresse your care and charge in the one; a graue and reser∣ued reuerence preserue your esteeme in the other. As your liues are liues of direction to your selues, so should they be arguments of instruction vnto others. Be you planted in what state soeuer, let your good report be your greatest stake for euer: so may you reape what your vertues haue deserued, and keepe your Estimation impregnably preserued. NOne can preserue what he loues,How Estima∣tion may be irreparably lost. by mixing it with the society of that he loathes. The Iuye while it windes and wreathes it selfe about the Plant, with an enuious consumption decyes the sappe. If you be companions to Ostridges, you shall sauour of the wildernesse. Socrates called Enuy an impostume of the soule: so may euery corrupt affection be pro∣perly tearmed. Vices loue neighbourhood, which like infectious maladies, do euer most hurt, when they draw nearest the heart. There is nothing (Gentlewomen) that brings your Honour to a more desperate hazard, then giuing reines to your owne desires. These must you subdue
to the soueraignty of reason, if you expect rest in your inward mansion. What better fruits then ig∣nominy may carnall liberty produce? When you make the Theatre your chiefest place of repose: phantasticke gallants, who neuer yet conuerst with vertue, your choisest consorts; delicious viands, ser∣uants to your liquorish appetites; what conclusion may wee expect from such dangerous premises? when modesty puts off her vaile, and vanity begins to ruffle it in sinne; when chaste desires are chac'd out a breath; and lightnesse pleads prescription; when vermillion h'as laid so deepe a colour on an im∣pudent skinne, as it cannot blush with sense of her owne shame: when Estimation becomes a word of Complement, or carelesly worne like some ouer-cast raiment, valued as painted Pageants doe guilded Puppets, onely for shew. What prodegy fuller of wonder, then to see a woman thus transform'd from nature? Her face is not her owne, note her complexi∣on; her eye is not her owne, note her straid motion; her habit is not her owne, eye her strange fashion. Whilest loose weares imply light workes; and thin cob∣webbe couers promise free admittance to all sensuall louers. Yea, which is more, she holds it no shame to glory in sinne, nor to court vice in her owne liue∣ry; all which she maintaines to be complements of gentility. Thus vice is euer in fashion, and keepes her gradation till she aspire to the height of her building. She begins with conceit, seconds it with consent, strengthens it with delight, and incorporates it with custome. One of this ranke haue I oft-times obserued tra∣cing the streets of this flourishing City; who, as one weary of her sexe, forbore not to vnwoman her selfe, by assuming not onely a virile habit, but a virago's heart. Quarrels she would not sticke to binde vpon
any fresh-water Souldier, whose late induction to the siedge of Gallants, had not sufficiently inform'd him in that posture. Nothing desir'd she more then to iue ronts in publike places, which she did with that contempt, as the disgrace she aspers'd on others, was her sole content. Places of frequent were her Rendeuon; where her imperious tongue runne des∣cant on euery subiect ministred; her selfe she vsu∣ally ingaged for a Second, vpon least occasion offred. Now could these courses any way choose but cause that to be irreparably lost, which by any modest wo∣man should be incomparably lou'd? Tell me, were not his spirit armou of proofe, who durst encoun∣ter with so couragious an Amazon? or enter nup∣tiall lists with such a feminine Myrmidon? Surely, these, as they labour to purchase them opinion of e∣steeme, by their vnwomanly expressions of valour, so they eclypse their owne fame, and by these irre∣gular affronts, detract highy from their eentialst honour. Such may gaine them obsruance, but neuer esteeme. Take heede then, lest publique rumour brand you, Scandall is more apt to disperse what is ill; then Opinion is to retaine what is good. When the world is once postest of your shame; many de∣seruing actions of piety can hardly wipe off that staine. Esaus birth-right was temporall, yet once lost, many teares could not regaine it; your soules honour is a birth-right spirituall, which once lost, many tedious taskes shall not redeeme it. Let your stmation be by you so tenderly lou'd, as you will rather choose to loath life, then irreparably loose that, which is the sweetest Consort of humane life.
THere is nothing which works not for some nd, wherein it may rest and repose. Long before that glorious Light wee now enioy,The absolute  whreto Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerefuly rests. did the very Hea∣thens, who had no knowledge of a future being, re∣ioyce highly in the practice of Morall vertues, and performing such commendable offices as might pur∣chase them deserued honour, liuing; and eternally memorize them dying. This might bee illustrated by suerall instances in Maids, Wiues, and Widowes. For the first; thoe Lo∣crian Virgin, deserue our memory; whose custome it was, yearely to be sent to Troy: which  conti∣nued for the space of a thousand yeares; yet was it ne∣uer heard, that any of those Virgins were euer de∣slowred. Who can likewise passe ouer in silence those seuen Milesian Virgins; who, at such time as the Gauls raued and raged euery where, subiecting all to fire and faggot, depriued themselues of life, lest hostile force should depriue them of their honour? With what praises also may wee worthily aduance those daughters of Scedasus of Leuctra, a Towne situ∣ate in the Region of Boectia; who hauing in their fa∣thers absence, hospitably receiued two young men, by whom, made drunke with wine, they were that night defloured: conceiuing a mutuall sorrow for their lost Virginity, became resolute actors in their owne Tragedy. Aristomenes of Messana; when in those publike feasts called Hyacinthia, hee had sur∣prized fifteene Virgins with the souldiers which at∣tempted their dishonour, straightly commanding them to forbeare from vsing any such violence: whose Command when they refused to obey, he cau∣sed them to be slaine: redeeming those Virgins with huge summe of gold. Afterwards, these Virgins hearing that this Aristomenes was accused about the
death of one of those men, whom hee had comman∣ded to be slaine; they would not returne into their owne natiue Countrey, till such time, as prostrating themselues before the feet of the Iudge, with their praiers and teares, they had deliuered from bonds the defender of their honour. Yea,An English Amazon. to draw nearer home, and instance this Mai∣den-constancy in one of our owne; I haue heard of a notable spirited irle, within the walls of this City; who, albeit she frequented places of publike Concourse boldly, discoursed freely, expressed her selfe in all assayes forwardly; yet so tender was she of preseruing her honour, that being on a time sui∣ted by a young Caueliero, who was so taken with the height of her spirit, wherewith shee was en∣dowed, as he preferred it before the beauty of an amorous face, wherewith she was but meanely en∣riched, She presently apprehending the loosenesse of his desires, seemingly condescended; so shee might be furnished and appointed, and the busi∣nesse with that secrecy carried, as no occasion of suspition might bee probably gounded. This an∣swer cheer'd our yong Gallant; winged with hope to enioy, what his wild desires did so much affect. A Coach is prouided; all things prepared; the ve∣ry place appointed where they shall meet, to hasten their light iourney; which, for more priuacy, must be the Country. Time and place they obseru'd; but before she would mount her Coach, calling him a∣side, shee tels him, how shee had vow'd neuer to consent to any man in that kind, till shee had first tri'd his mettall in the field. Draw he must, or she will disgrace him; in which combat, instead of a more amorous Conflict, shee disarm'd him, and with a kicke, wish'd him euer after to be more wa∣ry how he attempted a Maidens honour.
For the second, excellent was the answer of those Lacedemonian wiues; who being immodestly suited, made this reply: Surely, we should giue way to your request, but this you  for is not in our power to gra: for when we were Maids, wee were to be disposed of by our parents; and now bring wies, by our husbands. At such time as the Inhabitants of Tyre came to Lacede∣; suspecting them to be Spyes, they threw them into prison; whose wiues, hauing got leaue to visit and comfort them in their captiuity, changed gar∣ments with them, and according to their Countries guise, vailed their faces, by which meanes the men escaped,Plutarch. leauing their wiues restrained: which deep∣ly perplexed all the Lacedemonians. No lesse coniugall loue shwed Alcesta to her  to her Protesilaus; Pantia to her Susi; Arteia to her Mausolus; Zenobia to her Oedenat. These were good wiues, which  cals the highest grounds of humane felicity. Nothing being more amiable than an honest woman, saith Theogi; nothing conferring more ioy to man, saith sententi∣ous Xistus. For the third, what singular mirrors of viduall con∣tinency, and matron-like modesty were Cornelia, Ve∣truria, Liuia, and that most Christian widdow Salui∣a, to whom S. Hierom directed many sweet and comfortable Epistles. These you might haue sound attired in graue funerall garments, (as memorials of their deceased husbands) of modest behauiour, reue∣end presence, publishing to the world a contempt of the world, in their outward appearance. Now, what may you suppose did those Pagan La∣dies hold to be the absolute end, whereto this tender care of their Estimation chiefly aspired, and wherein it cheerefully rested? It was not riches, nor any such temporall respect: for these they contemned, so their
honour might be preserued. No; there was implan∣ted in them an innate desire of Morall goodnesse; mixed with an honest ambition, so to aduance their esteeme during life, that they might become exam∣ples vnto others of a good Morall life, and perpetu∣ate their memories after death. Your ambition (Ladies) must mount higher, be∣cause your Conuersation is heaenlier. It is immorta∣lity you aspire to; a lower Orbe cannot hold you; nothing else may confine you. Be it then your high¦est Estimation to honor him, who is the brne of your saluation. Let not a moment of  vanity, de∣priue you of the hope of eternity. Your voyage is short; your hazzard great. Many  en∣counter you in the way; addresse your  there∣fore in the way, to some good worke. Let Pati∣ence teach you how to suffer, Duotion swee∣ten your encounter, Estimation crowne you with succee∣ding honour.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Fancy is to be with Deliberation grounded; with Con∣stancy retained; Wanton Fancy is a wandring frenzy; How it may be checked, if too wilde; How cheered, if too coole; An attemperament of both. FANCY.FANCY. FANCY is an affecti∣on priuily receiued in by the eye,Obseruat. 6. and speedily conueyed to the heart. The Eye is the harbin∣ger, but the heart is the harbourer.Fancy is to be with delibera∣tion grounded. Loue con∣ceiu'd at first sight, sel∣dome lasts long. Deli∣beratim must lead it, or else it is mis-guided. Looke before you like, is a good rule; but to like at
first Looke makes an house of mis-rule. Is he of han∣some personage whom you loue? His proportion is a mouing Obiect to your eye, but his pertion (it may be) will not agree with your state. Againe, admit he haue both these; proportion to purchase your esteeme, and portion to maintaine your estate: his brest is not transparent; his disposition may be crookod; and that will cast downe all that was before affected. Themstocles being demanded by a Nobleman of Grece, whether he had rather marry his daughter to one rich and euill, or one poore and good; made this answer: I had rather aue a man without money, than mony without a man. Whence it was, that Portia, the younger daughter of Portius Cato, being asked when shee would betake her selfe to an husband, replyed; When I finde one that seekes me, not mine. Witty was that young Gentlewomans answer to an inconsiderate Suiter: who with much instancy sol∣licited the father for the affection of his daughter; whereto hauing at last consented; and the Couenants of marriage concluded: this indiscreet wooer vn∣sasonably imparts his minde to the daughter; who made strange with it, saying, She neuer heard of any such matter: Yea but, replied he, I haue made your father hrewith acquainted, and he hath already consented; and you may marry him too, answered shee, for you must hold me excused. There is no time that exacts more modesty of any woman, than in her time of suiting; a shamefast red then best commends her, and the mouingst Ora∣or that speakes for her. So as Virgil, the very Prince of our Latine Poets, when he should bring in King Latius priuately conferring with his wife Amaa, and Trus, to whom in nuptiall bands he was to e∣spouse his daughter: he brings in the young maid weeping, blushing, and silent. Whence is implyed,
that it becomes not a Maid to speake of marriage in her parents presence, for that were small argument of modesty or shamefastnesse. There is a pretty pleasing kinde of wooing drawne from a conceiued but con∣cealed Fancy; which, in my opinion, suits well with these amorous younglins: they could wish with all their hearts to be euer in the presence of those they loue, so they might not be seene by those they loue. Might they chuse, they would conuerse with them freely, conort with them friendly, and impart their truest thoughts fully, yet would they not haue their bashfull loues finde discouery. They would be seene, yet seeme obscured; loue, but not disclose it; see whom they loue, but not bee eyed. This the Poet in the person of a Shepherdesse neatly displayeth: Phillis to willowes, like a cunning flyer, Flye, yet she feares her Shepheard should not spy her. Now in this Subiect of Fancy, as there is nothing more dangerous than entertaining it without due and deliberate aduice: so there is nothing growes more generally fatall to the indiscreet Louer, than by grounding affection on outward respects, without relation to that inward faire, which onely makes the Obiect of Fancy full of beauty, and presents euery day as a Marriage-day to the party. Neither affluence of estate, potency of friends, nor highnesse of descent can attemper the griefe of a loathed bed. These may play vpon the Fantasie, but neuer giue satisfaction to the Fancy. Wherefore (Gentlewomen) to the end you may shew your selues discreetest in that, which re∣quires your discretion most, discusse with your selues the purity of loue, the quality of your louer; euer reflecting on those best deseruing endowments of his, which either make him worthy or vnwo∣thy your loue. Affection, though it enter in by the narrow cranny of the Eye, it shoots at the heart;
which, vnlesse it be seasoned by iudgement, it can not deserue so faire a title. A discreet eye will not be taken with a smooth skinne; it is not the rinde but the minde that is her Adamant. Iustin a Roman Maid, no lesse nobly descended, than noably accomplished, being married to one more rich than wise, exclaimed against her fate, that folly should hale her to so loathed a bed. And good reason had she to repine, when his groundlesse iealosie made her a tragick spectacle of misery before her time. For seeing her white necke, that obiect begot in him pre∣sently an argument of suspect, which hee seconded with reuenge, to vent the fury of his nature, and pub∣lish to the world the weaknesse of his temper. Let deliberation then be the Scale, wherin you may weigh Loue in an equall poize. There bee many high and consequent Circumstances, which a discreet woman will not onely discourse but discusse, before shee en∣tertain so mysterious and honorable estate. Disparity in descent, fortunes, friends, with other like respects, many times beget distraction of mindes. Whence it was, that Pittacus of Muylene, being intreated by a young man, to afford him his best aduice, in the Choyce of two wiues tendred him, whether hee should marry; the one whereof was equal to him∣selfe both in birth and wealth; the other surpassing him in both; Wish'd him to goe along the streets of the City, where children vse to play, and there obserue what they did aduise him. Truth is, inequa∣lity in these, procures distaste; but where there is a difference in the seazure or disposure of the heart, (which should be the firmest and strongest Cement to vnite affection) there ariseth the greatest hazard. Thence is it, Suspition workes vpon uery light and friuolous subiect; while the other party hunts after opportunity, to surfet on forbidden fruit, and giue her
suspitios Mate iust ground of iealousie. Feed hee may his indigested humour in a iealous pasture, and vow reuenge when hee shall finde an apt subiect, meane time hee becomes inuisibly gull'd, while he deludes himselfe with painted shadowes, —No Iealousie can euer that preuent Whereas two parties once be full content. Seuerall,Hieron. cont▪ Ruffia. I know, are the effects of loue, as are the dispositions of those that loue. Liuia made quicke dispatch of her husband, because shee lou'd him too little: Lucilia of hers, because shee loued him too much. Phoedra fancied Theseus lesse than shee should, but young Hippolytus more than hee would▪ Which effects are vsually produced, when either disparity of yeares breed dislike; or obscu∣rity of descent begets contempt; or inequality of fortunes, discontent. Deliberate then before you marry, and thus expostulate with your selues tou∣ching his Condition, whom you are to marry. Is he young? I will beare with his youth, till bet∣ter experience bring him to the knowledge of man. My vage shall bee more easie, than to weane him from what hee affects, by extremity. Youth will haue his swinge; his owne discretion will bring him home; at least, time will reclaime him; hee shall not finde mee put on a clowdy brow, or en∣tertaine his freer course with a scowle. I must con∣forme my selfe to him, confirme my loue in him, and so demeane mee towards him, that Coniugall duty mixt with all affability may winne him. Againe, is he old? His age shall beget in mee more reuerence; his words shall be as so many aged and time-improued precepts to informe me; his acti∣ons as so many directions to guide me; his rebukes
as so many friendly admonitions to reclaime mee; his bed I will honour, no vnchaste though shall de∣file it; his Counsell I will keepe, no forraine brest shall partake it. I will bee a staffe to him in his age, to support him; an eye to direct him; an hand to help him; his Substance I will not scatter on a youth∣full Louer: but serue him still, whom I haue vow'd to honour. Againe, is he rich? Much good may it doe him; this shall not make me proud; my desire shall be, he may imploy it for his best aduantage; I will moue him to communicate vnto the needy, that his riches may make him truly happy. It is a miserable state that starues the owner. I will perswade him to en∣ioy his owne, and so auoyd basenesse; to reserue a prouident care for his owne, and shunne pro∣fusenesse. Againe, is hee poore? His pouerty shall make me rich; there is no want, where there wants no content. This I shall enioy in him, and with him; which the world could not afford mee, liu'd I with∣out him. It hath beene an old Maxime; that as po∣uerty goes in at one doore, loue goes out at the other; but this rule shall neuer direct my thoughts; should pouerty enthrall me, it shall neuer appall me; my af∣fection shall counterpoize all affliction: No aduersi∣ty can duide mee from him, to whom my vowed faith hath indiuidually ti'd me. In a word, is hee wise? He shall be my Thales. Is he follish? I will by all meanes couer his weakenesse: as I am now made one with him, so will I haue mine equall share in any aspersion that shall be throwne on him. Thus if you expostulate, your Christian constant resolues shall make you truly fortunate. Your Fancy is on deliberation grounded; which promiseth such success, as your Marriage-dayes shall neuer feare the
bitter encounter of vntimely repentance, nor the curelesse anguish of an afflicted Conscience. THe selfe-same rule which Augustus was said to obserue in his choice and constant retention of friends,Fancy is to be with constan∣cy retained. are you, Gentlewomen, to apply to your selues in the choice of your second-selues. He was slow in entertaining, but most constant in retaining. Fauorites are not to be worne like fauours: now in your hat, or about your wrist, and presently out of request. Which to preuent, entertaine none to lodge neere your heart, that may harbor in his brest ought wor∣thy your hate. Those two Motto's I would haue you incessantly to remember; for the vsefull application of them may highly conduce to your honour. The one is that of Caia Tranquilla, which she euer vsed to her royall Spouse Caius Tarquinius Priscus; Where th art Caius, I am Caia. The other, that of Ruth vn∣to Naomi; Whither thou goest, I will goe; and where thou dwellest, I will dwell. There is no greater argument of lightnesse, then to affect the acquaintance of strangers, and to enter∣taine variety of Suiters. These, as they distract the eye, so they infect the heart. Constant you cannot be where you professe, so long as you affect change. Vowes deliberately aduised, and religiously groun∣ded, are not to be dispenc'd with. But say, you neuer vowed: haue you made outward professions of loue, and entertained a good opinion of that obiect in your heart? Againe, are you resolued, that his affection is reall towards you? That his protests, though de∣liuered by his mouth, are engrauen in his heart? Let not so much good loue be lost; insult not ouer him, whom vnfained affection hath vow'd your ser∣uan.
Let Wolues and beasts be cruell in their kindes, But Women meeke, and haue relenting mindes. It were too much incredulity in you to distrust, where you neuer found iust cause of distaste, Yea, but you will againe obiect; we are already by your owne Obseruations snficiently instructed, that Fancy is to be with eliberation grounded, that loue lightly laid on, lasts not long. Should we then affect before we finde ground of respect? Should wee entertaine a Rhetoricall Louer, whose protests are formal Com∣plements, and whose promises are gilded pills, which couer much bitternesse? No, I would not haue you so credulous, lest your Nuptiall day become omi∣nous. Make true triall and experiment of his Con∣stancy, who tenders his seruice to you. Sift him, if you can finde any branne in him. Taske him, before you take him. Yet let these be sweetly tempred with lenity; Let them not be Taskes of insuperable dif∣ficulty. This were to tyrannize, where you should loue. This was Omphaes fault, to make her faithfull seruant, a seruile slaue. Alas! shall hee fare the worse because hee loues you? This would induce others, who take notice of your cruelty, to loath you. And make your discarded louer, surprized with an amo∣rous distemper, to reply, as Absalm to Hushai, Is this thy kindnesse to thy friend? My counsell is, that, as it will be vsefull for you to deliberate, before you take so much as the least Notions of an affectionate Ser∣uant; yea, and to second that deliberation with some probable proofe or triall, that hee is truly constant: so it will be a gratefull office in you, to retaine him in your fauour with a gracious respect; to counte∣nance the improuement of his constancy with a cheerefull and amiable aspect: to banish all clowds of seeming discontent, and to giue him some modest expressions of the increase of your good Conceit to∣wards
him. Let this be done, till Hymen make you indiuidually one. Then, and neuer till then, may Loue enioy her full freedome. She stands priuiledg'd by a sacred rite to taste that fruit, which before was forbidden. Mutuall respects, like so many diametrall lines, pointing all to one Centre, are then directed to one exquisite obiect; the purity of loue; which produceth this admirable effect: it makes one soule rule two hearts, and one heart dwell in two bodies. Now, I would haue you, when your desires are drawne to this period; to become so taken with the loue of your choyce, as to interpret whatsoeuer hee shall doe, euer to the best sense. It were little enough that you retained a good opinion of him, who stands in so many seuerall ingagements obliged for you. Should your riot bring him into debt; his restraint must make you free. Drance must be his suit, while better stuffe makes you a Coate. Yea, what Consci∣ence is there in it, but hee should receiue an affable and amiable respect from you; seeing, if your Con∣scince be no Conformalist, he must pay for you? These respects should perpetually tye you, to ho∣nour him, who becomes so legally ty'd for you. Re∣quite these then with constancy, and retaine this en∣suing Example euer in your memory. Theogena, wife to Agathocles, shew'd admirable constancy in her husbands greatest misery, shewing her selfe most his owne, when he was relinquisht and forsaken of his owne; clozing her resolution with this noble Con∣clusion: Shee had not onely betaken her selfe to be his Companion in prosperity, but in all fortunes that should befall him. Conforme your selues to this Mirrr, and it will reforme in you many a dangerous er∣rors. Thus if you liue, thus if you loue: honour cannot chuse but accompany you liuing, much com∣fort
attend you louing, and a vertuous memory em¦balme you dying. VVAnton Loue seldome or neuer promiseth good successe;Wanton Fan∣cy is a wan∣dring frenze. the effect cannot bee good, when the obiect is ll. Sense must bee the blinde lan∣thorne to guide her, while shee rambles in the street: for Reason, she leaues her sleeping with the Consta∣ble. What deuices shee hath to purchase her a mo∣ment of penitentiall pleasure? Her eye lookes, and by it the sense of her minde is auerted; her eare heares, and by it the intention of her heart is peruerted; her smell breathes, and by it her thoughts are hindered; her mouth speakes, and by it others are deceiued; by touch, her heat of desire vpon euery small occasion is stirred. Neuer raged Alcydes on Mount Oeta, nor Olando for his Angelica, more than these Vtopian lo∣uers, for their imaginary shadowes. There is a kind of Spider bred in Pula, called Tarandula, which be∣ing of a diuerse nature, causeth diuerse effects; some to dance, some to sing, others to weepe, or watch, or sweat. The soueraignest cure it admits of, is Mu∣sick; while the Patient by dancing, or some other ve∣hemnt exercise of that sort, expulseth the poyson, & giues passage to his pores of respiration. Many like Creaturs there be of a malignant nature, but none comparable to a distempered Louer. Now, that we may vse the method of Art; to cure the effect, is to take away the cause: my purpose shall bee first to discouer those incendiaries or fo∣ments of this inordinate passion, or intoxicating poyson; secondly, the effects arising from them; lastly, the cure or remedy of them. For the first, wee may very properly reduce the prime grounds of this wanton fancy, or wandring
frenzy to a Catalogue included in these two verses: 1Sloth, 2Words, 3Books, 4Eyes, 5Consorts, & 6luscious fare, The Lures of lust, and stanes of honour are, On euery of which particular to insist, would en∣large this branch too much; we will onely poynt at them and so leaue them. For the first, sententious Seneca saith, he had rather endure the vtmost of for∣tunes extremitie, than subiect himselfe to Sloth or Sensuality. For it is this only, which maketh of men, women; of women, beasts; of beasts, monsters. This then is to be shunned, if the reward of vertue be to be shared. Secondly, Words corrupt the dispo∣sition; they set an edge or glosse on depraued Liber∣ty: making that member offend most, when it should be imployed in profiting most. The tongue is more effectuall than any Letter; let it be then so m∣ployed, as it may improue the hearer. Thirdly, Books treating of light subiects, are Nurseries of wanton∣nesse: they instruct the loose Reader to become naught, whereas before, touching naughtinese he knew naught. A story of the rape of Ganimedes, or of light Lais in Eurypedes, are their daily Lctures. Plato's Diuine Philosophy, or  pious Pre∣cepts Morality, must vale to Alcaeus, or Anacre∣ons wanton Poesie. Venus and Adons are vnfitting Consorts for a Ladies bosome. Remoue them time∣ly from you, if they euer had entertainment by you left, like the Snake in the fable, they annoy you. Fourthly, Eyes are those Windowes by which enters; your inward house cannot shine, these be shut; Obiects they haue of more beauty to take them, than these sights of vanity, which mise∣rably tain them. Eue looked on the fruit before shee coted, coueting shee tasted, tasting she peri∣shed. Thus aspiring to the knowledge of good and
euill, became to her and her posterity euill. The Eye is a Liuing glasse, but if wee make it a false glasse, it will neither represent vs truly, nor discouer our ble∣mishes freely; but make that seeme faire which is o∣dious and vgly. By this meanes, many good ob∣iects become Eye-soares vnto vs, which, if clearely viewed, would like a soueraigne Eye-bright, restore sight vnto vs. Fifthly, Consorts are theeues of time, they will rob you of opportunity, the best treasure time can afford you, if you suffer them to incroach on you and abuse you. Chuse such then for your Consorts, of whom you may haue assured hope, that they will either better you, or bee bettered by you. Chuse such, whom you may admire both when you see them and heare them: when you see their liuing Doctrine, and heare their wholesome instruction. Lastly, Luscious fare is the fuell of euery inordinate concupiscence. Nothing so much feeds it, nor insen∣sates the vnderstanding by delighting in it. By re∣straint of this, you shall learne to moderate your de∣sires. Whence you may reioyce, yet in him, who is your ioy, if you can liue sparingly, and embrace the meanes that may chastise in you all sensuality: for by your spare life is lust extinguished, vertue nourished, the minde strengthened, the vnderstanding to hea∣uenly things raysed. Yea, abstinence auaileth much for preseruing health of body and length of life. Whence it is said: He that diteth himselfe, prolongeth life.Eccles. 37. 30. Which the profound Stagirian confirmes in these words: To abstaine from riot and superfluity, is the soueraign'st prescription or physicke for the body.Arist dereg. Princ. Now to descend to the second branch of our diui∣sion in this Obseruation; wee might here enumerate those many odious and inhumane effects, which haue and doe daily arise from the violence of this Wanton fancy or Wandring frenzy; and what tragicke euents
it hath in all times produc'd: but they would seeme relations too full of horror to your modest and time∣rous Natures. Onely let mee tell you, if you desire to be satisfied in subiects of that kinde, our Italian Stories will afford you variety: Where indiscreet Loue clozeth her dolefull Scene with so miserable an Exit, as no Pencill can expresse any picture to more life, than an historicall line hath drawne out the web of their miseries. So as, that ancient Adage might seeme verified: That from slaues and miserable peo∣ple God hath taken away the one halfe of their vn∣derstanding. Now to cure this desperate malady (though to you the cure, I hope, be needlesse, being free from all such violent distempers;) the best and soueraignst receit is to fortifie the weaknes of your sexe with strength of resolution; that, with incessant deuotion. Be not too liberall in the bestowing of your fauors; nor too familiar in publike conuerse. Presume not too much on the strength of a weake Fort. Make a Contract with your eyes not to wander abroad, lest they bee catch'd in comming home. Treat not of loue too freely; play not wagges with the blinde boy; hee has a dangerous ayme, though he hath no eyes. Sport not with him, that may hurt you; play not with him, that would play on you. Your Sports will turne to an ill iest, when you are wounded in earnest: the Fly may be then your Embleme: So long the foolish Fly playes with the flame, Till her light wings are cinged in the same. Fly to an higher Sphere: you are yet vntouch'd; this wandring frenzy hath neuer yet surpriz'd you; preuent the meanes, and it shall neuer inuade you. Be not such foes to your selues, as to purchase your owne disquiet. Examples you haue of all sorts, both to allure and deterre you. Pure loue admits no staine.
Such a fancy is neuer  to a fezy. If euer then you entertaine any oue, let it it a vertuous solace; for all others, howsoeuer they may seene to premise sme perfctory delight, they euer cast vp their last account with repentance. WHen a man bleeds at the nose, and throg aburdance of blood is broght danger of his life,How Fancy may be chec∣ked, if too wde. the the course of the bood a oter way. If in too vioent a , it is to be ooled by a tmpe∣rate expostulaō with Fancy: or ese by fixing vpon some more attractie obiect, diuert the course of that  passion. Expostulate with Fancy, thus you may, safely & freely How is it with me? Mee thinkes, it fares otherwise than it hath done formerly. A strange distemper I find in my mind; and it might seeme to resemble oue, if I knew the nature of it. Loue! Can virgin-modesty re∣turne that accent, and not blsh? Yes; why not? If the Obiect I affect be worthy louing. And if not, what then? Is not the luer euer blind with afection towards his beloued? He, who may seeme a  to another, may be a Pars in Were he poore as , Fancy makes , dearer to me, than the wea of Cru. Yea, but a lit∣tle aduice would doe well. Art thou perseaded that this Non-paae, thou thus affectest, hath de∣dicated his seruice onely to thee? Yes; his pro∣tests haue confirm'd him mine. Besides, his conti∣nual presence seconds what hee protests: That houre is tedious, wherein hee sees me not; those pleasures odious, which my presence accompanies not. His eye is euer fixed on me; his sole discourse is to me. What I affect hee embraceth with de∣light;
what I dis-rellish, hee entertaines with distaste. These, I must confesse, (Gentlewoman) are promi∣sing arguments of vnfained loue: yet may all these rre, and consequently leaue you in a miserable Er∣ror. Your True-loue may proue a Iason or a Theseus, and leaue you in the bryers for all your confidence. You say, his Protests haue confirm'd him yours; he hath attested heauen to beare record of his loue. Alas of Credulity! Take heed he play not the part of that ridiculous Actor in Smyra, who pronouncing, O hea∣uen! pointed with his finger to the ground. Or like that namelesse Louer, who solliciting a Gentlewo∣mans affection with aboundance of amorous Rheto∣ricke, concluded with this Emphaticall protest; that shee was the onely Mistresse of his thoughts: which con∣clusion being ouerheard by one to whom not long before vpon like protests hee had ingag'd his faith; she replied, Doe not beleeue him, Gentlewoman; the selfe-same Arbour where you now are, might witnesse that he hath made the very like protests vnto me, many times before. Trialls in affaires of this nature haue euer a truer touch than protests. It is easie for beauty to extort a vow, or a temporary protest; which many times is as soone forgot as made. Let not these then worke on your Credulity. There be, I know (and so all be that are truly gene∣rous) who, rather than they would infringe their aith, would ingage their life. But all are not of that noble temper. Ohers there bee, who can tip their glozing tongues with Rhetoricall protests, purpose∣ly to gull a credulous Creature, for the purcase of an vnlawfull pleasure; which obtain'd, they leaue them to bemoane their lost honour. With more safety therefore may you suspect, than too rashly affect. It
will not be amisse for you to reade him, before you chuse him. As thus; Hath his faire carriage got him estimation where he liues? Hath hee neuer inur'd his tongue to play Hypocrite with his heart; nor made Ceremoniall protests to purchase a light Mistresse? Hath he kept a faire quarter, and beene euer tender of his vntainted honour? Hath he neuer boasted of young Gentlewomans fauors, nor runne descant on their kindnesse? Hath hee kept himselfe on euen boord with all the world, and preseru'd his patrimony from ingagement? Hath hee euer since hee vow'd himselfe your ser∣uant, solely deuoted himselfe yours, and not im∣mix'd his affection with forraine beauties? Chuse him, hee well deserues your choyce; in which choyce, let this be your impreze; My choyce ad∣mits no change. To be short; the blessing which Boaz pronoun∣ced vpon Ruth, shall like a honey-dew destill daily from the lippes of your husband. Blessed be thou of the Lord, my Spouse; thou hast shewed more goodnesse in the latter end, than at thy beginning, in as much as thou fol∣lowest not young men, were they poore or rich. Contrari∣wise, where you find no such demeriting respects in him, who makes loue vnto you; Checke your wilde Fancy by time, lest a remedilesse Checke attend your Choyce. Couertly knew that vnfortunate Lady how to paint out her griefe, the extent whereof her tongue-tide passion could not relate; When like a fruitfull vine, shee had brought forth many faire and promi∣sing branches to a debaucht husband, by whose pro∣fuser course, her hopes which shee had stored in her numerous progeny, perished, and her selfe through griefe irrecouerably wasted; shee wrote these pensiue lines with a Diamond in her Cham∣ber
Window, to giue a liuing shadow to her lasting sorrow. Vp to the Window sprung the spreading Vine, The dangling Apricocke, and Eglantine; Since when, that vine and branches too were found Shred from their root, laid sprawling on the ground. It is not so hard to giue comfortable counsel to the sorrowfull, as to finde a fit season when to giue it. I would haue you, whose more noble parts promise much comfort to your families, giue such attention to seasonable counsell, as you may preuent all ensuing occasions of sorrow. It is the condition of an incon∣siderate person, who neuer foresees his fall, to cloze the issue of his misfortunes with this improuident conclusion;Sen. de Tranq. an. I would neuer haue thought that this should haue thus come to passe; I neuer dream'd of this Euent. It will be more vsefull and benefi∣ciall to you, to checke your wilde Fancy, if any such seaze vpon you, than to giue way vnto it, and con∣sequently vndoe you. Repentance comes too late at Marriage-night. Affaires of such weight and con∣sequence are not to be entertained without due ad∣uice, nor seconded with rashnesse. In one word; haue you plaid a little too long with the flame? Haue you giuen too free accesse to your desertlesse louer? Haue you suffered your heart not onely to thinke of him, but with more intimate respect to harbour him? Lodge him no longer in that roome; it de∣serues a farre better guest. I will not heare you, if you reply, and say; This is a Taske of impossibili∣ty. Continuance of time, with discontinuance of his presence, will easily effect it. Meane time, fixe your eye vpon some more deseruing obiect. Reuenge your selfe of that Conceit, that shall affresh present him to you. So shall the wildnesse of your Fancy be checked; your halfe-lost liberty regained; and your affection
afterwards planted, where it may be better acqui∣ted; there seated, where it may be more sweetly sea∣soned. THere be Haggards of that wilde Nature,How Fancy may be che∣red if too cold. as they will by no meanes be reclaim'd; Neither Loue nor feare will cause them stoope to any Lure. Em∣blemes these are to such wayward Girles, whose in∣flexible natures will neither be woo'd nor wonne at any rate. These had rather dye for loue, than bee deem'd to loue. Their hearts are smeer'd ouer with Salamanders oyle, and will admit no heat. They may entertaine Suiters, but it is with that coldnesse of af∣fection, as the longer they resort, the lesser is their hope. They may boast more of the multiplicity of their Suitors, than their Suitors can of any probabili∣ty to be speeders. As it chanced sometime in a Con∣test betwixt two Maids, who comparing one with the other their descents, friends, and Suitors: Make no comparison with me, replyed the one to the other, for I must tell thee, I haue more Suitors than thou hast friends, More shamelesse you (answered the o∣ther) vnlesse you meane to set vp an house of good fel∣lowship. These vnsociable Natures, who many times deferre making their choyce, till age bring them to contempt, and excludes them from all choyce, Or Danaë-like, liue immured in their Chamber, til their Fort be vndermined by some golden Pioner; detract much from the relenting disposition of their Sexe. It is their honor to be woo'd & won. To be discreet in their choyce, and to entertaine their choyce without Change. Of such I speake, who haue not dedicated their dayes to Virginity; which is such a Conditi∣on, as it aspires to an Angelicall perfection. Good, (saith venerable Bede) is coniugall chastity, better
is viduall continency, but best is the perfection of Virginity. Yea, Virginity exceeds the condition of humane nature, being that, by which man resembles an Angelicall Creature. Wee reade likewise, that the Vnicorne, when he can be taken by no force nor sub∣till Engine, will rest and repose in the Lap of a Vir∣gin. To those onely I direct my discourse, who haue a mind to take themselues vnto the world, and to en∣tertaine their Louer: but it is with such coolenesse, as it driues their dispassionate Sweet-hart into strange extremes. And this proceeds commonly from an ouer-weening Conceit, which these dainty Dam∣sels haue of their owne worth: with the apprehen∣sion whereof they become so infinitely taken, as they can finde none worthy their choyce. Of this disdainefull opinion was that vnhappy Gentlewo∣man, who after many faire fortunes tendred, Sui∣tors of deseruing quality reiected, made her incestu∣ous brother her licentious louer. A crime detestable euen to Barbarians and bruit beasts. Insomuch as, it is reported of the Camell, that they vsually hood-winke him, when at any time they bring his mother vnto him; which act he no sooner knowes, than hee tramples her vnder his feet, and kickes her to death with his heeles; so hate∣full is Incest euen to bruit beasts, whose natiue in∣stinct abhorres such obscene commitures. You, whose discreet affections haue cast anchor, by ma∣king choyce of some deseruing Louer; afflict him not with needlesse delayes; if he merit your choyce, one day is too long to deferre him; if vndeseruing, taxe your owne indiscretion to rashly to entertaine him. Is it bashfull modesty that with-holds you? I com∣mend it; it well becomes you. Chastity cannot ex∣presse
it selfe in a fairer Character, than in blushing lines of louing shame fastnesse. Is it consent of friends that detaines you? I approue that too; These rites are best accomplished, when they are with consent and consort of friends solemnized. But if the ground of your delay trench either vpon some future ex∣pectance of better fortunes; or indifferency of affection in respect of your Choyce: the issue can∣not possibly proue well, being built vpon such weake grounds. For, to insist cursorily vpon either of these two; Shall a deceiuing hope of preferre∣ment dispossesse him of your heart, whom personall deserts make worthy of your loue? Looke to it; Such fortunes cannot purchase you content, which are got with an aged husbands contempt. It shewes a seruile nature, to cashiere a faithfull Louer, because he is poorer; and to preferre another lesse desertfull, because hee is richer. This inconstancy cannot suc∣ceed well, because the foundation is grounded ill. Againe, are you indiffrent or Luke-warme in af∣fection; in respect of your choyce? for shames sake, what doe you make of loue? Doe you vse it like a toy or tyre to put off or on as you like? Must it re∣semble the fashion? This day in request, and next day out of date? This, indeed, is such a coole and easie-tempered Loue, as it will neuer mad you; yet, trust me, it may well delude you. Fancy will not so be playd with. You will obiect, I imagine, your sto∣macks are too queasie to digest Loue. Why then did you euer seeme so greedily to feed on that, which your stomackes now cannot well digest? Haue you surfetted on the substance? Lay that aside for a while, and bestow your eye on the Picture. Such impressi∣ons haue sharpened the dull affections of many Lo∣uers. Alexander being much in loue with Apelles, as
one highly rapt with the exquisitenesse of his art, proposed him that Modell for a taske, which hee of all others, affected most; commanding him on a time to paint Campaspe, a beautifull woman, naked; which Apelles hauing done, such impression wrought the Picture in his affection, as Apelles fell in loue with her, which Alexander perceiuing, gaue him her. It is incredible, what rare effects were sometimes drawne from a Morian-Picture, being onely hung vp in a Ladies Chamber. If such impressiue motiues of affection draw life from a Picture, what may bee conceiued by the Substance? Oris Apollo writeth, that the Egyptians, when they would describe the heart, & fit her with a proper Embleme, paint the bird Ibis: because they thinke that no Creature, for proportion of the body, hath so great an heart as the Ibis hath. It is the Bird of loue must be the Embleme of your heart. It is neither picture nor posture can content her. Much lesse these inferiour pictures, which we call mneyes: which are so farre from satisfying the affe∣ction, as they are onely for the Mold or Worldling: whose grosser thoughts neuer yet aspired to the knowledge of loues definition. As then, the precious stone Diacletes, though it haue many rare and excel∣lent soueraignties in it, yet it loseth them all, if it be put in a dead mans mouth: so Loue, though it bee a subiect so pure, as none of a more refined nature; so firm, as none of a more holding temper; so hot, as none of a more lasting feruour: yet becomes her splendour darkened, her vigor weakened, her feruor cooled, when she is in a cold brest entertained. Re∣semble, rather, the Iuniper-tree, whose coale is the hottest, and whose shadow is the coolest: be hot in your affection, but coole in your passion. If you finde any thing which cooleth loue in you, remoue it; if any thing which vrgeth passion, quench it: contra∣riwise,
feed in you loues heat; but represse in you all passionate hate. Take into your more serious thoghts, a view of his deserts whom you affect: increase the conceit of them by supposing more than hee expres∣seth. The imagination of Loue is strong, and works admirable effects in a willing subiect. Yet in all this, let not one straid thought wrong your Mayden-mo∣desty so much, as to suggest to you a straine of light∣nesse: Other Closet-treaties you may entertaine safely and freely, without touch of modesty. As to thinke of the honour of that State, to which you are approaching; the mutuall Comfort from that my∣sterious vnion arising; how griefes will be attempe∣red by one anothers suffering; how ioyes will bee augmented by one anothers sharing. These thoughts cannot but well become you; nor otherwise chuse than with a pure affection inflame you; nor receiue lesse than free acceptance from you. Thus may that Loue, which seem'd before to haue beene as chilled, by these modest motiues bee cheered. That day no blacke Cloud should by right sit on your faire brow; no cold dampe seaze on your heart. You haue got one whom a sacred gage hath made yours; with a cheerefull requitall render your selfe his. This cannot choose but highly please the pure eye of heauen, to see that Mysterie so sweetly solemniz'd, which was honoured by Christ, with his first Miracle on Earth. IN this last branch of our Obseruation,An attempe∣rament of both. wee are to propose an attemperament of both those indispo∣sed Fancies before mentioned, and deseruedly taxed. First, the wildenesse of the one; secondly, the coolenesse of the other: by seasoning them both with an indif∣ferent temper▪
In a Vine, wild and luxurious branches are to bee pruned, that such as are free and kindly may bee bet∣ter cherished. In the spirituall field of your heart, is neuer to be expected any fruitfull increase of vertues, till there be weeded out of it all the thornes of vices. The difference betwixt a Wise and wilde Loue, is this: the one euer deliberates before it loue; the other loues before it deliberate. The first question that she askes, who wisely loues: Is he, who is here recom∣mended to my choyce, of good repute? Is he rich in the endowments of his minde? Next question shee askes, are of a lower siege: May his perso∣nage giue content? Are his fortunes such, as may not beget in loue a contempt? Thus beginnes shee that loues wisely, with goods inward, and ends with outward; whereas, shee that loues wildly, beginnes with outward, and ends, or else neuer remembers the inward: Is hee, you tender to mee, of promising personage? Is hee neat in his cloathes? Complete in his dresse? Can he Court mee in good words? and perfume them with sweet protests? Can hee vsher me gracefully in the street? and in his very pace expresse a reserued state? Next question shee askes, must be neare the same verge: Is he rich in Manors? Hath not fortune made him a younger brother? Can he, to buy himselfe honour, pawne the Long-acre? May his swelling meanes furnish me of Coach, Caroach, and daily fit mee for some Exchange trifles? I haue a moneths mind to see the man! Hee cannot but deserue my loue. Wherein shee sayes well, for in very deed hee could deserue little else. Now as the former, seldome bestowes her selfe, but where shee findes content; so the latter, seldome or neuer, but either she with her Choyce, or her Choyce with her falls into contempt. The rea∣son is, this wilde Girle neuer cares for more than to
be married. If she may but see that day, it accompli∣sheth her content: though shee haue but one Comi∣call day all her life. Yea, it is as well as can be expe∣cted from her hands, if she attaine that style without some apparant soile. Such as these I could wish, to pre∣ent the worst, they were married betime, lest they marre themselues before time. Albeit, moderate re∣straint, seasonable aduice (presupposing some seeds of grace to worke on) haue wrought singular effects in many of these wilde-ones, who afterwards became graue and modest Matrons. To you then, kind-hearts, am I to recommend some necessary cautions, which carefully obserued, may make you wiser than you thought of; and cause you haue a tender care of that, which before you had ne∣uer mind of. Your brests are vnlock'd, your tongues vnty'd; you cannot loue, but you must shew it; nor conceiue a kinde thought, but you must tell it. The Index of your hearts you carry both in your tongues and eyes; for shame, learne silence in the one, and se∣crecy in the other. Will you giue power to an insul∣ting Louer, to triumph ouer your weakenesse; or which is worse, to worke on the opportunity of your Lightnesse? Doe not; rather ramme vp those portells which betray you to your enemy, and preuent his entry by your vigilancy. Keepe home and stray not, lest by gadding abroad, you incurre Dinahs fate. You haue Consorts of your owne sexe to passe time withall; their society wil teach you to forget, what is better forgot than kept. Let not a straid thought be∣tray your innocency. Checke your madding Fancy, and if it vse resistance, curbe it with restraint. It will doe excellently well, if you forbeare to resort to pla∣ces of publike meeting; till you haue drawne vp and seal'd a Coenant with your eyes, to see naught that they may not lawfully couet. These, when they wan∣der,
they breed in the heart, a dangerous distemper. Lastly, addresse your imployment euer to something that is good; so shall your fantacy finde nought to worke vpon that is ill. This shall afford you more li∣berty, than the whole worlds freedome can afford you. Now to you, Coy ones, whom either coldnesse of na∣ture hath benummed, or coynesse hath made subtill to dissemble it. You can looke and like, and turne ano∣ther, way, where you like most. No obiect of loue can take you, till it ouertake you. Be not wise too much. True affection cannot endure such dissimulati∣on. Diuide not him, whom you loue, into such ex∣tremes: you may be modest, and spare a great deale of this Coynesse; It is the rule of Charity to doe as you would be done to. Now, would it content you to be entertained with disdaine, where your deserts merit acceptance? Rectifie this then on your selues, which you would not haue done by another to your selues. It is an ill requitall, to recompence fancy with contempt, or constant loue with disdaine. This were to incurre ingratitude, a vice so odious, as no age could finde euer ought more vnciuilly impious. I do not moue you to be too open-hearted, or if so, not too liberally to expresse it; this were no discouery of fancy, but folly. So conceale your loue, as your louer may not despaire of all hope to obtaine your loue. In∣different Curtsies you may shew without lightnesse, and receiue them too in lieu of thankfulnesse. I leaue it to your discretion to distinguish times and places; for these may either improue or impaire the oppor∣tunity of such like Curtsies. Doe not immure your beauties, as if a iealousie of your owne weaknesse had necessitated this restraint. There can be no Conquest, where there is no Contest, Conuerse with loue; conceit with your selues whom
you could like. This your cooler temper may admit, and stl retaine that liberty which is fit. alconers vse many meanes to make their Hawks sharpe; they begin with short flights, till weathring bring them to endure longer. Pigmalions image recei∣ued no life in all parts at once; first, it took warmth, after that, vitall motion. Is loue coole in you? let a kindly warmth heat that coldnesse. Is Loue dull in you? let a liuely agility quicken that dulnesse. Is loue coy in you? Let a louely affability supple that coy∣nesse: So, in short time, you may haue a full rellish of loues sweetnesse. Now wee come to the attemperament of these; wherein we are to extract out of grosser mettals some pure Oare, which wee must refine, before it can giue any true beauty to this specious palace of loue. Draw neare then, and attend to what of necessity you must obserue; if euer you meane to deserue HER loue, whom you are in Ciuility bound to serue. In Sicilia there is a fountaine called Fons Solis,Pop. Mela. out of which at Mid-day, when the Sun is nearest, flow∣eth cold water; at Midnight, when the Sunne is far∣thest off, sloweth hot water. This should be the liue∣ly Embleme of your state (Gentlewomen:) who, now after those cooler vapours of your frozen affection dispersed, those lumpish and indisposed humors di∣spelled, and those queasie risings of your seeming coy∣nesse, dispossessed; haue felt that chaste amorous fire burne in you, which will make you of shamefaste Maids, modest Matrons. When the heat of passion is at Mid-day, I meane his full height, with those, to whom faith hath engag'd you, and loue, before the hostage of that faith, confirm'd you; then are you to resemble the quality of that fountaine, by flowing with col water of discretion and sweet temper,An Explana∣tion of the Embleme. to allay that heat; lest it weaken those you loue, by gi∣uing
way to passion, which patience cannot chuse but loath. Againe, when heat is farthest off, and proui∣dence begins to labour of a lethargy; when seruants remit their care, neglect their charge, and the whole family grow out of order, through the coldnesse of a remisse Master; resemble then that fountaine, by flowing with hot water; win and weane these whom loue and loyalty haue made yours, with warme con∣iugall teares, to compassionate their neglected estate, and by timely preuention to auert the fate of impro∣uident husbands. Or thus,Another pro∣per applicati∣on of this Embleme. if you please, may you make your selues gracious Emblemes of that fountaine: Doth the Sun shine at Mid-day, and in his fullest height on you? Do the beams of prosperity reflect brightly on you? Flow with cold water; allay this your heat and height of prosperity, with some cooling thoughts of aduersi∣ty, lest prosperity make you forget both the Author of it, and in the end how to bestow it. Againe, doth the Sunne shine farthest off you? Doth not one small beameling of prosperous successe cheere you? Flow with hot water; vanquish aduersity with resolution of temper. Desist not from labour, because fortune seconds not your endeuour. To conclude, as your wild fancy (if you were euer surpriz'd of any) is now re∣ctifi'd; your coolenesse heatned; your coynesse bani∣shed; so conforme your selues to them, whom one heart hath made one with you, as no Clowd of aduer∣sity may looke so blacke, no beame of prosperity shine so cleare, wherein you may not with an e∣quall embrace of both estates, beare your share.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Gentility is deriued from our Ancestors to vs, but soone blanched, if not reuiued by v; Vertue the best Coat; A shamefasteed, the best colour to deblazon that Coat; Gentility is not knowne by what we weare, but what we are; There are natiue seeds of goodnesse sowne in gene∣rous bloods by lineall succession; How these may be ripe∣ned by instruction. GENTILITY.Gentility. GENTILITY consists not so much in a lineall deblazon of Armes,Obseruat. 7. as personall expression of vertues.Gentility is driued from our Ancestors to vs, but soone blan∣ched, if not reuiued by vs. Yea, there is no Orna∣ment-like vertue, to giue true beauty to descent. What is it to be descended great? to retaine the priuilege of our blood? to be ranked highest in an
Heralds booke? when our liues cannot adde one line to the memorable records of our Ancestors? There should be no day without a line, if we desire to pre∣serue in vs the honour of our Line. Those Odours then deserue highest honours, that beautifie vs liuing, and preserue our memory dying. Should we call to mind all those our Ancestors, who for so many preceding ages haue gone before vs; and whose memory now sleeps in the dust; we should, perchance, finde in e∣uery one of them some eminent quality or other, if a true suruey of their deseruing actions could bee made knowne vnto vs: yea, we should vnderstand, that many of them held it their highest grace, to i∣mitate their Predecessors in some excellent vertue; the practice whereof they esteemed more prayse∣worthy, than the bare title of Gentility. Now, what iust reproofe might we deserue, if neither those pat∣ternes, which our Ancestors had, nor the vertuous ex∣amples of our Ancestors themselues, can perswade vs to be their followers? Their blood streames through our veynes; why should not their vertues shine in our liues? Their mortality we carry about with vs; but that which made them immortally happy, wee retaine not in vs. Their Gentility wee clayme; the priuileges they had by it, we retaine. Meane time, where is that in vs, that may truly Gentilize vs, and designe vs theirs? What a poore thing is it to boast of, that our blood is nobler, our descent higher? Tell me, can any one prescribe before Adam? And what shall he finde in that first Ancestor of his, but red clay? The matter whereof he was made, it was no better; nor can we suppose our morter to bee pu∣rer. Hee most emphatically described our Genealo∣gy, who cryed, Earth, Earth, Earth▪ Earth by Crea∣tion, Condition, Dissolution. No lesse fully vnder∣stood he the quality of his Composition, with the
root from whence he tooke his beginning, who cal∣led Earth his Mother; Wormes his Brethren and Si∣sters. His Kinsfolkes hee could not much boast of, they were such inferiour Creatures; no strutters in the street, but despicable Creepers. Let me now reflect vpon you, Gentlewomen, whose generous birth should bee adorned with vrtuous worth, and so make you mouing Obiects of imita∣tion, both in life and death. Are you nobly descended? Ennoble that descent with true desert. Doe not thinke that the priuilege of greatnesse, can bee any subterfuge to guiltinesse. Your more ascending honour requires more than a Common lustre. In places of publike resort you chal∣lenge precedency, and it is granted you. Shall the highest place haue the least inward grace? No; let not a word fall from you, that may vnbeseeme you. Others are silent when you discourse; let it be worth their attention; lest a presumption of your owne worth draw you into some friuolous excursion. There is not an accent which you vtter, a sentence you deliuer, any motion in your carriage or gesture, which others eye not, and eying assume not. Your Retinue is great; your family gracious; your acti∣ons should be the life of the one, and line of directi∣on to the other. To see a light Lady descending from a noble Family, is a Spectacle of more spreading in∣famy, than any subiect of inferiour quality. I cannot approue of this Apish kinde of formality, which many of our better sort vse; it detracts from their descent, to make affectation their Tutresse. They were free-borne; nothing then that is seruile can become them. It is nothing to retaine the fauour or feature of your Ancestors, and to estrange you from that which truly dignifi'd your Ancestors. Vertues haue more liuing Colours, and are secon∣ded
with more lasting honours than any outward beauties. You deceiue your selues, if you thinke that honour receiued her first life from descent; no, It was demerit that made descent capable of honour. A Pedigree argues your Gentility: but had not some de∣seruing action beene, you had neuer attained to any noble Pedigree. For Gentility is not to be measured by antiquity of time, but precedency in worth. If brackish or troubled water seldome come from a pure Spring; wild and vnsauory fruit from a good tree; whence is it, that noble Predecessors, whose pure blood was neuer corrupted with any odious staine, should bring forth such degenerating scienes? Sure∣ly, this generally proceeds from the too much liber∣ty that is granted to our youth; whose inclinations, though otherwise good and equally disposed, are v∣sually by Custome, which becomes a Second nature, miserably depraued. Society they affect, and this in∣fects them; repaire to publike places they admit, and this corrupts them. Those eminent examples which their Noble Progenitors left them, become buried with them. They comply with the time; Vertue (they say) can hardly subsist, where Vice is in highest request. What though Plato aduise them to make choyce of the best way of liuing, which may be easily effected by assiduate vse and daily custome: they haue learned to inuert his rule, by affecting that custome most, which tends to the practice of vertue least. Besides, there is another reason which may be probably alleaged, why generous descents become so much corrupted; and vertuous Parents by vitious Children so frequently seconded. Our Nobler wo∣men, though in other respects truly imitable, and for their vertuous Conuersation admirable; come short in one peculiar duty, which euen Nature exacts of them, and which being duely perform'd, would,
doubtlesly, no lesse enable and ennoble them who are descended from them, than any particular, were it neuer so powerfull, that could informe them. These which are mothers by generation, are seldome their Nurcing-mothers by education. No maruell then, if they degenerate, when they partake of the natures of other women. Though their owne mothers blood streame through their veines, a strangers milke must feed them, which makes them participate of their nature, as they are fed with their substance. Where∣soeuer the Nurses milke is receiued, the Nurses man∣ners are likewise retained. Whence it was, that Chrysippus expresly commanded that the very best and wisest Nurses should be made choice of; that what good blood had infused, might not by ill milke be infe∣cted. It was the ioynt aduice both of Plutarch and Phaorine, that a mother should bee her childrens Nurse: because, commonly, with the milke of the Nurse, they sucke the quality or condition of her life. Yea, according to ancient Decree, women were bound to nurse their owne children, and not to hae any other women (vnlesse necessity enforc'd them) to nurse them. Let this then bee rectifi'd; yee, whose Noble de∣scents haue made you eminent in the eye of the world; and whom Gods blessing hath made fruitfull Mothers, to bring forth a faire and hopefull increase vnto the world: nurse them with your owne milke; this will expresse in you a motherly care to them; & beget in them a greater measure of child-like loue to you. Your care, the more it is parentall, will exact of them a loue more faithfull and filiall. Nurse them, I say, with the milke of your owne brests to feed them; with the milke of your owne liues to informe them. So shall their actions proue them to bee your Successours; when they shall not onely deriue their
blood from you, but on this Theatre of humane frail∣ty, shall publish themselues to be true representers of you. For in vaine is your blood to them deriued, if your memory by their vertues be not reuiued. Giue them then that which may make them yours. Good∣nesse may bee blamed, but her succeeding memory can neuer be blanchd. Thus shall you not onely shew your selues worthy of that house, from whence you came, but after your period on earth, bee receiu'd into a more glorious house in time to come. IT is not the Nobility of descent, but of vertues, that makes any one a gracefull and acceptable Seruitour in the Court of heauen. Houses are distinguished by Coats and Csts; but these are dignifi'd by something se. In Heraldry those are euer held to be the best Coats, that are deblazon with least charge.Vertue the best Coat. Consequent∣ly, then must vertue needs be the best Coat. Shee re∣quires the least charge, in her attire, shee is not sumptuous; in her fare, delicious; nor in her re∣tinue (the more is the pitty) numerous. She confines her desires vpon earth within a strait Circumfe∣rence; a very small portion of that mettall will con∣tent her. She sees none so great in the Court, as may deserue her enuy; none so rich in the City, as may beget in her an earthly desire; none so repos'd in the Countrey, as to induce her to change her state. Shee is infinitely happy, in that shee aymes at no o∣ther happinesse, than where it is to bee found. Am∣bition may display her Pie-colour'd flagge; but shee will neuer get vertue to be her follower: Her desires are pitcht vpon a farre more transcendent honour, than these State-corriuals on earth can ere afford her;
or by their competition take from her. Pleasure may cast out her Lure, but vertue is so high a flyer, as shee scornes to stoupe to ought vnworthy of her: it plea∣seth her to contemplate that on earth, which she is to enioy in heauen. Profit may seeke to vndermine her; but all her pollicie cannot worke on vertues con∣stancy. Content is her Crowne; Contempt of the world, her care; what worldlings seeke, she shuns; whence it is, that her beauty, in the darkest Night of aduersity, shines. In a word, shee is an absolute Commandresse of her selfe; and easie is it to haue that Command, where no turbulent passions labour to contend. Farre otherwise is it with those, who be they ne∣uer so generously descended, popularly graced, nor powerfully guarded, yet being not adorned with this Crest, distinguished by this Coat, they can neither enioy freedome within, nor safey without. Lewis the eleuenth had a conceit, which, no doubt, proceeded from his mlancholicke and indisposed humour, that euery thing did stinke about him; all the odoriferous perfumes, or fragrant sauours they could get, would not ease him, but still he smelled a filthy stke. So fares it with them, whose corrupt hearts, like musty vessells, not throughly seasoned with vertue, fed forth no other smell than what is most distastefull to a pure and well-disposed minde. Now, there bee many, who make an outward sem∣blance of conscience; and promise to the world ap∣parant arguments of their vprightnesse; whose in∣ward Cells, like corrupt Charnell-houses, afford no∣thing but filthinesse. Ya, these, to make the world more confident of their snctity, will not sticke to condemne themselues, disvalue their owne worth, and rank them amongst the vnworthiest that breath on earth. Yet, though they disprayse themselues be∣fore
others, they cannot endure to bee dispraysed by others. Whereof we read one excellent example to this purpose: There was a certaine woman, who had taken her selfe to a Cloyster-life, and seemed ve∣ry deuout; so as shee vsually said to her Confessor, who came often vnto her, to heare her Confession, and partake of her Deuotion: Good father, pray vnto the Lord for mee; for I am a woman so euill, yea, euen so vtterly nought, as I much feare left the Lord punish others for my sinnes. Vpon this, the Priest out of a discreet zeale, desired to try whether there were in her the foundation of true humility or no. Next time therefore, that shee vttered the like words vnto him, saying; That shee was the very worst of all women; the Priest forthwith answered: I haue of∣ten times at many hands beard thus much of thee before this. Whereat she being presently incensed, replyed: You lye in your throat: And whosoeuer hath told you, or reporteth such things of mee, are all lyers. To attemper which immoderate passion, the Priest humbly re∣turned her this answer: Now I perceiue thy pride and hypocrisie; for as much as thou speakest that of thy selfe, which thou disdainest any other should speake of thee. And this is no signe of true humility, but of inward pride and grosse hypocrisie. These dissembled, be they neuer so assiduate, sem∣blances, are no colours for Vertues crest. They must be dyed in graine, or they will not hold. These, who xpresse modesty in their outward carriage, are good examples to those that consort with them; yet if their priuate Parler be a witnesse of their dishonor, they deface the figure of goodnesse in themselues. Vertue consists note in seeming, nor piety in appearing but practising. What is it to bee outwardly retyred from the world, and inwardly affianced to the world? How are those women in Turkie affected, that most
part of the yeare come not abroad? Those Italian and Spanish Dames, that are mewed vp like Hawks, and lockt vp by their iealous husbands? This is such an enforced restraint, as it many times begets loose de∣sires in the restrained. It is the preuention of occasi∣on that crownes vs. More prayse-worthy were those women of Sio, could they confine their actions with∣in the bounds of modesty, than these restrained Li∣bertines. For those Iland Women, as they are the beautifull'st Dames of all the Greekes, so haue they more liberty granted by their auaricious husbands, than all the Dames in Greece. For their wiues pro∣stitution is their promotion. So as, when they see any stranger or promising factor arriue, they will presently demand if he would haue a Mistris: which, for want of better supply, they mercenarily ten∣der him in the person of their owne wiues: so wil∣ling are they to weare the lasting Badge of infamy, for base lucre or commodity. It is not then an enforced moderation of our affecti∣ons, that deserues the stile of goodnesse. Wee are to enioy freedome in our desires, and ouer those a noble Conquest, if we merit the name of rtuous. Come then, Gentlewomen, you see what Coat will honour your House most. Other Coats may be blan∣ched by corruption of blood; or blemished by some other occurrent: but this is so pure as it will admit of no staine. Fantasticall & false prophecies may be omi∣nously aduanced, published, & dispersed, vpon Arms, Fields, Beasts, or Badges, against which our Lawes haue ordained necessary prouisiōs. But no Augur, Seer, or Soothsayer can by any such groundles Diuinatiō, de∣tract from the cōstant beauty or splendor of his Coat. Soueraignizing Saladine, after he had made him∣selfe a terrour to many potent Princes, by making them his Subiects, who neuer till then knew what
subiection meant; after he had atchieued so many prosperous victories, taken in so many flourishing Prouinces, and attained the highest degree of an im∣periall greatnesse; being surprized by so mortall and fatall a malady, as he despaired of recouery: called his Chiefetaine or Generall before him, and bad him haste away to the great City Damascus, and there in the midst of that populous City, to fixe his shroud∣ing-sheete vpon a Spheare, and display it like a ban∣ner, with these words; This is all that Souldan Sala∣dine hath left of all his Ensignes. How happy had that Emperour beene, if after so many memorable ex∣ploits done by him liuing, so many imperiall tro∣phies of his dispersed victories erected by him brea∣thing, he had reserued this Coat to haue memoriz'd him dying? Dorcas Coats were brought forth and shown, after she departed. So liue, that your best Coats, which are your vertues, may giue testimony of you, when Earth shall receiue you. Let not your Gentility become blasted with infamy; nor your Noble families la∣bour of that scarcity, as not to giue vertue all hos∣pitality, Diuinely sung our Moderne Poet: To be of gen'rous blood and Parents borne, And haue no gen'rous vertues, is a scorne. Let it be your highest scorne, to stoupe to any base thought. It is not priority nor precedency of place, but propriety and proficiency in grace that makes an honourable Soule. That Cloath is of most worth that weares best; and that fashion of most esteeme that hlds longest in request. Vertue is right Sempi∣ternum for weare; and of that complete fashion, as with Christian women it growes neuer out of date. Make choice of this stuffe then to suite you, of this Coat to gentilize you. All others are but counterfeits
in comparison of her; whose property it is to ho∣nour those that serue her; harbour those that flye for refuge to her; and to reward those who constantly stand in defence of her honour. There is nothing can wound you, being thus armed; nothing ill-beseeme you, being thus adorned; nothing disparage you, be∣ing thus honoured. Heraldry findes a Coat for your house, but Vertue findes honour to grace your person. Retaine those diuine impressions of goodnesse in you, that may truly ennoble you: display your gentility by such a Coat, as may best distinguish your family; so shall you liue and dye with honour, and suruiue their fame, whose onely glory it was to enioy for∣tunes fauour. PAinters are curious in the choice of their colors, lest their Art become blemished, through those decaied colours, wherewith their Pictures are por∣trayed. Some are of opinion, that the receit of Pain∣ting or Colouring the substance of glasse through, is vtterly lost; neither that these late succeeding times can regaine, as yet, that mysterious perfection. Farre more is it to be doubted, lest vertue, which we haue proued by infallible arguments to be the best Coat, want her true colour, and consequently become de∣priued of her chiefe lustre. Some Pictures, I know, will doe well in white; yet it is colour that giues them life, Beauty neuer darts more loue to the eye, nor with quicker conuoy directs it to the heart, then when it displayes her guiltlesse shame in a crimson blush. There is one flower to be loued of women, which is the chiefest flower in all their garden;Nazian. and this is a good red, which is shamefastnesse.A shamefaste¦red the best Colour to de∣blazon ver∣tues Coat. These standing colours are slow wooers to discreet Louers. Vertues Coat then is best deblazoned when a shamefast¦red breathes vpon it.
Protogenes tables, wherein Bacchus was painted, and all his furious Bacchanals to life displayed, mo∣ued King Demetrius to such admiration, during his siege of the City Rhodes, that where hee might haue consumed the City with fire, and buried the glory thereof in ashes, would not for the preciousnesse of that table: so as, protracting time by staying to bide them battell, wonne not the City at all. If a liuelesse Picture could enforce such affection in a knowing Commander, what effects may we thinke will a li∣uing substance produce? Truth is, there is such sweet and amiable correspondence betwixt vertuous beau∣ty, and shamefaste modesty, as the one cannot subsist without the others society. Not a light passage can want the attendance of a blush, whilest modesty is in presence. Yea, though shee be not conscious of any conceit, that might beget in her face a shamefaste blush; out of a modest Compassion shee will not sticke to blush, when she obserues ought in another, deseruing blame. Her eares glow at any light re∣port; which, lest they should grow too credulous, shee fortifies with reason, to oppose the too easie en∣trance of suspition. Shee partakes of no resemblance lesse than that of the Chameleon, whose naturall pro∣perty it is to represent all Colours saue white. She is a milde and moderate interpretor of others actions; but a serious Censor of her owne. Light discourses, which tend rather to the deprauing of the hearer, than ministring any vsefull subiect to an attentiue Obseruer, she excludes; vnciuill Complement shee abhorres; what onely is modest she approues; and seconds her approuement with a gracefull smile. She holds an infected minde to be more dangerous than an infected house: such Company shee shunnes, on whom the rayes of vertue seldome or neuer shine. There is not that Condition, bee it neuer so meane,
which shee cannot with cheerefulnesse entertaine: so as, shee holds outward pouerty the best enricher of an inward family. Her desires are so equally poy∣zed, as shee neither seekes more than shee enioyes, nor wants freedome to dispose of what she enioyes. Honour shee affects, yet with no such eagernesse, as to hazzard the losse of a dearer honour, for so vncer∣taine a purchase. Friends and fauourites she admits, and with that constancy, as it neither repents her of accepting, nor them of tendring such vertuous fruits of amity. Here you haue her, Gentlewomen, who will tell you, and in her selfe exemplifie what shee tells you; that modesty is the choycest ornament that can adorne you. Now if you purpose to trace her path, or conforme your selues to her line; you must worke on your affections, to embrace what shee loues, and reiect whatsoeuer she loathes. Are you conuersant at any time with such protesting seruants, as make deepe Oaths meere Complements; and whose tongues are witty Orators in running descant on a wanton Tale? These are such Consorts as Modesty would be loath to conuerse with. She can neuer endure any of these discourses without an angry blush. Should you de∣light in these, you should quickly heare her out of a vertuous passion, cry out with the Poet: O Age! most of our women know not now, What 'ti to blush, till painting tell them how. Againe, should you entertaine in your naked bo∣somes, what some wantons haue too much affected, light amorous Poems; perusing them with no lesse Content, than if they had beene purposely penned to worke on your Conceit; this cannot stand with your modesty; These may corrupt you, but neuer rectifie what is wandring in you. Suffer not a wan∣ton passage to play on your fantasie. Sinne would
neuer enter in vpon you, if she found but a prepara∣tion of resistance in you. Tell me, what a sweet grace conferres it on you, to mixe your salutes with mo∣dest blushes, and entertaine your Suitors with a shamefaste bashfulnesse! Sure I am, where loue is discreetly grounded, this cannot chuse but be an espe∣ciall motiue to affection. There may bee, I grant, such wilde louers, who preferre the loose loue of an inconstant Phaedra, before the chaste embraces of a continent Antiope: but their indiscreet choyce is e∣uer seconded with a fearefull cloze. Those, who e∣steeme more of a painted cheeke, than a natiue blush, shall finde all their imaginary happinesse resolued to a painted blisse. It is Modesty and not Beauty which makes the husband happy. Would you then deserue the title of Chaste Virgins, constant Wiues, modest Matrons? While you are ranked amongst the first, conuerse not priuately with a wanton thought; send not forth a wandring eye to fetch in a Sweet-heart. Dis-value not your owne worth so much, as to wooe others to become your Suitors. This would bee a meanes rather to depresse loue, than increase it; im∣payre loue, than improue it. If you be worthy win∣ning, you cannot chuse but be worthy wooing. Meane time, let not a straid looke betray your too forward loue; nor a light conceit tax you of deserued reproofe. Dye your cheeks with a Rosie blush, when you heare ought that may detract from the modesty of your Sexe. Be as silent as the night; your best Rhetoricke consists in maiden blushes, and bashfull smiles; which will worke more powerfully on a Louers heart, than a Rhetoricall tongue, bee it neuer so curiously tipt with Art. For the second ranke; you know how strict a duty is imposed on you; now are you not to conuerse with strange loue: or suffer any other person haue the
least share in your affection. To Court loue, or vse any Complement, purposely to winne a priuate fa∣uourite, would detract as much from your honour, as for a Souldier to flye from his Captaine, and ad∣here to a stranger. He hath inuested you in himselfe, and ingaged himselfe yours by a sacred vow, which death onely may reuerse: the dispersed loues which you entertained before, must now be reduc'd to one, and that but one, by whose mutuall choyce two are indiuidually made one. A heart diuided cannot liue; no more can the heat of diuided loue. You are now so farre from entertaining any stranger; as you haue vow'd with your heart, not to enter so much as any treaty with an vniust intruder. It is dangerous to conuerse with a profest foe, whose drift it is to vn∣dermine you; and such an one is euery loose louer, who labours with the licentious art of adulterous Oratory, to depriue you of that inestimable gemme, which of all others, most adornes you. For you that are Matrons; ripenesse of yeares hath enioyned you to bid a lasting adew to the vani∣ties of youth. Now are you set as examples of gra∣uity, for others to imitate. It were dotage in you now to begin to loue, when your decay in Nature tels you, it is not long you are to liue. You haue hitherto performed your parts with a generous approuement of your actions, faile not in the conclusion. This small remainder of your declining pilgrimage, should be wholly dedi∣cated to the practice of goodnesse; that your pious end may second your vertuous beginning. The Sunne shines euer brighter at his setting than rising; so should your life appeare better at your departing than entring. It were incomparably beneficiall for you, now in this your Exit, to haue your affections seated in hea∣uen,
before you depart from earth: leauing some me∣morable examples of your wel-spent life, which may eternize you after this lie. This will make your names flourish; and cause o∣thers in a vertuous emulation of your actions, to re∣taine your memory in thier liues. To bee briefe, be you of what Condition soeuer, either in respect of your age or state; there is nothing can better become you than a modest shamefastnesse: which consists either in uerting your eare from your owne prayse; or with-drawing your presence from dishonest or vnciuill discourse; or reiecting an importunate Sui∣tor, whose too inconsiderate entertainment might question your honour. I haue noted in some women a kind of zealous and deuout passion, when they chanc'd but to heare any light or wanton communi∣cation; they could not hold but reproue them for their impudence, and amidst their reproofe, to adorn the Rosie Circlets of their cheekes with a blushing shamefastnesse. Surely, this expressed a singular mo∣desty in them; which I would haue you (Gentlewomen) in a serious imitation of them, to represent in your selues. It will happen, many times, that you cannot chuse but encounter with some frontlesse Buffoun, whose highest straine of obscene wit, is to iustifie some fabulous story, or repeat an vnciuill Tale; which you are to entertaine with such disgust, as these odi∣ous relaters may gather by your Countenance, how much you distaste such vnciuill discourse. For it is a sweet kinde of euincing sinne, to discountenance it with a modest shame. Thus shall you make your very frowne an ingenu∣ous Index of your vncorrupt heart: and to adde one line more vnto your Honour, display the Character of your guiltlesse shame in a Mayden blush, a Virgin-colour.
SEuerus the Emperour would haue maiesty pre∣serued by a vertuous disposing of the desire, not by a crious ffminacy in attire.Gentility is not knowne by what wee were, but what we are. For, as we cannot ac∣count him for lesse then a foole, who prizeth his horse by the saddle, and trappings that hang about him, more then by the worth that is in him: so is he most foolish, who values the man by the worth of his Cloathes, rather then those inward parts that doe accomplish him. How many formall Gallants shall we obserue, whose onely value consists in putting on their cloathes neatly; with whom, if you should conuerse, you might easily finde Aesops painted souls, fairely promising,O age! no couer now fit for our mold, but Plush, ▪ Veluet, Tissue, Cloth of Gold. but weakly performing? The greatest Obliquity these can finde in our age, is the too care∣lesse obseruance of fashions; which our neate forma∣lists haue no great cause to taxe for an errour, seeing affectation in the choice of fashion is this ages hu∣mour. The golden apple was giuen to the fairest, not the finest; the golden Tripode, neither to the fairest nor finest, but wisest. For might the fairest haue ob∣tain'd it, Alcibiades, being the daintiest and best fa∣uoured Boy in all Athens, might by right haue chal∣leng'd it. Againe, might the finest haue enioy'd it, he Lydian Croesus, being richer in attire than any of his time, might haue pleaded for it. Of whom it is said, that Solon of Salamine came to visite him: not to admire him, as simple people did, whose iudge∣ments most commonly were plac'd in their eyes: but to reproue him for his vanity, an apt subiect for Philosophy; and weane him from that, which threat∣ned ruine to his State. This delicate Prince had that learned Sage no sounder found decked and adorned with the choisest Ornaments, and seated on an high Throne, than he encountred that graue Philosopher with this vaine question: demanding of him, Whe∣ther
he had euer seene a more glorious sight? To whom Solon right grauely answered; Yes, quoth he, I haue seene House-cocks, Phesants, and Peacocks: And these were graced with a naturall beauty; whereas yours is but a borrowed glory, which must vaile to time, and shake hands ere it be long, with mortality. Truth is, should we iudge of mens worths by their outward weare, or distinguish Gentility by a fashio∣nable attire, we should erre more in iudgement, then a blinde man in his first discouery of colours. What eminent Ladies are recorded in the continuate histo∣ris of fame; whose esteeme tooke first breath, not from what they wore, but what they were? It was not their ayme to strike a stupid Beholder into admirati∣on with a phantasticke habit, nor allure an humorous Louer with a conceited complement. Our simple Elders knew not what it was, To set their face, or court a Looking-glasse. It was their highest taske to correct those errours that were in them: by which meanes they became so inwardly louely, as none truely knew them, that could doe lesse than entirely loue them. Surely, there is no state that suites so fity with Gentility, as the low, but loyall attendance of humility. This is shee, who (as she is rightly defined) is the Princesse of ver∣tues, the conqueresse of vices, the mirror of virginity, the choisest harbour or repose for the blessed trinity.Aug. She considers, how he, by whom our corrupt blood was restored, our vnualuable losses repaired, and our primitiue nakednesse compassionately couered, was not with a Diadem crowned, nor in a stately bed couched; yea, scarcely rather with one poore coat couered: which he wore not as an ornament to his body, to bestow on it trimnesse, but for necessity to couer his nakednesse. What a pouerty is it then for you, whose ancient descent promiseth something ex∣traordinary
in you, to haue nothing to boast of, saue onely a gilded outside? It was Necessity that in∣uented Cloathes for you; now were it fit to pride you in that, which depriu'd you of your prime beau∣ty? You shall obserue in many of our graue Matrons, with what indifferency they attire themselues. Their inward ornaments are their chiefest care; their re∣newing and repairing of them, their highest cure. They haue found such choice flowers, as they afford more spirituall delight to the soule, than any visible flowers or odours doe to the smell. And what are these, but diuine and morall precepts, soueraigne in∣structions; which haue taught them how to con∣temne earth, conquer death, and aspire vnto eterni∣ty? These by a continued custome or frequent con∣uerse with heauenly things, cannot now conceiue any obiect to be worthy their beholding on earth. Fashions may be worne about them, but little obser∣ued by them. The WEDDING GARMENT is their desired raiment. This they make ready for the Nuptiall day; the meditation whereof so trans∣ports them, as nothing below heauen can possesse them. It is not beauty which they prize; for they daily and duely consider the Prophets words,Ioel. 2. All fa∣ces shall gather blacknesse. Againe, they remember the threats which God denounceth vpon beautifull, but sinfull Niniueh, I will discouer thy skirts vpon thy face.Nahum. 3. This makes them seriously to consider the dange∣rous quality of sinne, and to apply Niniuehs salue to their soare: that wine of Angels, the teares of repen∣tance. Which, howsoeuer it is, as one wittily ob∣serues, Euery mans medicine; an vniuersall Anti∣dote, that makes many a Mithridates venture on poi∣son: yet works it not this banefull effect with these; for their affections are so sweetly tempered, their hearts so truly tendred, as they make not Repentance
security to delinquents: They well remember that Aphorisme of spirituall Physicke: As he that sinnes in hope of remission, feeds distemperature to seeke a Physician; so hee that repents with a purpose of sinning, shall finde an eternall place to repent in. Thse, who thus beull themselues in the downe∣beds of security, labour of an irreparable Lethargy. They make bold to sinne, as if they were sure to re∣pent. But the medicine was made for the wound, not the wound for the medicine. We must not suffer our selues voluntarily to be wounded, in hope wee haue to be cured: but preuent the meanes, that wee may attaine a more glorious end. Preuent the meanes or occasion of sinne; which if at any time we commit, to infuse the balme of re∣pentance into it; which seasonably applyed, may mi∣nister a soueraigne salue to our soare, so wee intend our care to so consequent a cure. Come then, Gentlewomen, beginne now at last to reflect on your owne worth. Vnderstand, that Gen∣tility is not knowne by what you weare, but what you are. Consider, in what member soeuer your Cre∣ator is most offended, in that shall euery sinner bee most tormented.Bern. Remember, how the time shall come (and then shall your time be no time) when the Math shall be your vnderlining, and the Worme your couering. Trimme your selues then with an in∣ward beauty; that a glorious Bridegroome may re∣ceiue you. Fashion your selues to his image, whom you represent. That Fashion onely, will extend the of time, and crowne you with immortality . These, who haue their iudgements in their eyes, may admire you for your Cloaths; but those, who haue their eyes in their heads, will onely prize you by your inward worth. Were it not a poore Ensigne of Gentility, to hang vp a phantasticke
fashion to memorize your vanity after death? So liue, that you may euer liue in the memory of the good. It will not redound much to your honour, to haue obserued the fashions of the time, but to haue re∣deemed your time; to haue dedicated your selues to the practice of vertue all your time; to haue beene Mirrors of modesty to your succeeding sexe; to haue dis-valued the fruitlesse flourish of fading vanity, for the promising hopes of a blessed eternity. Supply then that in you, which bleered iudgements expect without you. You challenge precedency in place, ex∣presse your selues worthy of that place. Vertue will make you farre more honoured, than any garish ha∣bit can make you admired. The one is a Spectacle of derision, the other of true and generous approbation. This you shall doe, if you season your desires with discretion; if you temper your excursiue thoughts, and bring them home with a serious meditation of your approaching dissolution. It is said of the Palme tree, that when it growes dry and fruitlesse, they vse to apply ashes to the root of it, and it forthwith re∣couers: that the peacefull Palmes of your vertuous mindes may flourish euer; that their branches may euer blossome and neuer wither: apply vnto their roots the ashes of mortification; renue them with some sweet and soueraigne meditation. That when you shall returne to your mother Earth, those that succeed you may collect how you liued while you were on Earth: by making these liuing actions of your Gentility, happy Precursors to your state of glory. FOuntaines are best distinguished by their waters,There are na∣iue seeds of goodnesse sowne in ge∣nerous bloods by lineall suc∣cesson Trees by their fruits, and Generous bloods by their actions. There are inbred seeds of goodnesse (saith
the Philosopher) in euery good man: and these will finde time to expresse themselues. It was Dauids testimony of himselfe: From my youth vp haue I loued thy Law. An excellent preroga∣tiue giuen him, and with no lesse diligence improued by him. Now these Natiue seeds, as they are diffe∣rent, so are the fruits which come of them, vari∣ously disposed. Some haue a rellish of true and gene∣rous bounty; wherein they shew that noble freedome to their owne, in their liberality towards others: as their very actions declare vnto the world, their com∣mand and soueraignty ouer the things of this world. Others discouer their noble disposition, by their no∣table pilty and compassion; These will estrange them∣selues from no mans misery. If they cannot succour him, they will suffer with him. Their bosomes are euer open with pittifull Zenocrates, to receiue a di∣stressed one. Ouer a vanquish'd foe they scorne to insult; or vpon a deiected one to triumph. They haue teares to partake with the afflicted; and reall expressions of ioy to share with the relieued. Others shew apparant arguments of their singular modera∣tion; abstemious are these in their dishes; temperate in their Companies; moderate in their desires. These wonder at the rioters of this time; how they con∣sume their daies in sensuality and vncleannesse. Their account is farre more straight; their expence more strait; but their liberty of mind of an higher straine. Cloathes they weare, but with that decency, as cu∣riosity cannot taxe them; meats they partake, but with that temperance, as delicacy cannot tempt them. Others from their Cradle, become braue sparkes of valour; their very Childhood promiseth vndoubted tokens of succeeding honour. These can∣not endure braues nor affronts. Generous resolution hath stampt such deepe impressions in their heroicke
mindes, as fame is their ayme; which they hunt af∣ter, with such constancy of spirit, as danger can nei∣ther amate them, nor difficulty auert them from their resolues. Others are endued with a natural preg∣nancy of wit; to whom no occasion is sooner offe∣red, than some dainty expression must second it. O∣thers with more solidity of iudgement, though of lesse present conceit. And these are such, as generally im∣ploy themselues in State-affaires; wherein Experi∣ence, purchased by an vsefull expence of time, doth so ripen them, as the Publike State takes notice of them, and recompenceth their care with honours conferred on them. These and many other excellent endowments shall we obserue to bee lineally deriued from Ancestors to their successors; which, as they retaine a neare re∣semblance of their persons, so they represent their Actions: so powerfull is nature in bestowing her di∣stinct Offices on euery creature, wherein they gene∣rally partake of their disposition as wel as outward fea∣ture: whence the Poet, Stout men and good are sprung from stout and good, Horses and steeres retaine their parents blood. Yet see the iniquity of time! It fareth oft-times with those who are endowed with these vertues, to be most traduced, where their more noble and emi∣nent parts are to be highliest honoured. Which, as it was a maine error in former ages, so descends it to these present times. When Rome was in her glory, this eclipsed her light, by detracting from their de∣merits most, whose free-bred vertues deserued of their Countrey best. Sundry Families shee had, fa∣mous for their vertues, which by a depraued and mis-interpreting Censure, became branded with vn∣deserued aspersious. If the Piso's were frugall, they
were held parcimonious; if the Metelli deuout, they were superstitious; if the Appij strict, they were ri∣gorous; if the Manj affable, they were ambitious; the Laelij, if wise, they were dangerous; the Publico∣lae popular, by being courteous. But with good and and well-disposed persos, vertue is neuer out of fa∣uour, though it bee neuer so much impeached by a traduing censure. Thus you haue heard, Gentlewomen, what vertes haue linealy and by blood descended from Parents to their Children; what especiall inward graces vsual∣ly attend some especiall families, which no lesse me∣morize them, than those natiue honours which are conferred on them. Now, to select such as sort best with your sexe and condition; in my opinion there is none that ennobles you higher, or makes you more gracious in the eye of the beholder than Mo∣desty, which was the greatest aduancer of many Ro∣man families. This is that vertue, which expresseth you to be women; this is that, which makes you ho∣noured amongst women. Chaines and Carkents, Iewels and Habiliments may bee valued; but this Ornament is of that high estimate, as it is not to be prized. Now, there is nothing that will cause this to appeare more pretious vnto you, next to the te∣stimony of a good Conscience within you, with an ardent desire of promoting his glory who made you, than a reflexion to your Family which bred you; whose honour to preserue, as it is your especiall du∣ty, so no obiect of profit or pleasure, no attractiue Lure of deceiung honour should remoue this opini∣on from you: To bee high borne and basely min∣ded, is to ingraffe bastard slippes in a noble stocke. High and heroicke vertues become great house▪ for, as they were first made great by being good, so should they by rceasing from being good, lose their
title of being great. If by abusing the liberty of time, you detract from your Ancestors fame, you lye a blemish on his shrine; which, though it touch not him, yet it taints you who represent him. This, no doubt, was that Noble Lady right mind∣full of, when on a time being sollicited by a power∣full Suitor, who wooed her first in person, and after in a wanton Rhetoricall Letter, she, as one tender of her honour, and perceiuing that the scope of his suit tended to her dishonour, answered his fruitlesse sol∣licitancy in this sort, with great modesty: Should I condescend to your Suit, I should not only dero∣gate from the honour of my present state, dis-value that which I hold most deare, make my selfe a sub∣iect of contempt to euery eare, but asperse that in∣famy on my family, which would beare record of my inconstancy. O what would the next age re∣port of me, that I should so farre degenerate from those that bred me? No; pouerty may enter in at my gate, but dishonour shall neuer lodge in mine heart. Reserue these promises of honour for such, as prize them aboue their nour: That generous blood which distreames through my veynes, shall sooner be dried, than it shall be for any hope of ad∣uancement ingloriously stained. Such singular resolues many of our Albion Ladies, questionlesse, euen at this day retaine; who, rather than they would incurre the least dishonour, or oc∣casion suspition by their too free entertaine of light Suitors, would confine themselues to their Cham∣bers▪ and debarre themselues of publike recourse. Seeing then, that there are natiue Seeds of goodnesse sonne in generous bloods by lineall succession; which euen in their first infancy giue faire promises of their in∣ward beauty: expresse your selues Daughters wor∣thy such vertuous Mothers. Emulation of goodnesse
in great persons is honourable. Their Pictures you hang vp, that their memories may liue with you. Enioy their vertues too, and their memories shall liue fresher in you. All memorials, being materials, be they neuer so durable, are subiect to frailty; only these precious monuments of your vertues suruiue time, and breath eternity. You spring from a noble Seminary; let those seeds of goodnesse which are sowne in your youth, come to that ripenesse in your age, that as in piety you imitated others, so you may become Presidents vnto others; as you were here seasoned with grace, a good report may follow you to your graue. All which by instruction onely may be effected, as in our next branch shall be more preg∣nantly proued. HE cannot chuse but liue well, who conformes himselfe to that hee heares.How these na∣tiue seeds of goodnesse may be ripened by instruction. Good instructors are such faithfull Monitors, as they will aduise what is most fitting, not what is best pleasing. And these are to be entertained with such endeered respect, as their speeches, bee they neuer so tart, should not in∣cense vs, nor their reproofes, be they neuer so free, distaste vs. Though Clitus open rebukes cost him his life, his free and friendly reproofe exprest his loue; so as A∣lexander could neuer sufficiently bemone his losse. Those Natiue seeds of goodnesse, whereof wee for∣merly treated, be they in our infancy neuer so plen∣tifully diffused, yet in time they would grow ranke and wilde, vnlesse they were by seasonable instructi∣on ripened. Now, Gentlewomen, there be no Tutresses fitter to perfect this excellent worke in you, than those who were the secondary instruments of being vnto you; Neither can those, who are deriued from
you, become better instructed than by you. Your loue, I confesse, will be more indulgent, yet your care so much the more incessant. Their dispositions are best knowne vnto you; if motherly affection then will giue way to discretion, who more fit to mold them than you? Preceding times may afford you variety of examples in this kinde. Cornelia instructed hers in all piety; Portia hers in exemplary grounds of chastity; Sulpitia hers in pre∣cepts of coniugall vnity; Edesia hers in learning and morality; Paulina hers in memorials of shamefaste modesty. These, though Heathens, were excellent informers of youth; so as, their Children were more bound to them for their breeding than bearing, nurturing than nursing. Besides, there is an inbred fi∣liall feare in Children to their Parents, which will beget in them more attention in hearing, and reten∣tion in holding what they heare. Now, there is no instruction more mouing,Greg. in 38. Euang. than the example of your liuing. By that Line of yours, are they to conforme their owne. Take heed then, lest by the dampe of your life, you darken both their glory and your owne. I might propose vnto you bookes of instructi∣on, which might minister arguments plenteously in this kinde: but so short is the memory in retaining what it reads, yea so distracted is the minde in ob∣seruing what it reads, that, as it fares with our natu∣rall face in a glasse, from which the glasse is no soo∣ner remoued, than the resemblance of it is abolished; euen so, the booke is no sooner left out of the hand, than the Contents are leapt out of the heart. Yet, to the end you may not be vnprouided of such Tracts as may enable you for instruction; and prepare you to encounter with tentation; I will recount such vnto you, as may best accommodate you for the one, and fortifie you against the other.
Learned Viues in his instruction of a Christian woman, recommends vnto them these glorious Lights of the Church,A briefe enu∣meration, se∣rious dicussi∣on, and iudi∣cious electi∣on of sundry ancient fa∣thers, with o∣ther morall Auhors. S. Hierom, Cyprian, Augustine, Ambrose, Hi∣lary, Gregory; annexing vnto them those morall Philosophers: Plato, Cicero, Seneca, &c. Of which, seuerally to deliuer my opinion, it is this: Than S▪ Hierom none more grauely copious, as may appeare by those pithy and effectuall Epistles of his, directed to those Noble Ladies, Marcella, Deme∣tria, Laeta, Furia, &c. wherein he vseth singular ex∣hortations, inuincible arguments, perswasiue rea∣sons, sweet similitudes, and forciue examples. Mo∣desty is the subiect hee commends vnto them; de∣cency in apparell he approues in them; to a mode∣rate restraint of liberty he enioynes them; to an ex∣emplary holinesse hee exhorts them; and with sweet and comfortable promises of an incorruptible reward he leaues them. Than S. Cyprian, none more deuoutly feruerous; in his reproofes he shewes mildnesse; in his treaties a passionate sweetnesse; he winnes the sinner by in∣ducing reasons; hee strengthens the soule mightily against temptations; he proposeth an excellent way of moderating the affections; he applyes soueraigne receits to soueraignizing passions: and concludes with that sober and discreet temper, as with a Di∣uine insinuation he wooes, winnes, and weanes the sinner, and in a spirituall tye vnites him to his Re∣deemer. Than S. Augustine, none more profoundly iudici∣ous, more indiciously zealous; pithy are his directi∣ons, powerfull his instructions; in his Meditations he is mouing; in his Soliloquies inwardly piercing; in his Manuall comfortably clozing. Amongst all those Conflicts in our Christian wafare, hee holds none sharper than our Combat with Chastity. Hee
applies meanes how wee may resist, resisting van∣quish; and by our Christian victory, receiue Crownes of eternall glory. That Conquest he holds, deserues small honour, which is atchieu'd without Encounter. In a Diuine rapsodie drawne, as it were, from himselfe, hee shewes what should be done by vs. Earth is no obiect fit to entertaine our eye; nor her deluding melody our eare: He exhorts vs there∣fore to leaue Earth now while wee liue, that lea∣uing Earth for altogether, wee may enioy our best Loue. Than S. Ambrose, none more Diuinely plenteous; sweetly serious are his instructions; enforcing are his reasons; he speakes home to the sinner: whom he no sooner findes wounded for sinne, than hee ap∣plies a Spirituall Salue to cure his sinne. Many graue sentences are in his Offices methodically couched; singular directions to guide euery Christian in his Spirituall Path-way, are there deliuered. Like an ex∣pert Physician, he first gathers the nature or quality of your distemper, and then ministers soule-saluing receipts to restore you to your right temper. Hee shewes you how in your very motion, gesture, and pace you are to obserue modesty: concluding that nothing can afford true comfort to a soiorning soule, but practise of piety. Than S. Hilary, none more fully sententious; hee discouers the occasion of our corruption familiarly; aduiseth vs with many passionate and teare-swollne lines to prouide for our inward family; he propo∣seth vs a reward, if we contemne Earth; he threa∣tens vs with the Law if wee contemne life. Sundry mouing and effectuall Lessons he recommends to the perusall of women of all rankes, ages, and conditi∣ons. Tenderly hee compassionates the case of a sin∣ner; passionately treats he of those torments which
shall last for euer: with prayers and teares hee solli∣cits them that haue gone astray, to returne; those that are already return'd, to goe no more astray. He con∣cludes with an vsefull Exhortation to sorrow for sinne, promising them, orth of that Store-house of Comforts, contained in the Gospell, for this their momentaine sorrow, an incessant ioy in Sion. Than S. Gregory, none more highly mysterious, nor contemplatiuely glorious; Diuinely morall are his Morals; full of heauenly comforts are his instru∣ctions; hee walkes in an higher way than others trace, yet with that humility, as there is not a cloze from him, but it discloseth in him a loue of meeke∣nesse, lowlinesse, and piety. With proper and ele∣gant similitudes are his works adorned; with choice sentences, as with so many select flowers, neatly gar∣nished; in a word, hee is sweetly substantiall, and substantially sweet. He reprehends the times graue∣ly; commends the practice the vertue gracefully. With an holy zeale he reproues the remisnesse of the Ministry. Directions he giues vnto women, to haue an especiall care of modesty: concluding, that the loue of this life should not so possesse vs, as to de∣priue vs of that inheritance which might eternally blesse vs. In good mindes he holds pouerty the por∣tresse of humility: accounting those Euils or Ad∣uersities, which doe here presse vs, to be the Cords which draw vs vnto God who made vs. Touching those three Philosophers, this is my conceit of them; wherein none can otherwise chuse than concurre with me, that shall seriously read, and sincerely scanne them: Than Plato, none more Di∣uinely Philosophicall; Than Cicero, more philoso∣phically Rhetoricall; Than Seneca, more Sagely Morall. But for as much as it is not giuen to most of you to
be Linguists, albeit many of their workes be transla∣ted in your mother-tongue, you may conuerse with sundry English Authors, whose excellent instructi∣ons will sufficiently store you in all points; and if vse∣fully applied, conferre no small benefit to your vn∣derstanding. I shall not need particularly to name them to you, because I doubt not, but you haue made choyce of such faithfull Retainers and vertuous Bo∣some-friends, constantly to accompany you. Neither, indeed, are bookes onely necessary; conference will singularly improue your knowledge; but that is not altogether so conuenient nor decent for your sexe in publike places. So as, I much condemne their opini∣on, who hold no meanes so fitting to bring their daughters to audacity, as a frequent consort with Company. This, in time, begets in them rather im∣pudence than boldnesse. It was held a touch to a Maid to bee seene talking with any one in a publike place. But in priuate Nur∣series, which may be properly termed your houshold Academies, it will suit well with your honors to treat and enter into Conference one with another; or in such places, where your owne sexe is onely conuersant. For such indiscreet Mothers, who vsually trim and deck their daughters, to send them forth to Showes, Meetings, or Enterludes, they annoynt bauin with oyle, that it may burne the better. But much more blame-worthy bee those, who take them along to Tauernes and gossippings; which Educaton a little time will bring into custome, and make modesty a stranger to her selfe. For aboue all things (saith the Philosopher) ought young Girles to be kept from E∣briety: which he confirmes with this reason: It is good, saith hee, for young men and maids to bee kept from wine, lest such become afterwards pro∣fest drunkards, profuse rioters, and prodigall expo∣sets
of their honour: the maine occasion whereof, are their parents,Arist. Poit. 7. by meanes of their ill instruction, and worse example. It is the very first instruction that takes the deepest im∣pression; how necessary then is it for you, Gentle wo∣men, whose sexe is the Embleme of weakenesse, and whose best resolues are oft-times weakned by youth∣full promises, to furnish your blooming youth with wholesome instructions: and so to improue them, that they may increase in vigour, as you doe in sta∣ture? This your sexe exacts of you; this your pre∣sent estate requires of you: and this shall easily be ef∣fected by you, if hauing (as is to be presupposed) dis∣creet and religious Mothers, you submit your selues in all humble obedience to their direction. For as it is very hard for any one to know how to command, vnlesse she know first how to obey; so will it be vn∣to you to performe the office of a Mother, if you ne∣uer knew the duty of a daughter. Strict and seuere may those Commands seeme to your youth, which riper age will easily digest. Againe, you that are Mothers, become patternes of modesty vnto your daughters. Your liuing actions are the lines of their direction. While they are vnder your com∣mand, the error is yours, not theirs, if they goe astray. Their honour should be one of the principall'st things you are to tender; neither can it be blemished, with∣out some touch to your Credit. I haue knowne some inconsiderate mothers, and those none of the lowest ranke or quality, who either out of a confidence they had of their daughters good carriage, or drawn with the hopes of some rich Suitors to aduance their mar∣riage, haue vsually giuen too free way to opportuni∣ty, which brought vpon their daughters names a spreading infamy. Your instructions will doe well with them, till so∣ciety
depraue them: diuert then the occasion, so shall your daughters, be they neuer so poore, haue good portions of reputation. Suffer not then those who partake of your image, to lose their best beauty. Sigh then if they bee soyled, for their shame must bee on you aspersed. Grace is a pure balme, and consequently requires a pure and sound vessell. In vaine is it infused, if the vessell be not whole and sound to preserue it. Looke then to your own actions; these must informe them; Looke to your owne examples, these must confirme them. Without you they cannot perish; with you they may. What will you doe with the rest that is left, when you see a part of your selfe lost? The Harpie hath the face of a man, but a Bird so cru∣ell by nature, as when she is an hungry, she wil assault any man and kill him. After which bloudy repast, she becomes thirsty, so as, going to the Riuer to quench it, she sees her owne face; and recalling▪ to mind how it resembles him whom she slew, she conceiues such griefe, as she dyes therewith. If your Education or instruction depraue those who deriue their beginning from you, the resemblance of this story may haue proper relation vnto you. But if your pious examples enable them, their proficiency in vertue shall enno∣ble you; your comforts shall be multiplyed in them; your hopes seconded by them; and to your euer-li∣uing fames, the memory of your vertues preserued by them. Let not that adage proue true, in respect of your Charge: The most precious things haue euer the most pernicious Keepers. Nothing more precious than a Virgins honour; it were shame for the mother to proue a Tarpeian or treacherous keeper. That Con∣ceit was elegantly expressed by the Emperour Charls the fifth, in his instructions to the King his sonne;
That Fortune had somewhat of the nature of a woman; that if she be too much woo'd, she is the farther off. But I hope I shall not finde that auersenesse in you. I haue wooed you in words; expresse your selues wonne by the testimony of your workes. I would not follow the indiscretion of Empericks, which minister same medicines to all Patients; I know well, that such Physicke as agrees with age, would not agree with the hot constitution of youth: To either sort there∣fore haue I applyed my seuerall receits: and to both, doe I addresse my conclusion. Let the whole progresse of your Conuersation be a continued Line of instruction; Let the mother discharge her office in commanding, and that with∣out too much rigour or indulgence; Let the daugh∣ter performe her duty in obeying, with all faithfull and filiall obseruance: So shall honour grace you here, and glory crowne you there with an heauenly inheritance.
THE ENGLISH Gentlevvoman. Argument. Honour is painted, when it is not with vertue pow∣dred; No cloath takes such deepe tincture, as the cloath of honour; Honourable personages should be presidents of goodnesse; Vertue or vice, whethersoeuer takes hold first, retaines a deeper impression in honour, than any lower sub∣iect; That, vertue may receiue the first impression by means of an in-bred noble disposition, seconded by helpes of Edu∣cation; Which reduc'd to habit, aspires to perfection. HONOVR.HONOVR. PRomotion discouers what men be, but true Honour shewes what they should be.Obseruat. 8. That is fed with a desire of being great; this is in∣flam'd with a noble emulation of being good. It is a miserable thing to obserue what braue and hero∣icke Spirits, whose resolutions neither danger
could amate, nor any disaster perplexe, haue beene madded with an ambitious quest after Honour; what difficulties they incountred; what oppositions they suffered; what intricate passages and prouinces they entertained! Corriuals they could not want in their rising; nor Enuyers of their greatnesse in their setling; nor Spectators to reioyce at their setting. Rough and menacing was the Sea, on which they sayled; dangerous and sheluy the wayes, by which they pas∣sed; yea, full of disquiets was the Port, at which they arriued. Nay, which is worse; in what sinister and indiscreet paths would they walke; vpon what strange plots and proiectments would they worke; how discontentedly and disconsolately, with Themi∣stocles, would they walke, till they attained their end: which, many times, brought them to an vntimely end? So quickly is poore man deluded with this shady picture of greatnesse, as hee will not sticke to engage for it his hopes of quietnesse. But these bee not those Eminent Personages,Honor is pain∣ted, when it is not wth ver∣tue pondred. of whom I am now to treat: for such mens honour is meerely painted, because it is not with vertue pondred. Morall Philosophy, much more our Christian theo∣ry, could neuer hold that for deseruing greatnesse, which had not neare relation to goodnesse. Those on∣ly they esteemed worthy honour, who did not seeke it, much lesse buy it, but were sought by it. Such as knew not what it was to admire the purple, nor fawne on a rising fauorite; but interueined their a∣ctions with the precious Oare of Diuinest vertues. Such as had attained to a singular Command or so∣ueraignty of their affections: so as, they had lear∣ned to say as Chilo answered his brother, We know how to suffer iniuries; so doe not these fiery and furious spirits. It is a poore expression of greatnesse, to exer∣cise it in reuenge; or in triumphing ouer inferiours;
or countenancing vniust actions. These detract from honour; neither can their memory liue long, who makes authority a Sanctuary to wrong. Know then, (noble Gentlewomen) that your Honour, be it neuer so eminent; your Descent, be it neuer so ancient; lose both their beauty and antiquity, if vertue haue not in you a peculiar soueraignty. Be your wanton fan∣cy painted and trimmed in neuer so demure or hypo∣criticall disguise; Be your ambition or Courtly aspi∣ring neuer so shrouded with gilded shadowes of hu∣mility; Be your vnbounded desire of reuenge neuer so smoothly coloured with the seeming remission of an impressiue iniury. In a word, should you neuer walke so couertly in a Clowd; nor neuer so cunning∣ly with a dainty kind of dissembling gull the world; all this will not auayle you. When your bodies shall come to be shrouded, then shall all your actions be vncased. Rumour then will take more liberty to dis∣couer vnto the world, what you did in it. Shew me that deepest dissembler, who retired himselfe most from the knowledge of man, and came not to disco∣uery, for all his secrecy, to the eyes of man. Many you haue knowne and heard of, that were great, but failing in being good, were their pretences neuer so specious, did not their memory rot? Iezabel was more eminent in titles than Aigall; but lesse glorious in her fame. Such a poore piece of painted stuffe is that adulterate honour, which from vertue re∣ceiues not her full lustre. When the subtill Spider shall weaue her curious web ouer your Monuments; when those beauteous structures of yours shall bee dissolued; when all your titular glory shall bee ob∣scured; when those fading honours, on which you re∣lyed, and with which you stood surprized; shall be estranged▪ and you from this goodly low Theatre of earth translated; it shall be then demanded of you,
not know how eminent you were in greatnesse, but how feruent in actions of goodnesse. While your skinnes then are with choycest Odours perfumed, let your soules be with purest vertues poudred. Now for vertue, would you know how to define her, that you may more eagerly desire to become her retainer? Or would you haue her described, that you may thence collect how well she deserues to be obserued? Heare the Poet; Vertue in greatest danger is most showne, And though opprest, is neuer ouerthrowne. Such a noble resolued temper euer accompanies vertue, as no prosperous successe can euer transport her, nor any aduerse occurrent deiect her. She feeds not on the ayrie breath of vulgar applause: her sole ambition is to aspire to an inward greatnesse; to be truly honourable in the title of goodnesse. Great atten∣dance, punctuall obseruance, stately retinues are not the obiects she eyes shee loues to be knowne what she is, by that constant testimony which is in her, rather than by any outward ornament, much lesse formall Complement, that may apishly suit her. Would you enter than (Gentlewomen) into a more serious suruey of your selues? Would you rightly vnderstand wherein your persons deserue honour, or how you may be eternally honoured by your Ma∣ker? Tender your seruice to vertue; auoyd what is hurtfull; admit what is helpfull. Sacrifice not a vaine houre to the Altar of vanity. Employ your time in exercises of piety. Dedicate your dayes to the ad∣acement of Gods glory. See not that poore soule in want, which your noble compassion will not re∣ue. Haue you frinds? hold them deare vnto you. If deare in the eye of vertue; otherwise, discard them, for you shal bee more stained by them, than
strengthened in them. Haue you foes? if vicious, they deserue euer to be held so; but if they affect goodnesse, prize them aboue the value of your highest fauning friends: who, as they are meere obseruers of the time, preferre your fortunes with which you are in∣riched, or honours to which you are aduanced, or some other by-respect secretly aymed, before those essentiall parts which are in you, and truly ennoble you. Are you of esteeme in the State? Become power∣full Petitioners for the poore mans sake. Preferre his suite, entertaine a compassionate respect of his wrongs. Labour his reliefe; and doe this, not for the eyes of men, but of God; who, as hee seeth secretly, will reward you openly. Againe; haue you such as maligne your honour? Their aspersions cannot touch you; Hee that made you, hath made you strong enough to despise them, and with a patient smile, or carelesse neglect to slight them. The sweet smell of your vertus hath already dispersed themselues; your memory is without the reach of infamy:  then secure, while your ver∣tues shine so pure. Retaine a true and unenforc'd in you; so shall honour appeare more gaeful∣ly in you. Imitate not those sudden-rising gourds of greatnesse, who haue no sooner attained the titls of Ladies, than this report makes them put on a new port; old acquaintance, must be forgot;  must sit on their browes; and a contemptuous disdaine on their lips. Though their mold be but the same, they would faine change themselues into another mold. These are such as deserue not your knowledge; though they be by their titles honoured, their titles by their ignoble actions become blemished. Let them therefore study making of a face; composing of their gate; preseruing of their vaine pompe; with
an vnbeseeming port: while your Contemplation shall fixe it selfe on no other obiect, than that true expressiue end of honour: which is, to retaine a Christian humility in your state; a noble Compassi∣on in your eye; an affable sweetnesse in your dis∣course; an exquisite practice of goodnesse in your whole life. To disesteeme vertue, and hugge that painted Idoll of titular honour; is to contemne the Instrument, and foolishly to prize the Case or Couer. Be ye neuer so eminent, ye are but painted Trunks, if vertue be not resident. Let her then not onely be re∣sident but president ouer all your actions; so shall you not onely liue but dye with honour; by leauing that succeeding memory of your vertues behind you, that time may here eternize you, when time to eternity shall change you▪ For as salt to euery subiect, whereto it is applied, giues a sauour; so giues vertue the swee∣test rellish vnto Honour. CLoath dyed in graine retaines euer the deepest colour;No cloath takes such deepe tin∣cture, as the Cloath of ho∣mour. but none of deeper dye than the Cloath of Honour, If it be but with the least blemish tinct, it can neuer wipe off that taint. Spots in white are soo∣nest discerned, & errors in great personages, whose a∣ctions should be whites for inferiours to shoot at, are quickliest discouered. True Corall needs no colour; no more needs true Honour any exterior lustre. When Parasius, that exquisite Painter was to take a Coun∣terfeit of Hellen, hee drew her with her head-attire loose; and being demanded the reason, answered, She was loose. Be your actions neuer so darkely shrouded, nor your amorous encounters cunningly carried; there will be euer some priute Pencill to portray them, some quicke-sighted eye to display them. Loues en∣teruiew
betwixt Cleopatra and Marks Anthony, pro∣mised to it selfe as much secure freedome as fading fancy could tender; yet the last Scene clozed all those Comicke passages with a Tragicke conclusion. No pleasure can bee constant, vnlesse it afford in∣ward content; nor can it minister content, vnlesse it be on vertue grounded. Honour then must chuse for her selfe such a Consort, as shee may not bee ashamed to haue chosen. A vigilant Circumspection should attend her; resembling in this particular, the watch∣full Crane, whose wary eye euer feares, and by a time∣ly feare preuents surprizall. Now, there is nothing that asperseth a deeper staine vpon the Cloath of Ho∣nour, than too much attention vnto Sycophants. These are they, which transport Honour aboue her selfe, by bringing her to a vaine and odious idolizing of her selfe. These will not suffer their Trencher-patronesse to reflect on her selfe, nor to enter into a priuate trea∣ty with mortality. Those bee too sowre and seuere Tractates for greatnesse. Death is to bee thought on with these, when nothing else is to bee thought on. O what pernicious Consorts be these for noble Per∣sonages? Antisthenes said truly of them; Praestat quàm  incidere: for Rauens feede onely on dead Carkasses, but flatterers vpon liuing men. O banish these your Portells! Their glozing will labour your Confusion. They will make you forget∣full of your being, and consequently depriue you of your well-being. Euery foole (saith Menander) will be taken with arrogance & applause; whereas the iu∣diciously wise account it their highest happinesse, to meditate of the meanes how to preuent their high∣est vnhappinesse. It is a miserable thing in a man, to make himselfe a beast, by forgetting himselfe to be a man. Which vsually comes to passe, when wee
propose before our bleered and deluded eyes the glo∣rious Spectacles of this Theatre of vanity, but neuer seriously meditate of our owne frailty, nor of the ex∣cellency of that Supreme beauty, which makes the enioyer absolutely happy. That Mot of the Athenians to Pompey the Great, Thou art so much a God, as thou acknowledgest thy selfe to be a man, was no ill saying: for at the least to be an ex∣cellent man, is to confesse himselfe to be a man. Vio∣lets, though they grow low and neare the earth, smel sweetest; and Honour appeares the fullest of beauty, when she is humblest. Alas! what are titles worth, when deserts are wanting? The best signall of de∣scent, is distinguished by desert. Antiochus was at one time saluted both  & , a glorious Prince, and a furious Tyrant. So flitting is the ap∣plause of the vulgar, as it neuer conferres on the sub∣iect it approues or applauds, any permanent honour. It is miserable (saith the Poet) to rely on anothers fame;Horace▪ but worse, to begge fame from them that are infamous. It is prayse-worthy to bee by some dis∣praysed; yea, vertuous actions, should they bee by vicious persons commended, would rather lose of their lustre, than become any way improued. To be cheerefull in aduersity, humble in prosperity, and in both to shew a temperate equality, is worthy praise, and deserues Honour for a prize. Yet, should these be but onely pretences to gull the world, or delude the simple admirer, they would in time vnmaske them∣selues, and display their counterfeit insides with shame to the world. False and adulterate colours will not hold, nor vertuous semblances long retaine the esteeme they haue. We haue euer held them for most ridiculous, who follow the fashion, and were neuer yet in fashion. And such are all those Counterfeit followers of vertue, who pretend fairely, but fall
off fowly. These may be properly, in my opinion, compared to our new counterfeit stuffes; which, as at first they are made best, so do they weare best at first. Your Cloath, Gentlewomen, must be of another nap: it must not be the best a farre off. Flowers, Edgings, Laces, and Borders doe beautifie the outward attire, but adde no grace to the inward man. Now, that Cloath is the best, which shrinks the least. Doe any extremities encounter you? Let the inno∣cency of your vntainted mindes cheere you? Doth disgrace or infamy presse you? You haue a Cloud of witnesses within you, that can beare testimony of you, and for you. That person needs not feare any foe, that hath within him such an incomparable friend. There was neuer any yet so happy, as to bee wholly freed from aduersity, and neuer feele any gusts of afflicti∣on. Trials of patience are sweet encounters; by a minde rightly-resolued, they are with more delight than distaste entertained. Which, as they come not vnexpected, so are they no lesse cheerefully receiued. It is the argument of a generous spirit, to expresse his highnesse most, when the world account of him least. Honour, if truly grounded, can looke in the face of terrour, and neuer be amated. Her deuice de∣seru'd approuement, who in the portrature she made for her selfe, directed her eye to the picture of ver∣tue, and pointing thereat with her finger, vsed this Imprezza: That picture is my posture. Truth is, shee that makes vertue her obiect, cannot but make euery earthly thing her subiect. Yea, there is nothing shee weares, which she makes not a morall vse of to bet∣ter her selfe. Her very attire puts her in minde of what she was before she needed it; and how breach of obedience necessitated her to weare it. Shee will not therefore pride her selfe in her shame, nor glori∣fie her selfe in the couer of sinne. Shee cannot eye
her selfe with any selfe-loue, seeing she lost her selfe by affecting that which she ought not to loue. Her head-tyre puts her in minde of the helmet of sluation; her stomacher, of the brest-plate of righteousnesse; her partlt, of the shield of faith; her very shooes, of the sandals of peace. In this Tabernacle of earth, shee is euery day nearer her port of rest; for her dis∣course is euer seasoned with discretion, winged with deuotion, and graced by her owne conuersation. She is none of these, who are Saints in their tongues, but Deuils in their liues: Shee propounds nought fit to be done, which shee confirmes not with her owne action. Againe, for her actions, shee is free from publike scandall, as her whole life is a golden rule of direction, a continued precept of instruction. In a word, she considers from whence she came, her descent was noble, and this she graceth with noble vertues. Her house must receiue no dishonor frō her, but an ample testimony of a deseruing successour. Let this Idaea, Gentlewomen, be your Patterne. Pure is the Cloath you weare; let no staine of yours ble∣mish it; no Moath of deserued detraction eat into it. Many of your Sexe, though highly borne, haue so blemished the honour of that house from whence they came, and corrupted that noble blood from which they sprung, as their memory rots, yet their infa∣my liues. Againe, others there haue beene, who though obscurely borne, yet by those eminent ver∣tues which did adorne them, those Diuine parts which did truly ennoble them, they became enlight∣ners of their obscurity, filling Annals with their glo∣rious memory. Imitate these; relinquish those. Ho∣nour is not worth receiuing, vnlesse it be entertained by one that is deseruing: yea, how many haue in∣curred disgrace by dis-esteeming vertue, when they were aduanced to highnesse of place? Nay, how
many while they liued obscure, liued secure, and preserued their good names, who afterwards, by becomming great, lost that priuate esteeme which before they possest? So hard it is to encounter with honour, and euery way returne a sauer. Seeing then no Cloath takes such deepe tincture as the Cloath of Honour; Let no vicious aspersion spot it, no corrupt affection staine it; lest, by being once blemished, it bring that honour into contempt, which before you retained. LAndmarkes are vsually erected for direction of the Mariner,Honourable Personages should be Pre∣sidents of goodnesse. Epictet. and Magistrates elected for instru∣ction of the inferiour. The keele of mans life, being euer more laden with vanity than verity; and more chilled with the bitter gusts of affliction, then chee∣red with the soule-solacing drops of true consolation, is euer tossed with contray windes: neither, with∣out the helpe of some expert Pilot, can poore delu∣ded man arriue safely at the Port where he would be▪ Pride transports him, auarice infects him, riot cor∣rupts him, sensuality secures him, anger distempers him, enuy consumes him, idlenesse duls him. Thus becomes he piece-meale diuided from himselfe, be∣cause he reflects not with a pure and impartiall eye vpon himselfe. What great need stands he in then of direction in this Maze of misery, vale of vanity? He portraid him well, who in the description of him, stil'd him a story of calamity, a statue of infelicity. He is fraile in resisting, prone to falling, slow in rising. Examples then were vsefull, to conduct him in his ournall. And who more fit to be these Presidents, than such whom an honourable descent hath enno∣bled, or Princes fauour aduanced? It is not for these to entertaine any seruile or degenerate affection, nor
to arbour one mutinous thought against the soue∣raignty of reason. To be a Lady of honour is more then titular. She is onely eminent, who makes eue∣ry action of her life a vertuous president. Goodnesse must be infused in her blood, that descent may partake of desert. Now, there be three especiall obiects, vpon which they are to reflect: Charity, Chastity, Humility. An honourable minde is best showne in her Liberall and compassionate exhibition to such, whose necessities require reliefe. Yea, she loues those best, to whom these arguments of bounty are in highest measure ex∣prest. She auerts not her eare from the needy beg∣gar, she will shew him all fauour for his image or feature. She holds it an vnbeseeming state, to enter∣taine a sowre looke, where noble pitty should beget in her a compassionate loue. She is so daily and duely inured to workes of mercy, as shee ioyes in no obiect more than occasion of bounty. Shee considers (and this she Diuinely applies vnto her selfe) how nought but vanity is to be attributed to them, retaine they neuer so much earthly glory on them, who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the Moath.Iob 4. 19. Silken vanity cannot delude her, nor any opinionate conceit of her owne estate transport her. Her minde is not subiect to wa∣uering, nor her walke to wandring. Be her life long; her goodnesse becomes improued: be it short; her desires are crowned. Neither reserues shee the glea∣nings for him, that is Master of the Haruest. Pouer∣ty, appeare it neuer so despicable to her eye, it con∣ueyes compassion to her heart. Shee giues Almes of the best, for his sake whom shee loues best. A mi∣serable minde she hates; for she conceiues how no∣thing can be better worth enioying, than a liberall desire of disposing: which she expresseth with that
cheerefull alacrity, as it inhanceth the value of her bounty. Thus shee liues in a free and absolute com∣mand of what she enioyes; with an hand no lesse o∣pen than her heart; that action might second her pi∣ous intention. Neither is the true Nobility of her minde lesse discerned by her loue to Chastity. Pure bee her thoughts, and vnstained. The Sanctuary of her heart is solely dedicated to her Maker; it can find no roome for an inordinate affection to lodge in. Shee knowes not how to throw out her loue-attracting Lures; nor to expose the glorious beauty of her soule to shame. A moments staine must not blemish her state. Shee will not therefore giue her eye leaue to wander, lest it should betray her honour to a treache∣rous intruder. How weak proue those assaults, which her home-bred enemies prepare against her? Her looke must bee set on a purer Obiect than vanity: Shee will not eye it, lest shee should be taken by it. Her Discourse must be of a better subiect than vani∣ty: She will not treat of it, lest she should be engaged to it. Her thoughts are not admitted to entertaine vanity: They must not conceit it, lest they should be deceiued by it. Occasions wisely shee foresees, timely preuents, and consequently enioyes true free∣dome of minde. You shall not see her consume the precious oyle of her Lampe, the light of her life, in vnseasonable reere-bankets; vnprofitable visits; or wanton treaties. Those will shee not admit of for companions, who are prodigall of their honour. These she reproues with a mild spirit, labouring to reclaime them with an ingenuous tender of her vertuous compassion towards them. None shee more distasts than these Brokers or Breakers of licentious bar∣gaines: Shee excludes them the List of all ciill so∣ciety. How cauteious shee is, lest suspition should
tax her? Outwardly, therefore, shee expresseth, what she inwardly professeth. That honourable bloud which she from her Predecessors receiued, till death surprize her, will shee leaue vntainted. Neither is there ought shee hates more than pride, nor scornes more than disdaine. Shee rightly considers how her daies are mensurable, being but a span long, which im∣plies her breuity; and miserable, being altogether va∣nity Shee disclaymes that state which consists in scornefull lookes; A sweet and affable Countenance shee euer beares: The honour she enioyes makes her humbler; and the prayses which are giuen her, work in her thoughts no distemper. So farre is shee from affecting the pompe of this world, as it growes con∣temptible to her higher-mounting thoughts. A faire and well-seeming retinue shee euer keepes a∣bout her: but none of these must be Sycophants, with their oylie tongues to delude her; neither must any, who cloaths his Countenance with scorne, attend her. Shee obserues on what steepe and dangerous grounds ambition walketh. Her sleepes are sweeter; her content higher; her thoughts heauenlier. It is one of her greatest wonders, that any one should be so rest of vnderstanding, as to forget what infirme ground he stands on. The purest Creature, be she ne∣uer so absolute in her feature, is of no richer temper than Earth, our Common-mother. She is wiser than to preferre a poore handfull of red Earth before her choycest treasure. Though her deserts merit honour, shee dis-esteemes her owne deseruings; being high∣ly valued by all but her selfe. Thus shee prepares her selfe daily for what shee must goe to. Her last day is her euery dayes memoriall. Lower may her body be, when interred; but lower cānot her mind be, than at this instant. So well hath shee attained the Know∣ledge of her selfe, as she acknowledgeth all to be fraile, but none frailer than her selfe.
Here, Gentlewomen, haue yee heard in what espe∣ciall Obiects you are to be Honourable Presidents. You shine brighter in your Orbe than lesser Starres. The beames of your reflecting vertues must admit of no Eclipse. A thousand eyes will gaze on you, should they obserue this in you. Choyce and select are the societies you frequent, where you see variety of fa∣shions: imitate not the newest, but neatest. Let not an action proceed from you, which is not exemplary good. These that are followers of your persons, will be followers likewise of your liues. You may weane them from vice, winne them to vertue, and make them your constant followers in the seri∣ous practise of piety. Let your vertues cloath them within, as their veiles doe without. They deserue not their wage, who desist from imitating you in a∣ctions of worth. Your priuate family is a familiar Nursery; Plants of all sorts are there bestowed. Cheere and cherish those that be tender; but curbe and correct those that be of wilder temper. Free and fruitfull Siens cannot be improued, till the luxurious branches be pruned. But aboue all things; take espe∣ciall care that those vices spread not in you, which are censured by you. You are Soueraignesses in your families; neither extend your hand too much to ri∣gour; neither contract it by shewing too much re∣misnesse or fauour. Let neither vertue passe vnrewar∣ded, nor vice, if it grow domineering, passe vnre∣proued. Foule enormities must admit of no Priui∣leges. No; should you, by a due examination of your selues, finde any bosome-sinne secretly lurking, any subtill familiar priuately incroaching, any distem∣pred affection dangerously mutining: Be your owne Censors. Be not too indulgent in the fauouring of your selues. Proficients you cannot be in the Schoole of vertue, vnlesse you timely preuent the ouer-sprea∣ding
growth of vice. Let not your Sunne, the light of your soule be darkned, Let not your Spring, the fount of your vertues be troubled; Let not your Fame, the perfume of your Honour be impaired. As you are ge∣nerous by descent, be gracious by desert. Presidents are more powerfull than Precepts. Be examples of good∣nesse, that you may be heires of happinesse. The style you enioy, the state you retaine, the statues which af∣ter you may remaine, are but glorious trophies of fa∣ding frailty. Vertues are more permanent Monu∣ments than all these; these are those sweet flowers that shall adorne you liuing, impall you dying, and Crowne you with comfort at your departing. Lastly, as you were honourable Personages on Earth, where you were Presidents of goodnesse, so shall you be glo∣rious Citizens in heauen, where you are to be Parti∣cipants of all happinesse. WHere Vertue is sowne in a noble Seed-plot,Vertue or vice whethersoe∣uer takes hold first, re∣taines a dee∣per impressi∣on in honour, than any low∣er subiect. manured and fructified by good discipline, strengthened by Example, and adorned with those more gracefull parts, which accomplish the subiect wherein vertue is seated: what bickrings of fortune will it sustaine? What Conflicts in the necessities of nature will it cheerefully encounter? Her spirit is raised aboue any inferiour pitch. Yea, the habit of goodnesse hath wrought such diuine impressions in her soule who is thus disposed; as society may improue her, but cannot corrupt her, because a zealous affecti∣on to vertue doth possesse her. You shall euer obserue these, whom Nobility of blood hath aduanced, to retaine some seeds or sem∣blances of their progenitors, which are so impres∣siue in them, as no occurrent, be it neuer so violent, can estrange these from them. Here you shall see a
natiue affability, or singular art of winning affection, to one naturally deriued. There in another such a rough and vnseasonable austerity, as her very count'∣nance is the resemblance of a Maleola. Some from their infancy haue retained such a sweet and pleasing Candor, as they could couer anger with a cheerefull smile, and attemper passion with a gracefull blush. Besides, they had the gift to expostulate with their discontents, and by applying seasonable receits to their wounds, free themselues from falling into any desperate extreames. Others would rather dye, then suffer the expressions of their Passions to dye. For af∣fronts, as their spirits could not beare them, so did their actions discouer them, and make them obiects of derision to such as obseru'd them. And whence proceeds all this? Surely, from the very first relish of our humours;Arist. 3. de ani∣ma. when that vnwrought Table of youth, becomes furnished with choice characters; and the Subiect begins to affect what is engrauen in them; by continuance of time they become so habituate, as no art can make them adulterate. Semprnia was too light in her youth, to be staid in her age. Fuluia gaue too much way to her passion in her youth to at∣temper it in her age. Zantippe was too shrewd a maid, to become a quiet wife. What Nature hath not effe∣cted in vs, may by industry be facilitated in vs, so we begin to worke, while the waxe is soft. O Gentle∣women, how many, whose excellent endowments de∣serue admiration, either by selfe-opinion haue be∣come transported, or by giuing loose reines to passi∣on, haue miserably wandred, or by inueying against others more deseruing parts, haue wittingly trans∣gressed? By which meanes, they become spectacles of contempt, who otherwise by their conceiuing dis∣course might haue giuen occasion of content. It is too true, that the liberty of greatnesse is such, as it is
more apt to finde fewell to feede the humour of vice, then to minister any vsefull ingredience for the re∣couery of vertue. Great mindes are many times sicke of great maladies, which by soothing parasites be∣come insensible, and consequently incurable. Vice in a poore habit neuer retaines that maiesty, which it displayes in a richer robe. Is it so? Reflect then vp∣on your selues; if vice seeme so specious, what will vertue do. (Though all your vertues be but indeed spe∣cious vices.) Beleeue it, if you cherish vertue in your minority, she will performe the office of a faithfull guardian. The widdowes teares shall be very few, for she will finde iustice to redresse her: the Orphans cryes shall not be so loud, she will finde compassion to cheere her. The State shall not exclaime of sur∣feits, for temperance shall shield her: nor the Church of coldnesse, for zeale shall inflame her: What a sweet consort is an vnison of vertues to the eare of a di∣uine soule? All other Musicke is disrellishing, be∣cause it workes not on the affection. Now would you know whence it comes, that ver∣tue or vice, whethersoeuer takes hold first, retaines a deeper impression in Honour, than in any lower subiect? The reason is euident: As in their state or condition they are more eminent, so is their representatiue ex∣ample in others more inherent. Doe these honourable personages then loue vertue? they are vertuous molds vnto their followers: they shall finde in their sha∣dowes what they expresse in themselues. Iulia could not be loose, when Lucrecia was so chaste: she saw that in her Mistresse, which deseru'd loue, and to that shee conform'd the line of her life. To consort at vnseasonable houres with loose louers, or to entertaine light discourse to beguile time, was no authenticke doctrine in her Mistresse family: no day was without her taske, no night without her pecu∣liar
employment. There is no question, but the prime yeeres of this noble Lady were seasoned with such exquisite instructions, as what her youth had recei∣ued; were not in her riper yeares to bee abolished. First motions haue deepe impressions: especially, when they become seconded by examples of authority, whose very persons impose on their Pupils a resist∣lesse necessity. The estimate of Honour, with those who are truly honourable, is at too high a rate to in∣gage it selfe to the hazard of disgrace, for any tempo∣rary profit or delight. Their onely profit is to become proficients in the practice of Vertue; Their highest delight, to subdue their delights to the obedience of reason, for the loue of vertue. Such as these, are to be accounted onely Noble; for their desires are so, which they euer ennoble with deseruing actions For tell me, can any one whole iudgement is not blinded, or inward light not wholly blemished, esteeme that Person for honourable, whose Outside onely magni∣fies it selfe in a poakt head, a poland sleeue, and a rotean body? No; these are but outward badges of their inward vanity. These haue too much coare at their heart, to be of sound health. If they haue no other expressions to deblaze their honour, they are ra∣ther obiects of Contempt than State, be they neuer so glorious to the eye of our vulgar. It hath beene (and I could wish it were not to this day continued) an vsuall forme of breeding, with some more eminent Persons, to haue their Children practise a kinde of state from their infancy; which, indeed, being truly defined, was a phantasticke su∣percilious garbe, which discouered more pride than deserued prayse. Neither could these so easily relin∣quish in their age, what was commended to them in their youth. or such as commonly attended their persons, extolled whatsoeuer they saw by them,
or  them expressed, such is the misery of greatnesse, that if it be not an exact Censor and reprouer of her owne vanity; They shall finde approuers of it by those odious professors of lycophancy, whose glozing condtion hath beene the ruine of many a noble fa∣mily. For what may bee the vsuall dialect of these Tam Beasts to their bounteous Benefactors, those prodigall disbursers of their fathers prouidence, but this parasitcall parley? It would well become you, to be rarely seene, reseruedly affable; to retaine state in your peace, awe in your face, scorne in your eye, a storme in your brow, with a gracefull con∣tempt in all your carriage. An excellent direction to purchase hate. These followers are not for your ho∣nour. The way to diuert their straine, is to affect what they distaste. You cannot want vitious Liber∣tines to second you in a sensuall course, if your owne disposition stand so affected. Calphurnia could not be good, when Messalina was so nought. Your liues, as they are liues to your selues, so should they be light vnto others. Are you modest? it will beget a loue of modesty through all your family. Not one who owes their obseruance to you, but will admire this vertue in you, and practie it in themselues, because they see it so highly valued by you. Againe; Light∣nesse or any irregularity in you whatsoeuer, will not redound onely to your owne, but your whole fami∣lies dishonour. Which opinion once possest, your Honour receiues such a mortall wound, as no con∣tinuation of time (so lasting is the record of infamy) may perfectly cure it: which seemes confirmed by our moderne Poet: Search all thy bookes, and thou shalt find therein, That Honour is more hard to hold than win. How cautelous then ought you to bee of that,
which preserues your well being? Many nobly de∣scended, are sufficiently instructed, how to retaine their state, what place to take, by remembring whence they came; meane time, they forget whence they came first. O consider how this Speciosior pluis, this more specious or seemingly precious dust of yours is but dust. Vice will but varnish it; it is vertue that will richly enammell it. Your birth rather restraines than improues your liberty; your sexe should detract from it selfe, were it estrang'd from modesty; your beauty, ho∣nour, and all, are seruants to time, or worse, if bestow'd on vanity. Let vertue retaine such deepe impression in you, as no vicious affection may seize on you. Occasions are dangerous perswasions: pre∣uent therefore the meane, that you may attaine a more glorious end. That onely deserues your loue▪ which shall make you for euer liue. Vertue, if you loue her and liue with her, by becomming your suruiuor, will crowne your happy memory with succeeding honour. IT is vsually obseru'd, that Hawkes of one Ayrie,That vertue may receiue the first im∣pression by meanes of an in-bred noble sposition, secoded by helps of Edu∣cation. are not of one nature; Some are more mettall'd, others more lazy. As in Birds, so in all other Crea∣tures. Liuia and Iulia, Augustus his daughters, were sisters, but of different natures. Some there are, who euen from their infancy haue such excel∣lent seeds of natiue goodnesse sowne in them, as their dispositions cannot rellish ought that is irregu∣lar. In arguments of discourse, they are moderate; in Company temperate; in their resolues constant; in their desires continent; in their whole course or carriage absolute. Others naturally so peruerse, that
like ourThese are described to life in the person of an huorous fantarticke in this pleasant Epigam. humorous Laies, they can affect ought that others loue, nor rellish ought that others like. The byas of their fancy runnes still on the fashion; their tongue a voluble Engine of feminine passion; their resolues full of vncertainty and alteration. The whole Enterlude of their life a continued Act of fe∣mall-follies. It were hard to winne these to the loue of vertue, or those to delight in vice. This might ea∣ly be illustrated by diuers memorable instances,Sic  must eat her break fastis her bed, And is til noon in trimming of her head, and ss at ta∣ble like a mai∣den-Bride, And takes all day of nothing but of pride, God may dae mu in mer∣cy to saue her, But what a cse is he in tha shall haue her? personated in such; who from their very Cradle, be∣came seriously deuoted to a religious priuacy, sup∣plying their want of bookes, wherein they were meerely ignorant, with a deuout and constant medi∣tation of Gods works, wherein they employed their whole study. Industrious were their hands in labouring, and bounteous were they in bestowing. A natiue com∣passion lodged in their hearts, which they expressed in their charitable workes. Hospitality to the stran∣ger and needy beggar, was their highest honour. Suf∣fer they would the height of all extremes, ere they would suffer the desolae to want reliefe. So strongly were their affections fortifi'd against the assaults of an imperious Louer; as death was to them a cheere∣ull obiect to preserue their high-priz'd honour. Such singular effects as these, haue beene vsually produced by an innate noble Disposition; so as, some of these whom wee haue here cursorily shadowed, were en∣dowed with such virile spirits, as they stickt not to spit in the face of tyranny; others were not abash'd toThis was formenly in∣stanced in that memora∣ble example of Sputnia, pay. 104. disfigure their own beauty, lest it should be∣come an adulterers booty. In these had vertue taken such deepe impression, as nothing could deepely touch them, but what trenched on their reputation. Though by nature they were timorous, and inconstant, reso∣lution had so prepar'd them, as they became discreet∣ly
valiant; looking death in the face without feare, and embracing her stroake as a fauour. Doe you ad∣mire this in them? Imitate them, and you shall be no lesse by succeeding times honoured, than these in ours admired. Conceiue your life to be an intricate Labyrinth of affliction; the very anuill, whereon the heauy hammer of misery incessantly beateth. Reflect on your birth; and you shall perceiue how you giue the world a good morrow with griefe; Looke at your death; how you bid the world good night with a groane. Ioy then cannot be long lasting, when you are daily taking leaue of the place where you liue; which now, though liuing, you are leauing. Besides, no continued hope of comfort can bee expected, where feare presents her selfe an inseparable atten∣dant. Feare has command o're subiect and o're King, Feare has no Phere, feare's an imperious thing. To allay which feare, addresse your selues to that most, which may giue you occasion of fearing least. And what may that receipt be? A minde purely re∣fin'd from the corruption of this infectious time. Meditate therefore of that neuer fading beauty that is within you. Labour to preserue it from the iniury of all incroaching Assailants. If you fls with any painted flourish of light Rhetoricke wooe her, time∣ly preuent her before shee winne her. If the world with her Lure of honour, command, or the like, seeke to draw her; reclaime her, lest vanity surprize her. If her profest Enemy labour to vndermine her, make knowne his long-profest enmity vnto her, that a vigilant circumspection may arme her. Admit, your dispositions become sometimes auerse from the pra∣ctice of that which you should most affect; diuert the Current of them. You loue liberty; confine it to moderate restraint. You affect honour, curbe it
with a serious meditation of your owne frailty. You desire to gather; sowe your bread vpon the water▪ Charity will bring you quickly to a better temper. You admire gorgeous attire; remember the occasion how you first became cloathed: had not sinne beene, these poore habiliments had neuer needed. Doth de∣licate fare delight you? Consider how it is the grea∣test misery to pamper that delicately, or cherish it with delicacy that is your mortall and profest ene∣my Doe wanton Consort▪ worke on your fancy? Cure betime, this dangerous phrenzy. Auert your eye, lest it infect your heart: Conerse with reason, and auoid nothing more than occasion. Doe you finde your af∣fections troubled, or to passion stirred? Retire a little from your selues; attemper that boyling heat which workes so violently on you: and in the end, re∣solue thus; It will redound more to our honour to bridle anger, than to engage our discretions by gi∣uing reynes to our distemper. Can you not see your Neighbours fid flourish without an Enuious Eye? Of all others, expulse this soonest; because of all o∣thers, it partakes of the Deuill the nearest. As you are commanded to loue him as your selues, so wish not that euill vnto him, which you would not haue to fall vpon your selues. Lastly, doe you finde a re∣misnesse in you to any employment that is good?Tob. 4. 15. Shake off this naturall dunesse, and inflame your af∣fections with a Diuine feruentnesse. You haue hi∣therto beene slow in doing good, shew that in do∣ing ill. Meane time, with the wings of holy and heauenl desires mount from earth to heauen; plant your affections aboue, though your pilgrim dimen∣sions be here below. Which the better to facilitate, certain euer in your memory this deuout Memoriall or Meditation: Think whence you came, and be a∣shamed;Bern. where you are, and be aggrieued; where
you goe to, and bee affrighted. Euery way wherein you wake, as it is full of snares, so shoud it be full of eyes. Those two roots of inordinate feare, and inordinate ue, haue brought many to the brinke of misery, by plunging their mindes in the puddles of vanity. Looke about you; snares you shall finde within you, snares without you. Snares on your right hand, and those deceitfull; Pro∣sperity in affaires temporall. In which, such persons are vsually taken and surprized, by whom the bene∣fits of God are abused. As the Rich, when hee be∣stowes his wealth in attiring himselfe sumptuously: the Mighty, in oppressing the needy; the Amorous or Louely, in giuing others occasion to be taken with their beauty: Whence the Lord by the mouth of his Prophet: Thou hast made thy beauty abhominable. Snares likewise on your Left hand, and those fearefull; aduersity in affaires temporall. In which the poore, nfirme, and afflicted are intangled and miserably in hralled: who by suffering affliction impatiently, cure God, their Neighbors, and themselues in their duersity: Whence that Duine and deuout Father aith: In affliction the wicked detest God, andAug. lib. 1. de Ciuit. Dei. blaspheme him: but the godly pray vnto him, and prayse him. Now, vertuous Gentlewomen, whose titles doe not so much transport you, as your loue to goodnesse doth inflame you; you may hence obserue, how no∣ble and generous dispositions, which indeed, are proper∣ly defined equall or temperate disposers of the affe∣ctions, haue and doe euer receiue the first impressions of vertue; which are with constancy retained, as they were cheerefully receiued. Expresse then this Nobility of your well-disposed natures in affecting what is good. Vice throwes her aspersions on no subiect so much as on Honour. Relinquish then ra∣ther
all state, than it should retaine the least staine. Much is promised by your disposition; and no lesse by your Discipline or Education. Your well-seasoned youth was neuer knowne to that rudenesse, which more rurall or seruile states were bred in. Second these rising hopes of inward happinesse. You are fruitlesly great, if you be not fruitfully good. Euery moment wafts you nearer your hauen; let euery a∣ction draw you nearer heauen. If you feare at any time to wander, Religious feare will bee your Condu∣ctor. If you doubt the issue of your Encounter, sted∣fast patience will be your Encourager. If you distrust your owne strength, you are securer; humility will crowne you with honour, and direct you to an happy harbour. As inbred noble dispositions haue then enrich'd you, which by helpes of Education are seconded in you, professe your selues louers of vertue by your affecti∣ons, aduancers of vertue by your actions; that as ho∣nour attends your persons, fame may crowne your names, felicity your soules. VVHat remaines then,Vertue re∣duc'd to b∣bit, aspires to perfection▪ to perfit this absolute Master-piece of honour; but that yee re∣duce to habit, and consequently to their best improue∣ment, these initiate seeds of goodnesse sowne in your natiue disposition, growne by succession, and ripened through Education? Now are yee in the way, and daily nearer the end of your worke. Your vnconfi∣ned soules must euer bee aspiring, till they come to their perfection. There is nothing vnder heauen, that can satisfie a oue created for heauen. Are you Vir∣gins? Let our Virgin-Lamps be fed with the Oyle of Charity. Be ready before the Bridegroome call you; yea, call on him before hee call you. Let not your Virgin-vayles be vayles for vices. Entertaine not a
light thought, lest by degrees it spread to a sinne. In suffering Ismael to play with you, though her sport seeme in iest; your ruine will proue in earnest. Eye not that Obiect, which may enthrall you; heare not that Subiect, which may corrupt you; rellish not that Delight, which may depraue you; admit not of that conceit, which may delude you. Retort a light discourse with a Maiden-blush;Candida virgi∣neis miscuit ora rofis. it argues a spotlesse soule. He well described a Virgins prime beauty, who display'd it in shamefaste mode∣sty. Let your good name be such a precious oyntment as you would not spill it for a world. Are you Matrons? Enlarge your selues by instru∣ction vnto the younger; this is the office of a Reue∣rend Mother. Deriue some portion of that know∣ledge vnto others, which you fruitfully receiued from others. Your liues must bee their lines. Euery action of yours is exemplar; take heed then, it lead not into error. As you are ripe in yeares, so appeare rich in houres. Remember not a sinne without a sigh; nor a toy without a teare. There is no sinne more o∣dious, because none more insolently glorious, than to remember sinnes committed with ioy, and ap∣prehend them with delight. Your families should be vertues Nurseries, wherein your selues are to be Go∣uernesses and Presidents of goodnesse.Aug. in Epist. Here you are to teac your children in the trade of their wayes, that when they are old,Prou. 22. 6. they may not depart from them. Briefly, are you young or old? Esteeme no life swee∣ter, than when euery day improues you and makes you better. Delights, as they may moderately cheere you, so let them not play too much on your fancy, lest they take you: Be not commanded by them, but command them. The onely meanes to weane you from them, or make you more indfferent for them, is to fixe your affections on those which doe infinie∣ly
surpasse them. There is no comparison betwixt a Pallace and a Prison. Neither betwixt finite & infinite is there any Proportion. O how happy were you, if with spirituall eyes you might once behold, how the Princes goe before, ioyning with the Singers, and in the midst, young Damsels dancing! The way to contemplate these, and consort with these, is to meditate of heauen, which enioyeth all these. Here no pleasure, be it neuer so promising; no delight, be it neuer so relishing; no recreation, bee it neuer so refreshing; but though it cheere you in the beginning, it cloyes you in the end. Last day, you were at Court; where reuels, reere-bankets, showes, and solemnities, were obiects to your Eyes, Eares, ad Tastes: but all these are vanished. This day, you Coach to th' Exchange; where you see all kinde of vanities set at sale, that may any way soile a deluded soule: but the night clozeth the day, which makes them shut vp shop, and then all those vanities are shroaded. Next day, you goe to a Play; wherein you expect some new Scene of mirth, or some State-action liuely presented: but the last Exit, your im∣preze of frailty, dismisseth you, and then all those art∣full presentments, which gaue so much content, are remoued. Thus you runne in a maze, while you lay the Scene of your Mirth on Earth. Recollect then you duided thoughts; seat there the delight o yor minde, where you may find a continued Mirth. Earth is too low a Stage for an Act of that Maiesty; and too straght to giue your best guest content within her Mad-wals of misery. Let not one houre passe by you, which is not well past. Consider, how the eyes of heauen are vpon you; how that generous stemme, from whence you were deriued, expects much from you. The former inioynes you vpon hope of a future reward, to be more caute∣lous;
The latter, as you tender the honour of your house, to be vertuous. Besides, know (Noble Ladies) that all the port or state-magnificence which this in∣ferior Globe can afford you, clozeth euer with more discomfort than content, bee your persons neuer so seemingly happy, nor happily secure, that doe enioy them. Yea, how happy had many Eminent persona∣ges beene, had they neuer beene taken with this Shadow of happinesse? Conclude then, for this con∣clusion will beseeme you, and in your highest ascent of honour incomparably secure you: Honour is vertues harbour; onely those Styl'd great, are vertues friends, and vices foes. That glorious Light of the Church, an industri∣ous Searcher and iudicious Censor of Antiquities, S. Augustine, saith, That anciently the Romans worship∣ped Vertue and Honour for gods. Whence it was, that they built two Temples, which were so seated, as none could enter the Temple of Honour, vnlesse hee had first passed through the Temple of Vertue: to sig∣nifie that none was to be honoured, vnlesse by some Vertue he had first deserued it. The Morall admits no other exposition than its owne expression. For Ho∣nour, none should be so daring bold as to wooe her, till by passing thorow Vertues Temple, he get admit∣tance vnto her. If you desire to be great, let it bee your height of ambition to aspire to honour in the Court of Vertue. Where the lowest cannot be lesse than a Lady of Ho∣nour, because the lowest of her actions correspond with Honour. Such a seruice were no seruitude but a solace. Admit, that sometimes you affected forraine fashions, now let forraine Nations admire your ver∣tues. Perchance, the delicacy of your nature, or mi∣sery of a long prescribed custome will not so easily at the first be wholly weaned, from what it hath for so
many yeares affected. Vse then an easie restraint at the first; withdraw your affections from vanity by de∣grees; reserue some select houres for priuate De∣uotion; check your fances, when they dote on ought that may distract you. The first Encounter will bee hardest; Time will bring you to that absolute soue∣raignty ouer your passions, as you shall finde a singu∣lar calmenesse in your affections. What a braue Sa∣lique State shall you then enioy within your owne Common-wealth? Vigilancy becomes Warden of your Cinque Ports; not an inuasiue forrainer dare approach, while she with watchfull eyes waits at the Port. All your followers, are vertus sauorites. Piety guides you in your wayes; Charity in your workes. Your Progeni∣tors deserued du prayse, but you surpasse them all. Thus shall you reuiue the ashes of your families, and conferre on them suruiuing memories. But, it is the uening Crownes the day; sufficient it is not to dif∣fuse some few reflecting beamelins of your vertues, at your first rising, and darken them with a Cloud of vi∣ces at your setting. As your daies and more in number, so must they be euery day better. What auailes it the Mariner to haue taken his Compasse wisely, to haue shunned rockes and places of danger warily, and at last to runne on some shelfe, when he should now ar∣riue at the ay where he would be? Rockes are euer nearest the shore, and most tentations nearest your end. If you resolue then to come off fairely, prepare your elues for some encounter daily; obserue your exer∣cise of deuotion duely; resist assaults constantly; that you may gain a glorious victory. This is all the Com∣at that is of you desired; wherein many of your sx haue nobly deserued. Stoutly haue they comba∣ted, and sweetly haue they conquered. Emulate their vertues, imitate their liues, and enioy their loues. So may you with that Patterne of patience dye in your owne
Nests, and multiply your dayes as the Sand: So may your vertues, which shone so brightly in these Cours of Earth, appeare most glorious in those Courts of hea∣uen. So may these Scatered flowers of your fading beauty, be supplied with fresh flowers of an incor∣ruptible beauty; yea, the King himselfe shall take plea∣sure in your beauty; who wil come like a glorious Prince out of his Palace of royall honour, to grace you; like a Specious Spouse out of his Nuptiall Chamber, to em∣brace you. Meane time, feare not death, but smile on him in his entry; for he is a guide to the good, to con∣duct them to glory. Conclude your resolues with that blessed Saint; in hope no lesse confident, than in heart penitent: We haue not liued so in the world,Ambros. that we are ashamed to liue longer to please God: and yet againe, wee are not afraid to dye, because we haue a good Lord. Short is your race, neare is your rest: Onely, let the losse of earth be your gaine, the loue of God your goale; and Angelicall perfection, o which your constant practice of prety and all Christian duties haue so long aspired, your Crowne. The feare of the Lord is a pleasant Garden of blessing, there is nothing so beautifull as it is, Eccles. 40. 27. Trin-vni Deo omnis gloria.
A Gentlewoman,Character IS her owne Tyrewoman; one that weares her owne face; and whose complexion is her owne. Her Iournals lie not for th' Exchange, needlesse visits, nor Reere-ban∣kets. Showes and pre∣sentments shee viewes with a ciuill admirati∣on; wherein her harm∣lesse desire is, rather to see than be seene. She haes nothing so much as entring parly with an immodest Suitor. Retire from occasions drawes her to her Ar∣bour: where the sole obiect of her thoughts is her Maker. Her eyes she holds her profest foes, if they send forth one loose looke; teares must sue out their pardon▪ or no hope of reconciliation. Her resort to the Court, is for occasion, not fashion: where her de∣meanour euer giues augmentation to her honor. Her winning modesty becomes so powerfull a Petitioner, as she euer returnes a preuailing Suiter. During her abode in the City, she neither weares the Street, nor wearies her selfe with her Coach; her Chamber is
her Tring-roome, where she bethinks her how she may play her part on the worlds Theatre; that shee may gaine applause of her heauenly Spectators. Her constant reside is in the Country; where hospitality proclaimes her in-bred affection to workes of piety. All which she exerciseth with that priuacy, as they will witnesse for her, she feares nothing more than vaine-glory. In her house shee performes the office of a Mistris, no imperious gouernesse. Shee knowes when to put on a smooth brow, and to cherish indu∣stry with moderate bounty. Her discreet prouidence makes her family look with a cheereful countenance: Her posterity cannot chuse but prosper, being nurs'd by so naturall a mother. The open field she makes her Gallery; her Labourers, her liuing Pictures; which, though she finds meere Pictures, hanging on, rather than labouring, Passion transports her not aboue her selfe, nor forceth her to the least expression vnwor∣thy of her selfe: she passeth by them with a modest reproofe, which workes in them a deeper impressi∣on, than any fiery or furious passion: Her Neighbors she daily wooes and winnes: which she effects with such innocent affability, as none can iustly tax her of flattery. An Ouer-seer for the poore she appoints her selfe, wherein she exceeds all those that are chosen by the Parish. She takes a Suruey daily and duly of them, and without any charge to the Hamlet, relieues them. She desires not to haue the esteeme of any She-clarke; shee had rather be approu'd by her liuing, than lear∣ing: And hath euer preferr'd a sound professant be∣fore a profound disputant. A president of piety shee expresseth her selfe in her family, which shee so in∣structs by her owne life, as vertue becomes the ob∣iect of their loue. Her taske shee sets her selfe daily, which she performes duely▪ Her owne remisnesse, (if any such be) shee reproues by so much more than
obserue her, could be well content to serue her. Shee is generous in all; Not a Look but giues Life to Loue; and that so vertuously dispos'd, as not a light thought can distract it. Her very motion is a mouing dire∣ction; She neuer learned to tinkle with her feet, to wan∣der with her eyes, to staie her spotlesse honour with a painted blush. All shee doth is her owne; All her owne doth incomparably please; which she clozeth with this impreze: Louing Modesty is a Liuing Beauty. COMPLEMENT she admits, but not that which this Age affects; she preferres Substance before meere formality. Pith before the Rinde, Performance before Ceremony. She distasts nothing so much as that Courts sustian; which, in her esteeme, is quite out of fashi∣on, your Seruants Seruant. She cannot protest in iest, nor professe what shee meanes not in earnest. Shee cares not for this Rhetoricall varnish, it makes a good cause suspitious; her desire is to expresse her selfe in action more than discourse. That COMPLEMENT which consists in congies, cringies, and salutes, dis∣ellsheth her pallate most: it tastes too much of the Caske; for the rest she is secure, so her actions bee really pure; her selfe completely honest. Thus shee summes vp her dayes, makes vertue her prayse, this her Impreze; Ciuill Complement, my best Accomplish∣ment. DECENCY is her natiue Liuery; though shee make no shadow of it, her owne shadow is not more indiuiduate. In her attire she is not so sumptuous as seemely, not so costly as comely; in her discourse she deliuers her mind not so amply as fully, not so quick∣ly as freely; in her whole course shee expresseth her inward beauty. Her Glasse is not halfe so vsefull to her selfe, as the glasse of her life is to others. What∣soeuer is worne by her, receiues a singular grace from
her. Her fashion is neuer out of request; though more constant in it, than the Age would admit. She liues to bring time into some better tune: this is her taske in euery place; this is that which crownes her with peace; while shee deuiseth this for her im∣preze: Virgin-Decency is Vertues Liuery. ESTIMATION is that precious odour whih giues sweetnesse to her honour. Dye had shee rather with it, than enioy an Empire and liue without it. It is the Goale of all her actions. The Crowne of all her Labours. Pouerty she holds an incomparable blessing, so her name be inriched by ESTIMATION: No dead Fly can corrupt that Ointment. Happy needs must be her State, that preserues this without Staine. This she feeds not with the iyce of vain-glory; nor seeks to augment it with a fabulous story. Many haue pur∣chas'd praise in Oylie lines, that neuer merited ap∣plause all their liues. Her desire is to be, rather than seeme, lest seeming to be what she is not, shee gull the world, but her selfe most, by playing the counterfeit. Resolute is she in this her Impreze: My prize is her owne prayse. FANCY shee entertaines with a cheerefull but chaste bosome. Though Loue be blind, her loue has eyes. No lesse faithfulll is shee in retaining, than doubtfull in entertaining. Protests are dangerous Lures to credulous Louers, but her FANCY is too staid to stoope vnto them. She can loue well, but lest she should repent soone, and that too late, shee will try before she trust, haue some reason to like before she loue. She holds that FANCY  Freny, which s onely led by Sense. She makes reason her guide, that Cotent may be her Goale. Long time shee debates with Loue, before euer she giue Loue her heart; which done, shee confirmes the bargaine with her hand. Her Constancy shee displayes in this Impreze: My
Choyce admits no Change. GENTLITY is not her boast, but that which dignifies that title most. Vertue is her soueraignesse; in whose seruice to liue and die she holds the absolu∣test happinesse. Gentry shee thinkes best graced by affbility: To be surly, derogates as much from her worth, as basenesse from Nobility of birth. Her Li∣nage is best distinguish'd by her Crest, her orth by her selfe. Her desert giues life to her descent. Not an action comes from her, but excellently becomes her. Shee euer reflects on the House from whence shee came, whose antiquity she ennobles with numerous expressions of piety, from the rising height of which increase, she drawes this Christian Impreze: Desert Crowne Descent. HONOVR she deserues more than desires; This she may admit, but not admire. Weake shee holds that foundation of HONOVR, where vertue is not a sup∣porter. The more HONOVR that is conferr'd on her, makes her the humbler; she cloathes not her Looke with a disdainfull scorne, nor clouds her brow with an imperious frowne Farre more esteemes she the title of goodnesse than greatnesse. Shee holds no∣thing more worthy of her approuing, than a daily drawing nearer to Perfection, by her vertuous liuing. Her whole Pilgrimage is nothing else than to shew vnto the world what is most requisite for a gret Personage. In a word, shall wee take a re-view of her Noble carriage in each of our Obseruances? For the first, she is fashionably neat; for the second, for∣mally discreet; for the third, ciuilly complete; for the fourth, amiably decent; for the fifth, precious in re∣pute; for the sixth, affectionately constant; for the seuenth, generously accommodated; for the eighth, ho∣nourably accomplished. Whence it is, that she im∣palls her diurnall race with this imperiall Impreze:
Honour is Vertues Harbour. Goe on, then, she may with Honour, seeing the King in her beauty takes such pleasure. A Diuine pre∣sage of promising goodnesse was her infancy; A continuate practice of piety was her youth and ma∣turity; The cloze of her Pilgrimage a calme passage from frailty to felicity. Long would the earth keepe her, but so should she be kept from that which shee values farre better. Her Husband cannot stay long behind, seeing his better part is gone before. FINIS.
EMBLEME. SOme hold these Obseruations to be long, Some more iudicious, hold them to be short, Thus are they censur'd be they right or wrong; What should we then make Censure but a sport, Since good or bad, we're ne're the better for't? Which to attemper, I should thinke it best, Vertue were Censor in each Authors brest.
