4301 99845252 10140
Concerning the true Be∣leefe of a Christian man, a most excellent and profita∣ble Dialogue, By S. C. Herevnto, besides the Marginall Notes, declaring the chiefe points of Doctrines, there is added a godlye and lightsome prayer, which in certain breefe petitions, comprehendeth the ve∣ry contents of the vvhole vvorke: vvritten in Latine, By ABRAHAM FLEMING Londoner borne. To the right Reuerend Father in Christ, IOHN Bishop of London. Translated out of Latine, by Arthur Golding. AT LONDON, ¶ Printed by Thomas Pur∣foote, and are to be sold at his shop ouer against S. Sepulchers Church.
To the right reuerend Fa∣ther in Christ, Iohn by the bles∣sing of God, Bshop of London, grace and peace from the Lorde. THERE is no man (right reuerend Father) but he may imagine at the first sighte, that this pretie Booke written Dialogwise, easie to be borne for the smalenes of the vo∣lume, soone to be ouerhandled for the fewnesse of the leaues, and very good cheape for the ouerlittlenes of the price, is vvorthy of no prayse, or else of very little. But if he searche and ransacke the bowels of it, so as he reade it not in post, or as one halfe asleepe, ne lightly giue as it vvere a glaunce at it, but consider vvell the excellencie of the matter, the orderly teaching therof, and the fitte knitting of all things together: he shall vvil∣lingly confesse (and that of very good
right) that it chalēgeth no smal cōmē∣datiō. For the case standeth not vvith this Booke, as vvith vvares, vvhich the Marchantmē are vvont to thrust vppon their Chapmen that are not a∣ware of their vviles, by setting a cer∣taine procured bewty vppon them, vvherof vvhen the tryall commeth, their Chapmen are so farre off from gaining any vvhit by them, that they do rather complaine of wrong done vnto them, and being ouertaken with losse vnlooked for, are faine to come short of the commodity vvhich they hoped after. For here the faith of a christian mā is plainly portraied out, wherof it beareth in deed the notable title in the forfront of it, not to pretēd one thing in show, & another thing in deed, after the maner of flatterers, but to the intēt that the readers being allu∣red with the rarenes of the Title, mar∣king the groūd, & cōsidering the Au∣thors vnaccustomed maner of proce∣ding,
should become the more skilful & desirous of so great & so heauēly a misterie, & by that mean, with liuely voice beare record that this little Boke is most worthy of their cōmēndation. I graunt that many Books do dayly come foorth (the more pittie) vvherof some, yea an infinite sum, in the parts beyond the seas, & other some on this side the seas haue ben hatched out of mens teeming & childbearing heads, by the midwifeship of the diuell. By the force of which Bookes, bewtified with glorious foretitles, these trim & cunning discoursers, allure, or rather infect, yea & vtterly kill mens soules through the presēt poisō of their opi∣nions & doctrins. Much like vnto cō∣mō harlots, vvhose dayly custome & ordinarie trade it is, to besmere them∣selues outwardly vvith oyntments & sweet powders, to the end they might the more tickle and stir vp, as it vvere vvith certayne prickes, their mates
set all vpon loue, to the cooling of the heate of their lust, hauing no regarde in the meane vvhile, to vvash away the filth grovvne together vvithin them euen in a heape. Of this stampe are all the bookes of the Romish route, glittering vvith glorious titles, pretēding the doctrins of greatest mysterie, yea and of grea∣test importaunce also, and (to saye briefly vvhat I thinke) chalenging and behighting any thing, vvhereas besides their stately vvords, their Thrasolike speeches, their scornefull scoffes, and their other childish tri∣fles, and olde vviues tales, they con∣teine not any thing that is vvorthie to be vveied or considered, but rather to be laughed at and hissed out. Inso∣muche that this saying of the Poet may vvell be applied vnto them, The mountaines labour of childe, and out there creepes a sillie mouse. To these, you among the rest of
the Bishops of this renowned Realm, vvhich are in manie respectes to be reuerenced, haue bin a verie sore eni∣mie: and though not at hande, yet a farre of you haue so vvounded that misshapen Monster of the vvorld, vvhich leaueth nothing vnattempted to bring all Princes in subiection to him, partlie by vexing of his mem∣bers diuers vvayes, hovvbeit not vvith anie kinde of torment, as their vvilful stubbornes requireth, but by vrging them vvith vvholsome coun∣sell and vveightie exhortation, to turne avvaie from their crooked pathes vvhich leade to destruction, partly in burning their bookes vvhich vvere stuffed vvith all kinde of filthie railings and reproches, and finallie in attempting all meanes to pinche in his kingdome, and to disperse and vt∣terlie abolish that pestilent Seminarie of his, vvherby he goeth about to be∣vvitch all the coastes of the vvorlde.
That these things are so, all mē confes with one mouth, & euen the Papists themselues (vnlesse they will lie most shamefully) will not deny thē. For as much therfore, right reuerēd Father, as you are greatly busied about these thinges, and (besides the time vvhich you spend in the studie of Diuinitie) the matters of greatest waight lie dai∣ly vpō your back, how fitly may this saying of S. Paules be applied vnto you, vvherwith he closeth vp his sen∣tence, after a long reckoning vp of his labours, saying. Besides all the other things that dayly distresse me, the care of all congre∣gations lieth vpon me. Now, were there the like mind and indeuoure in the Pope, the gazing stock of the vvorld, and in the residue of the Papists, thē shuld not so many hundred thousand soules be thrust downe into Hell, neither should so great darknesse be cast vppon the true vvorship of God, nor Christs, church
be so miserably and vvofully assaul∣ted, nor Christ himselfe the liuely Image of his Father, be mangled vvith so many dartes of reproch, nor the light of the Gospell be dimmed vvith so many mists of mens ima∣ginations, nor so many firebrands of dissention tost among Christian Princes, nor Common vveales be torne in peeces vvith so many tem∣pestes of insurrections, nor Gods glorie be abated vvith so greate carelesnesse and negligence, nor finally, the Deuill so triumphe and reioice. But I vvill call my self back againe, and vvith as much shortnes of speech as I can, I vvill touch the things that are nerer to the matter vvich we haue in hand. I haue declared already what an old hart grudge and deadly hatred you beare to the Pope of Rome and all Papistes: Also I haue shewed, though not cūningly, yet truly, what
meanes you haue vsed to call them back from their pernicious opinion, vvith how great zeale you haue bur∣ned to further the pure religion, and to put avvay heresies, and the sovvers abroade of heresies, by anye kinde of meane, that Christs church being cal∣led avvay from all blinde seruing and colourable misvvorshipping of God, may loue her Christ from her heart, vvith open armes embrace him, and vnseparably stick to him alone. And yet by the vvay, I vvill let passe that cheefe and intire care of yours, vvherewith you bee often touched, namelye of preferring the bookes of learned men to light, by the reading and considering vvhereof, your Fa∣therhoode knovveth, that so many as studie them, as becommeth them, be∣ing stayed vp and inlightned vvith right reason and founde iudgement, doe gather most plentifull fruite. For these resemble not those vvhich in set∣ting
forth Books, doe play the poy∣soners, vvho into their slubbersauces doe put liquerice, or of the choysest suger beaten into poulder, that they may vvith the lesse lothsomnesse and misliking be conuayed into the sto∣macke, and afterwarde shead them∣selues into all the conueiaunces of the body▪ so as the vaynes at length maye swel, the bovvels burst, and finally the vvhole man be killed. Naye, they be muche more hurt∣full then the poysoners vvhiche de∣stroy but only the frame of the body: for they infect the very soule, killing it vtterly, and throvving it headlong into the tormentes of Hell, vvhiche shall neuer die nor cease. Contrary∣vvise, the vvorkes of the right belee∣uers, (be they little, or be they greate) yield such profit to the Readers, that they grovv euer better, but neuer vvoorse, euer skilfuller, holyer, pu∣rer,
perfecter, and acceptabler to God. The reason vvhereof hath ledde your Fatherhood so to fauour the vvritten Copie of this little Booke, vvhich treateth lightsomly of the true faith of a Christian man, that a∣mong other Bookes whereof the nū∣ber is infinite, vvith the superscrip∣tion of your own hand, you haue au∣thorised the same to be printed, that it may go abrode and be common in the hands of all such as desire to haue the triall of their faith. The vvhich now comming forth vvith a new outward shew, if your re∣uerend Fatherhoode shall vouchsafe to accept, vvith the accustomed fauor of your good countenance, and to suf∣fer it to rest vnder the shadow of your defense, yelding your self to be as Pa∣trone of it, considering that the booke is commended inough of it selfe, and
the vvriter therof vvas notably lear∣ned, and hath deserued very vvell of the true Religion, vvhich vve novv imbrace, or as I may vvell say, that it shall be the better vvelcome to all such as loue the Christian faith, so am I vvell assured, that it shall turne to the great benefite of many, and besides that, though I be sore hindred vvith the great vvaight almost of daylye businesse, you shall stirre me vp to take in hande the Trans∣lating thereof into Englishe, and to make an ende of it euen oute of hand. GOD moste gratious and al∣mightye graunte you abundaunce of his heauenly grace, shead vppon you the most sweete Oyle of his ho∣l spirite, daylye increase your Ho∣nour, and lengthen the time of your life, that hauing putte the enimies of the Gospell to flight, sette foorth
his glory, inlarged his Church, and happily ended your last day, you may liue for euer blessedly, placed at the right hand of Christ, the vnspotted Lambe, and firste begot∣ten of the Father. So be it. Most addicted to your Honor, ABRAHAM FLEMING, Londoner borne.
¶The Argument of this Dialogue. WHat it is to beleeue in God, and what wonders are wrought by the power of beleefe, be it world∣ly or diuine: and what thinges doe hinder beleefe. Also how a man may hate himselfe, and by fayth forsake himselfe, and kill the deedes of the fleshe. The effect of the talke is this: That he which beleeueth in God, and in his sonne Iesus Christ, is able by the power of that beleefe, to mortifie his flesh with the lusts therof, through the holy Ghost, and to serue God in spirite and truth.
A most excellent and pro∣fitable little Booke, concerning the true christian faith. ¶The Persons that talke together are Lewis and Frederike. Lewis. GLadly in good sooth Friende Frederike,Hee be∣ginneth at the difficultnes of obay∣ing gods healthful cōmaun∣dements. haue I hearde your talke both yesterday and to day, and ther∣by I haue learned many thinges which I knew not before, and this is one thing which hath cheefly mooued me, that you haue shewed that our Lorde com∣maundeth not any thing which is vnpossible to be done. For, I was of beleefe before, that (as it is cō∣monly hearde and taughte) Gods commaundements are vnpossible to be obayed. Which perswasion, (to tell you the truth) hath made
me slowe to obay, so as I neuer strayned my selfe to obay with my whole power. Fred. The lyke hath befalne vn∣to me also, and I could neuer yield my selfe truely and earnestly to o∣baying, before I beleeued that it was possible to obay.The effe∣tuall po∣er and orce of eleefe. And truelye hereby I haue learned the force of Beleefe, which Beleefe maketh a man desirous & willing to obaye: And desire being afterward mat∣ched with power giuen of GOD, bringeth to passe that a man doeth the things which he hath beleeued himselfe to be able to doe, and so he is saued by obaying, as hee was earste vndone by disobeying. And so being led by the spirite of Christ he fulfilleth the rightuousnesse of the lawe,The righ∣uousnes of the law nd why t bea∣eth that ame▪ not walking after the flesh, but liuing after the spirite, whiche righteousnesse is therefore called the righteousnes of the law,
not for that it maketh the beleeuer righteous, but because the law re∣quireth it. For the whole perfor∣maunce thereof is Christs, because it is brought to passe by his power and spirite, liuing and working in those that are his. The Law then commaundeth, and Christ fulfil∣leth, and so the praise is due, not to the commander, but to the perfor∣mer. Neuerthelesse it were to smal purpose to beleeue that it is possi∣ble to obay God,Beleefe withoute obediēce is dead. vnlesse a man do also know the way how god may be obayed, without the which obe∣dience fayth is dead, and without fayth no man canne be saued. But this I would haue you to bee per∣swaded of, my Lewis, that the dis∣courses both of vs and of al others are (to saye no worse of them) vn∣profitable if they trayne vs not to obedience, and to the renewing of the man.
Lew. These things are true Fre∣derike. Therefore that I may fare somewhat the better by your com∣munication, I pray you shewe me by what meane I may attayne to obey God. For inasmuche as you haue shewed me by your talk, that it is possible to be done, I haue conceyued a desire of obeying. Fred. A godly and chri∣stian wish concer∣ning o∣bedience.O my Lewis, would God that I my selfe were rightly obe∣dient, to the intent I might leade thee as it were by the hande, to o∣bedience. As now it is vnpossible for me to leade you further, then I myselfe haue attayned vnto. Lew. Yet notwithstāding, I be∣leeue you haue proceeded further forward then I haue done, & ther∣fore I beseech you shew me but as farre as you your selfe are gone. Fred. Willingly will I do that Lewis: but I am afrayde the hardnesse and roughnesse of the
way will scare you from it. Lew. Feare not: I hope I am ready to all things, be they neuer so harde, so I may attayne to the ende that I desire. Fred. I pray God to stablishe this willingnesse of yours, and to bring it throughout to the ende. And therefore to go in hande with the matter, you knowe howe the author of the Epistle to the He∣brewes hath written, that with∣out faith it is vnpossible to please God. Lew. I know it well. Fred. First of all then you must beleue in God,Beliefe in God is most ne∣cessary to the obtei∣ning of saluatiō. if you wil be saued. Levv. Procede on then to other things my Frederike, for as con∣cerning beliefe, I haue euer from my childhood beleeued in God, & truely I am of opinion, that there are very few (if there be any at al) which beleeue not in God.
Fred. In deede it is very easie to be sayd, and so are men commonly perswaded.Manye thinges are easie to be said which are harde to be done. But I feare mee it is sayd rather rashly and of custome, than vpon truth, for the time hath bene, that euen I also haue belee∣ued the same, both of my selfe, and of others, but when it came to the triall, then I saw how farre off I was. Lewis. Thinke you then that I haue no fayth? Fred. I am not of opinion that you haue no faith Lewis, but I thinke you haue so slender a faith, as it cannot rightly be sayde to be fayth, or saue you. And I praye you be not offended with mee, for in as much as you haue sayde that you are readie to al things, be they neuer so harde, it is meete afore all thinges that you shoulde suffer to haue it shewde, that you want the thing, which you weene you haue
aboundantly,The first waye to the knoledge of the truth and soothly the first enteraunce to the knowledge of truth, is to vnlearne the vntruth, or else there will be no roome for seede, where all is ouergrowne with weede. Come on therfore: let vs examine your beleefe. I praye you Lewis, when you were a child did you beleeue in your father. Lewis. What meane you by be∣leeuing in my father?What it is to beeleeue in the fath is shewe by the gthering togethe of certai circum∣staunce. Fred. That you tooke him for your father, and depended wholy vpon him. Lew. Yea that I did. Fred. Then if you wanted any thing, as shoes, apparrell, or meat, you resorted to none but him, ney∣ther doubted you anye whitte his good will towardes you. Lew. Surely no more then of mine owne. Fred. Againe, if any mishappe befell you, you had your eye vpon
him onely. Levv. Yea verily. Fred. Also if he promised you a∣ny thing, you doubted not of his performance. Levv. No more thē if I had had the thing already in my hande. Fred. Then tooke you no thou∣ght for his behauiour towardes you, but onely of your owne to∣wards him. Levv. You say truely. Fred. Moreouer, if he either cō∣manded you any thing, or did any thing himself wherof you beeing a child knew not ye reason, or which seemed to you against reason: yet notwithstanding you did it,Howe eedefull bediēce o the fa∣her is, is hewed y ex∣mples. and stoode not skanning doubtfully vpon his doings. Le. So is it. For vpon a time, when new grapes wer broght in, & he bad me treade vpon them wt my feete, surely me thought it was
a fonde thing to treade vpon so good & faire grapes, which I had leuer shuld haue bin saued to eate. But because he was my father, I thought he commaunded me not without cause, & therfore I obeied him. Also at another time, when he shredded his vines, and greffed trees, to my seeming was agaynst reason to cut of the boughs which nature had broght forth, & which were likely to haue brought forth fruit. But yet this thought ran al∣wais in my mind, Unles this wer good, my father would not do it. Fr. Now let vs come vnto god. You say you beleeue in god the fa∣ther, and by that name you call vpon him, saying, Our father which art in heauen, and so forth. Surely it is meete therefore that you should depende vpon him no lesse then you depended vppon your father when you were
a childe. Lew. Yea. Fred. Then if you want anye thing you flie vnto God alone, and you doubt not at all, but that hee will giue you all thinges bounti∣fullye. What?Fleshlye feare, and what it vvorketh where it beareth way. Doubte yee? Why answere you not my Levvis? Con∣fesse the truth, and let not fleshlye feare restraine you, which is wont to withholde menne from being known of their vices, because they are afrayde, least e to whom they be to be vttered, shoulde mislike of them as of sinful folke, or make the lesse account of them. But there is no such perrill towarde you at my hande, for I cannot finde in my harte to mislike of any mā for those thinges, which I both see and be∣waile in my selfe not long agoe, and I doubte not but are in others also, vnlesse they be come alreadye to their wayes ende, which certesse
we two (that is to say, you and I) haue not yet attaind vnto, neither will I make the lesse accounte of you for confessing the things with your mouth to your Friend, which I am sure you acknowledge al∣readie in your heart. Levv. O my Frederike I am a∣shamed to be acknowne of it. Ue∣rilye I am (yea euen verye sore) a∣frayde leaste I should want bread and drinke and such other things, specially when I see I haue but a little money lefte, and no likelye meane at hande whereby to gette new money. Fred What if you haue youre purse full, or some meane in a rea∣dinesse whereby to come by Mo∣ney, then you take no thoughte at all, or at least wise your thoughte is the lesse. Levv. It is so. Fred. Ergo, you trust to youre
money, or to your owne pollicie, more then to God. Levv. How be∣efe in God is eglected y tru∣ing too uche to hese trā∣tory & ightfull hings.Truely it is euen so. Fre. But whē you were a child, you trusted only to your father. Levv. Yea. Fred. Nowthen you see howe you beleue not in God, but in your mony & in your owne policie. Ue∣rily I beleeue these things seeme boystous vnto you, in yt you be not able to deny them, & yet are eyther doutful or ashamed to confesse thē so soone. But inforce your selfe Lewis. Many things ar to be sif∣ted out which lye lurking in oure harts, and the very roote must be gone vnto, without ye plucking vp wherof we cānot be saued. Let vs go on. What say you to aduersitie Lewis? Is your minde nothing troubled at it? Levv. Yes very sore. I can very ill away with it, & besides that, I
seeke all the corners of my wit for worldly helps. Fr. What do you concerning Gods promi∣ses?That Gods promises de∣ceiue no the belieuers. He hath promised to giue all things needful for your life, if you first seeke his kingdome & righte∣ousnes. Do you certenly beleeue y• promise, so as you dout no more of his faithfulnes, thē you did of your fathers when you were a childe? Le. Alas, I am farre from it. Fr. But if your neighbour Hen∣ry Rottenfeeld, a riche man, and (in account of the world) a man of good credite, had promised you three hundred crownes, I am of opinion you were rid of that care for a good sort of yeres. Levv. Yea that I were. Fred. Now God hath promised, not three hundred crownes, but all things that you haue neede of, and yet you distrust him. Levv. O how truely you say.
Fred. Lesse therefore do you be∣leeue in God, I say not thā in your owne Father, but than in Henrye Rottenfielde. Levv. I am cōpelled to confesse the truth. Fred. wo thines maye t men om per∣orming heir pro∣ises.And yet men maye starte frō their promises, eyther through vntrustines or for want: whereof none of both can befall vnto God. You therefore by this distruste of yours, doe falsly accuse God, ey∣ther of vntrustines, or of wante. Levv. I doe so in deede. Fred. Nowe if you doe thus di∣strust of God in the sustenaunce of your body, whiche notwithstan∣ding you haue neuer wanted to this houre, can you trust to him for the blessed and endles life whiche you neuer yet tasted of? For consi∣der the matter after this sort with your selfe: If a King shoulde now send an Ambassadour vnto you to
adopte you to his sonne, and you beleeued him, how woulde you be∣haue your selfe? Levv. Truely what substaunce soeuer I haue, I woulde make no reckoning at all of it, and being here as a Wayfarer in bodye, I shoulde haue my mynde running vpon ye court: for a much like thing happened to mee when I was a stripling. For whereas I liued in very slender state, I was called into the housholde of a certayne Gentleman of great worship and wealth,Honors chaunge manners, as the cō∣mon pro∣uerbe sayth. whervpon I felt my mind so altered, that I thought of none of the thinges whiche I hadde thoughte of before, neyther was I pincht with any further care. In∣so much that when my father and my mother were aboute to haue sent me a little money, I sent them worde agayne that thenceforth I shoulde neede no money. What
neede many words? I imagined aforehande in my minde, a kinde of fashion of the buyldings, and of the place, & of the persons among whom I was to dwell, and yet had I neuer seene them. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis. For I myself also haue had experience of the like. But what if you had not beleeued that message? Levv. Surely I had continued in mine olde state still. Fred. And what if a man had seene you abyding in your former state, might he not well haue a∣uowed that you beleeued not the message? Levv. Yes, very well. Fred. Howe boūtifull God is to thē that oue him.Now let vs come to the matter. To them that loue God, God hath promised suche good things, as nother eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor heart of man conceiued. Let vs confesse ye truth
herealso my Lewis. If we belee∣ued this promise throughly, should not our mindes be rauished vp in∣to heauen, so as no earthly care might touch vs, and muche lesse trouble vs? Lew. Yes verily. Fred. But nowe when we bee glad of gayne,Proofes or tokens of distrust in God. sory for losse, great∣ly greeued and cast downe with reproch, hoyssed vp with honour, and ouerioyed with pleasure, all whiche things are earthly: is it not an apparant proofe that wee beleeue not Gods promises, but sticke stil to ye earthly inheritance? Lew. Yes that it is. Fred. What if God should pro∣mise vs some thing that mighte seeme vnpossible, as when he pro∣mised olde Abraham a sonne by Sara beeing old and barren too? Or what if he should commaund vs a thing that might seeme vn∣reasonable,
as when he willed the sayd Abrahā to offer vp his sonne in Sacrifice, by which sonne he had promised him an ofspring without number Lew Surely I am afrayde we would not beleeue him. Fred. Abrahās saith is of necessitie to salua∣tion.And yet was Abraham ye father of the faithfull, so as if we will be saued, we muste haue the fayth of Abraham. And thus muche concerning beleefe in the father. This (as I take it) is that whi∣che they call the historical faith.Now if we come to the sonne, I feare me we muche lesse beleeue in him. For I take not fayth (as a number thinke it) to be a beleuing that Christ hath done and suffered the things which are written of him: for as for that fayth or be∣leefe, the very diuels haue it. But I speake of the true, liuely, and mightfull fayth, whiche is able euen to remoue mountaynes,
whereof the Lord speaketh thus, The signes that shal follow those which beleeue,The signs that are peculiar to the beleuers. are these: In my name they shall caste out diuels, speake with new tungs, and driue away serpents: if they drinke any deadly thing, it shal not hurt thē. When they lay their hands vpon sicke folks, the sicke folks shall re∣couer. Doo these tokens follow your faith Lewis? Lew. No verily. Fred. Then haue you not fayth. Levv. Why? They deny yt there is now any neede of myracles. Fred. Nother do I now require any such, nother were they at that time wrought by all beleeuers. For Paule writeth, Do all worke myracles? Haue all the giftes of healing? Doo all speake with toungs? The thing that I re∣quire, is the same that Peter re∣quireth: Get you strength to your
fayth, sayth he. For needes muste the fayth of any mā or of any time haue strēgth, if it be matched with loue.he force f world∣ fayth, nd how onder∣ully it noueth en. Which thing that you maye the easier vnderstand, consider the force of worldly beliefe. A man beleeues that ritches are good, & that it is possible for him to atteine to them by marchaundise. Heere∣vpon, leauing oftentimes a very fayre and deare beloued wife, and young children at home, he vnder∣takes the vnmeasurable perils of robbers, of wayes, and of seas, and indureth intollerable payns, to fetche the ritches whereon he hath set his beleefe and loue, euen from Taprobane and the Iles of Canarie which are the vttermost partes of the world: and it is his beleefe that purchaseth him this stoutnesse. For vnlesse he beleeued it, he would not doe it. And there∣fore it may be sayd that this man
is inriched by beleefe. What shal we say of Learning, Lewis? The childe beleueth that learning and humane artes are a very goodly thing, & to be sought with all his power. And therevp∣pon applying him self to them day and night, he indureth pouertie, colde, and whatsoeuer else, in see∣king them with all his might, to the intent he may attayne to the thing which he beleeueth to be good. Also what do souldiers?He pro∣cedeth i shewing the strength of the worlly belef What kinde of calamitie is there which they vndertake not, to obteine ey∣ther victory or rewarde? How of∣ten watche they all ye night long: How often are they pinched with hunger? Insomuche that some∣times they eate Mice, Rattes, Horses, yea and euen their owne shoes, and afterward make their boast thereof. Whence haue they
so great strength? Whence but of beleefe? For they beleeue the thing which they couet, to be good. Agayne, what do Hunters? do they not spende oftentimes the whole winter nightes abrode, when the colde is so great that it riueth euen the flintes? Yea and what do louers? what inconueniences do they not most gladly indure, to ye intent to please the partie whom they be in loue withall? And still they deeme thē selues happy that they haue suffe∣red those things for her sake. ow ret force orldly eleefe ath euen mong me hole ations.And this force of beleefe is seene, not onely in seuerall persons, but also euen in whole Nations. For whereof comes it that our Ita∣lians doo so easily absteine from drunkennes, or that the Swissers are so resolute in battell, that they will rather be slayne, then flee? Euen of this, that they are per∣swaded
in themselues, that so they ought to doo. And surely if they perswaded themselues alike in all other vertues, they should excell alyke in all other vertues. Ma∣ny other things of the same sorte may be gathered: so great is the power of the beleefe that worketh in them. Therfore let vs examine our fayth, that we may see whe∣ther Christes spirite do dwell in vs or no. Christ telleth vs that they bee blessed whiche doo hunger and thyrst after righteousnesse: and hee commaundeth vs to hoorde vp treasure in heauen. Come on. Doo you feele as great thyrst of righteousnesse; as euer you haue felte at any tyme of water?A trial o Christia faith most wothy to b obserue Or as greate desire of Gods king∣dome, as the couetous man feeleth desire of money? Do you watche day and night to please GOD?
Haue you euer spent a whole yere or twayne in the studie of god∣lynes? Levv. Nothing lesse. Fred. Well: what strēgth haue you in suffering of wrongs? If a man strike you on the right cheke, can you turne to him ye left? Can you blesse him that curseth you? Can you wish well to him that re∣uileth you? Can you pray for him that rayleth vpon you? Can you seeke his welfare which practiseth your death? Lew. Soothly I am very farre of from these things. Fred. Where o∣bedience s not, here is not faith.Then do you not beleeue in Christ. For if you did you wold obey his commaundementes. Levv. But I neuer referred be∣leefe to this obedience. Fred. What maner of thing then did you take fayth to be? Levv. I tooke it to be a trust of
Gods freebestowed mercy, offred vnto vs in Christ. Fred. To what purpose then deeme you Christes commaunde∣mentes to serue? Levv. To put vs in mind of our infirmitie, in that we be not able to performe the things which we ought to doe, and so to make vs hang wholly vpon Christ, who hath performed them for vs, and imparteth them vnto vs. Fred. Euen the Apostles them selues trusted to Gods freebesto∣wed mercy, and yet they obeyed Christes commaundements.The mar whereat mans saluation shooteth No∣ther do I set saluation in our own obedience, but in Gods free mer∣cy. But this I say, that whosoe∣uer beleeueth Gods free mercy a∣right, obeyeth Christes commaun∣dementes. And if a man do be∣leeue but Gods free mercy onely, and not also all his commaunde∣ments,
threatnings,What things our fore∣fathers at¦tayned to by their faith. promises, and sayings whatsoeuer: I saye his fayth is maymed & vnauaylable. For the full and mightie fayth or belief, is that wherby the Saints haue subdued kingdomes, wroght righteousnes, obteined the promi∣ses, & done such other things as a∣ny man may wonder to thinke of them. For that mā doth not right∣ly beleeue in God,The fond and ydle beleef of the Iews. which vpon a rashnesse doth but onely behight himselfe saluation by his free mer∣cy, (after which maner the Iewes doo beleeue still yet at this day:) but he which doth so flatly yeelde credite and assent, not to some one peece of Gods sayings and dooings but to al of them: as you haue reported your selfe to haue beleeued your father when you were a child: or as we spake of the couetous and lecherous persons, which haue such a fayth or beleef,
as is not dead and ydle, but effec∣tuall and workful, counterfetting the spirite of Christ, and neuer re∣sting til it haue obteined the thing that it desired.The work¦fulnes of Christian faith ap∣pereth in charitie. Such a one is the true Christian fayth, which wor∣keth through loue: and whosoe∣uer hath not such a one, doth false∣ly boast him selfe of fayth. There∣fore whereas men do commonly chalenge fayth to themselues, and yet liue in all kind of wickednes: they lye, & haue not the true fayth, but a dead one, which is no more worthy of the name of fayth, then a dead man is worthy of the name of a man. That this is not fayth in deede, Christ himselfe sheweth sufficiently when he sayth, that at his comming he shall not finde fayth vppon the earth. And al∣so when vnto these whiche saye, Lorde, Lorde, haue we not caste out diuels in thy name? Haue we
not wroughte wonders in thy name? and haste thou not taught in our streetes? He shall say, I know you not, get you hence yee workers of wickednes. Ye see he will admit none for faythfull, but onely the weldoers and the obey∣ers. For they be the only persons which haue the true fayth:Who they bee whiche haue the true chri∣stiā faith. of whō it is written thus, These are they whiche haue mainteyned Gods commaundementes, and the faith of Iesus. Nowe if you haue not the fayth which maye make you righteous, (that is to say, chaste, lowly, gentle, liberall, and indued with such other of the vertues:) see how farre you be of from bee∣ing able to worke the miracles which Christ hath tolde vs should be the signes of fayth.To what purpose bodily miracles are wrou∣ght. I require not here bodily myracles, whiche were appoynted to the first tray∣ning of the Church vnto fayth:
But the thing that I require, is, that he which beleeueth in Chrst should breede the same vertues in other men, which God hath bred in him: that is to wit, that of drun∣kards, he should make them so∣ber: of lecherous, chast: of yreful, meeld: and at a word, of vnrigh∣teous, righteous. For, to caste out diuels,The di∣uels that lurk with in vs: and what is ment by speaking with new tungs. is to cast out the vices of lecherie, couetousnes, wrathful∣nes, and such other. Also to speake with new tongs, is to speake with fyrie and burning speach, such as no man can withstande: of which sorte theirs is, whiche speake the things, not which they haue hard, but which they haue seene with their eyes, heard with their eares, and felt with their hands: that is to saye, which they haue printed throughly in their harts, & which they do as verily beleeue, as you do verily beleeue that it is nowe
day,The wor∣kes of suche as speake with new tungs. or that anone it shal be night. With suche toungs they be able, truely and effectually to comforte the afflicted, to harten the weak-minded, to releeue them that are in despayre, to strengthen the fee∣ble, to counsell the fearefull, and to performe suche other things: which I make farre greater ac∣count of, then of the working of outward miracles, and of such as belong but only to the body. If a man haue not these things himself, ne can conuey them into others: I see not by what right he cā claime faith, vnlesse it be the fayth which the diuels haue, who do beleeue that there is a God, & do quake at him.Of the true and iustifying faith, and how migh¦ty it is in working. But I speake of the true and iustifying fayth, which maketh a man partaker of ye nature of God, and causeth all things to be possi∣ble to him. I haue shewed afore, howe great force beleefe hath in
matters of this worlde: and the same is to be seene euen in Religi∣on, be it false or true. The Turkes beleeue that wine is not to bee drunke, and therfore they can for∣beare wine. The Iewes beleeue that a man ought to absteine from the things which the Law forbid∣deth: and therefore they absteine. There are to be found which doo pyne them selues to death with long ouerfasting: some whippe them selues, I say not greeuou∣slye, but euen cruelly, till the bloud followe: other some for Religions sake doo take vppon them long pilgrimages,No man doubtes but that all these things ar spoken of the wic∣ked be∣leefe. wherein they indure beggerie and many other inconueniences and perils. What shall I saye of those whi∣che haue gelded them selues? What shall I say of the Circum∣cellions, who (as the report go∣eth of them) to thintent to become
Martyrs themselues and to make otherfolkes Martyrs with them, fordid themselues by sundry sorts of death, as drowning, burning, and leaping from high places, and perswaded other men to doe the like: all which things they dyd throughly beleeue. For vnlesse they had beleeued yt those things were to be done, they would not haue done them.By an ar∣gument from the lesser to the grea∣ter, he she¦weth the force of the true fayth. To bee shorte, whatsoeuer thing men beleeue is to be done, they can [indeuer to] do it. Now if their beleefe beeing false, and not onely not grounded vppon Gods commaundement, but also cleane contrary therevn∣to, haue notwithstanding suche strength: I pray you what is not that fayth or beleefe able to doe, which is both commaunded and also procured and strengthned by him? shall Gods spirite haue lesse power in man, then the spirite of
Satan? Shall lighte be of lesse force then darknesse? Ye see what force Paules fayth had: Unto this howre (sayth he) we be hun∣gry and thyrstie, naked, and buffe∣ted, we be tossed and turmoyled, we labour and worke with oure owne handes. Beeing rayled at, we wishe well: beeing vexed, we suffer it, beeing reuyled, we take comfort at it.Paules faith war¦ranted by his owne record. If they be ministers of Christ, much more am I: In la∣bour I exceede them, In taking strypes I go beyond them, In be∣ing imprisoned I passe them, In death I haue often bin: Of the Iewes I haue fyue times re∣ceyued fortye strypes saue one, Thrice haue I bin whipped, Once haue I bin stoned, Thrice haue I suffered shipwracke, Day & night haue I spent in the depe seas, Of∣ten haue I iourneyed, Often haue I bin in daunger of Riuers, of
Robbers, of mine owne Coun∣treimen, of straungrs, in the Citie, in the wildernes, on the sea, and among false brthren: Often haue I bin tyred with trauel∣ling and with watching: often haue I feinted for hunger and thyrst in fasting: often haue I bin a colde for want of clothes.What hing held Paul occupied chiefly & boue all other things. And besides all the other things which dayly distresse me, verily the care of all Churches lyeth vppon me. Who is weakned and I am not the wors at ase for it? who is of∣fended and I am not greued at it? This is the almightie strength of fayth, Lewis, wherewith he being armed, was inabled to do al things by him which strengtned him. And if we haue ye same strēg∣th, then surely thr is cause for vs to thinke ouslues to haue ye same faith: if not then let vs not beare our selues in hande, yt we haue the
thing which we wāt, least it befall vnto vs at it doth to yt man which dreameth yt he hath found a trea∣sure, and when he awaketh he hath not a halfepeny? Levv. O my Frederike,The true faith hath scarce a∣ny place in the world. my ima∣gination that I abounded in faith is but a dreame: but now beeing wakened by your wordes, I see playnly that I am quite & cleane without it, as the rest of ye world is. For as for this effectuall po∣wer of fayth, I nother finde it in myselfe, nor perceyue it in the world. Fred. That you bee faithlesse, Lewis, it is to be lamented: but that being so, you see yourself to be so, yt is not only not to be lamēted, but also to be reioyced at, like as a sicknesse is it selfe to be misliked, but the knowledge of the sicknesse is to be well lyked. Levv. By what meane then, or
by what medicine maye this my disease of vnbeleefe be cured? Fred. By taking away the im∣pedimentes of vnbeleefe. Lew. Which are those? Fred. You haue heard them of me already in my former talkes. Howbeit forasmuch as you haue scantly conceiued them as things that your eares haue not herd of: for our maner is not to be ouerha∣stie in bearing words or things a∣way which we haue not heard of afore,The impe¦dimentes of fayth shewed by an ar∣gument taken frō the court barre, or from a cace in Lawe. I will tell you them more playnly. Giue good heede. What thinke you to be the cause why no man in matters of iustice is ad∣mitted too bee a witnesse in his owne cace? Levv. Because all men do loue them selues, and therfore wil euer speake for themselues, or at least∣wise neuer agaynst themselues. Fred. You saye rightly. And if
they be not willing to speake a∣gainst themselues, nother are they willing to hear any thing against themselues. For the truth that is against them, misliketh them lesse out of another mans mouth, then out of their owne. Levv. It doth so. Fred. And if they be vnwilling to heare those things, truely they be not willing to beleeue them. For no man will willingly beleue ye things which he is loth to heare of: but all men do easily beleeue the things which they lyke of. As for example.An exā∣ple by the vse of things in commō. If a man should say that ye goods of Christians ought to be common among them, whe∣ther sorte would eazlyest beleeue it, the riche or the poore? Levv. The poore. Fred. Why so? Levv. Because that by yt match they should not lose, but rather
winne. Fred. What woulde the riche folke do? Lew. Hardly, or not at all ra∣ther, would they beleue it, bicause they shuld therby become the poo∣rer, which thing they mislike of. Fred. Another example by the de¦liuering of mens souls▪ &c.What if a man should de∣ny that mens soules are deliuered oute of Purgatory by Masses? whether would ye Cleargie, or the Laytie soonest beleeue it? Lew. Not the Cleargy, because that that opinion would be a di∣minishing of their reuenewes. Fred. What if it should be sayd that Usury were vnlawfull for Christians: were it possible to make those beleeue it, which lyue vppon Usury, and become riche by it? Levv. The laste example by the persecu¦tion for religion sake.Scarsly. Fred. What if one should teach that men ought not to be put to
death or religion: whether would they soonest beleeue it which are in credite with the Magistrates, & are diuines themselues, & yet are preuer of other mē, or atleast∣wise willing to persecute them, or the contrary sort? Levv. Th contrary sort. For I know some diuines, who as long as they wanted that authoritie▪ and were troubled for religions sake, taught that men ought not to be molested for religion. And yet the selfe same persons hauing gotten wealthe and authoritie, haue boh taughte and done the contraie. Fed. You see then how fayth is hindered by slfloue,Selfelou is the hiderer of fayth. so as men do not easily beleeue the things that are contrary to their lyking. Levv. I see it playnly. Fred. Let vs cōsider then whe∣ther the same cause be not an im∣pediment
to our beleefe in Christ. In the doctrine of Christ are hi∣stories, promises, and commaun∣dementes. As for the histories and promises, almost all men beleeue them, because that in them no du∣tie on mans behalfe is required. Nother is there any controuersie among Christians,There is o doubt mong Christiās ōcerning he doo∣ngs of hrist. whither Christ haue done the things whiche are reported of him in the holy Scrip∣tures, or whether he haue promi∣sed the things that are conteined there. But what is the cause that so fewe beleeue his commaunde∣mentes? Levv. Do fwer folke beleeue his commaundementes, then do beleeue his doings and promises? Fred. Doubt you of that? First as touching Gods commaunde∣ments, whereas our masters vni∣uersally be wont to teache, that they be not set downe to the intent
we should obey them, but to make vs acknowledge our infirmities▪ what else is it then a iscrediting of Gods commaundementes? For seeing our Lord hath sayd, that all things are possible to him that be∣leeueth: and Paule sayth he is a∣ble to doo all things through him that strengthneth him:What is the cause that so fewe be∣leue gods cōmaun∣dements. surely that man which not onely obeyeth not Gods commaundementes, but al∣so beleeueth that it is vnpossible to obey them, doth not beleue the commaundements aright. Wher∣vpon it followeth, that looke how fewe folke obey the commaunde∣mentes, so few do beleeue them. Levv. But this saying whiche you allege, namely, that al things are possible to the beleuer, seemeth to be spoken of myracles, and not of obedience. Fred. It is spoken generally of all the works of fayth which I
spake of in alledging that place of the Epistle to the Hebrewes. Tho∣rough fayth the Saints conque∣red kingdomes, wrought righte∣ousnes, &c. For surely, to worke righteousnes is a deede of fayth. Besides this,Not mi∣racles but beleefe is needeull to salua∣tion. if Gods wil be that men should through fayth be able to work miracles, which notwith∣standing are not of the necessitie of their saluation: muche more is it his will that they should by the same fayth bee able to obey his commaundementes, seeing that without obedience a man can not be saued, and that to obey is not a harder matter then to worke myracles, and yet that to obey belongeth to all beleeuers, wher∣as to worke myracles belongeth not to all, as I haue shewed a∣fore. Levv. In deede these things are true Frederike, but yet there re∣mayneth
one thing whiche I would ayne haue opened vnto me. You sayd euen now that all men beleeue Christes hystories, but not his commaundementes likewise.The be∣leuing Christes resurrection, maketh all the rest o his say∣ings and doings credible▪ But if they beleeued the whole story of Christ, and special∣ly his resurrection: in my opinion they should beleeue all the other things also. For no doubt but if they beleeued that Iesus Christ is risen from the dead, in so doing they should both beleeue that he is the very sonne of God in deede, and moreouer giue credite to all his sayings. In whiche respect Iohn sayde, These thinges are written to the intent yee mighte beleeue that Iesus is the annoyn∣ted sonne of God, & that through beleeuing it ye should obteine lite by his nam. Fred. Wheras I deny that they beleeue his commaundementes,
I would not haue it so taken,What is ent by ot be∣euing of Christes ōmaun∣ements, nd who hey bee hat offēd n that ehalfe. as though they beleeued not that his commaunding of those thinges was well, and as became ye sonne of God to do: but that forasmuch as they beleue not that the things which he commaunded to be done are eyther possible or needefull to be done, misconstering them after their owne fancie, and not accor∣ding to his mind: I say they be∣leeue them not aright. For your better vnderstanding wherof, I will giue you an example. When God hauing brought the children of Israel out of Egipt, commaun∣ded them to enter into the land of Canaan, did they beleue that god commaunded it? Lew. Yea verily. Or else they would neuer haue sent Spyes in∣to the lande of Canaan. Fred. Why then did they not obey him?
Lew. Because they were of opi∣nion that the Chananites could not be ouercome,How the Israelites beleeued not God in that they be∣leued no his com∣maunde∣ment. and that God had brought them out of Egypt, not to conquer Canaan, but to pe∣rish wretchedly in the wildernes. Fred. Then did they not beleue Gods commandement according to Gods meaning, forasmuche as his meaning was that they should haue inuaded Canaan, & subdued the Chanaanites. Lew. You say the trueth. Fred. Then did they not beleue aright. Levv. No, not aright. Fred. Whether then are they to be called beleuers or vnbeleuers? Levv. Truly by this reason they should be called vnbeleeuers. Fred. And soothly so bee they (Lewis) in very deede. For in the very same place God calleth them vnbeleeuers in these words. How
long will this people spite mee? How long will it be ere they will beleue me, for al ye miracles which I haue wrought among them? Now, if these be iustly called vn∣beleeuers, the same reason lea∣deth vs to call the others vnbe∣leeuers and distrusters of Chri∣stes cōmaundementes, forasmuch as they do no lesse misconster the preceptes of Christ, than the Is∣raelites did the commaundemen∣tes of God. For Christ hath not wrought fewer miracles to vs, then Moses did to them. Nother doth Christ cōmaund vs lesse ear∣nestly to subdue sinne, then God commaunded them to subdue the Cananites. Nother are we lesse spiteful & distristful towards him, if we deny that sinne may be sub∣dued, when as he both commaun∣deth vs & promiseth vs strength, then they were spitefull and di∣strustfull
towards God, in deny∣ing it to be possible to ourcome the Cananites. Nother do we of∣fende lesse agaynst the meaning of Christ, when we deny that it is eyther possible for vs, or ment by Christ, that we should do the things which he hath commaun∣ded vs to doo, then the Israe∣lites offended agaynst the mea∣ning of God, when they wrested it another waye then hys open wordes imported. And there∣fore in denying them to beleeue Christes commaundementes, I do them no wrong.How the place ta∣ken out of Iohn is to be vnder∣stood. As touching the place of Iohn by you alleged, it is too bee taken as if a man should haue sayde at that tyme to the Israelites, God hath wrought these miracles for your sakes in Egypt, to the intent you should beleeue and by beleuing enter in∣to the rstingplace of Chanaan.
But the cause why all of thē came not there, was not Gods purpose, but their owne hardening of their hartes against him: which thing woulde God were not done in Christ also. But wee see it is so, Howbeit the author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes warneth vs, not to do it, citing this saying out of a certain Psalm,Psal. 95.8 To day if ye heare his voyce, harden not your hartes as your forefathers did harden theirs. Therefore to returne agayne to the matter,Selfeloue dazeleth mens eies that they can not see to be∣leeue the truth. Whereas these men are wont so diligently to picke out the things to beleeue, which be∣long to the office of God, and to refuse the things that perteine to the duetie of man, I praye you what a dealing is it? Gods gra∣cious goodnes hath yelded salua∣tion to all men: O how gladly is this admitted. But as for that which followeth, namely, to teach
vs to forsake vngodlynesse and worldly lusts, and to liue thriftily, righteously, and godlily in this world, that is a seede which fewe men receiue. Many beleeue that Christ hath so performed yt poynt, as that we neede not to performe the same. Againe, that the man is blessed to whom the Lorde impu∣teth no sinne, is easily beleeued of all men: but as for that which is annexed to it, namely, & in whose hart there is no guyle, that they beleeue to be vnpossible. Likewise it is commonly vaunted with full mouth, that they whiche are in Christ Iesus are not subiect to a∣ny condemnation, for it is a very sweete saying: but as for this, VVhich walke not after the flesh, but after the spirite, it is bitter, and of very few beleeued. And (to make few words) men do easily beleue that they shall reape with ioy: but
if you tel them that they must sow with teares,hat is he cause hy false rophets oe easi∣ finde redite. they put that sentēce ouer vnto Christ. Herevpon it commeth to passe, that the false prophets because they teach delec∣table things, & blaze abrode Gods pleasaunt promises with open mouth do easily find credit: wher∣as the true prophets, because they vrge men and make them afraide with threats, and teach the truth seuerely, do beare sway among very fewe, according as Esay cri∣eth out, Lord who hath beleeued our preaching? Heereby it appea∣reth playnly my Lewis, that self∣loue is the let that men beleue not the trueth. And if selfeloue were done away, they would beleeue nothing so easily as the trueth, as who are borne vnto trueth, and do by and by fall in acquayn∣taunce with it as a thing of their owne kinne, if there be no impedi∣ment
to let it. Therefore if you will rightlye beleeue the trueth, (that is to say, God,) you muste needes put away selfeloue, or ra∣ther conceiue a hatred towards your selfe. Levv. Truly Frederik,We must of neces∣sitie hae our selues and not loue our selues. you win me to be of your minde in these things: but it is no smal matter for a man to hate himself. Nother do I see how I may attaine vnto it, or yet perceiue whether it be possi∣ble for me to attaine thereto, I am so farre in loue with my selfe. Fred. I know Lewis,Al things be they else neuer so impos∣sible, are possible to the power of God. that it is a very hard thing, and passing the strength of man: but in this case we must beare in minde, how that whē Sara beleued not yt she might breede child, our Lord said of her: Is there any thing which god can not do? The things yt are vnpossi∣ble to man, are possible to God, & wher god is our guide, nothing is
to be despayred of. Lew. How per¦nicious selfloue is, is she∣wed by certayne familiar exāples.I beseech you then shewe me the way to attayne thervnto. Fred. By Gods leaue I will do it: giue eare vnto me. If I had a Seruant in whom I very much delighted, fayrespoken and serui∣sable, whiche should prepare me some meates that best liked mine appetite, & with the same meates should mingle poyson to bereeue me of my life, and you who loue me should haue knowledge there∣of, what would you doo? Levv. Surely, I would spedily and earnestly giue you warning, that you should not taste of those meates, nor loue that seruant, for that he lay in wayte for your life. Fred. What if I should say that I am delighted with the seruisa∣ble behauiour of that seruant, and with ye sweetnes of his cooquerie? Lew. I would counsel you that
you should not make so great ac∣count of your present pleasure, as to loose your life for it. Fred. What if some friende of yours were in loue with a flatte∣ring and a peinted harlot, whiche were diseased with the Frenche pockes, and you knew of it: what would you do? Levv. I would make him priuie to her disease, and (to the vtter∣most that I could) I would dis∣swade him from her companie. Fred. What if he sayde he were delighted with her? Lew. I would tell him that Fi∣shes also are delited with baytes:Men are caught with ple∣sure as fishes are with an Angle & a bayt, to their vn∣doing. but yet that it were folly to pur∣chase so small pleasure with so great sorrowes, or rather with death. Fred. What if he should say that he can not but like well of the pleasure?
Levv. I would counsell him, that if he could not yet restrayne the desire of his minde, he should at leastwise resist it, and not yeeld to obey it. Fred. But what if he obeyed it for all that? Lew. Then would I think him foolisher then the brute beasts, and worthy of any mischief. For fishes wolues, foxes, puttocks, and such other, be they neuer so hungry, wil neuerthelesse forbeare the bayte, if they spye or mistrust any snare, or any thing wherewith they may be caught. Fred. You saye trueth Lewis. Thus then standeth ye case.Euerye mannes own flesh is a Har∣lot, of whom he warneth men to take very good heede. Euery mans own flesh is as a Harlot (as Iudas termeth it in his Epistle,) yea and a peinted harlot, which with her inticements & fayrefaw∣nings, doth allure, delight, & egge the man to sinne, & hold him down
in sinne, and at length throw him headlong into death of the soule. And man beeing ignorant of the poyson, imbraceth the pleasures & yeelds himself ouer to them. Now commeth in truth as a friend vnto him, & warneth him that ye wages of sinne is death, declaring vnto him that his flesh whom he tooke to haue bin his friend, is his dead∣ly enimie.Moste wholso counsai and wothy to b followe Therefore if thou desire to be saued, thou must beleue that thou hast not a more noysome eni∣mie to thee then thy selfe, that is to say, thē thy flesh, or thy lustfulnes, & that as thou hast hitherto loued it, thou must hencefoorth hate it and resist it, because it is noysome and deadly. And although thou canst not ridde away her allure∣ments out of hande, as in deede thou canst not, for they sticke fast to thee: the trueth wyll saye vnto thee, as it sayde in olde tyme
vnto Moyses, Go thy waye into Egypt (for it lyeth in thee to doo that,) and I will bee with thy mouth, and I will inable thee to do that which thou canst not do. Euen so Lewis, the trueth sayth vnto thee as now: Do thou what thou at able, and God will ina∣ble thee to do that whiche thou canst not do.A very fit example, and not o be pas∣ed light∣y ouer. As for exāples sake. Thou sittest at a well furnished table, and hast eaten ynough al∣ready to refresh thy powers and to staunch hunger. Now there is brought in some delicate dishe, made to prouoke gluttony with∣all. By and by thy flesh is tempted with it, and putteth suche an ima∣gination as this in thy head: This is a fine dish, if I eate of it I shall receiue pleasure by it. But the spi∣rite striueth against the flesh, and warneth thee thus: beware Le∣wis that thou yeelde not vnto vo∣luptuousnes,
for voluptuousnes is a poysoner.The incō¦parable harmes that co of plea∣sure. For first it calleth away thy minde from God, than the which there can be no greater mischiefe. For seeing that no man can serue two masters, thou canst not serue both voluptuousnes and god, because voluptuousnes ouer∣whelmeth the minde, beareth it downe to the ground, and sepa∣rateth it from God. Besides this, it also hurteth the body with sur∣fetting, insomuche that although thou haddest no soule, yet oughtest thou to absteine from superfluitie, euen for thy bodies sake. I re∣quire not now that you should not be tempted with the inticements of the flesh, but that you should not obey them. And whereas you alledge that you can not but obey them, you be easily disproued. For if a man would giue you a floren to absteine from the sayde dishe,
would you not absteine? [Yes.] And will you not absteine by rea∣son of the trueth? Do you not hereby bewray, that the truth bea∣reth lesse sway with you then one floren? Or if some man shoulde threaten that he would giue you a blow on the eare if you refrayned not: surely you would refrayne. Beholde God threatneth a blowe vnto your soule, and yet you re∣fraine not. The like I say of all other thinges.The pre∣posterous prefer∣ring of the feare of world∣ly punish∣ment be∣fore the feare of Gods wrath & venge∣aunce. You be minded to haue to doo with a whore▪ but bi∣cause a boye is by, you doo it not. Beholde, God is present, and yet you be not ashamed to do it. Do you not nowe make lesse account of Gods presence then of the pre∣sence of a boy? Or if you forbeare for feare of punishment at mans hande, and not as well for feare of Gods punishmente: doo you not preferre man before God?
You are angrye with a man, and you woulde fayne cudgell hym, but you forbeare for feare of the Magistrate: Why forbeare you not as well for feare of God? I pray you, if you make as great reckoning of God, as you doo of men, why doth the feare of God beare lesse swaye with you then the feare of men? You slaunder your neighbour: God seeth the slaunder, and yet you doo it ne∣uerthelesse. But if men sawe it, you woulde not doo it.The con∣clusion gathered of the thinges going a∣ore. Runne through all things after the same sorte Lewis, and you shall see that whosoeuer doth more for the loue or feare of men, then of God, doth beleeue in men, rather then in God. Levv. O my Frederike, my con∣science beareth mee witnesse, that the things which you say, be
true and rightfull: but thereof springeth a greefe in my hart. Fred. Why so? did you feele a∣ny suche greefe when we treated of Predestination or of Freewill? Levv. No, none at all. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis. For knowledge bringeth no greef, but rather gladnes, as which leaueth the old man vnappayred.The kno∣wing of many, yea or of all things is no let but that men may serue the Diuell. For al∣though you could skil of al maner of mysteries, yet might you serue the diuell euer still. But nowe when we deale with ye foresaking of our selues, the flesh perceyuing that she must go to wrake for it, playeth as Harlots are wont to do when young men giue them ouer. They vexe them with the desire of them, and try all meanes to holde them still. Euen so that Harlot the fleshe, which betwit∣cheth all men with the cup of her vncleannesse, as soone as she per∣ceiueth
that a man mindeth to giue her the slippe, doth vexe him with the desire of her stil, and lea∣ueth nothing vnattempted, that she maye holde him still. Hereof breedeth great greefe, according to the greatnes of ye loue towards the fleshe, like as if you were to forsake your Countrie, looke how much you were in loue with your Countrie, so much would it greue you to forgo it.Sinne being our natiue Countri cannot be forsaken without greefe to vs. And surely sin is our Countrie, (for in sinne haue our mothers conceiued vs) which cannot be forsaken without greef. Here is yt Crosse of Christ, wherof he him selfe sayth, If any man be minded to come after me, let him take vp his Crosse and follow me. And if any man come vnto me and hate not his father & mother, wife and children, brethren & sy∣sters, yea and euen his owne lyfe, so as he be contented to beare his
crosse and to folowe me, he cannot be my disciple.e will arne to e oure es, we ust me∣re it by re ha∣ng of o∣er men. And to the intent you may vnderstande what the hating of a mans self is, and what crosse it bringeth with it, consider it throughly by the hating of ano∣ther man. If you hated a man deadly, how would you be min∣ded towards him? or what would you do to him? Lew. I would wish him al euil euen from my heart, & likewise en∣uie him any good, I would be sory for his welfare, & glad of his ad∣uersitie. If a man broght me word of any mischance of his, I would reioyce at it, & both gētly intertein & liberally rewarde the messenger with some gifte. To be short, I would loue mine enimies foes & do them good, & I would hate his friends and do them harme if I could. All his sayings and doings would I prye at, and take aduan∣tage
of them, and by all meanes possible (yea diuers times euen to mine owne harme) would I hurt him. Finally, I would kill him if I coulde, and that not by anye cōmon maner, but with the gree∣ousest death that could be: and I woulde doo what I could to wype the very remembraunce of him out of the world. Fred. Now turne this your ha∣tred Lewis, towards your selfe: for you are a deadly enimy to your self,Euery mā is a dead∣ly enemy to him∣selfe: and how such an enemy is to bee delt with. & ought to hate your self dead∣ly, and not other men, who cannot kill you, that is to say, your soule. And therefore you must take pay∣nes to wishe all maner of euill, yea and euen death, to your selfe, that is to wit, to your flesh, and to en∣uye her all good things, and to be sory for her prosperitie, & to be glad of her aduersitie. And that if any man tell you any thing amisse of
your selfe, you may reioyce therat in spirit, and liberally reward the reporter thereof: and (to be short) that you may deuise and doo all things against your selfe, as men are wont to do against those with whom they be at deadly foode, & that you neuer rest till you haue killed your selfe.The flesh and the spirit are cleane contraries and fght full but one a∣gainst a∣nother. And forasmuch as no man hath euer yet hated his owne flesh, (as sayth S. Paule.) You must first and formost be di∣uorced from your fleshe, that she may no longer be your fleshe, but straunge fleshe: and in her steede you must place the spirit, betwene whom and the flesh there can ne∣uer be any more concord or agree∣ment, then betwene fyre & water. Levv. O my Frederike, to tell you the truth, me thinks ye things that you speake of are as harde as stone. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis, and
so must it nedes be. But be of good chere, and begin euen now to loue me in spirite, because I am an ad∣uersarie to your flesh. For it is for your benefite, and you can not be saued so long as your flesh is aliue. Wherefore if you will be saued, see that ye hate your selfe, and forsake your selfe.A familiar exāpl whereby he goeth about to teache a man ho to for∣sake him selfe. And I will tell you an example of this forsaking. If a seruant giue ouer himselfe in bon∣dage to you, he abandoneth him selfe, that is to say, his owne liber∣tie and will, thenceforth to follow your will and not his owne. Of∣tentimes when he would sleepe, he must watch if his master com∣maund him: when he would goe abrode, he must tary at home: whē he would play, he must work: and (at a worde) he so forgoeth his owne freedome, that if he be asked what he will do, or what he min∣deth to do, he must answere, what
his master listeth, at whose ap∣pointment he is. So we (if we be∣lōg to Christ, who hath bought vs at a great price,) are not at oure owne disposition or appoyntment, but at Christes: and therefore we must doo, not what we lst, but what he listeth, and worthily. For if he, beeing the waye and the trueth, did notwithstanding so submit his will to the will of his father, that he sayde, Not my will be done, but thine: what becom∣meth it vs to doo,A triacle agaynst the diue∣lish lustes of the flesh▪ and the insti∣gatiōs of the ic∣ked will, to re∣srain thē withall. which are ouer-couered with errours and lea∣sings? Therefore when you be a∣bout to be angrye without cause, you must restrayne your anger at the appoyntment of Christ. When you would giue your selfe to vo∣luptuousnes, you must absteine, and giue your selfe to sorrowing. When you would be aduenged of any body, you must forgiue him.
When you woulde doo a man harme, you muste doo him good. When you woulde laughe, you muste weepe. When you would sew for honour, you must indure shame. When you would seeke ri∣ches, you muste suffer pouertye. And (to be short) you must in suche wise depart from your own will: as if you be asked what you woulde, you maye answere, no∣thing but what Christ listeth.That to the bele∣uer all things seme they neuer so high, harde, or aboue our power, are not∣withstan∣ding eas to be done. And all these things shal you do throgh faith. For vnlesse you beleued, you would not do them. But it is ne∣cessary to be vnderstoode what is ment by this saing of S. Paules, that we must proceede from fayth to fayth. There is a certayne first and vnperfect beleefe, whereby a man is moued to renounce hym selfe. This beeing once kindled, becommeth daylye greater by a mans holding on, vntill at length
he be come so farre, that he doth as certenly beleeue all Gods say∣ings commandements, promises, and threatnigs: as you beleeue that the day shall succeede ye night. Hence springeth that almightie power of fayth, wherthrough it is able to remoue mountaynes, so as there is no pride, no couetousnes, no lechery, nor (to be short) no vice so huge & great, which that fayth is not able to put away, and to plucke vp by the oote. Howbeit, ere euer a man attayne to that strength, he is to indure many hard things in the way of his for∣saking of him selfe, and without such hardnes, there is no accesse to be had to that strength, like as a figge or a grape can not become sweet, except it be first sowre. And because I my selfe haue not yet obteined the victorie, but doo yet still sweate in the incounter of for∣saking
my self, and as yet am farre of from the garlande: I will say no more concerning the victorie, that is to say, concerning the thing that is vnknowen vnto me: but yet as much as I can I will helpe you (by Gods grace) in ye incoun∣ter, if you will be my companion. Lew. Truely for my parte, al∣though my selfe do shudder & start backe at it, yt am I caryed with my spirite & minde to follow you. For I see no other way for a man to be saued,There is but onlye one right waye to the attein¦ment of saluation but by departing out of his owne nature, that he maye put vpon him the nature of Christ, and by caring, studying, striuing, and taking paynes to repayre the image wherafter we were crea∣ted. And therefore beseeching God that it may be to his glory & mine own saluation, henceforth I yeeld my self into this way as a folower of Christ, taking god for my guid.
Fred. And I thank God for this willingnes which he hath giuen you, beseeching him to finishe his work which he hath begon in you, & to bring you to that poynt, that ye may at length serue righteous∣nes as you haue serud vnrighte∣ousnes, which thin he wil vndou∣tedly doo, except you greeue his spirite and cast it out through your disobediēce.Mē must ot con∣eiue prely & igadly,  rge¦y and a∣undant∣y o gods acious goodnes. Finally of this I will warney n, that you must haue a riche fayth, because you beleeue in him that is riche in doing good. For men haue euer sinned in belee∣uing vntowardly, and more ni∣gardly of Gods gracious good∣nes, then they ought to do. Abra∣ham and Sara were rebuked for laughing, as though it had but a matter to be laughed at, that God promised them issue when they were both olde, and Sara moreour barr. in. Zacharias the
father of Iohn Baptist was stri∣ken dumbe for a tyme, because he beleeued not the Angels words. We be commonly more forwarde in folowing the weake beleefe (or if I may so terme it) the vnbeleef of the godly, then in following their full and riche beleefe. Why doo we not rather followe those which durst beleeue all things? Eliseus durst craue double the spi∣rite of Elias,We can not ask so largely at God hand, bu that his bountie will sur∣moūt it. (which soothly was a great thing euen by the record of Elias him selfe) and yet he ob∣teined it: so vnpossible is it for any fayth to be so great, but that Gods gracious goodnes and po∣wer doo surmount the same. All thinges (sayth he) are possible to the beleeuer. Agayne, Whatsoeuer yee aske, beleeue that you shall obteyne it, and yee shall haue it in deede. Remember (I saye) the saying of Elizeus, speaking
after this maner to the poore wo∣man: Borrow oyle-vessels of thy neighbours, yea borrow a great sort, and the Lord will fill them al full. Euen so Lewis, let vs do our indeuor that we may haue suche a fayth, as maye be able to receiue the greatest good things, and let vs be bolde to beleeue that God both can and will bring to passe, that we shall loue him alone with our whole heart, soule, power, and strength.od will aunt vs  good ings for hristes ke. And he of his owne gra∣cious goodnes will bestowe all things vpon vs, much more large∣ly then we can euen thinke, for his sonne our Lorde Iesus Chri∣stes sake, to whom be honour, glory, and dominion for euer. Amen. FINIS.
A godly and fruteful pra∣yer, which beeing gathered out of the whole Dialogue, doth briefly compre∣hende the chiefe things that are to be obserued therin, & are there more largely opened. Made by Abraham Flemming Londoner borne. ALmightie and euerla∣sting God, which vp∣pon vs wretched sin∣ners, hast heaped vp many or rather infinit benefites, and vpon vs vntamed Hekfars despising the healthfull words of thy commaundements, hast bestowed most singuler orna∣mentes, euen the riches of thy grace: behold our lowlynes, and see how we cast our selues downe in comming to make sute at the throne of thy Maiestie, crying for helpe from heauen, that we maye be bolde to bring those things to
passe, which of our owne power we be scarsely or rather vtterly vnable to attempt. Let thy sonne Christ the bright light and full wisedome of the fa∣ther, shine vnto vs: Let him be our guide and directer: let him inligh∣ten our dim harts: Let him soften the thing that is hard, scoure the thing that is filthy, sweeten the thing yt stinketh, righten the thing that is crooked, lighten the thing that is darke, hallowe the thing that is vnholy, and finally make whole and perfect in all poyntes, the thing that is maymed and vn∣perfect, that by that meanes wee maye at length become the fore∣warder to performe those things which thy diuine word inioyneth vs, and to leaue the things vn∣done which we bee forbidden to meddle withall. Graunt O mercifull God, such
light of true knowledge, as may leade vs foorth righte, and make vs to walke without stumbling, in the wayes of thy worde. Let the true obedience take deepe roote in vs, whiche is wonte to bee more acceptable and plea∣saunt to thee, then any sacrifice. Increace in vs that fayth, with∣out which we can not please thee. Let that fayth bee effectuall and mightie in vs, that hauing shaken off all distrust, and put away all disobedience, we may not onely beginne, but also proceede and perseuer ater suche a sorte in be∣leeuing, as we may become wor∣thy of the name whereby we be called. And forasmuch as the nature of faith & obedience is such, that the one followeth the other as vnse∣parable cōpanions, insomuch that
faith without obedience is deade, and obedience without faith is liuelesse: bestow both of them vp∣on vs most gracious father. Giue vs myndes desyrous to know the truth, and able to conceiue the se∣cretes of thy worde: that all our sayinges and doinges maye yeelde to the gouernmente of righte rea∣son. Good God we beseeche thee giue vs not ouer in bondage to our own blinde and vnsauerye iudge∣ment, whereby we being led, or ra∣ther caried away may neglect our whole dutie towardes thee. Bring to passe we beseeche thee almightie Father, that vnto thee whiche haste raised vs out of no∣thing, shaped vs of clay, fashioned vs after thine owne image, indued vs with the light of reason, and fi∣nallye inriched vs with manye giftes, vnto thee, I say, wee may thinke our selues beholden for all
thinges which we haue, commen∣ding thee for them, and setting forth thy prayse. Let vs yeelde our selues seruiseable and obediente, first vnto thee O most high God, and secondly to our parentes, and to all others which loue vs, & seeke our welfare. Driue from vs all fleshly feare, which letteth vs to acknowledge our sinnes, and maketh vs rather to conceale them. Let the consci∣ence of our misdeedes sting vs, let that sharpe and pearcing spade of thine (I meane heart greefe accor∣ding to the will of God) cut vp the sandye, drie, and droughtie soile of our hartes, that bewayling our sinnes and repenting vs of our life forespent, wee maye giue ouer our selues wholy to thy haeuenly will, resort vnto thy holye Tabernacle, giue our selues earnestly to praier, delight in vncorruptnesse of beha∣uiour,
and finally shun all maner of words and deede from which the word of life disswadeth vs. Graunt O Lorde we beseeche thee, that we cooping vp our wā∣dring lusts into a corner, may wor¦ship thee sincerely, and offering vp our bodies a liuely sacrifice vnto thee, may fasten our fayth on thee alone, sticking fast to thy promises, & depending al wholly vpon thee. Graunt we beseech thee O mer∣cyfull father, that wee maye ac∣knowledge thine vnsearcheable goodnes, make our songs there∣of, and haue it in admiration. Plucke out of our hartes all the rootes of vnbeleefe, that we may truely, deuoutly, and vndouting∣ly beleeue in thee. Let Abraham the father of the faythfull teache vs what manner of beleefe wee ought to imbrace, namely that which leadeth to sal∣uation,
all counterfeit and ydle fayth beeing, put to slight. A sub∣stantiall and sounde iudgement power into vs, O euerlasting God, that hauing taken our laste leaue of worldly beleefe, we may cherishe in vs that true fayth sent downe from heauen, where∣by we take holde of Christ Iesus, through whose power and wor∣king we may be able to performe the things which maye beste be∣seeme the faythfull: and that bee∣ing moystened in our minds with the deawe of thy heauenly wise∣dome, we may labour to attayne to the heauenly things. Graunt O most merciful father, that we may be faythfull and o∣bedient, first vnto thee, and then to all others vnder whose gouerne∣ment thou haste put vs, that by this meanes our consciences may be eased of most heauy burthens,
and we at length haue whereof to reioyce and be glad. We know O euerlasting God, that our sal∣uation cōmeth of thy free bestowed mercy, wherof there is none other way for vs to take holde, then by true & vndoubting faith, through whiche faith our forefathers be∣came most highly renowmed, and by furtheraunce thereof wrought things to be wondered at. Uouch∣safe O louing father, of thine infi∣nite goodnesse to enriche vs with this faith, that being throughly in∣dewed therewith, wee maye per∣forme the workes of Charitie, without the which all fayth or be∣leefe whatsoeuer it bee, as filthye and vnworthy of so muche as the bare name of faith. But vnto vs whiche striue to please thy deuine maiestie, graunt O mercifull God that we maye foster, cherishe, and shew forth that iustifying & quick∣ning
faith, wherewith Paule bee∣ing furnished and armed at all poynts, became a most patient in∣durer of very many perils, euen which were deadly: insomuch that he did set more store by the loue of thy Gospell, then by his owne life, then the which there is not any thing in ye world more deare. Not without cause do we complayne, most mercyfull father, that this fayth is nowhere to be founde a∣mong men: for all kind of naugh∣tinesse is crepte into the whole world, and there is not any corner so secret, which is not most shame∣fully disgraced and filthily defiled with the vncleannes thereof. O lamentable age. Among the other impediments of fayth (which are many, as thou knowest O thou inhabiter of the highest heauens) there steppeth foorth self loue, who calleth vs backe from the true
worshipping of thee, and by tick∣ling vs in the eare with I wot not what, is wholly occupied in per∣swading vs to set our minds vpon the things that are here beneath, and to leaue the care of the things that are aboue, to them that are a∣boue. Good God cast out this di∣uell, that we maye no more serue the flesh, but that the spirite maye at length ouerrule vs. Without whose staye, forasmuch as mans minde being slippery and turning to euery opinion, is oftentimes snarled in such snares of errours, as he can neuer get out of: we be∣seeche thee bereeue vs not vtterly of the light of thy heauenly grace, least as some haue boldly denyed the rising agayne of thy sonne, so wee also doo fall into the same dungeon neuer to get out agayne: but rather graunt that by belee∣uing we may become partners of
the vnspeakable glory, which thou wilt shew foorth in the last day. Sort vs out O almightie God, from the company of those which beleeue not Christes commaunde∣ments whosoeuer they be, and suf∣fer vs not to become like the vn∣beleeuing people of Israell, who beeing ouercouered with the mul∣titude and hugenesse of thy bene∣fites, wallowed themselues in the puddle of their owne wickednes, not euen then departing frō their shameful lewdnes, whē they per∣ceyued thy loue turned into ha∣tred, thy patience into fury, and thy long sufferance into reuenge. Finally O most merciful father, to the intent we may hartily be∣leeue, driue all selfe loue farre from vs, make vs deafe at the perswa∣sions of false prophets: let vs ra∣ther hate then loue our selues: let
vs acknowledge that all things lye open to thy power. Let vs dis∣cerne how deadly a poyson selfe∣loue is, let vs despise the pleasures of this world, let vs beware of the whorish deceires of our owne fleshe, let vs shunne the spitefull delightes of this worlde, let vs be afrayde to stande in lesse awe of thy wrath and vengeaunce, then of mens threatnings and pu∣nishments, let vs abhorre the ser∣uing of the diuell, let vs bee de∣sirous to forsake our owne na∣tiue countrie, that is to say, sinne, let vs learne to hate our selues by the hatred of others. Let vs haue skill howe to deny our selues, let vs beate downe the diuelish lustes of the flesh, beeing fenced with the sheelde of fayth as with a banke, let vs set our selues agaynst all daungers, let
vs reape thence a most plentifull croppe and store of fruites, and beeing garded therewith, let vs incounter with out enimies both at hande and aloofe, marche on the right and ready waye to the attaynement of saluation, and haue the best opinion that maye bee concerning thy heauenly gra∣cious goodnes, acknowledging that it is able to performe more then we can eyther craue or de∣uise. Let vs consecrate our selues wholly vnto thee, leading a holy and vncorrupt lyfe, that by that meanes, after the breathing out of our Ghost, and the buryall of our body, we may rest at length moste happily in thy lappe. All these thinges, and whatsoeuer else both this flightfull life of ours craueth, and also the endlesse
worlde to come requireth, vouch∣safe most bountifull and mercifull father, to bestowe vpon vs abun∣dauntly, through Iesus Christe our Lorde. So be it. FINIS. ¶Imprinted at London by Thomas Poorfoote: And are to be solde at his shoppe ouer-agaynst S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate.
