5576 99852538 17863
THE ATTESTATION OF THE Most Excellent, and Most Illustrious Lord, DON CARLOS COLOMA, Embassadour Extraordinary for Spayne. OF THE DECLARATION made vnto him, by the Lay Catholikes of England: Concerning the Authority chal∣lenged ouer them, by the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon. WITH THE ANSWERE OF A CA∣tholike Lay Gentleman, to the Iudg∣ment of a Deuine, vpon the Letter of the Lay Catholikes, to the sayd Lord Bishop of Chalcedon. Superiorum permissu. M. DC. XXXI.
The Approbation of the famous Prea∣cher and Deuine, and most ancient a∣mongst the Doctours of Diuinity of Sorbone now liuing. SEing the ground of this whole Controuersy among the English Catholiks is therin pla∣ced, that the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon seemes to challeng more vnto him∣selfe, then is graunted by the faculties giuen him by the Sea Apostolike: from whence it comes, that out of the diuerse opinions & iud∣gemēts, which are with heat framed by many, there arise debats in this present tyme both dā∣gerous and hurtfull: To the appeasing & quie∣ting whereof, no remedy seemes more to the purpose, then to make fully knowne to all, the true sense and feeling of the Catholikes, & that his Holynes doe more clearely lay open his mind concerning the faculties graunted to the sayd Right Reuerend Lord Bishop. To both which this present Declaration of the English Catholikes is most necessary: therfore I iudge it worthy to be published in print, that it may be perused of all. Dated at Tornay the 29. of April 1631. Iohn Boucher Sorbone Doctour in Diuinity, Chanon and Archdeacon in Tornay, and Censor of Bookes.
THE DECLARATION OF THE Lay Catholikes of England, concerning the Authority challenged ouer them, by the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of CHALCEDON. WEE Lay Catholickes of the realme of England, haue vn∣derstood from sundry parts of the Christian world, that a foule as∣persion is cast vpon our honour & repu∣tation, for that we are iudged to frame a lesse reuerēd conceit of Episcopal Autho∣thority,
and iurisdiction, and not to ren∣der it that Obediecne, which may be thought fit. The only cause of this, is ta∣ken from thence, that we refuse to sub∣mit our selues to that power & Authority which the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon hath long since pretended▪ as due vnto his place; and to the which (as we are assured vpon strong motiues) he still layeth clayme, taking it as graunted him from the Sea Apostolike. This pre∣tended Authority of his, hath byn main∣tayned by sundry Treatises, as well writ∣ten, as printed, which warrant his Ordi∣nariship, and assure him of as much po∣wer, as is granted to other Ordinaries, in what Catholike Diocesse soeuer, and warne vs that the same Obedience is to be performed towards him on our part. Moreouer we are told, that hitherto we were not a Church, as long as we wan∣ted a particular Bishop; but a flocke with∣out a Pastor, an Army without a Gene∣rall, a Ship without a Pilot, a spirituall kingdome without a spirituall king, a fa∣mily without the good mā of the house; in a word, no true, or perfect Christians.
And although, as soone as we had retur∣ned an answere to a Letter sent vs from my Lord Bishop, presently diuers scanda∣lous wrytings (which his Lordship ne∣uer sought to suppresse, nor seemed to dislike of) were spread abroad, and we therin traduced with no small disparage∣ment to our reputation, and preiudice to our cause, especially in the opinion of the vnlearned; yet we chose rather to forgoe our proper, and priuate inte∣rest, then by standing out with vehe∣mency for our owne right, eyther af∣foard vnto others a subiect of scandall, or giue way to the daunger of an ensuing Schisme. Wherfore in silence we left the decyding of this matter to those, who by their Highest power in the Church of God, were as well his Lordships, as our Superiours. But seeing there haue not wanted many both at home and abroad who in a matter nothing belonging to them, and who could not so much as pre∣tend any Authority ouer vs, haue not∣withstanding vsurped the freedome of giuing iudgment in our cause, with great domage to our fame and honour, which
we endeare aboue our liues; we haue thought good to declare and auouch en∣tierly, and faithfully before God and man these ensuing points. First, we sincerely beliee & professe that Episcopall Authority in the Catho∣lick Church was ordained by God, and, as it beseemeth good Catholickes, we honour it with all reuerence; and daily beg with our best wishes, that the diuyne Goodnes will once be pleased to send a tyme, in which that authority, which is truly giuen, and which we account full necessary in the Catholick Church, may safely be established amongst vs, and we without increase of persecution, ack∣nowledge it, and as humbly submit our selues vnto it, as they do, who liue in coū∣tries not liable to lawes enacted against Religion, of which kind very many, and those seuere and capitall, be heere with vs in force. Which fauour, if we could but obteyne of his diuine Maiesty, truly we should esteeme our selues thrice-happy. Furthermore we declare openly, that for as much as belongeth to the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, we
honour and reuerence him in all duty, & take him to be a true Catholick Bishop, sent hither by the sea Apostolick to admi∣nister the Sacrament of Confirmation, & as we thinke, to gouerne that part of the Clergy, which is cōmitted to his charge; but not to be our Ordinary, either after an ordinary or extraordinary māner, because we in no case belieue, that any such thing hath bin hitherto declared by the sea A∣postolicke, seeing that the tymes, into which we are fallen, do no wayes permit vs to obey such Authority, without en∣dangering the losse of our goods, & such a losse, as cannot be recouered. Neither do we only thinke, that the Sea Aposto∣lick hath not as yet, bestowed any such of∣fice, power, or authority vpon the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon; but moreouer we rest assured, that it is not the intentiō of his Holines to grant it him herafter, vntil those times returne, which may promise, that this power will rather serue to support Religion, then to ouer∣throw it; and vntill it may be lawfull for vs to imbrace it freely, without so many, & so great difficulties and dangers, which
as things now stand, is altogeather im∣possible, for sundry and weighty Rea∣sons alledged by vs in the Letter aformē∣tioned in the beginning of this cōtrouer∣sy to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon; which for that the Reader should not peraduē∣ture light on, or we be inforced, often to repeate the same thing, we thought good to set downe in this place a Copy there∣of, togeather with a certayne Declara∣tion made, and presented to my Lord de Chasteau-neuf his Excellency, at that tyme the most Christian Kings Embassadour Extraordinary in Englād, before whome many Catholicks & some of chiefe digni∣ty & esteeme amongst vs, acknowledged the same for their owne. So as the iudici∣ous and vnpartiall Reader will easily per∣ceaue the state of our cause, which was the thing we aymed at, by adioyning this Declaration. In the meane tyme, seeing for diuers respects we haue not the freedom to pre∣sent our selues in person, & hūbly to lay downe our owne Cause before his Holi∣nes; we beseech those Catholiks who are lyke to fynd freer accesse vnto him, and
who shall light vpon these wrytings, to be intercessours for vs vnto his Holines, that he will vouchsafe to expresse his mind, and giue sentence of this contro∣uersy, which we now haue with the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, to the end, all occasions of further scandall & dissention may be entierly cut off, & quyte remoued; as we hope they will, if his Holynes will be pleased to giue it in such a manner, as his resolution may be publickely diuulged, and openly made knowne to all. For if it be only expressed in priuate, ech party may eyther affirme or deny what they thinke good; so that the strife begun will rather take increase by that meanes, then be any whit extin∣guished, as experience hath cleerly taught vs hitherto. Moreouer, we most earnestly crau, that in our behalfe they will humbly be∣seech his Holines, not to resolue of any thing in this busines, wherby our King most Excellent Maiestyes indignation, may be prouoked against vs, or we brought yet further into his displeasure. Lastly, we intreat them not to censure
or condemne these our proceedings, with disparagment to our honour & esteeme, seeing we haue alwaies yet byn ready, as the whole world may witnesse, to lay downe, with all humility, our very liues & fortunes, whensoeuer a iust cause, for the defence of our faith, shall require it. REASONS GIVEN to Monsieur de Chasteau-neuf Embassa∣dour Extraordinary of the most Christian King, to shew that the Authority of a Ca∣tholike Ordinary heere in England, is in∣compatible with this tyme & place. FIrst we professe in the sight of God, that from our harts we reuerence Episcopal Authority,Initio Aug. 1627. as knowing it to be Gods institution, and that we vn∣faynedly wish the times were such as we might submit our selues therūto: & what∣soeuer hath byn sayd of vs to the contra∣ry, is very slanderous. In the next place, we do with al reue∣rence and humility declare, that accor∣ding
to the lawes and state of this King∣dome as now they are, we conceaue that the authority and iurisdiction of an Or∣dinary is not only inconuenient, and vn∣usefull, but impossible to be executed, & so dangerous to be obeyed, nay euen ac∣knowledged, as that we cannot be obli∣ged thereunto. And we do verily belieue & that vpon many and weighty reasons, whatsoeuer hath byn affirmed to the con∣trary that his Holynes hath had no inten∣tion to oblige vs vnto it, nor will, after information how things stand heere. There are heere many Statutes of the Kingdome in force, which make it highly penall in some cases with losse of goods & liberty, and in others of life, to acknowledge any other Authority or Iu∣dicature, then such as by the same statuts are authorized, which though we are o∣bliged not to regard, when there is que∣stion of any doctrine of fayth; yet when a man shall run hazard of vtter ruine, for admitting and acknowledging of ex∣ternall iurisdiction and authority which importeth not faith, but practise of things not necessary but according to tyme and
place we conceaue that we cannot be o∣bliged to imbrace it. If it be sayd, that it is Capitall for a man to receaue a Catholique Priest in∣to his house, and that yet many receaue them with all the hazard, and that there∣fore we might aswell receaue an Ordi∣nary into our houses, acknowledging his Authority. The answere will make it ap∣peare, that the obiection proueth no∣thing agaynst vs. For first it is certayne, that euen for the reason of being so Ca∣pitall, and that there are so many lamen∣table examples among vs, not only of friends who haue discouered and betraied other friends for receauing Priests, ey∣ther for interest, licentiousnesse of lyfe, reuenge, frailty, or for some other pas∣sion; but of Seruants, who haue betray∣ed their Maysters, Nephews, Vncles, Grandchildren & children their Parents, Daughters their very Mothers, yea and euen Priests themselues sometymes, who haue fallen and betrayed Catholikes; we neyther are nor can by any humane au∣thority be obliged to take Priests into our houses. Many of vs indeed do it out of
deuotion and zeale, for the comfort of our soules, by celebrating Masse and re∣ceauing the most necessary and daily Sa∣craments, and many of vs also do it not. But howsoeuer, we thinke it a very ill consequence to inferre, that therefore a man is, or may be obliged with the ha∣zard of his estate of lyfe to acknowledge or submit to the Authority of an Ordi∣nary, for the practise of some thinges without which we yet finde by experi∣ence, and Gods grace, we haue alwayes subsisted in these sad tymes, because for∣sooth out of voluntary deuotion & zeale, many of vs are contēt, to run the highest hazards in receauing of Priests, for the so necessary and dayly exercise of our Re∣ligion, through want whereof we also find by experience of Saxony & Denmark, and many other countries in Germany, Religion hath in effect wholy fayled. Besides, a Priest who is a Person of our owne election, being first authorized as fit and capable by the Sea Apostolicke, may haue entrance into our houses, and exercise his function, in a much more priuate and safe manner then it is possible
for an Ordinary to doe, especially when he will carry himselfe as Ordinary. For in that case, besides seruants there must be alwayes Officers, parties and witnesses, who do not all, and euer vow so much as discretion, or yet to continue constant in the Catholicke fayth. And for our parts the dangers being such as they are, it will be impossible to secure vs in this poynt, where sometymes it happeneth that an vndiscreet word vttered euen without ill meaning may turne to our losse of goods and life. Besides, if we could abstract from the danger of offending the State, it is to be considered, that our Mariages and Te∣staments, and the lyke are made lyable heere to those Ecclesiasticall Courts and Tribunals which are setled by the lawes of this Kingdome, and are executed by certayne Chancellours, and Commissa∣ries for that purpose, who may often o∣blige and sentence vs in the affirmatiue, whereas a Catholike Ordinary, or Iudge would perhaps do it in the negatiue, and so we should be tossed betweene two ockes.
Agayne, if a Catholicke Ordinary should ponounce any sētence, at which the party might be grieued, which must needs occurre somtimes; his final reme∣dy would be an appeale to Rome▪ which yet it would be Capitall for him to make, besides the charge of prosecuting such a suite, and the impossibility for the most part of vs, so much as to send, or write to a place so distant, and so contradicted by the State heere, for the bringing of such a suite to an end. And to shew both the in∣conueniences and impossibilities of exe∣cuting the power of a Catholicke Ordi∣nary in such a tyme and place as this, we thinke it very considerable to reflect vpō many Catholicke Bishops, who suruiued the Reigne of Queene Marie of happy memory, and liued heere many yeares in Queene Elizabeths tyme, after the chāge of Religion, and yet there is no memory that any of them did euer practise any power of Ordinary, within his owne Diocesse in foro externo contentiosè, which yet it is cleare he had, and whereof he could not be depriued without personall demerit: & if hauing this Authority they
were so far from excuting it, it is moral∣ly certain, that if they had not had it, they would neuer haue sought it in these ti∣mes. And thus much, to auoyde greater length, for the shewing, that the autho∣rity of a Catholicke Ordinary in this ty∣me and place is impossible, eyther to be imposed or obeyed, and extremely in∣conuenient withall, euen if it were possi∣ble. To wch this only word may also be added, that euen in the most cleare cases, & which might appeare to be most easy, and might be carryed in the most priuate manner, as namely when any Catholike shall lead a scandalous life, or that men shall dissent from their wyues, or the like, we leaue it to consideration, whether as the lawes stand heere, a Catholike Ordi∣nary, as an Ecclesiasticall Iudge can now discreetly thinke it fit to reduce this man by any compulsory way▪ least thereby he may be made worse. But we heare some of the Lord Bishop of Chalcedons Officers say, that although he be Ordinary, and haue the authority and iurisdiction be∣longing to that quality, yet he will not
exercise the same. To this we answere, first, that if the authority be not to be executed, no reasō can be giuen why it should be graunted, when so many reasons are to be flt, why it must be so inconuenient and impossi∣ble. Secondly, we conceaue it not inough to say it shall not be executed, because if it be extāt, the state is put into iealosy ther∣by, as appeareth by the last Proclamatiōs agaynst the Lord Bishop: and it will dis∣dayne this answere at our hands; We ac∣knowledge such an Authority, but the Ordinary who hath it, giueth his word that he will not execute the same. Third∣ly the statutes of the Kingdom fal o pe∣naly as hath byn sayd not vpon such only as submit themselues to the execution of the sayd Authority, but vpon such also as acknowledge the same. Fourthly, the Catholique Ordinary may resolue this day not to execute his Authority, yet may to morrow thinke fit to do it, with euident daunger to vs of the Laity, whereof it must be intended, that wee our selues can iudge best, as whome it concerneth most. Fifthly, this
kind of Authority is not to be acknow∣ledged, or so much as secretly admitted, though vpon promise to forbeare the pra∣ctise, because the State is euer wont vpon any new Bul, or the declaring of any new authority, or any occasiō like this to que∣stion Catholikes who shall come before thē, with great rigor, how far they appro∣ue of the contēts of such a Bul, or conent to any such Authority. Many haue for∣merly beene entrapped & greatly preiu∣diced, vpon such occasions; and so may probably be heerafter vpon this: and if it should be denyed and forsworne, which all men who may be examined will not easily do, if indeed they approue such a thing; yet will not that denyal or oath be any way auailable where proofe may be made to the contrary. Besides that, if this Authority should be conceiued to be heer on foote, the Protestāt Bishops would be much more actiue in persecutiō of Catho∣liks, as finding their particular interest to be more immediatly touched by this, thē by any other thing forbiddē by the lawes of the Kingdome: and we palpably find by experience, that vpon their knowledg
that there is a Catholike Bishop heere▪ who calleth himselfe Ordinary of this Kingdome, the Pursuiuants are authori∣zed to be much more busy, & vpon pre∣tēce of searching for the Bishop, to search many houses, & to take many Priests, af∣ter whome otherwise they had not loo∣ked. These few Considerations we haue chosen out of many which occur fami∣liarly vnto vs, but which for breuities sake we haue omitted that so your Excel∣lency may be briefly informed of this af∣fayre; beseeching you, to procure our peace and safety, by keeping such an in∣conuenience still from vs, as it would be, for vs to acknowledge the authority of an Ordinary in this time & place, & vn∣der these Lawes; & that you will be plea∣sed to consider the Letter of the lay Ca∣tholiques, which was presēted by way of answere to the former Letter of the Lord Bishop of Chalcedon to them; which an∣swere we vnderstand to haue beene deli∣uered to your Excellency since your cō∣ming hither, and we auow that the said answere is the sense of vs, and in effect of
as many of the worthy and eminent men of our Communion as we know; & that the three persōs who first deliuered it for the sayd Lord Bishop, to a chiefe person of his Body, are men very remarkable for piety, prudēce, constancy in the Catholi∣que faith, Birth, Estate, and Reputation heere, with all good men we meane, al∣though they be but euen morally good of both religions; and that they are no such kind of people, as very passionately and iniuriously they haue beene traduced to be; and the same we are informed hath been manifested to your Excellēcy since your arriuall, by persons of the greatest ranck of our religion heere in England. We leaue this point also vnto your Excellency to iudge off, whether those Catholiks, if any such there be, who think it fit, to admit of the Authority of an Ordinary in this Kingdome, as things now stand, may be compared with vs, ei∣ther for degree, quality, or number, who think the contrary. Nay we are sure, that though some, when peraduenture they be asked, whether they wil acknowledg the Bishop of Chalcedon for their Pastour,
or Ordinary, or the like, will answere, they wil; either because they haue nothing to loose, or because the state of the Que∣stion is not rightly propounded vnto thē, or els not explicated, what that power of Ordinary may cōteyne in it self, or what penaltyes may thereupon ensue: Yet a∣mong those who vnderstand the matter, and are men iudicious, and withall of meanes, there will hardly be one found, who will not thinke as we do. A COPY OF THE LAY Catholikes Letter, sent to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, whereof mention is made in the former Declaration. Right Reuerend Father in God. VVEE haue seene a Letter of your Lordships of the 16. of October,Anno 1627. directed to the Lay Catholiques of this Natiō: so much therof as doth not imedi∣atly cōcern our selues, we shal endeauour to lay asi de; but for as much as there is o∣ther matter which importeth our persons
and posterity, with all that which can be deare vnto vs in this world, we shal most humbly declare, what sense we haue, and what iudgment we are inforced to make thereof. Your Lordships letter consisteth of foure points, whereof we conceiue the second principally to concerne vs, which is of your Authority as Ordinary, deliuered by you vnto vs in these words: As for the Authority, wherewith I de∣maunded it; that is as great, as any Or∣dinary hath, or can haue to demand the same of Regulars, or Diocesse. 2. And makes me a Iudge in prima instantia. 3. And therby makes me as true & absolute an Ordinary in Englād as other Ordina∣ries are in their Diocesse. 4. By my Briefe it is cleere that I am delegated by his Ho∣lines to an vniuersality of causes belōging to Ordinaries. 5. And haue been styled by the Cardinals de propaganda side, Ordinarius Angliae & Scotiae. These passages with the whole scope of the second part of your Lordships letter, argue your Lordship to assume your Authority ouer the Lay Ca∣tholiques, to be as great in England and Scotland, as any Ordinaries exercised
heere in Catholique tymes, and now is exercised in Cath. Countreys. The ex∣tent of this assumed Authority concer∣ning the Laity, we shall humbly craue leaue to lay open to your Lordship. First, an Ordinary hath power of questioning & proouing of Wills. Secōdly, of gran∣ting administratiōs. Thirdly, of deciding of Controuersies of Tythes. Fourthly, of Cōtracts, Mariages, Diuorces, Alimony, Bastardy. And fifthly of slaunders, with many others: in all which causes, exami∣nations are to be taken vpon oath, and sentences and censures will follow. Now cōtrouersies of this nature haue mixture with temporall Authority, concerning our temporall Fortunes, and haue beene by our temporall Lawes & Statutes so as∣sisted, altered, and directed both in the ty∣me of our Cath. and Protestant Princes, as hath seemed conuenient to the Church and state of these Kingdomes from tyme to tyme. All which are so already setled, as innouation is most dangerous, as being contrary both to diuers ancient and mo∣derne lawes. Now, since the erecting of a tribunal about the administring & course
of iustice eyther distinct, and much more if it be cōtrary to our lawes, is an offence of high Treason, & that all they who sub∣mit and conforme themselues thereunto may be drawne within the cōpasse ther∣of, or of misprision of Treason, or Premu∣nire at least, if they haue any litle priuity or participation thereof. Besides that, the execution of the Authority of this new Tribunall in so many cases as will dayly arise, alloweth no possibility of secresy, and wil prouoke the present gouernment to an exact search after it, and suppres∣sion thereof. It may therefore easily ap∣peare to your Lordship, how dāgerous it is for the Layty to submit, & conforme it selfe thereunto, and vnsafe euen to haue been so long silent to your Lordship, by whome it hath beene so claymed, & pu∣blished. Moreouer, the inconueniences must be great which were to follow out of the contrariety of such sentences, as would often happen between your Lord∣ships Courtes, and the Courtes of this Kingdome. These dāgers are so knowne, & by vs haue been so maturely conside∣red, that they admit no further question
thereof. And if they had been so vnder∣stood abroad (togeather with the con∣sideration of our long sufferings, and pre∣sent estate of miseryes) we presume no such Authority would haue beene impo∣sed vpon vs. Neyther can we be perswa∣ded, that there is a necessity of confor∣ming our selues thereunto, as to a matter of Fayth; or yet we can be obliged, to loose our estates and ruine our posterities where the necessity of faith doth not o∣blige vs. We also most humbly beseech your Lordship to beleeue, that this which we heer do represent vnto you, is the sense of the Laity, and we desire that it may be made knowne both heere & abroad, frō which we cannot recede for the reasons formerly expressed. To the rest of your Lordships Letter, not so directly concer∣ning the general estate of the Lay Cath.s but rather the Regulars, we humbly be∣seech your Lord.P that we may not be cal∣led into more interest & preiudice therby, thē we were in the time of your Lordships Predecessour, and that these differences may be carried with such charity, sweet∣nes, candour, and without noyse, as may
aduance that vnion, wherin your Lord∣ships desires and ours are to meete, for the greater good of our Countrey. And thus we must humbly take our leaues of your Lordship. Your Lordships most obseruant, The Lay Cath. of England.
A LIKE DECLARATION MADE BY the said Lay Catholikes of England, to the most Excellent, and most Illustrious Lord, the L. Marques de Fōtany, Embassadour to his most Christian Maiesty, and other Ordinary Embassadors of Catholike Princes in England. CONCERNING The said Authority of Ordinary, pretended by the Right Reuerend Lord Bishop of Chalcedon. HAuing vnderstood these days past, by the testimony of sundry witnesses of credit that a grieuous slaunder is layd vpō vs the lay Catholicks of England, both at home and beyond sea, as if we did not respect, and reuerence Episcopall Autho∣rity and Iurisdiction, as it behoueth good
Catholicks, & this vpon no other groūd, as we are well assured, then that we refu∣sed to acknowledge the pretended autho∣rity, & iurisdiction of my Lord of Chal∣cedon ouer vs; we thought it a part of our duety, both to God and our selues, to de∣clare, as well how deeply we resent the slaunder, as what is our iudgement con∣cerning the questions now in cōtrouersy betweene vs and my Lord of Chalcedon: which feeling, and iudgement of ours, we summarily represented before, to the most Excellent Lord Marques de Fontany Ordinary Embassadour, for the most Christian King, in this Court; and now very lately also we opened the same more at large to the most Excellent Lord Don Carlos Coloma extraordinary Embassa∣dour for the Catholick King in the same Court, who hauing before hastened his departure out of this kingdome, & being now hourely to depart we were forced to dispatch this matter in his presence with∣out delay. And now we desire to aduertise the courteous reader, that we haue thoght good to make the same Declaration fully and distinctly to the sayd most Excellent
Lord Marques de Fontany Embassadour Ordinary for the most Christian King, & to the other Embassadours and Agents of Catholique Princes residēt in this Court. Wherupon some of highest Ranke in the name of many others, deliuered to the sayd Embassadours, and Agents, a Copy both of the Letter aboue printed, in the which we answered my Lord of Chalcedōs Letter vnto vs, and of a certaine wryting also heere printed, which about some two yeares past, many of prime Nobility had presented to the most Excellent Lord de Chasteau-neuf, then Extraordinary Em∣bassadour for the most Christian King in this court, professing themselues Authors thereof. To the end that by these meanes it may be made knowne, as well to the Embassadours themselues, as by them to the whole world, how great a wrong, we conceaue to haue bin done to our Chri∣stian reputatiō, by the spreading of these false reports. And also what our opinion and iudgement now at this present is, of the questions in controuersy between vs & my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, touching the pretended Authority and iurisdiction
chalenged by his Lordship ouer vs; which that it might the more plainly appeare, we iudged it not only expedient, but also necessary, to declare our minds, by this way & course, that we haue taken.
THE ATTESTATION. I IOHN Mallery Gentleman, do witnes and testify, that I was present at London, in the House of the most Excellent, & most Il∣lustrious Lord, Don Carlos Coloma, extra∣ordinary Embassadour for the King of Spaine, the 3. day of March 1631. stylo nouo; when as sundry Catholike Noblemen, and others of quality, there present, did produce written in latin, the Declaration, Reasons, and Letter heere aboue set downe. All which, being di∣stinctly pronounced in presence of the forsayd Embassadour, and all and euery thing there∣in expressed (for as much as belongeth to the Cōtrouersy concerning the pretēded Authori∣ty of the Right Reuerēd Lord Bishop of Chal∣cedon, ouer the Lay Catholikes of England) the forsayd Gentlemen and Noblemen decla∣redfully and perfectly, to conteyne the sense and meaning not only of themselues there pre∣sent, but in effect, of all others whome they knew; and namely of many Earles, Vicounts, Barons, & other men of Quality whome they named vnto the sayd Embassadour. And they declared themselues to notify vnto him the
mynd and sense of them all to be fully expressed in the sayd Declaration, Reasōs & Letter, and that they had receaued full power & Au∣thority from them so to do. And the Embassa∣dour himselfe did then openly professe to haue vnderstood the same things, from many of those Lay Catholikes, whome they had named; nor did he doubt at all, of the truth of the whole matter; which he tooke vpon him, as they requested, to make publicke. Iohn Mallery. THE aboue named Iohn Mallery, Gentle∣man of the English Nation, appearing personally before the Maior, Magistrates, and Griffiers of the Citty, and Territory of Saint Winocks-Berge in the West-County of Flanders, did vpon Oath, affirme the things aforesayd, and in testimony thereof in our presence subs∣cribed & signed the same. In Witnes whereof, we appointed the Seale vsed in Causes of our forsayd Citty and Territory, to be set vnto this present Writing, and to be subscribed by the Griffier our Notary. This 15. day of March 1631. Locus ✚ Sigilli. Joannes Hardunius.
THE ATTESTATION Of the most Excellent, and most Illu∣strious Lord, Don Carlos Coloma. D. Carlos Coloma Knight of the Mi∣litary Order of S. Iames, Commendador of Montyelo & Ossa, of the Counsell of Sta∣te, and Warre to his Sacred Catholike Maiesty, Captaine Generall of his Armyes in the Low Countreys &c. We do witnesse and testify, whilst, of late, we resided, as Embassadour Extraordinary in the Court of the Renowned King of Great Brittaine, the forsaid Declaration to haue byn exhibited vnto vs in our House at Londō, the 3. day of March of this present yeare 1631. by many lay Catholikes of chiefe rāke in their Countrey, and the same to haue byn approued and confirmed by diuers English Noblemen, by word of mouth, as well in their owne, as in the Name of others; in which respect we ratify the Attestation of M. Iohn Mallery an English Gentleman, added vnto the end of the said Declaratiō, being in like māner also authen∣tically confirmed by the Magistrate of S. Wi∣nocks-Berge:
& in witnesse of the truth of all and euery the premises, as they were done, we haue heereunto put our hand, and seale. Giuen at Bruxells the 2. day of April, in the yeare of our Lord 1631. Don Carlos Coloma. Locus ✚ Sigilli▪ By Command of my most Excellent Lord. Fran. Schelen. Printed at Bruxells, by the widdow of Hubert Antony, sworne Printer, at the signe of the Golden Eagle, neere to the Pallace. M. DC. XXXI.
THE ANSVVERE OF A CATHOLIKE LAY GENTLEMAN, To the Iudgement of a Deuine, vpon the Letter of the Lay Catholikes, to my Lord Bi∣shop of Chalcedon. By L. B. Anno M. DC. XXXI.
THE PREFACE to the Reader. GENTLE READER▪ Lighting of late vpon a litle writtē Treatise intituled, The Iudgmēt of a Deuine vpō the 3. Gentlemens Letter to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon, I tooke and read it, thinking to find somewhat more then Ordinary in it. For hauing heard much talke of that mat∣ter (being now in euery mans mouth) & seene also something written, but not to much pur∣pose; now finding a Booke, with the Title of a Deuine, I presumed he would say something more then others had done. But whē I came to read him, I found him, but like other men of his owne syde; and particulerly so like the Lay Gentleman, T. M. his Iudgement vpon the same Letter, that I began to thinke it might be
the very same man; the style, discourse, and as I may say, spirit, wherewith both are writ∣ten, being the same. And that because then, that seeming to be but some Lay Gentlemans doing, men made small account of it, not vouchsafing it so much as one word of answere; Now the same party would speake a little lowder to be heard, writing ouer the same somewhat more dilatedly, and inserting a little Latin in some places, and ta∣king vpon him the person of a Deuine, for the substance of both, is the same; and accusing worthy Catholique Gentlemen of Passion, Te∣merity, Pretense of daunger, Partiality to Regulars, want of respect to Episcopal Authority, and the like: and all this vtte∣red with so litle reason & truth on the one side, and so much gall and bitternes on the other as that I could not but be sorry, and ashamed to see such a thing with the Title of a Deuine. For if such manner of writing ill be seeme any Christian mā, how much worse a Deuine, who is to be a light of the world, teaching men sobriety, and temper, by word and example, ha∣uing truth and reason with him, in what he sayth and writeth; and deliuering it in such sort, as the manner may not betray the mat∣ter,
by shewing any distempered affection. For euen that will much derogate from his writing, though what he writeth should otherwise be true. For euery man knoweth what a myst Pas∣sion is wont to cast before mens eyes, and how hard it is for a passionate man to speake truth, and nothing but truth. And this is so much more daungerous, where it concerneth the cre∣dit & reputation of other men: which how nice a point it is, and how soone, & how grieuously a man may offend in it, no Deuine can be ignorant; and especially, when the party dis∣couereth but so much of himselfe as may gayne himselfe credit, and thereby giue more force to the slaunder, or imputation (as the wryter doth, stiling himselfe Deuine;) and on the other syde so concealing his particuler person, that the partyes grieued know not of whome to complayne, nor where to haue remedy. And whereas it was to be expected of a Deuine, that he should handle the matter substantially and solidly, I found no such thing heere, but euen the very mayne Question for the most part mistated. For the Controuersy being of the Authority of Ordinary, as Ordi∣nary, how it may stand with the safety of Catholiques in these tymes, and vnder these
lawes; the writer flyeth from it to Episcopall Authority in generall, Obedience to lawfull Pa∣stours, Gouernement of the Church, and the like; whereof no man maketh any doubt. Or if he happen a litle to touch the point, he doth but touch it, and so slenderly, that any man may see he hath not much confidence in his cause, but seeketh rather to carry it by the Title, then rea∣son of a Deuine. Wherefore finding my selfe euery way de∣ceyued of my expectation, both for the matter and manner; and considering on the one side the harme, which euen the bare Name, or Title of a Deuine might do, among many that looke not farre into things, and the wrong that it might do to those three worthy Persons, and zealous Catholiques in particuler, agaynst whome this writyng is chiefly intended, and to the cause of Catholiques in generall; I thought best to make some answere to it, though I be both least fit of a thousand, & that this course of writing be for the most part disallowed by wise men, as being a thing that doth minister more matter of dissention, and keepeth those things longer on foot, which were better buryed. For some answere must be sometymes made, least such men thinke they haue wonne the field:
and indeed the silence of the one syde, seemeth to haue made the other take more hart, and to speake, and to write more freely, because per∣haps they thinke men will still be as temperate of their pennes, as they haue beene, and are still, of their tongues. But they must think that this extreme heate of writing will force men somewhat to alter their course: hoping that the necessity of a iust defence may plead their ex∣cuse, & that the end of this Warre wilbe Peace, which is my desire also, & intention in this my Answere: which the God of Peace vouchsafe to graunt vs. And so I come to the matter: which as the Deuine diuideth into fiue Se∣ctions; the first shewing the Letter to proceed from passion; the 2. from Temerity; the 3. the motiues to be humane and worldly; the 4. that the temporall daungers are meerely pretended; the 5. that their cause of publique disauowing the Bishops Authority, is pretended & feigned: so shall I endeauour in so many Sections, to shew all the Contrary.
The Anwsere to the Iudgement of a Deuine, vpon the three Gentlemens Letter, to my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon. THOVGH in answering of these papers I must be faine to let passe many greater matters then the Title, yet it presenting it selfe in the first place, I cannot omit to note two things in it. The one is the word Iudgmēt, which doth sound somewhat authoritatiuely, insinuating, as if the writer were a Iudge or Superiour; for to such only it properly belongeth to giue iudgment: whereby though perhaps he would gayne himselfe and his writing credit, so to further my Lord Bishops cause, which he handleth; yet he is best to looke he do him not more harme. For by making himselfe a man of such Authority, he may make it to be thought, that he is my Lord Bishop him∣selfe, or some one of his officers, but only that men presume more of the discretion
of such Officers, and much more of my Lord Bishop himself, thē that they would write, or euer suffer such a thing to be written with their priuity. Wherefore though he take vpon him to giue iudgmēt yet I will take him not to be a man of iudgement: I meane, that hath any fur∣ther Authority, then his knowledge of Diuinity will affoard him, and so I shall in this answere speake to him as to a De∣uine, not as a Iudge. The other thing of the Title, is, that he calleth the Letter of the Lay Catholiques, the Letter of the 3. Gentlemē, who vndertooke the deliuery of it. Wheras it is well knowne that most Catholiques of worth in, and about Lon∣don at the tyme of the deliuery of it, were priuy to it, and that these 3. were but chosen out of a great nūber, as men most fit in al respects to vndertake the deliuery of it; wherof I shall haue occasion to say more hereafter in this answer. Only this I say here, because hereupon as he calleth it the 3. Gentlemens Letter, I meane to cal it more truly, the lay Catholiques Letter.
SECT. 1. That this Letter, did not proceed from passion. THE Deuines first Section, is wholy to proue this Letter to proceed from passion. Wherin a man might aske him, what passion? But because I will not stumble him to much at first, nor intend so much to vrge him as answere, I let that passe. His first reason is, because these Gē∣tlemen take no notice (as he saith) of any thing but that which disliketh them: to wit, my Lord Bishops Ordinaryship, and exacting approbation of Regulars▪ there being diuers other things that in the Deuines iudgment imported them more: as the validity of their Cōfessions, which concerned their soules good; the Bishops care of not increasing their temporall troubles, which cōcerned their fortunes▪ and the preseruing the Bishops honour & Authority, which concerned the commō good of our English Church. This is the substance of the first paragraph, wherin he taxeth these Gentlemen as if they had only a mynd to quarrell with my Lord
Bishop; for so he saith in the marginall note. But how false this is, may easily ap∣peare, if a man cōsider how many things there were in that Letter very subiect to exception; which, a man that had bene disposed to picke quarrels, might haue made matter of; and among others that bitter imputation of practising and li∣belling, wherwith his Lordship chargeth Catholiques in generall in his common Letter 16. October 1627. Which though no man could but resent, yet euery man forbare to speak of, because it was imper∣tinent to that end, which they set before them in writing this Letter: which end of theirs, if it had beene, as this Deuine imagineth, this had beene the first thing in the whole Letter to take hold of: and this is the very reason why they medled not with those other matters, wherwith this Deuine would faine haue had them trouble themselues. Besides that, there be other reasons, which a man might easily bring: as for that of the validity of Con∣fessions, that they saw not any colou∣rable reason of doubt; yet they prayed his Lordshippe (in whose power it was
with a word speaking, or rather not spea∣king a word) not to bring them into fur∣ther trouble, then they had bene in his Predecessours tyme and before. And for their tēporall state, they saw wel inough, all my Lords aduise would nothing a∣uaile them, so long as he had the authori∣ty he challenged. Besides that, in their tē∣porall matters they can better aduise thē∣selues, then any man els can; that being their owne element. And lastly, for the not belieuing euill speaches against the Bishop, they saw it was a needles thing to mention it, being a knowne point of Christian duty, not to heare any man ill spoken of, much lesse a Bishop, if they should chāce to meete with any such dis∣course, which they neuer do, they and their friends abhorring such way of pro∣ceeding. The second proofe of passion is, be∣cause the Bishop offering further satisfa∣ction concerning his Authority to any man that would aske it, these Gentlemen did not aske it. It is true indeed; hauing seene my Lord Bishops publique clayme of that Authority, it was no tyme for thē
to go, and aske a priuate glosse or Decla∣ration, which would little auaile them, when such a Letter should be brought a∣gainst them. But let this Deuine aske my L. Bishop, Whether he were neuer desi∣red to make it knowne, what Authority he had? I am sure his Lordship wil not deny but he was many tymes: but he ne∣uer would, til he declared it in this publi∣que manner. If my Lord then meant to giue them sufficient satisfactiō in priuate, why did he not do it in priuate, while mē did desire it, and while there was tyme? Besides, suppose my Lord would haue written a Letter, he might haue forborne to speake so plainly of his Ordinaryship, only inuiting those that desired to know his Authority to come priuatly vnto him. And for that which this Deuine saith, that my Lord could not informe them suffici∣ently of his Authority in so short a Letter, I se not what reason there is for it. I dare say his Letter is 5. tymes at least as long as his Patents, or Breue, and Instructions, the sight whereof would haue serued the turne without all this writing & doing. Which being so easy a matter, & tht yet
his Lordship would not do it, they might well despaire of further satisfaction. The third proofe of passion is, that as this Deuine saith, this Letter stretcheth my Lord Bishops words vpon the Tenter-hookes, or rather addeth vnto them, in saying, that the particuler passages cyted and the whole scope of the second part of the Letter, argue his Lordship to assume his Authority ouer the lay Catholiques, to be as great in England and Scotland, as any Ordinary exercised here in England in Catholique tymes: Whereas my Lord Bishop neuer spake of Authority ouer lay Catholiques in Scotlād; but only to proue himselfe Ordinary, brought the Inscrip∣tion of Letters from some Cardinals thus Ordinario Angliae & Scotiae. In which the Deuine complaineth of two Additions, the one that the Letter sayth, my Lord challengeth Authority ouer the laity of Scotland; the other that it sayth my Lord challengeth as much Authority here in England, as Ordinaries haue had in Ca∣tholyke tymes. But first, the Letter nei∣ther stretcheth, nor addeth to my Lords words; but only maketh a manifest and
immediate inference vpon, or out of thē. For it saith, his Lordship words argue him to assume &c. Which plainely shewes that they do not charge his Lordship with saying so in expresse termes, but saying, that out of which, as antecedent, the cō∣clusion is manifestly gathered. Now there is great difference betweene an inference and an Addition, as euery body know∣eth. Secondly, if the Deuine would haue answered, and not cauelled, he should haue shewed the Conclusiō not to be wel & truly deduced out of his Lordships an∣tecedent, & then he had sayd somewhat to the purpose. But that he cannot do. For if my L. Bishop out of the Inscription Or∣dinario Angliae do proue himself Ordina∣ry, & out of this inferre, himselfe to haue authority ouer Lay Catholiks of Englād, why may he not do the lyke of the words Ordinario Scotiae, which Title his Lordship vseth continually, and ioyntly with the word Angliae thus, Ordinarius Angliae & Scotiae? Thirdly his Lordships patēts make no difference betweene the faithfull of England and Scotland. Wherfore if he challenge authority ouer the one, he may do it ouer the other.
For the other Addition, as this De∣uine sayth, or Inference, as in truth it is, of assuming the same Authority, which Ordinaries haue exercised heere in Ca∣tholique tymes, what can the Deuine say to it? Is it not truly and euidently infer∣red? My Lord Bishop sayth the Pope ma∣keth him as absolute Ordinary in En∣gland, as other Ordinaries in their Dio∣cesses; and this Deuine, acknowledgeth him, to haue as much as any Ordinary hath, or can haue in his Diocesse. But our Ordinaryes heere in Catholicke tymes were no more, but as other Ordinaries in their Diocesses, nor had more then any Ordinary hath, or may haue in his Dio∣cesse: Ergo, my Lord Bishop (supposing these his Lordships premises) hath the sa∣me Authority, that Catholique Ordina∣ries haue had heere in England in Catho∣lique tymes: Or by the challenging that Authority of other Ordinaries, or what they haue, or may haue, he challengeth the same that Ordinaries haue had in Ca∣tholike tymes. What fault is there in this Argument? Why then doth this Deuine ryfle thus? As if these two were not all
one; The Authority which an Ordinary hath, or may haue in his Diocesse; and which an Ordinary had in tymes past heere in England? Had our Bishops more heere, then an Ordinary may haue els∣where? Did he perhaps thinke, that no man would euer vouchsafe to answere, or perhaps read this paper▪ Where is now the passion in stretching, and adding of words? But because it may moreouer ap∣peare, that this inference of the Autho∣rity, which Ordinaries had heretofore, did not proceed from passion, I will ad a reason why mention was made of our Ordinaries of former tymes in England; which is this: That they, who wrote the Letter, came better to be acquaynted with what belongs to the Authority of Ordinary, and how farre it extendeth it selfe, by that which Ordinaryes were wont to do heere in England, and which for the most part they do still in the same Courts heere established, then what Or∣dinaries do abroad, which we heere, are not so well acquainted withall. And from hence commeth the an∣swere to another obiected Addition, in
that this Letter saith, that such cōtrouer∣sies, as were spoken of immediatly before in the Letter, haue mixture with tempo∣rall Authority, and concerne temporall fortunes, and receiue also temper from our temporall lawes &c. This the Deuine according to his former māner of speach, calleth an Addition to his Lordships words; who, he sayth, sayd nothing of temporall fortunes, nor Authority of temporal Princes. As for the word (Ad∣dition) it suteth yet farre lesse in this pla∣ce, then before. True it is, the Bishop did not speake of temporall fortunes and lawes; but he spake of that, which hath necessary connexion with them: which is his Ordinaryship. Which connexion, though the Bishop perhaps did not so se∣riously reflect vpon, as a thing, that might hinder the extēt of his power; yet Lay-men, whome it concerned, could not but looke about them, to see them∣selues hooked in, vpon a suddayne, by Tytle of an Ordinary, which bringeth after it all this, that is mentioned in the Lay mens Letter, and which with all res∣pect, they represent to the consideration
of my Lo. Bishop, of whose loue towards them▪ they were so well perswaded, that they did not doubt, but vpon the very first representation of the inconuenien∣cyes, perplexityes, and daungers, which that Authority did bring with it, his Lordship would presētly desist from fur∣ther claime of it. Howsoeuer these daun∣gers to them, were a very sufficient en∣forcement to disclaime from it as they did. Now where is this Inference forced? Doth not my Lord Bishop say absolutly, he is Ordinary, or hath as much power, as any Authority may haue in his Dio∣cesse? May not others then say, what the power of such an Ordinary is? and what inconuenience may come to themselues by it in some particular circumstances? What force or strayning is heere? Oh, my Lord Bishop (will the Deuine say) spake only of his Authority, to vrge ap∣probation of Regulars. True; that is the occasion indeed. But doth not his Lord∣ship by that occasion, chalenge the abso∣lute and full power which an Ordinary hath, or may haue? Doth not all that he bringeth, proue his Ordinaryship abso∣lute
without limitation of cause, or per∣sons, if his proofes were good? Might not Lay-men plainly say; my Lord meant more of them, whome he tooke to be his proper subiects, hen of them, who were exempt? And if his Lordship had meant only to clayme Authority ouer Regu∣lars, in the matter of approbation, he might haue answered plainely and pre∣cisely, restrainyng all to them. But I shall haue occasion to speake more of this by and by. The 4. argument of passion is, that they deny my Lord Bishop all Authority, not onely temporall▪ but spirituall; and vnder pretence of their temporall For∣tunes, they would be Oues sine Pastore. If I would be captious with this Deuine, I could aske him, where this Letter de∣nyeth my Lord Bishop to be Ordinary; or where it speaketh of his Lordships tē∣porall Authority? But I will not presse him further in that. But for his spirituall Authority, or rather the power in fore interno (for indeed all the power of a Bi∣shop, as he is a Bishop, is spirituall, spea∣king properly) where do they deny it?
Or if they do not speake of it, hauing no occasion, and it being from the purpose, doth it follow that they deny it? He may haue that, though he be no Ordinary, nor haue power in foro externo. How then doth the deniall of the former infer the deniall of the latter? Is not heere stret∣ching of wordes, or forcing inferences? And much more in that, as this Deuine saith, we would be Oues sine Pastore. Haue we beene Oues sine Pastore now aboue. 60. yeares, wherin we haue had no Bishop? Nay, haue we not so much more had a Pastor, as we haue more immediatly been gouerned by the Pastor of Pastours, re∣ceyuing immediate influence from the sea Apostolique? But more of this anone. The 5. Argument of passion is, be∣cause they omit the principall point, which the Bishop handleth: which was his full Authority to exact approbation of Regulars, and take hold of the secon∣dary, which was his Ordinaryship. And neere the Deuine cōplaineth, they tooke no notice whether he had satisfied them or no. Well, what passion was it for Ca∣tholiques to leaue that, that concerned
them not so immediatly, though it were the principall point, and touch that, which concerned them more, though it were but secondarily intended? To what end should they take notice of satisfa∣ction in a thing, in which they needed none, as making no doubt of it? For, sup∣pose there had been any litle shaddow of probability of my Lord Bishops pretence, yet so many good and learned men, as there were heere, of Regulars, nay and of all moderate and learned of the secular Clergy, affirming the contrary, & euen my Lord Bishop not ventring, to say to the contrary, at least to some persons, but that Confessions made to Regulars were good; what doubt could any prudent man make, of the validity of his Confes∣sions? The Authority of any one or two learned men, being sufficient for a wise man to lay aside all scruple of that kind: what needed therfore all that ado? And the rather because it was a matter of lear∣ning, they would not trouble themselues further, then to desire his Lordship not to put them to further trouble then his predecessor, or himselfe had hitherto put
them vnto: in which they shew, though not in expresse termes, how they were sa∣tisfied with his Lordships Letter in that point, especially laying his Authority of Ordinary for groūd of that claime: what passion then is heere? But now, if a man would stand vpon it, it might perhaps be proued that my Lord did intend no lesse principally to declare his Ordinaryship, and by this occasion to make open chal∣lenge of his Authority in that kind. For what else doth the greatest part of his Letter pretend? Why doth he write so largely to the layty of a matter, which doth not so properly belong vnto them, but only to put needlesse scruples into their heads? And with all to make some answere to the Laity, who not long be∣fore had been very instant to know his Authority more precisely, though his Lordship could not be met withall, to haue their demaunds deliuered to him∣selfe? But because these are coniectures, I will not stand vpon them: only this I may say, if his Lordships intent had not been to clayme that Authority, he might presently haue disclaymed it, and there
had beene an end. The sixt Argument of notorious pas∣sion (our Deuine sayth) is this, that they incense the State against the Bishop, by saying that the execution of the Autho∣rity of this new Tribunall, will prouoke the present Gouernmeut vnto an exact search after it, and suppression thereof; and so bringeth a clause of Bulla Coenae to proue them excommunicated therfore, & asketh, why else this Letter was shew∣ed to the King? This is a strange point of Diuinity, that a man shall incurre ex∣communication, for representing vnto the Bishop, the daunger which by clay∣ming such Authority he bringeth vpon himselfe, and other men. This is a thing allowable by the lawes of God and man: and how then doth it deserue excommu∣nication? Is this to prouoke the state to persecute? No surely: but to moue the Bishop not to prouoke the State against himselfe and others: & as for publishing the Letter, and causing it to be shewed to the King, if it were so, this Deuines intel∣ligence is better then mine. Howsoeuer▪ it was no more then needed, for men to
declare themselues somewhat in a more publique manner, that Authority being so publiquely claymed, which would bring so many daungers vpon them. And some great Officers haue been knowne to say since, that it was tyme for Catholi∣ques to do as they did; for that otherwise they might haue smarted for it. Wherein then doth passion notoriously appeare in this matter, vnlesse it be that this Deuine will haue all to proceed from passion which lyketh him not. And so hauing cleered this Letter of passion, I might aske this Deuine, what temper he was in, when be called this graue, substantiall & humble Letter, no answere, but a publi∣que defy of the Bishops Authority? What is there in the whole Letter that hath e∣uen a shadow of defiance? Doth not the whole manner & phrase import as much respect and humility, as such matter can possibly affoard? Can defyance stand with humility and respect? Why then should this Deuine call it a defye? What Law giueth him this liberty? Let him looke home a litle and see whether he be not liable in what he accuseth others. I
leaue it to himself to cōsider, for I wil not so take vpon me to play the Iudge. And heer is an end of the 1. Section of passion, I pray God there be an end of that passion on the Deuines part. SECT. 2. That the lay Catholiques Letter is free from Temerity. THE first point of Temerity allead∣ged by this Deuine is, because they being Lay and priuate men do take vpon them to iudge publiquely, and to con∣demne their Pastor: which is as much as by fact to iustify, & euen far to surpasse the Oath of Supremacy, which giueth power to the Prince to iudge of Ecclesia∣sticall persons: and heere priuate and Lay men take the same vpon them, in saying the Bishop assumeth Authority ouer Lay Catholiques, which he interpreteth vsur∣ping; and so bringeth a place out of S. Ambrose to shew that Lay-men, euen Emperors must not Iudge. Heere you see the Deuine waxeth warme in his Iudg∣ment seat: but let him be carefull he do
not condemne men without cause. For his Diuinity may teach him, that, that is a dangerous thing. Well; let vs see where is this grieuous crime, worse then the Oath of supremacy? For priuate men to iudge a Bishop, it is true, it is a heynous matter, but yet by this Deuines leaue, far short of taking such an Oath, which is the denyall of a mans fayth. And therfore this I suppose was but to shew a little of his Rhetorike. But for all that, he must not let his Rhetorike go before his Diui∣nity. Let vs thē see wherin do they iudg? because they say he assumeth this Autho∣rity: which, saith this Deuine, is as much as to vsurpe Authority. But if his Cha∣rity had stretched so far, he might haue found out a more benigne interpreta∣tion, considering with himselfe, the dif∣ficulty of finding a fit word for this pla∣ce. For the question being, of his Lord∣ships Authority, they could not vse any such word, as might importe, that in their iudgments his Lordship had it. For that were in a sort to acknowledge it, contrary to the purpose of their Letter; besides, they had no ground, but his
Lordships owne word to thinke that he had it. In which case they might say that he assumeth it, as well as to say his Lord∣ship sayth he hath it: for that would im∣ply, that they did not build vpō his Lord∣ships word, which would haue been as ill taken: and to say, he did take it vpon him, would haue beene worse taken, as being neerer to vsurpation. Thirdly they could not presume him to haue the Au∣thority. For though he were Ordinary, he must shew his Letters of his Cōsecra∣tion, or Confirmation, as the Canons require. Or if perchance his Lordship should pretend difficulties, that he durst not bring in such things, & that he may as wel be belieued as Priests that come in heere without written testimonies, yet there might some meanes, or other be found out and vsed, to giue men some probability of assurance. But much more being a Delegate, as it is certaine he is▪ For both Canon and ciuill lawes require that a man in that case shew his Autho∣rity in writing. For it is an axiome that Iurisdictio delegata non praesur, sed pro∣batur. Now if they cannot presume such
Authority, his Lordship may well be sayd to assume it. This supposed, it is not cer∣tayne, that he hath any Authority ouer them, and consequently whether he be a Pastour or no, & an vncertain Pastour in this case, is as if he were no Pastor. How then do they iudge their Pastor? Besides, what iudging is this, to say he taketh such Authority vpon him? They do not say that he hath it, or hath it not, but suppose they thinke he hath it not; the worst that any man can make of it, is to say, they do not belieue he hath it. Is this then such a cryme as to be compared with the Oath of Supremacy, especially since they had many reasons to induce them not to be∣lieue it? Is it not great temerity then in our Deuine, thus rashly to condemne ho∣nest well meaning men, of such a crime without cause? 2. The second poynt of temerity is to teach their Pastor, what Authority he must not haue; in saying that all things are so setled, as innouation might breed daunger, being contrary to diuers an∣cient and moderne lawes; since the ere∣cting of a Tribunall distinct, or contrary
to our lawes is Treason, or Premunire at least, if they haue any priuity or partici∣pation &c. Heere the Deuine asketh whe∣ther it be the part of lay men to tell a Bi∣shop, he must haue no Authority contra∣ry to a setled course of state, for matters of Episcopall iurisdiction; and he asketh whether this be not to tell him, that he must not haue authority to preach, cōfirm reconcile &c. And whether innouation in religion is not as dangerous? with a great deale more of that kind. But then he sayth withall, that those ancient lawes of a new Tribunall are not vnderstood of a Catholique Episcopall tribunall, but of a Legatiue, and that therefore the chalen∣ging of this tribunall is no innouatiō but a restitution of ancient Episcopall iuris∣diction &c. To all which I answere; that first this Deuine taketh it for granted that my Lord Bishop is our Pastor, certayne and abso∣lute; but of that I say nothing til anon, & so I let him vse his owne lāguage in that. But I must tell him heere, he taketh to much liberty to call the humble aduise of lay Catholiques, or declaration of their
owne ease, Teaching: which is nothing but to make them odious, as if they tooke vpon them with Authority to teach his Lordship; whereas in the very beginning they humbly craue leaue to declare their minds, and so continue throughout the whole letter. This is not good dealing for any honest man, much lesse a Deuine: for it cānot come from a good meaning. But we must beare with a hundred such things as these, at this Deuins hand. Secondly wher∣as he inferreth à paritate Rationis, that the Bishop must not preach, confirme, reconcile &c. because these are against the setled course of state, he is mistaken. The reason is not a like, for these are neyther against our ancient lawes, neither do, or can hinder the ordinary Courts of Iustice heer, & withall these things are more ne∣cessary for sauing of soules, for establish∣ment and preseruation of Catholique Re∣ligiō thē a Bishops court, which as things stand, will rather hinder then help. Now for our auncient lawes which our Deuine sayth are not against a Catholique Epis∣copal tribunal (not according to the mea∣ning of the Law-maker, howsoeuer it
may be against the sound of the words) I say first, that as times stand, it is enough to be against the letter of the Law: & our Protestant Iudges and men in Authority who thinke themselues fittest to be inter∣preters of the Law, will haue great aduā∣tage against vs, if they shalbe able by the very words of the aunciēt lawes to bring vs with in compasse of Treason, or Pre∣munire. And if now by word, & writing they publish to the world that we dy not for Religion, but for Treason, although we suffer but by the lawes made in this time of Protestancy, how much more co∣lourably would they thinke to do it, whē we shall suffer by the auncient Lawes, made and practised in Catholique tymes, and not disallowed, or contradicted by the Sea Apostolique? And it may be this very thing, if it had been so knowne to his Holines, as the Catholiks Letter saith well (for it is no disparagement for any man to say, that he doth not know all particular Lawes, and Ordinances of all Countryes) it is most probable his Ho∣lines would neuer haue put the Catho∣liques into any the least occasion of such
offence: especially being a thing wholy needlesse at this time. Secondly, a man may perhaps also say it is against the mea∣ning of the law in some sort. For though it were neuer the meaning of our Catho∣lique Auncestors, to hinder the lawfull exercise of Ordinary Ecclesiasticall po∣wer, yet their end was, as this Deuine con∣fesseth, to restrayne the exercise of extra∣ordinary power, or Legatiue, by reason of the disturbance, which it did many times cause in the vsuall courts of Iustice of this kingdome. Why then may not a mā say, they meane of such power as my Lord Bishop would haue heere, conside∣ring the presēt state of things? For, heere be now vsual Ecclesiastical courts of Or∣dinaries or Bishops: but they are Protestāt Bishops, say you▪ I graunt it, but yet in their Courts they retaine the same forme of iustice in great part, the same kinds of causes they had aunciently; and though it be true that they haue not true Ecclesi∣astical iurisdiction, as being Branches cut of from the roote which is the Sea Apo∣stolique, yet they exercise it de facto, by the Kings authority, so as all, both Pro∣testants
and Catholiques must be subiect vnto them, so much as concerneth the outward gouerment, or forum externum. Now my Lord Bishops Authority in this case (suppose it Ordinary for the present for disputatiōs sake) is of no lesse hinde∣rance, or disturbance to the Ordinary Courts, and course of Iustice, then was Legatiue in ancient times; nay more: for the Legatiue court was a Superiour court and therfore did not medle in Ordinary and dayly matters, but in some particuler cases and euents. Whereas my Lord Bishops Court, if he were Ordinary, would answere ex aequo, as I may say and directly to the Or∣dinary spirituall Courts heer, and might challenge the hearing and determining of all causes, as due to it selfe, excluding the other, as vsurper. In which respect I thinke, that as this Deuine sayth the law-makers neuer intended to hinder the re∣stitution of Catholique Episcopall iuris∣diction, so I am of opinion with him thus farre, though they would not hin∣der it when tyme should be for it, so yet that in such tyme, and circumstances as
now we are in, and so long as it were not in their power to hinder, but that Prote∣stants should bare the sway as they do, they would neuer haue lyked the restitu∣tion of it, in such manner as his Lordship desireth. To which though I am the rather induced by considering how the Catho∣lique Bishops, who in Queene Maryes ti∣me exercised their Authority, and kept their courts, vpon the suppression of Re∣ligion and their Authority, and the sub∣stitution of others in their place, forbare the exercise thereof, as hurtful rather then any way vsefull; nay euen impossi∣ble. Thirdly, not to stand guessing what would haue been the mind of the Law-makers in this particular case, suppose my Lord of Chalcedon were Ordinary heer; to come to the true playne meaning of the Law, which this our Deuine ac∣knowledgeth, to wit, that by it is for∣bidden the exercise of a legatiue tribunal; I say, this law precisely and directly tou∣cheth his Lordships Court, which he would erect. For though be not a legate à latere, yet he is a Delegate of the Sea A∣postolique, and his power is of the same
kinde with Legatiue, though inferiour vnto it. And this is manifest by the words of his owne Letter, saying, he is Ordina∣rius, not Ordinario modo, but extraordinario modo, as Legats, Nuncio's, and the like, though he be not yet so truly Ordinary as any of them, whose power is expressed in the Canon Law, his Lordships power being wholy out of the Commō Course. Therfore the law is much more against it then against the power of a Legate. Se∣condly, the very manner of conferring the Authority, by speciall Commission, doth manifestly shew him to be a Dele∣gate: for that is proper to Delegation. Thirdly he hath his Iurisdiction ad bene∣placitum; which is essentiall to Delega∣tion. But what need I stand further pro∣uing so manifest a thing, whē as both his commission hath the expresse word Dele∣gamus, and his Holines his Nuncio of Pa∣ris in a Letter vnder his owne hand, spea∣king of my Lord Bishop of Chalcedons Breue, sayth, Delegationis suae Breue suffi∣cienter ostendit &c. & by word of mouth, he did not only tell diuers that will iusti∣fy it, that my Lord was not Ordinary, but
proued also by the Cannons, that he could not be Ordinary. His Lordships Power then being rather Legatiue then Ordinary, and euen not that legatiue, which is expressed in iure, and whose power in that respect is called Ordinary, because it is belonging to the office of a legate by law, it is plaine that the ancient Law doth properly touch his Lordships power and Tribunall. For suppose when Englād was Catholique, a man had come in hither, (all the Bishopricks being ful) with such a speciall title and commission, and chalenging such Authority heere as his Lordship now doth, what would o∣ther Bishops say? In what Ordinary Tri∣bunall should he sit? Must he not erect himselfe a new one? Nay suppose his Lordship should haue byn Bishop of Can∣terbury, and one come in as he doth Bi∣shop of Chalcedon, by speciall Commis∣sion, would not his Lordship think that man to offend against this ancient law in such a case? And whosoeuer should ac∣knowledg or submit himselfe to such Au∣thority, liable to the penalty there ap∣pointed? Certainly he would. And why
not then in this case? You will say now there be no Catholique Ordinaries, as thē there would be. What then, say I againe? Doth that alter my Lord of Chalcedons Authority? Doth not that remaine the same in it selfe still without chāge, what∣soeuer the others be? Is not their change meerely accidentall to his Authority? For he is still Bishop of Chalcedon, & hath the same commission. If then that would be against that law, now it is. What temeri∣ty is it then in Catholiks, to aduertise my Lord of Chalcedon, what danger he brin∣geth vpon himselfe, & others, by erecting this new Tribunal, which they may truly call Innouation, as being a thing without President in our nation, and contrary to our ancient Laws, & therfore no restitu∣tion of Ordinary Episcopall iurisdiction, as the Deuine would haue it: though sup∣pose it were truly and properly restitutiō of Ordinary Episcopall iurisdiction, and consequently, not against the ancient Lawes, yet would it be against the mo∣derne, which threaten so many & so great dangers, that a man may very wel with∣out note of temerity declare them, & vse
what means they can to auoyd them. I could heer note how some friends of this Deuine, I meane some of the Appellants in Clement the VIII. his time, vrged these an∣cient lawes against the Authority of the Archpriest, then appointed by that Pope, though that were no externall iurisdictiō nor ouer the Laity; how much more then may they be vrged against my Lord Bi∣shop of Chalcedons which he pretēds? But I say no more of it. 3. The 3. poynt of Temerity wher∣with this Deuine chargeth Catholikes is, in that they censure the sea Apostolique, as he sayth, and 2. most wise Popes, by saying, that if these their dangers, togea∣ther with their long sufferinges, & pre∣sent state of miseries had ben considered abroade, they presume no such Autho∣rity woulde haue beene imposed vpon them: as if, sayth he, the sea Apostolique had not considered the daungers which might come to Lay Catholiques by Epis∣copall Authority. And then he asketh why they did not giue, the Sea Aposto∣lique to vnderstand these daungers, all that tyme that the Clergy stood suing for
a Bishop, the Iesuits opposing it? Or all the tyme that the Bishop hath been heer, wherein, as the Deuine sayth, he hath e∣uer professed himselfe Ordinary? Wher∣vpon he cōcludeth that it is not the reare of daunger to themselues, but their pa∣ssionatenesse to Regulars, who stood in daunger of Approbation, that moueth thē to this. This is the Deuines discourse, and a very good and likely one it is, for∣sooth, because the Catholiques say▪ that if their daungers had beene considered (to vse the Deuines words) abroad, they presume they should not haue had such Authority imposed vpon them▪ Therfore they cēsure the sea Apostolike. This man is so much in giuing iudgment, and cen∣suring, that all that any man else sayth, seemeth to him to be censuring. What is there heere any way condemning the Sea Apostolique? Nay rather, do not Catho∣liques, in this, shew the great confidence they haue of the loue and tendernes, that the Sea Apostolicke beareth towards them? Which induceth them to thinke, that if their case had been fully made knowne, it would no way do a thing, so
preiudiciall vnto them: where it is to be noted, that besides the Deuines ordinary liberty of terming thinges as he listeth to cōceiue thē, & wresting words to a worse sense, heer he corrupteth the text, the bet∣ter to ground his accusation of Temerity. For in those copies that I haue seen of this Letter, there was not the word [Conside∣red] but the word [Vnderstood] which is no way subiect to exception. But not∣withstanding, suppose the Deuines copy had the word [Considered] which yet a man may doubt of, none else hauing so, it may very well carry the same sen∣se. Which supposed, what Temerity, or what Censure is it, to say, if the Pope did vnderstand our case &c. May not the Pope be ignorāt of many particular laws or Statutes of a Kingdome so remote in place, and so different in manners and language, and especially in this tyme of Protestancy, as this Kingdome is? He being a man, and hauing none but hu∣mane meanes to know thinges, he can∣not know our affaire; by himselfe but by information of others: and it seemeth they haue beene such men as were more
carefull to prosecute their owne ends, then seeke our good, and therefore would make no more knowne of our case then might stand with their pretences: & now that we come to speake for our selues, & to make knowne our owne case, for say∣ing, that if it had beene so vnderstood a∣broad, we are calumniated, as if we did temerariously cēsure the Sea Apostolique: What dealing is this? But because this Deuine doth thus grieuously accuse Ca∣tholiques for Temerity in censuring the Sea Apostolique, I would willingly aske him a question in his eare, whether he do know a man in the world, that hath been often heard to say, before there was a Bi∣shop, that the Pope was bound vnder paine of mortall sinne to let the English Clergy haue a Bishop, and consequently it euidently followeth, that in the same Deuines iudgment, in not granting one, he did sinne mortally. If he do not know such a man, I can tel him who he is; and vouch for my selfe, one of the Clergy it selfe, and a man of chiefe Authority vn∣der my Lord Bishop, and of great credit with him for his forwardnes and zeale in
the cause. Now whether this be not cen∣suring, let any man iudge? For, what greater censure can there be then to con∣demne the chiefe Pastour of Gods Church of a mortal sinne▪ And of a mortall sinne, nor so much in matter of fact, which might depend of information, and so be somewhat excusable, but in matter of Iudgment, or error in a Doctrinal poynt, which cannot be excused▪ as whether the law of God require the hauing a Bi∣shop, or not, heere in England▪ at this tyme? Which the Pope denieth▪ this De∣ affirmeth: and not only affirmeth, but condemneth the Pope of a mortall e, for not being of his mind. These tlemen vsed a modest worde (; they vsed also a conditionall anner of speaking, which were suffi∣cient to mollify the word, suppose it had beene a little harsh. They impute no crime, they shew assurance of loue and tendernesse, and of great wisdome and maturity in counsel; and yet this is cen∣suring. And wheras he accuseth Catholi∣ques also for Censuring two most wise Popes, of doing what they vnderstood
not, I might answere him likewise that he condemneth all the Popes that went before these two; for the space of three-score yeares, to wit Ten most graue and wise Popes, who for many and very waighty reasons would neuer be drawen to haue a Bishop heere, as tymes stood. And the two last yelded to the hauing of a Bishop, not out of any Scruple of con∣science, or feare of transgressing the De∣uine precept, but out of other motiues. Nay it is most like, that they would haue held the same course, that so many of their Predecessours did holde, but that they were persuaded by some, that the tymes were altered: so that it might bet∣ter be now then heertofore: which can be no fault of the Popes, but of such as care not what they say to compasse their owne ends: and so vsed such vnder-hand dealing, as that thinges were wrought, without any knowledge, or consent of those whom it might heere concerne. For what did Catholicks heere in England, know what others were working at Rome? And though they should heare some∣thing of a Bishop, they might well thinke
the Sea Apostolicke, knowing somwhat in general the different state of this King∣dome, from others at this tyme, would not send hither a Bishop, with like Au∣thority as in other places, as indeed we finde since this controuersy began, it was neuer the meaning of his Holynesse, though this Deuine would make vs be∣lieue otherwise. They might likwise think that no man of those that did sue for a Bi∣shop, would so far passe the boundes of reason, as to desyre a thing so impossible as is a Bishop heere in England, with the same power that Bishops are of elswhere, and haue beene formerly in England: but that they would be cōtent at the furthest with a Bishop, who might Confirme, blesse Holy Oyles, & gouerne his Clear∣gy, without challenging a further iuris∣diction in foro externo, which would not any way proue vsefull, but many wayes harmefull. As for the Iesuites Opposition, I will not say much, but leaue them to speake for themselues, as I doubt not but they can very sufficiently, in this busi∣nesse, as they haue done heertofore in o∣ther
occasions, though in this they need not say much for themselues; for any man may see, by the Deuines manner of speaking, how well he wisheth them, & consequently how litle, or no credit is to be giuen to what he sayth of them. Yet for this matter in particular although I neuer had fee to speake for them, euē out of the loue I beare to Innocency, I will tell a thing of myne owne knowledg, which as it hath made me belieue, all that such men say of the Iesuits, to be false, so it may well do others: and it is this. I knew a Priest, now a Blessed Martyr in heauen, who long had a mind to enter a∣mongst them, and by false suggestions of some, he was with held for many years. And at the last, when being still more vehemently moued by Gods holy spirit to prosecute his good desyres, a greate man of the Cleargy, who shall be name∣lesse in this place, to dehort him, tould him the Iesuits made a vow, or an oath (I know not now well whether) to op∣pose the hauing of a Bishop, which thogh it cooled the good mans desyre for the present, yet when he informed himselfe
better, and found that false, he belieued all the other fables that were tould him to be false, as indeed afterwards he also found them. So, I hauing seene better proofe for clearing of the Iesuits in this point, then this Deuines authority for ac∣cusing them, will forbeare to belieue any thing he sayth of them. Only, If they should haue hindred it, foreseeing all this stirre & inconuenience which hath hap∣ned since the Bishops cōming, who can wonder if they would haue hindred it, if they could, though I am most credibly informed they neuer medled not spake word all the tyme it was now last in trea∣ty. Heertofore indeed when they were called to Councell they spake what they thought, as it is the part of any honest man. But this last tyme being not called, they did not speake a word, nor mooue a foot in it. For, what is it to them? Do not they liue aswel where ther be Bishops as where there be none? I trow they do: why then should they hinder it? And thus much for the Deuines third poynt of Temerity. 4. The fourth poynt of Temerity, as
he sayth, is that these 3. priuate men erect a new Tribunall, neuer heard of before, frō which there is no Appeale, in saying that the matter they speake of, viz. of their dangers, admitteth no further que∣stion, which the Deuine interpreteth, as if they would iudge vpon a Bishop, and vpō Ecclesiasticall Authority, so as no further question is to be made. What a friuolous obiection is this for a man to make? Or with what conscience can he transferr their words which they speake of the cer∣taynty and manifestnesse of their owne daungers to so different sense, as if they did take vpon them to iudg of Bishops & Ecclesiasticall Authority, so, as if from them there were no appeale? Nay what affinity is there betweene the bare affir∣mation of a thing, by saying it is out of doubt, and, erecting a new Tribunall? This mans head is so filled with Miters, that he dreameth of nothing but Tribu∣nals. This is too to grosse: and as for say∣ing, that these three priuate men erect a a new Tribunall, as if it were but the act of three, I haue touched that before, and shall do agayne afterwards.
The 5. point of Temerity he saith lyeth in these words, from which (he putteh this parenthesis of his owne) refusing the Bishops authority) we cannot recede for the reason aforesayd; which, he sayth, is a temerarious profession of disobedience not only to the Bishop their immediate Pastour, but also to the Pope. That, from which the Catholickes say they cannot recede, is the substance of the Letter con∣cerning the difficulty of a Catholike Tri∣bunal, and danger which ensueth thereof to themselues, which what disobediēce can it be? Agaynst what Authority is it? for there is no obedience, nor disobediēce but where there is Authority. What po∣wer is it that commaundeth men not to speake the truth in matters of Fact, that so much concerne them? What Law, what Superiour, can abridge them of this li∣berty, though he were a knowne Supe∣riour? Much lesse heere where the questi∣on is, whether my Lord Bishop haue Au∣thority ouer Catholiks or not, or what he may haue, as things stand? For to be bound to obey, there be these three things requisite at least; that the thing com∣maunded
be possible; that the party that commaundeth be a Superiour; and that others be subiect in that kind, wherein they are commaunded, or in the matter of command▪ for men are not subiect to al Superiors in all kinds, but to one in one kind, and to another in another. So as this Deuine, shoud first by proofe haue put it out of question, that my Lord Bishop hath the authority he pretēdeth. Secōdly, that, that authority can stand with the present gouernment and state of Catho∣likes. Thirdly, that Catholiks are so farre subiect to him in matter of life and tem∣porall fortunes, as to hazard all for ac∣knowledging and obeying his Authority. And hauing made good all this, he might then haue accused them of Temerarious Disobedience. But till then, it were more honesty and wisdome to forbeare his Cē∣sures. And this order was more suteable with the order of the Letter; wherin ha∣uing first sayd they were persuaded they could not be bound to hazard the ruine of their state and posterity, where the ne∣cessity of professing their fayth doth not oblige them, they conclude cōsequently
that they cannot recede &c. But the De∣uine had an eye in this to his conueniēcy, reseruing this poynt for the last, therin to shew his Diuinity, which he hath hither∣to made litle shew of: and so now he commeth to that which followeth. 6. Their 6. point of Temerity, sayth the Deuine, is in their words; neyther can we be persuaded that there is a necessity of conforming our selues therunto (Epis∣copall power) (obserue these two words of the Deuines owne putting in by the pa∣renthesis, and by way of glosse) as to a matter of fayth▪ or yet, that we can be obliged to loose our state, and ruine our posterityes, where the necessity of pro∣fession of Fayth doth not oblige vs. Vpon which words the Deuine descan∣teth: asking, what is this, but to get vp into the Bishops chayre, and teach him how far they are obliged; where he sayth that as long as they taught, what was common law, they were to be heard; but that where they come to teach the duty of a Christian, they passe the duty of a Chri∣stian. And then he teacheth, that it is a matter of Fayth, that there ought to be
Episcopall power in Gods Church; and that the Pastors are to be obeyed, and that although particulars be not matter of fayth, yet men are bound out of the ver∣tue of Religion to hould them so, where there is no cause of doubt. For, sayth he, it sufficeth that they are obliged to obey theyr lawfull Pastour, and that they haue no reasonable cause to doubt but that the Bishop of Clalcedon is such to them: and so concludeth, that they erre exceedingly if they thinke that they are not bound to conforme themselues to any thing but matters of fayth; for that they are bound to conforme their willes to matters of religion, obedience, or other vertues cō∣maunded by God, & his Church, as they do their vnderstanding to matter of faith. Thus the Deuine discourseth, more it seemeth to shew his Diuinity, then to speake to the purpose: for what needed al this whereof there is no question; as that it is the institution of Christ, that there should be Episcopall Authority in the Church; that lawfull Pastors are to be obayed; that men are no lesse boūd to the practise of other vertues, then the profes∣sion
of fayth? Who denieth all this? Or what was there in the Letter, that being rightly taken might enforce any such dis∣course? The Catholickes meaning ther∣fore is playne that the acknowleging or obaying such Authority, as my Lord Bishop now pretēdeth heere in Englād, as things stād, is not a matter of necessity to the profession of the Catholike fayth, or exercise of any other vertue necessary for a good Christian. But that they may be good Catholickes without it, as they haue approued themselues before God & the world these 60. yeares: which if it had been necessary, the Sea Apostolike would neuer haue suffered them to want a Bi∣shop so long. This was the thing the De∣uine should haue touched, without going about the bush: now what Temerity is it for any lay man in the world to say this? Or wherin doth he take vpon him more thē he should? How doth he teach the Bi∣shop? or, by saying this how doth he passe the duty of a good Christiā? What crime is it for a man now in time of heresy & persecution, where the profession and exercise of the Catholique fayth, is dan∣gerous
to his life and fortune, when he shall be vrged by my Lord Bishop to fur∣ther exercise or profession therof then is necessary, to make answere, that he thin∣keth he cannot be bound vnto it? Will this Deuine in good company and before learned men say, he can? No, no, hee will be better aduised whatsoeuer he wri∣teth. Nay this thing is so playne, and so necessarily included in the Common practise of the Catholique fayth, all this tyme of persecution, as I wonder this Deuine should thinke it such a matter for a lay mā to speake so much Diuinity. He need not; for his willbe neuer the lesse, though all the world know it. And on the other side Catholiques haue beene so bea∣ten to it, that there is no man can but know it. For what hath made them stand out against the oath of Supremacy, going to Church, the oath of allegiāce &c. but the necessary connexiō that these things of their owne nature haue with the pro∣fession of their faith? which were it not, all Catholiques in England know, they could not by any humane constitution be bound not to cōforme themselues to our
lawes in this behalfe, the dangers being such as they are. Now they see, that the hauing of a Bishop at this time with such Authority as is pretended, is not of such necessity on the one side, as these things; and on the other side of no lesse danger, and therfore they thinke, they cannot be bound to it. Is this such a deep point of Diuinity, as a Lay man may not presume to know it? Or if he know, not speake? Or if he speake of it, he must be sayd to get vp into the Bishops Chayre? Who would thinke a Deuine would trifle thus? But let vs see more: he enlargeth himselfe in this, as being in his iudgement a sub∣stantiall poynt of temerity, making ano∣ther Paragraph of it. But before I haue done with this, I cannot omit to note the Deuines Parenthesis in the beginning of this 6. Paragraph, where to the words of the Letter, which say▪ Neither can we be perswaded, that there is a necessity of confor∣ming our selues heerunto, which they me∣ane playnely of an Episcopall Tribunall as things stand. This Deuine with his pa∣renthesis of (Episcopall power) maketh as though Catholiques deny conformity to
Episcopall power in generall: which is a strange slight; & I may say plaine corrup∣tion. But to goe on with him, he goeth forward thus. Like to this, is that other great errour of theirs, where they say they cannot be obliged to loose their estates, & ruine their posterityes, where the neces∣sity of profession of fayth doth not oblige them. For saith he, they are aswel obliged to loose their estates, nay liues also, where the exercising of any necessary Vertue doth oblige them, as where the profession of fayth doth. For example, he bringeth Ioseph the Patriarch, who was obliged to loose his estate and liberty, as well when the necessity of Chastity did bind him, as necessity of professing his fayth. So he sayth, Christians were no lesse bound to obay the decrees of the Apostles, thē be∣lieue their doctrine. And he brings the Authority of S. Thomas to proue, that he suffereth as a Christian, whosoeuer suf∣fereth for doing any good▪ or auoyding any euill▪ saying withall of himself, that to loose their liues for acknowledging their lawfull Pastor, is to loose it for pro∣fession of their fayth. So the Church hol∣deth
them for Martyrs, who would ra∣ther dy then subscribe to the condemna∣tion of S. Athanasius &c. To this I an∣swere, that the Deuine is very free to call this an errour, which by answering what he sayth against it, shall manifestly appe∣are to be a solide truth. For, that which he sayth first then, that a man is bound to loose not only his estate, but lyfe also, where the necessity of exercising any ne∣cessary vertue doth oblige him, no lesse then for the profession fayth, it is true; but nothing pertinent to our purpose, which is, not to dispute whether a man be bound to hazard his lyfe and fortune for his fayth only, and not for other ver∣tues: but whether he be bound to hazard all for a thing which is not necessary for profession of fayth, & is supposed not to fal vnder the necessary obligation of any other commandement, or vertue: and so the questiō may be the same of any other vertu, whether a man be boūd to exercise it, whē it is not necessary, with hazard of his life & fortune; & this the Deuine ra∣ther seemeth to grant by requiring a ne∣cessity of exercising a necessary vertue to
oblige a man: for I would aske him wher∣in is the necessity of exercising a neces∣sary Vertue, as he calleth it, by acknow∣ledging and admitting his Authority? May we not haue all things necessary to saluation without it? If not, how haue we done all this while? If we may, what maketh this for his purpose? You see then the Deuine would decline the question, by slipping asyde to another matter. For his example of the Patriarch Ioseph, I say there was a necessity of exercising a ne∣cessary vertue (to vse the Deuines owne Phrase (though it be not very good) & therfore nothing to our purpose. But by the way I would know what he meaneth by necessary Vertue in this place, for my part I do not see what he can meane, o∣ther then an act which a man is bound to exercise; so as eyther the word neces∣sity, or necessary in his Phrase, is super∣fluous; & then the meaning of his whole sentence is this. A man is bound to loose his life for exercising any vertue wher∣to he is bound, and so we are where we were at the first, to wit, whether al kinds of obligation bind at all tymes and in all
circumstances, and with all manner of difficulties and daungers. For the Pa∣triarch Ioseph, there is no doubt, but he was bound to hazard all, rather then his chastity, wherto the law of God and na∣ture did bind him in that case: not so the hauing of a Bishop with Ordinary power in ours. For the Apostles Decrees, it is true, they are to be obeyed: but yet I would know of this Deuine, whether he thinketh a man bound rather to hazard his life or liberty, then to eat flesh in lent, or vpon a friday or saturday? And so of other Apostolicall Precepts, which are not diuine Traditions, but enacted by them meerely out of their owne Autho∣rity. Onely heere I say, by this it is mani∣fest, that there is difference betweene the obligation of profession of our fayth, which is wholy diuine, and obaying the Decrees of the Apostles, which are but human. For S. Thomas his Authority I re∣uerence it, and am therfore sorry to see it applyed by a Deuine to so litle purpose: for who denieth, but he sufferreth as a Christian, or for his fayth, and conse∣quently is a Martyr, that suffereth for
exercise of any vertue, or auoyding euen the least veniall sin? For example a man perswadeth a yong woman, that hath many suiters to leaue the world, and be∣come Religious; some one of the suiters who is most earnest, and in most possi∣bility to haue her, conceaueth a great hate against the party that perswadeth her to Religion, and so wayting his op∣portunity, killeth him for it. This man no doubt suffereth as a Christian in this case by S. Tho. his rule. But doth S. Tho∣mas say, he is boūd with foresight of this danger to perswade the woman? No, nay will this Deuine say it? What then is this to that which Catholiques say they can∣not be bound to loose all, where there is not a necessity of professiō of their faith? But the Deuine inferreth heere; that for a man to loose his estate for acknowled∣ging his lawful Pastor (I suppose he me∣anes the Bishop of Chalcedon with his po∣wer of Ordinary) is to loose it for profes∣sion of his fayth. Be it so: what then? Is this a matter of necessity or obligation as the case stādeth? If not, you say nothing: & this I say, supposing it an act of vertue,
as the Deuine sayth it is. But now not to dehort any from this acknowledgment, but only to iustify a man that shal not ac∣knowledg it for good reasōs, I aske whe∣ther it be an act of vertue to acknowled∣ge that Authority, which there is no suf∣ficient ground for, but the Parties owne saying; whereas there is much against it? Is this discretion? If not discretion, how can it be a vertue? Besides, graunt he haue that Authority, but that this Authority is on the one side not neces∣sary, and on the other syde daungerous, so as the Daunger and Inconuenience doth preponderate the conueniency or commodity. Is it discretion to be si∣lent in this case, or is this profession of fayth, as our Deuine calleth it, ioyned with discretion? Haue not many beene condemned therefore, both aunciently & modernely for want of discretion, e∣uen in profession of their fayth. Is it ver∣tue for men to put thēselues into need∣lesse dangers, or not prudently to decline them when they may without offence? What such special vertue then is it, to ac∣nowledge my Lo. of Chalcedons Ordina∣ryship,
and submit to his Tribunall, being no way necessary to the professiō of faith & being on the other side so daungerous as it is? Neyther doth this Deuines exāple of S. Athanasius his followers help. For first, it was an vniust, and wicked thing in it self to subscribe to the condemnatiō of an Innocent man, the which for al the world a man may not do. Secondly, the persecutiō of Athanasius being known to be for defence of the Catholique Faith & beliefe, to subscribe to his condemnation was held in that tyme to be a deniall of a mans Fayth, concerning the Diuinity of Christ. So heere was a necessity (to vse the Deuines phrase) of exercising two ne∣cessary vertues, Iustice and Fayth. In our case no such matter. So that all this wind hitherto shaketh no corne. Now then I come to Caietans Authority, which in∣deed cōmeth neere the poynt. For he put∣teth the question aright, whereas the Deuine leades vs out of the way all this while. And it is this; An lex humana ita obliget in conscientia quòd homo teneatur mori pro eius obseruatione? To which he sayth that some teach this position, Non habet
anc potestatem nisi in causa fidei, vel tuend republica. Which he sayth is erroneous & false Doctrine: and proueth it by diuers reasons as our Deuine sayth, whereof he bringeth this one. Lex humana est obliga∣tiua ad peccatum mortale, vt manifeste patet, cùm praecipitur aliquid sub poena capìtis: Ergo est constitutiua alicuius actus, in hoc quòd sit peccatum mortale: Est ergo obligatiua ad ui∣tandum magis actum illum, quàm mortem corporalem, quia mors animae fugienda est ma∣gis quàm mors corporis And after saith, Nos autem secundum veritatem dicimus, quòd v∣niuersaliter lex praeceptiua obligat ad mortem pro sui obseruatione, in casu autem, non ex benignitate legum. From whence our De∣uine concludeth, that it is false and erro∣neous doctrine to teach that men are not bound to loose their estates, & ruine their posterities where necessity of profession of Fayth doth not oblige them; but that they are bound to loose both estate & life euer where the necessity of a lawfull com∣mād doth oblige them vnder mortall sin. And such no doubt it is to acknowledge and obey their lawfull Pastour (as he sayth.) Heere you see Caietans Doctrine,
and our Deuines Inference. To which I answere first, that our Deuine cannot be ignorant how little Authority in many matters Caietan carrieth in schooles now a dayes, though he were a great Doctor in his tyme, and this in regard of his sin∣gularity in many points of great momēt and freedome in censuring other mens o∣pinions. Both which faults he seemeth somewhat to commit in this place. For as for singularity, he can hardly escape it, hauing but one only man of the whole schoole of Deuines to hold with him, who is Adrianus, of his owne tyme, or rather a little after him; so as when he taught it, it was singular among Deuines for any te∣stimony that is extant, & since, he hath not any one man but Adrian to follow him: which being so, then is it manifest that he falleth fowly into that other fault of censuring Doctrine as erroneous and false, which was approued and taught in his owne tyme by learned men, and that it seemeth with such likelyhood, that all Deuines of ensuing tymes haue left his, & followed this. Though in this he be not so much to be blamed, not being able to
forsee what men would say that came af∣ter, as our Deuine, who liueth now, and cannot but know it to be allowed and taught by all learned men. All whom this Deuine in alleadging and approuing Caie∣tanes censure, doth condemne, which is a great fault in a man of his profession. But to let that goe; In my opiniō it had beene more for our Deuines purpose to haue alleadged Caietanes bare Authority with∣out his reason. This reasō which he brin∣geth, being Caietanes best reason, as is to be presumed in our Diuines Iudgmēt (for sure he would bring the best) and it pro∣uing nothing worth, it will appeare that he hath no reason at all: for his reason is this. An humane Law may oblige a man vnder mortall sinne, as when a thing is cōmanded vpon paine of death; but a mā is boūd rather to loose his life then cōmit a mortal sinne: Ergo a man may be bound to loose his life for the obseruation of it. To this I might answere first that his first Proposition is not altogether so certaine.Nauar. apud For that some great schollers not inferior to Caietan for Authority in schooles in morall matters,Tol. lib. . c. 0. . are of opinion, that no
humane ciuill law doth bind vnder mor∣tall sinne. But I do not build vpon that. And therefore I answere secondly, that Caietanes reason, is petitio Principij, and consequently no reason, taking the very thing in question, though deliuered in o∣ther words, for a reason of his saying. For it is the same question, whether an hu∣mane law can bind a man vnder mortall sinne, to losse of goods or life, but in case where there is some higher obligatiō pro∣ceeding from the law of God, or nature: and whether an humane law can oblige him to loose his fortunes and life, where there is no necessity of profession of his Faith, or other higher bond. And this is it which Caietan with one other Deuine sayth, and all other Deuines gainesay him in. And the reason is manifest. For, a law being to be for the common good, and the power by which it is made, procee∣ding originally from the people (if we speake of ciuill or Politicall power) and giuen for that end, it were a great abuse of that power, to force men to so great domage as to hazard fortune and life, but where it is meerly necessary for that end:
for men are not supposed to be so voyde of reason, as to cast away themselues so freely. Now in that case of common good the law of nature doth come in, and for∣tify that bond. The like we may say of Ecclesiasticall humane power, which though it come originally from God, not from the people, yet reason doth prescribe the vse of it: and a Law made thereby to the domage and hurt of mens fortunes & liues, without a necessity, for their eter∣nall good, would rather proue preiudi∣ciall then profitable, and therfore no Law. Nay, to matters of extraordinary difficulty, though otherwise good and holy, euen Religious men are not many tymes bound. That Ordinary Example, which authors bring of a Religious man entring heere in Europe, who, they say, by his generall Vow of Obedience is not bound vpon his Superiours commaund to go to the Indies through so many dan∣gers by sea & land: How much lesse then can secular men be bound with daunger of life and ruine of their fortunes, to thin∣ges not absolutly necessary to fayth and saluation? Such as is, the not acknow∣ledging
and obeying of my Lo Bishop of Chalcedons Ordinariship. And therfore no matter fit for so great an obligation, as the losse of life, and ruine of a mans po∣sterity. Wherefore that must needs faile, which our Deuine buildeth vpon Caieta∣nes Authority, as the foundation: to wit that men are bound to loose all, not only for profession of Faith, but also where the necessity of a lawful commaund obli∣geth them, if he meane the necessity which a commaund doth bring with it subsequent, as an effect; which he must meane for his purpose. For as I haue said all this while, all cōmaunds do not bind in all occasions, and then there is no such necessity, or rather it is no law or com∣maūd in this case being not able to bind. Therfore to auoyd all ambiguity & equi∣uocation of the necessity of a lawfull cō∣maund, I distinguish and say: If this ne∣cessity be antecedent and such as may be sufficient to ground such a commaund on because the thing is of necessity of it selfe for the saluatiō of a mans soule or the pu∣blique good this commaund is lawful & the necessity sufficient to bind a man to
the losse of life & goods: if not, but only the necessity subsequent, that is, because it is commanded, I say, this is no suffici∣ent ground for a man to hazard all; ney∣ther is it a commaund in this case, hauing no power to oblige, as I haue proued. And so much for our Deuines Diuinity, which hath foyled him in this point of Doctrine contradicting the whole current of De∣uines. Let him looke Bonacin. to. 2. disp. 2. q. 8. punct. 2. n. 3. & seq. Now to his te∣merity againe. 7. The seauenth point of temerity saith he (if I may giue it so sharpe a terme) is in these words: We also most humbly beseech your Lordship, to belieue, that this which we heere present vnto you, is the sense of the Laity; whereas scarce 30. Laymen knew of the writing of this Let∣ter: & since they knew of it, many hun∣dreds haue disclaymed from it, & open∣ly protested against it, some of them not accounting those Catholiques that wrote this Letter. Hitherto are the Deuines owne words. And then he Rhetorically ampli∣fieth it: asking whether it be the sense of the English Catholike laity, that a Bishop
lawfully sent by the sea Apostolike doth vsurp authority? must do nothing against the setled Order of the state, in matter of spirituall Iurisdictition? That a Catholi∣que Episcopall tribunall is a new Tribu∣nall in England? & so in like sort he rec∣koneth vp Epilogically al his former te∣merities, and prayeth, God forbid that such presumption should be the sense of the Laity. And that rather the quite cō∣trary is their sense, to wit; to accept the Bishop for their lawfull Pastor; to thanke his holynes for sending him; to be as rea∣dy if not more, to vēture the losse of their estate for entertayning a Bishop their Pa∣stor, as for entayning regular Priests: and this he saith many hundreds haue testified by word, writing, and deeds. This point it seemeth is a shrewd one in the Deuines iudgment: wherfore he would fayne haue a worse tearme then Temerity for it. But let him stay, and see whether it deserue euē that, any more thē the rest that went before. To say that this is the sense of the layty, wheras scarce 30. knew of the writing of the Letter, he sayth is Temerity. Yea is it euen so? Did
30. know of it? how commeth it thē that all this while you spake but of 3. calling it the three Lay-mens Letter, in the very title, & afterwards continually speaking but of three? It is wel increased suddainly from three, to thirty. But meane while hath not our Deuine strangely forgotten himselfe confessing & confuting himselfe out of his owne mouth? For if 30. or neer 30. were priuy to the writing of the Let∣ter, and did not disclayme (as if they had done, the Deuine would not haue passed it ouer in silence) it is to be presumed that they did consent therto. If they did con∣sent, then was it their act, not the act of those 3. alone: and what these 3 did, they did in the name of the rest. Therefore those 30. are subiect to al the Deuines cen∣sures of passion and temerity no lesse thē those 3. But he thought better to lay al v∣pon 3. because he thought he might be the boulder in his censures, the smaller the number was, therfore he made it lesse to himselfe, though contrary to his owne knowledge, as is manifest by this his Cō∣fession. Well to go on, we haue 30. may there not be a great many more, that he
doth not know of? Will he arrogate so much to himselfe as to know all that pas∣seth in priuate amongst men? might not many vtter their mynds so priuately in this matter to their friends, as not only not the Deuine, but no man else but the party, that they spake to, shall know it? How then doth this Deuine, so peremp∣torily affirme, that there were scarce 30. priuy to it? As if no man did any thing but they came presently and told him: but he must excuse me for not belieuing that, but rather it is to be presumed that if he could come to the knowledge of 30. there were fiue tymes as many at least, that knew of it, & are not knowne to euery one, considering the secret manner of carrying things of this kind among Ca∣tholiques. And so much this Deuine might truly haue imagined, at least belieued, when this Letter was deliuered by 3. such per∣sons in the name of the Laity, being euery one of them of such worth, as might de∣serue credit in a greater matter then this. For it is no way to be presumed, that any one of them would do such a thing in the
name of others without very good war∣rant from them, especially seing they might be so easily disauowed. Nay it can∣not be vnknowne vnto this Deuine, that they were warranted by most of the Ca∣tholiques of honour and quality, in, and about London, at the tyme of the wri∣ting the Letter: for my Lord Bishop him∣selfe, did then in a manner confesse as much. For to one Noble man very well knowne, he writ, that his Lordships Let∣ter which he had written to disclayme from the Lay mens Letter, appeared vn∣to him like a starre in a cloud; as if he were the only man that stood for him. And it can be no lesse knowne to this Deuine, what a do ther was to haue a con∣trary Letter written by some of my Lord Bishop friendes in the name of the laity to the contrary effect. But it would not succeed; & why? But because that none that considered the state of Catholique affaires heere in England and what con∣sequences the Authority of Ordinary brought with it, and withall had any care of their owne fortunes or common good, could thinke it safe for them to ad∣mit
of such Authority. It is true, that if a man, aske ordinary people that diue not into the matter, whether they ac∣knowledge my Lord of Chalcedon for their Pastour, or some perhaps who vn∣derstand the matter better, but haue not much to loose; it may be they will easily answeare, they acknowledge him for their Pastor. And this is the way which hath beene vsed, with those hundreds, which this Deuine sayth haue disclaymed from this Letter. But though they were more, it made not much matter. And though there should be but 30. that were priuy to this Letter, might not those 30. be of such account, as might be more worth then many of this Deuines hun∣dreds? I belieue they might. For they are the cheif men for honour and estate that are most to be regarded in this matter, as being the men vpon whome the credit of the Catholique cause most dependeth; and who, for a thing that shalbe subiect to exception, are most like to suffer: & therfore they might well say the Laity, being the cheifest and better part; and what they wanted in number they might
counteruayle in worth. This letter then is the sense of the Laity, not wrested and wrung, not glossed and commentaryed by the Deuine at his pleasure, but in the plaine and obuious meaning of the very wordes, farre from passion, and teme∣rity, as I haue here shewed. And so I come to the 3. Section, the title wherof is this. Sect. 3. That the motiues of the three men, were not all humayne, and worldly. IN this 3. section the Deuine examineth what the Lay mens motiues were to resist the restoring of Episcopall power, or rather to impugne and banish it, as he saith, according to his vsuall manner, af∣ter it is restored by the Sea Apostolique, which seing, saith he, that it is diuine su∣pernaturall, instituted by Christ, appoin∣ted by the Holy Ghost to gouerne the Church, obserued alwayes in the Church in all tymes of persecution whatsoeuer, profitable for administring Confirmatiō, hallowing of Oyles, keeping vnity and
good life, the motiues had need be good; and then he reduceth al to two: viz. feare of losse of worldly fortunes, and troubles by contrariety of sentences betwixt the Bishops Court and the Protestantes. But then picketh out a third, which he saith, was the true motiue, deliuered somewhat in a couert māner: to wit, that the Regu∣lars may be freed from the Bishops appro∣batiō. Out of which he deduceth certaine points for the lay men to consider. 1. whe∣ther it be fit for them to impugne spiritu∣al & diuine Authority vpon mere world∣ly motiues, and such as may better be ob∣iected against Priestly Authority, it being forbiddden by moderne lawes; Bishoply authority being not forbidden by them expressely. Secondly whether it beseeme them to reiect Episcopall Authority, and the certaine spirituall commodityes ther∣of, for vncertaine or rather pretended tē∣poral dangers. Thirdly how farre they are frō the Catholique Africans, who would haue a Bishop, notwithstanding the per∣secution threatned by the African King if they had one. 4. Whether it beseeme them to impugne a Bishop their Pastor in
behalfe of Regulars not their Pastours Fifthly, whether Regulars deserue this at their handes, since for the quiet of their Penitents consciences, they would not aske the Bishops approbation, though he offered it vnder his hand and seale, that it should be no preiudice to them, wheras the Bishop for quiet of mens consciences with his owne preiudice approued Regu∣lars though they would not aske it. This is the whole discourse of this Section. To which I say first, that he commit∣teth a very foule fault for a man of lear∣ning, in misreporting and mistaking the question, by saying that the Lay-men re∣sist, impugne, and banish Episcopall Authority: whereas it is nothing so. For it neuer came into the hart of any Catho∣que man, much lesse of any of these Lay men to question or make doubt of Epis∣copall Authority in general. But the que∣stion being of my Lord Bishop of Chalce∣don who came into England with a for∣raine title of a Bishopricke in Greece, but with Authority to be exercised heere in England, what Authority is giuen, what Authority can fitly be exercised, & how
far Lay Catholiques stand bound, if new Tribunals with power in foro externo, or Ordinary power be erected. And he clay∣ming such Authority, they whome it most concerned, declared theyr sense and iudgment cōcerning these points: which it seemeth our Deuine would needs mi∣stake and draw the question another way to make himselfe a little more roome to discourse at liberty, of Episcopall Autho∣rity, crying out a Pastor, a lawfull Pastor &c. because what they sayd, was so iust and consonant to reason, as he could not impugne it. Wherfore it is no won∣der that of all this deal, he saith there is so litle sayd to the purpose. Secondly for the motiues, he saith not much against them: but only taketh vpon him to iudge of the secrets of harts, by saying, the principall motiue was to free Regulars from appro∣bation. Wherein I might aske him, by what Autbority he taketh vpon him to iudge of such matters as are not subiect to the iudgment of the Church it selfe? for, Ecclesia non iudicat de occultis. But I need not presse him heere: for it is ordi∣nary with him to censure men meerly out
of his owne imagination. Now for his Corollary demands, I answer to the first, that it supposeth falsly, that they impugne spirituall Authority, which they do not. Secondly, it may stand with very good reason for a man to desire sometymes not to be vrged to the acknowledgment and admittance of such a speciall Authority out of feare of temporall daunger of life or fortunes, which though they be in themselues temporall things, yet being desired or preserued discreetly with refe∣rence to a spirituall end, as they may be, and as it may be presumed good men de∣sire them, they are in a kind spirituall. Thirdly, these motiues do not make a∣gainst Priestly Authority so much as a∣gainst the Authority of a Bishop, for they speake only of a Tribunall, or power in foro externo, which doth not belonge to Priests, as Priests, and which is against our auncient Lawes, as is sayd before, which is worse then to be against our mo∣derne lawes. Besides the Authority of a Bishop is more against our modern laws, for he cometh with Authority and iuris∣diction deriued from the sea of Rome, not
only in foro interno, but also in foro ex∣terno, which is much more against the in∣tendement of our lawes, howsoeuer it be against the words: and this may appeare by the Proclamations, and Persecutions which haue been for him in particular. Lastly put case the daunger were the same yet God doth bind men to the one, as being a thing of necessity for the saluati∣on of their soules, but not to the other, being no way helpfull to their soules in these circumstances, but daungerous to their Liues and Fortunes. But because this Deuine maketh such frequent mention & so sure account that Episcopall Authority is not more, if not lesse against our moderne lawes then Pri∣estly power, this later being by them ex∣presly forbiddē, the other not, as he saith; I thinke it not amisse heere in a word to shew it to be forbidden both expresly, & vpon greater penalty. For first the Law of 27. Eliz. which maketh it felony to re∣ceiue, relieue, and maintaine, or com∣fort a Priest, maketh it felony to do the same to any religious or ecclesiastical per∣son. Now I presume the Deuine will not
a Bishop to be an Ecclesiastical per∣son: how then can he say, he is not ex∣presly forbidden. It may be he meaneth, because he is not forbidden by the name of a Bishop: true, I graunt the word Bi∣shop is not there; no more is the word monke, or friar; much lesse Benedictine, Dominican, Franciscan &c. and yet who can say that these are not expresly for∣bidden by the law in the word Religious person? If this Deuine say againe that they are forbiddē in the word Seminary, or o∣ther Priest, so say I also of a Bishop. It is cleare then, that a Bishop is also expresly inough, & as much forbidden by that law as a Priest: & this our proclamatiōs suffi∣ciently shew, as that 1. Caroli Regis for ba∣nishment of Priests and Iesuits, wherein the word Bishop was also expressed. Now for the penalty of reconcilemēt, it is true it is treason to be absolued or reconciled by a Priest. And is it not so by a Bishop also? yea verily as much one as other, for in the nature of reconcilemēt neither one nor other is named: where in I cānot but wonder why this Deuine should so speci∣ally note, that it is treasō to be reconciled
by Priests. The matter then for that, is all one. But to go a little further with him, I say, it is not Treason for a man to heare masse, to receiue the Blessed Sacrament, to be baptized, married, annoyled, or the like, or to do any act in acknowledgemēt of his Priesthood, except only absolutiō & reconciliation; wheras it is farre other∣wise of a Bishop. For not only to be abso∣lued or recōciled by him, but euen to pro∣mise any obedience vnto him is high trea∣son in the Doer, Coūsellour, or A bettor, much more to do any act in conformity of his Episcopal power in foro externo, as to appeare before him vpon his citation, to obey his censures, or the like: & this by a law of 23. Eliz. (to wit 4. yeares before that other of receiuing, relieuing &c. of Iesuits & Priests) where it is enacted that if any person shall promise any obedience to any pretended Authority of the sea of Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or Po∣tētate, that then such person shalbe takē, tried, and iudged, suffer and forfaite as in case of high Treason: in which words is plainely comprehended Episcopal power
as such; for it is deriued from the sea of Rome, whether it be delegate or ordinary. Or if it be Ordinary as that of Bishops in their diocesse, and as the Deuine takes my Lord of Chalcedons to be, then it is like it may be vnderstood in that word Prince, for such a Bishop is a spirituall Prince. And that it may yet further appeare that his Episcopall power as such, is so forbidden by this law, I will put this De∣uine a case thus. Suppose there should com one in hither sent by the Pope, without the order of Bishop, Priest, or any other order, but only with Episcopall power or iurisdiction, as he might be, to determine such causes heere among Catholiques, as Bishops do els where in their spirituall Courts; would this case be comprehēded in our Lawes thinks he, or not? or would it not be Treason for men to promise him obediēce, come to his Court, obey his cē∣sures, &c? certainly it would; & euen by this law of 23. Eliz. How then can this Deuine so confidently auerre, that Epis∣copall power is no more against our mo∣dern Lawes then Priestly? But heere now I must intreate this Deuine to conceyue
me right, for my intentiō is not to inforce Lawes against my Lord Bishop of Chalce∣don, but only to answere his arguments, which force me to this, to shew that there may be some more daunger in Episcopall then Priestly power, for auoyding wher∣of Catholiques are not to be blamed, if they be lesse willing to admit of the one, then of the other, now in these tymes, wherein it is but good discretion for men to serue God, and exercise their religion with as little hazard of their Liues and Fortunes as they may. To the second demaund, whether it beseeme them to reiect Episcopall Au∣thority, and the certayne spirituall com∣modityes therof, vpon vncertaine or ra∣ther pretended daungers. I answere as to the first, that it supposeth falsly, that they reiect spirituall Authority. For they reuerence it, though nothing seemes re∣uerence to this man, but yielding to his will. Secondly, they do not refuse any spirituall commodity that commeth ther∣by, as Confirmation, hallowing of Oy∣les, or whatsoeuer else doth not concerne such manner of Ordinary Authority, as
they cannot safely admit, for the reasons alleadged in their Letter; which this man sayth, are vncertaine or pretēded: which conceit of pretented, so much pleaseth the Deuine, that he maketh a distinct se∣ction of it, & therfore if it deserue any an∣swere, I will make it there. To the 3. demaund, how far short they are of the zeale of the Affrican Ca∣tholiques, who would rather venture a persecution, then want a Bishop; I an∣swere, it is well knowne, Catholiques heere want no zeale to Bishoply Autho∣rity, who haue suffered so long & sharpe persecution for the Authority of the sea Apostolique, which they haue defended with losse of goods, and life, for admit∣ting of Priests sent by the Authority ther∣of: which that holy sea considering, with great wisdome and charity hath so tem∣pered things all the tyme of persecution, that as on the one side it hath sent Priests with sufficient Authority for our instru∣ction, administration of Sacraments, & other necessary matters: so on the other side it hath for borne to presse vs further for the admittance of such Authority, at
is more dangerous then needfull. And who can blame vs if we desire the conti∣nuance of the same course still, till God send better times? And if our zeale be the same to the sea Apostolique (for whose Authority we suffer, and vpon whome we desire therfore to depend immediatly, as vpō our proper Pastour) as those Ca∣tholiques had to their particular Bishop, of what can any man iustly taxe vs? Are we worse Catholiques? Nay are we not rather so much better Catholiques as we depend more neerly of the Head of the Catholique Church? Besides our case is different from the Africans in many res∣pects: they had no other meanes of main∣taining the succession of Priests, for ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, and pre∣seruation of the Catholique fayth, but by a Bishop of their owne; we haue. They de∣sired a Bishop of their owne; we should also be glad of such a one; as for example a Catholique Bishop of Cāterbury, Lon∣dō &c. if it might be; but not a Bishop of another Diocesse, to come in hither as Ordinary; for that is against our aun∣cient Catholique Lawes. Their Bishops
seas were not possessed by others, ours are: and the like. This Deuine therefore doth vniustly taxe vs of want of zeale to our immediate Pastor. Besides, the exam∣ple of the Africans is often answered, & proued to make quite against the Deuines end. To the 4. demaund, which is, whe∣ther it beseeme them to impugne a Bishop who is their Pastor, in behalfe of Regu∣lars, who are not their Pastors: I answe∣re, that still this Deuine supposeth a false ground of impugning a Bishop. Now for a Pastor, we know not what he meaneth by it. If he meane one with power to preach, teach and administer Sacraments without other ordinary forrayne power, we graunt he is a Pastour. But then why should not other Priests be also Pastours, hauing the same power? and Regulars as well as seculars? for it is not the name of a Bishop only. For any Priest that co∣meth heere into England is more our Pa∣stor, then the Bishop of Paris, Lyons, Bur∣deaux, or any such Bishop who hath no∣thing to do heer, but by speciall cōmis∣sion; which if it be no more then is giuen
to other Priests, thē is he no more Pastour then they. Will this Deuine say my Lord of Chalcedon is a Pastour otherwise? Say it perhaps he may; but proue it I thinke he cannot. Sure I am his Breue or Cōmission importeth no such thing, but all the con∣trary; as that he is Delegate, his power re∣uokable, that it is only for the spirituall good of soules It is signified by the word Facultyes, which signifieth power in him, but no obligation on the other part to o∣bey, & we vnderstād the ordinary forme of creating a Bishop for ordinary Pastour to be this: Prouidemus Ecclesiae tali, de tali per∣sona: & praeficimns cum in Patrem, ac Pastorē ac Episcopum eiusdem Ecclesiae, cōmittentes ei administrationē in temporalibus & spirituali∣bus, in nomine patris, & filij, & spiritus sācti. Amen. The omission of this ordinary forme, and auoyding of all words which might signify any power or Authority, maketh vs verily belieue his Holines ne∣uer meant to make him Ordinary, or Pastour, other then in that general sense, that al that are sent with power of instru∣cting men & administring of Sacramēts may be called Pastours. And this power
euery body willingly affoardeth him. As for that which our Deuine sayth, that the Laity impugne the Bishop in behalfe of Regulars, I say, that the one is euen as true as the other. For they nether impu∣gne him (but he them) nor do what they do in behalfe of the Regulars, but of them∣selues, & their owne right: for it is their owne liues & fortunes which they defēd: and as for the Regulars they defend their owne priuiledges of another kynd, & no doubt, will be able of themselues to do it, without help of the Laity, being so lear∣ned as to know how farre they ought to yield, or not to yield to his Lordship, and so vertuous as not to deny him any thing that is due. To the 5. demaund, whether Re∣gulars deserue this at the hands of the lay men, since for quiet of their consci∣ences they would not aske approbation, though the Bishop offered to giue it vnder his hand & seale, that it should be no pre∣iudice to them; wheras the Bishop as the Deuine sayth, for quiet of lay men consci∣ences approued the Regulars to his owne preiudice, though they would not aske it.
I answere that lay mens consciences were quiet enough, till my Lord Bishop begāne to disquiet them with needles scruples: & that therfore they were not so much be∣holding to him for quieting them after∣wards, as they were little beholding to him for disquieting them at first. Secondly Lay men saw well enough, it was some thing else then the quiet of their consci∣ences which moued his Lordship to that course of mouing approbations: to wit, to haue his Authority which he pretendeth, therby published and acknowledged. For otherwise he might either haue approued all Regulars without more a do at first, or haue dealt the matter priuatly with them: and they denying to aske approbation, he might haue expected the award of the Sea Apostolique, without further acquain∣ting Lay Catholiques, who, he might be sure, for all yet he could say, would secu∣rely rely their consciences vpō the word of so many, so vertuous, and so learned men, as are in the seuerall Orders of Re∣gulars. Besides, that they, the Regulars, giue so good reason in their owne Letter to the Bishop, and there were so many &
so good reasons alleadged in a shorter let∣ter of a Priest for that matter, that no mā that would be ruled by reason, would ei∣ther doubt of the power of Regulars to heere cōfessions, or thinke that my Lord Bishop himselfe, being so learned a man, could doubt of it, & therfore they might wel thinke he meant that but by the By, and aimed at another matter principally: and so they answered that which seemed to them the principal matter more largly, and touched the other but briefly. Now, for Regulars to aske his Lord∣ships approbation where the matter was so manifest, was wholy vnnecessary; be∣sids, that though his Lordship should giue it vnder his hand and seale that it should be no preiudice to them, it is like they knew it might be preiudiciall in some res∣pect or other: for the very asking it as necessary, argueth a dependency. But for his Lordships approbation, which this Deuine saith, he gaue to Regulars with his owne preiudice, I do not see wherein it can be preiudiciall, for he approued them but only for a time til the matter be deci∣ded, & without preiudice of his owne, or
his successours right: wherein then hath he yielded one iot of his right, suppose he had any? Nay this manner of granting it was a putting of himselfe in possession. In which respect the Regulars were wise inough not to make any acceptance of it. Or wherein hath he more obliged the Laymen, then the Regulars haue, vnlesse it be by disquieting them with new pre∣tences? And for some part of satisfacti∣on, approueth all Regulars, whereby he obligeth Catholiques, like as that man doth that first breaketh anothers head, and then giueth him a plaister. So much then for that answere of this Deuines de∣maunds, and clearing what he sayth of the Laymens motiues. But what if before I passe to another Section▪ I should touch a little vpon the the motiue which maketh the Deuine and others of his mind to be so vehement in the pursuite of this pretended Authority, that they will heare no reason to the con∣trary? They say, it is spirituall good of soules by administring the Sacrament of Confirmation, by hallowing oyles, by kee∣ping vnity and good life; because it is
the institution of Christ, because it hath beene obserued in Gods Church, in all tymes of persecution. But these cannot be the motiues; for as for Confirmation and hallowing of oyles, it is cleare they may be without the authority of Ordinary, & therefore cannot be the ground of such claime. For keeping vnity and good life, it is as cleare, that Authority can do litle in it, as things stand now, and that it is only perswasion and fayr meanes that must do it. For the institution of Christ, sure it is not, that in all places, and in all tymes there must of necessity be particular Bi∣shops in euery particular Diocesse, or▪ Country, for if it were so, then should those 10. Popes frō Pius 4. to Paulus 5. haue offēded grieuously in not creating a Bi∣shop heere. Nay these two last viz. Greg. the 15. and his Holines that now is Vrba∣nus 8. should offend in not making so ma∣ny Bishops as we haue Bishopricks. How then can this Deuine inforce out of the institution of Christ, that my Lord Bi∣shop of Chalcedon should haue the Autho∣rity of Ordinary in England? For the obseruāce of Episcopal power
in the Church in all tymes of persecu∣tion, it is true, there haue euer beene Bi∣shops, and would still be, though there should be no Ordinary in England for a tyme. But where, when, and how, for particular places, it hath euer depended vpon the wisdom of the Sea Apostolique, giuing Bishops in such manner, and with extent of power, as time & place hath re∣quired. So when some Citties or Coūtries haue beene first conuerted to the fayth, they haue giuen them Bishops; when they haue quite fallen away, they haue for∣borne to giue them any; & now heere in our Kingdome which hath fallen away by Heresy, yet so as there be some Ca∣tholiques left, with hope of totall restitu∣tion of the Catholique fayth, when Al∣mighty God shall please, the Sea Aposto∣lique dealeth most prudently, sending men hither with so much power as is ne∣cessary, and expedient for Catholiques at this tyme, reseruing the fullnesse of Ordinary Episcopall power, till the full restitution of Catholike Religion in this Kingdome. For, so Catholiques are well assured, that his Lordship is not Ordi∣nary,
howsoeuer the Deuine cry nothing but Pastour, and lawfull Pastour, at euery word. But men giue him the hearing: only they cannot but woūnder, that he should so brauely carry out the matter, as if there were no Declaration, or order to the contrary, when he cannot but know that my Lord Bishop hath had more or∣ders thē one to that purpose. Nay that my Lord Bishop hath acknowledged the re∣ceipt of them else where, though heere he do not, and hath promised to cease from further stirring, though we do not yet see the performance of it, vnlesse it be that his Lordship indeed forbeare, but that his Officers wil not be obedient to him in that wherin they may soone do his Lord∣ship much wrong. For their faults wilbe imputed to him. Now, because this Deuine sayth Epis∣copall power hath beene euer obserued in the Church in all times of persecution whatsoeuer, inferring thereupon that here now in England there ought to be a Bishop; I would wish him to consider whether euen in the primitiue Church, the persecution were like ours, in some
respects: for though it were more bloudy and the tormēts more various and cruel yet it was but by fits, and generally the Christians had their Cripts placed vn∣der ground, and howses dedicated to that vse, wherein they had a publike kind of exercise of their faith, & euen by publike allowance; and Priests and Clergy men were distinguished by their habit & ton∣sure, or shauing of their crowne, as it is v∣sed now generally in the Catholique Church. But our case is farre different, for heere we haue much ado to heare Masse in a corner, as priuate as may be, without discouery: how much lesse might we haue those other things, which be∣long to the Authority of an Ordinary. But of this againe in another place. These things considered, since none of these spiritual cōmodities which this De∣uine speaketh off are necessarily cōnected with the Authority of Ordinary, neither are so necessary, but that a man may be a good Christian and Catholique without them, they cannot be the true motiue of pursuing the matter with such violence and heate, to the greater scandall and
harme of the Catholique cause, then all the Authority my Lord Bishop would haue, or this Deuine haue for him, wil do good: and therefore men are induced to thinke that the true motiue is Ambition, desire of Rule, interest in the fortunes of Lay men, disposing of Legacies in maius bonum, as would be pretended, iudgemēt of controuersies betweene party & party without their consents; and by little and little to draw into practise a vexation, by the seuerall tribunals, vpon Catholiques. This I will not say, but surely there be great presumptions for it; for if their rea∣sons were good, they would carry things with more tēper, they would with a litle more patience endure to heare men pro∣pound their reasons to the cōtrary; they would quietly expect the determination of the Sea Apostolique, and obey it when it commeth: besids that, in their very dis∣courses they cānot but bewray somwhat of their minds, concerning Legacies & monyes for pious vses. But I will say no more of it, but passe to another Section.
SECT IIII. That the Temporall daungers are not meerly pretended. THE Deuine in his 4. Section labou∣reth by many reasons to proue, that the tēporall Daungers are but pretended; which is but euen the same that he said in the former Section in other words. For though he sayth in the title that their mo∣tiues were worldly, yet in his discourse he sayth, that those were not their true motiues, but their passionatenesse to Re∣gulars; and so he sayth heere: yet I must yield to follow him, though he saith but the same things ouer againe. His first rea∣son to proue the daungers to be only pre∣tended, is, because they neuer mentioned those daungers till approbation was mo∣ued to Regulars, which was about Ea∣ster 1627. whereas Episcopal Authority had beene restored since the yeare 1623. I answere first, that wheras he sayth that Episcopall Authority was restored, I see not how that can be said to be restored which neuer was: for when was there e∣uer
a Bishop of Chalcedon in Englād with power of Ordinary in England, before this mans predecessour? Secondly Catho∣liques did little dreame at first of any such Authority, as my Lord Bishop challen∣geth. For the forraine title of Chalcedon gaue thē some assurance, that he was not to be a Bishop, like as in former Catholi∣que tymes. And though they heard som∣tymes of the word Ordinary amōg some of my Lords Clergy, yet they made no great matter of it, not knowing any great ground. Notwithstanding they were de∣sirous to know, what Authority the Bi∣shop had, and for that cause vsed all the meanes they could to see his Letters, or Faculties, but they could not get a sight of them; which made them begin to sus∣pect somwhat, and so they began to be a litle more carefull then before, especially hearing of diuers things done by my Lord of Chalcedons officers, as Excommunica∣ting of some, and threatning others; as also comming to see the Letters Patents wherby his Lordship did create his. Arch∣deacons, true and lawfull Rulers, and Ecclesiasticall Superiours of the Laity;
which when they saw, they began to cō∣sult among themselues what was fit to be done. And all this was before, that euer my Lord of Chalcedon moued any thing about Approbation of Regulars. And without question they would haue done what they did for their owne security, though the matter of Approbation had neuer beene moued to Regulars. It may be when they saw the flame breake out so strōg against Regulars, who were other∣wise exempt, by challenging of a thing which could not belon but to a proper Ordinary in his Diocesse, it might quickē them, & make them go about what they were doing, with a little more speed, and therupon they drew certaine points con∣cerning my Lord of Chalcedons Authori∣ty, in which they were desirous to be re∣solued, and all of them concerning them∣selues, and such as they had heard, many of my Lord of Chalcedons Officers and friends speake of, as things that were like to be put in practise. But because it was not fit for thē to go vpon vncertaine reports, they were desirous to know of my Lord of Chalcedon himselfe what his
Lordship did conceiue to belong vnto him; so that this Deuine is cleane out of his way, in making the matter of approbatiō of Regulars, the cause of the Laymens stirring. His second reason to proue the daun∣gers to be pretended only, is, because no man hath beene in daunger since the re∣stitution of Episcopall Authority. For answer to this reason, I remit this Deuine to a great friend of my Lord Bishops, who is wont to alledge his fauour to my Lord Bishop, for a reason of the Kings displea∣sure towards him. I might for answer also alledge the Proclamations, & much and continual searching for him, which hath brought so great vexation vpon Catholi∣ques, and vpon many Priests taken by his occasion, but that I list not much to med∣le in such a matter as this. Only this I may tell the Deuine, that my Lord Bishop him∣selfe, as I haue beene credibly informed, tooke notice and exceptiō to the speachs of some Catholiques of worth, who spa∣ke feelingly of what they suffered by his occasion, and wished he would for auoy∣ding their trouble, withdraw himselfe:
which sheweth that Catholiques find the contrary of what this Deuine would make them beleeue. His 3. reason is, because there can be no greater daunger iustly pretended a∣gainst one Bishop, then against so many Priests, they being forbidden by the mo∣derne lawes, and he being not forbidden by either moderne or anciēt lawes. Wher∣to I answer, that as I haue shewed before, the daunger is far greater. For Episcopall Authority is so much more forbidden, as it is greater Authority, deriued from the sea of Rome, and a double Authority. For besides the iurisdiction of forum internum, which Priests haue, the Bishop would haue another of forum externum, which is much more against the moderne lawes, then the former. Besides that I haue shew∣ed before, that the Authority which my Lord Bishop of Chalcedon challengeth, is truly against our ancient Lawes. The 4. reason is, because there is no Law ancient or moderne against Catho∣lique Episcopall Authority: for the an∣cient lawes forbid an extraordinary Tri∣bunall, as that of Legates, and ordayne
only for Catholique tymes, when there were true Episcopall tribunals, which they would not haue disturbed by extra∣ordinary Tribunals, and so are rather in fauour of vsuall Episcopal Authority, as the Bishop of Chalcedons is, then any way against it; that they are only against a new Tribunall, such as a Catholique E∣piscopall tribunall is not. For this reason I answere, it is the same with the former, and hath beene oft repeated; the often repetition of the same discouering the want of matter the De∣uine hath. The substance of the argument I answered fully before in the answere to the 2. poynt of Temerity, where I shewed this Tribunall, which he preten∣deth, to be new, and to be by many de∣grees more neere a Legatiue, then an E∣piscopall Tribunall, though indeed nei∣ther; and so not onely extraordinary, but most extraordinary. Heere therfore I wil onely speake of that, which the Deuine de∣cideth so plainly of my Lord of Chalcedons Tribunall, in saying the auncient lawes are rather in fauour of vsuall Episcopall Authority, such as my Lord Bishop of
Chalcedons is▪ wherin I cānot but note how this Deuine is a little more free in auou∣ching my Lord Bishops Tribunall, or power in foro externo, then I belieue my Lord Bishop himselfe or some of his more wary Officers are, when they write, or speake to men of vnderstanding. For though my Lord Bishops words in his owne Letter did seeme very plaine in this point, as that he was delegated by his Holynes to an vniuersality of causes belonging to Ordinaries, and that he was made a Iudge in prima instantia; yet after∣wards in a certayne Letter, to a Lady, which hath beene seene vnder his owne hand, his Lordship sayth, that concer∣ning the new Tribunall, which some say he hath erected, it is a meere fiction, in∣uented without ground, for he neuer thought of erecting such a Tribunall, and that his Authority ouer them, is meerly spirituall; as the wordes of his Breue are, in Spirituale bonum Catholicorum, to wit, to administer to them that Sacramēt, which they cannot haue, but by a Bishop &c. And in conformity hereof, there being a meeting appointed by some of the Cler∣gy,
and some of the Layty, and Confe∣rence held concerning this Letter of my Lords to the Lady, those of the sayd Clergy, that were there (and were lyke to know most of my Lord Bishops mynd) acknowledged; and conformably them∣selues sayd, that my Lord Bishop neuer in∣tended any such Tribunall. And it went so far, as that the Lay Gentlemen drew a certayne Letter to the same effect, in ex∣plication of his Lordships first Letter, in which he sayd his meaning was mistakē, which his Lordship might please to write to the Laity, expressing as much to thē, as he had done to the Lady; which though it were no more then he had already writ∣ten, and was confessed by his owne offi∣cers, yet he would not write it: for what reason I know not. Nay, this Deuine himselfe in mayntay∣ning this Tribunall, seemeth a little con∣trary to himselfe. For in his first section, and 3. point of Passion, he complayneth of the Gentlemen for stretching, as he sayth, my Lord Bishops words vpon the Tēter hooks, in that they vnderstood his Lordships words of an Episcopall Tribu∣nall,
or power, in foro externo. Whereas, sayth he, the Bishop speaketh onely of such Authority, as Ordinaries haue, or can hane in their Diocesse, and which was sufficient to exact of Regulars, that they should aske his approbation. And a little after: Where, sayth he, in all the Bishops Letter, is there one word of temporall Authority, or of Authority ouer temporall fortunes, or such as haue beene altered or directed by our Tempo∣rall Princes? What word then of the Bi∣shops enforced them to make this sense? None surely but their owne passiō, which made them make this forced sense, this forced inference. These are the Deuines owne words: which I do not see well, how he can reconcile with his words in this place. Wherfore, though I will not take vpon me to teach such a Deuine, yet I may say he should haue beene better ad∣uised, and agreed better vpon his tale, both with himselfe and with others of his owne sayde, before he had fallen to write; and so perhaps he might haue saued him∣selfe all this needlesse labour of writing, and me the labour of answearing; for
neyther he, nor any else can well tel what Authority they would haue for my Lord Bishop; onely Authority they would haue for him, and for themselues: But what, or how, they cannot tell. For, fayne they would haue his Lordship to haue Authority of Ordinary: for with∣out that, they cannot so well compasse their ends; nor with it neyther, I may truly say. And yet they find such mayne obstacles on the other syde, making it not only difficult, but euen impossible, that they are fayne for shame sake to deny all such pretences. And thence it is, that so∣metymes they say one thing, sometymes another. Sometymes that he is Ordinary, sometymes that he hath faculties only for the spirituall good of Catholickes, &c. And they are so nice and wary, when they speake with people that vnder∣stand things, or may make any vse of their words, that one cannot tell well, what they say; and yet they are more free of their tongue, then their penne. For they will not giue halfe that vnder their hands, which they talke freely. But if they went vpon a sure ground, and
meant nothing but wel and fairely, what should all this need? Well then; so it is, that the Deuine doth heere challenge more Authority for my Lord Bishop, to wit, a true Episcopall tribunal, then his Lordship doth for him∣selfe. For in his sayd Letter to the Lady vnder his own hand, he saith it is a fictiō: to which Letter I remit this man for an∣swere to his 4. reason. After these 4. sub∣stantiall reasons to proue that the daun∣gers are only pretended, this Deuine co∣meth to answere that which the Lay men say in their Letter; that the execution of this Episcopall Authority, alloweth no possibility of secrecy, by asking, why not aswell as the execution of Priestly fun∣ction, who say masse, preach, and com∣municate before many scores of men, women, and Children; whereas to the Bishops Tribunall there come no chil∣dren, few women, and not many men. He asketh moreouer how the Bishop hath gone ouer almost all England, and con∣firmed many thousands with sufficient se∣crecy? How was secrecy kept in the pri∣mitiue Church? How is it now kept in
Ireland and Holland? To this I answere, first, that it is no wonder, that such men as this Deuine, re∣late the case of English Catholiques els∣where as they please to strangers, when this Deuine will tell men heere at home such a tale as this is in writing. Secondly I tell him, though he cannot but know it, the Execution of Episcopall Authority in a Court, is of its own nature publique. There must of necessity be a Iudge, and other Officers; there must be partyes; there must be witnesses, there must be writing; there must be records: some must be sometymes grieued; some will complaine, some will appeale. Is any of all this needfull in hearing of Masse, Ser∣mons, or receyuing of Sacraments? May not a man heare a Masse, confesse, and communicate without a Iudge, a Summo∣ner, a Notary, without an accuser, a wit∣nesse, without a writing &c? What then doth this Deuine meane to bring such an argument? Suppose there be 10. persons at Masse, may there not be one alone? Can a busines be so dispatched iu∣idically in a Bishops Court, without
writing, witnesse, or Officer? Nay againe, suppose there must of necessity be 20. at Masse, and a busines in the Bishops Court might be dispatched but with the priuity of 2. men, would not euen this be more publique in regard the things must re∣mayne in writing, with note of place, tyme, and other circumstances; or that one of the partyes may be grieued, as it falleth out commonly, in matters of suite? For the Secrecy of the Bishops going o∣uer a great part of England & cōfirming, I am full glad that he, & they haue done so well with it, and wish they may do so still. But for all that, it is not good brag∣ging: and as secret as it is, I know many a right good man, that would be loath to haue it so well knowne, when he hath a Priest in his house, as it is knowne wher∣soeuer almost his Lordship went: and the secrecy it seemeth, was so great in some places, that there was a great complaint made in Parliament, to what bouldnes the Papists were growne, to haue a Bi∣shop, to whome there was such resort in a certayne place in Staffordshire, where he
confirmed many, and shewed himselfe in his Pontificall Ornaments. Thirdly I answere, that suppose the Bishops going vp and downe and confir∣ming were as secret, and voyd of daunger as this Deuine would haue it, what doth it make for his purpose? Which is to pro∣ue that a Bishops Tribunall alloweth as much secrecy, as the exercise of Priestly function? For who doubteth but the Bi∣shop may if he will, confirme a man as priuatly, as a Priest may communicate him? Doth it then follow, that he may with the same priuacy iudge, and deter∣mine a controuersy betweene party and party? What manner of arguing then is this? Now for the Primitiue Church, which our Deuine speaketh of, I sayd a word be∣fore, and it is cleare there is a great deale of difference. For that persecution was more by fits, more violent for the tyme, but shorter; & in the interim, there were such calmes as Christians had free resort to publique places of prayer and sacri∣fice, and houses deputed and dedicated for that vse: and that not onely by a con∣niuency
but euen by publique allowance of the Emperours, restoring vnto them their Churches, & permitting of free ac∣cesse to them, & the Cemiteries or places of buriall, where the bodyes of the Chri∣stians and Martyrs reliques were buryed and kept. There was an outward apparēt distinction in habit and haire, betweene Clergy men & others. Where hath there beene any thing like this, all this time of Schisme in England? Haue not men inough to do to heare a Masse priuatly in a corner? Where is there a Church to say Masse, or to preach, or an Oratory for mē to meet & pray togeather, or Church∣yard for Catholiques to bury their dead? Or where is there a Priest, or Religious man that goeth publiquely in his habit, or with his crowne shauen? Would not any man count one halfe mad that should go so, because they did so sometimes in the Primitiue Church? What wonder then is it, if in the Primitiue Church Bishops kept their Tribunals, & Prouinciall Coū∣cels, met with many scores of Bishops, as the Deuine sayth? Though by his leaue, they met not so freely, nor exercised their
Authority so much at all times; to wit, in those hoate fittes of persecution. And what a wonder is it for our Deuine who must be supposed to haue a little know∣ledge of the Ecclesiastical History, to bob men heere in the mouth, with the state of the Primitiue Church? The same is of Ireland and Holland. For Ireland, Catholique Bishops haue still continued in their seuerall Seas, with their proper titles, heresy hauing neuer taken so deep root there. But heere it is well knowne, that when our Catholique Bishops were suppressed, they, during their liues, forbare the exercise of that power which they were in possession of; & the state of things being such as it was and impossible to exercise Episcopal Au∣thority: wherefore the Sea Apostolique did not put any Bishop in their place, du∣ring the space of 60 yeares till of late, the state of things nothing changed but only that for matters of life & death the lawes were not so rigorously put in execution, vpon informatiō of some men, who lon∣ged for Myters, as if the times were now for it, Gregory the 15. of happy memory
condescended to their importunity, sen∣ding one with Title of a Bishop, but not with that full power, which belongeth to a Catholique Country: which experi∣ence sheweth to be more then the times can well beare. What comparison then betwene Ireland, and England? Now for Holland, though conside∣ring the littlenesse of persecution, they might ten tims better haue a Bishop there then we heere; yet they haue only a Bi∣shop with a forraine Title, and I belieue with power farre short of that which this Deuine would faine haue for my Lord of Chalcedon. Where if they had Bishops, & Bishops Courts as we haue, such lawes of auncient and late times as we haue, I doubt whether they would haue euen that. But to be brief, I say in a word, that our Kingdome is more different frō both Ireland, and Holland, then they two are from perfect Catholique countryes. And whereas this Deuine bringeth a place of Scripture for proofe of the prouidence of God, thereby to make men not so to stād vpon secrecy, I may bring two to the cōtrary. One is that of our Sauiour Math.
4. Non tentabis Dominum Deum tuum, thou shalt not tempt thy Lord God, as they do that put themselues into needlesse perils. Another is that of our Sauiour also which he gaue to his Apostles, when he sent thē to preach, Matth. 10. Ecce ego mitto vos sicut oues in medio luporum: estete ergo prudē∣tes sicut serpentes, & simplices sicut columbae: Cauete autem ab hominibus, tradent enim vos &c. Behould I send you as shep amid∣dest wolues, be therefore prudent as ser∣pents, and simple as doues: but beware of men, for they will betray you &c. Which admonition is as proper for our Country, & our tymes, as euer it was for any. And therefore notwithstanding our Deuines confidence, I shall wish still, that with sincerity and zeale, men ioyne pru∣dence, or else their zeale may do more harme then good. And we find by expe∣rience, that the prudent secrecy of some hath beene a greater meanes of preser∣uing Catholique Religion in these hard times, thē the ouer-hardy zeale of others. And so much for the fourth Section.
SECT. V. That their cause of publi∣que disauowing the Bishops Authority is not pretended, and feigned. VVHEREAS the Catholiques in their Letter say, that it was vnsafe for them to haue beene silent so long to∣wards his Lordship, so clayming & pu∣blishing his Authority; this Deuine saith, that they pretend the cause of disauowing the Bishops power of Ordinary, was the feare of daunger of the State, if they had not so done. Which to be meerely feigned he proueth by many reasons, all of them almost alledged, and answered before. But as he alledgeth them heere againe, so must I be faine to repeat the answers. The first is, because no vsuall Authority of an Ordinary, which alone the Bishop clay∣meth, but at most Extraordinary of Le∣gates and such like, was forbidden by the ancient lawes, without the Princes ap∣probation. I answere as before, that my Lord Bishops Authority which he clay∣meth is not that vsuall Authority of an
Ordinary, but that extraordinary of Le∣gates▪ and such like; as appeareth plainly by the wordes of his owne Letter; wherin he sayth, he is not Ordinary, Ordinario modo, but Extraordinario, as Legats, Nūti∣o's, & such like. Now that is vsuall Au∣thority for an Ordinary, which is had in the vsual manner: therfore that Autho∣rity which he claymeth, is that, which is forbydden by the aunicent lawes. The 2. reason, because those lawes were made for Catholique tymes, and in fauour of Catholique Ordinaryes: not for herelicall tymes, and in fauour of he∣reticall Ordinaries against Catholiques. I answere; well, be it so. Doth this Deuine thinke in his Conscience such an Answ∣ere would quit a man that should stand at the barre for acknowledging of my Lord Bishops Ordinaryshippe, or Iudicatiue Power? Sure he cannot thinke it; For though the law were made in a Catholi∣que tyme, when they litle dreamed of such a change, as hath beene since; yet now the tymes are changed, and Prote∣stant Ordinaryes are come in place of Catholiques; all the power & priuiledges
of the one conferred vpon the other; and the Law not repealed, are not men still liable? What with right, and what with might, questionlesse, a man would be found guilty. For his 3. reason, he saith, he much suspecteth, that only priuity doth not make a man guilty, but granteth it of acknowledgement or participation? But he asketh, what need they had, to take knowledge of such Authority? For, the Bishop, he sayth, wrote but one Letter of this matter, which came to few hands, and far fewer can be conuinced to haue seene it. I answere, that for the priuity, though this Deuine say he suspecteth that wil not make a man guilty, yet I presume he cannot be so bad a Lawyer as not to know that priuity in matter of felony or treason maketh a man accessary, if he but onely know it, and not discouer it. If ac∣cessary, then certaynely guilty: and this is generall in all criminall maters without exception. Why then, should he make question in this matter? Or taking know∣ledg of it, I would faine heare how could any man auoyde it? Suppose any man
should haue been questioned for acknow; ledgement of his Lordships Authority, could he pleade ignorance of his Lord∣ships clayme, it being made, by a Letter written to all the Catholiques of En∣gland, for their satisfaction, and to let them know, what Authority he had? Would it seeme probable that any Catho∣lique should not see, or heare of such a Letter? Now that the Letter was but one, that it came to few hands; It is true, it was but one: But that one was inough, and more then inough. For what he sayth, of the Letters comming to few hands; I answere first, it seemeth by the matter and manner of writing, to haue beene my Lord Bishops intention that it should come to more. Secondly, it is well knowne, that there were more copies made, and some of my Lords Clergy had the care speedily to diuulge it; so as it was diuulged in some remote parts of En∣gland; at the very same tyme it was pu∣blished heere. How then can this Deuine say, the Letter came but to few mens hands? And for being conuinced to haue seene it, in so publique a thing as that
was, no man will stand to proue it, but presume it, as any man wel may. For what Catholique could be ignorant of it? The 4. reason is, That many mo∣nethes before my Lord Bishop published his Authority of Ordinary, these Gent∣lemen sent Interrogatories (as this De∣uine termeth them) vnto him to haue him declare whether he was Ordinary or no. So as he sayth, they were rather desyrous, he should declare himselfe to be Ordinary then conceale it. It is true, Catholiques saw many things they could not tell what to make of; and so might be willing to know certainly, and from his Lordship himselfe what Authority he had: but might not the answere haue beene pri∣uate, as the demaunds were? They were desirous to know, but not so, that all the world must know, they knew; had they knowne in priuate, they might haue re∣presented the inconueniency and daun∣gers priuately to my Lords considera∣tion. But his Lordship feared some such thing, and therfore made answere in such publique manner, as to carry the matter cleere, without reply. But that
put men vpon a greater necessity of reply. As for that which he sayth, that they see∣med desirous he should declare himselfe Ordinary, it is playne they desyred it not, but the cleane contrary. But whatsoeuer it was that he pretended, they desyred to know it. The fifth reason is, That the Bishop euer since his comming auouched him∣selfe Ordinary, and till the matter of ap∣probation of Regulars, his Ordinaryship was not questioned, nor daunger preten∣ded; whereof, he sayth, they cannot de∣ny, but they had some priuity. I answere that heere againe the Deuine forgetteth himselfe, for he was angry before with Catholiques, for vnderstanding the Bi∣shops owne words in his Letter so plainly of his Ordinaryship, and yet he would haue them take notice of ordinary vn∣certayne reports. It is true therefore that they heard sometymes speaches, as if he were Ordinary, but they made not much account of them (for his predecessour was sometymes sayd to be Ordinary also, and yet he neuer pretended any Authority ouer them, that they could heare.) But
when they heard of many things, which his Lordships Officers did, and of perem∣ptory, and Authoritatiue Letters which they writ, with the Iudicatiue manner of proceeding of some Rurall Deanes, and saw the very Patents or Letters of insti∣tution of Archdeacons playnely signi∣fying the same, then they beganne to looke about them, and to enquire a litle more of that Ordinaryshippe, what it meant, and whether my Lord of Chalce∣don tooke himself to haue the same power, which Bishops had heretofore in Catho∣lique tymes, and so sent to his Lordship to know it from himselfe; so that all this while they had no priuity of it, nor af∣ter, till his Lordship published it by his Letter, The 6. reason: They gaue this Letter to be sent to Rome, and as some say (saith he) long before they sent it to the Bishop, and desired the Bishop, that it might be knowne abroad: Now, to what end was it sent to Rome, and desired to be sent abroad, if it were made only for the state? I answere, that the Deuine with his (as some say) is egregiously mistaken in say∣ing
the Letter was sent to Rome, before it was sent to the Bishop, for there be o∣thers that know better then all his (some sayes) if there be any besides himself, which auerre the contrary. Now for the demaund why it was sent to Rome, and desired to be sent abroad, if it were onely made for the State? I demaund againe, where he findeth that it was made onely for the state? If he meane that the chiefe reason of writing it, was to declare the dangers & inconueniences which might fall vpon them from the state by acknow∣ledgment and admittance of his Lord∣ships pretended Authority, it is true: but that is not all one, as to say, that it was made onely for the state. For it was made principally for his Lordship, & for those, of whome his power, and the enlarging and diminishing therof doth depend, to see; that considering the daungers and in∣conueniences, both his Lordship might please to desist from such pretensions, & others forbeare to graunt such power as was so daungerous, and so peiudiciall to Catholiques. Now what inconsequence was there in this to desire his Lordship to
make it knowne abroad? or fearing with themselues (for they expressed no such feare to him) that he would not, they sent it by some other meanes? What a doughty reason then is this, to proue the Catholiques cause to be pretended, and feigned? The 7. reason: When Father Campian came in, and made publique chalenge of disputation in print, and proclamations were made agaynst him, what Catho∣lique did publiquely disauowe him, or his Authority, or faculties? My answere to this is, that I see not what there is to an∣swere; for what likenes can there be ima∣gined in this argument, saue onely the publiquenesse of Father Campians chal∣lenge of disputation, and the publique∣nesse of my Lord Bishops clayme of Au∣thority? Which if it be sufficient, then I will make the Deuines argument a little better for him, by asking, why Catho∣likes do not disauow al Letters, or Breues of the Sea Apostolike nay al bookes writ∣ten of Controuersies, in defence of the Catholique Fayth for these are publique? Now, I assure my selfe there is no Deuine
in the world so dull, but can easily find a great deale of difference betweene these two last, and my Lord Bishops Letter, though one be much more like the in∣stance of Father Campians challenge. But because the Deuine perhaps will not be willing to find a difference, I will do it for him. It was not Father Campians doing nor meaning to publish any such chal∣lenge, but made two Copies of his wri∣ting, one to haue about himselfe in case he should be taken suddenly, before he should haue time to do any thing, of what he came for: and another in a freinds hand, with order to publish it when he should be taken, if by chaunce, as it was most like, his aduersaries should suppresse that which he should haue about him. But his friend not obseruing this order, goeth and publisheth it of himself. So the publishing was not his doing. Besides it was a particular acte, which concerned himselfe only, without relation to Ca∣tholiques, no matter of Authority, or iurisdiction eyther in foro externo or inter∣no, but a necessary defence of the Catho∣lique fayth at that tyme, no exercise so
much as of Priestly function, but a thing which any Layman, for the thing it self, might do. What need then of disauowing his Authority, or Faculties for that mat∣ter? Now, my Lord Bishops Letter was in∣tended to be publique, as being written to Catholiques, so that they could not but know of it, hauing also for the mat∣ter particuler relation to them; the subiect of the Letter an authority of an outward Court or Tribunall, not necessary at this time, nor conuenient for the defence or propagation of the Catholique faith, but offensiue to the State, dangerous to Ca∣tholiques, as being contrary to the aun∣cient, and moderne lawes; grieuous in regard of many inconueniences, which it bringeth with it; and the very know∣ledge, much more admittance wherof, bringeth daunger. What then doth this Deuine talke of disauowing Authority & facultyes such as Fa. Campian had, as if any mā denied them to my Lord Bishop? No, no man denieth, or disauoweth thē, or any thing else of my Lord Bishops, but only they desire not to be pressed to the
admittance of that Authority of Ordina∣ry, which without any furtherance, or any the least necessity of their spirituall good may bring many temporall daūgers vpon thē, & put them into more straites, then they haue beene this time of perse∣cution. Which truly, is but a very ordi∣nary, and reasonable request. There is no affinity therefore betweene my Lord Bishops claime of Authority, and F. Cam∣pians challenge of Disputation. The eight reason. It is more noto∣rious, that there are many hundred of Priests then one Bishop, and more seuere lawes against any priuity or participatiō with them, then for the Bishop; and yet these men, sayth he, make no publique disauow of Priests Authority, nor ac∣count thēselues vnsafe for hauing beene so long silent. I answere, that the reason is idle. Suppose there were as many thou∣sands of Priests, as there are hundreds, nay if there were as many Bishop as there are Priests, if they had not the power of Ordinary what were that to our purpose, the question being of an Ordinary with power in foro externo? Now for the daun∣ger
of a Priest or Bishop whether greater, is impertinent as long as the one is neces∣sary, the other not. Besides that, such Bi∣shoply Authority with the daungers, and incōueniences proper to it selfe, bringeth with it the daūgers of Priestly Authority. The Deuine could not, but know thus much of himselfe, and yet he must put downe this reason to make number. The ninth reason; None but these 3. and some few of their adherents appre∣hend this daunger of being silent, tou∣ching the Bishops Authority, & yet many haue more to loose then they; & a Noble man tould them by publique Letter, that Timebant, vbi non erat timor. I answere, for the number, and worth of the Persons that apprehend this daunger, there is e∣nough sayd before: & the thing is so well knowne, that surely this Deuine would not haue ventured his credit by speaking so apparent an vntruth, but that he con∣cealed his name. For the Noble mans say∣ing, I answere it with the wisemans say∣ing, sapiens timet, & declinat à malo: stultus transilit, & confidit. The wiseman feareth and auoydeth euill; the foole leapeth ouer
and consideth. The 10. reason; The Monkes made clayme of a farre greater Authority, and farre more daungerous to the Laity, and in a more publique māner by many prin∣ted copyes, and yet these men do not go about to disauowe the same publiquely. I answere, that till my Lord Bishops Letter no man heard of any such matter from the Benedictines, or any else. Therefore if there were any daunger in their clayme we may plainly thanke my Lord Bishops Letter, as the cause thereof. Secondly, the same Letter wherby the Catholiques desired to be excused from my Lord of Chalcedons Ordinaryship, is sufficient a∣gainst that, or any other booke, that shal clayme such Authority, as things stand heere in England, and therefore there needeth no other disclayming. Now for their claime, I do not see that for the pre∣sent they exact any such matter of sub∣iection from Catholiques, but only say, they keepe a kind of possession of their ancient right, against the tyme shal serue for it; and that if they would stand vpon it, they might better do it then my Lord
of Chalcedon. Now what offence or daun∣ger is this to Catholiques? And for the publiquenesse, the book is printed indeed, but no way directed to Catholiques, but to their owne Religious. But this Deuine, that in this place thinketh much, that mē do not disauow this Booke, I presume, was priuy to another Paper deliuered vp at Rome, wherein it was sayd, that the Layty were much offended at such a vast claime: how do these hang together? But that was for the purpose in that place, & this, it seemeth, in this; and he perhaps thought the same man should neuer come to see both the papers. But as close as that and such like papers are carried by this Deuine, & his friends, they come to light one way or other, little to their credit, that care so little for truth in what they say. The last reason, is deliuered by the Deuine in these words: Lastly what nee∣ded they to haue incēsed the state against the Bishop? therefore these pretences are ad excusandas excusationes in peccati: whe∣reas the true cause was to help some Re∣gulars to banish Episcopall power out of
England. This is the Deuines Conclusiō. Whereto I answere; that for a conclusion I did expect a concluding reason, but it is so farre from concluding, that I see no shew of reason. For how doth the asking of this question, what they needed to in∣cense the State against the Bishop, proue that the cause of writing their letter, was pretended? The Deuine might haue made this a motiue, which might haue moued them not to write their Letter to the Bi∣shop in that manner: but to make it an argument to proue, that their pretence was faygned, I see not with what Logick it can stand▪ But now for the matter, it is a strange thing, that a Deuine should haue no more scruple then to charge mē of knowne vertue, and wisedome; with incensing the State against the Bishop. Were it not more time for him to study his cases, & examine well his Consciēce, then to stand censuring men so deeply, and so iniuriously? What do they say ten∣ding this way? That the erecting of a new tribunall, will moue the State to a more exact search &c? For this, I haue answe∣red before, and shewed, that this is sayd
to the cleane contrary end; to wit, to de∣cline the Search and Persecution, which his Lordships clayme would bring vpon himself and others; and by their saying to appease that which his Lordships doing would incense. Which if it seeme preiu∣diciall vnto him, is wholy besydes their meaning and he may thnke himselfe for it. For they in this, do but defend them∣selues, cum moderamine inculpatae tutclae. Therefore to answere this Deuines ap∣plied place of Scripture, of excuses in sinnes, I may now aske him in behalfe of these Gentlemen, and all others whose letter it was: Quis ex vobis arguet  de pec∣cato? St malè locutus sum, testimonium per∣hibe de malo: Si autem benè, quid ecaedis? Who of you will accuse me of sinne? If I haue spoken ill, beare witnesse of the ill: but if well, why dost thou strike me? And for the last word of all, that the true cause was, to help some Regulars to banish Episcopall power out of England, being but a bitter gal belike of a distempred stomack to end withall, and deseruing rather pit∣ty, then answere, I let it alone: wishing this Deuine the same measure of Charity,
which he desireth of Authority, both for his owne good, and the quiet of others, boing more his friend therein, then him∣selfe. AN ADVERTISEMENT. GOod Reader. This Treatise was writ∣ten two yeares ago, whē the forsayd Iudgment of this Deuine, began to go vp & downe; but that other Bookes cōming then out, and ministring other occasion of Discourse, the Author thought better to let it alone; as he would haue done wholy, but that now of late the same Let∣ter of the Catholiques, being a new publi∣shed, with A Declaration to the same ef∣fect, some of the other side, began to re∣peate their former vngrounded Discour∣ses. For rectifying whereof, and stating the Question aright, the Author hath thought fit, now to publish the same. FINIS.
