763 99843995 8773
THE ROBLEMES F ARISTOTLE, with other Philosophers and Phisitions VVherein are contayned diuers questions, with their answers, touch∣ing the estate of mans bodie. At Edenborough, Printed by Robert Waldgraue. 1595.
To the Reader. EVery man dooth won∣der (gentle reader) at an Eclipse of the Sunne or of the Moone, and gazeth at a Blazing Starre, and beholdeth with admiration, an exquisit picture, drawne with the pensill of a skilfull hand, yea all nouelties doe please, be they neuer so small. But if they be once com∣mon, bee they neuer so great wonders, no man vouchsafeth to giue them the looking on. But then as Seneca doth say: Non est AEthiopia inter suos  color. The selfe same doth happen in man, and in the wonderfull workmanship of his bodie, and vnspeakeable excellencie of his soule: for if we regarde his excellencie, he doth surpasse all creatures vnder Heauen; and therefore the Aegyptians being rauished with the cō∣templation of mans dignitie and perfection, doubted not to call him a terrestriall god, a
celestiall creature, a messenger of the god Lord and Master of things belowe, and a fa∣miliar friend vnto those who liue aboue, miracle of nature, and as Seneca doth  him, Natures darling. It is said, that after that Phidias a most fa∣mous caruer had made Mineruas shielde, he engraued his own portraiture so liuely, & deepely in the same, that it could neuer be taken out againe, without the defacing of the whole worke. So God himselse a farre more excellent workeman then Phidias, af∣ter he had made the vniuersall world, and all creatures therein, for a token of his skill, drew it a new in a small compas, as an a∣bridgement of all his workes, to wit, when he made man, who is a Microcosme or little worlde, and in him printed his owne image and similitude, so liuely, that no power what soeuer is able to blot it out. This image and similitude is the soule and vnderstanding, which he would neuer haue printed in man, vnlesse he had first made him a bodie of a substance fit and apt to receiue that impres∣sion, and vnlesse also he had so skilfully fra∣med it, that it should be worthie to receiue so great an ornament, as the vnderstanding
is. And therefore the body of man is made of a complexion most pure and delicate, and in shape comely and beautifull, and yet not∣withstanding, all these perfections which man hath in himselfe, few or none take de∣light in the studie of himselfe, or is carefull to know the substance, state, condition, quali∣tie, and vse of the parts of his owne bodie, al∣though he be the honor of nature, and more to be adm red then the strangest and rarest wonder that euer happened. The cause of this is no other, but because mans nature de∣lighteth in noueltie, and neglecteth to search out the causes of those things which are common. I haue therefore thought good, to giue thee in a knowne tongue, this little booke, written by the deepest of all Philosophers who teacheth the vse of all the parts of mans body, their nature, quality, property and vse, which may bring thee in reading of it, if reade it thou wilt no lesse delite then profit, nor no lesse profit then delight. Farewell The first Probleme.
Question. AMongst all liuing creatures, why hath Man onely his face and countenance lif∣ted vp towards ? Answer Vnto this question there are diuers answers: first,  proceedeth from the will of the creator himselfe. And although that answer be true, yet in this out purpose it seemeth not to be of force, because that so all questions might easilie be dissolued. Secondly, I answer, that for the most part cuery workeman doth make his first worke worst, and then his second better, and so God creating all o∣ther beasts before man, gaue them their face looking downe to the earth, and then secondly hee created man, as it doth appeare in Genesis, vnto whom he gaue an honest shape lifted vp vnto hea∣uen. But yet this answer doth not seeme to be to the purpose, because it is drawne from diuinitie, and doth also derogate from the goodnes of God,
who maketh all his workes perfect and good. Thirdly, it is answered, that man onely among all liuing creatures is ordayned vnto the king∣dome of Heauen, and therefore hath his face ele∣uated and lifted vp vnto Heauen, because that de∣spising worldly and earthly things, he ought to contemplate on heauenly things. Fourthly, that the reasonable soule is like vnto Angels, and finally ordayned towards God, as it appeareth by Auerroes in the first de anima, and therefore he hath a figure looking vpward. Fiftly, that a man is a microcosme, that is, a lit∣tle world, as it pleaseth Aristotle to say in the eight of his Phys. and therefore he doth command all other liuing creatures, and they obey him. Sixtly, it is answered, that naturally, there is vn∣to euery thing, and euery worke, that forme and fi∣gure giuen, which is fit and proper for his motion; as vnto the Heauen roundnes, to the fire a pyrami∣dall forme, that is, broade beneath and sharpe to∣wards the top, which forme is most apt to ascende: and so man hath his face vp to Heauen, to behold and wonder at Gods workes. Question. Why is the head of beastes hayrie? Answer. The answer according vnto the opini∣on of Constant is, that the hayres are an ornament of the head, and of the brayne, and the brayne is purged and euacuated of grosle humors, by the growing of the hayre, from the highest vnto the lowest parts, which passe through the pores of the exterior flesh, and doc become drie and are con∣uerted into hayres. This appeareth to be true, be∣cause that in all mans body there is nothing drier
then the hayres, for they are drier then the bones, as Albertus Magnus doth affirme, because that some beastes are nourished with bones, as dogges, but no beast can digest feathers or hayre, but doe voyde them vndigested, and are so due that they are vnfit for nutriment. Secondly, it is answered, that the brayne is pur∣ged fowre manner of wayes, first, of superfluous watery humors, by the eyes: from melancholy by the eares: of choler by the nose: of fleume by the hayre, and that is the intent of the Phisitian. Question Why haue men longer hayre on  head then other liuing creatures? Answer  3 degenerat animal. saith, that man hath the moystest brayne of all liuing crea∣tures, from the which the sweat proceedeth, which is conuerted into the long hayre of the head. Secondly, it is answered, that the humors in man are fat, and doe not become due easilie, and therefore the hayre growe long in  in other beasts the humors are easilie dried, and therefore their hayre grow not so long. Question, Why do the hayre take deeper roote in mans skin then in other liuing creatures? Answer. Because they haue greater store of nourishment in man, and therefore growe more into the inward part of man. And this is also the reason, why in other beasts the hayre doth alter and change with the skin, and not in man,  it be sometime in a searre or wound. Question. Why haue women longer hayre then men? Answer. Because women are moyster than
men, and more flegmatick, and therefore there is more matter of hayre in them, and by a conse∣quence, the length also of their hayre doth follow. And further more this matter is more increased in women then in men, from the interior parts, and e∣specially in the time of their monthlie tearmes and flowres, because the matter doth then ascend, wherby the humor which breedeth the hayre doth encrease. And Albertus doth say, that if the hayre of a woman in the time of her flowers be put into doung, a venemous serpent is engendered of it. The second answer is, because women want beards, and so the matter of the beard doth goe in∣to the matter of hayre. Question. Why haue some men soft hayre, and some men hard? Answer. Wee answer with Aristotle, that the hayre hath proportion with the skinne: of which some is hard some thick, some subtill and soft, some grosse; therefore the hayre which groweth out of a thick and grosse skin, is thick and grosse; and that which groweth of a subtill and fine, is fine and soft. Also when the pores are open, then there com∣meth forth much humor, and therefore hard haire is ingendered: and when the pores are straite, then there doe growe soft and fine hayre. And this doth Aristotle shew in men, in whom we haue an euident token, because women haue softer hayre then they, because that in women, the pores are shut and are straite by reason of their coldnes. Secondly, because that for the most part, chole∣rick men haue harder and thicker hayre then o∣thers, by reason of their heate, and because the
pores are euer open in them, and therefore also they haue beards sooner then others And there∣fore the Philosopher saith, that those beasts which haue hard hayre are bouldest, because that such hayre proceedeth of heate and choler, the which choler maketh men to fight. Aristotle also giueth example in the Beare and the Boare: and contra∣riwise those beasts which haue soft hayre, are feare∣full, because they be colde, as the Hare and Hart. Aristotle doth also giue another reason of the soft∣nes and hardnes of the hayre, drawne from the cli∣mat where a man is borne: because that in a hot region hard and gresse hayre is ingendered, as it appeareth in the Aethiopians, and the contrarie is true in a colde counney, as towards the North. Question. Why haue some men curled hayre and some smoothe? Answer. The answer is, that the cause of the curling of the hayre is great abundance of heate, so that if there be much heate in a man then his hayre doth curle, and grow vpward. And a signe of this is proued true, because that sometimes a man doth enter into a bath smoothe hayred, and afterward by the bath becommeth curled. And therefore the keepers of bathes haue often curled hayre, and also the Aethiopians and cholericke men. But the cause of the smoothnes, is the abun∣dance of moyst humors, which tend downeward, and a proofe of this is, because that women for the most part haue smoothe hayre, because they haue much humiditie in them and small heate. Question. Why doe women shew their  by the hayre of their  part, and not else where,
but men in the breast. Answer. We answer Phisitian like, because that in man and woman there is abundance of humi∣ditie in that place, but more in women, because men haue the mouth of the bladder in that place, wherein the vrine is contained, of the which the hayre in the breast is ingendered, and about the nauell. But of women is said, that the humiditie of the bladder, and of the matrix or wombe is ioy∣ned and meeteth in that low secret place, & there∣fore is dissolued & separated in that place, through much vapors and fumes, which are the cause of hayre, and the like dooth happen in other places where hayre is, as vnder the armes. Question. Why haue not women beards? Answer. Because they want heate, as it appea∣reth also in some effeminate men, who are beard∣les for the same cause, because the are of the com∣plexion of women. Question. Why dooth the hayre growe in those which are hanged? Answer. Because their bodies are exposed to the sunne, the which through his heate, dooth dis∣solue all the moysture into a fume or vapour, of which the hayre doth growe and increase. Question. Why is the hayre of the beard grosser and thicker then else where, and the more men are shauen, the thicker and harder it groweth? Answer. Because thar according vnto the rule of the Phisitian, by how much the more the humor or vapour of any liquor is dissolued, by so much the more the humour remayning dooth drawe to the same place: and therefore how much the more
the hayre is shauen, so much the more the humors gather thither, and of them the hayre is engende∣red, and doe there also waxe hard. Question. Why are women smoothe and fayre in respect of men? Answer. The answer is according vnto Arist 1. de generat, animal because that in women all hu∣miditie and superfluitie, which are the matter and cause of the bayre of the bodie is expelled with their monthly tearmes, the which superfluitie re∣maineth in men, and through vapors doth passe in∣to hayre. And a signe of this is, because women haue seldome any running at the nofe, or im∣postume, or , because such matter is expelled also. And we see some olde woemen begin to haue a heard in their olde age, that is after fortie or fiftie yeares of age, when their flowers haue ceased, as Aristotle doth teach . de . Question. Why doth man onely aboue all other creatures waxe  and gray, as  and Aristotle affirme? Answer The answer according vnto the Phi∣losophers is, because that mā hath the hottest harr. of all huing creatures: and therefore nature being most wise, least man should be suffecated through the heate of his hart, hath placed the hart which is most hot, vnder the braine which is most colde, to the end that the heate of the hart may be tem∣pered with the coldnes of the braine, and contra∣riewise, that the coldnes of the braine may be hea∣ted with the heate of the hart, that thereby there might be a temperature in both. A signe to proue this, is because that of all huing creatures, mā hath
the worst breath. Furthermore man doth consum halfe his life in sleeping: which doth proceede on the great excesse of the coldnes and moisture o the braine, and by that meanes doth want naturall heate to digest and consume that moystnes: the which heate he hath sufficiently in his youth, and therefore in that age is not graye, but in his olde age that heate faileth, and therefore the vapours ascending from the stomack, remaine vndigested and vnconsumed for want of naturall heate, and then putrifie, of which putrifaction of humors the whitenes doth follow, which is called graynes or hoarenes. Whereby it doth appeare that hoarenes is nothing else, but a whitenes of the hayre, caused by the putrifaction of humors about the rootes of the hayre, through the want of naturall heate in olde age. Sometimes also graynes is caused by the naughtines of the complexion, which may well happen in youth, and sometimes by reason of the moystnes vndigested, and sometimes through ouer great feare or care, as it appeareth in Marchants, Saylers, theeues, from thence commeth those ver∣ses. Cura &c. Cura facit canos, quamuis homo non habet annos. Question. Why doth red hayre grow white soo∣ner then other? Answer. According vnto the opinion of Ari∣stotle, because that rednes is an infirmitie of the hayre, for it is engendred of a weake and infirme matter, that is to say, of a matter corrupted with the flowres of the woman, and therefore they waxe white sooner then blacke hayre. Question. Why doe Wolues grow grislie?
Answer. The better to vnderstand this questi∣on, note the difference betwixt graynes and grisly∣nes, because that graynes is caused through the defect of a naturall heate, but grislienes through deuouring and eating, as Aristotle witnesseth, 7. de animal. The Wolfe being a very deuouring beast, and a great eater, he letteth it downe gluttonoasly without chewing, and that at once enough for three dayes: of which meate grosse vapours are en∣gendered in the Wolfes body, & by a consequence grislienes Secondly, graynes and grislines do dif∣fer, because graynes is onely in the head, and  lines ouer all the bodie. Question. Why doe horses grow grissie or graye? Answer According vnto Aristotle, because they are for the most part in the sunne, and in his openi∣on also, heate dooth accidently cause putrification, and therefore of that kinde of heate, the matter of the hayre doth putrifie, and by a consequence, they are very quicklie pild. Question. Why doe men become balde, and trees fall their leaves in winter? Answer. Aristotle doth giue the same reason for both, because that the want of moysture in hoth, is the cause of the want  hayre & of the leaues. And this is proued because that a man becom∣meth balde through Venerie, because that leache∣rie is a letting forth of naturall humiditie & heate. And so by that excesse in carnal pleasure, moysture is consumed, which is the nutriment of the hayre, and therefore baldnes doth insue. And this is eui∣dently proued in Eunuches, and women which doe not growe balde, because that they doe not
depart from that moystnes. And these upon Eu∣nuches are of the complexion of women. But if you aske why Eunuches be not bald, nor haue not the gowte, as Hippocrates saith? The an∣swer is according vnto Galen, because the cause of baldnes is drines, the which is not in Eunuches, because they want their stones, the which doe mi∣nister heate vnto al the parts of the bodie, and the heate doth open the pores, the which being open, the haire doth fall. Question. Why are not women bald? Answer. Because they are cold & moyst, which are the cause that the haire remaineth: for moist∣nes doth giue nutriment vnto the haire, and the coldnes doth bind the pores. Question. Why are bald men deceitfulli accor∣ding vnto the verse: Si non vis falls, fugias consortia calui. Answer. Because baldnes doth witnesse a cho∣lerike complexion, which is hot and drie, and cho∣lerike men are naturally deceitfull, according vn∣to that verse: Hirsutus, fallax irascens, prodigus, audax. And therefore it followeth, a primo ad vltimum, that bald men are deceitfull and craftie. Question. Why are not blinde men naturallie balde? Answer. Because that according vnto Aristotle, the eye hath much moisture in him, and that moi∣sture which should passe through by the substance of the eyes, doth become a sufficient nutriment of the haire, and therefore they are seldome bald. Question. Why doth the haire stand on end when
men are afraid. Answer. Because that in time of feare, the  doth goe from the outward parts of the bodie vn to the inward, to the intent to helpe the heart, and so the pore, in which the haires are fastened are shutvp, after which stopping and shutting vp of the pores, the standing vp of the haire doth fol∣low, as it is seene in brute beasts, as hogges, wilde bore, . Of the Head. Question. Why . Answer. Because that this figure , most fit to  any thing into it, as  doth  and the head doth containe in him the  is also seene in a mate∣riall spheare. Question. Why  hard? Answer. Aristotle saith because he doth  in  the  part of the  and also because the braine may bee defen∣ded thereby as with a shield. Question. Why is not the head absolutely , but somewhat . Answer To the and that the three creekes or cels of the braine  be the better distinguish∣ed, that is, the  in the fore head, the discour∣sing or reasonable part in the middle and the me∣morie in the  most. Question. Why doth a man list vp his head to∣wards the between ?
Answer. Because the imagination is in the fore∣part of the head or braine, and therefore it lifteth vp it selfe, that the creekes or cels of the imagina∣tion may be opened, and that the spirits which rise in the heart, hauing their concourse thither, may helpe the imagination. Question. Why doth a man when he museth, or thinke on things past, looke downe towards the earth? Answer. Because the cell or creek which is be∣hinde, is the creeke or chamber of memorie, and therefore that looketh towards heauen, when the head is bowed downe, and so that cell is opened, to the end that the spirits which perfite the memo∣rie should enter in. Question. Why is not the head fleshie like vnto the other parts of the bodie? Answer. Because that according vnto Aristotle, the head would be too heauie, and could not stand stedfastly, and therefore it is without flesh. Also a head loaden with flesh doth betoken an euil com∣plexion. Question. Why is the head subiect vnto aches and griefes? Answer. According vnto Constant. by reason of euill humours, which proceede from the sto∣macke, and ascend vnto the head, and disturbe the braine, and so cause the paine in the head. And sometime it proceedeth of ouer much filling of the stomacke: because that according vnto the o∣pinion of Galen, two great sinewes passe from the braine to the mouth of the stomacke, and there∣fore these two parts doe suffer griefe alwaies to∣gether. Sometime the ach doth proceed of drink∣ing
strong wine, or fuming meats, as garlike and o∣nions, and sometime of  in the stomacke, whereof spung quotidian feuers. Question. Why haue women the headach more ostner then men? Answer. Albertus saith, that it is by reason of their monthly tearmes, which men are not trou∣bled with, and so a most vncleane and venemous  dissolued, the which  a passage vp∣ward, doth cause the head to ake. Question. Why  white? Answer. There  answers. The , be∣cause it is cold.  in the mother of white as the Philosopher doth teach. The , because it may receiue the simili∣tude and likenes of all colours, which the white colour can best doe, because it is most simple. Qusetion. Why are  in the head? Answer. Because (as Albertus saith) the braine is there, of what all  do depend and are directed by  all the , and by and all the  are gouerned. Question Why  death, if the braine or ? Answer. Because the heart and the braine are two of the  parts which  and therefore  left for cure. Question Why ? Answer. Because it may  impression,  peareth in
print of the seale. Question. Why is the braine cold? Answer. This is answered two waies. First, be∣cause that by his coldnes it may cleere the vnder∣standing of man, and make it subtile. Secondly, that by the coldnes of the braine the heate of the heart may be tempered: and this is Aristotles in∣tent, lib. de animal. Of the Eyes. Question. WHy haue we one nose and two eyes? Answer. Because the sight is more necessarie for vs then the smelling: and therefore it doth proceede of the goodnes of nature, that if wee receiue any hurt or losse of one eye, that yet the other should remaine, and so wee see that the spirit, with which wee see, called spiritus visiuus, is directed vnto one eye, as it is plaine in the com∣mon perspectiue. Question. Why haue children in their youth great eyes, and why doe they become smaller and les∣ser in their age? Answer. According vnto Aristot. de generat it proceedeth from the great humiditie of the brain, and for the same cause children are very sleepie. Question. Why doe blacke eyes see well in the day time, and badly by night? Answer. According vnto the opinion of Ari∣stotle, it proceedeth from the want of fire, and for the assembling and meeting together of light and humour in the eyes, which are lightened by rea∣son
of the sunne, and purged, and in his absence darkened, which dooth lighten the eysie hu∣mour. Question. Why doth the blewish gray eye see badly in the day time and well by night? Answer Because (saith Aristotle) grainesse is light and shining of it selfe, and the spirits with which wee see are weakened in the day time, and strengthened in the night. Question. Why be mens eyes of diuers sorts? Answer. This proceedeth; saith Aristotle, by reason of the diuersitie of humors. The eye there∣fore hath foure couerings, and three humors. The first is called Consolidatiue, which is the outer∣most, which is strong and fat. The second is called a hornie skinne or couering, to the likenes of a horne, and that is a cleere couering. The third is called Vuea, of the likenes of a grape. The fourth is called a Cobweb: but according vnto the opi∣nion of some, the eye doth consist of seuen coue∣rings or skinnes, and three humours. The first is called Albugitieus, for the likenes vnto the white of an egge. The second Clacial, that is like vnto yee. The third Vitreus, that is cleere like a glasse. And that diuersitie of humours, causeth the di∣uersitie of eyes. Question. Why are men which haue but one eye good Archers, and why doe good Archers com∣monly shut one eye, and why doe such as behold the starres looke thorow a trunke with one eye? Answer. This matter is handled in the perspe∣ctiue art, and the reason is, as it dooth appeare in the booke of Causes, because that euery vertue
and strength vnited and knit together, is stronger then it selfe dispersed and scattered. Therefore all the force of seeing dispersed into two eyes, the one being shut, is gathered vnto the other, and so the sight is fortified in him, and by a consequence he doth see better and  with one eye, being shut, then both being open. Question. Why doe such as drinke much and laugh much, shed teares? Answer. Because that whilest they drinke, the aire which is drawn in doth not passe out through the windpipe, and so with force is directed & sent to the eyes, passing out by the eyes, and so dooth expell the humors of the eyes, the which humors being so expulsed, doe bring teares. Question. Why doe such as weepe much, vrine but little? Answer. Because (saith Aristotle) that the ra∣dicall humiditie of a teare and of vrine, are of one and the same nature. And therefore where wee∣ping doth increase, there vrine doth diminish. And that, they be of one nature it is plaine by the taste, because they are both salr. Question. Why do some which haue cleere eyes, see nothing at all? Answer. By reason of the opilation, and naugh∣tines of the sinewes with which wee see. For the temples being destroyed, the strength of the sight cannot bee carried from the braine vnto the eye. As the Phisolopher doth teach, lib. de sens. & sen∣sato. Question. Why is the eye cleere and smooth, like vnto a glasse?
Answere. Because the things which may bee seene, are better beaten back from a smooth thing then otherwise, that thereby the sight should bee strengthened. Secondly I answere, it is because the eye is very moist, aboue all the parts of the body, and of a wa∣trish nature. And as the water is cleere & smooth, so likewise the eye. Question. Why doe men which haue their eyes deepe in their  see well a stirre off, and quickly, and the  of other beasts? Answer. Because (saith Aristotle 2. de  ani∣mal.) the force and power by which wee see is not dispersed in them,  doth goe directly vnto the thing which  seene. And this is  by a simi∣litude: because that when a man dooth stand in a deepe ditch, or well, he dooth see in the day time, standing in those places the starres of the  as Aristotle dooth teach, in his   , because that then the power of the sight and the beames are not . Question.  their eyes farre out, and not ferre out their head, see but   distance? Answer. Because saith Aristotle) the beames of the sight which passe from the eye, are  on euery side, and doe not goe directly vnto the thing which is seene, and therefore the sight is weakened. Question. Why are many beasts,  whelps, and  whelps? Answer. Because such beasts are not as yet of perfect  and , and the courte of
nutriment dooth not worke in them. And this is proued by a similitude of the swallowes, whose eies if they bee taken out when they are little ones in the neast, will growe againe. And this is plaine in many other beasts, which are brought forth before their time, as it were dead, as whelps, beares, & this reason dooth belong rather vnto the perspectiue, then the naturall Philosopher. Question. Why doth the eyes of a woman which hath her flowers, staine a newe glasse, as Aristotle saith, De som. & vigil. And this is the like probleme, why doth the Basilisque kill a man with his sight? Answer. To the first, the answere is, that when the flowers doe runne from the woman, then the most venemons ayre is dissolued in the, the which doth ascend vnto the womans head, and she ha∣uing griefe of her head, doth couer it with many vailes and kerchiefes: and because the eyes are full of small vnsensible holes, which are called pores, there the ayre seeketh a passage, and so doth infect the eyes, which are full of bloud. And their eyes doe also appeare dropping, and full of teares, by reason of the euill vapour which is in them, and those vapours are euapourated and multiplied, vntill they come vnto the glasse before them: and by reason that such a glasse is very sound, cleane, and smooth, it doth easily receiue that which is vn∣cleane. To the second it is answered, that the Basilisque is a very venemous and infectious beast, and that there passe from his eyes venemous vapours, the which are multiplied vnto the thing which is seen by him, and cuen vnto the eye of man, the which
venemous vapours or humours entering into the bodies, doe infect them, and so in the end the man dieth. And this is also the reason why the Basi∣lisque looking vpon a shield perfectly well made with fast clammy pitch, or any hard smooth thing, doth kill himselfe, because the humours are bea∣ten backe from this smooth hard thing vnto the Basilisque, by which beating back he is killed. And the like is sayd of a woman when she hath her mo∣nethly disease. Where of it followeth, that some old women doe hurt themselues when they looke v∣pon glasses, or other firme and solide things in the time of their tearmes. Question. Why is not the sparkeling of cats eyes and wolfes eyes seene in the light, but in the darke? Answer. Because that the greater light dooth darken the leiser, and therefore in a greater light that sparkling cannot be seene: but the greater the darknes is, the easlier it is seene, and is made more strong and shining, because it is not then hindered by a greater externall light, which might darken it. Question. Why dooth a man beholding him∣selfe in a  presently forget his owne disposition? Answer. The answere is made in lib. de formed  that the image seene by the glasse, doth re∣present it selfe weakly and vndirectly vnto the po∣wer of the sight: and because it is represented weakely, it is weakely also apprehended, and by a consequence is not long retained. Question. Why is the sight recreated and refre∣shed by a greene colour, as this verse doth shew? Fons, speculum, gramen, oculis  alleus .
Answer. Because the greene colour doth mean∣ly moue the instrument of the sight, and therefore doth comfort the sight: but this doth not blacke or white colour, because these colours do vehement∣ly stirre and alter the organe and instrumēt of the sight, and therefore make the greater violence: but by how much the more violent the thing is which is felt or seene, the more it doth destroy and wea∣ken the sence: as Aristctle doth teach, 2. de anima. Of the Nose. Question. WHy doth the nose stand out further then the other parts of the head? Answer. There are two answers. The first, be∣cause the nose is as it were the sinke of the braine, by the which the fleume of the braine is purged. And therefore it dooth stand so foorth, least the o∣ther part should be defiled. The second, according vnto Const. is, because the nose is the beautie of the face, and therefore it doth shew it selfe and shine. It doth smell also and adorne the face, as Boetius saith, De discipl. schol. Question. Why hath man the worste smell of all other living creatures, as it doth appeare, 2. de a∣nima? Answer. Because that man, as the Commenta∣tor saith, in respect of his quantitie bath the most moystest braine of all creatures. And thereforé by that exceeding moystnes and coldnes, the braine wanteth a good disposition, and by a consequence the smelling, seeing the instrument is not good, as Aristotle and Themist. doe teach. Yea, some
men there be which doe not smell at all. Question. Why doth the Vultur or  smell very well, as the Commentator doth say? Answer. Because they haue a very dry braine, and therefore the ayre carrying the smell, is not hindered by the humiditie of the braine, but doth presently touch his instrument. And therefore he saith, that the Vultures, Tygers, and other beasts, came 500. miles to the dead bodies after a battade in Greece. Question, Why did nature make the . Answer. For three commodities. First, because that the mouth being , wee draw breath in by the nosthrils to refresh the heart with. The se∣cond commoditie is, because that the ayre which proceedeth from the mouth, dooth fauour badly because it dooth sauour of the vapours which use from the stomack, but that which we breathe from the nose is not so noysome. The third, because the fleume which dooth proceede from the braine is purged by them. Question. Why doe men sneese? Answer. Because that the expulsiue vertue or power, and the sight should thereby bee purged, and the braine also from superfluities: because that as the lungs are purged by coughing, so the sight and the braine by sneesing. And those which sneese oft, are sayd to haue a strong braine: and thereupon the Phisitions doe giue sneesing medi∣caments to purge the braine. And such sick per∣sons as cannot sneese, dye quickly, because it is a signe that their braine is wholly stuffed with euill humours which cannot be purged.
Question. Why cannot such as are apoplectikes, sneese, that is, such as are subiect easily to bleed? Answer. Because the passage and ventricules of the brain are stopped in them, and if they could sneese, their apoplexie would be loosed. Question. Why doth the heate of the sunne pro∣uoke sneesing, and not the heate of the fire? Answer. Because the heate of the sunne doth onely dissolue, and not consume, and therefore the vapour dissolued is expelled by sneesing: but the heate of the fire doth dissolue and consume, and therfore doth rather consume sneesing, then pro∣uoke vnto it. Of the Eares. Question. WHy doe all beasts moue their eares, and not man? Answere. Because there is in man a certaine muscule neere vnto the iawe, which dooth hinder motion in the eares, and therefore that muscule being extended and stretched, men doe mooue their eares, as it hath bin seene in diuers men: but other beasts want that muscule or fleshy sinewe, and therefore doth moue their eares. Question. Why is raine prognosticated by the pricking vp of the Asses eares? Answer Because the Asse is a very melancho∣ly beast, and it proceedeth from melancholy that he doth foresee raine to come. In the time of raine all beasts doe pricke vp their eares, and therefore the Asse perceiuing that it will raine, doth pricke
vp his eares before it come. Question. Why haue small birds no eares? Answer Aristotle dooth answere, and say, that nature dooth giue vnto euery thing that which is fit for it. But if she should haue giuen birds eares, their flying would haue been hindered. Likewise fish doe want eares, because they would hinder their swimming, and haue onely certaine little holes, through which they doe heare, as Aristotle doth declare by the sea calfe. Question. Why haue Bats eares, seaing they doe seeme to be birds? Answer. Because they are partly birds in na∣ture in that they doe flye, by reason where of they haue wings: and partly they are of the nature of foure footed beasts, and in that respect they are hairie, because they are mise, and therefore nature as being wise, gaue them eares. Question. Why hath onely man round eares? Answer. Because the shape of the whole and of the parts should be proportionable, and especially in things of one nature: for as a drop of water is rounde, so the whole water, as Iohn de sacre Rosco doth proue. And so because mans head is round, the eares incline towards the same figure: but the heads of other beasts are somewhat long, and so their eares are drawne into length also. Question. Why did nature giue liuing creatures eares? Answere. For two causes. First, because that with them they should heare. Secondly, because that by the eares cholerike superfluitie is purged: for as the head is purged from fleugmatike super∣fluitie
by the nose, so from cholerike by the eares. Of the Mouth. Question. WHy hath the mouth lippes to com∣passe it? Answer. According vnto Const. because the lips doe couer and defend the teeth: for it were vn∣seemely that the teeth should alwaies be seene. An other answer is, that the teeth are of a cold nature, and would therefore bee easily hurt, if they were not couered with the lippes. Another morall rea∣son is, because a man should not bee too hastie in speech. Question. Why hath man two eares, and two eyes, and but one mouth? Answer. Because a man should speak but little, and see and heare much. And withall, Aristotle doth say, that the hearing is the sence with which learning is gotten. And hee sayth, that the sight doth shew vs the difference of many things. And Senecae doth agree vnto this, affirming, that nature hath enuironed the tongue with a double cloister, the teeth and lips, and hath made the eares open and wide, and hath giuen vs but one mouth, to speake little, though we heare much. Question. Why hath a man a mouth? Answer. For many commodities. First, because the mouth is the gate and doore of the stomacke. Secondly, because the meate is chewed in the mouth, and prepared and made readie for the first
digestion Although Autcen doth hold that the first digestion is made in the mouth. Thirdly, because that the aire drawne into the hollow of the mouth for the refreshing of the heart, is made more pure and subtile. And for many other causes, which shal hereafter appeare. Question. Why are the lips moueable? Answere. Because of forming the voyce and wordes, which can not bee perfectly done with out them. For as without a, b, c, there is no writing, so without the lips no voyce can well be formed. Question. Why doe men gape? Answer. The glosse vpon the last part of Hip∣pocrates Aphorisures sayth, that it proceedeth of wearisomnes, as when a man sitteth among such as he doth not knowe, whose companie he could willingly want. Secondly, gaping is caused of the thicke fumes which fill the iawes, by the expulsion of the which is caused the stretching out and extension of the iawes, and opening of the mouth, and then a man doth gape. Question. Why doth a man gape when he seeth an other man gape? Answer. This proceedeth of the imagination. And this is proued by a similitude: for an Asse is animal , by reason of his melancho∣lie, because he doth retaine his superstuitie a long time, and would neuer care  pisse, vnlesse hee should heare an other pisse. And so a man dooth gape through imagination, when an other man doth gape.
Of the Teeth. Question. WHy doe the teeth onely, among all other bones feele with the sense of feeling? Answer. Because, as Auicen and Galen dooth say, they might discerne of heate and cold which hurt them, which the other bones need not. Question. Why haue men more teeth then wo∣men? Answer. By reason of the abundance of heate and bloud, which is more in men then in women. Question. Why doe the teeth growe vntill the end of our life, and not the other bones? Answer. Because they should otherwise be con∣sumed with chewing and grinding. Question. Why doe teeth onely come againe when some fall, or be taken out, and other bones ta∣ken away grow no more? Answer. Because that, according vnto Aristotle, all other bones are ingendered of the humiditie which is called radicall, and so they breede in the wombe of the mother: but the teeth are ingende∣red of nutritiue humiditie, which is renewed and increased from day to day. Question. Why doe the foreteeth fall in youths and grow againe, and not the cheeke teeth? Answer. This proceedeth of the defect of mat∣ter and of the figure, because the foreteeth are sharpe, and the others broad. But according vnto Aristotle, there is another answer: that is, that it is
the office of the foreteeth to cut the meate, and therefore they are sharpe: and the office of the o∣thers is to chew the meate, and therefore they are broad in fashion, which is fittest for that purpose. Question. Why doe the foreteeth grow soonest? Answer. Because we want them sooner in cut∣ting then the others in chewing. Question Why doe the teeth grow black in the old age of liuing creatures? Answer. This proceedeth of the corruption of the meate, and the corruption of fleume, with a naughtie cholerike humour. Quest. Why are colts teeth yellow and of the co∣lour of saffron when they be young, and waxe white when they be old? Answer. Aristotle sayth, that a horse hath a∣bundance of watrie humours in him, the which in his youth are digested and conuerted into gros∣nes, but in olde age heate is diminished, and the watrie humours remaine, whose proper colour is white. Question. Why did nature giue liuing creatures teeth? Answer. Aristotle saith, 2. de generat. animal. to some to fight with and for the defence of their life, as vnto woolues and boares: vnto some to eare with, as vnto horse: vnto some for the forming of their voyce, as vnto men, as it appeareth by the Commentator in the bookes De animal. Question. Why doe horned beasts want then vpper cheeke teeth? Answer. According vnto Aristotle in his booke de animal. hornes and teeth are caused of the selfe
same matter, that is, of nutrimental humiditie, and therefore the matter which passeth into hornes, turneth not into teeth, and therefore the vpper teeth want. And such beasts, according vnto Ari∣stotle, cannot chew wel: whereupon for want of teeth they haue two stomackes by a consequence, and so doe chew their meate twise: and they doe first conuey their meate into their first stomacke or belly, and then returne it from whence it came and chew it. Question. Why are some beasts brought foorth with teeth, as kids and lambes, and some without, as men? Answer. Nature dooth not want in things ne∣cessarie, nor abound in things superfluous: and therefore because these beasts not long after they are fallen do need teeth, are fallen with teeth: but men are nourished with the mothers dugge for a time and therefore for a time want teeth. Question. Why haue not birds teeth? Answer. Because the matter of teeth passeth into their beake, and therefore there is their dige∣stion: or els it is answered, that although they doe not chewe with teeth, yet they chewe with the in∣struments belonging vnto them. Of the Tongue. Question. WHy is the tongue full of pores? Answer. According vnto A∣rist. 2. de anim. because the tongue is the meane whereby wee taste, and through the mouth into
the pores of the tongue, the taste doth come vnto the sense of tasting. Otherwise it is answered, that a frothy spettle is sent vnto the mouth by the tongue frō the lungs, moystening the meate, and making it readie for the first digestion: and therefore the tongue is full of pores, because this spettle may haue passage through him. Question. Why doth the tongue of such as are sicke of agues, iudge all things to be bitter? Answer. Because the stomacke of such persons is filled with cholerike humours, and choler is ve∣ry bitter, as it appeareth by the gall, and therfore this bitter fume doth infect the tongue, and so the tongue being full of these taste, doth iudge them bitter, although the bitternes be not in the meats, but in the tongue. Question. Why doth the tongue water when we heare sowre and sharpe things named? Answer. Because the imaginatiue vertue or power, is of greater force then the power and fa∣cultie of tasting: and when we doe imagine of any taste, we conceiue it by the power of tasting, as by a meane, because there is nothing felt by taste, but by the meane of that spettle, and therefore then the tongue doth water. Question. Why doe some stammer and some lispe? Answere. This happeneth for many causes. Sometimes through the moystnes of the tongue and braine, as in children, which cannot speake plainly, nor pronounce many letters. Sometime it happeneth by reason of the shrinking of certaine
sinewes which are corrupted with fleume: for such sinewes there bee which goe to the tongue, the which are corrupted. Question. Why are the tongues of Serpents and mad dogs venemous? Answer. Because of the malignitie and furno∣sitie of the venemous humour which doth predo∣minat in them. Question. Why is a dogs tongue apt and fit for medicine, and contrariwise a horse tongue pestife∣rous? Answer. This is by reason of some secret pro∣pertie, or els it may be sayd, that the tongue of a dogge is full of many pores, and so doth draw and take away the viscositie of the wound. Some say that a dogge hath by nature some humours in his tongue, with the which by licking he doth heale, and the contrary is in a horse. Question. Why is spettle white? Answer. By reason of the continuall mouing of the tongue, whereof heate is ingendered, which doth make white this superfluitie which is spettle, as it is seene in froth of water. Question. Why is spettle vnsauoury, and with∣out taste? Answer. If it had a certaine determinat taste, then the tongue should not taste at all, but should onely haue the taste of spettle, and so could not receiue other tastes. Question. Why doth the spettle of one who is fa∣sting, heale an impostume? Answer. Because, according vnto Auicen, it is well digested and made subtile.
Question. Why doe some abound more in spettle then other some? Answer. This doth proceede of a fleugmadke complexion, which dooth predominate in them: and therefore the Phisitions doe say, that such should take heeds of a quotidian ague, which ari∣seth of the predomination of flume. The contra∣ry is in those which spet little, because heate dooth abound in them, which doth consume the humidi∣tie of spettle, and so the defect of spettle is a signe of a feuer. Question. Why is the spettle of a man which is fasting, more subtile and white, then of one who is full? Answer. Because that that spettle is without the viscositie of meare, which is wont to make the spettle of one who is full, grosse and thicke. Question. From whence proceedeth the spettle in man? Answer. From the froth of the lungs, which ac∣cording vnto the Phisitions, are the seat of fleume. Question. Why are such beasts which often goe together for generation, very full of fome and sroth? Answer. Because that then the lights and the heart are in a great motion of lust, and therefore there is ingendered in them much frothie mat∣ter. Question. Why haue not birds spettle? Answer. Because they haue very dry lungs, ac∣cording vnto Aristotle in his booke de animal. Question. Why doe such as are called Epilepti, that is, such as are ouerwhelmed, & as it were drow∣ned
in their owne bloud, and are diseased, sauour badly and corruptly? Answer. The answer, according vnto the Phisi∣tions, is, because the peccant matter lyeth in the head: but if he do vomite, then the matter is in the stomacke: but if they vrine much, then the matter is in the passage of the vrine: but if they begin to haue seede, then it is in the vessels of the seed, and according vnto this the Phisitions do purge them. Question. Why doth the tongue loose sometime the vse of speaking? Ans. The answer is out of Hippoc. that this doth happē through a palsie, or apoplexie, that is, a sud∣dē efffusiō of bloud, & of a grosse humor. And some∣times also by the infection spiritus animales, in the middle cel of the brain, which doth hinder that the spirit is not carried vnto the tongue: and this is Ga∣lens meaning, for by the expressing of the tongue, many actiōs of diuers passions are made manifest. Of the roofe of the mouth. Q. WHy are fruits, before they be ripe, of a naugh∣tie relish, or bitter, and afterward sweet? Ans. A naughtie relish in taste proceedeth of cold∣nes & want of heat in grosse & thick humidity but a sweete taste proceedeth of sufficient heate. And therefore in ripe fruite the humiditie is subtile through the heate of the sunne, & therefore such fruits are cōmonly sweet: but before they be ripe the humiditie is grosse, and not subtile, for want of heat, & therfore then the fruits are bitter & sowre. Quest. Why be we rather delighted with sweete tastes, then with bitter, or any other?
Ans. Because nature is delighted with sweetnes. The reason is, because a sweete thing is hot and moist, and through his heat, it doth dissolue super∣fluous humidities, & by his humiditie the immūdi∣citie is washed away: but a sharp eger taste, by rea∣son of the cold which doth predominate in it, doth bind ouer much, & prick, & offendeth the parts of the body in purging. And therefore we do not de∣light in that taste, because the Phisitiōs counsel vs to eate nothing which is bitter in the summer, not in a great heat: and the reason is, because bitternes doth breed heat: but we should eate bitter things in winter onely. And therefore Aristotle doth say, that sweet things are gratefull vnto nature & doe greatly nourish. Question. Why doth a sowre taste prouoke ap∣petite rather then any other? Answer. Because it is cold and doth coole. Now it is the nature of colde to desire, and drawe, and therfore is cause of appetite. Mark that there are nine kinds of tastes, three which proceed frō heat, three from cold, & three frō a temperate meane. Q. Why do we draw more aire, thē we breathe out? Ans. Aristotle and Albertus in his booke de  cordis do answer, that much ayre is drawne in, & is turned into a nutriment, & with the virall spirits is contained in the lungs. And therfore a beast is not suffocated so long as he receiueth ayre with the lūgs, in which some part of the aire remaineth also. Question. Why doth the aire seeme to be expel∣led and put foorth seeing that indeede the aire is in∣uisible by reason of his raritie and thinnes? Answer. Because that the ayre which is recei∣ued into vs, is mingled with vapors and fumosities
of the heart, by reason whereof it is made thicke and so is seene. And this is proued by experience, because that in winter wee see our breath, because the coldnes of the ayre dooth binde the breath mixed with fumosities, and so it is thickened and made grosse, and by a consequence it is seene. Question. VVhy haue some men a stinking breath? Answer. The answere is, according to the Phi∣sitions, because there doth arise euill fumes from the stomacke: and sometime it proceedeth of the corruption of the spirituall parts of the body, as of the lungs. And the breath of leapers is so infected, that it doth poyson the birds which are neere vnto them, because their inwarde parts are very cor∣rupt, as it appeareth by Const. defin. because that leprosie is a nourishment of all the parts of the bodie, together with the corrupting of them: and it dooth begin in the bloud, and end in the mem∣bers of the body. Question. VVhy be leapers hoarse? Answer. Because that in them the instruments vocall are corrupted, that is the lights. Question. Why doe men become hoarse? Answer. Because of a rheume desceding from the braine, filling the conduites of the lights: or somtimes through some importumes in the throte or rheume gathered in the necke. Question. Why haue all the femall of all liuing creatures the shrillest voyces, a cowe onely excepted, and a woman shriller then a man and smaller? Answer. According vnto Aristotle, by reason of the composition of the vaines, and vocall arte∣ries,
that is, where the ayre doth enter in, by which vaines and arteries the voyce is formed: as it ap∣peareth by a similitude, because a small pipe dooth sound shriller then a great. And so also in , because the passage where the voyce is founded, is made narrow and strait, by reason of cold because it is the nature of colde to binde: but in men that passage is open and wider through heate, because it is the propertie of heare to open and dissolve. Also it proceedeth in women through the moyst∣nes of the lungs and weakenes of heate. Young men and diseased men haue sharpe and shrill voy∣ces for the same cause. And that is the naturall cause why a mar-child at his birth time dooth crie a, i, which is a bigger sound, & the femalle, which is a slenderer sound, as it pleaseth Laberintus, whe he sayth, Masculus a proferr. Question. Why doth the voyce chaunge in men and women, in men at 14 in women at 12. in men, when they begin to yeeld seede, in women when their breasts begin to grow, as Aristotle dooth say, lib. de animal. Answer. Because that then, sayth Aristotle, the beginning of the voyce is slackened and loosed: and he proueth this by a similitude of a firing of an instrument let downe or , which giueth a greater sound. And he proueth it another way, be∣cause that beasts which are gelded, as , Eu∣nuches, and gelded men, haue softer and slande∣rer voyces then others, by reason they want stories. Question. Why doe men become hoarse, by the looking of a woolfe?
Answer. The answer, according vnto Aristotle is, because a wolse is a very cold beast in the brain, and thereupon hath a very heavie head. If then the spirit of the sight or be ames be directed & goe towards the wolfe, it doth draw some coldnes from him to the breast, and then of that coldnes the breast is straightened, where the instruments are, by which the voyce is formed: because a wolfe can not send foorth any other fumosities, and they are breathed out into the ayre, that ayre next vnto him is infected, and the next aire by that aire, and so another aire, vntill it come vnto the man: then that ayre being infected, is drawne in by man, and so doth make him hoarse, by closing the vocall ar∣terie or windpipe. And it hath been alreadie sayd that a woolfe is a very rauenous and deuouring beast, and doth eate as much at once as will serue him for three dayes, and therefore by opening his mouth doth cast foorth rawe and grosse humours vndigested, by the which the next ayre vnto him is infected, and so the next vnto it, vntill it come vn∣to the looker on, and so dooth infect like the Basi∣lisque, which dooth cast foorth venemous ayres, which infect men by the eyes. Question. Why is not a wolfe hoarse when a man doth looke on him? Answer. Because a man is not so cold as a wolfe, nor of so malignant a qualitie. And for the like reason this probleme is moued. Question. Why doth a man which is staine, bleed when he is seene of him which killed him? Answer. This proceedeth of a diuine cause, and not of a naturall, because his bloud dooth call for
reuenge against the murtherer. But if there be a∣ny naturall cause of it, this is it. The committer of this wicked fact calling it to minde, is verie sorie for it and repenteth him of it, and is in anguisn of mind, and in a great heat, through the strong ima∣gination which he hath conceiued, and by that meanes all his spirits doe stirre and boyle and re∣paire vnto the instruments of the sight, and so goe out by the beames of the sight of the eies vnto the wounds which are made, the which if they bee fresh, doe presently fall a bleeding. Secondly, this is done by the helpe of the ayre which is breathed in, the which being drawne from the wound, cau∣seth it to bleed. Question. Why doe small birds sing more and lowder then great ones, as it appeareth in the Larke and Nightingale? Ans. Because the spirits of small birds is lighter and greater then the spirits of great birds, & there∣fore follow easily any desire, & so do sing very oft. Question. Why doe the male sing more then the female, as it appeareth in all liuing things? Answer. It proceedeth from the desire of car∣nall copulation, because that then the spirits are moued throughout all the body with the foresayd appetite and desire. And speaking generally, the females are colder then the males. Question. Why doe Bees, Waspes, Flies, and Lo∣custs, and many other such like beasts, make a noyse, seeing they haue no lūgs nor instrumēts of the voyce? Answer. According vnto Aristotle, there is in them a certaine small skinne, agaynst the which when the ayre doth strike, it causeth that sound, &
therefore there is a strange sound. Question. Why doe not fish make a sound? Answer. Because that according vnto Aristotle, they haue no lights, but only gils, nor yet heart, & therefore they need not the drawing in of ayre, and by a consequence they make no noyse: be∣cause that as Aristotle dooth say, a voyce is a per∣cussion of the ayre which is drawne. Of the necke. Question. WHy hath a liuing creature a neck? Answer. Because the necke is the supporter of the head, as Aristotle doth teach: and therefore the necke is the middle betwixt the head and the body, to the intent that by it and by his sinewes, as by certaine meanes and wayes, mo∣tion and sence of the body might bee conueyed through out all the bodie, and that by the meanes of the necke, as it were by a distance, the heart which is very hot might bee separated from the braine. Question. Why doe some beasts want a necke, as Serpents, fishes? Answer. Because such beasts want a heart, and therefore they doe not want that distance which wee haue spoken of: or els wee answere, that they haue a necke in some inward part of them, but it is not distinguished from the heart and the head. Question. Why is the necke full of bones and ioynts? Answere. Because it may beare and sustaine
the head the stronger. And also because the backe bone is ioyned to the braine in the neck, and from thence it receiueth marrowe, which is of the same substance with the braine. Question. Why haue some beasts long neckes, as Cranes, Storkes, and such like? Answer. Because such beasts doe seeke their li∣uing in the bottome of the water, and therefore doe want such neckes. And some beasts haue short neckes, as Sparrow-hawkes, because such are ra∣uenous beasts, and therefore for strength want such short neckes: as it dooth appeare in an oxe, which hath a short necke, and is therefore strong. Question. Why is the necke hollowe, and especi∣ally before about the tongue? Answer. Because there be two passages, where∣of the one dooth carry the meate vnto the nutri∣tiue instruments, as to the stomacke and liuer, and is called of the Greekes Isophagus: the other is the windpipe. Question. VVhy is the arterie made like rings and circles? Answer. The better to how, and to giue a good sounding againe. Question. VVhy dooth a chicken moue a great space after his head is off, and a man beheaded neuer stirreth? Answer. Because a chicken and such like, haue straite sinewes, and therefore the spirit of mouing continueth long after the head is off: but men and other beastes haue long and large sinewes and vaines, & therefore the motiue spirits doth quick∣ly
depart from them, and by a consequent cannot moue their bodies. Of the shoulders and armes. Question. WHy hath a man shoulders and armes? Answer. To giue and carry burdens, according vnto Aristotle. Question. Why are his armes round? Answer. For the swifter and speedier worke, because that that figure is fit to moue. Question. Why are the armes thicke? Answer. Because they should be strong to lift and beare burdens, to thrust, and giue a strong blow: so their bones are thicke, because they con∣taine much marrow, for feare least they should bee easily corrupted and marred: but marrow cannot so well be contained in small bones as in great. Question. Why doe such as are diseased and in griefe, vncouer and couer their armes, and such also as are in an agonie? Answer. Because such are neere vnto death, and it is a signe of death, by reason of great griefe which causeth that vncouering, as Hippocrat. doth teach, lib. prognost. Question. Why doe the armes become small and slender in some sicknes, as in mad men, and such as are sicke of the dropsie? Answer. Because all the parts of the body doe suffer the one with the other, and therefore one member being in griefe, all the humours doe con∣curre
there in the foresayd griefes. For when the head dooth ake, all the humours of the armes doe runne to the head, and therefore the armes be∣come small and slender, because they want their proper nouriture. Question. Why haue brute beasts no armes? Answer. Their forefeete are in stead of armes, & in their place. Or els we may answer more fitly, because all beasfs haue some partes for their de∣fence, and to fight with, as the Woolfe the teeth, the Cowe hornes, a Horse the hinder feete, birds the beake and winges: but onely man hath his armes. Of the hands. Question. WHy hath a man hands, and an ape also which is like vnto a man? Answer. The hand is an instrument which a man dooth especially want, because many things are done by the hands, and not by any other part, as Aristotle doth teach. Question Why are some men ambidexters, that is, vse the left hand as well as the right? Answere. By reason of the great heate of the heart, and for the hot blowing of the same, and that maketh a man as nimble of the left hand as in the right: and without doubt such are of a good complexion. Question. Why are not women ambidexters as well as men, as Hippocrates sauth, vlt. part. Aphoris. Answer. Because, as Galen sayth, a woman in
health which is most hot, is colder then the col∣dest man in health: I say in health, for if she haue an ague, she is accidentally hotter then a man. Question. VVhy are the singers full of ioynts? Answer. To be the more fit and apt to receiue, and to keepe the thing receiued. Question. VVhy hath euery finger three ioynts, and the thumbe but two? Answer. The thumbe hath three, but the third is ioyned vnto the arme, and therfore is stronger then the other fingers, and is bigger in strength, seeing he is also in quantitie, and is called pollex a polleo, that is, to excell in strength. Question. VVhy are the fingers of the right hand more nimble, then the fingers of the left, as Aegidius saith? Answer. It proceedeth of the heate which doth predominate in those parts, which causeth grea∣ter agilitie. Question. VVhy are the fingers thicker before meate, then after, as Albertus saith. Answer. According vnto the Phisitions, be∣cause a man which is fasting is full of bad humors, and diuers fumosities, which puffe vp the parts of the body, and the fingers also: but when those hu∣mors are expulsed through meate, the fingers be∣come more slender. And for the same reason, a man which is fasting is heauier then when he hath meate in his belly, as it is most plaine in fasters. Another reason may be giuen, that is, because that after meate, the heat departeth from the outward parts of the body vnto the inward, to helpe dige∣stion, and therefore the outward and externall
parts become slender: but after the digestion is made, the bloud returneth againe to the exteriour parts, and then they become great againe. Question. Why are some men left handed? Answer. Because the heart sendeth not heate vnto the right side, but more vnto the left, & dooth also worke a slendernes and subtiltie in the left side. Of the nayles. Question. FRom whence doe the nayles pro∣ceede? Answer. Of fumosities and humors which are resolued, and doe goe into the extremities of the fingers, and there are dried through the power of the externall ayre, and brought to the hardnes of a horne. Question. Why doe the nayles of old men growe blacke and pale? Answer. Because the heate of their heart de∣cayeth, the which decaying, their beautie doth de∣cay also. Question. Why are men iudged to bee of a good or euill complexion, by the disposition of their nayles? Answer. Because they giue witnes of the good∣nes or badnes of the heart, and therefore of the complexion: for if they be somewhat red, they be∣tolten choler well tempered: but if they be incli∣ning with red somewhat to blacknes, they beto∣ken a sanguine complexion: but if they be yellow∣ish or blacke, they signifie melancholy.
Question. Why doe white spots appeare in the nayles? Answer. Through the mixture of fleume with the nutriment. Of the breast. Question. WHy is the breast hollow? Answer. Because there is the seate of the spiritual members, which are most no∣ble, as the heart and lights, and therefore because these might bee kept from hurt, it was necessarie that the breast should be hollow. Question. Why hath a man the broadest breast of all living creatures? Answer. Because the spirits of man are weake and subtile, and therefore doe require a spacious place, wherein they may bee contained, as the breast is. Question. Why are the breasts of birds round? Answer. Because they bee in continuall mo∣tion, and that figure is fittest for motion, as Ari∣stotle doth say, 4. Phisick. Question. Why doe we draw those things which we loue vnto our breast? Answer. Because the first and chiefest part of the heart is vnder the breast, and therefore that which the heart dooth loue wee doe draw to the breast, by reason of the neighbourhood it hath with the heart, so applying the thing loued vnto the louer. Question. Why haue women narrower breasts
then men? Answer. Because there is heate in men, which doth naturally moue to the vppermost part of thē, making those parts great and large. And therefore a great breast is a token of courage, as Aristotle doth say, declaring this to be true by the Lion and the Bull: but in women cold dooth predominate, which naturally doth tend downward. And there∣fore Aristotle dooth say, that women doe oft fall vpon their taile, because those partes behinde are grosse and heauy, by reason of the cold descending thither: but a man dooth commonly fall on his breast, by reason of his greatnes and thicknes. Of the paps and dugs. Question. WHy are the pappes placed vpon the breast? Answer. Because the breast is the seate of the heart which is most hot, and therefore there the pappes doe growe, to the end that the flowers be∣ing conueied thither, as being neere vnto the heat of the heart, should the sooner bee digested and perfected, and conuerted into the matter and sub∣stance of milke. Question. Why are the pappes below the breasts in other beasts, and aboue the breast in women? Answer. Because a woman hath two legges on∣ly, and therefore if her dugges should bee belowe her breast, they would hinder her going: but other beasts haue foure feet, and therefore they are not hindered in their going.
Question. Why haue not men as great breasts or paps as women? Answere. Because a man hath no monethly tearmes, and therfore no vessell deputed for them. And yet Aristotle dooth say, that men haue small paps and women little small stones. Question. Which pappes are best for children to sucke, great ones or small ones, or the meane between both? Answer. In the great ones the heate is disper∣sed, and there is no good digestion of the milke: but in small ones the power and force is strong, because a vertue vnited is strongest, and by a con∣sequent there is a good working and digesting of the milke: and therefore the small ones are bet∣ter then the great ones: but yet the meane ones are the best of all, because that euery meane is best. Question. Why doe the pappes of young women begin to grow great about 13. or 14. yeares of age, as Albertus doth say? Anwer. Because that then her tearmes begin to haue course and to increase: and as Aristotle doth say, mans seede and womens flowers doe be∣gin to increase at one age. Question. Why doe the pappes of such women at cast their child, waxe soft, as Hippocr. saith, 2. part. Aphoris. Answer. Because that there the flowers haue no course to the teates, by the which the yong one is nourished, and therefore they waxe soft. Question. Why hath a woman that is with child with a boy, the right pap harder then the left?
Answer. Because the male-childe is conceiued in the right side of the mother, as Hippocrat. sayth, and therefore the flowers doe runne to the right pap and make it hard. Question. VVhy doth it signifie weakenes in the child, when the milke doth drop out of the pappes be∣fore the woman be deliuered? Answer. According vnto Aristotle, because the milke is the proper nouriture of the childe in the wombe of the mother, and therefore if the milke runne out it is a  that the childe is not nou∣rished, and therefore is weake. Question. VVhy doth the hardnes of the pappes betoken the health of the child in the wombe? Answer. Because the flowers are conuerted in∣to milke, and that milke doth sufficiently nourish the child, and thereby his strength is signified. Question. VVhy hath a woman but two pappes, and some brute be , or more? Answer. Because that for the most part a wo∣man hath but one child either boy or wench, and therefore one pap is sufficient or two: but beasts haue many young ones, and therefore so many teates. Question. VVhy be womens pappes hard when they be with child, and soft at other times? Answer. They swell then and are puffed vp, be∣cause that much moisture which proceedeth from their flowers dooth runne vnto the pappes, which at other seasons doe remaine in the matrix or wombe, and is expelled by the place deputed to that end. Question. By what meanes doth the milke of the
pappes come Sonto the matrix or wombe? Answer According vnto Hippocrates, because there is a certaine knitting and coupling of the pappes with the wombe, and there are certaine vaines which the Midwiues doe cut at the time of the birth of a child, and by those vaines the milke doth flowe vnto the nauell of the children, and so they receiue nouriture by the nauell. Some say, that the childe in the wombe is nourished at the mouth but that is false, because that so he should auoyde excrements also: but that is false, because that that is not seene where. Question. VVhy is it the signe of a male-child in the wombe, when the milke which runneth out of the womans breasts is thicke, and not much, and of a fe∣male when it is thinne? Answer. Because that a woman which goeth with a boy hath great heat in her, which doth per∣fect the milke, and make it thicke: but such as goe with a wench haue not so much heate, and there∣fore the milke is vndigested and vnperfited, and waterie and thinne, and will swimme aboue water if it be put into it. Question. VVhy is the milke white, seeing the flowers are red, which it is ingendred of. Answer. Because that bloud well purged and concocted, becommeth white, as it appeareth in flesh, whose proper colour is red, and being well∣boyled is white. Another answer is, because that e∣uery humour which is ingendred in such a part of the body, is made like vnto that part in colour where it is ingendred, as neere as it can: but be∣cause the flesh of the pappes is white, therefore the
humour of milke is white. Question. VVhy doth a Cow giue milke more a∣bundantly then other beasts? Answer. Because a Cow is a great eating beasts and where there is much monthly superfluitie in∣gendred, there is much milk, because it is nothing els but that bloud  and  and because a Cow hath much of this monthly bloud she hath much milke. Question. VVhy is  milke holesome, as Hip∣pocrates saith . Answer. According vnto the opinion of Galen, for diuers reason  because it dooth curde in the stomacke, where of an euill breath  bred. But to this Hippocrates giueth a remedie, . If the third part of  with running water, then it is not hurtfull. Another reason is, because that sometimes the milke doth waxe fowre in the stomack, and  dry whereof euill hu∣mours are bred, which  infect the breath. Question. Why is milk naught for such as haue the head-ach? Answer. Because milke is easily conuerted into great fumosities, and hath much terrestriall sub∣stance in it, the which fumosities ascending, dooth cause the head to ake. Question. VVhy is milke a fit nutriment for chil∣dren and infants? Answer. Because it is their naturall and vsuall foode, and because they were nourished with the same in the wombe of the mother, it is fit for them. Question. VVhy are white meates made of a
new melch Cow good? Answer. Because the milke is at that time very spongie, and dooth expell many fumosities, and doth as it were purge at that time. Question. Why is the milke naught for the child, if the woman doe vse carnall copulation? Answer. Because that in the time of carnall copulation, the subtilest and best part of the milke goeth to the vessels of the seede, and vnto the wombe, and the worst remaineth in the pappes, which doth hurt the child. Question. Why is the milke of browne women better, then of white women? Answer. Because that browne women are hot∣ter then others, and because the heate doth purge the milke sufficiently, and so the milke is the bet∣ter. Question. Why doe the Phisitions forbid vs to eate milke and fish at the same meale? Answer. Because they doe dispose vs to a lea∣prosie, and because they are both fleugmatike. Question. Why haue not birds milke and paps? Answer. Because pappes would hinder their flying: and fish also haue neither paps nor milke, as Aristotle doth say: but in fishes the female doth cast many egges, vpon which the male doth touch with a small gut, which causeth their kind to be in∣finit in succession. Of backes. Question. WHy haue beasts backes? Answer. According vnto A∣ristotle,
for three causes. First, because the backe should be the way & meane of the sinewes, which are extended and spred throughout all the bodie from the back bone, as it appeareth in such as are hanged, because that when they are torne in pee∣ces, or without flesh, the sinewes hang whole in the chine or backe bone. The second, because it should be a garde and defence for the soft parts of the body, as of the stomacke, liuer, lights, and such like. The third, because it should bee the founda∣tion of all the bones, because wee see other bones, as the ribbes, fastened in the backe bone. Question. Why hath a man aboue all creatures a broad backe, which he can lie vpon, which no beast can doe? Ans. Because a broad back doth answer a broad breast. If therefore a man should haue a sharpe backe like vnto other beasts, that would bee of an vnseemely shape, and therefore it is requisite that he haue a broad backe. Question. Why hath a man which lieth on his backe horrible visions? Answer. Because then the passage or sinewe of the fantasie is open, which is in the forepart of the braine, and so the fantasie is destroyed, and then those visions followe. Another reason is, because that when a man doeth lve on his backe, the hu∣mours are disturbed, and moued vpward where the fantasie is, which is so by that meanes distur∣bed. Question. Why is it naught to lie on the backe? Answer. Because, as the Phisitions do say, that doth dispose a man to a leprosie, madnes, and to
an Intubus. Where you may note, that Mania or madnes is the hurt or disturbāce of the forepart of the braine, with a taking away or depriuation of the imagination: but Incubus, that is, the night∣mare, is a passion of the heart, when a man dooth thinke himselfe to bee strangled in his sleepe, and some what lie heauie vpon his stomacke, which he would put off. Question. Why hath the backe bone manie ioynts & knuckles, called Spondylia by the Phisitions? Answer. For the mouing of the backe, and bo∣wing of him, without the which ioynts that could not be done. And therefore they say amisse which say that Elephants haue no such ioynts: for with∣out them he could not moue. Question. Why doe fish dye presently when their backe bone is burst? Answer. Because that in fish the backe bone is in steede of the heart. Now the heart is the first thing which dooth liue, and the last thing which doth dye, as it appeareth in the book de longit. & breuit. vitae, and therefore when that bone is bro∣leen, fish can liue no longer. Of the marrow. Question. WHy doth a man dye quickly after the marrow is hurt or perished? Answer. Because the marrowe doth proceede from the braine, which is a principall part of man, as it appeareth in two reasons. First, because the marrow is white like vnto the braine. Thē, because
they haue a small skin or rinde, which that which is called Nucha hath not, which dooth somewhat differ from the marrow, because that Nucha hath two couerings like the braine, called Ptamater, & Dura mater. Of the Piles or fluxe of bloud in the fundament. Question. WHy haue some men the piles? Answer. Because they are me∣lancholike, the which melancholy first passeth to the spleene, which is the proper seate of melan∣choly, and there cannot bee retayned through a∣bundance of bloud: and therefore from thence it is carried to the backe bone, where there are cer∣taine vaines which haue their end in the back and in the necke. And when those vaines are very full of melancholy bloud, then the waies & conduits of nature are opened, and that bloud issueth our once a moneth like a womans rearmes or flowers. And those men which haue this course of bloud, are kept from many infirmities, as the dropsie, plague, and such like. Question. Why are the Iewes subiect vnto this disease very much? Ans. The Diuines do say, because they cried at the death of Christ, Let his bloudfall vpon vs and our children. And therefore it is sayd in the Psalm, Percussit eos Deus in posterior a dorsi. Another rea∣son is, because the Iewes do eate much fleugmatike & cold meats, which doth breed melācholy bloud, which is purged by this fiuxe of bloud. Another reason is, because mouing doth cause heat, & heat
digestion, as 4. Meteor. but the Iewes doe not moue nor labour, nor conuerse with men. Also they liue in great feare, lest we should reuenge the death of our Sauiour, which doth also breede a coldnes in them, which dooth hinder digestion, which dooth breede much melancholy bloud in them, which is by this meanes purged. Of the heart. Question. WHy are the heart and the lungs called, truely parts of the body, in Latine Spiritalia membra? Answer. From this word Spiritus, which signi∣fieth breath, life, or soule, and because the vitall spirits are ingendred in the heart: but that is no good answer, for so the liuer and the braine might bee so called, which is false: because the liuer is a part which giueth nouriture, and the braine sence and life. And yet the consequence is cleere, be∣cause the vitall spirits are ingendered in the liuer, and the sensible or animall spirits in the braine. And therefore the answere is, because that in the heart and in the lungs breath and ayre is recei∣ued, by which we liue. Question. VVhy are the lungs thinne and spungie, light and full of small holes? Answer. Because the ayre might be the better receiued in them, for the cooling of the heart, and expelling of superfluous humours, because the lungs are the fanne of the heart. And as a paire of bellowes is puffed vp by taking in of the ayre, and
shrinketh by blowing out the ayre: so like wise the lights do draw aire when they coole the heart and cast it out, least through too much heate the heart should be suffocated. Question. VVhy is the flesh of the lungs white? Answer. Because they bee in continuall mo∣tion. Question. VVhy haue those beasts onely lungs which haue hearts? Answer. Because the lungs be no part for them∣selues, but for another, that is, for the heart: and therefore it were superfluous for those beasts to haue lungs which haue no heart: but nature doth neuer want in things necessary, nor abound in su∣perfluities. Question. Why doe such beasts which haue no lungs want a bladder? Answer. Because such drinke no water, to the end to make their meate to boile, or to helpe dige∣stion, but onely for the tempering of their meate, and therefore they want a bladder and vrine, as it appeareth in such birds as doe not drinke at all, as the Falcon, Sparrow hawke. Question. Why is the heart in the middest of the bodie? Answer. Because it should impart life vnto all the parts of the bodie: and therefore is compared vnto the Sunne, which is placed in the middle of the planets, to powre light vnto them all. And therefore the Pythagorians calling the Heauen a great liuing creature, say, that the Sunne is the heart of him. Question. VVhy onely in man is the heart pla∣ced
in the left side? Answer. To the end that the heate of the heart should mitigate the coldnes of the spleene: for the spleene is the seate of melancholy, which is seated in the left side likewise. Q. Why is the heart first ingendred? for according vnto Aristotle, the heart doth first liue and last dye. Answer. Because, as Aristotle sayth, de inuent. & senect the heart is the beginning and origine of life, & of all the parts of the body, and without him no part can liue. Note, according vnto the Philo∣sophers, that of the seede retayned in the matrix or wombe, there is first ingendred a certaine little small skin, which doth compasse the seede, where∣of first the heart is made of the purest bloud, then of a bloud not so pure, the liuer, and of a thick and cold bloud the marrow and the braine. Question. Why are such beasts bold which haue but a little heart, as the lyon? Answer. Because that in a little heart the heate is well vnited and vehement, and the bloud touch∣ing him dooth quickly heate him, and is speedilie carried vnto the other parts of the body, which doth giue courage and boldnes. Question. Why are such beasts as haue a great heart very fearfull, as the Hare? Answer. Because the heate is dispersed in such a one, and is not able to heate the bloud which commeth to him, and so feare is bred. Question. Why is the heart continually moued? Answer. According vnto Arist. de motu cordis, and Galen, because that in him there is bred a cer∣taine spirite which is more subtile then the ayre,
which by reason of his great thinnes and rare fac∣tion, dooth seeke a larger space, filling the hollowe roome of the heart, whereof the dilating and ope∣ning of the heart dooth follow. And because the heart is earthly, that thrusting and mouing , his partes are at rest, and tend downwards. And Galen giueth an experiment of an acorne, the which if he be put into the fire, the heare doth dissolue his humiditie into smoake, which is thin∣ner and greater then the humiditie, and therefore doth occupie a greater place, and so cannot abide in the rinde, but dooth pusse it vp, and cause it to fall into the fire. The like is of the heart: and ther∣fore note that the heart of a liuing creature is three square after a sort, and hath the least part to∣wards the left side, and the greatest towards the right, and doth alwaies open and shut in the least part, and by that meanes is in continuall mouing. The first mouing is called of the Phisitions Diasto∣le, that is, the extending of the breast or heart. The second, Sistole, that is, the shutting of the heart: and of these two mouings all the mouings of the bodie doe proceede, and the mouing of the pulse which the Phisitions doe seele. Question. Why are great beasts leane? Answer. Because the naturall heate procceding from the heart, doth consurne the waterish humi∣ditie, which should be conuerted into fat. And for the most part women are fatter then men, because they haue much humiditie in them, and haue a moyster heart then men. Question. Why is the flesh of the heart so com∣pact and thicke together?
Answer. Because that in a thicke compacted substance, heate is strongly receiued and vnited, as it appeareth in other things. And because the hart with his heate should moderate the coldnes of the braine, it is made of that fast flesh apt to keepe a strong heate. Question. VVhy is the heart the hottest part in all liuing creatures? Answer Because it is so compacted, it receiueth heate best, and because it should mitigate the cold∣nes of the braine, as is sayd. Question. VVhy is the heart the beginning of life? Answer. Because that in him the vitall spirit is bred, which is the seate of life. And therefore ac∣cording vnto the opinion of August. de different. spirit. & animae. the heart hath two bellies or re∣ceptacles, that is, the right and the left: the right hath more bloud then spirit, the which spirit is in∣gendred to giue life, and to viuific at all the body. Question. VVhy is the heart round, and of the figure of a pyramide, long and sharpe? Answer. The round figure hath no angles, and therefore the heart is round, for feare least any noysome and hurtfull matter should bee kept and retained in him. And also, as Aristotle dooth af∣firme, because the round figure is fittest for mo∣tion. Question. Why is the bloud principally in the heart aboue all other parts? Answer. Because the bloud is in the heart as in his proper place, or in his efficient place, which some doe attribute vnto the liuer. And thereupon
the heart dooth not receiue bloud of any other part, but other parts of him. Question. VVhy doe some beasts want a heart? Answer. Although they haue no heart, yet they haue somwhat which doth answer vnto the heart, as it dooth appeare in fish, and celes, which haue the backe bone in steed of the heart. Question. Why doth the heart beate and liue in some beasts when the head is off, as it appeareth in birds and in hennes? Answer. Because the vitall spirits doe remaine lōgest in the heart, because the heart is that which is first aliue and last dead, as Aristotle doth say, and therefore the heart dooth beate more then other parts. Question. Why do all beasts which want a heart, or somewhat proportionable vnto it, want bloud al∣so, as it appeareth in flyes? Ans. The heart is the beginning of bloud, and therefore the cause sayling the effect doth fayle. Question. Why is the pulse of the heart more certainly iudged in the right side, then in the left? Answer. Because the heat of the heart is more liuely there then in the other side, and therefore it is better felt there, then in the other side. Question. Why doth the heate of the heart faile sometimes on a sudden, as in those which haue the falling sicknes? Answer. This dooth proceede according vnto Constant. through the defect of the hart it self, and of small skinnes with the which it is couered, the which being infected or corrupted, the heart fay∣leth on a sudden: and sometime it doth happen by
reason of the parts next adioyning. And therefore when any venemous humour doth goe out of the mouth of the stomacke, that dooth hurt the heart, and the parts adioyning, the which doth also cause this fainting. Note according vnto Aristotle, that the disposition of the heart is knowne by the pulse of the heart, because a swift great beating pulse, doth giue witnes of the heate of the heart and of a good complexion. A slow and weake pulse dooth betoken the coldnes of the heart and an euil com∣plexion. And therfore a woman which is in health hath a slower and weaker pulse then a man, as it shall appeare hereafter. Of the stomacke. Question. WHy is the stomacke large and wide? Answer. Because that in the stomacke the meate is first concocted and dige∣sted, as it were in a pot, to the end that that which is pure should be separated from that which is im∣pure, as Aristotle sayth: and therefore according vnto the quantitie of meate the stomacke is in∣larged. Question. Why is the stomacke round? Answer. Because that if it had angles and cor∣ners, as Const. sayth, the meate would remaine in them, and a man should neuer want agues: the which humours neuerthelesse are lifted vp and consumed, and are not hidden in those corners, by reason of the roundnes of the stomacke. Question. Why is the stomacke full of sinewes
and feeling? Answer. As Aristotle dooth say, because the si∣newes can bee extended and inlarged, and so the stomacke is when it is full, and when it is hungrie it is drawne together, and therefore nature hath prouided those sinewes. Question. Why doth the stomacke digest? Answer. By reason of the heate which is in him, the which heate commeth from the parts adioy∣ning, that is, the liuer and the heart. For wee see that in metals the heate of the fire dooth take a∣way the rust and drosse from the yron, and siluer from tinne, and gold from copper: and so by di∣gestion the pure is separated from the impure. And that digestion is of foure sorts, according vn∣to the Phisitions. Question. Why is the stomacke ioyned vnto the liuer? Answer. Because, sayth Const the liuer is very hot, and with his heate doth helpe digestion, and doth compasse the stomacke. Question. VVhy be wee commonly colder after dinner then before? Answer. Because that then all the heate goeth to the stomacke to further digestion, and so the outward parts be cold, being depriued of heate. Question. Why is it hurtfull to studie presently after dinner? Answer. Because that when the heate doth la∣bour to helpe the imagination in studie, then it ceaseth from digesting the meat, and so the meate remaineth raw. And therefore according vnto the Phisitions a man shuld walk somwhat after dinner.
Question. Why haue women with child an vn∣ordinate appetite of eating coales, ashes, and such like? Answer. Because that such as are the humours in the stomacke, such nutriment they desire: and because women with childe haue corrupted hu∣mours, they desire such things, because like dooth couer his like. Question. Why doth the stomacke slowly digest very fat meate? Answer. Because such meates doe swimme in the stomack. Now the best digestion is in the bot∣tome of the stomacke, where fat meate commeth not. And therefore such as eate fat meate are very sleepie after the eating of it, because their dige∣stion is hindered. Question. Why is all the bodie the worse when the stomacke is ill at ease? Answer. Because the stomacke is knit with the braine, heart and liuer, which are the principall parts in man, and therefore when he is not well, the others are euilly disposed. Another answer is, that if the first digestion bee hindered, the others are also hindered: for in the first digestion is the beginning of the infirmitie that is in the stomack. Question. Why are young men sooner a hun∣gred then old men? Answer. Young men doe digest for three cau∣ses. First for growing: then for restoring of life: and lastly, for conseruation of their life, as Hippo∣crates and Galen dooth say. Els wee answere, that yong men are hotter then old men, because yong men are hot and drie, and therefore the heat doth
digest more, and by a consequent they desire more. Question. Why doe Phisitions prescribe that a man should eate when he hath an appetite? Answer. Because much hunger and emptines dooth fill the stomacke with naughtie rotten hu∣mors, which he doth draw vnto himselfe in steede of meate: which doth easily appeare, because that if we fast ouer night, we haue an appetite to meat, but in the morning none. That is therefore a to∣ken that the stomacke is filled with naughtie hu∣mors, and especially his mouth, which is no true filling, but a deceitfull. And therfore after we haue eaten a little, our stomack commeth to vs againe. And therefore the common prouerbe is, that the mouth is a deceiuer: for although he were cor∣rupted with bad humours, yet after meate the ap∣petite commeth againe. Question. Why doe the Phisitions prescribe, that we should not eate too much at a time, but by little and a little? Answer. Because that when the stomacke is full, the meate dooth swimme in him, which is a dangerous thing. Another reason is, that as very greene wood doth put out the fire, so dooth much meate choke the naturall heat and put it out. And therefore the best phisicke is to vse temperancy in eating and drinking. Question. Why doe we desire change of meates, according vnto the chaunge of times? as in winter, beefe, porke, mutton: in summer, lighter meates, as veale, lambe? Answer. Because the complexion of the bodie
is altered and chaunged, according vnto the time of the yeare. Another answere is, that this doth proceede from the qualitie of the season, because that the cold of the winter doth cause a better di∣gestion, because the stomacke and belly is hotter in winter, by reason of the compassing colde, as Hippocrates and Aristotle doth teach. Question. Why should not the meate we eate be too hot, as Pepper, Ginger? Answer. Because that hot meate dooth burne the bloud, and doth dispose vnto a leprosie. So con∣trariwise, meate too colde doth mortifie and con∣geale the bloud. Also our meate should not be ouer sharpe, because it procureth olde age: and ouer much sauce dooth burne the intrailes, and procu∣reth often drinking, as raw meate doth: and ouer sweete meates do constipate and clinge the vaines together. Question. Why is it a good custome to eate cheese after dinner, and peares after all meate? Answer. Because that cheese, by reason of his earthlines and thicknes, tendeth downe toward the bottome of the stomack, and so putteth downe the meate: and the like is of peares. Note that newe cheese is better then olde, and old drie salt cheese is very naught, and procureth the head-ach and stopping of the liuer, and the older the wor∣ser. Whereupon it is sayd, that cheese is naught, and digesteth all things but it selfe. Question. Why be nuttes good after fish: as the verse is: After fish nuttes, after flesh cheese. Answer. Because fish is of a hard digestion, and
doth easily putrifie and corrupt, and nuttes doe helpe digestion, because they are somewhat hot. Also fish is poyson at some times, and nuttes are a remedie against poyson. And note that the fish should be of a cleere stony water, and not of a cold standing muddie water, and should be sod in wine with parsly, and so it doth least hurt. Question. Why is it vnholesome to stay long for one dish after another, and eate of diuers kindes of meates? Answer. Because it beginneth to digest when the last is eaten, and so the digestion is not equally made, and therfore it is good to vse but few dishes. But yet this rule is to be noted touching the order of meates, that if there bee many dishes, whereof some are light in digestion, as chickens, kid, veale, soft egges, and such like, these meates should bee first eaten: but the grosse meates, as venison, ba∣con, beefe, rosted porke, hard egges, and fried egs, should bee eaten last. And the reason is, because that if they should be first serued and eaten, if they were digested, they would hinder the digestion of the others: and the light meates not digested, should be corrupted in the stomacke, and be kept in the stomacke violently. Whereof there would follow belching, loathing, head-ach, belly-ach, and great thirst. And by a consequent it is very hurtful to at the same meale, to eate milke, and drinke wine, because they dispose a man to a leprosie. Question. Which is better for the stomack meat or drinke? Answer. Drinke is sooner digested then meat, because meate is of greater substance and more
materiall then drinke, and therefore meate is har∣der to digest. Question. Why is it good to drinke at dinner? Answer. Because the drinke should make the meate readier to digest. For if a pot be filled with flesh or fish without liquour, then both the meare and the pot is marred. And the stomacke is like vnto a pot which doth boyle meate: and therfore the Phisitions do giue counsell to drink at meales. Question. Why is it good to forbeare a late sup∣per? Answer. Because there is no mouing nor stir∣ring after supper, & so the meate is not sent downe to the bottome of the stomack, but remayneth vn∣digested, and so breedeth hurt. And therefore a light and short supper is best, as the olde verse doth. Question. Why is it naught to drinke wine fa∣sting? Answer. Because it doth greatly endanger the braine, and breedeth the falling sicknesse, and the apoplexie. Question. Why is it hurtfull to drinke much cold water? Answer. Because one contrary doth expel and hinder another; but the water is very colde, and therefore comming vnto the stomacke doth hin∣der digestion, and the heate which doth digest. Question. Why is it vnholesome to drinke new wine, and why dooth it hurt the stomacke verie much? Answer. Because it cannot bee digested: and therefore it doth cause the belly to swell, and so it
doth in sorne sorte cause a bloudie flixe: it dooth also hinder making of water: but to drinke good wine is holesome. Question. Why do the Phisitions forbid vs to la∣bour presently after dinner? Answer. For three causes. First, because mo∣uing doth hurt the vertue and power of digestion, and by that meanes the meare is expelled vndi∣gested. The second is, because stirring immediatly after dinner doth cause the parts of the bodie to draw the meate raw vnto them, which doth breed sicknes. The third, because mouing doth cause the meate to descend before it bee digested: but after supper it is good to stirre and moue, because wee sleepe not long after. And therefore wee should walke a little, because the meate may goe to the bottome of the stomacke. Question. Why is it good to walk in the morning before dinner? Answer. Because it maketh a man well dispo∣sed, and dooth fortifie and strengthen the naturall heate, and causeth the superfluitie of the stomack to descéd. And therfore Auicen doth say, that such as forgoe this exercise, doe fall into the inflamma∣tion of the heart. Question. Why is it holesome to vomite, as di∣uers say? Answer. Because it doth purge the stomacke of all naughtie humours: for it dooth expell greene and blew humours, which would breede agues, if they should remaine in the stomacke. And accor∣ding vnto Autcen, a vomite dooth purge the eyes, the head, and make the braine cleane.
Question. Why doth sleepe greatly strengthen the stomacke and the digestiue vertue? Answer. Because that in sleepe the heate doth drawe inward, and dooth helpe the digestion: but when we be awake, the heate doth remaine about the sences, & is dispersed throughout all the body. Question. Why doe some men in some diseases, voyd their meate downward, in the same qualitie and quantity, as they did receiue it into the stomack? Answer. By reason of the weaknes of the natu∣rall vertue of the appetitiue power, attractiue, di∣gestiue, retentiue, and expulsiue, which disease is called Lienteria. Of the bloud. Quest. WHy is it necessary, that euery liuing thing which hath bloud, haue also a liuer? Answer. According vnto Aristotle, because the bloud is first made in the liuer, because the liuer is the seate of the bloud, according vnto other Phi∣sitions, and is drawne from the stomacke by cer∣taine principall vaines, and so ingendred. Question. Why is the bloud red? Answer Because it is like vnto the part in which it is made, that is, vnto the liuer, which is of a red colour. And the bloud is also sweete, because it is well digested and concocted: but if it haue a little earthly matter mixed with it, it is a cause that it is somewhat salt, as it appeareth in Arist. lib. meteor. Quest. Why haue women thicker bloud then mē?
Anwer. By reason of the cold which doth thic∣ken, binde, and congeale, and ioyne together. Question. Why doth the bloud come to all the partes of the bodie from the liuer, and by what meanes? Answer. By the meanes of the principal vaines, as the vaines of the head, of the liuer, and such o∣ther, and to nourish all the bodie. Of vrine. Question. HOw doth the vrine come vnto the bladder, seeing the bladder is shut? Answer. Some say by sweating, and it seemeth to be true: but some say, that it commeth by a small skinne which is in the bladder, which dooth open and let in the vrine. Thenphilactus dooth say, that the vrine is a certaine and not a deceitfull messen∣ger, of the health and infirmitie of man. And Hip∣pocrates doth say, that men haue white vrine in the morning, and before dinner red, and after dinner pale, and likewise after supper: for there are diuers colours of the vrine, whereof wee will not speake at this present. Question. Why doth the dropsie proceede from the liuer? Answer. Because that (sayth Const.) the dige∣stiue power in the liuer, cannot conuert the thicke substance into the foure humors, but is conuerted onely into water, the which dooth swell and puffe vp a man, and especially the belly.
Of the gall. Question. WHy haue liuing creatures a gall? Answer. Because that chole∣rike humors are receiued in it, the which through their sharpnes do help the guts to expel superflui∣ties, it doth also helpe the stomacke in digesting. Question. Why doth the iaundise proceed from the gall? Answer. Because the humor of the gall is blew∣ish and yellowe: and therefore when the pores of the gall are stopped, then that humor cannot goe into the sacke or bladder of the gall, but is mingled with the bloud, wandring throughout al the body, and infecting the skinne. Question. Why haue not a Horse, a Mule, an Asse, and Crow a gall? Answer. Aristotle sayth, that although those beasts haue no gall in one place, as in a purse or vessel, yet they haue a gall dispersed by some small vaines. Of the spleene. Question. WHy is the spleene blacke flesh? Ans. Because it is caused of a terrestriall and earthly matter, that is, of a blacke substance, as Aristotle doth say. Now the effect is like vnto the cause. Another answer is according vnto the Phisitions, because the spleene is the re∣ceptacle of melancholy, and melancholy is of a blacke colour.
Question. Why is a man leane which hath a great spleene? Answer. Because the spleene doth draw much matter vnto himselfe, which should goe into fat. And therefore contratiwise, men which haue but a small spleene are fat. Quest. Why doth the spleene cause men to laugh? as Isidorus doth say; we laugh with the spleene, wee be angrie with the gall, we are wise with the heart, we loue with the liuer, and we feele with the braine, & speake with the lungs: that is, the cause of laugh∣ing, anger, loue, wisedome, and speech, and feeling, doth proceed from the spleene, the gall the liuer, the heart, the lungs, and the braine? Answer. The reason is, because the spleene doth drawe much melancholy vnto it, because it is his proper seat, the which melancholy is cause of sad∣nes, and is there consumed, and so the cause fai∣ling, the effect faileth. And that melancholy is cause of sadnes, it appeareth in Arist. in Proem. de anima. and therefore that being consumed, the contrary vnto sadnes doth follow, that is, ioye and gladnes. And for the same cause the gall causeth anger: for cholerike men are angrie, because they haue much gall. For the better vnderstanding of this, note that there be foure humors in man, that is, bloud, choler, fleume, and melancholy: whereof each hath a speciall receptacle and place where it is receiued and kept. Of a drie and hot substance choler is ingendred, which goeth vnto the gall, as to his seate and place. But of a colde and drie hu∣mour melancholy is ingendred, which runneth to the spleene as to his peculiar place & receptacle.
But of a colde and moyst humour fleume is bred, which goeth vnto the lungs, as vnto his recep∣tacle, or as the Phisitions doe say, vnto the spleene. But the bloud which is the most noblest humour, is ingendred in the liuer, and there his proper place doth seeme to be. Of carnall copulation. Question. WHy doe liuing creatures vse car∣nall copulation? Answer. Because it is the most naturall worke which is in liuing creatures, to beget the like vnto themselues in kinde, to continue the kinde. For if carnall copulation were not, all kinde of liuing creatures had before this time perished. Question. What is this carnall copulation? Answer. It is a mutuall action of the male and female, with instruments ordayned and deputed for that act, to maintayne the kind. And therefore the Diuines do say, that it is a sin to vse that act for any end, but for begetting his like in kind. Question. Why is this action good in those to whom it is lawfull, if it be moderatly taken? Answer. Because that according vnto Auicen and Const. it doth ease and lighten the body, cheere the minde, comfort the head and the sence, take away many griefes of melancholy, because it doth expell the fume of the seede from the braine, and it doth expel the matter of impostume. And ther∣fore sometimes, through the intermitting of this act, the darknes of the fight doth ensue, and a gid∣dines
in the head. And therefore the seede of a man retayned aboue a due time, is conuerted into some infectious humour. Question. Why is immoderate carnall copula∣tion hurtfull? Answer. Because it doth destroy the fight, and drie the bodie: because that as Aristotle sayth, 2 de gen. anim. lecherie and in continencie is the wa∣sting of the pure humiditie, and doth consurne the braine: and it breedeth sharpe feuers, as Auicen teacheth, and as experience doth shew. And doth shorten the life of man, as Aristotle saith, de longit. & breuit. vitae. And Albertus doth shew this in the sparrowe, which by reason of his often coupling, doth liue but three yeares. Question. Why dooth carnall copulation verie much hurt to melancholy men, and cholericke men, and generally to leane men? Answer. Because it dooth drie the bones very much, which are drie of themselues. And contra∣riwise, it is good for the fleugmatike and sanguine, as Auicen sayth, because they abound with that substance, which by nature is necessarily expelled. Although Aristotle dooth affirme, that euery fat creature hath but small store of seede, because the substance of it doth turne into fatnes. Quest. Why doe not the female of brute beasts couet carnal coupling, after they be great with yong? Answer. Because that then the wombe or ma∣trix is shut, and the flowers cease, and therfore the desire vnto the act doth cease. Question. Why should not this act be vsed when the bodie is full?
Answer. Because it dooth hinder digestion, as Aristotle sayth: likewise it is not good for a hungry belly, because it doth weaken him. Question. Why is it not good after a bath? Answer. Because that then the pores are open, and the heate dispersed throughout all the bodie: and therefore carnal copulation following a bath, doth coole the body very much. Question. Why is it not good after a vomite, or a loosenes of the belly? Answer. Because it is very perilous to purge twise in one day, as Hippocrates and Galen say: but so it is of this act of carnalitie, and loosenes in the belly, because by this act the raines and kidnies are purged, and the guts by the vomite. Question. Why are wild beasts furious whē they couple, as it doth appeare in Harts which bray, and Asses which are then almost mad, as Hippoc. saith? Answer. Because their bloud is kindled with the desire of carnall act, & nature also doth labour to expell superfluities in them, which in the sence doe dispose vnto anger and madnes: & therefore after the act done they are tame and gentle. Question. Why is there such delight in the act of venerie? Ans. Because this act is a base & contemptible thing in it selfe, naught and vncleane, so farre that all beasts would naturally abhorre it, if there shuld be no pleasure in it, & so there shuld neuer be any carnall copulation, by reason of the vncleannes of it. And therefore in this delight nature doth wil∣lingly practise it, to the end that the kinds of liuing things should be maintained and kept.
Question. Why doe such as vse it oft, take lesser delight in it, then such which come to it seldome? Answer. For three causes. First, because the passage of the seede is ouer large and wide, and therefore the seed maketh no stay there, by which stay the delight is had. The second, because that through often going together, there is but little seede left, and therefore giueth no delight. The third, because that such in steed of seede cast out bloud vndigested and rawe, or some other waterie substance, which is not hot, and therefore causeth no delight. Question. Why then doth a woman and a mare desire carnall act after they be great, as Arist, doth affirme, lib. de animal. Answer. Galen sayth, that the remembrance of it doth further it in a woman: and because she doth remember the  past in the act, she doth couet it againe. But it proceedeth in a mare, be∣cause she is a rauenous beast, and hath many di∣stempered fumosities in her, and therefore desi∣reth new seede, because euery like doth desire his like. Question. Whether can this carnall copulation bee done by the mouth, so that beasts may conceaue thereby, as some doe say of pigeons, which they say by kissing doe this act at the mouth and conceaue. And some say this to be true in the Weesell or ermine? Answer. According vnto Aristotle, that is vn∣true. For although pigeons doe play by the beake, yet they doe not couple together this way not conceaue. And because the weesell doth beare his young ones from place to place in his mouth they
are of that opinion. And therefore Aristotle doth shew it thus: Whatsoeuer goeth in at the mouth, that is consumed by digestion: but if the seede should goe in at the mouth, then it should also bee consumed by digestion. The maior is plaine, nor is no easie instance, and the conclusion dooth hold in Darij. Of the seed of man or beast. Question. WHereof commeth the seede of man? Answer. There are diuers o∣pinions of Philosophers and Phisitions in this poynt: Some say that it is a superfluous humour of the fourth digestion. And some say that the seede is pure bloud, flowing from the braine, concocted and made white in the stones. And some say that it is the superfluitie of the second or third dige∣stion. But because sweate, vrine, spettle, fleume and choler are the like, Aristotle sayth, that the seede is alwayes the superfluitie of the last nutri∣ment, that is, of bloud dispersed throughout al the body: but yet principally it commeth from the principall parts, that is, from the heart, liuer, and braine. And an argument of this is, because that those parts are greatly weakened in the casting out of seed: and thereof it doth appeare, that car∣nall copulation is not profitable nor good. But some thinke this to bee true by ouer vehement practise in this act: for otherwise moderatly taken it is good and holesome, for the lightening and easing of the body, as is sayd before.
Question. Why is the seede of a man white, and the seede of a woman red? Answer. It is white in man, by reason of his great heate, and because it is digested better, and made white in the stones, the flesh of which is white, as the flesh of the pappes. But the seede of a woman is red, because it is the superfluitie of the second digestion, which is done in the liuer, which is red. Orels we may say, that it is because the flo∣wers is corrupt vndigested bloud, and therefore it hath the colour of bloud. Question. Whether doth the seede of man come from the parts of the bodie, or from the humours? Answer. As some say, from the parts of the bo∣die: and that we proue, because we see that a lame man dooth beget a lame child, and a father which hath a skarre, a child which hath a skarre, as Ari∣stotle reporteth, lib. de animal. which could not be if the seede did not fall from the parts of the body. But some say that it commeth from the humours, because it is made of the last nutriment, and the nutriment is no part but a humour But as for the lamenes & skarre, that proceedeth from the ima∣gination of the mother at the time of carnall co∣pulation, as Aristotle sayth, 2. de generat animal. Question. Wherefore doth the imagination of the mother, which imagineth of an A Ethiopian or Blackamoore, cause the mother to bring forth a black child: As Albertus Magnus reporteth of a Queene, who in the act of carnall copulation, imagined of a Blackamoore which was painted before her, and so brought foorth a Blackamoore? Answer. Auicen sayth, that an imagination of a
fall, maketh a man fall, and the imagination of a leprosie maketh a man a leaper. And so in this purpose the imagination is aboue the forming po∣wer, and so the child borne followeth the imagina∣tion, and not the power of forming and shaping, because it is weaker then the other. Question. Whether doth the seede of the man enter into the substance and matter of the child? Answer. The seede of the father and the mo∣ther doth goe into the substance of the childe in the wombe: because that as creame doth goe into the substance of cheese, so the seede of man into the fruite in the wombe like vnto the creame, and the flowers of the woman doth enter in like vnto the milke. But this opinion doth not seeme to be of force. And therefore according vnto Aristotle, and other Philosophers, we say that the seed doth not goe into the substance of the childe: and it is proued thus, because that of the matter and the efficient cause should be all one, which is agaynst the Philosopher. The consequence is good, be∣cause the seede is the efficient beginning of the child, as the builder is the efficient cause of the house, and therefore is not the materiall cause of the child. It is proued another way, because there is the selfe same materiall cause of nourishment and generation, 2. de anim. because wee haue our being and our nourishment of the same matter: but the seede cannot bee the materiall cause of nourishment, according vnto Auerrois, and there∣fore not of being. But in trueth this it is, both the seedes are shut and kept in the wombe: but the seed of the man doth dispose and prepare the seed
of the woman to receiue the forme, perfection or soule, the which being done, it is conuerted into humiditie, and is fumed and breathed out by the pores of the matrix, which is manifest, because on∣ly the flowers of the woman are the materiall cause of the young one. Question. Why doth the matrix or wombe of a woman draw greedily the seede of man? for as Auer∣rois doth say, there was a mayd in a bath, where some seede had been , the which the mayd drawing, did conceaue with child, and was deliuered? Answer. Auerrois doth say, that the wombe and nature doe draw the seede, as the Lodestone doth yron, and the Agathe steele: but she dooth draw it for the perfection of her selfe. Of womens monthly termes. Question. WHy haue women monthly tearmes or flowers? Answer. Because they are colde in respect of men: and because all their nourishment cannot: be conuerted into bloud, a great part of it is tur∣ned into their flowers, the which in euery moneth in euery woman are expelled, I say of euery womā which is in health, and of a certaine age, that is, af∣ter thirteene yeares: for before they runne not though she be in health, and some diseased women haue them not. Question. Why doe they runne from women? Answer. Because it is an infectious matter: for as Aristotle doth say, if that substance being young
and flowing doe touch a tree, or a greene bough of a tree, the tree dooth dye and not prosper: yea, Aristotle doth say, that if a dogge should taste of it, he would runne mad in three dayes. And there∣fore nature would expel it euery moneth, as being an enemy vnto life. And if women doe detaine it aboue their due time, according vnto Aristotle, it doth breed great infirmities & diseases, as swoun∣ing. Question. Why doe they not runne before thir∣teene yeares of age? Answer. Because young women be hor, and so doe digest all their nourishment: and therefore they are not bred in them before that age, nor ex∣pelled, vnles the goodnesse or naughtines of their complexion doe hinder it. Question. Why haue not women them after fif∣tie yeares of age? Answer. Some answer, that old women be bar∣ren, and therefore they cease. But a better answer is, that then nature is weake in them, and therfore they cannot expell them, by reason of ouer much weakenes. And therefore there is great store of immundicities bred in them in one whole lumpe, & they are by that meanes so infectious, that they infect men with their breath, and then the cough and other infirmities come vpon them. And ther∣fore according vnto the counsel of the Phisitions, then men should abstaine from them. Question. Why doe not such women corrupt and infect themselues? Answer. Because poyson doth not worke vpon it selfe, but vpon some other obiect: or els it dooth
not hurt themselues, because it is their nature. Al∣bertus reporteth of a certaine maide which was brought vnto him in Colen, which did care spiders, which did her no hurt at all, but were good meate vnto her. And Aristosle in his book of the gouern∣ment of Princes to Alexander, reporteth of a maid which in her youth was nourithed with poyson. And some men  done the like. Question. Why haue not women with child the flowers? Ans. Because that them the flowers turne into milke, and into the nourishment of the child: for if a woman with childe haue them, it is a signe of miscarying with her child. Question. Why doe they runne the first three moneths in women with child? Answer. By reason of the smalnes of the child, which cannot take all that matter and substance. Question. Why haue not the female of brute beasts, as of sowle and fish, their flowers? Answer. Because as Aristotle and Albertus doe say, in beasts which go with feet, the flowers turne into haire, in fish into their skales, in birds into their feathers. And therefore in beasts you may note that the female is more hairy then the male, and the female of fishes fuller of skales, and the fe∣male of birds fuller of feathers. Quest. Why doe the flowers receiue their name menstrua, of this word Mensis amoneth? Answer. Because it is a space of time which doth measure the Moone, because the Moone doth end her course in 29. dayes and 14. houres. Now the Moone hath dominion ouer moyst things, and be∣cause
the flowers are an humiditie, they take their denomination of the moneth, and are called mo∣nethly tearmes: for moyst things doe increase as the Moone doth increase, and decrease as she doth decrease. Question. Why doe they runne longer time in some, the in other some, as in some sixe or seuen daies, and ordinarily in all three daies? Answer. The first are colder, and therfore they increase the more in them, and by a consequent they are the longer in expelling. And other womē are more hot, and therefore they haue the fewer, and are a shorter time in expelling them. Question. Where are the flowers kept before they runne? Answer. Some say, in the matrix or wombe. But Auerrois dooth mistike this, and dooth say that the matrix is the place of generation, and that those flowers further generation nothing at all. And therefore he doth say, that there are certaine vaines about the backe bone which doe keepe them. And a signe of this is, because that those women at that time haue great griefe in their backe, by rea∣son of expelling the flowers. Question. Whether are the flowers which are expelled, and the flowers which the child is ingendred of, all one? Ans. No, because the one are vncleane, & vnfit for that purpose: but the other very pure & cleane, and therefore that bloud is fit for generation. Question. Why doe women which are gotten with child when they haue their flowers, bring foorth weake children, and leprous?
Ans. Because those flowers are venemous, yea a woman in her flowers is most infectious. And so the cause dooth shine in the effect, as the Philoso∣pher dooth say, the effect dooth carry a likenes of the cause, and therefore such a childe is euilly dis∣posed of bodie. Question. Why haue not women their flowers all at one time of the moneth, but some in the newe Moone, some in the full, and some in the waine? Answer. By reason of their diuers complexions. And although all women in respect of men bee fleugmatike, yet of women among themselues, some are more sanguine then others, some more cholerike. And as euery moneth hath his quar∣ters, so they haue their complexions: the first is sanguine, the second cholerike. A woman which is of a sanguine complexion, hath her flowers in the first quarter, a cholerike in the second, a melan∣choly in the third, and so in the rest. Question. Why haue such women as are of a sanguine coplexion, their flowers in the first quarter? Answer. Because that as Galen doth say, euery such thing added vnto such a thing, dooth make it more such, and therefore the first quarter of the Moone increasing bloud in a sanguine complexiō, therefore she doth then expell it. Question. Why haue women their flowers so oft in the end of the moneth? Answer. Because generally a women be fleug∣matike, and the last quarter is fleume Orels this doth proceede of a defect, and therefore cold doth worke then to multiplie that matter, and the mat∣ter multiplied is then expelled.
Question. Why haue women paine and griefe in the running of their flowers? Answer. Because it is like vnto the paine of the strangurie, that is, making of water drop by drop. For as the strangurie, by reason that the drinke is vndigested, doth offend the subtile passage of the vrine, as it doth happen after a bath, so the flowers which are an vndigested & earthly substance, doe hurt the passage by which they goe. Question. Why doth a woman easily conceaue after her flowers are runne from her? Answer. Because she is better prepared vnto conception, as being made cleane from her flo∣wers. Question. Why doe women looke pale when they purge their flowers? Answer. Because then the heate goeth from al the outward parts of the bodie to the inward to helpe nature, and to expell the flowers, the which depriuation of heate, dooth cause a palenes in the face. Or els it is, because that fluxe is caused of raw humors, the which when they runne, do make the face colourles, and so by a consequence cause palenes. Question. Why doth a woman which hath her flowers detest her meate? Answer. Because nature doth labour more to expell the flowers then to digest, and therefore if she should eate meate, that meate would remaine raw, which carefull nature doth not admit.
Of barrennes. Quest. WHy are some women barren and can not conceaue? Answer. According vnto the Phisitions, for di∣uers reasons. The first is, because it proceedeth sometime of the man, that is, when he is of a cold nature, because then his seede is vnfit for genera∣tion. The second, because his seede is somewhat waterish, and therfore doth not stay in the wombe. The third, because the seede of the man and the woman haue not the same proportion, as if the man be melancholy, and the woman sanguine: or if the man be cholerike, & the woman very flaug∣matike: because as it is euident in Philosophy, the agent and the patiēt ought to haue the same pro∣portion, otherwise the action is hindred. Question. Why doe fat women seldome conceaue with child? Answer Because they haue a slipperie wombe, out of which the seede slippeth, and is not hol∣den in. Or els because the mouth of their matrix is very straite, that the seede cannot enter in: or if it do goe in, it goeth in very slowly, so that the seed doth waxe colde in the meane time, and so is vnfit for generation, & is resolued into a fleshy substāce. Question. Why doe women of a very hot com∣plexion seldome conceaue with child? Answer. Because that the seed receiued in thē is extinguished and put out, as a little water cast into a great fire. And therefore we doe see that wo∣men which doe vehemently desire the flesh, sel∣dome
conceaue with childe. Question. Why are common women and whores neuer with child? Answer. By reason of diuers seede which doth corrupt and spill their instruments of conception: for it maketh them so slippery, that nature cannot retayne the seede. Or els it is because one seede dooth destroy another, and so neither is good for generation. And note out of Albertus, that the best remedie to helpe conception, is to take the matrix of a Hare beaten into powder, and purified in drinke, which worketh much to conception. Of conception. Question. WHy dos some women conceaue a male child? Answer. If the seede doe fall into the rightside of the matrix or wombe, then a male-child is be∣gotten, because that that side is hotter then the o∣ther, and heate dooth principally worke to the be∣getting of a male-child. And therefore as Albertus doth say, it the right side of the woman doth swell, it is a signe that she goeth with a male-childe. But some dot giue another reason, that is, when the seede of the father hath dominion ouer the seede of the woman, then a male-childe is bagotten: if the womans doe , then it is a female. Question. Why doe some women conceaue a fe∣male-child? Answer. Because the seed is falne vnto the left side of the , which is coller then the right,
by reason of the spleene ioyning vnto it, which hel∣peth colde. And as Albertus dooth say, when the woman after the act of copulation doth lye on the right side, it is a boye: when on the left, it is a wench: for the seede doth runne to that side on which the woman doth lye, and then such a childe is formed. Question. Why hath a woman a wombe? Answer. Because it is the proper place of gene∣ration, and is placed in the middest of the woman. For as all the immundicities of a citie doe runne vnto the sinke, so all their monthly rearmes runne to the wombe or matrix. Question. Why haue some women long and slon∣der children, and some short and thicke? Answer. Because as Galen and Auerrois do say, the childe is formed according vnto the quantitie of the wombe. And therfore because some women haue a long & a narrow wombe, their children be long and stender: and some contrariwise short and large, therefore their children be short and thick. Question. Why dooth a woman sometimes con∣ceaue twinnes? Answer. According vnto Galen, because there are seuen cels or receptacles of seed in the womb, and therfore a woman may naturally haue so ma∣ny children at once, as there dooth seede fall into those cels: for there are three in the right side, and three in the left: in the right side boyes are ingen∣dred, and in the left wenches. And in the middest of those cels or chambers there is another, where old writers do say a Hermaphrodite is ingendred, that is, one who hath the secret parts of both sexes.
And therefore if a woman should haue more then seuen children at once, it should rather bee mira∣culously then naturally. Question. Why are twinnes but halse men, and not so strong as other men? Answer. Because the seed and substance which should haue been for one man, is diuided into two, and therefore they bee weake, and in trueth they doe not oft liue long. Of Hermaphrodites. Question. HOw are Hermaphrodites begotten? Ans. Because there are three principall cels in the wombe, one in the right side, another in the left, and the third in the middle, in∣to the which whē the seed doth fall, a Hermaphro∣dite is said to be begotten in this manner: because nature doth alwayes tend vnto that which is best, therefore she dooth alwayes intende to beget the male, and not the female, because that the female is only for the males sake, and a monster in nature. Therefore the male is sometime begotten in all principall parts, and yet through the euill disposi∣tion of the wombe, and obiect, and inequalitie of the seed, when nature cannot perfect and end the male, she doth bring foorth the female, or Herma∣phrodite. And therefore the natural Philosophers doe say, that a Hermaphrodite is impotent in the priuy part of man, as it doth appeare by experiēce. Question. Why doth not nature dispose in him two secret parts of a man, or two of a woman, but
one of a man and one of a woman? Answer. Because then nature should make one of them in vaine but that is against the Philoso∣phers, when they say, that God and nature doe make nothing in vaine. Question. Whether is a Hermaphrodite to bee reckoned for a man or for a woman? Answer. It is to bee considered in which mem∣ber she is fittest for the act of carnall copulation: if he be fittest in the womans act, then it is a woman: if in the mans, he is a man. Question. VVhether should he bee baptized in the name of a man, or of a woman? Answer. In the name of a man, because names are giuen ad placitum, and therefore he should be baptized according vnto the worthiest name, be∣cause euery man is worthier then a woman, be∣cause euery agent is worthier then his patient, as Aristotle doth say, 3. de anima. Question. Whether shall he stand in iudgement in the name of a man, or of a woman? Answer. According vnto the rule of the law, he should first sweare, before he be admitted into iudgement, which secret part he can vse, and so is to be admitted, according vnto the vse and power of that part. Of Monsters. Question. DOth nature make any monsters? Answer. She doth, 2. Phis. for if she did not, she should then bee depriued of her end. For of things possible she doth alwayes pur∣pose
to bring foorth that which is most perfect and best: but in the end through the euil disposition of the matter, and influence of some speciall constel∣lation, not being able to bring forth that which she entended, bringeth forth that which she can. As it did happen in Albertus time, where in a certaine village a cow brought foorth a calfe halfe a man: then the countrey men suspecting a shepheard, would haue burned him with the cow. But Alber∣tus being skilfull in Astronomie, sayd, that this did proceede from some speciall constellation, and so deliuered the shepheard from their hands. These are Albertus words: We saw that their two bodies were ioyned in no∣thing but in the backe, they had two heads, foure feete, foure hands, and did go which way they lu∣sted. And he saith, they reported vnto vs that there were two men ioyned in the backe, and were of a contrary complexion, the one furious, and the o∣ther meeke: they liued two yeares, and the one dyed, & the other liued long after, vntill the stinke of the other did kill him. I aske how can this bee? It is answered thus: because the seede is cast vnto the cels or receptacles of the wombe, which seede was enough for two children, and then by chance it dooth sometime happen, that the skinne or di∣stance betwixt the two cels or receptacles is bro∣ken, and they knit and ioyne in the back, and haue two heads. Question. Whether be they one or two? Answer. Aristotle sayth, you must looke vnto the heart, and if there be two hearts, there be two men.
Question. Why is a man borne sometime with a great head, or sixe fingers in one hand, or with foure? Answer. Aristotle sayto it proceedeth of super∣fluitie and abundance in matter: when there is too much matter, then he is borne with a great head, or sixe fingers: but if there be want of matter, then there is some part too little, or lesser then there ought to be. Of Infants. Question. WHy are some children altogether like the father, some the mother, some to both, and some vnta neither? Answer. If the seede of the father doe fully o∣uercome the seede of the mother, the child dooth wholly resemble the father. but if the mothers seed predominate, then he is like vnto the mother: but if he be like neither, that doth happē for many causes: sometimes through the foure first quali∣ties: sometime through the influence of some hea∣uenly constellation. Allertus giueth an example, and saith, that there was on a time a good constel∣lation for the begetting of hogges, and a man was then begotten and brought fooith which had a face like vnto a hooge. and according vnto this, diuers sorts of monsters are brought foorth. Question. Why are children of men like the fa∣ther then the mother? Answer. That proceedeth of the imagination of the mother, which thinketh of the disposition of
the father in the act of carnall copulation. And therefore by reason of the strong imagination in the time of conception, the children get the dispo∣sition of the father. As it appeareth before of the Queene which had her imagination on a Blacka∣moore: and of an AEthiopian Queene which brought foorth a white child, because her imagi∣nation was vpon a white colour. And this is seene in Iacob his skill in casting roddes of diuers co∣lours into the water, when his sheepe went to ramme. Question. Why doe children sometime resemble more their grandfathers and great grandfathers, then their parents? Answer. Because the vertue and force of the grandfather is graffed in the hearts of the beget∣ters: and it may be said, that sometime it doth pro∣ceede of the similitude of the nouriture, and then the child is formed by the similitude of the grand∣fathers. Question. Why are the parts of a childs body of diuers qualitie, and some soft? Answer. This proceedeth of the predomina∣tion of diuers elements, because that the bones are made of a terrestriall matter, and therefore are hard. But the braine and the marrow are made of a more waterie matter, and therefore are more soft: but the vitall spirits and animall spirits are ingendred of a more aerious substance, and these vitall spirits are principally in the liuer and the heart. Question. Why doe children, according vnto the common course and vse of nature, come one of the
mothers wombe the ninth moneth? Ans. Because the childe is then fully perfect, or els it is because some benigne planet doth raigne, as Iupiter, who is a friend vnto nature: for accor∣ding vnto the Astronomers, he is hot and moyst, and therefore doth temper the malice and naugh∣tines of Saturne, which is cold and drie. And ther∣fore for the most part children borne the ninth moneth are healthy. Question. Why doe children borne in the eight moneths end, for the most part, die quickly? and why are they called the children of the moone? Answer. Because the Moone is a colde planet which hath dominion ouer the child, and therfore dooth binde the childe with his coldnes, which is cause of his death. Question. Why dooth a child cry as soone as he is borne? Answer. Because of the sudden chaunge from heate to cold, which cold doth hurt his tendernes. Another reason is, because the childs soft and ten∣der bodie is wringed and put together, comming out at the narrowe and straite passage of the ma∣trix. And especially the braine being moyst, and the head pressed and wringed together, is cause that some humours doe distill by the eyes, which are the cause of teares and weeping. The Diuines say, it is for the transgression of our first fathers, and originall . Question. Why doth a child put his finger to his mouth when he commeth first into the world? Ans. Because that comming out of the wombe, he commeth out of a hot bath. And therefore en∣tring
into the cold, putteth his finger to his mouth for the want of heate. Question. How doth a child come into the world out of the wombe? Answer. He commeth forth with the head for∣ward for if he should come with the thighes or armes forward, he shuld kill himself & the mother. Of the yong one in the womb. Question. How is the young one successiuely in∣gendred in the wombe? Answer. The first sixe dayes the seede hath the colour of milke, but in sixe dayes following a red colour, which is neere vnto the disposition of flesh, and then it is chaunged into a thicke substance of bloud, curded and thicke not running, like vnto a masse of flesh: but in the twelue dayes following them, this substance is made so thicke and sound, that it is able to receiue shape and forme: because that a fluid and running substance keepeth no impression, and so euery day receiueth some other disposition vntill his birth. And how he is gouer∣ned euery moneth by the planets, Boetius dooth teach else where. Question. Whether doth the child in the wombe voyd any excrement, or make water? Answer No, and the reason is, because he hath not the first digestion which is in the stomacke, be∣cause he receiueth no meate by the mouth, but it commeth to him at the nauell: and therefore he maketh not water, but doth sweate, which vrine is
but little in quantitie, and is reserued in a small skinne in the matrix, and at his birth is cast out in abundance. Question. Why doth the child come out of the wombe easily after seuen, eight, or nine moneths? Answer. Because, sayth Galen, when the fruite is ripe, then the ligaments are easily broken, and so it falleth easily. Of aborsment or vntimely birth. Question. WHy do women which eate vnhole some meates as rammish putri∣fied meates, easily miscarry? Answer. Because it breedeth purrified seede in them, which the minde abhorring, doth cast out of the field of nature, that is, out of the wombe, be∣cause it is vnfit for the most noblest shape, that is, for mans forme and shape, which is apt to receiue the soule. Question. Why doth wrestling and leaping cause the casting of the child, as some craftie women doe of purpose? Answer. Because that by such leaping, the liga∣ments of the child are loosed, & by a consequence there followeth aborsment, because it can bee no longer kept in the wombe. Question. Why doeth the striking of thunder or lightening cause a woman to mtscarrie? Answer. Because that that vapour is burning, and dooth easily hurt the tender substance of the childe, entring in at the pores of the matrix or wombe. Yea, Albertus doth say, that if the childe
were aliue, lightening and thunder would kill him. Question. Why doth thunder and lightening ra∣ther cause young women to miscarrie then old? Answer. Because the bodie of young women are fuller of pores, and more slender, and therfore the vapour of lightening dooth sooner enter into their bodie: but old women haue a thicke skinne, and wel compacted, and therefore the vapour can not enter in and cause this abortment. Question. Why doth much ioy cause a woman to miscarry with her burden? Ans. Because that in time of ioye the wombe is destitute of heate, and by a consequence misca∣rying dooth followe. The same reason doth cause feare to breed it, because then the heate runneth to the heart to helpe him, and forsaketh the ma∣trix. Question. Why doe women easily miscarry when they are newly with childe, that is, the first, second, and third moneth? Answer. Galen sayth, that as apples or peares doe easily fall in the beginning, because the knots and ligaments are soft and weake: so it is of a child in the wombe. Question. Wherfore is it hard to miscarry when they are gone the middle of their time, that is, three, foure, fiue, sixe moneths? Answer. Because that then the ligaments are stronger and fortified, and therefore are not easily broken.
Of diuers matters. Question. WHy haue some women greater griese then othersome in child∣birth? Answer. For three causes. Sometimes for the greatnes of the childe, or because the Midwife is vnskilfull. Sometime because the childe is dead, and then boweth not, nor cannot be bowed in go∣ing foorth. And for the contrary causes, some haue lesse paine. Question. Why hath not a man a tayle like vn∣to other beasts? Answer. Because a man is a liuing creature, whose propertie is to  but this is proper to no o∣ther beasts which hath a tayle. Question. Why doe such as keepe baths or  houses, expell the heate out of the furnace better with cold water then with hot? Answer. Because they are contrary qualities, which worke strongly the one against the other, and therefore the heate is better expelled from the stones. Question. Why dooth hot water rather freese then cold? Answer. Because that that water is thinner, and by a conseqnence giueth better entrance to the cold. Question. Why are men fatter about the belly, then in other places? Answer. Because the greatest digestion is in the
stomack, and therefore those parts which are nee∣rest vnto the stomacke, are greatest and fattest. Question. Why is euery liuing creature sad af∣ter carnall copulation? Answer. Because the act is filthie and vncleane, and so euery liuing creature doth abhorre it, and when men doe thinke vpon it, they are ashamed and sad. Question. Why cannot drunken men iudge of tastes as well as sober men? Answer. Because the flesh of the tongue is full of pores, and spungie, and receiueth great moy∣sture in it, and more in drunken men then in so∣ber. And therefore their tongue through often drinking, is full of naughtie humors, and by reason that it is so full, the instrument of taste is made thicke and grosse, because that taste is a vaine of the tongue, a subtile thin flesh being taken away. And therfore through the thickning of the mean, that is, of taste it selfe, drinke taken of drunkards is not perfectly felt, because that vnto due feeling, there is requisite to haue a due proportion of the meane. And of this it is also vnderstood why drun∣dards haue not a perfect kind of speech. Quest. Why haue melancholy beasts long eares, and why are not men wise for the most part, which haue long eares, but such as haue short, as Aristotle sayth in lib. de animal? Answer. The eares doe proceed of a cold and dry substance, which is called a gristle, which is apt to become a bone. And because melancholie beasts doe abound in this kind of substance, there∣fore they haue such long eares.
Question. But why are the others halfe fooles? Answer. Because the minds and soules doe fol∣lowe the bodies: for if the sences of the bodie bee subtile, then the soule exerciseth subtile operatió, as well actiue as speculatiue, and the contrary is in a grosse body. Question. Hory is the intellectuall soule ioyned to the childe in the wombe of the mother? whether doth the father which begetteth him, make the mat∣ter apt and fit to  the soule? Answer. The answer is, as the Diuines doe say, that into a  or substance sufficiently dispo∣sed and made fit, God doth infuse the intellectuall soule. And  sayth the like: The soule in creating is infused, and infusing is created. Question. Why doe Hares sleepe with their eyes open? Answer. Because they haue their eyes standing out, and their eye lids thort, and therefore they are hardly shut. Another reason is, because they are very feareful beasts, and therefore for the safegard of themselues, they sleepe with theyr eyes o∣pen. Question. Why doe not Crowes giue their young ones meate before they be nine daies old? Answer. Because that seeing them of another colour, they thinke that they are of another kind, and in the meane space, almightie God doth feed them with the dew of heauen, as the Psalme doth say: He who doth giue beasts their food, and yong crowes which call vpon him. Question. Why are a sheepe and a pigeon very mild beasts?
Answer. Because they want gall, and it is the gall which stirreth vnto anger. Question. Why haue birds their stones inward? Answer. If they had them outward, they would hinder their flying and lightnes. Question. Why doe not birds pisse? Answer. Because that that superfluitie which should be conuerted into vrine, is turned into fea∣thers: as it appeareth because there is much moist∣nes in the feathers. Another reason is, because they are in continuall mouing, and therfore much moysture in them is dried vp by the ayre and winde. Question. Why are long egges a signe and cause of the male, and the flat short egges of the female? Answer. Because that as it pleaseth Hippocra∣tes, it is the condition and propertie of heate, to sende from the centre, to the circumference of cold. And therefore if there be any long egges, it is a signe they haue great heate, and therefore they passe into the substance of the male: because that in euery kind of thing the male is hotter then the female, as the Philosopher doth say. If the egges be short and flat, it is a signe that the heat is small, and vndispersed, and therefore goeth into the sub∣stance of the female. Question. Why doe we heare better in the night then in the day. Answer. Because, as Aristotle doth say, there is greater quietnes in the night then in the day, be∣cause the sunne doth not so well draw vp vapours in the night as in the day, and therefore the meane is more fit and readie, and the meane being fit, the
motion is better done by him, the which is sayd to bee done with a sound. Another reason is, because there are more motions of the ayre and sound in the day then in the night, which doe hinder one another. Also in the night there is greater silence which is opposite vnto sound, and things opposite put one against the other, shew the better. Question. Why dooth a man laugh sooner if he be touched vnder the arme-pits, then in any other part of his bodie? Answer. Because there is in that place a mee∣ting of many sinewes, and because the meane wee touch by (which is the flesh) is more subtile there then in other parts, and therfore a better feeling. And this is true, if that place bee not touched too hardly: for if you doe so, then there is not that de∣light: and when a man is moderatly and softly touched there, the spirits which are there, are dis∣persed and runne into the face, and then from thence are cause of laughter. Question. Why is wood burned conuerted into coale, and a bone burned into a white substance? Answer. Because the wood before it was bur∣ned was reasonable moyst, and so after burning getteth heate accidentally, and that heate is not able to consume all the moysture of the wood, and therfore there remayneth some after the burning, and is conuerted into a blacke substance, because that the humiditie in the wood was slimie, & could not bee altogether consumed by the fire. But a bone of his owne nature is colde and dry, hauing but small moysture in it, which the burning dooth wholly consume, and so accidentally the moysture
being consumed the bone waxeth white. Question. Why doe some women loue white men, and some blacke? Answer. There are two answers: Some women haue a weake sight, and such delight in blacke, be∣cause the white dooth hurt the sight more then blacke. The second reason is, because like doth de∣light in the like: but because some women are of a hot nature, such are delighted with blacke, because blacknes doth follow heate. And some of them are of a cold nature, & those are delighted with white, because cold is the mother of whitenes. Question. Why doe liuing creatures sleepe? Answer. For necessitie, because the instrumēts of diuers actions are wearied, and by rest which is in sleepe, they are comforted, as Aristotle sayth. Question. Why are students readie to sleepe af∣ter dinner, if they goe about to studie, and not if they solace themselues? Answer. Because that when a man doth applie his mind to studie, the naturall heate goeth from the outward parts of the bodie to the inward, and there is strengthened, because there commeth much together, and so causeth a fume to ascend from the meate to the head, which is the cause of sleep. Or els we may answer, that when the power or vertue with which wee liue is strongest, the na∣turall power is weakened. But when a man dooth solace himselfe by his pleasure, the naturall heate is spred abroad, and suffereth no vapour to ascend vnto the braine, and so he sleepeth not, but is kept from sleepe, by reason that the heate is disper∣sed.
Question. Why doe men willingly sleepe after labour? Ans. Because that through continual mouing, the heate is dispersed to the externall parts of the bodie: the which after that the labour is past, ga∣thereth together to the internall parts of digestiō, there to digest. And from digestion vapors doe rise from the heart to the braine, the which do stop the passages, by which the naturall heat should be dis∣persed to the externall parts: and then the exter∣nall parts being colde and thicke, by reason of the coldnes of the brain, sleep is procured. And by this it appeareth, that such as eat much & drink much, doe sleeps much and long, because great store of humours & vapors are bred in such, which cannot be digested and consumed of the naturall heate. Question. Why are such as sleepe much euill dis∣posed, and haue an  colour? Answer. Because that in sleep much moysture is gathered together, which cannot be consumed, which is expelled in waking: and so it doth couet to goe out through the superficiall parts of the bo∣die, and especially it coueteth to the face, & so is cause of a bad colourias it appeareth in such as are fleugmatike who desire more sleepe then others. Question. Why dooth it appeare vnto some in their sleepe that they eate and drinke sweet things? Answer. Because the fleume drawne vp to the iawes, doth  and drop to the throte, and this fleume is after a sort sweet, and therefore that see∣meth so vnto them. Question. Why doe some dreame in their sleepe that they be in the water, and drowned, and some
that they be in the water and not drowned: and this doth happen especially in such as are fleugmatike? Answer. The reason is, as Aristotle sayth, be∣cause the fleugmatike substance doth runne to the high parts of the bodie, and then they thinke that they are in the water and drowned, and when that substance draweth vnto the internall parts, then they thinke they escape. Another reason may be, ouer much repletion and drunkennes: and there∣fore when a man is ouer much filled with meate, the fumes and vapors ascend and gather together, and therefore they thinke that they are drowned and strangled: but if they cannot ascend so high, then they seeme to escape. Question. May any man procure a dreame by an externall cause? Answer. Aristotle holdeth that it may be done. If a man doe speake softly at a mans eares, and a∣wake him, then of this stirring of the spirits, there are thundrings and buzzings in the head, and so a dreame of that. And so some men haue dreames by diuine reuelation, when it pleaseth God to send any. Question. How many humors be there in mans bodie? Answer. Foure: whereof euery one hath his proper place in mans bodie. The first is choler, which the Phisitions doe call flaua bilis, and is pla∣ced in the liuer. The second is melancholy, called atrae bilis, whose seate is in the spleene. The third is fleume, whose place is in the head. The fourth is bloud, whose place is in the heart. Question. What conditions and qualities hath
a man of a sanguine complexion? Answer. He is faire and beautifull, he hath his haire for the most part smooth, he is bold, he retai∣neth that which he hath conceiued, he is shame∣fast, giuen to musicke, a louer of sciences, liberall, curteous, and desireth not reuenge. Question. What properties doe follow a fleug∣matike complexion? Answer. They are of a dull wit, their haire ne∣uer curle, are seldome very thirstie, they are much giuen to sleepe, they dreame of things belonging to water, they are fearefull, couetous, and giuen to heape vp riches, and are weake in the act of ve∣nerie. Question. What properties doe follow the cho∣lerike man? Answer. He is furious and angrie, quarrelsome, giuen to warre, pale coloured, he is vnquier, drin∣keth much, sleepeth little, and desireth much the companie of women. Question. What properties doe followe the me∣lancholy man? Answer. He is swarthie, browne of complexion, his vaines hidden, he eateth little, and digesteth lesse: when he creameth, it is of darke confused things, he is sad, fearefull, exceeding couetous, and incontinent, vnlesse he bridle his affection. Question. What dreames doe follow these com∣plexions? Answer. Pleasant merry dreames doe followe the sanguine complexion: fearefull dreames the melancholy: the cholerike dreame of chiding, fighting, and fires and the fleugmatike of water.
And this is the reason why a mans complexion is sayd to be knowne by his dreames. Question. What is the reason that if you couer an egge ouer with salt, and let him lye in it a fewe daies, all the meaete within him is consumed? Answer. The great drines of the salt doth con∣sume the substance of the egge: but in sand some say they may be kept long, as Mariners doe prac∣tise. Question. Why is the melacholy complexion the worst of all complexions? Answer. Because it is the dregges of the bloud, which is an enemie to mirth, and farthest off from the beginning of mans life, and bringeth olde age and death, because it is dry and cold. Question. Why are the fleugmatike for the most part dull of wit? Answer. Because that as the viuacitie of wit proceedeth of heate, so of cold the contrary, which they are subiect vnto. Question. Whereof doth it proceede that some men die with extreame ioy, and some with extreame griefe? Answer. Ouer great ioy doth ouer much coole the internall parts of the bodie, and ouer much griefe dooth drowne and suffocate the heate, the which fayling a man dyeth. Question. Why hath man so much haire on his head? Answer. The haire of the head doth proceede of the vapors which rise from the stomacke, and ascend to the head, and also of the superfluities which are in the braine: and these two passing
through the pores of the head, are conuerted into haire, by reason of the heate and drines of the head. And because mans bodie is full of humours, and hath more braine then other creatures, and also more superstuitie in the braine, which the braine expelleth, it followeth that he hath more haire then other lining creatures. Question. How many waies is the braine pur∣ged, and other hidden parts in the head? Answer. The watery and grosse humours are purged by the eyes, melancholy by the eares, cho∣ler by the nose, and fleume by the haire. Question. What is the reason that some blush and change colour, when they heare that which they would not? Answer. Shamefastnes is a certaine kind of an∣ger and displeasure, and feare ioyned together, when a man is offended against himself, or against another: when wee see or heare some thing to bee discouered, which ourselues haue done naughtily, or would not haue knowne, the anger which wee conceiue is greater then the feare, and therefore the bloud running to and fro in the end remai∣neth in the highest part of the bodie, vntill the spi∣rits be quiet and pacified, and the passions gone. Question. What is the reason that such as are very fat in their youth are in daunger to dye on the sudden? Answer. Such haue their vaines very small and close, by reason of their fatnes, that the ayre and breath can hardly haue free course in them, and thereupon the natural heat wanting some refresh∣ing of the aire, is put out, and as it were quenched.
Question. Why doe garlike and  growe when they are gathered? Answer. It proceedeth of the great humiditie which is in them. Question. Why do men feele the cold sooner then women? Answer. Because that men, being more hot then women, haue their pores more open, & ther∣fore the colde dooth sooner enter into them, then into women. Question. Why are not old men so much subiect vnto the plague, as yong men and children? Answer. They are colde, and therefore their pores are shut vp, and not so open as in the youth, and therefore the infecting ayre doth not pene∣trate so soone as when they are open, as in youth, by reason of their heate. Question. What is the reason that lime is set on fire, and on a greater heate, by casting water on it? Answer. Lime is hot of nature, and therefore when water is cast on it, it fleeth from the colde, and by vniting his force, gathereth a greater heate and strength, and so is set on fire. And that is also the reason that a candle dooth burne faster in the winter then in the summer: for then, by reason of the compassing cold, the heate vniteth it selfe, and gathereth the closer to the  or waxe, and so doth consume it the faster. Question. Why do we  water in a mans face which doth ? Answer. Because that through the coldnes of the water the heate may  to the heart, and so giue strength.
Question. Why are those waters best and most delicate, which  towards the sunne rising? Answer. Because  running towards the sunne rising, they are soonest sttooken with the sunne beames, and made pure and subtile, because the sunne hath thorn long vnder him, and by that meanes taketh away their coldnes, & other grosse vapors, which they take of the groūd they run by. Question. Why haue women such weake small voyces? Answer. Because  instruments and organs of speaking, by reason they are cold, are small and narrow: and therefore receiuing but little ayre, causeth the voyce  small and effeminate. Question. Whereof with it proceed that want of sleepe doth weaken the bodie, and the braine? Answer. Much  doth ingender cho∣ler, the which being, , dooth drie vp and lessen the humours  the braine, and the head, and other parts of the bodie. Question. Whereof doth it proceede that vine∣ger doth starch ? Answer It proceedeth of his colde vertue and all colde naturally  binding, and vineger being cold, hath the like . Question. Why is the seawater salter in sum∣mer then in winter? Answer. This doth proceed from the heate of the sunne, seeing by experience, that a salt thing being heated becommeth more bitter. Question. Why is snake contrary vnto the eyes? Answer. Because that in the eyes there is a deli∣cate and pure chrystalline humer, & the eie is also
cold, and without any colour at all, and the smoke is grosse and hot, and by that meanes doth pierce the  of the eyes and hurt them. And if the eye had any colour in him, all things set before him would seenie to bee of the same colour. And because the eye is cold, and the smoke hot, it doth cause the vapors which are contained in the eyes, to drop and distill, which is hurtfull for the eyes. Question. Why do men liue longer in hot regions then in cold? Answer. Because they are more drie, and by that meanes the natural heate is better conserued in them, then in cold countries, because the colde doth  the heate. Question. Why it well water seldome or neuer good? Answer. All water which  still in his spring, & is neuer heared with the sunne beames, is  heauie, and hath much  matter in it, and therefore wanting the heate of the sunne is . Question. Why doe we sleeps better, and more at our  on the right side, than on the left? Answer. Because that when we lye on the left side, the lungs doe lye vpon and couer the heart which is on that side vnder the pappe. Now the heart being the fountaine of life being thus occu∣pied  which the lungs, cannot exercise  ouer much heated with the lungs lying on , and therefore  which the lungs  of a paire of bel∣lowes  and : and lying on the
right side, these inconueniences are auoyded. Question. Whereof doth it proceed, that the hol∣ding of the breath doth cause the yexing to go away? Answer. Because the holding of the breath doth heate the internall parts of the bodie, & this heat chaseth away the yexe, being nothing els but a cold ayre within the body. Question. What is the reason that old men doe sneese with difficultie? Answer. Because that through their coldnes, their arteries are very narrow and close, and ther∣fore the heate is not of force to expell the cold: for I thinke that sneesing is like vnto the combat in the ayre made by thunder, which is caused of heate and cold Question. Why dooth a drunken man thinks that all things doe turne round about him? Answer. Because that the spirits which serue the sight, are mingled with vapours and fumes of the wine: and then the ouer much heate cau∣seth the eyes to be in a continuall mouing, and the eye being round, causeth all things about him to seeme to goe round. Question. Whereof dooth it proceede that the bread which is made with salt, is lighter then that which is made without it, considering that salt is ve∣ry heauie of it selfe? Answer. Although bread bee heauie of it selfe, yet the salt drying it, dooth make it light, by reason of the heate which it hath, which heate doth drie: & the more salt there is irrit, the better the bread is and the lighter, and the more holesome for the bodie.
Question. Why is not men  bread good for the ? Answer. Because it is ful of moistnes, and thick and hot vapors, which doe corrupt the bloud: and hot bread is blacker then cold, because heat is the mother of blacknes, & because the vapors are not gone out of it. Question. Why dooth lettise cause a man to sleepe? Answer. Because they doe ingender grosse va∣pors. Question. Why dooth the dregges of wine and oyle goe to the bottome, and those of honey swimme ? Answer. Because the dregges of wine and oyle are earthly, and no way purged before, and there∣fore being of the nature of earth, doe goe to the bottome. But honey is a liquor, which commeth from the stomacke and belly of the Bee, and was there in some sort purified and made subtile, and by that meanes that which remayneth is light and hoc, and therefore goeth vpward. Question. Why doe cattes eyes and woolfes eyes shine in the night, and not in the day? Answer. The eyes of these beasts are by na∣ture more chrystalline, then the eyes of other beasts, and therefore doe shine as they do: but the brightnes of the sunne dooth hinder them to bee seene in the day time. Question. What is the reason that some men, when they see others daunce, doe the like with their head, or feete, or by some other gesture of their bo∣die?
Answer. The answer is, because that the sight hauing carried and represented vnto the minde that action, and iudging the same to be pleasant & delightfull, and therefore desiring it, the imagina∣tion draweth the likenes of it in conceit, and so stirreth vp the bodie to those gestures. Question. Why doth much sleepe cause some to grow fat, and some leane? Answer. Those which are of a hot complexion, when they sleepe, doe consume and digest the su∣perstuities of that which they haue eaten, and for that cause become fat. But such as are of a colde complexion, when they sleepe are more cold, and so digestlesse. Question. How or for what cause doe wee suffer hunger better then thirst? Answer. When the stomacke hath nothing to consume, it consumeth the fleume or humours, which it findeth most readie and most at hand, and therefore wee suffer hunger better then thirst, because the heate hath nothing to be refreshed withall. Qu. Why doth the haire fall after a great sicknes? Answer. When the sicknes is long, or an ague, the humors of the head are dried vp, through ouer much heate, and therefore wanting nourishment, they fall. Question. Why doth the haire of the eye browes grow long in old men? Answer. Because that through their age, the bones of the eye-lids are thinne, by reason of want of heate, and therefore the haire doth grow there, by reason of the rheumes of the eyes. The like
doth  to such as imagine much, because that with their heure they draw many humours to the forepart of the head,  the imagination is placed. Question. Whereof proceedeth gaping? Answer. Of gresse vapours which occupie the vitall spirit of the head and the , and are cold and make men readie to sleepe. Question. What is the  that some flowers doe open  the ? Answer.  doth close and shut, as hath been sayd, and the  of the  doth open and in∣large. Some doe compare the sunne vnto the soule in the both  the soule giueth life, and whē it departeth death followeth for the sunne dooth giue life and  & the cold brin∣geth death, and with , and decaying of all things. Question. Why doth  men is growe old, and gray? Answer. Age is nothing els but a drines and  of  in the bodie griese then cau∣sing  heate, and heate drines, age followeth immediatly and graynes. Question. Why are  then such which are not gelded? Answer. Because they haue lesse heate, and by that meanes lesse force and strength.
MARCVS AN∣TONIVS ZIMARAS SANCTIPETRINAS PROBLEMES. I. WHy is it esteemed in the iudgment of the most wise, the hardest thing of all to know a mans selse? Is it because nothing can bee knowne, if his forme and per∣fection cannot be knowne To know the forme and perfection of a mans self, as it seemeth vnto the Philosopher, is a matter hard enough. And a man by the autho∣ritie of Plato, either is nothing, or if he bee any thing, is nothing els but his soule. Or is this be∣cause it cannot be done but by a reflexed action? And to reflect and looke vnto himselfe, is a tokers that we are separated from the flesh. For he who would know himselfe, should be drawne from sen∣sible affections, and  hard this is, no man is ig∣norant. Or is it  a man  by vnderstan∣ding? But the vnderstanding of a man cannot con∣ceiue
himselfe, but after the vnderstanding of ano∣ther, and this is very hard. II. Why  esteemed the wisest of all Greece, by the  of , seeing that by the o∣pinion of , he   and busied on∣ly about , and nothing about nature. Whether is it because it is more expedient for the common commoditie and vse of man to liue wel, then to contemplate? or because as it seemeth to Plato,  was vsually  of him euery where, I know this one thing, that I know nothing. III. Why doe men especially contend and striue in things of wit? Is it because they think, that other things which are called goods, are in the power of another? as the gifts of the bodie are natures, & externall and worldly goods are subiect vnto the rule of fortune: where of it  to passe, that euery man can ea∣sily suffer himselfe to be ouercome in such things, as things not happening through his fault or oc∣casion. But they think wit to be in our own power. Or is it because they thinke that the goods of the mind do excell al other goods, & therfore do think it a thing most naturall to contend for that which is most excellent? Or is it, because it is a common disease of all mā, as it seemeth vnto a certaine wise man, that euery mā doth think himself more lear∣ned then he is, & therfore doth desire to performe that which he beleeueth, without study & labour. IIII. What is the cause that few men take paines in at∣taining
of sciences, seeing that all men by nature do desire to know? Whether is it because that the gods haue put vertue to bee gotten with sweat and labour, as He∣siodus saith? or because the pleasures of the body do draw a mans minde from the searching out of the trueth? It is requisite for him who desireth to liue in mind, that he thinke and medicate on the death of the bodie, as the diuine Plato doth think. Or is it because the nature of man is forced to serue many waies, as it pleaseth Aristotle: whereof it falleth out, that when things necessarie doe faile, the na∣turall desire is not brought into action? for nature of her selfe is not sufficient to contemplate. V. Why doe men say that Philosophie is naked? Is it because trueth is naked, and that there nee∣deth no colour of words, whē we handle a matter of trueth? for it belongeth vnto Sophisters to dis∣pute of tearmes, when the sincere trueth is sought. Or is it because they do not play the Philosophers well, which seeke philosophie for gaine and ambi∣tion, and not for her selfe? Or is it because he shuld be voyd from all worldly affections, who desireth to endeuour himselfe in the studie of philosophie? for as Aristotle doth say, The soule is made wise by rest and cuietnes. And it were easie for Philoso∣phers to become rich if they would, as it appea∣reth by the example of Thales. VI. Why doe men desire to be had in memorie after their death? and therefore some make pyramides, and statues, and images, and diuers other tokens and mo∣numents
and  behind them? Is it because all things, as it seemeth vnto Ari∣stotle, doe  to  of some perpetuitie and diuine  they can? And ther∣fore if they can not  in nature and being, yet they  at the least to continue in opi∣nion and conceit of men: or els hath custome brought it in so, to  such as come after, to the end they may not degenerate from their pa∣rents? VII. 1. What is the cause why mens desires grow with∣out Is it because natural desires, as  saith, haue an end, and such desires which proceede of a false opinion, haue no where, where to end? VIII. Why doe   and appoynt some wise man to bee familiar with Princes? at Homer dooth  with : Euripides  with .  prometheus with Iu∣piter: and Mars  with AEneas? Is it because that by the law of nature, as Place doth say, wisedome and power should direct their actions to one end, and affect the same thing, loue it, and seeke it. IX. Why doth Homer, when he maketh mention of Embassadors, talke  of the  of a com∣mander, in bare words? Is it because it is the dutie of Embassadours to declare the  will of the commander, and put his sentence in execution? and therefore it is cer∣taine
that he should adde nothing nor take away. Or els is it because the commaundement of him who doth rule, that is, of a wise man, is set in good order, and is presumed to bee most perfect? And therefore there should be nothing chaunged, but his decrees and constitutions are to be iudged ab∣solute and perfect. X. Why doth Aristotle use exceeding breuitie in most hard matters? Whether is it, because it is the custome of wise men to loade their words with sentences  or els to the end that he would bee obscure, to feare and keepe offrude wits from the reading of his works, as it seemeth to the expositors? Or whether is it because that in a hard matter, many words in a matter of trueth are suspected? because that truth doth consist in a fewe words. Or is it because that as it seemeth vnto the wise man, in many words there is error often committed? XI. Why do famous men in any science; when they  erre in any matter, erre more dangerously them those which are lesse famous? Is it because that such, trusting vnto the skill of their owne wit, are drawne farre from their sences, and therefore must needes bee deceiued? Auicen may serue for a proofe of this, who for all his fame in Philosophie, sayd, that a man might naturally be brought foorth of the earth. And that fumous great Auerrois, who thought that a maide might conceaue with child in a bath, without knowledge of man.
OVT OF ARISTOTLE. WHy is man, who is  with learning, the most  of all liuing creatures? Whether is it because with his wit and con∣ceit, he is much giuen to pleasures? and therefore he doth seeke out greatly and weigh what felicitie is, which no man can obtaine but with iniurie. XII. Why do men desire rather to seeme, then to be and not seeme? Is it because only man is participate of honour? whereby it commeth to passe, that euery man de∣sireth to seeme good, and yet naturally fleeth la∣bour, and yet we get no vertues but by labor. Or is it because the propertie of a Sophister is rather to seeme, then to bee, and not seeme? But there are very fewe which truely attaine vnto vertue. XIII. Why doe some in their youth beget girles, and in their middle age, or when they begin to grow old, be∣get boyes? Whether is it because the seede waxeth cold in such as vse the act of carnall copulation too oft? And therefore in their middle age, or when they grow old, not vsing it so much, their seede is hotter, which is the begetter of males. XIIII. Why haue children and boyes pleasure in the act of venerie, considering that they doe not cast foorth any seede? It is as the Philosopher faith, because that there
is a certaine tickling & itching in the letting forth of the spirit, or breath, as it is in such as are of age, by the casting out of seede. XV. Why haue they lesser pleasure which vse this act of copulation oft? Whether is it because that by often vsing car∣nall copulation, the spirit and seede doth decrease and waxe cold? and therefore the seede is not so itching nor so tickling, which is the cause of de∣light, as Philosophers affirme. XVI. Why dooth immoder are carnall copulation more hurt, then immoder are letting of bloud? Whether is it because the seed is fuller of spirit, and a nutrimen better disposed and prepared for the nature of the bodie then the bloud? for as it seemeth vnto Galen, the seede is the substantiall cause of the parts of the bodie, and of it the bodie doth grow, increase, and is nourished. And as he who is a hungred, is hurt more by the taking away of bread then of flower, so the bodie is more wea∣kened by the taking away of seede, then by the e∣uacuation of bloud. XVII. What is the reason that such as haue a very long yard, cannot beget children? Whether is it because the seed going a long di∣stance, the spirit doth breathe out? and therefore is cold and vnfit for generation. XVIII. Why do such as are corpulent cast forth little seed in the act of copulation, and are oft barren?
Is it because in such, the seede passeth into the nourishment of the bodie? and for the same rea∣son corpulent women haue but small store of flo∣wers? XIX. Why are women apter to the act of venerie in summer time; and men in the winter? Whether is it, as it seemeth vnto the Philoso∣pher, because at that time their stones hang down∣ward, and are feebler then in the winter? seeing it is necessarie for him who will vse carnalitie, to draw them vp. Or is it because hot natures doe boylt and chase in summer and decay, and colde natures become liuely? for a man is hot and drie, a woman colde and moyst. And therefore in that season the strength of men doth decay, and the strength of women growe stronger and liuelier, through the benefit of a contrary qualitie. And for the same cause, as Galen saith, some beasts of a cold nature doe almost dye in dens and holes, through the excessiue cold of the ayre, and receiue little nouriture at all, which reuiue againe when heate commeth. XX. Why is man the proudest of all liuing creatures? Whether is it by reason of his great & straunge knowledge? for as the Philosopher sayth, all sen∣sible things consist in sence, intelligible in the vn∣derstanding, what remaineth then which eacapeth his knowledge? Or is it because he seemeth to be the knot and fastening together of God and the world? for he is in the middle betwixt both. Or is it because he hath rule ouer all other creatures,
and all things seeme to bee brought vnto his arbi∣trement? Or shall I answer, that the pride of men dooth proceede of the want of knowing himselfe? for truely if he would remember that he is con∣ceaued like vnto dung and vrine, if he would mark how hee is brought naked into the world, if hee would weigh how he doth leade his life in miserie & toyle, if he would think deeply how he is bound to dye, he would not be proud at all. XXI. Why doth man especially vnderstand one thing, and doe another? Is it because there is the same science of con∣trary things? or because the dutie of the minde is to reach vnto many things, and the appetite ren∣deth vnto one thing only? And a man for the most part doth loue by vnderstanding and reason, and beasts are lead with appetite, anger, and pleasure OVT OF ARISTOTLE. WHy is man the wisest of all liuing creatures? Whether is it because he hath a very little head, in respect of the proportion of his bodie, as it seemeth vnto the Philosopher in his problemes? Or is it because he is of a most perfect nature, and therefore the  of vertues are more excel∣lent in him? Or whether is it because the bloud of man is most subtile, and pure, and cleane? The bloud is the nouriture, and that the last nouriture, and therefore there is great difference whether it be cold or hot, thinne or thick, doubled or cleere. Or is it by reason that through his owne ,
he hath a most perfect sence of feeling, as ex∣perience doth shew in men? for because they haue soft flesh, they are endued with a sharpe and quick wit: and they whose flesh and skin is thicker and grosser, are dull and slow. And therefore the tem∣perature of a man seemeth most fit and apt for prudence and wisedome. And that by reason, be∣cause that in a soft bodie and tender, the first and motherly spirit of the soule is easlier infused, and dooth more willingly and speedily discourse: and contrariwise, the hardnes and thicknes doth stop, and therefore is a hinderance that the pure and cleere bloud be not carried frō place to place: for vnto euery man is giuen a certain portiō of spirit. XXII. Why is a womans wit vnapt in good things, and most prompt in naughtie things? as Euripides sayth in Medea? Whether is it because of a priuation, which see∣meth to bee coupled and ioyned with her nature? for as it doth appeare vnto a Philosopher, a womā is a man hurt: and the condition of a priuation is, alwaies to goe about hurt and intend mischiefe. XXIII. Why doe men say, that a womans first counsell should be chosen? Is it because as we see in things which want rea∣son, their actions and motions are guided and di∣rected to their proper ends by a superiour power? for I thinke that to be most true which is sayd, that there was a prouidence which did cast into an vn∣honest man the desire of honestic; and in a poore man the desire of wealth, as farre as is sufficient.
So the vnderstanding of a woman, although they vnderstande not the reason of good and euill, is sometime directed by an infallible trueth to take such things : the counsels which they goe about, through their owne searching, are to be left of, as weake, and subiect vnto many errors. XXIIII. Why do women desire rather to goe trim, and deck themselues then men? Is it because the nature of women is vnperfect? and thereupon they endeuour to supplie the want of nature with the benefite of arte? for by nature that which is euill fauoured and vnseemely, dooth couet and desire that which is faire and honest-or is it because  wanting, the beautie of the mind they are forced to studie how to trimme and deck their bodies. XXV. What is the cause that a tall man is seld me wise. Is it because the largenes of his bodie doth pre∣ceede of excesse of heate, and abundance of humi∣ditie? But wise men doe thinke, that the perfec∣tion, accomplishment and goodnes of our opera∣tions is perfected by drines, which dooth alwayes goe on and increase, vntil it bring vs vnto our end. For the constitution of the bodie, from his fast be∣ginning did spring from the last humiditie, but the vehemencie and excesse of heate doth ouerthrow the iudgement and quietnes of the mind. XXVI. Why is a multitude of princes or rulers naught, as Homer sayth? Is it because that if the gouernmēt shuld be tur∣ned
into tyrannie, it is better to be vnder the yoke of one, thē of many? Or because a multitude of ru∣lers doe seldome looke to the good of the Com∣mon-wealth? where of it proceedeth, that if one doe disagree, great hurt is like to hang ouer the comminaltie. It is easier for one man to be well gi∣uen then many. In the gouernment of many there wanteth not strife, debate, and enuie. And there∣fore seeing that experiēce doth teach, that a king∣dome will not receiue two, it is most truely sayd of Aristotle, that a multitude of rulers is naught, and therefore let there be but one prince. XXVII. Why haue other beasts their hearts in the middest of their breast, and man declining somwhat towards the left side? Is it because it should moderate the cold of that side? for as Aristotle doth say, man onely hath the left side cold. Or is it as the Phisitions doe say, be∣cause it should giue place vnto the liuer, which is placed in the right side. XXVIII. Why doth a woman loue that man exceeding well, who had her maiden head? Is it because that as the matter dooth couet a forme or perfection, so doth a woman the male? or is it by reason of shamefastnes? for as that diuine Plato saith, shamefastnes dooth follow loue. It is reason that she loue and esteeme of him who loo∣sed the bonds of her credite and shame. Or is it because the beginning of great pleasure, dooth bring a great alteration in the whole, because the powers of the minde are greatly delighted, and
stick and rest immoueably in the same? And ther∣fore Hesiodus giueth counsell to marry a maide. XXIX. Why are the nights in the full Moone somewhat warme, seeing that according unto the Mathema∣ticians, the Moone is cold by nature? Whether is it, because the opinion of the Peri∣patetikes is to be preferred, which say, that euery light doth heate in that respect that it is reflected? XXX. Why are the nights in the Autumne colder, then in the spring? Is it because the ayre is then very thinne, and bodies which are rarefied are very apt to receiue heate or  it is easily seene in the water  water heated dooth sooner freese then colde wa∣ter, because it is rarefied with the heate. XXXI. Why are our bodies sooner hurt with colde in the Autumne, then in the spring? Is it because the bodies which are accustomed vnto cold, doe in the spring time come to heate? and therefore the mouing or mutation is naturall and not suddene but in Autumne they hasten from heate vnto cold, not being accustomed, and with∣out any meane. And nature doth not endure sud∣den changes, as Galen sayth. XXII. Why are men full of haire prone and apt vnto the lust of the flesh? Whether is it because that in them, there is pre∣sumed to be great store of excremēts, and of seed, as it seemeth vnto the Philosopher?
XXXIII. What is the reason that men which haue a small head, are naturally angrie and testie? Is it not because that when the head is little, & the braine by a consequence, the heat of the heart cannot be moderated with the cold of the braine as it ought to be? And anger doth proceed of the boyling of the bloud about the heart, through the desire of some thing which doth grieue and make the heart sorry. XXXIIII. Why dooth a man hold fast together and close his fundament, after he hath made water? Whether is it because the ayre doth runne pre∣sently to fill that which is voyd? and therefore the parts of the body are altered immediatly with the coldnes of the ayre, and doe quake and tremble. XXXV. Why haue some men dyed through griefe and sad∣nes, and some through ioy, and none for anger? Is it because ioye dooth coole the very inwarde guts? griefe and sorrow doth suffocate and kill the inward parts, and coole the outward? anger doth heate both: whilest heate doth remaine, the life & nature remayneth, because the soule is sayd to be life in naturall heate. XXXVI. Why doth the voyce chaunge in man and woman when they begin to haue seede? Is it because the heart is the beginning of the vaines and of the bloud, as Aristotle sayth against the Phisitions? and thereupon it riseth, that be∣cause the change of the excremēt of seed is made
in the highest part of the body, the voyce as being aboue doth make it manifest. And thereupon it is that the voyces of both man & woman do change when they begin to haue seede. XXXVII. What is the reason that when a pot full of boyling liquour is seething ouer, yet the bottome is cold? Is it because the hot vapors ascend vpward? and therefore when the vppermost water is hot, the bottome in meane space is colde, by reason of the coldnes of the water  next vnto it. XXXVIII. Why doe wee finde the graine which we finde in ants holes & gathered in the summer time, gnawne on one end? It is because they are directed of nature, to gnaw & consume that end where the vertue of seeding is, for feare it  againe: truely, their labours sprouting and growing, they should be depriued of their nouriture belonging necessarily vnto them∣selues. XXXIX. Why do the mothers loue their children more  then the fathers? Is it because they take greater paines with thē  or because of the greater certaintie which they haue of themselues  Aristotle sayth. XL. Why is not the father as welbeloued of the sonne, as the sonne is of the father? Is it as wise men say, because loue doth nor goe backward, but alwaies forward? because that loue doth by nature serue such as loue, to continue the kind: where of it cōmeth to passe, that our naturall
desire neglecting things past; doth looke to things to come. Or is it, as the Philosopher doth say, be∣cause the father hath somwhat of his in the sonne, the sonne nothing of his in the father? XLI. Why doe the children for the most part, resemble rather the mother then the father, seeing that (as Aristotle doth say) the matter doth not concurre ac∣tiuely to the begetting of the child? Whether is it because al similitudes and likenes in mankind and nature, are virtually contayned in the seede of the father? whereby it is that for the most part the sonne is like neither, but the grand∣father or great grandfather, and sometime like none of all the familie. Or is it because this dooth proceede of a strong imagination? for such are wont wonderfully to loue their wiues. For as Aut∣cen doth affirme, the bodie is sometime chaunged by affections, which are called affect us animales: for they doe print deepe impressions in naturall things, as it doth happen that the childe dooth re∣present him, whose pourtraiture & image was for∣conceaued in the act of carnall copulation of the woman and of the man. But some of the vulgar sort, who knowe not the causes of things, are not contented with this doctrine: but the wise agree and consent vnto it. And therefore it commeth al∣so to passe, that the bloud runeth and goeth to the externall parts in him, who casteth conceits in his minde of red things. And so some mens teeth are on edge, when they see another eate sowre things: and when we behold another diseased and grieued in any part, the same part in vs doth languish and
grieue. And often also the constitution of our bo∣die is changed through excessiue feare. XLII. Why are  more nimble, as the prouerbe is, when they are yong, then in any other time? Whether is it because that their nature and constitution being melancholy from the begin∣ning, it is requisite there should be a temperature, with the recompence of contrary qualities. For melancholy by nature is cold and drie: but when they are young they are hot and moyst. This wee also see in melancholy children, the which in their childhood are of great wit, and before it be looked for, are of great wisedome so farre foorth, that you may hope and promise any thing of them in time to come: whose wits neuerthelesse in progresse of time doe decay and fade. Be therefore (sayth the Greeke) naught, to the end that thou mayst liue for the nature of such is most short. XLIII. Why be there no  in Pontes and ? Is it because their nature is most impatient of cold, as the Philosopher doth say? XLIIII. Why are  men and women most couetous? Is it because the habite of vertue is bred of ma∣ny actions? and therefore seeing that priests doe want wife and children, they are forced no wayes to spend their goods, and yet are accustomed as take and receiue, and so become couetous. For as the Philosopher doth say: Such as euery mans a∣ctions are, such dooth he become. The nature of women, as wee haue often sayd, is vnperfect, and
therefore they thinke it impossible, fully to satisfie themselues. And therefore they gather together, and keepe, that by that meanes they may helpe their need, and by industrie and arte they couet to get, that which nature dooth not giue them. And for the same reason, I suppose old men giue them∣selues to couetousnes: for wanting & being desti∣tute of helpes by age & nature, they gape after the goods of fortune, that with them they may resist and oppose themselues against all wants. XLV. Why doe wounds grieue lesse in warre, then out of warre? Is it because the powers of the soule bend ano∣ther way? for as the Philosopher dooth say, if our mind be strongly fixed vpon other matters, we doe not see those things which are before our eyes. Or whether is it by reason of anger, the which as wise men doe say, doth heate the internall & externall parts? And as Aristotle dooth affirme, with heate the soule dooth worke all things. And therefore it happeneth, that the angrie man doth growe colde but slowly after his wound, and therefore also he doth lesse grieue and late. XLVI. Why do we wonder at the eclipse of the sunne and the Moone, and not at all at the generation of plants and beasts by seede? Whether is it because our admiration ceaseth in things which are vsuall, & our mind neglecteth to search out the trueth in such things? But that which happeneth seldome, dooth stirre vs vp to wonder, and induceth the vnderstāding to search out the causes of it.
XLVII. Why doth the head-ach, and  of the memo∣rie, and an euill disposition of the imagination follow the long detayning of the seede? Whether is it because it doth hinder and make heauie the braine by excesse of seede? or els be∣cause the seede long kept, getteth some venemous qualitie, and therefore the furne and vapour of it doth hurt the head? XLVIII. Why doe Priests and Munkes feare and abhorre death more then any men? Is it because they are by nature cold & melan∣choly' or because they perceiue themselues to pe∣rish vtterly? for whē they are out of this world, they neither continue in their owne nature, nor in . XLIX. Why if trees fall their leaues, & beasts their haire and feathers they receiue them againe? and if a man become bald, his haire commeth no more? Whether is it because the times of the yeare do bring that change of bodies so, that in the first change there followeth an interchangable course one after another? and beasts receiue againe their feathers and haire, & trees their leaues: but bald nes commeth vnto man through age, but nature giueth no comming againe to age. L. Why doth a summer end all diseases? If force and nature bee strong, it shall finde an ayre most fit for resolution, and digestion, & expul∣sion of superfluities if weake and ouerthrowne the heate dooth ouerthrowe it  it dooth
loose weake bodies, and therefore there commeth nothing vnto the sicke bodie but death. LI. Why, is a man do put his hands into the water in the summer, he is colder when the water is moued, then when it standeth stall? Whether is it because the parts of the water which touch his hands, he hot by the heate of his hands? for euery agent which doth communicate with the patient, in the thing whereon it worketh, in doing dooth suffer againe, and the water being moued, it is necessarie that the parts of it which are rarefied be scattered abroad, and others more cold succeed them. LII. Why doe some which haue an euill complexion and constitution of body liue longer, then some others which are of a sanguine and better nature? Whether is it through his bad gouernment and order? or because there was some hidden cause in those dispositions: for as Auerrois sayth, the num∣ber of the elements is infinite in the workes of na∣ture, the which none besides the author of nature doth vnderstand. LIII. What is the cause, as the Phisitions doe say, that the suffocation of the matrix, which happeneth vnto women through strife and contention, is more dan∣gerous, then the detayning of their flowers? Whether is it, because that how much the more an excrement is perfect, as long as it dooth conti∣nue in his naturall dispositiō, by so much the more it is worser, when it is remoued from that, and
drawne to a cōtrary qualitie? As it is seene in vine∣ger, the which is sharpest which is made of best wine. And so it happeneth, that the more men loue the one the other, the more they hate, when they fall at variance and discord. LIIII. Why doth the land which standeth still, seeme to moue vnto such as saith in the sea? Is it because the instrument of the sence of see∣ing is accidentally moued, when the shippe is mo∣ued? whereby the  and similitudes of things perceiued are receiued with the mouing. LV. Why doe we loue  sight aboue other sences? Whether is it, as Aristotle dooth say, because it doth shew vs the diffrences of things? or because his knowledge is more drawne from material sub∣stance? or is it because the diuine force of loue is placed in that sence, as Plato sayth. LVI. Why doe we not iudge a staffe to be broken in the water, seeing it dooth  appeare in the sence of the sight? Whether is it, because we perceiue by the sence of feeling and touching, that the sight dooth erre? or is it because wee doe not iudge with the same power, as we doe imagine with. And an argument of this is, because the sunne dooth seeme to be but a foot round And by a tricke and mouing of the fingers, one thing doth seeme two, and yer we doe nor yeeld that they be two. LVII. Why doe we put our hand ouer our eyes when we
will see anything a farre off? Is it because the sight should not bee dispersed? and so Aristotle dooth say, that those which haue their eyes standing out, cannot see farre: and con∣trarie, such as haue them hollow in their head, can see farre, because the mouing of the sight is not skattered. LVIII. Why can some see the obiect before their eyes farre off, better then if it be neerer their eyes? Is it because things which may be seene cannot be seene, but by the meane of the bright ayre? and weake eyes doe want more plentie of light, then strong eyes. But the obiect being put farre off from the sence of the sight, in the distáce from the thing seene doth require a greater light, then good eyes need: and the further the obiect is, the more light there is in the distance betwixt the obiect and the sight. Or els because the motion which procee∣deth from an obiect farre distant vnto a weake sence, is weake, which the sence cannot endure? And the motion which is hard by is strong, which also a weak eye cannot suffer: which is easily seene in olde men, the which by reason of their weaknes doe see a farre off, and can reade small letters in the light of the sunne, the which notwithstanding, cannot hard by them reade, nor see at the light of a candle, or the Moone. LIX. Why can some see things hard by them, and can not see things further off? Is it not through the weakenes of their sight? for in such the power of seeing is very weake, and
not vnited together, and therefore they had need of a strong mouing as it is also in such as haue their eyes stanging  which cannot see farre. LX. Why doe such as  shoote aright, winke with one eye? Is it because the power of the sight is then more and better , and therefore is better able to performe his actions? LXI. Why bee such as haue been long in the darke, if on a sudden they come into a great light, halfe blind? Whether is it because nature cannot endure those sudden  because the spirit of their sight  and weake, and therefore are glad of their  is dissolued when they come into the light? Or els is it, because of the desire of the light, which they wanted a long time, they doe behold the light too earnestly? And so their sight is weakened, as it happeneth in such as haue a long time , and therefore eating greedily, doe take more then they can digest, and so by that meanes . LXII. Why doe such as see weakely, for the most part, write small letters?  maruell that such as are purblinde, or haue a weake sight, should doe that which dooth belong vnto such as haue a good sight? Is it because that things hard by doe seeme great, and such are wont to write with their eye
hard by their paper? Or is it because they do write almost wincking? For if they should write with the eyes wide open, their sight being dispersed and skattered abroad, it would waxe dimme. And ther∣fore wincking they see more quicker: and there∣fore seeing that through their wincking, their pas∣sage of seeing is narrowe, they must of necessitie make a small letter. LXIII. What is the reason that if a man will see farre in the night, he shall doe it better if he bowe his head neere vnto the ground, then if he stand vpright? Is it because the obscure vapours which made the ayre darke, are thicker aboue in the ayre, then they are neere vnto the earth, and thereupon doe more hinder the sight farre off in the ayre, then neere vnto the ground? or is it because the light of the starres being dispersed through the ayre, causeth a reflectiō neere vnto the earth, although weakly, and so by that meanes doth some what the more make light vpon the ouermost part of the earth? LXIIII. What is the cause, that if a man hath committed any euil fact, he cannot dissemble it in countenance, and in his eyes? and therefore the Poet doth say; O how hard it is not to bewray a fault with thy coun∣tenance. Is it because the eye is the messenger of the heart, as a glasse of the minde wherein all things doe shine? or is it because it is the weakest part of the bodie, and the fullest of passages: and there∣fore all alteration which beginneth in the heart,
(which as the  doe say, is the begin∣ning of all feeling and cogitation) goeth directly vnto the eyes. LXV. Why cannot such as gape, or put foorth, or  ayre, heate well? Whether is it because the end of the instrument of hearing, is  at some spiritual part? where by it commeth by passe, that it is shaken also and moued, together with that spirituall or aerious , as  doth moue that ayre: for it is moued when it doth moue. Or is it because much breath or ayre dooth outwardly enter in at the eares, whilest , and therefore mouing and sence cannot be perceiued for it dooth thrust at the eare. The  the ayre, or some  of the ayre and the  when the ayre  the eare is weakened, and the aire outwardly doth enter in, of  one dooth  o∣ther: and that which is within doth  out and expell that  come in. LXVI. Why can not  bee the cause of  and ? Is it because the  must be before  moued, and  the thing  gendred, and  is impossible to bee  himselfe. XVII. Why are women bodies looser and softer then mens bodies, and  why doe they want haire? Is it by reason of their monethly  with them the  go away, whereof haire
should grow, and wherof the flesh should be filled, and therefore they are lesser, and therefore also their vaines are more hidden, then mens vaines. LXVIII. What is the reason that when we thinke vpon a∣ny horrible thing, we are striken into a feare? Is it because, the conceit, thinking and vnder∣standing of things, haue force and vertue? for as Plato doth say, the reasons of things, haue some af∣finitie with the things themselues. For the image and representation of cold and heat, is such as the nature of the things are, as the Philosopher hath sayd. Or is it because that when wee comprehend any dreadfull matter, the bloud runneth to the in∣ternall parts, and thereof the externall parts are cold, and shaken with feare. LXIX. Why cannot a companie or multitude of women be led vnder a captaine without tumult? Is it because they are inconstant by nature? And for the same reason the Philosopher would ap∣poynt no shepheard ouer goates, because they are instable and vnconstant by nature. Or is it because a woman is more prating, worser tongued, & more backbiting? also complaining, despairing, and lesse wise, and more lying then a man. LXX. Why doth a radish roote helpe digestion, and yet himselfe remaineth vndigested? Whether is it because his substance doth con∣sist of diuers parts? for there is some thin parts in him which is fit to digest meates, the which being dissolued, there doth remaine some thicke & close
substance , which the heate cannot digest. LXXI. Why doe  wood, cleane it easier in length, then ? Whether  because that in wood there is some graine if it be cut at length, as it is to followe the haire in cloath, which go on in length: where∣by in the very , one part draweth another fast by it. LXXII. What is the reason of you strike a speare on the end, the sound commeth sooner to one which stan∣deth at the other end, then  one who standeth neerer to him which striketh? Whether is it because that as it hath been sayd, there is a  long graine in wood  forwarde  with ayre, but  or on side there is none. And therefore a beame or a speare strooken on  end, the ayre which is hidden re∣ceiueth a sound in the foresayd graine, which ser∣ueth for  the ayre. And therefore see∣ing the sound cannot goe easily out, it is carried vnto the eare of him who is opposite vnto him, and those passages doe not goe from side to side, & therfore the sound cannot be so distinctly hard. LXXIII. Why be there not famous men in euery  in our age? Is it because the nature of man decaieth in our age? and as  sayth, succession being corrup∣ted, the  of our age is worse by birth? Or is it because  are not esteemed of  for take away  and due vnto vertue, and no
man will embrace it. Or is it so ordained by na∣ture, that men doe alwaies complaine of the pre∣sent time? LXXIIII. VVhy are flatterers in great credite with Prin∣ces? Is it, as Plutarke sayth by the authoritie of Pla∣to, because they loue themselues? Too much im∣moderate loue of themselues, causeth them to ad∣mit flatterers, and to giue them credit. Or whe∣ther is it, as I thinke, because they want the light of reason? For among birds, some through the cor∣ruption of their nature, delight in stinking meats, and whom the day doth blinde, and the night doth lighten. LXXV. Why haue Philosophers for the most part in these daies euill conditions? Is it because they are not esteemed of Princes? or is it because that for philosophie it selfe they are accused of crimes, and thinke therefore they re∣ceiue such rewards, and therfore they are compel∣led to forsake vertue and flee to vice? Or els de∣ceiued through error, they thinke they haue chal∣lenged all the garments of philosophie, when they haue snatched vnto themselues some of her rags. And therefore they are by vs rather called Sophi∣sters then Philosophers: for certainly a Philoso∣pher should bee of a stout courage in all respects, and in all fortune for they reason badly that ther∣fore they shuld giue themselues vnto Philosophie, because they would be honoured of Princes. And their desire is not ruled by nature, but by error, and
are thrust forward with the streame of false . LXXVI. Why doe such as  waxe pale in the be∣ginning, and afterward red? Is it through the desire of reuēge for that which grieueth, that the heate and bloud are called vnto the heart, and therefore of necessitie the externall parts are pale? when they haue determined to put that in execution which they desire, the heate and bloud doe runne vnto the outward parts, and then they are greatly to be feared and to be taken heed of. LXXVII. Why doe Serpents want a yard and stones? Is it because they want thighes, and therfore do want a yard, and they want stones, because of the length of their bodie. LXXVIII. Why can Serpents turne their heads backward and the rest of their bodie stand still? Whether is it because that like vnto those beasts which are called Insecta, they are made of a win∣ding composition, and haue their ioynts flexible and made of  And this is the reason in Ser∣pents, and also because they may auoyde those things which hurt them: for hauing no feete, and being long of bodie, they cannot easily turne thē, whilest they bowe against those things which are behind them.  to no purpose to lift vp their head, if they could not exercise anger. LXXIX. Why is the  changed into diuers colours?
Whether is it, as it seemeth vnto the Philoso∣pher, because that he is the slenderest of all footed beasts ingendred of egges; and is starke for want of bloud? The cause is to be referred vnto the qua∣litie of the mind: through ouer much coldnes he is of so many colours: for it is the propertie of feare to bind fast, through want of bloud and heate. LXXX. Why are the thighes and calfe of the legges of men fleshie seeing the thighes of other beasts are not so? Is it because man only goeth vpright, and ther∣fore haue them so to sustaine the vpper parts: and therefore nature hath giuen the lower parts cor∣pulencie, and hath taken it away from the vpper: and therefore she hath made the buttockes, the thighes, and calfe of the legges fleshie. LXXXI. Why doe very fat beasts waxe olde quickely, and soone dye? Is it because they haue but a little bloud, seeing that much of it is drunken vp with the fat? And those which haue but small store of bloud are ap∣test to dye: for death is a want of bloud. LXXXII. Why doth man onely goe vpright? Is it because he is most hot of nature? or is it because his substance is diuine? The part of diuine things is to vnderstand and bee wise: which could not easily bee, if a man had a great massiue bodie: for heauines dooth make the vnderstanding and the sence slow. LXXXIII. Why is the flesh neerest the bone sweetest?
Whether is it because it receiueth temperature through the equalitie of the contrary? for the na∣ture of flesh is hot and moyst, and the nature of the bone is cold and drie. And therefore of con∣trary extreames there must needes be a meane. LXXXIIII. Why is it forbidden to talke whilest we eate? Whether is it because, that before the wizard, by the which we eate and drink, the arterie is put, by the which ayre & breath goeth vnto the lungs, and this arterie is molested with meate or drinke entring into it. Yet nature hath prouided for this a little flappe, which dooth couer the arterie, the which is opened when wee speake. And therefore meate can easily get into it, where of followeth choking, and coughes. Or whether is it because speaking dooth hinder the chewing of the meate, and therefore the meate is not well digested? LXXXV. Why doth wine mingled with water, after a sort make a man soonest drunke? Whether is it because the water doth cause the wine to runne hither and thither, and penetrate the more. And that is the reason that Must, as A∣uicen dooth say, dooth sooner make a man drunke then wine, because that the water mixed with it, doth make it penetrate. LXXXVI. Why are Noble men, and such as are placed in high dignities, troubled with the gowte? Is it because they cramme in diuers sortes of meats euē to the fill And the Phisitiōs do affirme
that there is nothing worser then at one time to take diuers sorts of meats, and then be a long time in eating and drinking of them: for the first is half digested before the other come: and therfore such as remaine not long vndigested, breede rawe and naughtie humours, which runne vnto the ioynts. Or whether is it by reason of ouer much pure wine, and too much idlenes, and exercises done out of due season? Or is it through the ouer much vse of lecherie, which wasteth and killeth digestiō? These things are greatly to bee feared, as Plotinus sayth, least we become stockes or brute beasts: for like vnto brute beasts they are giuen to gluttonie and the belly. LXXXVII. Why are they taken with sudden death, which are loden with ouer much fat, and especially when they be young? Whether is it because their vaines be straite, & therefore are stopped with the fat, that the spirits cannot haue free course? whereupon the heate which is bred within them doth kill them, because they cannot receiue the cooling of the ayre. And therefore as the Phisitions doe say, they should greatly feare least their vaines breake, or their na∣turall heate be suffocated. LXXXVIII. Why can such be hardly let bloud which are very fat, and that with danger? Whether is it because they haue very slender vaines, and they hidden? or els because all fat is without bloud, as it seemeth vnto the Philoso∣pher.
LXXXIX. Why, as Aristotle doth affirme, are the sensible po∣wers in the heart, and yet if the hinder part of the braine bee hurt, the memorie payeth for it: if the forepart, the imagination: if the middle, the cogita∣tiue power? Whether is it because the braine is appoynted by nature, to coole the heate of the heart? where∣of it is, that in diuers of his parts he serueth the powers and instruments in the heart: for euerie action of the soule dooth not proceede from one measure of heace. XC. Why dooth it happen out for the most part, that children which are not lawfully borne, are wittier and subtiler, and liker vnto the parents, then others? Whether is it, because the powers of the minde of the parents are very vehemently bent in the act of carnall copulation? such doe loue exceedingly, and therefore seeing that their affections bee not distracted, the child by nature shall not varie from them. And that is most true, when they goe toge∣ther with tranquilitie of minde: for if it bee with feare or griese, the children be vnlike. XCI. What is the reason, seeing that death is by na∣ture, yet it is more terrible vnto man, then vnto all other liuing creatures? Whether is it because the nature of man, as the Philosopher sayth, hath purchased the meane, not only of liuing, but also of liuing well? for mankind onely, is partaker of supernaturall things, other beasts haue regard vnto that only which they see,
wherein, as Plinie doth say, the goodnes of nature doth suffice, which is to be preferred before all o∣ther things: and therefore they thinke not of glo∣rie, wealth, ambition, nor of death. Wherefore see∣ing that a man is depriued of a more noble life when he dyeth, death is vnto him aboue all other most grieuous. Or is it because other beasts regard only things present, & man onely foreseeth things to come. XCII. Why if death come by nature, is it iudged the last of all terrible things? Whether is it, as it seemeth vnto the Philoso∣pher, because it is the last, & that nothing els doth seeme good or bad vnto mortall men? Or is it be∣cause we inueigh against nature, who is the begin∣ning of necessitie, & not the nature of the forme, or of the end, from which that which is good is de∣riued, which all things doe desire? Or peraduen∣ture dooth death seeme the most terriblest of all things, because they meant so to liue, that they thought to be immortall? or doth it strike a feare onely into them which liued a naughtie life? And vnto such as liued a vertuous life, death is not grie∣uous, as the Poet sayth. Death is the end of a pri∣son obscure. Or be they grieued because they are seased on with a violent & vntimely death? for such as dye when they come vnto olde age, doe for the most part dye without feare and griefe. For truely nature is, as a candle readie to be put out. And as Plato doth say: of all sorts of death, that which by nature doth come is most light, which happeneth rather with pleasure then dolour.
XCIII. Why, seeing that man is the end of nature, is he of so short a life, in respect of other liuing things, as Poets doe complaine, by the example of the crow? Whether is it because that those our makers, consulting of our kinde, the perfection of fraile things, is not measured at all by continuance of time? as the Philosopher sayth: It is farre better to be very ioyful a short space, thē a long time mean∣ly or lightly glad. Or whether is it because that na∣ture of things possible, dooth alwaies make that which is best? And it could not be that the consti∣tution of mans bodie, could be conuenient and fit for long continuance and the operations of the soule. For by the authoritie of the wise, there is re∣quired another temperature first for life, and ano∣ther for the workes of life. Whether should they make vs of a long life and the worse, or of a shorter and the better? It seemed good vnto them, sayth Plato, to preferre a short life and a good, before a long life and a bad. XCIIII. Why did nature bring foorth man naked, and without defence? Is it because nature doth make nothing without reason or in vaine? seeing that a man is most wise, hee can vse many instruments. The hand is not one instrument but many. And therefore they thinke amisse, as the Philosopher affirmeth, which say that a man is the noblest of all crea∣tures, and yet in worser case then all, because he is naked and weaponles: yet other beasts keepe
their common helpe, and cannot change it by any meanes, but man can chaunge his weapons at his pleasure: for the hand is a hoofe, and horne, and speare, and sworde, and euery other kinde of wea∣pon. Seeing then that a man is indued with vn∣derstanding, and hath a hand giuen him by na∣ture, he cannot complaine of his nakednesse and condition. Whether was the excellencie of the substance of which mankinde was made, fit and conuenient for hornes, and such like? XCV. Why is wine put into a vessell of water mingled with saltpeter, very cold? Because saltpeter is presently actu cold, though it haue power to bee hot, and the water mingled with it is colder then the wine. Now a thing which is more colde, doth make a thing lesse colde, more cold thē it was: & therfore the wine put into such a vessell is cooled the better. I haue sometime an∣swered, that it proceedeth of the Antiperistasis, that is, by a repulsion whereby heate or colde is made strong, and euery contrary by his contrary: but saltpeter is not hot actu, but in posentia. And therefore hauing power only to be hot, and is not hot indeed, it cannot worke by that contrarietie: for it is actu cold, as the feeling can iudge. XCVI. Why hath Philosophie seemed a wonderfull and a diuine thing vnto some? Whether is it, because that as a medicine is the perfection of the bodie, so philosophie is the per∣fection of the soule, as Themistius sayth? Or is it because the studie of Philosophie dooth increase
and further vs in our dutie towards God, & make our zeale more feruent? for those things being perfectly knowne which God hath done, he tur∣neth all mens hearts and minds to praise and ad∣mire him. This admiration, charitie, faith, and hope doth follow. Or whether is it because it doth breede great pleasures and delights, through the certaintie of it and sincerenes? or because it doth make vs like vnto God? XCVII. Why doe  hate learned men? Is it by reason of the vnlikenes in manners? for so it hath alwaies been that wisedome hath been iniured by euill manners. Or doe they feare least they should breede sedition and tumults in their cities with their doctrine and authoritie? or be∣cause they doe taxe and reprehend their condi∣tions? for as Plato doth say, Poets haue great force and skill, either to praise or dispraise, and euery man who hath a care of his fame, shuld take heed how he offend a Poet.
ALEXANDER A∣PHRODISEVS PRO∣BLEMES. I. WHy did Homer call men Polio∣crotaphus, of the hoarenes of the temples? Because that for the most part there gray haires beginne, be∣cause the forepart of the head hath more moysture & fleume in it, then the hinder part. II. Why is onely the forepart of the head bald? Because it is loose and soft. And therfore seeing that the haire dooth want nourishment, by reason of natural drines, it doth easily fall in those  doth not stick as it doth behind, where the head is drier and thicker. III. Baldnes proceedeth of drines: and therefore such as haue curled haire bee soonest bald, by rea∣son of the drines of their head: and are gray haired very late, by reason of the drines which consumeth the superfluities of fleume. They are watchfull a∣boue
others, because sleepe commeth of humidi∣tie. Children doe shew this because they are both moyst and sleepie and full of excrements. Such as haue softer haire, as such bee which haue a moyst head, are of a contrary disposition: for they are ve∣ry seldome or neuer bald. And sometime baldnes happeneth by some defect of the kinde, or stocke, as the gowt, and some other diseases. Such are soo∣ner bald, and are sleepie, and haue much superflui∣tie. The hoare haires be whitest, because they fol∣low the colour of fleume, from whence they pro∣ceede. They be sometimes almost yellowish, when the fleume is mingled with burnt choler. IIII. Why are old men ful of excrements, & watchful? They are full of excrements, because they are colde and weake by nature, and therefore digest badly, and so gather many excremēts by the pores and open passages of the bodie. And seeing they be drie, they are also waking and watchfull, and al∣so because their bodies bee hard and stiffe. And children notwithstanding the interlacing of the pores, and soundnes of their bodies, are moyst. V. Why haue children which are moyst by nature, & full of excrements, no hoare haires? Because they are moyst and hot, and fleume is moyst and cold, and haue the forepart of the head as it were fleshy & thin, whereby superfluities are voyded: and that with age doth grow hard, & bo∣nie, and thicke: and therefore nature doth after∣ward giue it seames, by which superfluous vapours should breathe out and euaporate.
VI. Why doe women and gelded men quickely growe hoare and gray? Women because they are cold by nature, and haue small exercise, do gather many superfluities, and especially then when their flowers cease. And gelded men because they yeeld no seede, but doe yeeld superfluitie which should breed seede, the which with the bloud doth spred it self ouer all the bodie, and that hath the nature of fleume. VII. But why doe they want haire? Women because they be cold, and haue thicke passages in their bodies: for colde dooth thicken, and therefore there is no way which way haire should passe. Gelded men because they are moyst, and aboue measure full of excrements, and there∣fore in such moyst places as no hearbes can grow, so neither in dry and stony, which followe bald∣nes. VIII. Why are gelded men for the most part crooked legged? By reason of that superfluous humiditie, they haue soft and wet bodies, and therefore weake, and therefore seeing the thighes cannot be are the burthen of all the bodie, they are wrethed & croo∣ked, as a bulrush dooth bend if a weight be put on it: for that which is hard and dry is strong, and can resist: and that which is soft & moyst, is weake and cannot resist. This is declared by wood, and osiers, and also men. And with baths and drinke men are much weakened: and with a moderate
diet are dried, and become stronger vnto any ac∣tion. Where of it ariseth, that gelded men are after a sort women, and weake, and giuen to wine, and drunkennes, and full of fleume. For being colde, they couet to induce the contrary qualitie, and wine by nature is hot. The AEthiopians being of a drier nature, haue curled haire, and are leane, and strong to worke. IX. But why haue they a sharpe shrill voyce? Againe, abundgnce of humiditie filling vp the arterie, dooth make it straite, and therefore the breath going by a narrowe passage, dooth cause a sharpenes in the voyce. It is plaine that they a∣bound in humiditie, because they be light, & their paps grow great like vnto women, and haue swel∣ling eye lids, and haue soft white haire. X. Why doe some gelded men after a sort couet wo∣men, and doe sometime loue the act of venerie? Because some are but vnperfect gelded men, & some haue a hot liuer, and haue large vessels and conduits of seede. And therefore they imagine the vse of carnall copulation: they cannot performe that which they desire, and their  want liuelines. For that spirit which dooth puffe them vp, dooth alwaies saile, and is weake: that spirit ri∣sing of the seede, through the passages of the seed, is carried from those parts which are about the loynes. But in children those conduites of seede are closed vp. XI. Why seeing there bee but three simple vniforme
hamours, yet they doe not breede three simple disea∣ses, but more? There are double in euery one, continuall, or whole and broken. For the difference of diseases doe not proceede onely of the humours, but also of the places. A hot, thine and sharpe humour doth breede a sharpe, and a short, and a hot feuer: a cold and a thicke humour, a long and a dull one. So of wood, that which is hot and drie, as bayes, o∣liue trees, cause a great flame, and are quickly bur∣ned: greene wet wood make a small smokie fire, and are long a burning. Againe, if the place be large & spacious, it doth sooner, and that greatly inflame the humour, be∣cause that when it is heaped vp together, then at once being full rotten it is put on fire. But if the place be narrowe and small, seeing it cannot con∣taine all the humour, but by peecemeale, and ther∣fore cannot ripen all together, it will stirre vp a small feuer, but such a one as shall burne long. Put then the nature of the humour vnto the place, and so thou shalt finde all the differences of agues, which rise of the corruption of the humours. If yellow choler doe putrifie in great receptacles, as the vaines and arteries, seeing it is hot, it dooth kindle a most sharpe, hot, and short ague, which is called a burning, or heat. But if cold fleume do pu∣trifie in the small vaines and arteries which are a∣bout the flesh, it doth cause a long and a languish∣ing ague, which they call a Cotidian. But if yellow choler doe corruptin small receptacles, it dooth cause a small and a short ague, but yet sometime longer then a heate, which wee call a Tertian or
sharpe ague. But if fleume do purrifie in great pla∣ces, it will cause a shorter ague then a Cotidian. And likewise blacke choler, if it putrifie in great vaines, because it is burned almost all at once, cau∣seth a short ague by fourths: if in small, it breedeth a longer quartaine: for there doe concurre a cold and a thicke humour not fit to alteration, and a narrow place, which will not suffer all the melan∣choly and anger to be consumed at once. XII. Why doe some when they are ashamed, sweat vn∣der the armepits? Because the pores are thinne in that place, na∣ture, when any thing is worthie of reuerence and honour, doth flee with the bloud into the vaines and arteries, & they being full do distill. As it doth happen to such as are merry, because their bodie is made thinne, and especially the armepits. XIII. Why doe such as are  waxe pale? Because our nature, and that power which hath a care of our bodie, will suffer nothing done exter∣nally vnto vs. And as we doe runne within dootes to keepe our selues, so nature looking vnto her sa∣fetie, conueieth her selfe into the bodie as much as she can, and carrieth the bloud with her, whom she hath for her nourishment and wagon, and that bloud also which is best: and that is the bloud which doth dye our skin with a red purple colour. XIIII. But why doe they tremble also? Because that virtue animalis, that is, certaine spirits which rise about the hart, with the cōsent of
nature doe forsake the sinewes, which before they kept: and it bee they which keepe the bodie from trembling: whereupon it riseth, that such are loose in the belly, and vnawares doe make water. For those muscules and sinewes which doe stoppe the course of excrements, being become weake then, giue leaue for superfluities to passe. XV. Why doe such as are ashamed waxe red? Because that nature of her selfe, as it were with a certaine conscience, like vnto a noble virgin, re∣uerencing that which is worthie of honour, mo∣deratly doth draw her selfe into the secretest parts of the bodie. The bloud is moued with her, & pow∣red abroad, and therefore the skinne is dyed with the colour of bloud. Others say that the bloud is cast ouer them by nature, like vnto a vaile, as wee as it were admonished by nature, do put our hand before our face. XVI. Why are some dead with seare? Because that the naturall power fleeing aboue measure, and retiring it selfe with the bloud into the inward parts of the bodie, doth choke and put out that naturall liuely bloud which is bred neere the heart, and therefore doth bring death. By the same reason, when much oyle is powred on a sud∣den into the flame of a lampe, it doth put out the flame. The bloud which is in the heart is compa∣red vnto the flame of the candle or lampe. Some for the same cause haue dyed with griefe: as fire couered with a couer is put out, so the inward mo∣tion of the naturall heate is resolued.
XVII. Why are some ouercome and dismaied with drun∣kennes? Because that abundance of wine doth suffocate and choke with his heate our naturall and liuely vertue. And it happeneth chiefly vnto such whose naturall heate is weake and small. That which is strong and much can resist, and in space of time can ouercome and digest the abundance, as a great flame can endure much oyle to bee powred on it. XVIII. Why doe old men shake and tremble? Because that the sinewes of our naturall ver∣tues and forces, and the muscules of the parts of the bodie, when they receive not sufficient motiue vertue, doe not endeuour to be are the burthen of the bodie. The shaking is, because the weight of the bodie draweth some part of the body down∣ward, and another power which is called animalis, vpward: when this is done without intermission, and one after another, it causeth a quaking: then commeth in bowing and stooping to the ground, and so in steed of a rafter to vphold the building, they vse the helpe of a staffe: and for the same cause they auoyd their excrements and vrine on a sudden. XIX. Why doe not pepper and mustard seede heate the bellie, if they be swallowed whole, but if they be bro∣ken they doe? Because that those thinges which haue their qualities in power onely, and not in action, want
some externall helpe to bring their vertue and po∣wer into action. And therefore being brused and made small, and entring into the passages of the bodie, doe worke his effect through their inherent heate. And the like is of other qualities. There be some things which haue their qualities in action, as the water, tisan, and milke, are to be drunk pre∣sently: they are moyst and cold, nor want no other externall helpe to coole and moyften, but do work immediatly. Likewise the salt and the earth, both virtually and presently and in sight are drie. Line seede and bread are dry in imagination & in sight, but moyst in vertue and act. The sea also & brine and pickle, and Aquavitae, are moyst in imagina∣tion and in sight, but are dry in vertue and actu, action. XX. Why doe some see nothing in the night, and see in the day? Because they haue a thicke spirit of seeing, and which cānot pearce the ayre, vnto the thing which is seene: and in the night it groweth more thicke, because it is made more cold with the absence of the sunne. Or els as others doe say, because that in the day time it is made fine and attenuated with the pure and hot ayre, & is thickened in the night. The contrarie vnto this doth happen in a Cat, and an Owle, they see nothing in the day, and see very well in the night: for they haue a very cleere and thinne sight, the which when it dooth somewhat thicken in the night time, is most fit to receiue his obiect: in the day time and in a cleere light, being exceedingly attenuated and made thinne, is resol∣ued
and skattered. Whereupon Lions which are almost of the like qualitie, cannot go in the sunne, and if they see fire in the day time they flee from it. A man may see the ball of their eye very bright, and they haue the moyst of their eyes verie cleere. XXI. Why doth a sudden vehement ioye sometime dis∣may a man, and  him? Because that when the vitall vertue, and inward naturall heat is immoderatly carried to the out∣ward parts, it is cast out and resolued and there∣fore such sweat and grow red, because the bloud is present. The naturall heate, and fire, both by rea∣son of his heare, and also because it is out of his place, moue vpward, and then for desire of foode and nouriture downe againe. And when one of these mouing due perish and faile, the man peri∣sheth and falleth also. XXII. Why doe such as are in griefe, and in loue, and in anger, sigh very oft? Because that the soule and minde of such as are grieued, is turned vnto the cause of griefe and sor∣rowe, and the mind of such as couet, to that which they doe couet, and the minde of the angrie, vnto that which causeth the anger. The soule then be∣ing intentiue vpon that whither she moueth, doth after a sort neglect & forget to giue motiue vertue and power vnto the muscules of the breast. There∣fore the heart not receiuing aire by opening of the breast, & by a consequēt neither blowing nor coo∣ling, nor yet casting forth, by shutting and closing,
any sighing superfluities, which are bred of the ad∣ustion of bloud, whilest it dooth feare suffocation, the heart, I say, doth force the minde and giue her warning, that she would giue more motion vnto the muscules, and cause greater breathing in and out, and that she would take more store of colde ayre, and thrust out more excrements, and that of∣ten small breathings would performe that that one great one may effect. And therefore men of oldtime; called the word suspirio sighing, of the straitnes of the breast. They doe sigh long and of∣ten, because the minde is alwaies vpon that which causeth the passion. Nature doth force the soule to send in by the heart more motiue vertue to the muscules of the breast. It is most euident that we doe breathe in and out by the arteries. Vnder the name of pulse, the opening and shutting, the re∣ceiuing and casting out breath is comprehen∣ded. XXIII. Why is a sausiege hardly digested? Because that through his lightnes, it doth swim in the belly aboue the moyst meate, nor doth not ioyne with that meate where concoction is made, but swimmeth at the gizzard where appetite is, & not digestion. If you cast him into the water out of a mans bodie, it will not sinke but swimme aboue the water. For whilest meate is minced in it, it re∣ceiueth a light ayre, which causeth it to swimme aboue inoyst things: and therefore it is limber and flaggie, because it is participant of ayre. XXIIII. Why doe wee make hot water before we goe into
the bath, and after that wee haue been long in the bath, our Vrine is cold? And this is so in comparing it to some other. V∣rine is of a luke warme qualitie, and moderatly hot: therefore out of the bath, because our bodie is cold, the vrine we make, as it were in compari∣son is hot, yet in the bath, because the bodie is much hotter then the vrine, therefore the vrine doth seeme colde, although it bee hot after a sort. The which doth appeare by that, that he who doth goe into a bath to get heate, if he onely goe into hot water, it seemeth very hot, but if already hea∣ted he goe into it, it doth not seeme so hot. XXV. Why doe we finde sweet fresh water, when we dig more the sea. Because that in the sea that water which is thin∣nest and purest is fresh, that which is thicker is salt: the thin water therefore which runneth through the passages of the earth, is hidden in the earth, the which we finde when we digge. It is fresh, be∣cause that in winter it is drawne vp into the ayre: the thicke and dried water doth become salt, but in the seashores, because the passages bee broad and wide, salt water is found. XXVI. Why is well water warme in winter, and colde in summer? Because that euery thing doth flee from his con∣trary as from his enemie. It is manifest that colde is contrary vnto beate, and dooth destroy it. And therefore because that in summer heate doth oc∣cupie the ayre, the cold doth flee into the bowels
of the earth, and therefore causeth the water to become cold. But in the winter, because the colde hath greater sway in the ayre, then the heate a∣gaine fleeth to the same place, and so dooth heate the water. For it is against the law of nature, that contraries shuld dwell together in the same place and time. XXVII. Why are men of a small stature commonly wiser then the tall? Because that in small men the soule is well ioy∣ned and compacted together in the whole bodie: in tall men it is extended in length. And therefore Homer doth describe Vlisses to bee short and wise, and Atax tall and a foole. XXVIII. Why doe we cast water into a mans face when he doth swoune, to make him come to himselfe againe? Because that through the coldnes of the water, the heate may repaire to the heart to giue strégth. XXIX. Why doe many fooles beget wise and strong chil∣dren? Because that fooles when they are in the act of copulation, yeeld very much vnto pleasure, and haue their minde drowned in the bodie. Whereby it commeth to passe, that their seede being partici∣pant of great vertue, as well reasonable as natural, doth cause such as are begotten to bee the wiser. But it happeneth otherwise vnto such as are wise and learned: for their seede wanteth much natu∣rall vertue, and the force of wisedom maketh them to thinke on some other externall cares, which
weakeneth their intention in the act of vene∣rie. XXX. Why doth not the dung of wilde beasts stinke so much, as the excrements of men? Because they vse drie, and not superflucus meates, and haue great exercise: yea the dung of some beasts are of a good sauour. But of all other the dung of a man doth sanour worst, because that men doe vse many moyst meates out of season, and more then is needfull. Then they are lesse hot then other beasts, and are not so much exerci∣sed. And therefore seeing that it is not fully dige∣sted, nor euaporated, by reason of the abundance, but dooth corrupt, therefore it is of a bad fa∣uour. XXXI. VVhy doth mustard and such like sharpe things, blister and exulcerate the skinne, if it be put on it, and when it is swallowed doth not exulcerate the bellie? Because they are dissolued with the moysture of the bodie, and because they are changed and di∣gested before they worke: and vpon the skinne which is thin they haue more time to worke. XXXII. Why doth barly branne, seeing that it is cold, dis∣solue fleume? Seeing that all cold doth make thicke, and hin∣der dissolution truely I thinke, not because it doth coole, therefore it dooth loose and dissolue, but because it dooth cast out, it hath a vertue of diuiding and expelling humours. And there are
diuers such kindes which worke contrarie vnto themselues, accidentally and by chance not prin∣cipally. As the nature of Bees which are hot, doe weaken an ague: not because they are hot, for the like dooth increase his like: but because they doe expell naughtie humours from the vaines, and prouoke vrine. So flower-deluce, and hysope are good for the pleurisie: although they bee hot, yet they doe cut those humours which doe breede be∣twixt the skinne, and which girde the side. So the disease which is called Tetanus, is cured with hot water powred on it, which is bred of cold humors: it doth heale it not principally, and of the own na∣ture of water, but because it is heated. XXXIII. Why do some men puffe and blow when they make water? Because the bladder when it is full of water doth swell, and straiten the gut which is called the right gut: and when it is emptied, a wind which is in the gut desireth passage out. Some thinke that there is an agreement in these parts in the auoyding of the vrine. XXXIIII. Why doe some gape when they see other men to gape? Because the nature of liuing creatures, and e∣specially of such as want reason hath a likenes of consents, and affections. And therefore when one asse doth piffe, the others doe stale likewise. XXXV. Why doth one which is bleere eyed, infect one who is whole, and yet he who is whole cannot heale the
bleere eyed? Because the eyes are soft and moyst, and expo∣sed vnto affections: then health receiueth an alte∣ration of a small cause, and sicknes of a great and vehement: and that which is in a meane, is easlier changed of that which is vehement, then contra∣riwise, the vehement and great of the temperate and meane. And therfore bleerenes is a vehement and great disease, and so doth easily turne health, which is a temperate and moderate state of the bodie. XXXVI. Why doe money and an apple seeme greater in the water then they be? Because the water dooth deceiue the sight, and the water about them make them seeme of one colour. So the Sunne, and the Moone, & the Pla∣nets, when they are seene neere vnto the point of the rising or falling, seeme to bee of a greater big∣nes then at other times: for they alter the ayre a∣bout them with their qualitie. XXXVII. Why when a man doth giue a blow with a staffe farre off we see the blow presently, but we heare the sound after, although the sound and the blow goe to∣gether? Because wee haue a sharper and quicker sight then hearing, and therefore the sight doth antici∣pate the stroke, and the hearing which is grosser, doth heare the sound slowlier. And by the same reason wee may dissolue the doubt of thundring and lightning: for wee see the lightning before we heare the thundring, although the thunder be
first, or at the least together with the lightning: and yet the sight being more subtile then the hea∣ring, doth see the lightning before the eare doth heare the thunder. XXXVIII. What is the reason seeing we be naked on our face, and clothed ouer all the bodie, yet we can endure cold better on our face, then on the bodie? Vse is the cause of it. XXXIX. What is the reason that yellow choler, which all a mans life time is contained in a place which is called the bladder of choler, dooth not eate out the same bladder, seeing that it is subiect vnto many altera∣tions, and yet if it fall into a tooth but a small time, which is a bodie which cannot easily suffer, it will presently eate him out? Because nature hath so wrought, that it should onely remaine in that bodie and not hurt it. The name of nature is a great remedie against griefe, as by many examples it can be proued. The infant is in the wombe of the mother nine moneths, and giueth no griefe of heaft vnto her: but if a light wind should breede there, it would presently cause a sharpe disease. The rough arterie is the onely re∣ceptacle of winde: but if a crumme should goe a∣misse in it, it causeth either choking or a vehement cough, which could not be so it nature had not so prescribed. XL. Why doe some men goe into a bath a thirst, and come out without thirst, and some contrariwise goe in not a thirst, and come out a thirst?
Such as are drie, doe waxe moyst in the bath, and quench their thirst: for thirst commeth of drines. But those which are moyst, and not thirstie, if they stay long in a hot ayre, are a thirst, be∣cause their moysture is dissolued and spent with swear. XLI. Why doe some belch vnsauerously after the eating of a radish, and  not? They whose stomack and belly doth not abound with naughtie and superfluous humours, tending vnto fleume, they haue a sweete breath: but they whose stomacke doth abound, they haue an vnsa∣uourie breath. A radish is hot, and dooth cut and attenuare the grosnes of humours, and dooth stirre vp a winde of the humours, the which it doth cast forth by belching. So dirt which is not stirred doth not sauour at all, but if it be stirred, yeeldeth a strong stinch. Those which thinke that a radish is of a stinking qualitie of himselfe because it doth stinke out of the bodie if it beelong kept, without doubt are deceiued. For all men which doe eate of them should haue an vnsauourie breath, if that were so. XLII. Why in very great cold doe the singer and super∣ficiall parts of the  waxe blacke and decay? Because that extreame cold doth driue in the naturall heate into the bodie, and so the outward side of the bodie dooth first growe wanne, then blacke, and almost like a corse. They doe fall and decay, because that nature being intentiue in the other parts of the bodie, dooth ioyne vnto
it selfe that which is hot, and doth driue away and cast out that which is decayed and naught. The superficiall parts are altered, because that they be not very fleshie, nor very hot. For in trees, those leaues fall soonest in the winter, which are least hot in nature, and therefore are weaker and thin∣ner. Those which say, that the naturall heate doth presently in the beginning flee from the cold, as it were from an aduersarie, into the internall parts of the bodie, and then gather it selfe againe and strengthen it selfe, and as it were with a supplie helpe those parts which were altered: and so ei∣ther because it was on a sudden, or because great store of heate doth runne backe againe, and so burne the vttermost parts of the bodie, because that staying there, there is much of it gathered to∣gether, those I say without all doubt doe thinke a∣misse which say this. XLIII. Why are such in great paine, which being very cold, do heate their fingers ends, or vttermost parts of the bodie? By reason of the sudden chaunge of qualitie, much cold doth change into much heate. What∣soeuer is suddenly done, dooth bring griefe to na∣ture. Whatsoeuer is suddenly done agreeing vn∣to nature, dooth delight nature: for mans bodie dooth consist much in the manner of his disposi∣tion. XLIIII. Why doe such as eate pepper, or great morsels of bread, yexe? There is a proportion in them with those things
which doe outwardly ouercharge vs, or cause vs to haue paine. Pepper and choler haue a proportion with thornes: but fleume and bread with a heauie stone. Such as haue a stomacke, not full of super∣fluities, nor hot and sensible, they are quickly bit∣ten with the sharpnes of pepper: they doe stirre vp the stomacke to auoyd and cast out that which grieueth, and so doe yexe. But such as haue a cold stomacke, and full of fleume, and feele not so well, they doe not yexe so soone. The like doth happen vnto them which doe swallow great store and gob∣bets of bread, the stomacke is oppressed with the abundance and greatnes of bread: and nature doth not suffer her parts to bee idle, when she fee∣leth any thing that doth hurt her. And therefore pepper, with his biting qualitie, which hath a pro∣portion with yellowe choler, and bread with the waight of his quantitie, and also abundance of fleume, oppressing vs within, doe cause yexing. XLV. Why do such paines as are in the nailes grieuously torment vs? Because that the sinewes which are in the fin∣gers, with a peculiar kind of superfluitie doe breed the nayles, as the teeth are in the gummes. There∣fore when the sensible vertue of the sinewes goeth to the extreame parts, and is there gathered toge∣ther, like water flowing into a valley, without all doubt, the greater the alteration is, the greater griefe is felt. XLVI. Why doth a great deale of bread deuoured hasti∣ly,
by staying from breathing, driue away the yexe? Because that pressing the stomack, and driuing it into a narrow roome, it causeth that the meate which is hardened in it, to bee pressed out into the belly, and so being discharged, doth stay the yexe. XLVII. Why doe such as yexe, giue vp yexing when they heare of any sorrowfull matter? Because they are intentiue vpon that which sor∣rowfull newes brought, and therefore neglect to moue their breast. And againe, seeing we doe then holde our breath, and so cause it to grow great in vs, it doth stay the yexe. XLVIII. Why doe pictures to those which are neere them, shew their colours plaine, and vnto those which stand a farre off, shew some hollow, and some bending and hanging? Because the force of seeing is dissolued & stret∣ched in a long distance, and therefore cannot see exactly the skill of colours, but doth see the white colours bending, and the blacke hollow. For the white dooth shine outwardly, and moueth it selfe vnto that which is bright, but black as being dark, inwardly. XLIX. Why if cold water be an enemie vnto the sinewes, is not hot water a friend and good, but yet that is al∣so hurtfull? For if such a thing bee hurtfull, the contrary is profitable: for contraries cannnot worke the same way, vpon the same thing. But in trueth hot as hot in his owne nature is not hurtful vnto the sinewes,
but in that that it is hot and moyst. Such as haue their sinewes hurt, their sinewes because they are of quicke feeling, want much fastening, and ben∣ding, for they are dry of their owne nature: but the moystnes which is contrary, dooth mollifie them, and slaken them, and putrifie them. And so it is plaine that heate of it selfe is not hurtfull by na∣ture. A draught of hot oyle is good, because it hath a binding nature. L. Why if apples be naught, because they be cold and moyst, is not water so to being of the  qualitse? Because water is more subtile then apples, and sooner purged, and therefore it doth not hurt so much: yea, it doth somewhat strengthen the body. LI. What is the reason that those things which haue a hard concuction, and are of a grosse humour, are more easlier digested, as beefe, then those which are of an easier digestion, and not of so grosse a humour, as fish? Some attribute this vnto custome: some thinke the cause to bee in some secret hidden qualitie of nature. Some say that by reason of exceeding heate, those meates which are more digestiue then is requisite, as being more mutable, are burnt, and consumed through the great force of heate. And those meates which are not apt to digest, as being hard to be changed, seeing they be not much cha∣ged, are onely digested. So straw as being apt to be altered, with great fine turneth into ashes present∣ly: but the like is not in oake which is orderly bur∣ned.
LII. Why are such as are sicke and in paine, pale out∣wardly? Because that nature, as wee haue sayd, doth pe∣netrate euen vnto the heart, together with the bloud. And it is the bloud which doth heat the su∣perficiall parts, and make them thin and cleere. LIII. Why doth cold wine grow in AEgypt, which is a hot countrey? For the same reason. Againe, the cold doth flee to the rootes of the vines, and dooth make them cold: for the vines are more apt then other trees to receiue alteration. LIIII. Why doth hot water cast into a well, cause the wa∣ter to be very cold? Because the cold which is in the well, doth resist the heate: and because it is greater then the heat, it doth prosecute the heate by al meanes, and doth flow into the hot water very much, and so make it cold. LV. Why, when a small beast doth flee into our eyes, doe we shut the other eye when we put him out? Because that the spirit of seeing cannot goe out by the eye which is shut: but gathering it selfe to∣gether, goeth with all abundance to the eye which is open, and doth fill it, and make it swell outward, and so that is driuen out and expelled that is in him. LVI. Why doe such as are buffeted see fire?
Because that the spirit of seeing, being made thinne and slender with the blow, doth waxe fitie, and so going into the ayre, is seene as he is. The like doth happen when two stones, or two peeces of yron are striken together: for the ayre be∣tweene both is greatly rarefied and made thinne, and becommeth fire. The like also doth happen in the clowdes. LVII. Why is not fire made by the striking of all stones? Because force of them doe yeeld too much, and are too light, and as it were full of holes. For all striking of the ayre doth not make it thinne alike, and by reason of his lightnes it dooth flee, and en∣ter into euery passage. And therefore it is not all striken at once, nor all waxe fire. The like dooth happen by striking of wood. And fire is made of the sunne and water: for the broken beames of the sunne against a glasse, doe waxe more and more fi∣rie, and doe rebound vpward againe. LVIII. Why doe such as itch, desire hot feruent things? Because that fleume, through whose grosnes and cold itching doth rise, doth dull the feeling of the skinne. LIX. Why are they also glas of bath? Because heate doth disperse the fleume, and the nayles also doe dissolue it. LX. Why doe the shoulders itck most? Because they are colder then the soreparts, and therefore haue more fleume in them. And that is
the reason, that old men which are cold, are much troubled with the itch. LXI. Why is the comming downe a ladder more easie, then the going vp? Because that in descending, the waight of the bodie doth of his owne nature moue downward: in ascending, the strength dooth labour in lifting vpward the waight of the bodie. So a stone is easier cast downwarde then vpwarde: for that which is heauie tendeth downward. LXII. Why doe children cry when they are first borne? Because their nature and sences, doe as it were wander in a strange countrey: for they come out of a warme soft bodie of the wombe into the colde ayre. And peraduenture also they are afrayd of the light. LXIII. Why doe Bees, Emmots, and Flyes, and such beasts as are called Insect a, dye in oyle? Because their breathing hole is very narrowe, which oyle doth stop, and therefore they petish. LXIIII. Why doe we coole hot things by blowing, and heate cold things? Because that breathing being hot, going out doth dissolue their qualitie. We coole hot things, because wee doe moue and resolue their hot qua∣litie. LXV. Why doth flesh putrifie in the night vnder the full Moone? Because then the ayre is hot and moyst, which
disposition dooth especially further putrefaction: whereof it riseth that if the heate and moystnes be small, cōcoction is wrought: if great, consuming: if heat preuaile, burning. The Moone also hath foure dispositions: the middle doth seeme to bee moyst, and after a sort hot: the full, hot after a manner and dry: in the wane, dry and cold: when she is without light, cold and dry: for then she wanteth the sunne beames. LXVI. Why are such pale as are in paine and griefe? Because that nature remembring that which doth vexe her, fleeth with the bloud to the inward parts, which doth paint the skinne: and it happe∣neth lesse vnto those, then to such as feare. LXVII. Why are such red as are glad? Because that nature doth meete that which de∣lighteth of her owne accord, if it be without, as we doe our friends and children. The bloud doth fol∣lowe nature, which dieth the flesh with a red co∣lour. Palenes commeth by the contrary vnto this. LXVIII. What is the reason, that in a dead sleepe in the night, when we open our eyes suddenly, we see light? Because that the force and spirit of seeing be∣ing gathered together in sleeping, and increased, dooth rush our through the darke in great abun∣dance, and being bright himselfe, doth see like vn∣to the light. LXIX. Why doe such as are ashamed, cast downe their eyes?
Because the eyes are the glasse of the minde: for we see the affections of the minde by the eyes, as griefe, anger, shame: because the minde cannot beare that which is not worthie of honor, for con∣science sake, it causeth the muscules of the eyes to be cast downe, as it were hiding himselfe. LXX. Why can the care endure all moystnes, the water excepted? Because that the water being cold, is presently carried vnto the sinewe of hearing: and all cold is hurtfull vnto the sinewes. Againe: Why before a great winde, are there as it were some running staires or lightnings going before to foretell it, and especially in a dry cleere element? Because that it began to blowe before, and yet it appeared not vnto vs, because wee haue grosse thicke bodies of hard sences. And therefore blowing the vpper ayre, which is more thinne and pure and heauen∣ly, it doth conuert into fire, and therefore wee see some of his sparkles. When it hath gotten a grea∣ter force, it moueth this grosser ayre which is a∣bout the earth, and so is hard and felt, and percci∣ued. LXXI. Why cannot some see very great things a farre off, yet see things which are neere vnto them, although they be very small? As such as wee call purblinde, because they see best winking: truely I thinke that the force and spirit of seeing is very thinne and pure, and there∣fore when it goeth farre is dissolued, and cannot reach vnto the obiect which is seene. It doth skarse
see things neere by reason of his thinnes & pure∣nes. There are some which see very small things a farre off, as certaine old men. These contrariwise, because they haue a thick spirit of seeing & much, it doth moue and reach a great distance off, and by that meanes is attenuated and made thinne, and apt and fit, to receiue things visible. And so two contraries are dissolued. LXXII. Why are dogges onely aboue all other beasts, lined so together after they couple? Because the necke of the matrix hath a narrow passage, and the dogges yarde dooth swell in cou∣pling, and the seed is cleauing in them, which hap∣peneth vnto them by reason of their drines. The drines doth  the parts, and moysture doth make them thicke. LXXIII. Why are dogges onely mad in summer? By reason of their dry disposition: they are very dry by nature, and most of al in summer. And ther∣fore when their humiditie is heated and dried, they are set on fire, and so they are mad like vnto franticke men. And therefore their some at the mouth is most dry and venemous: for it is mani∣fest that it is inflamed either by often breathing, or by firie eyes, or by gaping of their mouth, which they haue alwaies open to take ayre, or els because their taile groweth crooked with drines, and fal∣leth away. They are most raging which are most dry. Some say that the canicular starre, through his influence, doth cause them to goe mad.
LXXIIII. Why are they lesse grieued which become blind on a sudden and against their will, then they which by election? Because that such as on the sudden suffer it, haue their minde turned another way. But those which by choise and election haue their minde whollie vpon the thing which is cut, and knowe what they shall suffer, and therefore suffer greater torment. LXXV. Why doe such as carrie burdens goe singing? Because the reasonable soule is delighted with musicke, & therfore turned vnto it, doth feele the lesse weight. And in like manner answer, when the question is asked, why in funerals, bels, drummes and flutes are vsed: and why multitudes of men re∣sort vnto such as mourne, or bee sicke, and vse di∣uers speeches vnto them: for the minde being oc∣cupied and intentiue to the words, dooth seele the griefe lesse. And therefore Comedies and stage playes were inuented in times past, to withdrawe the minde. LXXVI. Why doe the AEthtoptans for the most part die of anague, and why are those which are bleere eyed vl∣cerated? They are most hot and dry, and there is a kinde of resolution of elements in them, and that little moisture which is in them being consumed, it hap∣peneth that the other elements are dissolued. The heate goeth away for want of meate, the colde ri∣seth vp through the absence of heate. Drines doth raigne through the consumption of moistnes. And
for that cause dead car casses are cold and dry. And therfore Honter did know, that in dead bodies two elements did see away, that is the lightest, & thin∣nest, and two remayned: there went away fire and ayre, and there remayned water and earth, that is, drines and coldnes. They are exulcerated and blistered in the bleerenes of their eyes, because that the bloud is made full of choler, by reason of inflammation, which dooth eare the eyes  his sharpnes. LXXVII. Why are such alwaies a thirst which haue the dropsie? Because that that moysture is salt, and passeth not away, but dooth putrifie, and dry the mouth of the stomacke, and they haue small seuers withall. Further looke how much more the belly is puffed vp, so much the more the rest of the bodie is drier, seeing it is  nourished, and doth waxe feebler and feebler. For much of the food turneth into water and increaseth the disease. LXXVIII. Why doe we in the beginning of a bankes and be∣fore we be full sit close, and before the end of the  we take more roome, ? Because that in the begining,  and haue an appetite vnto the  haue an eye vnto that which is  & all doe fall to it. But after they are  one boweth one way, and another another, and  no care at all to that which is before them: and by this meanes after meate we take more roome. LXXIX. Why in whatsoeuer place wee haue haire, they
waxe gray,  vnder the armepits? Because that place is hot, because it is thicke of arteries sinewes and vaines, and is also thinne, and therefore doth alwaies voyde the excrements of fleume, and therefore doe sweate alwaies. LXXX. Wherefore if fleume be cold, and thick, and clam∣mie, and likewise blacke choler cold and thicke, but much lesse then fleume, yet a quartaine ague is lon∣ger then a quotidian? Because that fleume, although it be colde, and much of it, yet it is moyst, and moystnes is easily altered and changed. Black choler or melancho∣ly is cold and dry, and therefore is hardly altered and chaunged. They deceiue therefore with the likenes of cold, and abundance of choler, and doe hide some contrary qualitie. Furthermore, fleume is more agreeable vnto nature then melancholie: and therefore when a mans health dooth perish with hunger, nature doth turne fleume into nou∣riture. And therefore in a quotidian ague, she tur∣neth all the profitable fleume into nourishment, and that which is vnprofitable putrifieth, and kind∣leth an ague. LXXXI. Seeing that there are foure humours which doe sometimes putrifie, wherefore are there only but three agues, and not foure? Because that bloud naturally is a nutriment of the bodie. And when it doth abound, it causeth a repletion onely. If it bee corrupted, it remaineth bloud no longer: for being heated, it is chaunged into yellow fleume. Therefore the other humors
abounding, breed diseases, and especially about the skinne, as serpentine vlcers, and cankers, two kinds of leprosie: and when they bee corrupted they breed agues. LXXXII. What is the reason that the externall parts of the bodie of louers are sometimes cold, sometimes hot? Because that when they conceiue any griefe or dolour against their welbeloued, the naturall hear posteth away with the bloud into the internall parts of the bodie: whereof it commeth that the outwarde partes are colde, and for the same cause they become pale and sad. But when they receiue any good hope of their louer, or be greatly angry, then the heate with the bloud goeth to the skin, and becommeth hot and ruddie. And for the selfe same cause painters doe paint loue to be sometime sad and quiet, sometime fleeing and laughing, a very boy and child, because that lust is vehement, but dureth not long. The affection in lawfull friends is durable, as in fathers towards their chil∣dren, and wiues toward their husbands, but loue doth not last. And it happeneth oft among such as are vnknowne the one to the other. The other disposition and affection is firme and stable: & im∣moderate loue is vehement, and like vnto a mad man. They faine Loue to haue a firebrand, and wings, because that the mindes of louers are in suspense, and hang doubtfully and are vnconstant like birds: and then their heate burneth their heart with an vncessant, and vehemēt care of that which they loue. He holdeth a sword in his right hand, and in his left a quiuer with many arrowes,
because that in the beginning loue doth rise from one beame and glance of the eye: for he doth see and desire at the selfe same time. And as soone as he doth desire, the louer sendeth cōtinuall beames of the eie towards that which he loueth. And those beames are like vnto arrowes, because the louer doth dart them into the bodie. There are arrowes in the quiuer, because that those which loue, send forth secret beames and glances of the eies. As the wind doth kindle the fire, so custome dooth kindle loue: for properly loue doth not rise of custome. For if it were so, then of necessitie custome should alwayes breede loue: but the beginning of loue is sudden. He is naked, because that that desire hap∣peneth without any meane. For no man loueth by by another, nor priuily, nor whom he knoweth not. And therefore caruers doe sometime carue kings and gods naked for honours sake, thereby to shewe that they haue no hidden vice lurking in their breasts, but that their thoughts are open and sincere. Loue is not one but many, either because there are diuers louers of things, (for they loue not alike: and Plato sayth, that loue is a beast with many heads) or els, because as the same Plato saith, the same loue falleth vnder many loues. Loue hath Venus for his mother, that is, sensuali∣tie and lust: and by the image of Venus they faine vnlawfull desire. Loue is sayd to haue been in loue with Erinnys a furie of hell, because that many haue loued wickedly, and haue been thrall to wicked affections: as I haue declared in my se∣cond booke of Allegories, which I haue made of those fained stories.
LXXXIII. Why doe some die in a plague and some not? This proceedeth of their disposition of . For if a man haue a body full of euil humours, him the ayre which is corrupted doth enter into, and corrupteth that little good humour which is left in him: and so all their humours being corrupted, they must needs perish. But if a man haue not ma∣ny superstuities, & doth aboūd with good humors, he is either not at all, or not much offended with the plague. That the disposition of the bodie is the cause of this effect, it doth appeare by the example of externall things. The oake is not easily subiect vnto alteration, not dooth not easily set on fire. Reedes and rushes are much more apt to receiue fire: and straw more then they. But if you take wet straw, and greene reedes, and very dry oake pow∣dred ouer with brimstone, you make that fit to burne which was not fit. By this example you may dissolue another question, how it cōmeth to passe, that  doth rather breed a cotidian ague, then that which breedeth of purrefaction, or that which is called Habituall: for we say that this doth proceed from the disposition of the bodie: for he had not any superstuous natural spirits, or humors. All things which are sound and solid are dry. And the cause is in the same, why the heat of the sunne doth procure sleep in some, and in othersome not. For he in whom there was much fleume, that be∣ing dispersed, doth moysten the head, and then he is in a sleepe: but such as haue a drie head are kept more awake, because they are made more drie.
LXXXIII. Why doth the sunne make a man black, and make dirt white, and make waxe soft, and the dirt hard? By reason of the disposition of the substances which doe luffer. All humours, fleume excepted, when they are heated aboue measure, doe seeme blacke about the skinne: but dirt being full either of saltpeter, or other salt liquour, when the sunne hath consumed his dregges and filth, doth become white. Againe, when the sunne hath drawne and stirred vp the humiditie of the waxe, it is softened: but in dirt the sunne doth consume the humiditie, which is very much, and so doth drie it and make it hard. LXXXIIII. Why doe not such as are sicke of the idundise goe to siege, and why is their excrement white? Because that yellowe choler is spred ouer all their bodie, as their eyes doe shew, and their skin: for it doth not flowe into the inward parts, as by nature it should, and by that reason their excre∣ments is not coloured, nor dooth not prouoke thē to the stoole with his sharpnes, which in the guts it should doe. And therefore Phisicke imitating nature, as all other arts doe, when the patient is in danger, doth helpe the part affected. LXXXV. Why haue such a very black skin for a time, which haue a continuall ague, after the time of iudgement, which the Phisitions doe call Crisis? That doth happen through continuall yellowe choler, the which being burnt and adust by the ri∣gour of the disease, is turned into blacke choler.
And so in that time of iudgement, being driuen & repulsed by nature to the skinne it doth dye it. As also the skinne is white in leprosies: that colour is hardly dissolued, by reason of the thicknes of that humour. LXXXVI. Why doth blacke choler comming vnto the paps, or to the shanke, worke a cerrosion, or gnawing or wasting, and in those which are called melancholie, it doth not worke she like, although it stow into their braine? Because there are many great vaines in the paps, by reason of ingendring of milke, and there∣fore store of that humour doth runne thither. And likewise vnto the shanke, because it goeth down∣ward: but into the braine, because it is aboue, and also because it hath very small vaines, small store of choler doth ascend, and which hath only power and force to pricke, and not to gnaw and eate. Moreouer, the braine is cold and moyst, whereby it is after a sorte contrary vnto the disposition of blacke choler, and doth mollifie it. That therefore which is property called blacke choler, doth breed an eating and gnawing canker in the pappes: in the shanke, a byle or sore hard to be cured, which of eating is called Nomades. In the braine it dooth breed a mad fierce melancholy: but that which is not properly blacke choler, but a melancholy hu∣mour, causeth a swelling onely which is like a can∣ker, but dooth not gnawe and eate, and dooth also breede a quiet and peaceable melancholy. LXXXVII. Why do those vessels which of the Greckes are cal∣led
Baucalia, (a kinde of vessell or drinking glasse with a narrowe streit mouth) when they are filled with water, make a certaine noise proper vnto them∣selues, and thereupon haue their name giuen them, as other fained names of sounds, as in the water, Phloesbos, and such like? Because that when such a vessell is without wa∣ter, it is filled with ayre, which is a most thinne bo∣die. And therefore when water is on a sudden pow∣red into it, with his heaft it doth follow and beate out the ayre which is thinne, and exclude it vtter∣ly. For they cannot both stay in the glasse or vessel, vntil it be full. For the Philosophers doe shew that two bodies cannot at one time possesse and occu∣pie the same place. And therefore when the ayre is on a sudden thrust vpward through straites, a sound or noise is made of necessitie, and that not one but many, for then is as it were a fight betwixt both: for the water doth presse downe the ayre, & the ayre lifteth vp the water: and although this bee done successiuely, yet there is often times a noise. LXXXVIII. What is the reason that when wee put our finger on the mouth of a watring garden pot, the water will not runne out at the bottome, and our finger being taken away, it runneth presently? Because that when our finger is taken away from the mouth of the pot, the ayre entring in doth thrust downe the water, which of his owne nature doth goe downward, and so it goeth out at the bottome. And this is the reason of all mecha∣nicall engins and instruments made by ayre and
water, as clocks and houre glasses made by water. LXXXIX. Why doth both wine and water giuen out of sea∣son vnto the siche of an ague cause a great distempe∣rature of the braine: for these two are contrary, for the water is cold, and the wine hot? I say then that the wine being apt to ascende, doth burne the braine, at the time that it is distur∣bed and distempered with the ague. And wee see also many which are in health, if they vse much wine, to be skarse well in their wits. But water doth stop the passages of the bodie, by which the spirits (which are the instruments of the soule) are dis∣solued, and so cause them to become more thicke and grosse, and more corrupt and putrified, which breedeth the ague. And oftentimes water being ouercome by the ague, becommeth his nourish∣ment. As wee see in a  forge, where a little water doth kindle the fire,  make it flame more. XC. Why haue women and children and gelded men shrill and lowd voyces? Because through abundance of humiditie, their arterie is not stretched wide. And therefore as a small flute or  a small slender sound, so the arterie in them which is  and narrow for it is the propertie of heat to make wide and loose, and women and  be cold. XCI. Why are children strocken with a planet in the summer? They are sicke of a weake and lingering ague, and their eyes sinke hollowe in their head, and
they become weake and feeble, and sleepe very little. And some of them haue a flixe, because chil∣dren are tender and easily suffer, and haue great store of fleume in the head, as we haue sayd. And therefore the fleume being ouer much heated with great heates, and also putrified, doth inflame an ague. Whereupon the gristles of the braine are set on fire, and therefore they sleepe little: & that fire descending by the arteries to the heart, & set∣ting on fire the liuely spirits, dooth kindle an ague without putrefaction. And seeing that much cho∣ler riseth of an ague, thereby it falleth out, that that choler gnawing and eating the belly & guts, the flixe, or running of the belly ariseth. It is most plaine, that the cause of that alteration is in the braine, because that cooling medicins are applied vnto the head, & such as are good to quench that fire. And some of ripe yeares are sicke of the same disease, that is, such as haue fleume or some choler heaped in the head, which dooth putrifie. By the very breathing therefore, and after a manner by the firie ayre, the spirits are set on fire. XC II. Why are round vlcers or byles hard to be cured? Because they breed of sharpe choler, and which hath a force of eating and gnawing. And because it doth runne dropping and gnawing, it doth make a round vlcer: and for that cause it requireth me∣dicaments which dry and burne. And this the Phisitions doe speake. The naturall Philosophers do say, it commeth to passe, because there is no be∣ginning where that mischieuous impostume doth begin. For in a circle there is neither beginning
nor ende, and when they are burned by the Phisi∣tion, then they take another shape. XC III. Why is honey sweet vnto all men, and yet seemeth bitter vnto such as haue the Eunuches be cold. Because they haue much bitter choler ouer all the bodie, and which aboundeth in the tongue. And therefore it happeneth when they doe eate honey, that the humour is : and the taste it selfe when it hath felt the bitternes of choler, breedeth an imagination that the honey is bit∣ter. XC III I. Why haue very angrie men firie eyes? Because the bloud about his heart is feruens, and his spirits hot. And therefore these spirits be∣ing very subtile and pure, are carried vp ward, and by the eyes which are cleere, they shine and haue bloudy vapours ascending with them. And there∣vpon their face appeareth red which Homer not being ignorant of sayth: And his eyes were like a burning flame. XC V. Why doth water cast vpon Serpents cause them to flee? Because they are colde by nature, and dry, and haue but little bloud, and therefore they doe flee from excessiue coldnes. And that they bee of this qualitie it appeareth, because they seeke for dens and secret places of the earth in winter, as being warme places. And at sunne set, they flee the ayre for the most part as cold: and againe in summer, because the bowels of the earth are cold, they flee
from them, and goe vnto hot places. XCVI. Why doth a negge breake if he bee rosted, and ne∣uer breake if he be sod in water? Because that when his moystnes cōmeth neere vnto the fire, he doth heate ouer much, and is bur∣ned, and thereby dooth breede much winde, the which through the straitnes of the place, doth seek a way our, and so breaking the shell dooth flee out. The like is in tubbes and earthen vessels when new wine dooth boyle in them. Also too much flame dooth breake the shell of an egge in rosting: which doth also happen vnto earthen pottes ouer much heated and burnt. And therefore the com∣mon people doe wet a negge which they purpose to roste. Hot water through his softnes doth sepa∣rate the humiditie little and little, and dooth dis∣solue it through the thinnes and passages which are in the shell. XCVII. Why doe men in the act of carnall copulation af∣ter a sort winke, and suffer such like alteration in the other sences? Because they being ouercome with the affect of that pleasure, they doe comprehend it the better, as it were winking with their eyes. They are not lifted vp, nor doe not carrie the mind abroad into the aire with the sences, whereby they should lesse feele those corporall affections. XCVIII. Why haue some medicines of one kind contrarie force, as experience doth teach: Mastick doth expell, dissolue, and knit; Vineger doth both coole & heate?
Because there are some smal indiuisible bodies in thē, not by confusion, but by interposition. As sand moystened doth clod together, and seemeth to be but one substance or bodie, but in trueth there are many small bodies in the sand if this be so it is not absurd, that contrary qualities and vertues should be hidden in  in diuers parts of it, and not confounded with it, because that nature hath gi∣uen that law vnto those bodies. XCIX. Why doth our  member sivell, when we hurt one of our toes? Because that nature prouiding for those things which belong vnto those die, doth speede to helpe those parts which are grieued. And because she hath the most profitable, and nourishing of all the humors for her wagon, it is requisit when she doth descend vnto the toe, together with the bloud, that those vaines bee filled which are about the priuie member, and those partes which are about those vessels which are called Adenes of the Greekes, which are little round kernels. Therefore an im∣moderate constipation doth cause inflammation and standing vp: and that priuie member is called Inguen, borrowing his denomination of the place itselfe. C. Why hath not nature giuen birds a bladder for a receptacle of vrine and kidneis? Because they did want much moysture to giue matter for feathers to grow, and that also they do consume with the exercise of fleeing. Neither doe they pisse at all: and when they drinke, they voyde very moyst dung.
CI. Why haue children grauel breeding in their blad∣der, and olde men in the kidneis and raines of the backe? Because children haue straite passages in the kidneis: and an earthly and thick humor is thrust with violence by the vrine from the kidneis, and from those receptacles which are made of the fa∣shion of the Moone, euen into the bladder of the vrine. The bladder hauing wide conduites & pas∣sages, giueth roome to the vrine to goe out, and al∣so place to the humour, whereof the grauell is in∣gendred, to waxe thick and seate it selfe, as the cu∣stome of it is. But in olde men it is contrary: for they haue large and wide passages of the raines of the backe and kidneis, whereof it commeth passe, that the vrine may passe away, and the earthly hu∣mour congeale and sinke downe. The colour of the stone doth shew the humor whereof the stone doth rise. CII. Why if the stone doe congeale and waxe hard through heate (children are hot) and by the same rea∣son it is done in old men: for there is not so much cold to be graunted as there is in yce or snow: for with extreame cold the kidneis would perish, yet we do not vse contrary things to dissolue the coldnes, but like things, that is, hot things, as persley, fennell, and such like? They say then that it salleth out, that by ex∣ustion, parching and scorching, the stone dooth crumble into small sand: As it is in earthen vessels, which when they are ouer heated and tosted, they
become sand. And by this meanes it falleth out, that small stones are voyded together with small sand in making of water. And sometime it falleth out that cold drinkes doe thrust out the stone, the kidneis being stretched and casting it out, by a great lask, by vertue of easing the belly of his bur∣then. And besides this it falleth out, that an immo∣derate heate of the kidneis or raines of the backe, by reason whereof the stone doth growe, is quen∣ched with coldnes. CIII. Why is the curing of an vlcer or byle very hardin the kidneis or bladder? Because that the vrine being sharpe, doth exul∣cerate the wound, which good and fit  doe couer and skinne. Vlcers are harder to be cu∣red in the bladder, then in the kidneis, because the vrine dooth stay in the bladder, and doth runne a∣way from the kidneis. CIIII. What is the reason that in bathing vessels the hot water when it is stirred, doth seeme more hot vnto vs, and almost burne our bodies? Because that when wee goe downe into those baths, the water it selfe dooth suffer, that is, when the water doth heate our bodies, the water after a sort is made colde by vs. Wee haue learned, that whatsoeuer doth worke in generation and corrup∣tion, the selfe same without all doubt doth . The water then being in some sort cooled, dooth not heate a like, and we being accustomed vnto it, do not feele the heate as we did in the beginning, because that the immoderate heate of it is dimini∣shed.
If then stirring the hot water, more faire hot water bee added vnto it, which neither hath yet wrought, nor suffered any thing of the body which is in the water, that will seeme very hot and skal∣ding, in respect that working it dooth also suffer, and by little and little lose his heate, as the first did. CV. How is it, if whatsoeuer be moued, is the hotter for it, and especiall) in a hot aire and place, yet when the aire is beaten and stirred, it dooth seeme the colder vnto vs, and especially in summer, when the heate of the sunne is most hot? For this dooth seeme contrary vnto the other: for hot water did seeme hotter vnto vs by mouing it, and here the hot ayre doth seeme colder when it is stirred and moued. I say therefore that it is a common thing, that that which is most and prin∣cipallest in any thing, either in qualitie or vertue, dooth ouercome and chaunge that which is lesser and weaker, and that which is the stronger dooth somewhat suffer againe in doing. Therefore the hot water when it is very hot, sticking vnto the hot bodie, is somewhat cooled, and doth not keep the same qualitie. The ayre then which dooth compasse vs about, being hot in summer, like vnto the water, compassing our bodies, is heated some∣what by vs, which are hot through the heate of the time of the yeare, and doth likewise againe heate vs: As linnen garments doe, the which being first cold then being made hot by vs, doe then heate vs againe. When wee doe then stirre the ayre, that ayre which was before heated by vs is driuen a∣way,
and another which is not as yet heated doth succeed, which seemeth cold vnto vs. CVI. Why doe those  which breed in the ball of the eye seeme white, when they haue left growing and are old, and others  which growe out of the Because that through the ball of the eye onely the spirit of seeing doth go out the which is bright and cleere. Therefore in the white of the eye, when the wound doth make thicke the passage of the couering of the eyes which is like a horne, the spirit of sight cannot  out: whereof it com∣meth to pasle, that much of it being there gathe∣red together, it dooth make the wound light and cleare, and shewe the wound white. And because that by reason of the thickening of the sight the spirit cannot goe out, it falleth out that they can∣not see. CVII. Why doe chaffe and straw keepe hot water and cold snow, which are contraries in qualitie? Because the nature of chaffe doth want a ma∣nifest qualitie, and are sayd of some to be without qualitie. Seeing therefore that of their owne na∣ture, they can easily be mingled and confused with that which they are next vnto, they easily also take the same nature vnto thē. And therefore being put vnto hot things, they are easily hot, and doe heate againe, and keepe hot: and contrary being made colde of the snowe, and making the snowe colde, doe keepe his coldnesse. So Waxe and Oyle
will easily be confused, & made one with another thing, and are also without qualitie, and doe helpe the qualitie of that which is mingled with them, as being made one with them. CVIII. Why doe the starres and heauens seeme cleerest in the bright winter time? Because the ayre, either which doth compasse vs, or that which is higher, is made thinne and pur∣ged with windes and showers of raine, and by that meanes our sight dooth see both further and clee∣rer. The like is manifestly seene in running riuers: for such things as are in thē are farre better seene, then in thick puddle standing water, where either nothing is seene, or confusedly. CIX. Why haue we oftentimes a paine, and doe quake in making of water? Because that sharpe choler issuing out, & prick∣ing the bladder of vrine, doth prouoke and stirre vp the whole bodie to ease the part offended, and to expell the humour moderatly. This doth hap∣pen most of all vnto children, because they haue most excrements, by reason of their often filling. CX. Wherefore are griefes greater in the night, then in the day? Because the minde being then idle and at rest with himselfe, is neither busied with the sight nor hearing, nor occupied with any other sence, and doth nothing at all, nor is not vrged to any exter∣nall action, and thereupon is much more touched with the feeling of any trouble or griefe. It is very
plaine that the mind doth lesse feele griefes of the bodie, whē he is drawne abroad to external works, seeing that in sicknesse and other such accidents, the companie and familiaritie of friends, & com∣munication and tales telling, doe make their trou∣bles and griefes more light and tolerable. Men haue marked that nature doth least worke by day, in digestion of meates, in altring of humours, in making of bloud, in growing, and such like opera∣tions. But the minde is then most occupied in his actions, as in the fiue sences, in motions of the parts of the bodie, in imagination, in thought, in memorie: and contrary in the night, then nature worketh most, and the mind least. CXI. Why doth a glasse breake in the winter, if you powre any very hot liquour into him? Because that it is throughly affected and altred, by reason of the coldnes of the ayre which dooth compasse it. And therefore when we powre in very hot water on a sudden, and not heate the glasse be∣fore, the heate doth fight and striue with the cold which was in it: the colde with the ayre presently fleeing, causeth the breaking of the glasse. It must be granted, that there be certaine small holes and passages in the glasse, which doe hold and receiue the purest and thinnest parts of the aire, the which although we doe not see with our eyes, and with sence, yet wee cannot deny but by nature there they be. Others doe say, that because the glasse is very cold, then it is very dry also, & therfore that which is the subtilest part in it, whether it be a hu∣mour or the ayre, is thrust out, and doth as it were
vanish away, and so is made apt to breake. And so it is in very dry wood. And so Hippocrates did say, that the vaines were broken with cold. That ther∣fore which is very hot, finding the glasse to bee such, drying it more and more, doth cause him to breake. If it had been before wet ouer, and heated a little, it would not haue been hurt: as wee see wrastlers annoynted before they goe to wrastle. For when drines falleth into those passages and inuisible holes, it fleeth quickly with the ayre, and the softnes of the glasse giuing place vnto the heate, doth not easily breake. It is easily seene that grasse hath those passages, by earthen pottes, into which if you powre water, and dawbe them with pitch, yet the humour will woose out. You may also see in winter time a smoake or fume breake out of a glasse, when you cast water into him. CXII. Why are not children and especially infants, so easily shaken and put out of ioynt, as men? By reason of their softnes, yeelding vnto the earth, they doe dissolue his hardnes, that it can worke no further. Men therefore, hauing a hard bodie, because they doe resist the hardnes of the earth or stone, they doe increase the vehemencie of the blowe, and doe force the stone to worke a∣gainst themselues, as being hard themselues. And for the same reason a spunge yeelding is not bro∣ken: but a glasse, an earthen pot, or any such other hard bodie is broken with a fall. And by this also we learne why a vehement blast of winde doth o∣uerthrow an oake, and not a reede, because that an oake being hard and strong and great, dooth resist
the wind, and so make his force more strong: but the reede being light and soft and small, yeelding hither and thither to the winde, doth breake his force. So a wrastler striuing against his companion dooth increase his force, and yeelding sometimes, and bowing with him, doth sooner breake his ve∣hemencie. CXIII. Why doe infants  the nurses singing, cease their crying, and sleepe  after? Because that the  of musicke, as of science, and all other artes, is on grassed naturallie in the minde, as heate is in fire. As Plato doth say, our minds doe remember  and not learne them. And therefore the minde hearing such a song, in that that he dooth remember, causeth the infant to be quiet, and in that that he taketh plea∣sure it doth draw on sleepe. For not being infected with the companie of the bodie, hee perceiueth those sciences very plainly, and being somewhat defiled in the bodie, falleth into some obliuion of of them. CXIIII. Why doe nurses rocke and moue children when they would draw them to sleepe? To the end that the humors being skattered by mouing, may moue the braine: but those of more yeares cannot endure this. CXV. Why doe some  see double? Because that the muscules of the eyes being more or lesse filled, and by the selfe same meanes weake and seeble, doe draw and wrest one eye vp∣ward, and the other downward: So by that meanes
the eye beames do not looke one way at once, but towards  places and bodies: and therefore each of the eyes vsing a priuat office and duetie of seeing, doth cause a double sight. CXVI. Why are boyes apt to chaunge their voyce about 14. yeares of age? Because that then nature dooth cause a great and sudden chaunge of age. Experience proueth this to bee true: for at that time wee may see that womens pappes do grow great, to hold and gather milke, and also those places which are about the hippes, in which the young fruits should remaine. Likewise mens breasts and shoulders which then beare great and heauie burthens. Also their stones in which the seed may increase and abide: and his priuie member, to let out the seede with ease. Fur∣ther, all the whole bodie is made bigger and dila∣ted, as the alteration and chaunge of euery part dooth testifie. And the harshnes of the voyce and hoarsnes: for the rough arterie or windpipe being made wide in the beginning, and the exteriour or outward part within, vnequall euen to the throte, the ayre going out at that rough vnequall and vn∣euen pipe, doth become vnequall and sharpe, and after a sort hoarse. Like vnto the voyce of a goate, whereof it hath his name Branchus. The same doth happen vnto them into whose rough arterie any distillation doth flow. It happeneth by reason of the dropping humiditie, that a light smal skinne filled vnequally, causeth an vneuen going forth of the spirit & ayre. Vnderstand that the windpipe of goates is such, by reason of the abundance of hu∣miditie.
The like doth happen vnto all such, as na∣ture hath giuen a rough arterie, as vnto Cranes. After the yeares of foureteene they leaue off that voyce, because the arterie is made wider, and re∣ceiueth his naturall euenes and equalitie. CXVII. Why dooth oyle being drunke, cause vs to vomit, and especially yellow choler? Because that seeing it is light, and ascendeth vp∣ward, it prouoketh the nurriment in the stomacke, and lifteth it vp. And so the stomacke being grie∣ued, summoneth the eiectiue vertue to vomire, and especially choler, because that it is light, and consisteth of subtile parts, and therfore is the soo∣ner conueied vpward. And it is most plaine that oyle is light and carried vpwarde: for when it is mingled with any moyst thing, it runneth vnto the highest roome. CXVIII. Why doth not oyle mingle with moyst things? Because that being pliant, soft, and constipat in it selfe, it cannot be diuided into parts, and so it can not be mingled. Neither if it be cast vpō the earth, can it quickly enter into it. CXIX. Why is water and oyle frozen in cold; wine and vineger not? Because that oyle being without al qualitie, and fit to be confounded with any thing, is cold quick∣ly, and so extreamly, that it is most cold. Water be∣ing cold of nature, dooth easily freeze, when it is made colder then his owne nature. Wine being hot and of subtile parts, is not so soone cold. But
vineger being of most subtile partes, suffereth no freezing. CXX. Why doe contrary things in qualitie, bring foorth the same effects? That which is moyst, is hardened and bound a like of heate and of colde: snow and liquour doe freeze with colde: a plaister and the grauell in the bladder, are made hard with heate. That is so in deede, but by a diuers action. The heate doth con∣sume and cate the abundance of moysture: but the cold stopping & shutting, with his ouer much thicknes, doth wring out the filthie humiditie: like as a spunge, wrung with the hand, doth cast out the water which it hath in his pores & small passages. CXXI. Why doth a shaking or quiuering cease of tentimes, when any fearefull matter doth chaunce, as a great noise or cracke made, with a sudden downfall of wa∣ter, or great tree? Because that oftentimes the humours being di∣gested and consumed with time, and made thinne and weake, all the heate, vehemently and sudden∣ly, and sharply fleeing into the inward parts of the bodie, consuming the humour which causeth the disease, dooth dissolue it. Treacle hath this effect and many such like, which are hot and dry, when they are taken after concoction. CXXII. Why doe such fall which turne round, and bee not vsed to doe it? Because they doe disturbe the animall spirits which are in the braine, and tosse them vp & down together with humidities. They then be made lesse
apt and fit to receiue the sensible and motiue po∣wer, and doe not suffer any action to goe into the muscles and sinewes: whereby it falleth out, that the waight of the bodie, as not being borne vp nor supported by the soule, is throwne to the earth: and for the same cause they see darknes, because the spirit of seeing is disturbed and troubled, & can not worke like vnto the other sences. But this doth not happen vnto such as are accustomed to turne moderatly, and by little and little. Custome doth breed this: for the soule and nature are not stran∣gers the one to the other, but in time are as it were reconciled. For that which is done by little and by little, and without intercession, is hidden from the sence. And after that it hath often escaped, fal∣leth not as a straunge thing vnto nature, who was wont to receiue it. CXXIII. Why doe steele glasses shine so cleerely? Because they are lined on the inside with white leade, whose  is shining, the which being put to the glasse which is also shining, doth shine much more, and casting his beames through the passa∣ges of the glasse, doth double that which is in the superficiall part of the glasse, and without the body of the glasse, and by that meanes the glasse is very shining and cleere. CXXIIII. Why do we see our selues in glasses & cleere waters? Because that the quality of the sight passing vnto cleere bright bodies, by a reflexion, doth returne againe by the beames of the eyes, to the image of him who looketh on it. That qualities do go forth
and passe from the face, and that it is not absurd, they doe shewe, which remaine neere vnto trees, because they are wont to looke greene. For the greene qualitie of greene leaues, passeth to the face it selfe: likewise going into the running wa∣ter, doth make it to shew greene. CXXV. Why doe hard dennes, and hollow places, and high places, send backe the image and sound of the voyce? Because that such places also, by a reflexion, do send backe the image of a sound. For the voyce doth beate the ayre, the ayre the place, the which the more it is beaten, the more it dooth beate, and thereby dooth cause the more vehement sound of the voyce. Moyst places, and as it were soft, yeel∣ding vnto the stroake, and dissoluing it, giue no sound againe. For according vnto the qualitie and quantitie of the stroake, the qualitie and quantitie of the voyce is giuen, which is called an Echo. Some doe idly sable that shee is a goddesse: some say that Pan was in loue with her, which without doubt is false. He was some wise man who did first desire and search out the cause of that voyce: and as they which loue and cannot enioy their loue are grieued, so in like manner was hee very sorry vntill he found out the solution of that cause. As Endymion also who first found out the course of the Moone, watching nights, & obseruing her course, and searching her motion, did sleepe in the day time. And therefore they doe fable that he was be∣loued of the Moone, and that she came to him when he was asleep, because she did giue vnto the Philosopher, the solution of the cause of her selfe.
They say also that he was a shepheard, because that in deserts and high places he did marke the course of the Moone. And they giue him also a pipe, because that high places are blowen with winde: or els because he sought out the consonan∣cie of figures. Prometheus also being a wise man, sought out the cause of the starre which is called the AEgle in the firmament, his nature and place, and when he was as it were wasted away with the desire of learning, then at the last he rested, when Hercules did dissolue vnto him all doubts with his wisedome. CXXVI. What is the reason that if you cast a stone vnto a standing water which is on the ouer most part of the earth, it maketh many circles, and not if the water be deepe in the earth? Because that the stone with vehemencie of the cast, doth pursue and follow the water  part of it, vntill the stone come to the bottome. But if there bee  great vehemencie in the throwe, the circle is the greater, the stone going downe vnto the earth and drawing down the wa∣ter with it, causeth many circles. For first of  doth driue the ouermost and  part of the water into many parts, and so going down alwaies vnto the bottome, againe diuiding the water, it maketh another circle. And this is done succes∣siuely, vntill the stone resteth. And because the ve∣hemencie of the stone is slackened still as he go∣eth down, of necessitie the last circle is lesser then the first, because that with the stone and also with the blow, the water is diuided.
CXXVII. Why doe some thinke that laughter proceedeth frō the spleene, affirming that it is not like, that they laugh not much, whose spleene is corrupted, as they do whose spleene is sound, but say that such are very sad? Truely I thinke that the cause of laughter is ac∣cidentally, and not properly in the spleene: for if it be sound and perfect, it dooth draw from the li∣uer all melancholy humour. Whereof it procee∣deth, that when the pure bloud without any dregs doth goe both throughout all the bodie, and also into the braine, it doth delight both nature & the mind, and doth make men merrie like vnto wine, and bring men to a quietnes and tranquilitie, and so of that laughter is moued. CXXVIII. Why do not Mules bring forth young ones? Because they do cōsist of a diuers kind of beasts, and so then the mixtion of seed differing in quali∣tie and quantitie, begetting a certaine other thing besides that which is first, doth marre and abolish the nature of those things which first were. As the mingling of white and black, abolishing the colour of the extreames, breedeth another colour which is darke and dunne, which is none at all of the ex∣treames. Therfore the ingendring qualitie is abo∣lished, and the aptnes of receiuing formes. CXXIX. Why are such as are deaffe by nature dumme also? Because they cannot speake, and expresse that which they neuer heard. Some Phisitions do say, that there is one knitting and vniting of sinewes belonging vnto the tongue and to the eares, and
therefore they are of the like disposition. But such as are dumme by an accident, are not deaffe at all, for there then riseth a locall passion. CXXX. Why are some stiffe after meate which were long fasting? Because they abound with choler, & so do heape vp a sowre sharpe humour. Therefore the parts of the bodie being nourished after meate, driue away from them the choler vnto the skinne, and so that stiffenes doth rise, that is, the choler gnawing and biting those parts, and stirring them vp to pursue himselfe. CXXXI. Why doe not swine cry when they be carried with their snowt vpward? Because that aboue all other beasts they bend more the other to the earth. They delight in filth, and that they seeke: and therefore in that sudden change of their face they be as it were straungers, and being amazed with so much light, keepe that silence. Some say that their windpipe dooth close together, by reason of the straitnes of it, whé they lye with their face vpward. CXXXII. Why are swine delighted with dirt? As the Phisitions doe say, they are naturally de∣lighted with it, because they haue a great liner, in which desire is. Aristotle saith, that the widenes of his snowt is the cause: for he hath a smelling which dooth dissolue it selfe, and as it were stnuing with stinch. CXXXIII. Why doth itching rise, when an vlcer doth waxe whole, and flueme ?
Because the part which is healed and made sound, dooth pursue the reliques of the humour, which remaineth there against nature, and which was the cause of the boyle: & so going out through the skin, and dissoluing it selfe, doth cause the itch. CXXXIIII. Why are those diseases or accidents longest & most grieuous, which do molest one eye only, and not both? For two causes: because the running or fluxion is heaped vp at one eye only: for whatsoeuer is di∣uided into many, is weaker then it selfe, and of les∣ser strength: or els because that when the whole eye dooth moue himselfe in his actions, so ofthe doth force the sicke eye to moue also: and the me∣dicaments of euery diseased part dooth consist in quietnes. CXXXV. Why doth man sneeze more oftner, and more ve∣hemently then other beasts? Because he doth vse more meates and drinkes, and of more diuers sorts, and that more then is re∣quisite, the which when he cannot digest as he would, it doth gather together much ayre and spi∣rits, by reason of much humiditie: that spirit then being very subtile, ascending vnto the head, it for∣ceth a man oft to auoid it, and so causeth sneezing. And it maketh anoise, because a vehement spirit or breath passeth through the conduites of the , as a belching by the stomacke, or a fart from the belly, the voyce by the throte, and a sound by the care. CXXXVI. Why do dead mes haire & nules grow for a time?
Because that the flesh rotting, withering, and pi∣ning away, that flesh which was hidden about the roots of the haire, doth now appeare and deceiue, and cause an imagination that the haire did grow. And some say that it groweth in very deede, be∣cause that dead carcasses are resolued in the be∣ginning into many excrements and superfluities, by reason of the putrefaction which commeth vn∣to them. These going out to the ouermost part of the bodie, by some passages and pores, do increase the growing of the forelayd haire. CXXXVII. Why have children rather then men certaine white spots in the  of their fingers, rather then in their toes? Because they doe breede of fleume, and chil∣dren doe abound with fleume more then men, be∣cause they are fauer and greater eaters. And the feete by reason of walking and motion, do dissolue superfluities more then the hands: and therefore those spots doe not appeare in the nayles of the feete. CXXXVIII. Why doth not the haire in the feete quickly growe gray? For the same reason, because that through great mouing and walking they doe disperse & dissolue the superfluities of fleume, which doth breed . And the haire of the secret parts dooth grow gray very late, because of the heate of that place, and because that in carnall copulation it doth dis∣solue fleume allo. CXXXIX. Why doe very many beasts  then
they see their friends, & a lion and a bull beate their side, when they are angrie? Because they haue the marrowe of the backe reaching vnto the taile, which hath the force of mouing in it. The imagination acknowledging that which is knowne vnto him, as it were with a hand, as it doth happen in men, dooth force them to moue the taile, which dooth manifestly shewe some secret force to bee within them, which dooth acknowledge that which they ought. In the anger of lions and buls, nature dooth consent vnto the minde, and doth inforce it to be greatly moued, as men doe sometimes when they bee angrie, beate their hands or other part. When the mind cannot reuenge vpon that which doth hurt, it dooth pre∣sently seeke out some other solace, and dooth cure his affection with some stroake or blow. CXL. Why if you doe put dry burnt barly vpon a horses sore, the haire which groweth on the sore is not white, but like the other haire? Because it hath the force of expelling, and doth wipe away and dissolue the excrement of fleume, and all vnprofitable operation which is gathered together, through the weakenes of the part, or cruditie of the sore. CXLI. Why doth haire neuer grow in mās vlcers or biles? Because a man hath a thicke skin, as it is seene by the softnes and thinnes of his haires. And see∣ing the skarre is thicker then the skinne it selfe, it doth stop vp the passages, by which the haire shuld grow. Horses haue thinner skins, as it is seene by their thicke haire, and therefore all passages are
not stopped in their wounds and fores. And after that the excrements which were gathered toge∣ther, haue broken a passage through those small pores, the haire doth grow. CXLII. What is the reason that such as are bitten with a snake, being most exceedingly a thirst, doe quench their thirst, & not increase it, by drinking of treacle, which is dry and hot? I say then that it doth not quench the thirst, by reason of his qualitie, but by some mutuall simpa∣thie & consent and naturall reason. That is a kind of counterpoyson and preseruatiue which is made of diuers sorts of hearbes, which haue some kinde of consent and agreement with all the parts of the bodie. As Dictamum, Dettander, or garden ginger, hath a propertie cōseruatiue of the heart, Agrimo∣nie or Liuerwort, with the liuer, Stonewort or fin∣ger ferne with the spleene, Parsley with the mouth of the belly, Hyssope with the lungs, Elicampane with the raines of the backe, Rue with the necke, Bitterwort with the braine, and  with the bladder of vrine. Euerie one of these drawne as it were with the sweetnes of honey, doth draw that which is best for his safetie.  all which, the flesh of some vipers is mingled, which hath a certaine mutuall affection, which wee call Antipathiam, a contrarietie of naturall qualities, against euery venemous beast & corruptible ver∣tue. These being distributed into euery part, they suffer not to work that effect, which doth threaten corruption. For they do resist like vnto lawfull souldiers, who haue taken armes for the defence of their countrey. FINIS.
