8198 99850653 15874
❧ By the Queene. A Proclamation for the prices of Wines. WHere it is ordeined and prouided by a Statute made and established in the Parliament holden at Westminster the viii. day of Iune, in the xxviii. yere of the Reigne of the Queenes Maiesties dearely beloued father of fa∣mous memorie King Henrie the eight, that the prices of all kinde of wines (that is to say) of the Tunne, Butte, Pipe, Punchion , Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrell and Rundlet, when it should be solde in grosse, shoulde be limitted and declared by the Lorde Chauncellor of Englande, Lorde Treasurer of England, Lord President of the said Kings most Honorable priuie Coun∣sell, Lord priuie seale, and the two chiefe Iustices of either Bench, or fiue, foure or three of them, & that the same should be solde according to the same prices so by them set and taxed, vpon paine and penaltie conteyned in the sadie Act: Forasmuch as the Lord Chanceller of England, Lord Treasurer of England, and the two L. chiefe Iustices, for diuers considerations them mouing, and accor∣ding to the effect and meaning of the saide Statute and Act, haue in writing by their deliberate aduises, vpon conference had with sundry persons thereto requisite, taxed, limitted, assigned and appointed, the prices of Gascoigne & French wines to be solde within this her Highnesse Realme for this yéere following, that is to say: Euery Tunne of the best Gascoigne and French wines to be solde (the seller bearing all the charges due and payable to her Maiestie in her Custome house) after the rate and price of xv. li. sterling the Tunne, and not aboue: The buyer bearing all the sayd charges, after the price and rate of xii. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tunne, and not aboue. And euery Pipe, Butte, Hogshead, Tierse, Barrell, Rundlet, and other vessels of the same seuerall wines to be solde in grosse after their quantities according to the same rates, and not aboue. And euery Tunne of Rochel and other small and thinne wines to be solde (the seller bearing all the charges due and payable to her Maiestie in her Custome house) after the price and rate of xiii. li. sterling the Tunne, and not aboue. And the buyer bearing the sayde charges, at x. li. vi. s. viii. d. sterling the Tunne, and not aboue. And euery But, Pipe, Hogshead, Tyerse, Barrell, Rundlet, and other vessels of same seuerall wines to be solde in grosse after their quantities, according to the same rates, and not aboue. The Queenes most excellent Maiestie therefore straightly chargeth and commandeth all and singular her louing subiects, and others, putting any maner Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or other small or thinne wines to sale, within this her highnesse Realme, that they, ne any of them in any maner of wise, by any craft, couine, or priuate agreement, shall sell any Gascoigne, French, Rochell, or other small or thinne wines, otherwise then is aboue limitted, vpon paine to forfeit and pay such penaltie as is conteined and expressed in the said statute, or in any other statute made or ordeined for the same. And moreouer, her High∣nesse pleasure and commandement is, that all and singular Maiors, Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other officers to whome it apperteineth, that they, and euery of them, with diligence, cause, and see that this her Proclamation be put in due execution, after the tenour of the same, and also according to an∣other Act of Parliament established in the Parliament aboue rehearsed, against such as will refuse to sell their wines at prices taxed as is aforesaid, as they will answere thereto at their perils. Giuen at our Manour of Richmond, the first day of December, in the three and thirtieth yeere of our reigne. God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
