8224 99850696 15920
¶ By the Queene. ❧ A Proclamation for keeping the Terme at Hartford Catle, and for adiournement of the same from Mense Mihae vntill Crastino Animum. WHereas the Queenes most excellent Maiestie▪ vpon information giuen vnto her Highnes of the infection of the plague growen and dispersed in her Cities of London a Westminster, did by her Proclamation dated at her Mannor of Woodstone the eighteenth of September for the conside∣rations therein expressed, cause the Terme of S. Michael to be adiourned vnto the fourth re∣turne thereof commonly called Mense Michaelis, hoping by that time▪ through the goodnes of Al∣mightie God, and such orders as by her Maiesties special commanement were appointed t be kept & obserued, the said infection of the plague might haue bene much diminished: Forasmuch as her Maiestie hath since receiued knowledge by certificats sent frō London and Westminster, that the plague still continueth litle abated or diminished, and therefore doubteth that the said Terme should be kept at Westminster frō the said Mense Michaelis, it could not be but dangerous to such her louing subiects, who for suits and other causes should make their necessary repaire thither: Therfore vpon like considerations, her Maiestie hath by aduise of her said Counsel, found it very expedient, that it should be adiourned from the said Returne commonly cal∣led Mense Michaelis, vntil the Returne cōmonly called Crastino Animarū next ensuing. And thereby the rest of the vsual terme to be continued & kept. For which purpose, especial choice is made of her Maiesties castle of Hartford in her Countie o where heretofore the Terme vpon the like occasion hath bene kept▪ and at which place her Maiesties pleasure is that now the residue of the said Terme shalbe kept: Doth therefore declare & hereby signifie her wil and pleasure, That Writs of adiournment shalbe directed to the Iustices of either Bench, and to the Iudges of all other her Maiesties Courts to whom like Writs haue bene vsually directed, giuing them authoritie to adiourne the said residue of the said Terme frō Westmin∣ster aforesaid vnto the said castle of Hartford, there to begin in the said Crastino Animarum next ensuing, & so to continue: And the same adiournement shalbe made at the said Returne called Mense Michaelis. And also that all matters, causes a suits be∣tweene partie and partie, as in her Highnes Courts of Chancerie, Starchamber, Eschequer, the courts of Wards & Lyue∣ries, the Duchie of Lancaster and court of Requests shal haue continuance, & the parties shal haue day from the said Mense Michaelis vntil the said Crastino Animarum at the said castle of Hartford. Willing and commanding them and euery of them to whome it doth appertaine, to obserue and keepe their apparances & assemblies in all and euery her Highnes said Courts at the said castle of Hartford in the said Crastino Animarum, in like maner, fourme and condition, as they would, should, or ought to haue done, if the said Terme and Courts had bene holden and kept at Westminster, as they and euery of them wil answere at their perils, any thing in her Maiesties said former Proclamation to the contrary notwithstanding. And further, her Maiestie considering that if there should happen to be any accesse and apparance of her louing Subiects at the said Castle or at the Towne of Hartford, during the residue of the Terme, of such as haue had the plague in their houses, or haue bene themselues infected therewith, there might insue great peril and dammage, to those that haue as yet bene cleere thereof, and so further inconvenience might grow thereby to the rest of the Realme: her Highnesse therefore for the auoyding thereof, doth straightly charge and commaund, that no such person or persons, who haue beene so infec∣ted or haue had the plague in their houses at any time since the xx. day of Iuly last, of what estate or degree soeuer he or they be, shall repaire to the said Castle or towne of Hartford, during the residue of the said Terme, except he or they shall be commaunded by speciall proces, or otherwise haue speciall commaundement, for his or their personall apparance. And yet neuertheles euery such person or persons so infected before his or their repayre to the said Castle or Towne, shall before he or they enter into any house within the saide Towne or into the said Castle, openly notifie and declare by some message his or their state, touching his or their infection, with the cause for the which he or they shall be called by proces or other commaundement, to such person or persons, as shall be appointed by the Lord Keeper of the great Scale of England, to haue the charge of the keeping of the gate of the said Castle and entries into the said Towne. So as if the saide party shall be ordered to come into the Towne, or into any Court within the said Castle, the same shall after (during the time of his or their abode there) beare and hold vp in his or their hād vpright to be seene, one red rod, of the length of one yard or more, vpon paine of her Maiesties displeasure, and imprisonment of their bodies during her Highnesse pleasure. And further her Maiesty straightly chargeth and commandeth al Iustices of peace of the said County of Hartford dwelling within xii. miles of the said Towne and Castle of Hartford, and all Iustices of peace in the county of Essex dwelling within vii. miles of the said castle, & al bailiffes, constables, and head officers of any boroughs, towns, villages, or hamlets within viii. miles of the said Towne and Castle of Hartford, that they and euery of them shal from and after the day of the proclaiming of this Proclamatiō within the said county, do their best indeuors to make & set forth such good orders, as by the goodnes of God, may tend most to the preseruation of al places within the same circuite of viii. miles from infection of the plague. And for that purpose to assemble themselues together weekly at some conuenient place in both the said counties, frō the time of the publishing of this Proclamatiō, vntil the end of the residue of the said Terme, aswel for the deuising, as for the execution of such good orders. And that the said Iustices of peace shal in the first day of the sitting in the residue of the said Terme, signi∣fy & declare to the L. Keeper of the great seale of England, al that they & the said constables and other the said officers shall then haue done in & about the premisses. And shal also from time to time folow such directions as they shal receiue from the said L. Keeper and other of her Maiesties counsel, being at Hartford, tending to the preseruation of the places within the circuite aboue specified from the said infection of the plague: Not doubting but that aswel the said Iustices as other the in∣ferior officers wil carefully discharge their duty in that behalfe, as they tender the continuance of her Maiesties fauor, and wil answere for the contrary at their perils. Giuen at her Maiesties Honor of Hampton Court the xxi. day of October 1592. in the xxxiiii. yeere of her Highnes raigne. God saue the Queene. ¶ Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
