8586 33142985 28184
By the Kings Maiesties Commisioners, for granting free VVarrens, and other things of that nature. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms THE KINGS most excellent Maiesties, tendering the quiet, ease, and contentment of his louing Subiects: AND for the better preseruation of each mans Game of all sorts in their owne lands and possessions, from common hunters, Potchers and the like: which his Maiestie vnderstanding diuers of his Subiects are desirous of, hath been gratiously pleased to graunt his Commission vnder his great Seale of Eng∣land, directed to some of his learned Counsel and others, whose names are subscribed, or compounding and agree∣ing with all such as will compound for free and Charter Warren, to be granted to them and their Heires vnder the great Seale of England: AND for erecting Parkes and Warrens, in each mans seuerall possessions: AND for renewing Charters and Grants of that nature, with diuers other benefits, & more ample priuiledges, and speedy remedies by his Maiesties said Grant, so to be obtained, against such inconueniences of Hunters and Potchers, more then the common or Statute Lawes, without the helpe of his Maiesties grant, can yeeld and afford: for Warrens or Parkes are not to be holden or erected but by Charter or Prescription, as by the said Commission may appeare. The Command and commoditie of the priuiledge of Chartr'd grounds, and Warrens, grounded vpon lawe and experience. 1 IT doth enfranchise the land, by giuing an interest in the game to the owner of the ground, excludeth all strangers, who other∣wise without the kings grant haue as much interest therein as the owner: neither will any action lye against aman for taking of killing his game, or recouery be had without the kings grant. 2 It hath great immunities and freedomes, whereof other grounds are destitute. 5. Eliza. Rast 43. 3 The trespasser shall incurre the paiment mentioned in the kings grant, which other Warrens want. 4 Warren ground is not subiect to the statute made against the conuersion of tillage, into pasture: whereby an arable ground out∣worne and barrened by corne, may so be imploied to greater benefit, till it be fruitefull for corne againe. 5 Trespassers shall incurre imprisonement for three yeeres, and make fine and ransome, and put in sureties not to offend againe, and the finall punishment is abiuration. 6 The garden of wards that destroyes or annoies such groundes, shall be punished in wast. 7 The delinquent incurreth the danger of the statute lawes, and the penalty of the kings Charter and common lawes. The Commoditie. 1 IT is good to all persons and grieuance to none. 2 They be subiect to a sute by Quo Warranto, that keepe and maintaine Warrens without the kings graunt. 3 The new Patentie hath full power to punish Potchers and petty hunters. 4 The barren and wast grounds may be won to be fertill, and gained to be seuerall and good. 5 This kinde of grownd will be made fit for Tillage, and fruitfull for corne. 6 The Marchant shall be furnished with Furres for cold Countries, to the maintenance of Marriners and shipping. 7 The increase of Conies, in many barren wast grounds will be so great, that it will in those places keepe down the price of victuals. 8 The feare of these punishments, hereby to be inflicted, will beate downe Idlenesse the roote and cause of mischiefes. 9 It will be an occasion to preserue mens hedges, corne, and sheepe, more free from petty hunters, Potchers, &c. The charge of passing this graunt vnder the Seale, shall not be great, as in other Cases. The Office hereof is kept at Sir Henry Bretons house in Drury-Lane aboue Drury house, next to the signe of the Griffin, where you shall haue further satisfaction and direction herein. The Commissioners for this Grant. Sir Henry Yeluerton, Knight, Atterney generall. Sir Thomas Couentry, Knight, Solicitor. Sir Iohn Townsend, Knight. Sir Henry Breton, Knight, Sir George peckham, Knight, Henry Gibbe, Esquire.
