A312 10440543 45039
AN ACCOUNT Of the late HARDSHIPS AND VIOLENCE Inflicted upon certain Persons CALLED QUAKERS For their PEACEABLE Religious Meetings In the City and County of Glocester, LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-yard in Lombard-street Bookseller, 1682.
A Coppy of a Letter dated from Glo∣cester City Goal, the 11th. of the 12th. Month, 1681/2. Giving Account to some Friends at London, of the late Hardships and Violence inflicted upon certain Persons called Quakers for their Peaceable Religious Meetings in that City and County. AFter the Salutation of our Sincere Loves to you in that blessed Holy Truth, that above all ought to be esteem∣ed, and faithfully testifyed too &c. These may Certify you, that having an understanding, of a Letter lately sent to our Friend Richard Townesend, relating to the Sufferings of this County and considering our present State and what hath been acted against us: We therefore Judged it convenient to send these to acquaint you thereof viz. That on the 29th day of the last month, There came to disturb our Meeting two Al∣dermen, the Sherriffe, the Chancellor, and one Con∣stable with others; who after some discourse took our names and threatned to Tender the Oath of Allegiance to us, but then refrained and turned us out, and locked the Door and delivered the Key to the Constable. But we having another Key entred our Meeting house again upon the 5th day following. Upon the 1st day after, being the 5th of this Instant Twelth month; 1681/2. we being again in the fear of God met, there came again four Aldermen, with the Sheriffe, and two Con∣stables and others, and after some Queries about the House, and Abusive and Threatning words in great Wrath, the Town
Clerks man took our Names; and the Book being brought ready, he upon Order Read the aforesaid Oath, and we were required to Answer directly (and not permitted to speak but in short) whether we would take the same or not; which we re∣fusing particularly every man of us, were all first Committed here to Prison; and afterwards the same was tendred to the Wo∣men, who refusing also, were Committed there to the same Prison. The main Goal whereof is so much out of Repair, that it is not fit for people to be in, and some of us thereby are at that Charge, that if continued long, cannot afford to bear it, by reason they are taken wholly off from their Imployments. So were they, in all being Twenty four persons here Imprisoned, one whereof was upon coming here to Visit us, and so was detained, being formerly Committed for the like refusal, but had some Liberty: Some of them also are Poor, and have Families to maintain, and nothing but what they gain by their Labour to administer to their Necessities; and other Women having Children Sucking at their Breast, which is so Cruel, that we have not known the like; and it being so, therefore we (al∣though freely given up in Patience and Cheerfulness here to continue the Lords appointed time, enjoying his Presence and Peace) yet thought good as aforesaid our Case to signify, de∣siring the King or his Councel may be acquainted with our Suffering condition, which indeed is very Deplorable, con∣sidering also that both men and their Wives are here Con∣fined, without Liberty admitted, nor know when it will be: For it's declared that here we must be continued, and in time Praemunired or Banished, our Adversaries being so Fierce and Unmerciful towards us: And we expect more Friends also shortly to be sent to us, &c. After our Com∣mittment they also broke the Meeting-House Windows, took the Forms &c. out and burned them in our Burial-Yard.
The Mittimus is to this Effect, &c. WHereas such Persons (whose Names are under written) being at an unlawful Assembly, and the aforesaid Oath tendred to them, and they refusing to take the same, were thereupon Committed, &c We rest your Friends in Truth. John Edmunds and his Wife. Henry Angley and his Wife. Thomas Monington and his Wife. John Eliot and his Wife. Richard Green and his Wife. Ann Hollund. Ann Washborn. Elinor Calice. Nicholas Wastfield. Henry Riddall. Thomas Mills. Thomas Freeman. Daniel Bayly. Joseph Blinkoe. John Webb. Jane Jawes. Mary Arnold. Joan Wager. Alice Cox. Emah Fry. These Lines are only in plainness to unfold our Suffering state to you, and to shew how we been acted against; and the same if it can be to be Redressed, &c. And not upon any other Account designed. Since the above said Letter, we hear the Women have Liberty to go home. Note, There is also Sixteen Imprisoned in the Country-Goal. Seven of which were Committed from one Meet∣ing near Badmonton; one of which was Thrust out of a House, to the rest who stood in the Street, and then Com∣mitted with them to Glocester Goal for being at a Meeting. And after some time of Imprisonment, were brought forth and Fined 7 l. a piece, and told if they would pay their Fees, they might be Discharged: The Clerk of the Peace demanding 2 l. 4 s. 2 d. of each for his Fees, besides all other Charges.
Note also, One Ancient man, a Prisoner in the same Goal, Named John Peirce, living in Little Badmonton, some Neighbours with an Officer of Little Badmonton, came into see him; which Officer the Old man was very glad to see: And after they had been with him some time, he brought them to the Prison Door; and returning back up the Stairs Staggered, and being led to a place to sit down, he only held up his Hand, and never spoke more, but Died the next Morning; for which the Officer is much Troubled in Conscience, and came to the Prison next day, and was Sorrowful. Note also, That John Boy's Wife being at a Peaceable Meet∣ing of the People called Quakers at Little-Badmonton, (through the Instigation of the Rector or Vicar of the Parish) was in a violent manner, much unbecoming one pretending to be a Mini∣ster of the Gospel, Dragd out of the Meeting by the Lord Harberts Footmen; who came in and fell on them with that Unchristian Deportment, that through their Abuses this poor Woman went home, fell Sick and Miscarried, the next day following save one, to the great endangering of her Life. After she had re∣ceived this great Abuse, her Husband was likewise taken at the same place, and carried before the Lord Herbert, &c. who Committed him to Glocester Goal: But its supposed Friends had not been so severely dealt withal, had the Marquess of Worcester himself been at home; and we farther hear, that the Lord Herbert did not allow his Servants to abuse our Friends in that Unlawful manner: And yet when this John Boys de∣sired Liberty before he went to Goal to see his Wife, who then lay sick of the aforesaid Abuses, he could not be per∣mitted.
A farther Account out of Glocestershire. Cirencester 3. 1st. Month 1681/2. INtimates that several persons called Quakers are Committed to Glocester Goal, and others threatned with the like by one of the Justices, for their Religious Meeting; who also threatens them with the tender of the Oath of Allegiance. His chief occasion against them is, their not giving their Voices for his being a Burgess: Though he sent to them a Letter when he stood for Burgess, wherein he pretended his great Kindness for Honest People, and by the Grace of God would continue as long as he Lived. And being advised not to let fall such a Re∣solution, he said of our Friends, (called Quakers) That they are a pack of Rogues, and gave their Voices against me: And I will be even with them. And also further threatned them, that if he did live he would deal with them severely, &c. To which 'tis added, thus we are like greatly to suffer for giving our Voices for H. Powel Esq and Sir R. Atkins our Burgesses according to our perswasions, and not in contempt or disrespect to the said Justice. His Name is here omitted, in some Hopes he may better bethink himself; and consider that Threatnings, and Revenge, and Premeditation against persons, are not consistent with the Office and Oath of Justices of Peace. Here follows a Copy of the said Justice his Letter to certain Persons called Quakers in Cirencester, at that time when he stood for Burgess in the year 1679. of which he was reminded as before. Good Friends, I Am sory such ill Persons should appear to Asperse you; and charge me with any Ʋnkindness to any Honest and Godly People. I do assure you all, I ever had a great respect to the Godly People of this
Nation, and ever shall; and I am sure my Family ever had a great Respect and Kindness for all my Neighbours of this Town of Ciren∣cester: And by the Grace of God I will continue in the same Opi∣nion as long as I live, and I will be very plain with you, for Com∣plements I do abhor: I am resolved by the Grace of God to oppose the Interest of that abominable Antichrist the Pope, and all his private and subtle Adherents and Incendiaries, and remain your True Friend to serve you. Here follows the Answer from those called Quakers. Cirencester the 19. 6th Month 1679. Loving Friend, THese are to acquaint thee that we have tenderly considered thy Lines; whereunto we have thus much to say, and that in good Conscience in the sight of God, who knows our hearts: That us for Aspersions, we have Learned to go through good Reports and evil, and for unkindness, we charge thee not; but do assure thee that we have no prejudice, nor ill will towards thee, nor on any such account have we appeared to give our Voices in this Election for the other Persons▪ but as pre-engaged in our own minds for such Reasons, as intended no Reflection upon thy Honesty, Reputation or Person, but as free born English Subjects, have taken the liberty to act according to our perswasions without Reflection; not knowing at present which side may carry it, but shall be content which soever it be: Thy respect to the Godly People of this Nation, and Abhorrence of Popery and Popish Interest; we desire thou mayest retain in Sincerity, and then we doubt not but to have a share in thy Respects; and thou wilt so far be of the same mind with us against Persecution, which is the principal part and support of Popery, so we Remain thy Well-wishers. Memorandum, That this Account is not published by any Ad∣vice or Knowledge of the Sufferers themselves, but by others Commiserating their Distressed Condition.
THE END.
