A809 12397849 61209
COVNTERPOYSON CONSIDERATIONS touching the poynts in difference between the godly ministers and people of the Church of England, and the seduced brethen of the Separation. ARGVMENTS That the best assemblies of the present Church of England, are true visible Churches. That the Preachers in the best assemblies of Engl. are true ministers of Christ. Mr BERNARDS book intituled The SEPARATISTS SCHISME Mr CRASHAWES Questions propounded in his Sermon preached at the Crosse. Examined and Answered by HENRY AINSWORTH Lord God the strength of my saluation; couer thou my head, in the Day of battel, Psal. 140.7. RIGHT RIGHT Printed in the yeare 1642.
A fore-speech to the Christian reader. THE truth and church of God, by multitude of enemies, hath euer been dsgraced and troden down in the world that many which haue seemed to loue and seek after it, haue stumbled at the reproch & oppotision of the same. Yet the godly wise haue vnderstood & discerned things that differ. It is a great help vnto the weak and simple, when the deceits and snares wherewith the adversarie seeketh to destroy the sowl, are oenly discouered, by the light of Gods word and for this cause haue I endeauoured according to the measure of knowledge and grace giuen vnto me, to make answer vnto such rea∣sons cauils and calumniations, as are giuen out against that part of the truth, which this church witnesseth vnto the world, touching our sepa∣ration from the Church of Engl. the Considerations & Arguments first an∣swered, were written by Mr Spr a Minister of Glocestershire; & in them (as I suppose) the summ and weight of that which may be sayd for that church, is comprised. Mr Bernards booke hath rather shew then weight of reason, as the iudicious reader may perceiue; and seemeth to be penned by him, rather for disgrace of others then defence of themselues. But no better fruit can be exspected from such as rebel against the light which themselues once seemed to re¦gard. Mr Crashawes questions are rather to stumble at, then to direct the ignorant as hauing neyther weight of argument against vs nor for themselues. Yet as by al these meanes the truth is oppugned, so by all contrary good meanes it should be defended; that wisdome may be iustified of all her children, and others left without excuse. How weak and insufficient the aduersaries reasons are in partiular, the an∣swers vnto them more paricularly will shew. Here I will briefly ob∣serue, some generall things whereby falshood endeavoureth to vp∣hold it selfe; and how it may by the prudente be discried. Vntruth hat sought to preuayl. 1. By perseuting such as haue spoken against, or forsaken her iniqui∣tie.
iniquitie. This the blood of Gods martyrs shed in all ages proclaimeth vnto all men. And thus haue the chief Pastors of the Church of England dealt with Christs lambs, in these our dayes. For hauing gotten into their hands the sword of the Magistrate, they there with haue smitten such as with the word, (the sword of the spirit) they could not conuince. In which they fulfill the measure of their Fathers; for so haue the Papall Prelates vsed to feed their flocks 2. By blaspheming and preaching against the faith & witnesses therof. For they that hold forth the truth are exposed to the reproch & venim of the tongue, and many vniust calumniations come forth against their persons, especially the principall of them, whom evill minded men doe most maligne. Also the cause it selfe is often wronged, whiles the truth thereof, and reasons that vphold it, are svpressed; arguments feighned and confuted which wer neuer made, or otherwise made then the aduer∣saries pretend; and sometimes such articles and errors imputed, as from which it is altogether free. How others heretofore haue caried them∣selues this way, all records shew: how men at this day haue dealt with vs and the truth which we imbrace; many pulpits in Engl. can witnesse. besides priuate calumnies innumerable, and some publicke pamphletes. The stinch of their reprochfull mouthes, hath caused many to distast the sweet sauour of the Gospell, and caused also for a while a dislike in sun¦dry of vs, till God in mercy visited and saued vs from the deceitfull tongue. 3. Yet is not this yenough, but men seek to bear down the truth by writing against and to the defamation of the same, with all exquisite cunning and frawd to disgrace it, and by plausible reasons to perswade vnto error. If any would see this, let the generall arguments vsed at this day against vs, consonant and agreable to the reasons of Papists & other ancient adversaries of the Gospel, be obserued. 1. The Papists haue continually exclaimed against them for leauing their mother the ch: of Rome that bare them; crying out the Church the Church, the Catholike church; and saying that Kellisons Suruey. 2. book 1. chapt· Luther and all the pack of their first fathers, were children of their mother the Catholike Church and are gone out from them. And when the Protestants obiected her sinns, for which they left her, it was pleaded againe, Mr Gif∣fords dialo∣gue bteweē a pap. & a pro, f, 19. b, will ye forsake your mother be¦cause shee wanteth perfect bewty, or because there is some deformity in her &c? Moreouer they would allege (to proue them schismatiks) how in that ch: Calui o¦pusc. Re∣sponse. ad ves. quend Mediator. thy had been regenerated and made hr citezens and members by baptisme. &c that from her they had their first faith and knowledge, yea euen Kllisons Sur. 1 book 2. chap. the Bible it selfe, which treasure their church euer had the custody of; and ma∣ny such like. These are the mayn reasons obiected to vs at this day, they tel vs the Church of England is the See after in this trea∣tise. pag. 49 mother of the faithfull, that the ministery thereof pag. 13. hath begotten vs, if euer we were truely begotten in the spirit; asking
us pag. 135. where els we were regenerate, f not in the womb of that their church &c. And if we tell them of their transgressions, for which we forsake them, they answer, Mr Cra∣shawes ser. pag. 27. though there were in our church these wounds you speake of, yet doe they not come neare the hart, they be not deadly, they may blemish the bewty but endanger not the life of our church. &c. ibid. p. 28 therefor your separation from vs, is scismaticall and vniust. and many such like pleas they pretend. 2, For the chrch of Rome, it hath by her Mediators been alleged, that Caluin. Respons. ad versiple. in her is reteyned the pofession of Christ authorety of scriptures and A∣postolike doctrine, as touching all the chief or capitall articles of religion; and that the church is to be esteemed by the foundation thereof which is Chrst, on which foundation though they that came after, builded wood and hay and stubble instead of siluer and gold and precious stones; yet haue they not by and by depar∣ted from the foundation &c. Now who knoweth not, that this is the bul∣warke of the church of Eng. now, against all batteries, and one of the chiefest reaons whereby they reteyn many simple and wel affected peo¦ple among them? and that may be also seen in this book following pag. 43.105 119. & 123. and in many other of their writings. 3. Vniuersall consent agreement and applause of Churches in al nati∣ons, of Synodes and Councels, of Fathers and learned men haue been the continuall boast of Papists in all their books against the Protestants: now they in Enl to beare out their estate, vrge agayn and agayn the like against vs; that when Gods word will not vphold them, yet mans word at least may honour them before the people. See after in this trea¦tise. pag 9. & 22. & 44, & 5. & 89, 91.92.128. 4. Whereas the truth hath brought for her defense the evident scrip∣tures. Gregory Martin Campion· Kellisō. &c papists haue been wont to carp at the allegations and interpre∣tations of them, and chalenge their aduersaries for corrupting them; the formall protestants in Engl. haue done the like D. Whig defen. of ans to admon: in the gen. tab: S. against the Reformists, and they now use the like colour against vs; but how truely. let the par∣ticulars shew after in this book, pag. 90.91.97. 5. To reuile and calumniate such as forsooke them hath been the cō∣mon practise of Papists, calling them heretiks, schismatikes, Lutherens, Cal¦umists &c. and matching them with wicked heretiks heretofore, & now liuing: The same way doe our aduersaries now walke in proclayming vs to be Schismatiks, Seduced, Brownists, Donatists &c. and to make vs the more odious vnto the people, they enroll vs sometime with the most vile blasphemers that they can mention. For he was esteemed a Mr Ios. Nichols for∣ward reacher amng them, who to grace his own cause by disgracing the truth, would needs plea of the innocēt pag, 33.34. ioyn vs with the blasphemer Hacket, (some∣times a brother of the reformists, and hot mainteyner of their cause,) & to make his malice the more remarkable, he puts in the margine of his book, The brownest and Hacket of an euill spirit; and that which he writeth besides, is so fraudulently set down, that the simple reader who know∣th not our cause, may thinke that this Hacket was one of vs. This
abuse we sufer, because (forsooth) we were thought to hinder their coū¦terfeyt reformation, which Hacket would haue set vp by force for which they beare their reproch at his hands that wrote English Scottizing for discipline; but this man most iniuriously would turn it vpon vs. These and the like arguments doe euill men continually vse against the truth which presseth them; and which they seek to suppresse, but all in uayne: for it will preuayl, mangre their opposition; and that which they thinke to hinder the Gospell b, God will turne to the furtherance of the same, and confusion of his aduersaries. Against these and all other like colours wherewith false churches a adorned, two meanes haue been vsed for to discouer the falshood; th one manifesting the fact or estate of a person or people; the other▪ the lawfulnesse of the same. The commandement of God is a lantern; and the law a light to declare what is good or euill: and evidences there are of euery publick estate and action. For in al ages God hath moued some to obserue and speake against the abuses reigning; and some haue recor∣ded things for their glory, which turne vnto their shame. y this mean the skirts of the whore of Rome haue been discouered, whiles some that loued, and othersome that loathed her, haue painted out her filthinesse: which being compared with the chastitie of Christs spowse set forth in holy writ, hath caused righteous men, (as was Ezek. 23.45. foretold to iudge her children after the manner of harlots and of murtherers; and the very hornes of that beast, to hate the Rev, 17, 16. whore and burne her with fire. And we at this day that witnesse the truth against the remainders of that whores cup, are driuen to breake silence & to plead for Christ in publik, because the aduersaries so importune vs, by continuall preaching and writing against vs, and seeking to bear out all with the cloke f the gos∣pel, and to hide the iniquities vnder a vaile of professing truthes funda∣mentall, they will hardly be a known of the manifold euils and grosse corruptions, that preuayl in their assemblies. Therefore also are we for∣ced to produce their own writers for to witnes with vs; who both hereto¦fore and to this day, complayn of the sinns that reign among them And worthy it is to be obserued how the ministers of England are come to contradict and depart from their own grounds, for to mainteyn their corrupt estate. For now they See after in this book p 122.anno 1562 vtterly deney the visible church to be a company of faithfull people that truely worship Christ and readily obey him; co∣tray both to all the scriptures and to their own Articles d of religio. Ad Mr Bernarde in the name of all the diuines in their church, yea (if we ay beleue him) of all the reformed Churches in Christendome, In the 123 pag of his book. telleth vs with a marginall note also to haue it wel obserued, that the true word of God preached. and true sacraments of Christ administred, are infallible tokes of a true church. I say not (saith he) the word truely preachd, nor the sacr∣mnts rightly administred: but thus; the true word preached, the true sacr∣mn administred. Now lay these things together and see what a holy
communion they will make the church of God to be: namely, if not a rot of miscreants, yet at least a mesceline multitude of beleeuers and infidel, holy and profane. Among whome it the true word be prea∣ched, though neuer so curruptly falsly peruersly, by any Popeling, Baa∣list. or Balaamite; if the true sacraments be administred, though neuer so superstitiausly profanely and disorderly, to the open wicked &c. yet there must needs be a true church. Such heauenly doctrine, or rather such hellish error is now taught by the transformed ministers, for to make mē keep communion with Belial. Against these and other like impostures, haue I endeauoured to bring out the truth, (though naked and destitute of all wordly ornaments,; and by it to manifest the present aberations of my country from the pri∣mitiue faith of Christ; I haue also produced their own testimonies a∣against them, that the Saincts on eart may say, Deut, 3.31, their rock is not as our Rock, euen our enemies being iudges. And if they will yet resist, the world may see, they are condemned by themselues, But my harts desire and prayer for my brethren is, that they may be saued; turning from dark∣nes to light, and from the power of Satan vnto God that they may re∣ceiue forgiuenes of sinns, and inheretance among them which are sanc∣tified by faith in Christ. Hny Ainsworth,
A Direction to some principall things conteyned in this book. Administration of the Ministers of Engl, scanned; with the effects pag, 14. &c. 58. &c. 60. &c. 62. &c. 109. &c. 110. &c. Antichrists kingdome not ouerthrowne by the ministers of Engl. pag. 61. &c. Begetting of faith, how it is pag. 5, 6: It is no essentiall note of a true church, p, 6. It should be before the planting of a church p. 40, 41 146. Building of the church, and how it is performed in England p. 33 34: &c Christ, not the head, Mediator, Prophet, Priest, or King, of the church of England p, 74. &c. not the spowse of the same, pag, 42. &c Compulsion to the faith and church, vsed in Engl. but vnwarrantable. pag 120.78.131. &c.. p 133, Constitution of a church. pag, 98.99. K. Edwards reformation of religion, and how it was accepted. pag. 120.133 Foundation Christ; and Fundamentall truth. pretended and discused, pag 34.123, &c. 126.117. &c Gifts, proue not a true ministery. pag, 13: &c. Matter of the church of Engl. pag, 106. Ministery of the church of Engl. pag, 108 &c. A Papist argument against the church of Engl. pag. 111. Pattern of planting a church. pag. 44. Popular▪ gouernment, obieted and answered. pag. 101, &c. Popes authors of many ordinances now in Engl pag. 137, &c. Positions concerneng a true church. pag. 65 &c. Profession in Engl. contrary to their estate and pratise. pag, 124, &c Reformation by the Kings of Iudah. p. 134. &c Reformed churches, alleged for approbation of the church of Engl. and an∣swered, pag. 9, 10.22 &c. 48, 51, 2, &c. 128, 129. Repentance not truely preached or practised in the church of Engl. pag. 45. &c. 56. &c. Separation proued necessary: p, 5, 22, granted by our aduersaries, pag. 1: Synns suffred, how they defile the church. pag. 101. &c. Spirits of the Prophets subiect to the Prophets scanned pag. 28.29. Testimonies of the ministers of Engl. against the estate of that church, concerning The people pag. 2.107.108.59, 60, 62.122.125, 126.127. The ministery and ministers pag. 3.11.112.81, 114.119, 136, 142, 143. The worship, pag, 3, The church gouernours. pag, 4, Worship of God in the church of England, polluted pleaded for & against, pag. 137. &c,
CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the poynts in difference, betvveen the godly  people of the Church of England; and the seduced brethren, of the separation. A Separation we deny not, from the corruptions of the Church wherein we liue; 1 in iudgment, 2 profession, 3 practise: 1 of teaching eury part of truth and righteousnes; 2 of per∣forming the things we teach; 3 of reprouing every part of sin and error; 4 and absteyning from all corruptions of life and dctrine: for which particulars, so many of both parts haue suffred and doe suffer so many things. But the difference is, we suffer for separating in the Church: you, out of the Church. And this to be true, you know: vnlesse you will cauill, against your own conscience and knowledge. Answer. WHO so examineth these your Considerations, and weigheth them in the ballance of equitie: may finde them wanting in many poynts, touching the differences between your Church, and vs that separate frō the same; and insufficient in the poynts that are handled to perswade a∣ny wise hart to returne vnto you. You ouerpasse 1 the hierarchie of your spirituall Lords the prelates with their vnder officers which reign ouer you; 1 and the forme of Gods worship by your Leitourgie or seruice booke set vp and vsed in all your parishes. These are two mayn excepti∣ons that we make against you, though you dissemble them in this your writing, and insist vpon other two, 1 the people, and 2 inferior ministe∣rie (as I conceiue you;) as if these onely were the poynts of difference be¦tween vs and you. Which whether you haue done of ignorance, or of fraud rather, to deceiue your reader; I leaue it vpon your conscience to consider of. Againe, the two things that you take vpon you to handle, you for down in these termes, the godly Ministers and people of the Church of England; whereas our separation is from your Church in generall. wherein many vngodly ministers and people are to be found, standing in com∣mixture, or confusion rather, as one body with those which are estemed more godly and religeous: and therefore you deale not syncerely, to make our separation to seem but from apart and those the godly. Agayn, whereas there is a scisme in your Church, by two contra∣ry factions at warr with your selues, Conformitans and Puritans, (as you stile one another.) you deale not plainely, to tell vs whither party you
meane to defend, but lead your reader into clowdes and mst, speaking of godly miisters and people; not naming who or where they are. That thogh one may guese whome you mean, yet you write so generlly & covertly that if danger or in conuenience come by any thing you hae sayd, yo may sif it of to eyther side for your best aduantage. A  you deny not from the corruptions of the Chrch whrein  liue; yet  not what those corruptions are, which behooued you to hae done, if you woul haue effeted or retrne vnto you. For we are uerily perswaded, that they are nothing bt your corrutons  we haue separated fro; and therefore cannot reioyne our selues vnto you till they be remoued. And seeing you may minde some things to be corrutions in your Chrch, and we othersome: it cannot be we should well accord, till particulars be related; which therefore (if you write a∣gayn,) we pray you in your next to set downe Yet for the present, it is well that the truth hath wrung out such a testimony from yovr own mouth and pen; whiles you grant and deny not such a separation in generall, as you mention: to the branches whereof if you will stand, and abide also by whch you haue heretofore wrtten; I doubt not but the discreet reader will see, your bat ell is ot so much a∣gainst vs as against your selues; & the sword which you haue dra  slay svch as be vpright of way, doth enter into the verie hart of your own Church; & the bwes which you haue bent at us, are broken. For e forsake your Church for this mayn corruption, that all, sorts of profane and wicked men haue been and are, both they and their seed, receiued into and nourished withn the bsome of your Church contrary to the first couenant of our redemption, wherein God with his owne mouth proclaymed & perpetvall emnity and warr against the Ser¦pent and his seed, which the women and her seed should wage; though with the brusing of the heel thereof. Gen. 3. Contrary also to the exam∣ple of all Gods Churches since the world begann, who alwayes were se∣perated from the vngodly, as the scriptures shew. Now that this is a corruption aong you, your selues haue taught saying and complayning that in the Church Sermon on Rom. 12.6. pag 65 66. are swarmes of Atheists, j∣dolaters, Papists erroneus and hereticall sctaries, withes, charmers, sorcerers, murtherers, theeues, adulterrs, liers, &c Also that Playn deccla of eccles desc, pag, 72. among you the holy Sac¦craments are communicated with the Papists, the holy misteris of God profa∣ned, the Gentiles enter into the Temple of God, the holy things are indifferent∣ly communicated with clean and vnclean, circumcised and vncircumcised. A∣gaine that Dil of the stryfe of your▪ Church page. 99 there be thwsands which be men and women growne, which if a man ask them how thy halbe saued they cannot tell. As for wickedness in pride envy hared and all sinns that can be nmed almost. it deth ouerflow; and yet you are not ashamed to say are thy not Christians? This Testmony being tre, I hope your selues now wilbe ashamed to plead that such a people ar Chri∣tians & to be communicated wth; or deny that we may separate from them in thngs concerning God.
An other weighty cause of our separation is, that you haue a popish ministerie ouer this profane multitude; touching which, your selues also haue thus writen; 1 adm o the Par. in the preface. eyther we vst haue a right ministerie of God, and a right gouerment of the Church according to the scriptures set vp, both which we lack; or els there can be no right relign &c. Now for the present ministery that is among you, as Parsons, Vicars. parish priests, Stipendaries, with the rest, you sayd, in the sam admonitiō. that cme from the pope, as out of the Troian horses belly, to the de¦strction of Gods kingdome. An other cause why we refuse communion with you, is for that you serue God not as himselfe commandeth, but after your own deuising, or by imitation rather of the Romane Antichrist: whch your selues haue proclaymed though we should hold our peace; for of your seruice booke you say, it was 1 admon. pag. 16. culled and picked out of the Popish dunhil the portuis and masse kfull of all abominations: & that in the order of your seruice, ibid. 14. ther i o edification but confusion. Now this seemeth vnto vs no small corrup¦tion, that yov should offer vnto God that filth which you haue picked out of the Popes dunghil. May we not say vnto you, with the prophet, Mal. 1 8 Offr such things vnto your Prince; will he be content with you, or except your person, saith the Lord of hosts? You know that Christ hath said Psa 16.4.their, offrings of blood I will not offer; and yet will you take your drinke offrings out of the Reu 17. great wheres cup, which the holy Ghost saith is verse. 4. full of abominations, and of the filthines of her fernication? What mor loathsome thing could you haue foud vnder the sun? Agayn we haue forsakē your Church because the ecclesiastical gouern¦ment and gouernours, the Lords spirituall, are not according to the ordi¦nance of that Lord who is 2 Cor. 3.17 the Spirit, but after the institution of his ene¦my Antichrist. And that this is a fowle corruption, we have also learn∣ed from your selues, which say, 1. admon. page. 15. The gouerment now used by Archbishops and Rps. &c, is both Antichristian and diuilish. That it Demonst. in the pref. is that which gi∣ueth leaue to a man, to be any thing sauing, a sound Christian. Item that Tble of Artic, by di¦uin. Reader in Cam. that Vgly and ilfauoured hierarchie, or Church princelines, which instituted at the first by antichrists deuise did afterward villy serue the Pope of Rome to accom¦plish the isterie of iniquity, and to destroy the Church of Christ and doth yet stil at this day serue him: must be abolished, that no remnāts, ne yet any shew therof remayn, if so be we will have Christ to reigne over us. Item that ibedem, that profane jurisdiction of Lordly Lord Archbishobs, Bps, Archdeacons, Chansellors, Offi∣cialls &c. as contrary to Gods gouerment, and wholy vnderpropt by the canon & Popish law, and with all ioyned with hypocrisie vaynglorie lordlinesse and ty∣ranny. euen for these respects, (if there were no moe,) are to be vtterly rooted out of the Church; except possibly we mean by reconciliation to make Christ and Antichrist frinds: Thus haue we been taught by your selues, what corrup∣tions there are in the Church, euen so many and so great, that you com∣playned thus, 1. admon. page. 2. as our lacks are, there can be no right religeon: and now you haue added vnto all the former to teach vs a separation from your corrupti∣ons
and this not onely in 1 iudgment, or 2 profession, but also in 3 practise and that we should not onely reproue (as you heretofore haue done.) euery part of sinne and error, but abstaine also from al corruptions of life and doctrine. And now we would pray you tell vs, seeing corruption hath so seased vpon, and possessed (by your owne confesion (both Preist and people, both worship, and ecclesiasticall gouerent; that as your lacks are, there can be no right religion: and seeing from all corruption we mus separate: What then remaneth for vs to communcate with you in? For take away these corruptions out of your church, and you shall se an vtter dssolution and abolishing of the same. Though now it spread it selfe like agreene bay tree: yet will it pse away and be gone, and though one seek t, it cannot be found. And is it not strange, that when your selues haue taught vs how esteeme of your people, ministerie, divine service and church gover∣ment; how also to walke and cary our selues, where such corruptons ar, and we haue but departed from these corruptions, (for, any truth that is among you, we haue not forsaken:) that yet you will say we are se∣duced? Are not you then the seducers? We doe but practise that which you haue taught vs, If you would haue vs to returne vnto you, first iustify by the word of God, that people, ministerie, and wor∣ship, that you haue condemned: refute your owne writings; and build againe the things which you haue destroyed. So when you haue made your selues trespassers, if we be not able by Gods word to proue that the things we refreyn from, are as bad as you haue writen; we will, by his grace,Exo. 14.5.9. come agayn vnto you. Til then, let the discreet reader mnde, whither you deal not with us as did the horsmen of Aegipt with the Isra¦lite; that after you hau giuen us leav to depart, you thus persue vs with your writings, to bring vs back again to our ācient bondage. Again, whe¦ther you that pretend a separating in the church, & condemn our separating out of it though your Church be so throughly corrut, as before is shewed and now call vs seduced: deserue not rather to be called your selues The se¦ducing brethren of the separation. But let vs hear what it is you now say for your selues. On our part, consider, 1. THis separation that we make, is grounded. 1. On Gods commndements, Matt. 15.14. Rom. 16.17. Eph. 5.7.11. 2. Thes. 3..14.15. Tim 6.5. Tit. 3.10. 1. Pet 4.4. 2. On the examples of all the prophets, Apostles, & Christ himself who separated in the Church & not out of th' Ch. albeit in most corrupt estat, & yet communi¦cated in tht which was good; reprouing refusing & suffring for abstyning from euill. Luk. 2.2. 2 24 & 22.7.8.9. Mat. 22 3. &., 20, & 6, 1 2 5.16 & 11.16.17 18.9.20. &. 12 31.34 39. & 23 totum. And (note) those Churches were Antanosaicall as you say ours are Antichristian: yet for as much
th  Christ, as ur Church doth at least, Luk 1, 9 10, Iob. 1 2 1. & 7 23.17 31 4 42. & 10, 24. Rom. 3 2.3. & 9.4. wth Gen 49.10 A.t. 2 39. thy separated not from them. Answer. IF by the Cmmndements of God, by the examples of Christ, his  and Astles, we may & mst separate from all corruptions mayn teed in a tre Church: then ought we much more to separate from the being maynteyned in a false; vnlese; a false Church haue more pri∣vlige, ten  cre And we consider that our separation is from the cor∣rptiō: of  false Church; 2. The scrptures also are playn, that we must separate and forsake all false Churches, as well as corrutions in a true, 2. Cor. 6 17. Come out from among them, and separate your slues saith the Lord, and touch no unclean thng, and I will receiue you. Reuelation. 18 4 Goe out of her my people, that ye receive not of her plagues. Hosea. 4.15. Come not ye vnto Gilgal, neither give vp to Bethven; and many the like How rightly then doe you allege scriptures, as if they taught vs separation in a Church onely, and not out of it also; when it is false, and Idolatros? 3. Yor selues are a president to vs of like practise, in separating not in but out of the Church of Rome: as yo haue dealt with the mother, so doe we with the daughter; because like mother like daughter, according to the prouerb; Eze. 16.44. 4. You allege th examples of all the prophts; yet shew you not any that aled by your rle, to searate in the Church and not out of it. Wee are sure they called the people out of the Church of Israel when it was i∣dolatrous, ad forbad them to come at their asemblies. Hos, 2.2.3.4. & 4 15.17 Amos. 5.5. And how they cold themselues joyn with that Church from which they separated others is strange ūto us; especially cō¦sierin that Israel in that estate, is noted by the prohet Azariah to be withut the true God, without Pist to teach, nd wihtut law; 1, Chro. 15.3 and may we thinke, he separated not from that Church; The Israelites thn, sacriced to Divils, not to G, Deut. 3 17. Chron. 11.15 and wil yo sy the prophets separated not from them? 5. The like I Answer to the examples of Christ and his Apostles; who as tey absteyned from corruptios in the Ieish Church; so were they qre seprte from all false Churches as the Samritans and other like Mat 10 5. Ioh. 4.22. Act. 2.40. & 199 so ther examples also, doe approue our practise. 6. Were as you would haue noted that those Churches (which Christ and hs Apstles counicated with) were Antianosaicall as yours we ay ar : I  te comparson, For  the Iewish Church con∣sistd it all,  the same, Leuit, 20, 21.16.) of a peo¦ple
separated not onely from heathens, but also from flse professors, he¦retiks, and idolaters; and were children of the prophets ad couenant of God; Iohn. 4.9 Act 3.25. But your Church cnssteth f an vnsepa∣rated people, children of Idolatrous Priests, & strangers from the coue∣nant of God. 2. The Iewes then, had their sacrifices, seruices and solemne feasts, according to Moses Law; Mat 8.4. Mar, 14.12. Luk 9.O. & 2.21, 24 and Chrst himselfe jstfed ther worship Ioh. 4.22. but your seruice, worship, and fstival, are after Antichrists law, translated out of his masse-booke. 3. Ther Priests were according to Moses insttution, of Aarons line Luk, 1, 5. with 1 Chro. 2.1, 10 their Scribes and Pharisees, sate in Moses chare; Mat 23.2, your Priests after the Popes institution your prelates fit in Antichrist chair. So they wer not so much against Moses; as you are a¦ganst Christ: and that your Church reteyneth not the foundation Christ, shal through his grace anone be proued. The 2. Consideration. 2. OVR Church hath the essentiall notes of a true church, able to beget a true sauing faith, to worke the fruites of the spirit, to make a man a true and perfect Christian, and last of all to saue him. To the which also Christ hath tied his gracious promise and blessing to the end of the world Rom, 10, 13, 17, Mat, 28 19.20. Act, 20.32. 2 Tim. 3.15.16. 1. Tim. 4.16 Iam. 1.21. Isa 55, 11. Answer. THese notes which you propound, 1 are not the essentiall notes of a true Church: a neyther (if they were,) are they ordinariely found in your Church 1. These are not essentiall notes, because; 1 One man may haue al this you speake of; and no one man, is or can be a Church, for that consisteth of a multitude or nūber of persons it is an assembly or convocation; joynt¦ly together it is a body, and euery one severally is but a member. 1. Cor 12, 20.27, That one man may haue all your esentiall notes, may appear in Pavls exaple, who was able to bget a true sauing faith, to worke the fruites of the spirit, and so the rest. 1. Cor. 4 5. Gal. 3, 2 5. 2. An Angel may haue all the notes you mention; and no Angel is a Church. For example, the Angel Gabriel, who was sent to giue Daniel knowledge and understanding, and preached liuly of Christs death, & the benifits thereof. Dan. 9.21.22, &c 3. A wicked man may doe al that you speake of; but no wicked man is a true church. Iudas sent forth with the other Apostles to preach and
work miracles, might bring others to saluation by his doctrine, though hmselfe were a rerobate Mat. 10.5, 6. &c, 4. A true Church is the spowse & hous of Christ, & bringeth him forth a sirituall seed. But, as God gaue the blessing of multilying childrē, onely Gen 1 & 2 to lawfull maried estate, yet often it commeth to passe, through hs almighty power and goodnee that harlots also are partakers of this blesing: and doe bring forth children: so the blessing of spirituall pro∣pagation, is peculiar to the true Church; yet God, which brought light out of darknes, causeth some children to be borne and brought vp vnto him in false Churches For example; the Church of Rome, (the mother Reu 17. of whordoms and abominations of the earth) hath doubtles, since she was wedded to Antichrist, borne and brought vp, by the generall true grounds of Chrstian relgeon taught in her, many children of God, and heyres of saluation, This I sppose your selues will not deny, neyther yet wll you say, that Rome is Christ true Church. Your reason then is, as if Thamer should haue pleaded, I am able to bear cildren, to nourse and brng them vp to mans estate, &c. therefore I am my Father Iu∣dah true and lawfull wife, Gen. 38, 15.18. &c. 2. Now if these were essentall notes, which you haue set down: yet helpe they you nothing, for I deny that they ar ordinarily found in your Chrch. For, though I doubt not but the doctrine of your Church hath saued many: yet that is Gods extraordinary blessing, not the ordinarie effects of your Church. This is the thin you should haue proued, by comparing yor Church and minsterie with the Lawes and promises in Gods word: which because you haue not done, but onely quoted some scriptures generally; which men of all religions may doe likeweise;) I will by one or two of the scriptres that your selfe here cie, shew how vnlike you are to a true Church and Ministery. In Rom. 10.3.17. th' Apostle treateth of two things, 1 of calling on the name of the Lord, and 2 of faith, by hearing his word. 1. Whosoeuer call th upon the name of the Lord shalbe saued. This we are to understand according to Dauids exposition, whosoeuer calleth vpon him in truth. Psa. 145 18. for God is a spirit, and must be worshiped in spirit and trth, Ioh. 4.24. but the worship and calling vpon God which your Church vseth, in reading the prayers letanie collects, and other like things of your Leiturgie, translated out of AntiChrst masse-booke, is carnall false Idolatrous; for such a manner of diuine service you haue no commandement or warrant in the scriptures. And this popish wor¦ship, begetteth not, but destroyeth faith and the true caling on God name, and deceiueth mens sowles; for in vayn they worship me (sayth Christ,) teaching fr doctrine the precepts of men; Mat. 15.9, and, they that wayt vpn lyng vanties, forsake their own mercy. Ionah, 1, 8 2. For the other poynt, Fath is by bearing (or by one & th same word is by figure of speech.  for hea∣ring & r∣porting. Rom 10. report) saith the A∣postle; and proueth it by Isa. 53.1. Lord who hath beleeued our bering; that
is, our report, Now no man can truly and faithfully report nlesse God hath first spoken vnto m; nether can ay man frutfully hear other re∣port or doctrine then the Lords; and so hearing is by the word of God, i the mouthes of such as are sent, as he sheweth in the 15 verse. But you Ministers are not truly and lawfully sent, (for they cannot shew eyther calling, ordination, or office, according to Chrsts Testament;) there∣fore they cannot truly and lawfully preach his word and consequently, cannot beget (ordinarily) a true sauing faith. The next scripture also Mat, 28 19, 20, playnly condemneth the state of your Church and ministere: for, 1. There, is a lawfull calling, authorizing and sending; of minister from him that hath all power in heauen and in earth, saying Goe therfore and teach: but such a sending your ministers haue not; for (as your selues haue 2 admon. to the Parl, f. 16. sayd,) they enter not in by Chrict but by a Popish and vnlawfull vca∣tion. 2. There, is a commandement to teach (or make disciples,) before they be receiued into th' Church by baptisme, for o them that ar taught, such onely as gladly receiue and beleeue the word, are to be baptised and ad¦mitted into the Church. as the practise of th' Apostle sheweth, Act. , 40 41. but your Church was not thu gathered or plāted by th' preaching of the Gospell: but by the commandement of the Magistrate: neither we onely the willing beleevers receiued, and others refused; but the whole profane multitudes wer admitted, or rather compelled into your church wher they and their seed are still retyned, 3. There, Gods Ministers are willed to teach Chrstians so baptised to obserue all things whatsoeuer Christ commanded his Apostles verse. 20, & so they haue his gracious promise and blessing to the end of the world: but in your church, many things are obserued which Christ neuer com∣maded. Yea the Ministerie and goerment appoynted in his Testamēt, are held and confirmed by practise among you, not to be perpetual, not necessary, nor fitting for your state: but an other pompous minstery, and Lordly ecclesiastical gouerment; after the manner of the court of Rome. And as for power and libery to obserue Christ commandements, that is farr from your people, which al are in bondage to the Bishops and their courts; hauing not chrstian freedom to censure sinne or sinners or prac∣tise the ordinances of the Gospel, as the Apostles did vnlesse Princes and Parliaments will permit or command them. The like may be sayd, and returned vpon you, from the other scrip∣tures by you alleged; all which do concerne the true church and mi∣nisterie, as your selues will not deny: and so will helpe you nothing vntill you proue your church and ministerie such, Boast not therefore of a true sauing faith and fruites of the spirit; when such bitter fruites and works of the flesh, doe reign among you: for faith without works  dad. Iam. 2.26.
Now then, if you will giue us leaue to consider the state of your Church aright, we would mind it thus. your Church hath the essentiall notes of a false Church. namly a confuse prophane worldly people, with an Anti∣chrstian Prelacie, and preisthood over them; able to beget ordinarily, but a vayne and dead faith, through want of the true ministery of the word in Christs ordinance, and by meanes of the false worship and false doct¦nes that are in your Church; to worke the fruits of the flesh, as the idolatries and other sinful actions abounding in your Church doe shew; to make a man a very Antichristian, by resisting persecuting and blasphe∣ming, the true way of Christ and practise of his Gospel; (which alas, too many doe,) and last of all to destroy him. if he repent not of his sinne nd find mercie with the Lord. which we desire you all may finde, for the saluation of your soules. The 3. Consideration. OVr Church and ministerie, are approved of and rejoyced for, of all the pure reformed Churches in the world. Our confession by them pla∣ced in the Harmonie of Confessions; giing vs the right hand of fel∣lowship: as also by all the godly learned, and most sound and excellent fathers & lights of the churh, that euer liued in or meddle with our church; Bucer Mar∣yr, Fagius, Alasio, Knoxe, who liued n our church; Caluin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualtr, ymlr, Zanchius, Iunius, Rolocus &c. with others verie many, who haue giuen their testimony and approbation to our church and ministerie. Wher¦in if our errors were fundamentall, damnable and Antichristian, (as you terme them,) these churches and persons had vndoubtedly the spirit of discerning. and could not be deceiued all at once. 1. Cor. 11, 16. & 14.33. & .15. &. 10.15 & 14.32, 37, 2. Thes. 1.4. Answer. THough you come against vs with horsemen and charrets, yet we Psa. 20.7 will emember the name of the Lord our God; by whose word alone all doctrines must be tried all persons must udge and be iudged. It is incident to the best men and purest churches, to erre and be deceiued wherefore their sentences and approbations, must be examined by Gods word. If you say otherweise you teach corrupt and popish doctrine. With such weapons as these, haue the Papists long foght against you, and where you can bring one, they can bring many to witnesse for them and their Romish superstitions. Bellarmin de notu eccl Antiquity, vniversality, and sch lke popular reasons. they seek to vphold their kingdome withall: 2. The word of God condemning your church and ministerie, (as we haue often proued; and our proofes ly vpon you yet unanswered;) though all churches in the world, should aproue of you, your case wer o whit the better; for all men are vanity.Psa. 62.9.
3. The Iewes obieted as weighty a argmn agat Crit him selfe, whe they sayd, dth any of the rulers or of the Pharises  in him, but this people which know not the Law, are ursed. Ih 7, 1.19. 4. If the reformed Church's aproue so well of you Church and mi∣nistere, they are n onely against vs but against themselues: for theyr own Crches consist of  separated and voluntary people, wheras yors are cofused and compelled; they condemn and haue reeted the hie∣rarchie and ministerie of Archbishop, Lord bishos &c. Prests, Par∣sos, Vicars &c. which are yet among you and hae amon them an∣ther ministerie. Now how they can aproue of two sorts of Churches & mnsteres, so contrary one to another, let them look to t. 5. It seemeth to me, you are verie laush in your praise, which now vaunt so of the aprobation and reioycing of al the ure refored Churches in the world: whereas heretofore you complayned that you had 1 Admon o the Parl. all the bst refrmed Chrhes throughut Chistendom aginst you. Agayn the Har∣mony that you mention, was set forth but by the French and Belgick chur¦ches; the things that they approue among you, are certayn general heads of religeon which a Bshop wrote in an Apologie of your Church: most of all which heads, we our selues also approue and reioyce for But the controuersies between you and vs, touching the gathering and constitu∣ting of a Church; the manner of divine seruce; the form of Church go∣vernment, and the like; are eyther not at all, or in very generall termes set down in that boke: and so uerie slenderly, if ought at all, by them aproued or reioyced for. To giue an instance or two; in the tenth sec∣tion of that Hrmony, treating of the Chrch, your English confession is so shor and in generall words, I doubt not bt the Pope himselfe will subscribe vnto it, letting him haue his own interpretation. In the 15 sec∣tion of Ecclsiasicall metings; you speake of prayer, in the tongue which all yor people vnderstand. Now because the Reformed churches ap∣proue of thi, we must take it belike, that they approue of your Leitur∣gie and service book also, and al your publick worship, though it be not set downe fr any to judge of. In the 16. section, of Holy day's, fasts &c. there yo wrie aginst purgatory; which being put into the Harmonie, i ynough (as seemeth) to proue that other chrches approue of al your Pope holy-dayes and festiuals. The lke may be minded for other poynts, as in the 17. section for ceremonies & things indifferent; which being ap∣proued of and reioyced for by all the Reformed churches in the world; the Prelats wl haue a shrewd hand against you that are called Puritans, for standing so much against the ceremonies of your Church, as you do· And for your minstery, I marveil you say not that, it is approued of and riyced for of the Pope also, for in the 11. section of that Harmony, you beleeue these orders and degrees of ministers in the Church, 1 Deacons. 2 Priests, and 3 Bishops; which orders, wehther the Reformed Churches ap¦proe of or no, I am sure the Counsel of Trent doth, and hath decreed, If
any shall say, that in the Catholik Church there is not a Hirarchie instituted by diuine ordination, which consisteth of Bishops. and Priests and Deccōs by interprta¦tion ar mi¦nisters 1  3.5. ministers, let him be ccursd. Concil. Trident. Sess 23. Can. 6. But now seeing not onely the Fathers of the Counsel of Trent, but all reformed Churches in the world, (as you sayd, doe approue of and reioyce for this your ministerie; I hope the Bishops and hirarchie of your Church shall no more be prea∣ched & writen against by your inferior Priests, (as many a day they haue been,) as being Antichrstan. Thus may you see what a weak foundation, you bring for your church and ministerie; and if we lyfted to fight against you with your own wea∣pons; we could allege many things from the persons whome you cite; a∣gainst your present church and ministery: but the word of God yeeldeth vs armour ynough for this battell against you, as in due tme through his grace shall be seen. 6. In the meā while, it shal not be amisse to put the reader in mind, how your selues heretofore haue iudged and written of your ministerie, which you say it is approued of and reiyced for, of all the pure reformed chur∣ches in the world. your ministers being (as before is noted, Deacons, Priests and Bishops; Of the Deacenship you haue written, that Defēnc of eclesiastical disci, p. 102. it is a meer hu∣mane institution, a degree to the Priesthood, and nothing like to the ordinance of God. Of Priests &c. that 1 admo to the Parlia. they cam from the Pope. as out of the Troian hor¦ses belly to the destruction of Gods kingdom. Of the Bishops &c. that defence of godly minis: against brid¦ges. p. 12 3. you account them no natural members of the body of Christ church becauase they are of humane addition, not borne with her, nor grown up with her from the cradle, Agayne Sermon. on Rom. 12 p 34. that they be rather members of the strumpet of Rome, then of the spouse of the Lamb &c. And haue not you & the reformed Churches great cause now to reioyce for this ministery. 7. Moreouer consider you also, how we may allege, that now 10. yeares sithence, we have published our Confession of faith, and causes of our separation from your Church and ministery, to the learned Vniversi∣ties of the Reformed churches; with desire if in our faith or practise we erred, that they would shew it vs: but to this day, we know not any that haue vndertaken so to doe: wherefore we also may suppose by their si∣lence, that they approue our case or at least suspend their iudgments and condemne, vs not. 8. Finally, it is written in one of the scriptures that you quote, the spi¦rituall man iudgeth all things, but he himselfe is iudged of no man; 1 Cor. , 15. Now every true Christian is a spirituall man Gal. 6. 1. 1 Pet 2.5. ther¦fore he may judge and discerne by Gods word and spirit, faith from here sie, and the true church from the false; he may see with his eyes & liue by his own faith, and not depend vpon other men, to liue & walk in sin till other churches condemne it. Let every man therfore retayn his li∣berty, and take heed how he iudgeth.
4. THe onely wicked Paists, Athist, and most ungodly ones: are aduer∣saries to our godly ministers and people. The godly in all placs and times among vs, by them alone an ordinarily hae been conuerted vnto Christ, and by them approed, reurenced, and obeyed alwayes in the Lord. Answer. 1. IF the onely wicked be adversaries, to your Godly ministers and people; it perteyneth not to us, who hate none of you, bt wish well and pray for you al; euen for our persecutors we are aduersaries one¦ly to the sinns, & corruption that are among you; & whiles we reproe you for inne, you should ude that we loue, and hate you not, as the Leu. 19, 17. law techeth. We say therefore with the Apostle; are we become your ene∣mies because we ell ou the truth? Gal. 4 16. 2, The Atheists and wicked one that so hate your godly ministers and people; are the not also mbers of yor owne Church? So then your church is diuided against it selfe, and you are aduers one to another. And why tel you vs of this, as a consideratiō to reduce us to your church, when we because such Atheists & wicked ar (cōtrary to Gods wil) suffred among you, doe separate from your Church? 3. Agayn, who be those godly ministers and people you mean? If such as are called Puritans; they haue (I suppose) moe adversaries the freinds in your church; yea the publick state, alwes and canons of your church are against them, and all that know the truth of God, and ther estate aright, haue just cause to blame them for ther long halting and dis¦sembling. If the Prelates be those godly minsters, they haue in regard of their vnlawfull places and proceedings; many good people for their aduersaries, both within and without the land, and your selues also which suffer for sparation in your church. By neither of these two contrary facti∣ons among you, ar men ordinarily conuerted unto Christ, both sorts setting your selues against the true way of Chrst for gathering and gouernmen of the Church, and worship of God; and so do hinder mens saluation, and desere to be not approued, but reproued in the name of the Lord. The 5. Consideration. 5. GOD hath giuen witn for the truth of our ministerie, by the vndoub∣ted tstimony of his gracious presence and approbation of the same; by his gifts of 1. sanctifiation. 2 knowledge. 3 spirit of discerning. 4. of vtterance. 5 of power and authority in teaching, 6 effectuall and ordinarie alling and beget¦ting to the faih of God, and bringing them from darkns to light, from the old man to the nw, from the flsh vnto the spirit; which ministery of ours; begat you lso, if ever you were truy bgotten in the spirit, & by Gods mrcie hath begot∣ten me, & other hs vnworthy seruants.
Answer 1. THe Papists will say as much as all this and more too, (if words will sere for the ministery of their church; they boast of ther Friers, & Iesuts holines, knowledge, utterance & authority in teaching and their maruelous effects in conuerting to Christianity, the Indians & other ethens all ouer the world Yea what religeon, glorieth not in te sanctitie, gifts and effects of their ministerie? But Gods word must try all. 2. The ministerie of our Church being Archbishops, L. Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, &c Priests, and Deacons, as is to be seen in the books statutes, and canons of your church: you brng not here any one word of God, or text of scriptures (which are his testimonies,) to witnes for the truth of your ministery: and this is indeed worthy to be considered of vs & of al that shall read your Considerations 3. Your own brethren heretofore confessed and complayned to the Parliament, that you 1 admo 2.3.4. lack in England a right ministery of God; that the mi¦nisters are neithr proued, elected, called, nor ordeyned, according to Gods word. This testimonie being true, how then doth God giue witnes for the truth of your ministery. 4. The witneses that you bring, if they be examined, wil say little ar nothing to this purpose. For, 1. The gift of santification, is a common note of Christianity, 1. Thes. 4.3. 1 Pet. 2.9. and therefore no speciall note of a ministery. This was Korahs argument when he would haue vsurped the Priesthood. All the congregation is holy euery one of them: why may they not therefore be Prests? Num. 16.3.10. But what saith the scripture? No man taketh th honour to himselfe but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. Heb. 5.4. 2.3. The second and third 2 knowledge, 3 of the spirit of discerning, are also generall for the whole church, and not speciall for the ministe∣rie; Rom. 15.14. Phil. 1.10. Yea some in the flock, may have a greater measure both of sanctification and of knowledge; then the Pastor or tea¦cher or any Officer It cannot be denied but Barsabas had knowledge as wel as Matthias; yet was he not therefore an Apostle, Act. 1.23.26. and they whose ge∣nealogies could not be found, had knowledge as wel as the other Prests yet were they not therfore kept in the Priesthood, Ezra 2.62. Boast not you therefore of your knowledge, but shew vs yor genealogies in the scriptres There be a great many in your ministerie called dumb Priest whch are but bare readers, by whose meanes many people perish for want of knowledge: these testimones will be dumb for them; yet your urch proclaymeth them to, be rue ministers. Your best minister, of whose knowledge you boast, shew themselu
ignorant; (or worse,) in the  or  lanting of a church whles; they will haue it (as their ractise proueth) with commixre of al form without separation: wherea they cannot shew any true church since the beginning of the world, but was of a separaed people. Gen. 61.2. &12 1. Lv, 20.23.24. Ezr. 6 21. Act. 2, 40.41. &. 19:9. &c. 4. 5. The fowrth and fift, 4. vttrance, with 5 power & authority in teaching, are needfull in such as are ministers, but no necesarie proof of a true ministerie. For had not the false Apostles and Prophets. utterance and power; that preached wth eloquence and wisdom of words dsgra∣cing the Apostles and Prophets of the Lord? 2 Cor. 10.10. &. 11.13.15. 1. Kin. 22.4. Ier. 23.31. &. 28.1.2.10, 11. 2 Tim. 3.8. Your ministers, many preach not at al many preach to mayntain the pompous prelacie, & laudable ceremonies of your Church: and they that prach best, shew little power or authority For how many yeers haue they been preaching for Discipline, and against some corruption of your church? yet nothing preuailed, but are further now at last then they were at the first. Who knoweth not that the prelates haue closed vp the mouthes of many Ministers, that the prophesie of Esaias is verified vpon them; Isa. 56.10. and yet you boast of ther utterance & auhority in tea∣ching. But lamentable ministers are they ll; and the best of them may be seen to be but briers; and to haue betrayed the authority of Christ; For when they took the Order of Priesthood as they call it, they solemnly pro¦mised euen before the Lord, and by his help, that form & manner of consecrating Bishops, priests and Deacons. they would giue their faithfull diligence alwayes so to minister the doctrine and sacraments and the discipline of Christ as the Lord hath commanded, & as this realm hath receiued the same. according to the commandements of God so that they mought teach the people committed to their care and charge wth all diligence to keep & obseru the same. They promised also, ibidem, reuerently to obey their ordinary & other chief ministers is to whom the gouernmēt & charg is commited our them, follow∣ing with a glad mind and will their godly admoniion, and submitting thēselu to their godly jugement. Yet your forward preachers (as they are estee∣med,) doe not minister the doctrine sacraments and discipline of Christ as th Lord hath commanded; but sue and wait for authority from the Magstrate, to haue that whch they count the true discipline of Christ erected in ther parishes; which because the ciuill Magistrate doeth not they practise not the discipline, nor teach their people to keep and ob∣serue the same yea they blame us for practsing Christs lawes withou the Magistrates leaue, as if Christ wer not head of the church, & Prince of all the Kings of the earth. Again they administer not their doctrine sacraments and discipline, as this realm hath receiued, neither reuerently o∣bey their Ordinaries, but resist, preach and write against the Bishops, their canons, rites and ceremonies. as much as they dare Thus halt they be∣tween two opinions, and practise neither the discipline of Chrst nor of
the preltes whiles; yet they would seem to practse both: being in this poynt like to the Saaritans, which whiles they would both 2 Kin. 1 33.41. fear the Lord and serue ther images also, they ver. 34. neither feared God, nor did af∣ter their orinances, as the scriptures sayth. What then may we esteem of your ministers pwer and authority in teaching Aaine, cnsider you if some Absolom, Adonia, or other vsurper, should say; I haue 1 sanctification, 2 knowledge, 3 spirit of dscerning, 4 of tterace, 5 of power and authoritie in iudging, 6 effectual & ordi∣nrie decidind & ending of controuersies &c therefore I am a lawfull King, Iudge or Magistrate; and God hath giuen witnesse by these vn∣dbted testmonies, of the truth of my Magistracie: whether this lea wold serue him, or these testimonies approue his office? yet are these most regnant proofs of your Minstery. 6. The 6. and last testimonies is, their effectual & ordinary calling and bgetting to the faith of God, &c. This I haue before touched and shewed that ordinarily they beget not, but hinder the true faith: they keep the people in blndenes and idolatrie, whch is a worke of darknes and of Gal. 5, 19 20. the flesh; and if by their preaching any be brought to the true faith, I ac¦count it Gods extraordinary work, which I doubt not but is also aōg the Papist. Againe, if this were granted them, I would know what office they would claym i the church hereby; whether Apostleship of some other function. For in the Church of Corinth were many teachers and instruc¦tours yet begat they not their eople to the fath, for the Apostle Paul challengeth to be their father only, and to hae begotten them in Christ through the gospel. 1. Cor, .15. So there may be a lawfull Pastor or Teacher in a church, which neuer begat any of them to the faith, but onely nourisheth and increaseth faith in them, that were begotten afore He is chosen to feed the flock. 1. Pet. 5.. not to begett the same; the flock is a company of faithfull people, begotten before they haue a Pastr. The begetting of faith, was first and chiefly by the Apostles and Evan¦glsts, that went about preachng the word, to them that had not heard it. Rom. 15, 20.21. It s also by the ministers of churches, or prophets; (though not in office of ministerie,) whn vnbeleeuers come into their as¦smblies, 1 Cor. 14.24.25. It is also by all Christians priuately me and women which preaching and witnessing the truth of the Gospell, rea∣ding talking, conferring of the scriptres, doe conuert many unto God informe their children and families in the faith, and saue their soules, Act 8.4: &. 18 6 1 Cor. 7.16. Eph. 6 4. Deut. 6.7. S the begetting of fath, is no certaine testimony of a true Minsterie. Whereas therefore you conclude, that your Ministery begat us also, if e∣ver we wer trly begotten in th spirit: we may answer yov with Moses Num 16.7 e take to muh vpon you. y sons of Levi. For know you not the wind
bloweth where it liteth, and you hear the sound thereof, but cannot tl whence it commeth or whether it goeth; and Ioh. 3.8. so is euery man that is bor of the spirit? It seemeth you count nothing preaching but that which is in the pulpit; nothing the word of God, but that which commeth out of your Ministers lips: but thanks be unto God that hath giuen vs better to dis∣cerne the worke of his grace, and hath breathed vpon vs with his holie spirit;Reu. 7.1. whiles your Ministers stood lik the 4. Angels in the corners of the earth, holding the windes that they should not blow. The 6 Consideration. 6. ALso our godly people haue all the marks and tokens of Gods people and elect, 1 which the scriptures set downe, 2 which the people in the tim of Christ and his Apostles had, 3 which the professors of any church that is now in the world haue, 4 yea which your selues in your supposed perfection can boa of: which is sealed vnto them, 1 by the care, peace, and testimony of a good con∣science in all things. 2 by suffring for sundrie parts both of righteousnes and  3 by effectual comforts in such sufrings, 4 assrance of faith, of hope, of remis∣sion of sinns; Gods dear loue vnto them; 5 by spiritual loue and th fruits there∣of, 6. by the progresse and daylie growth in knowledge strength and godliness &c. Answer. THAT many of your people are Gods elect, I vndoubtedly acknow∣ledge: and I would to God such were the estate of you euery one. Yet the constitution of your people in your church, is not a Com∣munion of Saincts with which we may participate: but a confuse mix∣ture of all sorts of men from which the godly must separate, as touching the worship of God. In this your defence of them, you begin thus, Our Godly people, Bu who ar they, can we tel? are not al your people godly? of the true church it is written, If· 60.2 thy people shalbe al righteous if your people be not such? why make you not a separation from the vngodly, that will not be re∣claymed; or why cast you them not out from among you? Thus ought you to doe by the Testament of Christ. 2. Cor. 6.14.17. 1. Cor. 5.13, If you doe it not, you profane Gods everlasting couenant. I deny not but many hypocrites and reprobates wil creep into the true church; and much vngodlinesse will their break out, as in any assembli in the world: but when it is seen, the sinner is presently to be reproued; and eyther must purge himselfe by repentance, or be excommunicate. Luk. 17.3. Mat, 18.15.16 17. Thus still the church continueth a com∣union of Saincts, an vnleauened lump, a holy nation. 1 Cor. 1, &. 5. . 1 Pet. 2 9.
Now for your works and tkns; you say they have all 1 which the scrip∣tures set rw. This is denied, and had you searched the scriptures▪ you might easilie haue seen it otherweise. For; They are not a separate people called out from the world: which is oe prncipal ark, (as before I haue shewed,) vrged often in the scrip∣tures. 1. King. 8 53. Isa. 52.1. Ier, 15.19. Ioh. 17.14.16, Reu'18.4. They are not the Lords free people, injoyng the libertie of the gos∣pell: but in thraldom to strange Lord ad lawes ecclesiastical. Contrary to Luit. 5.42.55. 1 Cor. 7.3. Ioh, 8, 32 36 Gal. 5 1. They walk not in the truth of the gospel; but in many things ar cor∣rupted with the remainders of poish sperstons and idolatrie. Contra∣rie, to Psal. 26.3. 3 Ioh 3, 4. Rom. 6, 4. Ephe, 2, 10. 1 Cor, 10, 14.2. Reu. 14, 9.12. In these and many other particulars, your, people are contrary to the scriptures: so the prncipall marks are wanting. 2 Next you compare thm with the professrs of any church new in the world This is more bollie then wiselie spoken of you: shew if you can any re∣formed church, whose people are like yours, for rr mixtre of al sorts or in lke bondage to Antichrstian relates; or that use like superstions and idolatries in the worship of God, and dailie conversation. Remem∣ber also what some of your selues haue written heretofore; how that Epistle be¦fore the De monst. Of all the nations that, haue rencunced that whore of Rome thre ïs none in the world so farre out of square, as England, in reteyning the Popish hierarchie. Your last comprison is with ourselues, whome you twite with supposed perfection: wherein you iniurie vs, and yet help not your selues. For we suppose no perfection at al to be in vs, eyther in knowledge or practise but are priuie to our selues of our infirmities;; and are sure we haue more also then Psa. 19.12. we can discerne. Yet by the grace of God we are that we are and his grace is not in vaine in us, but as it hath brought vs out of con∣fusion bodage and Idolatrie, whrein your people still remayn, so we trust it will keep vs in the truth of the gosel, vntil we come to perfecti∣on in the kingdome of our father which is in heauen. 3. Next you speak of the sealing hereof vnto your people, 1. By the care, peace and testiny of a good conscience in al things. what care can be seen in such confused carelesse walking of your people, commixt in one bodie, with the profane and serpents seed? what peace of conscience can there be, when men doe walke in open transgression of Gods law ex∣cept such as whereby a man falsely bleseth himselfe, saying I shal haue peace, although I walke according to the stubbornes of my own hart? Deut. 29, 19, There is no peace sayth the Lord, vnto the wicked, Isa. 48.22. The waies of your people being wicked, their spirituall actions idolatrous it must needs be a blind or corrupt conscience that testifieth for thē in this estate. 2.3. Their 2 suffrings, and 3 effectual comforts in them; we will beleeu
when we see them. For the present, we behold many of your peopl for auoyding the crosse of Christ to submt to the Idolatries of your Church against their owne conscience and confesion, Very few that will suffer for any part of the truth but none at al that suffer for all, ex∣cept such as forsake your confused assemblies. And if one or two in a shire, doe suffer a litle trouble, for not being buxome enough to the Prelates and their corts: what is that to jstify the prophane multi∣tudes and generall state of your people, which are readier to prsecute, then to suffer persection for rghteousnes sake; as we haue had len∣table experience these mny yeires. Wrefore, as their suffrings, so I think their Comforts are. 4, Their assurnce of faith, of hope, of remission of sinns▪ and of Gods dear loue unto th; may wel be boaste of, but not soundlie felt. For where so many evil works doe abound and reigne, there is not true faith, and con∣sequently no re hope of remision of sinns. Shew vs therefore your faith by your works for we cnnot see your harts. Bnt this we find in the scriptures, that yor forfathers; when the Prophets reroed the for their sinns, wold vaunt as you do an lean vpo the Lrd ad ay, is not the Lord aong vs; no euill can come upn vs. Mic. 3 11. This glrying of inward graces when outward transgresions doe prevaile: is meer de∣lusion; common with all sorts and sects of religion. Even the hrlot can boast of her peace offrings, Pro 7.14. and the Phrisee thanketh God, that he is not as other men Luk. 18 11. 5 Their spritual loue and frites thereof, let them record tht haue tas¦ted of. It is wel known in the land, how many of Gods children hau been empouerished, afflicted, tormented, by long and lamentable im∣prisonment vexation and spoile of goods, exile and other like meanes women left widowes, and children fatherlesse. How your godlie peo∣ple haue visited comforted and releiued them▪ is not so wel knowne: it may be their charitie hath been in secret, and their left hand knoweth not what their right hath done. Wherefore you needed not haue offred this to our consideration, who are so ūaquainted with their loue: let them selus rather cōsider how they shal answer whē they com to that howr mē∣tioned, Mat. 25.34 35.41, 42. &c. If you think they haue shewed loue to their freinds and fauourites; that will procure them but little thank, e∣uen sinners and publicans doe the same. Luk. 6.32.33. &c. 6, Their progresse and dayly growth in knowledge strength▪ & godlinesse, is ill seen in the estate they stand; there being at this day rather moe gross abominations vrged and observed in your publick assemblies, then haue been heretofore; and your chrch further from reformation now in the end, thē was at the begin: that vnlesse you come to walke as your bre¦thren of th separation, and quite abandon the hope of reforming Babel; it wil shortly apear tat all your labours be but siders webs; and your expectation vanitie and vexation of spirit
The 7. Consideration Consider how God hath witnessed his loue and approbation to our church, 1 by many victories and deliuerances from the enimies of Christ, 2 long continuance of the gspel among us 3 strang iudgments on the enimies & persectrs of the gospel. 4 the power and blessing in casting out Diuils. 5 pray∣er heard both in spirituall and earthly things, 6 by throwing down the Chur of , and building of the Church of God, by preaching, disputing and printing of many excellent works and volumes puplished of all sorts▪ which non of you in anything haue ever yet atteyned, but onely to threw down Gods church to raise ssention among brethren, to rent the church, to distract the ignorant, to aford the weak▪ to hinder the cause of refrmation, to bear false witnesse a∣gainst your brethren, and belye the holy ordinances of God. Answer. 1. IF many victories and deliuerances, be an vndoubted testimony of Gods loue and approbation of a people and their religeon; then  might wel haue boasted of his religion, who con∣quered seventy Kings and made thē gather bread vnder his table. Iudg. 1.7. Then Raisak hs reason was good, which he alledgeth against the Is∣rael t, fr that he had conquered so many nations 2 Kin 18, 33·34, 35· If on the Turks at this day, may triumph ouer Christian religeon, be∣caus they haue warraye a great part of the world‘ & takē from Christiās any kngdmes and rouinces. Yea this verie reason did heathen men hertofre allege for dfence of pagan me, as that Symma in Epist. pr sacr. patrū by it Rome had been kept agaist , and ther neies: and, that Caeciliu; Areb lib 8 therefore Rome had got the Empr of all provinces and parts of the world; because, it worshiped and ser∣ved.  os that were in the wrld, even the vnknown Gods also. I would wish you therefore to minde better ground for the truth of religion: and remeber what is written of the ancient Babylonians: after their victo∣ries; Thn shall they take courage, & transgresse and doe wickedly imputing this their power vnto their Gods▪ Habak. 1.11. 2. The long continuance of the gspel among you, will make the more aganst you at the day of your accounts because you yeld no better obe∣dience to the gospell as your present idolatrous estate sheweth. The gos¦pell was among the men of the Gen 6. 1 Pe 3.19.20. 2 Pet, 2.5. old world; 120, yeares taught by No∣ah, a preacher of righteousnes; yet at last they perished by the stood for their disobedience: therefore though it hath been with you, about halfe that time, you also ay perish, if you repent not. But (note) you take it for granted which is yet to be proued, that the gospel is among you: whereas the true peachng and practise thereof, you cannot endure. The sound of the Gosel, by th fet of them that puplish peace, is this Thy God o Sion reignet;  Iudah keep thy solemne feasts perforrme thy
vowes, for the wicked shall no more passe through thee (he is utterly out off. Isa. 52, 7, Nahum. 1.15. with Rom. 10 15. but Christ reigneth not yet among you by his own officers and laws, (as hath been confesed by the best of your Ministers;) you keep the solmn feasts of Antchrist, as your Christ∣mas. Cnelinas, Hlloas Ear, and many the like; and the wicked at still in the midds of you, and wlk on eery side; yea are exalted; which Daid saith is a forme for the sons of mn. Psal. 12.8. 3. The strange iudgnts on nimies and persecutors, are good warnings for you that you persecute your bethren no longer: we haue seen & min¦ded some, vpon no mean men mong you; but wish not to see more we rather desire the conuersion of our enimes. 4. The power and blessing in casting out Diuils, (though it may be ques¦tioned whether it be so or no in your Church,) is a thing that the Papists can boast of more then you. See their late supplication 37. reason of reli∣gion. Secondly, such Diuils as are said to dwel in Babylon, Reu. 18, 2. we playnly see you haue no power to cast out. 3 I would wish you to remember the words of Christ, Many will say to me in that day; Lord Lord, haue we not by thy name prohesied. and by thy name cast out diuils &c. and then will I professe to them I neuer knew you depart from me. ye that work iniquity. Mat. 7.22.23. 5 For your prayer heard both in spiritual and earthly things take heed you deceiu not your selues; many years haue you prayed & fasted for your discipline and pretended reformation; but how you haue bene heard, your present state sheweth. As for earthly things, if God giue them vnto you, it is no sound proof that he approueth your praiers, much lesse your church. Some evil mens eyes Psal. 73.7 stand out for fatnes, they haue more then the hart desireth; but Iob 21.16 their wealth is not in their hand, there for the councel of the wicked be farr from me. God heard the praier of the King of the Philistims; Gen 20.4.6, he answered at the sacrifices of the sooth sayer Balaam; Num, 23, 3, 4, 15, 16. &c, shal we think God there∣fore allowed of their religion? Againe, what people in the world is not perswaded and will not say that God heareth their praiers? Euē the hethens would boast thus of their false Gods; as Iulian protested that Cyril. cōtra Iul. lib. 7 s. Aesulapius had often healed him be∣ing sick: and Fast 5 ae∣pe Iouē vids quum iam sua mittere vellet fulins  susti∣isse  Ovid, that he had often seen Iupiters anger appeased with incense. &c. See you not then, that as the Saincts when they walk vp∣right before the Lord, haue assurance, and sound comfort thereby that be Psa 66.18 19 116.1 2.1. Iob 5.1. heareth their praiers which they make according to his will: so hi∣pocrites and ethniks haue also their false perswasions that their praiers are heard and vaine comforts according? Vaunt not therefore of your praiers being eard, so long as you doe works which are to be abhorred but remember how it s written, whosouer we ask, we receiue. (of God, be∣cause w kep his , and doe those things that are pleasing in his sight. Heb. 3.21.
6. Your throwing down the church of Antichrist, and building the church of God, by reaching, &c. is according to the prouerb, Pro 25, 14 Clowdes and wind without . Let your brethren be witnesses; Of the first they say, 1 admon, to Parl, pag 33 An∣tichrist raigneth amongst you: Of the latter, that ibid. p 4. as yet you are scarse come to  a church rightly reformed, and againe; that Supplica∣tion to the Parl. p, 67. the wals of Sion he euen with the ground. Yet now you vaunt of throwing down An∣tichs hurh and building Gods. The Martyrs in Q Maries daies did indeed by their faithfull testimo∣nies and patient suffrings, throw downe a great part of Antichrist church but sithence that time, what haue you doen, unlesse it hath been to re∣payr Iericho? For many grosse abuses which those Martyrs abhorred, are now stfly mainteyned and practised in your church: but farther thē they went, haue you not stepped a foot & if some of your inferiour mi∣nisterie, haue spokē or writtē against a few foolish ceremonies; yet others of your chiefest ministers haue written as much for them, that what su∣perstition your church pulleth downe with the left hand, it setteth vp with the right. The Prelates and their side haue written against you that seek reformation of Babel: and they both haue set against vs that make separation from Babel: and yet you heer offer to our consideration, how you haue builded Sion. But the Lord wil visit both you & your building; then shall your reword be according to your works. In the end you ease yor stomach against vs, as they that throw downe Gods church, raise dissention, with many moe greeuous calumniations, which in your distempered affection you throw forth. More wisdome, and much more modestie had it been, if you had spared these reproches til you had convinced vs of such things. But I see how your zele did ca∣rie you Ezekiah threw downe the idolatrous places in Israel; and redu∣ced the people vnto Gods true worship 2 Chro 31.1.2, &c. & 30.1.2 &c. Rabsaketh reproched him for this, as hauing done sacrilege against his own God. Isa. 36.7 We, by the word of our testimonie, throw downe your idolatrous high places, superstitions, ceremonies, false worship and mnistere you charge vs wth throwing downe Gods church, and lode vs with many criminations. But it is your selues that trouble Israel; for doe we eproue you for any good thing in doctrine or practise; or haue we left any truth that is among you; And if by our testimonie of the gos¦pel, dissntion be raysed and your church rent, the ignorant distracted & weak offended: blame not vs which testifie the truth, but your selues and such as reist it. Thinke you that Chrst came to giue peace on the earth? he hath told you may but rather debate. For fiue in one howse shalbe, di∣ided, three against two and two against three, father against sonn mo∣ther against dughter: and Luk 12.51:52, Mat. 12.6 blesed is he that shall not be offended in Christ When the Temple of God is opened in heauen, & the ark of his couent seen therein there are lightnings, and voyces, and thundrings, & earthquak, and much bayl. Thinke it not strange then,Ren 11.19 if troubles doe fol¦low
follow the preaching of the Gospell; neither impute your own faults vn∣to vs: but submit your necks vnto the yoke of Christ, least he Psa 18.14. send out his arrowes and scatter you. and increase lightnings and destroy you. How your churches state hat been iustified by you, the reader may se by that you haue brought? and how far we are from your vnchristian ca¦lumnies shall further appa, by the help of God, in the answer to your other Considerations, that now next follow. On your part, consider, 1, YOur Separation is very strange, vnboard of in any age of the Church, hauing no shew of warrant from Gods word, eyther by commandement or example. Answer. YOV would not call our separation strange, if your selfe were not a stranger from the common wealth of Israel. What age was there euer in the world, since light was separated from darknes; that heard not of separation from the false Chrch, the fast man Adam saw it. in the separation Gen 4.16 & 6.2. of Seths posterty from Caines. Noah did the like Gen 9.25 26. &. cha, 11. in Sems posteritie from Chams. Abraham was Gen 19 called out of Chaldee: Gen. 12. Lot out of Sodom: Israel, out of Ex, 4 &c Aegipt and Isa 48.20 Babel; faithfull Iudah Hos. .15 from rebellious Israel; Christs disciples, Act 2 40 41. 2 Cor, 6 14.17. from faithlee Iewes and Gentiles; and all the Lords people. Reu. 18:4 from your confused Babylon Yea God him selfe did first teach it when he made a separation between the wmans seed and the Serpents, Gen. 3.5. And yet you say, it hath no shew of warrant from Gods word Hereafter I suppse you will say so no more, but wil see if you can proue your selues a tre Church, meet to be communi∣cated withal: which when you doe, we by Gods grace will returne vnto you. The 2. Consideration. 2, THE poynts in difference between vs and you did arise at first from per¦sons, in whome God tstified against your present causes, 1 Mr. Bol∣ton hanged himselfe;  Mr. Brown revolted and came back from you; 3 Mr. Pe¦ry, Barrow, and Greenwood were hanged; 4 Mr. Ihnsons and the rest banish∣ed: and (note) not by heathen and Antchristian tyrants, as were true Martyrs of Christ, but by Christian Magistrat's profssing and mayntyning the Gospell of Christ. Besides your principal pillars of greatest reckning gifts and iudge∣ment, haue returned from you unto the Church of England; as Harrison, Smith, Crud, Slad, and sundry other misters and men of learning and ac∣count, who also liued holily, and died most comfortably in the Lord notwithstan∣ding.
Answer. IT is a wonder, if you be a teacher in your church that your salt is so vasauory. Shal mens persons now be brought against the case of Christ haue you no better learned him? Mought not a Cananite or Philisti∣an have reasoned thus against Israel? The wares against us and you did a∣rise at first from persons in whome God testified against your present cause. Some were Num 11.1 brunt with fire, som Num. 16 32 33. sunk into the earth aliue, some were destroyed by Num 21.6 serpents. some by Nū 25.9 pestilence, some by the Num. 14.45. enimies sword. some by the sword of Ex 32, 27 their own brethren. euen Moses and Aron your rincipall pillers of greatest reckning, dyed in the desert Nū 20.12 for their sinne, and of Ex 12, 37 six hundred thousand men that came out of Aegipt to fight against vs onely Num. 26 64, 65, two men are left aliue: and (note) these things have come vpon you b the hand of your God, whom you say, that he hath sent you to warr agaynst vs Thus might a Pagā haue pleaded a∣gainst Gods church then; with as much truth and more colour then you that are called a Christian, can do against vs. But let us see your parti∣culars. 1. M, Bolton (yo say) hnged himselfe. And so did Iudas, one of the irst and principall publisher of Christs Gospell. Will you therefore call Christaity into question for it? Besides this Bolton. (one of the El∣ders of that separated Church whereof Mr. Fits. was Pastour in the be∣ginning of Q. Eliz. reigne,) first revolted at Pauls Crosse, was reproued and excomunicate for this by the church: and aftr not hauing grace to returne or epent, hanged himselfe. This is testified to me by one yet liuing among vs, who tho was member of that church & well acquaint∣ed with the affairs threof: and with this matter, and saw the man dead. Which being so Boltons Martyrdom is little for the credit of your cause and church where of he died a member 2 Mr. Brown reuolted &c. And to did 2 Tim. 4 10. Demas, and divers others in al ages, who loued this present world, more then God. But consider you here the Apostles words: what though some haue been vnfaithful, shal their vnfaithfulnes make the faith of God without effect? Farr be it. Rom. 3.3 4. besides, how wel Mr. Brown approueth of your church, though he liue in it; if you ask him I suppose, will tel yov. 3. Mr. Penry Barrow, and Greenwood were hanged. And so was Christ himselfe; and (note) not by heathen tyranns, (for Pilate Mat. 27.24. washed his hands of his blood;) but by Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, professing and mainteyning the religion of God, as your church now dooth. And you that allege the hanging of these men to reproach our faith: it is pro∣bable that if you had then liued, you would haue reproached Christ him selfe; in the fellowship of whose afflictions and reproaches, we now re∣joyce and are not ashamed. But fulfill you the measure of your forefa∣thers.
4. Mr. Iohnsens and the rest . And so was Reu. 1.9. Ihn, the Mar 3 17 sonn of thunder; and many other of Gods people many tmes You and your church shall haue small cause to boast of your persecuting Christs witnes¦ses, when the day of your  shall come. Your captions note that these unishments are nely heathen tyran but by profesed Christians▪ is indeed worthy to be noted and lamented: yet is it of no note or force, to disproue the truth of our cause. For who ersecuted Chrst and his Apostles more then the Israelites Gods peculi∣ar and profesed people? who mre then the Act 4.11. builders, refused him the chief corner-stone? whee were the Prophets killed, but Luk 3.33 in Ierusalem? Yea not onely false Chrstans and hypocrites, but Gods elect-seruants may so be ouertaken, as to persecute and kill the Lords people. Did not the Gen. 37. Patriarche sel Ioseph into Aegipt, when some of them would haue klled him? was not Solmn a good King? Yet sought he 1 Kin. 11 30.31 37.40. to kill Iero∣bam without cause; whom God had appoynted to be King after him. Was not Aja 2 Chro. 14 23 &c. a godly King, and good reformer of the church (yet was he wroth with Hanani the Seer, and 2, Chro 16 7.10. put him into prison, onely for spea∣king vnto him the word of the Lord. What weight is there then in thi your cavil, that our affliction are by Christian magistrates, therefore out cause is evill? Good princes may be ouer caried eyther by their own af∣fections; or by the suggestions and prouocations of other men. And if you will not yet see your folly, mind this for your selues; that you which  called Puritans, are molested, imprisoned, persecuted: and (note) not by hethen and Antichristian tyranns; but by your own Christian magistrates and Bishops, professing and maynteyning the gospel of Christ. Ergo, eyther your cause or your argument is naught. Your last poynt is partly false, and partly friuolous: for Mr. Harrison▪ returned not vnto your church of England; but died at Middleburgh in this faith that we professe. Mr. Smith, Crud, and some others, (which ne∣ver were officers. much lesse pillars, in our Church,) did indeed forsake their first faith, and died soone after; with what comfort, themselues now know. But what if many more had forsaken vs, yet the truth of the gos∣pell which we professe, shall stand. Christian religion was at a low ebb, when so many went back, that Ie∣sus sayd to the twelue Ioh. 6.66.67. will you also gee away? Yet Christianitie still flou∣risheth, and shall, so long as the moone endureth. And we with com∣fort doe behold; that though many bad ones haue gone away▪ yet God bringeth better in their place dayly. The 3. Consideration 3. NOte your dissentions between 1 Brown and Harrison, 2 Brown  Barron, 3 Barro and Francis Iohnson; 4 Francis and George Iohn¦son; 5 r. Iohnson and Mr. Slade (that great scholler) 6 Chaphn and others a∣out Anahaptisme, nay none of your great Rabines but haue grosly disa∣grd
disagreed among themselues. It piieth vs to see your poor congregation, how la∣mentably it hath been rent with mutuall dissentions bitings, and deuouring of echethers▪ whch doubtlesse is no  f the spirit of God. These are not lies but matters known; and they are matters horrible and strange. Answer. IF you were an Atheist or Pagan▪ as you professe to be a Christian: you mought in this mar reprch the church of God uer since the world began; saying. Note the dissentions, etween Gen. 4. Kain and Abel; Gen. 9. Cham and Noah; Ge 27. etc Esaw and Iaacob, Ge 37 &c, Ioseph and the Patriarches, Exo, 32. Num, 20. Moses and the Isra∣lites; Num, 6 Moses and the Leuites, Num 12 Moses and his wn sister and brother, Iudg. 8. Ge∣deen and the men of Ephraim, of Succth. and of Pennel, Iudg, 9. Abmelech and his brethren Iudg. 11 Iphteh and his brethren, Iud. 20 &c. Beniamin and the other tries of Israel, 1 Sam 18 &c. Saul and Dauid, 2 Sam, 15 &c. Dauid and Absalom, 1 Kin 12 &c. the ten tribes and the two, from Ieroboams times and after, Act 23.7 &c. the Pharisees & Sadducees in the Iewish Church, Luk, 22.24. the Apostles of Christ, the dissntions 1 Cor 1 & Galat. Phi∣lip. 3 Iohn. &c. in Corenth and the other Apostolike Churhes: These are not lies, but matters knowne, and rcorded in the scrip∣tures: and they are matters horrible and srangem. So then, if your proposed Cnsideration be of weight to turne vs from our present faith, because of the dissentions that haue been among vs: the like consideration nought turne vs also (which God forbid) from all faith and religion, & make vs as very Athests, as a many of your church already are. And indeed wher unto leadeth this manner reasoning which you vse, bt vnto Atheism? For if an Infidel hould mind religion, mought he not be kept back, by considrng the dissentions, in fath, between Painims, Iewes, Mahome∣tists, and Chrstians, and a Iew or Turke be kept from Christianitie, be∣cause of the disentions between Protestants, Papists, Arians, Anabap∣tists and other sects many? Yea are not the Papists at this day hindred from true religeon, by Bellarm, de not, eccles 10. noting (as you doe) the dissentions between Lu¦ther, Zwinglius, Calvn &c? But it seemeth all these were farr from your consderation, or if you minded them yet were they but motes in your ey: they be our dissentions, ours onely that trouble you It pittieth you to see our poor congregation. how lamentably it hath been rent &c. but you are hard-harted, and take no pity belike on your own Church. which you so highly commend vnto us, though dissentions for discipline, (that I speake not of other matters) haue been so great, that you hae not onelie preached & printed on against an other now many a year and that in ve∣rie bitter and hostile manner, but also, persecuede imprisoned & fought the blood on of an other. Wel, howsoeuer we haue indeed just cause to la∣ment, that by our dissentions, you and others haue taken occasion to blaspheme the truth of God: yet herin haue we comfort that such things must be amongst us (as the Holy Ghost saith,) 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. that they which are approu¦ued may be known. And you, if by no meanes you will learne the estate of
a Church here on earth, where it is in continuall warr with the Serpent and his seed; but stil you think these things horrible and strange: take heed you stumble not at the stone Christ to your distruction & haue your abi¦ding in that house, which the strongman armed keepeth and the things that he possesseth are in peace. Luk 11.21. The 4. Consideration. 4. YOur chiefest teachers cannot as yet determine, what the discipline i that they would haue as what the difference is between a Pastor & a Doctour, whether Apostates ought to be admitted to office in the church &c. Answer. 1, THere is no such dissention among vs touching these matters as you would here insinuate: though if there wer, yet our im∣perfection and difference in iudgment sheweth that we are weak men; but no whit preudceth the truth we professe. 2, The heathen Philosophers, in the Nioean Synod. obiected the like against Christians, that they agreed not in opinion among themselus Szomen. lib. 1, cap. 18. 3. Your selfe heathen-like, may obiect against Paul and Barnaba (twoo of the chiefest teachers of Christian religion,) one of the two things wherewith you here doe reproach vs; because they not onely could not de¦termine whether Iohn Mark, (who had before departed frō them) should accompanie them in the work of the Gospel; but were so stirred, that they departed asunder one from the other, Act. 15.37.38.39.40. 4. You might much better blame your owne Church and chiefest teachers, that cannot as yet determine what the discipline is that they would haue; witnesse your long continued controuersies in print; wherein what adoe you make about discipline, all the world knoweth. If your selues would walke better, in the truth, peace and concord of the gospel, you might wih more equitie find fault with us: pul therefore the beam first out of your own eye. The 5 Consideration. 5 THE Lord hath also testified against you, by giuing over very many people, 1 to Atheisme. 2 carnall life, 3 Papisme, 4 Anabaptisme, 5 Arinijme, 6 Familisme, which are not slanders but matters known to all that are acquainted with the course and state of your Church. Answer. ALl this being true, it sheweth the badnes of some men, not any bad¦nes in the faith we professe. An infidel might haue obiected vnto Is¦rael. as you doe here: The Lord hath testified against you, by giuing o∣uer
ouer very many of your people, to Carnall life, Sedmitrie. Peorisme, Bautisme,Num. 2.1 3. Iudg 19 22. &. Psa. 106.14 28 36. Iudg. 2 13. & many other idolatries with strange Gods. The Papists may and doe ob∣iect the like things to your selues at this day. much more iustly then you do to vs. For when any such haue appeared among vs, we presently cast them out if they repented not: whereas with you, such are stil reteyned in the bosome of your Church; yea such hereticks and vicious persons, as we haue excommunicate; you doe entertayn, as is knowen to all that ar acquainted with your estate. Wherefore the Lord hath testified for vs, not against vs, whiles by the light of his word, such hypocrites haue been discouered and avoyded: but you are condemned by your own doctrine, whiles such miscreants, and flagitioius persons are kept in your commu∣nion. The 6. Consideration 6. THE churches and godly learned persons that euer heard of your separa∣tion, did not approue of it, which was the quarrel that Fr Iohnson had with Mr Iunius, and he sharply replyeth on him. Nay Mr Barrow plainely ray¦seth at Caluin and the Geneua church, and euen at al churches in Christendom. in his Discouerie: and counsels not with other reformed churches about their se¦paration. but Answers (as Mr Iohnson doth) the word is neer vs, we need not go ouer the seas to seek it as if the Spirit of the Prophets were not subiect to the Pro¦phets, and himselfe (as the Pope) had infallible rule of inerpretation of the scrip¦tures in his brest. Answer, THE strength of this reason, is quelled before, in the answer to the third of your first Considerations: thither I refer the reader. Further I answer, here that you teach such doctrine, as standeth not with Christian freedom or truth, whiles you would forbid vs the pro¦fession and practise of the Gospel, til we haue consulted with, and be ap¦proued of other persons and Churches. For though I grant ther is a good use of aduising with other Churches, (if conueniently we can,) eyther when cases are difficult. or when in any respect it doe concerne them: yet that in all matters of religiō Christiās should be boūd thus to walke when the finne to them is euident, which to other Churches (not wel ac∣quainted with their estate,) is not so perspicuous; this were to abridge Christian liberty, and to bring our consciences in bondage vnto men; that though God forbid vs 1 Cor 10.14 1 Ioh 4, 21. al communion with idolatrie, yet we may not separate vnlesse they approue it. It is contrary to the word of God, which teacheth vs that Gods commandement is Deu 30, 11 12.13.14. Rom. 10, 8 not hid from his people neyther is far off, not alost in heauen, nor beyond the sea, but in our mouthes & rts to doe it. But you to deceiue your reader, allege this, as if it were
Mr. Brrows or Mr Iohnsons reason, and not the doctrine of Moses and of the Apostl. The colr that you bring for your selfe, is that saying of the Apostle the spirites of the prophts are sbiect to the prophts 1 Cor. 14.32 which scripture considered by the words and circumstances of it, will in no wese proue your purpose. Fr. first it may be qestioned. whether the meanin be, that the spirits of the prophets are subiect to other prophets or to thmselves. For the Prophets among the gentiles, (such as the Co∣rinthians naturally 1. Cor 12, 2 were, (were sbject unto, & caried and ruled by their spirits, and not their spirits subject to them: so that they could not choose but seke, (as Ora, Sibil l. 2 in prin¦cip. Sbylla wtneseth of her selfe.) neither could they lin or cease speaking, when they would themselues yea and in holy scrip∣ture we see how Num, 23 &. 24. Balaam prophesied good to Israel, and blesed, when he would haue cursed thm▪ Saul also and his messengers, 1 Sam 19 20 4. prophesied (as it were) by constreynt, being ouermastered by the spirit, soo as he could not coteyn himselfe, bu stripping off his clothes, prophee all that day and all that night, when he had no purose thus to doe. Now ther∣for, where as the Apostle here had ordeyned, that if any thing were 1 Cori , 30 reeled to another that fare by the first prophet should hold his peace, because ver. 32. almight prophesie one by one: if any should allege, that they could not hould their peace, but must speak, so long as their spirit moued thē he telleth them, that ver. 34. the spirits of th prophets are suict to the prophets; so intimating that they may, if they will giue others leue to speak shewing also a reason hereof because Rom 14.1 God is not (the author) q of confusion but of peace. And if thus wee understand the Apostle, his words make no∣thing for that you say. Vnto this also may be added, that he speaketh this affirmatuely, they are subject, and not by way of ordinance, let them be subject, as ver. 22 els where he vseth: and as other things in this place are spoken; as ver. 30, Let the prophets speak; ver. 34. Let the first hold his peace; Let wo∣men be silent. But be it granted (which I will not deny) that he meaneth their spir∣its wer subject to other Prophets; because when they had spoken ver. 29 others were to iudge: yet those oher, were the Prophets of he same church and there present not in other churches. For Paul meant not, that the spirits of the Prophets in Corinth, were subiect to the prophets in Rome or Iudoea and so must send to them for approbation; but appoynteth like order in this, as was in ver, 30. all (other) the Churches of the Saincts. And if they were bound (as you would haue us) to send and submit to other church∣es, and others likeweise to them; then no Church hath no power in i selfe, to apre of her prophets, or Ministers or of their doctrine, without the good likng of others,. Which how farr it is from the Apostles mind I leaue it for the dscreet reader to judge: neither thinke I but your owne brethren will distat yr so collecting from this place Howsoeer they doe, it is verie like if you had liued in Ahabs dayes and
should haue heard 1 Kin 22.6 400 prophets at once prophesying good vnto the King, and Micaiah onely ver 17.18 prophesying evill: you would with uerse. 24. Zidkijah haue smittē him on the cheek, (as now you do vs in reproch,) & told him that his spirit must be subiect to the prophets, especially they being so many, and he but alone. But if it were further granted vnto you, that we must be subiect to the prophets of other churches: yet I suppose you wil not deny but al prophets and churches must trie and iudge euery thing by the 1 Pet 4.11 Act 18·11. word of God ac∣cording to which if any man speak not, his iudgment is not to be regar∣ded. And we, haue offred and doe still offer our doctrine and practise to the triall of al men by that word: if men eyther will not trie nor giue sen¦tence at all, or doe judge amisse; we are not bound to wayt vpon them; but must liue by Hab. 2. our own faith. The reformed churches haue been wrten to by vs; (for we know and acknowledge them to be true chur¦che and our brethren in the Lord:) they giue vs no Answer. Shall wee cōtinew still n bōdage to Antichrst, til they bid vs com out? What scrip∣ture teacheth vs so? If they or any, convince vs of error or evill, and we yeeld not; le vs be esteemed accordingly: otherwise if we walke in the truth, and they will not approue it, be it vpon them, as they shal answer befre the Lord. Mr. Iunius, whom you mention to reply so sharply, neyther approueth your Church, nor condemneth our practice. no not though he were in∣stantly vrged: the writings between him and us are extant to the world, let the reader judge what both sides haue sayd. Your censure of Mr, Barrow, (or scoffing rather at him,) neyther hur¦teth him or vs, nor helpeth you. His playn dealing in reprouing the cor¦ruptions of these times. you call rayling; it is marvel you say not also the prophets Isa 1.4.10.21.23. &. 26.10.11. Mic, 3:9.10, 11 &. rayled on the people of Israel, when they vsed sharp rebukes; for I suppose you can hardly shew any hard speech that Mr. Barrow ther writeth; which the Prophets and Apostles haue not vsed before. But if he were overcaried with some seuere speeches in a good cause‘ neyther we not himselfe euer iustified that infirmitie, we know that we are frayl men let the sharpnesse therefore be his but the trueth (which he sharply tea∣cheth) Gods: And why carp you at the manner of his writing. and meddle not with the matter? That book with others haue discouered the idolatries of your church; which neyther by you nor any, haue euer yet been answered & refuted by the scriptures. For your self, let the reader iudge what you aue sayd. The 7 Consideration. 7. THe great and grosse disorder and partiallity in administring of your disciplin, which George Iohnson sheweth cheerly; besides the wants of sunctimony and common duties of godlynes, which (he sayth) are
to be found in farr greater measure in the cmmn professrs of the church of En¦gland: and saith further, that the Dutch churches take you for a most vnquiet, conentious, and disorderly people. Answer. THis article you obiect vnto vs, vpon one mans report that was for ly¦ing, and slandering, false accusation, and contention. himselfe cast out of our Church. By what rule or word of God, can you admit of the testimony of an excommunicate against a whole congregation? Reason also might teach you, that no man standing against a church to excom∣munication, will ever speake wel of that church, in the cause wherein he standeth. But grant that this all were true which he reporteth what would you vrge vpon it? that therefore Christianitie which we professe, is evill? so perhaps a Turk or Iew would doe with as much reason as you can con∣clude, that our separation from you is euill▪ Was there ever any truth, (think you,) that men did walke in it as they ought? or any Church in the world, wherein the discipline (as you call it) was administred as it should Iulian the Apostata, (that wrote so much against Christ,) reading the tes¦timonies of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, Deut. 9.7.22.24, Isa. 59 3, 4, 5, &c. Mic. 3.9.11. 1. Cor. 5.1.2, &. 11.21.22, &c. 3 Iohn. 9.10. had as good ground to blame the Israelites and Christians for their manners & discipline, and consequently to disswade them from their faith as you do vs: yea he might allege faithfull and vndeniable witnesses: whereas you rely vpon a slanderer. Finally, what ayme you at, in all this, but to draw vs back vnto your church; and there it is like. we shall find discipline without disorder or par∣tiallity to weet, in your Bishops courts, for there the discipline of your church is to be seen. Of which, we need say nothing; the voyce almost of al the land crieth out of their abominations. Onely we obserue how pregnant your perswasions are, to make vs beleeu, that because there ar sinns in Sion, there be none in Babylon. The 8 Consideration 8. GOD neuer witnessed for you, nor gaue testimony of his approuing your separation whether we consider your ministerie or people. For hardly can you shew any one person conuerted by your ministery from papistry or atheisme, or other open wickednes; as by Gods blessing multitudes haue been by ours: but onely haue you seduced and wrought vpon the tender consciences of such as by our ministery were first begotten vnto Christ, But (which is specially to be obserued) from your distracted and devided congre∣gations, multitudes haue fallen away, to euery kind of impiety & herisie reig∣ning in the world.
Answer. IF God approue our seperation and our ministerie by his word, (as we are sur he dooth) it is yenogh, though our ministery haue not con∣uerted any. Your reason is as if a Cinite should hae sayd vnto Nah God neuer witnesed for thee nor gaue testimony of his approuing thy building of the Ark:Gen. . for hardly canst thou shew any one person converted by thy precahing or Ark building, these 120. yeares. Our ministery belongeth to our church; the assemblies whereof Pa∣pists, Athists & such like wicked ones vse not to frequent: and how is it posible ur ministery should conuert such as come not to heare it. If we wld obiect vnto you, that few Turks and Saracens haue been con¦verred by yur misterie: what would you answer? Yet where you say e can harly shw my &c. we can (if need wer) shew you many that wer sometime profin & irreligious whiles they were of your church but cō∣mng and herng by Gods providence the doctrine of our church, haue been reclymed from their lewd life & doe walk holily in the faith with vs. It is true in eed that our cause hath wrought most vpō such as being somtimes vner yor ministery, had tender consciences & pliable to the truth others, of more corrupt consciences haue set against & blasphemed it▪ Te ideratio of this in any wise mans iudgment wil rather lead vn¦to, hen rom our cause; when the better sort (by your own confession) do come vnto vs; the worser and refuse remayn stil with you. Your last poynt which you would haue specially to be obserued that mul¦titudes hae fallen from vs, to every kind of heresie and impietie, is indeed wor¦thy to be obserued. For first the scripture is fulfilled, which sayth, mny shll leaue vnto them faynedly, Dan. 11.34, Secondly being fallen if they had com to a more holy faith & better walking whē they were gone out from vs, it might haue importe ours to be evil: but now that they haue fallen to grosse heresie & impietie; it argueth Gods hand so be heavy vp on them because they continued not in the truth with vs. And this the scripture confirmeth saying of such as 2 Thes, 2 10.11.12. receiue not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued; that therefore God wil send them strong delusion, that they shall belee lies; and of such as 1 Tim 4.1.2. depart from the faith; that they shall giue heed vnto spirits of errors and doctrines of Diuils. It is also to be obserued that al such impious & hereticall persons as haue departed from vs; are interteyned with you in your communion, (vnlesse them∣selues refuse to communcate with you;) your church is the receptacle of al sch Apostataes, & there they are suffred in herisie & impietie so as they wl frqēt your assemblies. Better reasons therfore & more weith∣ty cnsidrations▪ hae you need to allege; before you can perswade vs to reture vnto your church; for these hitherto propounded & examined are found too too lght. But it may be, better follow.
ARGVMENTS. That the best assemblies of the present church of ENGLAND, are true visible CHVRCHES. 1. IN what churches soeuer are found in publick practise, the things that essentially constitute a true visible church; they are true visible churches of Christ. But in the best of our assemblies are found in publick practise the things that essentially constitute a true visible church: Therefore the best of our assemblies, are true visible Churches. Proof of the assumption A visible church is the house of God, 1 Tim. 3.15. Now the meanes or things that constitute it, are 1 Foundation Iesus Christ to build vpon; 1 Cor 3.11 Mat 16.18. 2 Builders; that is, such preaching ministers of the word, as doe build in godlynes, convert and confirme. 1 Cor 3 10. 3 Instrument of building the word of God. Eph. 2.20. 4 Matter to be built; people ioyned togither in the profesi∣on of the Gospel. 1 Cor 3.9 Eph. 2, 20. But all these are found in publick practise in the best of our assemblies. Ther∣fore in the best of our assemblies, are found in publick practise, the things that con¦stitute a true visible church. Answer. THE title of your arguments conteyneth 1 an error or absurditie; 2 & argueth some check in your own consciences for defence of your Church. 1 The error is, that you divide the church of England into many Churches; making the first (as I conjecture) a national Church; the other, parishionall. This is an error, because it is an Ex, 20, humane inuention and dif∣fereth from the scripture, which sheweth many churches to be in a na∣tion or country; as in Iudea, Asia, Galatia &c, Gal, 1, 2, 21. Reu. 1.4. but sheweth not any natiōal church. Now that yours is a national church not onely the name and title, but also the constitution sheweth; for it hath a Pastor over it, the Archbishop of Canterbury Primate and Metro∣politan, your most reverend father in God; who maketh and consecra∣teth the Diocesan Bishops. (wherevpon there are Diocesan churches or Sees; (and they agayn make the Parish Priests. To him and form of cō¦secrat. Bi∣shops and Priests &c to his succes¦sors, the inferior Bishops haue sworn (so help them god through Iesus Christ.) all due reverence and obedience. If the mould of this Church were not fetch¦ed from Rome; shew where you learned it. 2. The check which the title argueth to be in your conscience, ap∣pareth
ap∣eareth it that you plead but for the best assemblies of the present church of England; for doe you not hereby intimate, that there is a worser sort which you will not plead for? yet both bst, and worst are all one body, one church and communion: If your Church of England be Christs why maynteyn you not the whole? is not every art and parcell of Christs church to be defended? Thinke you that the priests and people of Israell, would haue mainteyned the Most holy place of their Temple onely, & haue suffred the rest of the howse to be ruinate and troden vnder foot. or if they did thus, should they haue done well? How persidiously then doe you deal with your church, (if it be the true church of Christ,) that you seek to vphold your Sanctum sanctrum, your best assemblies; and neglect the rest▪ Or, if you would make one peece of your church Christ and another peece Antichrists, where both be in brotherhood and vnitie togither: it is as absurd as if you would make one part of your bodie hu∣mane, an other bestiall one peece Gods another Diuils. It is contrarie also to the playn scriptures which say; 2 Cor. 6.14.15, what communion hath light with darknese hat concerd hath Christ with belial meaning. none at all. Eyther therefore you must iustify your whol Church; or you must with vs make a separation. How long will you halt between two opinions. To your Argument I answer; the proofs of your assumption fayl you. A visible church (you say) is 1 Tim .15. the house of God. True; but your Bethell, will be found Bethaen. the houe of Idolatrie. You make the things constituting your howse to be fowr 1 Foundation 2 Builders, 3 Instruments, 4 Matter, But the forme or fashion of the buil¦ding, you leaue quite out: perhaps you saw that it would not endure the trial▪Heb. 8.5. when it should be compared with the patterne that God shewed in the Mount. The Prophet Haggai Hag. 1.4 &c. reproued the Iewes for that Gods house was not builded amōg them. If you had beē ther. you would have disproued the Prophet by this sophistrie. We haue the 1 Foundation laid. Hag. 2.9, 2 Builders we haue many both priests and people 3 Instruments also for to hew and square the timber and stone as axes &c. 4 and matter where∣with to build, as wood from the mountain, and stone from the qarrie. Therefore (though the stones be neither laid nor squared. nor the timber hewen, fitted or framed: because with vs are found the things that essen∣tially constitute a visible house,) we haue the true house of God, But if your own material houses were no otherwise builded, then your church is, by this your argument. you would haue but an vncouth dwelling. If you read Gen. 11. you shall find the towr of Babel, to be as wel builded as your church; for there was the 1 Foundation laid; 2 Builders many, 3 in¦struments also; & 4 matter both brick and slime. Now let vs examine the things which you say you haue; and doe bu barelie say for you proue it not. 1. The Foundation is Iesus Christ to build vpon. 1 Cor. 3.11 Mat. 16.18.
But this Foundation is not yet rightlie laid in your assemblies you haue it onelie in name and shew: Christ is neer in your mouthes, but farr from your actions. If you had shewed by the scriptures how Christ is laid for the foundation of the church: it would soon haue bene seen that your house is set vpon the sands. For you haue not him for the mediator, pro¦phet, priest, or king of your church, as it is now established. Many tru∣thes I acknowledge are taught among you but many vntruthes are also mixed with them, and the power of godlines is denied; for the truthes that are taught cannot be practised. Your church hath also other spiri∣tuall Lords and lawes then Christ and his testament; as your Prelates, with their cannons, articles, and decrees imposed vpon you to be obser∣ued on paine of excommunication and, further penalties So Christ alone, is not your foundation, but his seruants also Rō 6.16 you ar to whom you obey. 2. Your builders are your preaching ministers, but I deny them to be Gods builders, let them shew when God designed them as he did Exod. 31 Be∣zaleel & Aholia', to make his sanctuary. let them shew by the word their office and calling as the Apostle Paul, of whome mention is made in the place you allege, 1 Cor 3:10.) did n all his Epistles. Otherwise, not all that offer themselues to build may be admitted; for you know how it is written; It is not for you, and for vs, to build the howse vnto our God. Ezra. 4.3. In most of your parish assemblies, you haue but one preaching minis∣ter; and so but one builder, and he will be a good while in building the house; and if he be taken away (as many are) then your church wanteth one of the 4 essent all things In many parishes there be vnpreaching mi∣nisters; your church maketh them builders also, (though you doe not,) and vnto such if we were among you, should we be constreyned to sub¦mit our soules. The Bishops are master builders in all your churches, they command and control you their inferior Priests: if you build not by their line they throw down quicklie all your building, and thrust the builders out of dores. These are like the hornes that Zacharie saw Zac 1.20 21. which scattered Iu¦dah, so that a man darst not lift vp his head; but your preaching minis∣ters are not like the carpenters that came to fray them away. How great a jarr there is between your builders. we all doe know; and long it wil be ere they agree togither to build Gods house; or the work be finished for Christ to dwel in, when the master workmen work all awry and when (as you Supplica∣tion. pag 67 complained to the Parliament) the walls of Sion, lie euen with the ground. 3. The instrument of building is the word of God. (as you allege Eph. 2.20. deliuered by the Prophets and Apostles and Christ himselfe. But your builders vse not this instrument aright, in doctrine or practise, they new not here with the rough stone, and knotty timber they reform not
the profain & rebellious people, neither haue they power in their armes to cut off any one wicked man; for the axe of excommunication is in the Bishops hand alone, and his commissaries; he hath the keyes to open & shut the dores of your Church; the parish priest hath perhaps a weeding hook, and may suspend from the sacrament a while, by vertue of his ser∣vice-book: but the greatest wound that he can make herewith, the Bishop or his substitute will quickly heal. Again you haue besides the Bible, Apocripha bookes, commanded by law to be read in your church: also that other instrument called the seruice book: and with this tool your best minsters build vp your church, and the reading hereof doth now much edifie, in al your parishes: though the dayes hauee been when you could say, that 1 admo. p. 24. in all the order of your seruice, there was no edification but confusion. And who put this instrument into your ministers hands? Christ in his tes∣tament appoynted none such. Your church hath also Homily books to build withall, and many edifying canons and ceremonies, such tools the Preles haue allowed for your building. even the instruments of the foo∣lish sheheard, Za. 11, 15.16. & if you will not beleeu me beleeu your selus which heretofore haue complayned and written thus, 2 admon to the. Parl pag. 6.7. No preacher may without great danger of the law vtter all the truth comprised in the book of God It is so circumscribed and wrapt within the compasse of such statutes, such penal∣ties, such iniunctions, such advertisements, such articles, such canons, such sober caueats and such manifold pamphlets that in manner it doth but peep out from behind the skreen. The lawes of the land. the book of common prayer, the Queens iniunctions, the Commissioners aduertisements, the Bishops canons, Linwoods provincials, euery Bishops articles in his dioces, my Lord of Canterburies sober aueats, his licences to preachers, and his high court of prerogatiue or graue fa∣therly faculties. these to-gither or the worst of them, (as some of them be too bad) may not be broken or offended against, but with more danger then to offend a∣gainst the bible. To the subscribing & subscribing agayn, & th third subscribing are requred: for these preachers & others are indited▪ are fined, ar prisoned, are excommunicated, are banished, and haue worse things threatned them. And the Bible that must haue no further scope, then by these it is assigned. Is this to pro¦fesse Gods word Is this a reformation? &c. Thus haue we your own confessiō what manner of instruments your church is builded with, and all men may, see, what small cause you haue to boast of the word of God, amongst you. The matter of the building, is people ioyned togither in the profession of the Gospell. And what manner of people are ioyned togither in your church? are there not all sorts of profane, wicked and irreligious persons, as wel as religious and men of better life? and where find you in the scriptures such matter for Gods howse? The texts 1 Cor, 3, 9 Eph. 2.20. by you alleged teach farr other¦weise: for the Church of Corinth, were saincts by calling, even called of God unto the fellowship of his sonne Iesus Christ. 1 Cor 1, 2, 9, and the Apostle neuer sayd to any profane or confused people ye are Gods husbandry. Gods
building, So for the other text if you had minded eyther that which is be¦fore or after, it might haue stayed you from applying it to your church. For the Apostle writing to the Eph 1.1. Saincts, (not to the profane) which were at Ephesus, sayth, Now y are no more strangers and forreners. but citizens with the saincts and of the how should of God;Eph 2.19 and after, he sheweth how in Christ verse, 21. all the bulding coupled togither, groweth vnto an holy temple in the Lord. But neyther are your people saints by calling. neyther can you say of your church of England, that all the bulding (of all the parishes) coup∣led togither, groweth to an holy Temple in the Lord; for your self here defend not all, but the best only. And we know well, that the mlti∣tudes of profane wicked persons and miscreants, meer strangers and for¦reners, are of the matter of your church; and are bulded in and with the same (if the word and sacraments doe buld among you) even the vilest of the when they goe to the gibbet, as pleasantly as 1 Sam 15.32. Agag did to his death Now mind with your seles, if God haue commanded to build his house with the fine Ceder and Ex. 26 15 Sittim trees: & you take the thornes and briars of the wildernes, or wild figtrees of the playn: whether Christ (who Heb. 3.2. is faithfull to him that hath appoynted him, even as Moses was in all his house,) when he shall take a view of all your work, will allow of your labours, and blesse you for them, as Moses blessed the builders of the tabernacle. Exod. 39.43. Your first argument therefore is to weak to vphold your church or best assemblies, and the assumption of your pro¦fyllogisme is denyed. The 2 argument, 2. THose Churches whose true members are onely espowsed to Christ, a true visible Churches; Ephe. 5.30.32 2. Cor. 11.2. But the true members of our best assemblies. are espowsed onely to Christ. Therefore &c. Proof of the assumption, They are espowsed onely to Chrisi. which are indued with true sauing faith. Eph. 5 30.31.32. with Iohn. 15.3 4.5.7. &. 17, 20.21. But the true members of our best assemblies, are indued with a true sauing faith confessed by Mr. Iohnson in Iakob. pag. 7· Look also in the confirmation of the 5. argument folowing here. Therefore &c. Answer. HEre agayn you haue gott an other starting hole, whiles you plead but for the true members of your best assemblies; yet neither tel you vs which are your best assemblies, nor who be the true members of them; that how to follow or where to finde you we cannot tel. As
is Prov. 30.18, 19, 20. the way of an eagle in the aire, such is the way of an adultrous woman, it is hid and cannot be known. But I will see if I can discouer your falsehood though I cannot find your footing. First I deny that the true members of your best assemblies are espowsed onely to Christ. for (as the prophet sayd of Israel,) Ie, 3.2, lift vp your eyes ūto the high placs & behold wher you haue not plaied the harlot. Now whils a church doth play the harlot, Christ willeth vs to plead with her, Hos 2.2. that she is not his wife, neyher is he her husband. Idolatrie is spirituall whordome, as the Prophets testifie, Psa. 106 39. Ier. 3.9. Deut. 31.16. but the true members of your best assemblies, commit idolatrie in their daylie worship according to their Romish leiturgy or book of commō prayer, an idol of your own inuentiō. How are they thē espowsed to Christ alone? Yes they are (say you,) because they ar indued with true sauing faith I answer; Faith is in the hart, as it is writen, with the hart man beleeueth, Rom. 10.10. The hart no man knoweth but God alone; as agayn it is written, thou (Lord) onely knowest the harts of all the children of men 1 King, 8, 39, So then I ask you how you know that your members haue true faith; your answer must needs be, (vnlesse you wll make your selfe a God,) you know it not but by their words and works. Wel thē let vs bring these to th' trial; their con¦fession and ther practise; leauing their faith to God that knowes it The confssion of ther faith is set downe in their service book, the 12. articles of the Creed. But this Creed the Papists also confesse and read in their church; and if it will proue your people to haue true faith it will proue theirs to haue likewise; & you say no more for England, then for Rome. Agayn the Apostle sayth, there are some which Tit. 1.16 professe that they know God but in works doe deny him, and are abominable and disobedient and to eue∣ry good work reprobate. So then words are not yenough, to proue true faith But we must come to the Apostle Iames his triall, shew me thy fayth out of thy works; for faith without works is dead.Iam. 2.18.26. Now the works of your people are apparant to be evil; they standing in communion or confusion rather with the vnclean, profane and, wicked whereby al Gods holy things are defiled; as it is written, Num. 19.22. Hag. 2.14. submitting their soules to Antichristian prelates and priests, and hearing their voyce, contrari to Iohn,) 10, 5. worshiping God in vayn, after their own invented seruice book, which is a high transgression of the second commandement; Exo 20 And these things are general and publick; the particular and more priuate inqities, will not easily be numbred. Whereas therefore you would perswade vs your church is espowsed onely to Christ, (although her fornicatons are so manifest between her brests, because she sayth. she beleeveth only in Christ; it is with no more colour, then as if Gē 35.29 Bilhah (whē she was known to lie with Reuben,) should haue pleaded; yet am I an honest woman, and espowsed to Iaacob onely, for my loue and harty af¦fection is towards him alone. But the wise man teacheth vs, these be but the tricks of an adultrous woman, she eateth and wipeth her mouth & sayth I haue done no iniquity. Pro, 30, 20.
The scriptures which your selfe allege; doe also make against your chvrch. Eph 5 30. We are members of (Christs) body. of his flesh and of his bones. Frst your church can shew no covenant that was made between Christ and her, at any time: the gathering and planting of your church having been by the Magistrates authority: not by the word of Christ, winning mens soules unto his faith, separating them from the vnbelee∣vers, and taking them to communion with himselfe. Secondly, in say∣ing his body, the Apostle excludeth al other bodies; as more plainlie appea∣reth in the other scripture, 2 Cor. 11.2. where he prepared the church as a pure virgin for Christ, which cannot be whiles she defileth her self with others; as doth your church with the abominations of the Papists; com∣pāying also in the bed of loue, with the Prelates, (whom the better son of you haue confessed to be Antichristian) and their inferour priests, who work vpon mens consciences by their jurisdiction, ministery, doctrines, canons &c. being as the bridegrooms of your church, not Iohn 3.29 the friends of the bridegroom which stand and heare and reioyce for the bridegrooms voyce; for, that Christ should speak and rule, vnlesse it be according to their own canons; they cannot endure. The other places in Iohn. 15. & 17. will confirme also that the true members of your best assemblies are not espowsed onely to Christ For Christ sheweth,Iohn 15, 1 that his Father is the husbandman, who caleth and bring¦eth vnto and planteth in him the true vine; all the branches, that is the particular persons of the Church. But the true members of your best as∣semblies: are as yet the branches of that false Antichristian vine. your confused church of England: not separated from, but liuing and grow∣ing in one stock, body and communion with the idolatrous and profain. So that you cannot say, as did the Israel of God. Psa, 80, 8. Thou hast brought a vine out of Aegypt, thou hast cast out the heathens & plāted it. Christ sheweth that his branches were ver 2.3. purged of the Father, by the word spoken vnto thē; your members ar not yet purged or clensed by the word of Christ, from their idolatries, and profane communion with the ympes of Satan,. The word of life the word of separatiō from the serpēt & his seed; hath not yet sounded in the eares, or at least, not sunk into the harts of your people. Christ branches ver. 5, bring forth much fruit, through their abiding in him, being able without him to doe nothing: your branches bear little fruit but vnto themselues; and (as Moses foretold) Deu 32·23 their grapes are grapes of gal their clusters bitter, for the publick idolatries vsed in your assemblies, af∣ter the maner of the mother of Rome. shew that your vine is of the vine of Reu, 11, 8 Sodom. Christ prayed onely Ioh 17, 20 21. for them that should beleeu in him through the word, that they all might be one in the Father and the Son, as the Father in him, and he in the Father; but the true members of your best assemblies, are one with the world, for whome Christ would ver, 9, not pray; being on spiritual body, & ioyned in communiō with the whol mul∣titude of profane and wicked of the land; That strange it is you should
read the scriptures and not discerne, how farr you are from being vni∣ted with Christ, who as himselfe was not of the world, ve 14, 16, so neyther are his people, but chosen and separated out of the same. Whereas you bring no proof that your people haue true faith, but by Mr, Iohnsons confession; it sheweth how distressed and helplesse your e∣state is. Yet doe you great wrong to Mr. Io, (as the reader may see in the place that you cite;) For although considering them apart from the con∣stitution of your Church he thinketh by the appearance of the knowledge faith and fruits of diuers. that they may well be thought in regard of Gods election in Christ, to be heirs of saluation, and in that respect true Christians: yet in respect of the constitution of your Church, he sayth, they can not be iudged true Christian. Now we deal against your church in regard of the constitution thereof; not doubting but God hath many elect heyres of salation among you, which we leaue vnto him that knowes them. Your argument then from Mr Iohnsons confession, is faultie, and agre∣eth not with the rules of right reasoning; for whereas he limiteth his iudg¦ment of them, shewing in what respect it is & plainelie excepteth their church-constitution: you bear your reader in hand as if he granted it without lmitation? and that too, according to the Scriptures in your first proposition, which evidently do concern the churches constitution. You may much abuse any mans words, if what he speaketh respectively you will take and allege as spoken absoltelie. So your proofe fayleth you. In the end you referr vs, to the confirmation of your 5, Argument following to the Answer whreof I also refer the reader Now though I haue answered first to the assumption or second part of your argument on proof whereof you doe insist: yet the first part also shalbe better examined, ere I let it passe: Those churches (you say) whose true members are onely espowsed to Christ. are true visible churches. By true members I conceiue you doe meane. (not as the truth is, all baptised and so reteyned in your church, but) some few choise persons, or forward professors, among whom there is an imaginary brotherhood, and separation from the other profane in your parishes; though invery deed they stand all one bodie. If thus you intend (as the proof of your assumption plainelie intimateth you do,) then offer you violence to the similitud of mariage or espowsall which al mē know is not with some few members of a womans body, as her fingers, or hands &c, but with the whole woman, who giueth her selfe by cove∣nant vnto her spowse or husband. And as in civill mariage so it is in spi∣rituall; for Israel of old. when the Lord became a Ier 31.32 husband vnto them, did not some of them, but Exo, 19. Deut, 5.3.22. &. 29.10.11.12, all the multitude generally make covenant with their God: the scriptures also which you alleg, Eph, 5.2 Cor 11 speak of the whole body of the church, not of a few select members of the same. For though it be true of every visible church, that some onely are
elect howsoeuer all be called; yet the discerning of this belongeth to God alone, and not to vs; who esteem of persons according to their out∣ward covenant profession, and walking. Your reason then seemes to be like this; That womans hose true members,) as namely. her eye, and eare. and some of her fingers) are espowsed only to such a man. She is his true and lawfull wife. But the true members of N, (howsoeuer her whole bodie in generall is coupled with an adulterer; and the most of her members ar affected and wholly giuen ouer to that adulterer, and her pretended hus∣band they hate, & never made couenāt with,) ar espowsed only to such a man Threfore. &c. If this reason be not absurd. let him that readeth iudge; and if such absurdity be not implyed in your argument, shew if you can in your next writing; for if you striue to avoyd this, you will fall into a∣nother evill as shall then be manifested. The 3. argument IN what churches soever, is such an ordinance of God in publick vse and for by which there is ordinarily made an vndoubted resurrection or quickning frō the death of sinne vnto the life of grace, and a new birth: they are true visible churches of Christ. Iam, 1, 18, 1 Pet, 1 23. But in the best of our assemblies is such an ordinance of God &c. Therefe &c. The assumption is manifest. because by that ordinance of preaching which is in publick vse and force. there is ordinarily made an vndoubted new birth; seing there doe ordinarily appear in many. the vndoubted fruites and testimonies of Gods spirit, after the publick and ordinary preaching of the word. in our best as∣semblies. Answer. THE first part of this your argument seemeth to imply an error; as that a church is first gathered & constituted of an vnregenerate pro¦fane and worldly people; over which are set Pastors and Teachers, who by preaching the Gospel doe beget them or some of them vnto th faith and quicken them from the death of sinn &c which quickning or new birth, is a proof that they are a true visible church. This course I finde to be contrary vnto the scriptures; which I would thus manifest. When the Lord Iesus would shew mercy to the world, and call his elect out of the same, he sent Mar 16.25 Ep 4, 11 Apostles Prophets and Evangelists to preach his saluation to all peoples. The people to whom they preached, wer not (for the most part) churches of God. but assemblies of heathens and idolaters; as for example, the men Act. 14 8 11.14. &c of Lystra of Act. 18, 6 10.1 i 1 Co 12.2. Corinth; of Athens where Paul preached Act. 17.2.32.34 in Mars street; and other like places. By meane
of this manner preaching many eople were regenerate or bene a new quickned from the death of se. ad tued from idols to the liuing God. And being thus begotten vnto God, they were At, 19.9 separated from o¦thers that beleued not. and ioyned togither into a holy comunion, not hauing other officers over them for a while till men were fitted for such a worke. Therefore oft times the Apostles departed to other places and left the Evangelsts to Tit, 1, 5, redresse things that remayned, and to ordein them Elders in every citie, as the Apostles appoynted them These El∣ders, called generally Phil. 1.1 Bishops or Ouerseers, had charge Act. 20.17.28 1 Pe , 1.2. of their parti∣cular flocks, and might not goe from them as did the Apostles. but at∣tend and feed them: These now could not properly be sayd to beget their peole to the faith, (as the Apostle noteth 1 Cor 4.15 to the Corinthians) but to feed and instruct them; and therefore are not called Fathers, but  Fee¦ders, or Pasters. and Pedagogues. Child-leaders or Instructeurs. From which I gather, that people must regenerate and borne again, before they may be admitted into any particular church, or haue officers ouer them; and that ordinary ministers, which feed their flocks, cannot be sayd to beget them, as is the common vawnt of you Ministers in England. which me thinks even reason it selfe might shew you: For you that are now o∣ver your parishes, how found you your people at first, a church or no church? If you say a church then you begat them not, but entred vpon other mens labours that were before you if you say they were not a church, then you condemn the state of your parishes as they were plan∣ted, before you were their Ministers. Now then to come to your roposition; In whatsever churches (that is assemblies. for so I vn∣derstand you to vse the werd generallie,Act. 19.32.39 as the , Scripture some∣time vseth Ecclesia, (is such an ordinance of God in publick vse and force, by which there is ordinarily made an vndoubted new birth &c. they are true visi∣ble churches of Christ: This I denie; for in the assemblies of the heathens in the Apostles daies (as before is proued) there was such an ordinance of God sometimes in publick vse and force, as by it ordinarilie there was made an vndoubted new birth; as th' fruit of th' Apostles preaching sheweth· yet were not those assemblies of heathens, true visible chur∣ches of Christ. but such onelie as were converted to God and separated from the rest that beleeved not; and joyned in a holy communion togi∣ther were true visible churches. Whereas you assume, that in the best of your assemblies is such an ordinanc of God &c this also I denie for your ministers are not Gods ordinance, he hath not called or sent them, they execute no lawfull office in your assemblies. But your assumption (you say) is manifest, because by that ordi∣nance f preaching which is in publick vse and force. there is ordinarily made an vndoubted new birth. I answer, first in verie many of your assemblies there is no such ordinance of preaching in publick use, as you here bast of; but bare reading onely: yet those assemblies are by the Constitutions of your church, to be reputed as true visible churches as the other. Secōdly in those other
other where preaching is, I deny that there is ordinarily mad an vndoubed new birth; Your proof is, because thre do ordinarily appear in many, the undoubted fruites and testimonis of Gods spirit &c. I answer, first if this be so, yet what will these many, help the mot and greatest umber, in whom such fruits appear not? When many of the hethens beleeued the Apostles word, did their beleef bring the other that beleeued not, into the church did not the Apostles separate the beleeuers from the rest. and 2 Cor. 6, 14.7. teach them to come from among them? Yet you for the faith of some, will vnite all the assemblie vnto Christ and his church, contrary to the A¦postles practise, and to all the scriptures. Secondly, I deny that there doth ordinarily appear in many such vndoubted fruits of Gods spirit after your ordinary preaching as for which we may esteem them true visible churches. Some fruites I knw there doe appear; so doe there among the Papists: yea they take occasion for such things to Pap. sup∣to the K. reason of re¦lig. 22.20. reproch you. that there follow not so many good works after your preaching as after their doctrine; but among neyther of you: are those fruits seen, whch by the testimonie of scriptures will proue you true visible churches. So we haue here but your bare affirmation to rest vpon: and though I might thus end with as bare a deniall: tl you bring further proof, yet for to help the rea¦der. I wil shew that ordinarily there appeareth not a new birth after your preaching. Because of your publick idolatrous estate, wheren you stand subiect to Antichristian Prelats and canons whiles you haue your pub∣lick worship after the Romish idolatrous manner, and are stil comming led in one bodie with the profane, and serents seed, with many other e¦vils among you: which plainly shew you want the new birth and are stil in your old mothers womb. This the scriptures which you allege in your proposition will confirme; for the Apostles shew, Iam, 1, 18 1 Pet 1, 23. that Christs church is a people begotten of God with the word of truth; that is the Col, 1, 5, Gospell: but your church was first begotten. gathered, constitu∣ted, ordered, and is still continued, by the Magistrates word and autho∣rity; which if it did not inforce the people. the estate wherein you now stand, would soon be changed; your church dissolved, and eyther be bet¦ter or Worse. And where you learned so to inforce fth, and constrein men to be members of your church I can not tel; vnlesse you follow Ma¦homets doctrine who Alcoran, hap 18 & 19. taught that men should be compelled to the faith, by warr and sword. Againe, the Apostle addeth this for a testimony and end of our new birth, that we should be as the first fruit of Gods creatures This men are not, till they be as was Israel, hallowed to the Lord; Ier, 2, 3, which was by separation from the world Levit, 20.26, and a willing covenant with the Lord Exod. 19.5, 6.8; Dut, 26, 17, 18, 19, And that the like must be of vs Christians, an other scrpture confirmeth, saying, Rui  These are they wih are not defild with women, for thy are virgins; (this implyeth a se∣arton from the world; hs fllow the Lamb whithrsoeuer he goeth, (this
argueth a couenant and communion with Chrit: and in the next words. both poynts are repeted.) these are 1 bought from men. being the first fruits 2 nto Gd and to the Lamb: after this followeth the fruit, uer, 5. and in their mouth  found no guile, for they are without spot before the throne of God. Whereas therefore you haue stood so long against vs for separation and would mainteyn a meer confusion of all sorts of people in a Crch, vp∣on an imaginary separation made in the clowdes of your own fansies whiles outwardly and indeed, you are one body with the wicked: you are vndoubtedly ot yet borne a new; your Church hath not strength to bring forth: your ministers are vnskilfull midwiues; and the saying of the Prophet cōcerning the people of Ephraim, is verified also vō your people be is an vnwise son. els would be not stand still such a time. even in the breaking forth of the childen. Hos 13, 13. The 4. Argument. IN what churches soeuer all things needfull to saluation by publick authoryy and gnrall approbation, are ordinarily and publickly taught they are true visible Churches. But in the best of our assemblies are &c. Therefore true visible churches. Proof of the assumption, In what churches soeuer ar ordinarily and publickly taught. the doctrines wh¦by the people of God were conuerted and saued in the time of Christ and his A∣postles. in those churches are all things needfull to saluation taught. But in th bst of our assemblies are &c, Ergo &c. Proof of this assumtion appeareth out of Luk. 1.77, 78. with Mar. 1, 4.15. Luk. 24, 47. Act. 2.37, 38, 41. Act, 11, 17 18. Act 16.30.31, and 20.21. If it be oicted that the poynts in question betwen vs. be needfull to salua∣tion: it is thus disproued. Al things needfull to saluation are cleerly set downe in the scriptures to the vnderstanding of the spiritual 1 Cor 2.15. Dan 12.10. Pro. 8 9. nd the things that are not open to the spirituall, are not needfull to saluation. But the pynts in question between us, are not cleerly st down in scripture to the vnderstanding of the spirituall; as appeareth both by thowsands of inistrs and peole of the church of England and oher forryn churches among hme are the cheefest lights of this age as Caluin, Beza, Iunius, Fiscatr. Gualter. Zanchius with others, which were vndoubtedly spirituall; are of cntrary iudge∣ment to the Separatists as also in that it is not agreed vpn among themselues. what is the discipline and order required by the word in uey pynt, nor in any other poynts of difference among them. namely touching the diffrences of the of¦fice of Doctor and Pastr &c. Answer. FIrst wishing the reader to remember what is answered to the fist part of your former Syllogisme; I wil with out further reetition, pro¦ceed
poceed in answer of this; where the grond and proposition of your first argument is vnperfect, so that which you build thereon is vnsound. For whereas you speake of all things nfull to slauation &c. to be publickly taught: you should haue added also, are obsered or done; according to Christs saying Iob. 15, 14 ye are my freinds if ye doe whatsoever I commaund you. If men hear truth taught and obey it not, it avayles them nothing Ther¦fore as the Apostle saith,  .22 be ye doers of the word, and not hearers onely. d∣ceiuing your selues. Your assumption also is denyed: for in your best assemblies all things needfull to saluation be not taught, much lesse done or practised. To giue an instance; to be separated from the vnbeleevers, and to be ioyned togither vnto a holy comunion and church; is needfull to salation; 2 Cor, 6, 17.18. Act, 1 47, Isa 65.9, Reu 21, 24. This is neither taught not practised in your asemblies but oppugned by all the cauils you can. Your proof of the asmtion is, a comprison of your church with those in Christs time and th' Apostles. I answer you agayne, your church is not like those in dtrine or in practise of things needfull to saluation. Then you say, the proof of this assumption appeareth out of Luk. 1.77. &c. This is a strange proof of your assumption, which is this, But in the best of our assmblies are taught &c. Doth Luk 1, 77. shew what is taught in your asemblies? and why doth not Mat, 15, 9. and 23, 16 17, &c. shew what is taught there also? The places that you allege shew what doctrine was taught in the Iewish and Apostolick churche; not what is taught in yours. It must be therefore your own writings, sermons, doctrine, prac¦tise and estate. that must proue your asumption. But you will say (per∣has) your doctrines and practises. agree with those mentioned in these scriptures. That I deny; and would therfore that you should haue made application of the particulars: Which because you haue not done, I will doe for you. You allege Luk, 1, 77.78. with Mar, 1.4.15 where knowledge of saluati∣on is giun unto (Gods) people. by remission of their sinns, through the tender mercy of our God &c. & this was done, by preaching the baptisime of amende∣ment of life, for rmission of sinns. and beleef in the Gospel. So in Luk. 24, 47 repentance and remission of sinns should be preached in Christs name among all nations. The same things are also taught in all the other places which you cite, as the reader may see in the texts. Now these things (you will say) are taught and obserued among you. I shew the contrary thus. First you giue knowledge of saluation, (though faslly) vnto other then to his, that is to Gods people; in as much as you giue the sacraments, which are the seales of our saluation vnto the profane and wicked and their seed thus prostituting the most holy things. even Christ hmselfe, vnto ha∣trs ad blsphemers of God, (a you cann r deny but a number of yor church are) and such as make a mock of religion; and herein you aru¦ty of high sacrilege agaist God.
Secondly, the doctrine of repentance. is not truly taught nor obeyed in yur Chrch. For vnto true repentance is required, 1 a knowledge or notice giuen and taken of sinns; Isa 58, 1, Lam, 2, 14 & 3 39, 40. 2 an acknowledgment or confession made of sinns, (as a testimony of true sor¦row of hart,) with asking mercy Leu 4, 13, 14. &c, & 5, 5.6, Psal. 32, 3, 5, 3 and a foraking of sinns, or amendement of life. Prou. 28, 13, Psal, 28.21.2 Cor. 7, 11. Eze. 18, 21. Nw the sinns of your church haue not by your Ministers been signi∣fie to yor people; as namely their confuse estate and commixture with the wicked; though it be a sinne every where reproued in the scriptures. as before is shewed. The great transgressions which your people dayly commit in Gods publck worship, whiles, you haue your own wilworship, and stinted prayers witht warrant from Chrsts testament, read in place of Gods true spirituall service; these are not preached against, reproued or cast out by your ministers doctrine; but contrariwise, they haue by word & writing soght to minteyn the same. The serule subiection that both ministers and people, are in, vnder your Lords the Bishops and their courts; is not discoere by your minsters to be a sinne and bondage which you must depart from, if you wil be subiect to that onely Lord & maister Chrst though secretly they haue sought to vndermine that ju∣risdicton of Bshops whch how ca they doe, if it be of Christ; or how may ay stad vnder it, if it be of Antichrist? This being the sinfull state of your church, as we wel know. (and you ar neuer able to iustfy your selues;) your ministers not teaching repentāc for these things, nor being suffred by your Church to speak against them, teach not repentance truely. For, It is not yenough to cry out of Idola∣try, or to preach repentance from sinns in generall; for so they doe a∣mong the Papists, but the perticuler sinns of euery people and persn mut be reproued; yea every sinne that is seen and dis∣cerned, or els your preachers doe not their dutie. Gods word teacheth u tat f a man walke in any one sinne though he doe not all he shal nt liue. but die the deth Ezek. 18, 11, 13. Wen Gibeah was giuen o∣ve Iudg. 19 2, &▪ to the Sinne of Sodom, if the Priests and prophets should haue prea¦ched against idolatrie, swearing, breaking of the Sabbath, and such like evils. and not against that particular filthynes which the people follow∣ed should they haue preached repentance truly? When Israel followed 1 Kin: 12 28, 29.30. Iereboams calues at Dan and Bethel, if the ministers then had prea∣ched against Sodoie, whordome, drunkennes, and the like, and not cried out aainst that present idol worship, but pleaded rather for it: shuld they haue tuht repenatnce truly? Even thus it is with your best minster, they will thde out in their pulpits, against Popery, and i∣doltry in eerll aainst theft, whordome, prde, coueteousnes, and my oher iqie, but the sinne which cleaueth so fast to the bones of or Church, te heynous enormities in Gods worship amongst you▪
these they meddle not with, neither vpon payn of excommunicati draw the people to repentance for them; as after I will further shew. Perhaps now and then they will glance at the Bps. or some other cor∣ruptions, but bring the people from vnder these iniquities, they doe not, nay they plead for them rather, and cry ot vpon vs, which haue forsa∣ken so grosse abminations. Now there being no notice giuen by the ministers, or taken by the people of the sins wherein they liue: the other two parts of true reen∣tance doe also fail among you: for farr you be from confessing your sins, which though you offer the sacrifice of fools,Eccl. 4, 17, yet will you not know that you doe evill, and most farr from amending them, when with so high a hand you doe maintain them: although the testimonie and sffrings of vs your disised and persecuted brethren, against them, haue sounded in your eares now mane a day. Thus teach they not repentance aright. As for faith it cannot be sound, and true, where it hath not ground o the couenant and promise of God: Gods couenant and romise of salua∣tion, you haue not without repentance, as Christ sayd, Luk. 13, 3 5, Except ye repent. you shall all likewise prish for surely God will wound the Psa, 68, 21, hairie ate of him that walketh in his sinnes. To preach faith therefore. and aply ius∣tification by faith, to an vnrepentant people, is to rofane that holy doc¦trine, and turne the grace of God into licentousnes. But to giue the seales of the righteousnes of faith, (baptisme, and the Lords supper) to the wicked blasphemers, irreligious, and to their seed, it is a sinne of sin for which your ministers shall giue an heauy account to Christ at his ap¦pearing. as haue counted the recious blood of his testament an vnholi thing. and washed and fed therewith een doggs and swine, as the scrip¦ture Ma, 7.6 calleth such vngodly ersons. And thus you haue not truly taught among you eyther repntance from dead works or faith towards God, which are the doctrine of the beginning of Christ and the very foundation, as the Heb. 6, 1 Apostle saith. I will now also compare the practise of the Apostles (in the plac which you cite) with yours, that the reader may see how your right eye is blinded, to bring scripture so playn against your selues. In Act. 2, 37, &c, the manner of gathering and planting that church‘ is thus de∣scribed. There was first the word preached. by the Apostles, verse 14 &c which being heard, pricked the harts of the eople, verse, 37. there was repentance taught (not for adultery, theft, worshiping of Idols o the like, whereof it may be that people was not knowen to be guilty. but) for their particular trespasse in so after more plain¦ly Act 1, 13 14.19, 26, refusing of Iesus Christ, into whose name they must be baptised, if they would be saued, verse 38, then fol∣lowed a playn separation from such as frowardly resisted the truth. vers. 40, and none were baptised or ioyned to the church but such as gladly receiued the word verse· 41. After this followed a contnewing (not∣withstanding the imminent peril of trouble and persecution for the truth
sake,) in the Apostles doctrne, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer; verse 42, If you had walked in this primitiue churches steps you should before the constituting of your Church, haue preached vnto the poor ignorant and idolatrous Papists, (which was the generall face of the land at Q Maries death,) repentance for their sinns in all their i∣dolatries. wll worships, and superstitions, subiection to Antichrist, his prelacie, priesthood, and gouernment. &c. To such as had their harts pricked with your doctrine, you should haue shewed the true way of the Gospel faith, and holy walking therein You should haue taugh them a separation from the profane and obstinate; and haue gathered in∣to the Church, such onely as gladly receiued the word; and with them you should haue walked in a holy communion and practise of Christs or¦dinances, thugh Princes and Parlaments, thogh men and Angels, should haue forbidden, & threatned you for it. Thus had your church beē the daughter of tht mother church in Iersalem, whereas now by neg∣lecting this patterne, and reteyning the Popish confuse multitude, and a great part of their ministery and worship; you haue imitated Bbylon e mother of fornications, ad re as vnlike Sion, as you are like your selues. The objection which you feared, and therefore would prevent with answer.: is yet of more weight then will be eased by your syllogisme; the asumption whereof I deny For the true constituting of a Church by the word perached, callng men to a willing holy covenant with God sepratin them from the wayes of Satan & Antichrist. his false & idoa∣trs worship, priesthood and government. vniting them togither in the comunion of the true faith, and bond of loue and peace, (which ar the controuersies between you and vs,) these poynts are cleerly set down in scriptures to the vnderstandng of the spirituall, as the history of all the Bible, and the practse of the Apostles, and primitiue churhes alrea¦dy alleged doe plainely shew and I am sure you will not deny, but they were spirituall. Whereas you would roue, they are not clearely set downe to the vn¦derstand of the spirituall, because thowsands of ministers and people of the churh of Englnd, are of contrary iudgment to vs: first we haue many testi∣monies of your own minsters for the things that we defend against you as in pag. 2.3. answer, to Mr Hild Mr, Iak. this and other books we haue manifested. Secondly, if we had no such testimony, yet what doe you but make your selues iudges in your own cause, that though we bring never so playn evidence against you from the word, yet if you see it not, or wil not see. it must not be need¦ful for saluation. More vnsound and popish doctrine hath seldome been taught But I leaue vpō you the saying of Christ vnto the Pharisees, If you ere blinde ye should not haue sinne. but now ye say, WE SEE therefore your sin remayneth, Iohn, 9, 11. And whereas you further bring aginst vs, forreyn churches, and speciall
persons the chiefest lights of this age, first mind whither this be not lso  ground of Popery, so to presse humane authority: and whether the Pa∣pists cannot for many of ther heresies, allege the ancient fathers, (the chiefests lights of their ages) whome your selues I suppose will not deny but to be spirituall, seing their testmonies are often alleged by your church in pulpits and in print. Secondly, this your dealing is such, as both the better sort of the late Fathers (as Augustine for example, August cē¦tra Maxim l. 3 c. 14 Nec ego ni¦cenā Sinodū tibi, nec tu mihi Arimi nemsē debes bijcere scrip¦tuarum au∣thoritatibus res &c. who was of mnde that counsels, Bishops &c. ought not to be obiected, for triall of controuersies, but the holy scriptures onely,) and the very superstitious Popelings them∣selues haue condemned: saying that Panormi∣tā de electio et elect Po∣test.. signis: we are rather to beleeu ne priuat faithfull man then a whol Councel. and the Pope (himselfe) if a man haue bet∣ter athorety & reason on his side. Thirdly your obiection and pleading against vs, is much like as if the Iewes should haue obiected against Christianity. thus: It is not needfull to saluation to beleeu that Iesus who was crucfied is the Christ: for then it would be cleerly set down in scripture to the vnderstanding of the spi∣rituall Dan 12, 10, Prou, 8, 9, but that it is not for the thousands of priests and people of Israel, Gods own people, among whom are the chiefest lights of this age, the Rabbines, expounders of the law &c. which are vndoubtedly spiritull; are of contrary judgment to you his disciples, Iob 7 47, 48, 49.52. Fourthly, (as I haue before answered) forreyn churches, and the lights in them, haue cleerly seen the things we stand for, and doe asset with vs, touching separation from Antichristianisme, gathering into and walking in a holy communion of Saincts, and other poynts of greatest moment between you and vs. as their Harmony of Confessions, besides o∣ther particular books many. doe testify. If you obiect their particular judgment of your churches estate, I answer, that is not needfull to salua∣tion therefore they may misse in it; and yet be spirituall: for if men i their own churches profese and walke in the truth so farr as God giues them to see; and thinke better of other churches then they doe deserue, such errors even the most spirituall are subiect vnto. It was cleerly revealed in scriptures that the Gentiles should be called vnder the Gospell, Deut 32.43 Gen. 12, 3 Psal. 67. &, 117 Isa. 11.10 Chrst imself plainly confirmed and commanded it, Mat, 28.19, Iohn, 10, 16, Act 1, 8. Yet the Apostle Peter himselfe and many other spirituall men, per∣ceiued it not till in more speciall and particular weise it was to them re∣uealed Act. 10.14, 28, 34, 3, &, 11, 2, , 18. As Peter and many other godly then, fayled in esteeming worse of the Gentiles then they should: so learned and godly men now may fayl, in esteeming better of your es∣tt then it doth deseru.
The 5. Argument. WHatsoeuer church is the mother of the faithfull, is a true visible church, but the best of our assemblies are &c. Ergo true visible churches. The preposition is true. because that regeneration and new birth, is onely ordi¦rarily wrought by the word preached, Rom, 10.8.17. Iam. 1.18. 1, Pet. 1, 23. which is onely and ordinarily found in the visible Church. Gal, 5, 26. 1 Iohn. . 5. The assumption is true, because many are ordinarily new borne in our best as∣semblies, by the ordinance of preaching in publick vse and force; as appeareth by Mr Iohnsons foresayd confession, as also by the meanes of the causes and meanes ordeyned by God to beget faith in the hearers, and efficacie, thereof, Esa. 55, 11, Rom. 10.17, and lastly, y the infallible effects of faith, and fruits of the spirit, appearing in the true members of our best assemblies, Gal. 5, 6, 22. Answer. HEre you seem to bring a new argument, though it be but the old in a new coat: for take away this mantel wherewith your Major is clothed, The mother of the faithfull; and all the rest wilbe but regene∣ration and new birth. wrought as (you say) by the preaching in your best assemblies. Which things we heard in your third argument, and there refuted. As you here vrge them agayn, I further answer, first to your proposition. Whatsoever church (say you) is the mother of the faithfull, is a true visible church But Israel (say I) in her idolatrous estate, was the mo∣ther of the faithfull; yet was she not in that estate a true visible church: ther¦fore your proposition is not true That Israel then was the mother of the faithfull, appeareth by the words of the Lord Plead with your mother Hos, 2, 2, That they which were wil∣led thus to plead,ver 1 were the faithfull appereth by ther names Ammi & Ruhamah, that is, My people and she that hath obteyned mercy. That yet notwithstanding this mother was not a true visible church, appeareth by the Plea to be made against her, ver, 2. She is not my wife, neyther am I her husbād: her estate being (as elsewhere is sayd) 2 Chr, 15 3, without the true God; and her chil¦dren that continewed in her idolatrie, should Hos. 2, 4. obteyn no mercy, Thus you see a church may be sayd to be the mother of the faithfull, and yet not be a true Church of God. You would confirme the proposition to be true. because regeneration and new birth is ordinarily wrought by the word preached, which is one lie and ordinarily, found in the visible church. I answer, the word prea∣ched is to be found also in the false church; as among Papists, Anabap∣tists,
Anabaptists &c. as ordinarie if not more ordinarie then n many of you assemblies: and although there be not such or so many truthes aught a∣mong them as are among you, yet the word that is taught, hath effect for sanctfication of life, in as great measure, as ordinarly appeareth in your Church of Engl.; where so much profannes reigneth, as all men see and know. The church of Rome. is as your selues prfee, a fale church: yet doubt I not, neyther doe I thinke you doubt but sundrie children haue been borne vnto God by that harlot. The church of Enland, it as we professe; a false church, your Ministery also fale: yet God which brought light out of darknesse, hath brought forth, (I dobt not,) and saued ma∣ny of his dear chldren among you. But let not thi embolden the rest to continew with you in your false estte: least they finde no mercy with the Lord, because they be children of fornications. To your assumption then I answer, as you first set it down. I graunt it; yet will not your conclusion follow for it may be a mother of the faithfull and yet no true visible church; for the reason foreshewed, But as you af¦terward explain your selfe saying; the assumption is true because many ae or¦dinarily new borne, &c. I deny it thus to be true, because neyther is a new birth ordinarily to be had among you neither haue you Gods ordinance of preaching in publick vse and force. If your people were truele regenerate they would not sinne; mstike me not, I know the remainders of sinne dwell in the best men, and draw them to that they neyther Rom 7 15 would not ought, but as th Apostle sayth, 1 Ioh 3.9. He that is borne of God sinneth not. And seing so many and great sinns reign in your best assemblies. how can you say you are regenerate? for I haue before manifested, that ordinarilie people are kept and continued among you, in an vnholy communion with the wicked and irreligious, and nourished with sperstition and i∣dolatr: these and the like things are no tokens of true regeneration. Mr Iohnsons confession, is pag. 39, before treated of: and will not import that which you would infer. The causes and meanes ordeyned by God to beget faith, are not by Esa, 55 11, Rm, 10.17. proued to be among you For there is spoken of the word going out of the Lords mouth: but your minsters are not the Lords mouth, because they hae not from him their calling;Rom. 10.15. sending and authoritie to preach, bt haue it from his enemie Antichrist, and (as the Apostle saith) how shal thy preach except they be sent? Neither are they as the Lords mouth: because they separate not the precious from the vile. Ier. 15 19. Neyther are the infallible effects of faith &c. proued by Gl. 5, 6, 2. to be in the true members of yur best assemblies: For seing faith is there ver, 6. sayd to work by loue, and there is no loue of Christ, vnlesse men Ioh 14.1· & 15.10 keep his com∣mandements, and his commandments are not kept in your idolatrou assemblies: it cannot be affirmed that you loue the Lord, if so you con∣tine
continew in sinne: or that you haue true faith. But rather, seing the con∣trary works of the flesh; which the Apostle there mentioneth. Ga, 5, 9 20.1. adulte∣ry. fornication, &c, idolatrie, witchcraft, hatred &c. contentions. sedi∣tions heresies, &c. are found in the true members of your church, (for all among you are baptised, and all baptised are true members;) you are more rightly to be reputed vnregenerate and vnsanctfied, in that your sinnfull and confused estate. Neyther haue you Christs 1 Cor. 5, power in your best assemblies to cast out the wicked from among you: but they are foste¦red. fd, and blessed. with your word, prayers, sacraments, &c. and such as absteyn from your idolatrie and from communion with the wicked; you hate, reproach, excommunicate and persecute: that your church, is indeed, a mother to the profane. But a stepmother to the faithfull. The 6, argument, THose Churches for whome the Churches of God reiyce. are true Churche 2. Thes. 1.4. But our best assemblies are such, for whome the churches of God reioyce. Ergo. The reason of the proposition is, because the churches of God haue the spirit of discerning; a true church and ministery from a false; as Ioh 10.27, 5. Ma 24, 24 1 Cor. 14 32. and 10.15· 1 Ioh. 4 1· The assumption is true; because all the churches of God, reioyce, in our best as¦semblies; and haue giuen vs the right hand of fellowship and testimony of a tru hurch; hauing ioyned our publick confession with their Harmony. Answer. THIS argument is one and the same, with the third of your first Const∣lerations, saue that it hath gotten the fashion of a syllogisme. The in sfficiencie of this reason, I haue there shewed, and thether doe referr the reader. Further here I answer, that you turne the testimony of the reformed churches, to your best advantage, yet neyther with equitie, nor good successe For they joy not for your best assemblies, more then for your worst. but for your Church in generall, and the confesion of the same. They rejoyce for every Bishop, Priest and Deacon, and for e¦very Parish that maketh such confession. as Bishop Iewel in his Apologie hath set down: Part of which Apologie they haue vnited with their Har∣mnie. And why bring you them as approuing your best assemblies one¦ly. Your Lords the Prelates may truely say you doe them wrong: to ap¦ply vnto your selues the applause which other churches giue to their A∣pologie. They wil tel you in your own words, the churches of God haue the spirit of discerning a true church and Ministery from a false. But the reformed hurches haue discerned the nationall church of England, (whereof the
Archbshop of Cant· is Pastor to be a true church; they haue discerned the Dicesan Bishps in England as well as the Parish Priests, to be true Ministers; and reioyce as well for their Sees, as for yor Parishes, hauing joyned these all alike in their Harmony And what will you (that suffr s many things for seprating in yur chrch. as yo syd) answer to your right reverend Fathers, against whome like vnnaturall children, yo hau stri∣ven so long, and would have them with their jrisdcton ut out of your church tht the Prsh priest or Deacon mght Lord it alone. More particularly I answer: yor first propostion is vnsound, & can∣not be proed from the scripture you allege 2 Ths. 1.4. from which text yo must conclude on this fahon. Pul and Siluanus and Timotheu reioyced of the Thesalonians in other churches of Gd, because of their pacience and faith in all persecutions &c. Therefore the reformed chur∣che reioycing for the church of England. it must needs be a true church. The conseqence is denied. True churches may err in their judgment of an other church, especialy if the be not rightly informed of the stat thereof? as the reformed churches are not by that your Apologie. More∣over he that mindeth the things recorded of that church, 1 Thes. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9 &c. and the different estate to be seen in your church: may soon per∣ceie their is no lke cause of joy for you s for them; that if there be a lke effet, it is in error. The reason of the proposition, is no better confirmed by the scriptures you allege: For when Chrt sayth Iohn. 10, 27, 5. M sheep har my voyce and they will not follow a stranger; doeth he send his sheep to other flocks, to try their shepheards by; or if I see my shepheard to be a thef, a hire¦ling, a wolf? mst I commit my sowl vnto hm, because other shepherds wll giue him the right hand o fellowship? In the other scriptures, say nt the Apostles to the particular churches. and persons, 1 Cor, 10, 15. iudge ye what I sa? 1 Ioh 4 1. try ye th sprit and beleeue not euery spirit; But you would not haue our selues to iude or try, but to send over sea, and hear what other chur¦ches iudge; if they aproue we must not disalow. You may as wel bid vs. put out our own eyes. that other men may lead vs; and as soon will we follw you in that, as in this your popish counsell. We have lear∣ned to liue by Hab, 2.5 our own faith. and know that Gal. 6.5. every man shall beare hs own brden, and answer for himself to God. But you will tell vs, if we can iudge and discerne the true church: o∣thers can doe it also and better. I answer, I may err iudgment, & so may others, even whole churches, therefore let euery man look how he iudgeth, and how he deendeth on other men: and let evey mans udg¦ment be tried by the scriptures. For this cause we say vnto you; seing we haue fought for the judgement of other churches, but can get no an∣swer. procure you some reasons from them, in defence of your church, ministerie, worship, and ecclesiasticall gouerment: and if by Gods
word they can justfy those things, and evince that we haue done evil to depart from you: we will returne vnto you. Otherwise if they reioyce neur so mch for your estate: we are verly perswaded, that both they and you haue more caus to mourne, for the many abominations that are amng To conclude, consider in an example, the weight of your argument; for by the like reson the envious ministers in Pauls time, mought thus hae justfied themselues That mnisterie and ministration for which the Apostles of Christ re∣ioyce, is true to be obeyed, and continued in. But our ministery and minstration is such as for it the Apostle Paul reioyceth, yea and will r¦ioyce Philip  16.18. If you Answer the Apostle reioyced for the preaching of Christ, not forthe envious affection of the preachers, who might be damned them∣selues, notwithstanding their true doctrine: it is true. And so minde I for the reformed churches. They reioyce for the many truthes you pro∣fese against Popery, (as we also doe the like,) yet may you neverthelesse perish for your false constitution, idolatrous worship, popish hierarchie and other transgressions that are among you. Amend your liues there∣fore, and turne your feet into the wayes of peace, for if you rely vpon man, an make lesh yor arme; and will not her the word of the Lord that condemneth your iniquities. you shll perish in your sinns, & other chrches shall not be able to excuse of sue you ARGVMENTS That the PREACHERS of the best assemblies of the church of ENGLAND, are true ministers of Christ. I TH prachers after whose publick & powerfull doctrine, of the word do ordi∣narily follow repēance, conuersion to God, sauing fayth in Christ, loue to the brethrn, and ohe fruits of the spiit Gal. 5, 6, 22. in the hearers, are true ministers of God and of the visible chrc: But fter he dctrine of Gods word taught by the preachers of our best asse¦blis, doe ordnarily appear the fruites of the spirit in the hearers. Threfore th preachers of our best assemblies, are true ministers of Christ. The roposition is proued, because onely the word that God doth send in the  o his ministers, is ordinarily effectull for these things Ier. 23, 22, Esa. 55 11. Mat, 7, 20, Luk 1, 76 Ioh. 10.1, 2. 1 Cor, 9 1., & 4, 15. Th assumption is proued by the answer to the assumption of the 4 argume  th churche.
Answer. OVR separation is from your Church consisting of many assemblie all compact into ore bode, and from all your Ministerie both pre∣lacie and priesthood. We cannot tel which assemblies or ministers be best; for they that seem best may proue worst, because they most de∣ceiue the simple: the wolf that comes in a sheeps coat, is no whit better than he that commeth in his natiue hiew: but he may doe more harm, in that he is disguised. Reason would perswade vs, that the Bishops are the preachers of your best assemblies, for they haue greatest dignity, fatherhood and authority in your church: they preach in the highest and most hono∣rable assemblies of the land; they are most carefull to obserue their oath of due obedience, to keep the canon orders lawes and ceremonies of your church and set themselues against such as secretly vndermine the state of the church and ministerie of England, yet openlie stand members and professed friends of the same. They and their assemblies, are best orde∣red after the constitution and lawes of your church. So that to speak as I think, I know not which assemblies be best, where the Leven hath sow red the whole lump; though I can guesse which you doe mean: but plain dealing about your ministers and asemblies would haue beseemed you best. Tel vs therefore (when you next write) what ministers you mean; whether the Bishops, Deanes, Doctors &c. that are in the cathedrall churches; or the Doctors and Diuines that are in your vniuersities; or th Parsons, Vicars, Lecturers that are in your Parishes? Again what Minis∣ters they be whither Apostles or Prophets or Evangelists or Pastors or Teachers; for all these are ministers, Eph. 4. and meet it is to know your meaning: for though Apostles and Pastors be both ministers ordeined of Christ, yet if one will say everie Pastor is an Apostle, he is but a liar. So you see it is needfull that we ransack these your ambiguous and generall termes. Now for your argument; first I answer to the proposition, that though these fruites you mention, doe many times follow the doctrine of Christs ministers, yet not theirs onely, nor alwaies Not onelie be∣cause other men that are not in office of Ministerie may by excercise of their gifts work such fruites, as appeareth 1 Cor. 14.1.31.3.24, 25. &c. I appeal also to your selues, whether you thinke not that your best minis∣ters, though silenced, or degraded, from all ministeriall office: may not▪ when they teach, work repentance, fath and other fruites of the spi∣rit. Neither doe these fruites alwayes follow the doctrine of true ministers; for Noah preached 120· yeares yet followed there not faith, and repen∣tance in the old world: Christ himselfe preached to Chorazin and Bethsai¦da; yet left Ma 11.20 21, the woe vpon them; and complaineth (in Esaias that he had Isa, 49, 4. laboured in vayn among the Iewes: and of Israel it is said, Rom 10.21 All the day
long haue I stretched out my hand a disobedient and gynsaying people. To reason therefore from the effects, this man wrought faith by his teaching therefore he is a true minster; or this man wrought not faith by his tea∣ching, therefore no true minister; is vnsound, and vnconcludable by the scriptures The roofs of your proposition being examined, wil be found to light for your purpose; if you mean that the officers doctrine, onely, or al∣wayes, is effectuall for these thins, to weet, repentance, faith &c often I know it is; and alwayes it hath effect, eyther to life or death in the hea∣rers. Your scriptures are, Ier, 23, 22. which sheweth what true prophets should labour to doe, namely to turne sinners from their evill way &c, (whereas the false prophets did otherwise, Eze, 13, 22:) but proueth not, that the prophets onely did this; for the Priests and Levites did it also Mal, 2, 6, yea priuate men may often turne their neighbours from evill, Leu 4, 27.8. & 19.17. Prou. 31.26, Mal. 3, 16, Mat. 18.15. Iam. 5.19, 20. neyther proveth it, that the prophets alwayes did this; for Esaias crieth, Lord who hath beleeued our report? Isa. 53.1 and it is written, that the Lord testified to Israel by all the Prophets and by all the Seers, saying, turne from your evill wayes &c. neverthelesse they would not obey but hardened thir necks &c. 2 Ki, 17, 13, 14 The next place Isa 55.11. sheweth the nature of Gods word, which is effectll to make better or worse as he will that sendeth it: not al∣wayes t conuert, for Exo. 5, &c. Pharaoh was hardned by it: not onelie by the officers, fr is honor is to all the Saincts, to haue the high acts of God in their mthes, and a two edged sword in their hands, to execute ven¦geance in the heathens, and corrections among the people &c. Psal, 149 6, 7.9. The fruites whereby false prophets are knowne from true; Mat. 7.0, are not the effects of their doctrine by converting men onely; for so ma¦ny 2 Kin, 1.7 13, 14 true prophets heretofore should haue been iudged false: but the doctrine it selfe, and the works of life and conuersation, are the pro∣phets fruites; which also may both be good, in them that haue no office at all. The next place Luk. 1.76. speaketh in partcular of Iohns extraordi∣nary office, and work wherein God imployed him; and proueth your purpose no more then the other. Iohn, 1, 1, 2. speaketh of lawfull enterers into the sheepfold by the door, and of theeues that clime vp an other way. What this will say for your ministers I know not vnlesse, to proue them theeues; for their en∣trance into the ministerie by the dore, that is, by Christs ordinance i his church they cannot shew; no lawfull office or calling haue they to witnsse for them Yea they are ashamed of their office, calling, and en¦trance by the Bishops, and secretly doe disclaym that to their people, &
pretend their gifts, graces and effects, for proof of their ministerie,  many of vs that haue dealt with them; doe know: But what say I, secr∣ly? nay openly and in print they haue yeelded, that 2 admn to the Parliā,  16. thy enter not in by Christ, but by a popish and vnlawfull vocatin. The like seemeth o be close¦lie implied in these your arguments, where you neither name what of∣fice your preachers haue, nor how lawfullie they come by it, as the rea∣der may obserue. The words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2, & 4.15. shew two things, 1  lawfull office of Apostleship, 2 and Gods blessing vpon his labors in that office: neither of Which can be shewed by your ministers; neither pro∣ueth it yor proposition more then the other places. For I hold with you that Gods lawfull ministers, are the principall, and most excellent ordinarie outward meanes, for to work repentance, faith, &c. but not the onely, as you would haue it. The Assumption, namelie, that such effects doe follow your preachers doctrine is denied. You refer vs for the proof thereof, to that which you wrote before: and I also refer the reader to that which is before answe∣red And here I wil add a further demonstration, that true repentance can not follow your preachers doctrine, in as much as they teach not true repentance, neyther can teach it because their mouthes are mou∣zled by your church that they may not speake For thus Constitut & Canons ecclsiast. 1603. it hath enac∣ted. Canon. 4,Whosoeuer shall hereafter affime that the forme of Gods worship in the Church of England established by law, and conteyned in the book of Common prayer &c. is a corrupt, superstitious or vnlawfull worship of God, or contey∣neth any thing in it, that is repugnant to the scriptures, let him be excommuni∣cated ipso facto; and not restored but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop after his repentance and publick revocation of such his wicked errors.Can. 6. Whosoeuer shall hereafter affirm that the rites and ceremonies of the church of England by law established, are wicked, Antichristian or superstitious, or such as being commanded by lawfull authority, men who are zealously and godly affec¦ted, may not with any good conscience approue them, vse them or as occasion re∣quireth subscribe vnto them; let him be excommunicated, ipso facto, and not restored vntill he repent, and publickly revoke such his wicked errors. Can. 7.Whosoeuer shall hereafter affrm that the gouerment of the Church of Eng. vnder his Maiestie by Archbishops, Bishops Deanes, Archdeacons and the rest that doe bear office in the same, is Antichristian or repugnant to the word of God, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so continew vntil he repent and publickly reuoke such his wicked errors. Can. 8,Whosoeuer shall hereafter affirm or teach that the forme and manner of ma¦king and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, conteyneth any thing in it that is repugnant to the word of God &c; let him be excommunicated ipso fac∣to; not to be restored vntil he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked er∣rors.
These and the like constitutions, hath your representatiue church of England made for maintenance of their worship, ministerie, ecclesiasti∣call gouernment, rites ceremonies. &c, against which your forward prea¦chers heretofore so earnestly inveighed, as being corrupt vnlawfull and antichristian: but now behold their mouthes are shut, they may not preach repentance for the many abominations that are among you; if they doe, they are excommunicated ipso facto, and then are they neither officers nor members of your church. Wherfore your ministers are ey∣ther fain to hold their peace, and be such as the Prophet Eze 13 4 complaineth of, that rise not vp in the breaches, nor make vp the hedge for the howse of Is∣rael, to stand in the battel in the day of the Lord; or els they preach for de∣fence of your own inuented worship, pompous clergie, and laudable ce∣remonies; and are such as the prophet blameth for Eze 13.7 hauing seen a vayne vision, and spoken a lying divination, saying, the Lord sayth it, albeit he hath not spoken. What reward then can they exspect for their preaching but as the Lord there threatneth, that vers 8. his hand shalbe vpon them, they shall not be in th' assembly of his people, nor written in the writing of the howse of Israel. Wherefore if there be any weight or soundnes in this your argument, it may be returned vpon you thus. The preachers after whose publick doctrine doe ordinarilie follow impenitency, and continuance in an evill nd idolatrous estate of life in the hearers, ar not the true ministers of God. But after the doctrine of the preachers of your best assemblies, doe ordinarily follow and appear impenitency, idolatry and other fruites of the flesh in the hearers: (as is proued by the answer to this and to the assumption of your 4 argument for the churches.) Ther¦fore the preachers of your best assemblies, are not the true Ministers of God. The 2 Argument SVch Ministers as haue promise of salvation in their present standing, ar true Ministers of Christ. But so haue the ministers of our best assemblies; Ergo. &c. Proof of the assumption, Because the promise of saluation is giuen to such Ministers as 1, are faithfull and wise stewards, giuing the household meat in due season Mat, 24, 45.46. 2. build gold siluer or stubble on the foundation 1 Cor 3, 12, 15. 3. continew in taking heed to themselues and vnto learning 1 Tim. 4, 16. 4, feed the flock willingly, of a ready mind, as ensamples, 1 Pet. 5.4. 5. turne many soules to righteousnes. Dan. 12, 3.6. Ez 1, 3. Thou shalt saue thine owne soule. But these things doe the ministers of our best assemblies: Ergo.
Answer. THe assumption of this argument I deny; and will consider the 6. rea∣sons that you bring to proue it. 1. Are faithfl nd wise stewards &c.] but your ministers are your Lord Bishops stwards or bayliffes, not the Lord Chrsts: by them ther muthe; are ened and shut a . For let them shew when, wher & how God gaue the stwarshi and key of the howse to them, as he did to Is, 22, 20 2 22, Eakin, Ths should be first cleared, before they presume to admi∣nister as stewards. Did not the Bishop (after they had romised their re¦verend obedience vnto him) say vnto ech of them, Book of or¦ders. Recive the holy Ghost whse sinns thou doost forgiue thy ar forgiuen &c, & be thou a faithfull dispen∣sour of the word of God, &c? Thus haue they their stewardship or ffice of dispenstion, frm their spirituall Lord, and reverend Father the relate; who by his presuming to giue the Holy Ghst, should seem to be Ioh 20.22 23, Christ, or rather, as I think 2 Th, 2.4, Antichrist: but say you whether he be, when you next write. As is their calling, such is their administration: for, they feed not Gods houshold, but confuse assemblie, wherein are many rofane, uch as Christ caleth Mat. 7: dogs & swine, vnworthy to be at his table; tho your ste∣wards admit them to the table of your church, to your most holy actions. Neyther giue they them meat in due season; for such diet as is meet for them, to rebuke them for their idolatrous estate, they giue them not; false doctrnes See a cata¦logue of thē in answ. to Mr Iac. pa 158, &c: many they giue them to feed on and such meats Christ never left for his houshold. Finally, if the Bishops silence them, & set vnpreaching priests in their places, they feed their flocks no longer but leaue them to the wolf. And are these your faithfull stewards? They are such as was the steward Shebna, to whome the Lord sayd what hast thou to do hr? I will driue the from thy station. Isa, 22, 15, 19. 2, Build gol siuer or stuble on th'foūdaō First ther is not yet a good foun¦dation layd of your chrch; what then is your building? There is no good foundaton, because your church neuer yet stroke a holy and orderly coue∣nant with Christ, according to the rules of his testament. Scondly they hae not been called or sent of God to build, but ey∣ther have intruded themselues, or els by the Bishops, the Lords of your haruest, haue these yur laborers been thrist forth. Thirdly they buld much stubble indeed, little gold or siluer that will endure the sre; let the frame and constitution of your church, the wor∣ship, ministery and gouerment thereof, be brought to the triall of Gods word, and it wll burne these thins to ashes. Yet if your minsters will be content their works shall burne; and will vpon the true founda∣tion build better▪ they ay through the mercy of God be saued, which I hartely wish vnto them al Otherwise, thus sayth the Lord; Ee 13.10 &c: Because thy hau deceiued my people, saying PEACE and there was no peace; and one built vp a wall, and behold the others daubed it with vptempered morter, say vnto
them which daub it with vntempered morter, that it shall fall ver· 14. I will destroy the wall that ye haue daubed with vntempered morter, and bring it downe to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shal be discouered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midds thereof; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 3. Continew in taking heed to themselues and vnto learnng.] First, these words were spoken to one, that had a lawful office, calling and entrance and so serueth nothing for your ministers, that want all these. Second∣ly by  learning is meant teaching of the people, (as the words following also shew;) which he willeth Timothee to continew in: but this your mi∣nisters doe not; for the doctrine that is most needful for the present state of the people, they teach not; besides, if their Lords the Bishops forbid them, they continew not with their flocks, nor their flocks with them; but another hirelng comes in their place. 4. Feed the flock willingly) First Christs flock is of Ioh. 18, sheep, not of car∣nall worldlings, atheists, blasphemers, and other lke wild beasts of the forrest: Christ would not haue his childrens bread to be cast vnto dogs; as your ministers apply their word and sacraments, to the most profane and their seed. Secondly to  feed importeth also, to Mat. 2, 6 Reu, 2.7. rule & gouern; but that your mi¦nisters doe not, both they and their flocks are subiect to other Lords & gouernors, the Prelates, which loue preeminence, and haue authority ouer your church to suspend, silence, and excommunicate priests and peo¦ple. If the flocks of your Minsters wer Christs sheep, they would not hear the voyce of strangers, Iohn, 10.5· But the people of your parishes, if the Bishop depose their shepheard and set a wolf or a blinde guide o∣ver them they submit vnto him, and take him for their priest; and their former sheepheard feeds no more, but giues place to the stranger. O i∣dol shepheard, that leaueth the flock Zach, 11, 17. 5. Turn many soules to righteousnes.) The contrary is true: they hinder many sowles from righteousnes, by preaching against the truth and wit∣nesses thereof, by pleading for Baal, and toleration of the evils that are a∣mong you 6. Eze 3. Thou shalt saue thine own soul.) This was conditionall, if he warned the wicked of the evill way wherein he walked; vers. 18.19. &c. which your ministers doe not, (as before is shewed,) but strenthen the people in an evill way. How then shal they saue their soules? Agayn this was spoken to Ezekiel who had a lawfull office, calling & sending from God, vers. 1.4.11. &c. and you should first haue proued that your Mi¦nisters haue these and then you might haue spoken of their administrati∣on. But seing they haue neyther true office, lawfull calling, nor good administration: your conclusion is amysse, for the premisses doe not proue it.
The 3. Argument. THose ministers by whome the Saints are gathered, which doe the work of the ministery, which edify the body of Christ, are the ministers of Christ. But such are the ministrs of our best assemblies: Ergo The propsition is made manifest by Eph. 4.11, 12, where it approues that these works are proper effects of the publick ministery giuen by Christ: also none can ordinarily build vp Gods church, but such as God giueth to this end 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 9, 10. The assumption is proued, because the ministers of our best assemblies, doe ga∣ther the Saints from the reprobates, making a manifest separation, and being ga¦thered, doe build the body of Christ in godlynes, by their ordinary preaching in these assemblies. Anwser. THe assumption or 2, part of your argument that such are the Minis∣ters of your best assemblis, is denyed; for these reasons. 1 In Ephes 4. it is sayd, He, (that is Christ,) gaue but your mi∣nisters are giuen by the Bishops: and for disobedence to them, are ta∣ken away agayn from your parishes: Christ never gaue such hirelings 2. The ministers mentioned in Eph. 4, are Apostls Propets Evangelists Pastors and Teachers. Your minsters are none of these, but Priests, Parsons Vicars, &c. whose very names, besides their offices, calling &c.) shew them to be from Antichrst. 3. Your ministers gather not the Saints, but persecute and scatter them as we know by experiēce: they gather (or keep being gathered) a cōfused idolatrous multitude, svch as is in their parishes: the right way of gathe∣ring a church by separation from the world, they know not, or will not acknowledge. 4. They doe not the work of Christs ministery, which is aright to dis∣pense the word, seales, censures &c according to the scriptures: but the work of Antichrists ministery, in reading the service book, marying, burying, churching of women, & the like; as in your Leiturgie & other church books are set down. 5. They edify not the body of Christ, but build and fortify the tower of Babel their confused assemblies; which were constituted of ignorant idolatrous papists, and other profane, the very body of Antichrist: but the way of truth and such as walke therein, are evill spoken of by your Ministers, as their books, sermons, conferences &c, dayly shew. For all which reasons, the right conclusion of your argument should be this, that the ministers of your best assemblies. are the ministers of Antichrist. To proue, your assumption, you giue vs your bare word, saying they do gather the Saints from the reprobats; making a manifest separatiō &c. This is to proue the same by the same: they doe so because they do so; wheras all the world may
may see, they doe not so. For the church of Eng., and parish assemblies thereof, from which we haue departed, consist of all sorts of persons; the ministers stand priests by law to the whole parishes, whereof all are par∣takers of the holy things of God, every one baptized &c. and can you say, they are not then builded in and with your church? And for se∣paration, we know your priests, nor the whole parish, cannot excom∣municate any, be they never so blasphemous, wicked or licentious: that power is in the Bishops courts And how few are excommunicated for their heresies, blasphemies, atheisme or wicked life, who knoweth not: but for wel doing, you haue excommunicated many. And further, if a¦ny of your ministers should goe about to make a separation or gather any other churches or assemblies, then are already by the lawes of the land established and allowed they are ipso facto excommunicated, by force of the Canons of your church; made in Anno 1603. Can. 9, 11, 1. So still the open wicked remayn edified with the rest in your church, & there is no such separation, as you against all mens knowledge doe pre∣tend. Your argument therefore is no better, then as if Ieroboams priests should thus haue pleaded. Those priests that teach Iacob. Gods iudge∣ments, and Israel his law, that put incense before the face of God, and and brnt offrings vpon his alter, are the true priests of God: Deut, 33.10 But these things doe we: therefore we are true priests. If you say their assumtion is false; the like is sayd of yours; and your works plainly proue your assumption most vntrue. The 4. Argument THose ministers by whose ministery and preaching, the overthrow of the kingdome of Antichrist is effected, are the ministers of Christ. But such are the ministers of our best assemblies: Ergo the true ministers of Christ The proposition is proued, 2 Cor, 10, 4 5.2 Thes 2.8. Reu, 14.6.7.8. & 18 12. & 11, 3, 11. The assumption is manifest; for that the ministers of our best assemblies haue weakned and thrown down and doe still fght and prevayl against the kingdom of Antichrist, by the power of Christ; 2. Thes, 2, 8, and Satan cannot cast out Satan. Mark. 3.23. Answer THere is no cause or person so bad, but many haue store of such ar¦guments as you bring for your ministers wherein you assume & take for granted that which is most needful to be proued: & if we wil not beleeu your bold affirmation, contrary to our know¦ledge and the truth of your estate, your ministery hath nothing to justify or confirme it. The assumption of this argument I deny; for your ministers haue not throwen down Antichrists kingdoe, but sought rather to hold it vp.
Here in sted of due proof, you tel vs it is manifest, for that the ministers of your best assemblies haue weakned &c, the kingdome of Antichrist. Thus again you prou the sae by the sain; & say that is manifest which is most obscur & vnknown ūto vs: & to discouer your falsehood, I wil briefly shew, how the scriptures that you bring for your propositiō; do disprou your assumptiō. The weapons of our warfare (sayth the Apostle. 2 Cor, 10, 4, 5.) are not carnall but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God. &c. But the weapons of your ministers warfare, haue been carnal, not mightie through God. For against the remaynders of Antichrists king∣dome among you, they haue sued to Parliaments, that the arm of fleh might throw down the prelates, their courts, and corruptions but when the state hath not hearkned to them, what haue your ministers done but submitted themselues to their spirituall Lords; or at least weise ceased their warfare against them; and in their sermons and writings, haue tur∣ned the edge of ther sword against vs that haue departed from Babylon And what haue they throwen down by their preaching these half hun∣dred yeares? Is there any of their Romish abuses, that they haue got re∣formed? any one of the rabble of Antichristian officers, courts, canons &c. cast out of the Church? Nay themselues now are cat out, if they speak or write any more against them, as they did in times past. Doe not all their people stand still in subiection vnder that Leitourgie, prelacie, priesthood and popish ecclesiasticall gouernment which were set ouer them at the first? They haue warred with the Antichristians, as did Israel with the Canaanites; when they were Psal 106.35.36, mixed among them, and learned their works, and serued their idols, which were their ruine. There∣fore are these enemies, become thornes to the sides, and pricks to the eyes of your best ministers and people, vexing them in the land wher¦in they dwel; as God did threaten Num. 33, 55. So when th' Apostle sayth 2 Thes, 2.8. that the Lord shall consume (An∣tichrist with the spirit of his mouth, and abolish him with the brightnes of his comming; may we not hereby learne, that Gods spirit is not in your minis∣ters mouthes, seing they haue not consumed or abolished, the Antichris∣tian prelacie, and other abominations of that man of sinne? nay it is evi∣dent they maynten Antichrist, for haue they not al, receiued their mini∣stery from the prelates & promised obediēce to their ordinaris, yet your preachers wer wōt to say the prelats ar Antichristiā. Agayn if your mini∣sters had in them the spirit of the Lords mouth, they would ere this time, haue made a separatiō from the wicked, popish, & sinful generation, for God sayd vnto Ieremie, Isa 15.19 if thou take away the precious from the vile, thou shalbe as my mouth. But this doctrine of separation, your ministers wil ney¦ther teach, nor suffer to be taught; but lock vp the kingdome of heauen as much as they can, that men may not enter: they blame vs for nothing so much, as for separation, when nothing is more needfull to be done, if we will keep the couenant of our God, and maynteyn that war which
his own Maiestie first proclaymed, between the womans seed, and the serents, Gen. 3, 15. so vnlike your ministers be to the mouth of God. As vnlike they are also to those Angels and witnesses Reu. 18. & 14. & 11. whch cried the downfall of Antichrists pompous church and ministerie, and called al Gods children out of it, saying Reu 18.4 Goe cut of her my people; but your ministers cry that men should tarry within, as the 1 Chr, 4.23. potters, that contrary to Ier. 51, 6, Gods commaundement dwelt with the king (of Babel) for hs work: and such as are gone out, they labour to bring back agayne, saying that with them is the true doctrine of saluation; their errors ar not fundamentall their corruptions abolish not from Christ, all reformed churches aproue of ther church and ministery: and many such Babilo∣nian songs, haue we heard among them And whereas in Re, 14 there followed an Angel, that with a lowd voyce threatned all those ver▪ 9, 10 that worshipped the beast and his image and receiued his mark in forehead or in hand; your ministers themselues stand vnder that wrath, whiles the mark of the beast is so open in ther foreheads, by that false ministery of priesthood which they haue receiued from there is a character imprinted by the Bish¦ops ordinati¦on concil tri¦dent Ses, 23 Can, 4. the Bishops whose vnlawfull authority and iurisdiction they submit vnto and teach men to doe the like in whch respect they cannot excuse themselues from worshipping the Beast, seing that hierarchie and prelacy‘ is by the light of Gods word and by the atetation of the Christian reformed churches, and by your own confession heretofore, found to be Antichrstian; if the Pope be An∣tihris, & Rme be the throne of the Beast. Thus men may see that your ministers are far from overthrowing Antichrist kingdome & your selfe haue shewed a good reason why: Satan cannot cast out Satan. The 5. argument. THose ministers which are the sauiour of death to the wicked, and life to the godly, are the true ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. Such are the ministers of our best assmblies. Ergo true ministers of Christ. Answer. THis naked argument, hath not a ragg to help to couer the falsehood of the aumption; wherefore t may soon be stript and let goe. I dis¦prue that which you haue asumed ths. Your minsters are not the saviour of death to the wicked, because they suffer them in the bosome of ther church; by their sacraments and bles∣sins, confirme them in their sinns, doe not excommunicate the profane or vicious liver, but let them remayn in mixture with the rest, and plead for such a people, to be the true church of God. They are not the sauour of life to the godly because they preach not the way of lfe trely, by separating from idolaters and idolatry, and gathe∣ring to a hly communin in the faith and obedience of the gospel. Bt while they persecute, preach, and write against Gods children, which prctise the orinances of his couenant, and by fayr pretexts and tolorable reasons, seek to draw them back to their confused assemblis
they are lke those whome the Lord reproued thus; And will ye pollute me among my people, for handuls of barly, and fr peeces of bread. and to stay the soules of them that should not die, and to giue life to the soule that should not liue, in lying to my people, that heare your lyes? Ezek 13.19. The 6. Argument. THese ministers that are hated of all men for the sake of Christ, are the true ministers of Christ; 1 Cor. 4, 9, 10.11..12.13.. 2. Cor. 6.4.5, 6.8.. Mat. 10:2. Such are the ministers of our best assemblie, Therefore true ministers of Christ. The MINOR is proued, for that thy are hated of the most part, and of the most evil of all sorts, as were the Apostles and desciples of Christ. Consider what I say, nd the Lord giue thee under∣standing in all things, 2 Tim, 2.7. Answer. THis your last reason comes al too late, and wil help your ministery nothing, For by the discussing of your former arguments We haue seen that your ministers cnnot proue their office, calling or entrance in¦to the sheepfold, by Christ neyther administer they according to his tes∣tament, but after their owne invented leitrgie lawes, and Cannons, So that if they be hated of all men in respect of their ministery, they are not hated for Christs sake; seeing they haue none of his ministery, hated it may be they ar of many; so, are Frars and Monks, and the rest of Anti-christs clergie, so it is written that the ‡ whore shall be hated, made deso∣late and naked, her flesh eaten and shee burned with fyer; but it is the cause, not the suffering which makes the martyr, Whereas therfore your minor is proued by a bare affirmation onely, that so it is; (as is your manner of disputing; you must take a better course, and proue things otherwise, ere we, will yield: for the Arrian, and Anabaptists, and all sorts of religion, wil Plead that both they and their ministers are hated for Christs sake: but every tree is knowne by its fruits. Yet haue yea no such cause to complayn of hatred; for the ministry of your Church; is aproued and reioyced for, (as your selfe while are sayd, (of all the, forreyn reformed Churches in the world; and at home wee know, how it is reuerenced, honoured and obeyed. Your cheifest mi∣nisters being acknowledged for spiritual Lords, and right reverend Fathers; the inferiour priests, as sound and excelent Divines, followed and flock∣ked after by the people. And how they are provided for by rich Bis∣hoppricks. & fat benefices, al ouer the Land; besides their dayly inter∣tainment, at great and rich mens tables; who is there among you that knoweth not, These are not signes of hatred. Therefore let him that readeth consider indeed what you haue sayd; and the Lord giue him vnderstanding in all things. O England ISRAEL thy Prophets are like the foxes in the wast places, Ezek. 13.4.
Positions concerning a true Church INtending to set down some arguments against the corrupt estate of the present church of England; I thought it profitable to prefix some few positions, as a ground, whereby thou maist (good reader;) iudge the better of that which shal∣be sayd. Yet mean I not to handle this poynt at large, which in so many other writings thou moyst profitably read: but onely to obserue such principall things as may giue light vnto the simple, who many of them mistake this doctrine of the Churh, and erring once, are y seducers further led astray The Lord reduce all hi that erre, and stablish his seruants in the truth for euer. THis our English word Church, through custome of speech is com∣monly vsed for the Temple or place where people come togither for the worship of God: but they that are any thng excercised in religion, know, that it also signifieth the People, which gather togither for diuine service; and this is the irst and proper meaning of the word Churh, as it is vsed to expresse the originall scripture termes, Kahal and Ecclesia. 2. This name Church, we English men (which cme of the Saxons) haue receiued from the Saxon, German, and Duitch cames Cyri, Kirch, Kerck; whereby those nations now, doe vsually call their Temples or meeting-places: but the people which come togither in them, they call the Gemeine, and the Gemeinte, that is to say, the Communialtie; & we in our first English Bibles called it, the Congregation. 3. As all religion is learned out of holy scriptures, so the name and doctrine of the church, is from thence to be deduced; and there the Church is called in Hebrew Dut. 5.22. Kahal or Deut. 33.4. Kehillab, which signifieth a Con¦vocation or Assemblie of people, and Exod. 16.1. Psal. 111.1. Ghnedah, that is to say a Congrega∣tion: in Greek it is named Ma 16, 18, Act. 7 38. Ecclesia, that is in like manner, a Conuocation or people called forth to an assembly, and sometime Iam, 2, 2, and in th greek of the old Test. often, Deut. 5.22, Exod, 16 3, &c. Synaggee, that is a Congregation: which word is also vsed for the Luk. 7.5. Act, 18, 7. place wheren the people assembled. 4 The Hebrew word Kahal is diversly vsed; sometimes more gene∣rally for a great or vniuersall multitude, as Gen. 35.11, Ier. 50.9. of nations and Gen 48, 4, Ezek, 23, 24. of peles sometymes more particularly for an aembly of one nation: as of Exod. 12.6. the Israelites; somtimes for apart of them, as 1 Chro. 13.1, 2, ; 5. and 29.1.6. 1: Chro, 1.2 3. the Elders and Gouernours; or some 2. Chron 20.4.5. of the tribes of Israel apart; or some 2. Chron. 30.10.13.25. of all the trbes, euen Ezra. 10.1. men, women and children: and indifferently for Gen. 49.6. any assemblie, and this not only of Gods people, but of Ezek. 27.27. and 32.22. and 38 4.7. &c. heathens also & infidels.
5. Likeweise the Greek word Ecclesia is of as large extent and signification; vsed sometime for Eph. 5.23, &c. Heb 12.23, the church enerally, sometime for a 1. Cor. 1, 2. particular church or congregation in a citie: someties more articula¦ly in Rom. 16, 5, 1 Cor. 16.19, Colos, 4, 15, a house or family, sometimes (in the Greek version of the old te∣stment) for an asembly 2 Chron, 1, 3, &c, of Governours, or company of 1, Sam, 19, 20, Prophets, or congreaton Psal, 107.32, of the people: and finally for Eze. 32, 3. Act. 19, 32, 39, 41, any asembly lawfull or vnlawfull, of good men or of Psal. 26 5. evill. 6. These words thus genreall, are in more speciall sort both by the scriptures, and by vse of speach among all religious peole restreyned and applied to such Assemblies and congregations as are called and ga∣thered for diuine excercises: and so our English name of church is attri∣buted peculiarly to spirituall or religious assemblies, called ecclesiastica and not to any other assemblies ciuill or poltcall. 7. Of religious or ecclesiasticall assemblies generally considered, there ar many srts in the world, all disalowed of god, saue one sort onely which he acknowledgeth to be his, and hath separated to himself from all the rest. 8. The many false sorts, may be reduced vnto fowr; 1 The asemblies of Pagans or heathen people, which profese some God, Gods, or, Goddes∣ses, whome they doe worship, ignorantly, hauing Rom. 1.25 chaged the truth of God into a lie, and so seruing creatures, not (indeed) the creator, which is blessed for ever. Amen. 2 The assemblies of Iewes who professe the true God (after a srt) and allow the writings of Moses ad the pro∣phets, bt abhorre Christ Iesus our Sauiour, and reiect the new testa∣ment, 3 The aemblies of Mahomiss, as Persians, Turks, Moores, &c. whch professe also after their manner, that Alkoran; Azoar. 4. one true God of whom Mo¦ses and the prophets wrote, and acknowledge Azoar. 2. &. 4 &, 11. Chrst to be a Prohet sent of God, yea and the breath or sirit of God yet beleeu hey not that he is Azar, 12. &c, God, or the Azoar. 19:20. sonne of God, or sauiour of the world, but follow the lies and fablies of their false prophet Mahomet. 4. Finally the chur∣ches or assemblies of false Christans, which professe God and i Sonne Christ, into whose name they are baptised; but by ther works doe deny him, and by their errors and heresies, doe overthrow the truth of reli¦on. 9. The 1 thre sorts, Pgans, Iewes, and Mahometists, becase of thei so open and manifest dny all of Christ and saluation by him, are gene∣rally
generally of Christians reputed as no Churches, the later are reuted no true but false churchs, and so also doe they esteem of true Christians, and one of another Herevpon is continuall controuersie beween true nd and false chrstians, which is the true church, and how it ay be know∣en. 10. To help the weak and doubtfull in this case, I will so truely and plainly as by the grace of God I can, describe the tre Church, which in the holy scrtures is called the Congregation and churh Nhe, 13.1 1 Tim. 3.5, 14, of God, con∣sisting of godly and holy peole named 1 Cor, 1 2. Psal, 89, 5. & 149.1, Saints; opposed to the wicked or Psal. 26.5 malignant churchs, the Re, 2, 9. Synagoues of Satan. 11. The true church is a people 1 Pet, 2, 9, called of God by 2 Ths, , 14, the Gospell, Ioh, 17, 6, 9, 14. and. 15, 19, from the world, vnto the 1 Cor. 1, 9, communion or fellowshi of his sonne Iesus Chrst, in whome they are Eph, .21.22. coupled and built togither. to be the habi∣tation of God by the spirit 12 The church is said to be a people, 1 Pet, 2 9. nation or generation, because it consisteth of many persons, or of a mltitude little or great: for though a particular Christian is called, and of the church; yet no man is a church or congrgation, 13. It is a people called; Eph, 41 Heb. 9.15, because every concourse or assemblie is not a true church: none of themselues can come vnto this estate, vnlesse they be Rom: 9.11, 12, 24. Sng. 1.3, called or drawen therevnto: and they are sayd to be called of God, because he Iob. 6:44: onely calleth and draweth men vnto Christ with a 2 Tim. 1:9 holy calling; and addeth them Act. 2.47. to his church, 2 Chro. 30.6 10.12. Rom. 8 30. no humane power or autho¦rity s able to doe it, 14. The Gospel 2 Thes. 2 14. noted to be the the meanes of our calling, he maketh knowen vnto his people outwardly by his 2 Cor. 5.19. word Act. 5.20 spoken and Iob. 20.31. writ∣ten, and inwardly by Nehem. 9.20. 1 Cor. 2 10.1. his holy spirit: and thus the Church are all Iob. 6 45. the taught of God. 15. The state out of which the Church is caled, is sayd to be out of or from the Iob 5.1. , & 17, 6, 9. world, whereby is meant, first Satan the Ih. 12.31, Prince of this world, from whose power they are Act. 26:18, turned vnto God; secondly, the wicked people of the world, called the 1 Ioh. 3.10. children of the Diuill, from whose communion and fellowshp Exod. 34 15, Prou. 15.8. Psal 16.4. Eh. 5, 11, 2 Cor. 6.17. in their religion, and all other wicked ac∣tions, we must be separated, thirdly, the corruption of nature in our selues, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Ioh 2.16. all which are of the world. and whch we must Rom 7.15. Iude. 23. hate and Gal. 6, 14. crucifie, &
so turne and become Mat. 18, 3. like little children, euen borne agayn, that we may see the kingdome of GodIoh 3.3, 16. The estate wherevnto God called his church in this life, is gene∣rally 1. Cor. 1.9. to the communion (or fellowhsip) of his sonne Iesus Christ, as being their onely mediator and Sauiour, the Prophet Priest and King of the church; which they beleeung and professing, are alo made partakers (in a proportion and in their measure) of these three offices with him 17. Iesus Christ is the Deut, 18.15, 18. Prophet rased vp of God vnto his people to teach them all that God commanded him which also he did, both by Act. 3.22.26. Mat. 5, 2, &, himselfe, and by the Mnistery of his seruants Ioh, 13, 20. sent of him. And as Col, 2.3. all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge are hid in him, so him the church mst Mat. 17, 5. hear; for all Iohn 3.13. &. 6.68 Reu 5.1, 5 heauenly wisdome and knowledge is to be learned of him; and every person which shall not hear this Prophet, Act, 3 23. shall be destroyed out of the people. 18, This Prophet call office of Christ, he hath communicated with the church, by giuing Psal, 147 19, 20 Isa. 59, 21. Rom 15.4. to the same his word for their instruction and comfort, and Iam. 1.21. graffing the same within them, his spirit also as an 1 Ioh, 2.20.27. Anoynting to teach them all things giuing Ep 4.8.11. 1 Cor. 12, 28. gifts also, or ministers, to o∣pen and apply the same vnto their sowles, likewise power and freedome by Isa. 43 10. witnes 2 Cor. 4, 13. profession and Mat, 28, 20 practise, to Phil, 3.16, hold forth that word of life as lights in the world: thereby to Act. 8.4, preach vnto others the fath of Christ, to 1 Thes. 5, 11. edfy and build vp one another dayly therein, to Heb. 10.24. prouoke vnto loue and to good works. to Rom. 15, 14, admonish and Leu. 19, 17. reprehend for evill and iniquity; to Luk. 17, 3. forgiue and 1 Thes 4.18 comfort one another in the bowels of Christ, whose word therefore all ought to labour that it may dwel plen∣teously in them, that if any man speak, it may be 1. Pet, 4.11. as the words of Gd.Col. 3.16 19. Iesus the son of God, is also the Heb, 4, 14, 20, great high priest or Sacrificer of the Church▪ by whose Rom. , 19, obedience, and sacrifice or oblation of Heb, 10.5, 10, hs own body and blood, the church is clensed 1 Ioh, 1, 7. from all sinn, and Rom, 5.10, reconci∣led to God: by whose intercession the church, with the holy actions & oblations of the same, are Heb. , 25, nd 9.24.  13.15, Reu, 8.3 4. accepted of God, and made heires of bles∣sing. 20. And this his Prestly office, is  imparted to his church, as they
haue not onely interest in his Isa 53 5. Rom. 5.8.10 death and suffrings whereby they are re∣conciled to God, but also are themselues made a 1 Pet. 2.5. holy priesthood, to offer vp spirituall sacriices acceptable to God by him: giuing vp Rom. 12.1. their own bodies a liuing sacrifice; Col 3.5. mortifying their members whch are on earth and Gal 5.24, crucifyng the flesh with th affections and lsts; offring vp Psal. 51, 17, con∣trite and broken hrts, with Heb. 13.15. sacrifices of praise confesing to his name; and praying not oly every man for himself, but Eph. 6.18. one for another, Heb. 13.16. doing good and dstributing to the necesities of the Saincts, 2. Tim. 2.3.9, suffring afflction for the Gospell and fynally if they be called therevnto, pow∣ring out the r soules vnto Heb. 12.4, 2. Tim 4.6. death fr the truthes sake. 21. The Lord Iesus Christ, is also the Mat. 2, 6. gouernour and Ioh 12 15. king ouer Sion Gods hly mount, and sitteth at his Fathers right hand and 1 Cor. 15, 2. reig∣neth till all his enimies be made his footstool, being Isa 33, 22. a King, iudge, and lawgiur, to hs people, Mat. 28, 20, commanding and ruling them by his word and spirit, Psal. 72. jdging them in iustice and equty, preseruing and defendng them by his almighty power, Ioh. 10, 28 & 1.33, Reu. 19 11.21. from all their enimies. 22. And this his kingly office he so communicateth with hs church; as they are by him presered and defended from all aduersarie Pwer, freed from the dominion Rom 6 14, of sinne and tyrannie of 1 Ioh, 5, 18. Rom. 16, 20. Satan from sub∣iection to 1, Ih 5, 4 the world, and seruitude 1. Cor. 7 23, vnto men: and restored to the ioyfull librty of the Chldren of God, 1, Cor. 3 2. the world and all things in it made theirs: that howsoeuer they haue still to 1 Pet. 5, 8.9. combate with the Diuill to Eph 6 12. wratel against principallities & powers: to suffer Iob. 11 19 & 16.33. hatred & afflicti¦on of the world; an to warr with the fleshly lusts, 1 Pet, 2.11. which fight against the sol: yet neither Rom. 8, 38, 39, deah, nor life, nor Angels, nor principallities, nor power, nor, things present nor things to come nor, heigth nor depth, nor any other creatre, shalbe able to separate them from the loue of God which is in Christ Iesus our Lord; who hath Reu. 1 6. made them Kngs and Priss vnto God even his father, and they shall Reu 5, 10, reign on the earth, till huin sered here ther time, they come to 2. Ti. 2 12. Ih. 17.24 1, Ths. 4.17 reign with him in glor, in he heauens for euer 2. Vnto the participation of these promises and heauenly graces, are lat. 28.19. Rom, 16, 26. all peoles ruoked by the Gospell reached; and such as obey the clng of Gd, an come vnto Chrst, are vnited vnto him ther head and edatr, from whom proceedeth the Iustification and sanctificatio of te Churc.
24. Iustification is the partaking of Christs Phil, 3 9, justce or righteousnes, n his fulfilling and obeyin Rom, 5.19, the law of God, and dschargng 1 Ih. 1, 7, all ou depts and trespasses by his death; so freeing vs Gal, 3, 13, from the curse, and set∣ing vs in full fauour Rom. 5, 10, with God and vnder his Gal. 3, 9.14, blesng: which righ∣teousnesse of Christs, is fully made ours, and impted to vs Rom, 3.25, 30. and 4.4, 25. by faith for our justification, 25. Sanctification is the partakng of Christs holynes by being Rom. 6, 5. graf∣fed with him to the similltude of his death and resurrection; whereby the corruption of nature or vers, 6, old man in vs, becometh crucified and vers, 4. buried with him; and the Eph. 4.22, 24. Col. 3.10. new man or image of God is put on and re¦newed dayly in a holy conuersation. 26. Hthrto of the Churches union and communion with Christ her head: now followeth the union of the churches member, one with ano∣ther: which is their Eph. 2, 21. Rom, 12, 4, 5. couling togither as one body by the communi∣on of one and the same 1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 11, 12.13. Eph. 4.4 5, 15.16. spirit, faith, and loue, 27. The vnion of the members one with another is to be considered generally or totally; and particularly. Generally as the chrch is cal∣led vniuersall or caholik, comprehending the Eph, 3, 15, whole family of God in heauen and in earth, and the 1 Pet. 5, 9, fraternity or brotherhood of all Christi∣ans which are n the world: in whome there is but Eph, 4, 5. one faith, in 1 Cor. 8, 6, &, 12.4, 5, &c. Eph, 2, 8, &, 4.4, 5, 6, one and the same God by that one Lord Iess Christ, throuh one Sprit. Thus haue they all one Father which is God; one Gal. 4, 26, mother, Ierusalem which is aboue, and by the mediation of Chrst are all made Ioh, 17, 21. one, bap∣tised by one spirit into Cor, 11, 13. one body, and al made to drink into one spirit. 28 More Particularly, they that are called of God, and members o he Church vniversall, are vnited and gathered into many 1 Cor. 14 33, churches or congregatiōs, in Reu: 1.11 several cities & countres: every of which churches being Act. 2 41 4:47. and. 5.13. Heb, 10.25, joyned togither in the profession and practise of the Gospel of Christ, haue his 1, Cor, 5, 4, power and Mat. 18, 20, presence with them, and is to conuene or come 1 Cor. 11, 2, 33 &. 54 togither in one for the worshp of God, and per∣formance of publick duties 29. Whatsoeuer promise or blessing of God, is bestowed on the church on earth generally considered: the same may be apprehended & injoyed by every particular church, (though not in like measure by all:
as the Exo. 20, 24. Mat, 18, 20, Isa, 4.5, promises generall, and examples particular of the church, 1, Cor, 3.22, 23, & .7, 30. &c, Reu, 2. &. 3. in Corinth, and others mentioned in the scrpture, doe confirme. 30. The Testament of Christ sheweth vs no Prouintiall, Nationall, Emerial, or other lke Church, hauing seuerall meetings or aemblies, and special Pastors ouer the same: neither, since th Apostles Prophets & vangelists were taken from this world, are there any other lawful Bis∣hops or Church-gouernours, then the Bishops or Overseers Act, 20, 17.28, Phil, 1, , , Pt. 5, 1, 3. of the par∣ticular churches; neyther euer was ther other lawful Head, Lord, or Lords spirituall, of the Church, then Col. , 8. 1 Cor, 8, 6, &, 12, 5. Iesus Chrst alone. 31 Vnto the chrch are to be admitted, all vnto whome the coue∣nant and promise of God doth apperteyn; and they are so many Act, 2, 3 as the Lord our God shall call; and all those are called (in the iudgment of man,) which hauing Rom, 10, 17. Eph. 1, 13, heard the word of God, doe professe At, 2, 38.41, &, 8, 37, repentance from dead works, and faith in God, by Iesus Christ the alone Sa∣uiour of he world, and promise Exod, 19, 5, 8. 2, Chron, 34, 1, 12, Luk. , 17, Ioh, 1, 26. Rom, 1, 5. Mic 4, 5. obedience to the word, through the holy Ghost the sanctifier of the elect. Such of Gal. 3, 2, all sorts and estates of people in the world, are with their Gen, 17, 7, 1 Cor, 7, 14, seed to be receiued into, and nou∣rished n the church; their ignorance being holpen by Colos. 1, 28. &, 3, 16, instruction, their weaknes Rom, 15. , &c. 1 Gal, 6, 1, Leuit, 19, 17, borne by lenity, their faults corrected i with loue and meeknes; and their feeble consciences , Thes, 5, 14. comforted with the promises of God. 3. Out of the Chrch are Mar, , 7, 2 Cor, 6, 14 &c Reu, 2, 27. & 22, 15, Isa. 31, 8, 9 Zach, 14, 21, all sch to be kept, as are profane, world¦ly and wicked, vntill they be called of God vnto repentance & faith in his promise: and out of it are to be cast all such as Mat. 18.17, 1, Cor, 5, 5 12.13, Tit, 3 10, Num, 15, 30, 31. sinne against the law of Go, by errour or corruption, in doctrine or conuersation; and will not by pruate or publick admonistion, be reclaymed and amended 33; Every particular church or congregation throughout the world haung equall interest Ioh. 17.0, &c. in Christ, and in his 1, Cor, 14, 36, word or couenant: conse∣quently hae equall power. and ought to haue a lke care; to practise Mat, 28.19.20, all the commandements and ordinances of the Lord, standing fast in the lberty where with Gal, 5, Christ hath made them free. 34, Every one that would be saued, ought to joyne himself vnto some
particular Song, 1, 6, Act, 2, 41, 47 Deut, , 5, &c. Exod, 20.24. church, where Gods name is se, and knowen, and called vp∣on: that in and with the same, he may grow vp in the fath, and loue of Christ vnto saluation. 35. Although the church consisteth onely of sch as are called, yet these are of two sorts, some outwardly onely and for a tyme, which though they be in the church yet are they not indeed , 19.1 Mat. 2.14. of the Church; o∣thersome called also inwardly effectually and for ever. So that the chur∣ches on earth, haue Cor, 10.5, &c Act. 20.30. many hypocrites and reprobates for members of them: whose secret sinns, defile Gal. 6.3 4.5 themselues alone. Howbeit the : Tim. .19. Lord knoweth them that are his; & a true Christian may by the word  spirit of the Lord, and fruites of his faith, haue Rom. 8.16. 2 Cor. 13.5 1. Ioh. 3 14.19. &c. assurance that himself is the Lords; of others, he is for their outward good profession and conversa∣tion which he seeth, to hope and judge Ma. 22.39.1. Cor. 13, 5.7. as of himself, leauin the finall doom and iudgment, vntill the Lord come, 1. Cor. 4, 5, who will lhten things that are hid in darknes and make the counsels of the harts manifest; and will reward every man Ru, 22, 12. according as his works shalbe 36, The best churches on eart are alwayes subiect Act, 20, 30, 2 Pet, 2, , 2, 1 Cor, 11, 19, to haue open & greeuous sinas of all sorts, break out in them: all which niquitie mst speedily be redressed, and euery church purged by Reu, 2, 16, 22, repentance or 1 Cor, 5, 1, 2, 13. cas∣ting out of the impenitent; least Iosh, 22, 18. wrath doe come on all the congre∣gation, 37. For churches by sinning and impenitencie therein, may forfeyt their Isa, 24.5, 6 couenant, and be Eze, 23.18. forsaken of God; and for their adulteries by Ier. 3 8, duorced from Christ, and so Reu. 18, 4, left of his people, the Reu 2, 5. candlestick be∣ing remoued out of the place. 38, By this which hath been sayd, may appear, that euery people cal¦led of God into couenant and communion, with Christ, and one with an¦other, and, so walking, though with much weaknes, ignorance and day∣ly syn; is to be esteemed a true church of God: but they that are not so called and come into couenant with the Lord, howsoeuer they may pro¦fesse many excellent truthes, yet want they the mayne essentiall thing which, makes a true church. 39, A church thus hauing the essence or being: by refrence vnto or coniunction with Christ, which is Eph.  32. 1 Cor 6, 17, a secret and spirituall thing; cannot now as it is a church, properly be seen with carnall eye Whereas then the church is sayd to be visible, it is figuratiuely spoken, and after a sort; to weet so farr as by a peoples profession and conuersation seen or heard, men may discerne and iudge, by the rules of Gods word
40. As Christ the head and sauiour of his body, cannot be found or knowen by the wit or wisdom of man, Mat, 11, 25.27, Gal. 1, 15, 16, 1 Cor, 2.7, 8, but by the revelation of God: so the Church which is his body kingdome and spowse, caot be dis∣cerned by naturall or humane skill, Sng, 1.6, 1 Cor 2, 10, 11. but by the manifestation of God a∣lone through his word and spirit. 41, Hence it is that the true churches of God, are both contemned and condemned of the world as Act, 24, 5, 14, & 28.22. heretiks, schismatiks, sedetious, &c. when the false antichrstian assemblies are highly honoured and regar∣ded. For they whch vnderstand not the word of God, (whch natu∣ral men 1 Cor 2, 14, doe not,) nor haue the spirit of God, (which naturall men haue not) how should they rightly judge of, or discerne the Church of God?Iude, vers. 19. 42. And Satan to deceiue the simple, doth Reu, 17, 4 &, 18. Prou 7.14.16. deck his synagogues with many ornaments of the church of Christ, as Ier. 18.18, 1. King. 22, 24, 2 King 12, 28, 33, the preaching of the word, prayers, sacraments discipline &c; he procureth them also honour amplitude and prosperity: when from the true church oftimes he taketh not onely outward peace and glory; but bereaueth the same of Christs Dan. 11, 31, Lam. 1.4 &c. publicke ministery of the word and sacraments; by, persecuting, impri∣soning, banishing and killing Act: 12:2, 3: the officers of the Church, and Act: 8:1: Heb: 1:37:38. scatte∣ting the members. 43. Yet is not Satans synagogue for all the pomp thereof, a church of God; because it inioyeth and useth not his word and holy things aright according to his Iohn, 3, 27, Heb, 5 4. heauenly ordinance, Neyther can the true churches be spoiled or depriued 2, Tim, 2:9, of the word of God, which is Iam, 1:21: graffed in them, and able to saue their sowles, is 1 Pet, 1:23:25. seed immortall and endureth for ever: but in the mids of their many afflictions, they both Phi. 2.16. hold forth that word of life, as lights vnto the world; and by the same doe 1 The, 5.11: edify and comfort one another, in the faith and feare of God; whose power and Mat 18.20. presence they haue with them in all estates and places. 44 So to conclude, a true church is a sacred communiallty, consoci∣ate and knit togither into a mistical body, whose head Colos, 1.18. is Christ; whose members, christians Gal. 3.28: of any nation or condition; whose soul is the Deut. 32, 47. Ioh, 5.25, word and whose spirit is Gal. 4.6.1. Cor, 2, 12, the spirit of the liuing God: who gathereth togither Eze, 37, 1, 2, 6.10, &c. dry desolate bones, layeth synewes on them, makes flesh to grow, and couereth them with skin, and putteth breath in them that they may liue, and stand vpon their feet an exceeding great army Vnto him for all his blessings, be praise in his churches throughout all generations; Amen & Amen.
ARGVMENTS Disprouing the present estate and constitution of the CHVRCH of ENGLAND EVery true Church, is the body of Christ, and hath him for the head thereof: For t is wrtten, (God) hath appoynted him ouer all hngs the head of the church which is his body Eph, 1, 22, 23 and agayn, to the church of Corinth it is sayd, y are the bdy of Christ 1 Cor, 12, 27. But the church of England, is not the body of Christ, neyther hath him for the had thereof. Because, it wa first constituted as now it standeth, of the members of Antichrist; namely the idolatrous Papsts, which openly pro¦fessed Antichristian sme in Q. Maries dayes, haing Reu 9, 11 Abadden the Pope for their head; and spilled much christian blood, that they might main∣teyn their Romish abominations. Who all (except some few that of themselues refused,) were at the beginning of Q. Elisabeths reign, rece∣ued into the body of the church, and so haue continued, they and their seed euer since. Yet did they not then, enter in by repentance and faith in Christ, (which two things Heb, 6, 1, Mar. 1.15, are the beginning and foundation of the kingdome of God,) but by the commandement of the Magistrate, were compelled vnto the Church, sacraments, ministery &c. which then were by law establshed and euer since continewed. Now the Magistrates law, cannot work faith in any; seing faith is the Eph. 2.8, gift of God, and by Rom. 10, 17. his word onely is wrought in mans hart So that the Magistrate though he outh to abolish idolatre, and set vp Gods true worship, to suppresse all errours, and cause the truth to be taught, yet cannot he constreyn men to ioyne vnto the church, but they must doe it Psa 110, 3 Act, 2, 41, Gen. 9, 27. willigly and gladly, the Lord perswading them herevnto. And these, (of whome we speak) not being perswaded by the Lord and his word, but (s the worldly mul¦titude alway is,) beng ready to receiue any religion the prince wold establish, rather then they would suffer persecution, wherein that their popish estate, the body of Antichrist, yet then compelled and vnted vn¦to this church. Agayn, not onely those that were popishly  and superstitious; but such also as were profane and irreligous, atheists, blas∣phemers, whoremongers, theeues, drunkards, witches, and all other vn∣godly persons, of which then were and still are too too many in the land these al, though by reason of their wicked and miserable estate, hey wr¦limmes of Satan, and (as the scripture calleth such,) children 1 Ioh 3, 10 Ioh. 8, 44, of the Di∣uill, were yet receiued, into the Church likeweise, they and heir seed & so continew; as the state of that Church plainely sheweth. For een to this day, profane people, mockers and contemners of religion, tha blas∣phem God and his holy name even in the streets as they walk; such as cal themselues the donned crew, Familists, Athests, and all other sorts of miscreants and wicked liuers, are members of the Church of Enland,
vnited with the body and partakers of the sacraments, and other holy actons of the same. Now these children of wrath, this sinnfull generation, cannot possibly be members of the body of Christ, nor haue him for their head, seing they are not partakers of his life and spirit, nor called to his faith, neither ad∣mitteth he any such vnto him vntil they repent; he hath no cōcord 2 Cor, 6 15. with Belial, therefore not with the children of Belial: the members of his glo¦rious body must not be the dead, stnking, and abominable members of Satan Light and darknes, heauen and hel, will as soon be vnited togi∣ther. Neyther will it be yenough to say that some are affected to re∣liion, are of better life, and conuersation &c. and that for their sakes, the residew are sanctfied, and may be ioyned vnto, and reputed Christs body and Church: for they that professe more sincerity, yet are not come to a true rofesion of the Gospell, or renoncing of Idolatrie; but after ther false and popish manner, worship God with the rest, remayning one body one Church with them. Now we are taught of God that the religious are so farr from sanctifying the wicked, as contrariweise the wicked doe pollute them, whatsoeuer the vnclean person toucheth sayth the Lord,) Num. 19.22.2 Cor 6.17.18. shalbe vnclean, and the person which toucheth him shalbe vncleane:  wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selues, and touch no vnclane thing, and I will receiue you, and I will be a Father vnto you and ye shalbe my sonns and daughters, sayth the Lord almighty. So then the re¦ligious and well affected people must separate from the rest, if they would be acknowledged of God for his and not think by their holynes, to sanctify the profane. Agayn, it is as easy to make peace & agreement between Christ & the Diuil, as between Christ and such open obstinate synners, the 1 Ioh 3.10 children of the Diuill; yea it ouerturneth at once the first promise of saluation made by God, and so the uery ground of Christian religion. For when God first promised redemption to mankind; it was by Christ the Gen 3.15 seed of the woman that should crush the serpents head, who in due time appeared for this purpose, that he might 1 Ih. 3, 8. Heb 2, 14. loose the works of the Diuill; & destroy and abolish him And as then the Lord put enmity between Christ and the serpent so did he also between him and the serpents Gen. 3, 15 seed that is wcked men, which being Ioh, 8, 44 children of the Diuill would take the Diuls part to hate and kill Christ, and root out his chldren and re∣liion: accrding to whch decree and word of his Father, or Lord Ie∣sus set himselfe not onely aganst the Serpent. but against sch wicked men also, as would not be turned from their impietie; therefore he sayth by his prohets Psa, 139; 21, 22. De not I hate them that hate thee ô Lor? &c, I hate thm with an vnfeighned hatred, as they were myn vtter enemies. I hate the assembly of eil doers, and company not with the wicked; Psa 26, 5 Betims wil I destroy all the wicked of th land, that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord; Psa. 101 8 Zach, 11, 8. Three shepheards I cut of in one moneth, and my sowl loa¦thed
loathed them, and their sowl abhorred me: with many such like speeches, throughout the scriptures; whereby Christ shewed how farr he was and would be, from being head vnto such wretches, or any way admitting them vnto his body, or the communion of hs Church. And for his arch-enemy the Romane Antichrist and his adherents, the Lord Iesus Faith∣full and true that iudgeth and warreth righteously, Reu 19.11.14. he with his heauen∣ly warriours after him, fighteth with that Beast, and with the kings of the earth that make battel against him; and is so farr from peace with them, as he giueth vnto all the fowles of heauen for to eat, ver. 18. the flesh of the Kings & hie captayns, the flesh of mighty men, and of horses and those that sit on them, the flesh of all freemen and bondmen, of small and great; and casteth ver, 20. the beast into the lake of fyre. By this may appear that Christ is no head of such Antichristians, nor of any other profane wicked worldlings; seing his spi¦rith giues them not life and motion, but they are caried by the spirit of Satan that possesseth them; and warred against with the sword that com¦meth out of Christs mouth neyther can they be knit vnto him by ioynts or bands; as Col 2, 19. al his body and members thereof ar: & consequently that the Popish and profane multitude of the Realme of England, which at Q. Maries death, were made and esteemed a Church; and they and their seed euer since without separation so continewing; and at this day al the notorious wicked stll commingled with the rest; that this Church can∣not be sayd to haue Christ for the head, neyther is it his body. Therefore the Church of England, is not the true Church of God. EVery true Church of God, hath Christ for the mediator and Aduocate of the same. For it is written 1 Tim 2, 5 there is one God, & on mediator between God & man, which is the man Christ Iesus; and 1 Ioh. 2, 1 if any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the iust. Neyther is there saluation in any other; for among men there is giuen no other name vnder hea∣ven, whereby we must be saued, Act. 4.12. But the Church of England hath not Christ for the mediator and Advocate of the same, Because, Christ is not Mediator of any other couenant or te∣stament, then that which God promised by his prophits to make with the house of Israel, nor of any other people, then of such as are vnder that couenant promised, which was g that he would put his law in their inward parts (or mind) and write it in their harts, and be would be their God, and they should be his people, and that Ier 31, 3 Heb. 8, 10. he would forgiue their iniquity, and remember their sinns no more. Of this new testament or couenant, established vpon ver, 34. better promises then was the old, is Christ the Mediator, (as the Apostle Heb, 8, 6. teacheth) and not of any other humane or profane couenant,Heb 9, 15. made by or among the sonns of Adam. Now that the Church of England, (as it is publickly and generally constituted,) is not as yet come vnder this covenant, may appear by the articular conditions of the same. First, let the exceeding profanenes and irreligi∣on
irreligion that is among them, the open contempt of God, blaspheming of hs name, despising of his word, and innumerable wicked acts, with∣out fear or shame committed, besides the idolatrous false worship per∣formed by all in their publick assemblies, according to their stinted po∣pish leitoargie, learned and receiued from the Romane Antichrist: let these (I say) and the like, speake to euery christian conscience, whither Gods law be written in the mind or inward parts of such, which is one Ier 31, 33 part of the coenant, whereof Christ is Mediator; and which grace he promised by his Eze. 36, 25, 26, 27, 28, Prophets to bestow vpon his Church and people, when he shold be their God: and when the grace of God, that bringeth sal∣uation vnto all men, did appear; it Tit, 2, 11 12, taught so much. Secondly, that ths church of England, hath no promise that their sins and iniqities are forgiuen, which is Ier. 31, 3 an other part of the couenant, ap∣peareth by their impenitency in this euill estate. For the profane, scoff at repentance, and scorne all admonition, they despise wisdomes coun∣sel, and such as reproue, they turne agayne and rent them. And for the idolatries and false worship of the whole; the great iniquities in the hierarchie ministery, orders, rites, ceremonies &c, they are farr from repentāce whch wil here no reproof, nor suffer any to speak against their corruptions, but haue generally agreed and decreed such eanons in anno. 1603 See also be∣fore pag. 56 to be excom¦municated, as shall affirme any of these things to be wicked or idla∣trous; and they that would call them to repentance for their sinns, or refuse to communicate with them in these euils, are persecuted, impri∣soned, banished, and haue long suffred at their hands many calamities. And all people are forced by fayr and colourable pretenses or by threat¦ning and punishments, to walk still in these sinns. Thus want they the foundation of Heb, 6, 1. repentance from dead works, and consequently of faith towards God for without repentance there is no promise of pardon; & without promise, ther can be no faith; and without faith; no couenant or testment confirme with them or their seed, as all the scriptures shew; & if no Couenan, then also no Mediator. Thirdly, that the summe of the Couenant, (namely Heb, 8, 10 I will be their God and thy shall be my people;) is wantin also vnto these, may be seen by ther estate compared with th' Apostles doctrine, who vpon 2 Cor, 6 16. this promse, resently inferreth vers. 17. a commng out, and separation of themselues, from the world, if they would haue the Lord to receiue them. Which se∣paration from the vngodly, as it was not at the As in the former ar∣gument is shewed first constituting of this Church obserued, so vnto this day it is resisted, and pleaded against, and the holy scriptures vnsufferable abused to mayteyn a confuse mixed mul¦titude of all sorts of people to be a true church. But, Christ is no Medi∣ator for such a mixture, as himself sayd to his Father Ioh. 17, 9 16. I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast giuen me for thy are thin; and they are not of the world, as I am not of the world. Fourthly the Church of England is not vnder this coenan, because e¦very
euery couenant is made vpon conditions wllingly agreed and assented vnto on both parties, as was in that couenant Exo. 19. Deut. 26, 1, 18. made between God and the Israeltes of old. For God being a sirit, must be couenanted wth & worshipped in 1 Cor 6, 17 Ioh. 4.24, spirit, he requireth the hart and minde, which if it be not freely giuen him, all relgion is in vayn. But this harty and willing submission Psa 110.3 foretold to be, and Acts, 41, seen in Gods people heretofore, was not seen in this Church, which was by law of man compelled, not by loue of Christ constreyned to enter into this communion and religion, at the beginning of Q Elis reign, as in the former argument is shewed. Such complusion vnto religion, where God perswadeth not the hart, ma¦keth men hypocrites, not true christians: which not onely Gods word, but even lght of reason teacheth, as Themistius a Philosoher acknow∣ledged, when he sayd of state professors, that follow the Emperours re∣ligions, that Non De∣um sed, our puram col∣uisse Socrat hist. eccles l 3. c 1. they worship not God, but the purple robe, that is the autho∣rity and persons of Prnces. Moreouer the church of England hath not Christ for their Mediator, because they cannot come vnto God by him, nor haue assurance by faith that he maketh intercession for them; for that they offer vnto God, a worship or seruice which themselues haue made and taken by imtati∣on out of Antchrists Massebook; which Leitrgie or Diuine seruce, ha∣uing in it also many erroneous, superstitious and idolatrous ordiances, rites, and ceremonies,) being not required of God, nor warrantable by Christs testament; they read out of their book dayly in ther asemblies, and offer or obtrude t vpon God. By meanes whereof they also extin∣guish the true way of calling vpon God, by the help of his sprit, (as the Apostle Rom, 8, 26. teacheth; and bring in a fleshly and dead kind of seruice, rea∣ding other mens words instead of their own praying and calling on the name of the Lord. Which humane devise, is contrary to the second com¦mandement, that forbiddeth vs to make or submit vnto any similitude or likenes of any thing in heauen,Exod. 20, earth or vnder the earth, in matters con∣cerning the worshp of God. And it, being against the old couenant or testament, which Christ hath confirmed vnto Mat, 5.17.18 19 euery od and ; a∣gainst the new testament also, which calleth vs vnto a worship of God, Ioh. 4.24 Phil. 1.3, in spirit and truth: hath no promise to be sanctified by Christs Medati∣on, who sanctifieth no idols, nor idol seruice or false worshi, but con∣trariweise hath testified, Psal 16.4 their offrings of blood, will I not offer, nor by make mention of their names with my lipps. For asmuch then, as the peo∣ple which worshippeth, is not the called, iustified, sanctfied peple of Gd; but an vnlawfull cmmixture  fall sorts of ersns, and foras∣much as the worship it self which they read with and before he holy bible, and thrust vpon God whither he like it or not, is a false dead and vayne inuented worship of their own, not commanded of God not iustifiable by his word: it cannot be by the doctrine of the scripture or a any promses therein, that Christ should be Mediator for such worship
or worshipprs, or put any Rev. 8.3, odours vnto such prayers. Therfore the church of England is not the true church of God. EVery true church of God, hath Christ for the Prophet of the same For of  it is written, I will raise them vp a Prophet from among thir bre∣thren  &c. and every person which shal not hear that Prophet shalbe deser¦ed  the people. Dut, 18.18. Act, 3 23. But th hurch of England hath not Christ for the Prophet of the same. Be∣cause it hath neyther himself in his own person, to teach them, (for he is now in heaen, and there must be Act 3, 21. vntill the time that all things be restored;) neyther hath it his appoynted ordinane of teaching by Rom 12.6 7 pro∣phesie or office; which if it had, Christ were the Prophet of the same, as himself sayd Ioh 13.20 if I send any, he that receiueth him receiueth me. The church of England hth not Christs ordinance of prophesie without office; for it is vnknowen, vnpractised, and vnsufferable among them, for priuate men to preach in their aemblies, they must be ministers allowed by the Or∣dinary, els it is punishable by the law of their church, though by the law of Christ, all men may prophesie in his church, which is to speake to e∣difying, to exhortation and to comfort, and all men are exhorted to co∣uet this mre then other spirituall gifts. 1. Cor. 14 vers. 31.3.1.39, Ney∣ther hath the chrch of England Christs appoynted officers to teach, which are set down in scripture to be these, Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists Pastors, and Teachers, Ephe 4.11. (Of which the first three serued for the first publishing of the gspel throughout the world;See for this point of the ministery of Englād, an other trea∣tise purpose¦ly handling this argu∣ment: inti∣led Reasōs &c. shew∣ing that it is not law¦ful to hear the Minis∣tery of En¦gland. the latter two con∣tinue stll vnto the worlds end,) but in stead of these it hath the hierar∣chie and ministery of Antichrist to teach the same; namely Metropoli∣tan Archbishops, Lord Bishps, Deanes &c. Priests; and Deacons; which is none of Christs Ministery, eyther in name, office, calling, administra∣tion or mayntenance, but the very ministery of the man of sinne as he left it in the land, and as is to be seen at this day in Rome and other his dominions, and in the lawes and canons of the popish church, wher ar all the offices that now be in England. Thus hauing not the ministery gi∣uen of Christ, but a different ministery giuen of Antichrist, it followeth also by proportion from Christs words, saying he that receiueth him (that I send) Ioh 13, 20 receiueth me, and he that receiueth me, receiueth him that sent me: that the church of England receiuing such as Antichrist the Pope did send hath receiued Antichrist himselfe, and so hath intertayned him for their Pro∣phet and not Christ. Now where it is obiected, that there are many excellent truthes pub∣likly taught in this church and by this ministery of England; it is answered that is not yenough vnlesse it were taught in and according to the ordinance of God. For false Prophets teach much truth, as is to be seen among Papists, Anabaptists, Arians, and other like heretiks. And as the
morall good works which heathens doe, in honouring their parents and Magistrates, giuing almose, absteyning from and punishing murder, a∣dultery, theft, &c. are not inded good works, according to christian re∣ligion, because they are not done in obedience to Gods word, by persons that are called iustified and sanctified by that word, and so not done in faith, and consequently Heb 11.6 cannot please God: even so the theologicall works which Antichristians doe, in preaching the truth, praying, minis∣tring the sacraments, &c. are not indeed, works pleasing vnto God, be∣cause they are not done by persons that please him, (for alwayes the Gen 4, 4, 5Heb, 11.4. man must be accepted before his work can be;) and such persons please him not, as without his Heb, 5, 4. calling and Rom, 10, 15, sending presume to administer his holy things. It is not therefore the work, but the word of God that sanc∣tifieth the work, which we must look vnto; for as by this the vertuous heroik and religious acts of the Patrarchs and other holy men, differ from the like acts of Pagans, and infidels: so also by this, the difference i to be put between the works and administrations of tre and false Christians. And seing the ministers of England are not by Christ called and sent, (as the better sort of themselues heretofore haue confessed,) & so haue not his word to warrant their administration: whatsoeuer good doctrine they teach, it proues them no more to be true ministers, then the excellent doctrines and prophesies of the soothsayer Num. 23 Balaam, will proue him to be a true minister of God, or that the Moabites or Madia∣nites hauing him to sacrifice, prophesie and teach among them, had an ordinance or prophet of God. See Deut. 18, 10.11.14.15. &c. Agayn Christ is not the Prophet of this church, because a great part of his word and scriptures, and of the graces of his spirit, are here neuer spoken nor heard nor suffred to be vttered: and contrariweise much of mans word and writing is brought in; as Aprocrypha books made of old the Seruice and homily books made of late, in which also there be mani¦fest Thse things are more parti∣cularly ma∣nifested in other treati¦ses as Di∣cu, of the false Ch. Refut of Mr Gif∣ford. And by the Mi∣nisters thē∣selues See a¦mong other The Abrid¦gement of the book which the Ministers of Linco∣lnsh deli∣uered to his Maies∣ty, printed. 1605 errour, les contradictions to the holy scriptures, idolatrous and and supersttious doctrines, rites, ceremonses &c. taught vnto and ob∣serued, by th' priests & people, an idle & soul-murthering ministry mayn¦teyned, Chrsts spirituall graces giuen for teaching and building vp his church, quenched, with other like evils. The proof of this may be seen in their communiō book, whose Kalender alotteth what is to be read day¦ly and yerely in all their Assemblies: where many chapters of the Bi∣ble are wholly and perpetually excluded, many Apocrypha chapters read as holy scriptures. And by the written homilies, the graces and vt∣terance of Gods spirit are extinguished that mans erroneus writing may come in place. Besides this all preaching Ministers so See their own confes. before pag, 35, limitted and re¦streyned in their doctrine that they may not preach against any sinn by publick authority establshed, and if they doe, they are silenced See befor pag, 56, excom¦municated &c. this indignity and dishonour Christ will not suffer at mans hands, to haue his word and mans word matched together, his spi∣rit
spirit & truth restreyned: he wilbe Prophet alōe or not at al. as they that with the tre God and his true worship, had other Gods also, & other worships, are sayd in scripture to Is 1, , 1, 1, ▪ 13, &c. forsake the true God, and to b 2 Chro. 15 3, without him: so they that with the true Prophet and doctor Christ and his doctrine, haue other also; may rightly be sayd to haue forsaken him and to be wthout him. For when men set their thresholds by the Lords and their posts by his; they Eze 43.8 defile his holy name with their abominati∣ons, and in Mat 15.9 vayne they worship him, that teach such doctrines as be precepts of men Moreover thi Church wanteth part and communion with Christ in that propheticall office, which he hath imparted to his peole, namely power and freedom Isa. 43, 10 to witnes, 2 Cor 4.13 professe, Mat. 28.20. practise, and Phil 2, 16 hold forth the word of life, and all that Christ hath commanded; to Rom, 15, 14. admonish & Leuit, 19 17. Luk, 7.3 reproue one another for sinne and transgression, and eyther if they re∣pent to Mat, 18, 16.17. forgiue them, or if they repent not, to follow them further Ioh 17, 17 vnto the church and even to excommunication for their obstinate viola∣ting Gods law. That they haue not power or freedome to professe and practise the truth of the Gospel in these things, appeareth by their ser∣uile subiection to the hierarchie, lawes and canons which are amongst them, whereby they are restreyned from professing and practising any further truth then is by law establshed among them, but must obey & follow all that their spirituall Lords the Bishops doe inioyne them, and may not speake against or reproue any of the abominatiōs that ar in their church worship, Ministery, ceremonies &c. neyther haue power to deal according to that rule of Christ Mat. 18 15. &c, for any sinne, be it ne∣ver so horrible and manifest, but must leaue it to the censure of the Pre∣late or hi Commissarie, who at his pleasure buyeth and selleth the sins and soules of men. This bondage the people should not be in if they had and inioyned the word of God, which is Ioh 8, 32 the truth; for that truth would make them free, that they should not in this sort be 1, Cor, 7 23, seruants of men. But now not haing power to professe, much lesse to practise the truth: nor to reproue the euils that reign among them; not hauing the free vse of Gods word in priuate, nor the right and lawfull Ministery or vse ther¦of in publick; they cannot be sayd to haue Christ for their Prophet, and Therefore the Church of England, is not the true Church of God. EVery true Church of God hath Christ for the Priest and Sacrificer of the  sme, for he onely is the high Priest of our profession, and to him it was sworne, thou art a Priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedek. Heb, 3, 1, &, 5.5, 6, 10, &, 9, 11. &c. But the Church of England hath not Christ for the Priest or sacrificer of the sme. Because the gifts and sacrifices which it offreth vnto God, are not presented and offred vnto him by Christ; neyther is this church recon∣ciled
reconciled vnto God by him. And first the worship and seruice which they performe vnto God, their prayers, prayses and confesions, (which now are Christan mens Heb 13.5 Psal. 69, 30.31. sacrifices,) are not offred and sanctified by Christ, because they are false and idltrous, wherewith Christ hath no communion. For nstead of true spirtuall prayer and prayses the fruits of Gods spirit in his eole; they read a written leiturgie translated out of the Masse book: and accordng as they are stinted in the same, they speak; obsering also the many Popish ordinances, rtes, and ceremonies commanded in the same, as their holy and festivall dayes, holy eues and fasting dyes, absolutiō of sinns by their priests, confirmatiō of Baptisme by ther Prelates, profanation of the Sacraments by priate administra∣tion and howsling with them, by gossips, by idolatrous signes and ges∣tures of croe, kneeling &c. also marying by the Priest with signe of the ring, churching of womē, burial of the dead, readng curses or commi¦nations in stead of discipline, besides the sundry errours and vntruthes in that book, vayn repettions in their prayers, and the like. All which be∣ing commanded and vsed dayly by law of their church, without ground from Gods word, which approueth none of these idolatries but condem∣neth them; are not sanctified by Christ nor presented vnto God hi Fa∣ther; For he will Psa, 16.4 not offer the idol sacrifices, neyther will God accept such things as by his Exo. 20, 4 5. Lev. 18.3.4. law he teacheth all men to abhorr. Secondly; whereas the bodyes and sowles of men are also spiritual Rom 12, 1 and liing sacrifices, and the persons offred in the Church by the Minis∣tey of the Gospel, should be as the Ezek 36 38. holy flck, as the flock of Ierusalem in their solemne feasts, that so the oblation of them might be acceptable Rom, 15.16. be∣ing sanctified by the holy Ghost: the people offred in this church are a con∣fuse vnsanctified mltitude, not separated from the world, (as before in the first argument Isa 66, 20. is shewed,) and many of them so wicked, (even by the confesion of their pag, 74. own ministers, and in every honest mans con¦science,See befre pag, 2. as they neyther deseru to be layd on Gods alter, nor to be touch¦ed of any true Israelite in such respect. Yet ar they by the Priests of this church offred dayly vnto God, in their administration, and blessed in his name. Yea the precious sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ (re∣membred and reresented by 1 Cor: 11, 24.26. bread and wine at his supper,) is prosti∣tut as if it were an vnholy thing) to the prophane and wicked in this church, which being vnworthy receiuers, are verse, 27, guilty of the body and blood of Chrst as were the wretche that crucified hm. Also Baptisme which should be an ingraffing into Christ Rom 6, 3.4.5, his death buriall and resurrec¦tion, and a sgne Act 22, 16,1 Ioh, 1.7. of washing away mens sinns in his blood; is giuen to the seed of the vngodly, blasphemers, and enemies of Christ, vnto whom by no right it doth apperteyn. Which sacrilegious prophanation of the holy misteries, sheweth a manifest contempt of Christ represented in them: who as he communicateth not himselfe with such wicked persons so neyther the signes and seales of himselfe and the redemption that he
wrought for his elect. For by his suffring he consecrated them onely that are Hb 10, 14 sanctified, that by Ioh 6, 53.35, faith doe eat his flesh and drinke his lood, & the wicked which haue no portion in his death and oblation, when they participate in these seales of grace, doe but eat and drink iudgment to themselues; the ministers which so prostitute Christ vnto the teeth of his enemies, and tread vnder foot the sonne of God, if they repent not shall not escape his hand whch sayd, Heb 10.29 30. Vengeance is myne, I will repay: & the people which by an imaginary separation are or seem to be sundred from those profane, and yet communicate together in such things, doe even by that action shew that they are one body with them; for so it is written, we that are many, are one bread and one body, because we all are par∣takers of one bread. 1 Cor 10, 17. This bringing of Satans seed into the church, unto the alter of God, may further be minded as a high degree of violating the second com∣mandement, whereby all images idols and simillitudes whatsoeuer, of the Diuils or mens inuention or forming, are seuerely forbidden to bee brought into Gods howse, or vsed in his worship. Now such images or Idols, are these wicked persons. For as children are the Gen, 5, 3. images of their parents; and all fathfull people called the Deut 14.1 children of God, are Gods liuely images in Christ, whose Rō 8.29, image and simillitude they carry, him∣selfe being truely and properly the sole Col, 1.15. image of the invisible God his Father, and they all being borne a new of him, are changed 2 Cor 3.18 into the same image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, being re∣newed in knowledge after Col. 3.10 the image of him that created them so Sa∣tans children, (as wicked worldlings be called in scripture,) are his liue∣ly images, hauing lost the first image of God, Gen, 1, 27 wherein they were crea∣ted; and into the image of the Serpent are changed dayly by his spirit that ruleth in them; and him they represent in his malycious nature and actions. As it is sinne, and so esteemed, to haue images and represen∣tations, of beasts, of fowles, of fishes, &c. brought into the church and worship of God: so would and wel might it be esteemed more horrible if in any Christian congregation, there should be brought in pictures of the Diuill or other like helish representations. Yet men will not see the horror of this sinne, that the liuing images and pictures of the Serpent, even wicked and profane people, his seed and children, should be brought into the Church and worship of God, to haue part and interest in Christ and his couenant, whether he will or not; to be offred vnto God & layd vpon his alter for spiriritual sacrifices: though they be much more abominable then vnclean beasts were vnder the law, as the Act 10.11 12.28, Leuit. 11, substance or figured thing, is more then the figure and shadow. But doubtlesse God, who abhorreth all idols and religious images of humane devise; and Christ, who would not Esa 16, 4 offer the bloody sacrifices of idolaters; abhorreth this confusion of Satans images within his church neyther will the high-priest after the order of Melchisedek, offer such to his
Father, or be priest vnto them. Otherwise he should not be so faithfull in the house of God, as ws Aaron, nor the sacrifice; of the Gospel, be so holy as the shadowes of the law, which Leu. 22.19, 20. were vnblemished. Finally, all that haue Christ for their Prest, are by him to bring their sacrifices for their sinns vnto God, that so attōemēt may be made through his intercession. For every high Prest is Heb. 5.1. ordeyned for men in things perteyning to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sinnes; and every man is appoynted of God to present his sacrifice Leu 17, 5 by the Priest, who is to Leu 4, 26 make attonement for him concerning his sinne, that it may be forgiuen him. But the church of England, (in asmuch as it persisteth in sinne, and will not repent of the many transgressions dayly commit¦ted in their publick worship and aministration of holy things, refuseth reconciliation by him who is the Heb, 9, 11 high Prest of good things to come; and Heb 7.25 able perfectly to saue them that come vnto God by him. This their impenitency appeareth not onely by their perseverance in evill do¦in, notwithstanding all the amonitions and reproofs that haue soun∣ded in theyr eares these many yeares,) but aboue al, by their vngodly Ca¦nons & constitutions made by the whole representatiue chuch of Engl: and submitted vnto by the rest of the people. Whereby they publish vnto all the world, how they are hardned in their evils, that excommu∣nicate pnish and persecute all that seak against or refuse to communi∣cate with their people, prelacie, priesthood, worship, ceremonies, &c. wherein are so many sinns and idolatries. For asmuch then as the publick seruice and sacrifice of this church is idolatrous, the holy mysteries, of Christ profaned, the people vnsanctifi∣ed, and their sinns vnrepented of; there is no word or promise in scrip∣ture that Christ is the Priest or sacrificer of such worship or worship∣pers Therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of God. EVery true church of God, hath Christ for the King thereof; For of him the Father sayth Psal, 2.6. I haue set my King vpon Zion my holy, mountayn; and he must rign, till he hath put all his enemies vnder his feet, and shall sit vpō the throne of Dauid & vpon his kingdome,1 Cor, 15 24. to order it and to establish it with judgement and with justice, from henceforth even for ever, Isa. 9.7. But the church of England hath not Christ for the King thereof. first, be∣cause it hath not these officers which he hath appoynted to gouerne his, church vnder him, namely, Eph. 4, 11, 1. 1 Tim. 5.17. Pastors, Teachers, and Elders: but in stead of them it hath the hierarchie or Prelacye of Antichrist, Arch¦bishops, Lord Bishops, Chanellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, &c. who reign or tyrannize ouer the sowles of men by their vnlawfull jurisdicti∣on, ruling ouer many Churches making them constitutions and canons prescribing them words, both for prayer and doctrine; summoning, cen∣suring
censuring, excommunicating, absoluing, both priests and people, ma∣king and deposing ministers, giuing the holy Ghost excercising also ci∣vill offices in the common wealth, and carying the titles both of Christ, and of the Gods, Psa, 82.6 the Magistrates, into whose places they intrude‘ ha∣uing no warrant for their spirituall Lordships in the Testament of Christ. Secondly, because this church hath not the Lawes and sta¦tutes of Christ for to gouerne the same; for although they haue the holy Bible among them, yet are not the ordinances therein written, practi∣sed or suffred to be practised in these assemblyes. As for an instance, the way and meanes which Christ hath appoynted for repressing of sin (that enemy which his scepter alway Rom. 6, 6 &c. beateth down) namely first Mat 18.15 16, &c. priuate admontion. Secondly with witnesses, Thirdly by telling the Church, and then if the sinner be not reclaymed, casting him out or de∣liuering 1 Cor 5.4, 5.12.13 him to Satan by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, giuen to euery congregation; this holy and orderly walking, is vnknowen, this power is wanting in all these Parishes, who cannot excommunicate any person be he neuer so profane wicked or blasphemous. But contrari∣weise ll must repayr to the Bishops Chancellors or Commissaries courts, where things are handled and judged according to their own lawes and canons, and not by the rules of Christ. Thirdly, because the people of this church were and are (euen by the confession of our aduersaris) of all sorts of people, as well wicked as Godly, and sins of al sorts doe abound and reign among them that if the good lawes of the common wealth did not represe them, there would be no liuing in peace among them. Such profane worldly people. are not the subiects of Christ, his kingdome is Ioh 18.36 not of the world, ney¦ther is it Reu. 21.27. for the open wicked, but for the Mar, 1, 15 repentant and beleeuing, for the Mat, 5, 3 &c. poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the persecuted for rightious¦ne; sake not for persecuters haters & cōtemners of the truth. If thus it should be then were Christs kingdome diuided in & against it selfe, and so could Luk 11, 17 not endure & be perpetuall, as the scripture sayth Dan 7, 14 it shalbe. For both by the oracle of God, Gen 3, and by experience we learne and see there is continuall warr between the womans seed and the serpents, Christians and the Antichristians, the children of God and the children of Belial or impiety so that the hauing of such sinfull in the church, is the bane and ruine of Christs kingdome and religion. The couenant made with the howse of Dauid (on whose throne Luk 1, 32 33. Christ sitteth for euer) is an euerlasting couenāt 2 Sam, 23, 5, perfit in all poynts & sure, but the wicked shal∣be every one verse, 6, as thornes thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall touch them must be defended with yron and with the shaft of a spear: and they shall be burnt with fyre in the same place. Finally, this Church wanteth Christs power agaynst Syn, Satan, and ntichrist; if any would deal against sinne and synners, he hath no wy,
but by complaint to the Antichristian spirituall courts. (for the ciuill ma¦gistrate punisheth civilly, and not with ecclesiasticall censure, which is the power and scepter whereof we speak,) and if those courts refuse to censure the sinner (as they seldome cast out any except it be for wel do¦ing, or not appearing at their Summons,) there is no redresse of any evil among them As for ecclesiasticall matters, and the many abuses and a∣bominations that are in the church, ministery, worship, ceremonies &c. the Priests and people of the parishes are in bondage to the Prelates, in seruile subjection to theyr vngodly decrees, censures and cursing Ca∣nons; no spirituall Christian power haue they against this tyranny, but are fayn to seek to the arme of flesh, the Prince and Parliament, for re∣dresse; who if they refuse or neglect to help them; then remayn they vn∣der the Prelates Antichristian yoke still, as hath now appeared by their practise these many yeares. But if they had Christ for their King, his Ioh. 8.32 truth, his word, would make them free, he would make them also Reu. 1, 6. Kings and Priests vnto God his Father; that howsoeuer the supressing & abolishing of this vnruly hierarchie with their many abominations, is to be left vnto the Magistrate who onely hath power from God Rom. 13.3, &c to ex∣ecute this vengeance, yet every man should deliuer Ier. 51.6. his own sowl, ab∣steyning Deut. 5, 7 8.9, &c from errour, false worship, superstition, popish thraldome & all other evill whatsoeuer, though with 2 Tim 3, 12 affliction, bonds, banishment &c. and stand fast in the liberty Gal. 5, 1. wherewith Christ hath made him free, without yoke of thraldome. For he will reign in the midds Psa 110.1 of his enemies; Satan and sinne he hath subdued, as for himselfe so for all his people and subiects, whome he hath redeemed out of all Satanean and Balylonian bondage, that sinne should reign Psa 110.1 no more over them. But if they forsak this fredom, & take vpō them th' yoke of Antichrist, his ser∣uāts they ar Rom 6.14 22. to whom they obey, Which this church doing to the Anti∣christian Prelates whome they acknowledge for their spirituall Lords, re∣ceiuing and obeying their hests and canons, reteyning and nourishing such as be enemyes and rebells against Christ,Rom 6.16 and remayning in spiritu∣all bondage: cannot be sayd to haue Christ for theyr King and Lawgi∣uer, Therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of God. THE summe of all that which hath beene sayd, is this, That Church which hath not Christ for th' Head, Mediator, Prophet Priest & King of the same; hath not God his Father for God of the same: because the Father and the sonne are one. Ioh. 10.0, and whosoeuer hath not the Sonne hath not the Father, 1 Ioh. 2 23.3 Ioh, 9. But the Church of England hath not Christ for the head, Mediator, Pro¦phet, Priest or King of th' same as by the former Arguments hath ben proued. Wherefore it hath not God the Father for God of the same, and conse∣quently is not his Church.
THat church which is not the true church of Christ and of God; ought not by any true Christian to be continued or communicated with: but must be forsaken & separated from; & a true church of God sought and ioyned vnto, wher Christ and saluation by him, may vndoubtedly be had. Because we are willed to absteyn and separate from the false church, 2, Cor 6 1, 17; Reu. 18, 4 Hos 4.15. Isa. 48, 20. Ier 51.45, Zach. 2.6, 7, 1 Cor 10.20, 1, &c. We are willed also to seek and ioyne vnto a true church, Deut. 12, 5 Song. 1.6. Ier 50 4, 5. Isa, 65, 9. Psal. 26, 5.6, & 87, 2, 5 6, Act, 2, 47. But the church of Engl. is before proued not to be the true church of Christ and of God. Therefore it ought to be separated from; & a true church sought for, and ioyned to, of such as would be saued. THose Ministers which haue and execute the ministery of a fals church are not the true ministers of Christ, & consequently not to be heard or obeyed as shepheards of our sowles. Because the ministery of a false church, must needs be false also, seing the church hauing no interest in Christ, can haue no interest in a Christian ministery. Besides Christ hath giuen his mi¦nistery to his own church onely, Eph 4.11.12, 14.15, 16. 1 Cor. 12, 27, 28. See also Ioh, 10.1, 4.5, Act, 20, 28. Ioh. 21, 15, 16. But all the ministers of the church of England, haue and execute the ministery of a fals church; for so by the former argumēts that church is proued. Therefore they are not the true ministers of Christ, and consequently not to be heard or obeyed as shepheards of our soules. For the further descrying of the false ministery of this church, I referr the (good reader) to a treatise lately published intituled, Reasons and Arguments prouing that it is not lawfull to hear the Ministerie of Engl. And to an other heretofore published, called A treatise of the Mi∣nisterie of the Church of England. I will put enimitie between thee (ô Serpent) and the woman, and be¦tween thy seed and her seed: He, shall crush thy head; and thou, shalt crush his heel. Gen. 3.15. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also (Christ) himselfe likewise took part of the same: that through death he might abolish him that had the power of death, that is, the Diuil; and that he might deliuer them all which fo fear of death all their life time were subiect to bondage. Heb. 2.14:15. And there was warr in heauen: Michael and his Angels warred against the Dragon; the Dragon also warred, & his Angels; but preuailed not, neither was their place found any more in heauen And cast was the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called Diuill and Satan, that deceaueth the whole world: cast was he into the earth, and his Angels were cast with him Reu, 12.7.8, 9.
A BRIEF ANSWER TO Mr BERNARDS BOOK; INTIVLED, The Separatits Scisme. WHen the former treatise was almost finished; among o∣ther aduersaries Mr Bernard commeth forth to fight against the truth, which but a while since he would needs seem to fauour: but things not succeeding to his exspe∣tation, he hath changed his loue into hatred, And in the bitternes of his zele, he hah sent out a treatise con∣teyning Disswasions from the practise of the Gospel, which he pleaseth to call The separatists schisme, or Brownisme. Though in his book ther be little weight of reason or truth to be seen, nor any thing which may grea¦ly trouble a discreet reader, who is but meanely acquainted without cause: yet both for the stopping of the mans mouth, if it may be, who mak∣eth huy and crie after some of vs, as in his Prooeme to the reader he proclaymeth; and for help of the simple who may be offended at the truth, not discerning his frawd. I thought it needful to obserue and answer brief¦ly, the principall things by him obiected; many of which are before in this treatise, and in other books more largely refuted; and all of hem may, if need require, hereafter by some other, be particularly refelled. Herein now the Lord giue me wisdom, to discouer this adversaries falsehood; and thee (good reader) vnderstanding to discerne it. Of his PROBABILITIES, THE first meanes whereby Mr BERNARD would disswade from the truth, which he calleth Brownisme, are Probabilities or liklihoods that the way is not good: and they are in number (as himselfe hath cast them,) seuen. 1. The Novelty of it. 2. The agreement thereof with ancient schismatiks. 3. The ill meanes by which it is mayteyned, namely, by abuse of scripture & deceauable reasonning.
4. The want of approbation of the reformed Churches. 5. The condenation thereof by all their Diuines, (vidz of the church of England.) 6. Gods iudgment against it 7. The ll success it hath had. Such lkelihoods as these, the Papists heretofore with as much colour and truth, haue alleged against the church of England; heathens and e∣nemies haue in former ages obiected the lke things to the church of Christ, and Mr Ber. speaketh but that which hath been spoken before him, fulfillng the measre of his forefathers. But to the particulars. The Novlty he maketh to be in differing from all the best reformed chur∣ches in Christendome But if a Papist had to deal with him,1 Liklihood See Kelli sons Survey of the new rligin 1 bok chap, 1 5, & 2, book c. 2. he would bring those reformed churches also within the cmpasse of Novely: and then Mr Bern. would flee, (as his brethren before him haue done) to the scriptures for antiquity: as he would answer a Papist, so wll I an∣swer him; let the scriptures speak for the differences between other chur¦ches and vs. But here Mr Bern. is mute; and medleth not with ths controversie he thought belike the very name of Noveltie and of the re∣formed churches would fray the simple If it be Nouelty to differ from the reformed churches, then may he blame his own church f Engl. more then vs, seing it differeth from those chur∣ches in me and weightier poynts then we doe: yea it hateth persecuteth silēceth & excommunicateth those ministers & people, that stand vp & plead for such things as the reformed churches haue and practise. Agayn these churches haue reiected and writen against many of the Antichrsti¦an enormities that are now in England. So if it be likely, we are not in the truth because we dffer from the churches in few things; it is more likely Mr Bern. and his brethren, are not in the truth, because they differ from them in many Wherefore let him first pull the beam out of his own eye. Agayn where he standeth vpon the hard words which some of vs haue vttered of the Presbytery &c. if he had not an evill and par∣tial eye he mought haue seen many moe hard & reproachful words vsed by his right reverend Fathers, and fellow priests against the Presbytery and discipline which the reformed churches haue, and the reforming ministers of Engl. would haue. That still his weapon entreth into his own bowels. His 2 likelihood he maketh to be our agreement with ancient schisma∣tiks: yet any poynts wherein we agree with them in evill,Likelie∣hood. he nameth not much lee proueth; but referreth us to Mr Giffords paynes herein, who had long since his answer by Mr Greenwood to every particular of that his pretended consimillitude between the Donatists and vs; to which an∣swer I rferr the reader. Agayn, this obiection is such as the Papists make against the church of England for so The three cōursiōs of Engl. par 2 c. 12 s. 19 &c. N. D. compareth Protes∣nts with Donatists; and let vs see what answer the Priests of England
can make for themselues that will not as well, if not better, clear vs And to come a little neare to this or aduersary, we could pt Mr Ber. in mind of his own wayes, wherein he might see himselfe more like a schismatik then any of vs: for we openly professe our departure frm the chrch of England, as from a false church, so proued by evident gronds out of Gds word; whereas Mr Bernard holding it to be a true chrch & abding in it, yet he and a hundred with him, made not long since a pretended coenant togther; whereby they separated from the vnprea¦ching ministers, and all that hate to be reformed Yet are those reaing priests of as ood authority by the Lawes and Canons of that Church as himself, and the Conformists of farr greater esteem in this church, then the Reformists. Whether this be not a playne schisme, and Mr Bern a factious person thus to carry hmselfe in a church, let himselfe say: as also whether he be not fr this, ipso acto excommnicated, by force of ther own Canon which sayth, Constit, & Can. eccles. 1603. Can 9.Whosoeuer shall hereafter separate themselues from the Communion of Saincts as it is approued by the Apostles rules in the Church of England, and combine themselues together in a new brotherhood, accounting the Christins who are conformable to the doctrine, gouernments, rites and ceremonies of the church of England to be profane and vnmeet for them to ioyne with in Christian profession: let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the Archbishop after their repentance and publick reuocation of such their wicked errors. Into like danger doth he come by Canon. 11, and 12. Likelie∣hood.The il meanes, by which our cause is mainteyned, he makeh to be strange expositin of scripture, &c. First Mr Bern. here walketh still in the Papists steps, who obiect the like vnto the Protestants. Let an indifferent reader (Kellis, Suruey, 1. book chap, 5 say they) peruse the learnedst book of these reformers, and he shall see in them false allegations of Fa∣thers, corruptions of scriptures, fathers, and councels &c. Secdly I answer our expositions may seeme strange to such as are themselues strangers from God: but the Godly wise can discerne, to whom (if they haue read our books,) I leane the iudging of this probability. Now ths old calum¦niatiō which Satā layd vpō the Sainct, how truly Mr Brn. hath layd vp∣on vs, let his proofs shew, which are in these two particulars. First, that one of us sayth, All the truth is not taught in the Church of Egland, and to proue this, Act. 20 21. is cited. Which one of vs thus citeth Act. 20 and where; Mr Bern. nameth not. Good cause we haue to suspect his faith∣fulnes; for in his book he chargeth vs with some errors, which we hold not, as after shall appear. And he that would so iniury the whole, what may we think he wll doe for a part. I suppose therefore the party ci∣ted that scripture to proue the whole truth ought to be taught which because it may be questioned whether it be needfull at all times, there∣fore the Apostles example is brought. As for the Priests of England,
they preach not the whole truth, is proued by their dayly practise, who balk many truthes, touching the church, ministery worship, governmen &c. as all that obserue their doctrines know very well. It is proued l∣so by the lawes and canons of their church, which excommunicate ll such as shall by the truth reproue the falsehoods and abominations that are among them, as before in pag, 55. this treatise is shewed. And Mr Bern. is very silly, if he exspect any scriptures to proue what is now taught in his church. Furthermore if it be granted him, that Act. 20. were by some one of vs alleged for the purpose he pretendth: yet it is no more lke∣lihood that our cause is evill, then that his brethrens cause and plea a∣gainst vs is evill, for they without all doubt doe allege scriptures for to proue things done in Engl: which it is not posible by the scripturs for to shew, See before in this book pag. 43. &c 44. But what speak I of others Mr Bern, himsefe is fayn to vse such colours, els would the glory of his church soon fade: for in the 48, page of his book he allegeth God for wit¦nes that they are his people, 1 by giuing them his word, Psa, 147.19 20. 2 by his effectuall working thereby, Ier, 22, 22, therefore there is the voyce of the sonne of God, Ioh. 5.25, &c. If these be found and sufficient proofs, that England hath Gods word, because Israel had it, and so in the rest; then why may not men allege like Scriptures and proofs against them, say∣ing, They are stayned with their own works, and goe a whoring with their own inuentions; Psal. 106, 39. from the Prophets of Ierusalem, is hyprocrisie gone forth into all the Land, Ier. 23.15, I haue not sent these Prophets sayth the Lord: yet they ran &c. Ier. 23.21. and the like. So then Mr Bern. must ey¦ther bring better reasons for himselfe, or els he may blush to blame o∣thers for that wherein himself is more faulty then they; if they be faulty at all. The other particular which he specifieth is, that places setting forth the inuisible church &c. we bring to set forth the visible church by; as namely; 1. Pet. 2.9, 10. But Mr Bern. shewes his reader no reason at all, why that Scripture must be vnderstood of the inuisible church, as he Sayth; and it is an easie matter for him to find faults without reasō, in any mās writing. That place of Peter, (as the wise reader may perceiue,) Speaketh of and to the visible or Sensible church: for th' Apostle wrote to the visible chri∣stians, the 1 Pet, 1.1 strangers that then dwelt in Pontus Galatia, &c. and this which he speaketh to them in Chap· 2, 9.10. is as Moses of old spake to the visible church of Israel, Exod. 19:6. Againe, he mentioneth the end of their calling to this dignity, vidz. to shew forth the vertues of him that had called them out of darknes into his maruelous light; which whether it appertaynes not to the visible church, I leaue it for euery true member thereof to iudge. And such as these,4 Likeli∣hod. are the exceptions that D. Allison (to whome he referreth us,) tooke heretofore: which because they are vnworthy a Dr. of Diuinity, we haue though best to passe by, as vnwor∣thy of reply, till further occasion. The 4. likelihood is, that we haue not the approbation of any reformed chu¦rches
Churches for our cause. This is much like his first probability, before an∣swered, and seemeth to be a mayn propp to vphold the church of En∣gland, which loue to make flesh their arme. The reader may see this poynt Pag. 9. & 7, &, 51. pag. 10 & 27, &c 7, &, 51. &c thrise vrged before in this book, and Apol part 6 . 18. . 1. thrise answered. I referr him also to our Letters vnto Mr Iunius whome Mr Bern. mentioneth: & finally to the Apologie of the church of England, where themselues say, vn∣to the like obiections of the Papists, , Likly∣hood th truth of the Gospel of Iesus Christ dependeth not upon councels, (add also, nor vpon Churches;) nor as S. Paul sayth, vpon the iudgements of mortall creatures. The 5. is, the condemnation of this way by the Diuines (of England) both liuing and dead, &c. But this is no other likelihood then it is like Mr Bern. (if he had then liued) would haue alleged against Christ himselfe, when the learned Priests, Rabbines, and Diuines of Israel, condemned his way and doctrine Ioh. 7.48.49. & 19, 7. &c. If these learned En∣glish Diines haue confuted vs, let Mr Bern. or any shew the scriptures and reasons by which they haue done it: if they were our aduersaries without reason, (as some of them he mentioneth, shew little or none at all,) wise men will esteem them accordingly But if such a Diuine as Bredwel doe but call our curse a by-path, this sentence is authentik ye∣nough, for Mr Bern to put in  1. Likelie¦ood. his book. The 6. is, the Lords iudgement giuing sentence with them (of England) & against vs. These things as they are before more prudently urged, both for the good successe of the English ministers, and bad ysue of many of vs, so I leaue the reader vnto the answers before made pag, 13. &c, 23. &c. Onely I would advise Mr Bern. to look better to his words, when he next write, and not to set down such positions, as may tend to Atheis∣me or Iudaisme; as wherein his brother Boltons case that hanged himself he pag. 34. Sayth, which end the Lord letteth not his speciall instruments to come vn¦to, &c. A Iew vpon this graunt, would trouble Mr Bernard to defend Christianity; seeing Act. 1.17, . Iudas hanged himself, who was a farr more speciall instrument of the Lord, being an Apostle; then Bolton that was but a ru∣ling Elder; and not the first brocher of this way, as Mr Bern. very vntruely (vpon Mr Giffords report, if he so reported) doth allege. Besides that Iudas after a sort repented and acknowledged his sinne, and was not (that we know of) excommunicate, yet came to that woefull end; wher∣as Bolton for revolting from his faith at Paules crosse, was dealt with, ex∣communicated, and so died (for ought that is knowen) without repen∣tance, a member of Mr Bernards church. See before, pag. 23. ikelie∣d.The 7. is, the ill successe it hath had, these very many yeares, being no more increased. The naturall man perceiueth not the things of God; but iudging by the outward appearance, giues vnrighteous iudgement. If M. Bernard had liued in Noahs dayes, and seen his 120. yeares labours and preaching spent in vayn, how would he haue stumbled at the work of God, that
gaue his word no other effect in the world? And loe it is written Luk, 17.26. as it was in the dayes of Noe, so shall it be in the Dayes of the Son of man. But had Mr Bern. bene in the dayes following, when Israel very few in number Psa, 105, 12.13. walked from nation to nation, from one kingdome to an other people, and notwithstanding the Ge, 15. promise of multiplication, yet in 200. yeares and mo, had increased but vnto Deut, 10.22. 70. sowles, and as many moe yeares were in Aegyptian bondage: and had he in the mean while seen the Gen, 17.20. Princes of Israel, and Gen 36, 15. &c. Dukes of Esau with the ver 3 c 1 & Kings that raigned in his land, before any King in Israel. how would this man (may we think) haue gathered likelihoods, or rather haue concluded out of doubt against the poor afflicted church of God? But it is no new thing to hear this pleading from such carnall gospellers. Wel, not totell him of Gods gracious work in bringing many to this truth and causing moe to listen after it dayly, let Mr Bern. look to himselfe and his fellow Re∣formists, and if his right eye be not blent, let him acknowledge Gods hand aainst themseles, who heretofore had so many fautors, and that not of the meanest in the land: yet now are repressed as troublers of the church, and their counterfeyt reformation further from all likelihood of effecting then was at the first. And this much of his vnlikely likelihoods. Of his REASONS. HIS reasons now follow, of more force (as he pag. 44. pretends) then his bare pro¦babilities. These are three fold, taken 1 from the evill of the entrāce, in to this way; 2 from our persons so greueously sinning in this way; 3 from our opinions which are altogether erroneous and false. The first sort of reasons, haue this foundation.1. The evil of the entrance. The entrance is very sinful and cursed. Because of these 2 great evils. 1 That we doe not onely condemn corruptions and the notorius wic∣ked, but also forsake pag, 44, all former Christian profession amongst them. A man must cast off that word there with them which made them aliue; al¦so the faithfull messengers of God, the Fathers which begat him: yea he must renounce all fellowship of the godly there &c. But we may with the Prophet truely complayn of this man,Answer. that his mouth is Psa. 10.7 full of cursing and deceit and frawd; for how often haue we in our publick writings protested our consent in all the holy doctrines that themselues professe: onely because we cannot enioy them without Antichristian abominations; which the Prelates impose, and the Priests and people practise we haue separated from those assemblies, where ido¦latry is publickly set vp and maynteined from those blinde guides that would seem to make concord between light and darknes, Christ and Beliall, and vnder shew of many truthes, seduce mens sowles vnto de∣struction. Did the church of England forsake all former christian professi∣on among the Papists, when they left the Pope and some of his Prelates,
Masse, images &c. If not; then neyther doe we that haue left but the remnants of Popery yet reteyned; and doe walke in the truth to our knowledge and utmost power as God inableth vs; not casting off any jote of his word, nor any faithfull messenger of his, or other godly per∣son, as this adversary calumniateth. His hart knowes better, though it sendeth forth such bitter waters. 2. Next this he sayth pag, 46. with such a renunciation of truth, must be reteyned, much vntruth: the particulars are 1 that men must beleeu our way to be the truth of God; 2 and then condemn their church as a false church. Answer.Whether our way be not the truth of God, let the Godly iudge by his word; by it also let them try the estate of the church of England. But Mr Bern. begging the question, will haue things to be taken for un∣truthes, before triall or due conviction. To help himselfe he seekes ad∣vantage by that we haue published as he sayth vnder our hand, that the dif∣ferrences between vs and them, are onely such corruptions as are by vs set downe. Though the word onely be not ours, but Mr Bern. own; yet to let this passe as ordinary with him, what gathers he from it? Corruptions saith he, doe not mak a false church, but a corrupt church, (make the worst of it that can be;) as corruptions in a man, maketh but a corrupt man, and not a false man. First let the reader obserue that he speaks not a word of those cor∣ruptions which we set down; neyther indeed is he able with our corrup∣tion to plead for them. Secondly it is very corrupt and grosse that he would perswade, no corruptions can make a church to be false: for then rebellious Israel, though they Zeph. 3.7 corrupted al their works, was a true chuch still; but Moses foretold that for Deut 32, 5 corrupting themselues, they should be none of Gods children but a froward and crooked generation. Now let Mr Bern make the best of it he can. His simillitude of a man is not fit in this case. A man is a substance, but a church consisteth in relation or reference to Christ, as a wife to her husband. But if a mans wife play the whore neuer so often and openly, she may be, by Mr Bern. doctrine esteemed a corrupt but not a false wife. Such distinctiō he may cary to the stewes. Corruptions there may grow in churches and they yet be true churches as at Reu 2.14 15. Pergamus, ver. 20. &c. Thyatira, &c. corruptions also there may be that will make true churches false; as in Israel and Rome, where first wre as∣semblies of Saincts; afterward they became Eze 23,  Chro. 11.15. Reu 17 1, &, 18, 2 whores and habitations of Diuils. And there may be such corruptions in the constituting of a church that embraceth much truth, as will make it from the first a false church, as in Samaria, 2. Kin. 1, 27.28. &c 2 The per∣sons gree∣uously sin∣ning &c. 1 Syn.HIs second sort of reasons, is from the greeuous sinns that are among v, by reason whereof (from our own ground) we may not (sayth he) be ioyned with. The sinns he reckneth 6. First, that woefull entrance before named. I answer, that Mr Bern. en∣tred into this reason with vntruth, and continued in it with begging the
question, as before is shewed. So that this his obiection is very wofull ad the man desereth rather to be pitied then answered in his ile  made without proof. THe second is a hie degree of vnthankfulnes both to God that begat vsly, is word, and to our mother the church of Engl. that bar vs. I answer,2. Syn.  thank God for that knowledge of him whch we atteyned vnto in the Church of England, and are thankfull also (as is meet) to all the instruments which God hath vsed to bring vs vnto knowledge: but now when God hath shewed vs a further truth, (as what chle of his, seeth not more dayly,) we should shew great vnthankflnes if we would not walk in it, much more if we should blaspheme and persecute it, as Mr. Bern. and many of his fellow Priests doe, strugling against the light that shineth vpon them; A papist may haue occasion of thankfulnes vnto Gd ad men, for the knowledge of God and Christ which he hath get in th Roish church, farr aboe that which he could haue had among Pagans: yet if vpon sight of the errors in Popery, he forsake that false church and ioyne to some other true, no man can without vngodlynes, condemne him of vnthankfulnes. The Papists heretofore haue vsed such reasons as these aganst the Protestants; now they, for want of better apply them ainst vs. Te third sinne imputed to vs is,3. Syn. that we are full of spirituall vnchari∣blenes First toward thm that will not goe our way, nor be inclinable to vs whome (he sayth) we deeply censure and deadly condemn. First, this also is an old popish cauill,Answer. vsed often against the Protes∣tats. One Kellison, Suruy 1 book 4 chap telleth them, they deserue the punishments of Parricides, for scoffing, taunting, contemning and reviling their forefathers. 2. Our vncharitablenes, (if such it be) is this, that we pray for and wish vnto all, as to our own sowles, even life and peace we seek to couer a multitude of sinns which then is done, when sinners Iam 5, 20 are con∣verted from going astray. And for this cause we speak that which we beleeue and know, though the world therfore hate vs. 3 Cnsu or condemn those that go not our way we doe not, we know every man shall stand or fall to his own master. It is the sinne onely which we condemn, the sinner we seek to saue, leauing him to the Lord who shall iudge both him and vs at the last day. 4. But how charitable the ministers of England are vnto vs let thei continuall reproches and vituperies in pulpit and in print shew: and how they censure and condemn vs and all that will not goe their way; let Mr. Bernards own book speake where by the sentence of his godly minis∣ters, every one is damned, as pag, 263. cutting himselfe off from Christ, whosoeuer wittingly and continually separateth from the church of Englād, where yet so innumerable abominations and idolatries doe abound. 2. Secondly our vncharitablenes (as pag; 52, he sayth) is a most vngodly de∣sire as ever was heard of, to haue the wrd vtterly extinguished among them,
Aegyptian darknes to come over them, rather then that it should be preachedly such as doe not fauour our course &c. Answer.Our desire is, that the Aegyptian darknes which now couereth the land by meanes of the false Prophets that are therein, were done away; and that the true light of the Gosell were risen vnto them. We are sory to see the prophets (which haue night for a vision and darknes for a divina∣tion, as Mic. 3.6, was threatned of God,) o to deceiue the people, by preaching lyes in the name of the Lord, when he neuer sent them Christ hath no need of such falsers to help up hs kngdome he hath wayes and meanes yenough, by his own ordināce & minstery to build vp his hurch, though Antichrists clergie be sent back to the bottomles pit from whence Rev. 9. they came. We know men gather not Mat 7, 16 grapes of thornes nor figs of thistles. Lamentable experience these many yeres, sheweth what hurt and mise∣ry commeth by this false hierarchy and priesthood, which vpholds ido∣latry, profanenes, and humane traditions; pleads for sinne, and against the truth; to the destruction of mens sowles. We wish people therfore to beware of false prophets, though they come in sheeps clothing; and to seek the Lord by his own ministery, not by Ant christs: for the theefe commeth not Ioh 10, 10 but to steal, to kill and to dstroy. Let them see by the lamps of God in his own Sanctuary and Candlestick, and walke in the light of Ierusalem his church, which Isa. 60.1, 2.3, Reu. 21, 24, hath the glory of God arisen vpon it leauing Vr of the Chaldees, and walking no longr in the light of the fire and sparks that men haue kindled to themselues least Isa 50 11 they lie down in sorow. 3. The last poynt of our vncharital lenes, whch M. Bern. pag. 56. sayth is the highest degree of all, is that we are sorry and enious that the good things of God doe prosper with them. &c. Answer.That the good things of God doe prosper with them, and the truth preuail manger all opposition; we haue cause to reioyce for, and doe reioyce, Yea and we doubt not, but the enuious writings and dealings of Mr. Bern and his fellowes, against the gospell, God will turne to the furthe¦rance of the same; and the generation Psa 112.2 of the righteous shalbe blessed which the wicked vers. 10, shal see and fret and gnash their teeth and pine a∣way; when their desire shall perish. But what are the good things Mr. Bern. meaneth? Not the truth of God indeed, for that he blasphemeth and writeth against as Schisme and Brownisme. Nor the reformists cause, called Puritanisme; for that prospereth not, as all men see, but decrea∣seth dayly. The Prelates are the men that prevayl, for a whle; their ca∣nons are confirmed, their ceremonies flourish, and their hornes are ex∣alted. Whether M, Bern, himselfe (who wrote not lng since a book a∣gainst them, which also he was willing a gentleman should haue prin∣ted in his own name, that M, Bern. might haue slept in a whle  whi¦ther himselfe I say, and his fellow Reformists who are disaoyntd of their hope, be not sorry for this prosperitie, let themselues say. As for vt
we haue learned sal. 37. not to fret or eny when we see the wicked flourish; for they shall son be cut down as grasse, and wither as the green herb. Sory we are indeed for their lamentable estate and desire that they may find mercy, at the hands of the Lord. Our forth kind of sinne, he sayth is, our abusing of the werd, misaleging and  it, &c.The 4 syn. This was the third of his probabilities before pag. 90. an∣swered, and is here for a shew mustred agayn among our sinns; but na∣kedly and without all proof: I leaue it therefoe to the reproof of God; and to the godly iudgements of all that shall read our writings and alle∣gations of the scriptures. The 5. sinne is our wilfull persisting in our schisme.The 5. syn This is agayn to beg the question, first let it appear to be schisme that we are in, let the rea∣sons ad grounds of our separation be orderly dealt in, and soundly con¦vinced by Gods word: then if we yeild not, let vs be holden wilfull. O∣therweise, to persist in wel doing is good And as easily do the Papists cal Protestants schismaticks, as they vs. Whether M Bernard with all the helps that he hath had from other men, hath conuinced vs of schisme, let the godly judge. If reproching of vs, and idle excursions into by mat¦ters, be a conuiction; doubtlee he hath done it better then any before him. The 6. syn, is our rayling and sffing,The 6 syn and (as he sayth) Henry Barrowes blasphemies, who hath grgiously abused all their holyest exercises of religion, &c. I answer, if such sinne be in any of vs, it is even by our selues con∣demned; and f by humane infirmity any haue been ouertaken with vn∣seasoned speeches, we desire the Christian reader to bear with and par∣don it in vs, as himselfe would haue pardon of God The like hath Mr. Barr earnestly intreated in his Preface to his Discouery, as the reader may see; so farr was he from delighting in such wayes. Secondly I answer (howsoeuer I will not justify all the words of ano∣ther man, nor yet mine own, for in many things we sinne all;) that many of the thngs which this man counteth raylings, scoffs and blasphemies, are no other speaches them the hol Ghost hath vsed before vs in the scrip∣tures, and appled to like persons; and seemed as harsh to men of those times, as these doe to men now. Thirdly it is lkely that some be rather the printers fault (vnlesse Mr. Bernard hath forged them himselfe), then Mr Barrowes. Fourthly the Reformists themselus, amongst whome Mr Bern. some¦times seemed one, haue uttered as hard speeches against the Prelate & other corruptions of their own church; though now like time seruers they gloze with their reuerend Fathers; as this man maketh the first of Mr Barrowes raylings scoffs and blasphemies to be his caling the Bishops It would be knowne what Mr Brn, coun¦ted & caled them in his book that of late he wro¦te against them. Antichristian. But how many volums haue themselues heretofore writ¦ten of this argument? And who amongst vs hath euer dealt as did Mar∣in Marprelate among themselues?
Finally Mr. Barrow did sharply in  against the reforming prea∣chers, as being the greatest deceiuers of the people, vnder shew of holi∣nes. This maketh them aayn so eer agaist him; but whither he spake not right of them, may in part be seen already, & time will shew more; they can no longer halt as hitherto they haue; but eyther they must re∣cncile them to thir Fathrs, or quite forsake them: and a blesed work of God it is, that the most dangerous seducers should thus first be disco∣ud. THe third and last sort of reasons which M. Bern. ag., 78 &c. 1. Error. vseth against vs, is, Our errors, and (as he sayth) the matter of our shisme. The errors which he reckneth vp, and vndertaketh to confute ar ten. The first of them is that we hold the constitution of their church to be a false constitution. To this he sayth, 1. That we cannot proue this simply by any playn docrine of scrip∣ture &c. 2. That it is against the euidence of the scriptures, which ma∣keth the word, (Mat. 28.19. Mar 16 15. 2 Cor. 5.19. &. 11 2. Iob, 23.23.24. Act. 2.14.37.38. & 16.32.33.) the externall profesion Act. 8.12.37.38.) and Sacraments (Mat. 28, 19. 1 Cor. 10.16.) the visible and true constitution of a company so gathered and knt together; and so was theirs constituted: as that book of (Mr. Ber.) sheweth; and as in ano∣ther ere long shalbe plainly manifested &c.Answer. First Mr Ber. setteth down barely this as our position and doctrine, not nameng place or bok where it is written, nor the proofs that we make of it, but peremtorily sayth we cannot proue it. Whereas it hath in Discouery Resut of Giff. Con∣fessiō Apolo¦gy. Answer to Mr. Ia∣cob &c. many books by many playn doctrines of scripture been euidently proued, so as Mr Bern. and all his fellow priests could neuer yet, make a playn and direct answer And if when book is writen after booke, no refutation be made, but a bare deneyall, as here M. Bern. sayth we can∣not proue it, I say the ministers of Engl. may so turne away any thing; but with what credit or conscience, the wise will judge. Secondly, for M. Bernards reason, it selfe wanteth a good constituti∣on, being to confuedly set down, as a man knowes not what he makes the constitution of a church; or how he would conclude that their church is constituted aright. He pretends the word to be the Constitution of a church; whereas the scriptures that he quoteth, and reason it selfe might teach him, that the word is the instrument or meanes of Constituting, & conseruing the church constituted; so also be the sacraments. But as the constitution of a common wealth or of a city is a gathering and vni∣ting of people togither into a ciuill polity: so the Constitution of the common wealth of Israel, (as the church is Eph. 2, 12 called) and of the city of God the new Ierusalem, is a gathering and vniting of people into a diuiue po∣litie: the form of which polity is Order, as the heathens acknowledged, calling polity,  Arist, 3. Po¦lit, c. 1. an order of a city: which Order is requisite in all actions and administrations of the church as the Apostle * sheweth, and special∣ly
specially in the constitution thereof: so that next vnto faith in God, it s to be esteemed most necessary for all holy societies Wherefore Pal re¦joyced for these two things in the Church at Colss, Clo. 2.5 euen their order, & their stedfast faith in Christ. Now whereas to the constittiō of a chrch there belong  a people, as the mattr whereof, and 2 a calling, gathe∣ring and vniting togither, as the form whereof the church consisteth. in both these the Constitution of the Church of Engl. hath (in sundry trea∣tises) been roued false. For with them all sorts of profane worldly and wicked ersons, are receiued as the matter whereof the church is buil∣ded, contrary to the layn and manifest doctrine of the scriptures. Leu. 20.24 1 Kin 8 53. Act. 2.40, and 19.8  Iohn. 17.16. 2 Cor. 6.14, 7, 18. The form and order of their viting is als strange; for these profane peo¦ple, euen all persons in a famly, an all families in a parish, are vnited into one parish church, as it is called; not voluntarily, as ought to be Act 2.4 in the true chrch, but by constreynt, not by any due profesion of repen∣tance from ead work and faith in God; but by the priests readin a Confession absolution, and such like popish stff as is to be seen in their ser¦uice book, not vnder the guidance of Chrsts officers, but of a Parson, Vi∣car, Curate or other like creature of the Bishops, who in many places can but read English vnto them. And this with the other Parshes of the Diocee so gathered also, are vnited into one See or Doces church vnder a Lord Bishop and his Cortiers, and all the Dioces into two Pro¦inciall churches, the Prouinciall, into one nationall church, called the Church of England, ouer all which there is a most reuerend Father and spiri∣tuall Lord, Archbushop, Primate, and Metropolitan: vnder whome al Bis∣hops and Priests of the land are subiect; and all people and parishes in the land bound to obey the dead canons and decrees, which he the Ach Lord with his brethren of the gouerning clergie, agree of in their repre∣atiue church in the Conuocation howse, if once the Ciuill Magistrate giue life vnto them. This forme and order of a church is not to be found in Chrsts Testament; but receiued it is from the church of Rome by he∣ritage or succession; as the Papists boast of (to the dishonour of Protes∣tants) when they say; Supplic to the king an¦no 1604. Reason of rligion. 6. A religion &c. that distinguished the multitude into, prishes roportiōed he tithes, annxed th Glebeland, fon̄ded the Bishopricks, mitted the Dioceses &c, So, as the mother is the daughter is, false in her c¦stitutiō; though in the doctrin which she profeseth she is far better & pur¦er thē that whoremother of Rome. The discussing of thes things. as Mr Bern. refereth to other places & books, so also do I; seing in thi place e hath brought nothing of weight to proue his cōstitutiō. For the scriptre that he alegeth, & the 3. things that he colecteth from thē; do make aga∣inst his purose. The word is not by Christs mnistery rihtly; reached & applyed to the people, but vnsufferabley abused to the maintenance or the confusion and idolatries that are among them: the sacraments are highly profaed and prostituted to the most vngodly and thir seed, and
popishly administred, and the externall profession which the people, make is by constreynt, and therefore nought worth: besides it is corrupt and idolatrous, being a mixed profession, partly of the truth of God, & partly of their own inuentions, as appeareth by their Communion book Canons, and the like. 2. ErrorOur second error should be, that we hold their Constitution a real idol, and so them idolaters. To confute this, Mr Ber. sayth that he hth perused in any scriptures, and can see none that take an idol or idolaters in any such snse; agan, that Marlorat mentioneth 47. idols, and not one of them in he snse. Answer.Whether this article be of Mr Bernards own forgin, or where he hath had it, I cannot tell; his reader must take all of his cred, for he lets not down his author. As for his confutation hereof, it is very slender, that becase he seeth it not, or Malorat nameth it not, therefore it is no idol. For it is no sure position that Mr Bernard seeth all that he scriptures; teach; and both he and Marlorat may as soon number the hayres of their heads, a all the idols that are in the world. Wel therefore yet may t be a real idol, for oght that this man hath sayd to saue it. And if it be a false constittion (as before is proed) set vp in stead of a true, what is it bet∣ter then a very idol. In the end he trneth and renteth vs for making or own constitution (as he sayth) an idol or goddesse; and feighneth that we may say, Great is the Goddesse Constitution; great is Diana of the B∣nists Bt seing this is but a reroch of a scorner, and the reproch rea∣cheth vnto Christ himselfe who hath appoynted the frame order and constitution of hs own chrch, which we haue laboured for I leaue him for this calumniation, vnto his rebuke, who will teach him one day no more to blaspheme. And whether (may we think) tendeth the inuectiue of this vayn man, who thus skoffeth at the Constitution of Christs church, but to bring in a mere ataxie or confsion, worse then was at Babels tower-building: for take away the orderly framing and constituting of a church, and there will be but a Tohu, (as the scripture  Ier. 4.23 Gen, 1.2.3. Error speaketh,) a rude indigest heap or confute Chaos, more beseeming the wild beasts of the wood, then any humane, much lese diuine polty. That such as are not of a particular constituted church, (to weet such a one as ours is,) are no subiects of Christs kingdome. Answer.Neyther is this position set downe in our words; (to my knowledge;) neyther doth Mr Brnard take away, but confirme rather the thing that we hold; for he pag. 81, granteth that they offend God, which may and doe not ordi∣narily, (hauing  canes offred) liue in a church rightly constituted; and we grant that many of Christs subiects, for want of meanes, doe not liue in a true constituted church, If therefore he were not a caviller, he would not haue reckned this among our errors. That all nor in our way, are without: and we apply against them (in Engl.) 1 Cor. 5, 12, Eph. 2, 12.4 Error
The first part of this position, you must impue to Mr Bernards cha∣rity, who wll needs frame our assertions for vs, because he thinkes we cannot speake for our selues; we might leaue it vnto him to frame an an∣swer also. But if he would let vs tel, what we hold, it is, that all not in the way f Chist, are without: and if this be an error, let him make the most of it. The applying of those scriptures against them, he must be content to bear, til he or his brethren can proue thēselues a true church; for though there b great differences of peoples professing religion, some with more truth, ome with lesse; yet all not wthin Christs church, are without, as th Aostle speaketh. Mr Bernards exception, that those places are meant of sch as neuer professed Christ at all; is childish: why doth he not except aant the holy Ghost himselfe, who Reu 18, & oftē in that book. aplieth against the false Chris∣tans of the Rmish Church, words and seaches meant first of heathen Babylon, that profeed not God or Christ at all. His boasting of the word, sacraments, effects and deliuerances; are be∣fore in this traatise taken away. And Mr Bernards proofs, are but a beg¦ging of the question, which he blameth in other, as before is obsrued. That onely Sayncts, that is, a people forsaking all known sinne,5 Error. of which they my be conuinced, doing all the known will of God, increasing and abiding euer thr, are the onely matter of a visile church. Ths Position I deey,Answer. and disclaym also the errors which he gathe∣reth from t: and therefore will spend no time in answering it; but refer Mr Ben to them that haue so spoken or writen, if any be. This we hold ( let vs se what Mr Bernard can say against it,) that 1 Cor 1.2. Rom. 1, 7. Eph 1.1, Saincts by calling are the onely mater of a true visible church. Yet withall we hold, that any be calle, Mat. 20.16. & 22, 14. but few chosen. That he power of Christ, that is, authority to preach, to administer the sa∣crams, and to exercise the censures of the Church, belongeth to the whole Chrch, yea to euery one of them. And not the principall members thereof.6 Error. Answe.. This opinion, he calleth the A, b, c, of Brownisme: but he may put it if he please in the Criss-crosse rew of Bernardisme; he himselfe being the first that I euer heard to vtter such a position. This point he much vrgeth and relleth vs with; he mentoned it in his Forspeech to the Reader, thus, Th Paist sayth, Christs ruling power is in the Pope; nay, sayth the Protestant. i is in the ecclestasticall gouernours, Bishops, may sayth the Puritan, it is in the Presbyterte; nay, sayth the Brownist, it is in the body of the Congregation, the multitude, called the Church. And in this beginneth Brownsme. &c. Here first I require of Mr Bern. that he produce his autors, and shew the book, or writing, where we haue auouched such things. He tells his reader of all the errors that he chrgeth vs with, that pag. 78. we hold & can¦not deny them, being already auouched vnder our hands: and that he will not wrong vs in setting them down, &c. Yet durst he not (as every honest wri∣ter
writer in suh controuersies vse to doe; an if he doe not in his next, the reader may estem of his truth and honesty as it is. Next, for the poynt it selfe, I answer, Christs ruling power, which the Papists say is in the Pope; we say not (as this man calumniateth vs) that it is in the body of the Congregation, the multitude, but in Christ himselfe; and that the Pope is Antichrist, not for taking into his hands the power of the mulitude, but of Chrst, to rule and gouern the church as Head of the same. Agayn, Christs ruling power, which the Protestants say is in the Bishops the Prelates, we doe not say it is in the multitude; but in Christ himselfe: for he onely is 1 Cor 8, 6. & 12.5. Lord of the Church, he onely is .1 Pet, 5, 4, Archbishop or Chief pas¦tor; he only walketh among the seuen golen Candlesticks, as Ouerseer of the seuen chrches; ruling them by his lawes canns and decrees. Whereas the Bishops of England are sirituall Lords, and one is Archi∣shop and Primate over all: they rule many chrches and minsters, mak new canons and decrees in their Conuocatin howse;Reu 1.13 & 2.1. prescrbe formes and words of prayer, and of preaching, by their leiturgie and homilies, and other like spirituall jurisdiction, apperteynng to Chrst alone, thus are they very Antichrsts; and to ther with their exorbitant usurped. power, ought vtterly to be abolished out of all Chritan churches. Neyther, that ruling power of Christ, which the Pritans (whereby I suppse, Mr Bern. meaneth the Christian reforme churches in other coū¦tries,) say is in the Presbitery; doe we say, is in the multitude for we ac∣knowledge Christ to haue ordeyned a 1 Tim 4, 14 Presbitry; or Eldership, and that in Tit. 1.5. 2 Co, 12, 28. Act, 14 23. every church, for 1 Tim 5, 17 to teach and rule them by his own word and lawes, vnto whome all the multitude, the members. the Saints ought to Heb 13, 17 1 Pet. 5.5 obey and submit themseles, as the scriptures teach And for the particular branches of this 6. Error that Mr Bernard chargeth vs with, That the power of Christ, that is, authority to prach, belongeth to the whole church, ye to every one of them, &c. we deny it, a he setts it don, and for the help of te reader whome he abuseth, will distinctly set down our opinion. The word of God, is giuen to all and every member of the Church to read, and exercise priuately: but publickly in the Church there is a double vse, 1 in prophesie, and 2 in office, as the Apostle Rom 12, 6 7· distinguish∣eth. The office of teaching is layd vpon some few chosen & ordeyned therevnto Into this office may no man intrude, or vsurp it, without a lawfull calling. This we haue long since published, as a pat of our faith Confess, Art. 19.20.21. Teaching in way of prophesie, (which the Apo∣stle treateth of 1 Cor, 14) is absolutely vs lawfull 1 Cor. 14 34. for all women in th church, but men, so many as haue the gift and ability from God, may  31, 24 all prohesie one by one, of which poynt see our Conss Art 34. And this is that we hold concerning preaching, which whether it be an error and Mr Bern. hath so proued it, let the indifferent reader judge.
For the second poynt, authority to administer the sacraments, that it shold belong to euery one of th church; we vtterly deney; and maruell at Mr Bernards vnconscionable dealing with vs, for in or Confession he cold not but see, (vnlesse he winked,) this plainely expressed, Art. 34. no sacra∣ments to be administred vntill the Pastors or Teachers be chosen and ordeyned int heir office. The third and last, that euery one hath authority to execute the censures of the church we also deny; but hold, that euery member hath authority to Luk 17.3 rebke hs brother for sinne, and if he repent to forgiue him, if not, to take wtnees; if yet he repent not, to tel it Mat. 18.15.16.17. to the church, which church hath Christs 1 Cors. 4 12, 13. power to iudge all within the same, and cast out from a∣mong them all wicked men: Now that every one hath not this power, nor yet any member or members apart, we haue plainly signified in our Conssin, Art. 24. If this be an error in Mr Bernards account, let him by the scriptures confute it, not onely in vs but in a principall minister of his own chrch D, Flk, who hath written Treatise of Popes pard. part. 2. c 3, that the keyes of the kingdome of hauen whatsoeuer they are; be committed to the whol church, and not to one psō only, as Crian, Augustine, Chrysostome, Ierome, and al the ancient Doc∣tors agrealy oly to the scriptures doe confesse. So then for popular gouernment, (which Mr Bern. would traduce vs by,) we hold it not, we approue it not, for if the multitude gouern, then who shalbe gouerned? Christian liberty (which 1 Cor. 7.23 Gal 5.1 all haue) is one thing, the raynes of gouernment (which 1 Cor. 12 28. some haue) is another thing. Now how farr te peoples right and liberty and benefit thereby eytendeth, would require a larged scourse to shew, which is not my purpose here. It is ye nogh to mainfest the iniquity of this aduersary who would father such errrs on vs, dealing like his predecessors the Papists, who in this weise reroched the Protestants, as labouring Apolog of the church of Engl. 1. part c, 2 di¦vis. 7. to bring all things vnder the rule of the rash vnconstant people and vnlearned multitude; and to make the church Suruey of the new re∣lig, 1 book, 3 chap. democraticall and popular, because every one of the people by his pri∣uate spirit, is supreme iudge and head in matters of religion. Our different judgement and practise from the church of Engl. wher all y men as they call them, are forbidden all speaking or expounding of the word in the publik assemblies, and where a Bishop, Chancellor, or Commissary, hath power to excommunicate by a Latin writ &c. Our difference also and dislike of the Presbyteries practise, whereby people are excluded, and depriued of a great part of their Christian liberty and benefit thereby, is in other books See mōng other. the Discouery of the false church; pag 165. & for¦ward. Apo¦logy a∣gainst the Oxford DD. pag. 60 &c. largely treated of, with scriptures & reasons many, which M, Bern. neyther orderly handleth, nor soundly confuteth, as the wise reader may see; but ignorantly and confusedly shuffleth them ouer; running into by matters, and vniust calumniations. I will end therefore with the words of one of his fellow ministers, who touching this poynt of Church gouernment writeth much more sound∣ly then by Mr. Bern. in his blindenes, hath done, Mr Iacob I mean, which
sayth, Necess. of reorm, pag 28. It is childish, and without all wit, to cry out aganst vs us our adue∣saries doe▪ Popularity, Anarchie &c. for our so▪ wel grounded and so approued an assertion. 7 Error.That the sinne of one man publckly and obstinately stood in, bing not refor∣med nor the offender cast out, oth s pllute the whole congregation, that none may commucate with h same in any of the holy hings of God, (though it be a church rghtly conituted, till the party be excommuncated. Answer.I deney agayn this to be eyther our iudgement or practise Mr. Bern. sayth the formr position is the ground of this; and so it seemeth, he c∣lumniating vs in the forer, thouht he might doe likeweise in this. We professe and haue long since publshed, that Confess. , 3, none is to separate for flts & corrutiōs, which may & so long as the Church cōsistth of mrtall men will fall out and aris among them; but by due order to sk rdresse threof Now that euery Chrstian not onely may b tought to rebuke his neighbour for sinne, we hae playn lawes both n the old Testament and the new Leuit. 19.17. Luk. 17.3. That sinners not repenting, are after the second admonition to be signified vnto the church, is also Christs or∣dinance, Mat. 18, 15.17. But what f he church will not cast him out? I answer; Synns are ey∣ther conrouertible or manifest. If controuertible and dubtfll; men ought Rom 15, 1 Phil, 3 15, 16.Eph, 4, 2, 3 to bear one with anothers different judgement; if they doe not, but, any for this make a breach or separation, Heb 10, 25 they syn. But if the sinne be manifest, as for example a man is conuict of adul∣tery, blasphemy, theft or the like: and the church will not rebuke him nor cast him out, but suffer him obstinate and impenitent in his wicked∣nes; and plead for him aganst such us call vpon them for iudgemnt: then are all such abettors of the wicked, sinners themselues; and that in a high degree, as th' Apostle noteth Rom. 1 31 the whole lump is leue∣ned, 1 Cor. 5, 1, 6. &c. and now not that one mans sinne, but the sinne of them all, is that which polluteth them: for they fauour and iustify a wicked man more then God; therefore Isa. 5, 20 23, woe is vnto them, and Solo∣mon sayth, He that sayth to the wicked, thou art righteous him shall the peo∣ple curse, and the multitude shall abhorr him. Prou, 24 24 If M, Bern think the sinne is the lesse, because a church maynteyns it; he is much deceiued; evill, the more common it is▪ the worse t is; be∣cause God is more dishonoured, and mens sowles more endangered. If he think men should regard and reuerence the church in this case▪ the law teacheth every man not to follow Exo. 2, 2 the many (or, the mighty) to doe euill, nor agree in a controuersie to decline after many, and ouer∣throw (the right.) The round of all this is playn in Gods law, if any one of the people sinned against any of the commandements of the Lord, Leu 4 (27 28. &c, and one shewed him his sinne which he had committed, he was to bring his sacrifice, a testification of his repentance. If a ver 2.23 &c, ruler sinned, or the high verse. 3. priest himselfe, they were to doe likewise. If the whole uerse. 13. &c.
Congregation sinned, the like law was for them: God respected no per∣sons; but if they that sinned were greater or moe in number, they were so farr from being sauoured, as they had the greater sacrifice inioyned them, a priuate man offred vers. 28. a shee-goat, a ruler a vers 24, hee-goat, the high Priest, and the Congregation, a ve 3 & 14 yong bllock. These lawes were gi∣uen to all sorts of persons, for all manner sinns‘ and the law was agayn re¦peated and stablished from that day forward throughout their gene∣rations, Num. 15.22.23. &c. But if any man despised this law, and sin∣ned with a high hand, the same blasphemed the Lord, and was to be cut off from among his peole. Num. 15.30.31 Now further, that the whol congregation taking Part with wicked men in syn, after due admoniti∣on, are all defiled and subiect to like iudgement, we haue a playn exam¦ple in the whole Tribe of Beniamin,Iudg, 19, where in Gibeh one of their towns filthines was committed, the Tribe was called vpon to deliuer Iudg. 20.13. &c. thse wicked men to death, that evill might be put away from Israel, t when they would not deliuer them, all the other tribes warred against that trbe, and almost rooted out every man of the same. Likeweise the trbes of Israel in an other case, sayd to some of their brethren, Iosh. 22.18.20. see∣ing ye rebel to day against the Lord; euen tomorrow he wilbe wroth with all the Congregation of Israel. Did not Achan sinne, &c. and wrath fell on all the con¦gregation of Israel and this man alone perished not in his wickednes. What Mr Bern. seeth or how he readeth the scriptures I cannot tel; but if he knew the contagion of sinne or guilt of the same, he would neuer haue writien as he hath done Now where he pleadeth that men should not for the offender, refreyn the holy things of God, abhrr the sacrifices &c. We grant it. The holy things are alwayes to be reuerenced, Gods house and sacrifices frequented, when we may without sinne But we deny such an assembly to be Gods church, as with a high hand sinneth, and blasphemeth the Lord. The sacrifice of the wicked is Prou. 21.27. an abomination. And it cannot be said that any holy thing is lawfully administred in such a society where all agree together to mayntein open iniquity, and doe despise the word of the Lord, calling them to repentance If they doe not thus, we hold it not lawfull to separate from them, nor in any weise at any time, till all holy and orderly meanes be vsed for their reclay∣ming. That euery of their assemblies are false churches.8 Error. This we hold indeed,Answer. being vnderstood of the ordinary cathedrall & parish assemblies of England, which all are by one line. For defense of these churches Mr Bern. refers the reader to an other treatise after, and so doe I to the answer of the same, following. Yet least he should seem o say nothing, Mr Ber excepteth 1 That they haue no false head, for, they hold Iesus Christ. I answer, so might Ieroboam haue pleaded for himself & his people, that they had no false head, but 1 Kin. 12 28. the true God which brought them out of the Land of Aegypt. Yet were they a false church The Pa∣pists
Papists and Anabaptists at this day, hold and professe Iesus Christ: yet such errors are among them, as Christ in deed is deneyed: the parishes of England professe him also, but such is their estate otherweise, that they haue him not truly for a head, prophet, priest, or king vnto them; as be∣for pag. 74. is proued. But it is yenough for Mr Bernard to affirme without proofe: and correction with him is a pag. 111. needfuller argument in this case tē istruction For when the Priests lis preserue not knowledge how should men be answered but by the gaole or gallowes? 2. The matter (sayth he) is not false: and to shew this he noteth a diffe∣rence between No matter, true matter, and false matter. No matter are thy which make no profession of Christ at all; as Iewes, Turks, and Pagans, True (visible) matter are all such as openly professe this mayn truth, that Iesus the sonne of Mary is the sonne of God▪ Christ the Lord, by whome onely & alone they shalbe saued. And pag 116. false matter is contrary to this true matter. I answer; this false matter is very rawly set down, for being contrary to the former true, it may imply Iewes, and Turks, whome he made no matter: and then it confoundeth his own distinction. But if he mean that they which professe not Christ rightly and truely, as he setteth downe, are a false matter, then, say I; t will euince the matter of their Churches to be false, seing there is not aright and true profession of Chrst, made by their parishes▪ But Mr Ber. leauing out this word rightly & truly, tels vs pag 113. they all professe this fayth, as is apparent 1 by the doctrine of their church (vidz. that in the Harmony of Confessions,) 2 by the same publickly preached 3 by the same mainteyned by their lawes, writings and blood of holy martyrs. I answer, if all this were granted▪ yet will it not proue Mr Bernards pur∣pose, for some may write and preach the truth, the Magistrate may e∣stablish it by law, and some may seal it with their blood; and yet not al the nation be a true matter for Christs church, except they also make lke profession Which that the parishes of England doe not, the profanenes of the multitudes shew. But least I be thought to speake of envy, let vs hear the testimony of their own ministers and such as were no fauourers of vs at all▪ as their malicious writings of vs sheweth Mr Nichols estee∣med a forward preacher among them▪ sayth, Plea of the innēt. p. 218. &c. We finde by great experi∣ence, (and I haue now fiue and twenty yeres obserued it,) that in those places where there is not preaching and priuate conferring of the Minister and the peo∣ple; the most part haue as litle knowledge of God and of Christ, as Turks and Pagans. To confirme this, he giues vs an example in his own flock For I haue been in a parish sayth he) of fowr hundred communicants, and maruel∣ling that my preaching was so little regarded, I tooke vpon me to conferre with euery man and woman, before they receiued the communion. & I asked them of Christ, what he was in his person; what his office; how firme came into the world; what punishment for sinne; what becomes of our bodies being rotten in the graue and lastly whither it were possible for a man to liue so vprightly, that by wel do∣ing he might winn heauen. In all the former questions, I scarse found ten in the
hundred to haue any knowledge, but in the last question, scarse one,A sayer pro∣fssion. but did af∣firme, that pag. 20. man might be saued▪ by his own wel doing, and that he trused he did so liue, that by Gods grace he should obtyn euerlasting life by sering of God and god prayers &c. Now then, this being so, tell me I pry yu (sayth Mr Nihols▪ first for Athisme, whether these be any bettor then Ahiss, whih know not Christ? And tell me I pray you Mr Bernard whether th be a rue matter, such as Christs church consisteth of? But you would a vs beleeue the Bishops and Priests of Engl. are wondrous men; for i hey write books, or preach sermons to the people, their whole Dioceses and Parishes must needs be estemed conuerts and profelytes. Such effect & grace was neuer heard of before, since the world began. More absurd it is to say, that the good lawes of the Magistrate, doe make a profane i∣dolatrous multitude, true professors: but most of all, that because some few were martyrs, therefore they that killed the martyrs, professe Christ truly. If these be not pregnant reasons, then M. Bernards book is little worth. 3. But he proceedeth and sayth, The visible form is not false; which is the vniting of vs unto God, and one to another uisibly. This he would proue by 3, reasons 1 because the word is preached and offred to the people; 2 Be∣cause of the peoples open profession of their fayth, vnto the doctrine, God working in them a will to receiue it. 3 because the Lords supper is in vse among them. Sundry scriptures are alleged to shew that thus the primitiue churches were planted and constituted; all which we grant; but when he comes to apply pag. 121. these to themselues; he barely assumes, that thus is their case; ney¦ther answering any reason of ours to the contrary, nor shewing any rea∣son of his own, to confirme that which he sayth. And what cause in the world, what church is so bad; but may thus be pleaded for? He knowes wel, that we except, (and the visible estate of that church, their own mo¦numents, records, complaints, &c. doe bear witnes with us,) that they were planted in this religion and profession by force of the Magistrates law; that multitudes are profane; that many thowsands want the prea∣ching of the word; that they ar al compelled to come to church, be bap∣tised, receiue the communion, and the like; and what profession the poor ignorant people make, is before manifested. If he would heare more of their profession, and subiection to the word and ministery, Mr. Nichols shewes it thus; Plea of the innocēt pag, 246· How little haue they esteemed the godly and learned minis∣ters! How content they be with simple and ignorant men! How hardly are they drawn to pay duties which law hath appoynted! How many quarrels they pick a¦gainst painfull ministers! And how little reuerence they giue to any that are faithfull! How they follow their couetousnes and pleasures! How they fil al sorts of courts with brawles, foolish and wilfull strifes, and sutes, and demurres in law with murthers, whordomes▪ dronkennes, and all disorder. Loe this is the commendations of the professant people of the Church of Engl, whome Mr Bernard pleadeth for. As for their constitution and vniting together into parishes▪ dioceses,
proinces, and at last in to one nationall church with an Archbishop & his high court ouer all it is pag. 99, before shewed to be a Rmis to, and antichristian, nt iustifiable by the law or testament of Christ. 4. Lastly, the visile properties are (he sayth) not false ut true, namely thse, 1 Coninuance in hearig of the dctine of Christ receiued, and vsing of th sacraments and prayer. 2 The holing out of this truth an  sacraents as  displed, against the eney▪ 3 A care for the welfare of all, and eue∣ry one for  and ech for oher. But all this buildng is on a sndy ground: for their estae (as before is mnifsted▪ beng euill: the longr they continew in it, the worse it is fr them Contnuance to read he seruice book, and homilies, to rosti¦tute te Sacraents to the profane, to administer them after a opish mnnr, by a false mnster; these are the banners and ensignes of Anti∣christ▪ dislayed n al his aemblies; that poor sowles haue cause to com¦playn a in the Psalm, Ps. 4.4. they haue st vp thi banners for signes. As for the care of the welare of all, &c. which Mr. Brn. boasteth of: let Mr. Nichols foresayd complaynt of the people on the one hand▪ and the Bishops, & Preists open neglect & contempt of the people on the other hand, shew what care they haue one of another. For how many sowles are misera∣bly famished by dum, negligent, and non resident priests evill beasts and slow bellies. How many preachers are put out for not subscribng and u∣sing the ceremonies, &c. These, that I gue no other instances, shew what care there is of mens sowless am them; which he that commen∣deth, shewes himselfe carelesse what he speakes or writes. 9 Error.OVr 9. error is, that we say, Al thr ministrs are false ministers. A∣gainst this Mr Bernard allegeth for the truth of their ministery, that they are sent of Christ according to his ordinance in his church, as is mani∣fested by th, tht thy are quallfid with good gifts, they are called by the church, & such also as de diligently, and faithfully preach, and so preach Christ as many threby doeth ar and beleue, euen confirming their calling by the bles∣sed successe and effct of thi laburs. Rom. 10.14.15. 1 Cor. 9.2. Answer,First, if Mr Bernard would indeed haue refuted our error, if such it be he shoul haue answered the reasons which in many writings we haue brught ainst ther minstery Bt he found that, all too heauie. The for the reasons that mslfe allegth, they are naked and with∣out all cofirmtin; such as Paist, Anabaptists or any other Antichris∣tians might llege for theseles Fr, a Papist wil oast as wel as he, that their Priests are qulifi wih god gifts, called, by the church, doe deligently an faithfully prech, so as  hr an beleeue. Bt I will an∣swer ech of is partclr Their qalificatiō is wih Good gfts, is no proffe of a lawful ministry; seing  many priuate men hae as good gifts as they; vsurpers and intrder may alo haue as excellent gifts, as law∣full officers:  Iesuites, Smmries and ther instuments of Satan, are knowen to be as learned and well furnished with gifts, as Mr Bern. and
his brethren. 4 Moreouer I deny that the principall ministers of England are qualified or able to execute their office; the Archbishops, Bishops Arch deaons, &c. that haue whole Dioceses and Prouinces vnder their charge cannot possibly performe the duty▪ of true ministers vnto them. 5 And filly a number of ignorant Sir Iohns can read their Leiturgie vnto their parises; and haue no other good ministeriall quallity. The second thing, their calling by the church; which afterward he ex∣plyneth ths; pag. 141. beig examined, found fi, and so are elect and ordeyned; this  vpon the sands; for the church of England not being a true chrch of Gd, as is before manifested, hath no power from God to call and rdeyn miisters▪ But besies this, I would fayn learne of Mr Bern. what Chch it is that examined, elected, and ordeyned his Lords grace of Canterby, for Arhbshop then whether the same or some other chrch examined elected and ordeyned the Diocesan Bishops, the Deans the Archdeacons, and the rest of that Lordly priesthood, then what church ordeyned the parish Priests, and Deacons. These things if he dare vnder∣take to deal in, and bring to the triall: will be found more agreable to the Canons of the Pope, then to the testament of Christ. Their office it selfe, Mr Bern. balketh quite, and tels vs not what func¦tions this pompous clergie haue to execute, yet is it most needfull to be known, for how els shall men discerne their administration? To begin therefore with his Arch Lord of Cant. the Angel of the church of Engl. what office ath e to execute, of a Pastor; or of a Pope? If he be Pastor of this rch, what be the inferior Bishops; pety Pastors, or Pety popes? what offices  the Suffragans, Chancellrs, deanes, Archdeacons Commis∣ss, ffiials, Dctors Proctors, and the residew of that army? what offi∣ces haue the Prebndaries, Canons, Ptianons, Chanters, Subchanters, and other like brds of the cloister? what offices haue the Bishops bay lifts the Priests, the half priests or Deacons, the Parsons, and Vicars, the Churchwar∣dens, Clerks, & Sextius? Mr Bern. affirmeth that pag. 131▪ the Lord onely ordeyneth offis in his church 1 Cor. 12. and that the church it selfe cannot doe this, but Iesus Christ both Lord and King. Now seing he hath ouerskipped in this book, al the stately offices that are in his church: let him in his next shew (if he can) the offices that Christ in his testament hath appoynted this troup of horsemen and charrets vnto. Now for their administration, he telleth pag. 142. vs, they preach the true doc∣trine or Christ, administer the sacraments, performe their office faithfully, and liue cnsinably, and Christ doth assist such graciously in conuerting soules, and h peple doe approue of them. Fayr words, and such as it seemeth Mr Bern. useth to feeed his flock with: but if one deny that thus it is, he must tary for proof, till an other treatise come forth; it was yenough in this, to affirme it so to be; and for his Lords grace to confirme it. Wel, to let passe the multitude of com∣plints and testimonies to the contrary in their own books, let him shew
how it is possible for the Archbishop of the church of Engl. or the in∣ferior Bishops, to preach and performe their office faithfully, vnto so many hundreds of parishes, & thowsands of people, as are vnder their charge. Let the infinite number of soules that are famished vnder them speake, how often their Chief-shepheard of Cant haue fed them with the word and sacraments, (vnlesse perhaps he hath blessed some of their youthes with the Sacrament of Confirmation;) how many of their soules he hath conuerted, yea let them say whether euer he saw their face? As for the Bishops Deputies the parish priests, many of them are dumb by nature, and cannot preach; many are made dumb by their spirituall Lords pow∣er, and silenced for disobedence; so preaching wexeth geazon, and peo¦ple perish for want of Instruction. In the mean tyme, this painful Cler∣gie feedeth the Lay weekly, with their mattings, Euensong, and Homi∣lies; and sometimes in a year with sermon, and reading the Bishops canons. They discipline their notorious sinners, with reading curses and Comminations out of the pulpit, till the Lent penance (which is much to be wished) be restored agayn: they solemnize the holy dayes of Angels and of Saincts; they giue ech man the sacrament at Easter deuoutly vpon his knees, they baptise with water, and a signe of the crosse in the aer; they wed their parishioners with a ring, & teach the man to worship his wife, in the name of the Father and of the Son & of the holy Ghost: they church the women after childbirth: they visi the sick, and absolue him from all his sinns, and howsel him with a Communion: and last of all, they bu∣ry the dead, in sure and certayn hope of resurrection to eternall life. And this is yenough for priests to doe in the country parishes; but in the Ca∣thedrall churches, where Bishops, Deanes; and other great Doctors do re¦side; there the Queristes and Organ-pipes, make sweeter melody. Mr. Bern. confesseth pag, 121. that the Lord onely prescribes the duties to be done in euery distinct ffice: now he that knowes not these dutiess to belong to Christs ministers, or these works to be a faythfull performance of ministeriall of∣fice, let him read Mr Bernards book, for there pag, 139.140. he hath quoted many scriptures, the end of all which is to raise pag, 141, an euident proof of the truth of their ministery and administration; as if one should cite the second com¦mandement, for to vphold idolatrie. The effects of their administration, in conuerting sowles, is but a vayne boast, as their idolatrous estate, with the lamentable ignorance and pro¦fanenes of the people every where sheweth The reasons brought by others (for Mr Bern bringeth none,) to perswade such effects, are be∣fore in this pag 54. &c. treatise answered.. It maketh also against the estate of this church and ministery; for if these preachers haue conuerted and wrought faith in some of their hearers, then it followeth that before that conuer∣sion they were infidels, yet were they of the church and had this minis∣tery set ouer them, as all men know. Which how it can stand with the rles of Gods word, hath neuer yet bene shewed. The example which
Mr Bern. allegeth of th' Apostle 1 Cor, 9.1.2. helpeth him nothing: For Apostles were sent Ma 28.19, to conuert heathens, but Pastors are set for to 1 Pt , 1 Act. 0.28 feed conuerted Christians. And the Priests of England challenge to be Pas∣tors, I ween, and not Apostles. Agayn the work and seal of Pauls Apostle∣ship was seen in Corinth, by 2 Cor, 6, 4 &c. separating the beleeuers from infidels; and gtherng the 1 Cor 1.2 Saints onely into the communion of the church, vnder the officers  Cor. 12 gien of Christ but in England the vnbleeuers and wicked, were receiued and are reteyned in the church. So that Mr. Bern. is but a alse Apostle (as his work shewes) if he be any at all. But in the end he tels vs pag. 144. we forget to iustifie the lawfulnes of our own ministers, who are made iistrs y sch as are no ministers, contrary to the constant practise of the church of God, from the dayes of Adam hitherto. &c. In which dispute, Mr. Bern. teacheth playn apostasie from the Gospell unto Poperie, from whch he deriueth the minstery of his church of Engl. For seing all the examples that he allegeth from scriptures, are of Diuine persons and ap∣proued ministers of the true church; and comming pag. 145. to his church of En∣gland, he fetcheth her ministery out of the Popish church and from the Prelates thereof, it cannot be (if his last words agree with his first) but the poish church is a true church, and their prelates true ministers. O∣therweise hs reasoning is absurd, to say, God ordeyned Adam, Moses odeyned Aaron; Christ ordeyned the Apostles; the Apostles ordeyned or∣ther mnisters in churches: therefore Antichrist of Rome, his synagoue of Satan, & hs eldest sones the Prelates, must or may ordeyn miniters in the church of Christ. If this be a good consequence let al men iudge: if s it be not, then Mr. Bern. holdeth the popish church, and the o∣pish ministers true ministers; and so himselfe and his church of England must needs be schismatiks for leauing that church of Rome. When he hath cleared himselfe of this his absurd doctrine, then (if he cannot see that the church of Christ hath power to ordeyn her own ministers) it shalbe shewed hm by the scriptures, Tll then, what should we do fo∣lowing of a wauering reed, whome we cannot tell by his writing, whe∣ther he be Papist or Protestant. And that the reader may see into what an intricate Labyrnth the ministers of England haue brought them∣selues, about this matter of their ministery, by writing as they haue do both of the Papists and of us: I will set down a Papist argument against them: from which how handsomely they can defend themselues, I would fayn see. There came out, in anno 1602 a book called A detection of di¦uers notable vntruthes &c. wherein the author hauing to deal wit Mr S¦cliff, who as (he sayth) had reasoned thus, In his cha¦lenge, p: 85. The true church is a societie of faithfull people vnder lawfull Pastors &c But the Church of Rome hath long wanted true Pastors and Bishops; for the Romish Bishops haue no authority r missiō but frō the Pope, to whome also they swear feally: but he hath no au∣thority to send them or ordeyn them, eing himselfe no Bishop, &c. This argu∣mēt of Mr Sutcliffs the Papist detestion, &c. p. 100. retorteth vō thē thus. The true church of
Christ hath alwayes true Pastors and Bishops: but the English Congregation wanteth true Priests and Bishops: Therefore the English congreagation  not the true church of Christ. The fist proposition (sayth the Papist) he must not deny, being of his own making, &c. The 2, proposition is apparant according to Mr Sutcliffs diuinity. For most certaine it is, that their first Bishops recei∣ued their orders and consecration from our catholik Bishops, as his brother Bel confesseth, Suruey. pag. 201. And the thing it selfe speaketh: seing when L∣ther begun, there was not any protestant Bishop or Priest &c. And if Mr Sut∣liffe dare deny that their Bishops were cnscratedl ours, then let him name who they were that did lay hands vpon Mr Parker the first of Cant. that deri∣ued not their mission authority and consecration from the Bishop of Rome. Cer¦tayn it is, tht yther none at all can be named, or els none bsides: therefore if our Bishops be no Bishops, then doth it follow most euidently, that all the En¦glish Bishops, be no Bishops at al, as hauing no other cōsecratiō then from them: And if our English Prelates be no true Bishops, then surely nyther be they Prists or Minisers or Deacons, that be ordeyned by them, and so consequently the congregation of Eg, by Mr Sutcliffs argumēt, not th tru church of Christ. This is the Catholis argument and plea: which how Mr Bern. or his brethren will wel answer, and stand also to that which they haue writ∣ten against vs; I cannot tel. Finally, against that often boasting of the work and effect of the mi∣nistery of Engl, I will oppose a testimony of one of their chief miisters, yet our professed aduersary, that it cannot be thought he was partial for vs at all. Mr Gifford is the man that thus hath Dialogue between a Papist & a protestāt: in the Epistle dedicatory: written. Som de won∣der how it should come to passe; that among vs there should be so many which being borne since the gospell was restored in this land are so zealously addicted un¦to Popery, which thy neuer did know. and so utter enemies to the Gospel which they hear. But if they weigh the causes of this deadly mischeef, they will cease wondring at that, and rather wonder that there be no more. For how can it b so long as there be so many abuses in the ministery, but that many shall stum∣ble and loath the Gospell. For from thence as it is manifest, the cheife cause of this euill doth spring. True it is that our ministery doth fight against them but yet in such sort, that it doth greatly increase them. Seeming and pretending to tread vpon those cockatrise eggs, for to breake them, and so o destroy utterly th viperous generation: when as indeed they sit vpon them, and so hatch the brods of this euill kinde, and bring them forth in great plenty. For behold a number cry out against popery, and proclaym vtter defiance in speach: but their doings are such, that for euery one which they conuert to the gspel, they cause an hun∣dred to reuolt, to be hardned in their errors, or to fall into flat Atheisme. While many cōtrary to the professiō wich they made when they entred, setting aside the care of sowles, not esteeming nor regarding what become of them, studie most how to clime high, and to satisfy their ambitious desire of honour: taking togi∣ther liuings couetously and greedily: not caring who feed the flock, so they may me by the fleese, Moreouer the door hath been opened also o let into the church
and swarme of such, as are more like the priests of Ieroboam, then minis∣ter of the gospell: not onely unlearned idols, which haue mouthes and speake nt; which being weary of their occupations, and couet to liue easily, and to that end are entred; but also riotous, dicers, gamesters, quaffers, quarrellers, adulterers and such like. If the matter were secret I should doe amisse to make it manifest; but when it is open in the sight and view of all men, who can complayn iustlie when it is spoken of? Let this record of Mr Gffords, for the effect of their administration and their good quallities besides, togither with Mr Ber∣nards former doctrine for their first calling and ordination by the popish prelates; shew whether it be not like, that this ministery will ere long make accord with the mother church of Rome that hatched it, and for whom it againe hatcheth cockatrices eggs. The tenth error that we should hold is,10 Error that their worship (in Engl.) is a false worship. To proue this to be an error, Mr Bern. bringeth these reasons. 1. That they worship no false God. I answer.Answer. Neyther did Ieroboam the son of Neba who made Israel to syn: yet vsed he a false worship 1 King. 12. 2. That they worship the true God with no false worship; for they haue the true word preached, the true sacraments, and their prayers are such as ma be warranted by the word. &c. I answer, this is but taking for granted, that which he should proue; for he knowes well that we deney thse things, and by many reasons in sundry bookes (none of which Mr Bern. answereth) haue disproued their preaching, ministring of Sacraments, booke prayer &c. Seing he will an¦swer nothing before written by vs, let him in his next booke, prooue that the Apocrypha scriptures and homily bookes, which they read in Gods worship are his true word; that the sacraments which the vnprea∣ching priests minister to their profane parishioners by their popish lei∣tourgie, are true sacraments; let him approue by Gods word the obser∣uation of all their holy dayes, fasting dayes, with their prescript peculiar seruice; briefly, let him shew warrant for his seruice book, the making and vse thereof with all the popish contents therein. These are strange incense, new forgeries of their own, neuer appoynted by Christ or his A¦postles: wherefore we doubt not to affirme their worship to be false, e∣uen an humane inuention. With these things Mr Bern. medleh not, but bringeth proof for other matters, which we neuer denyed; and referreth vs to an after treatise. which now next followeth to be answered. Yet ere he leaueth us, he will utter all his hart, and from his inner store pow∣reth out against vs 12. errors moe, whch he will not spend time (he saith) in conuttion of, they are so absurd and false; being also (as he thinketh) conured by the former. Though nothing need be answered where no shew of proof is made: yet to satisfy the reader and shew him the vani∣ty of this aduersary, I will briefly touch them all; and they be these.
1 That their congregations, as they stand, are all and euery of them vncapa∣ble before God to chuse them ministers, though they desire the meanes of salua∣tion. Al such as desire the means of saluation in what congregations soeuer, haue,Aswner. ower and liberty from God to separate from all euill, and ioyne togither in good, and so to enioy Gods blessings in his ministery, or any other part of the Gosel But, we hold that no false church, hath power from God to chuse ministers: which he hath ordeyned onely for true chur¦ches. 1 Cor. 12.28. Eh. 4, 12 Rm. 12.4, 5 &c. & we wonder with what face any Christian can say otherweise. If Mr Bern. make the error to be in holding them false churches; then is it the same with the 8. error be∣fore answered, and is here bt idly of him repeated. 2. That God in their best assemblis, is worshipped after a false manner. Answer.An other idle repetition of that which before he made our Tenth er∣ror, which there was answered. 3. That baptisme is not administred into the fayth of Christ simply, but into the fayth of Bishops, and Church of Engl. Answer.This I think is Mr Bernards vncharitable collection, not our Positi∣on. Though we hold baptisme among them to be administred neyther by a true minister nor after a lawfull manner, but according to their own prescript Leitourgie and to the seed of the wcked, with great disho∣nour of the precious blood of Christ; and therefore to be no true seal of Gods couenant vnto them. 4. That their faith and repentance is a false faith, and a false repentance. Answer.Faithfulnes and repentance is desired in Mr Bernard himselfe, who ca∣reth not to calumniate us We professe to iudge no secret things such as true faith and repentance are. We are perswaded many in true churches may haue a false fayth and a false repentance, because there are many hypocrite also that many in false churches may haue true faith and re∣pentance, for there are Gods elect But who these are on both sides, we leaue vnto God that knowes them. Of Mr Bernards church this is that we say, they walke not in the true fayth, they bring not forth fruites of tre repentance, in the publick estate wherein they stand. 5. That thir Ministers conuerting men to God there, doe it not as Pastors but as Teachers.Answer. This distinction which Mr Bern. skoffeth at▪ must rest, skoff and all, in his own bosome, till he bring out another father. I know not who be∣gat it. 6. That their church standeth in an adultrous estate. A strange assertion (sayth Mr Bern.) what idol worship we? Answer.False worship is spirituall adultery Ier. 3. If Mr Bern. were not a stran¦ger in Christ fold, he would so acknowledge it, and not count it our er∣rour. If he say the error is in holding their worship to be false; then say I, he repeteth now the third time, that which before he made our 10. &
agayn our second Errors, and if he goe forward thus, he may multiply it to a thowsand, and teach us new Arithmetik. If he would know what idol he worships! let him take his Ordinary for one among many, who stan¦deth for a spirituall Lord ouer many churches, vsuring Christs place: to him doth Mr Bern. with his flock, bow and stoup. An other idol he may nde in his pue. 7. That we cannot say certaynly by any warrant of Gods word, that any of  them hath eyther faith or fear of God. A hard speech, If that man whome he mentioneth in the margine,Answ. so sayd; let not one mans word be imputed to our common cause He may see it otherwise minded by others of us, before in this treatise pag. 39 and our Apolog. pag. 91.92. 8. That nne of their ministers may be heard. Not heard in the execution of their ministery, for it is of Antichrist.Answ. Christs sheep hear his voyce, not a strangers Ioh, 10 All Antichrists mi∣nisters are strangers. So are all ministers of euery false Church. Such their church and ministery hath bene proued to be in many treatises. 9, That it is not lawfull to ioyne in prayer with any of them, As a false church generally, so the members thereof particularly,Answ. may not be communicated with in spirituall actions. Such we hold, & haue proued their church to be. Til Mr Bern. take away this foundation, he fighteh but with shadowes; and sheweth his ignorance in the com∣munion of the Saincts. 10. That ministers may not celebrate mariage nor bury the dead. There wanteth a third thing to make vp the error,Answ. Churching of women These and the lke ministerial functions, we know the Romish Antichrist layeth on his priests, and the Prelates of England on theirs: But in Christs testament we finde no such duties imposed vpon his ministery Let Mr. Ber therefore bury his dead still; for he will quicken but a few by his po¦pish doctrine. 11, That ministers should onely liue of voluntary contribution, and not ey∣ther  of set stipends or tithes. Against this Mr Bern. allegeth Gods wisdome who allowed a setled mainte¦nance under the law: and there is nothing against it in the Gospel, God in wisdome appoynted tithes, first fruites & other particulars for his Prirsts liuelihod ūder the law:Answ. Christ in wisdom appoyntth nōe such for his ministers under the gospell; but Pope Paschalis about 827 yeares after Christ Qu 19. ca. 1. Decima a populo. decreed that tithes should be giuen to the priests. This Popes wisdome Mr Ber. preferreth before Christs. It cannot be deney∣ed but tithes were a part of the Law, and that Chris abolished the legal Priesthood; whervpon it followeth by the playn doctrine of the Gospel, if the priesthood be changed, then of necessity must there be a change of the law. Heb. 7.12. But Mr Bern, had rather any shadow should be done away then this of Tithes, for it hath much substance with it. and there be moe
siluersmithes of Demetrius minde which sayd, Act 19.15 Siroye know, that by this craft we haue our goods. But what sayth one of their own ancient Martyrs against Mr Bernards predecessors. Acts and Monumēts, Wiliā Thor in his testa¦ment. This Priesthood is blown so high and borne vp in pride and vayne glory of their estate and dignity, and so blinded with worldly couetousnes, that thy disdayne to follow Christ in uery meeknes and wil¦full pouerty, liuing holily, and preaching Gods word truely freely and continual∣ly, taking thir liuelihood at the freewil of the People; of their pure almose, wher and when they suffice not for their true and busy preaching to get their sustenance with their hands To this true sentence grounded on Christs own luing, and teaching of his Apostles, these foresayd worldly and fleshly priests, wil not consent effect ally, &c. If this martyr were now aliue, the Clerge of England would sooner condemn him for a Brownist then approe of his doctrine; albeit now that he is dead, they garnish his toomb. 12. That their churches ought to be raced down, and not to be jmployed to the true worship of God. Answ.To repayr this ruine, M. Bernard telleth us; there is great difference be∣tween Antichristianisme and Paganisme. He might tel us also there is great difference between Paganisme & Paganisme, some Pagans worshippng the true Act 17.23 God ignorantly; some the Sun and Moon and host of heauen, some the Diuil himselfe. But what were this to the purpose? The thing he should shew is that God more estemeth fauoureth aloweth or tolerateth antichrists idol howses, then of the Pagans. Till he doe this, we know that by Gods word and in his account, as Pagans 1 Cor, 10 20. worship Diuils, so Anti∣christians Reu 9 20, & 16, 14. and 18.2. worship diuls Let men feign to themselues what difference they lst. But it must be proued (sayth Mr Bern.) that our churches were built by Antichrist. First God in his law required no such proof, when he com∣manded utterly to destroy al the places wherein the nations which Israel should possesse serued their Gods;Deut. 12.2.3. whether it were in the groue which Abraham himselfe had Gen, 21, 33, planted, or on the altars which he had Gen 12, 7 8. &, 13, 4 &c, builded; the law of God made no inquiry Secondly, If M, Bern. will seek the records of his temples, he may find many to haue been builded by Papists, if he will grant that they be Antichristians: or if he will goe frther, he may finde some of them builded by heathens, and dedicated to Diuils. But though the Records sayd nothing, yet the form and shape of these masse howses, proclayme them to be the uery shrines of idols, and lyable to the Curse. Thus are we come to an end with M, Bernard; passing by his imper∣tinent discourses, which in his rouing he ran into: leauing him also for his unchristian reproches, and iniurious calumniations, to the mercy or iudg¦ment of the Lord, who Iude vers. 14.15. behold commeth with ten thowsnds of his Saincts to giue iudgment against all men, and to rebuke all the vngodly among them, of all their wicked deeds which they haue wickedly committed, and of all their cru∣l speakings, which wicked sinners haue spoke against him.
THE MINISTERS POSITIONS SHAKEN. THere is added to Mr Bernards book, an other work intituled; CER¦TAIN POSITIONS held and maynteined by some godly ministers of the gospel, against those of the separation, and namely against Barrow & Greenwood. The groundwork whereof is thus layd; That the Church of England is a true Church of Christ and such a one as from which whosoeuer wittingly and continually separateth himselfe, cutteth himselfe ff from Christ I will not stand vpon the consequences that may be made of this posi∣tion, whereby all that abhorrng the abominations in that church, and so separating from it, are quite cut off from Christ, whatsoeuer truth they profee and walke in, or whatseuer other church they ioyne vnto: but I will insist in a brie answer to that which these Ministers bring to proue this their peremtory sentence, and they be 4. reasons. 1, For that they enioy and ioyne togither in the use of those outward meanes which God in his word hath ordyned for the gathering of an inuisible Church: that is, preaching of the gospel, and administration of the sacraments. 2. For that their whole church maketh profession of the true faith. 3. For that thy hold and teach &c. all truthes fundamental. 4. For that all known churches in the world acknowledge that church for ther sister, and giue vnto her the right hand of fellowship. These things haue been before handled in this treatise, and the weak∣nee of them discouered: yet because it may be thought new men will make new arguments, and many heads together bring forth deep coun∣sels, let us weigh what these godly ministers haue here sayd. For proof of the first poynt,1 Reason, they doe allege that the meanes which they vse and enioy haue been effectuall to the vnfained conuersion of many: as may appear both by the other fruites of faith that may be found amongst them, and by the martyrdome which sundry haue endued &c: yea euen we our selues are able to witnes with them, that if there be any true faith and sanctification in us, it was begun and bred in thir assemblies, Secondly, that if Mat. 8.18.20 Eph. 4, 11.12.14 be well examined, it wile found that the meanes which Christ ordeyned for the gathering of an in¦uisible church are the very same which they enioy euen the preaching of the word and administration of the sacraments. I answer; All this that they say will not proue their, Position,Answ. namely that the church of England which consisteth of the whole nation, diuided in to many dioceses and parishes, vnder one or two Archbishops &c. is a true church of Christ. For the Papists boast of all these things, as colou∣rable and as truely as these ministers Their priests haue conuerted ma∣ny from Pagenisme, Iudaisme, and profanenes of life; their church hath had many martyrs; Luther and others that first left them, had their faith begun in their assemblies; &c. and whatsoeuer Ministery is in England, from the Archprelate to the halfe priest, the Papists, haue amongst them
yea Engl. had it from them. And it is to be admired that these godly mi¦nisters can allege nothing for their church, but such old popish stales. How vainely they assume these things vnto themselues, hath been shew¦ed befoe: See before p. 37.42.43. fruits of faith appear no in their confuse assemblies whre God is publckly dishonoured by false worship; his enemies (profane & wicked people) fostered and blesed with his most holy things, and An∣tichristian prelates, and Canons obeyed: Were it as they say, that many haue been conuerted, is that enough to make all the church? We haue testimonies from their See before p. 2.107. own mouthes that there be swarmes and thowsands of profane, irreligeous, atheists, blasphemers and open wicked liuers Mr Gifford a champion of their own hath confessed and printed it that Coūtry di¦vinity: in th Epis de dic. through want and absence of  sin¦cere ministery, there is a flood of ignorance and darknesse ouerflowing the most part of the land: the fear of God is banished from the greatest part: the wonder∣full heaps and piles of sinne, which should be washed and clensed away by the word, doe undoubtedly with one voyce cry alowd in the eares of the Lord for ve∣geance vpon the whole realm &c Shal now a few supposed conuerts, mak all this rowt a Christian church? It is impiety, and an ouerthrow of the Gospell. Gen. 3.15. 2 Cor. 6.14, 18, Mat, 15.13. Reu. 21..2:3.27. and 28.15. What meane these Ministers to boast so much of their martyrs whose blood cries against them, in the eares of the Lord of hosts. For did not their church kill them? Let one of themselues speake in this case, least we be thought partiall. Ios, Nich. Plea. of the innocent. p. 236. Who knoweth not (sayth Mr Nichols,) how much blood of Gods Saincts. was spilt in former ages, and how many howses were guil∣ty of blood? And when did this land seriosly and sincerely humble it selfe. & by pen repentance make reconciliation for the same? Nay rather how many thow∣sands repined at the happy reign of her maiesty, for the casting out of the idola∣trous and superstitious worship of God, and for the establishing of his holy nam and the liberty in preaching of the Gspell? This testimony is known to b true; the greater is their sinne that now plead for such a people to be a true Church of God. Shall the Cainites be honoured for Abels martyr∣dom; or the Iewes for crucifying Christ? then also may the bloody gen∣tion of Papists be canonized for Saincts, and made members without r¦pentance) of a christian church. And for these ministers, let them heart and make vse of Christs words to their predecessors. Luk. 11.47.48. Woe unto you, for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers killed them Truly y bear witnes and allow the deeds of your fathers, for they killed them, and y build their sepulchres. Mat. 23.3, Fulfil ye also the measure of your Fathers. It is a slight and simple kinde of reasoning, to tel us if those scripture Mat. 28. Eph. 4. be well examined; it will be found that the meanes which Christ ordeyned for the gathering of an inuisible church, ar the uery same which they inioy. First, what doting Friar will not say this much, for his popish Synagogue? Then, why doe not these ministers bring the meanes they boast of to the examination by these scriptures: is it yenough (think they
to the examination by these scriptures: is it yenough (thinke they) to cite a text or two, and then ran away; The scriptures they allege haue been Pag, 13 & 102, 103. before examined and the ministers of Engl. being put into the other ballance, are found all too leight. But if it were true that they had the mean; yet their argument is false if they conclude of the effect. Israel had farr better meanes; then England I am sure: for the Prophets, and Apo∣stles and Christ himselfe preached among them Yet loe he complay∣neth Isa. 49, 4. that he had laboured in vayne; for Ierusalem Mat. 23.37. killed the Prophets, and stoned those that were sent vnto them, and the Lord by his Apostles Rom, 10.31. stretch¦ed forth his hand to a disobedient and gainsaying people. And shall we thinke that the Prests of Engl. haue such power and grace tied to their lips, that because they haue reached, therefore the whole nation is a true church? Or dot there such vertue proceed from these ministers, as can make the multitue of swaggering professors, atheists, blasphemers, and all sorts of profane which swarme in the land, to be turned Christians. worthy to be washed and fed with the body and blood of, Christ. and yet con∣tinue atheists and profane as before? what wondrous effect shall we next hear of, but that their preaching hath conuerted the Diuils also. But let us hear what testimony M. Gifford hath left behnde him, of the gra & learned prachers of the church of Engl: among whom himselfe was one,) and of the people in their parishes, The Diull (Coūtry di¦uinity fol. 48. sayth he) is content those preachers should ride vpon his back because he is sure they will not spurg all him: they be very gentle riders. Doe ye not thinke, that if they should set forth Gods word as they ought, and spread the light: that all wicked, (of which their parish is full,) would storme and fret against them? the Diuill himselfe would fik about, if they should spur him but a little. But they can tell a smooth tale in the pulpit garnished with some merry story, for to make the people merry or els some old rotten allegory; or some far fetched matter out of some great wri∣ters, that their people may be at their wits end and admire, admit them. A man would thinke to see the people come out of the church blowing, that they were fed as ful as tikes: when they goe home with emty bellies. This I dare warrant, if it be not so let me loose both mine eares, that ge through the parishes of these grae and learned Diuines and except such as run to fetch their victuals otherwhere, ye shall not finde fie among fiue skore, which are able to vnderstand the necessa∣ry grounds and principles of religion: and yet the People will say, they be excel∣lent deep men. But I loue not those welles which are so deep, that a man can draw no water out of them. Loe here the means which the, parishes of England doe enioy, and worthy effects that follow. If Mr Barrow. or any of vs, should I haue written this, it would haue been counted sffing, ryling, & blasphemy: but now that Mr Gifford, (so worthy a patron of the church) hath thus recorded, I hope the witnes wilbe thought irrefragable And now let these godly ministers examine Mat 28. & Eph. 4 and see if there they can finde these meanes which they enioy, iustified. But they proceed and tel vs in their second reason that pag. 116. their whole church maketh profession of the true faith.2. Reason. For the Confessiō of their church tegi¦ther
togither with the Apologie thereof, and those articles of religion agreed vpon in the Conuocation howse, anno 1562, doe proue this euidently. But herein they would deceiue the simple euidently: for first profession of the true sayth, when men in practise doe deny it, maketh them not a true church, but they are as the Apostle sayth, Tit. 1.16· abominable. Then for profession it selfe, if it be by constreynt, for fear of punish∣ment, by mn that otherweise are profan, lewd, and dissolute and ene∣mies to the gospell this is no true profession, such as will make men a true church, for they ought to receiue and professe the truth willingly and gladly Psal, 110.3. Act. 2 41. Now we know that with them, men were and are forced to the profession they make, and if it were at their own choise, many thowsands would professe otherwise. Their own acts and Monuments, (besides manifest experience) doe witnes this. For Mr Fox reporteth, that when K. Edward had established this church and re∣ligion many people Act & monu. edi. 5. pag 117, 1190 in Cornwal. Deuenshire and other places, not one∣ly misliked it, but openly rebelled for their old idolatrie. The Preists, though some allowed, yet others ibidem pa 1184. dissembled, and many carelessly conem∣ned all, and still excercised their old moned Popery. The Iustices &c were not onely pag 1185 slack in furthering of religion, but hindred so much as lay in them the Kings proceedings &c. So that ciuill force, not Christian zelo made men Protestants in that Kings dayes: wherefore at his death, hauing got¦ten Q. Mary, they so vp agayn their Romish superstition, and persecu∣ted the other vnto the death. Til Q. Elisah came, and inforced them the second tyme to put away ther Latin Masse and images, and receiue that English seruice and ceremonies, whch since haue preuayled to this day, Whch how willingly the people yelded vnto, Mr Nichols testimony (to omit all others) before alleged, sheweth. And How wel this religion is liked of now after so many yeres▪ let the multitude of church papists in England shew: together with the whole row of rebels in Ireland, all which are of the communion of the church of Engl, hauing the same Bishops, Priests, service & the English and Irish that dwel in the country, being ioyned togither in one body and brotherhood: Then adde to these papists, the profane time-seruers, such as M. Gifford deseribeth thus, Coūtry diui¦nity. fol. 2 I know there be many which care not for the Pope, but yet beleeue much of his doctrine: they be those which we call Atheists of no religion: but look whatsoeuer any prince doth set forth that they will profess and add vnto them those other firarmes in the church of England that Mr Chaderton complayneth of; eronius and hereticall sectaries, witches, char∣mers sorcerers, murtherers, theeues, adulterers, liars, &c and all these togi∣ther being compelled by law into one church and brotherhood, can any man doubt now of that which these ministers,Serm. on Rom. 12. p. 65.66. say, that their whole church maketh profession of the true faith? The Confession, Apologie. and Conuocation-howse articles, are strange proofs of the peoples profession. If a few men in their Studies or Con∣sistories, write books or articles of religion. and send them a broad; must
all people that see or hear them, wil they nil they, needs be counted pro¦fessors of that religion? yea such also as neuer heard of them in their liues nor cānot tel what they meāe? Surly these ministers ar eyther very igno∣rant, or carelesse what they say, when they call this an euident proof. The churches in France and Belgia haue published Confessions and Articles also, better then those in England: yet are there thowsands and ten thow¦sands dwelling among them, that neyther so professe, nor are members of their churches. But if it were granted that the publicke writings, articles canons &c. are to be esteemed the faith & profession of all Engl. yet we deny them to make profession of the true faith; for their Seruice book, homilies. book of Ordination, with the impious canons confirming all the Romish idolatries, Antichristian clergie and ceremonies that are among them, ex¦communicating, See before p. 56. ipso facto, all that speake against them; this is no true Christian profession, whatsoeuer other truthes are mixed with them. For as the Papists holding many good grounds of religion in generall, yet by other additions and contradictions, do ouerthrow the truth: so is it in England, as before in this treatise, and in many others, hath been proued and after shall further appear. Whereas these Ministers confidently deny that their church accounteth any one for her childe or member, that doth not professe the faith of Christ in some measure: it is nothing but a vayn flourish. For was there euer such gross∣nes in the deepest gulfe of Popery as to deney Christ utterly, and not to professe him in some measure? Nay it could not be the throne of Antichrist vnlesse he did professe Christ. It is wel known, none are baptised among the Papists, but they professe the very same faith that is now professed at the baptisme in Engl. namely that which they call th' Apostles Creed So then what haue these godly ministers sayd more then the simplest papist in the world could haue sayd for his church? Now in that they make this a colour, as if the profane and wicked were not accounted children of the church: they shew themselues to be Hos. 9.8 the snare of a fowler in al their wayes: yet set they a snare so slight, that euery man may breake it. For who knowes not that there be multitudes of profane and wicked persons in the land? Who knowes not that the whole land generally is baptised? Yea the baptisiing of the seed of the most wicked, is not onely practised but befended in print, by their late Archbishop D. Whitg. who pleaded Answer to the admon. pag. 111. what if it be the child of a dronkard, or of an harlt? what if the Parents be pa¦pists? what if they be heretiks? &c. shall not their children be baptised? Yes, he will haue it to be a common passage for all uile persons, Good and euil (sayth Defense of the answer to the adm, pag. 621. he) clean and vnclean, holy and profane, must needs passe by it. And at baptisme their seruice book teacheth the priest to say of euery one, we receiue this child into the congregation of Christs flock. Being thus receiued, not one of a thowsand wicked persons, are euer excommunicated: but are fostered in the church vntill their death; and then the priest is taught agayn to say that Seruice a burîall. it hath pleased God to take vnto himselfe the sowle of their
dear brother there departed, and so he committeth his body to the ground in sure and certayn hope of resurrection to eternal life. This being the gene∣rall state of the land, as all men know; what dissemblers are these Mini∣sters to intimate. as if their church acknowledged not the open wicked for her children and members? Mr Gifford, when tyme was, yeilded farr o∣therweise. I confesse Dialog, be¦tweē a Pap & a protes. fol 38. (sayth he) that our church, if ye vnderstand the whole assembly, is ful of al wicked vices. There are a number among vs which are of your brood, speaking to a apist,) whse euill life is seen wel yenough, there ar a very great number of meer worldlings which doe not greatly esteem any religion although they seem now because of lawes, to allow and fauour our side. &c. Now hauing sayd somewhat for themselues, such as it is, they cauil pag. 167. at our description of a church, when we say, that it is a company of faith∣full people that truely worship Christ and realy obey him. This say these Mi¦nisters, is vtterly vntrue if it be understood of the visible church. This is strange. What would they haue vs describe the Church to be a company of infidels; or a company of faithfull and of infidels togither: when Paul tea¦cheth that there is no communion between such, 2 Cor 6.14.15 or should we say, a people that falsely worship Christ? Indeed if so we held, we might wel returne to their Church of England; for there is false worship more then yenough. The Apostle writing to the visible church of Ephe∣sus, calleth them Eph, 1, 1. Saincts, and th faithfull in Christ Iesus. Wil they say that this also was utterly untrue? Their own Articles of religion in England Ano 1562 art. 19. say thus; the visible church of Christ, is a congregation of faithfull people &c. and is this also vttrly vntrue? But let vs hear their reason why this should be vntruth. For (say they) if euery one that the church may account a visible member, be truely faithfull, how is our Sauiour to be vnderstood when he compa¦reth the churh or ministery thereof to a draw net gathering aswel that which must be cast away as good fish &c. Me thinks these godly ministers f should be ashamed so to depraue not onely our meaning, but our very words, that when we say of faithfull people, that truely worship, they wil turne and trans lace them to truely faithfull, and then gather (as afterwards they doe,) as if men may not account any to be members of the church, by their out∣ward profession, vnlsse they know them to haue true faith, which the Lord one∣ly is able to disrne. Could any reasonable man thus construe our words, or gather from them, vnlesse he purposely would depraue? especially knowing (as these men know wel) our constant witnesse otherweise, who esteeme of all men, by their outward profession and walking; and haue long since published in our Confussion, Art, 17· that many hypocrites will lurke in the church whiles it is on earth. But thus it pleased these men to abuse vs, before the simple reader. Their third reason for their church is, that pag, 168 they hold teach and maynteyn every part and article of Gods holy truth which is fundamentall. The proof of this,3. Reason, they would haue to be seen in their Confessions, Catechisnes and Ar∣ticles of religion published and approued of in their church.
This reason is like (if not the very same with) the former, which sake also of professing the true faith, as was to be seen in their Confsn,Answer, Apolo∣gie, & Articles. What meane these ministers to cloy their reader so oftē with one dish of meat, a little diuertly dressed? It is doubtlesse for want of better store. Yet this whch they bring is very vnsauoury, for it is not seasoned with the salt of Gods couenant. First for that poynt of fndamen¦tall truth, which they so long haue stood vpon, and cold neur be got∣ten distinctly to shew what truth is fundamental, and what not: we haue now these ministers resolute judgement of it thus, pag. 174. The onely fundamental truth in religion is this; That Iesus Christ the Son of God, who took our nature of the Virgin Mary, is our onely and alsufficient Sauiour For proof of this, they first allege, that thy receiue this truth are the people of God, and in the state of saluation: they that receiue it not cannot possibly be saued. Mat. 16.18 Mark. 16.16 1 Ih. 4.2. Col 2.7. But first, none of these scriptures doe say, that this one article, which these ministers haue set downe in this forme of words, is the onely funda∣mentall truth in religion. Neyther doth any other scripture, that I know of, so speake; for though Christ 1 Cor. 3.11. onely is the foundation of the Christian church; and though (as they secondly allege) no other point of religion is necessary otherwise then as it tendeth necessarily to teach or confirme this one truth: yet foloweth it not, but other points also are fundamental truthes the denyall of which will abolish from Christ. Secondly they haue altered, added to, and omitted some of the words of these scriptures, for their own aduantage: For fearing that we would (as indeed we mean to doe) presse them with the profession of the Ana∣baptists Papists and other heretiks; they thinke to preuent vs. And first against the Anabaptists which deny that Christ took our flesh, these men haue added, who took our nature of the Virgin Mary. Then against the pa∣pists which hold merit of works, they adioyne these words, our onely and alsufficient Sauiour. And this because the church of England mainteyneth the truth in these points, against those fore sayd heretiks. On the other hand to help themselues in their corrupt Antichristian walking, and false constitution; they omit and mention not th' Apostles words Col. 2. wher he sayth, vers. 6.7. As ye haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke in him, rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye haue been taught &c The discreet reader may soon espy their purpose in this cunning cariage.Mat 16.16. For let the position be set downe in the scripture termes, and we shall see, how weake their plea will be. The onely fundamentall truth in religion is this: That Iesus is 1 Ioh 4.2. the Christ, the sonne of the liuing God, Mark. 16 16. comen in the flesh in whom we must Col. 2.6.7. beleeue and h walke, being rooted and build in him, and stablished in the faith as we are taught in the new testament. If now these ministers will insist vpon the three first scriptures onely, and generall terms that are in them; it is apparant that the Papists, Ana∣baptists and many other miscreants, doe hold and professe them abso∣lutely:
absolutely: But if they joyne with them, Colos. 2. and compare the wal∣king rooting, building, and stablishing in the faith taught by th' Apostles, with the Popish church, or with their own; it wilbe found that neyther of them hold the fondation Christ aright. Themselues wll grant it of the Papsts and other heretiks. and for their own church, it is before in this pag, 74. &c. treatise proued▪ So then to come agayn vnto their reason, that they hold, ech and mainteyn euery part of Gods holy truth which is fundamntall; whereby they woul conclde themselues to be a true chrch the arument is deney∣ed. Fr first if t were granted that thy hld, aught and maiteynd every part of fundental truth, which yet with them is but one article onely as we haue heard,) it wll not follow necessaryly that therefore they are a true chrch, or that they truely professe the Christ an faith. There wan two things; 1 obedience to the truth professed; (withot which men Ioh. 3, 36 Mat, 7.21 23 Rom. 2, 6.8. shalbe damned, whatsoeuer they professe,) 2 and a right profession of the true faith onely, without errurs adioyned that ouerthrow the same faith, and obedience thereto For if a people profesing that onely funda¦mentall truth which these ministers pag. 174. speake of; should withall professe Mahomet the prophet of the Turks; or H. N. the God of the Familists; or any other like abomination: were this misceline profession of Christ and Belial togither. a true and sound profesion? I trow not. So then these ministers must alter their plea thus; that they hold teach mainteyn and obey every part of the fundamentall truth, and nothing els with it, that ouerthrowes the same. If now they say this they doe, I haue before in this treatise pag, 74. &c. disproued it; and here agayn will briefly disproue it, thus. They professe to beleeu In the Creed, the Communion of Saincts; and that the visible church is Art. 19, anno. 1562 a congregation of faithfull people. Yet contrariweise they hold teach and mainteyne, that their own church is a true church of Christ; though it consists as wel of vnholy as holy, infidels as beleeuers and innu¦merable wicked persons openly seen and known. That this they hold & mainteyn, is proed by their continual clamors and reprochful writings against vs, that call vpon them for a separation of light from darknesse. It is proued by Dr Witgifts plea before mentioned, that the children of Papists, heretiks, and other wicked persons are and ought to be bap∣tised amōg the It is further proued by the visible estate of their church knowne vnto all among them, and testfied by her dearest freinds & fa∣uourers. M Gifford speaking to his brethren f the Communion of Saincts in Engl. sayth, Coūtry, di¦uinity, fol. 19. Yee would euen powr out your stining and rten pyson, like blaspemous and venemous beasts: ye would speake after this manner, you that are so full of the spirit; you that are Saincts, and suh like. What are you Diils; are ye of the flesh? No dout ye are, vntill God convert ye. But we may se how diuiishly men ar become wicked: when a man cannot make any ap∣pearance to be godly and holy, but it is reproched as though it were a shamefull thing to be lead by the spirit &c. These and the like records, with the con∣tinuance
continuance in this confused estate, plainely proue an ouerthrow of that article of the true church; which is the body of Christ: and the bo∣dy being disanulled, Christ the head cannot soundly be reteyned. Agayn, they professe in Engl. that Art. 19. anno 1562 the pue word of God is to be prea∣ched, the sacraments duely administred &c. also, that ibid, art. 17, in our doings, that will of God is to be followed which we haue expresly decleared vnto vs in the word of God. Yet withall, they professe and practise in that church, to Book of cō¦mon prayer read the Apocrypha criptures (in which are found vntruthes and er∣rors, when many parts of the authentik scripture, are neuer read among them.) they haue also written Art. 35. anno, 1562 homilies, in sted of preaching; a written Letourge, Letany, collects &c. in sted of praying; which Consti. & canōs, 1603 Leitoargie with all the popish contents therein. must be approued and vsed by all the Priests and people, and God serued by it euery day. They haue also an antichristian clergie, caled and ordeyned according to their ponti∣fical, or book of ordination, which n their beleef,Art. 36, ano. 1562 hath not any thing that of it selfe is sperstitious and vngodly &c. Finally all the Romish reliques yet in England to be seen in the hierarche, worship, ceremonies, ordinan∣ces church constitution &c. (which things can neuer be approued by the word of God,) are yet Canōs, an¦no 1603. & their practise ac∣cording. held and vpheld, taught and mainteyned in the church to the excommunicating and persecuting of all such, as speake against them, or refuse to communicate with them. This sinfull mixture, and maintenance of so much antchristian error, with the chris¦tian truthes that they profee; is no true Christian profession and prac∣tise of our obedience vnto the fundamentall truth of the gospell: ney∣ther can the ministers proue, that these contraries will stand together, when account shalbe giuen before the iudgment seat of Christ. Secondly I answer (as to their former reason that although some Bi∣shops and Priests haue written Articles, Catechismes &c. yet are not these approud, much lesse walked in, by the church of Engl. neyther are the peo¦ple rooted, bilded, and stablished in the faith according to Colos. 2. but are diolute and profane in their conuersation, rooted in uices, and sta∣blished in iniquitis as lamētable experience teacheth all men; as the te∣stmones of their own ministers before alleged proue, and many o∣ther we might allege, and must; if these men still continue to vrge that, which is knowne to be farr otherweise. For how well their people doe walke in the faith of the foundation Christ, and approue of all fundamen¦tall truthes in the scriptures; let these testimonies of their own freinds shew. The most part of your honest men (saith Mr Gifford Country Devinity fol. 73 to and of his brethren) now a dayes, delight so much in the word of God, and meditate so much in it, that they care not a button though they neuer heare it. they loue it: and set as much by it as they doe by an old se. Euery man (sayth Preface to Mr, D. Fenners Coūterpoys an other) followeth the pride couetousnes, whordome, dronkennes, of his owne hart, and no man remembreth Ioseph. The barrs are filled with pleadings, & the streets are full of cries of the poor, fulnes of meat, and contempt is among vs, and who
considereth! Yet if this our sinne were onely against men, and not against God there ight be some hope. But when the mouth of the blspemous swearer is not tid vp, and the hands of the idolatrous generation of Atheists and profane persons be not chained, when the most holy and precious word of God is manifestly contemned, the ioyfull and heauenly tidings of saluation so negligently and vn∣gratefully troden vnder foot, the true and faithfull messengers pursued, arraygn∣ned and diuers wayes fflicted: then if the old world for malicious imaginations Sodome and Gomora for pride fulnes of meat and vnmercifulnes: if Ierusalem for abusing Gods Prophets and wilfulnesse were woefully destroyed: what may we poor carelesse People look for it we doe not repent, but (as it is almost vniuer∣sally feared spedy ruine and vtter desolation, The exceptions which these Godly ministers take against Mr Bar∣rowes writings, and yet professe pag, 169. not to answer them; need not now to be stood vpon, till the particulars whereby he hath discouered their errors and euill dealings, be by them taken away. They further taxe & note it in him as pag. 173. a strange opinion and an error full grosse, mainteyned in pag. 156.157. of his Discouery, vidz that euery truth conteyned in the scrip∣ture is fundamentall. But the grossnes or crossnes wilbe found in themselus for that which Mr Barrow there inueigheth against, was this, Discouer. Pag. 156. that though transgressions and errors be obstinately continued in, and openly taught. after they be reproued and conuinced by the word of God, yea and the parties dye in that estate without repentance of these transgressions or errors: yet may they hold the foundation and be vadoubtedly saued. Of this minde were, and still continue (sayth he) fiue of the very principal and best esteemed ministers of Engl. both for learning and conscience: although there were alleged against the same these expresse scriptures, Num. 15.30 31. Exod. 23.21. 1 Sam. 15.22.23. Ezek. 18.26 Mat. 5, 18, 19 Iam. 2 10. &c. This was the thing that M, Bar. there bet down, shewing further, that if the whole scripture was giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to conuince,2 Tim 3, 16 Prov. 30.5 Psal. 19.8. & 12.6. Psa. 119 en¦tyre. Eph, 2 20. to correct, to instruct in righteousnes; if it be the groundwork and foundatiō of the church, of our fayth: if it be the law and rule of our life, the light of our eyes &c. If euery word of God be holy, pure, perpetuall; then is this deep learning of theyrs, diuilish and blasphemous, that thus to colour and couer their wickedness. make some part of gods word fundamentall. substantiall, necessary, other accidentall, superficiall, needlesse, especially where it sheweth reproueth and condemneth their doings &c Now what say these ministers against this plea? they plainly yeild in e¦ffect to th'truth, which they could with no coulour gainsay; we beleeu (say Pag. 174 they) and teach, that there is no Part of holy scripture, which euery Christian is not necessarily bound to seek, & desire knowledge of so far sorth as in him lyeth. Very wel sayd &; had they added also this word obeyed, (which I suppose they would be thought to intimate,) there would be no difference be∣tween M, Barrow and them, though thus they would traduce him. But least they should seeme to condemne themselues, they except. yet dare
ibidm. we not cal euery truth fundamentall; that is, such as if it be not knowne and o¦beyed, the whole religion and fayth of the church must needs fall to the ground; and agayne; pag, 173, we doubt not that some parts are of more vse, and more necessa∣ry for men to know, then othersome. In these things (excepting the word fundamentall which seemeth to be but strife about a word,) We agree with them; neyther doth Mr Barrow, that I can perceiue disagree for it is one thing not to know and obey euery truth, as they speake, and another thing to know, as haung reproofe and conuiction by the word of God, and yet to disobey and rebel against the truth, and continue obstinately in trans∣gresion▪ which was the poynt in hand. And for the world fundamentall, seing all Gods testimonies are true; and Dauid sayth that the Lord hath Psal. 119 152. founded them for euer; I see no cause why we need be afraid to call eue∣ry trth fundamentall that is such as is firme and stable. and on which we shovld ground and builde our faith and actions vp on alwayes. Yet seing now what these ministers vnderstand by the word, I will not striue. Also M, Barrow himselfe in his Obseruations vpon Mr Giffrds last reply telleth him that he Answe to Artic 5 denyeth not in vse of speech such distinction, so much as withstand such eronius abuse of that distinction, which M. Gifford and other deuines of these tymes would infer thereof. And in deed the simple are much beguiled by this subtile distinction. For when the sinns and idolatres of these Priests are blamed: answer is made, though they be sinns, yet are they not fundamentall, they cut vs not off from Christ we hold him the foundation, and beleeue to be saued by him alone and by this colour, men continue in transgression and idolatrie stil. which is as if a theef, dronkard, whormaister, blasphemer, or other vicious, li∣uer, being blamed by the lawes of God which condemne these sinnes, should say; These are petty faults I confesse, but they are not fundamental: for the onely fundamentall truth and ground of all Gods law is Loue, and that is the fulfilling of the law. Rom. 13.8 9.10. Gal. 5.14. 1 Tim. 1.5. Now this foundatio I hold, for I professe to loue God aboue al, and my neighbour as my slfe, on which ground as Christ sayth Mat. 22.40. the law and prophets doe depend; and this I doe, howsoeuer I cannot keep my tongue from swearing, lying and iauldrie, nor my hands from picking and stealing, nor my body chast, &c. yet my hart is good, I loue God and my neighbour, and hope to he saued as well as the precisst puritan of them all, And now what will these ministers say to ther profane parishioners, if thus they pleaded? for doe not themselues thus plead for the transreossins of the first table, and violating of the te¦stament of Christ, in their own false ministery, idolatrous rites, ceremo∣nies, and forged worship. But as euery true Christian hart knoweth that such profane ruffians, howsoeuer they say they loue god, yet in deed they hate him, and howsoeuer the smme and end of all the Law is Loue onely, yet that loue implyeth obedience to every particular pre∣cept, and he which breaketh the least commandement and teacheth men so, shalbe called the least in the kingdome of heauen; as Christ Mat 5.12 sayth:
so know they likeweise, or should know, that such superstitious idola∣ters, false and Antichristian Prelates and priests, howsoeuer they boast of true fayth, yet by theyr works they deney it; and although Fayth in Christ be the foundation of Christian religion, yet in imlieth necessarily Ioh 3.36. Rom. 1.5. obedience vnto the ordinances of his Testament, euen Ioh 13.14 Mat 28.20 whatsoeuer is commanded them therein; and as the curse is denounced against all the transgressors of Moses law Gal 3.10 in any part thereof; so they shall not escape vengeance Heb 2.2.3 & 3.7.8 & 10.26 &c. &. 12, 25. that wilfully despise the law of Christ or any part of his te∣stament, confirmed with his precious blood. And if thus we vnderstand not and interpret those scriptures which sum vp al christianity in Christ; we must needs confesse that many false churches, euen Rome it selfe is a true church; seeing they doe professe such generall grounds of Christ, as by playn evidence of scripture seem sufficient vnto saluation, as appea∣reth by Council Trident. Ses, 3. compared with Rom. 10.9. Act. 8.37, 38. 1 Ioh. 4.2. Mark. 16.16. also Rhemes testam annot. on 1 Tim. 2.5. wher they professe, Christ by nature to be truely both God and man, to be that on eter¦nall priest and redeemer, which by his sacrifice and death vpon the crosse, hath reconciled us to God, and payed his blood as a full and sufficient ransome for all our sinns, &c. How beit, that these ministers stumble no more at that we professe, let them know, we hold euery generall head and ground of doctrine more necessary to be known, then ech particular branch of the same? & an error ouerthrowing a whole ground of religion, to be much more wic¦ked then that which ouerturneth but a part thereof. Also that many of Gods church, are ignorant of sundry particular doctrines of the Gospell yea Psa 9.12 all of vs in some, for none is perfect; yet that in some generall grounds, ignorance is damnable; and further that the wilfull and obsti∣nate refusall or contempt of the least evident truth of the Gospel, is Ian. 3.2. deadly and damnable of it own nature. Neyther see we, how we should beleeue otherweise, vnlesse with the Papists we think some sinns veniall some mortall As for Mr Barrowes words from Ioh. 16.13. which also, these ministers mistaking doe Rom 6.23 1. Ioh 2.4.6 & 3.6.8.9  pag. 171, mislike; it is evident by his own writings See cōfer. in th' Fleet with Mr. Hutch and D'Andrews 4 Reason, to the contrary otherwhere, that he meant not so erroniously as they collect. But that promise made to the Apostles, he applieth vnto all the members of Christ by proportion, though not in like measure. Which that it may be done, we learne of the Apostles themselues in other like cases. 2 Cor. 4.13. from Psalm. 116. Heb. 13.5.6. from Ios. 1 & Psal. 118. &c. Their last reason is from the approbation of all the known churches in the world, which acknowledge this church (of Engl.) for their sister, and give vnto them the right hand of fellowship. This poynt is handled before in this treatise, pag. 9. &c. & 48 & 51. &c. vnto which places I refer the reader. Many scriptures and reasons these ministers allege from the pri∣mitiue churches examples, that reioyced for. and saluted one another; & of
and of the comfort that a church may haue in the communion and appro¦bation of other churches. All which we grant; and de obserue, how fast hey can cite scriptures for things that we deny not. But they say nothing for the controuersie between them and vs. which consisteth of these 3. poynts; 1 whither a people may not separate from euill and professe and walke in the truth vnlesse or vntill other churches allow them 2. whe∣ther it be a necessary and vndenyable argument, that whomsoeuer other churches approue, they are true churches, and so must be esteemed of all men; 3 and whither the reformed churches at this day, doe approue of the church of England, in all or any of the differences for which we s¦parate from them. The first of these is proved by all Gods commande∣ments, which require euery man particularly to refrayn all evill, and doe that which is good: Exod. 20. The second is disproued by themselues in their writings against the Papists; who pressed them with such reasons. Let councels (sayth In the an¦swer to Mr Raynolds preface. Mr Whitaker) be esteemed as they deserue: let their de∣crees be examined by Gods word; and if they agree let them be receiued for that agreement: if not, let them be reiected for the contrary. To this agreeth their own Bishops Articles, ano 1562. Art. 21. and also their Apoligie; before alleged in pag. 92. this treaise; and finally Mr Bernards own counsel. (though perhaps he knew no more then Caiaphas what he sayd.) saying; pag. 8. See in∣to the glasse of the word by thine own sight, without other mens spectacles &c. For the latter poynt, we know the reformed churches (as their constitu∣tion and writings shew) are for vs and against them; of which see before pag 10, &c. and it shall hereafter be further confirmed, if these ministers will deny it. Hitherto of the reasons alleged by the godly ministers wherein how they haue proued and setled their first position; let the godly wise judge. Next follow their answers to the obiections made by vs. And these they make two. First, that their church of Engl. was not gathered by such meanes as God in his word hath ordeyned and sanctified for the gathering of his Church.pag. 18 Se∣condly, pag. 191. that they communicate together in a false and idolatrous outward worship of God, which is polluted with the writings of men, vidz. with read slinted prayers, homilies, catechismes, &c. Here let it first be obserued, that whereas Mr Barrow (whose books they would seem to answer,) hath Refut. of Giff pag, 1. giuen 4. causes of our separation, namely the 1. false worship, 2. profane people, 3 false ministery, and 4. Antichristian hierarchie; these godly ministers like the vniust steward Luk 16, 6 that set down fifty for fiue skore, haue contracted the 4. causes into 2. for what cause let him that readeth consider. Secondly in the two which they professe to answer, they keep not the words by Mr Barrow there set downe; as to begin with the first; he sayth For that the profane vngodly multitudes without exception of any one per¦son are with them receiued into and reteyned in the bosome of the church TheseRefut pag 1
ministers set down the poynt to be about the not gathering by due meanes. Whereas if it were granted that they had due meanes of gathering, yet the exception made is of force against them, rather more then lesse for they that haue the true meanes of gathering a church, and yet gather it amisse; the greater is their sinne. Now to the particulars, whereas Mr Barrow had first Dis, p, 8. shewed by many scriptures and reasons what manner persons were to be the mat∣ter of Gods church; and then compared here with the people of the church of Engl. where all sorts of wicked persons are admitted & kept in communion: to this the ministers answer, pag. 182.183, Ioh 20.19. First that they might law∣fully be accounted a true church, though it could not appear that they were at the first rightly gathered. For euen as the Disciples might be wel assured of Christs bodily presence amongst them when they saw and felt him, though they could not haue discerned which way or how he could possibly come in. so may we esteem them a true church, of whose present profession and faith we are wel assured, though we cannot see by what meanes they were first gathered. This answer of theirs is full of errour and frawd; for, (not to speake how they corrupt Mr Barrowes words in the places which they quote; by leauing out things of speciall importance,) first they blamed because all profane & wicked persōs ar of the mater their church; they tel us, they may esteem them a true church of whose present profession and fayth, they are wel assured. If this answer be direct and to the purpose then we must beleeue that the godly ministers are wel assured of the present profession and faith of all the lewd, profane. irreligious and wicked persons in the realm, which are members of the church of Engl. Against these was the exception made; for these the answer is giuen, vnlesse they answer their own fan∣sies. and now what assurance the ministers have of such mens faith, let the faithfull iudge. Secondly the similitude which they bring, is a great abuse of the rea∣der, whome they would blinde with a false comparison; which if it were duely made, would make against them thus. As the disciples might be wel aured of Christs bodily presence when they saw and felt him &c. so men may he wel assured of the wickeds bodily presence in the church of Engl: when they see and feel them, as who doe not? But now as these men haue made the parable, what likelihood of truth is there in it, for iustifying the vngodly? If a man seeing a Priest in bed with one of the Popes courtizans, should blame him for this fornication, and an other to defend him should plead thus; As we are sure that Sarah was Abrahams wife, though we cannot tell when or how they were married. so may wee esteeme these two (of whose present chascity we are wel assured,) to be lawfull man and wife, though we cannot tel how they came together; would this be a sufficient defence? Yet loe when Mr Barrow blamed Dis. p. 10. the Priests of England for linking themselues in the bed of spirituall loue, with the idolatrous Pa∣pists and all other wicked of the land, at the beginning of Q. Eliz. and
continuing in like sinful commixtur vnto this day: these Ministers now, to saue their credit, tel vs an example of Christ presence, &c. as before is seen. Yea the indignity of it stayeth not here; for as the Apostle by the Ministery of the gospell prepared the church of Corinth, as a pure virgin for her husband Christ, so these men pretending to be true Ministers,2 Cor 11.24 will haue Papists, Atheists, profane and wicked persons, to be Hephzi-bah Ia. 62, 4. people in whome God delighteth; they will bring this sinfull and adulte∣rous generation, even all the vngodly in the land, vnto the bed of Christ in his church, whether he will or no Which high transgression, is the o∣uerthrow of the mayn ground of the gospell; which euer since it began to be sounded in the world, hath proclamed a separation of the children of God from the children of Belial, as before hath bene proued. This being thus obserued, how these ministers haue missed at first o the ques¦tion; the further they goe, the further they stray, and run themselues out of breath in vayn. For neyther the examples of Melchisedek, Iob, Corne¦lius &c. nor their reasons following of 2 other meanes of gathering the church then by the preaching of the Gospel; 3 of the preaching of Mr. Wickliff. &c 4 & 5 of the course that Q Elizab. took for bringing the Gospell in agayne &c. none of these (I say) will proue eyther that open profane and wicked persons, may be receiued and kept in the bozome of the church; or that there be not multitudes of open profane and wic∣ked, members of the church of England. Their present lamentable e∣state proclaymeth this latter to all men that haue conscience; their own writings also heretofore doe strongly confirme it: and all the scriptures cry out against the former & teach a separation as before in this treatise, and in sundry other books is manifested. As these ministers have thus passed by the mayn controuersie; so haue they in their pretended answers, inserted some things corruptly and frau¦dulently: which I will briefly touch First, for to bolster out the con∣streyned profession of faith, and ioyning to the church which their peo∣ple are compelled vnto, they plead; pag. 185. that Synce Kings became noursing fathers &c. to the church; their lawes haue been means to bring men to the outward society of the church; and the parable proueth, that men may be compelled to come; Luk. 14, 23. This doctrine openeth a dore in the church to all the profane in the world, contrary to the scriptures; Isa 25.2 & 35.8, 9.2 Chron. 23.19. Reu. 21.27. Leuit. 10.14. Zac. 14.21, 2 Cor. 6.14, 17. Act. 2.41. & 19.9. For if a prince may compel some of his subiects to be members of the church, he may compel al; and if one prince may doe it, all may. So if there were such an Emperor as Augustus that commanded Luk. 2.1, all the world to be taxed, he might also command and compell all the world to be ioy¦ned vnto the church. And thus the world and the church, between whom there hath been perpetuall warr, mought soon be reconciled. If this be a lawfull and orderly course, it is strange that Christ sent forth poor fi∣shermen to conuert sowles by preaching, and set not the princes, (which
he could as easily have done, seing he had Ma 28, 18 al power in heauen, & in earth) to make disciples by compulsion and penalty. Now for the parable they allege, it is apparant, that the same seruant was sent to vers 17.21.22, 23. compell, that was before sent to call the inuited: and if this be meant of the Magistrate then, kings must leaue gouerning and goe to preaching. We finde in the scripture, that compulsion is not alwayes by the ciuill sword, but sometime by instant and earnest vrging of the word and doctrine; as they that Gal 6, 12 compelled the Galatians to be circumcised; and he that Gal 2, 14 compelled the Gentiles to Iudaize. And from this word compell, to vrge or gather a ciuill forced compulsion, is with no more reason or colour, then as if some factious rebells should take vp armes for to stablish religion; and allege how it is written Ma 11, 12 the kingdome of heauen suffreth violence, and the violent take it by force For as force and vi∣olence here, is not ciuill but spiritual; so is compulsion to be taken in the pa¦rable. But a throne (sayth Solomon) gets vp in a dronkards hand; and a pa∣rable in the mouth of fools. Prou. 26.9. They allege pag. 185. that the first conuersion of our land to the faith of Christ, was by preaching of the gospell. Whether this were so or not, remayneth for them to proue in their next book for in this they doe it not. They must (I suppose) take the preaching of the gospel in a large sense, if they will proue it. For as it is vncertayn what was the fayth of the ancient Brit∣taines, or how they were converted; so for the English Saxons which were conuerred from Paganisme, Mr Bale one of their own writers) saith Iohn Bale Cent. 1. scri Brit, fol. 35 that Austen the Roman was sent as an Apostle from Gregory 1. to conuert them to a popish fayth. And by an other Chronicler we learne Chr. Ra∣nulph, Ci∣er. that Pope Gregorie 1. sent this Austen the monk into Engl. with fourty monks moe, which entred the ile of Thennet on the east side of Kent, with a crosse & with banners displayed, hauing a crucifix painted vpō every one of them singing the Letany, with Orate pro nobis. to al Angels, Archangels, Patri∣arches, Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Monks Nunns, Heremites, and finally to all hee Saincts and shee Saincts, that they might haue good luck, and wel to fare, in setting forth their Ro∣mish religion. But howsoeuer the conuersion of English men was then (which is not now to be stood vpon till we hear the testimony of the best approued histories, which these men pag, 186. Rom, 1. 1 Cor 1 &c. say they haue for their assertion) it is sure by the scripures, that the churches in Rome. Corinth, and many other places were conuerted by the gospell: yet remayn they not true churches still. But (say these ministers) since that time many haue from age to age been called by the same means, And so say I, hath there been in Rome: yet is she a Reu, 17, harlot and not Christs spowse. Great numbers (say they) were effuectally called in K. Edwards dayes. I answer, the whole land was compelled by ciuill force to change their forme of seruice in part; and sundry true doctrines were taught in some places, which some bele∣ued: but many disobeyed and rebelled. as before pag, 120. is shewed. Ney∣ther was that confuse popish multitude with a few conuers therein, a
true visible church. Mr Fox describeth the estate thereof by a similitude; a Act. and monū, edit, 5, p. 1180. a new face of things began now (sayth he) to appear, as it were in a stage, new players comming in, and the old being thrust out. Thus vpon that old stage of the popish church, came new players, to weet, new Bishops & Priests; and the ibid. pag. 1181. masse was then (at first) still by law reteyned, but the gospel and Epistle read in English; yet were not all new players for (as is ther no¦ted) the preists and clergie that yeilded to the kings lawes, were suffred to keep thir places, liuings &c. After this the king appoynted the c Archbishop of Cant, with other Bishops &c. to make one conuenient and meet order, rite and fashion of common prayer and administration of Sacraments &c. who did so. Then in the Parliament following, it was agreed that all ministers in the realm should be bound to say and vse the mattins, euensong celebrating of the Lords supper &c. in such order and form as was mentioned in the sayd book and none other or otherweise. But the players, it seemeth, played not their parts well. for after complaint is made, how ibidem. pag 1186. by the cloked contempt, wil full winking, and stubborne disobedience of Bishops and old Popish curates; the book of common prayer was long after the publishing thereof eyther not knowne at all, or els very irreverently vsed through many places of the realm. Yet was there no great cause why the people should so despise it; for (as the K. answered to the rebels of Deuonsh.) ibidem, pag 1189. if the seruice in the church was good in Latin, it remayneth good in English; for nothing is altered, but to speak with knowledge, that which was spoken in ignorance. Now let the reader minde what was the estate of the church in those dayes; and see if the word of God will approve it. But there were say pag, 186, these men) great numbers by preaching so effectually called, that in Q Maries reign, many sealed the truth with their blood: I ac∣knowledge it; and say also that as there haue many martyrs died hereto∣fore in the Popish church, so I doubt not, but great numbers at this day are by preaching so effectually called, in Rome, Spayn &c. that if Turks or Pagans should preuayl ouer them, they would mainteyn & seal Chris¦tian religion with their blood, rather then submit to Mahomet. For (as one of your best ministers hath truely sayd) M Dering 23, Lectur on Epistle to the He∣brewes, pag, 186.187 God of his infinite goodnesse who clleth thyngs that are not as though they were, even in that ministery, hath giuen grace vnto his Saincts; &, it was impossible that the man of sinne should so much adulterat the word of God, but that it should be to the faithfull a gospel of salvation. It is further alleged, h there were sundry secret congregati∣ons all Q Maries dayes which gladly receiued the gospell offred by Q. Eliz. & (say thes ministers) if it be sayd that they ceased to be the tru churchs of Christ, becaus they ioyned & became one body, with such as were newly come (and that not of conscience but for fear onely) from idolatrie: we answer, that they rather that-had fallen from the Gospel in Q. Maries dayes were moued by Q Eliz: proclama¦tion, to ioyne themselues vnto them, that had stood faithfully all that while, Here is still building vpon the sands, for the profane & popish multi∣tude had not receiued the gospel before, but (as hath been shewed) wer constreyned by K. Edw. against their wills to hear English Mattins in their churches, where they were wont to hear Lati
Latin masse; and were glad with all their hearts when their old blind de∣votion did agayn take place, and they might suck the blood of such as spake against it. So they cannot rightly be sayd to fall from the gospel, which they neuer receiued. And what secret congregations there were in Q. Maries dayes, I know not: but if they were so secret, as onely they met now and then in priuate, and ordinarily went to church openly with Papists, they were not a true church of Christ. And that constreyned, v∣nion of Papists and of Protestants at the beginning of Q Eliz reign, vn∣der Archbishops, Bishops, Priests &c. with most of the same mattins, even∣songs, rites, ceremonies &c. that before had been imposed; this order can neuer be warranted by the testament of Christ, nor such a commixture proued to be a true church. And whereas it is noted for pag. 187. an other vntruth that Mr. Barrow and Greenu. should say, that in one day by the blast of her Maiesties, trompet at the Beginning of her reign, all sorts of men were drawne to a profssion of the gospell, without any further means vsed: these ministers may be seen to be mere cauillers, and bent to depraue. For the words euen as themselues haue set pag. 182. them down, (whereby the reader may espy their falshoode) were these, where such profane multitudes were all immediately from publicke idolatry at one instant receiued or rather compelled to be members of this church, in some parish or other, without any due calling to the fayth, by the preaching of the Gospell going before, or orderly ioyning together in the faith, there being no voluntary or particular confession of their own faith &c. Now these men to reign an vntruth, yea an other vntruth when non was afore, haue among other things, changed without any due calling to the faith into without any further meanes vsed; and then to conuince this their own fictiō, they tell vs of sundry preachers sent betweē Nouember & Midsommer that called many. But his neyther cleareth them of corrupt dealing, nor proueth that the whole realme which at Midsommer was compelled to this church, worshp, ministery, &c. was duely called vnto the fayth: much lesse that they orderly ioyned together in the same. So that the vntruth must rest in their own bosome. pag. 188.This being proued (say these ministers) that there was a true Church in thi land, before her Maiesties reign; the question must not be whether the meanes she vsed were the right meanes for the first calling and conuerting a people in the faith; but wether she took not a lawfull course for the recalling and reuni∣ting of her subiects vnto those true professors, whose fellowship they had forsa∣ken. Loe how these men run on, as if they had proued that, whereof we haue yet heard scarce any shew of proof. And altering closely the ques¦tion, they say there was a true church in the land; whereas they must prou a true church of the land, as now it is and long hath been esteemed the Church of England, hauing an Archbishop and other officers ouer it, which re in their Conuocation house, the Representative Church of England. So it no
not being a true church the examples, they allege of reformation by the Kings of Iudah, fit not their turnes; for Iudah was a true church, though some corruptions had crept in, as will easily doe into the best.) Abijah the predecessor of Asa, mainteyned Gods true religion, and worship a∣gainst idolatrous Israel both 2 Cro 14.8 9.10. &c. by word and sword. So Asa found not his kingdome a false church, as K. Edw: & Q Elizab. found England: yet v∣sed he that great care for reformation, mentioned, 2 Chro. 14. & 15. and his son Iehoshaphat after him greater care both to reforme and teach the peole. 2 Chron. 17. Afterwards when abominations had ouerspread the land, Hzekiah laboured a godly reformation, and opening the dores of the Lords house, he 2 Chr. 13 2.3. brought in the Priests and Leuites, not the Che∣marins or Baals Priests, as the popish clergie (which their own notes on Reu. 9.3. acknowledge to be the Locusts of the bottomlesse pit) were brought in or rather reteyned still in this church, as Mr Fox sheweth, Hezekiah sent 2 Chr. 30 6. ouer all the land to conuert the people from idolatry; who vers. 10 laughed the messengers to scorne and mocked them howbeit vers. 11. di¦vers submitted themselues and came to Ierusalem; and it was God that gaue vers. 11. Iudah a hart to obey the King and rulers according to his word Neyther were any admitted to the Passeouer but such as had voluntarily yeilded, repented, and eyther sanctified themselues, or els (being pre∣uented through want of time) were vers. 12. healed (or clensed) of the Lord, at the Kings prayer. The other disobedient. Israelites God punished vers. 18 19.20. by the sword and slauery of Asshur, because they would not obey the voyce of the Lord their God. Finally Iosijah 2 Kin. 18 10.11.12: 2 Chr. 34. purged the land of idols & false worship, reduced his people vnto the true seruice of God; which they with himselfe had vers. 30.31.32. couenanted to walke in. These examples we acknowledge al Christian princes should folow, hauing equall power with these Kings of Iudah, to abolish all idolatry within their dominions; yea and to punish obstinate idolaters, and not suffer any superstitious worship among their. subjects,Fides suadē¦da est non imperanda. Bern. in Cantic. but to procure their conuersion by the word, yet not to compell them to be members of the church, because they cannot giue them faith and repentance, which is the onely dore into vers. 30.31.32. Christs kingdome, and cannot be opened to any but by Mar 1.15 & 16.15.6 Act, 2.37.38 & 8.36.377. Act 11.18. Eh. 2.8 God alone. Which doctrine and practise these ministers (if they would not learne out of holy writ) mought haue seen set forth in their own book of Martyrs; where when Ethelbert King of Kent was conuerted and Christened, and after him innumerable other daylie came and were adioyned to the church yet the King (Act and monum. edi 5 pag. 105. sayth Mr Fox) compelled none; for he had learned that the faith and seruice of Christ, ought to be voluntary and not coacted. I acknowledge the Godly and gratious disposition and care of K. Ed. & Q Eliz. at the first for restoring of the Gospel; to be worthy of purpe∣tuall praise and memory: and the error that was, in reteyning the po∣pish profane multitudes, the Antichristian clergie, the Romish wor¦ship
worship turned into English, (some few grosse things left out;) and th other euils yet to be seen in the ecclesiasticall estate; these I iudge are ra∣ther to be imuted vnto the false clergie men, which were trusted too much in thes matters & dealt not according to the trust reposed in them but sought to inrich themselves with the spoyles of Bable and of Iericho the Bishopricks benefices, and other like Romish reuenues, rather the for the build the howse of God, vpon the foundations of Sion. And this sin cleaueth fast vnto these priests, euen to this day; who cannot endure to haue their portion spoken against, but thinke all As appea¦reth by D Downams. Serm. on 1. Tim. 3.1. 2 pag. 80.81.86.87. too little that they inioy; when as for discharge of their functions in teaching the people, the most conscionable among themselues haue complayned to the Parlia∣ment 2 Admon fol. 43. that the word of God is negligently, fantastically, profanely and ∣thenishly preached; and all the land knoweth, that many ministers preach not at all. Whereas these ministers tel vs pag. 190, of diuers congregations, that haue publik∣ly professed their repentance for their former idolatry; it is well if so it be; & God giue them grace to goe forward in wel doing. But they tell vs not of any congregation that professeth repentance for their present idola∣trie, or that renounceth the communion of the other impenitent and profane parishes: which they should also doe if they would be 2 Cor, 6, 1, 18. the sonns and daughters of the Lord almighty. Nay we know that if any a∣mong them doe this, they ar excommunicated ipso facto out of the church of England, by force of their canons, anno 160. Finally, whereas these Ministers doubt not to affirme, that the whole land in the parliament held in the first year of her Maiesties reigne, did enter into a solemn couenant with the Lord for renouncing of Popery, and receiuing the Gos∣pel. First they set not downe what couenant the Parliament then made nor how they renounced Popery; and therefore that is to be iudged of, when it shall more particularly be produced Secondly if then the Par∣liament house so did it is commendable in them but that the whole com¦munialtie of the realm can be sayd to doe it with them, I vtterly deny. For howsoeuer all subiects are and ought to submit to the good ciuill lawes there enacted: and obedience may be inforced by Rom. 13 the sword, if any man resist: yet in cases of conscience euery man must liue by Hab. 2.4 his own faith; men must Act 2.4. gladly receiue the word out of which all religion must be gathered all Kings and kingdomes Psal. 2. submitting vnto the lawes and ordinances in Chrsts Testament if they would haue blessing and sal¦uation by him. And as the honourable in the Parliament, could not be baptised for the commons; so neyther could they repent or couenant with God for them: but the people must yeild their own willing con∣sent, which they neuer did; but were and still are compelled by law and penalty to be of the church and religion established. Which how well they haue brooked, let the testimonies of the ministers before alleged, and the irreligious walking of many thowsands euer since manifest. For
now our land is a reprouch to the idolatrous Papists Ke. Sur 8, book in the preface 2 Obitio for the multitude of Atheists and Machevillians that are therein. The second thing (which these Ministers say) we obiect against the whole body of their assemblies is, That they communicate together in a false and idola∣trous outward worship of God, which is polluted with the writings of men, vid. with read stinted prayers, homilies, Catechismes and such like. To which they giue this answer. First it is euident by the word,Answer. that the church hath vsed and might lawfully vse in prayer, and Gods worship, a stinted and set forme, of words. And here hey allege Num. 6 23.24. Deut 26.3.15. Psal. 22. & 92.1 Chro. 16.8.36. Luk. 11.2. Very strange it is, that after so much time and consideration;Reply. men that professe to be ministers of the Gospell, should giue such an answer. The thing obiected against their worship made of the inuention of the man of sinne, was in the first answer to Mr Gifford (who shut his eyes, and would not see th' abominations of the same). Refut. p. 8. shewed in sundry par¦ticulars; as the Romish fasts; feasts and holy dayes, Comminations, Ro∣gations, Purifications, &c. blasphemous & hereticall collects &c. which Refut. pag 29. &c. Discouer, p. 62. &c. after were more plainely refuted These and the like evils conteyned in their Leitourgie translated out of the Massebook, and imposed vpon their parishesr being by Mr Barrow blamed: now come these ministers and tel vs of Psalmes that Dauid made, of formes of blessing and prayer, that God and our Lord Christ prescribeth to his church; and these must countenance and bear our all the popish trash that is in their seruice booke. But it would farr better haue fitted their estate and worship,Platima  vitis pootie Damasus 1 f if they had cited the Popes in sted of the Patriarches, Prophets and Apostles, who were altogether vnacquainted with this Romsh seruice. For how¦soeuer Dauid made many Psalmes, yet not he but Pope Damasus (as wri∣ters say) Blat. V¦talimus. 1. i ordeyned Glory be to the Father &c. to be added vnto them, and they to be sung by tournes, (as the church of Engl. yet vseth;) and Pope Vitalian Guil Du∣rammus. to make vp the musick, brought in the Organs, Yea the foresayd Damasus Act. and monū. edi, 5 pag, 1184. inioyned Hierom to make an order of seruice for chur¦ches, and appoynt what prayers should be sayd on euery day, and how many Psalmes &c. which being done, the Pope commanded al churches should vse that order and none other And a much like exploit was per¦formed by the Archbishop of Cant. and his brethren in K. Edwards days (as Mr Fox Guil Du¦randus Ifi¦dorus. reporteth) for the seruice now vsed still in Engl. Agayne, for the particulars, who framed the Anthemes, Responds, Collects,Ioan. La∣ziasdus, and Kyries, that are sayd at mattins? neyther Prophet nor Apostle, but as Platiua de vit. Marcus 1, some say pope Gregorie I. and Pope Gelasius. And the same Pope Gre∣gory put k the Pater noster into the masse. and commanded it to be sung; and Pope Marus I would haue the Nicene Creed sung after; the Gospell. Pope Anacletus thought it fit the priest and people should salute one ano¦ther
another in seruice time, and therefore  appoynted the one to say. T Lord hearth , and the other to answer, And with thy spirit. Pope   put i at the Sacrament O lamb of God that takest away the sinns of the wrl, hu mercy on vs; Pope Symmachusd added the hymme Glory be to Gd on high; and the other Popes bought in their parts, and patched to∣gether ther Letani, & Leitourgie out of which the English seruicebook is taken, Likewise for the fasting dayes and holy festiuties, though the Apostles appoynted them not, yet the Popes did: Telesohorus Plaina. Telsphorus & Celistus 1. woulde haue the Lent to be fasted; and Pope Calistus the fowr times in the year, or Imbring dayes. Pope Syluester 1. Bergomen sis. added the Wednesdayes, Frydaye and Saturayes weekly; and Pope Innocen 3. Lyb 3 decre¦tal. Grego. put vnto the former al∣most all the Apostles eues. The Saincts and Angels were also beholding to these Reuerend fathers for hallowing their dayes. For generally all the Saincts found such fauour with Pope Boniface, Volator, Platina. Bonif. 4. that they had not only a catholik holy day giuen them, called All-hallomes, but a famous Temple in Rome once dedcated to all the Duils and called Pantheon, was turned by this holy Father into the name of Maria rotunda. and consecrated to the honor of the B Virgin‘ and all martyrs Pope Felix 3, Fasci, tem mad holy the day of the archangel Michael,Lib Con Boniface the 8. Pap, suppl anno 1604 Reasō of re¦ligion, 13. shewed like honour to the 4, Euangelists, and many other memorable gests are recorded of the Fathers of the See of Rome, whereof there is not a word in the Testa∣ment of Christ, that he or his disciples did euer the like. For they ap∣poynted not priests apparall, long gownes, tippers 4. horned capps, as did Pope Zacharie; nor a white linen surplice at seruice time, as did Pope Syluester 1. They hallowed no Temples or Churches as did P. Hyginus, nor Churchyards, as did P. Calistus 1, Neyther ordeyned ringing of bells to call the people to diuine seruice, as did P. Sabinian. They ap∣pointed no Rood-loft to part the Chancel from the church, as did P. B¦niface 2, nor hallowed Font to Christen in; or Godfathers and Godmothers at baptisme, as did P, Pius 1. and Hyginus. They commanded not the people to goe procession as did Pope Agapetus 1. nor appoynted any Bish∣oping or Confirmation of children, as did P, Clement. 1. with a great num¦ber more of like pranks vsed in the Romish seruice. which Christs Apo¦stles knew not, as their writings shew. But the church of Engl. (as next heir of Romes constitutions,) reteyneth these reliques, obserueth these rites and a many moe; for which the Papists doe insult and say that from their treasure house, the religion now established hath learned the forme of chris¦tening, Marrying, Churching of women, Visiting the sick, Burying: and sun∣dry other lik as the books translated out of theirs, doe declare. And now what sayth Gods law for all such things vnto his people? I am (sayth he) Leu 18, 2 3, &c, the Lord your God. After the doing of the land of Aegypt wherein ye dwel, shall ye not doe: and after the doing of the land of Canaan whether I will bring you; shall ye not doe; neyther walke in their ordinances. My iudgments shall ye doe; and my ordinances shall ye keep, to walke in them: I am the Lord your God,
Thus he forbad them not onely the worship of false Gods: but euen the imitation of idolatrous worship rites and ordinances in his seruice: wher¦fore he charged them againe, that they should not so much as inquire or Deut, 12, 30, 31, ask how the nations serued their Gods, that they might doe so to the Lord their God. But whatsoever he commanded them, vers. 32, they should make heed to doe it; putting nothing thereto, nor taking ought therfrom. Yet the Bishops and Priests of Engl. haue almost all things in their Lei∣ourgie, according to the doings of that spiritual Reuelatiō 11, 8, Aegypt the Romish church wherein they dwelt, and haue imitated her worships‘ orders, ce¦remonies &c. reteyned her ministery, prelacy, courts, and canons: th Latine being turned into English, and some grosse superfluities left ou. And in defense of this worship, haue these godly ministers written, & Mr Bernard published their work: wherein if the reader see not a sond proof of the things that Mr Barrow (whose errors they pretend to confute) reproued; he must impute it to the badnes of their cause, which wil scars admit of any colour from the booke of God. For (besides the abuse of holy scriptures alleged to iustify these popish stratagems,) how sound & diuine, (or rather how fond and corrupt) is the reasoning of these men, from Gods example and authority, vnto their own practise and power that because the Lord God gaue formes of blessing, prayer and psalmes to his people, (as the scriptures which they cite doe shew) therefore their Lords the Prelates may giue them also prescript words for blessing, prayer, and Psalmes &c. as is to be seen in their seruice book. Can we thinke that Ieroboam had so slender a reason for his goldē calues? Why doe not these men also plead, that God gaue a law by Moses? therefore ther may a law be giuen likewise by the Bishops: or, th' Apostles wrote a new Testament, therefore the Conuocation house may also write a Testa∣ment or Gospel; & bring it into the church? If the Prophets practise will bear them ovt in the one: I see no cause why it may not vphold them in the other. Wel, seing neyther Mr Gifford heretofore, nor these ministers now, can bring better defense for the work of their own hands where∣with they worship or rather prouoke the Lords I leaue them to consi∣der of those lawes that euery where cry Deu 5, 8, 9, 32, 33 & 6 14, 15, 25 & 7, 25 26, & 12, 2 3.30 &c Isa 1.12.13 & 29, 13.14. Ier, 1, 16. Reu. 17.2. & 18.3, 11 12, 20, ovt against and shew the pu∣nishment of idolatrie. Neyther is it needfull to keep the Reader with longer answer, seing Mr Barrow in the fornamed books, and Mr Green¦wood in a peculiar treatise against these stinted prayers, and se worship haue proued the vnlawfulnes of them by many reasons, which neyther these ministers nor any other haue yet taken away. And when they write agayn, let them not bring proofs for things that we deney not; as that Daunds Psalmes may be sung in the church; and that in our prayers we may vse or apply, the words that other holy men before vsed in their prayers, vpon like occasions; both these we grant and practise: but let them proue, (if they be able and their right hand can help them, that their own writetnn prayers, psalmes &c. may be read and sung in chur¦ches,
church, as Gods true worship and then also they may command the clowdes to rayn no more, and may cause to cease the bottels of heauen. Like to their former plea, and maintenance of their seruice booke, is also their answer for Catechismes; as for Homilies it seemes they leaue the the defense of them to the simple priests that read them, but Catechismes are vsed euen by the learned preachers, therefore somewhat they say for them, as pag. 196. that the principles of religion were taught in the churches of old, Rō 2.20, & 6 17.2 Tim, 1 13, Heb. 5.12.13, 14 and 6, 1.2. But these mini∣sters are eyther simple or very deceitfull, so to turne away from the que¦stion For we neuer deneyed that the grounds and heads of Christian re¦ligion should be taught to the people; far be it from vs: but this we say, the Prophets and Apostles are not found to prescribe set words for the minister to teach, or the people to answer being examined. And that therefore these Bishops and Priests are very presumptuous, that wil take vpon them to doe that which Christs Apostles neuer did in the churches. Agayn, that if those men of God had to done; yet seing the writings of Prophets and Apostles are canonicall scriptures, and so are no mens wri∣tings now: it will by no meanes follow, that if they wrote catechismes to be vsed in the Church, therefore men may writ some for like vse now. Yea rather why are they not content with that which is already written in the scriptures, but run to erroneous catechismes of humane wri¦ters, such as is that authorized catechisme in the book of common pray∣er, commanded to be vsed in the church of England? Hauing heard what these godly ministers say for their people, and ser∣uice book; I exspected somewhat also, for defense of their own minister, and the ecclesiasticall gouernment of their Lords the Prelates; which were the other two eads of error excepted against, in the forenamed books. But in both these they are silent; and reason there may be for it: for the inferior ministery hangs vpon the superior, the hierarchie, and now the godly ministers are in a great strayt, for eyther they must loose their mi¦nistery, and then what boots it to plead for the same, or els they must, (though they be loth) be buxome and submit to their Fathers the Bi∣shops; and when this is done, it may be we shall see some such defense of two later, as we haue already of the former. Mr Bernard himself hath begun fayrly; for whereas a while since he was hot against the Bishops. he now cannot endure they should be pag. 71, called Antichristian proud prelates or the like; and thinks pag, 142. it can neuer be proued, that the entrance into the ministery by the Prelates, is a false entrance. So it is not to be thought but his Ordinary and he will agree wel yenough. Wel howsoeuer it be, God (I doubt not) wil turne all things to his own glory and furtherance of his truth; yea euen the writings of these aduersaries, shalbe a meanes to stir men up vnto a consideration of their wayes, which God giue them grace for to doe, and to turne their feet into the pathes of life and peace that they may finde rest vnto their sowles.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Crashawes 4. questions propounded in his sermon preached at the Crosse Febr: 14, 1607, and printed 1608. Mr. Crashawe preaching vpon Ier. 51, 11. We would haue cured Babel but she would not be healed &c. took occasion pag, 26. &c. to inueigh against such as haue separated from the Church of Engl. as from Babel, in to a couenant and communion (as he sayth) of their own deuising. To con∣uince this bitter (as he calleth it) and schismaticall separation, he asketh but 4. questions; wherevnto if they can giue him satisfaction, he promiseth he wilbe one of them. Now though this promise be not in his own power to performe, (for Rō. 9.16 it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that sheweth mercy;) yet shall it not be amysse to labour for his satisfaction herein; for who can tel, but there may be giuen him an vnderstanding ear, and tender hart, for to conuert that God may heal him if not, that his own writing may be a witnes, himselfe is one of those whome we would haue cured in Babel, but he would not be healed. I will not stand vpon his interpretation of the scripture treated of whether it be the direct and proper meaning of that place: but will come vnto the demands by him propounded. HIs first question consisting of many branches is summed vp by him∣selfe in this one: Wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded?1 Questions. Your demaund being, as the particulars shew of the wounds of sin and corruption. I answer. First we deny not, but all your sins are cura∣ble,Answer. as we trust in the mercy of God, if you repent of them, and beleeu his promises: neyther haue we euer thought your wounds in this sense, to be 1 Iohn. 5, 16. deadly or incurable. Secondly, the sinns that your church lieth in, & which if they be not repented of, and pardoned in the mercy of Christ, are Rō 6, 23. deadly and will destroy the sowl for euer; haue heretofore by such as would haue cured you, been set before your eyes, in Refut, of Gifford. Discovery Apolog. &c large and am∣ple treatises, shewing these capitall transgressions, 1 Your confuse peo∣ple, 2 false worship, 3 antichristian hierarchie or church-gouernment, 4 and false ministery therefrom deriued: that strange it is, you should yet ask what deadly wounds you haue; and it makes vs fear, your state is like his that sleepeth in the midds of the sea, in the top of the mast, & Prou. 22, 34, 33. sayth, they haue stricken me, but I was not sick, they haue beaten me but I
knew it not. You haue also here supra, pag. 74. &c. in this treatise arguments to proue that Christ is not the head, Mediator, Prophet, Priest & King of your church: which if it be so, no Christian can doubt, but your wounds in then selues are Ioh. 8, 24 Act 4.12 deadly. Though this were yenough for Answer to your question in generall; yet because the particulars which you further demaund, are stembling blocks vnto the weak; I also wil labour to remoue them away. Q. What fundamentall wound is in our doctrine. A. This among others, that you teach and mainteyn both by word and practise, that all sorts of people, though profane and wicked are to be receiued into and reteyned in the church; which is contrary to the foundation of the Gospel layd by God himselfe Gen. 3 15. That such is your doctrine, both your sermoris and printed books, and the estate of your church since the planting thereof, to this time: doe confirm. Q. What deadly corruption is in our discipline, such as es out the hart, and life and being of a church. A. First, they which execute it, as the Prelates Commissaries, &c. are antichristian; so iudged & proued long since by the reformed churchs by th better son of your own ministers hertofore & now liuing & by others. Seconly; in the executiō of it, the good ar consured & excommunicated: the wicked fauoured and tolerated. That the good are censured, appea∣reth by the late Canons of your church: for in them it is enacted Canōs ano 1603 Can 4, 6, 7.8. &c. against such, as blame or resist any of your vngodly ceremonies, ordinances, wil worship, &c. in your Communion book; book of ordering, Bishops Priests and Deacons, &c. that they shall be excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored, vntill they repent and publickly reuoke such (as you call them) their wicked errors That the wicked are fauoured, and tolerated; though experience may teach euery man, yet your own testimonies wilbe most pregnant. Mr Bradshawe one of your fellow Ministers in his 11. Argu∣ment against the ceremonies of your church complayneth that the  missions of your ceremonies make a minister by your law more subject to depriuati∣o and suspension, then the commission of the sowlest crimes, euen drnkes, blasphemie, grosse ignorance, and vncleannes. Which he proueth. by  such ie persons (as he sayth that are ministery. Some that haue been  to be carryed home in a wheel barrow. Some that comming home drunkē from the market town, haue been found sleeping under a hedge in their own filth. Some that knowing and consenting to their wiues filthines, that he might swear he knew no such matter by her since he maried her, maried her agayne the morning before he was to answer it vpon his oath. Deliuering the sacrament to a filthy woman, instead of Take, eat, sayd Turne thee, turne thee &c. To another that would take it in her hand, he put it in her mouth, and sayd Cob, Cob, or Daw, Daw, he knowes not whether. Dr Henry Parry, tels vs In his pre befor Vrsi∣nus Cate∣chisme. of a  of aterpillars, the very trash and riff raff of our nation &c. that haue like  of idle and dissolute quallity, onely moued, thereto in a lazy speculation, layd
wicked & sacrilegious hands on the Lords ark, taken his vndefiled testimonies in their defiled mouthes, disgraced, defaced and defamed the glory and Maiesty of diine rites and mysteries &c. they run like hungry companions with an eye one¦ly to the flesh pots; & so sel both themselues and their people for ibidem morsel of bread and messe of pottage to the Diuill. He mentioneth also accursed and simonical patrons who haue sodered & simoned the walls of their houses with the very blood of sowls. some others among you speaking of that a miserable vulgus that woful crew that racked regiment of dunsticall and vnlettered Sir Iohns, which haue euen couered the land like the froggs of Aegypt, leading many thow sands with themselues into the ditch; and he same not still graced & countenanced by the Prelats as being their creatures. And others complayn that Remoual of imput layd on the ministers of Deuo. and Corn. p. 27 whol swarms of idle. scandalous, popish &, non-resident Ministers are tolerated euery where a∣mongst you. Your selfe (Mr Crashawe) in this very sermon tel in of pag, 169 little pet∣ty Babylons, namely incurable sinns among you 1. That great sacrilege and church robbing as you call it committed by Impropriations, in which case (you affirme) at this day almost halfe of the kingdome is, wherby it comes to passe that an ignorant and vnpreaching ministery is set ouer a great part of your people which is the sourse and fountayn of all other euils in your church. 2. The vngod¦ly players enterludes. so rise in the nations; which you call a bellish deuise, the Diuils own recreation to mock at holy things, by him deliuered to the heathen, from them to the Papists, and from them to you, And these (you say) bring reli¦gion and holy things vpon the stage And hypocrisie a child of hel must bear the names of two churches of God Nicholas S. Antlings, Simon, S. Maryveries: which churches by these miscreans are thus dishonoured (you say) not on the stage onely, but euen in print. To this you add, heir continuall profannesse on their phrases, and sometime Atheisme and blasphemy; their continuall pro∣fanening of the Sabbath, which generally in the country is their play day, and oftentimes Gods diuine seruice hindred, or cut shorter, to make room and giue time for the Diuils seruice. Many other like testimonies might I allege frō your own mouthes of exceeding impiety openly practised, not by the people onely, but by the Priests and Clergie and how doth your disci∣pline heal these corruptions; when by your own grant, such caitiffs are graced and countenanced by the prelates, when your law punisheth the con∣scionable ministers, more then such; as your selfe pag, 169: say of your petty Babi¦lon of Impropriations. this deep wound was once curable yenough &c. but now (alas) how incurable it is, he obserues but little that sees not. And vnlesse the K. Maiesty vouchsafe to take the matter into his hands, otherweise it is in∣curable. Agayn you say pag, 172· of that horible abuse of the Sabbath &c. that est is hath been complayned of, and some haue endeuoured to heal it, but it is  of Babylon that will not be healed, but rather it creps  a  though the whole state from the foot to the head. and if you would yet haue more add herevnto Mr Iacobs testimony, (who hath so manfully stood for your church,) The right and true discipline ecclesiasticall (sayth he) in
ch proper visible church, is one mayn part of the ordinary meanes of saluation ap¦poynted by God for euery sowl, and this we in England vtterly want. Now let the reader iudge, whether there be not deadly corruption in your discipline, which euen in a true church, would soon eat out (if it wer not healed) the hart and life and being of a church, according to your de∣maund. But you proceed and ask vs. Q. What book of Canonicall scripture receiue we not? what hold▪ we for Ca∣nonicall: that is not. A. What book of Canonicall scripture receiued not the idolatrous Is∣elites? what held they for Canonicall that was not? The like I ask for the Arians, Anabaptists and sundry other heretikes of these times and shall these, or any of them be therfore true churches? Agayn in your own church, there is read for holy scripture, erroneous books and lying sto∣ries, as Tobie, Iudith and other Apocrypha. Your Homilies , 2 pag. 325. citing th̄, call them holy scripture, and say the holy Ghost speaketh so in the scriptures: & the chiefest ministers of your church, sometimes preach and take texts out of them. If this be not to hold them canonicall, I know not what you count canonicall. Q. What sacrament that Christ ordeyned doe we want? and what haue we more then Christ ordeyned? A. What sacrament wanted Ieroboam the son of Nebat? what had he more then God ordeyned? Or the Anabaptists at this day? Yet if one would stand with you he might by your Communion book proue Confirma¦tion to be a sacrament: but who ordeyned it, I cannot tel, vnlesse Pope Clement. Agayn, Mr Bradshaw a man of your own church and pro∣fession, 9 Argum against the ceremonies. hath proued against you in print that your Crosse in baptisme, ring in mariage, surplice &c. are sacraments in your church, and not of di∣uine institution. Q. What article of faith deny we? or what hold we for an article of faith this is not? A. Suppose that the Papists, should ask you such a question, what would you answer? For all the Creeds that are in your communion book; are they not with euery article, neyther more nor lesse in the masse book and other popish pamphlets? The Papists and you both con¦fesse Christ in words, both deny him in practise Q. What fundamentall heresie doth our doctrine maintayn? A. The vnlawfull commixture of the children of God and children of the Diuell, in one church and communion, is a fundamentall heresie being stifly mainteyned. All the scritures condemne it; all wel refor∣med churches avoyd it, nature it selfe teacheth to abhorr it: yet in such profane communion your church abiderh; and you wil not endure to br of a separation.
Q. What haue we in our church that ouerthrowes the being of a church? A. A popish▪ Clergie, and Laitie. Q. What is necessarily required to make a church that wee doe want? A. You want both matter and forme of a true church, namely a people called of God, separated from the world, and vnited with Christ and one with another, according to the rules of his eternall Testament. Q. I will end as I began, wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded? A. The sinns before mentioned, are deadly wounds of Satan; the onely cure is by repentance and faith in Christ Iesus. ut as yet you be farr from cure, for loe you make questions of your diseases; and will not beleeue that you are sick, Herevpon you refus all salues and medicines; and will neither haue physician nor chirurgian to meddle with your sores. If any Leech come with a curing Pro 15, 4 tonge. and words that be leaues of the tree of life, which serue Rev 22.2 to heal the nations with, if he offer to touch the Egyptian vlcers that appeare in your worship, church-government, ministerie, ceremonies, &c. he is presently thrust out of dores; and if he dare but affirme these or any of these to be discea¦ses and botches in your body, sinns against God, or repugnant to his word; he is Canons. 1603. excommunicated ipso facto, by the decrees of the whole re∣presentatiue church of England. And are you willing now to be hea∣led? Nay if any among you, not medling with the publike estate of your church, but feeling or fearing his own particular sowl sicknes, doe resort to a physician (whose receipts are not after the common sort,) for aduise about his health, or of friendship and acquaintance to see him: he is subiect to the censure and thunderbolt of your church. Witnesse the late practise in Norwich; where certayn citizens were excommuni∣cated for resorting vnto and praying with Mr Robinson a man worthily reverenced of all the city for the graces of God in him as your selfe al∣so I suppose will acknowledge,) and to whome the cure and charge of their sowles, was ere while committed. Would any vnmercifull man haue dealt so with his bondslaue in a case of bodily sicknes? But here∣by all may see what small hope there is of Curing the Kanker of your church. THe second question is, Are they (themselues) healed?2 Question then where were they healed? where were they called? where were they regenerate and be¦gotten to Christ? was it not in the womb of this our church, and by means of the immortall seed of Gods word that is dayly sown in our church, a holy chur∣ch, a church of God, where in ordinarily men are called and brought to God.Answer The winde bloweth where it will, and we heare the sound thereof but know not whence it cometh and whether it goeth: Iob. 3.8. so is every
one that is brne of the spirit. To your demaund then I answer; we wer cll being in Bylon, your Church I meane, which restreyneth the  by vnrihteousnes; there was our regeneration begun Where we fa in darknes and in the shadow of death; the light of God appea∣red▪ and  vs lfe. If you yet inquire how this was, I refer you to  brouht light out of darknes, and daylie  5, 16 bringeth forth the  treasre; and his wayes are past finding out: for as I , 11 5 knw  te way of the winde, nor how the bones doe grow in the womb of her that is with childe, so know I not the work of God, that worketh all. If you demand of the means; it was doubtlesse the word and spirit of the Lord, without which there is no calling, no regenerati∣on. Now where you ask, how then we can deny that to be a true church, wherin  men are called and brough to God? I answer; first, you take vp more thn we lay down when you say rdinarily: for the ordina∣ry and common fruit of the word among you, is through your own cor¦rupt handling and hearing of it, euell and not good, the many walke the broad way, and Gods calling is like, to that which the Prophet sayth Ier, 3, 14, one of a city and two of a tribe, in resect of the worldly multitudes. Secondly, all the Saincts are not begotten vnto Christ in the wombe of a true particular church for when the Apostle preached among Act. 17.22.33.34. Pagans & conuerted many, I would know in the womb of what church they were begotten? they were first conuerted vnto Christ, before euer they were in any other church, then that Ierusalem which is aboue, & Gal. 4, 26 the mother of all the elect. Let vs come to later times; your selues when you began to be a church of protestants, in what particular womb were your people begotten? I suppose if in any, it was in the womb of your mother church of Rome, where they had both receiued Baptisme the seal of regeneration, and been catechised in Christian religion: and then look how your selues can deny that to be a true church, or be free of vnthankfulnes towards her that bare you. But you prosecute your cause against vs, and would driue vs eyther to say, there is indeed a true ministery of the word among you. but it is not powrfull to any but our selues; or els that we were not called in your church, but since we left you. To the first I answer; there is no necessity that we must grant a true ministery; for first we hold that the true word may be put in Num, 23 5, 26. &c. Balaamites mouthes, and a false ministery may through Gods wondrous grace, beget faith in his elect: if you say otherweise you will shake the foundation of your English church, layd by Aust the monk Pope Gregories Apostle; and damn all your late fathers vnder the Roman Clergie. Secondly, we ie not the grace of God in the true church to the ministers lips: knowing that men by other meanes are often conuerted to the Lord. And if your ministers in England hold that men cannot be begotten to Christ among them, but by their
preaching; you may take vp your Letanie (which causlesse you vse for vs) and say from this horible and bellish pride, good Lord deliuer them. As they cannot restreyn the winde from blowing: so much lesse the spirit of God from breathing, out of other places then ministers mouthes. To the second also I answer; that it is one thing to be called in your church, as you speake; and another thing to be called by your church or ministery, as I thinke you mean. It is written Reu. 18.4. Goe out of her my people. you see here Gods people were in Babylon, and are called ovt of the same, not by Babel it selfe, or any minister of it, buy by a voyce from heauen. So we might be called in your church. though not by the same. And thus we haue not bard our selues from pleading a∣gainst you, as you would bear men in hand: neyther yet shew you of whom or wher you had that which you say we all stoutly answer and stifly stand to it, namely that we leau your church meerly & only out of conscience &c. We haue a better ground if you would receiue it, euen the Law of the Lord that so commandeth both vs and our consciences. Conscience is the blinde Papists common plea: but we know that mans conscience is as much Tit 1, 15, defiled as any other part or power of his sowl or body; and therefore it may be no rule of our actions, but the law of God onely, which is Psal. 19. pure, perfect, and vndefiled. Yet you wil needs proceed and say, then we had conscience before we left you. I answer yea, or els we would not haue left you. Thinke you that your prede∣cessors had no conscience when they left the Popish church? Then where (say you of us, and minde whether the Papists will not say as much of you where) came they to that conscience and care of their saluation but in our church? You are answered before, we had it in your church, as Gods people had in Babylon. But that (I suppose) will not satisfie you, but it was you will say, by your church and ministerie. Therefore I distin∣guish and consider of conscience in generall and in particular General lie, when men so farr as they are taught and see, doe walke carefullie: & this I confesse we had through Gods grace & by means of your church: this also I acknowledge many among you haue, walking conscionably so farr as they see and know. The same I am perswaded also of many Papists and other misbeleeuers. But as a conscionable Papist or Anabaptist, when a further light of the Gospel ariseth vnto him, must leaue that church, wherein his conscience was so farr informed, because it is not the true church of God: so must a conscionable Protestant doe with your church, when God giueth him to see the false estate wherein you stand although you worke many good effects in a mans hart and conscience. Particularly a good conscience is to be considered in this or that parti∣cular action, as for example in this particular of our separation; and so we had not this good conscience from or by your church or ministe∣nistery;
for you thought to corrupt our consciences, and keep vs still in Babylon; we had not, I say, this good consciene by your meanes, vn∣lese it be by accident and against your wils, and so no thanke vnto you, as he that would haue kild his enemie, and vnawares cured him of an impostume: thus indeed many of vs haue been brought to this good co¦science of separation. For whereas heretofore many of your ministers vnawares haue discouered the vnlawfulnes of the prelacie, priesthood, leitourgie and other enormities of your church: wee haue herevpon thought, how it could be the church of Christ, which thus lay vnder An¦tichrist. and pressing you with your own doctrines we haue found that you cannot but eyther goe from that whch before you taught: or el yeeld vs our separation, which you so earnestly condemn. Of which thing there is pag. 2.3 &c. before spoken in this treatise. 3 QestionTHe third question is; How haue thy sought and sufficiently endeauou∣red our healing? and til they haue done all that possible can be done for our healing,Answer. how dare they forsake vs? I answer, we haue sought your healing, euen as by your own doctrin the faithfull Iewes sought the cure of Babel; and as you selues haue soght the healing of Rme. The meanes which the Iewes and your selues haue vsed to cure Babel, you shew in pag. 12 & 42. your sermon to be three Instruction, example, pryer. By instruction, you say, laying opn their er∣rors, discouering their impieties, and lying before them the excellency of true re¦ligion. Thus (say I,) haue we done with you witnesse (besides our speeches and conferences) the many books of this argument, which are publised in print. 2 By example (you say) practising their own religion uen before their very faces, nor fearing their scornes and rebukes &c. And to (say I) haue we practised our religion amongst you and before your faces not fearing your scornes and rebukes. And for proof hereof, not one man (as Daniel in Babel) hath been taken in prayer, but very many f vs haue been apprehended sundry times, when we were praying and excercising in the word of God; and from our publick meetings haue been caried to your loathsome gaoles and prisons, and there deteyned many a day, till some were cared out vpon the Bere vnto their graues, some caried to the tree and executed. Which (to vse your own words) had been sufficient to haue driuen you into deeper and better considerations, had you not been incurable; and it is to be hoped that the sight hereof, hath done good on some of you. 3. Thirdly they endeauoured (you, say) to heal them by their prayers, praying continually and desiring God to heal them. Thus also haue we en∣deauoured to heal you alwayes mentioning you in our prayers, that God would vouchsafe yo mercy: and this we professe and promise to
doe for you still, (howsoeuer you reward vs for it,) so long as we liue on earth. Thus haue we dealt with you, according to all the duties that your selfe haue shewed both from the Iewes practise. and from your own. For whereas you allege pag. 44. a fourth thing that your selues haue done, namely, by devising and enacting good and wholsom lawes against their errors, superstitions, impieties &c. seing this cannot be done by subiects or pri∣uate men, but onely where a common weal and magistracie is establish¦ed; and so neyther was nor could be done by the Iewes in Babel, nor by vs in Engl: I suppose you will not impute this as want to Duty vnto vs, which if we had attempted to doe, mought iustly haue been esteemed rebellion in vs, and so our suffrings should haue been as malefactors. Whereas then we haue vsed all lawfull meanes to cure you that we could, as your selfe haue layd them down before vs- I hope you will be satisfyed, or if not, yet any indifferent reader will thinke you are suffici∣ently answered. THe 4. and last demand is,4. Questions If they Will needs leaue our church whether will they goe? To leaue one thing for another no better, is seely: but for a orse s folly and madnes. &c. I answer, We haue left Babylon, for to come vnto Sion: we forsooke your confused assemblies which consist of all sorts of people and an vn∣lawfull mixture with the profane and wicked that we might haue com∣munion with the people of the Lord,Answer. that willingly and gladly professe to beleeue the gospel and walke in it. Now where you vrge vs to ioyne to some other church in other coun¦tries. first you passe the bounds of your text, from whence you can ga∣thr no such doctrine; for the Iewes forsaking Babel, ioyned not to any other nation or church then their own. Secondly, it is also contrary to your own practise, who when you first left Poperie in K. Edwards daie and Q. Eliz. ioyned not your selues to any forreyn church; but one to a¦nother among your selves. And where you tel vs of the approbation of other churches, and pag. 3, quote their Harmony of Confessions; I answer, that book was set out long after your separation from Rome, and commu∣nion among your selues: besides also how farr they approue of you, is before in this treatise considered of Pag. 10. Thirdly we could not ioyne to any of those forreyn churches, becaus We vnderstood not their languages nor they ours, and therefore vnlesse we would haue builded a new Babel, with strange tongues, we must ioyne into communion among our selues. Thus haue I answered your 4. demaunds: and for your further satis∣faction, if it may be, will yet giue you a view of your own dealings with vs, and the Babylonians dealing with the Iewes of old, as they are
collected by your selfe in you sermoon. They of Babel obiected (as you in you ser¦mon, p. 17. say) that their own religion was general and vniuersall ouer the world, and the Iewes, but in a corner: and agayn pag. 18. they say Look into the world at this day, and see if any nation of all that came from all the  sonns of N¦ah be of your religion: all that came of Cham are of ours: all that came of Ia∣phet are of ours, and all that came of Sem, but onely your selues. Your selfe pag, 32, say vnto vs, in these like words, Look ouer all Christendome, and you shall not finde a Church that condemneth ours, or any that is not of our religion &c. the churches of the Low countries, are of or confession, the Ch: of France, the church of Geneua, the church of Scotland, the Cantons of Switzerland. the stats and Princes of Germany, they are all of our confession. Whither then will you goe but vnto your corners and conventicles &c. The like things are obiected to vs also by other of your ministers, as before in this treaise may be seen pag. 9. The Babylonians Sermon, p 17. are by you feigned to hae sayd vnto Israel, Doth not our religion prosper and flourish, and is not yours condemned by the consent of all the world? Your ministerse say for England against vs,supra. p. 19. Consi∣der. 7. God hath witnessed his loue and approbation to our church by many vectories and deliuerances, long continuance of the Gospell, prayers, heard &c. And the Churches and godly learned persons that euer heard of your separation did not approue of it.supra. pag 19. Consid. 6. See also Mr Bernards book pag. 33. You (Your Ser. pag. 17, sayd the babylonians to Israel) for holding your religion are iust¦ly ouerthrown and conqured by u' Mr Penry, Barrow and Greenwood Supra, p. 23 Consid. 2. say your ministers to vs) were hanged, Mr Iohnsons and the rest banished, by Christian magistrats professing and mainteyning the Gospel of Christ. Alas poor men (sayd the Babylonians) for one learned Rabbine that your haue, haue not we twentie? are not the Caldeans the famoust learned men in the world? Of vs your ministers say, Yovr ser. p. 18. setting aside one or two at most, there is neuer a minister amongst thm tht vnderstandeth the summe of religion and grounds of the Catechisme: and further they vnderstand not any tongue saue only English & wher thē is their knowledg. againe an Mr Sions. sermon on Psa. 120. Supra, pag. 19. Consid. 7. other vp braydeth vs by the preaching disputing and printing of many excellent works and volumes published of all sorts (by the ministers of England): which none of vs is any thing haue euer yet atteyned. The Babylonians k sayd to Israel, During the time that you haue had your Kings and Priests, shew one nation by you conuerted, or one that came and ioyned with you of all that time. Hardly (say your ministers to vs) can you shew any one person conuerted by your ministery, from papistry athisme or other opē wickednes; as by Gods blessing multitudes haue been by ours. Thus we see how you and your ministers imitate Babl, as if they had been set to scool by Nebuchadnezar,Dan. 1.4 to get Your ser. pag. 19. Supra. pag. 30. Consid. 8. the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans;pag. 20. wherein how they haue profited, let the reader iudge; as also whither we may not apply against you, your own words, that
you please your selues in such like carnall arguments and fleshly conceyts, a papist in their popery, and other pfane men in their carnallity, did heretofore, and doe at this day. Of these things as I haue laboured to giue you notice; so I desire God to giue you repentance, and to heal all your deadly wounds: least that come vpon you which is foretold by the Prophet, Ier 51:2 I will render vnto Babel, and to all the inhabitants of the Chaldeans, all their euill that they haue done in Sion; in your sight, saith the Lord. My people goe out of the midds of her; and deliuer ye e∣very man his sowl from the feirce wrath of the Lord. Ier. 51.45. Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinns, and that ye receiue not of her plagues, Reu. 18.4. FINIS.
