b2156 15555626 103714
An Humble Remonstrance concerning some Additional Confirmations of the King∣dom of Christ to be in its Succession 1697. rising from further Light in Prophecy. THE Lord having made me a Watchman to this Na∣tion, concerning the Approach of his Kingdom, and the Great Change of the whole State of the Christian Churches, and so of the World upon it, in 1697. I cannot but sound the Trumpet; For These Things are not by way of Impression, or any private Inspiration, but by such Great and Infallible Arguments, out of his Word, that all Judicious Christians may, and ought to discern Truth by Them, and know, whether these Things are so, or not? but especially the Ministers of his Word. And they are such as are most Amazing, especially in these Two last Instances, of which I cannot but give this Notice, like the sounding of the Trum∣pet louder and louder. When I had setled that most Eminent part of the Line of Time, Given by God in so Various Characters; viz. Time, Times, Half a Time, and Three Days and a Half (although for very great Reasons Diverse from the other, yet of the ve∣ry same Import and Duration, as I have shewn). These Times and Days are Four Times Nam'd; Forty Two Months Twice Nam'd; and 1260 Days Twice Nam'd expresly; and Twice inclusively Nam'd; viz. in the 1290. and 1335 Days, Dan. 12. And as in Time, Times, Half a Time, Given with a Solemn Oath, Dan. 12. And at the Entrance of Half Time, Embarrass'd with an Oath, that such Time should be no more, Rev. 10. as I had also abundantly made out: when I had also to my Full Assurance Establish'd the Necessity from all manner of Concurrent Arguments; That the Beginning of this Part of Time, made every way so illustrious by God, must needs begin A. D. 437. and so End 1697. and that I had con∣tinually
urg'd; that the 42 Months of the Gentiles, and of the Beast, are prepar'd by the most Wise Spirit of Prophecy, for the Adjusting the Time, between the Beasts not being in his Succession so early as the 1260 Days began; and the Gentiles, as his People, preparing for him at their Beginning 38 Years be∣fore. I had also consider'd, That the Adjustment must needs be made by Equalling the Time of the Sun and of the Moon one to another. I had observ'd also, That the 38 Years made a Re∣presentation of Two Nineteens, or the Golden Number Twice Accounted. When All was thus setled, What more Ravishing Assurance could be given, than that Just now by looking more intimately into the Matter, I find, that That so Wise and Mathematick A∣dequation of Time of the Sun and Moon, Approved by all the World, is made use of by the Spirit of God in this Time: For as the Lunations every Nineteen Years, are found to Re∣turn to the same Point of Congress with the Sun, as at their first setting out together, it must needs be, That what Time the Sun has spent more, and the Moon less in those Nineteen Years, must needs also be the Just Proportion of Time between the Sun and Moon, throughout all Time; and that being about E∣leven Days, every Year, is Thirty Eight Days in Three Years and a Half, and Thirty Eight Years in Three Years and Half of Years.By a Natu∣ral Intercalati∣on, the Moon adds about 217 Days, a∣bove its own Years, every 19 Years, to meet the Sun in the same Point. And this is the very Time found by All Accounts of Scripture-Prophecy and History, between the 1260. begin∣ning 437. and the Beast coming into his Months 476. And as in filling up the Moon's Time to Time of the Sun, there must be a proportionable Intercalation; so here the Beast's Moons, wherein they are short of the 1260 Days, are intercalated for by the Moons of the Gentiles: Who can think this Frame of Things by Chance, as in the Annexed Discourse is de∣scrib'd? And as I was thus considering this Noblest and most Prin∣cipal Part of the Line of Time, in the Eye of Prophecy; it pleased God, by a very Judicious and Honourable Hand, to send me this Observation upon the whole Prophetical Part of my Line of Time; as I have stated it to begin from Solomon's Death, where the Types of the Kingdom of Christ
fell so low, and to reach to the Vision of Ezekiel's Tem∣ple, c. 40. when the Visional Type of Christ's Kingdom is at the Height, but Debarr'd from Coming into Effect, till the Fullness of All Time. And it is Given in 390 Days of Ezekiel's Lying on his Side, c. 4. After which I observ'd Forty Days of Bearing Judah's Sin, and 2300 Eves, Morns of Delay, e're the Sanctuary Cleans'd, according to Ezeki∣el's Vision. All which put together, make 2730 Years. Now as that same Excellent Person hath observ'd, God had setled a Standard of Punishment, Levit. 26. That a Multiplication by Sevens should be the Proportion; The first Time therefore he fixes this State of Punishment, ex∣press'd in so Solemn Bearing Iniquity; it is in 390 Days of Years. Let this then be multiplied by Seven, and it makes the Just Sum of 2730. which is made up of 390. 40. 2300 Days of Years; and then according to the Sab∣batick Seven, and according to what God assures after the Sevens of Punishment, There shall be a Restoration of All Israel, Lev. 26. v. 44. Now I would Appeal to the Reason of all Mankind, seeing These Things are so Mathematically Demonstrative; out of Words so undeniably written in Scripture; whe∣ther it be not a Justification of my whole Prophetical Line of Time in its Whole; and in its Parts I have also justified it Part by Part, and especially in the principal part, the Times and Half Time. And it is the more Astonishing to me, This Assurance of the whole Prophetical Line should be sent to me by Another so Worthy Hand; else in all probability I had ne∣ver Thought of it, and upon his Survey of my whole Line of Time. Now seeing, however it hath pleas'd God to lay me in the most Abasive Outward Circumstances, that I might not be exalt∣ed above measure by All this Manifestation, yet He hath Honour'd me, so unworthy, with so publick a Character, as to be the He∣rald of his Kingdom, at 1697. to these Nations, by so many In∣fallible Proofs of the Time, that I can bid Defiance to the Great∣est Wit, Reason or Learning, that Allows Scripture to be the Word of God, to Answer, or make them nothing worth; being
such as even a Considering Anti-Scripturist must be convinc'd by observing so much already fullfill'd, according to such Rules. I most humbly therefore beseech, That in regard of the Prodigious Aversations of the Mind of even Those whose proper Sphere it is to consider of these Labours, and to take care for the Honour of Those, who so Labour in this Word and Doctrine, as I have done. If it shall yet please the Wise and Holy Disposer of All Things, to humble my Outward Condition, to the Lowest Dungeon; both in regard to the Punishment due to my Iniquities; in regard of the yet Low State of the King∣dom of Christ, in Tribulation, and Patience; during which, the Ministers of it must be Low also, and in Sackcloth: And, Lastly, As Things will appear within Little Time, that it may Upbraid to Christians (even tho it was their Office to do o∣therwise) their Low Regard to the Kingdom of Christ; In All these Regards, Let No One be moved by my Afflictions, whatever they may be; but consider the Vast Accounts of Scripture Truth, and Reason, and be Assur'd, the Kingdom of God must needs be as close upon us, as I have Declared. For the Word of God cannot be Broken: And it must have a Sense; and that Sense we may, by a Deep Pondering, and a Diligent Compare, be as sure of in Prophetical, as other Parts of it. I cannot therefore but earnestly beseech Considera∣tion, whether the Things I have offered, can be thought either Frivolous, or Forc'd; And whether on such a Settlement as I have long a go made, what I now offer upon it, be not even most Surprizing and Wonderful in its Confirmation, neither depen∣ding on Phantasie or Fiction, but most Substantial Scripture, History, Nature, Reason. Oh that then neither the Gallio-Spirit, of Caring for None of These Things, nor the Unbelieving Spirit might prevail; That tho God should open the very Windows of Heaven, They cannot be: For be Assur'd, That at the Seventh, or Last Half Time Ending, from a Cloud as big as a Man's Hand, The Heavens shall be over-spread, and a mighty Rain of the Gospel Fall, according to that Type, 1 Kings 18.34.
