B5739 12441904 62098
The King of France HIS MESSAGE TO THE Queene of England: PRESENTED To Her Majesty by Colonell Goring, at the Hague in Holland, in answer to her Letter sent to the French King at Paris by the foresaid Colonell Goring. Wherein is declared what Forces are raising in Flanders, Artoys, Normandy and S. Mallo, for the assistance of the Malignant Party against the Parliament in England: the Copie whereof was sent from M. Burlacey at the Hague in Holland, to a Merchant in London, Novemb. 29. 1642. Also the Parliaments Instructions to Sir Edward Rodes and Captaine Hotham, with power to pardon such as shall submit within ten dayes. LONDON, Decemb. 9. Printed for T. Wright. 1642.
The King of France HIS MESSAGE TO THE Queen of England: PRESENTED To Her Maiesty at the Hague in Holland by Colonell Goring. SIr, I have received your Let∣ter, with the newes therein inclosed, for which remem∣brance of me I thank you, I cannot return you any from these parts, being quiet: I could wish England were as quiet, and in so good a posture of defence; but that cannot be, so long as the Queen is so great
an enemy to it; for she sayes she will bee revenged, and told M. Strickland the Am∣bassadour from the Parliament, that there should never be quietnesse in England so long as liberty of conscience was not gi∣ven to the Catholikes. Her Majesty is merry, and by no meanes would have the King yeeld to the Parliament upon any condition: she is making ready to come for England, and will bring with her great store of ammunition, money and souldi∣ers. We conceive her Majesties departure will not be too much lamented for. Colonell Goring hath been lately at Pa∣ris with the King of France, he was ac∣companied by Monsieur Montgomery to his lodging, and after three dayes respit he was sent for and accompanied with divers Lords and Gentlemen to the Kings Court, and was bravely entertained, before whom his Majesty delivered a short speech, much to this effect. Je à considere vostre. Messuage à le request de ma sore, vostre Roigne & Madam, à que par l'advice de mon Conseil, Je le vou prome autant come Je peu, en be tans excuse moy pour le presant.
Two weeks after the Colonell received his Message, with a Letter to the effect fol∣lowing. That his Majesty, the King of France, hath considered her royall intentions, and the troubles and vexations of the Catho∣likes in England, for which in so just, so honourable, and so good a cause, I have by the advice of my Privy Councell given consent, that what forces may be conve∣niently spared out of Flanders, Artoys, Normandy and S. Malo, I have given con∣sent that they shall bee withdrawne from their garrisons, leaving but a sufficient number of souldiers therein, to that end the King hath sent Letters to the chief Go∣vernours and Commanders to deliver up both Officers and Souldiers that can bee well spared. As for Ammunition, Colo∣nell Goring hath brought with him ten thousand mens armes, besides all sorts of ammunition, and furniture, with saddles for horse, besides 20. peeces of Ordnance: as for money, the King cannot supply her Majesty for the present, in regard of his
vast expence which he hath been at, at the late siege at Arras; but neverthelesse, as it is conceived, there shalbe a collection tho∣rowout the whole Kingdomes amongst the Catholikes for their liberall contribu∣tion in this kinde. The Prince of Orange hath gotten great strength at Breda in Bra∣bant. The Prince of Conde at Durmount, who is thought to go for Ireland, and what more for this time, I cannot certifie you for truth. Hague 29. Novemb. Stilo novo. Your obliged friend, Miles Burlacey.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament. THat Master Hotham, and Sir Edward Rodes, and o∣ther the Committees for raising of money, Plate and Horse, for the defence of King and Kingdome in the Coun∣ty of Yorke; And such as they or any two of them shall nominate shall, be Commissioners for the advancing and raising of Monies Horse, and Plate upon the propositions, and shall have power to appoint Commissaries to value the Horse, and Treasurers to receive the Monies and Plate. That Master Hotham and Sir Edward Rodes, shall have the like instruction as other Counties with this addition that they shall have power to seise and apprehend all De∣linquents that are so voted by the Parliament, and all such others as Delinquents, as have or do shew themselves op∣posite and disobedient to the orders and proceedings of Parliament. That the 4 Article of the L. Generalls instructions, shall be extracted and sent to Master Hotham &c, with power to them to publish it. viz. You shall publish and declare, that if any, who have been so seduced by the false aspersions cast upon the proceedings of the Parliament, as to assist the King in the acting of those dangerous Counsels, shall willingly within ten dayes after such publication in the Army, return to their duty not do∣ing any hostile Act within the time limited, and joyne themselves with the Parliament in defence of Religion, his
Majesties Person, the liberties and Lawes of the Kingdome and priviledges of Parliament, with their persons and e∣states, as the Members of both Houses, and the rest of the Kingdome have done; That the Lords and Commons will be ready upon their fubmission to receive such persons in such manner as they shall have cause to acknowledge they have been used with Clemency and favour, provided, that this shall not extend to admit any man into either House of Parliament who stands suspended, without gi∣ving satisfaction to the House whereof he shall be a Mem∣ber; And except all persons who stand impeached or par∣ticularly voted in either house of Parliament for any delin∣quency whatsoever, Excepting likewise such Adherents of those who stand impeached in Parliament of Treason, as have been Eminent persons and chief Actours in those Treasons and except the Earle of Bristoll, the Earle of Cumherland, the Farle of Newcastle, the Earle Rivers, Se∣cretary Nicholas Master Endimion Porter, Master Edward Hide, the Duke of Richmond, the Earle of Carnarvan, the Lord Viscount Newarke, the Lord Viscount Faulkland, one of the principall Secretaries of State to his Majesty. Joh. Brown Cler. Parl. FINIS.
