c1668 r35951 15580194 103921
A CENSURE OF THREE Scandalous Pamphlets. I. A Defence of Dr. Crisp, against the Charge of Mr. Edwards of Cambridg, by Esquire Edwards in Wales. II. Reflections on the Authors of the late Congregational Declaration a∣gainst Antinomianism, and Trepidan∣tium Malleus, by the A. Club. III. A Sermon preached Jan. 30. last, by Canon Gilbert in Plimouth, with a tedious Preface of Mr. J. Y. Haud timeo, si jam nequeam defendere crimen Cum tanto commune viro. Ʋlys. Gen. 19.7. I pray, Brethren, do not so wickedly. LONDON; Printed, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick-lane▪ 1699.
A Friendly Epistle to Esquire Ed∣wards, concerning his Defence of Dr. Crisp, against the just Charge of Mr. Edwards of Cambridg, that Orthodox, moderate Confor∣mist. GREAT SIR, THAT you are a Gentleman, a studious one, and of unusual Accomplishments, natural and acquired, cannot, and there∣fore shall not be denied, but chearfully granted by me. I meddle not with your late large Book with its superfluous Branches, Bax∣terianism Barefac'd, for which fault Dr. Chamry was a∣gainst its publication, as we are credibly informed. I, and other zealous Anti-Baxterians, are both troub∣led and ashamed, when we see, 1. That any Advocate for Dr. Crisp should thus appear against Baxterianism: For which sound Cal∣vinists will give you no thanks, knowing you often oppose not Error with Truth. You confirm these Men in their Notions, when they read your more wild ones. 2. That you in that Book drop such words as these. They (the Baxterians) like the Writers against Dr. Crisp, mistake Mens sense, and misrepresent their words—Thus you became rather their Compurga∣tor than Censurer.
3. That you should charge Mr. Baxter as a Writer against sound Conformists, and Nonconformists, a∣bout Justification, &c. and yet vindicate Dr. Crisp much more corrupt than he, and more opposite to the Authors you cite. This fills us all with amaze∣ment, that you so strangely forget your self. 4. That you have impos'd on us in citing some Authors against Mr. Baxter; particularly Bishop Ʋsher's Body of Divinity, p. 58. when it is well known Bishop Ʋsher told Dr. Bernard on his Death-bed: He was not the Author of that Book, but that much of it was taken out of Mr. Crook's Catechism. That there were excellent things in it; and if any one would be at the pains to cut off some Excrescencies, and make some good Additions, he might take the credit of the whole. See Bishop Ʋsher's Life. By the way, was it like a Disputant to write against Mr. Baxter's Doctrin of Ʋniversal Redemption, to tell us plainly, That you never saw that Book of his bearing that Title, tho you heard it was printed since his death? Yes, by Mr. Read. Again, you bring in Mr. Baxter's Objections, Christ did not for us do the Duty of a Husband, or Wife, or Father; and cite Mr. Traughton to less purpose, when you might do it to better. P. 116. Christ (says that blind seeing Man, that had the Eyes of Angels, tho not of Cats and Dogs) was habitually dispos'd to do all the Work, and perform every Duty for us in that Relation in which it pleas'd the Father to put him, and this was virtual Obedience, &c. Luther. Rediv. Part. 2. Was not also your tedious, endless Citation of Mr. Herbert Palmer's Memorials of Godliness inexcusable? Almost all the Book. You say he was an old Presby∣terian Puritan, and an abhorrer of Baxterianism, which, say you, is a Paradox among some, tho not all of them. Why a Paradox? I know not above four Baxterians among the Ministers in a County,
where once Providence cast my Lot. 5. That you seem to treat Mr. Baxter with less rudeness than Mr. Edwards. What, is an unexcep∣tionable Calvinist worse with you than a Neonomian? And, which is worse, you damn the Baxterians, and little less Calvinists, as if lost by a Covenant of Works. Yet we are glad, seeing you would meddle in these matters, 1. To see so many good Strokes in that Book, and in a better Style than in some other Books. Many things you mention are too bad, too true: You say right of Barkly the Learned Quaker: He linkt the Pa∣pists and Baxterians together, and himself with both, a∣bout Justification, P. 22. Let others answer for them∣selves, and, Master, this is not my Work. 2. That you are so good an Example to our Gen∣try, who spend their time in Pleasure, Hunting, Whoring, Drunkenness—When you are so sober, so serious, so contemplative, I take you to be a pious but melancholy Man. 3. That you are so zealous against Quakerism, in your Comparison between Quakerism and Baxteria∣nism. I hope now the fit or temptation to turn Quaker, so much talk't of, is over. I leave that Book, and ap∣ply my self to you about your Defence of Dr. Crisp against Mr. Edwards of Cambridg bound up with it. You, Sir, call this famous Divine (and so all of us that own the sound Doctrine he pleads for) a Self-Justitiary—and tell us, That the Truth, and that in Fundamentals, hath been from Dr. Crisp's Works, maintn'd and defended fully. That Mr. Edwards's Doctrin (Justification by Faith) justifies the Papists Charge against us of Schism from the Church of Rome and Council of Trent: and that you will maintain, that any Jesuit might unequivocally, and safely as well as
gladly subscribe.—What, Man, is Justification by Faith Popery? What shall I do? To cite, is to con∣fute; and therefore I will save the Reader's Time and Money, not to answer such little (very little) trifles. Your Discourse of Fountain Ʋnion in Election, virtual by Redemption, manifestative in effectal Calling, is un∣learnedly and too much Crispianly exprest; tho it is true you tell us before of being made actual Mem∣bers of the Head in time. I should think, you be∣ing a sober Gentleman, had written this Book too soon after a fit of Sickness, or the Vertigo, or the Calenture; or had you been a profane Gentleman, af∣ter a Night's Debauch. P. 3. You say, Our Author (Mr. Edwards and his Jesuitical Fraternity, jumble Justifica∣tion and Sanctification together promiscuously. That the Doctor (Dr. C.) separates them not, but as to their Ends and Designs. No! why, were they sanctified too from Eternity, from the Womb, in the height of all Wickedness? Manasseh, when he used familiar Spirits? Saul, when he breathed out Slaughter against the Church? What, is imputed Sanctifi∣cation good Doctrine already? This is beyond Crisp. Why such a trite Proverb so often repeat∣ed, Ab Equis ad Asinos—What is it from the Baxterians to the Crispians? I pray our late Preach∣ers of imputed Sanctification to consider, as Christ's Righteousness is so imputed to us for Justifica∣tion, that no subjective Righteousness of ours can justify: So if Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us for Sanctification, no subjective Righteousness of ours could sanctify. There would be no room for inherent Righteousness, Sanctification, or Holi∣ness, were the Elect in the height of all their Wick∣edness, in a state of Unregeneracy, sanctified as well as justified; was there then no spot in them.—Which our Divines apply to Justification, when Be∣lievers.
You say, The whole I have seen against Dr. Crisp, will no more avail to Salvation than the Turkish Alcoran. I will make it good, should a∣ny Man be saved by the Principles of these Semi-justitiaries, his Hosannahs in Heaven would be but mere hypocrisy, season'd with a proud, pharisaical, vain-glorious Spirit. Therefore, you say, Mr. Ed∣wards in writing against Dr. Crisp, is not far from the Sin against the Holy Ghost. And, pag. 4. There is not the least tincture of common Morality in all his pitiful Pamphlets. On you go; The shaking of my Dog's Tail is more pleasing to me, because more of Integrity in it. What a compari∣son is here? Can you not vindicate the young Tobie, but you must think of the old one and his Dog? Where are some throwing away Integrity, to the Dogs? and shall it have no better place there than in the Dog's Tail? Why no touch of the Birds muting?—They were unkind Birds that did this to Toby senior, who had once good Eyes; but to do this to Toby ju∣nior was worse, whose Eyes or Sight was never right, but a poor purblind, dimsighted (or if you will, blind) Creature, from the Womb, or at least the Cradle. You say, Knight of the Post, Arminianizing Palate—But where is the proof? A Mentiris may serve the turn here. I hope this Censure of yours may be my Apology in vindicating Mr. Edwards, for I have charged Dr. Crisp higher than he hath done; and I assure you, without sinning against Light. You, and your Master, have paraphras'd on some Scriptures so wildly, and that, you under the Titles of the Books, as Mr. Masters in his Spiritual House, P. 107. They set up Post by my Post, and Threshold by my Threshold. So, says he, will Men bring a Bason in∣stead of a Font, and a new Directory instead of an old Liturgy—After all your bitterness, Who is the Ro∣gerus
Lestrangus Redivivus you write of, you, or th worthy Divine? But R. L. is not dead, by the way. With what face can you say Dr. Crisp was soun one with Dr. Owen, and others, and with our Refor∣mers? When it is so well known, 1. The Assembly of Divines made a woful Outcr on the sight of Dr. Crisp's Books, and employ'd Mr. Anthony Burges to answer him; whom he followe , as much as Mr. Williams hath done, an more than Mr. Edwards. 2. Mr. Lobb (now with God) to the last charg' Crisp as a Blasphemer; who vindicated the Doctrin  our Reformers. 3. One would think you never read Dr. Owen,  make him one with. Dr. Crisp. Dr. Owen in his Di∣course of Justification; so much shunn'd that extrea that, 1. Mr. Baxter, as is fam'd, was not displease with the Book. 2. Mr. Williams, ex abundanti, hat prov'd, that Dr. Owen's Doctrin was most opposite  Dr. Crisp's. 3. Our Congregational Divines have prov' the same out of Dr. Owen's Writings, and Dr. Good∣win's; That both were Enemies to Antinomian o Crispian Abominations, and there I refer the Rea∣der. And seeing, Sir, you offer a meeting to prove Dr. Crisp's Orthodoxy, and challenge any of his Accuser to appear, I accept your Challenge; and that I wil prove that Dr. Crisp was an Enemy to Repentance, fro the 298, 299, 300 Pages of his Book, where he say, David sinn'd in having Sin a burden, &c. The Answers given me I laugh at, the Doctor spoke of Sorrow to desperation, to excess. No, this Sorrow was never lawful. Now the Doctor supposeth i might be lawful before the time of Sacrifice, not af∣ter; or if after, not since the great Sacrifice was of∣fer'd up. Or that David was a Type of Christ, and
so Sin might be a burden to him. This was the An∣swer of Mr. L— to a scrupulous Antinomian, who found this Instance of David lying in the way of their cursed Doctrin. 1. Then am I justified in my Charge, and Dr. Crisp condemned for a notorious Heretick; for if Da∣vid did this only as a Type of Christ, who bore the burden of our Sins? then he did it not as a penitent Believer, or as a Member of Christ, or Child of God. 2. Then, as the Doctor says; He is in this to be no President to us. If it were lawful for David before the great Sacrifice was offer'd up, it is not so for us under the Gospel, For we are not, say I, Types of Christ. O Diabolism! none but the Devil and Dr. Crisp ever threw this Dirt upon true Repentance, which hath gotten a good Name among all Men, the worst of Heathens, and Men profane. I heard one of them say in the Pulpit; That David spoke not of him∣self, but of Christ, when he said, Mine Iniquities are gone over my head, they are a heavy burden.—I cannot look up. Some such Preachers are fitter to preach on a Ladder than in a Pulpit. O ye adorers of this Idol Crisp; you are like them that worshipped Wood and Stone: Who had Eyes and saw not, &c. being a senseless brainless Man. And they that make such Idols are like unto them. Sirs, be Men, and do not act like Egyptians who worshipped Dogs, Cats, and Calves. I say it again on mature thoughts, Socinus preached not more dangerous, more damna∣ble Doctrine, than Dr. Crisp. The great God pardon Mr. H—, Dr. B—, Witsius, and others, for their favourable character of Dr. Crisp, whereby they have undone many a Soul; tho I firmly believe they never read over all the Book, or did it with a running eye. God forgive Mr. Williams, and Mr. Edwards too, for
publishing their blind charity about the Doctor, and all on this hope, that he practis'd not his own Doc∣trine. And whereas it is often said Mr. Williams hath been the Man that hath thus heated me against Dr. Crisp; I declare nothing is more remote from truth: but I have rather heated him; and I am sure he repented of his imprudent, unadvised Charity, and I hope the aforemention'd have, or will, of their greater Error here. Say next, We hope Soci∣nus was a good Man—This were less absurd if they did. Mr. Hoskish in his Imputation of Sin, tells us that dreadful Story I mention'd in my Vindiciae, when I then testified against Crisp's Abominations, that in discourse he declared; Believers were not bound to be troubled for their Sins, and said, Tho David was so, he was not bound to be so, and did it for want of being better acquainted with the Cove∣nant of Grace. I knew Mr. Hoskish well, and dare not question his Veracity. Good God! Was ever such a Heretick, such a Blas∣phemer, such a foolish kind of Antiscripturist, count∣ed a Christ-exalter till now! I have endeavour'd, with others, to pull down the Walls of this Jericho, and with some success. Cursed, say I, be the Man who buildeth her Walls any more. I am ready to sweat in writing such Heresy, and dunstical Divinity, and by passages elsewhere will I prove my Assertion: If I do it not, I will beg pardon of God and the Cris∣pians for wronging him; but if I do prove it, I c the Throat of Crispianism, and undeceive some of his deluded Followers who cannot believe this Charge. You take no notice of his damnable Heresy; vindi∣cate him here if you can. You say, Sir, If a Man be justified before he believes, then he is not ju∣stified by Faith. Every School-boy will tell you,
hath been is the Preterperfectence. Rare discoveries: and such may tell you, that hath is put for the Fu∣ture shall be, else Christ was Incarnate before Isaiah wrote. But these, and many other things, I have consider'd in my Three contending Brethren, Apology; and New-Years-Gift, and thither I refer you. If Dr. Owen, say you, was not a Crispian, I know not who was. Say I, if Dr. Owen was not an Anti-Crispian, I know not who was; and this will I make good, if we meet, as before. You say, p. 16. They censure the Doctor for condemning Graces and good Works in the Popish and meritorious sense, and that this is the plain Grammar of all our Virulency against him.—All our Prayers, Tears, Meltings, cannot make God lay our Iniquities on Christ.—A profound Assertion: When Dr. Crisp said it, Mr. Edwards replied, who ever said they did? You call him Doeg, and p. 18. say that God will remember Amalek for standing in the way of God's Israel, and that with an obliterat∣ing Remembrance. False Prophets, say you, acted by a lying Spirit. That the Man of Sin notwithstand∣ing all his Wickedness is call'd his Holiness: Christ is the Lord our Righteousnest: All the Popes pro∣fest or practical Adherents.—We have Copies of the Council of Trent fleeing about our Ears in various Pamphlets, against Dr. Crisp, or rather his Doctrin, which is the Scripture Doctrin of Justification. No Man can believe you, nor you your self. Sir be sober, and let not your arrows flee at random. Are Calvinists Amalekites, as well as Baxterians? Doth the Pope's name make Holiness less lovely than an Arch-bishop's GRACE makes Free Grace so? Arminianism and Socinianism, say you, p. 25. lies in our Author's treachery, tho he owns a commu∣tative imputation of Sin and Righteousness be∣tween
Christ and Believers. Will not the granting of this do? You say, p. 26. Most absconded Sir, your cask smells of Socinianism, &c. I have spent some time to consider, what makes you so waspish, and in such fits of Raving: Is it a turbulent brawling Creature at home? If so, I pity you. Some at first give them their Authority, and call for it too late. It is storied of Semiramis, she desired Ninus she might Reign in his stead nine days: he granted his supplicant Wife this thing, in which time she put him to death, and took the Government on her self. It is not safe to let a Woman reign nine Days: nine Days did I say; no, not nine Hours. Mrs. B. was too much Master at home, and would do what she pleas'd. Such Men must be pitied, as well as blamed. Now, Sir, whatever you and I differ in, I heartily agree with you in the close of your Book, of what Mr. Edwards says after his Censure of Dr. Crisp's Doctrine, That he hopes he was a good Man. This is, say you, a perfect Riddle: It is a great one too to me. Mr. Edwards, Mr. Williams, that have so said, deserve (I think) your Reprimand. Seeing you at last Rhime an Epitaph on Dr. Crisp, I will think of it. Yours begins, Great Carbonado'd Crisp, what's now thy Crown, And was thy Glory here, is trampled down, &c. Frightful word! Carbonado'd! Where is he? Is he broiling? I should not like it, if any had made such an Epitaph, as one did on a notorious Knave. If Heaven be pleas'd, when Men do cease from Sin, If Hell be pleas'd when it a Soul doth win, If the World be pleas'd when it hath lost a Knave, Then all are pleas'd — is in his Grave.
Carbonado'd Crisp! I cannot get the word out of my Mind; such a word might provoke one of us to Rhyme as foolishly as you, and so to deserve to be as severely reprov'd. Suppose I should make this Epitaph. Crisp did not fear to be, whilst here, Compunctions Enemy. Where he's now sent, he must repent, To all Eternity. None in the least ever profest This Grace to have disgrac'd, Satan alone, and Crisp his Son In this are both barefac'd. He that did say, David did stray When Sin his burden was; A burden be finds Sin to be, And ever cries, Alas! Would you not say it were rashly done, and that I had made him a Carbonado'd Man as well as you. Come now, and let us reason together. I do ac∣knowledg I look not on you as the worst sort of Crispians. I know you would make Dr. Crisp to speak better than he intended, and you pass by my Charge about Repentance. Because some of my Friends are offended with a passage in my last Book, That Dr. Crisp his Book was worse than the Racovian Catechism, and say it was a word of Passion, I say no, I use no Hyperbole in it, but will now prove it. Next to the Notion of a God, nothing is a greater Principle in na∣tural, Religion than Repentance, even to bitterness, for Contempt of this God, affronting his Authority, and offering violence to the Laws and Methods of Hea∣ven: and therefore Dr. Crisp, in scoffing at such Re∣pentance, hath struck at one of the greatest Princi∣ples in natural Religion. Now whether God may be
merciful to some Socinians (such as Mr. Fermin, and others) we are not all agreed, but we are all agreed (even, those who assert the Salvation of Heathen by the light of Nature) That none can be saved with∣out Repentance, and bitterness for Sin. Neither can I see that I am bound to be burdened for the Sins of others; for if they be Converted, the great Sa∣crifice is offered up, and Christ hath born the burden: if they be not Converted, they may be Elected, for ought I know, and be converted in time. Why then, if Rivers of Waters run down our Eyes, because Men keep not God's Laws, we Sin after David in this also. If, with Lot, our Souls be grieved from Day to Day, for the filthy Conversations of the Wicked: This will not prove us to have righteous Souls with Lot, but legal Spirits. Paul's great Heaviness, and conti∣nual Sorrow in his Heart for his Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, was not commendable, but culpable. O God of infinite Patience and Goodness, whence is it, that when thine Enemy made Repentance, Com∣punction, bitterness of Spirit, feeling Sin a burden, to be so far from being a Duty, a necessary one, as thou hast made it, that with him it became a Sin of debasing of Christ, and so scoff'd at, thou hadst not sent him to Hell immediately to cry Alas there, who idicul'd it here! Blind Toby could not see the Ab∣surdities he on all occasions committed, as when he tells us, we are to do no Duties to profit our selves, but others; Mr. Baxter answered well, Plowing, Sow∣ing, &c. is to profit our selves,—and asks, Whether Christ hath not done all for others as well as for me, and whether he wants my help more for another Man, tha for my self? This Man toss'd the Doctor like a Dog in a Blanket, and here often wrote well; Si sic omnia. But to return to the other matter, of Repentance; How shall penitential Tears be wip'd off those Eyes,
where they never were. But if any say, I have con∣versed with many Antinomians, and they deny not Repentance. 1. All Antinomians be not Crispians, no not Toun himself, who, for ought I know, was an upright Man. 2. Many that are thought to be so, not only by o∣thers, but themselves, to do them right, do not be∣lieve Crisp was guilty here; who had neither time nor sense to read or Understand him. 3. Ask right Crispians, what they mean by Re∣pentance, they will tell you it is Faith. They dare not be so impudent as to quarrel with the Word, or blot it out of the Bible. Observe how rarely any one of them will bring in Sorrow for Sin, or Compunction in their definition of Repentance. It is a turning from Sin to Christ; that is perhaps a believing our Sins are no longer ours, but Christ's; but if they mean as they speak, is it not a sinner turning from Sin, then, that comes to Christ, and so consequently not without a Change? Crisp makes Mat. 11.28. Labouring, and being heavy laden, an Error in them, and brings in Christ's saying to this effect, You have been legal, and so heavy laden, cease to be so, and come to me. So that this labouring and being heavy laden, that God by the Prophets often calls Men to, and Christ by the Apostles, is no gracious Qualificati∣on, as our Divines expound it, but a sinful legal frame of Spirit. But I am bold to say to such Antinomians, what Christ said to their Elder Brethren, the Hypo∣critical Pharisees, O Generation of Vipers, bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance; or, How can you escape the Damnation of Hell? Or as Stephen to the obdurate Jews, who exalted Christ too, as Dr. Crisp did on the Cross, to crucify him there, Ye stiff necked and un∣circumcised i Heart and Ears, how long resist ye the Holy Ghost? Vae vobis Hypocritis may be their Motto.
Repentance from dead Works, Paul (Heb. 6.1.) makes the Foundation, and names it before Faith. And whereas it is pleaded, the Assembly of Divines put Repentance before Faith in their short Cathecism. I am sure they did not thus break Scripture Method, on any Antimonian design; for in their larger and bet∣ter Catechism, they put Repentance before Faith, as Scripture always doth. Where is it once said, Faith and Repentance, or Believe and Repent? and I say in the order of things, God first wounds, and then heals; shews a Man his Sin, and then his Saviour: not that true Repentance and Faith are inseparable. We are often and foolishly ask'd, can there be any true Re∣pentance without Faith? No; answer you as roundly, Can there be any true Faith without Repentance? When Stephen call'd with great sharpness, on the Council to repent, they gnashed upon him with their Teeth. Tell false stories of me as you please, perhaps I account them some of the greatest Ornaments I carry about with me. I challenge any Man that ever saw me Drunk, or finds any Lie in my Mouth; (Consci∣ence accuseth not, but justifies here) or can testify the idle Story of the Confessions I made to Dr. Bates. I am sure he is too good a Man to report any such Story: he is so far from being my Confessor, that he is not my Friend (tho once so, for which I have yet a grateful Remembrance) through an intemperate Zeal for his bosom Friend, Mr. Baxter. B. C. the Quaker, tells the World, That I once acknowledg'd my self to be a proud Man. So I do still: He that hideth his Sin shall not prosper. Did I once say so? I wish I had said so a thousand times, for I never told a greater truth in my Life. But are my Accusers free? Who hath a high look? Who expects to be bow'd to first in the Street, even by their Elders, and perhaps betters, They or I? I may be a proud Man,
and yet not stink half so much of the Disease as —. No wonder some Men care not what they say, who believe, The Sin was forgiven from Eternity. Is none of their Sin but Christ's, and that it is no Duty, but a Sin to be troubled about it; as the old Holy Ran∣ters, If I Sin, let Christ look to it; or as I heard one lately say, Get into Christ, and Sin if you can. The very words of the aforenamed old Ranters: As in my Apology, all now know (my very Enemies) that I was a true Prophet about the Draper, so I be∣lieve I shall be found as true about Rantism, that al∣ready puts forth its hand ready for the Birth. God accept of Mr. Gouge, and Mr. Trail's true, hearty, unfeigned Repentance, for once countenancing him; and comfort the former, and prevent the like mischief to the other, occasion'd by that infamous Jack: A Fire is kindled in his own Congregation al∣ready. This is he that hath poisoned this poor City with damnable Doctrines, and horrid Lies, of parti∣cular Men vomited out in the Pulpit. The grand In∣cendiary, the greatest Plague and Curse that hath happned to it a long time. I think the Independents will have their Belly full in time, of making Trades∣men Preachers: The Presbyterians are more wary. Let the Reader think of it; have I not a hard task put upon me, to prove Repentance (I speak not of the name, but thing) to be no Sin. I hear some say, Men may Repent that they do Repent. How Man! That is but adding Sin to Sin, according to you; for then you must Repent, that you repented for your Repent∣ance, and so in infinitum. The Magnifiers of so unlearned, dull, and incon∣sistent a Man as Dr. Crisp was, put me in mind of the old Heathen, that had their Lares; some of them made artificial Monkies (as others did Dogs) and these they worshipped as their Protectors, and the
Keepers of the House. (Now observe, their Lares or Monkies were Artificial ones, not Inartificial). And for the Doctor's Proofs, especially against Qua∣lifications, in Coming to Christ, they are so feeble, never were the like known: Which puts me in mind of some Men I have met with, who when I have reproved them for the sin of Drunkeness, said it was no Sin, and they would prove it by plain Scripture; Nothing that entreth into the Mouth, defileth the Man: and when I went to explain that Text, said, We care not for your Explications, the words are plain. Their explication was not more vile, yet more witty than some of the Doctor's: this is not to argue, but Rave; like Kellison the Jesuite, who says, The Protestants have taken away the Church's Bible. And sometimes Mr. B. with his wanton Wit, What is Imputation, Legal-Head, &c. How know you the Sun is not a Animal? Whether the Baxterians or Antinomians, gave me lately the name of Antichrist, I know nor, nor care not. You, Sir, write of Mr. Baxter's Pile or Fabrick of Antichristian Doctrine: They truly call true Crispians Antichrists, Know all Men by these presents, that I plead for the same Doctrine our old Reformers did against (not for) Antichrist; Justification by Faith only. But for some Men whose Malice is transparent, tho Ignorance thick, let them say what they will, I care not. Whereas the Doctor's Advocates please themselves with the names of Mr. Alsop, Mr. How, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Powel, and others before Dr. Crisp his Book. Mr. M. the Undertaker told them, The Book was castrated, and the old Offensive things left out: Yet told Mr. Lorimer, who cunningly and sub∣tilly thus objected in his Shop against buying it, said roundly, No not a word is left out. What a bad Ma then are you, said he, to tell the Attesters so? Yet this was one of the good Men Mr. Ʋnworthy Branch says,
call'd for a new Impression, when all know, the good Man did all for good Money: and he says, a Gentle∣man told him with Tears in his Eyes, that he was trou∣bled in Mind ten Years before he saw Dr. Crisp his Christ Exalted. (Was it the same Gentleman that confest he had lived in Uncleanness ten Years?) Better perhaps have doubted ten Years more. I wish Men be not more afraid of Sorrow for Sin, then committing it. How are plain Texts scrued and torn, not by the Doctor's Wits, I confess, but Folly, and make them speak what none but his wise, learned self could think on? Some tell us, say what we will, Dr. Crisp had the Gift of it, to preach Free-Grace, to bring Men to Faith without Repentance, and to comfort Men without a Change. Yes, I never doubted but he had the Gifts of it too: that he was paid for the Cushions he sew'd under Men's Elbows. Doth his Son now enjoy the Wages of that Iniquity, of the madness of the Pro∣phet? If so, it is the price of Blood; let the Fields be call'd the Potters Fields, or the —. I am glad to find you jibe not at Grace, as signify∣ing inherent Righteousness, as Crisp did, and Mr. Toun himself, Graces as they call them. (You indeed cite Dr. Goodwin, The hand of all other Graces are working Hands, but the hand of Faith is a receiving Hand)—Whether you are a doubter here, as some are open denyers, I know not: If you are, we will consider whether the Scriptures call them so; David says, He will give Grace and Glory. Zachary says, I will pour on the House of David and Inhabitants of Je∣rusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication. John 1.16. Of his Fulness have we received Grace for Grace. 2 Cor. 8.6, 7. As you abound in other things, see that ye abound in this Grace also: Titus finish'd this Grace. Charity then is a Grace. Solomon speaks of the gra∣cious Woman. Colos. 3.16. Singing with Grace in
your Hearts, to the Lord. And many other places of Scripture might be brought to prove the vanity of this wicked Notion of theirs, to bring Sanctification into Contempt. Observe, Sir, the strain of the Crispians, from a Book call'd, A drop of Honey from the Rock Christ. He pretends to exalt Christ over all, this is Crisp's pretence: But I pray how, or for what end did God exalt Christ; Him hath God exalted with his Right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give Repentance, (not deny it) to Israel, for the Remission of Sins, says Peter. Believe, saith he, Christ is willing, and that will make thee willing.—Many impeninent Men believe this without a Change; nay some be∣lieve him to be indeed theirs, and they think they are willing too: to what? To take him for a Saviour, but not Lord; for Faith, nor Repentance. He that, p. 27. sets up his Sanctification to comfort him, sets up the greatest Idol, which will strengthen his Doubts and Fears. To say without Christ: who opposeth? but in subordination to him. Nothing is more common with Christ and the Apostles, then bid Men rejoice for God's Work in them, and by them. Sorrow and Fear are dreadful things with these Men: examining themselves is doubting, questioning God's veracity, and I know not what. They never doubt, but I and others do for them: To distrust your selves, is not to distrust God: to question your Sincerity, is not to question the divine Faithfulness. Take heed you, with your painted Pageantry, go not to that Prison, where you are lock'd up for ever without hope. See this Author how he talks, Christ, Christ, Christ; as if their waxen Wings (for so is Faith without Re∣pentance) would make them soar aloft: Healing from Duties, and not from Christ, says he, is the most despe∣rate Disease.—Healing by Medicines, and not the Physician, is an Harangue. Christ hath appointed them
(and blessed them too to the Ungodly) and that with∣out an absolute promise, tho not contrary to it. Would that Man be a good Subject, that should cry King William, O King William, he is a comely King, a wise King, a gracious King, but cares not to hear a word of his Laws. Yet this Author says, To believe, there must go a clear Conviction of Sin: Is this coming with∣out a Change? When Satan, says he, chargeth the Sin on thy Conscience, charge thou it on Christ: this is Go∣spel like, and makes him Christ indeed.—Why! Is it Satan's Work, or the Spirit's Work, to charge Sin on the Conscience? He says, For Men to look to Duties, Graces, Enlargements, is to legalize the Gospel—. No, not as Helps, Encouragements; to say without Christ, we grant it. This is therefore not their mean∣ing, or they talk unintelligibly, or worse. All Grace, we all grant, is from God, as the Foun∣tain and Spring; from Christ by way of Purchase and Procurement; from the Spirit by way of immediate Efficiency. Ezek. 36.26. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. Then ye shall walk in my Statutes, I will be your God. The first reason from which all springs, is God's Will, and the last his Glory. Observe what gross Reflections they make on Grace and Duty; as if they were frighted out of their Wits, if ever they had any. Say next, I am all for the Sun, I care not so much for the Light and Heat coming from it. These would be perpetual Dictators, tho their mode of talking be Mad and Frantick: if they talk sometimes Pious, so would Oliver's Porter. Is his Chamber void.—Confidence is not Demonstration, tho an [I Experience] be clapt to it. You, Sir, being so great a Dissenter, I pray let me ask you one little question; How came you to mag∣nify
Dr. Crisp a Liturgical Man, and vilify others? If you say, Fox tells us of a Martyr, that had his Com∣mon-Prayer-Book in the Flames, and there hug'd it. I will not say I wish Dr. Crisp had had his there too, but I could wish his Book had been committed there by his own hand, as one, when forced so to do, said Parve, nec invideo, sine me liber ibis in ignem, I would not say as a stander-by did to him, Hei mihi, quod Domino non licet ire tuo. Had Dr. Crisp been by David, he had taught him (or the Spirit rather) to have given us better Psalms, where Sin should not be confest as a Burden. Had Alphonses been by God when he made the World, it had been better done, as he blasphemously said. I pray our considering Congregational Brethren to consider, what Confusion they have brought things into, by giving the People so much Power. Mr. Neuton of Taunton, told Mr. Ben of Dorset, when he complain'd how bitter his Life was, through the in∣tolerable Insolencies of his People; Brother, you would put the Keys into their Hands, and they jingle them about your Ears. None talk more of the Judgment of Discretion, then Jack and Tom, that have no Discretion at all. What Confessions came Dr. Owen to before he died? Lived he, or died he at last more like an Independent or Presbyterian? These Ships without Ballast, are driven before the Winds, they bite the Shell but can∣not come at the Kernel, Who shall compare Minis∣ters to Tinkers; have such any work for the Tinker? for it is high time to mend their brazen-faces: must such into a Pulpit? Christ kept his Disciples long at
his Feet, before he sent them out to preach. Work∣men, such should be, that need not be ashamed; what Trade could they live by, but by this! To hear Men of no natural Logick, of no Distinctions, talk with such Ignorance and Confidence, is intolerable. I was painted out in the Pulpit, as is fam'd, as a Drunkard in Coffee-houses; that hardly ever drink there. A∣nother is call'd an Adulterer. A Congregational Friend of mine, Mr. C. a Poet, (whom I had not seen this 25 Years) lately coming to visit me, he told me he liv'd in Dublin when Mr. Williams liv'd there; I ask'd him whether he was suspected to be guilty of any Immoralities? He told me, no: tho his Doctrine he liked not, and therefore would not hear him. They that tell the Story of the Woman in all its basest Circumstances, acknowledg the Fact not done. I challenge any one to shew me one Story in History, or that they knew of, that a Man so vile, as they say he is, and a Woman so lewd, as they, and she con∣fess'd she was, went so far and there stop'd; O Jesus, say to these Storms. Peace, be still.—When God set up a Tabernacle in the Wilderness, he imployed wise Men about it. Exod. 31.3. God fill'd them with Wis∣dom and Knowledg in all manner of Workmanship. He gave them, Ver. 6. Wisdom to make all God commanded Moses. What a Tabernacle had they had, if bunglers had had the making it? like a Drapers Church. Is this a proper Expression in Prayer, O God, we would not have been without our Corruptions for a World, that Free-Grace may be exalted.—I fear Rantism is come to the birth again. Had not his Highness the Protector sent timely, the Levellers had overrun all. I fear some hope for Winstanley's new Law of Righteousness, That he that wants a Horse, or a Sheep, should go for them to any Field where he can get them; See his Book so call'd. Thus may they turn Winstanley's Neonomians at last, tho not Mr. Baxter's.
But it may be some will say, what have we to do with Dr. Crisp? If he set Repentance at nought, we justify him not. 1. If you have nothing to do with Dr. Crisp, I have nothing to do with you; I charge you not, but the Guilty. 2. If calling his Book one of the best Books in the World, next to the Bible; if flying in the Faces of his Censurers, and loading them with all the Ignominy imaginable, be not justifying him: I pray what is? To say at last I never read him, will not excuse, I and others have, and therefore speak. These Men here set up for as great zealots for Infant-Baptism, and take liberty of Reflecting on me for my Conversation with Antipedobaptists, and say they believe, They will w me at last: I assure them, the Anabaptists here expect it not. And I am not a little disturb'd, to see the unfair Management of the late Portsmouth Dispute: To clea my self once more, I have reason to believe, so wise a Man as Mr. Leigh, never there talk'd of the Eunuch's Children, (tho another blunderer, Mr. H. did else∣where) That the Eunuch was in a Journey, and his Wife and Children might be a hundred Miles of.—Did ou Men talk so weakly, and one so strongly, as is repre∣sented? Time will undeceive Men about so vain a Story. I am ready to prove to our Brethren the Anabaptists, 1. That the word  signifies, not to Plunge exclusive of any other way of Washing. 2. That there are no certain Circumstances, to prove any one Person Plunged by John, the Disciples, or Apostles; but strong ones to make it probable that many were not, or could not be plunged. 3. As consequent upon all this, that their common way of Plunging is so far from being a Duty, and ne∣cessary, that to most Persons, and in most Circum∣stances,
it becomes a Sin, and unwarrantable. 4. That if Plunging were a Duty, the Anabap∣tists perform it not: for if every part must be bap∣tiz'd, because every part is Corrupted, and must be Mortified, as they say; then this Washing must be the Administrator's Work. Now their Men and Wo∣men go up a great way in the Water, not as a part of Baptism (for the Word and Element make the Sa∣crament) and the Minister puts in the other part. If I saw my Shirt put in by my Maid in a washing Tub, and the Sleeves hang out, and I put them in; do I plunge my Shirt? Besides, is it true, that there is a Washing with Water? Then I say, the Anabaptists wash not with Water, but in it; if with, there must be an Application of the Water to the Person, not the Person to the Water. And to say, Is sprinkling Washing? I know none that do sprinkle; if they did, it might be justified: Is, Sirs, taking a little bit of Bread, a Supper; the Lord's Supper? A Man may make a hundred such Suppers in an Evening, and go to Bed an hungry when all is done. And whereas, it is said, They went down into the Water; I think the Holy Ghost anticipates the Anabaptists Objection, by telling us they, not he: and again, both Phillp and the Eunuch; was the Baptizer plung'd, I pray? How many times when we were Boys, did we go down into the Water, when we never put off our Coats or Breeches, only wash'd our Feet, and came out again; and so many Women in some places often do. They that say it was but to send a Bason from the Chariot, to the Water: where should Men have Ba∣sons in Chariots? I am sorry Mr. Baxter, in his Pa∣raphrase, hath prov'd so inconstant to himself, after he had heated us against Plunging, in his Infant Church-membership and Baptism, and tells us, A Man might stride over the River Enon, and no Conveni∣ency,
was there to plunge; and that this way of Plunging is a breach of the 6th and 7th Command∣ment: and he told Mr. Tombs, he believ'd when he cool'd his Legs, he warm'd his Heart sometimes; when he plung'd the Maids in Bendly. When Christ wash'd Peter's Feet, he is said, to wash him. He in a fit of intemperate Zeal, cries out, as our Plungers do, Lord not my Feet only, but my Hands and my Head; plunge Head and Ears all over: Christ says, there was no need to wash the whole. If as Mr. Baxter says on Rom. 6.4. after others buried with him in Baptism, was washing the Body all over: for my part they have given up the Cause, as to the Form of Baptism; and were I of their Mind, I must be of the Anabaptists practice (as it should be) about the Form, tho not Subject. For had the Apostle indeed given us only an Historical Account, it would not have followed, because they were plunged, we must be so; but if he, according to these Pedobaptists, unreason∣able, and untrue grant, give us a symbolical Account, I know not who dares alter or change the Form. Plunging must be from Heaven, and any other way of Washing or Baptizing from Men. I know some that cannot contradict this, among my Brethren, will be angry for my plainness, but I cannot help it: I am Jacob the plain Man, more than Esau the cunning one. Thus hath Mr. Pool, the Dutch Annotations, Diodati, Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Baxter, at last so far betray'd the Cause; to talk of our cold Climate, is a cold Plea. I deny that the Form of Baptism signifies any thing of Christ's Burial or Resurrection, but only the wash∣ing away of Sin, or sprinkling of the Blood of Christ: my reason I have given in another Book, and there∣fore shall not do it now. The Church of England hath betrayed the Cause by their Fonts, foolish Questions to the Sponsors, as if the Child, Wilt thou be Baptized
in this Faith, &c. and saying in their Prayers, Nothing doubting but that he favourably alloweth this charitable Work of ours, in bringing these Infants to his holy Bap∣tism; observe favourably alloweth? Yes he commands it, a charitable Work of ours, when it is of Divine Appointment: and in the Catechism (the Childish one) That Repentance and Faith are requir'd in them who are to be so Baptiz'd.—Then ask, why they baptize Infants, the Answer is, Because Infants promise them by their Sureties—. I know some of that Communion are sick of this Answer, as well they may: For Mr. Dan∣vers and Mr. Tombs, and others (who with us justly scoff at this Answer) say truly, Prove the Ʋnlawful∣ness of God-fathers and God-mothers, and they have given up the Cause. If any say, where is your Scripture-warrant? Acts 2.39. Be baptized, the Promise is to you and to your Children, and to as many as are afar off, as many as the Lord your God shall call. Which is a Confirmation of the privilege they should have in the Christian Church, into which he brought them, which they had in the Jewish Church, out of which he took them. For the Promise or Covenant was unto them, and to their Children, and to as many of the Gentiles as should be Proselyted and Converted. If they say, the Promise was of extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost: I say, that was not performed to them, theirs, and all God call'd. This is a plainer Text then they have for taking Women to the Lord's Table; and as plain as that Divine Institution, which is e∣nough for the Change of the Sabbath to the first day of the Week; Psal. 118.24. This is the Day the Lord hath made—. I pray the Anabaptist not to slite this Consideration, Did God ever send such Rogues, as John of Leyden, St. Matthias, and David George, to be Re∣formers? As they brought their Restitution from the Devil, which was to be instead of the Bible: Can
you believe they brought your Plunging, &c. adult Persons only from God? What unheard of madness was it in Mr. Danvers, to question the Story of the besieging of Munster, and the wicked pranks there play'd? I would not care so much if the Anabaptist did only neglect baptizing their Infants; but there is worse in the thing, their leaving no visible way for their Children's Salvation if they die Infants, they are sent to herd with the Children of Jews and Pagans; and if God save them, it is in an un∣covenanted way (and it may be that is not at all) for without are Dogs and such as God judgeth. Children are within, or without the Church, there is no mid∣dle: They were within once; who turn'd them out? Yet I doubt not their Children any more than ours: The omission of Circumcision in Moses, was like to be the Father's Death, but not the Child's Damnation. I have been longer on this than I intended: But the Portsmouth Harangue hath put me into a Heat. I could say much of the Publisher, of vain Stories, if I saw fit: Is he indeed such a learned Man, and were they such mean Men as he falsly represents? Verbum sat Sa∣pienti. I hope we shall soon see Mr. Chandler's true, sober Account of the whole. If any tell false Stories of other Mens blunders, and hide their own true ones, it is worse than bad. The Anabaptists (whom I call not so in Contempt, but only for distinction: If we call them Baptists, we do amiss, as if we were not for Baptism our selves) I say they have torn the Co∣venant of Grace all in pieces, to cast their Children out. When Mr. Flavel told Mr. Cary, Moses and the rest could not be saved by any Covenant, but that of Grace; he talk'd Apothecary, (as our Devonshire phrase is.) They were under A Covenant of Works; tho not The Covenant of Works—A and The were learned Distinctions here. He is a good ingenious, well tem∣per'd
Man, I know him well, but am sorry he was so ll imployed. When shall I have done? I could run out here in infinitum, but I will soon stop my running Pen, whether it will or no. Those that call them Hereticks, do them wrong, as well as that Pedobaptist that compar'd them to Witches, who renounce their Baptism in compacting with the Devil. Yet I must grant Infant-Baptism fell with the Bible, by those reforming Devils before-mention'd, who receiv'd the due Reward of their Murders, Whoredoms, Blasphe∣mies, and whom all sober, pious, Anabaptists detest. Would all other Controversies in Religion, were as easily decided, as may Infant-Baptism be prov'd. They tell us in some old Bibles, they read John the Dipper, they never read John the Plunger: the dif∣ference is great, as I have elsewhere prov'd, To all sound Protestants, who own Justifi∣cation by Faith only, not without Faith, nor by Faith and Works. MR. Hoskish, in his Discourse of the Imputation of Sin on Christ, says roundly and plainly, the Truth I plead for, is defended by Mr. Baxter and Dr. Sherlock: blessed Company! Mr. Alsop's Antisozzo, is the best and most accurate Anti-Baxterian Book I ever saw; all sound; no more need be said. Baxterianism, I think, is spiced Popery, but Crispianism is spiced Rantism. Mr. Hos∣kith told me. That in the second Part of Mr. Trough∣ton's Lutherus Redivivus, were things not common on that Subject. Now Mr. T. is dead, and Mr. Lobb too, and Mr. Alsop will proceed no further, to speak as fa∣vourably as I can. I wish some great Man among you may appear if occasion be. Man is justified not by the Works of the Law, says
St. Paul. Mr. Clark's late noise by Works, and Works of the Law, is nothing: St. Paul speaks of the Mo∣ral Law, Rom. 7.19. By which came the Knowledg of Sin, by which every Mouth was stop'd, v. 13, 14, 15. I abhor all that deny the Integrity of Baxterians. Melancthon was not much better, if as sound: read his Loci Communes. Not by that Law is Man justifyed, that said, Thou shalt not Covet, not by that Law, That he that doth them, shall live in them; by these Man could not be justifyed. These were Moral Laws sure, not Ceremonial, not Pharasaical, not external Acts only: these do not all this. The sufferings of Christ are subjectively infinite, as of one that is God: as Sin by our Divines is often said to be objectively Infinite, as committed against an infinite Being; by his Stripes are we healed. Be∣ware you seek not to be the Death of Christ's death, by making it void or not of Effect, for its main Ends and Purposes. Some you know of late, besides Sherlock, deny Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and others to be saved by Faith in Christ, or to know much of him, tho Christ says Abraham saw his day and was glad; and Paul says, Abel offer'd a Sacrifice by Faith; but one place with me, well improv'd, is of great use, Enoch Prophesied so, Jude saith, Enoch the seventh from Adam, Prophesied of these things, behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Vengeance—. And we know Paul tells us, this Lord is Christ, who so cometh. 1. He that knew the greater things of Christ, must the lesser; he knew him to be a judg of the World, and therefore the Saviour of it. 2. He could not Prophesy to others, but what he knew, and they might and did understand: Luke 24.27. Many things were written of Christ in Moses, the Psalms and Prophets.
Think highly of the work of Conversion, Mr. Bax∣ter was sound here; so are most of his Followers, not all; Paul compares the Power of converting Souls to God, to the power of raising Christ. Had all been done by common Providence, and Man's great Care, he need not have compar'd this Work of changing the Will, and converting a Sin∣ner to the mighty Power which rais'd Christ from the Dead. Beware of loosing things, and still retaining words: some will keep the word Repentance, but condemn the thing; others the word Faith, but mean somewhat else. And you find these Mens Notions duelling toge∣ther: part then for pities sake. Tho I know the one is but as a sore Finger to the other, (Crispianism) which is as the withering of the whole Arm. Carry it civilly towards sober Baxterians; most in this City preach well, and Discourse so, and are not so corrupt as their Master: I heard only one preach at random. He knew not what was become of Noah, Sampson, Solomon; Ecclesiastes was not his Confes∣sions; Sampson died with Revenge in his Heart.— Did God ever work a Miracle, to answer a Prayer of Re∣venge? He consider'd them as Philistines, as the Churches Enemies, more than his, and the loss of his Eyes more as a wrong to the Church, than to him, who was the Pillar of it at that time, under God. We can better tell what is become of these, then what will become of him. Other Baxterians loath'd this, I mean the Conscientious ones, that believe their common Doctrine; not the Politick ones, that be∣lieve with us, but dare not say it: because these Men have gotten the Ascendant in this City, and can Ruin or Advance many Ministers at their Pleasure. There attempts against me, I care not for: for I am glad we have their help against Crispianism.
I wish their Doctrine end not in Arminianism at last; some are gone, others going, more would, had not Mr. Williams's Restrictions and refining of his Master's Doctrine hindred. As for Dr. Crisp, we are often told of him, That we understand him not—. Nor he himself, say I. In what inextricable Perplexities did he involve himself; then saying one thing, then another? It is often observ'd, that they that are zealots for wild unusual Notions, fancy they see them every time they take up their Bible, and every where: who could imagine Dr. Crisp should see in Heb. 11.1. That when Men be Believers, they know they were the Children of God, and lov'd with a complacential Love, in a state of Impenitency, or in short, there see, Justification before Faith? Keep clear in this matter, we are justified by Faith, not without, only, not with Works. Let that place be much in your Minds; Rom. 3.21.22. But now the Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested, being manifested by the Law and the Prophets: Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is  difference. It is call'd the Righteousness of God, as God or Christ is the subject of it, not efficient: Where is our Righteousness, that we are Subjects of, call'd God's Righteousness, because he is the Efficient? In this sense my Repentance, Love, Faith, may be call'd God's Repentance, Faith, Love. This is call'd the Righte∣ousness of Faith, as by Faith it is made ours, not in the Effects only; for so God's attributes are ours; but by Imputation. That Abraham's Righteousness was the Righteousness of Faith, and that that Righteousness of Faith was the Righteousness of Faith in Christ, and that as Abraham was justified, so are we; Rom. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. Paul and Mr. Alsop, have excellently prov'd Circumcision was a Seal of that Righteousness, and that
he should be the Father of many Nations (an unan∣swerable place for Infant-Baptism, by the way.) Heb. 11.9. There was the Exemplar and Copy, the Archetype, and Ectype; the promis'd Land was a strange Land to one that look'd for a Heavenly one; so Mr. A. against Sherlock. I could even Zabarellize that excellent Book. He observes, My Hand relieves me when it receives an Alms, the Cup refresheth me when the Wine in it doth so; so Faith justifies as it applies Christ: thus he af∣ter others, and I after him, and some of you, if you please, after me. Keep clear, I pray you, in the matter of irresistible Grace in Conversion. God takes away the opposition, the stubbornness of the Will; this is taking away the Stone; then gives a principle of Grace; this is his giving a Heart of Flesh; and then inclines to walk in ways of Obedience. Adam was made upright, and obeyed; he was not made so by doing this and that Duty; He was made good, and then did good for the time of his Station. God ath a love of Benevolence or good Will, before Men are turned, when they have not the Image and Super∣scription of God, but Satan on them; but no Love of Complacency, till in them is a conformity to his Na∣ture; when a homogeneous, not a heterogeneous Na∣ture: no Beast could be found to be a fit Wife for Man, God gives him an Eve; so Mr. A. against S. Now I doubt not, but the greatest of Sinners may, in the reaching of the Word, be prick'd at the Heart on a udden; his Will turned for God, and against Sin, and e pardoned: should this Man going home, ride or ross the Waters, and break his Neck, or be drown'd, ho he had not one quarter of an Hour for secret Prayer, or reading, or counselling others, he would be mmediately carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bo∣som;
for his Seed was in him; he was born of God. And this Mr. Williams, I am sure, will not deny, no, I think, to do Mr. Baxter right, he neither, were he alive. I solemnly profess I cannot remember one word in all his Books to the contrary, who have read more of them than any of his Followers I can meet with, tho none of late years except his Life, and Ʋniversal Redemption. A Censure of a Scandalous Pamphlet against the Authors of the Congregatio∣nal Declaration, and my self. THere coming out lately, What shall I call it? Not an Answer; sure, (where is not one real or pretended Argument against the Congre∣gational Declaration) but a Libel against the Reveren Authors and me, I find my self concerned to consider this as well as Esquire Edwards's Defence, being di∣rectly struck at here, and but indirectly there. The Composers of this Libel (as is agreed on a hands) are the Reverend Assembly of unlearned Trads∣men, the A. Club; and now the celebrated Lunati applies himself to the wise Men of Gotham to vindi∣cate Trepidantium Malleus (with whom they begin) then Mr. Mead, Mr. Nesbet, Mr. Lobb, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Taylor. The Fable of Box was answered three Years since in my Reply to W. C. his Censure of m Mr. Keith, and Mr. Lesly. As I then said, I say i now, I offer five Pounds to any that shall prove I wa in Box, or any such place one hour. Is it nothing t print Men Lunaticks, and celebrated ones too, because
once they were plunged into deep Melancholy for a long time? Mr. Mead is charged with taking a House and Garden surreptitiously—Where, I pray, hath he did him∣self and the stoln Goods? Are they not upon the spot? If other Mens Goods had been so, some of this Company needed not to have absconded, or gone to Goal for not paying Men their due, or spending o∣ther Mens Money in Taverns and Coffee-houses in idle Pranks, when they should be industrious in their Shops to pay every Man his own. Must a Man of Mr. Mead's known Worth, Integrity and Usefulness, have a Hue and Cry sent after him as a Cheat, by such as have been notoriously such? How he is cleared by that Gentleman most con∣cerned in that Affair, as well as others, is not conve∣nient now to relate. Let any sober dissatisfied Men (if any such there be) come to me or him about it. It is not convenient in Print to answer Men about these things at large, who can only rave, not reason. I am sorry if this publick Defamation hath been any unhappy occasion of Mr. Mead his late Distempers: Such a thing I confess may catch, as Tinder doth Fire, on Melancholy and the usual Distempers of old Age. If he dies, are not these Men Man-slayers? No wonder they spare no Man, when Mr. Gouge, who lately was by these Men magnified as the best, if not only Gospel-Preacher in the City, is now call'd a Drunkard and Murderer. He sees now how he was taken in his Policy, who by permitting Jack to speak in his Meeting place to prevent a Storm that he might not be accounted an Enemy to free Grace, hath thus occasioned one: I doubt he finds in this sense, 'tis not true, That true Repentance is never too late. Mr. Nesbet comes next: What if he were a Beg∣gar, &c. must none such write against Crisp? a Work
fitter for him, had he been so, to answer poor, beggar∣ly Arguments and Phrases of a poor Scholar indeed. Nam genus, & proavos, & quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco.— He that could call Mr. Nesbet a mean or contemptible Man, would by that thing prove himself so. Mr. Lobb comes next to be arraigned, tried and cast: He is made a Man of Contention, and yet once magnified for his faithful Report. That he was also a Favourite of K. James: They that thus charge him now, were Men that encouraged him in it then, s the Securer of their Liberty. I hope these vile Men contributed not to his Death also: Trepidantium Malleus and these Mens Names are written in large Characters, Mr. Griffith, Mr. R. Taylor in small ones; and the reason privately given is, We were Knaves, and they were Fools; and such a false Character is given of one of these for easiness of Temper, and flexibility, that all cry out, Shame on it; who for the contrary, might make an Archbishop or a Judg. Mr. G. say they, thought others had sub∣scribed—What then? Dear Hearts! Is it not enough he subscribed to the Declaration as good and sound. They say they know none that own the Antinomian N∣tions there censured, but some of old in Germany. I would all such were in Germany, and London rid of them. They know not! What then? Will it fol∣low we know not? Can some of them say the Te Commandments (I doubt it, they are old Laws) or read a Chapter in English as becomes a Man? The design of this Paper, as he that runs may read, is to bring Ministers and the Ministerial Functi∣on into Contempt; to make way, as is conceiv'd, for their own speaking as well as Jack's in time. Hence
they call Mr. Lobb Dunce, Blockhead, &c. compare them all to Porters and Tinkers, and tell of the Wicked∣ness of one and another, and all the while the Plague-Sores of Debauchery have been long running on them. Tho they begin with us, and name plainly, I only follow, and will put all under fictitious Names. What Letters shall I put them in? if in great ones, they must pass for Knaves only; if in small ones, for Fools only: Well, they being both, shall have of both sorts. Mr. CALƲMniator, Mr. STALLion, Mr. FRAud, Mr. DƲLman, Mr. MAGpy. 1. Let them read Trepidantium Malleus intrepidan∣ter malleatus, and my Defence before they go on. 2. Let me know one way or other my Accusers, and for what a Posse Comitatus is rais'd against me by Men baptized into Crisp: Is it because I cry of his Book as the Prophet, There is Death in the Pot? Call it not, Sirs, a savoury Book; What Savour but that of Death can it send? Or, is it that I have cautioned you against a Jack as dangerous and more ignorant? Let these Men please themselves, they do not much disturb me; and I doubt not some will think I am now, with Domitian, meanly imployed. Paul, no doubt, was a dull Legal Preacher to him; for whose sake Mat∣tocks are brought to erase the Foundation of the Mi∣nisterial Function. He is for a while honour'd by them as a King, but is he not what is said of the King of Spain, Rex Asinorum? I doubt not but in a little time these little Animals will rise up in Rebel∣lion against their little Man, and he shall be the Rogue, Drunkard—These are Men of crazy Intellectuals, tho said to be some of Christ's best sound Members; One reply'd, They have been well fluxt to be sound—Are they more like Epicurus his Swine, or Christ's Sheep?
O sad Case! that when some Ministers were fol∣lowed, they could not take a Cup without trouble! Now is a time of Liberty.— Have not some made their Antinomianism a Cloak for Deism or Atheism? To say, There is nothing in Religion worth suffering for, cost One dear in the City, who, after, in terror of Mind did stare with drops of Sweat at his Fingers-ends, and so rav'd, till he cut his Throat and died. Simon Thorvy (as Baker in his Chronicle, and others, tells us) boasted, that by his Wit, he should make void any Law of Christ. God so afflicted him with a fit of Sickness, that his Animal Spirits were so wasted, that after his Recovery, he was forced to learn to read Letters again, like a Child. Some say there is no need of much Wit to be profane: but this is not always true, we see. Give one another good Counsel; yet be sober more ways than one: study that famous Book of Mr. Perkins, Dedicated to some of you, viz. To all ignorant Per∣sons in the Kingdom of England—. You see what it is by the poor Draper, for Men not to move within their own Sphere, or for you to interfere with other Mens Work. You could not meddle with the substrate matter, or Doctrine of the Book you revile, no more than your Lord and Master. This Christ-Exalter is, like Pilate, a Christ-Crucifier; who said, What I have Written, I have Written; and so, what he hath said, he hath said; without giving any reason to any that fair∣ly, and privately desire it. Is this your Gamaliel, at whose Feet you sit, and hear Impudence and Folly pass for Sense and Demonstration? If ever I am printed as a Lunatick by these Men more, as twice already, I intend to print the ingeni∣ous Lampoon, mention'd in my Apology, about the Draper's Birth and Life—who now refuse to she
it to any Man. And for these Libellers, let them re∣member, the old Romans hanged Men that could not give a satisfactory Account for not payment of Debts, and a piece of their Bodies were given to their Cre∣ditors: let not Men talk of suffering for their Consci∣ences, who suffer for their God-pieces. None of these trouble themselves with the Learn∣ing of Antichrist's Doctors, as Mr. Ʋnworthy Branch phraseth it. The old Antinomians, as Thomas Taylor in that valuable Book, Regula vitae, describes them, pretended to act as if the Golden Age, say I, were return'd again, Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectum{que} colebat. but soon were Ranters, as if —Subjectum Pelion Ossae. scandalous Men on a sudden, come to have Peace, not of God's sending no doubt: their building on their sandy Foundation will fall to the Ground in the day of Trial; their Lamps without Oil, will soon go out. For Men who are in the chase of worldly Pleasures, to cry (not indeed, Lord, Lord, but) Christ, Christ—will have a woful repulse, I know you not, you workers of Iniquity. These Men perpetually declaim against the Baxteri∣ans, and damn them to boot, (O horrid Censorious∣ness and Wickedness!) and yet at the same time cor∣rupt the Doctrine of Justification much more than they, in denying the presence of Faith, as well as in∣strumentality in Justification, as Crisp doth in plain words. Reader, it is worth thy Consideration to remember, that Arminius himself owned Calvin's Doctrine of
Justification, as he tells the World, in his just Man's Defence: and I knew a great Arminian defending this Doctrine against an accurate Baxterian opposing it. That for my part I cannot forbear thinking and say∣ing, that Arminian, sound here, was less Corrupt, tho he denied Predestination, irresistible Grace in Conver∣sion, and Perseverance, than the Baxterian sound in all these Points, but corrupt in this one of Justifica∣tion, which toucheth the very heart of Religion and true Christianity: However we three managed our Controversy, not in the London, but Christian way and Manner, without Bitterness or Uncharitableness. But my Work is now with the Crispians, and about their making Repentance no Duty, but Sin. One of the most ingenious favourers of Dr. Crisp, told me lately, He knew not what to say to the three Pages I censure, about David: and shaking his Head, said, I know not what to say for the Doctor there. And I hope every Man of sense must grant me this, that if Repentance be a necessary indispensable Duty, with∣out which no Man can be saved, Dr. Crisp is one of the foulest Hereticks that ever appear'd in the World: worse, much worse, say I again and again, than Soci∣nus. If Repentance (or having Sin a burden) be legal and abominable, and Faith only a perswasion we are Justified, Rantism comes next. Mr. Williams (that Man of a sounder Heart, than Head) is so well pleas'd with the Congregational Decla∣ration against Antinomianism, that he hath lately writen his End to Discord; wherein he like a Christian and Gentleman (that is to say, like Mr. Williams) tells them he is sorry, he or others suspected them guil∣ty of Antinomianism, and that they have now purg'd themselves of any such Charge; and tells them, had they done this sooner, many late Books against them, and
Controversies had been prevented. And therefore now no doctrinal Controversies, between Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren, remain to justify any further Division: This is his Opinion. I am sure, he owns always, and to all Men (as he hath done in print) that the giving of the first Grace is not Con∣ditional, and where that is given, there is promis'd Perseverance. Now let such Men talk what they will of Conditions, they must be sound in sense, whether in Phrase or no; they are hedged in, they cannot help it. Mr. Lob and he met together, some Months since, and as I hear, were agreed to write one against ano∣ther no more. Mr. Lob put him on this last Work, and no doubt had been glad to have seen it, had he not died before its publication. I am glad to find help from any Men, Arminians themselves, to prevent Satan's Gospel, not Christ's. A Doctor of Divinity lately told me of one taken n Bed between two Women, and clap'd up in Pri∣on, who told him, that he was between two isters, godly Women, in Bed, without not only ny sinful Act but Thought: and all they did was, hey sung one of the Songs of Sion, but the wicked Man f the House, sent for him whom they call the Constable, nd they were all sent to Bridewel, and whip'd by the icked; but he was sorry for one of them, a good, gra∣ious Woman, whom he fear'd would die with it. You impenitent Believers, whose Doctrine hath once lready brought forth Rantism: you are laying the oundation once more; but Heaven grant, that as the ormer was soon blasted, the latter may. The Doctor so told me, that his Father knew Dr. Crisp, and said, e knew him from a Boy, a notorious dull Piece, and at he never could manage an Argument. And I erily believe, he was not able to give a Grammati∣cal
Account of any Chapter in the Latin Testament, nor of ten Verses in any Chapter there, in the Greek one. Tho other propositions of the Crispians are black, and look with an odious Face, yet they are nothing to this against Brokenness of Heart, as, That the Elect were always God's Children, as much belov'd by God in their Whoredoms, Murders, before Conversion, as after: That God saw then no Sin in them, no more than in Angels and Saints above. That the filthiness and pollution of Sin was on Christ till he breath'd it out, and so he was odious to God, as a Toad to a Man, and continued so till he rose from the Dead. That Whoremongers, Blasphemers, continuing such, may be assur'd they are God's Children; and that the general Tender of the Gospel, is their best security. That no Grace, not Faith it self, can make any one to have Comfort by it, or prevent Evil, or obtain Good, or further Salvation. The worst is, That God never chargeth Believers with Sin, neither ought they to charge themselves, nor be troubled about it; David sin'd in both. But see my Dialogue between a wild Crispian, and a sober Christian. And now I friendly apply my self to the Authors of this censur'd Libel. I bear you no ill will, as you well know, and some of you will candidly confess: you know not the Pleasure that I take in being of a Reconcileable Spirit; any of you shall be welcome to me at any time, if it please you calmly to debate matters: no Man would be more glad of your Refor∣mation, than my self. God Almighty give you Re∣pentance unto Life; for Sin must be a burden to you here, or hereafter. I am not without hope, but some of you are already ashamed for your abuse of Mr. Mead, especially. If it be in my power, I would be
ready to do you any Service, and love you as unfeign∣edly as if you had never given me this Provocation. We all offend and provoke the Sin-pardoning God every Hour, more than we do one another all our days. I remember (and O that I remembred it better) who said, For if you forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father which is in Heaven, forgive you your Trespasses. Forgive, O God, my Forgiveness, being so weak and imperfect. A Censure of a Sermon preach'd by Ca∣non Gilbert, Jan. 30. last, &c. IN the large Porch, to a little House, I find my self struck at, That Mr. Baxter, for asserting, The King to be inviolable, was lash'd in his Grave, by one otherwise of his own Kidney. I desire the Prefa∣cer to consider, 1. How unfair it is, to reflect in Print on his own Brother, both by Father and Mother (tho far from being his Brother in other things) who when occasion was, declin'd any Censure of him in my late Jacobites Con∣ference, but there gave him his due Encomium against his Censurer; who call'd him crack-brain'd Man, &c? My Brother is a wise Man: By his Oleum Terebynthinae, he hath much obliged the World. If Mr. Smith, the old famous Surgeon of London, say true, who told me, he had his Notions from him; I care not, the World hath them from my Brother; also by his famous Cure of a Boy who lost Brain, (whom afterwards I made a Scholar) and other Books. 2. Yet I challenge him, or any other, to answer
that part of the Book that relates to their Martyr∣maker, which is my name for him. Let those that pretend to weep for Tammuz, consider it: who saw any Tears in their Eyes, on Martyrdom days? How ma∣ny generally begin their Fast after a deep Mornings Draught, and some after a good Dinner? 3. What horrid playing with Scripture makes he, when he calls our Parliaments infallible Judges—.That Men that will not be tryed by this Law and Testi∣mony, it is because there is no Truth in them. Have not Parliaments in all Ages declar'd different things, about matters of Fact, and matters of Right? 4. Is what is cited, approv'd of? When the Questi∣on is, who is King? What they say ought not to be question'd. What makes some Men then talk as Jaco∣bites, and Non-resisters now? Is not K. William's Title as good by Parliament, as any of his Predecessors, and K. James his Right forfeited? And why then—. 5. Was it not horrid Wickedness for some to preach, and afterwards Print, and he to applaud such Passages as these, That K. Charles the 1st Was a strict observer of Justice— A Prince that had done no harm, nor committed any Fault— A Man of perfect Innocen∣cy—like Josiah, the best of Men, the best of Kings, &c. And never Answer what I in my Censur'd Book have prov'd, and many more? 1. That that King gave a Commission to the Earl of Antrim for what he did in the Irish Rebellion. Mr. Long of Exon, in his Censure of Mr. Baxter's Life, confesseth, if such Stories were true, no Death could be easy enough for him, or to that effect. I wrote him in a Letter, we were sure of the former, let him take the latter. Where is the Man that dares deny K. Charles the second confest it, in a Letter yet to be seen?
2. That he debauch'd the Nation by a Book of Sports on Sundays, contrary to the Laws of God and this Land: That the face not only of Religion, but Civility, was gone; he was one of the worst of Kings that ever sat on the Throne since the Conquest. 3. That he raised Money without his Parliament, contrary to his Oaths, and got Preachers to tell us, All we had was his, and no longer ours than till he is pleased to call for his own. The very words of Manwaring in his Sermon. So that a French Government was designed to be set up, and I doubt not Religion too; read the Cassan∣drian Articles, the Reasons why the Parliament would make no more Addresses to the King, particu∣larly what word he sent to Capt. Pennington, not to assist the Protestants of Rochel— Read Rushworth's Collections; his Oath to tolerate Popery on the intend∣ed Spanish Match: How he made the Pope weep for Joy to see a Prince so love the Catholicks, as he signified in his Letter to his Holiness when he pro∣mised to establish the Religion of his Ancestors. Did ever a Protestant decline speaking of his Reli∣gion before he died, as did this Martyr-maker? I do believe had Charles the Second died on the Block, he had declared himself a Protestant as his Father was forced to do; and had Charles the First died in his Bed, he had acknowledged himself to be a Pa∣pist a long time in his Heart, and received the Sa∣crament from a Popish Priest, as Charles the Second did. Circumstances alter Cases much. He that told such a notorious Untruth in the beginning of his Kingly Image, that he call'd a Parliament out of love to them, not from necessity, who call'd none in 12 years, but forbid Men to talk of them—He that said he had no ill design, tho his Friends blam'd him, in coming with a Guard to the House to de∣mand
Prinn, Hambden, Hollis, and others, who shall believe him? I say, he deserved to be sent with King Edward the Second to the Tower, &c. for that very Fact. Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, I will not determine where the Point must be put. What strange Citations makes this Gentleman to prove nothing! Some of his Citations of O. Cromwell's Eulogies of the King appear unevide and unsatis∣factory at the first view. To pray to God to save u for the Royal Martyr's Prayer—looks like worse here than a piece of Popish Bigotry, or Ignorance. Our Sa∣viour; I will not ask who is that? and how long he hath been accounted so by some Men? What, Priest-ridden at last! Only, I pray, hath not he been privately talk'd of as very a Cheat as Oliver Cromwell by a Club in that Town? As for that contemptible Toy the Sermon, p. 32. the Preacher says, K. Charles the Martyr had the Piety of David without his Sins; no Uriah felt his Cruelty;  Bathsheba was defiled by his Lust, &c. Now who im∣ployed the Irish Rebels to destroy so many hundred thousand Protestants in so barbarous a way, some driven into Rivers, some danced with Straw set on fire about their Wastes, some having their Backs broken, lay on the Grass, and sed on it till they dy'd; some Mothers made to roast their Children ty'd fast to Spits, and scourg'd if they turn'd not round, or pitied their roar∣ing Children; and after all, make a Child so to turn the Mother; and all this without Repentance. Keep your Eye on K. Charles the Second's Testimony as the most unexceptionable Proof of all. What Villanies before forty and forty one! A Massacre had we had in England, had not God and the Parliament (no Pen∣sioners) prevented it. Well, if some Men that thus reflect on penitent David could say, No Bathsheb was defiled by their Lust; no Bookseller's Wife in
Oxon so kept, and after married, that the poor Cuckold must be mentioned by the Scholars; if they could not cut the Wing of any Fowl, Send for — Observe, Reader, what a Generation of Men they generally are who talk of the pious Martyr now in Heaven; many of which secretly scoff at all Religion, and think Discourse of Piety and Heaven to be a Cant, and mock at Discoursers on these Subjects: Or such who are Ambidexters, preach up Nonre∣sistance of K. James, and cry it down; one while it is the Sin of Witchcraft, another time fast for Suc∣cess of Arms against him, and give God Thanks on Thanksgiving-days for Deliverance. To pray on the thirtieth of January, We bewail the Murther of this day— Let us be faithful to his Successors— Then presently in another Prayer, We give thee hearty Thanks for sending thy Servant, the Prince of Orange, among us, to deliver us from Popery and Slavery. And once pray'd to God to bless their Forces against him in Ireland, &c. Who for some Months pray'd for K. James, That God would strengthen him to vanquish and overcome all his Enemies; and plot at that time against him, and say, God prosper the Prince of Orange, else we are all undone? Do such Men indeed believe there is a God, or that he will be thus mock'd and play'd with? Whereas we are threatned with a large Vindication of the Martyr-maker, let it come out when it will, it will soon be answered, and it and the Author ex∣posed: This Cockatrice-Egg hath been hatching about five Years. I pray all Men to observe what kind of Friends they are to King William, who are thus such Advocates for their Martyr. The Canon passeth a cold Com∣pliment on him; the Prefacer not that. The King and his Cause is wounded through the sides of that
Parliament who fought for the English Liberties and Religion against an Invader of both. They know, if the Doctrine of Non-resistance be true, Men will soon be Jacobites, and make way for K. James his Return; then K. James shall be compared to the Martyr, as excellent Prince; and K. William to Oliver Cromwell, a Usurper, &c. by Men whose Lives are a Reproach to their Judgments, who already place David, a Man after God's own Heart, below Charles, a Man after the Devil's Heart. I am sorry I am forced to say the Prefacer was a great Friend to the Dissenters, went to their Meet∣ings, contributed, &c. till he was forced to go to Sa∣crament to get the Hospital at Plymouth; then he bewailed this Compulsion, and was drag'd to the Lord's-Table; then became one of the greatest Ene∣mies they had, except Roger L'Estrange and Dr. Hicks, and thirsted after Whiggish Blood for Preferment. I would conceal this as I do other things, could I do it without prejudicing the righteous Cause I have now espoused. I had almost forgotten to tell the Reader what this roaring Canon's Text was, that God told David the Pestilence was for Saul's slaying the Gibeonites. Well, God told David it was for that Sin, but had a scan∣dalous Weathercock-Priest told him so, he had not believed it. When K. Charles the Second returned he brought a Deluge of Profaneness with him; a Nest of Whores, and a Litter of Bastards had he, and heavy Judgments soon followed his Heels: The Plague one year, the Fire of London the next—Now if one had ask'd a Temporizing Trencher-Priest, What were these Judg∣ments for? O, the cutting off the Head of Charles the First! Who told them so? Not God sure, for he and they were too great Strangers, that they should
so easily know his Mind. Was it not for the unheard of Athe∣ism and Profaneness of the Court? For turning out eighteen hundred Ministers in one day, for Nonconformity to vain Traditions? For some Episcopal Mens bringing in the King, after Dr. Sanderson had perswaded them to take the Engage∣ment? Was it for idolizing Princes, and saying, as our Pre∣facer, of K. Charles, He did no Evil—? Perhaps he could do none; for so Sir Orlando Bridgman, in the Trial of the Regicides, urged it, The King can do no Man wrong. (He that can do no Man wrong; can he do any Man right?) Was it (some may say) that when the Father's Head was on the Block, the two Son's Heads had not been there too? I am not more confident of any one thing I ever studied of Histo∣ry, then that K. Charles was a Popish, Perjur'd, Bloody, Ar∣bitrary Tyrant. As for our Prefacer's Citations. 1. Some I doubt are untrue, and others want proof. 2. Men will too much talk like Courtiers, whose Minds cannot be known by their words. 3. Some very good prudent Men, did think favourably of K. Ch. the 1st's Cause and Family. 1. Till the Discovery of hat deep Plot by Dr. Oates, declared by the Parliament to be true. 2. Till they saw the after Proceeding of K. Charles the d, and his Death. 3. Till they saw the open defiance of our Laws by K. James. I would appeal to the Consciences of some Men (if I thought they had any) whether they do, or an believe what they write of that worst of Kings, C. 1st. tho ot Men. 4. Besides, when Men are in Misery, as the King was in the Isle of Wight, they then are like wild Beasts ta∣ed. So he might talk honestly and piously, and easily decoy well meaning credulous Persons, who are then through pity ready for such impressions. 5. Yet, I think, their fluid Charity (perhaps not fix'd) is more justifiable than their Prudence or mature Judgments. So it hath been, as before with the Censurers of Dr. Crisp his Doctrine: some close all, They hope he was a good Man. 6. Yet after all, I care not what any Man said, but what he ought to say. I therefore o to the merits of the Cause.
And for the Church-Men, who are angry with  of us, that hope Oliver is in Heaven, or the greate Parliamentarian Fighters; they themselves must ha own'd so much over their Graves, if but lately Dea tho they justified themselves, and proceedings to th last. If the common Plea be good here, That is  that is in the least degree a remove from Despair: and th you may say of any Man, You hope he is in Heaven, th you are not sure to be in Hell. Say next, you hope the grea Turk when he dies will go there: That you hope to  till a hundred Years old, and to find a great prey; not ∣ing sure to the contrary. I will not digress, else I wo lay open the vanity of this Notion, or blind Charity. I care not for Milton's Iconoclastes, tho I think he ha written a great deal of Truth, but whether honestly  no, I leave others to judg: I do believe both he and  Lord Lambert were Roman Catholicks, or Scepticks a Deists, doing the work of such. I once conversed with  Lord Lambert, in his Garden on the Island nigh Plymo and could hardly tell what he would be at in Religion,  when I saw him on the 15th Psalm, I there found a Beh menistical strain, and believ'd he intended to bring our R∣ligion into Contempt. What Bedlow swore, is well kno and he said he brought him Letters from —. Th Milton lost his Paradise, the Protestant Religion, but ne reain'd it more. But did nothing that Rushworth sa deserve our Prefacer's Consideration? Obj. But it shall be done in time. When? It is high ti if ever. And he might have let alone this magisterial, dog∣tical Assertion till that time, that we might see all in a pie What is a Machin, when taken in its parts: for my pa I not only can, but do hear patiently any Man that sh talk two or three Hours together, to prove the infam Martyr-maker, to be a glorious Martyr, if he so belie but for Men to assert, and assert without proof, and be  patient of hearing Objections; they are not fit for Conver∣
o doubt this destroyer of his Country, doubted not but ishop Williams of Ossery his Prophesy, should be fulfill'd in is Book against Non-Resistance, written in the 2d Year of the War, That the King should reign till he had put all his Enemies der his Feet. God heard the K. when he said, if I have ed innocent Blood, let my Honour be laid in the Dust. As for the keen severe Reflections, our Prefacer makes n those who mke a Calves head Feast every Martyr∣om day, I justify them not, but if I must be either at heir Feast, or some Mens Fast that day, I know which  would choose for good chear sake, tho I will not tell e∣ery Body, much less the Prefacer, lest I should be re∣ected on in his next Turkish-slavish-Book. His other rother N. Y. (that true English-man lately dead) is be∣ond his Censure now. This Sermon being printed, must never be preach'd ore, tho with a new Text, how often soever it hath been reach'd already. Must two hundred Pounds a Year be id to a repeater of Sermons, tho his own, and the Trade ntinue, durante Vita? He that preach'd his Daughters Di∣nity once about standing in inging Psalms, let him nsult her again, and it may be he will no longer up d down, preach Pro and Con, and turn his Cap as the ind blows. Will not his Head when he dies, serve for other thing now on the Steeple? Hath the Martyr-aker's Picture before the Pulpit, set up by Mr. Prefacer, ade them both giddy? That King Charles was the Author of his Image, is utly asserted by our Prefacer, as stoutly denied by Men  all Parties, but never was by me; for 1. Colonel Crook told me he saw the Copy of it under  King's own hand, and he never doubted him the Au∣or. Now tho I confess this proves him not the Au∣or, yet it is a great help, and confutes some who estion whether ever the King saw it. The Testimo∣ of an Adversary goes far; he was one of the greatest
Enemies the King had, and one of the best Friends his Highness the Protector had. 2. What will the denyers get by this, who cannot de∣ny the Conference between the King and Mr. Hindersham, and other Epistles of his, which prove he was a good Scho∣lar, and so far a wise Man. What if his Brother Julia, and his Brother Trajan, were both great learned Men, doth that excuse their Tyrannies, and other Villanies? No, tho their good Morals be added to all; as not given to Women or Wine, &c. Their learning unsanctified (not enthusiastically manag'd) was but as Judas and the Jews Lanthorns and Torches by which Christ was betray'd. 3. Doth any Man that knows Bishop Gauden's Stile, think this like it? And for what a late Writer says, Mr. T. of the Earl of Anglesy, leaving it under his hand in a Book, That he knew it was not the King's, &c. and this Mr. Millington testifies—. 1. Is it likely King Charles the first, and James the the Duke of York, should so confess to him? What! And none but him? 2. Ought not the Earl, if so, to have declar'd this whe live, Viva voce, for the satisfaction of his Countrey-men, and not leave a Note in so obscure a place? 3. I must have greater Testimony than Mr. M. to prove it was the Earl's own Hand, and not counterfeit: We know who can imitate. If as Mr. Millington told me, and others, That Paul a Knave of Jesus Christ, is no true Story, but it was found that Knave was with great Ar∣tifice put in, and the word there before blotted o might not a lesser Trick be here made? Lastly, If Bishop Gauden did say he was the Autho, and say true, it is as true, he was the greatest Villain  the face of the Earth. To tell the World, the King sa to God and Man, what he never said: his name deser to be a Curse on the Earth, for abusing all Manki But he was accounted one of the best of Bishops:
kely, the famous Preacher, once in Exon, told me great ngs of him, and that he believ'd him to be a Pious n, tho he himself was a warm Independent. Whether hop Gauden might help the King to any Materials, I l not say, or the like, but the same Arguments that ve him to be the Author, prove him to be a at R. remember I once heard our Prefacer say, when urged th the afore named Story of K. Charles the 2d's giving der his Hand, That the Earl of Antrim, in the Irish Re∣lion, acted by his Father's Commission; It cannot, said , be denied, But he hated his Father, because a Protestant— or, thin Sophistry. (Yet we had an Act from an in∣ible Parliament, by the way, to make it Treason to say, is King was a Papist.) I wish those excellent, admi∣le Accomplishments, God hath bless'd our Prefacer th, (say Dr. Salmon what he will to the contrary) had en well imployed! Would Plymouth Hospital had been ther, and the Sacramental Test! Then we had had him as ainter, not of an old rotten Post, but of a new good e, K. William, as more than a Crowned Head, which is all  good words he hath for him. If Christ and Oliver omwel, must pass for two Deceivers, in some Company;  Judas and the Martyr-makers, pass for famous Men. d the King been indeed a Pious Man, some Men would ver have one good for him; who hate every thing of ty where ever they see it, except the NAME. How hard is it for any Man to serve two Masters, Charles  Pseudo-Martyr, and our good K. William? Either he st hold to the one, and Despise the other; they can∣t serve K. Charles and K. William. If some took off the ad of the Father, others Dethron'd K. James for K. lliam, and would have his Head too, could they come at But if I am ask'd, as I have often been, Will you justify ver Cromwel in all that he did:
1. No, nor my self in all that I have done, but cry God be Merciful to me a Sinner. Will these Objectors justify themselves in every thing they have done? I believe some cannot justify them in any thing almost they do. 2. Can David, Solomon, Josiah, or the best of Princes be justified in all they did? The Church by Solomon  said to be fair as the Morn, which hath her Spots. 3. Yet what is it he is not to be justified in? O The taking the Government upon him: I know none hate Pre∣ferment. Did he then make, or attempt to make his Fa∣mily or the Nation great? It is well known, many Con∣gregational Ministers reflected on him every Lord's day i the Pulpit, for usurping the Government. When he se for them together, he so acquainted them with the Sta and Posture of things at that time, that had he not taken the Protector-ship upon him, all things had run into Con∣fusion: He wept, and they wept as fast as he, and would never reflect upon him more. Yet to be plain, his saying, in the Star-Chamber, He never sought the Protectorship, no manner of way, but was unwilling to take it till forced to it; and shutting the Parliament-door, till they had own'd his Authority, were bad, vile things, and shew'd him  be but a Man of like Infirmities with others. But if it cannot be prov'd he was a Pious Man: What then? He might be a good Governour. How rare are pious Kings? One in three or four hundred Year! But of him, and K. Charles, and Affairs relating to them have I said so much in my censur'd Book, Vindiciae Anti-Baxterianae, that there I refer the Reader. These talkers for the slavish Doctrine of Non-Resistance, are woful practitioners of it, when it comes to be against them. They forget themselves, as Roger L'estrange in his late Fa∣bles and Morals, unhappily begins, When Archodemus, King of the Lacedemonians, married a very little Woman, his Subjects fined him, because they fear'd a small breed by her—Why Roger, were Kings fined by their Subjects, in one of
e best Governments in the World (as the Lacedemonian s) and that for so small a thing? What if that King had pt a Nest of Whores, and among them another Man's ife; had not his Head been the Fire? Thus the great eaders for absolute Monarchy, and Kings to be inviolable, o Arbitrary, trip ere they are aware. This is like the ose; after he had censur'd many Fables in Aesop as trite, e makes a more foolish one then any there, about the Wo∣an and the Needle thrust in her Finger: He said, he did t thrust himself there, she did: so, Is it not shameful  see some Men condemn others, as Men having no nscience, and factious Atheists, forsooth? If K. Charles s Cause had been good, he might say to some pleaders for m, as a Holy Man and Martyr; what Christ said to their aster, when he said, I know thee who thou art, the Holy e of God: Hold thy Peace: accounting it no honour to m, to be thus applied to by an Unclean Spirit. You that compare the Man of Blood to David, Josiah; me, to Christ himself; remember how Williams Bishop  Ossery expos'd himself, when he wrote a Folio to prove, ery comically done) That Antichrist was the long Par∣ment, and Bishop Laud and King Charles the two wit∣sses. You that talk of the sick brain'd, Apocalyptical en at that time; can you find a worse than he? or a ore mad Prophet than Aris ap Evan? The Blood shed in the Civil War, (the worst of Wars) ied for Vengeance, and was heard. I pray the Inhabitants of that famous Town of Ply∣outh (the place of my Nativity) to consider how fa∣ous, above any Town in England, not only the Men, t the very Women made themselves, when they re∣ell'd the Martyr-maker in his highest Attempts to take e Town: How God afterwards blessed them with a ly, laborious, bountiful, genteel, learned Minister, Mr.  Hughes: How all blessings of Trade, Peace, Plenty, as ell as Piety then attended them. What Confusions are
there now in their Worship, contrary to the Co Prayer-Book: Instead of, with an Humble Voice saying me: They roar with a loud Voice, going on with reading Priest, or, as once I heard, going before him, Voice not being heard. How Atheism and Profan hath abounded there for thirty Years past. What  the B. in the Manger, &c. Our Prefacer knows this  true, and hath been an Ear Witness: as if they  verify, what some have said, Where the Common-P Book goes up, the Bible goes down. Let Mr. Mun other serious Persons there, compare Times with T Ministers with Ministers, Magistrates with Magistr Worship with Worship, People with People, and they not acknowledg, that Plymouth was once a dice, now a wild Wilderness, &c? O the Wickedne some Men, who have made other Men as Heathen Me Publicans, and deliver'd them up to Satan for a Trid Ceremony, and cherish'd, as Members of their Cha such as have kept other Mens Wives, whilst Magistr C. M. went openly on such particular days of the W and such particular hours of the Day! How came Canon to give this Man the Sacrament, contrary to  own Orders? Hold up your Head, Sir: Are you a C formist according to the Constitution of your Cha No: but in this, and other things, a vile Dissenter. FINIS.
