C5882 R2805 11880026 50300
THE Connexion: BEING CHOICE COLLECTIONS OF SOME PRINCIPAL MATTERS IN King JAMES his Reign: Which may serve to supply the Vacancy betwixt Mr. Townsend's, and Mr. Rush∣worth's Historical Collections. LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, 1681.
AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THE Collector. WHo ever you are, or of what Quality you be, that this Connexion comes to the ands of, there is no need of an Au∣hor's begging your Favour, for, (without an Apology) if the seri∣us and deliberate Results of a Wise King, by his Parliament, and by his Privy Council, with the Learn∣d Discourses of some Great men in
that time (such as the Duke of Buck¦ing ham, Sir Francis Bacon, &c.) without Reflections, Annotations Observations, &c. will not please, am sorry for it; yet I will give th reason of the Publication of this viz. There being an Historical Col¦lection of the last Parliaments o Qu. Elizabeth, by Mr. Heywoo Townsend, which Ends before th beginning of King James his Reign and Mr. John Rushworth begin his Historical Collections so late i the said King's Reign, that ther is nigh twenty years space betwix them, of which time, nothing of Hi∣story is in Print in this Method: And although Wilson and Saunderson have both wrote that Great King's Life, yet neither of them have re∣ported Matter of Fact in this man∣ner.
You have these Collections as hey came to my hands, from several areful Collectors of Choice Things: And truly, I was in hopes I should ave got more relating to that time, ut I found these so difficult, that I ave over the farther search, and ielded to the desire of some that ad seen them, to let them go as hey are.
THE CONTENTS AN. 1. Jac. Reg. A Proclamation b King James, to Repress all Pyr¦cies and Depredations upon the Se wherein Rules and Articles are set fo the prevention of Sea Rovers and Py¦rates. An. 2. Jac. A Proclamation of the Revo∣cation of Mariners from Foreign Ser∣vices, and to prevent them turning o Pyrates, and to hinder Acts of Hosti∣lity to be committed on the Coasts of England. An. 3. Jac. An Act of Parliament for the granting of three intire Subsidies, and six Fifteenths and Tenths granted by the Temporality to his Majesty, with the Reasons why granted, shewing the great Advantage his Majesty hath been to the Kingdom.
ac. The Declaration of the Opinions of the Non-conformists, as it was de∣livered to King James in the third year of his Reign. ac. A Proclamation by King James, with Rules to prevent Pyracies. . 7. Jac. A Proclamation of King James touching Fishing. . 8. Jac. The Case of Sir John Kenne∣da and his Lady, shewing the Contract in Marriage. ac. Ʋpon the Case of Sir John Ken∣eda, whether an English Jurisdiction may disannul a Marriage made in Scotland? ac. Certain Points of Law and Rea∣on, whereby it may plainly appear, that he Question between the Lady Kenne∣da and Sir John, concerning the Vali∣dity of their Marriage, may, and ought, by ordinary course of Law, be heard and determined before the Ecclesia∣stical Judges in England, who have Jurisdictions in the Places where they do both dwell. Whereupon the Civilians have grounded their Opinions, given in this Case to that Effect.
9 Jac. The Commission and Warrant fo the Condemnation and burning of Ba∣tholomew Legat, who was burnt i Smithfield in London, for Heretic Opinions. 9 Jac. The Commission and the Warran for the Condemnation and burning o Edward Wightman of Lichfield, wit an Account of his Heretical Opinions. 14 Jac. An Order of the King's Priv Council sent to the Peers of the Realm for the Tryal of the Earl and Countes of Somerset, for the poysoning of Si Thomas Overbury. 14. Jac. Sir Francis Bacon's Speech a the Arraignment of the Earl of Somer∣set. 14 Jac. King James his Pardon to Fran∣ces, Countess of Somerset, for poysoning Sir Thomas Overbury. 19 Jac. An Order of the Privy Council. 22 Jac. His Grace the Duke of Buck∣ingham's Answer to the Scandals of the Marquess of Inoiosa the Spanish Ambassador: wherein his Abusive Re∣flections are wip'd off.
CHOICE COLLECTIONS IN King JAMES His Reign. Anno Dom. 1603. in An. Reg. Jac. 1. A Proclamation by King James to repress all Pyracies and Depredations upon the Sea, wherein Rules and Articles are set for the prevention of Sea Rovers and Pyrates. THE Kings Majesty being cer∣tainly informed, through the manifold and daily complaints made to his Highness, as well by his own Subjects as others; of the continual Depredations and Pyracies committed on the Seas by certain lewd
and ill disposed persons; and finding, that the ordinary proceeding held of late times, for the suppressing of these enormities and offences, have wrought less Reformation than was expected: In his Princely care to preserve Justice, as one of the main Pillars of his Estate, and for the speedier suppression of all such Pyracies and depredacious Crimes, most hateful to his mind, and scanda∣lous to his peaceable Government, and for the better continuance of Amity with all other Princes and States, hath with the advice of his Privy Council, for the speedy prevention or severe punish∣ment hereafter of such foul crimes and pyracies, set down certain Articles here∣unto annexed, which his Highness com∣manded all his Officers whom it may concern, of what degree soever, to see duely executed, wherein if any man∣ner of person shall be found culpable or wilfully negligent, contemptuous or dis∣obedient, his Majesty declareth hereby that punishment shall be inflicted up∣on him or them with such severity, as the Example thereof shall terrifie all
others from committing any so odious crimes or contemptuous Offences. First, That no Man of War be furnish∣ed or set out to Sea by any of his Majesties Subjects, under pain of death and con∣fiscation of Lands and Goods, not only to the Captains and Mariners, but also to the Owners and Victuallers, if the Com∣pany of the said Ship shall commit any pyracy, depredation or murther at the Sea, upon any of his Majesties Friends. Item, That if any person whatsoe∣ver shall upon the Seas take any Ship that doth belong to any of his Majesties Friends and Allies, or to any of their Subjects; or shall take out of it by force any goods of what nature or quality so ever, he or they so offending shall suffer death, with Confiscation of Lands and Goods according to the Law in that Case provided. Item, That all Admiral Causes (ex∣cept the Causes now depending before the Commissioners for Causes of depra∣dations) shall be summarily heard by the Judge of the High Court of the Ad∣miralty, without admitting any unne∣cessary delay.
Item that no appeal from him be ad∣mitted to the Defendent or Defendents; in causes of Depredation, either against the offenders, or their Accessaries, be∣fore or after the offence committed, or those in whose possession the Goods spoiled are found, unless first by way of provision, the sum adjudged be paid to the Plaintiff upon Sureties to repay it; if the Sentence shall be reversed. Item, that no prohibition in such cases of spoil and their accessaries or dependencies be granted hereafter. Item, That no Ship or Goods taken from any of his Majesties Friends, shall be delivered by any other Order than upon proof made in the said Court of the Admiralty, before the said Judge or his Deputy, to the end that a Record may be kept of all such restitutions made to strangers, to serve when occa∣sion shall require. Item, That every Vice Admiral is enjoyned by this Proclamation (where∣of he shall take notice at his peril) to certifie into the said Court of the Admi∣raly every Quarter of the Year, what
man of War hath gone to the Sea, or returned home within that time, with any Goods taken at Sea, or the proce∣dure thereof, upon pain to lose to his Majesty (by way of fine) for every such default forty pounds of current money of England, to be answered in∣to his Majesties Receipt of the Exche∣quer, by Certificate from the said Judge of the Admiralty, under the Great Seal of that Office, to be directed to the Lord Treasurer, and the Barons of the Exchequer. Item, That all the Kings Subjects shall forbear from aiding or receiving of any Pyrate or Sea-Rover, or any person not being a known Merchant, by contract∣ing, buying, selling or Exchanging with them, or by victualling of them, or any of their Company, whereby they or a∣ny of them shall be the more inabled to go or return to the Seas to commit any pyracy or disorder, upon pain for so doing to be punished presently, as the principal Offenders and Pyrates ought to be. Item, That the Vice-Admirals, Cu∣stomers,
and the other Officers of the Ports, shall not suffer any ship to go to Sea before such time as they re∣spectively in their several Ports, have duly searched and visited the same, to the intent to stay such persons as ap∣parently shall be furnished for the Wars and not for erchandize or Fishing, and if there shall be any man∣ner of suspicion that the said person, though he shall pretend to trade for merchandize or fishing, hath or may have an intent by his provisions or fur∣niture, otherwise than to use the trade of merchandize or fishing, tha in such case of suspicion, the Officers of the Ports shall stay, and in no wise suffer the same to pass to the Seas without good Bonds by sufficient Sureties first had, to use nothing but a lawful trade of merchandize or fishing, and if the said Officers shall suffer any person o∣therwise to repair to the Seas, then a∣bove is mentioned, they shall not one∣ly answer for any pyracies which any such person shall chance hereafter to do upon the Seas, but shall suffer impri∣sonment,
until the Offenders may be apprehended, if they shall be living: And generally his Majesty declareth and denounceth all such Pyrats and Rovers upon the Seas to be out of his Majesties protection, and lawfully to be by any person taken, punished and suppressed with extremity. And whereas divers great and enor∣mous spoyles and pyracies have been of late time committed within the Streights of Gibralter by Capt. Thomas Tomkins, Gent, Edmond Bonham, Wal∣ter Janerin, Mariners, and divers others English Pyrates, and the Goods, monies, and merchandizes brought into Eng∣land by them, have been scattered, sold, and disposed of most lewdly and pro∣digally, by the means of their Receiv∣ers, Comforters, and Abettors, to the exceeding prejudice of his Majesties good friends the Venetians, whom they have robbed, and to the great displea∣sure of God, and dishonour of this State: His Majesty doth expresly com∣mand all Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieute∣nants, Admirals, Vice Admirals, and
their Deputies, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Con∣stables, and all others his Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to use all care and diligence in the inquiring, search∣ing for, and apprehending all such Py∣rates, their Receivers, Comforters, and Abettors; and if they shall by their travels and cares find any of them, to send them presently under safe cu∣stody to the Common-Goales of Hamp∣shire or Dorseshire, there to remain without Bail or mainprise, till the Lord High Admiral of England, or his Lieu∣tenant the Judge of the High Court of the Admiralty shall dispose of them ac∣cording to the Laws in that case pro∣vided. Given at his Majesties City of Win∣chester the 30th. day of September 1603. in the first year of his Highness Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland, the seven and thirtieth.
Anno Dom. 1604. An. Reg. Jac. 2. A Proclamation by King James for the Revocation of Mariners from forreign services, to prevent their turning of Pyrates, and to hinder Acts of Hosti∣lity to be committed on the Coasts of England. WHereas within this short time, since the Peace concluded be∣tween us and the King of Spain, and the Arch-Dukes our good Brothers; It hath appeared unto us that many Ma∣riners and Sea-faring men of this Realm, having gotten a custome and habit in the time of the War to make profit by spoil, do leave their ordinary and ho∣nest Vocation, and trading in mer∣chantly Voyages, whereby they might both have convenient maintenance, and be serviceable to their Country, and do betake themselves to the service of divers foreign States, under the title of men of War, to have thereby occa∣sion to continue their unlawful and un∣godly
course of living by spoil, using the service of those Princes but for co∣lour and pretext, but in effect making themselves commonly no better than Pyrates to rob both our own Subjects their Country men, and the Subjects of other Princes our neighbours, going in their honest trade of merchandize: By which courses they impeach the quiet Traffique of Nations one with other, leave our Realm unfurnished of men of their sort, if we should have cause to use them, and inure themselves to an impious disposition of living by rapine and evil means, although by reason of the universal peace, wherein we rre at this present with all Christian Princes and States, they may have a more plen∣tiful imployment in an orderly and law∣ful naigation, that at any time of late years they could have had: We have thought it necessary in time to prevent the spreading of such a corruption a∣mougst our subjects of that sort and cal∣ling, whereby our Nation will be so much shandered, and our Realm so great∣ly disedvnataged, wherefore we do will
and command all Masters of ships, Pi∣ts, Mariners, and all other sort of ea-faring men, who now are in the artial service of any foreign State, at they do presently return home in∣o their own Country, and leave all ch foreign services, and betake them∣lves to their vocation, in the lawful ourse of merchandize, and other or∣erly Navigation, upon such pains and unishments as by the Laws of our ealm may be inflicted upon them, if fter this Declaration of our pleasure, hey shall not obey; And We do also pon the same pains straitly charge and ommand all our Subjects of that profes∣on▪ that none of them shall from hence∣orth take Letters of Mark or Reprisal, r serve under any that hath such Letters f Mark or Reprisal from any foreign rince or State whatsoever, nor otherwise mploy themselves in any warlike ser∣ices of any foreign State upon the Sea, ithout special license obtained from our elf, or from our High Admiral, as they will answer the contrary at their perils▪ And for as much as although we are in
peace with all Christian Princes and States, yet during the continuance o the War between the King of Spain, and the Arch-Dukes on the one side, and the United Provinces of the Low Countries on the other side, many chan∣ces may happen, as some already have hapned, of difficult interpretation to our Officers and Subjects, how to be∣have themselves in such Cases, unless they be explained unto them: We have thought it convenient to make an open Declaration how our said Officers and Subjects shall demean themselves toward the Subjects as well of the King of Spain and Arch-Dukes, as also of the States united in the Cases following. First our pleasure is, that within our Ports, Havens, Roads, Creeks, or other places of our Dominions, or so near to any of our said Ports or Havens, as may be reasonably construed to be within that Title, limit or precinct, there shall be no force, violence, surprise, or of∣fence, suffered to be done either from man of War to man of War, or man of War to Merchant, or Merchant to Mer∣chant
of either party, but that all of hat Nation soever, so long as they all be within those our Ports and pla∣s of our Jurisdiction, or where our fficers may prohibit violence, shall be nderstood to be under our protecti∣n to be ordered by course of Justice, nd be at peace each with other. And whereas some of the men of War of each side have used of late, and  is like will use in time to come, though ot to come within our Ports, because here they know we can restrain vio∣ence, yet to hover and hang about the kirts of our Ports, somewhat to Sea∣oard, but yet so near our Coasts and he entry of our Harbours, as in reason s to be construed to be within the ex∣ent of the same, and there to await the Merchant of the adverse part, and do eize and take them at their going out of our Ports, which is all one in a man∣ner as if they took them within our Port, and will be no less hindrance to the trade of Merchants: Our pleasure therefore and commandment is, to all our Officers and Subjects by Sea and
Land, that they shall prohibit as mu as in them lieth, all such hovering  men of War of either side, so ne the entry of any of our Havens  our Coasts, and that they shall recei and succour all Merchants, and other that shall fall within the danger of an such as shall await our Coasts in so nea places, to the hindrance of Trade an Traffique, outward and homeward from and to our Kingdomes; And fo the better instructions of our Office in the execution of these two Article We have caused to be sent to the plats of those limits, within which  are resolved, that these Orders shall b observed. And where it hath happened, and  like to do often, that a ship of War  the one side, may come into some of ou Ports, where there all be a Merchan of the other side: In such Case for th benefit and preservation of the lawfu Trade of Merchants, our pleasure is that all Merchants ships, if they will re¦quire it, shall be suffered to depart ou of the said Port, two or three Tide
before the man of War, to the intent, that the Merchant may be free from the pursuit of his Adversary, and it it so happen, that any ship or ships of War of the one side, do find any ship or ships of War of the other side in any our Ports or Roads aforesaid: like as our pleasure is, that during there abode there, all violence be forborn, so do we likewise command our said Officers and Subjects both on Sea and Land, that the ship of War, which came in first, be suffered to depart a Tide or two before the other which came in last, and that for so long time they shall stay and detain any ship of War, that would offer to pursue another out of any of our Ports immediately: And where we are informed, that notwith∣standing the severity of our Laws a∣gainst Receivers of Pyrates goods, ma∣ny of our Officers of our Ports and o∣ther Inhabitants within and near unto them, do receive daily goods brought in from Sea by such as are indeed Py∣rates, if they and the getting of their Goods were well examined, we do
hereby admonish them all to avoid the receiving or buying of any good from sea, coming not into the Realm by lawful course of merchandize, for that they shall find we are resolved so to prevent all occasion and encourage∣ment of Pyrates to be used by any ou Subjects as we will cause our Laws to be fully executed, according to their true meaning, both against the Pyrates, and all Receivers and Abettors of them, and their goods. Given at Thetford the first day of March, in the second year of our Reign of Great Britain, &c.
Anno Dom 1605. in An. Reg. Jac. 3. An Act for the granting of three entire Subsidies and six Fisteenths and Tenths, granted by the Temporaltie to His Ma∣jesty, with the reasons why granted, and the great advantages his Majesty hath been to this Kingdom. MOst Gracious Soveraign, as at the first entrance of your Ma∣jesty into this Kingdom, there ap∣peared universally in all your Loving Subjects, greater demonstrations of af∣fection towards your Royal person, than ever hath been observed towards any former King, upon a joyful and foreruning expectation of your Ma∣jesties Religious, Just, and Gracious Government; so finding by the ground∣ed experience of three years now com∣pleat of the same your happy Govern∣ment, that your Majesty hath turned our hopes into sensible and actual be∣nefits, we cannot but still settle and in∣crease in Love, Zeal and Duty to∣wards
you, which we think fit more and more to make manifest to your Majesty, not by externe showes, but by real effects. And therefore We your most Loving and Loyal Subjects being by your Royal Authority assembled in Parliament to consult of the great and important causes of this your Kingdom, have en∣tred into due consideration both of your Majesties great Benefit, and of your present estate, in the support whereof the continuance of these be∣nefits doth principally consist, where∣in we do in the first place call to mind that by Gods great mercies and bles∣sing, and your Majesties Religious care in execution of the good Laws for that purpose ordained, the true Religion of Almighty God freed and delivered from the servitude of blind and For∣rain superstition, is continued unto us, and that in such sort as considering your Majesties constant, and Judicial profession thereof, and the Religious Education of your Children, we rest assured that under Gods favour, we shall comfortably enjoy the same to us
and our posterity for ever. Next to Religion and peace with God, we will Remember that Univer∣sal peace of State both at home and a∣broade, which under your Christian and prudent Government we enjoy, whereof we have the less reason to doubt any interruption, when we be∣hold the Greatness and reputation of your Majesties power, and the good∣ness and Excellency of your Royal dis∣position, whereof the latter is not like o give the cause or occasion, and the ormer is likely to abate the Courage nd forces of any hostile attempts. And astly we cannot but with unspeakable oy of heart consider of that blessing, which having respect to later times in his state, is rare and unwonted, which s the blessed fruit and Royal Issue of ingular towardness and comfort, which God hath given your Majesty, with reat hope of many the like; these being ndeed as arrows in the hand of the, Mighty, able to dant your Enemies, nd to assure your loving subjects, and o safe-guard your Royal person, and
to sheild and protect each other, and to be a pledge to us and our posterity, of future and perdurable felicity. The benefits, and blessings (dread Soveraign) amongst many others, as we gladly acknowledge to your Ma∣jesties great honour and our great com∣fort: So nevertheless having upon mature advice concluded to present to your Majesty a gift, in proportion and speed of payment, exceeding all former presidents of Parliament; and the times of Peace considered, we do further think fit to add and express those reasons special and extraordi∣nary, which have moved us hereunto, lest the same our doing may be drawn into President to the prejudice of the State of our Countrey and our po∣sterity. A first and principal reason is, tha late and monstrous attempt of that cursed crew of desperate Papists, to have destroyed your Excellent Majesty, the Queen, and your Royal Progeny, together with the Reverend Prelates. Nobility and Commons of this Land
ssembled in Parliament, to the great confusion, if not subversion of this Kingdom; the barbarous malice in ome unnatural subjects, we have hought fit to check and encounter with the certain demonstration of the niversal and undoubted Love of your Loyal and Faithful Subjects, not only for the present to breed in your Ma∣esty a more confident assurance of our uttermost aides in proceeding with a princely resolution to repress them, and to furnish your Majesty against hostile attempts both by Sea and Land, out also for the future times to give heir Patrons and partakers to un∣derstand, that your Majesty can ne∣ver want in this Kingdom meanes of defence of your rights, revenge of your wrongs, and support of your estate. A second reason is, that memorable benefice wherewith it hath pleased the Divine providence in great grace and favour to bless this Nation in your Majesties person by addition of ano∣ther Kingdom, whereby both ancient hostilities are quite extinguished, and
all footing and approaches of any For▪ rainer in this Island are excluded, and your Majesties other Dominions the more secured, which happy event was nevertheless attended with sundry rare and necessary circumstances of charge now at your Majesties first en∣trance and setling, such as the like hath not been in former times, nor is like to be in suceeding ages. A third and most urgent reason is, the great and excessive charge, which the unnatural Wars of Ireland newly finish∣ed before our late Renowned Queens de∣cease, did necessarily impose upon your Majesty, by drawing with it a long traine of after expences even in your Majesties time, till the peace thereof were throughly setled and assured, which Kingdom is now since your Majesties time become in the vastest Province thereof, capable of the plan∣tation of Religion, Justice, Civilty and Population, and may in longer time arise to be a most profitable and opu∣lent member of your Imperial Crown. A fourth reason ariseth from the great
contentment and joye which we have in the remembrance of your Majesti most gracious disposition to the good of your people, testified as well at your first entrance into this King∣dom, by your Princely care you took out of your own Royal mind to free them by your Proclamation from any burdens of Monopolies, and other un∣lawful things which then remained in use, as also of late your comfortable messages sent unto us, dureing this Ses∣sion of Parliament, purporting the continuance of like gracious intention towards them, where just occasion of grief should appear, which joye of ours hath bred a desire in us, to express in more then ordinary manner our ex∣traordinary and humble thankes unto your Majesty for the same, and to make it appear on our parts, that we will at no time omit any Testimonies of Love and Duty toward your Majesty, that may procure or deserve the perfecting and accomplishing of so Princely a work (so well begun) of Grace and favor towards us, it being far from our
dispositions to entertain any such un∣thankfulness into our hearts, as not chearfully to assist with our goods and substance, and all other duties of Subjects, such a Soveraign, by whom we find our selves so tenderly regard∣ed. Thus (Gracious Soveraign) out of those extraordinary Reasons and considerations, as also out of our great Love and affection towards your Ma∣jesties person, vertues, and felicities, we do with all humble and chearful affections present to your Majesty three subsidies and six Fifteenths and Tenths, and we do most humbly be∣seech your Majesty, that it may be enacted by Authority of this present Parliament in manner and form fol∣lowing.
Anno. Dom. 1605. An. Reg. Jac. 3. The Declarations of the opinions of the Non-conformists as it was delivered to King James himself on their be∣half in the third year of his Reign. 1. WE hold and maintain the same Authority and Su∣premacy in all causes and over all per∣sons, Civil or Ecclesiastical, granted by Statute to Queen Elizabeth, and ex∣pressed and declared in the Book of Advertisements and Injunctions, and in Mr. Bilson against the Jesuites, to be due in full and ample, manner (with∣out any Limitation or Qualification) to the King and his Heirs and Suc∣cessors for ever, neither is there (to our knowledge) any one of us but is and ever hath been most willing to subcribe and Swear unto the same, ac∣cording to form of Statute: And de∣sire that those that shall refuse the same may bear their own iniquitie. That, 2. We are so far from Judging the
said Supremacy to be unlawful; that we are perswaded that the King should sin highly against God, if he should not assume the same unto himself, and that the Churches within his Domini∣ons should sin damnably, if they should deny to yield the same unto him, yea though; the Statutes of the Kingdom should deny it unto him. 3. We hold it plain Anti-Christi¦anism for any Church or Church-Of∣ficers whatsoever, either to arrogate or assume unto themselves any part or parcel thereof, and utterly unlaw∣ful for the King to give away or alienate the same from his own Crown and Dignity to any Spiritual Potentates or Rulers whatsoever within or with∣out his Dominions. 4. We hold, that though the Kings of this Realm were no members of the Church, but very Infidels, yea and perscutors of the truth, that yet those Churches that shall be gathered toge∣ther within these Dominions, ought to acknowledge and yield the said Su∣premacy unto them, and that the same
is not tyed to their Faith and Christi∣anity, but to their very Crown, from which no subject or subjects have pow∣er to separate or dis-joyn it. 5. We hold that neither King nor Civil State are bound in matter of Re∣ligion to be subject and obedient to any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever, no further then they shall be able to convince their Consciences of the truth thereof out of the word of God, yea, we think they should sin against God, if they should ground their Religion, or any part or parcel thereof, upon the bare Testimony or Judgment of any man, or of all the men in the world. 6. We hold, that no Churches or Church-officers have power, for any crime whatsoever, to deprive the King of the least of his Royal prerogatives whatsoever, much less to deprive him of his Supremacy, wherein the height of his Royal Dignity consists. 7. We hold, that in all things con∣cerning this life whatsoever, the Civil Jurisdiction of Kings and Civil States
excelleth and ought to have the pre∣heminence over the Ecclesiastical, and that the Ecclesiastical neither hath nor ought to have any power in the least degree over the bodies, lives, goods or Liberty of any person whatsoever, much∣less of the Kings and Rulers of the earth. 8. We hold, that Kings by vertue of their supremacy have power, yea, also that they stand bound by the Law of God to make Laws Ecclesiastical, such as shall tend to the good ordering of the Churches in their Dominions, and that the Churches ought not to be disobedient to any of their Laws, so far as in obedience unto them, they do not that which is contrary to the word of God. 9. We hold, that though the King should command any thing contrary to the Word, unto the Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him there∣in, but only peaceably to forbear o∣bedience, and sue unto him for grace and mercy, and where that cannot be obtained, meekly to submit them∣selves
to the punishment. 10. We hold, that the King hath power by vertue of his Supremacie, to remove out of the Churches what∣oever he shall discerne to be practiced herein, not agreeable to the word of God, and if he shall see any defect either in the worship of God, or Ec∣clesiastical discipline, he ought by his Royal Authority and power to pro∣cure and force the redress thereof, yea, though it be without the consent, and against the will of the Ecclesiastical Governours themselves. 11. We hold, that the King hath as much Authority over the body, goods and affairs of Ecclesiastical persons, as of any other of his Subjects whatsoever, and that by his Authori∣ty, he may force them, not only to all Civil Duties belonging unto them, but also unto all Ecclesiastical, afflict∣ing as great punishment upon them for the neglect thereof, as upon any other of his subjects. 12. We hold, that he hath power to remove out of the Churches all
scandalous, Schismatical and Heretica Teachers, and by all due severity o Laws to repress them. 13. We hold, that all Ecclesiastical Laws made by the King (not repug∣nant to the word of God) do in some sort bind the Consciences of his sub∣jects, and that no subject ought to re∣fuse obedience to any such Law. 14. We hold, that the King onely hath power within his dominions, to convene Synods and General Assem∣lies of Ministers, and by his Authority Royal, to ratifie and give life and strength to their Canons and Consti∣tutions, without whose Ratification, no man can force any Subject to yield any obedience unto the same. 15. We hold, that though the King may force the Churches to be subject and obedient unto him, and to be members of the common-wealth, yet that the Churches severally or joyntly have no power to force him or any sub∣ject against their will, to any service unto them or to any Religious duty whatsoever, no, nor so much as to
e a member of any Church. 16. We hold, that the King ought ot to be subject to the Ecclesiasti∣al censures of any Churches, Church∣fficers or Synods whatsoever, but on∣y to that Church and those officers of is own Court and household, unto hom (in reverence of their Religi∣n and of the Spiritual graces of God e sees shining in them) he shall of is own free will, subject and commit he Regiment of his Soul, in whom here can be no suspicion or fear of any artialitie, or unjust or rigorous deal∣g against him. 17. We hold, that if any Ecclesi∣stical Governours (call them by what ame you will) shall abuse their Ec∣lesiastical authority in the execution f their censures, upon any man what∣ever: That the King and Civil States nder him, have power to punish hem severely for it, much more if hey shall abuse it upon the Supreme Majesty himself. 18. If the King subjecting himself to  Spiritual Guids and Governours,
shall afterwards refuse to be govern∣ed and guided by them according to the word of God, and living in no torious sin, without repentance, shall willfully contemn and despise all their holy and Religious censures, that the these Governours are to refuse to ad∣minister the holy things of God unto him, and to leave him to himself, and to the secret Judgment of God, and wholly to resigne and give over that Spiritual Charge and tuition over him which by calling from God and the King they did undertake, and mor then this, they may not do. And after all this we hold, that he still retaineth, and ought to retaine entirely and sol∣idly, all that aforesaid Supreme power and authority over the Churches o his Dominion, in as ample a manner, as if he were the most Christian Prince in the world. 19. We acknowledge King James to be our onely lawful Soveraign, and unto him to be due all the aforesaid Supremacy, and we renounce and ab∣jure all Opinions, Doctrines, Practices
whatsoever repugnant or Contrary to he same, as Anabaptistical and Anti∣hristian: And wish they may be se∣erely punished. 20. We hold, that the King ought ot to give his Authority away, or to ommit it to any Ecclesiastical person r persons whatsoever, but ought him∣lf to be as it were Arch-bishop and General overseer of all the Churches ithin his Dominions, and ought to ploy under him his Honourable Councel, his Judges, Lievtenants, Ju∣ices, Constables, and such like, to o∣ersee the Churches in the several di∣isions of their Civil Regiments, visit∣g them and punishing by their Civil ower whatsoever they shall see a∣iss in any of them, especially in the ulers and Governours. 21. We hold, it utterly unlawful r any Christian Churches whatsoever, y any armed force or power, against e will of the Civil Magistracy and ate under which they live, to erect ad set up in publick, the true wor∣ip and service of God: Or to beate
down or suppress any superstition or Idolatry, that shall be countenanced and maintained by the same, only e∣very man is to look to himself, that he communicate not with the evils of the times, enduring what it shall please the state to inflict, and seeking by, all ho∣nest and peaceable meanes all reformati∣on of publick abuses, only at the hands of Civil publick persons, and all practi∣ces Conrary to these we condemn as seditious and sinful. Anno Dom. 1605. An. Reg. Jac. 3. A Proclamation by King James with Rules to prevent Pyracy. WHereas the Kings Majesty hath alwaies been ready to Imbrace and Cherish such a perfect amity and friendship between him and the King of Spain, and the Arch-Dukes his good Brethren, as might stand with his own honour, and the common good of his people for the better and more parti∣cular bsevation whereof, there hath
been lately passed a Treaty, wherein his Majesties Royal will and pleasure s made so notorious to the world in ll things, as whosoever doth, or shall ross the sincerity of his Majesties in∣ention by any action of theirs, cannot void the censure of high and wilful ontempt against his person and state, though his Majesty is not Ignorant, hat these offences for the most part, e daily committed by such, as part∣ out of their own original corrupti∣n, and partly by habite of spill and apine, are become so insensible or esperate of the peril they draw up∣ themselves, and the Imputation they st upon the honour of their Sover∣gn (so precious to him) as his Ma∣ty is driven for repair thereof, to ke open profession of his sincerity in s kind, more often then otherwise he uld; nevertheless, his Majesty  lately found by many circumstan∣, that most of these great faults do ow and multiply, by negligence of eriour officers, (especially such as are dent in the ports, and dwell in the
Maritine Counties,) from whom his Majesty expecteth so continual care and vigilancy (not only out of fear of his Majesties displeasure, but even for Conscience sake,) as they should be ra∣ther industrious watches over those that runne such wicked courses, then (in any degree) receitors or abettors of the same, considering that those are a well accomptable to God, that hin∣der not the evil of others (being in their power, and incident to their per∣culiar places and duties) as those that are the personal Actors, or Contri∣vers of the same; His Majesty hath thought it necessary once again to pub∣lish to all persons of what place or con∣dition soever within His Majesties Do∣minions these Rules and Ordinance following, as things whereunto he com∣mandeth all persons (whatsoever) to yield their dutiful obedience, upon peril of his heavy Indignation and the grievous paines belonging to the same. First, His Majesty commandeth tha no Sea-man or Mariner whatsoever
shall be suffered to put himself into any warlike service at Sea of any Forrein Prince or State, straightly charging all that are in any such service already, to leave the same presently, and without delay, and to record their appearance in their Native Country to some of His Majesties officers upon pain to be held and punished as, Pyrates. Item, If any person offending, do at any time hereafter come into any Port, or place of His Majesties Do∣minions, upon what pretext soever, His Majesty expresly chargeth all his officers forthwith to apprehend the same, and to commit them to prison without Bayl or Mainpress, and the Certificate thereof to be presently re∣turned into the Admiralty Court, to the end that they may be proceeded withal, according to the Laws of the Realm, and the contents of his Ma∣jesties former Proclamations, Item, His Majesty Commandeth all his Subjects, (as they will avoid his heavy Indignation) to forbear to be aiding or Receiving of any Pirates, or
such persons as shall continue in any such warlike service, as aforesaid, or any person not being a known Mer∣chant, by contracting, buying, selling, or by Victualling of them, or any of their Company, upon pain for so do∣ing, to be punished presently, as the principal offenders and Pirates ought to be. Item, That no shipping, or men of Warr, of what estate or condition so∣ever, going forth with Commission of reprisal, or in any other warlike manner to serve at Seas, shall be per∣mitted in any of his Majesties Ports, or in the Members thereof to victual or relieve themselves with any warlike provisions, thereby to enable them∣selves the better to any acts of hostili∣ty at Sea against any of His Majesties Friends: But only in their returne homewards, if they happen to come into any of His Majestis Ports, that then it shall be lawful for them to re∣lieve themselves with Victual, or other necessaries to serve them only for the spe of twenty daies and no more,
hich is a proportion reasonable to use  Trade of Marchandize. Item, That all Vice-admirals, Cu∣omers, or other officers of the Ports all not suffer any Ship of His Majesties ubjects to go to the Seas, before such me as they (respectively in their se∣eral Ports) have duely searched and isited the same, to the intent to stay ch persons as apparently shall be fur∣ished for the Warrs and not for Mer∣andize or Fishing, and if there shall e any manner of Suspition, that the id person (though he shall pretend to rade for Merchandize or fishing) hath r may have any other intent by his rovisions or furniture, than to use he Trade of Merchandize or Fishing, hat in such case of suspition the officers f the Ports shall stay, and no wayes uffer the same to pass to the Seas, with ut good bands, with sufficient sureties irst had, to use nothing but the Law∣ull trade of Merchandize or Fishing, nd if the said officers shall suffer any ersons otherwise to repaire to the Seas, han above is mentioned, they shall not
only answer for any Pyracies, which any such person shall chance hereafter to commit upon the Seas, but shall suffer Imprisonment until the offender may be apprehended, if they shall be living. And further, as his Majesty declar∣eth and denounceth generally, all such Pyrates and Rovers upon the Seas to be out of his protection, and therefore to be lawfully pursued and punished to the uttermost extremity, so because His Majesty presumeth, that all other States and persons in peace and friendship with him, will think it just and hon∣nourable to proceed towards him, with the same sincerity, which he observeth towards them, His Majesty doth also hereby nortifie to the world, that where it falleth out that divers of his Subjects are, or may be entertained to serve at Sea under Captaines and Com∣manders belonging to some Forrein Prince or State, (which are now or may be in termes of Hostility with any of His Majesties Friends) thereby I∣magining, when they be free from any
Interruption, according to the liberty of Common amity and corresponden∣cy which is usually observed between Princes in such cases, only because the Commander or Captain with some few persons besides are strangers, and the rest only discovered to be his Majesties Subjects: For as much as His Majesty (having made his just and equal inten∣tions thus apparent to all men by his publick Proclamations) would be loath to frustrate the expectation of any his friends whom it doth or may concerne; he doth hereby declare to all the world that if he shall hereafter find any such fraudulent course taken, in hope co∣lourably to avoid the true construction of his so just and necessary ordinances, the breach whereof gives cause of further trouble and jealousies to arise between His Majesty and other Princes in the mutual exercise of their Subjects free Trade and entercourse: He will make absolute stay of any such Ships and per∣sons, which shall be so brought into his Ports or Harbours, as persons and things wholly exempted from that
protection and favour which he en∣tendeth to maintain and afford to all others, which shall not in such kind go about to abuse his Majesties Integrity, whose desire is to receive no better measure in any thing, than he is wil∣ling to yield to others upon the like oc∣casions. Given at our Castle of Windsor the eighth of July, 1605. in the third year of our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Anno Dom. 1609. An. Reg. Jac. 7. A Proclamation by King James touch∣ing Fishing. JAmes by the Grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland ender of the Faith, &c. To all and singular persons, to whom it may ap∣pertain, greeting. Although we do sufficiently know by our experience in he office of Regal Dignity (in which by the favour of Almighty God, we ave been placed and exercised these many years) as also by the observati∣on which we have made of other Christi∣an Princes examplary actions, how far he absoluteness of Soveraign power xtendeth it self. And that in regard hereof we need not yield accompt to ny person under God, for any acti∣on of ours, which is lawfully ground∣d upon that Just prerogative: Yet such hath ever been and shall be our are and desire to give satisfaction to ur Neighbour Princes, and Friends,
in any action which may have the least Relation to their Subjects and estates, as we have thought good (by way of friendly Premonition) to declare unto them all, and to whom soever it may ap∣pertain, as followeth. Whereas we have been contented since our coming to the Crown, to toler∣ate an indifferent and promiscuous kind of Liberty to all our friends whatsoever, to fish within our Streames, and upon any of our Coasts of Great Britain, Ire∣land, and other Adjacent Islands, so far forth as the permission or use there∣of might not redound to the empeach∣ment of our Prerogative Royal, nor to the hurt and damage of our loving Subjects, whose preservation and flourishing estate we hold our self principally bound to advance beforr all worldly respects: So finding that our connivence therein, hath not on∣ly given occasion of over great encorach∣ments upon our Regalities, or rather questioning of our right, but hath been a means of much daily wrongs to our own people that exercise the trade
of Fishing as (either by the multitude of strangers, which do preoccupy those places, or by the Injuries which they receive most commonly at their hands) our Sujects are constrained to aban∣don their Fishing, or at the least are become so discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them to betake themselves to some other course of liv∣ing, whereby not only divers of our Coast Townes are much decayed, but then umber of Mariners dayly diminish∣ed, which is a matter of great conse∣quence to our estate, considering how much the strength thereof consisteth in the power of Shipping, and use of Na∣vigation: we have thought it now both Just and necessary, in respect that we are now by Gods favovr lineally and Lawfully possessed, as well of the Is∣land of great Britain as of Ireland, and the rest of the Islles Adjacent, to be∣think our selves of good and Lawful meanes to prevent those incoveniencies, and many others depending upon the same. In the Consideration whereof as we are desirous that the world may
take notice, that we have no Intention to deny our Neighbours and Allies, those fruits and benefits of peace and friend∣ship, which may be justly expected at our hands in honour and reason, or are afforded by other Princes mutual∣ly in the point of Commerce, and ex∣change of those things which may not prove prejudicial to them: So be∣cause some such Convenient order may be taken in this matter, as may sufficiently provide for all these Im∣portant Considerations which do de∣pend thereupon: We have resolved first to give notice to all the world, that our express pleasure is, that from the beginning of the Moneth of August next coming, no person of what Nati∣on or quality soever, being not our natural born Subjects, be permitted to Fish upon any of our Coasts and Seas of great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles Adjacent, where most usu∣ally heretofore any Fishing hath been, untill they have orderly demanded and obtained Licenses from us, or such our Commissioners, as we have Author∣ized
in that behalf, viz. At London for our Realmes of England and Ire∣land, and at Edenborough for our Realm of Scotland: which Licenses, our intention is, shall be Yearly De∣manded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the Tonnage thereof, as shall in∣end to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of▪ our Coasts and Seas as aforesaid, upon pain of such Chastisement as shall be fit to e inflicted upon such wilful offend∣urs. Given at our Palace of Westminster, he sixth day of May, in the seventh year f our Raign of Great Britain, France nd Ireland.
Anno Dom. 1610. An. Jac. Reg. 8. The Case of Sir John Kenne∣dy and his Lady. UPon the Treaty with Gray Lord Chandoyes it was thought meet that 16500. l. should be allotted to the Lady for her right, to the value of 14500. l. in Land, and 2000. l. in money: But in regard the whole estate moved from the Lady, and that Sir John Kennedy, was able to give her no ad∣vancement or dower out of his Estate, It was thought meet, that the Lady should have, 8000. l. at her sole dis∣pose, and the residue to be at their joynt dispose. After upon motion on the Ladies behalf, out of a fear, that the Estate might be wasted by Sir John, and there∣by she deprived of maintenance (she
hen haveing no knowledge of the Mar∣riage in Scotland, or hope of a Divorce, r nullity of the said Marriage) it was ppointed, that the same should be con∣onveyed over to certain Feoffees in rust, to her use, that she by her Inden∣ure under her hand and Seal, solely and without Sir John, might dispose there∣of. The which Conveyance was directed y three liveing of this Honourable board, viz. the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy-Seal, and the Lord Stanhope, and by the Lord Popham, Lord Tanfeild, Sir Thomas Heskt, Serjeant Dodridge, and Mr. Stephens. The land allotted the Lady being sold for 7800 l. with 6500 l. thereof Barne-Elmes was purchased, but Sir John be∣ing trusted by the Lady to go to Mr, Stephens to draw the Conveyance. went to other Councel, and in the Clause where it should be freely at the Lady's disposal, solely without Sir John; he caused to be inserted these words, that the Lady should have power to convey the same to such intents and
purposes, as by the said Elizabeth solely, and without the said Sir John Kennedy by writing under her hand and Seal enrolled, should be limited and ap∣pointed; wherein besides the contra∣dictoriness of the sense he caused in that Deed delivered the Lady (the more to blind her Eyes) Enrolled to be rased and made Indented Deed. 31. Decem∣ber 3d. Jac. 8. And after the rasure was found out then by his Deed Dat. 2. July 4. Jac. he the said Sir John did limit power to the Lady by her Deed, Inrolled or not Inrolled to limit Uses. The Lady hath been a suiter two Years (if Sir John for saving his own credit will not confess matter to make a Divorce) then that in course of Justice she may be admitted to her proof, which for that it concerneth matter of state (as is suggested) she is denyed. 1. And therefore she hopeth, it is ut the same Equity to stay his proceed∣ings touching her Estate, against her or her Feoffees in Course of Justice, con∣sidering it is not by her laches that the
Marriage is not disproved, until both the said causes having a dependency one upon another, may be handled at this Board. 2. The Course of Conveyance by Feoffees, was by Honourable Person∣ages, grave Judges and learned Law∣yers, directed when the Lady was sup∣posed the true Wife of Sir John, and they held in Law and Equity sufficient, and now à fortiorè it should be more sufficient, she being none of his Wife, if she may be admitted to proofs. 3. Sir John hath already advanced himself by the sale of the Ladys Estate, over and above the Purchase of Ton∣bridge which cost 8500 l. wherein he hath a Joynt Estate of Inheritance, and all her Debts that he hath Paid 7700 l. 4. If the Course propounded at this Honourable Board shall not hold, then will the Lady never assent to sell, and so shall the Debts of the Lady before Marriage now resting unpaid being 2207 l. and Sir John's own Debts rest unsatisfied to the oppression and cla∣mour
of many poor men, and the King still troubled with renewing his pro∣tections. 5. If Sir John should proceed in Course of Justice, and that the Conveyance made to Feoffees should not be held sufficient, and strong enough to con∣vey the same to the Lady; yet Sir John can have but the profits thereof, being but 300 l. and not that clear, which is not able to pay half the Use of the Money. 6. Besides before any Suite began, the said Manner of Barne-Elms was for Valuable Consideration of money lent, mortgaged, and now resteth forfeited, for non-payment of 2000 l.
Whether an English Juris∣diction may disannul a Marriage made in Scot∣land. A. B. a Scotch man in a Parish Church in Scotland, publickly in the presence of the Congregation, Solemnizeth Marriage with a Scotch∣woman. About six or seven years after the said Marriage, the Scotch woman pre∣tending that at the time of her Mar∣riage, she was but ten years old, or at the most under twelve, before cer∣tain Competent Judges in Scotland pro∣cureth a sentence of divorce to be given against the said A. B. whereby the Mar∣riage between A. B. and her was pro∣mounced to be void and of no force,
and that she was at liberty to marry a∣gain to any other, upon this ground that she was under twelve years of Age at the time of her Marriage, and that she never consented thereto after she was twelve years old, nor had Carnal knowledge from the said A. B. from which sentence no Appeal or provoca∣tion was made. Afterwards the said A. B. coming into England did solemnize Marriage with an English Woman, the Scottish Wife being then living; after which Marriage, the said A. B. and the Eng∣lish woman for certain years Cohabited together here in England as Man and Wife, the said English woman being Ignorant of the Premises done in Scot∣land, during the time of her cohabita∣tion with the said A. B. the Scottish woman dyeth, after whose Death, the English woman being certified, that A. B. had another Wife living when he married her, so as he could not be her lawful Husband at the time of her Marriage, the said A. B. and she dwelling both in England: she refrain∣eth
from the company of A. B. and complaineth to the Eccleastical Judges in England, haveing Jurisdiction in the place where the said A. B. and she dwelleth, and craving Justice, offereth to prove that the said A. B. and the said Scotish woman were lawful man and wife, and after the said Marriage had Carnal knowledge of each other, and that they cohabited together as man and wife five or six years, after she was twelve years of Age, admitting she had been under that age at the time of her Marriage, and desireth to be admit∣ted Judicially according to the ordina∣ry course of Law, to alleadge and prove her aforesaid assertions before the said Judges, and upon proof thereof, to have sentence for the nullity of her own Marriage according to Justice. It is objected on the behalf of A. B. that she ought not to be admitted thereto, for these causes (viz) because the Marriage with the Scottish woman was solemnized in Scotland, the sen∣tence of Divorce was given in Scotland by the Judges there, where the Judges
of England have no Jurisdiction, nor Superiority over them: that there was no appeal or provocation from that sen∣tence, that it was given by the Judges of an high Courtin Scotland, from whence no appeal lyeth; and that if the Eng∣lish womans Marriage should be proved void here in England, the Justice of the Realm of Scotland, may thereby seem to be taxed. The Question is, whether the Ec∣clesiastical Judges or Judge haveing Jurisdiction in the place in England where the said A. B. and the English woman dwell, be competent Judges, and may and ought at the Petition of the English woman, to hear and de∣termine this Cause of nullity of the Marriage between her self and A. B. notwithstanding the former objections. We are of opinion, without any doubt, that the Ecclesiastical Judge haveing Jurisdiction in the place in England, where the said A. B. and the said English woman dwell, may, and in Justice is bound, at the Complaint of the said English woman, to hear and
determine the said Cause, concerning the validity of her said Marriage, and to pronounce the Marriage between her and A. B. to be void; if she prove before him the matters by her alledged, notwithstanding the aforesaid objecti∣ons. Neither can the Justice of Scotland be thought to be Impeached thereby, though upon sufficient proof made be∣fore the Judges here in England, which was not made before the Judges in Scot∣land, he giveth a Sentence which may seem repugnant to the Sentence given in Scotland.
Anno Dom. 1610. An. Jac. Reg. 8. Certain Points in Law and Rea∣son, whereby it may plainly appear, that the Question, between the Lady Kenneda and Sir John Kenneda concerning the validity of their Marriage, may and ought by ordinary Court of Law be heard and determined before the Ecclesiasti∣cal Judges in England, who have Jurisdiction in the places, where they both dwell: whereupon the Civilians have grounded their opinions, given in this Case to that effect, FIrst by Law and Reason there can fall out no Question or controversie between any Persons inhabiting in any Civil Common-wealth or State, but the same must be decid∣ed
by some Competent Judge or Judges, who ought to have Authority to hear and de∣termine the same, or else there must needs ensue confusion and horror. Secondly, when any contro∣versies happen between any Per∣sons proceeding of any Contract whatsover, and that require a Determination, or ending by Judgment wheresoever the Con∣tract was made; Those Judges are by Law the Competent Judges to hear and determine that controversie, who have Ju∣risdiction and Power in the place where both the parties, or party defendent, dwelleth, to hear and determine Causes of that Nature.
Thirdly, If there fall out any contro∣versie between any two Persons, the Defendent cannot be compelled to ap∣pear to answer the Plantiff, but before the Judge of the place, where the De∣fendent dwelleth, and especially if the Plaintiff himself dwelleth under the same Jurisdiction. Fourthly, In all causes where there may ensue Peril of Soul, and continuance of sin, the Judge of the place ought of his Office to enquire thereof, and re∣dress the same though no man complain thereof. Whereupon it followeth, that the Ec∣clesiastical Judges here in England, who have Authority to hear Causes of Ma∣trimony, are the competent udges, and have poer to hear and determine this matter of the lawfullness or unlawfullness of the Ladies Marriage, and the rather for that the Ladies Marriage (which is the Principal matter in Question) was made and solemnized here in Eng∣land. If it be objected, That because that
Point whereupon the validity or invali∣ity of the Lady Kenneda's Marriage ependeth, viz the Marriage between Sir ohn and Isabel Kenneda is already ad∣udged by a definitive Sentence long ince, from which there hath been no Appeal or provocation; and therefore it must barr the Lady. We answer al∣hough in causes of other Nature, where no danger of sin might ensue, though the sentence were against the Truth; if a sentence be once lawfully given, and not Appealed from in due time, the matter cannot be called in question a∣gain: Yet where a sentence is given to dissolve or annul a lawful Matrimony, that sentence may at any time, though never so long after, be called in questi∣on and reversed, whensoever it may be made to appear that the truth is con∣trary to that sentence, and that may be done even by the party himself who ob∣tained that sentence; and therefore not only Sir John Kenneda, but Isabel her self might have reversed that sentence, proving the same was given by error: Much less shall the Lady who was not
Party to that suite, be thereby debar∣red from proving the Nullity of her Marriage, being a distinct cause from that. And the reason of the difference between a sentence against a Matrimo∣ny and a sentence in another Cause, is, because in other causes, where no fear is of sin, or peril of soul to ensue, the Par∣ties may may by their agreement, make what end of the business they list by Compo∣sition or other ways; and therefore if they do not appeal from the sentence given against them, they are thought by the consent to confirm the same; but because a Marriage by Gods Law cannot be disolved by the agreement or consent of the Parties, no sentence threin given against a Marriage contra∣ry to the truth, by error, can by the Parties agreement be confirmed, lest if it should be otherwise, thereby they might by colour of the erroneous sentence marry other persons and live in Adulte∣ry. Nay more, if the Parties them∣selves thus erroneouly divorced contra∣ry to the truth would hold themselves contented with the sentence. If either
of them marry any other person, or they both live incontinently with other per∣sons, the Judge of that place, where they inhabit, may and ought of his own Office to inforce the Parties so by errour divorced to live together again as man and wife, and seperate them from their second Spouses. If it be objected that the sentence was given in another Country, where the Judges of England have no jurisdiction, and in an high Court from whence, there lyeth no Appeal, and that the Judges of England have no superiority to call their sentences in question, and that herefore the Lady cannot call that divorce in question here. We answer, that the Principal cause in this case of the Ladies, is not to reverse or call in question the sentence given in Scotland, but the principal cause here is, whether her Marriage made in England with Sir John, be of validity or no; for that (as we say) Sir John had another Wife living (viz. Isabel Kenneda) at the time of her Marriage, without any mention to be made by the Lady of any sentence
of divorce given in Scotland; this Question of Divorce is brought in but incidently by Sir John in this Cause, and also vainly and impertinently, if it can be proved that the truth is contrary to that sentence. For that sentence is in Law meerly void, and cannot barr the Lady for the reasons before alledg∣ed, and for that Ecclesia was decepta in giving of that sentence: now when a sentence which is void in Law (and especially against a Marriage) is called in question but incidently before any Judge whatsoever though, an inferior, in a cause that doth principally belong to his jurisdiction: That Judge may take knowledge of, and incidently examine the validity of that sentence, whether it were good or no, by whom and wheresoever that sentence was given; tho he were never so superior a Judge; not to the end to reverse, or expresly pronounce that sentence to be void or not void, but as he findeth it by examina∣tion of the Cause to be good or void, so to give sentence accordingly, and deter∣mine the cause Principally depending
before him, without ever mentioning the erroneous sentence in his sen∣tence. Neither can the sentence given here for the Nullity of the Ladies Mar∣riage upon other matter, than was pleaded and proved before the Judges in Scotland, although the same sen∣tence had been principally called in question, and directly pronounced to be void, any wayes impeal the Justice of Scotland, for sith Judges in all Courts and causes, must Judge according to that which is alleadged and proved before them; what impeachment is it to the Justice of any Judge (al∣though his sentence be revoked, and and a contrary sentence given by ano∣ther Judge) when the parties between whome the suite is, either cannot, or through negligence or collusion will not alleadge or make such proof before him the first Judge as they might, but afterwards before the second Judge, good and sufficient proof is made, a matter which falleth out every day here in England, in every Civil and
Ecclesiastical Court upon Appeal made from one Court to another, and the like falleth out in all other Countries, and yet the former Judge whose sentence is reversed, thinketh not himself any whit impeached of in∣justice thereby. That the absurdities which would ensue may by example more plainly ap∣pear, if the Law should not be as we say. Put this Case, a Widdower in the Confines of England towards Scot∣land, marrieth a Wife in a Parish Church publickly, in the presence of a hundred Witnesses, and afterwards they live together by the space of a year, and have a Child; at the years end upon some discontent∣ment, they both being disirous to be ridd, the one of the other; the wo∣man in England sueth her Husband to be divorced from him, pretend∣ing that at such time as he married her, he had another wife living, and produceth witnesses which prove that he had married another wife before he married her, and peradventure make
some probable shew, that that wife was living, when he married his se∣cond wife; who in truth was dead before, as the man could have plainly proved by twenty witnesses, if he had listed: Notwithstanding the hus∣band being willing to be ridd of his wife, either would not plead, that his former wife was dead, or else would not make any proof there∣of, Whereupon the woman obtain∣eth sentence against the man, where∣by the Marriage between them two, by this Collusion and errour is pronoun∣ced void, from which sentence there was no Appeal or provocation: Now within a Month after this Divorce, this man goeth into the Confines of Scotland, not Ten Miles from the place, where he and his divorced wife formerly dwelt, and there he marrieth another woman, being igno∣rant of the former wife and Col∣lusory Divorce, and there Cohabiteth and dwelleth with her. This woman shortly after understanding of the premises, and that she could not be
his lawful wife, but lived in Adul∣tery with him; desireth before the Judge in Scotland, under whose Ju∣risdiction they both dwell, to be devor∣ced from him, and to be delivered from her Adulterous living with him, and offereth to prove all the Premises most manifestly; were it not now a most absurd and abominable thing, that this woman, should have no re∣medy any where, but be inforced to live still in Adultery with this man, because the sentence of divorce was given by a Judge in England, pro∣nouncing the marriage between the man and his second wife to be void, whereas it can be most manifestly and apparently proved, that the first wife was dead before his second Marriage, and so the sentence was given against the apparent Truth? And what impeachment of Justice can this be to the Judge in England, before whom it was never proved, that the mans first wife was dead, to have his sentence reversed upon new proofs made before the Judge in Scotland.
Now between the Ladies Case, and this Case there is no difference in truth of matter and point of Law, only by reason of the multitude of the witnes∣ses, the nearness of the time and place, when and where, these things in this Case were done; the truth whereof may more easily and readily be pro∣ved than in the Ladies Cause it can, though with more difficulty, the cases are all one. If any man shall yet doubt, whether this cause can be heard and determi∣ned by the Ecclesiastical Courts in England, it is desired, that Sir John's Councel, considering the Marriage was made here in England, and the Lady and Sir John do both dwell here, and by Law Sir John is not com∣pellable to appear in any other place than in England, for this matter, I would tell before what Judge this matter should be heard and deter∣mined; for it is to be presumed, that when two persons live in Adultery together, and so in continual sin,
and the one of them seeketh redess, and to be freed from that sinful and Adulterous Life; no man will say, that he or she shall be compel∣led to live notoriously in Adultery still, and have no Judge at all to separate them and remedy this e∣normity. If further doubts be made how, where, or in what manner proof shall be made in this Cause: It is said that this Question doth not con∣cern the Question, what Court, or or before what Judges the Cause shall be heard and determined; But to this, it, is answered; That the Proofs shall be made in such man∣ner, as they be ordinarily in all o∣ther Cases, that is, by the answers of the contrary part upon Oath, by such witnesses as they can procure voluntarily to come before the Judges here, from whence, or out of what Country soever they can procure them: If they will not come volun∣tarily, then if they be within the Ju∣risdiction of the Judge, and the Par∣ty
producent think so good, he shall have process to compel them to come before the Judge; if they dwell so far off, as that it will be too chargeable to bring thm before the Judge, then a Commission shall be granted to some Commnsioners, to examine them near the places where they dwell, and this if they dwell within the Judges Jurisdiction, but if the witness dwell out of the Juges Jurisdiction, in any other place, Realm, or Country, then the Judge of the Cause may direct requisitory to the Judges of the places, or Countries, where the witness dwells, to intreat them to examine the witness remaining there by their Authority, and to send them depositions to the Judge of the Cause. Also by the Records of other Courts, or any o∣ther Instruments or Writings which may any way further the Cause; these being the ordinary and usual courses, used for makeing of Proof in every Cause, every day, and will not be denyed by any acquainted
with the proceedings in any Eccle∣siastical or Civil Courts. Anno Dom. 1611. An. Reg. Jac. 9. The Commission and Warrant, for the Condemnation, and burning of Bar∣tholomew Legatt, who was burnt in Smith-feild in London, 1611. for Heretical Opinions. JAmes, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and reland, defender &c. To our right Trusty and well beloved Councellor Thomas Lord Elsmere our Chancellor of England, Greeting: Where the Reverend Father in God John Bishop of London, haveing judicially pro∣ceeded in a Cause of Heresy against Bartholomew Legatt of the City of Lon∣don, in the Diocess of the Bishop of London, concerning divers wcked Er∣ours, Heresies and Blasphemous Opini∣ons, holden, affirmed and published
by the said Bartholomew▪ Legatt, and chifly in these thirteen Blasphemous Posons following, viz. That the Creed called the Nicene Creed and Athanasius Creed, contain not. a pro∣fession of the true Christian Faith, or that he will not profess his Faith ac∣cording to the same Creeds, that Christ is not God of God begotten, not made, but begotten and made; that there are no Persons in the God-head; That Christ was not God from Everlasting, but began to be God when he took flesh of the Vir∣gin Mary, that the World was not made by Christ, that the Apostles teach Christ to be man only, that there is no Generation in God, but of Crea∣tures, that this Assertion, God to be made Man, is contrary to the Rule of Faith, and monstrous Blasphemy; That Christ was not before the full∣ness of time Except by Promise, that Christ was not God otherwise than an anoynted God, that Christ was not in the form of God Equal with God, that is in substance of God,
but in Righteousness and giveing Salvation, that Christ by his God∣head wrought no Miracle, that Christ is not to be prayed unto; where∣in he the said Bartholomew Legatt, hath before the said Reverend Father, maintained his said most dangerous and Blasphemous Opinions, as ap∣peareth by many his Confessions publickly made and acknowledged, for which his Damnable and Here∣tical Opinions, he is by Difinitive sentence, by the said Reverend Fa∣ther John Bishop of London, with the Advice and Consent of other Reve∣rend Bishops, Learned Divines, and others Learned in the Laws assisting in Judgment, Justly adjudged, pro∣nounced and declared to be an ob∣stinate and incorrigible Heretick, and is left by them under the sen∣tence of the great Excommunicati∣on: and therefore as a Corrupt Member to be Cutt off from the Chruch of Chist, and society of the Faithful, and is to be by our secu∣ar Power and Authority as an Here∣tick
punished, as by the Significavit of the said Reverend Father in God, the said Bishop of London, bearing date at London the third day of March, in the year of our Lord, 1611. In the ninth year of our Reign▪ and remaining in our Court of Chancery more at large appeareth. And although the said Bartholomew Legatt hath since the said sentence pronouced against him, been often very Charitably moved, and exhorted, as well by the said Bishop, as by many grave and Learn∣ed Divines, to disswade, revoke and remove him from the said Blas∣phemous and Heretical Opinions; yet he arrogantly and willfully per∣sisteth and continueth in the same: We therefore according to our Regal Functi∣on and Office, minding the Execu∣tion of Justice in this behalf, and to give Example to others, lest they should attempt the like here∣after: Have determined by the Assent of our Councel to will and require, and do hereby Authorize and Re∣quire
you our said Chancellor, Im∣mediatly upon the receipt hereof, to award and make out under our great Seal of England, our Writ of Exe∣cution according to the Tenor in these Presents ensuing; and these Presents shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge for the same. The WARRANT. THE King to the Sheriffs of London▪ greeting: Where∣as the Reverend Father in Christ John Bishop of London, hath signified unto us, that when he in a certain business of Heretical pravity against one Bartholomew Legatt our Subject of the City of London, of the said Bishop of Londons Diocese and Juris∣diction, rightly and lawfully pro∣ceeding by Acts enacted, drawn,
proposed, and by the Confessions of the said Bartholomew Legatt, before the said Bishop Judicially made and acknowledged, hath found in the said Bartholomew Legatt, very many wicked Er∣rours, false opinions, Heresies, and cursed Blasphemies, and Im∣pious Doctrines, expresly contrary and repugnant to the Catholick Faith and Religion, and the Holy word of God, knowingly and ma∣liciously, and with a pertinacious and obdurate plainly Incorrigible mind, to believe, hold, affirme and publish; the same Reverend Father the Bishop of London with the advice and consent, as well of the Reverend Bishops and other Divines, as also of men Learned in the Law, in Judg∣ment
sitting and assisting, th same Bartholomew Legatt by hi Definitive Sentence hath pro∣nounced, decreed, and declared to be an Obdurate, Contumacious and incorrigible Heretick, and upon that occasion as a stubborn Heretick, and rotten contagious Member to be cut off from the Church of Christ, and the Com∣munion of the Faithful, whereas the Holy Mother Church hath not further to do and prosecute in this part, the same Reveren'd Father hath left the aforesaid Bartholo∣mew Legatt, as a Blasphemous Heretick to our secular power to be punished with Condign punish∣ment, as by the Letters Patents of the said Reverend Father in Christ the Bishop of London in this be∣half,
above made hath certified unto us in our Chancery; We there∣fore as a Zealot of Justice, and a defendor of the Catholick Faith, and willing to maintaine and de∣fend the holy Church, and Rights, and liberties of the same, and the Catholick Faith, and such Here∣sies and Errours every where what in us lyeth, to Root out and extir∣pate, and to punish with Condign punishment such Hereticks so Con∣victed, and deeming that such an Heretick in form aforesaid, Con∣victed and Condemned according to the Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England in this part occasioned, ought to be Burn∣ed with Fire, We do Command you that the said Bartholomew Legatt, being in your Custody,
you do Commit publickly to the Fire, before the people, in a pub∣lick and open place in West-Smithfield, for the Cause afore∣said, and that you cause the said Bartholomew Legatt to be re∣ally burned in the same Fire, in detestation of the said Crime, for the manifest Example of other Christians, lest they slide into the same fault, and this that in no wise you omit, under the per∣il that shall follow thereon, wit∣ness, &c.
Anno Dom. 1611. An. Reg. Jac. 9. The Commission and Warrant for the Condemnation and Execution of Ed∣ward Wightman, at Lichfield, 1611. with an Account of his Here∣tical Opinion. Ames, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and eland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To our Right Trusty, and Right ell-beloved Councellour, Thomas, ord Ellesmere, our Chancellour of ngland, Greeting. Whereas the Re∣erend Father in God, Richard, Bi∣op of Coventry and Lichfild, Having diciously proceededf in the Examina∣on, Hearing, and Determining of a Cause of Heresie against Edward Wight∣an, of the Parish of Burton upon rent, in the Diocese of Coventry and ichfield; Concerning the wicked He∣sies of the Ebionites, Corinthians, Va∣ntinians, Arrians, Macedonians, of imon Magus, of Manes, Manichees,
of Photinus, and Anabaptists, and  other Heretical, execrable, and un∣heard of Opinions, by the Instinct  Satan, by him excogitated and holden viz. 1. That there is not the Trinity  Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in the Unity of the Deity. 2. That Jesus Christ is not the true Natural Son of God, perfect God, and of the same Substance, Eter∣nity and Majesty with the Father, in respect of his Godhead. 3. That Jesus Christ is only Man, and a mere Crea∣ture, and not both God and Man in one Person. 4. That Christ our Saviour took not Humane Flesh of the Sub∣stance of the Virgin Mary his Mother; and that that Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head, was not fulfilled in Christ. 5. That the Person of the Holy Ghost is not God Coequal, Coeternal and Coessen∣tial with the Father and the Son. 6. That the three Creeds, viz. the Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, the Athanasian Creed, are the Heresies of
e Nicolaitaines. 7. That he the id Edward Wightman is that Pro∣het spoken of in the Eighteenth of euteronomy in these words, I will ise them up a Prophet &c. and that at place of Isaiah, I alone have troden e Wine-press; and that that place, hose Fan is in his hand, are proper d personal to him the said Edward ightman. 8. And that he the said ightman is that Person of the Holy host spoken of in the Scriptures, d the Comforter spoken of in the xteenth of St. John's Gospel, 9. And at those words of our Saviour Christ the Sin of Blasphemy against the oly Ghost, are meant of his Person. . And that that place, the Fourth  Malachy, of Elias to come, is ewise meant of his Person. 11. That e Soul doth sleep in the Sleep of e First Death, as well as the Body, d is mortal as touching the Sleep e first Death as the Body is: And t the Soul of our Saviour Jesus rist did sleep in that Sleep of Death well as his Body. 12. That the
Souls of the Elect Saints Departed, are not Members possessed of the Trium∣phant Church in Heaven. 13. That the Baptizing of Infants is an abomina∣ble Custom. 14. That there ough not in the Church the use of the Lords Supper to be celebrated i the Elements of Bread and Wine; and the use of Baptism to be celebrated in the Element of Water, as they are now practised in the Church of Eng∣land: but that the use of Baptism i to be administred in Water, only to Converts of sufficient Age and Under∣standing, converted from Infidelity to the Faith. 15. That God hath or∣dained and sent him the said Edwar Wightman, to perform his part in the Work of the Salvation of the World to deliver it by his Teaching or Ad∣monition, from the Heresie of the Ni∣colaitanes, as Christ was ordained and sent to save the World, and by hi Death to deliver it from Sin, and to reconcile it to God. 16. And tha Christianity is not wholly professed and preached in the Church of Eng∣land,
but only in part, wherein he he said Edward Wightman, hath be∣fore the said Reverend Father, as al∣o before our Commissioners for Cau∣es Ecclesiastical, within our Realm of England, maintained his said most erilous and dangerous Opinions, as ppeareth by many of his Confessions, s also by a Book Written and Subscri∣ed by him, and given to us; for the which his damnable and heretical O∣inions, he is by Divine Sentence de∣clared by the said Reverend Father, he Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, with the Advice and Consent of Lear∣ned Divines, and others Learned in he Law, assisting him in Judgment, ustly adjudged, pronounced and de∣clared to be an obstinate and incorri∣gible Heretick, and is left by them under the Sentence of the great Ex∣communication; and therefore as a Corrupt Member to be cut off from he rest of the Flock of Christ, lest he should infect others professing the true Christian Faith; and is to be by our Secular Power and Authority, as an
Heretick punished: As by the Signifi∣cavit of the said Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Coventry and Lich∣field, bearing Date at Lichfield the Fourteenth day of December, in the Ninth Year of our Reign, and remain∣ing in our Court of Chancery, more at large appeareth. And although the said Edward Wightman hath since the said Sentence pronounced against him, been often very charitably moved and exhorted, as well by the said Bishop, as by many other Godly, Grave and Learned Divines, to dissuade, revoke and remove him from the said Blasphe∣mous, Heretical and Anabaptistical O∣pinions; yet he arrogantly and will∣fully resisteth and continueth in the same. We therefore, according to our Regal Function and Office, minding the Execution of Justice in this be∣half, and to give Example to others, lest they should attempt the like here∣after, have Determined, by the Assent of our Council, to will and require, and do hereby Authorize and Require You our said Chancellour, immediate∣ly
upon the Receit hereof, to award, and make out, under Our Great Seal of England, Our Writ of Execution, ccording to the Tenor in these pre∣sents ensuing; And these presents shall e your sufficient Warrant and Dis∣charge for the same. Then was a Warrant granted by the King, to the Lord Chancellour of Eng∣land, to award a Writ under the Great Seal, to the Sherriff of Lichfield, for Burning of Edward Wightman, deli∣vered over to the Secular Power by the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. The Warrant. THE Kng to the Sheriff of Our City of Lichfield, Greeting, Whereas the Reverend Father in Christ, Richard, by Divine Providence, of Coventry and Lichfield Bishop, hath signified unto Us, That he judicially proceeding, according to the Exi∣gence of the Ecclesiastical Canons, and of the Laws and Customs of this our
Kingdom of England, against one Ed∣ward Wightman of the Parish of Bur∣ton upon Trent, in the Diocess of Co∣ventry and Lichfield, of and upon the Wicked Heresies of Ebion, Cerinthus, Valentinian, Arrius, Macedonius, Si∣mon Magus, of Manes, Manichees, Photinus, and of the Anabaptists, and other Arch Hereticks; and moreover of other cursed Opinions, belched, by the Instinct of Satan excogitated, and heretofore unheard of; the aforesaid Edward Wightman appearing before the aforesaid Reverend Father, and o∣ther Divines and Learned in the Law, assisting him in Judgment, the afore∣said Wicked Crimes, Heresies, and o∣ther detestable Blasphemies and Errors, stubbornly and pertinaciously, know∣ingly, maliciously and with an har∣dened Heart, published, defended and dispersed, by definitive Sentence of the said Reverend Father, with the Consent of Divines, Learned in the Law aforesaid, justly, lawfully, and Canonically, against the said Edward Wightman in that part brought, stands
adjudged and pronounced an Here∣ick; and therefore as a diseased Sheep ut of the Flock of the Lord, lest our ubjects he do infect by his Conta∣ion, he hath decreeed to be cast out nd cut off. Whereas therefore the Holy Mother-Church hath not fur∣her in this part what it ought more o do and prosecute, the same Reve∣end Father, the same Edward Wight∣man as a Blasphemous and Condem∣ed Heretick, hath left to our Secu∣ar Power to be punished with Con∣ign Punishment, as by the Letters Patents of the aforesaid Reverend Father the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield in this behalf thereupon made, is certified unto us in our Chancery. We therefore, as a Zealot of Justice, and a Defender of the Ca∣tholick Faith, and willing that the Holy Church, and the Rights and Liberties of the same, and the Ca∣tholick Faith to maintain and defend, and such like Heresies and Errors e∣very where, so much as in us lies to oot out and extirpate, and Hereticks
so convict, to punish with Condig Punishment; holding that such an H¦retick in the aforesaid Form Convi and Condemned according to th Laws and Customs of this our King¦dom of England in this part accustom¦ed, ought to be Burned with Fire We command thee, that thou cause the said Edward Wightman, being i thy Custody, to be committed to the Fire in some publick and open Place below the City aforesaid, for the Cause aforesaid, before the People; and the same Edward Wightman in the same Fire, cause really to be Burned in the Detestation of the said Crime; and for manifest Example of other Christi∣ans, that they may not fall into the same Crime: And this no ways omit, under the Peril that shall follow there∣on. Witness, &c.
Anno Dom. 1616. An. Reg. Jac. 14.  Order of the King's Privy Council sent to the Peers of the Realm, for the Tryal of the Earl and Countess of Somerset. Whitehall, Apr. 24. 1616. AFter our very hearty Commen∣dations to your Lordship; hereas the King's Majesty hath re∣ved, that the Earl of Somerset, and e Countess his Wife, lately indicted f Felony for the Murder and Poy∣ning of Sir Thomas Overbury, then s Majesties Prisoner in the Tower, all now receive their Lawful and ublick Tryal by their Peers, imme∣ately after the end of this present aster Term. At the Tryal of which oble Personages, your Lordship's resence, as being a Peer of the Realm, nd one of approved Wisdom and In∣grity, is requisite to pass upon them. hese are to let your Lordship under∣stand,
that his Majesties Pleasure  and so commandeth by these our Le¦ters, that your Lordship make you repair to the City of London, by th Eleventh day of the Month of M following, being some days before th Tryal intended; at which time you Lordship shall understand more of hi Majesties Pleasure. So not doubtin of your Lordships Care to observe h Majesties Directions, we commit yo to God, Your Lordships very loving Friends, G. Cant. T. Ellesmere Canc. Fenton. E. Wotton. Tho. Lake. Lo. Dare. C. Edmonds. E. Worcester. Lenox. P. Herbert. R. Winwood. F. Grevyll. J. Caesar.
he Speech of Sir Francis Bacon at the Ar∣raignment of the Earl of Somerset (the Countess having received the King's Pardon.) T may please your Grace my Lord High Steward of England, and you y Lords the Peers; You have here efore you, Robert, Earl of Somerset,  be Tried for his Life, concerning e Procuring, and Consenting to the oysoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, en the King's Prisoner in the Tower f London, as an Accessary before the act. I know your Honours cannot be∣old this Noble Man, but you must emember the great Favours which he King hath conferred on him, and ust be sensible, that he is yet a Mem∣er of your Body, and a Peer, as you re, so that you cannot cut him off om your Body but with grief; and herefore you will expect from us that give in the King's Evidence, sound nd sufficient matter of Proof to
satisfie your Honours Consciences. As for the manner of the Evidence, the King our Master, who (amongst other his Vertues, excelleth in that Vertue of the Imperial Throne, which is Justice) hath given us Command, that we should not expatiate, nor make Invectives, but materially pursue the Evidence, as it conduceth to the points in question. A matter, that (though we are glad of so good a Warrant) yet we should have done of our selves: For far be it from us, by any Strains of Wit or Arts, to seek to play Prizes, or blazon our Names in Blood, or to carry the Day other ways than on sure grounds; We shall carry the Lanthorn of Ju∣stice (which is the Evidence) before your Eyes upright, and so be able to save it from being put out with any grounds of Evasion or vain Defence, not doubting at all, but that the E∣vidence it self will carry that Force, as it shall need no Advantage or Ag∣gravation.
First, My Lords, The Course that will hold, in delivery of that which shall say, (for I love Order) is, First, I will speak something of the Nature and Greatness of the Offence which is now to be Tried, not to weigh down my Lord with the great∣ess of it, but rather contrariwise, to ew, that a great Offence needs a ood Proof: And that the King, how∣ever he might esteem this Gentle∣an heretofore as the Signe upon his inger, (to use the Scripture Phrase) et in such a Case as this, he was to ut it off. Secondly, I will use some few words ouching the Nature of the Proofs, which in such a Case are competent. Thirdly, I will state the Proofs. And Lastly, I will produce the roofs, either out of Examination, nd matters of Writing, or Witnesses iva voce. For the Offence it self, it is of Crimes ext unto High Treason, the greatest, is the foulest of Felonies: It hath ree Degrees. First, It is Murder by
Impoysonment. Secondly, It is Mu∣der committed upon the King's Priso∣ner in the Tower. Thirdly, I might say it is Murder under the colour.  Friendship; but that it is a Circum∣stance Moral, and therefore I leav that to the Evidence it self. For Murder, my Lords, the fir Record of Justice which was in th World, was Judgment upon a  therer in the Person of Adam's First born Cain; and though it was not pu∣nished by Death, but Banishment, and marks of Ignominy, in respect of the Primogenitors, or the Population o the World; yet there was a sever Charge given, that it should not g unpunished. So it appeareth likewise in Scrip∣ture, that the Murder of Abner by Jo∣ab, though it were by David respi∣ted, in respect of great Services past, or reason of State, yet it was not for∣gotten. But of this I will say no more, because I will not discourse: It was e∣ver admitted and ranked in God's own Tables, That Murder is of Of∣fences
between man and man next un∣to High Treason, and Disobedience to Authority, which sometimes have been referred to the first Table, because of the Lieutenancy of God in Princes the greatest. For Impoysonment, I am sorry it should be heard of in our Kingdom: It is not nostri generis, nec sanguinis pec∣atum; it is an Italian Comfit fit for the Court of Rome, where that person that intoxicateth the Kings of the Earth, is many times really intoxica∣ed and poysoned himself; but it hath three Circumstances which makes it grievous beyond other matters. The First is, That it takes a man a∣way in full peace, in God's and the King's peace; that thinks no harm, ut is comforting of Nature with Re∣ection and Food, so that as the Scrip∣ture saith, his Table is made a Snare. The Second is, That it is easily com∣mitted and easily conceal'd; and on he other side, hardly prevented, and hardly discovered: For Murder by violence Princes have Guards, and
Private Men have Houses, Attendants and Arms. Neither can such Murder be committed, but Cum sonitu, with some overt and apparent Acts, that may discover and trace the Offenders; but by Poyson, the Cup it self of Princes will scarce serve, in regard of many Poysons that neither discolour nor distate: It comes upon a man when he is careless, and without suspicion; and every day a man is within the Gates of Death. And the last is, because it concern∣eth not only the destruction the Mali∣ced men; but of every Man, quis modo tutus erit? For many times, the Poyson is prepared for one, and is taken by a∣nother; so that Men die other Men's Deaths, Concidit infoelix alieno vulnere: And it is as the Psalmist calleth it, Sa∣gitta nocte volans, the Arrow that fli∣eth by Night, that hath no Aim nor Certainty: And therefore, if any man shall say to himself, Here is great talk of Imposoynment, but I am sure I am safe: For I have no Enemies, neither
have I any thing another man should long for. Why, that is all one, he may sit next him at the Table, that is meant to be Impoysoned and pledge him of his Cup: As we may see in the Example of 21 Hen. 8. That where the purpose was to Poyson one man, there was Poyson put into Barm or Yeast, and with that Barm, Pottage or Grewel, was made, whereby Six∣teen of the Bishop of Rochester's Ser∣vants were poysoned. Nay, it went into the Alms-basket likewise, and the Poor at the Gate were poysoned; and therefore with great Judgment, did the Statute, made that Year, touching this Accident, make Impoysonment High Treason, because it tends to the Dissolving of Humane Society: For whatsoever Offence doth so, is in the Nature thereof High Treason. Now, For the Third Degree of this particular Offence, which is, that it is Committed upon the King's Pri∣soner, who was out of his own De∣fence, and meerly in the King's Pro∣ection, and for whom the King and
State were a kind of Respondent: It is a thing that aggravates the Fault much: For certainly (My Lord of So∣merset) let me tell you this, That Sir Thomas Overbury is the first Man that was Murdered in the Tower of Lon∣don, save the Murder of the two young Princes, by the Appointment of Richard the Third. Thus much of the Offence, now to the Proofs. For the matter of Proofs, you may consider, that Impoysonment, of all Offences is most secret, even so secret, that if in all Cases of Impoysonment, you should require Testimony, you should as good proclaim Impunity. Who could have impeached Livi by Testimony, for the poysoning of the Figgs upon the Tree, which her Husband was wont to gather with his own Hands? Who could have im∣peached Parasetis for the poysoning of the one side of the Knife she carried with her, and keeping the other side clean; so that her self did eat of the same Piece of Meat that they did, whom she did impoyson.
These Cases are infinite, and need not to be spoken of the Secrecy of Impoysonment; but wise men must take upon them, in these Secret Cases, Solomon's Spirit, that, when there could be no Witnesses, collected the Act by the Affection; but yet we are not at our Cause, for that which your Lord∣ships are to try, is not the Act of Im∣poysonment; for that is done to your Hands: All the World by Law is con∣cluded to say, that Overbury was poy∣soned by Weston; but the question before you, is of the Procurement on∣ly, and as the Law termeth it, as ac∣cessary before the Fact; which abet∣ting, is no more, but to do, or use any Act or Means which may aid, or conduce to the Impoysonment. So that it is not the buying, nor the making of the Poyson, nor the prepa∣ring, nor confecting, nor commixing of it, or the giving, or sending, or laying of the Poyson that did the only Acts that do amount unto the Abettment; but if there be any other Act or Means done or used, to give opportunity of
Impoysonment, or to facilitate the Execution of it, or to stop or divert any Impediments that might hinder it, and that it be with an intention to accomplish and atchieve the Impoy∣sonment: All these are Abettments, and Accessaries before the Fact: As for Example, if there be a Conspiracy to murder a man, as he journeyeth on the way by Invitation, or by colour of some Business; and another taketh upon him to dissuade some Friends of his Company, that he is not strong e∣nough to make his Defence; and ano∣ther hath a part, to hold him in talk till the first Blow be given. All these, My Lords, without Scruple, are Ac∣cessaries to the Murder, although none of them give the Blow, nor assist to give the Blow. My Lords, He is not the Hunter a∣lone, that lets slip the Dog upon the Deer, but he that lodgeth him, and hunts him out, or sets a Train or Trap for him, that he cannot escape, or the like; but this My Lords, little need∣eth in this Case: For such a Chain of
Acts of Impoysonment as this, I think was never heard or seen. And thus much of the Nature of the Proofs. To descend to the Proofs them∣selves, I shall keep this Course. First, I will make a Narration of the Fact it self. Secondly, I will break and distri∣bute the Proofs, as they concern the Prisoner, and, Thirdly, According to the Distri∣bution, I will produce them and read them, to use them, so that there is nothing that I shall say, but your Lord∣ships shall have Three Thoughts or Cogitations to answer it. First, When I open it, you may take your Aim. Secondly, When I distribute it, you may prepare your Answers without Confusion, and, Lastly, When I produce the Wit∣nesses, or the Examinations themselves, you may again ruminate, and read vise to make your Defence. And this I do, because your Memo∣ry and Understanding may not be op∣pressed
or over-laden with length of Evidence, or with Confusion of Or∣der: Nay more, when your Lord∣ships shall make your Answer in your time, I will put you in mind, where Cause shall be, of your omission. First, Therefore Sir Thomas Over∣bury, for a time, was known to have great Interest and strait friendship with my Lord of Somerset both in his mean∣er Fortunes, and after, insomuch, that he was a kind of Oracle of Directi∣on unto him; and if you will be∣lieve his own Vaunt, (being indeed of an Insolent and Thrasonical Disposition) he took upon him, that the Fortunes, Reputation and Un∣derstanding of this Gentleman (who is well known to have an able Teach∣er) proceeded from his Company and Counsel; and this Friendship rested not only in Conversation, and Busi∣ness at Court, but likewise in Com∣munication of Secrets of State: For my Lord of Somerset exercising at that time, by his Majesties special Favour and Trust, the Office of Secretary, did
not forbear to acquaint Overbury with the King's Pacquets and Dispatches from all parts of Spain, France and the Low Countries; and this not by glimp∣ses, or now and then rounding in the Ear, for a Favour, but in a settled man∣ner. Pacquets were sent, sometimes opened by my Lord, sometimes un∣broken unto Overbury, who perused them, copied them, registred them, made Table-talk of them, as they thought good; so I will undertake, the time was, when Overbury knew more of the Secrets of the State, than the Council-Table did. Nay, they were grown to such Inwardness, as they made a Play of all the World be∣sides themselves; so as they had Cy∣phers and Jurgons for the King and Queen, and Great Men of the Realm. Things seldom used, but either by Prin∣ces or their Confederates, or at the least, by such as practice and work a∣gainst, or at the least upon Princes▪ But understand me, My Lord, I shall not charge you with Disloyalty at this day, and I lay this for a Foun∣dation,
that there was great Commu¦nication of Secrets between you an Sir Thomas Overbury, and that it ha relation to matters of State, and th great Causes of this Kingdom. But, My Lords, as it is a Principl in Nature, that the best things are in their Corruption the worst, and the sweetest Vine maketh the sourest Vi∣negar; so it fell out with them, that this Excess (as I may say) of Friend∣ship, ended in mortal Hatred on my Lord of Somerset's Part. I have heard my Lord Steward say, sometimes in the Chancery, that Frost and Fraud end foul; and I may add a Third, and that is, the Friendship of Ill Men; which is truly said to be Conspiracy and not Friendship: For it fell out some twelve Months or more before Overbury his Imprisonment in the Tower, that the Earl of Somerset fell into an unlawful Love towards that unfortunate Lady the Countess of Fsse, and to proceed to a Marriage with her; this Marriage and Purpose did Overbury mainly impugne, under
retence to do the true part of a riend, for that he accounted her an nworthy Woman; but the Truth as, Overbury, who (to speak plainly) ad little that was solid for Religion, r Moral Vertue, but was wholly ossest with Ambition and Vain Glo∣y, was loth to have any Partners in he Favour of my Lord of Somerset; nd especially, not any of the House f the Howards, against whom he had ways professed Hatred and Opposi∣tion. And my Lords, that this is no sini∣er Construction, will appear to you, when you shall hear that Overbury ade his Brags, that he had won him he Love of the Lady by his Letters nd Industry; so far was he from Ca∣es of Conscience in this point. And certainly, my Lords, howso∣ver the Tragical Misery of this poor Gentleman, Overbury, might somewhat bliterate his Faults, yet because we re not upon point of Civility, but to iscover the Face of Truth before the Face of Justice: For that it is material
to the true understanding of the Stat of this Cause, Overbury was nough and corrupt; the Ballads must be me¦ded for that point. But to proceed, when Overbury sa that he was like to be Possessor o my Lords Grace, which he had po¦sessed so long, and by whose Great¦ness he had promised himself to d Wonders; and being a Man of an un¦bounded, impudent Spirit, he bega not only to dissuade, but to dete him from the Love of that Lady; an finding him fixed, thought to find  strong Remedy; and supposing tha he had my Lord's Head under his Gi¦dle, in respect of Communication o Secrets of State, as he calls them him self Secrets of Nature; and therefor dealt violently with him, to make hi desist with Menaces of Discovery an the like. Hereupon grew two Stream of Hatred upon Overbury: the one fro the Lady, in respect that he crossed her Love, and abused her Name▪ (which are Furies in Women) the o¦ther of a more deep Nature, from my
Lord of Somerset himself, who was a∣fraid of Overbury's Nature; and if he did break from him, and fly out, he would wind into him, and trouble his whole Fortunes. I might add a hird Stream of the Earl of Northamp∣ton's Ambition, who desires to be first in Favour with my Lord of Somerset; and knowing Overbury's Malice to him∣self and to his House, thought that Man must be removed and cut off; so as certainly it was resolved and Decreed, that Overbury must die. That was too weak, and they were so far from giving way to it, as they crossed it; there rested but two ways of Quarrel, Assault and Poyson: For that of Assault, after some Proposition and Attempt, they passed from it, as a thing too open and subject to more ariety of Shame: That of Poyson likewise was an hazardous thing, and subject to many Preventions and Cau∣tion, especially to such a Working and Jealous Brain as Overbury had, ex∣cept he was first fast in their Hands: Therefore the way was first to get
him into a Trap, and lay him up, an then they could not miss the Mark And therefore in Execution of thi Plot, it was concluded, that he should be design'd to some Honourable Em¦ployment in Foreign Parts, and should under-hand by my Lord of Somerset be encouraged to refuse it; and so, up¦on Contempt, he should be laid Pri∣soner in the Tower, and then they thought he should be close enough and Death should be his Bail; yet were they not at their End: For they considered, that if there were not a fit Lieutenant of the Tower for their purpose, and likewise a fit Under∣keeper of Overbury, First, They should meet with many Impediments in the giving and exhibiting of the Poyson. Secondly, They should be exposed to Note and Observation, that might discover them. And Thirdly, Over∣bury in the mean time might write cla∣morous and furious Letters to his Friends, and so all might be disappoin∣ted: And therefore the next Link of the Chain, was to displace the then
Lieutenant Wade, and to place Yelvis a Principal Abettor in the Impoyson∣ment, to displace Cary that was Un∣der-keeper in Wade's Time, and to place Weston, that was the Actor in the Impoysonment; and this was done in such a while, that it may appear to be done as it were in a Breath. Then when they had this poor Gentleman in the Tower, close Prisoner, where he could not escape, nor stir, where he could not feed but by their Hands, where he could not speak nor write, but through their Trunks; then was the time to act the last Day of his Tra∣gedy. Then must Franklin, the Purveyor of the Poyson, procure five, six, se∣ven several Poysons, to be sure to hit his Complexion; then must Mrs. Tur∣er, the Lay-mistress of the Poysons, dvise what works at present, and what at distance; then must Weston e the Tormentor, and chase him with Poyson after Poyson, Poyson n Salt Meats, Poyson in Sweet Meats, Poyson in Medicines and Vo∣mits,
until at last his Body by the use of Treacle and Preservatives, was so fortified, that the force of the Poysons was blunted upon him. Weston con∣fessing, when he was chid for not dis∣patching him, that he had given him enough to poyson twenty men. And Lastly, Because all this asked time, Courses were taken by Somerset both to divert all the true means of Overbury's Delivery, and to entertain him with continual Letters, partly with Hopes and Protestations for his Delivery, and partly with other Fa∣bles and Negations: somewhat like some kind of Persons, which keep in a Tale of Fortune-telling, when they have a Felonious Intent to pick their Pockets and Purses. And this is the true Narra∣tion of this Act, which I have summa∣rily recited. Now for the Distribution of the Proofs, there are four Heads to prove you guilty, whereof two are prece∣dent to the Impoysonment; the Third is present, and the Fourth is following or subsequent: For it is in
Proofs, as it is in Lights, there is a direct Light, and there is a Reflecti∣on of Light, and a double Light. The first Head or Proof thereof is, that there was a Root of Bitterness, a Mortal Malice or Hatred mixed, with a deep and bottomless Mischief, that you had to Sir Thomas Overbury. The Second is, That you were the Principal Actors, and had your Hand in all those Acts which did conduce to the Impoysonment, and gave Op∣portunity to effect it, without which, the Impoysonment could never have been, and which could seem to tend to no other end but the Impoysonment. The Third is, That your Hand was in the very Impoysonment it self, that you did direct Poyson, and that you did deliver Poyson, and that you did continually hearken to the Success of the Impoysonment, and that you spur∣ed it on, and called for a Dispatch, when you thought it lingred. And Lastly, That you did all things after the Impoysonment, which may detect a guilty Conscience for the smo∣thering
of it, and the avoiding of Pu∣nishment for it, which can be but of three Kinds. That you suppressed as much as in you was, Testimony, that you did de∣face, destroy, clip and misdate all Writings that might give light to the Impoysonment; and you did fly to the Altar of Guiltiness, which is a Par∣don of Murder, and a Pardon for your self, and not for your self. In this, my Lords, I convert my Speech unto you, because I would have you alter the points of your Charge, and so make your Defence the better: And two of these Heads I have taken to my self, and left the o∣ther to the King's two Serjeants. For the first main part, which is the Mortal Malice coupled with Fear that was in you to Sir Tho. Overbury, altho' you did palliate it with a great deal of Hypocrisie and Dissimulation, even to the very end: I will prove it, my Lord Steward, the Root of this Hate, was that which cost many a Man's Life, that is, fear of discovering Se∣crets;
I say, of Secrets of a dangerous and high Nature; wherein the Course that I will hold shall be this. I will shew that a Breach and Ma∣lice was betwixt my Lord and Over∣bury, and that it burst forth into vio∣lent Threats and Menaces on both sides. Secondly, That these Secrets were not of a Light, but of an High Na∣ture: I will give you the Elevation of the Pole; they were such as my Lord of Somerset had made a ow, that Overbury should never live in Court nor Country; that he had likewise opened so far, that either he or himself must die for it; and of O∣verbury's part, he had threatned, my Lord, that whether he did live or die, my Lord's Shame should never die; but that he would leave him the most dious Man in the World; and fur∣ther, that my Lord was like enough to repent, where Overbury wrote, which was in the Tower of London, e was a Prophet in that. So there is the highest of the Secret.
Thirdly, I will shew you, that al the King's Business was by my Lord put into Overbury's Hands, so as ther is work enough for all Secrets what∣soever, they write them, and lik Princes, they had Confederates, thei Cyphers and their Jurgons. And Lastly, I will shew you, tha it was but a Toy, to say, the Malice was only in respect he spake dishonou∣rably of the Lady, or for doubt o breaking the Marriage, for that Over∣bury was Coadjutor to that Love; and the Lord of Somerset was as deep in speaking ill of the Lady, as Overbury▪ And again, it was too late for the matter; for the Bargain of the Match was then made and past: And if it had been no more than to remove Over∣bury from disturbing the Match, it had been an easie matter to have landed o∣ver Overbury; for which they had a fair way, but that would not serve. And Lastly, periculum periculo vinci∣tur, to go so far as an Impoysonment, must have a deeper Malice than Flashes; for the Cause must have a Proportion in the Effect.
For the next General Head or Proof, which consists in the Acts preparatory, or middle Acts; they are in eight se∣veral Points of the Compass, as I may term them. First, There were divers Devices and Projects to set Overbury's Head on Work to dispatch him and overthow him, plotted between the Countess of Essex, and the Earl of Somerset, and the Earl of Northampton, before they fell upon the Impoisonment: For al∣ways before men fix upon a Course of Mischief, there will be some Reje∣ction; but die he must one way or o∣ther. Secondly, That my Lord of Somer∣set was principal Practicer, I must speak it in a most perfidious manner, to set a Trap and Train for Overbury, to get him into the Tower, without which they durst not attempt the Impoyson∣ment. Thirdly, That the placing of the Lieutenant Yelvis, one of the Impoyson∣ments, was done by my Lord of So∣merset,
Fourthly, That the placing of We∣ston the Underkeeper, who was the principal Impoysoner, and the displa∣cing of Cary; and the doing all this within the space of fifteen Days after Overbury's Commitment, was by the Means and Countenance of my Lord of Somerset; and these were the Active Instruments of the Impoysonment  And this was a business the Ladies Power could not reach unto. Fifthly, That because there must be a Cause of this Tragedy to be Acted, and chiefly, because they would not have the Poysons work upon the sud∣den; and for that the Strength of O∣verbury's Nature, on the very Custom of receiving the Poysons into his Bo∣dy, did overcome the Poysons, that they wrought not so fast; therefore Overbury must be held in the Tower, as well as he was laid in; and as my Lord of Somerset got him into the Trap, so he keeps him in, and abu∣seth him with continual hope of Li∣berty, but diverted all the true and effectual Means of his Liberty, and
makes light of his Sickness and Extre∣mities. 6. That not only the Plot of getting Overbury into the Tower, and the De∣vices to hold and keep him there, but the strange manner of the close keep∣ing of him, being in but for a Con∣tempt, was by the Device and Means of my Lord of Somerset, who denied his Father to see him, denied his Ser∣vants that offered to be shut up close Prisoners with him; and in effect hand∣led it so, that he made him close Pri∣soner to all his Friends, and exposed to all his Enemies. Seventhly, That all the Advertise∣ment the Lady received from time to time, from the Lieutenant or Weston, touching Overbury's State of Body and Health, were ever sent nigh to the Court though it were in Progress, and that from my Lady, such a Thirst and Listening he had to hear that he was dispatched. Lastly, That there was a continual Negotiation to set Overbury's Head on Work, that he should make some to
clear the Honour of the Lady, and that he should be a good Instrument towards her and her Friends; all which was but Entertainment: For your Lordships shall see divers of my Lord of Northampton's Letters, (whose Hand was deep in this Business) written, I must say in dark words and Clauses, that there was one thing pretended, and another thing intended; that there was a real Charge, and somewhat not real, a main Drift and Dissimulatien: Nay further, there be some Passages which the Peers in their Wisdoms will discern, to point directly at the Poy∣sonment.
King James his Pardon to Frances, Countess of Somerset, for Poysoning of Sir Thomas Overbury. James Rex, THe King, to whom, &c. Greet∣ing. Whereas the Fountains, s well of Mercy as Justice, are wont, nd ought to flow from the King's Throne, of which the former of Ju∣tice in the memorable Case of the Death and Murther of Sir Thomas O∣erbury, in a constant and right Course, ath flowed, and is derived from us, nd our Royal Court, for the full Sa∣isfaction of our selves and Subjects: And whereas divers and manifold Causes of our Clemency occur, which ay move our Regal Mercy towards Fr. Carre, late Countess of Somerset, hiefly, that Murther, with so many nd such examples of Justice, before this ime expiated, especially two, where∣of the first respecteth her Father, and Friends, and Family, and Noble Pro∣geny; the other hath respect to her
self, because she freely and willingl confessed her Offence, submitting an prostrating her self at the Altar of ou Mercy, not only during the time  her Imprisonment, but also publickl and in her Trial: And forasmuch a Lord Ellesmere, our Chancellor  England, and being our High Stew∣ard of England in that behalf, and a her Peers, by whose Judgment sh was Convict, at the Humble Petitio of the said Frances publickly made solemnly bound themselves by thei promise to intercede for our Roya Mercy towards her; and first, weigh∣ing with our selves the Nature of he Offence, upon which she was Indict∣ed, Arraigned, Convicted and Con∣demned, viz. that the Process and Judgment were not as of a Principal but as of an Accessary before the Fact and that she seemed to have begun by the Procurement, and wicked Instiga∣tion of certain base Persons. Know ye, that We, moved with Pity, o our special Grace, and of our certain Knowledge, and our meer Motion
Pardoned, Remitted and Remised, and by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, do Pardon, Remise and Release to the aforesaid Frances Carre, late Countess of Somerset, or by whatsoever other Name or Sir-name, or Addition of Name, or of her Sir∣name of Dignity, Place, or Places, the same Frances may be known, esteem∣ed, called or named, or lately was known, esteemed, called or Named, the Slaughter, Killing, Poysoning, Bewitching, Death, Felony, and Fe∣lonious Murthering of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Oerbury, or by whatsoe∣ver Name, Sir-name, or Addition of Name or Sir-name, of Place or Pla∣ces, the said Sir Thomas Overbury may be known, esteemed, called or named, or lately was known, esteemed, called or named by the said Frances, by her self alone, or with any other Person, or Persons whatsoever, howsoever, in what manner soever, whensoever or wheresoever done, committed or per∣petrated, all and all manner of Con∣spiracies, Felonies, Abettments, Pro∣curements, Incitations, Partnerships,
Maintainances, Helps, Hirings, Com∣mands, Councils, Crimes, Transgres∣sions, Wrongs, Offences and Faults whatsoever the aforesaid Death, Slaugh∣ter, Killing, Poysoning, Bewitching, Felony and Felonious Murthering of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Overbury, in any wise, touching or concerning, and the Accessary of them as before the Fact, as after the Fact, and Flight and Flights made thereupon, although the said Frances of the Premisses, or any of the Premisses stand, or not stand Indicted, Impeached, Appellat, Vocat, Rectat, Maneat, Convicted, Condemned, Attainted or Adjudged by the Judgment of her Peers, before the aforesaid High Steward of England, or otherwise howsoever, or thence in time to come, shall appear to be In∣dicted, Impeached, Appellari, Rectari, Vocari, Waviari, Convicted, Condem∣ned, Attainted or Adjudged; and all and singular Indictments, Judgments, Condemnations, Executions, Pains of Death, Pains of Corporal Punishments, and all other Pains and Penalties
whatsoever, of, for, or concerning the Death, Slaughter, Killing, Poyson∣ing, Bewitching, Felonies, and Felo∣nious Murthering of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Overbury, in, upon or against the same Frances, had, made, returned or adjudged, or which we against the same Frances may have in time to come, (Imprisonment at our Royal Pleasure, or Restraint confining to a certain place only excepted) Moreover we do pardon, and by these presents for us, our Heirs and Successors, remit and re∣mise to the aforesaid Frances, all and every Outdowries, which against the same Frances, by reason or occasion of the Premisses or any of them, have been proclaimed, or hereafter shall be proclaimed; and all and all manner of Suits, Complaints, Impeachments and Demands whatsoever, which we against the same Frances for the Pre∣misses, or any of the Premisses have had, have, or in time to come shall have; and the suit of our Peace which appertained to us against the same Frances, or may appertain by reason
of the Premisses, or any of them, and by these Presents, we do give and grant our firm peace to the same Fran∣ces, willing that the same Frances by the Justices, Sheriffs, Escheators, Bay∣liffs, or any other our Ministers, by the occasions aforesaid, or any of them, be not molested, troubled, or in any manner vexed, so as nevertheless she stand right in our Court, if any to∣wards her should speak concerning the Premisses, or any of the Premisses, al∣though the said Frances do not find good and sufficient Security, accor∣ding to the Form of a certain Act of Parliament, of the Sovereign Lord Edward the Third, Late King of Eng∣land, our Progenitor, held at West∣minster, in the Tenth Year of his Reign, for her Good Behaviour from hence∣forth towards us, our Heirs and Suc∣cessors, and all our People: And far∣ther, for us, our Heirs and Successors, of our more ample, special Grace, and out of our certain Knowledge, and our meer motion, we will, and grant by these presents, that these our Let∣ters
Patent of Pardon, and all and sin∣gular the things contained in the same, hall stand and be good, firm, valid, sufficient and effectual in the Law, and from henceforth shal by no means be∣ome void; and that in time to come, he said Frances by any means shall not be Indicted, Arrested, Accused, exed or troubled of, for or concern∣ng the Death, Murther, Slaughter, Poysoning, Bewitching, Felony, or elonious Killing of the aforesaid Sir Thomas Overbury, howsoever, or by whatsoever means the said Sir Thomas Overbury came to his End. The Statute of the Sovereign Lord Richard the econd, Late King of England, in the Thirteenth Year of his Reign, or any other Statute, Act, Ordinance, Pro∣ision, Restriction to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. In Testimo∣y whereof, &c. Witness, &c. Francis Bacon.
Anno Dom. 1621. An. Reg. Jac. 19. An Order of the Privy Council. Whitehall January 18. 1621. Present, Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. L. President. L. M. Hamilton. Earle Marshall. L. Vis. Falkland. Lord Digby. Lord Brook. Mr. Treasurer. Mr. Secret. Calvert▪ Mr. Canc. Excheq▪ Master of the Rolls▪ Whereas his Majesty is Graciously pleased to enlarge and set at Liberty the Earl of Somerset and his Lady, now Prisoners in the Tower of London  and that nevertheless it is thought fit▪ that both the said Earl and his Lady be consined to some convenient place▪ It is therefore, according to his Maje∣sties Gracious Pleasure and Command▪ Ordered, That the Earl of Somerset and his Lady, do repair either to Gray
or Cowsham, the Lord Wallingford's Houses in the County of Oxon, and remain confin'd to one or either of the said Houses, and within three Miles compass of either of the same, until further Order be given by his Majesty. The Duke of Buckingham's Answer to the Spanish Ambassador's Informati∣ons, &c. Anno Dom. 1624. in the 22d. of King James. From the Original, written by Sir Ed∣ward Coke's (then Attorney Ge∣neral) own Hand. MY Master's known Wisdom, Ju∣stice, and constant Favour to∣wards me, attended with Confidence in my own Faith and Innocency, may make it seem both needless and unfit by any Defence, to shew respect to a Libellous Information, which reflecteth wholly upon the Author's Dishonour: For who will not abhor this deplored Art of Calumniating boldly? Because no Aspersion (how false soever) can
be wash'd off so clean, but some dis∣colouring will remain. Besides, tho' Conspiracy be a Work of Darkness, hardly to be cleared, be∣cause, in it, Suspitions go for Proof; yet my Youth and manner of Life, and even that Character of Irregular Freedom which the Accusers set up∣on me, will, by Caesar's known Judg∣ment, acquit me thereof: And there∣fore, if my Personal Disgrace or Dan∣ger were the Marks they aim at, I would stand or fall by his Knowledge of me, who hath made me what I am; and hath both Right and Power to unmake me at his pleasure. But as that Wife King well under∣stood, that when his Brother demand∣ed the Shunamite, he sought not her but the Kingdom; so his Majesties piercing Judgment will discover my Name to be the Mask, Himself, his Royal Children, and his Kingdomes to be the true Subjects of this practi∣cing Complaint. And tho' the Par∣ticulars thereof are forged, partly by Jesuites and their Factions at Home,
and partly by corrupt Ministers and Emissaries Abroad; yet the Workmen that manage them are Publick Mini∣sters of State, of whose Offices and Sway amongst us, we already feel the smart, and have cause to prevent the Danger that may ensue: especially considering, they are Engines of that affected Monarchy, which hath inlar∣ged it self by Negotiations, more than by Arms: And which by advantage of late Treaties, hath not lately inva∣ded the Patrimonies of his Majesties Children, but procured such Liberty and Connivance with his own King∣doms, as they supposed would pro∣duce a Rebellion, not to be appeased without the help of their Arms. And since their Designs (by God's Providence) are now brought to light, what could Malice it self have attemp∣ed more pernicious than by such In∣fectious Breaches, fury-like to stir Jealousies betwixt the King, his Peo∣ple and most obliged Servants; and which is more horrible, betwixt the Bark and the Tree: Nay, betwixt
the Tree it self and all the Branches thereof. Now in respect of these Consequences, altho' my Person be of no Consideration, and happily, by saying nothing, or doing easie Offices, might redeem their Displeasure: Yet where my Duty is so deeply engaged, I, in my Heart, cannot hold; and there∣fore for their Interests for whom by my humble thankfulness and Faith, I ac∣count the chief Hopes and Fruits of my Life; yet so as the World shall bear me Witness, I plead my Cause, the demonstration that his Majesty commanded these Informations; first to be told, and then to be written in the Letters they alledge, whereby they excuse themselves of being Infor∣mers, as of a Practise too base for Per∣sons of their Rank. But the Truth redoundeth only to his Majesties Ho∣nour. For as in their Treaties, they ever drew us on by making us rich and happy in general Promises, so now by such general contriving of strange Conspiracies and Plots among our selves, they endeavour to divert
us from any further Discovery or Prevention of theirs. And this his Majesty perceiving, First pressed them to Particulars, find∣ing their Verbal Charges uncertain, and subject to Inlargment, or Restri∣ction, at the Peoples Pleasure: he then commanded them to be written so as now they are fixed, and no more in their Power; but may be examined and judged by all men of Understand∣ing, to whose Construction and Cen∣sure, I willingly submit both them and my Answer. For what can be the Danger, When in the very En∣trance of my Accusation they acknow∣ledge, that the matters objected a∣gainst me, are not such as may be clea∣red by Judicial Proofs? And must his Majesty then take them merely upon Trust? Indeed Ambassadors have an Honourable Trust for their Masters Affairs; and if they obtain a like Trust with those Princes to whom they are imployed; what will they not persuade? Shall not the Restitu∣tion of the Palatinate, the Marriage
and Dispensation, and the Portion be made Articles to be added to our Creed? But the Original Sin and Root of all Treasons and Offences laid to my Charge is, that by eating the for∣bidden Fruit in Spain, mine Eyes have been opened to discover the Evil as well as the Good; and so to trust them no further than they deserve. And yet I will not here take them too short, for they say they have Wit∣nesses; but such as for fear of my Pow∣er do withdraw themselves; such as dare not speak and deliver their minds, though commanded by the King; and though thereby they suffer the best King in the World to be brought in∣to Extremities; and such as neither will nor dare speak, if first they be not freed from Jealousie and Fear, yet these they pronounce to be his Maje∣sties Most Faithful Subjects. Surely of our Faith they cannot be which holdeth them Traytors, Faithless and Perjured, that prefer not the Safety, and Honour of their Prince and Coun∣try, before the Fear and Respect of
any person whomsoever: And if this Fear proveth them to be of their Faith, how can they think, the En∣tring into the Ambassador's House, to be so heinous, a matter as here is pre∣tended? Doth not all the World know the Liberty they give; and which, as Papists, have taken beyond Examples in this kind? They are not then Mass-Papists, but perhaps of Higher Rank, having Place and Access to deliver their Minds to the King if they durst. And such only are worthy their Nomination, and his Majesties Audi∣ence in Matters of this Weight. His Majesty therefore, to go beyond Craft and Malice, hath, in his Royal Wisdom and Justice, by a new Example, per∣mitted even the great men, which by their ordinary Access might be sub∣ject to this Scandal, to be examined upon Oath. And what the Accusers gained thereby, let them boast, and shew reason (if they can) why the Ho∣nour done me in their Answer, should not give both his Majesty and the
World Satisfaction on my behalf; and why they themselves, (till they pro∣duce other Authors) should not be reputed the Inventors of these Scan∣dals and Reports? And whereas they say in in the end, that there wanteth not means to free these honest Men (as they call them) from Fear and Di∣strust: Indeed the Inquisition of Spain is said to have found the way, First to Imprison, and keep close, and so en∣courage Accusers, if such be not rea∣dy found, then to force men by Ex∣tremities to be Accusers of themselves. But howsoever this way hath prevail∣ed to Exterminate from their Country that which they call Heresie, and we True Religion: Yet considering no other Nation approveth it as Lawful and Just, I hope I shall not be the first Example of planting it amongst us. But they say further, though his Subjects durst not, yet the Ambassa∣dors would have informed his Majesty against me, if any free Audience could in my Absence have been ob∣tained. And why in my Absence?
Or why should not the Ambassador of so Great a King accuse me to my Face? Or how could they without Dishonour to their Master and them∣selves, traduce me behind my Back? And why did my Industrious seeking to be present, argue my Fear and Dif∣fidence of Conscience, and not rather an assured Confidence in my Truth? But this (say they) is not to be done, save only where the King is of small Experience or under Age, or of no Judgment, and the Favorite wise, cir∣cumspect, and of great Judgment and Experience; and not in this Case where every thing is contrary. Whereunto I answer, that I am most willing to lay my Honour at my Master's Feet in the Dust; so as the World be sensible with great∣er Indignation of this Jesuit-school-wit that by the Figure of Opposing, my Master to me, and him to other Princes, seemingly flattereth, really staineth the Honour both of our and their Kings. For ours, the Freedom of Access, Discourse, Conversation and Enter∣tainment he giveth to all Ambassadors,
is such a Singular Glory to all his Roy¦al Abilities, and Gracious Disposition as no Favourite can Eclipse, no Car∣per can blemish: And for theirs, wha Power Favourites have had in their Accesses and all Affairs, every Ma knoweth, that knoweth ought o Spain: And must we therefore apply the Use and Honour of their Favou∣rites, to the disabling of their King▪ As unexperienced and precipitate as they make me, I know my Duty bet∣ter; and do well understand, that Fa∣vourites do then vanish, when their Masters Greatness by them becometh less: Yet this is not all; for they tell us, that his Majesty is Most Wise, o Great Experience, and the best King in the World. And this they repeat, that with the Sugar of these Epithites they may cover their Bitter Pills▪ For they forbear not withal to say, that he suffereth a Precipitate Novice to be too Powerful with him, that his Most Faithful Subjects dare not deli∣ver their Minds unto him: And that thereby he is brought into Great
Extremities, and doth many unfit things. And are these Figures to be used to Princes? Did the Ministers of Great Monarchs thus by Deeds confute Words? And am I the Cat they whip, to make the King believe I draw him over the Pool? This savoureth not of that Modesty which I may challenge to my self, if I acknowledge those de∣fects they charge me withal. And yet when they have laid me as low as they please, they shall find my weak Un∣derstanding supported sufficiently with my Master's Wisdom: And for my Ex∣perience, though I may assume some∣what by so many Years Trust and Im∣ployment under him; yet somewhat more I have learnt in Spain, to be put in practise when my Service shall be com∣manded in those Parts. Notwithstand∣ing I confess ingeniously, that what I do amiss, proceedeth from my own Preci∣pitation and Error. And what I do well, is by my Master's Wisdom and Instru∣ction, for which I owe him more, than for his great Favour, and the Fortunes
I enjoy. But for these Actions, which under the Veil of my Name, they en∣deavour to make odious to their Par∣ty, I profess, that as they are really his Majesties or the Princes; so they are well approved by the chiefest and best part of Christendom, as tending to the Honour of his Wisdom, the Good of the Prince, the Happiness o the People, and the Settling of this State in their Posterity for ever. For the better clearing whereof, I will proceed to a particular Examina∣tion of those Extremities to which they say his Majesty is now brought. The First is the Enmity of their most powerful King by my industrious Pro∣curement. And why his Enmity? Be∣cause the Treaties are dissolved. And is this a necessary Consequence, that either we must suffer them by Trea∣ties to undermine and compass all their ends, or else undergo their Enmity, and (as they afterwards interpret it) a most cruel War? And is not this a Proclamation to all the World, that they aspire to such an absolute Monar∣chy,
as so many Books Stories, Dis∣courses, and the general Complaints of all Princes and States have long char∣ged them with? And indeed, as the true Character of their Religion is Persecution and Blood, so the true mark of their Empire is Oppression and War: Yet connot these Threat∣nings amuse or disturb the Religious and peaceable Resolutions of our King, Prince and People. They hate War, they pray against it, they love Peace, they prosper by it; and therefore en∣deavour by all means to preserve it: But if they be assailed, they cannot but remember how God's Mighty Hand, by a Late Queen of peace, brought down her Enemies greatness and pride, to acknowledge the Sovereignty of a despised people, which ever since hath resisted and ballanced their power: And therefore they cannot but hope, that the same Arm by a King of peace, shall in the end prevail with them to entertain a safe peace upon more equal Terms; and then all men shall have cause to applaud that Wisdom and
Resolution which these men are trou∣bled with, and therefore speak a∣gainst. The next Extremity they complain of is the calling of a Parliament by my procurement, and to my ends, where∣in the Honour they do me is more than I am capable of. And for the Jealou∣sie they would raise of making my self Head of that Council, or the Pu∣ritan Faction; my Master will laugh at it, and thereby know they want probable Matter to object against my Faith; which when they question, they assail me in my Strength, and shall find my Deeds as ready and con∣fident Justifications as my Words. But it is not my Faith or Aspiring, they here would bring in doubt; they have a further Strain: For as before they made my Name a Fume to disquiet the Head; now they make it a Poy∣son to carry Infection into the Bo∣dy. For, What is the Parliament, but the Body of the Kingdom? And why do they stain it with the hateful Name
of Puritan, but to make it odious to the King? Indeed such Names help the Jesuits in Disputes of Religion, when they are driven from all real Defences; and would they practice this deplo∣able Art in the Matters of State, if they were not in his Case that called Christ Galilean, when he was van∣quished by his Power? For who knoweth not the Upper House of Parliament consisteth of all the Pre∣ates and Peers, and the Nether House of near 500 Knights and Burgesses, Elected and sent out of all Parts of he Kingdom? And are all these Pu∣itans? Do my Plots receive better En∣ertainment amongst them than with he Council of State? And doth this re∣roachful Comparison honour or dis∣onour those Able and Wise Men who are here presented to be well ffected to their Cause? but their end as no Man's Honour: It was to break he Parliament, by setting Faction a∣ongst the Members of both Hou∣es, as well as with the Head; and their and is most evident in misrepresenting the Case.
For where they say, that almost e∣very one of the Council both liked and allowed of the Propositions of the Catholick King, and found therein no Cause to dissolve the Treaty. They conceal that the Proposition was then made for the Palatinate alone, suppo∣sing the Treaty of the Marriage should proceed: And in that Case it migh seem reasonable to very Wise Men that the other Treaty should not b broken off. But in Parliament where both Parties come in Question together, not one of those Able and Wise Men (for they were all Member of the one House or the other) dis∣sented from the Council of dissolving them both. The Altars of Provoca∣tion may then be objected to Wor∣shippers of Saints, or to them that ap∣peal to their Idol at Rome, and no to Us, who acknowledge no Sove∣reign upon Earth but our King, to whom both Council of State and Parliament yield Odedience in all things. How then may it be said, tha the Parliament is now above the King?
Or how can they hope that such shame∣less and impious Suggestions can make a prudent and good King jealous, and doubtful of a most obsequious and du∣tiful People? Especially at this time, when it may truly be said, That the Spirit of Wisdom in the Heart of the King, hath wrought the Spirit of U∣nity in the Hearts of his Subjects, which made the Success more happy than former Parliaments have had. And this indeed is the matter which the Devil and they storm at. For who can doubt that they and their Faction cannot endure without much trouble of Mind (as they con∣fess) to see the weightiest Affairs, and of greatest Moment, to be now refer∣red to the Censure of the Parliament, when their fair Promises and Pretences can no longer prevail? Yet let them tell us, what greater and more Ho∣nourable Senate they have seen in Spain or elsewhere. Besides, Do not the very Writs for the Summons of Parliament, express, That is for the great and weighty Af∣fairs
of the Kingdom? And have not our greatest and wisest Kings hereto∣fore referred Treaties of Leagues, of Marriages, of Peace, and War, and of Religion it self, to the Consultati∣ons of their Parliaments? Those then that take upon them to undervalue this High Court, do but expose their own Judgments to Censure and Con∣tempt; not knowing, that Parlia∣ments, as they are the Honour and Support, so they are the Hand-maids and Creatures of our Kings, inspi∣red, formed and governed by their Power. And if Charles the Fifth o France, by his Parliament of Paris, recovered a great part of that King∣dom from this Crown; and if Suc∣ceeding Kings there, by the Assistance of that Court, redeemed the Church from the Tyranny of the Pope, We have no cause to doubt, that our King, by the Faithful Advice, Assi∣stance, and Service of his Parliament, shall be able both to recover the Pa∣latinate, which they here make so difficult, and to protect our Neigh∣bours
and Allies; and either to settle such a Peace as we really desire, or to execute such Vengeance as God's Justice, and their Sins shall, for their Ambition assuredly draw upon them. But they proceed, and tell the King, that it is said, I have propounded ma∣ny things to the Parliament in his Name, without his Advice or Consent, nay, contrary to his Will. And is not this to abuse the Ears and patience of a Prince, to tell him many things are said, and yet neither specifie the Mat∣ters nor the Men? Or is not this to dally with my Name by Hear-says, when with a harsh and incoherent Transition, they suddenly fall upon he Prince, who is the next true Mark their Malice shooteth at: And when Malice it self cannot but ac∣knowledge his Ingenuity and great Gifts; and that in all things he shew∣th himself an obedient and good on; yet these Attributes they will eeds qualifie with a Nevertheless, which cannot charge me as with a ault, that I am confident in his Fa∣vour:
Or that I therefore despise all men, to which Vice of all other my Nature is least inclin'd; but indeed taxeth the Prince at least with participation of my ill Intentions, by suffering me to make those persons subject to my Will, which are most conformable to His. Whom they mean I know not; but pray God, that those Men they thus recommend to his Highness's neare Trust, prove not more dangerous to his Person, than I have hitherto been refractory to his Will. But having shot this Bolt, they come back again to me as to their Stalk∣ing-horse, to chuse a new Mark. And first, for a preparative to the Prince Attention, they wish that my Action were directed to his Good. Then t give at least some Varnish to thei Work, they tell him, that good me believe (meaning such as believe the with an implicite Faith) that I (wh have imbroiled the Match with Spain will not be less able to break any o∣ther his Highness should affect: i which Speech, if a Man will dive t
the Bottom of their Malice, he must descend into Hell. But for the Match with Spain, can any man believe, that his Majesty sent his Son; that he went in Person; that he both trusted Spain so far, and did that Kingdom so much Honour, and yielded to such Conditions; or that I underwent that Hazard and Charge, and pressed their King; importuned his Favorite and Council, and subjected my self to so many Indignities; or that so great a Fleet even into their own Ports, with Minds to interrupt or embroil, or not rather to remove all Impediments, to asten the Marriage, and to bring ome the Infanta which was promi∣sed with as great Assurance as words could express? But they will say, that his Earnestness and Haste, was it that disturbed all the Business; and so I hink it did: And I confess withal, hat it was our End and Endeavour o put them from their Shifts; and to ring to an Issue, that Treaty, under he Delay whereof we had suffered so uch. And I profess further, that
the Honour and good Success of this Intention, do properly belong to his Majesty and the Prince, by whose Wisdom and Resolution a desperate Remedy was so well applied to a de∣sperate Disease. But they say, That howsoever my Endeavours might at first concur to hasten the Match; yet after the Prin∣cess Palatine had written Letters un∣to me, and had sent her Secretary to confirm a Marriage betwixt her So and my Daughter: Then I instantly caused the Prince to revoke his Pro∣curation, and turn'd all upside down And here is revealed another mystica Use they would make of my Name to divide Father and Daughter, Bro∣ther and Sister, Master and Servant and to break all the Bonds of Natur and Affection, by Jealousie of Stat And can the Devil attempt more But what Proof? Nay, what Appea∣rance do they shaddow this withal Forsooth, by telling, that they kno in Spain, that the same day tho Letters were delivered, the Revoc∣tion
was pronounced; but how knew they that? Or do they not know in Spain, that the Prince himself opened and read all the Letters, and heard all Addresses. And by what Inspection could they know more than the Prince? Except those innocent Letters were like indented Pictures, which shew to one's view a fair, and to another's a foul Face? Is it not strange, that Malice it self is not satiated with the Distresses of those Worthy Princes, except it bereave them not only of necessary Support and Relief; but also of that Love and good Opinion whereby they must subsist? And to what other End tendeth that careful Admonition to the King, to takeheed both to himself and to the Prince? My Precipitation, my Ambition and my Popularity, are but the Fringe and Shadow: The supplanting of these Princes the Diversion of the Af∣fection of their Father and Brother, the bereaving them of all Assistance and Comfort; and finally, the Distur∣bing of all our Affairs, are the true
Ends of these Fore-warnings, and false pretended Fears: For my Ambition and Popularity, how appeared it in Parliament? by casting (say they) all Odious Matters upon the King; and arrogating the thanks of all things acceptable to my self, and by the Ti∣tle given me to be Redeemer of my Country: Such Generalities are ever the Subterfuges of deceit, But let them instance in any Particular, either of odious Matter there propounded, and cast upon the King, or of plausi∣ble, whereof all the Honour was not his; and that with greater Demonstra∣tion of Reverence and Thankfulness, than in former Parliaments hath been seen. For the Title, it is true, that by our Journey into Spain, we were brought out of Darkness into Light; and the Discovery of former Inconve∣niencies, and future Dangers of the Treaties was applauded in Parliament, as no less than a Work of Redempti∣on to the State. But therein, all that I assumed, or was attributed to me, was the Happiness to have been un∣der
the Prince's Government, whose Wisdom in discovering the Insincerity of their Pretences, in refusing those things which were utterly inconveni∣ent, in yielding to such, as being pre∣judicial, were corrigible afterwards; and in qualifying the rest to a tolera∣ble Construction, was the only means of redeeming our Safety, and settling our Affairs. And for his Majesty, who hath heard of his Name that can doubt that his deep Understanding and Experience was the true Foun∣tain from which all our Directions did proceed? Then how can I be charged with Envy against the great Good of Chri∣stendom, and especially of England and Spain? When all the World shall understand, that the King and Prince under God, and by his Blessings, are the chief means to rescue all Christen∣dom, especially England, from the U∣surpation of that pretended Empire, which they call the Good; but is tru∣ly the Bondage and Misery of both—Having thus served their Turns with
my Name against his Majesty, against the Prince, against the Parliament, a∣gainst his Royal Daughter, and her Race; who could think it possi∣ble their Malice could strain higher? Yet their Master-piece is behind. And whereas their former Suggestions were grounded upon, they say here, They know in Spain, and such Shaddows of Testimonies at large: For this they now hatch, because it is monstrous in it self; and hath nothing in Being, possible to ground upon. They lay a strange Foundation upon a bare Pretence, that many speak ominously fearing the worst; but withal, know∣ing that his Majesties Wisdom cannot be wrought upon by Popular Appre∣hensions, they say farther, that he that told it, did the Office of a good Man, both to God, his Majesty and the Prince. Yet surely, this was not the good Man of David, that imagineth no Evil, and telleth no Untruth; but such an one as St. John calleth the Ac∣cuser of the Brethren, or as Doeg the Edomite, that told the King, how Da∣vid
his Son-in-law, and the Priest of Abimelech had conspired against him: For what saith this good man? For∣sooth, that the Puritans (if they do desire a King, which willingly they do not) do not at all desire the Most Illustrious Prince, but the Prince Pa∣latine, whose Scout Mansfield is, what∣soever he pretends: And lest any man might imagine, that they mean Factious Puritans, which are now no considera∣ble Number amongst us: In the next Clause, for Explanation, they menti∣on the Fury of the Parliament; and soon after, the Reproach of the whole English Nation. But why then do they not call us by the old name of Pro∣testants? Because that is now a Name of too much allay, and could have bred no distaste in the King; but knowing what he suffered by Puritans else∣where, to make the whole Nation o∣dious both to King and Prince, they turn us Puritans all at once, though that Faction be more hated and sup∣prest amongst us, than in all the World besides. And what is then our Ruin?
First, In General, That we are not willing to be subject unto Kings. Secondly, In Particular, That we desire not the Prince, but the Palsgrave to succeed. For the First, Let them know, that these Kingdoms of Great Britain, are beyond Comparison more Antient than the Kingdoms of Spain; and yet no Story reputeth, that they ever had or desired, or were capable of any Go∣vernment but Regal: And the Reli∣gion we profess, binds our Conscien∣ces more firmly to obey, honour, sup∣port and defend our Kings against all hteir Enemies than Popish Religion can do: And this they will find to be true when they attempt ought a∣gainst us, For the Second, I will not be so vain, as to discourse of the Prince, or his Interest in the good Opinion of the People. This only I say for his Religion, they made him a Confessor in Spain, as their Faction long since made his Royal Father in his Honor a Martyr: And for his Carriage, he
converseth with us daily, and know∣eth us much better than any stranger can; and therefore we trust his own Experience and good Opinion of us, against all they can suggest. And for the Prince Palatine, we love his Na∣tion, from which we were extracted; and we love his Religion, which was the Ground of the Alliance with him; and we much esteem that Noble Prin∣cess by whom he participateth, with that Duty and Affection which from the King, as the Root, in due pro∣portion disperseth it self in all the Branches; yet so, as whensoever they shall divide from the Head, or the Body, they cannot but know, that their Moisture will dry up. And for Count Mansfield, it is worth the ob∣serving, how they labour to dissem∣ble, and divert that Fear of him which they cannot have for us, but indeed for themselves; least he, who hath already so troubled them in Ger∣many, should disturb them elsewhere. Now whereas they conjure King and Prince, to foresee the Vengeance of
God, provoked by my Practises, and the Fury of Parliament, for Testimo∣nies and Libels against the Honour of Spain: How much more Cause have they both, and we all, to consider and praise God's Miraculous Good∣ness, in preserving their Persons, and blessing their Endeavours in so happy a Discovery and Prevention of those Dangers, which the Treaties would have brought upon our Religion and State? And thereby rest assured, that he will still bless where they curse, and establish the Scepters of the De∣fenders of his Faith, and in powring his Vengeance upon the Beast, and the Enemies of his Truth. And if the Testimonies published against Spain, and believed in Parliament, were not true, why do they not con∣vince them and satisfie them, and sa∣tisfie the World? And for those bit∣ter and ignominious Libels they men∣tion, why can they not be read, with∣out Ignominy to our Nation, as well as Pasquin's in Rome, and like Libels in France, Germany, and other Nati∣ons
with their Reproach? Especially considering, as the Spaniards of all People, are most pursued with Wri∣ting of this kind, so the English of all other, do punish Libels with most Se∣verity and Rigour. But that which followeth, is yet more remarkable: It is apparent (say they) that the League is broken, and Histories will witness it: Surely those Histories must be of their Writing; for true histories cannot record any breach on our part. The Treaties are indeed dissolved. First, materially by them, and then formally by us. But are those Treaties any Articles of the League? Or is it in the Power of any Subject (be he never so willful) to break the Leagues of Princes without due Justice demanded and refused? But now the Ambassadors, publick Ministers of State, have made such Declaration: How far that extendeth his Majesty may consider; and whe∣her it be not an Advantage cunningly ought to countenance the first blow? And the rather, because immediately
after this peremptory Declaration, which may seem a degree to a De∣nunciation of War, they use all the Oratory to lull his Majesty asleep, and to persuade both him and the Prince, to prefer Peace and Quiet ever before their Kingdoms, which thereby may be lost. And what Confidence is this? Do they think their Learning sufficient, to teach my Master to understand his own Note, who can much better teach them that Pacifici beati, are not pas∣sive but Active? And that the Swor maketh Peace, both in Governmen and in War, by supporting Justice wherein the happiness of all Society doth consist. But whosoever con∣strueth the Speeches of these men by the litteral sence, cometh short o their meaning: For what are all these specious Adornings of his Majesty and the Prince in the Long Robes o Peace; but a Figurative menacing them with the Consequences of War And to see what the Love of the one or fear of the other may happily
work, by Peace, i. e. by a quiet sub∣mitting the Marriage of the Palatinate and the safety of the Kingdoms and Allies to the Devotion of Spain. First, His Majesty may believe his Symbol (as they say) is verified in his Person; and that he is extolled and admired through the World: Or that other∣wise he shall enjoy neither Happiness nor Honour. And Secondly, That the Prince can no other way succeed peaceably into the Hereditary Possession of these Kingdoms, or the Honour of his Fa∣ther; or shew that he is indeed of his Blood, or beareth him Love (as if all these should be questioned) if he do not entertain the same Peace with those Princes whose Alliances his Ma∣jesty hath so well procured and deser∣ved, meaning, by giving them way to work out all their Ends: And this being the sence clouded up in their unjointed Applications; all they gain thereby, is to give these due Acknow∣ledgments to his Majesty and the Prince.
First, That their Royal Dispositions and Endeavours ever tended to peace. Secondly, That of themselves they intended no alteration without vio∣lent Motions, on the other part: And, Thirdly, Those which force them, if at the very Entrance into War they want a just Cause; as the Jews called for Vengeance against themselves, so these men truly prophesie, that they shall have their Success. Hitherto I have been brought upon the Stage, to play other mens parts. Now fol∣loweth my own Indictment in more particular Terms. First, Concerning my Carriage of the Negotiation in Spain: And, Secondly, For my Personal Actions and Behaviour. For the Spanish Business, because greater Persons are still involved in their Censure, they make their way (as Poets do in Tragedies) by raising me as a Ghost, to possess King and Prince, and to terrifie all men that op∣pose my Designs. Surely, I think, they smiled, when they writ this passage:
For they cannot think me so predo∣minant, nor so terrible a Creature. But to satisfie the World in those four first Questions which contain the Sub∣stance of all the Business in Spain; I will briefly as I can, repeat the Pro∣ceedings which have been related in Parliament more at large, and justifi∣ed by Letters and Records; and al∣lowed, not only by the most tempe∣rate men they speak of, but by gene∣ral and unanimons Votes, from which no one did dissent. But First, having the honour to be of my Master's inward Council in these things, I must testifie to the Renown of his Wisdom, and especially of his Goodness; that as in the Marriage of his Daughter, his chief Intention was to settle and corroborate the Party of our Religion where it is most impro∣ved; so by the Marriage of his Son, in some powerful House of the other Religion, he sought not only the strengthening and assuring is own Peace and Succession, but the Univer∣sal Good of all Christendome: and a
means to qualifie by the Cooperation of those Princes, the Spiritual Usur∣pations, whereby, in time, some bet∣ter accord in the Differences of Reli∣gion might be made. From these In∣tentions, and that special Respect and Affection his Majesty ever bore to the most Illustrious House of Austria, the former motion for the Marriage of Prince Henry (who is with God) did proceed. But that brake (as the World knoweth) by incongruous Propositions on either part. Since then an Overture being entertain'd in France for Prince Charles that succeed∣ed: And Notice thereof being gotten in Spain, both the Duke of Lerma, and their Ambassador the now Count Gondomer, were imploy'd to divert that Match, by negotiating a Second Treatie for a Daughter of that King∣dom: And that with such Protestati∣ons for the accommodating of all for∣mer differences of Religion and State, and for so great a Portion, and with so Royal Conditions, that his Majesty therupon was persuaded to give Instru∣ctions
to that purpose, to his Ambassa∣dor in Spain; wherupon they proceeded, not only to Treat and to Article, but even to the granting of Commissions, and powers to contract: And all this while, no Stop, no Difficulty was pro∣posed, which they made not light and easie to pass over: Nay, the Ingage∣ments were so potent, that the Wars of Bohemia then happening, upon con∣fidence that their Forces should not attempt the Palatinate, his Majesty forbore to assist or countenance his own Son-in-law: And thereupon en∣sued the loss of the Battle of Prague, the disbanding of the Union; and un∣der colour of restoring, the Conquest of that Country, and the disposing of the Electorate to another Prince: and in the mean time to add Scorn to Loss, his Majesty was drawn with great Charge, to send Ambassadors to Prague, to Vienna, to Heidelbergh, to Bruxels, to mediate for Truce, for Ces∣sation of Arms, or for Peace, as best suited for their Advantage; whilst by cross Letters, or secret Intelligences,
they cooled or kindled their promised Mediation, and kept us still in appe∣tite and hope, by our own Ministers and their assuring us of the Match. At length the Treaty at Brussels gave the first Jealousie, that their Intenti∣ons were indirect. And thereupon his Majesty sent Porter into Spain, with a peremptory Direction to return in ten days; and to bring express An∣swer from the King, whether, accor∣ding to the promise made by his Mi∣nisters, he would cause the Palatinate to be restored: Or if by Mediation, he could not prevail, whether he would joyn in Arms to recover it by force; or at least, give Passage for the King's Forces thither. The Re∣turn brought by Porter, was cold and unsatisfactory; and withal delayed longer than here was expected: And this moved the Prince more seriously to consider, how by holding us in Treaty, they had gotten full Possessi∣on of his Sisters Estates; they had scat∣tered and broken most of our Allies; they would in short time eat out our
Neighbours; And every day gained upon us in matter of Religion. And this wrought in him that Princ∣ly and Heroical Resolution, to go in person into Spain, either with Honour and Contentment of both Nations to consummate that Marriage which his Heart was so constantly set upon; or else to free both his Father and Him∣self from being any longer abused with delays. This Counsel his Highness was pleased to communicate with me, and to make me his Servant to break it to the King, which I did accordingly. And His Majesty after long and deep deli∣beration, was contented to give way, and commanded me to wait upon him in his Journey. So we undertook it with that Adventure, Charge, Danger, and Travel both of Body and Mind, which I need not speak of, and yet with that Courage and Alacrity, and with that Constancy, which the con∣fidence of Love, and the hope of good Success do usually bring forth in young men. And to shew how great this de∣monstration was of His Majesty and
the Princes affections and desires to settle a sure interest and corresponden∣cy with that Royal House. I know not how to express by any parallel on Earth, I must do it by looking up to a Transcendent in Heaven, whence the Father sent his Son, and his Son gave himself for their love to Mankind. So at the first, the great Obligati∣on put hereby upon all Spain, was ac∣knowledged and magnified, by their Oracle Conde d' Olivares; who in thankfulness concluded, it must needs be a Match; and that the two Kings of Great Britain and Spain must part the world betwixt them: But this was the flourish of a mind which found it self surprized, and was not yet resolved in what mould to cast it self. For the very next day, upon se∣cond thoughts, he mixed a specious welcome, with a great deal more strangeness, and with a disavowing of all that was past, & spake of the match, as of a new thing; forgetting even the Laws of Hospitality and Honour, pro∣pounded an uncouth Condition to the
Prince of changing his Religion; as if all former agreed Articles by the Ad∣vantage of this honour done unto them, had been utterly disanull'd. And when the Prince's brave constancy put them from this hold, then they cast all upon the Popes Dispensation, which must be expected before any thing could be done. But in the mean time the Prince being in their power, what Difficul∣ties? what Jealousies? what Fars were raised up? what Arts of Divines, what Councels, what Persuasions, and what Engines were used to batter a young, but well resolved Heart, were too long to repeat. At length the Dis∣pensation came clogg'd both in matter and manner contrary to agreement, and new Conditions were also stood upon, either to draw the Prince, by accepting them, under their yoke, or by refusing to make him the Author of the breach. Notwithstanding by his care, wisdom, and patience, and also with some resent∣ment and shew of Resolution to depart unsatisfied; their expectation was gone beyond: and thereupon the Match
brought again to some tollerable terms tho' advantageous on their part, ye such, as thereupon the sending away o the Infanta with the Prince, & a Blank for the restoring the Palatinate were again promised and assured, if these Conditions might be ratified in Eng∣land, which was all they now required Insomuch that even in Spain, it was then believed, and much rejoyced at, that the Match was fully concluded on all parts. But it is to be noted, that this fair shew was made whilst Mansfield and Brownsweek stood entire in the field, for after they were broken, tho' all was done in England according to their de∣sires, yet then they found it too late to send the Infanta till the Spring; they complained that their Rebels in the Low-Countryes were served by our men; they required our assistance to reduce them to obedience; and the matter of Religion was meanly insisted on; so that now the Prince could not but un∣derstand that he was but juggled with, as himself has declared; and therefore he began to make way for his return,
which was all the hope left him to make his a good Voyage. And because they till bare him in hand, that they inten∣ed that Mach, he was still contented o pursue the Treaty; so as the resti∣ution of the Palatinate, which before ad been assumed as a divided Article, ight now go hand in hand; and to that effect he left the power of Despon∣atories with the Ambassadors, which was afterwards restrained, and renew∣ed, and finally revoked, as the confi∣dent or cold Answers out of Spain did require. And this is the substance of that Negotiation. The other particulars delivered in Parliament, how they said and unsaid, promised and denied, remembred and forgot, and plaid fast and loose at their pleasures, and what indignities they put upon us, I take no more pleasure to repeat, than I did to suffer. It sufficeth that by this which is said, the Questions propounded by the Informers are an∣swered: First, who they were that gave the first cause of distaste. Secondly, whe∣ther the Complaints against the King
of Spain be true. Thirdly, whether th King of Spain did desie to give satisfa∣ction to the Prince. And, Fourthly whether he did faithfully endeavour the Marriage? And if in any of these points any scruple doth remain, for th perfect discovery of their intentions an proceedings, the Letters produced by the Conde D'Olivares, and read in Par∣liament will justifie my Report; being (as it were) a Manifest from that King and his Councel, that they never in∣tended the Match, nor held it lawfu or convenient for that State, and the King therein requiring some other way to be found, to give without the Match contentment to the Prince; whereby I make as little doubt of that Kings own Royal disposition and affection towards the Prince for all personal respects, as I do of the insincerity of his Ministers in all their proceedings. In the rest of my Indictments, the In∣terrogatories which followed concer for the most part my Behaviour to∣ward the Prince, whereunto I will not answer by Recrimination, tho' I have a
ge field, nor by way of Defence; d for these Reasons, First, in Persons hich they now, & I then did instance, e reflexion of our faults upon the ho∣ur of our Masters maketh the pub∣hing as offensive as the Facts. Se∣ndly, by giving Answer unto them at Charge but by Reports, I shall eak my Duty to the Prince, who est knoweth the Truth in these things ey object; and if there had been cause ould have called me to an account. nd, Thirdly, my purpose is not (as I id) to Apologize further than may ncern the interest of that Cause which rough my sides they have laboured  wound. For my self, I know well, at I shall stand or fall in the opini∣ns of wise men, neither by the slan∣ers of any, be they never so great, or by my verbal Justifications, be they ever so confident; but rather by the ctions and Carriage of my Life, my irth, Breeding and Fortune, which ay happily, raise me above base Im∣utations, and also give hopes of A∣endment, if in ought I have done
amiss. As for the Conde D'Olivar when he chargeth me with breach  Faith towards him, I will make hi such Answer as may give him just co¦tent. And for revealing the Secre Treaty for Holland, I did it not wit out leave from the Prince, nor till might appear that it was entertaine on our parts, but for the Discovery  the advantages they sought. And this is all the Answer I wi make to these unworthy Reproache raked out of the Channel to be ca in my Face, only to Disfigure m and then serve their turns with me i what shape they please: And so ha¦ving used me (as I said) for thei Stalking-horse, from under my Sha¦dow, to shoot at other Games, the tell me they wish me well, and tur me off to Grass: yet in requital of thei favour, I will give them this Advic before I go: That the best way fo them and me to do the Christian worl good, which they seem to desire, is t persuade our Masters to moderatio and peace, and not to busie our selve
ith malitious aspersions upon the A∣ions of Princes, or Parliaments or overnments wherein we have no skill. or which fault of theirs, I presume their ommission giveth no warrant. And o' my Master should think it punish∣ent enough for them, thus to disho∣our themselves, and justifie mens com∣aints against their unthankfulness & alice, where they have found so much espect; yet let them take heed, lest me occasion may not fall out, to move heir own Masters to question them r this scandalous example, which annot but reflect upon his own Go∣ernment and State, as having no pre∣edent in any former time. Transcribed from the Original written with Sir Edward Coke (Lord Chief Justice) his own hand. FINIS.
Books newly Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon withou Temple-Barr. THE Moors Baffled, being a Di¦course concerning Tangier, espe¦cially when it was under the Earl  Teviot, by which you may find wha Methods and Government is fitest t secure that place against the Moor Written by a Learned person long r¦sident in that place. 40 6d. Thomae Hobbes Angli Malmsburiens Vita: being an exact account of M Hobbes, of the Books he wrote and th Times and Occasion of their writing Of the Books against him, and the Authors. Of his Conversation and A¦quaintance; being a full Account  his whole Life, part wrote by him se in Latine, the rest by Dr. N. B. in 8 price 5 s. The Institution of General History, O The History of the World. In two V¦lumes in Folio. By Dr. W. Howell Cha¦cellor of Lincoln. Historical Collections of the Four la Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth. B Haywood Townsend, Esq;
