D1622 R34424 14402893 102319
A DISCOURSE TOUCHING THE ADDRESSES OR PRESENTMENTS TO THE KING AGAINST THE Association. WITH An Account of the Association made and confirmed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. LONDON, Printed for J. Hither, MDCLXXXII.
A Discourse touching the Addresses or Presentments to the King against the Association, &c. AN Association Traiterously designed, to subvert the Monarchy, and to disturb the Peace and Quiet of the Govern∣ment, doth also tend to over throw the Protestant Religion, as by Law Esta∣blished; such an one detected, and by Law manifest∣ly brought to Light, is to be abhorred by every one, as a Loyal Subject, and as a good Christian. But when in the King's Court of Justice, there is legally declared none such designed or on foot in or∣der to such wicked Enterprizes, then an Imputation of such an one against any Person or Persons that are cleared, is but an injurious Imputation of Guilt, especially considering the known integrity of a Pro∣testant Jury; not one, but several men of spotless Conversations, as also of known abilities, as to their Parts and Estates too, and therefore most unlikely to be subject to Bribery, and thereby to sell Justice. And any person or person so clear'd by Law, and yet lie under the imputation of Traitors and Rebels, from others, publickly declared, is to render it Null, which is our main security. For what is the Law but Com∣mon
Right, in that it is the Right Line, whereby distributive Justice is guided and directed, whereby Justice and Right is done according to the Rule thereof, and Custom of England, whereby every one partaketh either of Punishment or Acquit∣tance according to his Innocence or Just De∣merits, and accordingly is to be looked upon as a Person Nocent or Innocent. The Law may Rightly be termed Rectum or Right, by Reason it is a means to discover that which is crooked or wrong, whereby the Injuries and Suf∣ferings of men are helped and eased, whereby the injuring Oppressors are regulated and punished: it is a Rule to Modell and rightly Square the Courses of Men, that some should not oppress, injure and wrong their Neighbours, that others also should not be wrongfully abused, injured or oppressed. It is also a greater Inheritance to every Man, than that which comes to Him (as an Heir) from his Pa∣rents, it is our security whereby our Wives, Chil∣dren, Lands, Houses, Names, Honour, Lives, &c. are protected from Injury; if it then cleares a Man or any men from such an Imputation of Guilt, which may have been laid to his or their Charge, is not then the Law violated, which is and ought to be a Covert and Defence to mens Names and Reputati∣ons, when this Design of it is disregarded. The King having distributed his Judicial Power to his several Courts of Justice, wherein all Causes, Treasons and Injuries are to be decided and deter∣mined, to the end men may receive Justice in a Le∣gal way, and avoid all Usurpation of Self-vindicating
or rather Revenging themselves upon the Persons, Names or Estates of the Offenders, whether the Quarrel, Injury, or Offence be publick or private. It must needs follow, That all men of what Degree or Rank soever must be justified or condemned by Law, that is in receiving Justice either in a clear discharge, or condemnation to condign punishment in the King's Courts of Justice. That also by an humble Submission to Authority, No man by his own arm or power should revenge his own Cause, for which also we have the Command and Law of Almighty God, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, saith the supreme Governour and Law∣giver of Heaven and Earth; or from the King (who is his Lieutenant) in some of his Courts of Justice, as he is appointed of God to bear the Sword, and to be an encouragement to them that do good, but a ter∣ror to them that do Evil; and therefore as any Person or Concernment is adjudged by the King, in any of his Courts of Justice; so likewise let us submit, and accordingly give out our censure, or judge cha∣ritably: But no Association found to subvert the Mo∣narchy, or to disturb the Quiet of the Government, the Person accused cleared in a Legal way by a wise Protestant Jury in his Majestices Courts of Justice, why then should that be accused to His Majesties Person, which in his Courts of Justice is acquitted. And besides, we seem to forget our English Clemen∣cy, and fraternal Hospitality, when English-men en∣deavour the Subversion of each other; surely we de∣generate from true English Spirits, for Subjects to re∣present their Country-men and fellow Subjects to
their Prince as Traiterous Fanaticks doth seem utter∣ly to forget the Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, in raising up the Memory of the late Unhappy Troubles, in which Act his Majesty is graciously pleased, That to the intent and purpose, all Names and Terms of distinction may be put into utter Oblivion, Orders, That if any Person or Persons, within the space of three Years next ensu∣ing it, shall presume maliciously to call or alledge of, or Object against any other Person or Persons, any Name or Names, or other words of Reproach, any way tending to revive the Memory of the late Differences, or Occasions thereof; that then every such Person, so as aforesaid offending, shall forfeit and pay unto the Party grieved, in Case such Party offending shall be of the Degree of a Gentleman or above, ten pounds; and if under that Degree, the sum of Forty Shillings; to be recovered by the Party grieved, by Action of Debt, &c. What was the tendency of his Majesties Gracious inclination herein, but to blot out of his own Mind, and the minds of his Subjects, all Terms of Difference by thus manifesting his dislike thereof? Then how un∣kind is it for Subjects to represent to their Prince their fellow Subjects as wicked and Traiterous, to revive the Memory of Differences, which the King has long since been pleased to bury in an Act of Ob∣livion, as they are presented to his Majesty in several of the Addresses; as also, desiring that the Laws may be put in Execution against all Popish and Fanatick Dissenters, which is a very unequal Yoking them together, and truly becometh not a Protestant Spirit.
What is this but to raise Feuds, Animosities and Contentions amongst Neighbours and Civil Socie∣ties. It is a a very evil Temper in men to act like the Fowler, who catcheth Birds by a Pipe which counterfeits their Voices: so likewise for men to turn with any Tide of the Times, that they may play upon their Magistrates and Governours, pre∣tending to that Loyalty and Affection in matters which we suppose exceed their Sphear; and much to be questioned; whether under pretence of a City, Corporation or Burrough, there be one quarter of them which voluntarily Subscribe thereun∣to It is Generally said, That in those Hives wherein the Bees make most noise, humming and stir, they are the most sound and useful in yielding much Ho∣ney: But this Comparison holds not good in Refe∣rence to a Common-Wealth or Nation, for the quietness, peace and Concord therein, is the only way of its preservation and happiness; But when any Discords or Tumults arise, it is greatly requisite that the Supream Magistrate sideth with None, but is general Patron of all his Subjects, to make up all Differences and Factions; for by siding with any patty (as my Lord Bacon saith) He maketh Himself of that party, in opposition to the Other. So that when some Differences and Seditions arise, it is need∣ful that a Common Patron should, without regard of either, only interpose as peace-maker, which doubt∣lessy would make Nations more sound and Harmo∣nious under their Government, for as in the Sick∣ness of the Natural Body, the Natural Body, the beginning of a change
toward the Recovery of Health, proceeds not from the diseased parts, but when the Temparature of the more sound and healthy Members is so puissant, that it expelleth that which in the rest of the Body was unkind: So in a People or Nation, where are Tumults and Seditions, wherein are many distem∣pered Members, the most certain healing way is for the Governing part, which sit at Helm, so to mode∣rate popular differences, as on neither side to de∣cline, but only to promote peace and quietness. And certainly it cannot be but unnatural in fellow subjects to render themselves Incendaries against their Brethren in meddling with the most intricate Con∣cerns of State; it is presumptuous, and issueth on∣ly from a vigorous Spirit of Ambition, which is, as it were, a Captain or Conductor of a Train of Mis∣chiefs and Differences, which is a most ineffectual way to heal the breaches of a Nation. And al∣though these Declarations and Addresses seem not such great Fires of Contention as presently to con∣found us; yet it's feared, that they are like Scare-Fires which generally begin not at sumptuous Houses and Magnificent Edifices, but may fall out by some Candle in a mean and ordinary House, which was not well observed; or it may be Straw or Rushes catch∣ing Fire might suddenly Flame: but if this be not timely quenched, may extend it self unto the Con∣fusion of the Town or City: so little Differences fomented, in process of time may prove great Con∣fusions.
And different Parties growing in Factions in a Nation, are but an evil presage, as may be plainly exemplified in the antient Story of the Civil Dissen∣tions in the City of Delphos, which arose by means of one Crates, whse daughter one Orgilaus had de∣termined to Wed, and coming to the point of that determination, it so happened that the Cup out of which they were to effuse Wine, First, in Honour of the Gods, and afterwards to drink one to ano∣ther, according to the Nuptial Ceremonies of that place, broke into pieces of it self, which Orgilaus taking to be an ill Omen, forsook his espoused Bride, and went away, not finishing the usual Ceremonies of Marriage; But some few daies after, as they were Sacrificing to the Gods, Crates underhand conveyed away a Vessel of Gold, and laid it to the Charge of the said Orgilaus, putting it amongst Goods of his, and so caused him to be thrown down from the top of a Rock, without any process at Law, as a noto∣rious Church Robber, and slew several of his Kin∣dred and Acquaintance; which at last, from a pri∣vate Quarrel, raising so much mischief and distur∣bance, that they were forced to put to Death Crates and his Complices, for prevention of publick Quar∣rels and devastations. At Syracusa also two Young men, intimately ac∣quainted: the one travelling abroad, committed to his Friends Custody a Concubine of his till his re∣turn home: but he in the absence of his Friend abused her Body. His Friend returning home, had intelligence thereof, who studying to avenge his own Cause, enticed and prevailed with the others
Wife to defile her Marriage Bed. The matter came before the Councel-board of the City to be heard: one of the Ancient Senators there moved, That both should be banished out of the City, least by reason of their deadly Feud the City, being filled with Parties on each side, should be destroyed; But his Councel being disregarded; in a short time, on this account, Parties being made, the People there∣by being exasperated, grew into an open Sedition, and after many dreadful Calamities, overthrow that excellent State and Government. And herein ap∣pears the manifest mischief of growing Parties in a State and Government. It is the misery of a Kingdom to have Enemies without doors and within: But the Domestick ones are most formidable, for they tend only to encou∣rage the Forraign; they are but in-lets for them, as well as promoters of the Ruin of their Country themselves. Let us consider an occurrence in the Year 1501. when Aretium and the whole Vale of Tiber was lost, and that of Chiana was taken by the Vitelli, there was sent a Gentleman named De Lant by the King of France, to cause a Restitution of all those lost Towns: This De Lant finding in every one of these Fortresses Men, who when they came to visit him, told him, They were of the Faction of Marzocco, he very much blaming their Division, said, That if in France, one of the King's Subjects should say, that he were of the King's Party, he would be punished: Because such a Speech could signifie no less, than that there were in the Country people enemies to the King; whereas the Well of the King
is, that all those Towns should be his Friends united in themselves, and free from all Factions; Noting, that it behoveth the Prince to carry himself a Neu∣ter to any Party whatever: for when things are in Quietness, a Party may flatter and somewhat help too, but when comes any distress and Calami∣ties, they quickly shew what trust is to be had in them. And it is prejudicial to the good and Interest of both King and Kingdom, for any Party to act that which may occasion the moving of discord or scan∣dal between the King and his People, for it is the Law of God, Non Malidices principi Populi, Thou shalt not Curse the Ruler of thy People: a greater Curse or dishonour can't be, than to raise scandal and discord, for a sweeter Blessing is not to be found in a Nation, than Subjects having an inward and hearty Love to their Soveraign, and the King a good and gracious opinion of his People: the happi∣ness whereof is hard to be attained whilst so many Addresses are continued to represent to the King ma∣ny of his Subjects as Traiterous Fanatick Enemies to his Government, and joynt Mutineers with the Po∣pish Faction, or rather worse, who in reality are his hearty Lovers, and Well-wishers, and are discharged from such Imputations by Law and Justice, and a good Protestant Jury. But to speak of Juries power and priviledge would be needless having had much of it already. I shall only aim to fortifie what was before said, that Protestants acquitted by a Protestant Jury of men able and just, should be looked upon as Innocent, being legally acquitted,
and therefore most unreasonable to be declaimed against as Guilty and Factious Traytors and Re∣bels. And we need not be tedious in enquiring for what end Juries were first Instituted, it may be easily known to any that will but take the pains moderate∣ly to inspect our ancient Laws and Customs: where he shall certainly find that Juries, were, alwaies ac∣knowledged, of all others, the best and most effe∣ctual means to find out Truth. There being no other way or Art, in the whole World, esteemed less subject to all danger of Subordination and Cor∣ruption; which will appear, especially, if we con∣sider how Jury-men ought to be qualified according to Law; which says thus, viz. That those which are returned to serve on Juries, ought to be Boni & legales homines, that is, Good and lawful Men, be free of, and from all manner of Bondage, Obliga∣tions, Affections, Relations, Passion, Interests, and other Prejudices whatsoever; Of full Age, that is, Twenty one Years old; not Out-lawed, never At∣tainted or Convicted of Treason, Felony, False Verdict, Perjury, any Conspiracy at King's-Suit, nor ever adjudged to the Pillory or the like, where∣by one is rendred Infamous. Neither is any Alien to be a Jury-man (unless an Alien be tried) but such as be most nigh, most sufficient, and least sus∣picious: They ought to be of the Vicinage where the Party accused liveth; or at least, where the Cause of the Charge or Action doth arise; chiefly for this Reason, viz. that so what is in issue before them may be the more fully known and under∣stood
by them who are to give their Verdict of the thing. And then in the next place, these persons being qualified, as aforesaid, must be bound to a faithful discharge of their duty and trust committed to them, by a solemn Oath, then which there is cer∣tainly no greater Obligation to honest men, and Consciencious, especially (such as Jury-men ought to be) to faithfulness and integrity in their proceed∣ings; which Oath is also tendred to every One in Particular; which Oath as it Concerns a Grand Ju∣ry-man is as followeth, viz. I will diligently en∣quire, and true Presentment make of all such things and matters as shall be given me in Charge, or shall come to my knowledge concerning this present service. The Kings Council, my own and my Fellows, I well and truly will keep secret. I will present nothing for malice, Lucre, or Evil-will: Nor will I leave any thing unpresented Love, Favour, Affection, Reward, or any hopes thereof. But in all things that shall concern this present service, I will present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing else but the Truth. So help me God. Now let any Person judge, whether Persons ap∣proved both for Honesty and Integrity, having en∣gaged themselves by such a solemn Oath, may not be Credited. A Consciencious person will certain∣ly be very careful and Circumspect in performing ex∣actly those things which he has undertaken so to do upon Oath; For does he not in effect pray that God would never help him, if he do not faithfully keep his Oath? Neither can he be ignorant that Perjury
is a contempt of God; and then however, as the Proverb says, It's ill Jesting with Edge-Tools. And when Juries have endorsed their Bill, or brought in their Verdict, they are only accountable to God and their own Consciences, for what they have done; neither is there Fine or Attaint lying against a Jury in Criminal Causes, so great is their Trust, that God alone must determine of their Integrity, which is certainly a great engagement to upright∣ness. Now when a Person is acquitted by a Jury, being men qualified as aforesaid, he is certainly ac∣quitted by Law; for what is the Law but most re∣fined Reason? And what's the Verdict of the Jury but the result of right reason, for they are the Sole Judges of matters of Fact, for the Law says, in Try∣al, whether any Complaint as made, or any matter as alledged, be true or not, the Judges ought not, nor can say, nor have any thing at all to do there∣with, but the Jury only. All the whole, or most they can do, or at least ought, is only after and upon what the Jury, or the Parties themselves agree, first to be true. So that what the Jury does, is called Ver∣dictum, viz. the declaring of what is the Truth in the matter; what the Judges do, is called Judicium, Juris dictum, the telling only of what is the Law. Thus it is, that every finding of the Jury as their Verdict, &c. must be positive what the Fact and Parties intent, &c. was, and not saying only what their Evidence is; neither can the Judges so far meddle with, or take Cognizance of the matter of Fact, as to say, then the Fact, Case, &c. is so and so, if you agree your Evidence to be so and so. For
they are not obliged to make the Testimony of those that Swear, the sole measure of the Fact, the Truth and Reality whereof, they are called to judge about. But they are to proceed on it in their own sense; and as they apprehend or understand it them∣selves, though the Judges differ with them, else how can they discharge their Conscience, if they may not bring in what Verdict they judge in their Conscience to be right, after through weighing all Circumstances, which have any way any relation to the matter in hand. Again, although they may be convinced of the Fact, that the person charged be∣fore them did it, yet they are not to find him Guil∣ty, unless they be satisfied, that he did it as it is laid in the Indictment, that is, that it be such a Crime as is there stiled, and done with that Traiterous and malicious intention, as it is there laid. They are also to weigh and Consider of the Quality and Cre∣ditableness of the Witnesses, who are brought to prove the Indictment; For there are some whose Testimony the Law doth not admit, and consequent∣ly the Jury are not to receive their Testimony, or in the least to be influenced by it. Nor are a Jury only to consider of the Quality and Credit of the Witnesses, but they are also to consider the probability or improbability of what they depose. For as a Witness is to Swear nothing but what he hath heard or seen, and is not allowed to make Inferences or Deductions: So are Jurors not to Swallow it without Chewing of it, and exa∣min the possibility of the whole, and the consistency of one part with another. Neither is the Quality of
the Witnesses, and the probability of the matter to be only considered by the Jury, but they are also to weigh the agreeableness of the Fact to the Principles of the Party brought and Indicted; and whether it be likely that a Person of such Loyalty, Integrity and Wisdom should be Guilty of it. And if upon their own Knowledge they believe him Innocent, they are not to bring him in Guilty, nor to find a Bill upon the Testimony of never so many Witnesses. Nor is this all that belongs to a Jury; but they are likewise to consider both the Motives, and the nature and man∣ner of the Prosecution. For where there is either malice at the bottom, or unusual and unbecoming ri∣gour and violence in the pursuit, there is just ground administred of a suspicion, that the person accused is not much Nocent, as his Enemies out of wrath and re∣venge would have him thought to be. Thus must they consider and understand well the Indictment, and whether the fault alledged with the circumstances and aggravations amount to and be a real fault or not, and also wrath Complaining of; If it be no fault, or one not worth complaining of, which in Law is all one, they reject the Bill and meddle no more with it. If they find it a fault and Considerable, as afore∣said, then they consider, if they know it to be true of themselves; which if they do, or other Evidence satisfie them it is, they indorse or write on the back∣side of it, Billa vera, This Bill is True: But if they do not know it themselves, nor be satisfied by the Evidence, then instead of Billa vera they write Ig∣noramus, We know not. And afterwards thus deli∣ver all Indictments into Court.
The Jury also may strike out of the Indictment, what they be not certain is true; or may any ways alter it to what they be certain is true; or if any thing be in it that they be doubtful of, they may subscribe it Ignoramus, otherwise they cannot per∣form their Oath, and so must become Perjur'd, in Swearing that to be true, which they are doubtful of. Thus if a Jury find the words not spoke, or the fact not done, with, and according to the Aggra∣vations and Circumstances in an Indictment, &c. mentioned, they ought either not to find the Indict∣ment, or strike out what they have not sufficient E∣vidence of, and then Endorse it Billa Vera to the rest which they have sufficient Evidence, and are well satisfied in. And although the Jury by their Oath are bound to observe as well the Charge which shall be given by the Court, as the form of the Oath it self; it's plain it must then be understood so far, as the Charge is according to Law, and not contrary, or repugnant to the Oath it self, and no farther, or otherwise. Thus now let a person be Charged of what Crime soever, and if a Jury passes upon him, and cannot find him, is he not then justly acquitted? and may he not be esteemed to be so, notwithstanding the E∣vidence brought in against him, which may seem suf∣ficient to others, or perhaps to the Judg himself to Condemn him; but then we must consider, that the Evidence is wholly committed to the Jury to examine, and throughly to weigh each Circumstance, and they
being many, can see further into a matter, than one single person, and being upon their Oaths, must Act without favor or affection to either side; as perchance other persons which judg that the Verdict should be otherwise, may be some way or other prejudiced a∣gainst the Person Charged; the Clerks of the Court also, to get Fees, and perhaps some others, for one sinister end or other, will be apt to say, that the Jury ought to find an Indictment, or make a Presentment against any supposed offence, or offendor, though they have but colour of Evidence, or a probability of the thing being true, and that what they do, is but matter of Course or Ceremony; but he that consi∣ders what was said before, and the Oath of the Ju∣ry, will certainly find it otherwise, for they are to proceed with great Integrity, Circumspection and Deliberation, and inquire diligently into the matter before them, neither certainly can they discharge their Consciences, unless they use their utmost endea∣vors to find out the very truth, to which end they are designed, and obliged to it by Oath; neither can they Endorse Billa Vera, unless they be fully satisfied in all Circumstances to give a positive Verdict, with∣out all doubting, for when a man doubts of the truth of a thing, how can he positively swear to the truth of it, without regret of Conscience, but rather when they cannot be satisfied, they write Ignoramus; we know not, that is, we cannot say, that the Person is guilty of the Fact alledged against him, we cannot say it is true; and if they cannot, I pray who can? Surely then the Party must remain as innocent of the Fact or Crime, on whatover Charged against
him, having stood the Trial of such an exact search, by a company of upright men, set apart on purpose to find out the truth, which are of known wisdom and uprightness, and well affected to the Protestant Religion; but certainly, an Association, the intent whereof is, to subvert the Monarchy, to disturb the Quiet of the Government, and then I believe, not to spare the Protestant Religion, such an one must needs be Popish; this Association there was (and doubt∣lesly still is) which are intended to effect such cursed designs, and this was legally declared in open Parlia∣ment, and with the unanimous Faith of the Nation believed; nay, which is more, the King himself in his Proclamations, hath declared his Credit thereof. This Associating Conspiracy of the Papists is need∣ful, not only to be abhorred by every Loyal Subject, but also that their abhorrency thereof should be e∣ven publickly manifested, viz. That every true Eng∣lish man (who if such, truly loveth his King and Country) will most deservedly adhere to his Majesty in defence of his Person and Government, and the Prote∣stant Religion, with his Life and Fortune, against any Po∣pish Associations, Confederacies, or Attempts whatso∣ever. Nay, that these Enemies of our Religion, Liber∣ties and Properties, are the very Enemies to both King and Kingdom, and Persons never to be trusted, but Associating Conspirers, in order to the ruin of both, may plainly appear to us, in taking a short view of their Disloyal, Wicked and Traiterous Principles and Positions.
Viz. That the Pope can Absolve Subjects from their sworn Allegiance to their King, so Suarez af∣firms, saying, The Pope can Absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and that to assert the contrary, is to act contrary to the Custom of the Church, the use and ap∣probation of General Councils, the consent of Catholick Doctors, nay, and against Reason, and is plainly Hereti∣cal: and with respect to our English Oath of Allegi∣ance, he affirms, That a man need never be absolved from it, because it was never binding to him. And upon these Reasons is grounded their Princi∣ple, That a King may be Deposed; and accordingly it is apparent, how disloyal they are, and what wick∣ed and dangerous Traytors they are, and how destru∣ctive (wherever they are) to the Interest of King and Kingdom. Several of their Writers broach these Principles in the World, many of vvhich they hold; that Kings, if they lavishly vvaste the publick Revenues, they may then be Deposed by their Subjects; or if they be not faithful to their pubiick Trust, or Promise to their Subjects. And that if a King should be guilty of Perjury, then He may be Deposed: Perjury indeed is a great and flagitious impiety and crying Sin in any, yet is to be tolerated in Subjects by them, when Absolved from their Oath of Allegiance to their Prince.
Or that a Prince may be Deposed, if any ways guilty of Murther; yea, even by consenting to it, or conniving at it; which is no Sin at all in them, but an act of Merit, though it were to shed the blood of many thousand poor Protestants, as has been done by them; it needs no Instance; it is ge∣nerally held among them, that for Heresie a King may be Deposed, and then what Protestant King is in safety; the word Heresie must be in their own acceptation, to wit, embracing a Religion which is not composed of Fopperies, Superstitions and Ido∣latries. Or if so be the King be a Schismatick, or a sa∣vourer of such, then may he justly be Deposed, according to their base Principles: And then any Prince that savours Schism, is to be Deposed accord∣ing to this Sentiment; but their Church hath not been free from Schisms; nay, what Church hath been more rent with Schisms, when several have declared themselves true Popes, and made the Church a huge Monster, with several heads? Or if (according to their opinions) a King, whose Title and Possession be lawful; yet if he oppress the People, then may He be Deposed, not having learned to suffer wrongs with patience, and submit unto that Providential Dispensation, which may set up an evil, sometimes, as well as a good King.
Or if a King be not diligent in the Extirpation of Heresie out of his Dominions; Nay, if so be He himself should be a Son of their Church, yet not diligent, but a sluggish one, minding not the Ad∣monition and Precepts of Holy Church (as they falsely call it), He may then be lawfully De∣posed. Or many of them assert, That if a King be easie, or soft-natur'd, or not fitly qualified for Govern∣ment, He may on that account be Deposed, which certainly is better so to be, than so impious and abo∣minably impure, as many of their Popes (who go lyingly under the Name of Christ's Vicars) have been, or as to their age uncapable, one would think, of such a Function, as was for example Benedict the Ninth, a Boy of twelve years old, and yet was his little Holiness Pope and Christ's Vicar, and as infal∣lible as the best of them. Nay, many of them will allow, that on what grounds soever the People think fit they may Depose their King. Yea, in short, it must be any thing whatever that is incomsistent with the interest of the Pope and Church of Rome, that (according to their Princi∣ples) will give allowance to Subjects to Depose their Price: there lyes the Basis of all. It must be when h is not subservient to their pleasures and wills. Nay according to Tho. Berrius, see Romish Treasons, Pag. 98. Although that a King be Lawful, and under∣standing
in Government, Industrious, Potent, a good Roman Catholick, and Godly; yet the Pope and the Bishops, by the Approbation of the Pope; by Divine Law delivered to the Church by Christ and his Apostles, have power to take away his Dominions and Kingdoms from Him, and give them all to a third person, who had no right unto them; if so be, that they think that so doing to be not only necessary, but expedient. Such are these in their Principles and Practices, the Deposing only will not serve turn, but also the Blood or Kings they must have, as appears in Chil∣derick the Second, King of France; whom Bodille seeing one time Hunting, and but few with him, having called his fellow Traytors together, went and presently flew him: But this not satisfying, to en∣crease their Villany, they took his Queen, great with Child, as she was, and murdered both her and the Infant. And King Henry the Fourth of France, who was attempted to be murdered by Jean de L'isse, who (as the King was returning from Hunting) upon Pont Neusi in Paris, by taking hold of his Cloak, would have pulled him off his Horse, and endea∣voured to Assassinate Him with his Dagger; but the King escaped him, and was pleased to pardon him, thinking him to be but an Enthusiastick Fool, for he declared himself to be King of All the World: But how this was, whether sham or no, we can't say. But the King some time after going in his Coach, with others, to visit his Great Confident the Duke of Sully, then indisposed; being come to the Street La Terronnerie (or Ironmonger), which was
then very narrow, by reason of the Shops built against the Wall of St. Innocent's Church-yard, and a stop being made to his Coach by two Carts, the one laden with Wine, the other with Hay. At this stop one Francois Ravaillac took the opportunity to thrust himself near the Coach, and setting one foot upon the Wheel, and the other against a Shop-Stall, so advanced himself, that with a Knife prepared for the purpose, he murdered him with two or three Stabs, before the mischief was perceived. And so Henry the Third also, who was murdered by one Clement a Monk, having received a Letter from the hands of this Clement; whilst the King was reading it, he plucks a Knife out of his Monk's Sleeve, and stabs the King in his Belly; yea, and their Princi∣ples justifie them to embrue their hands in the Blood of Kings. See Rom. Treasons, Pag. 84. Martinus Bea∣nus asserting—Sometimes it so falls out, that Kings become wicked, or Hereticks; then the Pope may com∣mand that they be removed; which if they disobey, they may be killed; and then this, nothing is more certain. And again, The Pope may deprive Kings of their King∣doms on a double account; for if they be contumacious, he may have them kill'd, and so they are also deprived of their Kingdoms: and that this may be done, no man doth doubt. As also Suarez affirming the same Doctrine, endeavours to prove it after this manner following: When a King is Deposed, then he is neither Lawful King nor Prince. And if therefore he endeavour to keep the Kingdom under him by strength, then he is an Ʋsur∣per, because he is no Lawful King, having no true Title to the Crown; for after that the Decree of Deposition is
gone out against Him, He is altogether deprived of His Kingdom, so that He can't, with a just Title possess it, and so he may be used as a Tyrant or Ʋsurper; and by Consequence may be slain by any Private Man: and this He saith, if He be an Heretick. Hereby it is most manifestly apparent, that if we will not shut our Eyes against the Light, that these are the Enemies, even those that embrace the same Principles, viz. the Popish Party; which are Ene∣mies to God, Enemies to King and Kingdom, those who are bound in a Confederacy to destroy us; those who must be false to their own Principles, if true to us; those who are in Confederacy against the King; and Disturbers of the Quiet of the Go∣vernment. Certainly it is most safe and requisite, with Re∣spect to the Person of the King, and the safety of the Government, and Preservation of the Prote∣stant Religion, of all Addressing to His Majesty, to Address against These implacable Enemies to the Protestant Interest.
For satisfaction of any that hitherto may not have seen the Copy of the Association, Charged against the Earl of Shaftsbury, it is here In∣serted. The substance of the Preface, is, THat the Knights, &c. finding to their Grief, that the Papists and their Ad∣herents, have, for several Years past, pur∣sued a Plot to Root out the Protestant Re∣ligion, to take away the Life of the King, to Subvert the Laws, and to set up Arbitrary Government and Popery. And it being Notorious, that the hopes of J. D. of Y. Succeeding the Crown, has given them encouragement, and they have been protected by him; and that thorough Popish Councils his Designs have so far prevailed, that he hath created many and great Depen∣dents
upon him by bestowing Offices and Preferments in Church and State. It appearing also to them, that by his In∣fluence, Mercenary Forces have been Levied, and kept on foot for his secret Designs, con∣trary to our Laws; the Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard of His Majesties Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had not been timely fore-seen by several Par∣liaments; and parts of those Forces, with great difficulty, caused by them to be Dis∣banded at the Kingdoms great Expence: and it being evident, that notwithstanding all the continued endeavours of the Parliament to deliver His Majesty from the Councels, and out of the power of the said D. yet his Inte∣rest in the Ministry of State, and others have been so prevalent, that Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued and Dis∣solved when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill Ministers of State their Assistants.
And that the said D. in order to reduce All into his own power, hath procured the Garrisons, the Arms and Amunition, and all the power of the Seas and Souldiery, and Lands belonging to these Three Kingdoms, to be put into the hands of his Party and their Adherents, in opposition to the Advice and Order of Parliament And they considering with heaviness how the Strength, Reputation and Treasure of the Kingdom at Sea and Land is wasted, and lost by the intricate expensive management of these destructive Designs; and finding the same Councels, after exemplary Justice upon some of the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost Devilish Malice, and desire of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in con∣tinual hazard of being Murthered, to make way for the said D's advancement to the Crown; and the whole Kingdom, in such Case is destitute of all security of their Reli∣gion, Laws, Estates, &c. Sad experience in the Case: Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince.
They having therefore endeavoured in a Par∣liamentary way by a Bill to Exclude the said D. from the Succession of the Crown, and to Banish him for ever out of England and Ireland. But the first means of Englands se∣curity being rejected, and they left almost in despair of obtaining any effectual security, and knowing themselves to be entrusted to advise and act for the preservation of His Ma∣jesty and the Kingdom; and being perswaded in their Consciences, that the dangers afore∣said are so reminent, that there ought to be no delay of the best means in their power to secure the Kingdom against them. They have thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union among themselves by solemn and sacred promise of mutual defence of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesties Person, and our Laws, &c. and that they held it their bounden duty to joyn themselves for the same intent in a Declaration of their United af∣fections and resolution in the form follow∣ing:
Thus follows the form of the Association. I A. B. do in the presence of God solemnly promise, vow, and protest to maintain and de∣fend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate the true Protestant Religi∣on, against Popery and all Popish supersticion, Idolatry, or Innovation, and All those who do or shall endeavour to spread or advance it within this Kingdom. I will also as far as in me lies, maintain and defend his Majesties Royal Person and Estate; as also the power and priviledg of Praliaments, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the sub∣ject against All Incroachments and Usurpation of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endea∣vour entirely to disband All such Mercenary Forces as We have Reason to believe were raised to advance it, and are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and terrour of all the good people of the Land.
Moreover J. D. of Y. having publickly professed and owned the Popish Religion, and Notoriously given life and Birth to the damnable and Hellish Plots of the Papists against his Majesties Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of this King∣dom; I will never Consent that the said D. of Y. or any other, who is or hath been a Papist, or any wayes adher'd to the Papists in their wicked designs, be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England, But by all lawful Means and by force of arms, if need so require, according to my Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavour to subdue, Expel, and destroy him, if He come into England; or the Dominions thereof, and seek by force to set up his pretended Title, and all such as shall adhere unto him, or raise any War, Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as publick Enemies of our Laws, Religion and Country.
The Substance of the Sequel. To this End We, and every one of us, whose Hands are here underwritten, do most willingly bind our selves, and every one of us unto the other, joyntly and severally in the Bond of one firm and Loyal Society or Asso∣ciation; and Vow before God, to oppose any with joynt Forces that shall oppose this As∣sociation, and defend those that enter into it in the just performance of the true Interest of it; and lest it should be hindred for want of Discipline or Conduct, or any evil-mind∣ed Persons under pretence of Raising Forces for the service of it, should commit disorders; we will follow such Orders as from time to time we shall receive from the Protestant Par∣liament, whilst Sitting, or the Major part of the subscribing Members, when Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as by them shall be set over us in the several Coun∣tries, Cities and Burroughs, until the next Meeting of this or another Parliament; and will then shew the same Obedience and
Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it. Neither will we for any Respect of per∣sons or causes; or for Fear or Reward, sepa∣rate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution of it, during our Lives, upon pain of being by the Rest of us prosecuted as Perjured persons, and publick Enemies to God, the King and our Native Country. To which Pains and Punishments, We do voluntarily submit our Selves and every one of us without benefit of any colour or pretence to excuse us. In Witness of all which Premisses to be in∣violably kept, we put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to admit any others hereafter into this Society and Asso∣ciation. See Proceedings at the Old-Baily, Page 15, 16, 17, 18.
Now follows an Account of the As∣sociation made and confirmed in the 27th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. IN the 27th Year of the Reign of Queen Eli∣zabeth, upon occasion of Rumors from all Parts; that great Dangers were at hand and threatned; to prevent the wicked Designs and Treacherous Practices of Seditious People, and to provide for the Queens safety, upon which the Wel-fare of the Realm and of Religion de∣pended. Many men of all Degrees and Condi∣tions throughout England, by means of the Earl of Leicester, and out of their own publick Care, and Love; whilst they stood not in fear of Her, but in fear for Her, bound themselves in an Association by mutual Vows, Subscripti∣ons and Seals to prosecute to the Death, as far
as lay in their Power, all those that should at∣tempt any thing against the Queen. Which Association, some time following, was confirmed and established by General Consent and Approbation. And it was Enacted, that twen∣ty Four, or more of the Privy Council, and the Lords of Parliament, to be deputed by the Queens Commission, should make Inquisition after all such as should Invade the Kingdom, raise Re∣bellion, or attempt to hurt, or destroy the Queens Person, for or by whomsoever employed, that might lay claim to the Crown of England. And that Her for whom, or by whom, They should at∣tempt the same, should be utterly uncapable of the Crown of England, deprived wholly of All Right and Title to it, and prosecuted to Death by all faithful Subjects, if he should be judged by those four and twenty Men to be Guil∣ty of such Invasion, Rebellion, or Treasonable Attempt, and by publick Proclamation so de∣clared. FINIS.
