D483 R8462 13106358 97513
THE Fathers Vindicated: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS On a late Socinian Book Entitul'd, The Judgment of the Fathers Touching the TRINITY, against Doctor Bull's Defence of the Ni∣cene Faith. BY A Presbyter of the Church of ENGLAND. LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Pauls Church-Yard, MDCXCVII.
THE Fathers Vindicated, Touching the TRINITY.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. A Character of M. N. and of the Scheme that he hath form'd of the Newness of the O∣pinions of the Trinity, and of the Divinity of Jesus Christ. Page 1. CHAP. II. A General Enquiry in M. N's Sy∣stem. p. 8.
CHAP. III. A Review of the Witnesses which M. N. brings in general for the Opinions of the Unitarians before the first Council of Nice. p. 22. CHAP. IV. That neither the Authors of the Apo∣stles Creed, nor Clemens Ro∣manus, were of the Opinions of the Unitarians. p. 41. CHAP. V. That the Nazarens, the Ebionites, the Minaeans, and the Alogians, were justly looked upon as Here∣ticks. p. 64.
CHAP. VI. That neither Hegesippus, nor the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem, were of the Opinion of the Cerin∣thians, or the Ebionites: And that the Alogi were Hereticks as well as the Cerinthians. p. 77. CHAP. VII. That Justin Martyr was no Inno∣vator. p. 93. CHAP. VIII. That the Notion of the  did not come from the Platonicks, but was the antient Notion of the Synagogue, and of the Apostles of our Saviour. p. 110.
CHAP. III. A Review of the Witnesses which M. N. brings in general for the Opinions of the Unitarians before the first Council of Nice. p. 22. CHAP. IV. That neither the Authors of the Apo∣stles Creed, nor Clemens Ro∣manus, were of the Opinions of the Unitarians. p. 41. CHAP. V. That the Nazarens, the Ebionites, the Minaeans, and the Alogians, were justly looked upon as Here∣ticks. p. 64.
CHAP. VI. That neither Hegesippus, nor the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem, were of the Opinion of the Cerin∣thians, or the Ebionites: And that the Alogi were Hereticks as well as the Cerinthians. p. 77. CHAP. VII. That Justin Martyr was no Inno∣vator. p. 93. CHAP. VIII. That the Notion of the  did not come from the Platonicks, but was the antient Notion of the Synagogue, and of the Apostles of our Saviour. p. 110.
ERRATA. PAge 12. line 24. lege . P. 24. l. 16. l. Theodotus. P. 41. l. 16. l. Hermas Pastor. P. 42. l. 18. l. Century. P. 59. l. 19. l. nunquam eum P. 68. l. 7. l. Christians that P. 99. l. 10. l. Catalogue l. 16. l. Elentherus P. 107. l. 12. l.
THE FATHERS VINDICATED Touching the TRINITY, &c. CHAP. I. A Character of M. N. and of the Scheme that he hath form'd of the Newness of the Opinions of the Trinity, and of the Divinity of Jesus Christ. SIR, THO' I have a great regard to the Commands that you lay upon me, yet it is not without some Unwillingness that I have undertaken to examine the Book entitu∣led, The Judgment of the Fathers concern∣ing
the Trinity, against Dr. Bull: For the Reverend and Learned Dr. Bull is best able to do this himself, and can do it with very great ease: and his Adversary be∣ing a Man who seems to have in him a great confidence of Temper, joyn'd to as great Affectation of Novelty; I have little Inclination to be concern'd with him. However, I have learn'd to obey; especially where my Obedience may be thought to do service to Truth. M. N. is of the Opinion of Francis Da∣vid, who deny'd the Lawfulness of in∣voking JESƲS CHRIST, Tom II. Soc. p. 710. & 711. and was for that reason detested by Socinus, as a Heretick, that renounced the Principles of Christianity, and had a design to bring in among Christians the Jewish Ideas about the Person of the Messiah. Socinus was a zealous Assertor of the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and proved it with such Arguments, as can∣not be answer'd: Especially for the Books of the New Testament; he hath shew'd with great Judgment that they can't be suspected of having been corrupted by any Party or Sect among Christians. De Autho∣rit. Scr. C. 1. §. 3. And where any Text makes evidently against his opinion, yet nothing could provoke him to question the Authority
of it. Whosoever is conversant in his Writings, can't but see what infinite pains he hath taken to evade the force of divers of those Texts which prove the Godhead of our Saviour. But M. N. little considering the pains that Socinus hath taken, and without giving himself any trouble to confute Socinus's Argu∣ments, to prove the Purity of the Books of the New Testament; boldly asserts, that the Gospels and Epistles have been falsified by those whom he calls Trinita∣rians; who, as he tells us, have added to them what they pleas'd. P. 30, 31. & p. 63. col. 1. This Accusa∣tion he often repeats with a groundless assurance. So that now the state of the Dispute is wholly changed from what it was with Socinus, and the Learned Writers of his Sect. It seems we must no longer contend for the Divinity of our Saviour, or the Doctrine of the Trinity: But our Controversy now with M. N. and his Collegues, is principally about the Puri∣ty of the Holy Scripture, just the same that we have with some of the Mahome∣tans, who accuse the Christians of ha∣ving corrupted the Gospels. And though at this distance from Turky, God be thanked, we are in no danger of that
Sect, yet we are not so secure against the Deists and Atheists, who are chiefly con∣cern'd in this Controversie, as being the profest Enemies of the Christian Reli∣gion. The Socinians do profess them∣selves Christians; but yet one can hardly think them in earnest that write at this rate. They are either downright Deists, or they are certainly in a great forward∣ness towards it; of which they were warn'd long since by Socinus himself. Tom. I. p. 327. Tom. II. p. 773. c. 1. He warn'd those of his Sect that deny'd the Worship of Christ, as our M. N. expresly doth; that if they went on, they would become Deists and Epicureans. However, you desire me to let you know my Thoughts of this Book of M. N. and to examine the Plan which he hath form'd of the Belief of the most Pri∣mitive Antiquity, concerning the Trini∣ty, and the Divinity of our Saviour; which at your desire I will endeavour to do. If we may believe M. N. he brings us up to the very beginning of the change; and doth all he can to perswade the World, that he sets forth the Manner of it; so that for the future there will be nothing more easie than to judge of the Truth and Apostolical Antiquity
of the Doctrine of the Ʋnitarians. But see in a few words what M. N. teacheth us of the Antient Faith: He telleth us the Holy Scripture faith no∣thing, either of the Trinity, or of the Godhead of our Saviour. So that accord∣ing to the Scripture, there is but one Person, as well as one Nature in God: and, That Jesus Christ is but a meer Man, miraculously born of the Virgin by the virtue of the Holy Ghost; indued with a power of doing Miracles, and at last taken up into Glory to govern the Church, and the World, at least, as far as the Church is concern'd in it. He tells us the Apostles writ that Creed which is commonly called by their name; and that they deliver'd no more than that Creed in the confession of Faith which they prescribed to all Chri∣stians. He would have us believe that the first Bishops of Jerusalem, and the first Bi∣shops of the greatest Cities in the World, who were Successors to the Apostles, ad∣her'd to this belief without any altera∣tion, till the slaughter and dispersion of the Jews under Hadrian, that is till about the year of our Lord 135.
The Jews that were converted by the Apostles and their successors, and the Heathens that were converted by the A∣postles, and by Apostolical Men out of Palestine, continu'd till then, as he tells us, in the opinion of the present Ʋnitari∣ans. About that time, or at least about the year 150, when all the Protestants, as M. N. tells us, P. 15. B. agree that the Doctrine of the Church began to be corrupted, Justin Martyr thought fit to set up the Doctrine of the Trinity. He averr'd that Jesus Christ was the Eternal Word: He proved it against Trypho the Jew, by the Apparitions of God that are related in the Old Testament. He tells us that as soon as Justin Mar∣tyr had published his Conference with Trypho, a great number of Christians quitted the simple Notions that they had of the Deity, to perplex themselves with those new Ideas of the Trinity. That they then took up the Doctrine of the Godhead of Jesus Christ, which was an Opinion never before heard of. This Belief spread abroad, and took so gene∣rally, from Justin Martyr's time to the Council of Nice, that although the An∣tient Christians, whom he calls the Na∣zarens,
the Mineans, the Ebionites, the Cerinthians, and the Alogians, defended the ancient Doctrine concerning the Unity of God, and rejected the Belief of the Trinity; and of the Godhead of the Saviour, properly so call'd; yet the multitude of those that believ'd the Tri∣nity, and the eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ, prevail'd in the first Council of Nice; and made this Heresie pass into an Article of Faith. This, Sir, is the System of M.N. which he establishes by divers conside∣rations out of Antiquity, and which he makes as probable as he can, by answer∣ing Dr. Bull's Arguments, with all the dexterity and confidence that he is Ma∣ster of. I desire you would not expect that I should dispute with M. N. about all that he alledges, and particularly about that which he saith against Dr. Bull. The Doctor, who will probably wait for all the Three parts of M. N's Book, of which he hath yet publisht, but the first, will be very well able to do right both to himself and his cause. Nor will I take notice of all that he saith, without authority, and yet with as much confidence as if he had all au∣thority
in himself. It is enough to let the Ʋnitarians see how rash their Cham∣pion is in his Assertions, to abate some∣thing of the Veneration which they have for an Author of so little Judg∣ment or Modesty. To do this with the more clearness and usefulness; I think it the best way. First, To examine his System in General. Secondly, To inquire into the Authori∣ties, that he brings to justifie it. And Thirdly, To make it appear, that he hath no ground to accuse Justin Martyr, as he doth, of Innovation. I think I may under these three Heads take in all that is worth considering in his Judgment of the Fathers. CHAP. II. A General Enquiry into M. N's System. WE shall first give a general Ac∣count of his Opinion, concern∣ing the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Godhead of our Saviour. I. He saith, That the writings of the Old Testament have nothing in them to ground the Belief of a Trinity, and of the Godhead of the Messiah. He
saith Justin Martyr is the first that hath gather'd both the one and the other out of the Writings of the Old Testament. Herein M.N. agreeth with the present Jews. But to say nothing of what Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught of this Matter, about which he makes a great stir to little purpose; it's plain, that the first Christians are against him in the Disputes that they had with the Jews before Justin Martyr had written. And this it will be no hard Matter to prove. 1. It is scarce to be conceiv'd; that Justin Martyr, having a Jew to dispute with, should go about to convert him with a new Notion of which himself was the first Author; and not only so, but that he should have the confidence to publish in the face of the World a private Dispute, which he had with a Jew upon that subject. We may well imagine, that a Soci∣nian, who rejects the Trinity and the Godhead of our Saviour, would easily agree with a Jew about these Opinions, and leave them out of the dispute, to make the Christian Religion more easie and agreeable to a Jew. But supposing
that before Justin Martyr these Doctrines had never been heard of, and that Ju∣stin thought he had discover'd them in the Writings of the Old Testament, is it probable, that he would have made them such principal Points of the Con∣troversie in disputing with a Jew, And that he would have pretended to ground them upon Authorities out of the Old Testament? 2. We need but consider the man∣ner how Justin disputes with the Jew to be satisfi'd, That he did not advance any new Doctrine. He proposeth two Questions. The First, Whether Jesus is the promised Me∣ssias? Which he saith he can maintain against Trypho, though he should not acknowledge Jesus to be any more than meer Man. The Second, Whether Je∣sus Christ had a Being before his Incar∣nation? Whether he was God? Whether he was born of a Virgin? Which he affirms to have been the Doctrine of the Prophets, and of Jesus Christ himself. Justin advanceth these Propositions, as being such as were generally receiv'd among the Christians. He quotes his Authorities out of the Books of the Old Testament; and carefully confutes the
different Solutions which the Rabbins used to evade these Arguments: Which sheweth, that his Proofs were drawn out of Scripture, and were not new to the Jews; but that the Dispute having continu'd ever since the Apostles times, the Jews had been diligent in finding Answers to these Objections; and that, as it often happens among them that plead for a bad Cause, they were already divided among themselves; such an Answer as hit the Fancy of one Rab∣bin, being not satisfactory to ano∣ther. It will be sufficient to bring one Example of it, out of many that I could produce. Philo the Jew, De opif. Mundi p. 16. c. De confus. ling. p. 395, & 396. De profug. p. 460, & 461. Et de no∣min. mu∣tat. p. 1048, & 1049. De epif. Mund. p. 32. Et de plant. Noe p. 217. long before the Year of our Lord 40, in explaining these Words of God, Let us make Man in our own Image, makes this Reflection, , This implyeth the taking in of others as fellow Workmen. And elsewhere he maintains, that Man was made in the Image or Likeness of the Word. The Christians having afterward alledged that Passage for the Proof of the Tri∣nity, the Jews were obliged to say, some of them that God spake to the Angels, others that he spake in the Plural because
of his Majesty, and others that he spake to the Elements, out of which the Bo∣dy of Man was to be compos'd. These Answers, being invented before Justin's time, P. 285. B. C. D. he mentions, and rejects them with Scorn. It appears then, That the Christians before Justins time did believe the Trinity, because the Jews in his time were so divided among them∣selves as I have shewn, and made such different Answers to the Objection which was made to them by the Chri∣stians. But I shall shew, that the Jews before Justin's time accus'd the Christi∣ans of acknowledging the Messias to be true God, as well as Man. This will plainly appear by what followeth. We need but consider in what manner Justin speaks of those among the Christi∣ans, that rejected the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and believ'd him to be a Man born of Joseph and Mary, for that is what he expresseth in these Terms,  A Man born of hu∣man Parents, which he opposeth to , A man born of a Virgin. P. 267. See how he expresseth him∣self, .
For there are some among us who confess that that he is CHRIST, but affirm him to be Man born of humane Parents; with whom I do not agree; nor would it be said by most of them that are of my Opinion; for we have been commanded by CHRIST himself, not to believe the Doctrines of Men, but to believe those things, which were publisht by the Holy Prophets, and taught by CHRIST himself. The word , as it is here oppos'd to the word , hath a great extent in the Greek; it signifies the far greater num∣ber, and the , that here Justin Mar∣tyr speaks of, he consider'd as such a sort of Christians as those whom Tiberi∣us would have made, if the Senate would have consented to it, by procu∣ring the Apotheosis of Jesus Christ because of his great Miracles, without examining whether he were born of a Virgin, Tertul. A∣polog c. 5. or of Joseph and the Virgin. But withal it appears, that Justin Martyr, together with the , that is the Body of the Christians, were of the Opinion
which he defends against Trypho's Obje∣ctions; and that they defended it, as grounded upon the Authorities of the Apostles, and of Jesus Christ himself. Certainly if we give our selves the trouble to examine the Pains that Rabbi Jochanan takes to instruct the Babylonian Jews, of whom he was the Chief, how to answer the Christians who prov∣ed the plurality of Persons in the God∣head, out of the Books of the Old Te∣stament, we shall see that it was not a Doctrine brought up by Justin Martyr after Hadrians's time. Gemara in cap. 4. lib. Sanhedrin fol. 38. col. 2. This Rabbin par∣ticularly answers the Arguments which the Christians drew from those words, Gen. I. 26. Let us make Man in our own Image, together with the like words, Gen. XI. 7. Come, let us go down and confound their Language, and likewise from Deut. IV. 7. from 2 Sam. VII. 23. from Dan. VII. 9, And he reports a more antient Objection drawn from that which we read of the Angel, that conducted the Children of Israel in the Wilderness. Exod. XXIII. 21. Can any one that hath not lost his Reason, ima∣gine that Rabbi Jochanan, who liv'd amongst the Jews a little after the Year of our Lord 170, and in a Countrey
that was almost always at War with the Roman Empire, should go about to con∣fute the Notions of Justin Martyr, whose name it is not likely he had ever heard of, if these Notions had not been common to all Christians? At least if he had seen that these Notions generally gain'd ground in the Belief of the People, would he not have spared his pains in answering those Arguments, and taken a shorter way to confute this Doctrine, by shewing that it was a new thing which he had seen the very beginning of, and that it was not yet so much as the common Opinion of those that were separated from the Synagogue? M. N. saith that those Doctrines of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and of the Tri∣nity, were not deliver'd in any of the Books of the New Testament; but that they have been invented since the wri∣ting of those Books: And yet the Jews reject these Books on this very account, because they contain these Doctrines; which, say they, are contrary to what hath been deliver'd in the Old Testament. It might seem a very strange thing that the Jews should find these Doctrines in the Gospels, and the other Books of the New Testament; and that the Ʋnitarians,
who call themselves Christians, and therefore ought to be much better ac∣quainted with these Books, should not be able to discover any such thing in them. Or if it be shewn them that these Do∣ctrines are there, in those very places which the Jews object against, that the Ʋnitarians should dispute against the na∣tural Sense of the words, and endeavour to elude it with forced and far fetch'd Interpretations. But the Strangeness goes off, when we see that these Gentlemen do not believe themselves. We cannot but judg so of this Writer, who, though he disputes and denies as confidently as the rest, yet confesses at last that these Do∣ctrines are in the New Testament; for he says they were foisted in there by the Trinitarians. And for this, if you will not take his word, you have Mahomet's that said it before him. But that the first Disciples of the Apo∣stles did not receive from them the Do∣ctrines either of the Trinity, or of the Godhead of our Saviour; of this he is certain, because they were not known before Justin Martyr's time. Plin. lib. X. Epist. 97. If so, what could Pliny the Younger mean? Who, after he had informed himself of the Worship of the Christians, about the
year of our Lord 106, gave this account of it to Trajan, That the Christians wor∣shipped Christ as a God; for it was in their publick Worship that, Luciani Philopatris he saith they did carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere, say a Hymn to Christ as God. What could the Author of the Philopatris, that goes un∣der the name of Lucian, mean by teach∣ing that the Trinity is the God of the Christians? V. Bulli def. Fid. Nic. p. 124, 125. This Author was contem∣porary with Justin Martyr, and very well knew the Christian Religion, and attributes this Doctrine to St. Paul the Apostle. What could be the meaning of Trypho, who was Justin's Adversary, Justin. M. adv. Try∣phonem. in objecting it so often to the Christians that they worshipped Jesus Christ as a God? What could be the meaning of the Phi∣losopher Celsus, that flourished under M. Orig contra Cels. p. 51,  162. Aurelius, when he reproach'd the Chri∣stians with believing the Divinity of our Saviour, as a Doctrine that was gene∣rally condemned both by the Jews, and by the Gentiles? Though M. N. knoweth but little of the Writings of those times, and there∣fore may be excused for thinking others to be as ignorant as himself in these mat∣ters; yet he ought not to take all the
World to be such Fools, that he may pass upon them what he will by his bare Affirmation. But it is plain that he doth so in these following Instances, which have no other bottom but his vain Ima∣ginations. Justin Martyr publish'd his Dialogue about the year of our Lord 140. It is a Dispute with the Jews in defence of the Christian Faith. Well, what then? He tells us that Justin ad∣vanceth a Doctrine before wholly un∣heard of, concerning the Person of Jesus Christ, and the Nature of God; namely, that Jesus Christ is God, and that he ought to be worshipp'd; that he was begotten of the Father before all Crea∣tures; that there are in the Godhead Three that are different numero, though not . He tells us farther, that as soon as Justin had publish'd this Work, which was in Greek, and which was un∣known to the greatest part of the Chri∣stians, all the World forsook the Ideas which they had before of the Deity, and of the Person of our Saviour; and that they began every where to worship him, whereas they before look'd upon him as a meer Creature. He tells us that hereby they gave a new and
just Scandal to the Jews, and made the convert Gentiles return to the Idola∣try which they had forsaken. He saith, the Nazarens and the Ebionites opposed themselves to this Innovation; but all in vain; for all the World was so inchanted with this Novelty, that they run into it blindfold. It was fol∣low'd and embraced both by Clergy and People throughout all Nations. Surely M. N. must believe that Justin M. had Apostles whom he sent to all parts, and bestow'd on them the gift of Tongues, and of working Miracles; otherwise how could he be able in thirty years to overthrow that Gospel which Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and their Successors, had been now near an hundred years in establishing? For not long af∣ter this, about the year 170, L. I. c. 2, 3, & L. III. c. 4. Irenaeus declares that the common Faith of the Churches all over the World was that of the Trinity, and of the Godhead of our Saviour. The Apostles also of Justin Martyr must necessarily have been more powerful than our Saviour's Apo∣stles. For according to Trypho the Jew, and according to M. N. the Gospel would have been much more probable,
if it had not been perplex'd with the Doctrines of the Trinity, and of the God∣head of the Messias. What is singular in this System of M. N's. is, that according to him the Jews were not sensible of this change, nor did they ever reproach the Christi∣ans with it; that the Pagans and their Philosophers did not take notice of it, nor ever objected it against the Christi∣ans; that all the Christians throughout the whole Roman Empire receiv'd the change without the least dispute; that those without the bounds of the Roman Empire receiv'd it without any the least repugnance; in a word, that these Christians, that were so ready to run to Martyrdom for the defence of their Religion, which in the esteem of M.N. had been so very reasonable in case there had been nothing in it of the Tri∣nity, and of the Godhead of Jesus Christ; were still more ready to throw away their Lives in defence of a Do∣ctrine that was new, and that M. N. thinks more extravagant and absurd than any that was ever before heard of in the World.
We learn from an Anonymous Au∣thor, Enseb. Hist. Eccl. V. 28. that writ in the beginning of the Third Century, that Artemon boldly af∣firm'd that which M. N. maintains at this time, viz. that the first Disciples of the Apostles knew nothing of the Trinity, nor of the Incarnation of the Word; and that the Doctrine which affirms that Jesus Christ was a meer Man, was the Doctrine of the Christi∣an Church, till the time of Victor Bishop of Rome, and of Zephyrin, that is till about the year of our Lord 190, or 200. M. N's Assertion is a little more within compass. He contents himself with saying that the Doctrine of the Ʋnita∣rians was the common opinion of the Christian Church till the time of Justin Martyr. So that he allows the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Godhead of our Saviour, to be fifty years older than Artemon did. Another Unitarian Wri∣ter, that may be a little modester than M. N. may afterwards happen to re∣form his account, and so carry up the Original of the Faith that we defend as high as the time of Jesus Christ, or the Apostles; and yet he may oppose it at last as M. N. doth, by questioning
the Authority or the Purity of the Scrip∣tures. But after this General Reflection up∣on M. N's System, which may be suffi∣cient to overthrow the whole design of his Treatise against Dr. Bull, we shall enter into a more particular Considera∣tion of what he sets forth, to give some sort of account of the Chymerical Sy∣stem which he hath framed. CHAP. III. A Review of the Witnesses which M. N. brings in general for the Opinions of the Unitarians before the first Coun∣cil of Nice. M. N. makes no scruple of charging Dr. Bull with unfair dealing, for bringing the Authority of but twenty Do∣ctors, whom he calls Approved Men, to prove the consent of the whole Church to the Doctrine of our Saviour's Divinity before the Council of Nice, when he can produce two hundred that held the Ʋni∣tarians Doctrine upon this point; and
thereupon he triumphs over the Doctor for having impos'd upon his Reader, by the liberty which he hath taken to pick out what Authorities he pleas'd, and to reject such as condemned his opi∣nion. But M. N. is grosly mistaken; for Dr. Bull hath followed the Method of Vin∣centius Lirinensis, which is approved by all Christians, and by M. N. himself: It is this, that a Doctrine is to be accounted Catholick, when it hath the approbation of all, every where, and at all times. That the belief of the Divinity of our Saviour had this Character the Doctor hath proved by above twenty Wit∣nesses, which he hath brought out of several places of them that lived in se∣veral Ages, before the first Nicene Coun∣cil, which Witnesses were look'd upon always as Orthodox in those times. Twenty Authors of this Character are sufficient to establish this truth. If Dr. Bull hath qualified these twenty Witnesses as approved Fathers, he might very well call them so, both because these Authors have been always look'd upon as true Disciples of the Apostles, and also because the Doctor hath quoted
only such Books as the Church hath always reputed authentick or worthy of those illustrious Authors. M. N's two hundred pretended Wit∣nesses, whose works are perished by reason of their Errors, are a Dream of his own; and consequently are of no authority in the least to be thus oppo∣sed in a heap to the Fathers that are proposed by Dr. Bull. But who after all are these Witnesses that in those Apostolical times maintain'd the Doctrine of the Ʋnitarians? M. N. reckons among his Witnesses: Theodotion, Symmachus Paulus, Samosatenus, Theodo∣rus of Byzantium, Apollonides, Hermophi∣lus, Lucianus, the Authors of the Apo∣stolical Recognitions and Constitutions: Melito Bishop of Sardis, the Nazarens, the Ebionites, whom he supposeth to have had great Churches in Palestine, in Syria, and in Arabia, and the Mineans that were spread all over Asia; moreover all the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem. All this is but a Chimaera of M. N's, who Fancies what he pleaseth, and after∣wards Disputes for it, as if he writ for none but ignorant People.
1st. We have Reason to wonder, how M. N. came to forget Artomon, who is mention'd by the Fathers of the Second Council of Antioch, as the first Author that held the Opinions of Paulus Samo∣satonus, which they condemned about the Year 270; so obscure and unknown were the Names of the rest of them at that time. 2ly. Why doth he not take Care to oppose to Dr. Bull's Witnesses, some Au∣thors that were Succcessors to the Apo∣stles, and that lived in the Ages next their Times? For he doth not quote any Writer, but such as lived after Justin Martyr's time; and Melito the most an∣tient of his pretended Witnesses present∣ed his Apology to M. Aurelius, about the Year of our Lord 169, or perhaps some years later. 3ly. How unreasonably doth he couple the Ʋnitarians, that thought Jesus Christ to be meer Man, or begotten of Joseph and Mary, or of Mary by the operation of the Holy Ghost, to such as Lucian Presbyter of Antioch, and the Authors of the Recognitions and Constitutions, who own'd the Divinity of Jesus Christ and his Pre-existence, tho' their Concep∣tions
of the Divinity were very imper∣fect, and not very agreeable to the Scri∣ptures and good Sense? The Arrians as M. N. tells us, and particularly Eusebius of Caesarea were the greatest Enemies of the Ʋnitarians: Nevertheless he doth them the Favour to reckon them among the Ʋnitarians, to oppose them to the Witnesses that are brought by Dr. Bull. It is plain that he doth this to abuse ignorant People, who do not examine so closely into Matters. The Arians did own the Pre-existence of the Word, and proved it from Texts of both Old and New Testament; and the Ʋnitarians and Socinians reject it as a Doctrine that hath no ground in Sacred Books. But for all that M. N. takes in those that main∣tain'd the opinion, which was after∣wards defended by Arius, among the Disciples of Artemon and Paulus Samosa∣tenus, as some kind of Officers take in any that come in their way to make a false Muster, not regarding how fit they are for service, for they intend them on∣ly for a present shew. Let us look a little more particularly into the Characters of M. N's Witnesses. The most ancient of them is Melito Bi∣shop
of Sardis, whom one would not have expected in his Roll, for this Me∣lito writ a Treatise with this Title,  which is as much as to say, about the Incarnation. And yet M.N. Euseb. L. IV. c. 26. list's him for an Ʋnitarian because he writ another piece Intituled,  M. N. infers from this Title, that Melito held that Jesus Christ was a Creature; but thereby he only betrays his Ignorance. For it appears by the Title of the Book that Melito was so far from designing to prove that Jesus Christ was but a Creature, as M. N. falsly imagines, that he writ it to shew that Jesus Christ was not a Creature, but the only Son of God by Generation properly so called. His scope being to solve an Objection which was made a∣gainst the Filiation of the Son, out of that Greek Translation of the VIII. of Proverbs in which the Divine Wisdom saith  God created me in the beginning of his way; which Passage Justin M. hath consider'd in his Dia∣logue with Trypho, P. 284. and the other Fathers have explain'd it against the Objections of the Arians. That this is no ill grounded conjecture, will appear by the
Testimony of an Author, that writ in the beginning of the Third Century a∣gainst the Heresie of Artemon, who reck∣ons Melito among the defenders of our Saviours Divinity. Eusch. L. V. c. 28. Nam Irenaei quidem, & Melitonis, & reliquorum scripta, quis est qui ignoret, in quibus Christum Deum simul & hominem praedicaverunt? For who is there that doth not know the works of Irenaeus, and Melito, and others, in which they have set forth Christ both as God and Man? The Second Witness that M. N. reck∣ons upon, is Theodotion, who was by some People, as Jerom tells us, affirm'd to be an Ebionite. Epiphanius saith, that he was a Pagan by Birth, and turn'd Christian. But what fort of Christian? He profest the Opinions of Tatian, of Mar∣cion, and of Ebion. After this he turn'd Jew, renouncing Christianity and receiv∣ing Circumcision. He learn'd Hebrew, and translated the Old Testament in the time of the Emperor Severus. This is M. N's mighty Critick, and his Witness of the highest Authority. I must Con∣fess, that some of the Greek Churches had so good an Opinion of Theodotions Translation of Daniel, that they pre∣ferr'd
it before the Septuagint Version. But how doth this prove that Theodoti∣on, if he was sometimes an Ebionite, was therefore lookt upon as an orthodox Christian, or one to whose Judgment they ought to pay any great deference? Besides, who doth not know that the Sy∣rian and Latin Churches, who had the Septuagint translated into Syriack and Latin, did constantly follow the Septua∣gint in the Book of Daniel? Symmachus is another of M. N's Wit∣nesses, but he is just such another as Theo∣dotion, that is, only such a one, as a Wri∣ter, that regarded his Credit, would be asham'd to reckon of his side. Symma∣chus was by Religion a Samaritan; he left the Samaritans because they had not a sufficient value for his Merits, and em∣braced the Jewish Religion; he was disgu∣sted at the Jews because they also did not preferr him as he thought he deserv'd, and therefore he turn'd Christian; after∣wards he went over to the Ebionites, and undertook to write for their Opinions. This he did in a Comentary upon S. Mat∣thew's Gospel, not that which we have, but the Nazarens Gospel, which all Christi∣ans since have lookt upon as an Apochry∣phal
piece, and a meer Forgery. Hath not M. N. great reason to triumph in the Merits of such an Author? Now for another of his Witnesses, no less remarkable than the former. He brings in Theodotus a Currier, who was born at Byzantium, and came afterwards to live at Rome. There he was Excommuni∣cated by Pope Victor, for being the first Teacher of this Heresie in that City. He was the more remarkable, because Artemon, or some of his Disciples after∣wards, had the impudence to say, that Victor himself was a maintainer of this Heresie, and that before Victors being Bi∣shop of Rome, the Doctrine that asserted Jesus Christ to be meer Man was receiv'd by the Church without any Contradi∣ction. These are the words of that Writer. Euseb. V. c. 28. Quomodo eos non pudet hujus∣modi calumniam adversus Victorem concin∣nare, cum certo sciant Theodotum coriari∣um, qui defectionis illius Deum abnegantis parens & author fuit, primusque Christum nudum hominem esse asseruit, per Vi∣ctorem à communione ecclesiae ejectum fuisse. Nam si, ut aiunt, Victor eadem sentiebat quae illorum docet impietas, cur Theodotum opinionis illius authorem ab ec∣clesiâ
removit? How are they not a∣sham'd, saith he, to throw this ca∣lumny upon Victor, when they very well know that Theodotus the Currier, who was the Father and Author of that Apostacy of denying God, and who was the first that asserted Jesus Christ to be meer Man, was cast out of the Communion of the Church by Victor? For if, as they say, Victor was of the opinion which they impiously hold, why did he excommunicate Theo∣dotus, who was the Author of that Opinion? As for Apollonides and Hermophilus, who are produced by M. N. with such high Characters, he must either be whol∣ly void of shame, or he hath never read that part of Eusebius which I have now quoted. For see the Character which this Anonymous Author in Eu∣sebius gives of them. After having set forth that they despised the simpli∣plicity of the Scriptures, and studied only human Learning and Sciences, making them a rule by which to judge of matters of Faith, He accuseth them of having corrupted the Sacred Books under pretence of Correcting them; he
offers to convict them of having falsified the Scriptures by comparing the Co∣pies that were in their hands, and by shewing the diversity of Readings that was to be found in their own Co∣pies. This Corruption he chargeth particularly on the Copies that were revised by Theodotus, and those that were revised by Asclepiodotus. He sheweth that Hermophilus had also made several Corruptions in the Text, and that Apollonides had done the like in a first and second review. And then he makes this reflection upon the bold Impiety of these Men; Quantae porro audaciae sit ejusmodi facinus, ne ipsos qui∣dem ignorare credibile est. Aut enim sa∣cras scripturas à Sancto Spiritu dictatas esse non credunt, ac proinde infideles sunt; aut semetipsos Spiritu Sancto sapientiores esse existimant, ac proinde quid aliud sunt quam Daemoniaci? Neque enim negare possunt hoc facinus à se admissum esse, cum ipsorum manu descripta snt exem∣plaria, neque ab illis à quibus in Chri∣stianâ side instituti sunt ejusmodi codices acceperint, Nec ostendere possint exempla∣ria, ex quibus sua illa deseripserunt. And for such a Crime as this, it is scarce to
believ'd, that they could be ignorant how horrible a thing it is. For they must either believe, that the Holy Scriptures were not dictated by the Holy Ghost, and then they were Infi∣dels; or they must think that they are wiser than the Holy Ghost, and if so, what are they but Daemoniacks? Nor can they deny that they are guilty of this Crime, for the Copies are of their own hand writing, and they neither receiv'd such Books from those who in∣structed them in the Christian Faith, nor can they produce the Originals out of which they transcribed them. Paulus Somasatenus Bishop of Antioch was a true Socinian, for he acknow∣ledg'd nothing more than human to be in our Lord Jesus Christ. He suc∣ceeded Demetrius in that See, but soon after his coming in, he was discover'd to be an Impostor that conceal'd He∣retical Notions. Whereupon they as∣sembled a Council against him at An∣tioch. There at first he avoided Con∣demnation by making before the Council, and all the people there as∣sembled, a satisfactory Profession of the Catholick Faith, after he had used
many vain endeavours to disguise his Opinions. Afterwards he relapsed in∣to his Heresie which himself had condemned, and he was so well dis∣cover'd and convicted of it, that he could not escape being condemned in a very numerous Council, that was assembled upon his account out of se∣veral Provinces of the Roman Empire. And in a Synodical Epistle yet extant, they acquainted the world what kind of Man he was. Particularly they shew'd how he made the Episcopal Dignity a means to heap up excessive ri∣ches; they shew'd, his Ambition, in having joyn'd to his Episcopal Office, the tem∣poral Dignity of being Ducenarius, which render'd him formidable to all the people of Antioch; his Vanity, in seeking applause in the Church as if he were on a Theatre; and his Licen∣tiousness, in keeping young Wenches in his house, and suffering his Clergy to do the like, and so indulging them in their Lewdness, that he might be himself supported in his. This is the brave Man whom the Ʋnitarians so highly exalt.
Domnus being set up in Pauls room, could not get Possession of the Bishop's house in Antioch; that City being then in Possession of Zenobia Queen of Pal∣myra, who was half a Jew, and there∣fore could not but favour Paul, being so near her in Religion. But soon af∣ter, the Emperor Aurelian having got Possession of the City, and there con∣quer'd Zenobia, receiv'd Complaints from the Church of Antioch against Paul, who, notwithstanding his depri∣vation, kept possession of the Bishop's house, and also from Paul who com∣plain'd of the Injustice of those that condemned him. Aurelian being wil∣ling to gratifie them that were most capable to do him Service, and not willing to concern himself otherwise in their Affairs, referr'd the considera∣tion of these complaints to the Bishops of the Diocesses' of Rome and Millan. They condemned Paul as a Heretick, whereupon he was driven out of the Bishops house by command of the Emperor Aurelian. Euseb. L. VII. c. 27. & se{que} After which we hear no more of him, but that his Sect was continued by one Lucian Priest of that City, who was therefore
excommunicated by three Bishops of Antioch sucessively. This Lucian our Author will have to be the same with the famous Lucian Priest of Antioch, who was Martyr'd about sorty years after the outing of Paulus Samosatenus. We cannot blame our Socinians that they are willing to adorn their Sect with his Name, for did so the Arrians before them, being taught so to do by their Master Arius, who pretended to be this Lucian's Disciple, as appears by his Letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia, whom he calls Collucianist, because they both held the Opinions of Lucian. But as it is cer∣tain that no Man can be both Arrian and Samosatenian, Epiphan. Haeres. 69. p. 732. for the Arrians Anathe∣matize the Samosatenians as damnable Hereticks, so that Lucian the Martyr was of neither of those Sects, it appears by the Creed which is yet extant, and by other Testimonies which the learn∣ed Dr. Bull hath brought together in the Book that M. N. pretends to an∣swer. For the Apostolical Recognitions and Constitutions; these Books do not at all make for M. N's Opinion, because they
are full of Arrian Doctrines, which are not consistent with those of our Ʋni∣tarians. But M. N. hath a mind to shew that he is not too scrupulous in his choice of Witnesses. Though he condemns these very Writers of extra∣vagancy, for believing that they saw sufficient Proofs of the Pre-existence of Jesus Christ as to his Divinity in the Books of the Old and New Testament, but nothing comes amiss to him, he knows how to make use of any thing that comes in his way, whether it makes for him or against him. Which Licentiousness of his in a matter of so great importance as this is, will not recommend him to the good esteem of any judicious Reader. But hitherto he hath brought his Authorities single, now he comes with whole Armies of them together. He tells us of whole Churches of the Mi∣naeans, or otherwise of the Nazarens, that were in the time of S. Jerom spread all over the East. This, saith M. N. is what S. Jerom shews in his 89th. Epi∣stle, which was to St. Austin. One that understands the Notitia of those times, can scarce tell where to
find these pretended Churches which M. N. proposeth as Authorities for the Ʋnitarian Doctrine: And indeed it is in vain to look for them; for in a word, they were no other than Jews, such as were in the Body of the Sy∣nagogue, who were by the Pharisees accounted Nazarens, and so condemn∣ed as Hereticks, because tho' they profest Judaism, they notwithstanding acknowledged Jesus Christ to be the Messias whom God had promised to their Nation. See the words of S. Jerom. Ʋsque hodie per totas Orientis Synagogas inter Judaeos haeresis est, quae dicitur Mineorum, & à Pharisaeis nunc usque damnatur: quos vulgò Nazaraeos nuncu∣pant, qui credunt in Christum filium Dei natum de Virgine Maria, & eum dicunt esse qui sub Pontio Pilato passus est & resurrexit: in quem & nos credimus: sed dum volunt & Judaei esse & Christiani, nec Judaei sunt, nec Christiani. There are at this time in all the Synagogues amongst the Jews of the East some Hereticks that go by the name of Minaei, who to this very day are condemned by the Pharisees and called Nazarens; they believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God born of the
Virgin Mary, and they say it was he who suffer'd under Pontius Pilate, and rose again the Third day from the Dead. This could be no other than the same Jesus in whom we believe. But while they would be both Jews and Christians, they become neither Jews nor Christians. Must he not have lost all sense of Shame that goes to impose thus upon his Reader? It is true, that S. Ʋpon Isa. C. V. v. 18. Jerom tells us, That the Jews curst the Christians in their Synagogues by the Name of Nazarens, and still to this day they give that Name to all that acknow∣ledge Jesus Christ to be the Messias; thinking thereby to perswade us, that because Jesus Christ lived at Nazareth, which was in the Tribe of Zabulon, there∣fore by consequence he could not be the promised Messias. But doth it fol∣low from thence that the Nazarens or the Minaeans, of whom S. Jerom speaks before, were not Members of the Sy∣nagogue? And being so they were properly Jews and not Christian Ʋni∣tarians. I have but one thing more to say in this place, of the Witnesses which M. N. brings against Dr. Bull, being
afterwards to speak of the Cerinthians, of the Ebionites, and of the fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem. But here I can∣not but take notice how he endeavours to impose upon his Reader, Ʋpon Euseb. L. V. c. 11. when he quotes Valesius, and makes him say; that the Errors that were in the Books of some of the antient Writers, soon made their Works to be neglected, and at length to be totally lost. M.N. being now to hunt about for Witnesses, catcheth up these among the rest, ima∣gining that all those whose works are perisht were Ʋnitarians, and among the rest he reckons Papias, Hegesippus and Clemens Alexandrinus. But he wrests the words of Valesius; for he speaks of Errors in general, and not particularly of those of the Ʋni∣tarians. Tis a plain Mark that the thing was so; because its certain, that Clemens Alexandrinus was reckon'd a∣mong the Defenders of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the Au∣thor that refuted Artemon in the begin∣ning of the Third Century, of whom there is a Fragment in Eusebius. L. V. c. 28. I shall make the same appear of Hegesippus in what followeth, and it will be easie
to judge by Parity of reason that the like holds true of Papias. CHAP. IV. That neither the Authors of the Apo∣stles Creed, nor Clemens Ro∣manus were of the opinions of the Unitarians. SINCE my principal Design is only to shew the vanity of M. N's System, I shall not stay to examine what M. N. objects against Dr. Bull's Authorities. The Doctor, as he saith, brings his Authorities from forged pieces, which he makes use of as if they were Apostolical writings, such as, the Epistle of Barnabas, Hermas, Pastor, and the Epistles of St. Ignatius, upon all which M. N. Criticizes to make a shew of his Learning in Antiquity. It would be ridiculous to enter the Lists with M. N. in a dispute concern∣ing the Antiquity, or the Authority of those pieces that are quoted by Dr. Bull, these Subjects having been sufficiently
handled by learned Men of the first Rank; and it is in vain for M. N. to expect, that his few petty Objections will carry the Point against their Ar∣guments and Decisions. But for Dr. Bull, it is enough to have proved that these pieces were written before the first Council of Nice, which the Socinians accuse of having innovated, and that they plainly teach the Doctrine which the Council of Nice have defined. This is what M. N. hath not ventured to deny. But let us suppose, if he pleases, and if he thinks it will do him any service, that these pieces were forged in the be∣ginning, or even in the middle of the second Centery, as M. N. pretends, doth it follow, that the Testimony of these Authors is of no value, or considera∣tion to prove that the Divinity of our Saviour was the current Doctrine of those times in which these pieces were written? M. N. hath very little Judg∣ment or Consideration if he thinks so. These, saith he, were forged pieces; but he cannot deny, First, But that they did hold a considerable Rank a∣mong the Ecclesiastical Books, in the
times before the first Nicene Council, and that many Churches read some of them publickly with great venerati∣on. Secondly, If they were forged he cannot deny but that it was for some other end, than to make this Doctrine of Jesus Christ's Divinity to be receiv'd in the Church, one needs but read them to make him agree to all this. As for Ignatius's Epistles, M. N. sup∣poseth that they were invented to con∣firm the Authority of Ecclesiastical Or∣ders, and from hence he takes occasion to shew his Talent in railing against the Clergy. But then that these pieces might pass for genuine, the Forgers of them must have spoke of the person of Jesus Christ, as he was generally spoken of in those times in which they lived. So that M. N. gets nothing by all this, unless he can pretend that Ju∣stin Martyr, or some of his first Disci∣ples that made these counterfeit pieces, conform'd them to his own Principles and Opinions. But how wisely doth M. N. suppose, that Clemens Alexandrinus might take that piece which goes under Barnabas's Name to have been written by Barnabas
the Apostle, notwithstanding that the Writer of it plainly taught and main∣tain'd that Doctrine of the Divinity of Christ; and yet M. N. in the Chapter next before, had affirm'd that Clemens's Hypotyposes were slighted and lost for this reason, because they so much a∣bounded with the Seed of Arianism and Ʋnitarianism? After this we have no great reason to rely upon M. N's Judg∣ment. I shall not take notice of his insipid railleries upon Pionius's Revelation a∣bout St. Ignatius's Epistles. There are none but weak People that look upon it as truth. But one must make him∣self very ridiculous to take occasion from thence to doubt of Polycarp's Mar∣tyrdom, which was asserted by the Church of Smyrna, whereof he was Bishop, in their Epistle that is extant in Eusebius. Those that shew their Wit in taking advantages against Truths of History, from the Fables that were in∣vented in obscure times, shew they have very little strength either of Wit or Judgment. A Judicious Man will al∣ways take care not to confound Truth with Fable, nor will he go to disprove
a Matter of Fact, or a certain Truth by a Fable that was tackt to it in after ages. For while he affects to make the ignorant laugh at the ridiculousness of the Fable, he will only stir up the in∣dignation of the Lovers of Truth, who cannot endure to see it treated in that manner. I shall now consider the Witnesses that M. N. brings against us as of un∣contestable Authority, and which he saith, prove the Doctrine of the Ʋni∣tarians to have been universally received by the Church in the time of the Apo∣stles and of their Successors, until Justin Martyr's time, whom he is pleased to brand with the Infamy of being an Innovator in the Christian Faith. To this end he musters up the Apostles as Authors of the Creed, St. Clemens Ro∣manus a Disciple of St. Paul, and the Primitive Churches that were planted by the Apostles, under the names of Nazarens, Mineans, or Alogians, and the Author of the Recognitions, who, if we may believe him, were all Ʋnitari∣ans. If we ask him, why he reckons the Authors of the Creed among the Ʋni∣tarians,
he tells us, that they have made no mention either of the Trinity, or of the Divinity of Jesus Christ; but that they have described our Lord Jesus Christ as a Man, though not as a com∣mon one because of his miraculous Con∣ception. If we ask him, why he af∣firms that the Apostles were Authors of that Creed, he tells us, that Vossius and Dupin deny'd it was theirs, only because this Creed passeth over in silence the Mysteries which the Papists and Protestants look upon as the foundation of their Religion, and thereupon he takes a great deal of pains to confute Vossius and Dupin. It is indeed a Question of no very great importance, whether or no the Apostles were Authors of this Creed. But setting aside that matter for the present, here are Matters of Fact to be considered. 1st. Though it is certain that the Apostles did teach their Catechumens, whether Jews or Pagans, an Abridge∣ment of the Christian Doctrine; yet no one hath spoke of it before Irenaeus, who giveth us a form of Christian Doctrine
much differing from that which hath been in the Roman Church. 2dly. We do not read that this form was in use among any of the Hereticks that were known in the first or second Century. 3dly. Most part of the Articles of the Creed were framed in opposition to the Heresies which arose in those Antient times. For example, the Article which saith that the Father of Jesus Christ was the Maker of Heaven and Earth, was oppos'd to the Heresie of Marcion. The Article that Jesus Christ is the only be∣gotten Son of God, was oppos'd to the Heresie of Cerinthus, who held that Je∣sus was a meer Man, and that the Christ descended upon him in the shape of a Dove, and left him again when he was ready to die. Those that upon a critical Examina∣tion of the Antiquity of the Creed, have deny'd that it was composed by the Apostles, had not the least thought of the design which M. N. layeth upon Vossius and Dupin. Nor could M. N. suspect them of such a design, unless he imagines, as there is reason to be∣lieve
he does, that all the Trinitarians, and also the Arrians, have for above 1500 years repeated this Confession of Faith, without being sensible how in∣consistent it was with their Belief, and that Vossius and Dupin were the only Men that did perceive it, yet did not dare to shew that they did; but left it to M. N. to discover what they thought, and he hath been so kind as to do it for them. Whatever we judge in this matter, if M. N. had thought of what he writ, 1st. He would have made the same reflection in this place, that he did in condemning Barnabas's Epistle. There he proved that the Antients could not really believe it to be Barnabas's; for if they had, they would have reckon'd it among the Canonical Books. This rea∣soning is just and solid, but it destroys all that M. N. hath writ, to prove that this Creed was composed by the Apo∣stles, and that they dictated it in so many words; for where is that Eccle∣stastical Writer that ever reckon'd the Creed which we call the Apostles, among the Canonical Writings of the New Testament? And doth M. N. who is so
witty upon the Revelation of Pionius about St. Polycarp's Martyrdom, take that for genuine, which we read in a Sermon that goes under the name of St. Austin, how every one of the Apo∣stles contributed his Article to make up the number of twelve in the body of this Creed? 2dly. What did M.N. think of, when he affirm'd so positively that Rufinus, who writ about the year of Christ 400. was the first that explain'd the Apostles Creed? Did not the Church of Jerusa∣lem pretend to teach their Catechumens the Apostles Creed, upon which their Bishop St. Cyrill writ his Exposition? Yet we see their Apostles Creed differs very much from that which we have in Rufinus, and Rufinus doth not pre∣tend that his Apostles Creed was used any where else but in Italy. By what Authority can M. N. make it appear, that the Church of Jerusalem left off the Creed of the Apostles to be used by them of Aquileia, and framed another for themselves that was unknown to the rest of the Christian World? I believe M. N. will never be able to perswade any reasonable Man, that the
Church, if it had receiv'd the Creed from the Apostles, in the same terms in which we have it, would ever have consented to let it be alter'd; nor would the Bishops have dar'd to substitute ano∣ther, there having been one already at Jerusalem; nor would the People, who had learnt it before their admission to Baptism, have ever receiv'd another from them; at least the imposing of it would have caus'd terrible divisions. It is very well known how Arianism prevailed in the East for sixty years, all which time the Arians without doubt put another sense on that Arti∣cle, And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. But after all, the People retained the Orthodox Sense of the Article; and the Ears of the People that had been baptized into the belief of the Trinity, were more pure than the Lips of their Teachers that endeavoured to impose upon them. But is not M. N. wholly singular in his Judgment of this matter? He pre∣tends, with his head full of the Ʋnita∣rian Opinions, to give us the sense of the Creed, and would make us believe that the Authors of it were Ʋnitarians.
But they that first quoted the Creed as an Abridgement of the Doctrine of the Church, were of a far different opini∣on; namely Irenaeus, who was proba∣bly as old as Justin Martyr, not elder than he, and who wrote within twenty years after him, being Bishop of Lions at that time; and Tertullian, who writ within fifty years of Justin Martyr, and was very well read in the Writings of the first Christians. Yet both these were so far of Justin's opinion, that they lookt upon those as Hereticks who would not acknowledge the eternal Divinity of Jesus Christ. How came they to strike in so early with Justin, and to suffer him so to impose upon them in so great a point of the Christian Faith? Were they so simple as not to discover that he put a quite different sense upon this Article from that which the Apostles designed when they made it, and which continued among all the Apostles Successors till the year of our Lord 150, which Irenaeus must needs have known, being then above thirty years of age when Justin writ, and Ter∣tullian, though he was younger, could not but have read or heard of this In∣novation.
But not to rely only on the Authority of Irenaeus and Tertullian, for the sense of that Article about the Person of Jesus Christ; we know the Jews understood very well the meaning of the words, Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; for they knew, as may be seen in several places in Philo, that the word , Lord, was equivalent to that of , or God; only that the first expresseth the Empire of God. How much better then was it known to the Christians? who, as Pliny saith, in his time, before Justin Martyr was born, sang in their Assembly a Hymn to Christ, as God. The title of only Son is of the same power with  among the Jews, as I shall shew from Philo, who often calls him the First-born; and St. Paul represents him under the same Idea, as being Heir of all things, b. . and by whom God made the World; and therefore justly the Object of Adoration of the An∣gels. Since we have not left us any Expli∣cation of the Creed by the Cerinthians or the Ebionites, which they could pre∣tend to have received from the Apostles, M. N. must pardon us if we stick to the
Notions, which the Fathers declared that they did receive from the Apostles, I say such Fathers as Irenaeus and Ter∣tullian, who were the first that mentioned that Rule of Faith, especially since they are comformable to those Notions of the antient Synagogue, and to the Writings of the New Testament. But have we not reason to admire the Fickleness of M. N's Judgment in letting himself discover a mighty Secret for an opportunity of shewing his Cri∣ticks? He tells us there are shrewd Pre∣sumptions, that to the Institution of Bap∣tism by our Saviour in the Gospel of St. Matthew, these words have been add∣ed, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. What are those Presumptions? He tells us only this one; It appears in the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles, that the Apo∣stles never baptized in that form of words, but only in the name of the Lord Jesus. But who told him that those words, In the name of Jesus, were the form in which they baptized? I should have thought those words had signified no more than baptizing them to be Disciples of Jesus, as baptizing
into Moses, or baptizing in the name of Paul, signifies no more than bapti∣zing them to be the Disciples of Moses or of Paul. And if these words were not the very form of Baptism, how can he say, that those other words, which Christ prescribed as his form, were never used by the Apostles, and therefore these words were foisted into the Gospel of S. Matthew by some Impostor? It would have been a very great satisfaction if he had told us whether he made this Discovery by comparing our S. Matthew with the Nazarens Copy, which is per∣haps to be found in MS. in some Li∣braries. But this would be to ask too much of him; for though he will not allow us this form that is in S. Matthew, he doth at the same time admit of the Apostles Creed, which is really no more than that form of Baptism, or the Pro∣fession of believing in the Father, in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, which they made before they were baptized. That which he tells us of S. Clement, is altogether new. Photias, saith he, and Petavius, and Huetius, three great Criticks, lament that S. Clement was only an Ʋnitarian; because he gives the
Person of Jesus Christ but very mean Characters, and infinitely below those of Divinity. M. N. quotes some passa∣ges of Clement, which he thinks have nothing in them too high; and because S. Clement in his Epistle, where he quotes that glorious Description which S. Paul hath made in his first Chapter to the Hebrews, did not quote the 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12th Verses, where Jesus Christ is called God, and where the Creation of the World is ascribed to him; tho' M. N. pretends thata convenient Solution may be put upon these words of S. Paul, ye he boldly affirms that it appears S. Clement acknowledged nothing in Christ more than Humanity; and that these five Verses of the first Chapter of the Epi∣stle to the Hebrews might well have been added by the like fraud, that hath been used in many places of the Epi∣stles and Gospels. His reason for it is, that S. Clement, who is said to have interpreted the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, could not be ignorant of the great Title of Jesus Christ, and would without doubt have exprest it, if he had designed to extol the Dignity of the Per∣son of our Saviour.
What a heap of false Suppositions is this? First, it is false that Photius believed S. Clement to be an Ʋnitarian. It is possible, that Photius might not observe in reading S. Clement's Epistle, that he treats Jesus Christ as God. But if Photius did not give all the at∣tention that he could in reading, doth it follow from thence that Clement was an Ʋnitarian? §. 1. & §. 58. We have by good for∣tune S. Clement's Epistle preserved to us, and we may judge of it our selves: when he wisheth, The Grace of God, and his Peace, may be multiplied through Jesus Christ, to them of Corinth; and adds at the end, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. What doth he mean, but that Jesus Christ may distribute the Grace of God? §. 16. And is not that the Sense of S. Paul, who wish∣eth, that Grace and Peace may be mul∣tiplied from God, and from Jesus Christ? When he saith, that our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Scepter of the Ma∣jesty of God, did not come, , in the Pomp of Grandeur and Pride, as he well might; but with all humilty, as the Holy Spirit had spoken of him Isaiah LIII; doth it not shew that he
followed the Description of S. Paul, who tells the Philippians; that our Lord Jesus Christ being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; or did not affect to seem equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant? Doth not this shew, that, according to S. Clement, our Lord Jesus Christ was in being before he chose the form in which he appeared? How can M. N. §. 21. who doth not be∣lieve that we ought to adore or call upon Jesus Christ, reconcile this Ex∣pression of S. Clemens, , &c. Let us pray to our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Blood was given for us? For this  properly signifies the Prayers that are made to God with adoration. What doth Clemens mean, §. 32. when he saith that Jesus Christ was born of A∣braham according to the flesh? Doth it not appear that he was well acquainted with S. Paul's distinction, Rom. IX. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen?
I don't mention that which he saith in §. 36. where he quotes the first of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where S. Paul, who follows the terms of Wisdom, VII. 26. exalts him above the Angels, as being the Son of God, and ascribes to him an Empire over all things, such as is described in Ps. CX. of which Em∣pire no Creture is capable. But I would fain know of what sort of Ʋnitarians M. N. will have Cle∣mens to have been? was he an Ebio∣nite? No. For he is continually quo∣ting the Writings of S. Paul, which the Ebionites rejected. Was he a Na∣zaren? No. For he quotes not only S. Matthew's Gospel according to our Greek Copy, but also the other Gospels, except S. John's; which was not then written. Was he a Cerinthian? No. For he quotes the Writings of the Old Testament. Sure this must have been a strange sort of Ʋnitarian. I know very well that M. N. observes that the title of Chief Priest is the most glorious Character that Clement gives to Jesus Christ, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, which is that we speak of. But after all, he ought not to be
ignorant, that that title in the stile of the first Christians, as well as the antient Jews, was the title of the . This may be proved from several places of Philo. Quis rerum divin. haer. p. 509. B.C. But I shall content my self with quoting this one. Caeterum illi ange∣lorum principi Sermoni antiquissimo hoc eximium donum concessit Pater Omnipo∣tens, ut in confinio stans, facturam à fa∣ctore discerneret. Idem supplex immortalem appellat pro mortalibus deprecans, & à summo rege legatione ad subditos sungitur. Quod donum tam libenter accipit, ut jactet etiam, dicens, & ego steteram medius inter vos & dominum, videlicet nec ingenitus ut Deus, nec genitus ut vos, sed inter ex∣trema medius, apud utrosque agens obsi∣dem; apud Creatorem, ut sides siat nun∣quam cum deleturum aut deserrum uni∣versum genus revolutum in perturbationem ab ordine; apud creaturam vero, ut ea certam spem habeat, nunquam Deo propitio curam operis sui defore. Nam ego denuncio creaturae pacem ab eo qui bella tollit Deo, pacis custode perpetuo Secondly, it is not true, that the Epi∣stle to the Hebrews was written origi∣nally in Hebrew, though some of the Antients have thought so upon a very
light conjecture, because, say they, he must have written in Hebrew to those who were Hebrews by birth. One needs but read it attentively, and com∣pare Rom. 12. with Heb. 10. and Heb. 1. with Coloss. 1. to see, that it is an Origi∣nal, and that it was written by S. Paul himself, as well as his other Epistles. No Man of Judgment, except M. N. could have thought otherwise, suppo∣sing that the Nazarens, to whom the Epistle to the Hebrews was directed, were so numerous in the East, because it highly reflects upon them to have lost the Original Tongue of that very Epistle, which was written to their Forefathers, and to have kept only the Greek Copy of it. Thirdly, it is the highest presump∣tion to conclude, because S. Clemens quotes only that which goes before, and that which follows in the first Epistle to the Hebrews, that those five Verses were foisted in after the Epistle was spread abroad and better known. At this rate of judging by Quotations, one that would take the pains to ob∣serve, might reject a great part of the Bible, and we could not be certain of any.
But saith M. N. the Epistle to the Hebrews was not reckoned a genuine piece of Scripture any where in the West, nor in many Churches in the East before the end of the fourth Cen∣tury; and that might have made it the more easie to have been corrupted. In this he shews what it is to meddle with things that he doth not under∣stand. It can't be denied, and this very Writer acknowledges, that Clemens Romanus quoted this Epistle, in the E∣pistle which he writ in the name, and by the order of the Church of Rome; so that by his own confession it was owned in the West in the Apostles times. Irenaeus, who also writ in the West, quotes the Epistle to the Hebrews: Ter∣tullian and S. Cyprian, who lived in Africa; all these quoted it as Canonical. But to put this matter out of question, S. Peter the Apostle is a Witness above all exception to prove that S. Paul writ an Epistle to the Hebrews. That which made several of the Antients doubt of its Authority to∣wards the middle of the third Century, was the business of the Novatians, who
made use of its Authority to justifie their refusing to admit to publick Penance such as had faln into Idolatry to avoid persecution. But after all, if one seri∣ously considers M.N's method, it tempts one to wish that he was sent to preach the Gospel to the Mahometans, of whom some maintain, (as well as he) that the Gospels and Epistles have been cor∣rupted by the Christians in many pla∣ces, and that the Christians have soisted in what they pleased that made for their opinions. Now for another instance of M. N's honesty, where Dr. Bull hath quoted a place in Clement's second Epistle to the Corinthians, that might have solved the Objection. . The words signify, Brethren we ought so to think of Jesus Christ as of God, as of the Judge of the quick and the dead. There can no other Sense be put upon them, though M. N. saith they must be thus translated: Brethren we ought to think of Christ, as we do of God, namely, that he also is our Judge. If it is want of skill in the Greek that
makes M. N. commit such Error, and rail so at Dr. Bull for his own Igno∣rance; let the Socinians look them another Champion, for there is no Grammarian but will say he deserves to be whipt for construing it so. .... and  are said of the same Person, if I know any thing of Grammar. Photius understood it as Dr. Bull hath, and M. N. thinks Photius sincere. But what need we care whether Photius was a good Grammarian or no. §. 10. Doth not Clemens explain himself about the Preexistence of Christ, when he saith, Jesus Christ who hath saved us, being first a Spirit, and afterwards becoming flesh, and so he hath called us? No, saith M. N. let the Grammar be how it will, the Scriptures declare that Jesus Christ is Judge because he is a Man. Poor Man! Could he be capable of judging, that is to say, of knowing the Hearts, if he was but a Man? It is not said simply, as M. N. pretends it is, that Jesus Christ is to judge because he is a Man, but be∣cause he is the Son of Man, by Excel∣lence; he that is described by Da∣niel in the VIIth of his Prophesies, that is the Messias, who was to be so,
the Son of Man, as to be also the Son of God. CHAP. V. That the Nazarens, the Ebionites, the Minaeans and the Alogians, were justly looked upon as Here∣ticks. I Am now come to the Nazarens, the Ebionites, the Minaeans and the Alogians; whom M. N. represents to us as the true Depositaries of the Faith of the Apostles: And he endea∣vours to perswade us, that the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem, and Hegesip∣pus, who calls them Orthodox, and all the Bishops and People in the World that were in their Communion, were true Ʋnitarians. Dr. Bull having acknowledged, that if the Jews, who were converted by Jesus Christ and the Apostles in Ju∣daea, and who continued their Assemblies till the destruction of Jerusalem, did
not own the Divinity of Jesus Christ, but believed him a meer Man, that Question is at an end between the Socinians and us. M. N. sets himself to prove; First, that the first Christi∣ans were called Nazarens and Minae∣ans in Judaea. Then he proves from Epiphanius, that the Cerinthians who observed the Law of Moses, and the Nazarens began at the same time. He saith, that the Ebionites were the same with them, only they had a different name; because, tho' some of them be∣lieved Jesus to be born of the Virgin and of Joseph, and the rest acknow∣ledged him to be conceived of the Holy Ghost without Joseph, they still agreed that he was but a meer Man, which was the reason of Origen's saying that all the Jews that believed Jesus Christ to be the Messias were called Ebionites. From all this he concludes, that the first Disciples of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles, rejected the Do∣ctrine of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and that the Body of these Nazarens, under the Government of the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem, preserved the true Faith of the Apostles touching
the Person of Jesus Christ; that is as much as to say, they held the Opinion of the Ʋnitarians. It is not necessary to repeat what I have formerly said of the Minaeans, from the Testimony of S. Jerom in his 89th. Epistle to S. Austin, that they were in the Synagogue, and that they were not a Body of Christians. I shall on∣ly take notice, that the Name of Mi∣nim, that is to say, Hereticks, was ne∣ver originally given to any People, Sect; or Party of Christians. It was the Name which the Pharisees gave to the Jews that were Sadducees: Afterwards the Pharisees gave it to those that rejected their Traditions, whom they looked upon as Hereticks for that reason. Afterward the Jews gave that Name to the Christians, be∣cause in teaching that Jesus was God they seem'd to destroy the capital Ar∣ticle of the Jewish Religion, which is the Unity of God. But most parti∣cularly they gave that name to such Christians, as, tho' they continued in Communion with them, did neverthe∣less acknowledge Jesus to be the Mes∣sias.
As for the Nazarens, I acknowledge that the Christians were at first called by that Name in Judaea: But I deny that those, whom they afterwards call∣ed Nazarens or Ebionites, were the Body of the Apostles Disciples, that were established at Jerusalem or in Palestine. To convince M. N. of this, I desire he will consider: First, That those who followed the Doctrine of the A∣postles in Palestine, were indeed called Nazarens, but only by the Jews; be∣cause they acknowledged Jesus of Na∣zareth for the Messias, whom the Jews looked upon as a false Prophet. It is in this sense that they call the Dis∣ciples of Jesus Christ Hereticks, and their Doctrine an Heresie. [Act. 24.14.] In this sense they have continued to call the Christians Nazarens in that Curse which they pronounce in the Synagogue a∣gainst all Christians, as Justin Martyr saith [against Trypho p. 323.] But this Name of Nazarens came af∣terward to have another signification among the Christians, as may be seen in the ancient Writers. And this be∣gun without doubt after the Disci∣ples of Jesus Christ were called Chri∣stians,
which was first at Antioch, as St. Luke tells us, in the Acts. And indeed we do not see that the Nazarens were known after that time except among the Jews, who called the Christians so by way of reproach. Ta∣cit. An. 15. calleth them Christians hat were persecuted at Rome by Nero in the Year of our Lord 64. After that, Nero made Laws against them by the name of Christians. Pliny speaks of the Christians in Bithynia in Trajan's time. The Emperour Hadrian sent a Writing to Minucius Fundanus Pro-con∣sul of Asia, Eus. H. E. IV. 9, 10. in favour of the Christians. The Author of the Epistle to Diogne∣tus, which is among the Works of Justin Martyr, describes the Life of the Christians, but doth not call them Na∣zarens, yet he calleth himself a Dis∣ciple of the Apostles. Justin Martyr witnesses that even all the Hereticks took the general name of Christians. And those whom Barchocba persecuted in Palestine are called Christians: But they are never called Nazarens by Justin Martyr, who describes the Jews cruelties against them. Where then were the Nazarens, who were so fa∣mous
according to M. N. and who, if we may believe him, were the only true Christians in Palestine? Epiphanius speaks of Nazarens as Hereticks; Haer. 29. Sect. 7. but he can't decide whe∣ther they believed Jesus Christ to be a meer Man, or to be God. Indeed Irenaeus doth not speak of these Naza∣rens, whom he would not have for∣born to call Hereticks, believing as he did the Divinity of Jesus Christ, if they had denied it in his time, and espe∣cially if they had made any conside∣rable Body. Eusebius saith nothing of them. S. C. 4. Jerom mentions them in his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers, but doth not tell us their Opini∣ons. Theodoret saith, that the Naza∣rens, and the Ebionites were Hereticks, that appeared under the Reign of Domitian. It is plain, that these an∣tient Doctors would not have been at such a loss to shew the Belief of the Nazarens, if there had been great Chur∣ches through all Asia, as M N. ima∣gines. For these Fathers would (with∣out doubt) have known these Naza∣rens, and would have learnt their O∣pinions from the Books of their Au∣thors.
2dly. The primitive Names, such as that of Nazarens, are not always a mark of Succession in Doctrine. No one doubts that the Apostles Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch; and yet M. N. must acknowledge, that the Christians at Antioch and all over the World, held the same Faith with his pretended Nazarens at Jerusalem. How then should it come to pass, that Paulus of Samosata, Bishop of Antioch, should be condemned as an Heretick; who ac∣cording to M. N. was a true Nazaren. 3dly. How chanceth it that M. N. doth not observe what Epiphanius saith, that the Cerinthians and the Nazarens began at the same time? If by the Nazarens M. N. understandeth the first Disciples of the Apostles at Jerusalem, they began immediately after our Sa∣vour's Ascension, and not under the Reign of Domitian. As for the Cerin∣thians, Epiphanius assures us, that they began at Antioch a little before the De∣cree of Jerusalem, that is to say, about Seventeen years after our Saviour's Ascension. For if we may believe E∣piphanius, it was against Cerinthus's Do∣ctrines, that the Assembly was held at
Jerusalem. But after all, the antient Tra∣dition which is delivered by Irenaeus from the mouth of Polycarp, saith, Lib. III. c. 3. that Cerin∣thus was rejected at Ephesus by S. John; probably after his return from Patmos, that is after the Year of our Lord 96. 4thly. How can M. N. reconcile all this with what he says, that the Apo∣stles Creed was the rule of Faith in this Primitive Church? Were the Ebio∣nites or the Symmachians (who believ∣ed Jesus Christ to be born of Joseph and Mary) also of the Body of the Apostolical Church, Orig. . V. p. 272. & 274. and reckoned true Nazarens? This was a strange Com∣munion. The Ebionites had the Apo∣stles Creed. Then they believed Jesus Christ to be conceived of the Holy-Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, and notwithstanding communicated with such, as believed Jesus Christ to be born of Joseph and Mary. 5thly. Is M. N. in earnest when he saith, That Origen maintains that all the Jews who acknowledged Jesus Christ to be the Messias were called Ebio∣nites, and that the Ebionites are Naza∣rens, and consequently the antient School of the Apostles? Hath he forgot that
Origen accounted the Ebionites to be He∣reticks? Orig. a∣gainst Cels. L. V. p. 272. M. N. is forced to acknow∣ledge that he accounted them such; and so he calls them and distingui∣shes them from the Church. 6thly. What doth M. N. think of, when he condemns Epiphanius for say∣ing that the Ebionites rejected S. L. III. c. 26. Pauls Epistles, Againct. Cel. L. V. p. 274. Haeret. Fa∣bul. L. II. c. 1. and called him an Apostate? Doth not Irenaeus say the same thing. And Origen in his piece against Celsus? The like is also related by Theodoret. 7thly. I should be glad to know, if the Nazarens, or the Ebionites, or the Cerinthians were the same with those in the Apostles times, whom the Jews called Nazarens. Why doth not M. N. receive the Gospel of the Nazarens, and why doth he reject it, as Apo∣cryphal and Superstitious. Did these first Christians, who ought to have served for a Pattern to all others, in∣vent a Gospel that was rejected by the other Sects? 8thly. It would be well if M. N. would let us know how S. Matthew's Gospel, such as we have it with the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, and S. Lukes Gospel came to be received as Cano∣nical,
after they had been rejected as supposititious Peices by the Ebionites and the Symmachians, who were both of them Nazarens? 9thly. How came it to pass that the Ebionites, that is, the true Ʋnitarians, continued in Communion with the Ce∣rinthians, who affirmed that S. John's Gospel was written by Cerinthus, and not by S. John the Evangelist? But it is time now to undeceive M. N. if it be possible, and to give him a more faithful Account of the Cerinthians, and of the Ebionites, L. I. c. 25. than that which he hath set before us. See what Irenaeus saith of them. Cerinthus asserted, that the World was not made by God, but by a certain Virtue whol∣ly different, and very far from that Principality which is over all things, and which knew nothing of the God that is over all. As for Jesus Christ, he believed it impossible that he should be born of a Virgin, and therefore taught that he was born of Joseph and Mary like other men; tho' he did ex∣cell other men in Prudence and in Wis∣dom. He saith, that the Christ de∣scended upon Jesus, from the Principa∣lity
which is over all things, in the Likeness of a Dove, and then Jesus Christ revealed the Father, who be∣fore was not known; and that at last Christ, who was not capable of suffer∣ing, forsook Jesus, and left him to suffer Death. For the Ebionites, their Doctrines were not altogether so impious, but they received no other Gospel but S. Matthew's, and rejected the Apostle S. Paul as an Apostate. They observ∣ed all the Ceremonies of the Law, and lived as Jews, and adored Jerusa∣lem, as being the house of God. This is what Irenaeus saith of them; Ibid. L. I. c. 26. who also ascribes to them the Belief that Je∣sus Christ was born of Joseph and Ma∣ry; which was common to them with the Cerinthians: L. III. c. 24. And saith that in this they followed the Doctrine of Aquila, and of Theodotion. If there was any of them afterward, who believed Je∣sus Christ to have been conceived of the Holy Ghost without Joseph, they must have received this Belief after Tertullian's time. De earne Christi, c. 18. For he speaks of them as Irenaeus doth. How can M. N. forbear blushing for
his Folly, in looking on these People as the Disciples of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and affirming that the Chri∣stian Church was composed of such execrable Wretches? Could such as these receive the Apostles Creed? Could they look upon the Apostles as their Masters? Could they pass for Christi∣ans in the Judgment of any Man, that is himself a Christian? M. N. ought to think himself obliged to those that defend the Trinity, and the God∣head of our Saviour, for having deli∣vered the World from these people, who rejected the most Sacred Princi∣ples of the Christian Faith; and for having preserved to the Evangelists and Apostles the right which Jesus Christ had given them of being the Teachers of his Religion. As for the pretended Gospel of S. Matthew, which was in the hands of the Nazarens, it is easie to convince M. N. that he hath spoken at random when he builds so many things upon what he had heard of it. If he had been acquainted with S. Jerom his Works, he would have found some Quotations out of that Gospel of the
Nazarens, which would have undeceiv∣ed him. S. Jerom cites that Gospel in Ezek. 16. in Isai. 8. and in Matth. 13. and brings these words, as the words of our Saviour; Modo me arripuit ma∣ter mea, Spiritus Sanctus. Now my Mother the Holy Ghost hath possessed me. I am sure M. N. will never find these words in the true Gospel of S. Matthew. And for the sense of them, as it depends upon the knowledge of the Jewish Tradition, which M. N. condemns and despises so much, it will be a Riddle to him for ever, although they are easily understood by those who are acquainted with the Jewish Notions. After all, when M. N. is pleased, to make all the Christians that came out of the Synagogue to be called Ebio∣nites, and grounds his Assertion upon a passage of Origen, who saith, that those among the Jews, who received Jesus Christ for the Messias are called Ebionites; Ibid. L. II. p. 56. he imposes upon his Reader. For Origen doth not say, that these Jews left the Synagogue to make se∣parate Assemblies. Ib. Contr. Cels. L. II. What Author ever did say so? Origen speaks of people
that lived in the Body of the Syna∣gogue; much like what S. Jer. Ep. 89. ad Aug. Jerom saith in the passage that I have quoted. And indeed Origen exposes Celsus for his ignorance, in making a Jew speak to Jews that were converted to Chri∣stianity, otherwise then he ought to have done, for want of knowing that these Jews whom the Christians called Ebionites continued in the Body of the Synagogue, and observed the Laws of it. Tho' otherwise they confessed that Jesus Christ was the Messias promised to their Nation. CHAP. VI. That neither Hegesippus, nor the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem, were of the opinion of the Cerin∣thians, or the Ebionites: And that the Alogi were Hereticks as well as the Cerinthians. IT is easie to be judged from all this; how solidly M. N. refutes Dr. Bull, who maintains from a passage in He∣gesippus
that the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem were Orthodox, and ac∣knowledged the Divinity of Jesus Christ; and that all the other Bishops in the World, and particularly those of Rome were Orthodox, because they held Communion with the Bishops of Je∣rusalem. M. N. pretends on the other side: 1st. That Hegesippus in his accounts of Hereticks, doth not account the Cerin∣thians and the Ebionites among the He∣reticks: From whence it follows that he did not think them Hereticks, but Orthodox, and therefore Hegesippus was himself of their Opinion. 2dly. That this appears, because He∣gesippus was a Jew by Nation; that all the Jews converted to Christianity be∣ing Ebionites, according to Origen, He∣gesippus was also a Nazaren or an Ebio∣nite; and that the Nazarens being ac∣counted by Hegesippus to be Orthodox, therefore the Fifteen first Bishops of Jerusalem must have been Nazarens, and that all the rest of the Christian World was Nazaren, because in Com∣munion with them. It is enough to put one out of Pa∣tience
to have such a Man to deal with. M. N. saith Hegesippus was an Ebionite, that is, denied the Divinity of Christ. What Proof does he bring for this? He was originally a Jew. I will grant it him if he pleases. And that Hege∣sippus mentions S. Matthew's Gospel in Hebrew: I grant that also. But what then? Will M. N. from thence inferr, that Hegesippus was an Ebionite? That is a small piece of Sophistry. The E∣bionites, who were Jews of the Syna∣gogue, had in Hebrew a Book which they called S. Matthews Gospel; but it was not the same that we all now make use of. For the Ebionites had taken the liberty to cut off the genealogy of our Saviour, and what else they pleased out of S. Matthews Gospel, and had added to it what they thought fit, as I have shewn by S. Jerom his Testimony. And be∣cause Hegesippus was a Jew by Birth, that he was therefore an Ebionite: What a consequence is this? He was not a Jew of the Synagogue, but a Christian by profession; and he might as well make use of the pretended S. Matthew's Gos∣pel in Hebrew, as S. Jerom could tran∣slate it into Latin without being an Ebionite.
Secondly, Hegesippus converss'd at Rome with Anicetus, Eleutherus, and Soter, and found them of the same opinion with the fifteen first Bishops of Jeru∣salem: So according to M. N. all the other Bishops in the World, who were in their Communion, were Ebionites and Nazarens. If this consequence were good, I wonder how Hegesippus came to say, that the Church was pure from Heresie no longer than till the begin∣ning of the second Century. He ought to have said that the Church had pre∣served her virginity till this time, that is till the year 170. Whereas he saith expresly, that the Hereticks peep'd out of their holes, and began to corrupt the Apostles Doctrine immediately after their Deaths. Thirdly, If Hegesippus did not take the Cerinthians for Hereticks, how came it to pass that he continued for so long a time in Communion with the Roman Bishops, namely with those three great Bishops Anicetus, Eleutherus, and So∣ter? For that these Bishops accounted them Hereticks, it sufficiently appears from Irenaeus, who accounted them Hereticks; and was not in Commu∣nion
only, but in high esteem with those three Bishops, as well as was Pothinus Bishop of Lions, whom he succeeded in his Bishoprick. But, saith M. N. Hegesippus, giving an account of the Hereticks of his time, did not reckon the Cerinthians among them; and Valesius was in the wrong to insert the words, Et alii, to take them in. But herein M. N. betrays his Ignorance as well as his Rashness. Hegesippus speaks of the Sects that were among the Jews before Jesus Christ, and shews that from them arose several Hereticks among the Christians: Such as the Simonians, the Menandrians, the Marcionites, the Carpocratians, the Va∣lentinians, the Basilidians, and the Sa∣turnilians. Was he obliged to speak of all the Hereticks, when he was only speaking of those which owed their Original more immediately to the Here∣sies of the Synagogue? But besides, it is easie to convince M. N. of the falseness of his position, as to Hegesippus his Belief. First, It is certain that he came to Rome in the time of Anicetus, who be∣gan in the year 150, and he lived there
at Rome to the time of Eleutherus, who began in 170, and died in the year 185. This is what Eusebius tells us, L. IV. c. 2. that He∣gesippus himself witnesseth. He declares that he lived in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and of its Bishop. Now this Bishop was of the same opi∣nion with Irenaeus, who was in Com∣munion with him, and who reckoned the Cerinthians and the Ebionites to be Hereticks; therefore Hegesippus reckoned them Hereticks as well as Irenaeus did. Secondly, It is certain that Justin Mar∣tyr, who died at Rome under persecu∣tion, was always lookt upon as Or∣thodox in the Questions about the Na∣ture of Jesus Christ. Now he is the first that treated of Heresies, and writ an History of their Authors. Et in Eus. H. E. IV. 2. He witnes∣seth it himself in his Apology. Those that came afterward, as Irenaeus who writ against Heresies in Eleutherus's time, L. III. c. 3. as appears from himself; and Hippolytus, who as far as we can judge followed him, did but copy from Ju∣stin. Now it is certain that Irenaeus and Hippolytus accounted the Cerinthi∣ans and the Ebionites Hereticks after Justin Martyr. Therefore the Church
of Rome, in which Irenaeus and Hippoly∣tus lived for many years in great credit, and consequently Hegesippus accounted the Cerinthians and the Ebionites Here∣ticks. To avoid this consequence, it must be supposed that the Church of Rome changed its opinions all on a sudden after Hegesippus his departure from Rome; that Irenaeus changed in like manner, with all the Christian Gauls; that those who were Orthodox in Justin Martyr's time, became all of them Hereticks in the space of fifteen or sixteen years; and that, when a small difference a∣mong the Western Churches about Easter-day, had troubled the peace of the Church, and given occasion for se∣veral Assemblies of the Bishops to com∣pose this difference, all the Churches changed their Faith almost in a night, without perceiving it, without making the least reflection, or being at all moved: The Catechists changed their Instructions to the Catechumens; the Bishops the stile of their Sermons, and of their Christian Common Prayers; those that writ against the Jews and the Pa∣gans altered all their Ideas, and the
whole method of the Controversie: All the People changed the form of their Prayers; and in a word, that all went to bed, Ebionites and Cerinthians,and did awake in the opinions of Justin Martyr; and all this when most part of them had never heard of Justin Martyr's Books, nor of his Conference with Trypho the Jew, in which M. N. saith that he advanceth new Hypotheses a∣bout the Person of our Saviour Jesus Christ. We are now come to the Alogi, whom M. N. takes for the Christians that were converted from Pagans, as those that were converted from Jews accord∣ing to him were Nazarens. So taking into the number of the old Ʋnitarians, all those that were converted by Jesus Christ and his Apostles. He supposes then that they bore the name of Alogi, because they denied the Logos or Word, of which S. John speaks. Epiphanius is the first that hath men∣tioned the Alogi; and he gave them that name of his own head, as he de∣clares twice in his Refutation of them; and, as M. N. himself acknowledgeth. Epiphanius tells us that they appeared
after the Quartodecimans; that is, after the year of our Lord 190. They a∣dopted the opinions of Cerinthus and Ebion, which had made Jesus Christ to be a meer Man, and to be born of Joseph and Mary. Against which opi∣nions S. John's Gospel and his Epistles were written, as saith Irenaeus; and these pieces giving their Disciples some trouble, they set themselves to elude the force of them. First, to make the three first Gospels contradictory to S. John's, to destroy the authority of it. And, Secondly, they were so ridiculous as to assert that that Gospel and the Re∣velation were written by Cerinthus, and not by S. John. It is probable that Epiphanius would by this term of Alogi, intimate such Hereticks as rejected S. John's Gospel and the Revelation: both because they rejected the , and because they de∣nied the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the Prophesie times promised in the Gospel. For Irenaeus speaks of certain Hereticks without naming them, of whom he saith: L. III. c. 2. p. 259. C. D. Alii vero ut donum Spiritus frustrentur quod in novissimis Temporibus secundum placitum Patris effusum est in humanum
genus, illam speciem non admittunt, quae est secundùm [Joannis] Evangelium, in qua Paracletum se missurum Dominus pro∣misit; simul & Evangelium, & Prophe∣ticum repellunt spiritum. Infelices [verè] qui Pseudoprophetae quidem esse volunt, Prophetiae verò gratiam repellunt ab Ec∣clesia: Similia patientes his, qui propter eos qui in hypocrisi veniunt, etiam à fra∣trum communicationese abstinent. Datur autem intelligi, quod hujusmodi neque A∣postolum Paulum recipiant. In ea enim Epistola quae est ad Corinthios de Prophe∣ticis charismatibus diligenter loquutus est, & scit viros, & mulieres in Ecclesia pro∣phetantes. Per haec igitur omnia peccan∣tes in spiritum Dei, in irremissibile incidunt peccatum. These however are the People that M. N. calls the body of the Pagans that were converted to Christianity. He represents them to us, as the body of the Church; and his proof for it is, be∣cause Theodotus about the year 190, forsook the party of the Platonick Chri∣stians, who believed the Preexistence of our Saviour, and joined himself to the Alogi. And after this, he spits his ve∣nom at Eusebius, for affirming that The∣odotus
was the first that made Jesus Christ a meer Man. What Injury hath poor Eusebius done to M. N? He was according to M. N. a great Ʋnitarian; though he calls Paul of Samosata, (the Ʋnitarians Favourite) an Heretick and Disciple of Artemon. Eusebius hath not said one word of what M. N. ascribes to him concerning The∣odotus: He only relates a pretty long passage out of an Author that had writ in the beginning of the third Century against the Heresie of Artemon, a fa∣mous Ʋnitarian. Apud us. H.E. . V. c. 28. This nameless Author saith that Theodotus, whom he looks upon as the first Author of the Ʋnita∣rians Doctrine, was excommunicated by Pope Victor; from whence he infers that Victor was not of the Ʋnitarians opinion as they supposed him to be, pretending that their Belief had been the general opinion of the Church, and of the Apostles Successors, until the time of Victor and of Zephyrin, Bishops of Rome. But how doth all this prove that the Alogi were the Pagans that were con∣verted by the Apostles? They are Peo∣ple that rejected the Gospel of St. John,
his Revelations and Epistles, as the Ce∣rinthians had done. That is, they were Cerinthians; or if you please they were those who are described by Ire∣naeus as a sort of Hereticks. Theodotus, as M. N. truly saith, being excommu∣nicated by Victor, went over to their party; what then? doth this prove that they were the body of the Church that were converted by the Apostles from among the Gentiles? It certainly shews that they resolved not to acknowledge the Godhead of Jesus Christ; and there∣fore thought they must reject the Go∣spel of S. John, and his other Writings. And yet they shewed more honesty in doing so than the Socinians, who have thought that they might receive S. John's Gospel, and yet deny the Divinity of Christ, which Julian the Apostate, confess'd to be clearly expressed by S. John. After all, I cannot but wonder how M. N. can think of the choice of Wit∣nesses that he hath made to confirm his System, without being ashamed of them himself. The Nazarens who were his converted Jews, received no other Go∣spel but that of S. Matthew, and that
very much adultered. The Ebionites, who were another sort of his converted Jews, rejected all the Epistles of S. Paul. The Alogi, who were his Gentile-Con∣verts, rejected all the Works of S. John. And all this for the Hundred and fifty first years of Christianity, and something longer. How then came the Books of the New Testament to be afterwards so well received at Jerusalem, and in Judaea? And how came they to be after that so well known all over the World? By M. N's reckoning, the Trinitari∣ans that were born after Justin Martyr's time, must have come and opened the eyes of the Apostolical Churches among the Jews, and also among the Gentiles; for it was by them that the Apostolical Books came to have their due authori∣ty. And therefore let M. N. magnify his Primitive Ʋnitarians as much as he will, he shall never perswade any con∣sidering Man to believe, that they who made so bold with the Apostles, as to reject so many of their Books, did not also reject what they pleased of the Apostolical Doctrines; or that the Apo∣stles Doctrines were not preserved by
them that rescued out of the hands of those Hereticks so many of those Books which the Socinians do now acknowledge to be Divine Scriptures. The last Monument or Remain of the Apostolical Succession, which agrees with the Socinian Doctrine concerning our Saviour, saith M. N. are the Re∣cognitions, ascribed to Clemens Romanus. He calls the Author of these, an Ebio∣nite; though he believeth it was a piece falsly put under the name of Clement. M. N. doth very well to shew his fair dealing in this. He hath re∣jected Barnabas, Hermas, and Ignatius, as suppositious Authors, and therefore of no authority in this Controversie. And yet now he gravely quotes these Recognitions as a monument of the Apo∣stolical Succession. Is there not a great deal of Justice in this? But then, it seems, others of the Primitive Ʋnitar∣ans were Forgers, as well as Cerinthus; he was not the only Man of this trade, though perhaps he was the first of them; for he forged Revelations and Visions under the name of S. John, which gave the occasion to them, that as M. N. elsewhere observes, would
have Cerinthus to be the Author of the Revelation. Now here is another of their gang that forges a Book under the name of Clemens, the Disciple of the Apostles. But how came M. N. to know that the Author of the Recognitions was an Ebionite? he tells us, he took Dupin's word for it. But he would have done better to have read the Recognitions himself, and then he would have seen that this Author favours the Arians, and not the Ebionites. After this it appears with how much vanity, and how little reason, M. N. con∣cludes all the Successors of the Apostles were Ʋnitarians. He doth indeed quote a long passage of the Author that writ against the Artemonites, in the beginning of the third Century, who saith that those Hereticks had the insolence to affirm this: For they boast that their Doctrines continued in peaceable possession of the Churches that were planted by the Apo∣stles, and by their Successors, till the times of Victor and of Zephirin. But the same Author confutes them with several Arguments. 1. From the authority of Scripture. 2. From the
Works of some of the Fathers whom he quotes, such as Justin, Miltiades, Tatian, Clemens of Alexandria, Irenaeus, and Me∣lito. Whereupon M. N. observes that Justin who lived in the middle of the se∣cond Century, is the first that he hath named; and from thence he infers that Justin was the first that set up the opini∣on of the Divinity of Jesus Christ. A pretty piece of Sophistry! as if the quo∣ting of five or six of the Fathers who de∣fended the Godhead of Jesus Christ be∣fore Victor and Zephirin's time, was not amply enough to destroy the assertion of Artemon, which was the thing he design∣ed to confute. If Artemon had been of his opinion, would not he have been a fool to put off the beginning of the Doctrine of our Saviour's Divinity to the time of Victor, who lived above thirty years af∣ter Justin Martyr's death?
CHAP. VII. That Justin Martyr was no Inno∣vator. IT is nevertheless upon this ridicu∣lous foundation, that M. N. endea∣vours to prove that Justin Martyr was the first that innovated; in affirming that it was the  that appeared to the antient Patriarchs under the Old Testament, and that was called by the name of Jehovah; from whence he con∣cludes the Pre-existence, and the Divini∣ty of the , or Word. To shew that Justin was an Innova∣tor, and asserted this without ground, M. N. brings divers considerations up∣on several passages of the Old Testa∣ment, where it is said that God appeared, or that God spoke; in which passages the Socinians endeavour to prove that it was an Angel, and not God that is spoken of. And besides, he brings the authori∣ties of some of the Antients, and late
Writers, that contradict Justin Martyr about these notions. But he doth this with very little judgment: For the question is not, whe∣ther Justin brings some proofs to con∣firm the Pre-existence and Godhead of the Word, that the other Orthodox Fathers did not think fit to make use of; but whether Justin was the first that advanced this Doctrine among the Christians, being the product of his own Brain, and before unheard of. His Di∣alogue with Trypho plainly shews the contrary: It was writ about the year 140. He there sets forth the Ebionites, or the Cerinthians, as People that made no great body among the Christians; which would have been very imperti∣nent in one that had first brought up the opinion of the Godhead and Pre-exi∣stence of our Saviour: and the Jew would have laught at him for proposing to him the belief of a Doctrine that he had never heard of before from any other Christian. But, in truth, that the Christians held this Doctrine of the Godhead of Jesus Christ was known to the Pagans, as appears by Pliny's Epistle to Trajan,
and the Philopatris that is among Lu∣cian's works; where the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Godhead of Jesus Christ, and of the procession of the Holy Ghost, is set forth and explained by that scoffing Heathen, as dictinctly as it is at this day by any Orthodox Divine; and it was known to the Jews to be an opinion of the Christians, and that a prin∣cipal one; as appears by Justin's Dia∣logue with Trypho. The Controversie between M. N. and the Church, turns upon this question, whether Justin Martyr was an Innova∣tor or not; that is, whether the Doctrine of our Saviour's Pre-existence is the an∣tient Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Primitive Christians? Or whether we have abandoned the Faith of the Apo∣stles and first Christians, and taken up a phantastical notion that was invented by Justin Martyr? This question being of so great im∣portance, ought to be considered with a more than ordinary attention. Ju∣stin presented his first Apology, which is the second in his Works now extant, to the Emperor Pius in the year of our Lord 139. He afterward writ his
Dialogue against Trypho, which con∣tains a dispute with a Jew about the truth of the Christian Religion. This appears, Dial. p. 340. because in his Dialogue he speaks of his Apology. Justin lived at Rome afterward till he writ his se∣cond Apology, (the first in his Works) and in the year of our Lord 150. he suffer'd Martyrdom there, being prose∣cuted by Crescens an Heathen Philoso∣pher. Here is a Man of great eminence a∣mong the Christians of his time, who lived in the Metropolis of the Roman Empire in the times of Hyginus, Pius, and Anicetus, being Bishops there; and who was so far of their Communion, that his Pen served twice to stop the fury of two Persecutions by two famous Apo∣logies that he wrote in behalf of the Christians. In his first Apology, representing to the Emperor the Faith that was then profest by the Christians, he saith ex∣presly, that they believed the Trinity, and also the Incarnation of the Word: which shews that it was not a new Doctrine, unheard of before that time, nor such as came then into Justin's head
while he was writing his Dialogue with Trypho. It is also to be ob∣served that this Justin, who defended the Trinity, in his Dialogue against Trypho, doth no less maintain the Ʋnity of God, as he hath done also in his Treatise of the Monarchy of God; though our Ʋnitarians can't tell how to reconcile this with the Doctrine of the Trinity. He writ his Dialogue against Try∣pho about the year 140. For in that Dialogue he sheweth plainly, that the Jewish War was then but newly ended. He lived ten years after in the eye of the World, and writ se∣veral Books after this; so the Church could not but be fully acquainted with his opinions. But for all that, he continued peaceably in the Com∣munion of those great Bishops, whom M. N. calls Nazarens, Cerinthians, and Ebionites, and his memory is still bles∣sed among Christians. But this is not all; for during his abode at Rome he lived in Com∣munion with Polycarp, Disciple of S. John, who came thither under the
Emperor Pius, and was in Commu∣nion with the Roman Bishop Anice∣tus. He learnt (without doubt) from Polycarp the abhorrance which S. John had for Cerinthus, to that de∣gree that he would not go into the House where Cerinthus was bathing, for fear it should fall upon their heads. He was also in Communion with Hegesippus, who came to Rome while Anicetus was Bishop there, and continued there till the time of Eleu∣therus. That there was an acquain∣tance between them, is more than probable. For Justin, though a Pa∣gan before his conversion, was born in Samaria then called Neapolis; and Hegesippus was also a Native of Pa∣lestine. Hegesippus witnesseth that he communicated with Anicetus, with Soter, and with Eleutherus; and that then all the Churches were in the same Faith. After this, how can Justin Martyr be looked upon as an Innovator? But to go to the bottom of M. N's System, let us consider it a little far∣ther.
Justin writ a Book against Heresies, which was the common store-house of all those Fathers that writ next after him upon that Sub∣ject; as Irenaeus, Hippolytus, &c. Now these Writers agree in treat∣ing the Cerinthians and the Ebio∣nites as pernicious Hereticks. See Irenaeus, L. 1. c. 25, 26. and the Latin Dialogue of the Heresies that is in the end of Tertullian's Book of Prescriptions, which is but an A∣bridgment of the Book of Hippoly∣tus. Now it is certain, that Irenaeus as well as Hegesippus lived in Commu∣nion with the Roman Bishop Eutherus, and Eleutherus had lived in Communion with the foregoing Bishops that had communicated with Justin Martyr; it follows therefore that in those times, Justin was never looked upon as an Innovator. One needs but read the Dialogue with Trypho, to be satisfied that Ju∣stin Martyr defends in it the Do∣ctrine of the Apostles, and of the whole Church till his time.
1st. When he represents his Con∣version to Christianity, he tells us, that it was by the Instructions of an old Man whom he did not know, and whom he met with in a Solita∣ry place, whither he was retired to me∣ditate upon Philosophy. 2dly. Justin reckons all those as Hereticks, who were distinguished by the Names of their Masters, with∣out naming any: But there were none at that time whom this Character fitted better than the Ebionites and Cerinthians. 3dly. Justin (as I have said be∣fore) doth mention a sort of Dissen∣ters among Christians, plainly mean∣ing the Ebionites; and represents them as a very small number in com∣parison of the generality of Chri∣stians, Just. p. 267. that believed the Godhead of our Saviour. 4thly. Trypho doth from the Unity of God raise an Objection against the belief of the Trinity that was acknow∣ledged by the Christians, P. 269, 7.4. and looks upon the belief of that small num∣ber,
namely of the Ebionites, to be the most consistent with reason. 5thly. P. 268. If there had been no other Christians but Ebionites, at the time of this Conference of Trypho with Justin, nothing could have been more impertinent than Trypho's question, whether those that observed the Law, and withal acknowledged Je∣sus Christ to be the Messias, were capable of being saved? For the E∣bionites did both observe the Law, and receive Jesus as the Messias. And they according to M. N. were the Body of the Christian Church. 6thly It appears that the Christians went by no other Name in the time of Justin, then that of Christians: Ib p. 287. and not by that of Nazarens, as M. N. supposeth. 7thly. Justin doth every where lay it down for a Rule, that Jesus Christ is the Object of Divine Worship for all Christians. 8thly. Trypho derides Christian Re∣ligion in general, because it teaches the Incarnation of the Word in the Womb of the Virgin, whereas for his
part he should have thought it rea∣sonable to have acknowledged him to be only a Man, who upon the ac∣count of his Justice had been raised to the Dignity of Messias. 9thly. Ib. p. 291, 292. Justin doth generally speak with horror against divers Here∣sies that had then risen up against the Church according to our Savi∣ours prediction. Ib. p 307, 308. 10thly. He constantly represents the Christians of his time, as being endowed with the gift of Miracles, and the power of casting out De∣vils in the Name of Jesus Christ, P. 311. as of the true God. A Power, which we do not read that the Ebionites or Cerinthians ever had, or did ever pretend to it: And which Irenaeus made a distinguishing Character be∣tween the Catholick Church and all Heretical Assemblies. Iren. L. IV. c. 45. 11thly. Justin protests that the Christian Faith which he defends is the same that was spread all over the World, Just. M. di∣al. p. 345. even in the most barbarous and unknown Countries: Which certainly he would not have
dared to affirm in the face of all Jews and Ʋnitarians, if they could have disproved him, and especial∣ly if there had been so many Ʋni∣tarian Churches as M. N. hath ima∣gined. Now when I look back upon all these Considerations, I can't per∣swade my self that M. N. hath ever read the Dialogue between Ju∣stin and Trypho. I rather believe that he hath read in Eusebius, that Justin Martyr was the most antient Author that the Anonymous of the Third Century quoted, to prove the Do∣ctrine of the Trinity and of the Godhead of the Messias was taught before the time of Victor, who ex∣communicated Theodotus of Byzanti∣um; and that thereupon he imagi∣ned, though without ground, as I have shewed, that Justin was the Author of the Doctrine of the Tri∣nity, and of the Divinity of our Sa∣viour. And as M. N. is a Man of extraordinary Confidence, he thought he might venture this System abroad,
since it would be so highly accepta∣ble to those of his Party, and would seem very specious to all others that could not gain-say, or that would not take the Pains to examine it. The especial Charge against Justin Martyr is this, That he was the first that ventured to say, it was the  that appeared to the Patriarchs and Fathers of the Old Testament, which according to the Socinians was either God, or an Angel that spake as Ambassador from God, and con∣sequently as God. And if so, it then followeth that Justin was an In∣novator. But they are much mistaken in thinking that Justin advanceth any new thing in affirming the  to be a Divine person, and in saying it was he that appeared to the Fa∣thers, when he hath the Apostles be∣fore him, S. Paul in the first Chapter to the Hebrews, and S. John in the Preface of his Gospel, affirming that the , or Word, was God, and that it was he by whom the World
was created, and without whom was not any thing made that was made. He hath likewise, both in the one and in the other, followed the anti∣ent Divinity of the Jews, such as we find it in the Writings of Philo, who writ before S. Paul and S. John; and in a time when the Jews had not invented the Evasions, which Justin reproaches them with in his Dialogue with Trypho. Now Philo doth positively affirm, That it was the Word who appeared to Abraham and to Sarah, Gen. 18. and whom Abra∣ham calls his Lord. He also affirms, that he was the same who appear∣ed to Hagar in the Desart, and who changed the name of Jacob in∣to Israel. Which Word, Philo indeed sometimes calls an Angel, but he calls him also the Son of God, begotten of God, and his first born. I shall quote the places in the next Chap∣ter. One would think that this being so well known to the Jews, as ap∣pears by so many several places in
Philo, M. N. might have spared his accusing the Christians of having foisted the name of Christ in the 9. Ver. of the X. Chapter of the 1. Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, to confirm their Doctrine of the Pre-existence of Jesus Christ; whereas in the antient Copies it was, Let us not tempt God, as Grotius pretends it ought to be read according to the Alexandrian Manuscript. M. N. confesseth that Epipha∣nius charges this upon Marcion, and not on the Orthodox Christi∣ans. But I do not see what reason Epiphanius could have to accuse Mar∣cion of this; for Irenaeus, who was more antient than the Alexandrian Ma∣nuscript, hath quoted the passage in these Terms, Iren. IV. 35. p. 385. Let us not tempt Christ; and surely Irenaeus, who is there dis∣puting against the Heretick Marci∣on, whom he accuses of having fal∣sified the Epistles of S. L. . c. 25. Paul, would take care not to use the Copies which Marcion had falsified. 2dly. Supposing in some Manu∣script they had read the word ,
as Epiphanius would have it instead of , the mistake might easily be committed in Manuscripts where∣in such common words they gene∣rally writ only the first Letters K or X with a v over the Head. And is not the word  sufficient to denote Jesus Christ, according to the ordinary Style of the New Testa∣ment? It is certainly so, according to Epiphanius, who saith, , that Christ and Lord denote the same person. M. N. Will not allow of this gloss of Epiphanius; but he would oblige us in shewing that which Epi∣phanius did not; namely, what de∣sign of Marcion's it could serve, to change the term of  into that of ; for it is not credible, he would corrupt the Text only for his pleasure, and not to serve any design. But this change was so far from serving Marcion's Hypothesis; that it would have been quite on the contrary. He denied that the God of the Old Testament was the
Father of Jesus Christ. He rejected the Old Testament, and could not endure it should be said, that the Jews were under the care and con∣duct of Jesus Christ, whom he set forth as the Author of a Gospel that was opposite to the Law and the Prophets. It was therefore contrary to his Design to make that corrup∣tion of the Text which Epiphanius charges him with by changing . into , which overturned all these Principles. According to him the Jews never had any thing to do with Jesus Christ; but whol∣ly depended upon the Creatour of Heaven and Earth, whom Mar∣cion would not allow to be the Father of our Saviour Jesus Christ. And therefore to make the Apostle say, that the Jews tempted Jesus Christ in the Wilderness had been to make the Apostle speak against himself. It was with the some de∣sign that instead of reading, but with many of them God was not well pleased, he had put, but Christ was not well pleased with many of them. But he had
not carried his falsification far e∣nough, for which Epiphanius laughs at him, for he had left these terms that the Rock was Christ, which was sufficient to justifie the reading of Irenaeus, Let us not tempt Christ, against the Authority of the Alexan∣drian Manuscript. This, I hope, is enough to shew with what rashness M. N. asserts, that it is only since the Council of Nice, that the Fa∣thers have taken advantage of this corruption of Marcion.
CHAP. VIII. That the Notion of the  did not come from the Plato∣nicks, but was the antient No∣tion of the Synagogue, and of the Apostles of our Saviour. WHAT I have said in general of the Doctrine of Philo, who was the most considerable of the Jews at Alexandria, and lived under Caligula, to whom he was sent by his Nation as their publick Agent or Orator, is sufficient to shew, that the Notion of the , and of his appearings under the Old Dispensa∣tion, was no new Doctrine, nor first advanced by Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho. Nevertheless M. N. either for want of due consideration, or in hopes of carrying it off by the help of his Criticks, doth obstinately maintain
that Justin's Notion of the  is a Platonick Notion; and that though it was afterward adopted by some Christians, yet it was not known to the Apostles and their next Successors. What Dr. Bull quotes from the Jewish Writers to prove, that the  was known to the Jews, is in no wise satisfactory to our Author. He saith that those Jews were all of them, either Phantastical Cabalists, or Com∣mentators upon the Writings of the Old Testament; but Men of no Au∣thority, or Persons obscure and un∣known, such as Rabbi Tanchuma; or they were Christians that writ under the name of Jews, as the Au∣thor of the Books that go under the Name of Philo. Now let us see whe∣ther M. N. hath any ground for being so very confident. The Notion of the , saith M. N. is a Platonick Idea, that was adopted by some Christians. This is a very bold Assertion. He takes the Liberty to say what he pleases
of Books, that go under the name of Philo, which I have already quot∣ed: But all that he saith is meer Talk without Proof. And it were strange if all the World reject Books that have not been questioned for so many Ages, because an angry Man resolves to cry them down. Let us but see what Philo saith of the Subject we now treat of, and then let any equitable Reader judge, whether M. N. hath reason to accuse Justin Martyr of having advanced Platonick Ideas, when he speaks of the . What follows, is the Doctrine of Philo concerning this Subject; which I have reduced to some Heads to avoid repetition; and I have quoted the se∣veral parts of his Works for it, which it would have been too tedious to transcribe. He saith, that though, there be but one God, yet there are in him two Sovereign , or Powers,
his Goodness or Bounty, and his Pu∣issance. His Goodness by which he hath created, and his Puissance by which he governs, and that the  or Word is a third Power, by which he unites those two other Powers: So that it is by the Word, that he is both powerful and good. And he saith, that the two Cheru∣bims were the Symbols of this truth. Philo de Cher. p. 112. E. de confus. Ling. p. 337. de Migr. Abrah. p. 367. B. He represents the Di∣vine Word, as being infe∣riour to God, but without being distant from God; and so being he that go∣verns those two Divine Powers, both that which Creates and that which Rules, and so that governs all. Which, saith he, was typified by the Presence of God above the Cheru∣bims. De profugi, p. 466. B. C. D. He saith, that it was the  or Word, that form∣ed
and created the World. De Mundi Opif. p. 4. D. & p. 5. C. & Alleg. L. I. p. 44. B. And that it was the , that was the Or∣gan of God to form the World. De Cher. p. 129. C. He calls the , the Image of God; De Mundi Opif. p. 6. C. and saith it was by him that he formed the World, De Monar. L. II. p. 823. and that he governs it. De Migr. Abr. p. 389. He affirms, That these words, Let us make man in our own Image, shew that God took in others to work with him. De Op. M. p. 16. C. De cons. Ling. p. 336. &c. and the Image of God in Man is the Chara∣cter of the  or Word which is eternal. De Plant. Noe p. 217. A. He saith that the Soul was formed after the Image of the  or Word. De Opif. Mund. p. 32. E. He saith, That the  or Word, is as the house that God dwells in. De Migr. Abr. p. 389. B. De Somniis p 574. E. & p. 575. B.
He shews plainly enough, that in the VIII. of Prov. he understood by the Wis∣dom of God there spoken of, a Person, and not an Atttribute. Alleg. L. p. 48. A. p. 52. A, B. Where he saith also, that it is the , or Word of God. Ib. p. 54. E. & lib. quod deter. pot. insid. p. 165. C. He saith, that the Word is the Interpreter of God, that he was begotten of God, and that he giveth Te∣stimony to us from God. Alleg. Leg. L. II. p. 99. D, E. He saith, that the Word is also called an Angel. Ib. p. 39. D. He affirms, that it was the  or Word, that appeared to Abraham and to Sarah, Gen. 24. and whom Sarah called my Lord. Ib. p. 101 D. He affirms, that it was the  that appeared to Hagar in the Desart De profug. p. 451. B. & de Somniis p. 600. D.
He saith, it was the  that changed Jacob's name, Gen. 32. De nomin. mut. p. 1088. He saith, that the Manna typified the , or Word of God. Alleg. Leg. L. II p. 93. B. Quod det. pot. insid. p. 176. E. De profug p. 470. A. B. L. III. Leg. Alleg. 1103. B. He giveth an Idea of the Eternal Generation, when he affirms, that of that which is Divine there is nothing cut off, but only it is ex∣tended. L. Quod det. pot. ins. p. 172. A. And when he speaks of the Communica∣tion of the Spirit without its being divided. De Gigant. p. 287. C. He affirms, that it is the  or Word, that is the Son of God; whom the Prophet Zechary calls Ori∣ens. De conf. Ling. p. 329. He saith, that the  or Word is the true High Priest, of whom the anti∣ent High-Priests were but Emblems. De prof. p. 666. B, C, D. de Somn. p. 597. C. De vit. Mos. L. III. p. 673. C.
He sets forth the Di∣vine Word, as the Media∣tor between God and Man at the time of the De∣luge. L. quia rerum div. h. p. 509. B. C. De vit. M. L. III. p. 673. C. I believe after this, N. M. is not very well satisfied in the care that hath been taken in preserving the Works of Philo. But though they had been all lost, the Truth, which M. N. opposes with such bold and yet vain conjectures, would not have suf∣fered much by it. For Philo was but one Jewish Doctor, though he flou∣rish'd in the time of our Saviour Jesus Christ. But I should be glad to know M. N's thoughts of an Author of a quite different character from Philo. Doth he believe that the Gospel according to S. John was written by S. John, or by Cerinthus? He that believeth the Cerinthians to have been Apostolical Men, must believe S. John's Gospel and the Revelations to have been the Work of Cerinthus,
and not of S. John. No, saith M. N. the present Ʋnitarians acknowledge the Gospel and the Revelations to have been written by the beloved Disciple of Jesus Christ, that hath given them those lights, which the Cerinthians and the Alogians had not. I am very glad it hath: but how can M. N. after this maintain that the notion of the  is a Platonick Idea? Is it likely that S. John, who, setting aside the advantages he had by being the Disciple of Christ, was but an honest Fisherman, had read the Works of Plato? Was Plato known to the Fishermen upon the Lake of Tiberias? or were his Works translated into Syriac, which was the only Language they knew? If not, then it is a strange extravagance in M. N. to suppose that the notion of the  is a Platonick Idea. S. John was no doubt well acquainted with the Writings of the Old Testament, and what he said of the  or Word, with plain reference to the
first Chapter of Genesis, and other places of the Old Testament; he learnt it not in the School of Plato, but in that of the Holy Ghost, who inspired him, and who was the same that dictated the Books of the Old Testament. But after all, is this stile only pro∣per to S. John, who was the last E∣vangelist that writ? The Evangelist S. Luke is quoted by Justin Martyr, as well as the Epistle to the Hebrews, both as Canonical Books; and we know that they speak of the  or Word. Luc. I. Heb. X. Joh. I. Rev. XVI. Justin also quotes the Wri∣tings of S. John, both Gospel and Re∣velations. And in all these, there is mention of the Word in this notion; the Pre-existence and Godhead of the Word is plainly set forth in them. Socinus endeavours to elude the proof of it in S. John's Gospel, by explain∣ing the word beginning by the begin∣ning of the Gospel. M. N. corrects Socinus for that, and agrees with us that the  signifies the Virtue by which God created the World, and only differs from us in the question,
whether that all-creating  or Word was a Person. After this, it is easie to judge with what reason or sense M. N. rejects the Authorities that Dr. Bull brings to shew that the notion of the Pre-existence of the , was not un∣known to the Jews at the time when S. John writ. For my part I can't but wonder, setting raillery aside, how he could satisfie himself with what he brings to evade the force of Dr. Bull's Arguments. The Jews, saith he, believed the Messias was to be a meer Man, as it appears by the Books of the New Testament, and by those of Justin Martyr. From thence he would in∣fer, that the Jews before Christ's time believed nothing of the Pre-existence of the Messias; and there∣fore that the passages drawn from the Books that were written before Christ's time, particularly from the Wisdom of Solomon, are of no au∣thority against the Jews to prove
that they have varied from their Fore-fathers in their notions of the Messias. If this reasoning is good, then Christ and his Apostles did them wrong in charging the Jews with so many Errors, on this account, of their corrupting of the Ideas of their Fore∣fathers. Dr. Bull sheweth that in the Book of Wisdom, there are notions of the  that brought up Israel out of Egypt, and that he was a Divine Person in the judgement of the Writer of that Book. M. N. can't deny this, but he hath two ways to make it signifie nothing. The first is, by speaking of that Divine Per∣son with a scurrilous Wit. The o∣ther is, by bearing us down with a conjecture of Grotius, that though this Book was written by a Jew, yet some Christian or other, who was a Greek, happening on it, hath given it us in the Greek Tongue, but with divers additions to it taken from the Christian Religion. For the first of these, it proves nothing
but what we know already, that M. N. presumes there are Readers that will be scoft out of their Re∣ligion. For the second, it is certain that this Book in Greek as we have it, was quoted by Philo the Jew Apud Eu∣seb. de Praep. Ev. p. 323. Clem. ad Cor. §. 3, & 27., and Clemens Romanus, and afterwards at least forty times by the Fathers of the second Century, who look'd upon it as a Book of undoubted An∣tiquity. And it seems very probable, that St. Paul did reflect on a passage in this Book, (Wisd. VII. 26.) when he was writing his Epistle to the Colossians, Col. II. 15. and again in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. I. 3. which places M. N. may consider at leisure. The Jews therefore that were converted to Christianity must have known this Book; and look'd upon it as a Book that contained the antient Sentiments of their Syna∣gogue. For the Jewish Cabala, or Tradi∣tion, which the Learned Dr. Bull recommends to his Reader, it is on∣ly their traditional Sense of Texts
of their Scriptures, which they an∣tiently understood of the Messias. Now for this sort of Jewish Tradi∣tion, it is certainly of great use to them that are to dispute against the Jews. But if M. N. will not be so just to allow this Tradition, all the World is not so obstinate as he. We find in the antient Writings of the Jews such express notions of the Doctrines which the Socinians dispute against, that they either must have been forged by Christians, or the Jews before Christ's time must have had quite other notions of these mat∣ters than those which the modern Jews have. We agree that these notions were not those of the com∣mon People; and it appears plain enough from hence, that when Je∣sus Christ spoke of himself in such terms, the Jews could not but see that he attributed Divinity to him∣self; the multitude who expected a mighty Conqueror for their Messias, seemed surprized at it, and were ready to stone him. These Traditions that we speak of, were the Ideas of such
as had taken more pains in studying the Sacred Writings, and had col∣lected the sense of them by attentive Meditation. That this was so, we learn from Philo the Jew, who makes a great difference between the Ex∣plications of the Law that they gave to the People whom he calls , and those which they reserved for such as had attained to a greater de∣gree of knowledge in the Mysteries of their Religion. This may be seen in his Treatise de Sacrif. De Sacr. Ab. & C. p. 153. B. Ed. Paris. A.D. 1640. Abel. & Cain, where he is shewing the Provi∣dence of God in events, which the Pagans look'd upon as meerly acciden∣tal. M. N. doth like himself in abusing Dr. Bull, and puting tricks upon his Reader, when he bears him in hand that these traditional Expositions of the Scripture were the very same that were rejected by our Saviour, and exclaims against the Doctor for using Arguments against the Socinians that are drawn from a Law, which was set up by the Pharisees, and condemn'd by Jesus Christ.
Indeed if we admitted of the Au∣thorities of the Jews before Christ's time, as a part of Divine Revelation that is not contained in the Books of Moses, M. N. would have reason to bring the authority of Christ against such Jewish Traditions. But here is a quite different case now. The Jews having stiffled those antient notions of a Messias, that according to their Prophesies was to be God as well as Man, we make it appear from the Books of their Ancestors, which were left, and which contain the Old Explications of their Synagogue be∣fore Christ's time, that they had such Explications, as they are now forced to reject, or else they must yield up the cause to the Christians. Now what hath M. N. to say a∣gainst our use of such traditional Ex∣positions? He either must deny that we have a right understanding of the old Jewish Paraphrases, or that they are not so antient as they are reputed, or else he must acknowledge
that the Jews, who are now of the same opinion as himself concerning the nature of the Messias, have alte∣red their belief concerning it since our Saviour's time. I shall not endeavour to refute what M. N. saith to take away the authority of two Hebrew Books that Dr. Bull quotes for the confirming of those Expositions. M. N. accord∣ing to his great stock of Learning, calls one of them an obscure Rabbi, and the other the unknown Book Tan∣kumam. The obscure Rabbi that he speaks of is Moses Bar Nachman, commonly called Ramban or Moses Girundensis, one of the highest note among the Jewish Commentators. The unknown Book called not Tan∣kuman, but Tanchuma, is as well known among the Learned Jews, as any of their antient Books that are now extant. M. N's ignorance of these things might well be excused; for he was not bound to understand Hebrew: yet we must needs tell him, that it is not very modestly done of
him to pass a Judgement upon Au∣thors that he neither knoweth, nor is able to understand. I will not spend time in answering what he saith of the Works of Phi∣lo the Jew, that they were written by one Philo a Christian, who lived in the second Century after Christ. This is truly an unknown Rabbi to all Mankind but M. N. for he is the first that ever mentioned him. But he shews by his Critical Remarks on this occasion, that he hath as little skill in Christian Antiquity, as he hath shewn in Hebrew Writers. Philo speaks frequently of the  that was imployed by God in the Creation of the World, and in the Production of his other Works. Now the question is, whether he bor∣rowed this notion from the Synagogue, or from the Platonicks? That is easie enough to be decided, because what∣soever he says of this matter, he always grounds it on the Books of Moses and the Prophets, without once mentioning Plato upon the Idea of the .
I ought also to observe that Cle∣mens Alexandrinus, who hath many quotations out of Philo's Works, of which some are lost, reckons him not a Platonick but a Pythagorean. But certainly M. N. must have lost his reason, if he maintains that the Works which bear the name of Philo were written by a more modern Author than him that writ the Apology for the Jews to Caligula, whom M. N. can't deny to have been Philo of A∣lexandria, that went to Rome as their Agent within seven years after Christ's Death. The Style, the Notions, the quotations from his other Writings, and what other Authors who lived after him have quoted from him, are to a Reader of any ordinary judge∣ment such convincing Arguments, that they were written by the same Author, that one that will go about to prove the contrary loses his time and his labour, and so will he that giveth him an answer. I am not ignorant that some of
the Antients after Eusebius have ima∣gined, that Philo did in his Treatise of the Therapeutae describe the first Christians of Egypt; and some of them have gone so far as to say, Philo might have seen S. Peter at Rome, and turn Christian. But all this is no∣thing else but meer groundless ima∣gination; they are such vain conje∣ctures that those that attentively read Philo's Works, and particularly what he saith of the Therapeutae, and that have any knowledge of Church-Histo∣ry, can't but pity those that let such Fathers opinions be imposed upon them by the name of Eusebius and his Followers. I believe I have by this time suf∣ficiently answered all that is worth considering in M. N's Judgement of the Fathers. According to the Scheme that I proposed. I did not think it worth my while to take notice of several faults that are here and there in his Work, but fall immediately upon the principal ones; my chief design being to shew the False∣ness
and Absurdity of his System, which I presume to say I have done. I have not taken notice of an ac∣cusation which he comes up with very often, viz. that those of the Or∣thodox Party were always Persecu∣tors; because it is so notoriously false, that there was no need of refuting it. M. N. confesseth that the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Divinity of our Saviour, was publickly and generally received af∣ter Justin Martyr's time; and that the Primitive Christians still lived under Persecutions from the Pagan Emperors till Constantine's time. What therefore can he mean by this accu∣sation against the Defenders of the Trinity? The first Persecutions un∣to blood that can be found any where among Christians, were by the Ari∣ans; and those M. N. himself is pleased to reckon among his Ʋnita∣rians. With what confidence there∣fore can he affirm so false a thing, as that is that the Doctrine of the Trinity hath been kept up only by Violence and Persecution?
But there is a blacker Calumny behind, which he throws upon the whole body of Christians; as if they had corrupted the holy Scriptures to make them speak in favour of their Doctrines of the Trinity, and of the Godhead of our Saviour. He says, in pursuance of this design, they added and left out as themselves pleased: and if their Divisions among them∣selves had not hindred, they would not have left us any remain of ge∣nuine Christianity. This is indeed calumniating stoutly; but the dirt will not easily stick with sober and learn∣ed Men. For of what Scripture doth he say this? The Writings of the Old Testament, those were always in the hands of the Jews, and are so still; so that they can't be corrup∣ted by Christians. For the Scrip∣tures of the New Testament, it is no less ridiculous to accuse the Christi∣ans of corrupting them in favour of these Doctrines. For if their Divisi∣ons, as he saith, have hindered them from doing this since the times of
the Christian Emperors, then the same have hindred them always; for there have been always divisions among Christians, enough to make them watch one another, and to hinder them from joyning together in the cor∣rupting of the Scriptures. M. N. may truly say, that the Or∣thodox Party did in the second and third Centuries complain of the Im∣pudence of the Hereticks in falsify∣ing the sacred Books: and it is to the party of those, whom we call Orthodox Christians, that we owe the preservation of these Books, and the restitution of their Authority, which was so vigorously attack'd by most of the Hereticks. If M. N. will take advantage of some various read∣ings that are in the several old Ma∣nuscripts, or antient Versions, let him fall on as soon as he pleases; let him exercise his Criticks upon these Texts, and he shall soon have an answer. I cannot say that M. N. had a design to gratifie the Deist in this;
though in many things he writes as if they had imployed him. But in this accusation which he repeats so often, and in such virulent Langua∣ge, he sheweth plainly a design to make the Clergy odious, and bring them under suspicion of having in∣tended to destroy the holy Scriptures, and to change the Christian Religion. For this we must leave him to the Justice of God, who seeth the Hearts, and will render to every Man accord∣ing to his Works. I might easily have justified the authorities which Dr. Bull hath quoted to prove that the Doctrine of the Divinity of Christ was brought down by Succession from the Apostles till Justin Martyr's time; and it would have been easie enough, after the light that I have given into M. N's System, to have shewed the vanity of his Ob∣jections against them. But I thought that would have engaged me into too great a length. And since Dr. Bull is still alive, and possibly may not think fit to let him escape with∣out
some Animadversion, I thought it not so proper to take the business out of his hands; especially since the Doctor hath laid in matter enough for it in those very Books that are written against by this Author. To conclude; As it was wholly in obedience to your Commands that I composed this small Treatise, so I leave it entirely at your disposal, to do with it accordingly as your great Wisdom shall think fit, to which I shall ever pay an absolute Submission. I am with the most profound re∣spect, Yours, &c. FINIS.
