E1644 12630115 64722
Many Remarkeable PASSAGES from both Houses of PARLIAMENT. From the 12. of May till this present, Concer∣ning the great affaires of the whole Kingdome. With many more Passages of great Consequence concerning Sir Edward Deering and divers other Kentish-men, and concer∣ning a Charge to be drawne up against them for their speedy Tryall. WITH The Examination of Mistresse Sanders, living at Ratcliffe, Sister to Oneale, before the House of Commons, the 12. of May, 1642. Also another Examination by the Honourable House of Commons, Concerning Sir Nicholas Cole, and the Inhabitants of Newcastle. May 13. 1642. Together with an Order of both Houses of Parliament, Concerning the continuance of the Terme at Westminster. John Browne Cleric Parliament. Likewise his Majesties Letter to the Gentry of Yorkeshire, May, 16. 1642. London, Printed for T. Ryder.. 1642.
Many Remarkable Passages from both Houses of Parliament, from the 12. of May, till this present, concerning the great affayres of the whole King∣dome. UPon the 9. day of this present moneth of May, there was a Committee of the House of Commons sate concerning the differences betweene Sir Nicholas Cole (Major) and the Townes∣men of Newcastle; where witnesses were examined in that cause, and an Order issued to be sent to Newcastle
forthwith to Mason Castle for the bring∣ing up of more witnesses. Vpon this present day there was al∣so then given up at the Court gate a Command from His Majesty by Sir Nicholas Hand for the speedy repaire of all his Majesties Servants in Ordnary to YORKE, upon paine of his Maiesties displeasure, the House of Commons falling into consultation of the malig∣nant party of the Kingdome, and among ohers, of Sir Edward Deering, and the residue that were instructers in the late scandalous Petitions delivered from Kent and having prepared a charge a∣gainst them, at a desied conference it was then moved for their speedy triall. Vpon the 12. day of this instant Moneth, one Mrs. Sanders of Ratcliffe, Sister to Oneale, was brought to the house of Commons upon report made that they furnished Oneale with cone∣niencies for his escape, who being exami∣ned thereupon before a Committee ap∣poynted, and denying thereof, was
committed to Custody, till convenient time for her examination. Divers Committees of this house of Commons, were appoynted to meet on Wednesday last in the afternoone, for Sr. Cornelious Vermuds Bill, for the Fines of Recusants and other delin∣quents. But the Body of the house met and sate in a Committee, for the nominati∣on of the time and place, for the Sinod to meet, which occasioned much con∣ferring, The Lords assembled in this present Parliament, received a Complaint against one Captaine Jackso, who had former∣ly had Command in the Ile of Provi∣dence, before the rising of the Spaniard, by a Souldier for affonts under him that Voyage, and concerning some pre∣tended oppressions and traines laid to take away hs life (by the said Captain) after some debate thereof it was refer∣red to a Committee for Examination.
Upon the 13. day of this present moneth, 1642. The House of Com∣mons taking into consideration His Majesties date Message, and the danger the Committees of each House under∣went residing at Yorke, then after some debate they Voted, that whosoever hee were that should attach or imprison ei∣ther the said Members, or any other of each House, imployed on their service, should be accounted as an enemy to the State and Common-Wealth, &c. Which being acquainted the Lords at a Confe∣rence, it were assented too, and a joynt Order issued for the printing of the said Votes. And likewise Order issued to the Sheriffe of Yorkeshire, for the sending up of those Delinquents in their County▪ formerly sent for, but not yet appeared.
Die Martis, 17 Maii, 1642. WHereas the Lords in Par∣liament, have this day beene Informed, That the King is Resolved to adjourn the next Terme from Westminster to Yorke; Upon which, The Lords sent a Com∣mittee to the Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, to know of him, whether hee had received my command touching the same, who acquainted the said Committee, That hee had received command from His Majesty, to issue Proclamations and Writs, to that purpose. Whereupon, This House taking the said matter into consideration, hath Voted: That the Kings removall of the Terme to Yorke, from Westminster, during sitting of this Parliament, is Illegall. And hath further ordered, That the said Lord Keeper shall not issue out any Writs, or Seale any Proclamation, for adjourning the said next Terme from Westminster to Yorke, as aforesaid. Joh. Browne, Cleric. Parl.
His Majestes Letter to the Gentry of Yorkshire, May, the sixteenth, 1642. To our right trusty and well beloved the Gentry of York, and others of this our County of York, whom it doth or may concern. WE have with great contentment considered your mercifull and affectionate Answer to our Proposition concerning the unsufferable affront which we received at Hull, We have not bin deceived in that confidence we had in your affection, wherefore we desire you to assure the rest of your Coun∣trymen, who through negligence were omitted to be sumoned: that We shall never abuse your love by any power wherewith God shall enable us to the least violation of the least of your Liberties, or the diminution of those Immunities which we have granted you this Parliament, though they be beyond the Acts of most (if not all) Our Predecessours; being resolved with a constant and firme Resolu∣tion to have the Law of this Land duely observed, and shall endeavor onely so 10 preserve Our just Royall Rights, as may enable us to pro∣tect our Kingdome and people, according to the ancient Hors of the Kings or England, and according to the trust which by the Law of God and this Land is put into the Crowne, being sufficiently war∣ned by the late affront at Hull, not to transferre the same o of our power concerning which Affront we will take some time to Advisse, which way we may usefully imploy your Affections, in the mean time we shall take it well from all such as shall personally attend us, so followed and provided, as they shall thinke fit for the better safety of our person, because We know not what suddain violence, or affront may be offered unto us, having lately received such an actuall testi∣mony of rebellious intentions as Sir-John Hotham have expressed at Hull: Being thus secured by your affections and assistance we pro∣mise you our Protection against any contrary power whatsoever, And that you shall not be molested for your humble and modest Petition, as of late have been threatned. Given at Our Court at Yorke, May the 16. 1642. FINIS.
