E3832 12677920 65601
An Excellent New Song ON LEWIS le Grand, OR, THE French King and the Devil. Tune of, The Orange. Printed according to Order. I. A Song I will sing Of a barbarous King Who in France for many Years Ruler has been; Look all the World o're, Nay, Rome and its Whore, Did never bring forth such a Monster before This damn'd Monsieur. II. For the Protestant Crew, He's resolv'd to undo, As daily we find by experience too true; He hangs up the one, And a second's undone, A third he is fain to pack up and be gone From damn'd Monsieur. III. In this his curs'd evil, He thinks himself civil, And mightily pleas'd in serving the Devil; By all that is good, His delight is in bloud, And chiefly to root out the Heretick brood From damn'd Monsieur. IV. His Neighbouring Allies, With Wars he supplies, Not minding poor Children or Widows out-cries, He sends Sword and Fire, To make them retire, Or else they must fall to the lustful desire Of damn'd Monsieur. V. All these and much more, This Son of a Whore Has laid to his Charge, and does lye at his door, For which he was try'd And Condemned beside, To be flung in the Fire, and there to be fry'd This damn'd Mounsieur. VI. Now Lewis le Grand, In Effigie is hang'd, We hope 'twont be long e're his person do gag To the Devil, whose due Twas to have long ago, So take in possession without more do This damn'd Monsieur▪ VII. Then Cerberus of Hell, Come take to thy Cell, The remains of a Carkass while any part's wel, For the Pox in his Groin And Fistula in time, Will wholly deceive you of what you design From damn'd Mounsieur. Devil to Lewis. I am sent ye to tell You are wanted in Hell, Since you your great Master has served so well, Then come Thee along To the fiery hot Thong, Where your Ancestors do most impatiently long For damn'd Monsieur. Lewis to the Devil. Pray Devil forbear, For I'm not fit ware To come to the paws of your Worship I swear; But give me some time, Purgatory to climb, There for to Flux, then I am in good time Your damn'd Monsieur. Devil to Lewis. Ay, begar Monsieur, You need not to fear Of Fluxing enough when in Hell you appear, For your Body is soul, And worse is your Soul, Therefore to the De'il the Poxt Body must roul Of damn'd Monsieur. LONDON, Printed by T. M.
