H2018 99834987 39638
NATVRALL and ARTIFICIALL CONCLVSIONS. Compiled first in Latine, by the Worthiest and best AUTHORS, both of the famous Ʋniversity of Pa∣dua in ITALY, and divers other Places. nglished since, and set forth by THOMAS HILL, Londoner, whose own Experiments in this kinde, were held most excellent. And now againe pulished, with a new addition of Rarities, for the practise of sundry ARTIFICERS; as also to recreate WITS with∣all at vacant times. LONDON, inted by Iane Bell, dwelling at the East end of Christs-Church, 1650.
A TABLE for the ready finding out of every Conclusion and Receit contained in this BOOKE. THe sundry properties of the Ada∣mant-Stone. 1. The secret properties of the Egge. 2. A Conclusion of an Hasell Sticke. 3. A proper practice to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens. 4. To make any Fowl, of what condition so∣ever the same bee, to have feathers all white. 5. A Conceit to make a Candle burne in the Water. 6. To make a Woman that she shall not eat of the meats set upon the Table. 7. A proper secret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone burne without fire. 8. To make one see fearefull sights in his fleepe. 9.
To turne Water into Wine, a proper Secet. 10. To make a light or Candle to indure burning▪ without going out by any winde, so long as the substance endu∣rth. 11. How to make quarters of wood to hang so fast together, that they cannot bee shaken asunder without breaking: or to lay Knives or Tobacco-pipes trian∣gular. 12. How to make a colour like to gold, in un∣derstanding this Secret. 13. To make Silver like any mettall, which shall so continue a long time. 14. How to stick an Iron or Steele Bodkin into the head of either Cock, Henne or Chicken. 15. To make a Candle that will not goe out untill the whole substance thereof bee wasted. 16. How to make Iron soft. 17. To make a Sword, Dagger or Knife to cut Iron so easily as Lead. 18. How to keepe weapons cleane and faire for a long time. 19. A very excellent and easie Conclusion to make steele soft as paste. 20.
An experienced and apt Conceit, how to make Hennes lay Egges all Winter through. 21. A rare and strange device how to make thy Chamber appeare full of Snakes and Ad∣ders. 22. How to make Letters perfectly appeare of the colour of Gold, Copper or Sil∣ver. 23. How to make any piece of Iron to appeare like Gold. 24. How to have fresh Roses at all times of the yeare, sundry wayes taught. 25 How to make Beanes and other seedes to grow up within the space of foure houres. 26. To make a Candle of Ice, to burne like un∣to another Candle. 27. How to make Flesh seeme to crawl full of Wormes. 28. To make a light in the night time, that all things about thy Hall or Parlour shall appeare in sight both blacke and greene. 29. How to make Rootes to have what propor∣tion you will on them. 30. How to breake a stone with the fist, of the thicknesse of ones hand. 31.
To make an hearbe to grow, which shall have many savours and tastes. 32 How to make sundry devices or Armes or such in a Rose, Carnation, Flower-de∣luce, or Lilly. 33. To write what you list on a Steele Dagger or Knife. 34 How to breake a new and bigge Rope with the hands onely. 35. How to make white Flowers, to become red. 36. How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it selfe, a proper secret. 37. To make Glew to hold together so hard as a Stone, a proper secret. 38. How to make an Apple move on the Table, a proper secret. 39. To make Roses and other Flowers that be red, to become white. 40. How to write Letters on an Egshel, that the same Letters may appeare within on the Egge. 41. How to kill Fleas divers waies. 42. How to make a Pot of glasse not to sinke in the water, a proper secret. 43 To make a Bottle or a narrow mouthd pot full of water or milke not to spill or shed forth. 44
How to make a thin Glew, very profitable, a proper Secret. 45. How to draw a Ring off: being very hard thrust on, and the finger swelled there∣with. 46. To make fruits, as Apples, Peares, Quinces, and such like, to have what proper forme you will on them. 47. A Device how to cut a Glasse; a proper Secret. 48. A rare experiment how to walke on the Water. 49. How to soften Christall, to imprint what you list thereon, a proper Secret. 50. To make a Candle after strange manner to burne, a proper secret. 51. How to draw many Candles the one after the other, being laid a foot distance, or more asunder. 52. How to cut an Apple into many pieces without harming of the skinne or pa∣ring. 53. How to make a Cup of Glasse being set in the fire not to burne. 54. How to make Quick-silver, in a manner so hard as Silver. 55. A pretty Conceit, to catch Fowles without a Net. 56.
How to make a Candle to be marvailed at, a proper secret. 57. How to see many wondrous and strange signes in, an Urinall. 58. How to make a Loafe of bread new set up∣on the Table to leap off. 59. How to make an Egge flie about, a merry Conclusion. 60. How to make an Artificiall Fire divers wayes: which will seeme very marvai∣lous. 61. How to know a natural precious stone from a counterfeit. 62. How to make a Man appeare on a flame burning, without any harme. 63. A new conceited Conclusion to make a Chamber appeare as light by night as by day. 64. How to make two Dogges fight together, a proper secret. How to make a Bitch that she shall not af∣ter bee desired to bee covered with any Dogge. 66. How to cast forth any Worme or Snake en∣tred within the body. 67. An experiment how to make a blown blad∣der to dance and skip about from place to place. 68.
How to make a Henne run away with great feare. 69. How to finde a person drowned that hath been sought for. 70. How to deale with Iron, many wayes right profitable. 71. To light a Candle at the mouth of an Im∣age painted on the wall. 72. To take fish by night, 73. How to make that no Dogge shall barke at you. 74. A Secret to make Birds come to your Cul∣ver-house. 75. An excellent conclusion how to put an Ap∣ple into a Violl. 76. To put an Egge into a Violl. 77 To make folke seeme blacke. 78 To prove if a Maiden be cleane. 79. To know if a Sicke Person shall die or not. 80. To make Salt Water fresh. 81. To see by night as by day. 82. To kindle fire at the Sunne. 83. To make Flesh cleave in the Pot. 84 An easie way to take Birds. 85. To make Silke-wormes. 86. How to take away haires. 17. To fat Hens or Capons. 88.
That one shall not be drunke 89. To make a good bait for Fish at all sea∣sons of the yeare. 90. A Conceit to make an Egge goe up to a Speares end. 91. A Device to make the Pottage run out of the Pot. 92. To make Fish or Flesh seeme raw. 93. To kill Hennes or Docks. 94. How to make Coales that they shall last a great while. 95. Ad capiendm Pisces. 96. A receit, whereby a man shall not be weary of going. 97. To make Yarne and Linnen-Cloath be∣come white. 98. How to make that a Horse may not goe through a Street. 99. To know if a Woman be with a man-Child or not. 100. A true experiment to ease thy feet for go∣ing. 101. To preserve your teeth faire, white and cleane. 102. A pretty device to take Fleas. 103. How to make abundance of Nails, or other pieces of Iron to hang one upon the other by the Load-stone. 104.
How with a Load-stone to make pieces de∣livered on a Shovell-board, to be Dewces or Traies at pleasure. 105. A new Receit for a Cooke, how with one Spit, and with one equall fire to keepe one Capon raw, the second to boyle, and the third to rost. 106. To make one that they shall not sleepe, or to sleepe when you please. 107 How (by a new secret) to make a paire of Bowles to lie as neere the Jacke as you please. 108. An excellent experiment, to make Artifici∣all Cloves. 109. A rare device to make a Walnut, that when you crack it, there shall be Biskets and Carawaies in it, or a Poefie written in a Paper. 110. A neat Conclusion, whether a Man and Woman shall marry or not. 111. A Conceit to finde whether of the married couple die first. 112. An approved Perfume. 113. A Conclusion, to finde out whether a man shall win or loose at play. 114. To make Steele or Christall soft. 115. How to set a varnish or colour on Iron or Steele.
How to gild upon Iron or Steele. 117. An Artificiall experiment, to cast Sugar in∣to the forme of either Birdes or Beastes, in whatsoever posture you are dis∣posed. 118. A very usefull Secret for the making of di∣vers Inkes. 119. How to make one speake in their sleepe, whatsoever you would demand. 120. An easie Conclusion for the making of Gumme-Water, 121. How to make a Thiefe affraid to come into your house. 122. How to cast a perfect silver colour upon any Copper. 123. A spotive Conclusion to make a whole Heard of Cattell to flie from you or fol∣low you when you please. 124. To make haire shine like Gold. 125 How to make a Receipt that neither Rat nor mouse shall eat or gnaw of your Cheese. 126. A very easie and merry Conceit to keepe off Fleas from your Chambers. 127. How to make of Paper a Bird, Frog, or o∣ther Artificiall Creature to creepe on the ground, flie, or runne upon a wall or post. 128.
How to make sport amongst Duckes, Hens, or other Poultrey. 129. An easie way to make discord or peace be∣tweene any parties. 130 To make a sportive Conclusion with a Cat, by putting her into a small Washing bole, in a Pond, River, &c. 131. How to make a pretty House-sport with a Cat. 132. To make a Cat piss out the fire. 133. How a Wager may be laid that a Catte shall draw a simple fellow over a Pond, Mote, &c. 134. An approved Artificiall Conclusion for ma∣king of Past-royall, white. 135. Of an hearbe which will make one to bee very forgetfull. 136. How to drive away all Inchantments, or VVitchcraft. 137. How you may doe to serve a Tapster such a tricke, that he shall not be able to froth his Cans or Jugs. 138. An experien'd naturall meanes to preserve your house in safety from Thunder and Lightning. 139. A good drinke for Travellers, or such like, when they shall happen to want Ale or Beere in their Inne. 140.
How to keepe Beere or Ale from sowring in the heate of summer, or when it begin∣neth to be dead. 141. How to take Crowes, Kites, Magpies or Jack-dawes alive. 142. To hang a Gourd, Cowcumber, or great Apple up in your House, that you may have Wheate, Barley, Rie or Pease to grow out thereof. 143. How to finde out a Delusion of the Vinte∣ners, in mixing Water with their Clarets and Whites, or honey with their other sweet Wines. 144. To preserve a man from being drunke, or make a drunken Man to become againe sober. The Vertue of a rare Cole, that is to be found but one houre in the day, and one day in the yeare. 146. The end of the Table.
NATURALL AND ARTIFICIALL CONCLVSIONS. I. The sundry Properties of the Adamant STONE. FIrst, if any how the Ada∣mant Stone in his hand, under a Goblet or silver Bowle, or under a Table, and that the same be mo∣ved to and fro in the hand; then in the like manner will the Iron or Néedle lying in the Goblet, or one the Ta∣ble, move to and fro and round about. Also the Adamant sometimes with the one cor∣ner
will draw Iron unto it, and with the other corner put the Iron from it. Also if any anoynteth this Stone with Garlike, it doth then hinder the Stone from draw∣ing any Iron or Needle unto it, although the Needle should be laid on the Stone. And some write that this Stone will also draw Glasse unto it, in like manner as it doth the Iron. II. The secret properties of the Egge ANd first, the round Egge set under the Henne bringeth forth a Henne Chicken, and the long Egge set under the Henne, bringeth forth a Cocke Chicken. Also the Egge with the shell laid to steepe in Vinegar for three dayes space, doth after so soften it, that any may worke the same at length like unto Waxe. And the same Egge afterward laid in the water, doth come againe unto the former state. Also, if an Egge be painted with sundry Colours, and the same set under a Henne to bring forth, she shall hatch a Chicken having such feathers, like unto the colours painted on the Egge. Also the Egge
laid for three dayes to steepe in strong Vi∣negar, and after for one whole Moneth laid to dry againe in the Sunne, shall after (by degrees) come to the hardnesse of a stone. III. A proper Conclusion of an Hasell Sticke. FIrst, take an Hasell Scke of a yard long, being new cut off, and cleave the same just in the middle, giving the one end so cleaved unto thy companion to hold in both his hands, and the other end hold your selfe in both your hands after such sort, that both the inner parts of the sticke may looke one right against the o∣ther, in the laying downe on the ground, and must also bee laid asunder unto the breadth of two fingers, in such sort that they may touch together at some one place, by an overthwart manner; and within a while after, you shall see them draw and joyne together againe of them∣selves. And this understand, that the sticke must be new cleaved soone after the cutting up of it, for otherwise this sticke worketh not the proper effect.
IV. A proper practice to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens. FIrst, to doe this, take a Capon and pull the belly bare of Feathers, and af∣ter rub the naked place with Nettles, setting young Chickens under him, and he will then miraculously cherish them, and bring them kindly up. And the ra∣ther, if you accustome to use the Capon the like for a time. For by that meanes hee is moved the willinger to cherish, bring up, and feede, yea and to love them so well, as the Henne naturally would doe. And the reason of this is, in that through the pricking of the Nettles, hee is thereby the rather desirous to touch the soft downe and fathers of the young Chickens sitying under him. V. To make any fowl of what condition soever the same be, to have fea∣thers all white. TO doe this, take the Eggs and roule them in the juyce of the hearbe called
Mouse-eare, or in the hearb called House∣leeke, or otherwise in Oyle (after the mind of Cardanus) and after put the Egges a∣gaine in the nest, and after the hatching, their feathers shall grow white. VI. How to make a Candle burne in the Water. ANd to doe this, take VVaxe, Brim∣stone and Vinegar, of each a like quantity; boyle these all together over the fire, untill the Vinegar appeare all con∣sumed; and then after of that Waxe remai∣ning make a Candle, and you shall see the proper effect as avove is written. VII. To make a VVoman that she shall not eat of the Meates set upon the Table. TO doe this, take a little of the greene Basll, and when one bringeth any Dishes of Meat unto the Table, then put the same Hearbe secretly under one of the platters or dishes, that she espie it not and as long as the hearb so lyeth on the;
table, the VVoman shall eat nothing of that meate in the platter or dish, which co∣vereth the hearbe. VIII. A proper seret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone to burne with∣out fire. ANd to doe this, take Calamit, Brim∣stone, unaked Lme. Pitch, Ce∣ruse, of each of these three Drames, of Camphora one Dram, Asphaltum three Drammes; all these make in powder, and put the same in a strong Potte, well stopped, and after make a fire under the Pot, encreasing the same by little and little, untill the powder in the Pot become so hard as a stone; and when you will have it burne, then rubbe the same well with a Cloath, and it will burne suddenly: and when you will put the same out, then spit upon it, and after set the same in a moist place, and it will goe out. IX. To make one to see fearefull sights in his sleepe. ANd to doe his, take the blood of a Lapwing, and therewith anoint
the pulses of thy forehead, before thy going to rest, and then after in thy seepe thou shalt see both marvailous and earefull ightes, as Vitalis Medicus writeth. Also he writeth, that if a man eateth in the Evening before his going to Bed of the hearb named Nightshade, or Mandrake, or Henbane, he shall see in his seepe pleasant sights. X. How to turne VVater into VVine, a proper secret. IF thou wilt convert or turne▪ Water into Wine, then fill a brasse Pot with the best Wine, etting upon the head of the Pot a Limbecke, and distill the Wine out, and the Lees remaining after the distillation, drie them, and bring them into fine powder, which equally mixed with the Water, doth so cause the VVa∣ter to have both the colour and taste of the same VVine. And the like unto this may be wrought and done in a Rose Limbecke. Also a Loafe of Barley Bread hot drawne out of the Oven, and broken into great peeces hot, and laid so to soke in good
Wine; which péeces when they shall bee well sken in the VVine, let them dry in the Sunne, and after oke of that bread in fare water, and it will after receive both the colour and taste of that Wine. XI. To make a light or Candle to indure burning without going out by any winde so long as the substance endureth. TO doe this, make a weeke after thy discretion, which infuse in the Oyle of Hemp-seede, and after into molten Tallow, as you would properly make a weeke or Cotten Candle, letting the same to hang somewhat untill it be cold, then light it in the like sort as you doe a common Candle, and it will not after goe out with any winde so long as the sub∣stance endureth. And in like sort may light be made to serve in the night time, if so be that ine linnen ragges be first so∣ked in the Oyle of Hemp-seed, and after dipped into molten Tallow; which so bound or wrought on a staff end, to carry about, or otherwise lying on a staffes end in an iron plate.
XII. How to make quarters of wood to hang so fast together, that they cannot be shaken asunder without breaking: or to lay Knives or Tobacco pipes triangular. TO make quarters old and hang toge∣gether thus without tying, must bee done on this wise. First, lay one of the quarters downe, as these two letters A. and B. doe instruct, on the which lay the other quarter, even as these two letters C. and D. doe here represent, and one that C. and D. lay the third quarter, as the letters E. and F. doe here expresse, and in such sort, that E. and F. must lye under A. B. And being then thrust hard toge∣ther
they cannot fall away without brea∣king, in that A. and B. is stayed and held of E. and F. and E. and F. of C. and D. and C. and D. holden of A. and B. so that none of them can fall asunder, the one from the other. Also that place where B. D. E. is holden or stayed together, and doth the like hold together, as by tryall of the same shall more manifestly appeare. Also, the more and harder they be thrust rogether, the longer they continue so han∣ging together. And a like riall unto this may be assayed and proved, either with three stickes made flat for the nonce, or with three knives being alike, or three Tobacco-pipes, if they be orderly used. XIII. How to make a colour like to gold, in understanding this secret. ANd to doe this, take of Aloes Hepa∣ticke, and of Salt Niter, of each sxe ounces, those grinde, and perfectly mixe together on a smoothe Marble, or other hard stone; that being so laboured toge∣ther they can after bee separated by no meanes, and after distill the same in a
Limbicke of glasse well luted about, that you may so draw out all the moist sub∣stance that will come. And with this you may gilde what you list, understanding how to draw this liquor▪ Also by a shorter way and lesser paine, may you doe the like, although not so perfect as the other above∣said, which indeed is right marvailous. And now this is on this wise: First, take of aloes Hepaticke thrée ounces, of Rosen sixe ounces, and of Oyle of Lin-séede well boyled, a pint and a halfe, these set over the fire in a pot, and mingle them well to∣gether, after straine the same liquor through a Linnen cloath, putting it into a Pot, which you must stop close, and so kéepe the same until you have need to gild any thing therewith. XIV. To make Silver like any mettall, which shall so continue a long time. TO effect this, take halfe an ounce of Aqua-fortis, and a scruple of quick-silver, and a little of the Tarter made of the VVhite VVine, and a little Salt: These put all together in a Pot or earthen
Pan, working and labouring the same to∣gether over hot Imbers, which so done, you may after (with this composition) make ilver like any mettall you list, and to con∣tinue so a long time. XV. How to sticke an Iron or Steele Bodkin into the head of either Cocke, Hen, or Chicken. TO doe this, write first these words following, that is to say, Gibell, Got, Gabel, in a Srole, and bind the same a∣bout the Bill of the Cocke, Hen, or Chic∣ken, to colour this secret withall; which so done, then pierce the head of the Bird just in the middle as you can guesse, with a very sharpe pointed Bodkin; and after set the Bird downe, and you shall see the Bird so lustily runne away from you, as if nothing were sticking in the head, if the Pullet be bigge, unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. And now the reason of this is, in that the head and braine of the Pullet, is divided into two parts in the bone, and the bone also dou∣bled in in the middest, so that the Bodkin
may easily enter without danger, and of this the braine so pierced, the Pullet ne∣verthelesse liveth; which if the ignorant see, they will perhaps beleeve, and thinke that the words onely doth the same, which is nothing lesse. XVI. To make a Candle that will not goe out, untill the whole substance bewasted. ANd to doe this, take the best Waxe and the purest Brimstone, of each a like portion, which take and melt toge∣ther, and after make a Candle thereof, which being lighted, set the same in a Candlesticke to burne. And the same Candle so lighted, will not goe out untill the whole substance be spent. Thus Car∣danus writeth. XVII. How to make Iron soft, a proper Secret. ANd to doe this, take the juyce of the Hemloke, and quench the Iron in
it, being well beated thrée or foure tims, letting it there remaine every time un∣till it be thorowly colde. Also Cardane writeth, that if you take Oyle, putting in∣to it molten Lead seven times together, and after quench your Iron red hot in∣to that Oyle, for foure or five times toge∣ther, and it will so make the same soft to worke, XVIII. To make a Sword, Dagger, or Knife to cut Iron so easily as Lead. OF this thing Hermes writeth, if a Sword, Dagger or Knife, being on∣ly Iron and fashioned, and being red hot, if the same be afterward quenched into, the juyce of the Radih, mixed with the Liquor of the fresh wormes of the ground, or rather the water of Artely distilled, being before somewhat bruised: such a Sword, Dagger, or Knife, saith he, shall after have such a strange edge, if the same red hot be quenched foure or five times in it, that with the same you may cut Iron so easly as if it were Lead. Also he wri∣teth, that if Steele be often molten in the
Fornace, and be purified, untill the sam be so white as Silver in a manner, and then after of the same fashion, graving Instruments with their edges and pointes orderly, like as to the Art of graving be∣longeth; which Instruments being red hot, quencht after into the juyce of Ra∣dish, and the distilled water of the wormes of the earth, mixed together: Or else with the water of the wormes, drawne through a cleane linnen Cloth; so that there be so much of this water, as of the juyce of the Radish, and then those Instru∣ments quencht foure or five times, in the above-said Liquor; And after will the edges and points of the Instruments bee so hard, that you may cut and grave in any stone and Iron, so easily as the same were Lead. XIX. How to keeqe weapons cleane and faire for a long time. ANd to doe this, take Barrows grease, common Oyle, new waxe, Ceruse, of each a like, these temper togethee very well over a soft fire, untill they be thorow∣ly
incorporated, and after you have so done, anoynt the burnished weapon with this Oyntment, and it shall so continue in the same brightnesse, In secula seculorum. And there cannot be a greater Secret invented, for the kéeping bright of Wea∣pons thn this is, if these words be well understanded. XX. A very excellent and easie Con∣clusion, how to make steele soft as paste. DOe thus: take the gall of an Oxe, Mans Vrine, Vergis, and the juyce of the Nettle, of each of these take a lit∣tle quantity, and mixe them very dili∣gently together; then after quench the Steele red hot in this liquor, foure or five times together, and it will after become so soft as paste: and this is a right proper and necessary secret to be understood of all such Workmen as doe any matters in Steele, as graving and such like, if these words be well marked.
XXI. An experienced Conceit, how to make Hens lay Eggs all Winter thorow. TO do this, take the tops of the Net∣tles, when they begin to come unto sed, and dry them: which so dried, give a little of the same, with Bran and Hemp-seed mingled together, to your Hens, and they shall every day after lay you an Egge apiece. XXII. A rare and strange Device, how to make thy Chamber appear full of Snakes and Adders. TO do this, kill a Snake, putting the same into a pan with Wax, and let it so long boil, until the same be thorow dried; and of that Wax make a Candle, lighting the same in the Chamber; and within a while after shall appear, as though there were a thousand creeping in thy Chamber.
XXIII. How to make letters appeare of the colour of Gold, Copper or Silver. ANd to doe this, take very cléere Christall, and worde the same into marvailous fine powder, on a Marble Stone, and after mixe the same powder with the white of an Egge, untill this bee so prepared to write with: and after with this confeccion, write what letters you will letting the fame drie: and after rub a Gold Ring, or any peece of Gold on the same letters, and all the letters shall appeare like Gold. And in the like sore may you make the Letters appeare like Silver or Copper. XXIIII. How to make any peece of Iron to ap∣peare like Gold. ANd to doe this, take foure butte of Raine water▪ into which put ten Drams of Roach Allum, and ten Drams of Oyntment, of Roman Vitrioll, and Salt Eemme, of each one an ounce, and
a scruple of Coppera; and these boyle together▪ after put therein a quart of Vinegar and▪ Taer, and ommon Salt finely beaten to powder, of each three oun∣ce, all these incpate againe over a soft fie very well▪ and after occupie the same which maketh a colour like unto Gold. XXV. How to have fresh Roses at all tim of the yeere sundry wayes taught. ANd first if you will have fresh Roses at any time, so well as in the Mo∣neth of May, then gathe the buds halfe on in a manner, in the Evening, when as the Sunne is set and touch them not with thy hand in the gahering, but with a sharpe knife properly gaher them, af∣ter lay the Roses upon a Boord, letting them to lye abroad in a faire night, all the night through, and then after have in readinesse a new earthen▪ Pot well glased within and without▪ into which put the former Roses before the Sunne bee un in in the morning, and stop close the mouth of that Pot with clay being mixed with
Horse dung and flocks, all tempered well together before, whereb no air of the Ru may pas or breathe forth. After, set the same pot into the ground, covering it in dry sand; and let no moist place be  about the same. And now on this ase may you have fresh Roses at any time of the yr. Also, take of the Rose-buds in the Spring∣time, when they begin first to open, and put those into a green Cane yet growing; cleaving the same by little and little, until you may handsomely put in those buds; and after  that place with a thred, stopping the same about, that no air breathe out; and after, cover that piece of the Cane or ee, so und and stopped about, under the earth, bowing down the same stalk by little and little, that the same break not; and cover the same well with the earth, letting it there remain so long as you lit: and when you be mnded to hae them forth, then cleave the Cane by little and little, that you spoil ot the buds; and after set them in the Sun, or in luke-warm water, and they shall be open nd fair in a sort space, as in the midst of .
Also, if you will have dry Roses to be∣come fresh, then take a new glased pot, and wet the same within with Rose-water, and after shut that pot with the Roses very close, letting it so to stand for five days, and they shall be fresh. XXVI. How to make Beans and other seeds to grow up in the space of four hours. ANd first, to make Beans grow up in an hours space, take the Beans, and put them in hot oil; let them there remain for eleven days, and after dry them. And when you will make proof of them, then set the Beans, and go to dinner; and by that time you rise again from the table, and go look on them, you shall finde them grown up well a san high. And the like you may do with Gourds. And now to make the Gourds grow up in the space of four hours, both with leaves and flowers, take the seeds of the Gourd, and let them lie in the blood of a anguine young man, and let them there remain for Fifteen days, in a moist place, and in a pot well stopped; and after
take them forth, and let them bee dryed well in the Sunne: and when you will sowe or plant them, then take a dish-full or two of good earth, and drie the same well; after wet the same with a little fresh water▪ and after have warme wa∣ter, powring the same upon this earth un∣till it become sufficient soft, and then plant your seeds in it▪ and within three or foure houres after you shall have Gourds growne up together with leaves and with flowers. And the like may you doe with the , , and divers other green seedes. XXVII. To make a Candle of Ice to burn like unto another Candle. TO doe this, make a Candle of Brim∣stone, which with the Powder of a Coale smeared about, and after in the Winter time drowne the same in water, but cover the head of it with a paper, and after hang the same at the mouth of some gutter which droppeth fast, whereby it may so bee covered with halfe a finger
thicknnesse of Ice in the Morning, and af∣ter being lighted, it will then burne unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. Also take pure VVaxe and fine Brim∣stone purified, of Earth alike: melt these together, making thereof a Candle; and after take the powder of a Cale finely bea∣ten, and Brimstone the like in powder, these sift through a Serfe or linnen Cloth, and after heating the Candle, smeare the said Candle about, so long untill it have (as it were) a thick crust round about the same, like unto the thicknesse of the backe of a Knife: which after cover about the ead of it with a Paper, and then hang the same at the mouth of a Gutter, which droppeth fast, untill the Ice cover it a∣bout a finger thick, then light the same, and it will burne like as if it were all f waxe. XXVIII. To make flesh seem to crawl full of Wormes. ANd to doe this, take Harpe-strings, and cut them into very short peeces, which straw upon Meate, being taken
hot out of the Pot, and those pieces will then move and stir about, like unto living worms. XXIX. How to make a light in the night-time, that all things round about thy Hall or Parlour shall appear both black and green. TO do this, take the black iuyce or ink of the Fish named Cuttle, and the like quantity of Verdigrease: these mix well together, putting the same into a Lamp, and dipping a week in that liquor; then light the same, putting out the other Lights in that room, and then shall all things round about that place, and the walls also, being white, appear both black and green, unto the marvel of such as shall see the same. XXX. How to make Roots to have what proper form you will on them. TO do this, take such green Roots which e big, like as be the Briony-roots,
Radish-roots, and Rape or Navew-roots, and of any of these Roots carve and ut as you lit, and after put the same in∣to the earth, letting it there so long re∣main, until the same carving be covered with a skin. And on such wise may you make the counterfeit Mandrakes, in fa∣shioning in the Briony-root, as both Mat∣theolus and Cardane do write, the form of a man with a Pen-knife; and setting the same Root again into the earth, with the head of the Root turned downward, and a little Barley put under it, which after will cleave and hang fast into the head of the Root, and appear like unto hair growing out of the same. XXXI. How to break a stone with the fist, of the thickness of ones hand. ANd to do this, first raise the edge of a flat stone upright from a plain boord; or rather, from a big smoothe stone, in suh sort, that it stand of it self, without any under-bearing or help; and after, with thy fist snae hastily or quickly
that part standing upright, wth falling together fl on the plaine boord or stone: doth to breake in so many pieces. And if the fist bée fr lir smien, then the end of the stone toucheth the boords in the fal∣ling,  that stroke in vaine: and breaketh not the same at that time. And in like manner may Life bee easly bro∣ken with a small and easie stroke of the hande,  that through the weight of the stone in the falling and helpe of the quick stroke, it doth of this so lightly breake, e∣ven as it were done with the vehement stroke of a . XXXII. To make an hearbe to grow, which shall have many savours and tasts. TO doe this, first take one seed of the Lettice, one seede of Endive, one of Smalledge, one of the Ball, one of the Léeke, and of the Parsley, all these put together in a hole in ich sort, that one eede may touch another: but this remem∣ber, that you plant these together in the dung of an Horse or an Oxe, without any
earth at all with them. And then after of these seedes shall grow up one proper hearbe, which will have so many savours and tasts, as there were seeds sowne to∣gether. XXXIII. How to make sundry devices or Armes of such like in a Rose, Carnation, or Flower-de-luce, or Lilly. TO doe this, take Sal Armoniacke grind the same on a Marble Stone, with fine Vinegr, and a little Sugar∣candy, and keeepe the same in a narrow-necked Pot or Glasse, and after take your Rose and dresse the Leaves, fastening them with red wax, that they may so lye plaine and even: which so done; then take a fine Pencill, with the licour draw∣ing on the leaves, what proper matter  Armes you list, and after let the same drie of it selfe, putting upon of the leafe-gold, or the leafe silver: and after pressing it lightly or gently downe with Bombasse, and that which sticketh not then fast, fal∣leth of in the doing, and so your work will remaine rim and faire.
XXXIII. To write what you list on a steel Dagger or Knife. TO do this, take an ounce of Salt∣peter, and an ounce of gréen Coppe∣ras; beat these grosly together, and after put the same into a strong battle of glass, distilling a water of it; which water use on this wise: First, take yellow or red Wax, stretching the same upon the Dag∣ger or Knife, so far as you will draw or write thereupon, unto the thickness of a paper leaf, and somewhat more; after, draw or write therein what you list, draw∣ing or writing unto the Stéel; and then fill that hollow drawing or holes with the di∣stilled water, which within a day and a night will have eaten it sufficiently. And the like may you draw and do on any other piece of Stéel. XXXV. How to break a new and big Rope, with the hands onely. TO do this, take and fasten the one end of the Cord or Rope, either
ith a nail driven fast into it, or about  strong hook of Iron, and after winde  same three or four times, or ofner, out thy hand, and the other end of the ord or Rope winde about by the top of  Palm, etwéen the fore-finger and he umb, that the one part of the Cord y reach unto the Nail, and the head,  other end, unto the bottome of the Palm, by which it must be again wind∣ about, and after that winded again nce or twice about. And this so done, hen with a vehement puck and force ay in the same part by which it is so der-winded, or rn with the Cord, for hat the substance of the Cord or Rope which is under, both defend, that the nd can take no harm by the hastie and trong pull: and take héed that the utter-ost fold of the Cord ide not  thy nd. And to conclude, this , that in the nhty and hasty pluck to∣gether, the one fold of the Cord doth to cut the other in sunder▪ and then especially, hen as that part shall be set soft, which is between the hand and the nail, and that both the hand be strong, and then pluck out-right and quick. And now if
XXXVI. How to make white Flowers, like as the Lilly, white Rose, and such like to be red.
Tubbe, where you minde o plante your white Flowers to become re, and after they be so planted in the , then let them not be watered at any time with any other water then this, which is made on this wise: Lake water, putting therein a certain quantity of Brasill finely  and boyle the same unto a third parte, which water after take, and being through cold water by little and little the same Earth▪ as both at morning and evening and wa∣ter it at no time with any other water then this▪ untill you see that the same water first have taken effect. XXXVII. How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it self, a proper secret. TO doe this, take a Ring round a∣bout hollow, into which put Quick-silver and stop the same fast that it rune no forth: After hre the Ring somewhere in the fire, or let it  the fie, and beng  lay the  on a Table or Stoole, which by and by after will be∣ginne to dance of it selfe, untill it be cold againe.
XXXVIII. To make Glue to hold together so hard as a stone: a proper Secret. ANd to do this, take unstekt Lyme, and quench the same with Wine, and beat the same into fine powder, mixing therewith both Figs and Swines grease, and after labour them well together: for this (as Pliny writeth) passeth the hard∣ness of a stone. Also, take Greek Pitch, Rozen, and the powder of Lyle-stones; these mix together: and when you will occupie of the same, then heat it over the fire, and work therewith▪ for when the same is cold, it holdeth them together so hard as any nail. Also, take of Spuma ferri one pound, of Lyle-sheards two pound, of unstekt Lyme four pound, of Oil of Linséed so much as shall sufice to prepare and work them together: for this Glue is marvellous strong, and indéed nei∣ther feareth nor yeeldeth to water nor fire.
XXXIX. How to make an Apple move on the Table; a proper Secret. TO doe this, take an Aple and cut the same in the middest, and in the one halfe make a round hole, putting therein a blacke Béetle, and so lay the halfe on the Table, and it will then move. XL. To make Roses and other Flowers that be red, to become white. ANd to doe this, take Brimstone beating the same into fine Pouder, which pouder burne on a new tyle-stone, holding such red flowers or Roses over the smoake of it, whiles it so burneth, and they will after become white; and on this wise you may make your Roses halfe white and halfe red, or one leafe white, and another red, by a cep of paper so cut for the nonce.
XLI. How to write letters on the Egshell, that the same Letters may appeare within on the Egge. TO doe this, take a little quantitie both of Galles and Allome, which worke together with Vineger, and after write with this liquor what you will on the shell, and that dryed, laye then the Egge in Vrine, else annoint the Egge about with waxe, unto the thicknesse of a Paper or somwhat more, and with a fine bodkin write déep letters, that the holes may be open, and the letters appa∣rant, into the which holes powre of this liquor, and when the same is dryed on the Egge, then séeth the Egge untill it be hard, and after lay the same to soke in sharpe Vineger, through the which soking the letters will so passe through the shell, that the letters may be easily discerned on the Egge after the shell is pulled off from it.
XLII. How to kill Fleas divers wayes. FIrst, to gather all the Fleas of thy Chamber into one place, annoint a Staffe with greace of a Foxe, or Hedg∣hogge, and lay the staffe againe where you list in your Chamber, and it shall so gather all the Fleas by it. Also fill a dish with Goats bloud, and set the same by the bed, and all the Fleas will come to it round about. And the like will they do by the bloud of the Hedghog. Also take the fat of a Goat, and annoint what you list therewith, and set the same under your bed, and all the Fleas will gather un∣to the same. Also take Lupines or flat beanes, and boyle them in water with Wormewood, and that water sprinkle well about the Chamber, and all the Fleas shall avoide that Chamber. Also take an Apple of Coloquintida, and in∣fuse the same in water, and in that wa∣ter boyle Wormewood, which cast a∣bout the Chamber, killeth all the Fleas. And the like doth the Peach leaves, or Vervine, or Coliander boyled in water, and so cast about.
XLIII. How to make a Pot of glasse not to sinke in the water, a pro∣per Secret. TO doe this, first fill a glasse Pot full of Water, or Wine unto the brim, for otherwise it sinketh downe, and is drowned in the setting of it in the water: the rea∣son of which appeareth by this demonstration. Imagine that the Pot be D. whose neck is A. B. C. that vacant part of it A. B. in that A. B. doth beare above water, through the very ayre which is contained therein; and the weight of the glasse A. B. draweth toward the Center, and A.B. C. can not descend by straight line downe, for that it shall labour in vaine. And ther∣fore the signifier D. voweth in that D. when as wine is set in the water, it re∣sisteth not, and therefore A. B. doth de∣scend untill it come unto the upper face of the water, but when A. B. shall be in the
upper face of the water, the part E. is then drowned, in that it is the nether part, and all the necke of the pot. XLIIII. To make a Bottle or a narrow mouth'd pot full of water or milke not to spill or shed forth. TO doe this: take a Bottle or nar∣row mouth'd Pot, and fill the same unto the brimme, after cover the mouth with a Paper, and then turne the mouth downeward on the mouth of an other Pot, and nothing shall shed forth, as by a triall in filling the one Pot with milke, and the other may be séene. XLV. How to make a thin Glew, very pro∣fitable; a proper Secret. TO doe this, take the Glew made of fishes, beating the same strongly on an Anvil, untill it be thin, which after lay to soke in water untill it becometh very soft and tender, which will be with∣in five or sixe houres, and then worke it
like paste to make small roles thereof, which when it is like unto paste, stretch it or draw it out very thin, and when you will worke with it, then put of the same into an earthen pot with a little faire water over hot embers, and skim the same very cleane, and let it so séeth a lit∣tle while, after worke with the same, kée∣ping it still over the hot embers, untill you have done with it, for so it fasteneth and bindeth the stronger. And in such sort, that it fasteneth pieces of glasse to∣gether. XLVI. How to draw a Ring off, being very hard thrust on, and rhe finger swelled. IF either man or woman hath thrust a Ring so hard on their finger, that he or she cannot draw the same off, through the swelling of the finger: then thréed a needle, and draw the same under a Ring, and winde the thréed about the thréed on the other side, and so often wind the threed about, and diligently consider that the whole joynt and part of the fin∣ger,
lying or being betwéene the joynt, and the Ring, be covered about with the thréed, and that no part be eene of the skinne, through the close covering of the thréed, and even draw the Needle againe under the Ring, and wind the thréed like about on the other side, and that speedily, whereby the Ring drawne and removed on the thréed by little and little may so passe over the joynt and come off. But whilest you are in the doing of this, make no tarriance or delay, for that the finger doth so lightly swell, that without great paine the Ring cannot be drawne off. XLVII. To make fruits, as Apples, Peares, Quinces, and such like to have what proper forme you will on them. TO doe this, counterfeit on a piece of wood, being in bignesse to the fruit which you desire, what forme you will? Or else cut Romane or other fashiond letters in it, to expresse (if you list) some proper words; which so done, then make a mold with water and Chalke, unto the
thicknes of thy little finger, the same part into just the halfe. And when this mold is dry, which soone dryeth, separate then the same from the wood with oyle before. And when you have gotten off the mold from the wood, and parted it in two just halfes, then take the same mold, and bind it most close unto the fruit, being growne unto his halfe bignesse, and let it so con∣tinue untill the fruite be come unto his full bignesse, and then take the mold a∣way, and you shall sée the tryall of the former taught. XLVIII. How to cut a Glasse; a pro∣per Secret. TO do this, stéep a thréed in Oyle and Brimstone mixt together, and com∣passe the Glasse with the thréed, in the place where you would have it parted, and after kindle and light the same, and often doe thus, untill the place be hot, and after compasse the same with a thréed wet in cold water, and it will part so cleane a sunder, as if the same had béen cut with a sharp pointed Diamond.
XLIX. How to walke on the Water. FOr to doe this, take two little Tim∣brels, and hinde them under the soles of thy féete, and at a staves end fasten another; and with these you may walke on the water, unto the wonder of all such as shall sée the same: if so be you often exercise the same with a certaine bold∣nesse and lightnesse of the body.
L. How to soften Christall, to imprint what you list, a proper Secret. TO doe this, take the blood of a Lamb, and the blood of a Weather, mixing these together, after take the Christall Stone, heating it in the fire burning hot, and then quench it in the blood, which af∣ter will become as soft as paste, then with a copper Print worke therein what you list, and after set the same abroad in the ayre, and it will come againe unto the former hardnesse. LI. To make a Candle after a strange man∣ner to burne; a proper secret. FOr to doe this, first make a wéeke of Silke, and infuse the same in the Oyle of Hempséed, and when the wéeke shall be sufficiently soked; role the same in Snow, untill it be of the bignesse of a great Candle, whereby it may so be well wrought together, and after light the
same, setting it in a sticke, and it will give the like light as a waxe Candle. Al∣so make a Candle of Parpen Stone and waxe together, about the which roule Snow▪ and the Snow will burne untill it be all wasted. Also take Snow, and mixe therewith the pouder of Camphire, and of the same make a Candle, and it will burne being lighted. LII. How to draw many Candles the one after the other, being laid a foot distance or more asunder. FOr this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and Oyle, these labour together, and make thereof an Oyntment, after take so many Candles as may well serve your Table, which lay on the Table a large foot asunder, and all a row, the one behind the other as long as you lift to lay them, yea, an hundred may you lay downe on this wise a length, if you lay them strait, then ake a long thréed, and annoint the same in this ointment, which after lay along on the Candles, and after drawing he formost, all will follow by order.
LIII. How to cut an Apple into many pieces without harming of the skin or paring. TO doe this, take a most fine Néedle, with a small thréed, and thrust the same by little and little under the pa∣ring, and thrust it in againe right a∣gainst the place, untill you have so gone round about the outside of the Apple. And this also remember that you thrust the néedle through the paring at straite corners one against the other of the Ap∣ple, and this so often do untill you come againe unto the first place where you be∣gan. And if so be you would divide the same in six or eight pieces, then draw the thréed againe by a like distance, alwaies taking héede to divide the Apple under the skin, and when you have thus done with the Apple, and the peeces yt covered with the skin, then draw out the ends of the thréed, and you shall after divide the Apple with∣in without harming of the paring or skin into so many péeces as you list. And when
you have thus drawne out, and taken the thréed quite away, you may kéepe the Ap∣ple so long as you thinke requiste. LIV. How to make a Cup of Glasse being set in the fier not to burne. AND to doe this, take what Cup or Pot of glasse you list, and séethe the same in common Oyle, by the space of five houres, and after take it forth, and it will be then made so strong that the said Cup of glasse or pot, will indure the heat of the fire. LV. How to make Quick-Silver, in a manner so hard as Silver. ANd to doe this, take the strongest Vineger, and whites of Egges wel beaten together, and thrée ounces of quicksilver, unto one of the other: these first distill together in a Limbeck wel luted, and in that distilled water put the quicksilver, and it will be after so hard, that you may worke it with the hammer.
Also take Quick-silver, and wash it in the distilled water of mans blood, and every time you wash the same, let it drie, and in the end it will come to be so hard as silver. LVI. A prety conceit, to catch Fowles without a Net. TO doe this, take Arsenick, putting the same in water, and in that water boyle wheate, or any other grain, and cast the same forth unto Fowls, and so many as eate thereof, will not be able after∣ward to flye away. And take the iuice of Celidone, and infuse wheat in the same, letting it there remain for thrée daies, af∣ter give the same to Fowles to eate, and such as eate thereof you may after take with the hand. Also take wheat, putting it in wine Lées, and let the same remaine there eight dayes, after that put it into the juice of Celandine and horehound, to stéepe, which so done, then give of the same nto the Foules to eate, and such as eae thereof cannot flye away.
LVII. To make a Candle to be marveilud at. A proper secret. ANd to doe this, take foure ounces of salt Niter, sixe ounces of fine Fran∣kinsence, thrée ounces of brimstone, sixe ounces of Oyle, and sixe ounces of the Milke of Cataputia; all these beat fine, and mixe together, after take thrée oun∣ces of Waxe, and make them a Candle of altogether, in the end of which Candle∣sticke, sticke déepe a néedle, and after set the same in a narrow mouth'd glasse full of water, and you shall sée after what the same will doe.
LVIII. How to see many wondrous & strange signes in an Vrinall. And to sée these, take a new and cleane washed Vrinall, into which powre either cleane water, or other running wa∣ter, after take the white of a new laid Egge, and a little Saffron binding it in a cleane linnen cloth, after that powre a little of the water into a dish, and put the cloth with the Saffron into it, so long un∣till it have coloured it somewhat, and be∣ing on this wise, then beat the white of the egge with this water seven or eight times with thy finger, and then powre the same into the Vrinall, and you shall after sée in it Towers, Castels, Hills, and many other strange sightes. LIX. How to make a Loafe of bread new set upon the Table to leape off. TO doe this take a Quill, filling the same with Quick-silver, and stop∣ping
it close, thrust the same after into  hot Loaf, new drawn out of the Oven, and the Loaf will by and by dance upon the Table. LX. How to make an Egge flee about: a merry Conclusion. TO do this, take a Goose-Egge, and after the opening and cleansing of it, take a Bat that flieth in the Evening, which put into the shell; then glue it fast about on the top, and the Bat will flie a∣way with it; which perhaps will be thought of some to flie about in the air of it self. LXI. How to make artificial Fire divers ways; which will seem marvellous. ANd first, to make a flame of fire to pass suddenly out of the mouth of a pot full of water, take an Egge, making a hole in the head, and draw out all the substance of the same: which so done,
then fill the same with the powder of Brimstone and unekt Lime mixed to∣ether, shutting the mouth with Wax, and so let it fall to the bottom of a Qut∣pot full of water, taking quickly your hand away, and suddenly will issue forth a flame out of the mouth of the pot. And also, if thou wilt spit fire out of thy mouth without pain, and to do thée no harm, take the powder of the Willow-stick, fine∣ly beaten and ered, with the which oyn a little new Silk, making it ound up, like unto a ball; into which ut this pow∣der, wrapping the silk well about it; and after, put within it, with the powder, a little fine Flax, and then properly stitch it up round about: which so done, then cut it open a little on the one side, putting a quick cole or a light Candle unto it, to set it on fire a little: then put it again into thy mouth, holding the same soft∣ly with thy téeth, and turning also the part cut inward in thy mouth; and when thou wilt spit fire out, then hold the all strongly in thy mouth, and blowe, and the ookers on shall sée then a great flame isue forth of thy mouth, and do thée no harm at all. Also, to make fire flie up in
the air, Te Towe, and wet the same in Aqua vitae; and after put fire to it, and blowe the same away, which after will flie up in the air, and burn. LXII. How to know a natural Precious Stone from a counterfeit. TO do this, rub the same on Lead; and if it change the colour, then it is counterfeit; if it change not, then it is a natural Stone. Also, if the Stone have like unto a Bladder within, then it is coun∣terfeit. LXIII. How to make a Man to appear on a flame burning, without any harm. FOr to do this, take Brimstone, Ori∣ment, and common Oil; of these make an Ointment, with the which an∣oint thy garments all about, and thy head and hands; and after light the same, and it will burn all at once, without harm. Also, take juyce of Adders tongue,
the juyce of March-Mallows, or other Mallows, and the white of an Egge; these mix together, anointing therewith all about thy body; and then cast the fine powder of Brimstone on the same, set∣ting it over a fire, and it will strangely bur, and yet neither harm hands nor garments which shall be anointed there∣with. LXIV. A new conceited Conclusion, to make a Chamber as light by night as by day. TO do this, take that part which shi∣neth of the Night worm, and bruise them well; which after set in hot Horse∣dung in a Glass stopped, and let it there so stand for fifteen days; and after, distil the same in a Limbeck of Glass, with a soft fire: the which water so drawn, stop close in a narrow-neck'd Pot of Chrystal-Glass, and hng the same in the entry of the house, and it will so give a very bright light.
LXV· How to make two Dogs fight together: a proper Secret. TO do this, take the Seelifset of the Wolf, and cast the same between two Dogs; and they shall so long fight toge∣ther, as they lie there between them: and when you will have them to cease fighting, then take them away. LXVI. How to make a Bitch hat she shall not desire to be covered with any Dog. ANd to do this, take Bees, and pre∣pare them orderly, which after give unto the Bitch with bread, or with meat, and she will not after suffer any Dog to touch her. LXVII. How to cast forth any Worm or Snake entred within the body. ANd to do this, boil the herb Basil over a soft fire, in Vinegar; which so
boiled, give unto the patient to drink, and it shall cast the same up forthwith. And if the same be a Snake entred within the bo∣dy, then you may take writing Ink, and good Wine, mixing them together; which after drink, and it will cast up whatsoever evil be in the body. LXVIII. How to make a blown Bladder to dance and skip about from place to place. TO do this, put Quicksilver in a Blad∣der, and lay the Bladder in a hot place, and it will after skip from place to place, without handling. LXIX. How to make a Hen to run away with great fear. FOr to do this, take the head of a Kite, and tie the sme aut a Hens neck, and she shal never ease running here and there, until you hav taken away the same from her neck: and when you will take the same rom her nek, she will ten move from you nothing at all.
LXX. How to finde a person drowned, that hath been sought for. TO do this, take a white lof, and cast the same into the water, ner the suspected place, and it will forthwith go directly over the dead body, and there still abide; by which you may well finde the dead body. LXXI. How to deal with Iron many ways right profitable. FIrst, to make Iron as soft as paste, take Vitriol, and salt Nire, of ach alike, beating these to powder; which af∣ter distil in a Limbeck of Glass; and in this Water lay your small pieces of Iron for a day and a night; which after cover in  dung for fiftéen days, and the same will become very soft, like unto aste: and with the same Iron you may make seals, or gave, or otherwise imprint what you list on Iron, so easily as into Earth: and you may also beat and
work the same Iron so easily as Lead. Also, make a Water of Roch-Allom, as is above-said, and in the same Water quench your Iron seven times, and it will make the Iron so easily break as Glass, and to make powder thereof. Also, quench the Iron in the dung of an Ox or Cow, tem∣pered. with Honey, oftentimes, and it will become so soft, that you may work the same like Lead, with the hammer. Also▪ take salt Armoniack well beaten, and mix the same with unsekt Lime, and temper the same with cold water, like unto a thick Broth; and in this water temper the Iron, and it shall after become white, fair, and very strong. Also, take the juyce of the Herb named Palma Christi, and with the same anoint thy hands; and thou maist after handle Iron firehat, without harm. And the like may youd with the juyce of Hem∣lock. Also, take red Arsenick, and red Allom, of each alike; these grinde into fine pow∣der, mixing the ame with the juyce of Sengen, or House-leek, and th gall of a Bull, and anoint thy hands with the same; and thou maist after handle burning Iron; and anointing thy feet, thou mayst go on
hot Grates of Iron, or Coles, without any danger. LXXII. To light a Candle at the mouth of an Image painted on the wall. TO do this, take and put Brimstone to the mouth of an Image, and take a burning Candle, and blowe it out; an ere the week be out, set it to the Images mouth, and it will burn. And so ye may do against a Glass. LXXIII. To take Fish by night. TAke a Lantern of Glass, and put a burning Candle in it, and set the Lan∣tern on the water, and the Fishes will come to light. Or else take Nettles and Housleek, and make juyce of them, and put it in a Pond, and all the Fishes will gather there: and if your hands be anointed therewith, you may take them at your pleasure.
LXXIV. How to make no Dog shall bark at you. TAke an Herb called Serpentine; and by vertue thereof, no Dog shall bark at you. LXXV. How to make Birds come to your Culver-house. CAst Barley stéeped in Honey, where they do féed; and they will gather to your Culver-house. LXXVI. An excellent Conclusion, how to put an Apple into a Vial. HAng the Vial on the twig of an Apple-trée, and put a young Apple in the mouth of the Vial, and it will grow there∣in. And so ye may do with Grapes, or other fruit.
LXXVII. How to put an Egge into a Vial. STéep the Egge two days and two nights in Vinegar, and then roll it on a Table softly, and it will stretch as Wax; and then may you put it in the Vial, or draw it thorow a Ring. LXXVIII. To make folk seem black. PVt Oil-Olive in a Lamp▪ and put thereto fine powder of ground Glass, and light it; and all that be above it, will séem black as Egyptians. LXXIX. To prove if a Maiden be clean. BVm Mother-wort▪ and let her take the smoke thereof in at her nose; and if she be corrupt, she shall presently piss, or else not. Otherwise, take gray Neties while they be gréen, and let her pis on them: if she e no Maiden, they will wither forth∣with; otherwise not.
LXXX. To know if a sick person shall die, or not. TAke gray Nettles, while they be green, and put them into the patients Vrine: and if they remain green, he shall live; and if they wither, not. LXXXI. To make Salt water fresh. TAke Clay, and put it into a bag, and strain it thorow until it b clear, and it will be fresh. LXXXII. To see by night as by day. ANoint your eyes with the blood of a Bat; and by this means you may effect your desire. LXXXIII. To kindle fire at the Sun. TAke a very bright Bason, and put a new Looking-glass therein, and set
the Bason in the hottest Sun, and lay a∣bout it very dry Towe, small hoped, and the Towe will take fire with the heat of the Sun. LXXXIV. To make flesh cleave in the Pot. TAke Dwall or Nightshade, and stamp it well, and put it in the Pot with meat, and the meat will cleave together. LXXXV. An easie way to take Birds. PVt Barley in the juyce of Rue, and Vinegar, and cast it where the Birds do haunt or come; and as soon as they have eaten it, they cannot flie: and then ye may easily take them. LXXXVI. To make Silk-worms. TAke the brain of a Calf, and put it in a pit of Mader, and let it lie thrée wéeks, and they will bréed of the brain, and ye may féed them with Mulberries.
LXXXVII. How to take away hairs. ANoint the rough place with the blood of a Bat, after that it is shaven; and hair shall never grow there. LXXXVIII. To fat Hens or Capons. MAke a déep pit in the earth, and make therein a bd of dung, and a bed of Nettles; and do so, till it be full, and there kéep your Pullen, till the herbs begin to gow; and then let them out: and wtin a short while, they will be very fat. LXXXIX. That one shall not be drunk. DRink the juyce of Yarrow, fasting, and ye shall not be drunk for no drink: And if ye were drunk, it will sober you. Or else  the marrow of  fasting, and by this means ye shall not be drunk.
XC. To make a good bait for Fish, at ali seasons of the year. TAke Wheat-flower, and Tallow of a new-slain Shéep, and the glair of an Egge, and beat them all together, and vait them all therewith. XCI. How to make an Egge go up to a Spears end. EMpty the Egge at a little hole, and fill it full of May-dew, and stop the hole close with a little Wax and Parchment glued, that the dew go not out. Then stick a spear in the earth, in the heat of the Sun, and lay the Egge by the Spear, and it will mount to the top thereof, by the heat of the Sun. XCII. To make Pottage run out of the Pot. TAke Sope, and cast thereof into the Pot, and it will run over.
XCIII. To make Fish or Flesh seem raw. TAke the blood of a Wat, or of a Kid, and dry it, and keep  from the air; then cast on Fish or Flesh that is hot, and it will séem raw. XCIV. To kill Hens or Ducks. CAst to them the seed of Henbane, and (having eaten thereof) they will fall down as they were dead. XCV. How to make Coles to burn a great while. MAke powder of S. Johns Wort; and when the Coles are wasted, and the fire néer out, cast it thereon, and let it lie. XCVI. Ad capiendum Pisces. REcipe luce Mullage, vel scolares sortas collectum cica medium
Maii. Quando Luna sit plena, distem∣perata cum nigro sale, & serva in Olla terrea; & quando vis occupare, unge manus tuas, & lava in aqua vel loco ubi sunt Pisces. XCVII. That a man shall not be weary of going. DRink of the juyce of Mugwort, and bear the herb about him, with the herb Pedelion and Crowfoot. XCVIII. To make Yarn and Linen cloth become white. TAke a Herring-barrel, and fill it nigh full of good Ale-dreggs, and stop it fast: but ye must have a good dish-ful of parcht beans, and put them in a linen bag, and very hot put them to the dreggs, till they be cool; and shut it fast, for the space of a quar∣ter of an hour. Then take two pound of Allom, ground to subtil powder, and cast it therein; and let it lie four days naturally well closed: then wash your Yarn.
XCIX. To make that a horse may not go thorow a street. TAke the guts of a Wolf, and lay them overthwart the Stréet, and cover them with earrh or sand, and he will not go that way as long as the guts do lie there. Pro∣batum est. C. To know if a Woman be with a Man-childe, or not. TAke a dih, and put water in it, and then let her milk her brest into the water; and if it be a Man-childe, it will fléet; and if it be a Woman-childe, it will sink. CI. An easie Experiment to ease thy feet for going. ANd to do this, take the leaves of Plantine, and stamp them well, and strain them, or otherwise preserve the
juyce thereof, and anoint your feet there∣with, and it will remove away the grief. Also, upon the going of any great journey, if you put within each of your shooes or boots a leaf of Plantine, it will both cool and refresh your feet, and likewise make you hold out mainly in travel. CII. To preserve your Teeth fair, white, and clean. FOr the fair and neat keeping of the Teeth, take Barley-meal, Honey, and Salt, and mingle them together, and use therewith to rub your Teeth at sundry times, especially in the Morning; and (by this means) they shall become very fair and white. CIII. An easie Device to take Fleas. ANoint a Pot with the grease of a Buck, and set the same on your Bed, and all the Fleas will gather thereunto. Or else the grease of a Goupil, and an∣oint the place of the house therewith where
ye would have them come, and they will be drawn thither. Or else take leaves of Dan, and lay them under your Coverlet, or where ye will; and when they be among the leaves, they cannot come away by any means. CIV. How to make abundance of Nails, or other pieces of Iron, to hang one upon the other by the Loadstone. FIrst, take a Nail, and knock it a little way into a Bean; then touch the head with a Loadstone: then put the point of another Nail to that, and it will hang. Then touch the second Nail on the head, and put to the point of a third: and so you may do till you come to the ground, let the beam be never so high, to the great admi∣ration and amazement of all the beholders. This Conclusion, and natural dependency, may be further amplified and extended with other several pieces of Iron or Stéel, which have onely formerly béen touched wih the Loadstone; whence cometh their contingencie.
CV. How with a Loadstone to make pieces delivered from your hand on a Shovel-boord, to be Deuces or Trays at pleasure. YOu must have Pieces of your own, in which you must drive points of Née∣dles, and then break them off smoothe and neat: Then, at the end of the Table (close by the Box underneath) cover a Loadstone, and there your Pieces will rest. But be sure then you do throw as néer the Tables end as you can: so shall you with the more convenience and the less suspition effect your desire. CVI. A new Receit for a Cook, how, with one Spit, and with one equal fire, to keep one Capon raw, the se∣cond to boil, and the third to roste. PRovide a long Spit, and put thereon thrée Capons, Chickens, Pidgeons, or what you please, (onely thrée:) then
make a long fire, and lay them thereto, and let one turn the Spit: Then, on that you would keep raw, pour continually cold water; and on that you would boil, pour scalding liquor; and that which you would desire to rost, baste it with Butter, and so bread it. As by this Figure is more plainly declared, thus: Let A be the raw Capon, whereon pour cold water. Then let B be the boil∣ed Capon; on which pour scalding liquor. And let C be the rosted; which expose to the fire, and baste with Butter. This is (being punctually performed) a very pretty Secret. But be sure you have in readi∣ness provided severl pans or vessels to re∣ceive each basting or liquor by it self.
CVII. To make one that they shall not sleep, or to sleep when you please. IF you lay the heart of a Crow or Bat upon a party you would not have to sleep, the said party shall take but little rest. Also, the head of a Bat brought to pow∣der, and bound to the right arm, doth the like. But if you put the same upon the stomack of one that is asléep▪ it is said that the party will not awake till it be taken away. CVIII. How (by a new Secret) to make a pair of Bowls to lie as neer the Jack as you please. DIvers men peg, and put in peggs of of Lead into their Bowls on their wheeling or running side: Now in stead of those leaden peggs, knck in points of nails, or else horse-nail heads very neat and hand∣some, so that it doth not make the Bowl to rub.
Then in the toe of your shooe (before∣hand) put a piece of a Loadstone, and then throw your Bowl as néer the Iack as you can: when the Bowl is out of your hand, run before it, and with that foot draw before your Bowl; and it will follow it: then, where you would have it lie, quickly take a∣way your foot, and there the Bowl rests. CIX. An excellent Experiment to make Artificial Cloves. TAke what certain quantity you will of the finest Gum-Dragant, and infuse it in Rose-water: then strain it, and beat it in a Morter with a little fine sersed Su∣gar: then take of the powder of Cloves, and beat it amongst your paste; and when it is somewhat stiff, take it forth, and roll it somewhat small, to the form of Cloves, and likewise cut them to the length of Cloves: Then take a knife, and cross the heads, and print them with natural Cloves: and being so in the right form of Cloves, dry them in your Oven or Stove, and serve them.
CX. A rare Device to make a Walnut, that when you crack it, there shall be Biskets or Caraways in it, or a Poesie written in a paper. TAke a quantity (as you think méet) of Paste-royal, white, being beaten with Gum-Dragant, and mix it with a little fine sersed Cinamon, and that will bring your Paste to the right colour of the Walnut-shell: then roll it thin; and ha∣ving a mold of a Walnut-shell which is in two halfs, print it therein; and being mold∣ed before, put what you please therein, and so close it up, and dry it; and when you are disposed, present them thus formed to any company of your friends, or strangers, at your pleasure. This Device will séem marvellous to all who are not by their own usual practice and profession inured to the forming and molding of sundry Devices and Experiments of this rare and strange nature.
CXI. A neat Conclusion, whether a Man and Woman shall marry or not. TAke the number of the Mans name, and three; and likewise of the Wo∣mans, and divide them asunder by Nine: if the mans name exceeds the Womans, they shall marry; otherwise not. CXII. A Conceit to finde whether of the married couple die first. TAke the number of the Marriage-day, as what day of the Moneth it was, and the number of the Signe that the Moon was in on that day: Then divide these by Thirty; and if the number remaining be even, the Woman shall die first; else not. CXIII. An approved Perfume. TAke Rose-water and Vinegar, of each a like quantity as you please,
whereunto likewise put a proportionable quantity of Bay-leaves, and Cloves, and let these boil all together in a Pot, or ra∣ther in a Perfuming-pan; and this will yeeld about the house a most excellent sa∣vour, and sweet perfume. CXIV. A pretty Conclusion, to finde out whether a man shall win or lose at play. MArk the name of the Man, and one for the place on the one party, and the number of the day, and the age of the Moon on the other party: Divide each number by Nine; and if the Mans number exceed the other, he winneth; or else not. CXV. To make Steel or Chrystal soft. TAke a quantity of nquenched Lime, and as much Sope-ashes, and thereof make a y after this manner. Strain it thorow a Strainer nine times: then take your Steel or Chrystal, and lay it therein
for a night and a day, and it will be soft: if you will have it hard again, quench it sud∣denly in cold water. CXVI. How to set a vernish or colour on Iron or Steel. ANd to do this, take the gall of a Calf, and after let your Stéel or Iron be clean vernished over: then take the gall, and stick it thereon with a cloth; and so let it dry well in the sun, and it will appear plain like a gold-colour. CXVII. A pretty Device, shewing how to gild upon Iron or Steel. ANd to effect this, take a quantity of Wine-stone, with as much Sal-Armoniack, and the like of Verdigrease, and some Salt; then séethe all together in White-wine: then strike all over your burnished metals; let it burn into the same, and ye may gild thereon with common gold.
CXVIII. An artificial Experiment, to cast Sugar into the form of either Birds or Beasts, in what posture you are disposed. TO effect this Secret, take to what quan∣tity you will of the finest Sugar, being clarified, and boil it until it will roll be∣twixt your fingers: Then take your Molds, being double, having lien in water two hours before, and stop them close with lome or paste, lest the Sugar should come forth: and then cooling your Sugar a little, pour it into your Molds; and let it so stand, un∣til it be fully cooled: Then open your Molds, of what form soever; and having taken them forth, you shall finde them alike shaped, according to the figure of your Mold, whether of Man, Bird, or Beast, &c. So you may, for further ornament, afterward gild or paint them; and so prefer them to the service of your friends, at any Feast or Banquet, or otherwise bestow them in gifts, as you shall finde best occasion of their ac∣ceptance.
CXIX. A very useful Secret for the making of divers Inks. 1. For the Golden Ink. TAke Chrystal beaten, and temper it with the white of an Egge, and write; and when it is drie, rub it over with a gold Ring. 2. For Silver Ink. Take Black-lead, temper it with Eum-water, and write upon a black paper; and when it is dry, wipe it with a linen cloth, and it will shine like silver. 3. For Yellow Ink. Take Saffron and Argil, and temper them with Gum-water, and it will appear a perfect Yellow. 4. For Green Ink. Take Verdigrease and Argil, grinde them together on a Marble-stone with a Moller: then temper it, and it will produce a perfect green colour.
CXX. To make one speak in their sleep whatsoever you would demand. TAke the tongue of a water-Frog, and lay it on the head of one that is asléep, and it causeth them to speak in their sleep. Also the heart of a Toad, or night-Crow, or the fat of a Hare put upon the brest of one that is sleeping, causeth them to tell whatsoever shall be demanded of them: whereby pretty sport may be raised to the demander and others, when the party is awaked. CXXI. An easie Conclusion for the making of Gum-water. TAke to the quantity of a dish-full of fair water from the Conduit, and put thereto an handful of Gum, and let it stand three days; after which, temper it well; and when you have occasion to make use thereof, you shall finde it perfect to your desire.
CXXII. How to make a Thief afraid to come into your house. IT is credibly reported, that the Gall of a Cow, hid in some priie or unknown place, will fear and astonish any that shal ad∣venture to approach that place. CXXIII. How to cast a perfect Silver-colour upon any Copper. TAke of Wine-stone, of Allom, and of Salt, of each a like quantity: then grinde them all together on a Painters stone; and withal, put thereto a leaf of Silver, and so grinde it well with the rest of your suff: Having so done, put it in a Leaden pot of Earth, and therein put like∣wise your Copper a little while: then scrape it with a Wyer Brush, and you shall sée the strange alteration thereof. But in case it come not, upon the first view, is its perfect change, you must let it lie a while longer threin, till it cometh to a more absolute co∣lour of Silver.
CXXIV. A sportive Conclusion, to make a whole Herd of Cattel to flee from you in a Field, or follow you when you please. AS thou passest at any time thorow the Field, having about thee either a Cloke or Coat; approaching before a Herd of Cattel, suddenly soop down for∣ward, and run backward at them, and they will flee from you, as so many Lambs from a Wolf: but presently again change your posture, and walk upright, and they will all follow you with wonder: But do the like again, (as before) and they will still be startled therewith, till you surcease, and leave them. This you may do to the fiercest Bull, Cow, or Ox, and daunt them. CXXV. To make Hair shine like Gold. TAke Colwint stalks, dry them, and burn them, and with their ashes make Ly, and wash therewith your hair.
CXXVI. How to make a , that neither Rat nor Mouse shall eat or gnaw of your Cheese. THe Weasel, the Rat, and Mouse, are at such deadly hatred one with the other, as that, if you ut the brain of a Weasel into the  or Curds whereof you in∣tend to make your Cheese, neither Rats nor Mice will ever came to taste or eat thereof. CXXVII. A very easie and merry conceit, to keep off Fleas from your beds or chambers. PLinie reporteth, that if when you first hear the Cuckow, you mark well where your right foot standeth, and take up of that earth, the Fleas will by no means breed, either in your House or Chamber, where any of the same earth is thrown or scattered.
CXXVIII. How to make of paper a Bird, Frog, or other artificial creature, to creep on the ground, flee, or run upon a wall or post. TAke a piece of Paper, and cut it with a knife or cizers into the form of the Fi∣gure before, (or what other you please:) then take a little piece of Wax, Pitch, or other glutenous stuff; and on the backside, where you see the letter A, place it: Then warm it at the fire and stick thereon a Fly, Beetle, or what other such small voluble creature you shall think fit: and you shall hereupon behold a very pretty conceited motion, with content sufficient, and a kinde of pleasant admiration.
CXXIX. How to make pretty Sport amongst Ducks, Hens, or other Poultrey. FOr the effecting of this Conceit, take a piece of Thred about some two foot long; and at the one end thereof, tie a little piece of Red cloth, or of some other colour that is light; then, at the other end, tie a piece of the pai of Chéese so big as they may well swallo, and throw it amongst them, with other meat▪ and they that take it down, (as one of them will) will thereby make pretty Sport. CXXX. A way to make Discord or Peace between any Parties. MAny learned Authors do relate of the strange operation which is to be found in the stone of a mad Dog, and how the same, being put into drink, is said to move a great Dissention between those Parties who shall happen to drink thereof. The like (on the contrary part)
may be averted concerning the validity which consisteth in the heart and brains of the Turtle-dove, viz. that if any do in their drink or otherwise partake of either, they shall thereby be inclined to peace, and mo∣ved with true affection. CXXXI. How to make a sportive Conclusion with a Cat, by putting her into a small Washing-bowl in a Pond, Thames, or other River. BRing forth a small Washing-bowl, and put therein a Ca: then shove the Bowl and Cat into a great Pond, the Thames, or other River, (in a calm:) when you have so done, manage your Spaniels or other Dogs that will take the water, or be apt to bait a Cat, and you shall have dainty sport: For the Dogs with their féet will turn the bottom of the Bowl upwards; the Cat being in the water, will still flée to her little Pinnace she first boarded, namely, the Washing-bowl; betwixt which will appear a terrible Sea-fight in fresh watr.
CXXXII. How to make a pretty house-sport with a Cat. CAtch your Cat, and take a Hawk bell, or the like: then tie a thred to the bell; and about half an inch from the bell, tie a knot: then binde it fast to the end of her tail, and let her loose; whereby you shall sée pretty sport. Also you may take Walnut-shells, when the kernels are out, and put therein a lit∣tle rum of Pitch, and warm them against the fire: then shooe her on all her four féet: Then put her into a dark room, and she will never rest quiet, but kéep her self so trampling, that the noise thereof, to those that onely hear, not knowing what you have done, will séem strange, and indéed de∣lectable. CXXXIII. How to make a Cat to piss out the fire. TAke a Cat▪ and, with a glove on your hand, hold all her four féet together:
then hold her head fast betwéen your leggs: when you have so dne, go to the fire, and hold up her tail, and you shall sée her spout forth presently. CXXXIV. How a Wager may be laid, that a Cat shall draw a simple fellow over a Pond, Moat, &c. TAke a long Rope, and tie it about the fellws middle very fast: then get the other end of the Rope on the other side of the Pond: when you have so done, tie the Cat with a small Packthred to the Rope. Now you must imagine, that the Rope must reach a good way from the Cat, and put it thorow some bushes or wéeds, behinde which you must have two or thrée Confederates, (so that the fellow sée them not.) Then, when all is ready, one must whip or beat the Cat, and then your Con∣orts must pull the Rope quickly over: and when he is come to the shore, they may  convey themselves away; for he will hae small minde to eye them.
CXXXV. An approved artificial Conclusion, for the making of Paste-royal, white. TAke of your finest Gum-Dragant, and infuse it in Rose-water; which (being dissolved) strain it thorow a fine linen cloth, and beat it with a little fine sersed Sugar: it will require beating the longer, because by this means it grows the whiter: When it is grown somewhat stiff, (as it will do by adding Sugar unto it) then take it forth, and put it in your Mold very thin, and dry it in your stow, and you will finde it useful for best occasions. CXXXVI. Of an Herb which will make one to be very forgetful. SOme do write, that there is a Tree or Herb called Lutos, that if any do eat the fruit thereof, they shall quite forget all sor∣row; nay, it will make them forget their own Countrey and birth.
CXXXVII. How to drive away all Inchantments, or Witchcraft. ALl Beasts do naturally detest the fe∣male-Pimpernel, but not the male, as sundry Authors affirm. And it is cre∣dibly witnessed, that this Pimpernel, laid under the threshold of the door, driveth away all manner of Inchantments and Witch∣craft. CXXXVIII. How you may serve a Tapster such a trick, that he shall not be able to froth his Cans or Juggs. PRovide but in readiness the skin of a Red Herring, and at some time or o∣ther, when the Tapster is absent, do but rub a little on the inside of his Pots, Cans, or Iuggs, and he shall not in any wise be able to froth them for a long time after, although he would. This is a Conceit to cozen the Tapster, when he would cozen you.
CXXXIX. A natural means to preserve your house in safety from Thunder and Lightning. AN antient Author reciteth (among diver other Experiments of Nature which he had found out) that if the herb  Synreen do grow on the hou , the same house is never stricke with Lightning or Thunder. CXL. A good Drink for Travellers, or such∣like, when they shall happen to want either Ale or Beer in their Inne. TAke a quart of good fair Water, and put into the same some half a dozen spoonfuls of Wine-vinegar; or, for failing, as much Aqua vitae, a little Sugar, Borage, Tyme, and Rosemary: then brew them well together out of one pot into another, and you shall finde it a good and wholesome drink, especially in Summer.
CXLI. How to keep Beer or Ale from sowring in the heat of Summer, or when it beginneth to be dead. TAke Mugwort, and put it into Ale or Beer in the heat of Summer, so that you put in a quantity according to the pro∣portion of your Drink: for the greater quantity requireth also the greater quantity of this Mugwort. Otherwise, put a handful or two of Oatmeal, or else of ground Malt, into your vessel of Ale or Beer, and afterward stir the same well together, and let it settle a little, and it will become fresh. Or else put into the vessel the roots of Ireos, Organy, and Barberries. CXLII. How to take Crows, Kites, Magpies, or Jackdaws, alive. TAke any piece of raw Flesh, or Liver of a Beast, and slice it into small morsels, that they may swallow it: then
take the powder or slices of Nux vomica, and (making holes in the flesh) put it into the same, and lay it where they haunt; and presently after they have eaten of it, they will take to a trée as soon as they can, and suddenly totter and fall down; where you may with your hands easily take them: but they will quickly recover again. CXLIII. To hang a Gourd, Cucumber, or great Apple up in your house, that you may have Wheat, Barley, Rye, or Pease to grow out thereof. TAke a Gourd Cucumber, or great Ap∣ple, and with a skewer or Butchers prick, make holes therein a little way, and in those holes put the slender ends in of Wheat, Barley, or Rye, so that they may be buried: Then take a Packthred or Brown thred, and tie it cross the Gourd, and so hang it up in your house, and, in short time, your séed of these several sorts will sprout and grow forth, and (for the Conceit) séem very rare.
CXLIV. How to finde out a delusion of the Vint∣ners, in mixing Water with their Clarets and Whites, or Ho∣ney with their other Sweet Wines. IF you suspect your French Wines (as Clarets or Whites) to be mingled with Water, (which you may partly perceive, by the thinness about the verge or brink of the Glass;) the best way to finde out the delusion thereof, is, to put a Pear pared into the Glass; and if it doth swim aloft upon the Wine, it is a pregnant evidence that the Wine is perfect, and unmingled; but if it sink to the bottom, then of a certain Water is mingled therewith. If you likewise have any suspition of your Sweet Wines, (as Canaries, Mali∣goes, &c.) that they should be mingled with Honey; you may finde out the trick in this manner: Take a few drops of the Wine, and pour them on a hot plate of I∣ron, and the Wine will soon dissolve, but the Honey remain and thicken.
CXLV. To preserve a man from being drunk, or make a drunken man to be∣come sober again. HE that will preserve himself from be∣ing drunk, let him drink, in a morning fasting, Sallet-oil; or eat the marrow of Pork fasting. Otherwise, if a man (being drunk) would become sober, let him eat Coleworts, or drink a good draught of Vinegar, or wash his privie members therewith. CXLVI. The vertue of a rare Cole, that is to be found but one hour in the day, and one day in the yeer. DIvers Authors affirm concerning the verity and vertue of this Cole, viz. That it is onely to be found upon Midsum∣mer-Eve (being the Eve of Saint John the Baptist) just at noon, under every root of Plantine and of Mugwort: The effects whereof are wonderful; for whosoever weareth or beareth the same
about with them, shall be freed from the Plague, Fever, Ague, and sundry other diseases. And one Author especially wri∣teth, and constantly averreth, that he ne∣ver knew any that used to carry of this marvellous Cole about them, who ever were (to his knowledge) sick of the Plague, or (indeed) com∣plained of any other Maladie. FINIS.
This may be Prin∣ted. July 26. 1688. Rob. Midgley.
