H3072 13065055 97056
Epistolae Ho-Elianae. FAMILIAR LETTERS Domestic and Forren; Divided into sundry SECTIONS, Partly Historicall, Politicall, Philosophicall, Vpon Emergent Occasions: By Iames Howell Esq One of the Clerks of His late Maties most Honble Privy Councell. The second Edition, enlarged with divers supple∣ments, and the Dates annexed which were wanting in the first, With an Addition of a third volume of new Letters. Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. London, Printed by W. H. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1650.
These ensuing Letters contain for their principal subject a faithfull relation of the privatest passages that happen'd at Court a good part of King Jame's reign, and that of His late Majesty. As also of such forren affairs which had reference to these Kingdoms; Viz. Of THe Wars of Germany, and the transactions of the Treaties about restoring the Pala∣nat, with the House of Austria and Sweden. The Treaty and traverses of the Match with Spain. The Treaty of the Match with France. An exact survey of the Netherlands. Another of Spain, Italy, France, and of most Coun∣treys in Europe, with their chief Cities and Governments. Of the Hans Towns, and the famous quarrell twixt Queen Elizabeth and them. Divers Letters of the extent of Christianity, and of other Religions upon Earth. Divers Letters of the languages up and down the Earth.
Accounts of sundry Embassies from England to other States. Som pieces of Poetry wherwith the Prose goes interlarded. Divers new opinions in Philosophy descanted upon. Passages of former Parlements, and of this pre∣sent, &c. Among these Letters ther goes along a Le∣gend of the Authors life, and of his severall em∣ployments, with an account of his Forren Tra∣vells and Negotiations; wherin he had occasion to make his address to these Personages, and Persons underwritten. Letters to Noblemen. TO His late Majesty. To the Duke of Buckingham To the Erl of Cumberland To the Erl of Dorset To the Erl of Rutland To the Erl of Leicester To the Erl of Sunderland To the Erl of Bristol To the Erl Rivers To the Erl of Strafford To the Erl of Carberry▪
To the L. Vicount Con∣way, Secr. To the L. Vic. Savage To the L. Herbert of Cherberry To the L. Cottington To the L. Mohun To the L. Digby. To the Lady Marchio∣ness of Winchester To the La. Scroope To the Countess of Sun∣derland To the La. Cornwallis To the La. Digby▪ To Bishop V sher, Lord Primat of Ireland To B. Field To B. Duppa To the B. of London To B. Howell. To Knights, Doctors, Esquires, Gentle∣men and Merchants. TO Sir Robert Man∣sell To Sir Iames Crofts To Sir Iohn North To Sir Edward Spencer To Sir Kenelme Digby So Sir Peter Wichts To Sir Sackvill Trever To Sir Sackvill Crow To Sir Arthur Ingram To Sir Thomas Lake To Sir Eubule Theloall To Sir Alex. Ratcliff To Sir Edward Savage To Sir Iohn Smith To Sir Will: Saint-Geon To Sir Thomas Savage To Sir Fran. Cottington To Sir Robert Napier To Sir Philip Manway∣ring To Sir Bevis Theloall. To Doctor Mansell To Dr. Howell To Dr. Prichard
To Dr. Wicham To Dr. I. Day. To Mr. Alderman Cle∣thero To Mr. Alder. Moulson To the Town of Rich∣mond. To Mr. R. Altham To Mr. D. Calawall To Cap. Fran. Bacon To Mr. Ben. Iohnson To Mr. End. and Cap. Tho. Porter To Mr. Simon Digby To Mr. Walsingham Gresley To Mr. Thomas Gwyn To Mr. Iohn Wroth To Mr. William Blois To Mr Robert Baron To Mr. Thomas More To Mr. Iohn Savage To Mr. Hugh Penry To Mr. Christoph. To Mr. R. Brown. To Mr. William Martin To Cap. Nicholas Leat To Mr. R. Brownrigg. To Mr. Iohn Batty To Mr. Will. Saint-Geon To Mr. Iames Howard To Mr. Ed. Noy To Mr. William Austin To Mr. Rowland Gwyn To Mr. Will. Vaughan To Mr. Arthur Hopon To Mr. Thomas Iones To Mr. I. Price To Captain Ol. Saint-Geon. With divers others.
To His Majesty. SIR, THese Letters address'd (most of them) to Your best de∣grees of Subjects, do, as so many lines drawn from the Circumference to the Centre, all meet in Your Majesty, who, as the Law stiles You the Fountain of honour and grace, so You should be the Centre of our happines. If Your Majesty vouch∣safe them a Gracious Aspect, they may all prove Letters of credit, if not credentiall Letters, which Soverain Princes use only to Authorize: They venture to go abroad into the vast Ocean of the World, as Let∣ters of Mart, to try their Fortunes; and
Your Majesty being the greatest Lord of Sea under Heaven, is fittest to protect them, and then they will not fear any hu∣man power. Moreover, as this Royall Protection secures them from all danger, so it will infinitely conduce to the pros∣perity of their voyage, and bring them to safe Port with rich returns. Nor would these Letters be so familiar, as to presume upon so high a Patronage, were not many of them Records of Your Own Royall Actions; And 'tis well known, that Letters can tresure up, and transmit matters of State to posterity, with as much Faith, and be as authentic Registers, and safe repoitories of Truth, as any Story whatsoever. This brings them to ly all prostrat at Your Feet, with their Author who is Sir, Your Majesties most Loyall Subject and Servant, HOWELL.
To the knowing READER. OF Familiar Letters. LOve is the life of Frendship, Letters are The life of Love, the Load-stones that by rare Attraction make souls meet, and melt, and mix, As when by fire exalted gold we fix. They are those wing'd Pestillions that can fly, From the Anartic to the Artic sky, The Heralds and swift Harbengers that move From East to West on Embassies of Love; They can the Tropics cut, and cross the Line, And swim from Ganges to the Rhone or Rhine,
From Thames to Tagus, thnce to Tyber run, And terminat their journy with the Sun: They can the Cabinets of Kings unscrue, And hardest intriacies of State unclue; They can the the Tartar tell, what the Mogor Or the great Turk doth on the Asian shore, The Knez of them may know, what Prester John Doth with his Camells in the torrid Zone: Which made the Indian Inca think they wer Spirits who in white sheets the Ar did tear. The luckie Goose sav'd Joves beleagred HillCapi∣toll. Once by her noyse, but oftner by her Quill: It twice prevented Rome, was not o▪re-run By the tough Vandal, and the rough hewn Hun.Liv. Pow∣der-Plot. Letters can Plots though molded under ground Disclose, and their fell complices confound, Witnes that fiery Pile which would have blown Up to the Clouds, Prince, Peeple, Peers, and Town, Tribunalls, Church, and Chappell, and had dride The Thames, though swelling in her highest prid, And parboyl'd the poor Fish, which from her Sand Had been toss'd up to the adjoyning Lands. Lawyers as Vultures had soar'd up and down, Prelats like Magpis in the Ayr had flown, Had not the Eagles Letter brought to light, That Subterranean horrid Work of night. Credentiall Letters, States, and Kingdoms tie, And Monarchs knit in ligues of Amitie; They are those golden Links that do enchai Whole Nations, though discinded by the Main; They are the soul of Trade, they make Commerce, Expand it self throughout the Univers.
Letters may more than History inclose, choicest learning, both for Vers and Prose; ey knowledg can unto our souls display, amore gentle, and familiar way, e highest points of State and Policy, e most severe parts of Philosophy ay be their subject, and their Themes erich well as privat businesses, in which nds use to correspond, and Kindred greet, rchants negotiat, the whole World meet. n Seneca's rich Letters is inshrin'd ere the Ancient Sages left behind: y makes his the secret symptomes tell those distempers which proud Rome befell, in her highest flourish she would make Tyber from the Ocean homage take. at Antonin the Emperor did gain re glory by his Letters, than his raign, Pen out-lasts his Pike, each golden lin is Epistles do his name inshrine, clius by his Letters did the same, they in chief immortallize his fame. ords vanish soon, and vapour into Ayr, e Letters on Record stand fresh and fair, tell our Nephews who to us wer dear, our choice frends, who our familiars were. he bashfull Lover when his flammering lips er, and fear som unadvised slips, boldly court his Mistris with the Quill, his hot passions to her Brest still; Pen can furrow a fond Femals heart, pierce it more than Cupide feigned dart:
Letters a kind of Magic vertu have, And like strong Philtres human souls inslave. Speech is the Index, Letters Ideas are Of the informing soul, they can declare, And shew the inward man, as we behold A face reflecting in a Chrystall mould: They serve the dead and living, they becom Attorneys and Administers: In somm, Letters as Ligaments the World do tie, Else all commence and love 'twixt men would die. J. H.
An Extract of the Heads of the choicest matters that goe inter∣woven 'mongst the Letters of the first Volume. The first Section. OF Abusers of Familiar Letters. Page. 1 Of Somersets fall, and Buckinghams rise. 4 listris Turner executed in yellow starch at Tyburn, and Sir Gervas Elwayes on Tower-hill, his memorable caution against swearing, and the Lo. Wil. of Pem∣brks noble act to his Lady and children. 4 Sir Walter Rawleigh's sorry return from Guiana, Count Gondamars violent prosecution of him, and a faceti∣ous Tale of Alphonso King of Naples, &c. 7 Of the study of our Common Law, and what Genius is aptest for it. 16 he tru manner of the surrendry of the cautionary towns, Flishing and Brill. 18 The force of Letters. 20 A Letter of love. 26 Som choice Observations of Amsterdam. 9. 13, 14 Of the University of Leyden, and a clash 'twixt Arminius and Baudius. 14
Of Grave Maurice Prince of Orenge, and of his regul cours of life. 1 Of Antwerp, and her Cittadell. 2 Of France, of Normandy, and th City of Rouen. 2 Of Paris, and an odd mischance that befell a Secreta of State there. 2 Of Luines the the Favorite. 2 An exact Relation from an eye-witnes of the assass nat committed on the person of Henry the Grea 3 His rare Perfections, and divers wittie Speeches  his. 3 An exact Relation of that Monstrous death of the Ma quis of Ancre by an eye-witnes. 3 Of St. Malos, and the Province of Britany, the vicini of their Language with the Welsh. 3 Of Rochell and the humors of the peeple. 3 The strong operations of love, and a facetious Tale  the Duke of Ossunas. 37 Of the Pyreney Hills. 38 Of the noble City of Valentia, and various effects  the Sun. 4 Of Alicant and the Grapes thereof. 4 Of Carthagena. 4 Of Scylla and Charybdis, Mount Aetna, and the vulga Greek, &c. 4 Of the admirable City of Venice, her Glass Furnaces, with a speculation rays'd theron, her renowned Arse∣nall and Tresury, her age and constitution, her famous Bucentoro, with a Philosophical notion arising thence, &c. from 45 to 6 Of the vertu of Letters. 52 A Letter of gratitude. 53
Some witty sayings of Spaniards. 60 Some witty Observations of Rome, the manner of crea∣ting Cardinals. 61 Of forren Travell. 67 Of the gentle City of Naples. 65 A saying of King Iames. 68 A resemblance 'twixt the old Lombards and the Welsh. 68 A witty saying of Lewis the 11. 70 Of Florence, Genoa, Luca, &c. 70 Of Milan, and the Duke of Savoy. 73 Of the Italian Toung. 74 Of the humor of the Italian. 85 Of the hideous mountains the Alps, and of Lion in France. 77 Of Geneva, and a strange thing that happend at Lion. 79 The six famous Verses made of Venice. 59 A notable magnanimous Speech of a Turk. 56 The second Section. MY Lord Bacons opinion of Monsieur Cadenet the French Ambassador about little men. 2 Two Letters of Endearments. 3 A notable saying of the La. Elizabeth. 4 Of Sir Robert Mansels return from Algier. 11 Queen Anns death and the last Comet. 7 M. of Buckingham made Lord Admirall, &c. 13 The beginning of the Bohemian Wars. 4 The Palsgraves undertaking that Crown. 4 Prague lost. 5 Spinola's going to the Palatinat, the manner of taking
Oppenheim, and the unworthines of the Marq. of Ansbuck the German Generall. 9 The strange wonder in Holland, of a Lady that brought forth as many Children as days in the yeer, &c. 14 Of the sailing Waggon. 1 An elaborat survey of the seventeen Provinces, the ground of their quarrell with the Spaniard, the diffe∣rence of Government, and humors of peeple, from 15 to 26 The difference 'twixt the Flemin, Walloon, and Hollan∣der. 26 The last French Kings piety to his Mother. 29 Phlebotomy much used in France. 33 A congratulatory Letter for Marriage. 27 A Satyrical Play in Antwerp about the Prince Palsgraves proceedings. 28 Wars 'twixt the French King and the Protestants. 31 A famous Speech of St. Lewis. 33 Of the French Favorite Luines, and his two brothers Cadenet and Brand. 47 The strange story of the Maid of Orleans, and how the English wer reveng'd of her. 36 A facetious passage of the Duke of Espernon. 38 The opinion of a French Doctor of English Ale. 34 The French Polette. 37 The third Section. GOndamars first audience about the Spanish Match, and the ill Augury that befell. 49 Sir Henry Montague made Lord Tresurer; a facetious
question ask'd him. 41 Cautions for travelling Italy. 43 K. Iames his sharp answer to the Parlement from New∣market about the Spanish Match, &c. His facetious Speech of my Lady Hatton. 44 Of the Synod of Dort. 54 Archb. Abbots disaster to kill a Keeper &c. 49 The French Kings proceedings against the Protestants, and the death of Luines. 56 Of the Infanta of Spain, and her two brothers. 51 The bold manner of Petitioning the King of Spain. 52 Som comendable qualities of the Spaniards. 54 Of the old Duke of Larma. 54 Materiall thinks of the Match. 55 The witty Speech of the Marquis of Montesclares. 57 Of Count Mansfields notable retreat to Breda, his chie∣fest exploit. 58 Of our Prince his arrival at the Court of Spain, his usage there, and som passages of Gondamars. 60 Of his comportment in courting the Lady Infanta, &c. 64 A witty saying of a Spanish woman. 63 Of their baiting of Bulls with men. 64 Verses upon the Prince his wooing. 66 The monstrous manner of Osman the great Turks death, with som Observations theron. 70 Of his ominos dream, and the grand Visiers Prediction to Sir Tho. Roe. 73 A Discours 'twixt our Prince and the King of Spain. 74 Of our Prince his departure thence. 76 How matters stood after his departure. 77 Preparations made for the wedding day. 79
The Earl of Bristolls Audience upon his receiving a new Commission. 80 Probabilities that the Spaniard intended a Match with England. 79 My Lo. Pagetts witty Speech in Parlement. 80 Of the Bishop of Halverstadt. 81 The notable Plot the two Spanish Ambassadors invented to demolish the Duke of Buck. 82 The high proffers that wer made the Earl of Bristoll, if he would stay in Spain. 97 Of the manner of the proceedings of the Spanish Match by way of comparison. 83 The breach of the Spanish Match by a Philosophical com∣parison. 83 An Abstract of the Spanish Monarchy, of its growth, of the soyl, and the humor of the Inhabitants, from 87 to 93 Of things happen'd at the siege of Bergen op Zooma. A pleasant Tale of a lame Captain. 94 Of the vertu of Familiar Letters. 96 Of that stupendous Monument the Escurial. 96 Of the late famous Duke of Ossuna, divers passages. 98 Of writing by Cypher. 99 A memorable Passage of the Jesuits. 98 A facetious Tale of a Soldier. 100 This third Section contains divers intrinsecall Pas∣sages more, of the Treaties both of Match and Pa∣latinat.
The fourth Section. OF the Jewels that were left in the Court of Spain, to be presented at the Betrothing day. 101 Of the fruitfulnes of frendship. 103 Of Count Mansfelt. 104 An exact Relation of his late Majesties death by an eye∣witnes. 106 Of my Lo: Verulam after his fall. 108 Cautions for Marriage. 109 The disasterous death of young Prince Frederic. 110 Of the Treaty of a Match with France, and of Cardinal Richelieu. 111 How lively Letters represent the inward man. 112 The Capitulation of the Match with France. 114 Of Monsieurs marriage. 115 The rare perfections of the late Marchioness of Win∣chester. 116 Of Grave Maurice's death, & of the taking of Breda. 117 The sorry success of our Fleet to Cales under the Lord Wimbledon. 119 Som advertisements to the Duke of Buckingham before the Parlement. 121 The tru nature of love. 12 Of Count Mansfelt. 124 Cardinall Richelieu's first rise. 111 A facetious saying of the Queen of France touching Co: Mansfelt. 124 A clashing 'twixt Buckingham and Bristoll. 124 A Comparison 'twixt the Infanta and the Daughter of France. 126
A facetious Pasquil in Rome. 125 The speedy conclusion of the French Match, and a face∣tious tale of the Pope. 125▪ Her Majesties arrivall in England. 126 The dissolution of the Parlement at Oxon, and of the Lord Keeper Williams. 127 Of the Renvoy of her Majesties French servants, &c. 130 The reasons alleaged for Lone-monies. 131 A memorable example in the person of a Spanish Cap∣tain, how strangely a sudden conceit may work with∣in us. 132 The fifth Section. A Northern Letter. 135 Our breach with France, and our ill success at the Isle of Rets. 139 The Lord Denbighs sorry return from before Rochell, 140 Of the Wars in Italy, about the Dutchy of Mantoua. 137 A circumstantiall relation of the D. of Buck death by an eye-witness. 141 The Lord of Lindseys return from before Rochel, the ta∣king and dismantling of her by the French King. 143 Colonell Grayes quick device to save his life out of a saltpit. 139 A methodicall Incitement for an Oxford Student. 144 Of the taking the great Royall Ship, the Holy Spirit of the French, by Sir Sackvil Trever. 145 A dehortatory letter from swearing, with examples of all sorts. 147 A Hymn therupon. 149
The properties of a Foot-man. 151 Of Ben Iohnsons Genius. 154 Of tardy Courtesies. 156 Som amorous Sonnets of black eyes, &c. 158 A check against habit of drinking. 162 A Poem upon the British language. 164 A witty reply to Sir Ed: Coke by a Country man. 155 A character of Sir Posthumus Hobby. 156 The first rise of the Lord Strafford. 156 The King of Swedens first rushing into Germany. 165 The King of Denmarks ill success against Tilly, and the favourable peace he obtained. 165 Of a ragged illegible hand. 166 The proud inscription the French King left upon a tri∣umphant Pillar, on one of the Alpian hills. 167 Of Sir Ken: Digbies Exploits against the Venetian Gal∣leasses, &c. 168 A geere put upon Sir Tho. Edmonds being Ambassadour in France. 169 Another geere of the French Ambassadour. 169 Of Sir Tho. Wentworth's violent rising up. 170 Of the King of Swedens monstrous Progres, his clashing with the English and French Ambassadors. 173 A Letter of thanks. 172 A discription of an Ollapodrida. 174 Of the Spanish Inquisition. 178 The death of the Queen Dowager of Denmark, His Ma∣jesties Grandmother, the richest Princess of Christen∣dom, &c. 175
The sixth Section. AN exact relation of the Erl of Leicesters Embassie to the King of Denmark and other Princes. 188 Som remarkable passages in the Danish Court. 183 Of Hamburgh and the Hans Towns, their beginning, and the famous quarrell they had with Queen Eliza. 184 The marvelous resemblance of Holsteyn men with the English, &c. 187 The King of Swedens related by an eye-witnes, his aver∣sion to the English, &c. 193 The Palsgraves death. 193 The late Pope's compliance with him. 191 A strange apparition happened in the West, about a dy∣ing Gentleman. 194 Of Noy the Atturney, and of ship-money. 196 Of the Lord Westons Embassie to Italy, and a clashing 'twixt my Lord of Holland and him. 196 The Queen Mothers, and Monsieurs retirement to Flan∣ders. 195 A Christmas Hymn. 197 Of the condition of the Jewes squanderd up and down the World, how they came to be so cunning and hatefull, from whence they expect their Messias, &c. 202 The sudden comfort of Letters. 203 Of a strange Pattent given a Scotchman. 203 Of Atturney Noy's death, and the od wil he made, &c. 204
The arrivall of the Prince Elector, and of Prince Rupert to England, their designes. 205 Monsieur steales from Brussells. 206 A Herald of Armes sent from France to denounce War against Spaine. 206 Of Mountmorencys death. 206 A memorable example of the force of affection in the person of a French Lady. 207 Of Peter van Heyns mighty Plae prize, &c. 210 Of judgements fallen upon disobedient children. 211 The Earl of Arondels return from the German Diet. 212 Lorain taken by the French. 212 Of Translations. 213 The young Prince Electors ill success in Germany, and Prince Rupert taken Prisoner, &c. 215 The most tragicall death of the Erl of Warfuzee at Liege. 216 Upon Ben Iohnsons death. 217 A method in devotion. 217 Razevil com from Poland Ambassador. 210 The Scots Comanders returning from Germany, flant at the English Court. 210 Of the Soveraign of the Sea, her dimensions, and charge. 222 Of King Edgar his mighty Navall power, and lofty title, &c. 222 Of the heat and medicinall virtu of the Bath. 225 The splendor of the Irish Court. 226 Of a memorable passage in Suidas touching our Saviour. 227 Of Edinburgh. 228 A dispute 'twixt a Vintner and a Shoomaker about Bi∣shops. 229
Of that furious Navall fight 'twixt Oquendo and the Hol∣landers in the Downes. 231 Of Chimistry. 232 The revolt of Catalonia, and the utter defection of Por∣tugal from the Spaniard. 233 The dolefull casting away of Captain Limmery's ship va∣lued at 400000▪ pounds. 234 Of a hideous Serpent found in a young Gentlemans heart in Holborn, and other ill-favoured auguries. 235 Of monstrous prophane Epithets given the French Car∣dinall. 236 Som facetious passages of the old Duke of Espernon. 238 Of comfort in captivity. 240 Of a miraculous accident happen'd in Hamelen in Ger∣many. 240 Of the calamities of the times, 241 Of self examination. 243 Of Merchant Adventurers. 245 Of the late Popes death, and the election of this by the Spanish faction, his propensity to Peace, and the im∣possibility of it. 246 Marquis Pawlet his ingenious Motto. 248 Of the Ape of Paris applied to these times. Of affliction. 249 Of a tru frend. 250 Of a strange peeple lately discovered in Spain. 251 Of Moderation and Equanimity▪ 253 Of the fruits of affliction. 253 Of Wiving. 254
Epistolae Ho-Elianae. Familiar LETTERS: I. To Sir J. S. at LEEDS Castle. SIR, IT was a quaint difference the Anci∣ents did put twixt a Letter, and an Oration, that the one should be at∣tird like a Woman, the other like a Man: The latter of the two is allowd large side robes, as long periods, pa∣renthesis, similes, examples, and other parts of Rhetorical flourishes: But a etter or Epistle, should be short∣coated, and closely couchd; a Hun∣gerlin becomes a Letter more hansomly then a gown▪ Indeed we should write as we speak; and that's a true familiar Letter which expresseth ones mind, as if he were discoursing with the party to whom he writes in succinct and short terms. The Toung and the Pn are both of them Interproters of the mind; but I hold
the Pen to be the more faithful of the two: The Toung in udo po∣sita, being seated in a moyst slippery place may fail and falter in her sudden extemporal expressions; but the Pen having a greater advantage of premeditation, is not so subject to error, and leaves things behind it upon firm and authentic record. Now, Letters, though they be capable of any subject, yet commonly they are either Narratory, Objurgatory, Consolatory, Monitory, o Cougratulatory. The first consists of relations, The second of repre∣hensions, The third of comfort, The last two of counsel and joy: There are some who in lieu of Letters write Homilies, they Preach when they should Epistolize; There are others that turn them to tedious tractats; this is to make Letters degenerat from their tru nature. Some modern Authors there are, who have ex∣pos'd their Letters to the world, but most of them, I mean a∣mong your Latin Epistolizers, go fraighted with meer Bartholo∣mew ware, with trite and trivial phrases only, listed with pedan∣dic shreds of Shool-boy verses. Others ther are among our next transmarin neighbours Eastward, , write in their own lan∣guage, but their stile is so soft and  that their Letters may be said to be like bodies of lose slesh without sinews, they have nei∣ther joyn of art, nor  in them: They have a kind of sim∣pering and ank hectic expressions made up of a bombast of words and finical affected complement▪ only:  cannot well away with such sleazy stuff, with such cobweb-compositions, where there is no strength of matter, nothing for the Reader to carry away with him, that may enlarge the notions of his soul: One shall hardly find an apothem, example, simile, or any thing of Philo∣sophy, History, or solid knowledg, or as much as one new created phrase, in a hundred of them; and to daw any observations out of them, were as if one went about to disil cream out of froth; In∣somuch that it may be said of them, what was said of the Eccho, That she is a meer sound, and nothing else. I return you your Balza by thi bearer, and when I found those Letters, wherein he is so familiar with his King, so flat, and those to Richelieu, so puff'd with prophane hyperboles, and larded up and down with such gross flatteries, with others besides which he sends as Urinals up and down the world to look into his water, for discovery of the cazie condition of his body, I fobore him further: so I am Your most affectionate servitor, J. H. H'stminster, 25. Julii., 1625.
II. To my Father, upon my first going beyond Sea▪ SIR, I Should be much wanting to my self, and to tha obligation of Duty, the Law of God, and his Handmaid Nature hath imposed upon me, if I should not acquaint you with the course and qua∣lity of my affairs and fortunes, specially at this time, that I am upon point of erossing the Seas to eat my bread abroad. Nor is it the common relation of a Son that only induc'd me hereunto, but that most indulgent and costly Care you have been pleased (in so extraordinary a manner) to have had of my breeding (though but one child of fifteen) by placing me in a choice me∣thodicall School (so far distant from your dwelling) under a lear∣ed (though lashing) Master; and by transplanting me thence o Oxford, to be graduated; and so holding me still up by the hin, untill I could swim without Bladders. This Patrimony f liberall Education you have been Pleased to endow me withal,  now carry along with me abroad, as a sure inseparable Tre∣ure; nor do I feel it any burden or encumbrance unto me at all: And what danger soever my person, or other things I have about e, do incur, yet I do not fear the losing of this, either by Ship∣rack or Pyrats at Sea, nor by Robbers, or Fire, or any other Casualty ashore: And at my return to England, I hope, at leastw  shall do my endeavour, that you may finde this Patrimony im∣roved somewhat to your comfort. The main of my employment, is from that gallant Knight Sir Robert Mansell, who, with my Lord of Pembrook, and divers ther of the prime Lords of the Court, have got the sole Patent f making all sorts of Glass with Pit-cole, onely to save those uge proportions of Wood which were consumed formerly in the Glasse Furnaces: And this Business being of that nature, that e Workmen are to be had from Italy, and the chief Mate∣rials from Spain, France, and other Forren Countries, there is need f an Agent abroad for this use; (and better then I have offered
their service in this kind) so that I believe I shall have Employ∣ment in all these Countreys, before I return. Had I continued still Steward of the Glasse-house in Broad∣street, where Captain Francis Bacon hath succeeded me, I should in a short time have melted away to nothing, amongst those hot Venetians, finding my self too green for such a Charge; therefore it hath pleased God to dispose of me now to a Condition more su∣table to my yeers, and that will, I hope, prove more advantagious to my future Fortunes. In this my Peregrination, if I happen, by some accident, to be disappointed of that allowance I am to subsist by, I must make my addresse to you, for I have no other Rendevous to flee unto; but it shall not be, unlesse in case of great indigence. Touching the News of the Time: Sir George Villiers, the new Favorit, tapers up apace, and grows strong at Court: His Prede∣cessor the Earl of Somerset hath got a Lease of ninety years for his life, and so hath his articulate Lady, called so, for articling against the frigidity and impotence of her former Lord. She was afraid that Coke the Lord chief Justice (who had used extraordinary an and industry in discovering all the circumstances of the poisoning of Overbury) would have made white Broth of them, but that the Prerogative kept them from the Pot: Yet the subservient instru∣ments, the lesser flyes, could not break thorow, but lay entangled in the Cobweb; amongst others, Mistris Turner, the first Inventress of yellow-Starch, was executed in a Cobweb Lawn Ruff of that co∣lor at Tyburn, and with her I believe that yellow-Starch, which so much disfigured our-Nation, and rendered them so ridiculous an fantastic, will receive its Funerall. Sir Gervas Elwayes, Lieutenan of the Tower, was made a notable Example of Justice and Terr to all Officers of Trust; for being accessory, and that in a passi way only to the murder, yet he was hanged on Tower-hill: an the Caveat is very remarkable which he gave upon the Gallow That people should be very cautious how they make Vows  heaven, for the breach of them seldome passe without a Judge∣ment, whereof he was a most ruthfull Example; for being in th Low-Countreys, and much given to Gaming, he once made a so∣lemn Vow, (which he brake afterwards) that if he played abov such a sum, he might be hanged. My Lord (William) of Pembrook di a most noble Act like himself; for the King having given hi all Sir Gervas Elway's estate, which came to above 1000 pound . he freely bestowed it on the widow and her children.
The later end of this week, I am to go a Ship-board, and first  the Low-Countreys. I humbly pray your Blessing may ac∣company me in these my Travels by Land and Sea, with a con∣uance of your prayers, which will be as so many good Gales to ow me to safe Port: for I have been taught, That the Parents Be∣udictions contribute very much, and have a kind of prophetic vertue o make the childe prosperous. In this opinion I shall ever rest, Broad-street in London, this 1. of March, 1618. Your dutifull Son, J. H. III. To Dr. Francis Mansell, since Principall of Jesus▪ Colledge in Oxford. SIR, BEing to take leave of England, and to lanch out into the world abroad, to Breath forren air a while, I thought it very andsom, and an act well becoming me, to take my leave also of ou, and of my dearly honoured Mother Oxford: Otherwise both f you might have just grounds to exhibite a Bill of Complaint, or rather, a Protest, against me, and cry me up, you for a forgetfull friend; she, for an ingratefull Son, if not some spurious Issue. To revent this, I salute you both together: you, with the best of my ost candid affections; her, with my most dutifull observance, nd thankfulnesse for the milk she pleased to give me in that Exuberance, had I taken it in that measure she offered it me while  slept in her lap: yet that little I have sucked, I carry with me ow abroad, and hope that this cours of life will help to concoct  to a greater advantage, having opportunity, by the nature of y employment, to study men as well as Books. The small time I upervis'd the Glasse-house, I got amongst those Venetians some atterings of the Italian Toung, which, besides the little I have, ou know, of School-languages, is all the Preparatives I have made or travell. I am to go this week down to Gravesend, and so mbarque for Holland: I have got a Warrant from the Lords of he Councell to travell for three years any where, Rome and S.
Omer excepted. I pray let me retain some room, though never so little, in your thoughts, during the time of this our separation, and let our souls meet sometimes by intercours of letters; I pro∣mise you that yours shall receive the best entertainment I can make them, for I love you dearly dearly well, and value your friendship at a very high rae: So with apprecation of as much happiness to you at home, as I shall desire to accompany me abroad, I rest ever, Your friend to serve you, J. H. London this  of March, 1618. IV. To Sir James Crofts, Knight, at S. Osith. SIR, I Could not shake hands with England, without kissing your hands also: and because, in regard of your distance now from London, I cannot do it in person, I send this paper for my depu∣ty. The News that keeps greatest noise here now, is the return of Sir Walter Raleigh from his myne of Gold in Guiana the South parts of America, which at first was like to be such a hopeful boon Voyage, but it seems that that golden myne is proved a meer Chymer an imaginary aiy myne; and indeed, his Majestie had never any other conceipt of it: But what will not one in Cap∣tivity (as Sir Walter was) promise, to regain his Freedom? who would not promise not onely mynes, but mountains of Gold, for Liberty? & tis pity such a knowing well-weigh'd Knight had not had a better Fortune; for the Destiny (I mean that brave Ship which he built himself of that name, that carried him thither) is like to prove a fatall Destiny to him, and to some of the rest of those gal∣lant Adventurers which contributed for the setting forth of thir∣teen Ships more, who were most of them his kinsmen and young∣er brothers, being led into the said Expedition by a generall con∣ceipt the world had of the wisedom of Sir Walter Raleigh; and many of these are like to make Shipwrack of their estates by this
Voyage. Sir Walter landed at Plymouth, whence he thought to make an escape; and some say he hath tampered with his body by Phisick, to make him look sickly, that he may be the more pitied, and permitted to lie in his own house. Count Gondamar the Spanish Ambassador speaks high language, and sending lately to desire Audience of his Majestie, he said he had but one word to tell him, his Majestie wondring what might be delivered in one word; when he came before him, he said onely, Pyrats, Pyrats, Pyrats, and so departed. Tis true that he protested against this Voyage before, and that it could not be but for some praedatory designe: And that if it be as I hear, I fear it will go very ill with Sir Walter, and that Gon∣damar will never give him over, till he hath his head off his shoul∣ders; which may quickly be done, without any new Arraignment, by vertue of the old Sentence that lies still dormant against him, which he could never get off by Pardon, notwithstanding that he mainly laboured in it before he went; but his Majestie could ne∣ver be brought to it, for he said he would keep this as a Curb to hold him within the bounds of his Commission, and the good be∣haviour. Gondamar cryes out, that he hath broke the sacred Peace twixt the two Kingdoms, That he hath fired and plundered santo Thoma a Colony the Spaniards had planted with so much blood, neer under the Line, which made it prove such a hot service unto him, and where, besides others, he lost his eldest son in the Action; and could they have preserved the Magazin of Tobacco onely, be∣sides other things in that Town, something mought have bin had to countervail the charge of the Voyage. Gondamar alleadgeth further, that the enterprise of the myne failing, he propounded to the rest of his Fleet to go and intercept some of the Plate-Ga∣leons, with other Designes which would have drawn after them apparent acts of Hostility, and so demands Justice: besides other disasters which fell out upon the dashing of the first designe, Cap∣tain Remish, who was the main Instrument for discovery of the myne, pistol'd himself in a desperate mood of discontent in his Cabin, in the Convertine. This return of Sir Walter Raleigh from Guiana, puts me in minde of a facetious tale I read lately in Italian (for I have a little of that Language already) how Alphonso King of Naples sent a Moor who had been his Captive a long time, to Barbary, with a consider∣able sum of money to buy horses, and to return by such a time.
Now there was about the King a kinde of Buffn or Jester who had a Table-book, or Journall, wherein he was used to register any absurdity, or impertinence, or merry passage that happened about the Court. That day the Moor was dispatched for Barbary, the said Jester waiting upon the King at supper, the King call'd for his Journall, and askt what he had observed that day: thereupon he produced his Table-book, and amongst other things, he read how Alphons King of Naples had sent Beltran the Moor, who had been a long time his Prisoner, to Morocco (his own Countrey) with so many thousand Crowns, to buy horses. The King asked him why he inserted that: Because, said he, I think he will ne∣ver come back to be a Prisoner again, and so you have lost both man and money. But if he do come, then your Jest is marr'd, quoth the King: No Sir; for if he return I will blot out your name, and put him in for a Fool. The Application is easie and obvious: But the world wonders extremely, that so great a wise man as Sir Walter Raleigh would return to cast himself upon so inevitable a Rock, as I fear he will; and much more, that such choice men, and so great a Power of Ships, should all come home, and do nothing. The Letter you sent to my Father, I conveyed safely the last week to Wales. I am this week, by Gods help, for the Nether∣lands, and then I think for France. If in this my forren employ∣ment I may be any way serviceable unto you, you know what pow∣er you have to dispose of me; for I honor you in a very high de∣gree, and will live and die, London, 28. of March, 1618. Your humble and ready Servant, J. H. V. To my Brother, after Dr. Howell, and now Bp. of Bristol, from Amsterdam. BROTHER, I Am newly landed at Amsterdam, and it is the first forren earth I ever set foot upon. I was pitifully sick all the Voyage, for the Weather was rough, and the wind untoward; and at the
mouth of the Texell we were surprised by a furious Tempest, so that the Ship was like to split upon some of those old stumps of trees wherewith that River is full; for in Ages passed, as the Skip∣per told me, there grew a fair Forest in that Chanell where the Texell makes now her bed. Having bin so rocked and shaken at Sea; when I came ashore I began to incline to Copernicus his opi∣nion, which hath got such a sway lately in the World, viz. That the Earth as well as the rest of her fellow Elements, is in perpetual motion, for she seem'd so to me a good while after I had landed He that observes the site and position of this Countrey, will never hereafter doubt the truth of that Philosophicall Problem which keeps so great a noise in the Schools, viz. That the Sea is higher then the Earth, because as I sail'd along these Coasts, I visibly found it true; for the Ground here which is all twixt Marsh and Moorish, lies not only levell, but to the apparant sight of the ey far lower then the Sea, which made the Duke of Alva say, That the Inhabitants of this Countrey were the neerest Neighbours to Hell (the great Abysse) of any people upon Earth, because they dwell lowest: Most of that Ground they tread, is plucked as it were out of the very Jaws of Neptun, who is afterwards pennt out by high Dikes, which are preserved with incredible charge, inso∣much, That the chief Dike-grave here, is one of the greatest Offi∣cers of trust in all the Province, it being in his power, to turn the whole Countrey into a Salt lough when he list, and so to put Hans to swim for his life, which makes it to be one of the chiefest part of his Letany, From the Sea, the Spaniard, and the Devil, the Lord deliver me. I need not tell you who preserves him from the last, but from the Spaniard, his best friend is the Sea it self, notwithstan∣ding that he fears him as an Enemy another way; for the Sea stretching himself here into divers Arms, and meeting with some of those fresh Rivers that descend from Germany to disgorge themselves into him through these Provinces, most of their towns are thereby encompass'd with Water, which by Sluces they can contract or dilate as they list: This makes their Towns inaccessi∣ble, and out of the reach of Cannon; so that Water may be said to be one of their best Fences, otherwise I beleeve they had not been able to have born up so long against the Gigantic power of Spain. This City of Amsterdam, though she be a great Staple of News, yet I can impart none unto you at this time, I will defer that till I come to the Hague. I am lodged here at one Mounsieur De la Cluze, not far from
the Exchange, to make an Introduction into the French, because I beleeve I shall steer my cours hence next to the Countrey where that Language is spoken; but I think I shall sojourn here about two moneths longer, therefore I pray direct your Letter accordingly, or any other you have for me: One of the prime comforts of a Traveller is to receive Letters from his friends, they be∣get new spirits in him, and present joyfull objects to his fancy, when his mind is clouded sometimes with Fogs of melancholy; therefore I pray make me happy as often as your conveniency will serve with yours: You may send or deliver them to Captain Bacon at the Glasse house, who will see them safely sent. So my dear brother, I pray God blesse us both, and send us af∣ter this large distance a joyfull meeting. Your loving brother, J. H. Amsterdam, April 1. 1617. VI. To Dan. Caldwall Esq. from Amsterdam. My dear Dan. I Have made your friendship so necessary unto me, for the con∣tentment of my life, that happinesse it self would be but a kind of infelicity without it: It is as needfull to me, as Fire and Water, as the very Air I take in, and breath out; it is to me not onely neoessitudo, but necessitas: Therefore I pray let me injoy it in that fair proportion, that I desire to return unto you, by way of corre∣spondencee and retaliation- Our first ligue of love, you know, was contracted among the Muses in Oxford; for no sooner was I matriculated to her, but I was adopted to you; I became her son, and your friend, at one time: You know I followed you then to London, where our love received confirmation in the Temple, and else-where. We are now far asunder, for no lesse then a Sea se∣vers us, and that no narrow one, but the German Ocean: Di∣stance sometimes endear's friendship, and absence sweetneth it, it much  the value of it, and makes it more precious: Let this be ve∣rified
in us, Let that love which formerly used to be nourished by personall communication, and the Lips, be now fed by Letters; let the Pen supply the Office of the Toung: Letters have a strong operation, they have a kind of art like embraces to mingle souls, and make them meet though millions of paces asunder; by them we may converse and know how it fares with each other, as it were by entercours of spirits. Therefore amongst your civill speculations, I pray let your thoughts sometimes reflect off me (your absent self) and wrap those thoughts in Paper, and so send them me over: I promise you they shall be very welcome, I shall embrace and hug them with my best affections. Commend me to Tom Bowyer, and enjoyn him the like: I pray be no niggard in distributing my love plentifully amongst our friends at the Innes of Court; Let Iack Toldervy have my kind commends with this caveat, That the Pot which goes often to the water, comes home crack'd at last; therefore I hope he will be care∣full how he makes the Fleece in Cornhill his thorowfare too often. So may my dear Daniel live happy, and love his J. H. From Amsterdam, April the 10. 1619. VII. To my Father, from Amsterdam. SIR, I Am lately arrived in Holland in a good plight of health, and continue yet in this Town of Amsterdam, a Town I beleeve, that there are few her fellows, being from a mean Fishing Dorp, come in a short revolution of time, by a monstrous encrease of Comerce and Navigation, to be one of the greatest Marts of Eu∣rop: Tis admirable to see what various sorts of Buildings, and new Fabrics, are now here erecting every where; not in houses onely, but in whole Streets and Suburbs; so that tis thought she will in a short time double her proportion in bigness. I am lodg'd in a French-mans house, who is one of the Deacons of our English Brownists Church here; 'tis not far from the Syna∣gog
of Iews, who have free and open exercise of their Religion here: I beleeve in this Street where I lodg, ther be well near as many Religions as there be houses; for one Neighbour knows not, nor cares not much, what Religion the other is of, so that the number of Conventicles exceeds the number of Churches here. And let this Countrey call it self as long as it will, the united Provinces one way, I am perswaded in this point, there's no place so Disunited. The Dog and Rag Market is hard by, where every Sunday morning there is a kind of public Mart for those commodities, notwithstanding their precise observance of the Sabbath. Upon Saturday last I hapned to be in a Gentlemans company, who shew'd me as I walk'd along in the Streets, along Bearded old Iew of the Tribe of Aaron; when the other Iews met him, they fell down and kiss'd his Foot: This was that Rabbi, with whom our Countrey-man Broughton had such a dispute. This City, notwithstanding her huge Trade, is far inferiour to London for populousnes; and this I infer out of their weekly Bills of Mortalitie, which come not at most but to fifty or thereabout; whereas in London, the ordinary number is twixt two and three hundred, one week with another: Nor are there such Wealthy∣men in this Town as in London; for by reason of the generality of Commerce, the Banks, Adventures, the Common shares and stocks which most have in the Indian and other Companies, the Wealth doth'diffuse it self here in a strange kind of equality, not one of the Bourgers being exceeding rich or exceeding poor; Insomuch, that I beleeve our four and twenty Aldermen, may buy a hundred of the richest men in Amsterdam. It is a rare thing to meet with a Begger here, as rare, as to see a Horse, they say, upon the Streets of Venice, & this is held to be one of their best peeces of Government; for besides the strictnes of their Laws against Mendicants, they have Hospitals of all sorts for young and'old, both for the relief of the one and the employment of the other; so that there is no object here to exercise any act of cha∣rity upon. They are here very neat, though not so magnificent in their Buildings, specially in their Frontispices, and first Rooms; and for cleanlines, they may serve for a pattern to all People. They will presently dresse half a dozen Dishes of Meat, without any noise or shew at all; for if one goes to the Kitchin, ther will he scarce apparance of any thing, but a few covered Pots upon a Turf-fire, which is their prime fuell; after dinner they fall a
scowring of those Pots▪ so that the outside will be as bright  the inside, and the Kitchin suddenly so clean, as if no meat had bin dress'd there a month before: They have nei∣ther Well or Fountain, or any Spring of Fresh-water, in, or about all this City, but their Fresh-water is brought unto them by Boats; besides they have Cesterns to receive the Rain-water, which they much use: So that my Laundresse bringing my Lin∣nen to me one day, and I commending the Whitenesse of them, she answered, That they must needs be White and Fair, for they were washed in Aqua Coelestis, meaning Skie-water. Twere cheap living here, were it not for the monstrous Accises which are impos'd upon all sorts of Commodities, both for Belly and Back; for the Retailer payes the States almost the one Moity as much as he payed for the Commodity at first, nor doth any murmur at it, because it goes not to any Favourit, or private Purse, but to preserve them from the Spaniard, their common Enemy as they term him; so that the saying is truely verified here, Desend me, and spend me: With this Accise principally, they maintain all their Armies by Sea and Land, with their Garrisons at home and abroad, both here, and in the Indies, and defray all other public charges besides. I shall hence shortly for France, and in my way take most of the prime Towns of Holland and Zealand, specially Leyden (the Uni∣versity) where I shall sojourn some days. So humbly craving a continuance of your Blessing and Prayers, I rest May the 1. 1619. Your dutiful S, J. H.
VIII. To Dr. Tho. Prichard, at Jesus Colledg in Oxford, from Leyden. SIR, IT is the Royall Prerogative of Love, not to be confined to that small Locall compasse which circumscribes the Body, but to make his Sallies, and Progresses abroad, to find out, and enjoy his desired object, under what Region soever: Nor is it the vast Gulph of Neptun, or any distance of place, or difference of Clime, can bar him of this priviledge▪ I never found the experiment here∣of, so sensibly, nor felt the comfort of it so much, as since I shook hands with England: For though you be in Oxford, and I at Leyden, albeit you be upon an Island, and I now upon the Conti∣nent, (though the lowest part of Europ) yet those swift Postillions my thoughts find you out daily, and bring you unto me: I be∣hold you often in my Chamber, and in my Bed; you eat, you drink, you sit down, and walk with me▪ and my fantasie enjoyes you often in my sleep, when all my sences are lock'd up, and my soul wanders up and down the World, sometimes through plea∣sant Fields and Gardens, sometimes through odd uncouth places, over Mountains and broken confused Buildings. As my love to you doth thus exercise his power, so I desire yours to me may not be idle, but rows'd up sometimes to find me out, and summon me to attend you in Iesus Colledge. I am now here in Leyden, the onely Academy besides Franiker of all the United Provinces: Here are Nations of all sorts, but the Germans swarr more then any: To compare their University to yours, were to cast New-Inne in counterscale with Christ-Church Colledge, or the Alms Houses on Tower Hill to Suttons Hospitall. Here are no Colledges at all, God-wot (but one for the Dutch) nor scarce the face of an University, onely there are generall Schools where the Sciences are read by severall Professors, but all the Students are Oppidanes: A small time and lesse learning, will suffice to make one a Graduate; nor are those Formalities of Ha∣bits, and other Decencies here, as with you, much lesse those Ex∣hibitions and Support for Schollers, with other encouragements; in so much, that the Oxonians and Cantabrigians—Bona si
suae norint, were they sensible of their own felicity, are the happiest Academians on Earth: yet Apollo hath a strong influence here; and as Cicero said of them of Athens, Athenis pingue coelum, tenu igenia, The Athenians had a thick Air, and thin Wits; so I may say of these Lugdunensian, They have a grosse Ayr, but thin subtile Wits, (some of them) Witnesse else Hernsius, Grotins, Arminius, and Bandius; of the two last I was told a Tale, that Arminius meeting Baudius one day disguis'd with Drink (wherewith he would be of∣ten) he told him, Tu Baudî dedecoras nostram Academiam, & tu Arminî nostram Religionem. Thou Baudius disgracest our Univer∣sity; and thou Arminius our Religion. The Heaven here hath alwayes some Clowd in his countenance; and from this grosse∣nesse and spissitude of Air proceeds the slow Nature of the Inha∣bitants, yet this slownesse is recompenc'd with another benefit; it makes them patient and constant, as in all other actions, so in their Studies and Speculations, though they use —Crassos transire Dies, lucemque palustrem. I pray impart my Love liberally amongst my Friends in Oxford; and when you can make truce with your more serious Meditati∣ons, bestow a thought, drawn into a few Lines, upon Leyden, May the 30. 1619. Your J. H. IX. To Mr. Richard Altham, at his Chamber in Grayes-Inne. Dear Sir, THough you be now a good way out of my reach, yet you are not out of my remembrance; you are still within the Hori∣zon of my Love: Now the Horizon of Love is large and spaci∣ous, it is as boundlesse, as that of the imagination; and where the imagination rangeth, the memory is still busie to usher in, and present the desired object it fixeth upon: it is love that sets them both on work, and may be said to be the highest sphear whence they receive their motion. Thus you appear unto me often in these Forren Travels, and that you may beleeve me the better, I send you these Lines as my Ambassadors (and Ambassadors must
not lie) to inform you accordingly, and to salute you. I desire to know how you like Ployden; I heard it often said, That ther is no study requires patience and constancy more then the Common-Law, for it is a good while before one comes to any known perfection in it, and consequently to any gainfull prac∣tise. This (I think) made Iack Chaundle throw away his Lit∣tleton, like him that when he could not catch the Hare, said, A pox upon her she is but dry tough meat, let her go: It is not so with you; for I know you are of that disposition, that when you mind a thing, nothing can frighten you in making constant pursuit after it, till you have obtained it: For if the Mathematics with their Crabbednesse, and intricacy, could not deter you, but that you waded through the very midst of them, and arriv'd to so ex∣cellent a perfection; I believe it is not in the power of Ployden, to Dastardize or Cowe your Spirits, untill you have overcom him, at least wise have so much of him as will serve your turn. I know you were always a quick and pressing Disputant in Logic and Philoso∣phy, which makes me think your Genius is fit for Law, (as the Ba∣ron your excellent Father was) for a good Logitian makes alwayes a good Lawyer: and hereby one may give a strong conjecture of the aptnesse or ineptitude of ones capacity to that study and pro∣fession; and you know as well as I, that Logitians who went under the name of Sophisters, were the first Lawyers that ever were. I shall be upon incertain removes hence, untill I come to Roüe in France, and there I mean to cast Anchor a good while; I shall expect your Letters there with impatience. I pray present my Service to Sir Iames Altham, and to my good Lady, your Mother, with the rest to whom it is due in Bishopsgate Street, and else∣where: So I am Yours in the best degree of Friendship, J. H. Hague 30. of May, 1619.
X. To Sir James Crofts: from the Hague. SIR, THe same observance that a Father may challenge of his child, the like you may claim of me, in regard of the extraor∣dinary care you have bin pleas'd to have alwayes, since I had the happines to know you, of the cours of my Fortunes. I am now newly come to the Hague, the Court of the six (and almost seven) confederated Provinces; the Counsell of State with the Prince of Orange, makes his firm Residence here, unlesse he be upon a march, and in motion for some design abroad. This Prince (Maurice) was cast in a mould▪ suitable to the temper of this peo∣ple: he is slow and full of warines, and not without a mixture of fear, I do not mean a pusillanimous, but politic fear: he is the most constant in the quotidian cours and carriage of his life, of any that J have ever heard or read of; for whosoever knows the customs of the Prince of Orange, may tell what he is a doing here evry hour of the day, though he be in Constantinople. In the morning he awaketh about six in Sommer, and seven in Winter; the first thing he doth, he sends one of his Grooms or Pages, to see how the wind sits, and he wears or leaves off his Wascot accordingly, then he is about an hour dressing himself, and about a quarter of an hour in his Closet, then comes in the Secretary, and if he hath any privat or public Letters to write, or any other dispatches to make, he doth it before he stirs from his Chamber; then comes he abroad, and goes to his Stables if it be no Sermon day, to see some of his Gentlemen or Pages (of whose breeding he is very carefull) ride the great Horse: He is very accessible to any that hath busines with him, and sheweth a winning kind of familiari∣ty, for he will shake hands with the meanest Boor of the Coun∣trey, and he seldom hears any Commander or Gentleman with his Hat on: He dines punctually about twelve, and his Table is free for all comers, but none under the degree of a Captain useth to sit down at it; after dinner he stayes in the Room a good while, and then any one may accost him, and tell his tale; then he re∣res to his Chamber, where he answers all Petitions that were de∣livered
him in the Morning, and towards the Evening, if he goes not to Counsell, which is seldome; he goes either to make some visits, or to take the Air abroad, and according to this constant method he passeth his life. Ther are great stirs like to arise twixt the Bohemians, and their elected King the Emperour, and they are com already to that height, that they consult of deposing him, and to chuse some Pro∣testant Prince to be their King, som talk of the Duke of Saxony, others of the Palsgrave: J beleeve the States here, would rather be for the latter, in regard of conformity of Religion, the other being a Lutheran. I could not find in Amsterdum a large Ortelius in French, to send you, but from  I will not fail to serve you. So wishing you all happines and health, and that the Sun may make many progresses more through the Zodiac, before those comely Gray hairs of yours go to the Grave, I rest Iune the 3. 1619. Your very humble Servant, J. H. XI. To Captain Francis Bacon, at the Glassehouse in Broad-street. SIR, MY last to you, was from Amsterdam, since which time I have travers'd the prime parts of the united Provinces, and  am now in Zealand, being newly come to this Town of Middl borough, which is much crest-faln since the Staple of English Clo was removed hence, a is Flishing also her next Neighbor, since th departure of the English Garrison: A good intelligent Gentle∣man told me the manner how Flishing and the Bill, our two Cau∣tionary Towns here were redeem'd, which was thus: The nin hundred and odd Souldiers at Flishing, and the Rammakins ha by, being many weeks without their pay, they borrow'd diver sums of Money of the States of this Town, who finding no hope of supply from England, advice was sent to the States-Generall  the Hague, they consulting with Sir Ralph Winwood our Ambassa∣dor
(who was a favourable Instrument unto them in this busi∣nes, as also in the match with the Palsgrave) sent Instructions to the Lord Caroon, to acquaint the Earl of Suffolk (then Lord Trea∣surer) herewith; and in case they could find no satisfaction there, to make his addresse to the King himself, which Caroon did, His Majestie being much incens'd, that his Subjects and Souldiers should starve for want of their pay in a Forren Countrey, sent for the Lord Treasurer, who drawing his Majestie aside, and telling how empty his Exchequer was, His Majestie told the Ambassador, that if his Masters, the States, would pay the money they ow'd him upon those Towns, he would deliver them up; The Ambassador returning the next day, to know whether his Majestie persisted in the same Resolution, in regard that at his former audience, he per∣ceived him to be a little transported, His Majesty answered, That he knew the States of Holland to be his good frends and confede∣rats, both in point of Religion and Policy; therefore he apprehen∣ded not the least fear of any difference, that should fall out between them, in contemplation whereof, if they desir'd to have their Towns again, he would willingly surrender them: Hereupon the States made up the sum presently, which came in convenient time, for it serv'd to defray the expencefull progresse he made to Scotland, the Summer following. When that Money was lent by Queen Elizabeth, it was Articled, that Interest should be payed upon Interest; and besides, that for evry Gentleman who should lose his life in the States Service, they should make good five pounds to the Crown of England: All this His Majestie remitted, and onely took the principall; and this was done in requitall of that Princely Entertainment, and great Presents, which my Lady Elizabeth had received in divers of their Towns, as she pass'd to Heydelberg. The Bearer hereof, is Sigr. Antoni Miotti, who was Master of a Crystall-Glasse Furnace here a long time, and as I have it by good intelligence, he is one of the ablest, and most knowing men, for the guidance of a Glasse-Work in Christendom; There∣fore according to my Instructions, I send him over, and hope to ave done Sir Robert good service thereby. So with my kinde respects unto you, and my most humble Service where you know is due, I rest Your affectionate Servent, J. H. Iune the 6. 1619.
XII. To Sir James Crofts: Antwerp. SIR, I Presume that my last to you from the Hague came to safe hand: I am now come to a more cheerfull Countrey, and amongst a People somewhat more vigorous and mettald, being not so heavy as the Hollander, or homely, as they of Zealand. This goodly ancient City me thinks looks like a disconsolat Widow, or rather som superannuated Virgin, that had lost her Lover, being almost quite erest of that flourishing Commerce, wherwith before the falling off of the rest of the Provinces from Spain, she abounded to the envy of all other Cities and Marts of Europ. Ther are few places this side the Alps better built, and so well Streeted as this, and none at all so well girt with Bastions and Rampasts, which in som places are so spacious, that they usually take the Air in Coa∣ches upon the very wals, which are beutified with divers rows of Trees, and pleasant Walks. The Cittadell here, though it be an addition to the Statelines and strength of the Town, yet it serve as a shrew'd Curb unto her, which makes her chomp upon the Bit, and Foam sometimes with anger, but she cannot help it. The Tumults in Bohemia now grow hotter and hotter, they write how the great Councell a Prague fell to such a hurliburly, that so of those Senators who adherd to the Emperour, were thrown ou at the windows, wher som were maim'd, som break their Necks.  am shortly to bid a farewell to the Netherlands, and to bend m cours for France, wher I shall be most ready to entertain an commands of yours. So may all health and happines, attend yo according to the wishes of Your obliged Servant, J. ▪ Iuly 5. 1619.
XIII. To Dr. Tho. Prichard at Oxford, from Roüen. I Have now taken firm footing in France, and though France be one of the chiefest Climats of Complement, yet I can use none towards you, but tell you in plain down right Language, That in the List of those friends I left behind me in England, you are one of the prime rank, one whose name I have mark'd with the whitest Stone: If you have gain'd such a place amongst the choi∣cest friends of mine, I hope you will put me somwher amongst yours, though I but fetch up the rear, being contented to be the ifima species, the lowest in the predicament of your friends. I shall sojourn a good while in this City of Roüen, therfore I pray make me happy with the comfort of your Letters, which I shall expect with a longing impatience: I pray send me ample advertisement of your welfare, and of the rest of our friends, as well upon the Banks of Isis, as amongst the Brittish Mountains. I am but a fresh▪ man yet in France, therfore I can send you no news, but that all is here quiet, and tis no ordinary news, that the French should be quiet: But some think this Calm will not last long, for the Queen Mother (late Regent) is discontented being restrain'd from coming to the Court, or to the City of Paris, and the Tragicall death of her Favourit, (and Foster-Brother) the late Marquis of Ancre, lieth yet in her stomach undisgested: She hath the Duke of Espernon, and divers other potent Princes, that would be strongly, at her devotion (as 'tis thought) if she would stir. I pray present my service to Sir Eubule Theloall, and send me word with what pace, Iesus Colledg new Walls go up: I will borrow my conclusion to you at this time of my Countrey∣man Owen. Uno non possum quantum te diligo versu Dicere, si satis est distichon, ecce duos. I cannot in one Vers my love declare, If two will serve the turn, to here they are. Wherunto I will add this sirname Anagram. Yours whole I. Howel. Aug. 6. 1619.
XIV. To Daniel Caldwall Esq. from Roüen. MY dear Dan. when I came first to this Town, amongst other objects of contentment which I found here, wherof ther are variety, a Letter of yours was brought me, and 'twas a Sh Letter, for two more were enwomb'd in her Body, she had an easie and quick deliverance of that Twin; but besides them, she was big and pregnant of divers sweet pledges, and lively evidences of your own love towards me, whereof I am as fond as any Mo∣ther can be of her child: I shall endeavour to cherish and foster this dear love of yours, with all the tendernes that can be, and warm it at the fuel of my best affections, to make it grow evry day stronger and stronger, untill it comes to the state of perfection, because I know it is a true and real, it is no spurious or adulterated love: If I intend to be so indulgent and carefull of yours, I hope you will not suffer mine to starve with you; my love to you needs not much tending, for it is a lusty strong love, and will not easily miscarry. I pray when you write next, to sond me a dozen pair of the best White Kidskin Gloves, the Royall-Exchange can afford; as also two pair of the purest White Wosted Stockins you can get of Women size, together with half a dozen pair of Knifs. I pray send your man with them to Vacandary the French Post upon Tower-Hill, who will bring them me safely. When I go to Paris, I shall send you som curiosities, equivalent to these; I have here inclos'd re∣turn'd an answer to those two that came in yours, I pray see them safely delivered. My kind respects to your Brother Sergeant at Court, to all at Batter say,' or any wher else, wher you think my Commendations may be well plac'd. No more at this time, but that I recommend you to the never failing Providence of God, desiring you to go on in nourishing still between us, that love, which for my part, No Traverses of Chance, of Time, or Fate, Shall ere extinguish till our lives last date;
But a the Vin h lovely El  wire, Grasp bth our Hearts, and flame with fresh desire. Roüen, Aug. 13. 1619. Yours J. H. XV. To my Father from Roüen. SIR, YOurs of the third of August, came to safe hand in an inclos'd from my Brother; you may make easie conjecture how wel∣com it was unto me, and to what a height of comfort it rais'd my spirits, in regard it was the first I received from you, since I cross'd the Seas; I humbly thank you for the blessing you sent along with it. I am now upon the fair Continent of France, One of Natures choicest Master-peeces; one of Ceres chiefest Barns for Corn; one of Bacchus prime Wine-Cellars, and of Neptus best Salt-Pits; a compleat self-sufficient Countrey, wher ther is rather a super∣fluity, then defect of any thing, either for necessity or pleasure, did the policie of the Countrey correspond with the bounty of Nature, in the equall distribution of the Wealth amongst the Inhabitants; for I think there is not upon the Earth, a richer Countrey, and poorer peeple. Tis true, England hath a good repute abroad for her fer∣tility, yet be our Harvests never so kindly, and our Crops never so plentifull, we have evry yeer commonly som Grain from hence, or from Danzic, and other places imported by the Marchant: Besides, ther be many more Heaths, Commons, Bleak-brren-Hills, and waste Grounds in England, by many degrees, then I find here; and I am sorry our Countrey of Wales, should give more instances hereof, then any other part. This Province of Normandy, once an Appendix of the Crown of England, though it want Wine, yet it yeelds the King as much desmeans as any one of the rest: The lower Norman hath Syder for his common drink; and I visibly observ'd, that they are more plump and replet in their bodies, and of a clearer complexion then those that drink altogether Wine. In this great City of
Roüen ther be many Monuments of the English Nation yet extant. In the outside of the highest Steeple of the great Church ther is the word GOD engraven in huge Golden Characters, evry one almost as long as my self, to make them the more visible. In this Steeple hangs also the greatest Bell of Christendom, call'd d'Am∣boise; for it weighs neer upon▪ fourty thousand pound weight. Ther is also here Saint Oen, the greatest Sanctuary in the Citie, founded by one of our Compatriots, as the name imports: This Province is also subject to Wardships, and no other part of France besides; but whither the Conqueror transported that Law to England from hence, or whither he sent it over from England hi∣ther, I cannot resolve you. Ther is a marvailous quick trade beaten in this Town, because of the great Navigable River Sequana (the Seine) that runs hence to Paris, wheron ther stands a strange Bridge that ebbs and flows, that riseth and fall's with the River, it being made of Boats, whereon Coach, and Carts may passe over as well as men: Besides, this is the neerest Mercantil City that stands twixt Paris and the Sea. My last unto you was from the Low-Countreys, wher I was in motion to and fro above four months; but I fear it miscarried in regard you make no mention of it in yours. I begin more and more to have a sense of the sweetnes, and advantage of forren Travell: I pray when you com to London, to find a time to visit Sir Robert, and acknowledge his great fa∣vours unto me, and desire a continuance thereof, according as I shall endeavour to deserve them. So with my due and daily Prayers for your health, and a speedy successefull issue of all your Law-businesses, I humbly crave your blessing, and rest. Your dutifull Son, J. H. Septemb. the 7. 1619.
XVI. To Cap. Francis Bacon, from Paris. SIR, I Received two of yours in Roüen with the Bills of Exchange, ther inclos'd, and according to your directions I sent you those things which you wrote for. I am now newly com to Paris, this huge Magazin of men, the Epitome of this large populous Kingdom, and rendevouz of all Forreners. The structures here are indifferently fair, though the Streets generally foul all the four Seasons of the yeer, which I impute first to the Position of the Citie being built upon an Isle (the Isle of France, made so by the branching and serpentin cours of the River of Seine) and having som of her Suburbs seated high, the filth runs down the Channell, and settles in many places within the body of the Citie, which lieth upon a flat; as also for a world of Coaches, Carts, and Horses of all sorts that go to and fro perpetually, so that somtimes one shall meet with a stop half a mile long of those Coaches, Carts, and Horses, that can move neither forward nor backward by reason of some sudden encoun∣ter of others coming a crosse-way; so that oftentimes it will be an hour or two before they can dis-intangle: In such a stop the great Henry was so fatally slain by Ravillac. Hence comes it to passe, that this Town (for Paris is a Town, a City, and an univer∣sity) is alwayes dirty, and 'tis such a dirt, that by perpetual mo∣tion is beaten into such a thick black onctious Oyl, that wher it sticks, no art can wash it off of some colours, insomuch, that it may be no improper comparison to say, That an ill name is like the Crot (the dirt) of Paris, which is indelible; besides the stain this dirt leaves, it gives also so strong a sent, that it may be smelt many miles off, if the wind be in ones face as he comes from the fresh Air of the Countrey: This may be▪ one cause why the Plague is alwayes in som corner or other of this vast Citie, which may be call'd as once Sythia was Vagina Populorum, or (as mankind was call'd by a great Philosopher) a great Mole-hill of Ants: Yet I believe this Citie is not so populous as she seems to be, for her form being round (as the whole Kingdom is) the Passengers wheel about, and meet oftner then they use to do in the long
continued Streets of London, which makes London appear lesse po∣pulous then she is indeed; so that London for length (though not for latitude) including Westminster, exceeds Paris, and hath in Mihnelmas Term more souls moving within her in all places. Tis under one hundred yeers that Paris is becom so sumptuous, and strong in Buildings; for her houses were mean, untill a Myne of White Stone was discover'd ard by, which runs in a continued Vein of Earth, and is digg'd out with ease being soft, and is between a White-Clay and Chalk at first, but being pullied up, with the open Air it receives a Crusty kind of hardnes, and so becomes perfect Freestone; and before it is sent up from the Pit, they can reduce it to any form: Of this Stone, the Louvre, the Kings Palace is built, which is a vast Fabric, for the Gallerie wants not much of an Italian mile in length, and will easily lodg 3000 men, which some told me, was the end for which the last King made it so big, that lying at the fag end of this great muti∣nous Citie; if she perchance should rise, the King might powre ot of the Louvre so many thousand men unawares into the heart of her. I am lodg'd here hard by the Bastile, because it is furthest off from those places where the English resort; for I would go on to get a little Language as soon as I could. In my next, I shall im∣part unto you what State-news France affords, in the interim, and alwayes I am Your humble Servant, J. H. Paris, 30. of March, 1620. XVII. To Richard Altham Esquire; from Paris. Dear Sir, LOve is the marrow of Friendship, and Letters are the Elixir of Love; they are the best fuell of affection, and cast a sweeter odour then any Frankincense can do; such an odour, such an A∣romatic perfume your late Letter brought with it, proceeding from the fragrancy of those dainty Flowers of eloquence, which I found
blossoming as it were in every Line; I mean those sweet expres∣sions of Love and Wit, which in every period were intermingled with so much Art, that they seem'd to contend for mastery which was the strongest: I must confesse, that you put me to hard shifto to correspond with you in such exquisit strains and raptures of Love, which were so lively, that I must needs judg them to pro∣ceed from the motions, from the Diastole and Systole of a Heart truly affected; certainly your heart did dictat every syllable you writ, and guided your hand all along: Sir, give me leave to tell you, that not a dram, nor a doze, not a scruple of this pretious love of yours is lost, but it is safely tresur'd up in my Brest, and an∣swer'd in like proportion to the full, mine to you is as cordiall, it is passionat and perfect, as love can be. I thank you for the desire you have to know how it fares with me abroad; I thank God I am perfectly well, and well contented with this wandring cours of life a while, I never enjoyed my health better, but I was like to endanger it two nights ago; for being in som joviall company abroad, and coming late to our lodging, we were suddenly surprized by a crue of Filous of night Rogues, who drew upon us, and as we had exchang'd some blow, it pleas'd God, the Chevatieur de Guet, an Officer, who goe up and down the Streets all night a horseback to prevent disorders, pass'd by, and so rescued us; but Iack White was hurt, and I had two thrusts in my Clock. Ther's never a night passeth, but some robbing or murther is committed in this Town, so that it is not safe to go late any where, specially about the Pont-Neuf, the New Bridg, though Henry the Great himself ies Centinell ther in Arms, upon a huge Florentine horse, and sits bare to every one that passeth, an improper posture me thinks to a King on horse∣back: not longsince, one of the Secretaries of  (wherof ther are here always four) having bin invited to the Suburbs of Saint Germains to supper, left order with one of his Laquays, to bring him his horse about nine, it so happen'd, that a mischance befell the horse, which lam'd him as he went a watring to the Seine, insomuch, that the Secretary was put to beat the hoof himself, and Foot it home; but as he was passing the Pont-Neuf with his La∣quay carrying a Torch before him, he might ore hear a noise of clashing of Swords, and Fighting, and looking under the Torch, d perceiving they were but two, he bad his Laquay go on; they had not made many paces, but two armed men with their Pistols cock'd, and swords drawn, made puffing towards them, whereof
one had a paper in his hand, which he said, he had casually took up in the streets, and the difference between them was about that Paper; therefore they desir'd the Secretary to read it, with a great deal of complement, the Secretary took out his spectacles, and fell a reading of the said Paper, whereof the substance was, That it should be known to all men, that whosoever did passe over that Bridge after nine a Clock at night in Winter, and ten in Summer, was to leave his Cloak behind him, and in case of no Cloak, his Hat. The Secretary starting at this, one of the Camerades told him; That he thought that Paper concern'd him, so they unmantled him of a new Plush Cloak, and my Secretary was content to go home quietly, and en Cuerpo. This makes me think often, of the excel∣lent Nocturnall Government of our City of London, wher one may passe and repasse securely all hours of the night, if he give good words to the Watch. Ther is a gentle calm of Peace now throughout all France, and the King intends to make a progresse to all the Frontier Towns of the Kingdom, to see how they are fortified. The Favourit Luines strengthneth himself more and more in his minionship, but he is much murmured at in regard the accesse of Suiters to him is so difficult, which made a Lord of this Land say, That three of the hardest things in the world were, To quadrat a Circl, to find out the Philosophers Stone, and to speak with the Duke of Luines. I have sent you by Vacandary the Post, the French Bever and Tweeses you writ for: Bever-hats are grown dearer of late, be∣cause the Iesuits have got the Monopoly of them from the King. Farewell dear child of Vertue, and Minion of the Muse, and continue to love Paris, 1. of May. 1620. Your J. H.
XVIII. To Sir James Crofts; from Paris. SIR, I Am to set forward this week for Spain, and if I can find no com∣modity of embarcation at Saint Malos, I must be forc'd to jour∣ney it all the way by Land, and clammer up the huge Pyreney∣hills, but I could not bid Paris adieu, till I had conveyed my true and constant respects to you by this Letter. I was yesterday to wait upon Sir Herbert Croft at Saint Germains, where I met with a French Gentleman, who amongst other curiosities, which he pleased to shew me up and down Paris, brought me to that place where the late King was slain, and to that wher the Marquis of Ancre was shot, and so made me a punctuall relation of all the circumstances of those two acts; which in regard they were rare, and I beleeve two of the notablest Accidents that ever happen'd in France, I thought it worth the labour to make you partaker of som part of his discours. France as all Christendom besides (for ther was then a truce twixt Spain and the Hollander) was in a profound Peace, and had continued so twenty yeers together, when Henry the fourth fell upon some great Martiall design, the bottome whereof is not known to this day; and being rich (for he had heap'd up in the Bastile a mount of Gold that was as high as a Lance) he levied a huge Army of 40000 men, whence came the Song, The King of France with fourty thousand men, and upon a sudden he put this Army in perfect equippage, and some say he invited our Prince Henry to come unto him to be a sharer in his exploits: But going one afternoon to the Bastile, to see his Tresure and Ammunition, his Coach stopp'd suddenly, by reason of some Colliers and o∣ther Carts that were in that narrow street; whereupon one Ra∣villac a lay Jesuit (who had a whole twelve month watch'd an op∣portunity to do the act) put his foot boldly upon one of the wheels of the Coach, and with a long Knife stretch'd himself over their shoulders who were in the Boot of the Coach, and reach'd the King at the end, and stab'd him right in the left side to the heart, and pulling out the fatall Steel, he doubled his thrust; the
King with a ruthfull voice cryed out, Ie suis blesse (I am hurr) and suddenly the bloud issued at his mouth: The Regicide villain was apprehended, and command given, that no violence should be offered him, that he might be reserv'd for the law, and som exquisit torture. The Queen grew half distracted hereupon, who had been crown'd Queen of France the day before in great tryumph; but a few days after she had something to countervail, if not to overmatch her sorrow; for according to Saint Lewis law, she was made Queen Regent of France during the Kings Minori∣ty, who was then but about years of Age: Many consultations were held how to punish Revillas, and ther were some Italia Physitians that undertook to prescribe a torment, that should last a constant torment for three days, but he scap'd onely with this, His body was pull'd between four horses, that one might hear his Bones crack, and after the dislocation, they were set again, and so he was carryed in a Cart standing half naked, with a Torch in that hand which had committed the murrher; and in the place where the act was done, it was cut off, and a Gauntlet of hot Oyl was clap'd upon the stump, to stanch the bloud, whereat he gave a dolefull shrike, then was he brought upon a stage, wher a new pair of Boots was provided for him, half fill'd with boyling Oyl, then his body was pincer'd, and hot Oyl powr'd into the holes; in al the extremity of this torture, he scarce shew'd any sense of pain, but when the Gauntlet was clap'd upon his Arms to stanch the Flux at which time he of reaking bloud, gave a shrike onely; He boar up against all these torments about three hours before he dyed: all the confession that could be drawn from him, was, That he thought to have done God good service, totake away that King, which would have embroil'd all Christendom in an endlesse War. A fatall thing it was, that France should have theee of her Kings com to such violent deaths, in so short a revolution of time. Henry the second running at Tilt with Monsieur Montgomery, was kill'd by a Splinter of a Lance that pierc'd his eye: Henry the third, not long after, was kill'd by a young Fryer, who in lieu of a Letter which he pretended to have for him, pull'd out of his long sleeve a Knife, and thrust him into the Bottom of the belly, as he was coming from his Close stool, and so dispatcht him, but that Regicide was hack'd to peeces in the place by the Nobles: The same destiny attended this King by Ravillac, which is becom now a common name of reproach and infamy in France. Never was King so much lamented as this, ther are a world not onely of his Pictures, but Statues up and down France, and ther's
scarce a Market Town, but hath him erected in the Market place, or ore some Gate, not upon Sign-posts, as our Henry the eight; and by a publick Act of Parliament which was confirmed in the Consistory at Rome, he was entiled, Henry the Great, and so plac'd in the Temple of Immortality. A notable Prince he was, and of in admirable temper of body and mind, he had a gracefull faceti∣ous way to gain both love and aw, he would be never transported beyond himself with choler, but he would passe by any thing with some repartie, som witty strain, wherein he was excellent: I will instance in a few which were told me from a good hand. One day he was charg'd by the Duke of Bovillon to have chang'd his Reli∣gion, he answer'd, No cosin, I have chang'd no Religion, but an Opi∣nion; And the Cardinall of Perron being by, he injoyn'd him to write a Treatise for his Vindication, the Cardinal was long about the work, and when the King ask'd from time to time where his Book was, he would still answer him, That he expected som Manu∣scripts from Rome before he could finish it: It happen'd, that one day the King took the Cardinall along with him to look on his Workmen, and new Buildings at the Louvre; and passing by one corner which had bin a long time begun but left unfinished, The King ask'd the chief Mason, why that corner was not all this while perfected? Sir, it is because I want som choice Stones; no, no, said the King, looking upon the Cardinall, It is because thou want' Manuscripts from Rome. Another time, the old Duke of Main, who was us'd to play the drol with him, coming softly into his Bed-Chamber, and thrusting in his Bald-head, and Long-neck, in a posture to make the King merry, it happen'd the King was com∣ing from doing his Ease, and spying him, he took the round Cover of the Close-stool, and clap'd it on his Bald-Sconce, saying, A Cousin, you thought once to have taken the Crown off of my head, and wear it on your own; but this of my Tail shall now serve your turn. Another time, when at the siege of Amins, he having sent for the Count of Soissons (who had 100000 Franks a yeer Pension from the Crown) to assist him in those wars, and that the Count excused himself, by reason of his yeers, and poverty, having exhausted himself in the former wars, and all that he could do now, was to pray for his Majesty, which he would do heartily: This answer being brought to the King, he replied, Will my Cousin, the Count of Soissons, do nothing else but pray for me, tell him that Prayer without Fasting, is not available; therefore I will make my Cousin Fast also, from his Pension of 100000. per annum. He was once troubled with a fit of the Gout, and the Spanish
Ambassador coming then to visit him, and saying he was sorry to see his Majesty so lame, he answered, As lame as I am, if ther were occasion, your Master the King of Spain, should no sooner have his foot in the stirrop, but he should find me on Horseback. By these few you may guesse at the Genius of this spritfull Prince, I could make many more instances, but then I should ex∣ceed the bounds of a Letter. When I am in Spain you shall hear further from me, and if you can think on any thing wherin I may serve you, beleeve it Sir, that any imployment from you, shall be welcom to Your much obliged Servant. J. H. Paris, 12. of May, 1620. XIX. To my Brother Dr. Howell. BROTHER, BEing to morrow to part with Paris, and begin my journey for Spain, I thought it not amisse to send you this, in regard I know not when I shall have opportunity to write unto you a∣gain. This Kingdom since the young King hath taken the Scepter into his own hands doth flourish very much with quietnes and Commerce; nor is there any motion or the least tintamar of trou∣ble in any part of the Countrey, which is rare in France. Tis true, the Queen Mother is discontented since She left her Regency, being confin'd, and I know not what it may com unto in time, for she hath a strong party, and the murthering of her Marquis of Ancre will yet bleed as som fear. I was lately in societie of a Gentleman, who was a Spectator of that Tragedie, and he pleas'd to relate unto me the particulars of it, which was thus: When Henry the fourth was slain, the Queen Dowager took the Reins of the Government into her hands during the young Kings Minority; and amongst others whom she advanc'd Signor Conchino, a Florentin, and her Foster-Brother was one; Her countenance came to shine so strongly up∣on him, that he became her onely confident and favourit, inso∣much, that she made him Marquis of Ancre, one of the twelve
Marshals of France, Governour of Normandy, and conferr'd di∣vers other Honours, and Offices of trust upon him, and who but he; The Princes of France could not endure this domineering of a stranger, therefore they leagu'd together, to suppresse him by Arms; The Queen Regent having intelligence hereof, sur∣priz'd the Prince of Conde, and clap'd him up in the Bastile; the Duke of Main fled hereupon to Peronne in Pycardie, and other great men put themselves in an Armed posture, to stand upon their guard: The young King being told, that the Marquis of Ancre was the ground of this discontentment, commanded Mon∣sieur de Vitry, Captain of his Guard, to Arrest him, and in case of resistance, to kill him: This busines was carried very closely till the next morning, that the said Marquis was coming to the Louvre with a ruffling train of Gallants after him, and passing over the Draw-Bridge at the Court-Gate, Vitry stood there with the Kings Guard about him, and as the Marquis entred, he told him, that he had a Commission from the King to apprehend him, therefore he demanded his Sword; the Marquis hereupon put his hand upon his Sword, some thought to yeeld it up, others to make opposition; in the mean time Vitry discharg'd a Pistoll at him, and so dispatch'd him: The King being above in his Gal∣lery, ask'd what noise that was below, one smilingly answer'd▪ nothing Sir, but that the Marshall of Ancre is slain; who slew him? The Captain of your Guard; why? Because he would have drawn his Sword at Your Majesties Royall Commission, then the King replied, Vitry hath done well, and I will maintain the act: Presently the Queen Mother had all her Guard taken from her, except six men and sixteen Women, and so she was banish'd Pa∣ris, and commanded to retire to Blois: Ancre's Body was buried that night in a Church hard by the Court, but the next morning, when the Laquays and Pages (who are more unhappy here then the Apprentises in London) broke up his Grave, tore his Coffin to peeces, rip'd the Winding-Sheet, and tied his Body to an Asses Tail, and so dragg'd him up and down the Gutters of Paris, which are none of the sweetest; they then slic'd off his Ears, and nail'd them upon the Gates of the City, they cut off his Genito∣ries (and they say he was hung like an Asse) and sent them for a present to the Duke of Main, the rest of his Body, they carried to the New-Bridg, and hung him his Heels upwards, and Head downwards upon a new Gibbet, that had bin set up a little before to punish them who should speak ill of the present Government, and it was his chance to have the Maiden-head of it himself: His
Wife was hereupon apprehended, imprisond, and beheaded for a Witch som few dayes after upon a surmise, that she had enchanted the Queen to dote so upon her Husband; and they say the young Kings Picture was found in her Closet in Virgin-Wax, with one Leg melted away; a little after a processe was form'd against the Marquis (her Husband) and so he was condemn'd after death. This was a right act of a French popular fury, which like an angry torrent is irresistible, nor can any Banks, Boundaries, or Dike stop the impetuous rage of it. How the young King will prosper after so high, and an unexampled act of violence, by beginning his Raign, and embring the Walls of his own Court with blood in that manner, ther are divers censures. When I am settled in Spain, you shall hear from me, in the in∣terim, I pray let your Prayers accompany me in this long jour∣ney, and when you write to Wales, I pray acquaint our frends with my welfare. So I pray God blesse us both, and send us a happy enterview. Paris, 8. of Septem∣ber, 1620. Your loving Brother, J. H. XX. To my Cousin W. Vaughan Esq from Saint Malo. Cousin, I Am now in French Britany, I went back from Paris to Roüen, and so through all low Normandy, to a little Port call'd Gran∣ville, wher I embark'd for this Town of Saint Malo, but I did purge so violently at Sea, that it put me into a Burning Feavour for some few dayes, wherof (I thank God) I am newly recovered, and finding no opportunity of shipping here, I must be forc'd to turn my intended Sea voyage to a long land journey. Since I came to this Province, I was curious to converse with some of the lower Bretons who speak no other Language but our Welsh, for their radicall words are no other, but 'tis no wonder for they were a Colony of Welsh at first, as the name of this Pro∣vince doth imply, as also the Latin name▪ Armorica, which though
it passe for Latin, yet it is but pure Welsh, and signifies a Coun∣trey bordring up the Sea, as that arch Heretick was call'd Pelagius, a Pelago, his name being Morgan. I was a little curious to peruse the Annals of this Province, and during the time that it was a Kingdom, ther wer four Kings of the name Hoell, whereof one was call'd Hoell the Great. This Town of Saint Malo hath one rarity in it, for ther is here a perpetuall Garrison of English, but they are of English Dogs, which are let out in the night to guard the Ships, and eat the Gar∣dens up and down the Streets, and so they are shut up again in the morning. It will be now a good while before I shall have conveniency to send to you, or receive from you; howsoever, let me retain still some little room in your memory, and somtimes in your medita∣tions, while I carry you about me perpetually, not onely in my head, but in heart, and make you travell all along with me thus from Town to Countrey, from Hill to Dale, from Sea to Land, up and down the World; and you must be contented to be Sub∣ect to these incertain removes and perambulations, untill it shall please God to fix me again England; nor need you, while you are thus my concomitant through new places evry day, to fear any ill usage as long as I farewell, St. Malo, 25. of Sep∣tember, 1620. Yours , J. H. XXI. To Sir John North Kt. from Rochell. SIR, Am newly com to Rochell, nor am I sorry that I went somwhat out of my way to see this Town, not (to tell you true) out of ny extraordinary love I bear to the people; for I do not find em so gentle and debonnair to strangers, nor so Hospitable a e rest of France, but I excuse them for it, in regard it is com∣only so with all Republic and Hans Towns, wherof this smels ery rank▪ nor indeed hath any Englishman much cause to love  Town, in regard in Ages pass'd, she played the most treche∣rous
part with England of any other place of France. For the Story tells us, That this Town having by a perfidious stratage (by forging a counterfeit Commission from England) induc'd the English Governour to make a general Muster of all his Forces ou of the Town; this being one day done, they shut their Gate against him, and made him go shake his ears, and to shift for his lodging, and so rendred themselves to the French King, who sen them a blank to write their own conditions. I think they have the strongest Ramparts by Sea of any place of Christendom; no have I seen the like in any Town of Holland, whose safety de∣pends upon Water. I am bound to morrow for Bourdeaux, then through Gascogny to Tholouse, so through Languedoc ore the Hill to Spain; I go in the best season of the yeer, for I make an Au∣tumnall journey of it. I pray let your Prayers accompany me all along, they are the best Offices of Love, and Fruits of Friendship▪ So God prosper you at home, as me abroad, and send us in good time a joyfull conjuncture, Rochell, 8. of Octo∣ber, 1620. Yours, J. H. XXII. To Mr. Tho. Porter, after Cap. Porter, from Barcelone. MY dear Tom, I had no sooner set foot upon this Soyl, and breath'd Spanish ayr, but my thoughts presently reflected upon you: Of all my frends in England, you were the first I met here, you were the prime object of my speculation; me thought the very Winds in gentle whispers did breath out your name, and blow it on me; you seem'd to reverberat upon me with the Beams of the Sun, which you know hath such a power∣full influence, and indeed too great a stroke in this Countrey: And all this you must ascribe to the operations of Love, which hath such a strong virtuall force, that when it fastneth upon a pleasing subject, it sets the imagination in a strange fit of work∣ing, it imployes all the faculties of the Soul, so that not one Cell in the Brain is idle, it busieth the whole inward man, it af∣fects the heart, amuseth the understanding, it quickneth the fancy,
and leads the will as it were by a silken thred to cooperat with them all: I have felt these motions often in me, specially at this time, that my memory fixed upon you: But the reason that I fell first upon you in Spain, was, that I remembred I had heard you often discoursing how you had received part of your educati∣on here, which brought you to speak the Language so exactly well: I think often of the Relations I have heard you make of this Countrey, and the good instructions you pleas'd to give me. I am now in Barcelona, but the next week I intend to go on through your Town of Valencia to Alicant, and thence you shall be sure to hear from me further, for I make account to Winter there. The Duke of Ossuna pass'd by here lately, and having got leave of Grace to release some slaves, he went aboard the Cape-Gallie, and passing through the Churm of slaves, He ask'd di∣vers of them what their offences were, evry one excus'd himself, one saying, That he was put in out of malice, another by bribery of the Judge, but all of them injustly; amongst the rest, ther was one sturdy little black man, and the Duke asking him what he he was in for, Sir, said he, I cannot deny but I am justly put in here, for I wanted money, and so took a Purse hard by Tarragona to keep me from starving; The Duke with a litte staff he had in his hand, gave him two or three blows upon the shoulders, saying, You Rogue what do you do amongst so many honest innocent men, get you gone out of their company; so he was freed, and the rest remain'd still in statu quo prius, to tugg at the Oar. I pray commend me to Signor Camillo, and Mazalao, with the rest of the Venetians with you, and wher you go aboard the Ship behind the Exchange, think upon Barcelona,10. of No∣vember, 1620. Your J. H.
XXIII. To Sir James Crofts. SIR, I Am now a good way within the Body of Spain, at Barcelona, a proud wealthy Citie, situated upon the Mediterranean, and is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Catalunia, call'd of old Hispania raconensis: I had much ado to reach hither, for besides the monstrous abrupes of the way, these parts of the Pyreneys that border upon the Mediterranean, are never without Theeves by Land (call'd Badoleros) and Pyrats on the Sea side, which li sculking in the Hollows of the Rocks, and often surprize Passen∣gers unawares, and carry them slaves to Barbary on the other side. The safest way to passe, is to take a Bordon in the habit of a Pil∣grim, wherof ther are abundance that perform their vows this way to the Lady of Monserrat, one of the prime places of pilgri∣mage in Christendom; It is a stupendous Monastery, built on the top of a huge Land Rock, whither it is impossible to go up, or come down by a direct way, but a path is cut out full of windings and turnings; and on the Crown of this Craggy-hill, ther is a fl, upon which, the Monastery and Pilgrimage place is founded, wher ther is a Picture of the Virgin Mary Sunburnt, and Tann'd, it seems when she went to Egypt; and to this Picture a marval∣lous confluence of people from all parts of Europe resort. As I pass'd between so of the Pyrency Hills, I observ'd the poor Labradors, som of the Countrey people live no better then bruit Animals in point of food, for their ordinary commons is Grasse and Water, onely they have alwayes within their Houses a Bottle of Vinegar, and another of Oyl, and when Dinner or Supper time comes, they go abroad and gather their Herbs, and so cast Vinegar and Oyl upon them, and will passe thus two or three dayes without Bread or Wine, yet are they, strong lusty men, and will stand stiffly under a Musket. Ther is a Tradition, that ther were divers Mynes of Gold in Ages pass'd amongst those Mountains: And the Shepherds that kept Goats then, having made a small fire of Rosemary stubs, with other combustible stuff to warm themselves, this fire graz'd along, and grew so outragious, that it consum'd the very Entrails
of the Earth, and melted those Mynes, which growing fluid by liquefaction, ran down into the small Rivelets that were in the Valleys, and so carried all into the Sea, that monstrous Gulph which swalloweth all, but seldom disgorgeth any thing; and in these Brooks to this day som small Grains of Gold are found. The Viceroy of this Countrey hath taken much pains to clear these Hills of Robbers, and ther hath bin a notable havock made of them this yeer; for in divers Woods as I pass'd, I might spie som Trees laden with dead Carcases, a better Fruit far then Dio∣genes Tree bore, wheron a Woman had hang'd her self, which the Cynic cryed out to be the best bearing Tree that ever he saw. In this place ther lives neither English Marchant or Factor, which I wonder at, considering that it is a Maritim Town, and one of the greatest in Spain; her chiefest Arsenal for Gallies, and the Scale by which she conveys her Moneys to Italy; but I believe the reason is, that ther is no commodious Port here for Ships of any burden, but a large Bay. I will inlarge my self no further at this time, but leave you to the guard and guidance of God, whose sweet hand of protection hath brought me through so many un∣couth places and difficulties to this Citie: So hoping to meet your Letters in Alicant, wher I shall Anchor a good while, I rest Yours to dispose of, J. H. Barcelona, 24. Novemb. 1620. XXIV. To Dr. Fr. Mansell, from Valentia. SIR, THough it be the same glorious Sun that shines upon you in England, which illuminats also this part of the Hemi∣sphear; though it be the same Sun that ripeneth your Pippins, and our Pomgranets, your Hops, and our Vineyards here, yet he dis∣penseth his heat in different degrees of strength; those Rays that do but warm you in England, do half roast us here; those Beams that irradiat onely, and guild your Honey-suckled fields, do scorch and parch this chinky gaping soyl, and so put too many wrincles
upon the face of our common Mother the Earth. O blessed Clime, O happy England, wher ther is such a rare temperature of hear and cold, and all the rest of Elementary qualities, that one may passe (and suffer little) all the yeer long without either shade in Summer, or fire in Winter. I am now in Valentia, one of the noblest Cities of all Spain, situ∣at in a large Vegue or Valley, above threescore miles compasse; here are the strongest Silks, the sweetest Wines, the excellenc'st Almonds, the best Oyls, and beutifull'st Femals of all Spain, for the prime Courtisans in Madrid, and else-where are had hence: The very bruit Animals make themselves Beds of Rosmary, and other Fragrant Flowers hereabouts; and when one is at Sea, if the Wind blow from the shore, he may smell this soyl before he come in sight of it many leagues off, by the strong odoriferous sent it casts; As it is the most pleasant, so is it also the temperat'st Clime of all Spain, and they commonly call it the second Italy, which made the Moors, whereof many thousands were disterr'd and banish'd hence to Barbary, to think that Paradise was in that part of the Heavens which hung over this City. Some twelve miles off, is old Saguno, call'd now Morviede, through which I pass'd, and saw many Monuments of Roman Antiquities there, amongst others, ther is the Temple dedicated to Venus, when the Snake came about her Neck, a little before Hannibal came thither. No more now, but that I heartily wish you were here with me, and I beleeve you would not desire to be a good while in England. So I am Your J. H. Valentia, March the 1. 1620. XXV. To Christopher Jones Esq at Grays-Inne. I Am now (thanks be to God) come to Alicant, the chief Rende∣vouz I aym'd at in Spain; for I am to send hence a commodity call'd Barillia to Sir Robert Mansell, for making of Crystall-Glasse, and I have treated with Signor Andriotti a Genoa Marchant for a good round parcell of it, to the value of 2000 pound, by Let∣ters of credit from Master Richant, and upon his credit, I might
have taken many thousand pounds more, he is so well known in the Kingdom of Valentia. This Barillia is a strange kind of Ve∣getable, and it grows no wher upon the surface of the Earth, in that perfection, as here: The Venetians have it hence, and it is a commodity wherby this Maritim Town doth partly subsist, for it is an ingredient that goes to the making of the best Castile-Soap: It grows thus, 'tis a round thick Earthy shrub that bears Berries like Barbaries, but twixt blew & green, it lies close to the ground, and when it is ripe, they dig it up by the roots, and put it toge∣ther in Cocks, wher they leave it dry many days like Hey, then they make a Pit of a fadom deep in the Earth, and with an In∣strument like one of our Prongs, they take the Tuffs and put fire to them, and when the flame comes to the Berries they melt, and dissolve into an Azure Liquor, and fall down into the Pit till it be full, then they dam it up, and som days after they open it, and find this Barillia-juyce turn'd to a Blew stone, so hard, that it is scarcc Mallable, it is sold at one hundred Crowns a Tun, but I had it for lesse; ther is also a spurious Flower call'd Gazull that grows here, but the Glasse that's made of that is not so resplendent and cleer. I have bin here now these three Months, and most of my Food hath bin Grapes and Bread, with other Roots, which have made me so fat, that I think if you saw me, you would hardly know me, such nourriture this deep Sanguin Alicant Grap gives. I have not receiv'd a syllable from you since I was in Antwerp, which transforms me to wonder, and engenders odd thoughts of Jealousie in me, that as my body grows fatter, your love grows lanker towards me; I pray take off these scruples, and let me hear from you, else it will make a schism in friendship, which I hold to be a very holy league, and no lesse then a Piacle to infringe it, in which opinion I rest Your constant Friend, J. H. Alicant, March 27. 1621.
XXVI. To Sir John North, Knight. SIR HAving endur'd the brunt of a whole Summer in Spain, and tryed the temper of all the other three Seasons of the yeer, up and down the Kingdoms of Catalunia, Valentia, and Murci, with som parts of Aragon, I am now to direct my cours for Italy; I hoped to have embark'd at Carthagena, the best Port upon the Mediterranean, for what Ships and Gallies get in thither, are shut up as it were in a Box from the violence and injury of all Wea∣thers, which made Andrea Doria being ask'd by Philip the second, which were his best Harbours? He answer'd, Iune, Iuly, and Car∣thagena, meaning, that any Port is good in those two months, but Carthagena was good any time of the yeer. Ther was a most ruth∣full accident had happen'd ther a little before I came, for wheras five ships had gone thence laden with Souldiers for Naples, a∣mongst whom ther was the Flower of the Gentry of the Kingdom of Murcia; those Ships had hardly sail'd three leagues, but they met with sixteen fails of Algier, men of War, who had lain skulk∣ing in the Creeks therabouts, and they had the winds, and all things else so favourable, that of those five ships they took one, sunk another, and burnt a third, and two fled back to safe Harbor; the report hereof being bruited up and down the Countrey, the Gentlewomen came from the Countrey to have tydings, som of their Children, others of their Brothers, and Kinred, and went earing their Hair, and houling up and down the streets in a most piteous manner: The Admiral of those five ships, as I heard afterwards, was sent for to Madrid, and hang'd at the Court gate, because he did not fight: Had I com time enough to have taken the opportunity, I might have bin made, either food for Hadocks, or turn'd to Cinders, or have bin by this time a slave in the Ban∣nier at Algier, or tugging at an Oa; but I hope God hath reserv'd me for a better destiny; so I came back to Alicant, where I light∣ed upon a lusty Dutchman, who hath carried me safe hither, but we
were neer upon fourty days in voyage; we pass'd by Mallorca, and Minorca, the Baleares Insulae, by som Pors of Barbary, by Sardinia, Corica, and all the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea; we were at the mouth of Tyber, and thence forc'd our cours for Sicilie; we pass'd by those Sulphureous fiery Islands, Mongibel, and Strmbolo, and about the dawn of the day we shot through Scylla and Charybdis, and so into the Phare of Messina, thence we touch'd upon som of the Greek Islands, and so came to our first intended cours, into the Venetian Gulph, and are now here at Malamocca, wher we re∣main yet aboard, and must be content to be so, to make up the month before we have pratic, that is, before any be permitted to go a shore and negotiat, in regard we touch'd at some infected pla∣ces: For ther are no people upon Earth so fearful of the Plague, as the Italians, specially the Venetian, though their Neighbors the Greeks hard by, and the Turks, have little or no apprehension at all of the danger of it, for they will visit and commerce with the sick without any seruple, and will fix their longest finger in the midst of their fore-head, and say, their destiny and manner of death is pointed there. When we have gain'd y'n Maiden City, which lieth before us, you shall hear farther from me: So leaving you to his holy protection who hath thus graciously vouchsaf'd to preserve this ship, and me, in so long and dangerous a voyage, I rest Yours J. H. Malamocco, April the 30. 1611. XXVII. To my Brother Dr. Howell, from a Shipboard before Venice. BROTHER, IF this Letter fail, either in point of Orthography or Style, you must impute the first to the tumbling posture my body was in at the writing hereof being a shipboard, the second to the muddi∣nesse of my Brain, which like Lees in a narrow Vessell, hath been shaken at Sea in divers Tempests neer upon fourty days, I mean naturall dayes, which include the nights also, and are compos'd of four and twenty hours, by which number the Italian computes his
time, and tells his Clock, for at the writing hereof, I heard one from Malamoeca strike one and twenty hours: When I shall have saluted yonder Virgin City that stands before me, and hath tantaliz'd me now this sennight, I hope to cheer my spirits, and settle my Pericranium again. In this voyage we pass'd thorow, at least touch'd, all those Seas, which Horace and other Poets sing of so often, as the Iornian, the Aegean, the Icarian, the Tyrrhene, with others, and now we are in the Adrian Sea, in the mouth whereof, Venice▪ stands like a Gold Ring in a Bears Muzzle: We pass'd also by Aetna, by the Infames Scopules, Acroceraunia, and through Scylla and Charybdis, about which the ancient Poets, both Greek, and Latin, keep such a coyl, but they are nothing so horrid or dangerous, as they make them to be; they are two white keen-pointed Rocks, that lie under water diametrically opposed, and like two Dragons defying one a∣nother, and ther are Pylots, that in small Shallops, are ready to steer all ships that pasle: This amongst divers other, may serve for an instance, That the old Poets used to heighten and hoise up things by their ayrie fancies above the reality of truth: Aetna was very furious when we pass'd by, as she useth to be somtimes more then other, specialy when the wind is Southward, for then she is more subject to belching out flakes of fire (as Stutterers use to flammer more when the wind is in that hole) som of the sparkles fell aboard of us; but they would make us beleeve in Syracusa now Messina, that Aetna in times pass'd, hath eructated such huge gob∣bets of fire, that the sparks of them have burnt houses in Malta, above fifty miles off, transported thither by a direct strong wind: We pass'd hard by Corinth, now Ragusa, but I was not so happy as to touch there, for you know Non cuivis homini contingit adire corinthum: I convers'd with many Greeks, but found none that could un∣derstand, much lesse pratically speak any of the old Dialects of the Latin-Greek, it is so adulterated by the vulgar, as a Bed of Flowers by Weeds; nor is ther any people, either in the Islands, or on the Continent, that speaks it conversably, yet there are in the Merea seven Parishes call'd Zacones, wher the Originall Greek is not much degenerated, but they confound divers Letters of the Alphabet with one sound; for in point of pronunciation ther is no difference 'twixt Upsilon, Iota, and Eta. The last I received from you was in Latin, wherof I sent you
an answer from Spain in the same Language, though in a courser Dialect: I shall be a guest to Venice a good while, therfore I besire a frequency of correspondence between us by Letters, for ther will be conveniency evry week of receiving and sending; when you write to Wales, I pray send advise, that I am come safe to Italy, though not landed there yet: So my dear Brother, I pray God blesse us both, and all our friends, and reserve me to see you again with comfort, and you me, who am Your loving brother, J. H. May the 5. 1621. XXVIII. To the Honourable Sir Robert Mansell, Vice-Admirall of England, from Venice. SIR, AS soon as I came to Venice, I applyed my self to dispatch your businesse according to instructions, and Mr. Seymor was ready to contribute his best furtherance: These two Italîans who are the Bearers hereof, by report here, are the best Gentle∣men-Workmen that ever blew Crystall, one is allied to Antoni Miotti, the other is Cousin to Mazalao; for other things they shall be sent in the Ship Lion, which rides here at Malamocca, as I shall send you account by conveyance of Mr. Symns: Herewith I have sent a Letter to you from Sir Henry Wotton, the Lord Am∣bassador here, of whom I have receiv'd som favours, He wish'd me to write, that you have now a double interest in him; for wheras before he was only your Servant, he is now your Kins∣man by your late marriage. I was lately to see the Arsenall of Venice, one of the worthiest things of Christendom; they say ther are as many Gallies, and Galeasses of all sorts, belonging to Saint Mare, either in Cours, at Anchor, in Dock, or upon the Carine, as ther be dayes in the yeer; here they can build a compleat Gally in half a day, and put her a float in perfect Equippage, having all the ingredients fitted before hand, as they did in three hours, when Henry the third pass'd this way to France from Poland, who wish'd, that besides
Pis, and his Parliament Towns, he had this Arsenal in ex∣change, for three o his chiefest Cities: Ther are three hundred people perpetually hero at Work, and if one comes young, and grows old in Saint Mes service, he hath a Pension from the State during life: Being brought to see one of the Clarissimos that governs this Arsenall, this huge Sea Store▪ House, amongst other matters reflecting upon England, he was saying, That if Cavaglier Don Roberto Mansell were now here, he thought verily the republic would make a proffer to him to be Admirall of that Fleet of Gallies, and Galeons, which are now going against the Duke of Ossuna, and the Forces of Naples, you are so well known here▪ I was, since I came hither, in Murano, a little Island, about the distance of Lambeth from London, wher Crystall-Glasse is made, and 'tis a rare sight to see a whole Street, where on the one side ther are twenty Furnaces together at work; They say here, that although one should transplant a Glasse-Furnace, from Murano to Venice her self, or to any of the little assembly of Islands about her, or to any other part of the Earth besides, and use the same Materials, the same Workmen, the same Fuell, the self same In∣gredients every way, yet they cannot make Crystall Glasse in that perfection, for beauty and Iustre, as in Murano; som impute into the qualitie of the circumambient Ayr, that hangs ore the place, which is purified and attenuated by the concurrence of so many fires that are in those Furnaces night and day perpetually, for they are like the Vestall fire which never goes out; And it is well known, that some Ayrs make more qualifying impressions then others, as a Greek old me in Sicily, of the Ayr of Egypt, wher ther be huge common Furnaces to hatch Eggs by the thousands in Cames Dung; for during the time of hatching, if the Ayr happen to come to be overcast, and grow cloudy, it spoyls all; if the Skie continue still serene and clear, not one Egg in a hundred will miscary. I met with Camillo your Consaorman here lately, and could he be sure of entertainment, he would return to serve you again, and I believe for lesse-salary. I shall attend your commands herein by the next, and touching other particulars, wherof I have written to Captain Bacon: So I rest Venice, May the 30: 1621. Your most humble and ready Servant, J. H.
XXIX. To my Brother, from Venice. Brother, I Found a Letter of yours that had lain dormant here a good while in Mr. Symns hands, to welcom me to Venice, and I thank you for the variety of news wherwith she went sreighted; for she was to me, as a Ship richly laden from London useth to be to our Marchants here, and I esteem her Cargazon at no lesse a va∣lue, for she inrich'd me with the knowledg of my Fathers health, and your own, with the rest of my Brothers, and Sisters, in the Countrey, with divers other passages of content∣ment; besides, she went also ballasted with your good instructi∣ons, which as Marchants use to do of their commodities, I will turn to the best advantage, and Italy is no ill Market to improve any thing; the onely procede (that I may use the mercantil term) you can expect, is thanks, and this way I shall not be wanting to make you rich returns. Since I came to this Town I dispatch'd sundry businesses of good value for Sir Robert Mansell, which I hope will give content: The art of Glasse-making here is very highly valued, for whoso∣ever be of that profession, are Gentlemen ipso facto, and it is not without reason, it being a rare kind of knowledg and chymistry, to transmute Dust and Sand (for they are the onely main Ingre∣dients) to such a diaphanous pellucid dainty body as you see a Crystal-Glasse is, which hath this property above Gold or Silver or any other minerall, to admit no poyson; as also, that it never, wastes or loseth a whit of its first weight, though you use it ne∣ver so long: When I saw so many sorts of curious Glasses made here, I thought upon the complement which a Gentleman put upon a Lady in England, who having five or six comly Daughters, said, He never saw in his life, such a dainty Cupboard of Crystall-Glasses; the complement proceeds it seems from a saying they have here, That the first handsom Woman that ever was made, was made of Venice-Glasse, which implies Beuty, but brittlenes withall (and Venice is not unfurnish'd with som of that mould, for no place abounds more with Lasses and Glasses) but considering the brittlenes of the Stuff, it was an odd kind of melancholly in him,
that could not be perswaded, but he was an Urinal, surely he de∣serv'd to be piss'd in the mouth: But when I pried into the Ma∣terials, and observ'd the Furnaces and the Calcinations, the Transubstantintions, the Liquefactions that are incident to this Art, my thoughts were rais'd to a higher speculation; that if this small Furnace-fire hath vertue to convert such a small lump of dark Dust and Sand into such a specious clear Body as Crystall, surely, that gran Universall-site, which shall happen at the day of judgment, may by its violent-ardor vitrifie and turn to one lump of Crystall, the whole Body of the Earth; nor am I the first that fell upon this conceit. I will in large my self no further to you at this time, but conclude with this Tetrastic which my Brain ran upon in my Bed this mor∣ning. Vistrea sunt nostrae comissa negotia curae, Hoc oculis speculum mittimus ergo luis: Quod speculum? Est instar speculi mea littera, per quod Vivida fraterni cordis imago nitet. Adieu my dear Brother, live happily, and love Ven: the 1. of June, 1621. Your Brother, J. H. XXX. To Mr. Richard Altham at Grayes-Inne, from Venice. Gentle Sir, —O dulcior illo Melle quod in ceris Attica ponit apis. O thou who dost in sweetnesse far excell, That Iuycc the Attic Bee store's in her cell. My dear Dick, I Have now a good while since taken footing in Venice, this ad∣mired Maid Citie, so call'd, because she was never deflour'd
by any enemy since she had a being, not since her Rialto was first erected, which is now above twelve Ages ago. I protest unto you at my first landing, I was for som dayes ra∣vish'd with the high beuty of this Maid, with her lovely counte∣nance, I admir'd her magnificent buildings, her marvailous situ∣ation, her dainty smooth neat streets, wheron you may walk most dayes in the yeer in a Silk-Stockin, and Sattin-Slippers, without soiling them, not can the Steets of Paris be so foul, as these are fair. This beutious Maid hath bin often attempted to be vitiated, som have courted her, som brib'd her, som would have forc'd her▪ yet she hath still preserv'd her chastity intire; and though she hath liv'd so many Ages, and pass'd so many shrew'd brunts, yet she continueth fresh to this very day without the least wrinkle of old Age, or any symptomes of decay, wherunto political bodies, as well as naturall, use to be liable. Besides the hath wrestled with the greatest Potentats upon Earth; The Emperour, the King of France, and most of the other Princes of Christendome in that famous league of Cambray would have sunk her, but she bore up still within her Lakes, and broke that league to peeces by her wit; The gran Turk hath bin often at her, and though he could not have his will of her, yet he took away the richest Jewell she wore in her Cornet, and put it in his Turban, I mean the Kingdom of Cypres the onely Royall Gem she had; he hath set upon her skirts often since, and though she clos'd with him somtimes, yet she came off still with her Maiden-head, though some that envy her happines, would brand her to be of late times a kind of Concu∣bin to him, and that she gives him ready money once a yeer to lie with her, which she minceth by the name of present, though it  indeed rather a tribut. I would I had you here with a wish, and you would not desire in haste to be at Grayes-Inne, though I hold your walks to be the pleasant'st place about London; and that you have there the choi∣cest society. I pray present my kind commendations to all there, and my service at Bishops-gate-street, and let me hear from you by the next Post: So I am Ven: 5. Iun. 1621. Intirely yours, J. H.
XXXI. To Dr. Fr. Mansell, from Venice. GIve me leave to salute you first in these Sapphics. In tendens iter ad Britannam Chta▪ te paucis volo,  gressum, Verba Mansello, bene noscis illum, talia perfer. Finibus longè patriis Hoellus Di, quantis Venetium superb Civitas distat ab urbe Plurimam mentis tibi vult salutem, Plurimum cordis tibi vult vigorem, Plurimum sortis tibi vult favorem Regis & Aulae. These wishes com to you from Venice, a place wher ther is no∣thing wanting that heart can wish: Renowned Venice, the ad∣miredst City in the World, a City that all Europ is bound unto, for she is her greatest Ram part against that huge Eastern Tyrant the Turk by Sea, else I beleeve he had over-run all Christendo by this time: Against him this City hath perform'd notable ex∣ploits, and not only against him, but divers other: She hath re∣stor'd Emperours to their Throne, and Popes to their Chairs, and with her Gallies often preserv'd Saint Peters Bark from sinking: for which, by way of reward, one of his Suceessors espos'd her to the Sea, which marriage is solemnly renew'd evry yeer in solemn Profession by the Doge, and all the Clarissunos, and a Gold Ring cast into the Sea out of the great Galeasse, call'd the , wherin the first Ceremony was perform'd by the Pope himself, a∣bove three hundred yeers since, and they say it is the self-same Vessell still, though often put upon the Carine, and trim'd▪ This made me think on that famous ship at Athens; nay, I fell upon  abstracted notion in Philosophy, and a speculation touching the body of man, which being in perpetuall Flux, and a kind of suc∣cession of decayes, and consequently requiring ever and anon, a
restauration of what it loseth of the vertue of the former alimnt, and what was converted after the third concoction into bloud and fleshy substance, which as in all other sublunary bodies that have internall principles of heat, useth to transpire, breath out, and wast away through invisible Pores by exercise, motion, and sleep, to make room still for a supply of new nourriture: I fell, I say, to consider whither our bodies may be said to be of like condition with this Bucentore; which though it be reputed still the same Vessell, yet I beleeve ther's not a foot of that Timber remaining which it had upon the first Dock, having bin as they tell me, so of∣ten plank'd and ribb'd, caulk'd and peec'd: In like manner our bodies may be said to be daily repaired by new sustenance, which begets new bloud, and consequently new spirits, new humours, and I may say new flesh, the old by continuall deperdition and insen∣sible transpirations evaporating still out of us, and giving way to fresh; so that I make a question, whither by reason of these perpe∣tuall reparations, and accretions, the body of man may be said to be the same numericall body in his old age that he had in his manhood, or the same in his manhood, that he had in his youth, the same in his youth that he carried about him in his childhood, or the same in his childhood which he wore first in the Womb: I make a doubt, whither I had the same identicall, individually nu∣mericall body, when I carried a Calf-Leather Sachell to School in Hereford, as when I woar a Lamskin Hood in Oxford, or whither I have the same masse of bloud in my Veins, and the same Flesh now in Venice which I carried about me three yeers since, up and down London streets, having in lieu of Beer and Al, drunk Wine all this while, and fed upon different Viands; now the stomach is like a crusible, for it hath a chymicall kind of vertue to transmute one body into another, to transubstantiat Fish and Fruits into Flesh within, and about us; but though it be questionable, whither I wear the same Flesh which is fluxible, I am sure my Hair is not the same, for you may remember I went flaxen-hair'd out of Eng∣land, but you shall find me return'd with a very dark Brown, which I impute not onely to the heat and ayr of those hot Coun∣tries I have eat my bread in, but to the quality and difference of food; but you will say, that hair is but an excrementitious thing, and makes not to this purpose; moreover, me thinks I hear yon say, that this may be true, onely in the bloud and spirits, or such fluid parts, not in the solid and heterogeneall parts: But I will presse no further at this time this Philosophical notion which the ght of Bucentor infus'd into me, for it hath already made me ex∣ceed
the bounds of a Letter, and I fear me to trespasse too much upon your patience; I leave the further disquisition of this point to your own contemplations, who are a far riper Philosopher then I, and have waded deeper into, and drunk more of Aristotles Well; but to conclude, though it be doubtfull whither I carry a∣bout me the same body or no, in all points that I had in England, I am well assur'd, I bear still the same mind, and therein I verif the old vers. Coelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. The Ayr, but not the mind they change, Who in Outlandish Countreys range. For what alterations soever happen in this Microcosm, in this little World, this small bulk and body of mine, you may be confi∣dent, that nothing shall alter my affections, specially toward you, but that I will persever still the same, The very same, J. H. Ven. 25. Iun. 1621. XXXII. To Richard Altham, Esquire. Dear Sir, I Was plung'd in a deep fit of melancholly, Satum had cast his black influence ore all my intellectuals, me thought I felt my heart as a lump of Dow, and heavy as Lead within my Brest; when a Letter of yours of the third of this month was brought me, which presently begot new Spirits within me, and made such strong impressions upon my Intellectuals, that it turn'd and transform'd me into another man. I have read of a Duke of Milan, and o∣thers, who were poyson'd by reading of a Letter, but yours pro∣duc'd contrary effects in me, it became an antidot, or rather  most Soverain Cordial to me, more operative then Bezar, of more vertue then Potable Gold, or the Elixir of Ambar, for it wrought a
sudden cure upon me: That fluent and rare mixture of love, and wit, which I found up and down therein, were the Ingredi∣ents of this Cordiall; they were as so many choice Flowers, strw'd here and ther, which did cast such an Odoriferous sent, that they reviv'd all my sence, and dispell'd those dull fumes which had formerly ore clouded my brain: Such was the operation of your most ingenuous and affectionat Letter, and so sweet an en∣tertainment it gave me: If your Letter had that vertue, what would your person have don; and did you know all, you would wish your person here a while; did you know the rare beuty of this Virgin-Clty, you would quickly make love to her, and change your Royall Exchange for the Rialto, and your Grayes-Inne. Walks for Saint Marks place for a time. Farewell dear child of Vertue, and minion of the Muses, and love still Ven. 1. Iuly 1621. Your J. H. XXIII. To my much honoured frend Sir John North Kt. from Venice. Noble Sir, THe first office of gratitude is, to receive a good turn civilly, then to retain it in memory and acknowledg it, thirdly, to endeavour a requitall, for this last office, it is in vain for me to attempt it, specially towards you, who have laden me with such a variety of courtesies, and weighty favours, that my poor stock comes far short of any retaliation; but for the other two, reception and retention, as I am not conscious to have bin wanting in the first act, so I shall never fail in the second, because both these are within the compasse of my power; for if you could pry into my memory, you should discover there a huge Magazin of your favours (you have bin pleas'd to do me present and absent) safeiy stor'd up and coacervated, to preserve them from mouldring away in oblivion, for courtesies should be no perishable commodity: Should I attempt any other requitall, I should extenuat your fa∣vours, and derogat from the worth of them▪ yet if to this of the memory, I can contribut any other act of body or mind, to en∣large my acknowledgments towards you; you may be well
assured, that I shall be ever ready to court any occasion, wherby the world may know how much I am Ven: 13. Iul. 1621 Your thankfull Servitor, J. H. XXXIV. To Dan. Caldwall Esq from Venice. My dear D. COuld Letters flie with the same Wings as Love useth to do, and cut the Ayr with the like swiftnes of motion, this Letter of mine should work a miracle, and be with you in an instant; nor should she fear interception, or any other casualty in the way, or cost you one penny the Post, for she should passe invisibly: but 'tis not fitting, that paper which is made but of old Ragg's wherwith Letters are swadled, should have the same priviledg as Love, which is a spirituall thing, having somthing of Divinity in it, and partake in elerity with the Imagination, then which ther is not any thing more swift you know, no not the motion of the upper sphere the  mobile, which snatcheth all the other mine after it, and indeed the whole Macrocosm all the world be∣sies, except our Earth (the Center,) which upper sphere the Astronomers would have to move so many degrees, so many thou∣sand miles in a moment; fince then, Letters are denied such a velocity, I allow this of ine twenty dayes, which is the ordinary time allow'd twixt Venice and London, to com unto you, and thank you a thousand  over for your last of the tenth of Iune, and the rich Venison Feast you made, as I understand not long since, to the remembrance of the, at the Ship Tavern: Believe it Sir, you shall find that this love of yours, is not ill imployed, for I esteem it at the highest degree, I value it more then the Treasury of Saint Mark, which I lately saw, wher amongst other things, ther is a huge Iron Chest as tall as my self, that hath no Lock, but a Crevice, through which they cast in the Gold that's be∣queath'd
to Saint Mark in Legacies, wheron ther is ingraven this proud Motto. Quando questo scrimio S' Aprirá, Tutto'l mundo tremera. When this Chest shall open, the whole World shall tremble; the Duke of Ossuna, late Vice-Roy of Naples, did what he could to force them to open it, for he brought Saint Mark to wast much of this Tresure in the late Wars, which he made purposely to that end, which made them have recours to us, and the Hollander for Ships, not long since. Amongst the rest of Italy, this is call'd the Maidin Citie (not∣withstanding her great number of Courtisans) and ther is a Pro∣phecy, That she shall continue a Maid untill her Husband for sake her, meaning the Sea, to whom the Pope married her long fince, and the Sea is observ'd not to love her so deeply as he did, for he be∣gins to shrink, and grow shallower in som places about her; not doth the Pope also, who was the Father that gave her to the Sea, affect her as much as he formerly did, specially since the exter∣mination of the Jesuits; so that both Husband, and Father, begin to abandon her. I am to be a guest to this Hospitable Maid, a good while yet, and if you want any commodity that she can afford (and what can∣not she afford for humane pleasure or delight?) do but write, and it shall be sent you. Farewell gentle soul, and correspond still in pure love with Ven: 29. of Iul. 1621. Your J. H.
XXXV. To Sir James Crofts Kt. from Venice. SIR, I Receiv'd one of yours the last week, that came in my Lord Am∣bassador Wttons Packet, and being now upon point of parting with Venice, I could not do it without acquainting you (as far as the extent of a Letter will permit) with her Power, her Policy, her Wealth, and pedigree: She was built of the ruines of  and Padoüa, for when those swarms of tough Northern pee∣ple overran Italy, under the conduct of that Scourge of Heaven Attila, with others, and that this soft voluptuous Nation after so long a desuetude from Arms, could not repell their fury, many of the ancient Nobility and Gentry fled into these Lakes and lit∣tle Islands, amongst the Fishermen for their security; and finding the Ayr good and commodious for habitation, they began to build upon these small Islands, wherof ther are in all threescore, and in tract of time, they conjoyn'd and leagu'd them together by Bridges, wherof ther are now above 800. and this makes up the Citie of Venice; who is now above twelve Ages old, and was contemporary with the Monarchy of France; but the Signory glo∣rieth in one thing above the Monarchy, that she was born a Chri∣stian, but the Monarchy not. Though this Citie be thus hem'd in with the Sea, yet she spreads her Wings far and wide upon the shore; she hath in Lombardy six considerable Towns, Padova, Ve∣rona, Vicenz, Brescia, Cromo, and Bergamo; she hath in the Mar∣quisat, Bassan and Castelfranco; she hath all Friuli and Istria; she commands the shores of Dalmatia and Slavonia; she keeps under the power of Saint Mark, the Islands of Corfù (anciently Corcyria) Ceptalonia, Zant, Cerigo, Lucerigo, and Candy (Ioves Cradle;) she had a long time the Kingdom of Cypres, but it was quite rent from her by the Turk, which made that high spirited Bassa, being taken prisoner at the battle of Lepanto, wher the gran Signor lost above 200 Gallies, to say, That that defeat to his great Master was but like the saving of his Beard, or the pairing of his Nails; but the ta∣king of Cypres was like the cutting off of a Lim, which will never grow again: This mighty potentat being so neer a Neighbour to her, she is forc'd to comply with him, and give him an Annuall
present in Gold: She hath about thirty Gallies most part of the yeer in cours to scowre and secure the Gulph; she entertains by land in Lombardy, and other parts 25000. Foot, besides some of the Cantons of Suisses whom she gives pay unto; she hath also in constant pay 600. men of Arms, and evry of these must keep two Horses a peece, for which they are allowed 120. Duckats a yeer, and they are for the most part Gentlemen of Lombardy: When they have any great expedition to make, they have alwayes a stranger for their Generall, but he is supervis'd by two Prov∣ditors, without whom he cannot attempt any thing. Her great Counsell consists of above 2000 Gentlemen, and some of them meet evry Sunday and Holyday, to chuse Officers, and Magistrates; and evry Gentleman being pass'd 25. yeer of Age, is capable to sit in this Counsell: The Doge or Duke (their Soverain Magistrate) is chosen by Lots, which would be too te∣dious here to demonstrat, and commonly he is an Aged man who is created, like that cours they hold in the Popedom. When he is dead ther be Inquisitors that examin his actions, and his mis∣demeanors are punishable in his Heirs: Ther is a surintenden Counsell of ten, and six of them may dispatch busines without the Doge, but the Doge never without som of them, not as much as open a Letter from any Forrain State, though address'd to him∣self, which makes him to be call'd by other Princes, Testadi legno, Ahead of Wood. The wealth of this Republic hath bin at a stand, or rather decli∣ning since the Portugall found a road to the East-Indies by the Cape of good Hope; for this City was us'd to fetch all those Spi∣ces, and other Indian Commodities, from the gran Cayro down the Nile, being formerly carried to Cayro from the Red Sea, upon Ca∣mels and Dromedaries backs, threescore dayes journey; And so Venice us'd to dispence those Commodities through all Christen∣dom, which not onely the Portugall, but the English, and Hollan∣der, now transport, and are Masters of the Trade. Yet ther is no outward appearance at all of poverty, or any decay in this City, but she is still gay, flourishing, and fresh, and flowing with all kind of bravery and delight, which may be had at cheap rates. Much more might be written of this ancient wie Republic, which cannot be comprehended within the narrow inclosure of a Letter. So with my due and daily Prayers, for a continuance of your health, and increase of honour, I rest Ven: 1. of Au∣gust, 1621. Your most umble and ready Servitor, J. H.
XXXVI. To Robert Brown Esquire, at the Middle-Temple, from Venice. Robin, I Have now enough of the Maiden Citie, and this week I am to go further into Italy; for though I have bin a good while in Venice, yet I cannot say I have bin hitherto upon the Continent of Italy, for this Citie is nought else but a knot of Islands in the Adriatic Sea, joyn'd in one body by Bridges, and a good way di∣stant from the firm Land: I have lighted upon very choice com∣pany, your Cousin Brown, and Master Web, and we all take the R of Lombardy; but we made an order amongst our selves, that our discours be alwayes in the Language of the Countrey, under penalty of a for iture, which is to be indispensably payed  Sys made us a curious feast lately, wher in a Cup of the richest Greek we had your health, and I could not tell whi∣ther the Wine or the remembrance of you was sweeter; for it was naturally a kind of Aromatic Wine, which left a fragrant perfu∣ming kind of farewell behind it. I have sent you a Runlet of it in the Ship Lion, and if it com safe and unprick'd, I pray bestow som Bottles upon the Lady (you know) with my humble Service. When you write next to Master Simns, I pray acknowledg the good Hospitality, and extraordinary civilities I received from him: Before I conclude, I will acquaint you with a common say∣ing that is us'd of this dainty Citie of Venice. Venetia, Venetia, chi non te vede non te Pregia, Ma chi t'há troppo veduto te Despreggia. English'd and Rim'd thus (though I know you need no Translati∣on, you understand so much of Italian,) Venice, Venice, none Thee unseen can prize, Who hath seen thee too much will Thee despise.
I will conclude with that famous Hexastic which Sanz made of this rare Cite, which pleaseth me much better. Viderat Hadriatis Venetam Neptunus in undis Stare urbem, & toti ponere jura Mari; Nunc mihi Tarpeias quantum vis Jupiter Arces Oice, & illa tui moenia Martis, ait, Sic Pelago Tibrim praefers, urbem aspice utramque Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse Deos. When Neptun saw in Adrian Surges stand Venice, and give the Sea Laws of command: Now Jove said he, Object thy Capitoll, And Mars proud Walls: This were for to extoll Tyber beyond the Main▪ both Towns behold, R men thou'lt say, Venice the Gods did mould. Sanz had given him by Saint Mark a hundred ,  evry one of these Verses, which amounts to about 300 pounds. It would be long before the  of London would do the like: Witne that old reward, or rather those cold drops of W which were cast upon my Countreyman Sir Hugh Middleto, for beinging Ware River through her Streets, the most serviceable and  sorest benefit that ever she received. The parcell of Italian Books that you writ for, you shall receive  Master Leat, if it please God to send the Ship to safe Port; and I take it as a favour, that you imploy me in any thing that my nduce to your contentment; because I am your serious Servitor, J. H. Ven: 12. Aug. 1621. XXXVII. To Cap. Thomas Porter, from Venice. My dear Captain, AS I was going a Shipboard in Alicant, a Letter of yours in Spanish came to hand: I discovered two things in it, first,
what a master you are of that Language, then how mindfull you are of your frend; for the first, I dare not correspond with you yet; for the second, I shall never com short of you, for I am as mindfull of you, as possibly you can be of me, and som hours, my Puls doth not beat more often, then my memory runs on you, which is often enough in conscience; for the Physitians hold, that in evry well dispos'd body, ther be above 4000 Pulsations evry hour, and some Pulses have bin known to beat above 30000 times an hour in acute Feavours. I understand you are bound with a gallant Fleet for the Medi∣terranean, if you com to Alicant, I pray commend me to Francisco Marco my Land-lord, he is a merry drole, and good company: One night when I was ther he sent his Boy with a Borracho of Lea∣ther under his Cloak for Wine, the Boy coming back about ten a clock, and passing by the Guard, one ask'd him whither he car∣ried any Weapons about him (for none must wear any Weapons there after ten at night,) No quoth the Boy being pleasant, I have but a little Dagger; the Watch came and search'd him, and find∣ing the Barracho full of good Wine, drunk it all up, saying, Sirrah, You know no man must carry any Weapons so late: but because we know whose Servant you are, ther's the Scabbard of your Dagger again, and so threw him the empty Borracho; but another passage pleas'd me better of Don Beltran de Rosa, who being to marry a rich Labra∣dors (a Yeomans) daughter hard by, which was much importun'd by her parents to the match, because their Family should be there∣by ennobled, he being a Cavalier of Saint Iago; the young Maid having understood that Don Beltran had bin in Naples, and had that disease about him, answered wittily, En verdad pro adobar mi la sangre, no quiero danar mi la carne; Truely Sir, To better my blood, I will not hurt my flesh. I doubt I shall not be in England be∣fore you set out to Sea, if not, I take my leave of you in this Paper, and wish you a prosperous voyage and an honourable return; It is the hearty Prayers of Ven: 21. Aug. 1621. Your J. H.
XXXVIII. To Sir William Saint John Knight, from Venice. SIR, HAving seen Antnors Tomb in Padoiia, and the Amphithea∣ter of Flaminius in Verona, with other brave Towns in Lom∣bardy, I am now co to Rome, and Rome they say is evry mans Countrey, she is call'd Communis Patria, for evry one that is with∣in the compasse of the Latin Church, finds himself here as it were at hom, and in his Mothers house, in regard of interest in Religi∣on, which is the cause, that for one Native, ther be five strangers that sojourn in this City, and without any distinction, or mark of strangenes, they com to preferments and offices, both in Church and State, according to merrit, which is more valued and sought after here, then any where. But whereas I expected to have found Rome elevated upon se∣ven Hills, I met her rather spreading upon a Flat, having humbled her self since she was made a Christian, and descended from those Hills to Campus Martius, with Trasteren, and the Suburbs of Saint Peter she hath yet in compasse about fourteen miles, which is far short of that vast circuit she had in Claudius his time; for Vopiscu writes she was then of fifty miles circumference, and she had five hundred thousand free Citizens in a famous cense that was made, which allowing, but six to evry Family in Women, Children, and Servants, came to three Millions of souls, but she is now a Wilder∣nes in comparison of that number: The Pope is grown to be a great Temporall Prince of late yeers, for the state of the Church extends above 300. miles in length, and 200 miles in breadth, it contains Ferrara, Bologna, Romagnia, the Marquisat of Ancona, um∣bria, Sabina, Perugia, with a part of Toscany, the Patrimony, Rome her self, and Latium: In these ther are above fifty Bishopricks, the Pope hath also the Dutchy of Spoleto, and the exarchat of Raven∣na; he hath the Town of Beneventa in the Kingdom of Naples, and the County of Venisse call'd Avignon in France; he hath title also good enough to Naples it self, but rather then offend his Cham∣pion the King of Spain, he is contented with a white Mule, and
Purse of Pistols about the neck, which he receives evry yeer for a heriot or homage, or what you will call it; he pretends also to be Lord Paramount of Sicily, rbin, Para, and Masser, of Norway, Ireland, and England, since King Iohn did prostrat our Crown at Pandelfo his Legat's Feet. The State of the Apostolie See here in Italy lieth twixt two Seas, the Adriati, and the Tyrrh, and it runs through the midst of Italy, which makes the Pope powerfull to do good or harm, and more capable then any other to be an Umpire or an Enemy: His authority being mixt twixt Temporall and Spirituall disperseth it self into so many members, that a young man may grow old here, before he can well understand the form of Government. The Consistory of Cardinals meet but once a week, and once a week they solemnly wait all upon the Pope. I am told ther are now in all Christendom but sixty eight Cardinals, wherof ther are six Cardinall Bishops, fifty one Cardinall Priests, and eleven Car∣dinall Deacons: The Cardinall Bishops attend and sit neer the Pope, when he celebrats any Festivall: The Cardinall Priests assist him at Masse, and the Cardinall Deacons attire him. A Car∣dinall is made by a short Breve or Writ from the Pope in these words, Creamus te Socium Regibus, superiorem ducibus & fratrem ostrum: We creat thee a Companion to Kings, Superior to Dukes, and our Brother: If a Cardinall Bishop should be questioned for any offence, ther must be twenty four Witnesses produc'd against him. The Bishop of Oia hath most priviledg of any other, for he consecrats and instals the Pope, and goes always next to him: All these Cardinals have the repute of Princes, and besides other in∣comes, they have the Annats of Benefices to support their great∣nesse. For point of power, the Pope is able to put 50000 men in the field, in case of necessity, besides his navall strength in Gallies. We read how Paul the third sent Charles the fifth twelve thousand Foot, and 500. Horse. Pius the fifth sent a greater ayd to Charles the ninth▪ and for riches, besides the Temporall Dominions he hath in all the Countreyes before named, the Datary or Dis∣patching of Bulls, the Trienniall Subsidies, Annats, and other Ec∣clesiastic Rights, mount to an unknown sum; and it is a common saying here. That as long as the Pope can finger a pen, he can want no pence. Pius the fifth, notwithstanding his expences in Buil∣dings left four Millions in the Castle of Saint Angelo, in lesse then five yeers, more I beleeve then this Gregory the fifteenth will, for
he hath many Nephews; and better it is to be the Popes Nephew, then to be favorit to any Prince in Christendom. Touching the Temporall Government of Rome, and Oppidan Affairs; ther is a Pretor, and som choice Citizens which it in the Capitoll: Amongst other peeces of policy, ther is a Synagog of Jews permitted here (as in other places of Italy) under the Popes nose, but they go with a mark of distinction in their hats, they are tolerated for advantage of commerce, wherin the Jews are won∣derfull dextrous, though most of them be only Brokers and Lom∣rdeers; and they are held to be here, as the Cinic held Women to be alum necessarium. Ther be few of the Romans that use to pray heartily for the Popes long life, in regard the oftner the change is, the more advantagious it is for the City, because com∣monly it brings strangers, and a recruit of new people. This Ayr of Rome is not so wholsom as of old, and amongst other reasons one is because of the burning of Stubble to fatten their fields; For her Antiquities, it would take up a whole Volumn to write them, those which I hold the chiefest are Vespasias Amphitheater, wher fourscore thousand people might sit; The Stoves of Anthony, di∣vers rare Statues at Belveder and Saint Peters, specially that of Laocoon, the Obelisk; for the genius of the Roman hath alwayes bin much taken with Imagery, Limming, and Sculptures, inso∣much, that as in former times, so now, I beleeve the Statues and Pictures in Rome, exceed the number of living people: One an∣tiquity among other, is very remarkable, because of the change of Language; which is an ancient Column erected as a Trophey for Duillius the Consull, after a famous Navall Victory obtain'd against the Carthaginians in the second Punic War, wher these words are ingraven and remain legible to this day. Exemet leciones Maci∣rates Castreis exfocient pugnandod cepet enque avebos marid Con∣sull, &c. And half a dozen lines more it is call'd Columna restrata, having the Beaks and Prores of ships ingraven up and down, wherby it appears, that the Latin then spoken was much differing from that which was us'd in Ciceros time 150. yeers after. Since the dismembring of the Empire Rome hath run through many Vieissi∣tudes, and turns of Fortune; and had it not bin for the residence of the Pope, I beleeve she had becom a heap of tones, a mount of Rubbish by this time; and howsoever that she bears up indifferent well, yet one may say,
Qui miseranda videt veteris vestigia Romae, Ille potest meritò dicere Roma suit. They who the ruines of first Rome behold, May say, Rome is not now, but was of old. Present Rome may be said to be but the Monument of Rome pass'd, when she was in that flourish that Saint Austin desired to see her in: She who tam'd the world, tam'd her self at last, and falling under her own weight, fell to be a prey to Time; yet ther is a providence seems to have a care of her still; for though her Ayr e not so good, nor her circumjacent Soyl so kindly as it was, yet she hath wherwith to keep life and soul together still, by her Ec∣clesiastic Courts, which is the sole cause of her peepling now: So that it may be said, When the Pope came to be her head, she was reduc'd to her first principles; for as a shepherd was founder, so a shepherd is still her Governour and preserver. But wheras the French have an odd saying, that Iamais cheval ny homme, S'amenda pour aller a Rome. Ne're Horse, or Man did mend, That unto Rome did wend. Truly I must confesse, that I find my self much better'd by it; for the sight of som of these ruines did fill me with symptoms of Mortification, and made me more sensible of the frailty of all sublunary things, how all bodies, as well inanimat as animat, are subject to dissolution and change, and evry thing else under the Moon, except the love of Your faithfull Servitor, J. H. Rome, Septemb. 13, 1621.
XXXIX. To Sir T. H. Kt. from Naples. SIR I Am now in the Gentle City of Naples, a Citie swelling with all delight, Gallantry and Wealth; and truely, in my opinion, the King of Spains greatnes appears here more emminently, then in Spain it self: This is a delicat luxurious Citie, fuller of true-bred Cavaliers, then any place I saw yet. The Clime is hot, and the constitutions of the Inhabitants more hot. The Napolitan is accounted the best Courtier of Ladies, and the greatest embracer of pleasure of any other peeple: They say ther is no lesse here then twenty thousand Courtizans registred in the office of Savelli. This Kingdom with Calabria, may be said to be the one Moytie of Italy, it extends it self 450. miles, and spreds in bredth 112; it contains 2700 Towns, it hath 20 Arch∣bishops 127 Bishops, 13 Princes, 24 Dukes, 25 Marquisses, and 800 Barons. Ther are three Presidiall Castles in this Citie; and though the Kingdom abound in rich Staple commodities, as Silks, Cottons, and Wine, and that ther is a mighty Revenue comes to the Crown; yet the King of Spain when he casts up his account at the yeers end, makes but little benefit therof, for it is eaten up twixt Governours, Garrisons, and Officers. He is forc'd to main∣tain 4000 Spanish Foot, call'd the Tercia of Naples, in the Castles he hath 1600 in perpetuall Garrison; he hath 1000 men of Arms, 450 Light-Horse; besides ther are five Footmen enroll'd for evry hundred Fire; And he had need to do all this, to keep this voluptuous people in aw; for the Story musters up seven and twenty famous Rebellions of the Neapolitans in lesse then 300 yeers: But now they pay soundly for it, for one shall hear them groan up and down under the Spanish yoak; And commonly the King of Spain sends som of his Grandes hither, to repair their decayed fortunes, whence the saying sprung, That the Viceroy of Sicily gnaws, the Governour of Milan Eats, but the Viceroy of Naples devoures. Our English Merchants here, beat a considerable Trade, and their Factors live in better Equippage, and in a more splen∣did manner, as in all Italy besides, then their Masters and Prin∣cipalls in London, they ruffle in Silks and Sattins, and wear good Spanish Leather-Shooes, while their Masters-Shooes upon our
Exchange in London shine with Blacking. At Puzzoli not far off amongst the Grotts, ther are so many strange stupendous things, that nature her self seem'd to have studied of purpose how to make her self there admir'd: I reserve the discoursing of them with the nature of the Tarantola, and Manna which is gatherd'd here and no wher else, with other things, till I shall see you, for they are fitter for discours then a Letter. I will conclude with a Proverb they have in Italy of this people. Napolitano, Largo di bocca, stretto di mano. The Neapolitans Have wide mouths, but narrow hands. They make strong Masculin promises, but Femal performances (for deeds are men, and words are women) and if in a whole floud of complements one find a drop of reality, tis well. The first ac∣ceptance of a Courtesie is accounted the greatest incivility that can be amongst them, and a ground for a quarrell, as I heard of a German Gentleman that was baffled for accepting one onely in∣vitation to a dinner. So desiring to be preserv'd still in your good opinion, and in the rank of your seravants, I rest alwayes most ready At Your disposing, J. -H. Naples, Octob. the 1. 1621.
XL. To Christopher Jones Esq at Grayes-Inne, from Naples. Honoured Father, I Must still stile you so, since I was adopted your Son, by so good a Mother as Oxford: My mind lately prompted me, that I ould commit a great Soloecisme, if amongst the rest of my frends  England, I should leave you unsaluted, whom I love so dearly ell, specially having such a fair and pregnant opportunity, as e hand of this worthy Gentleman, your Cousin Morgan, who  now posting hence for England: He will tell you how it fares ith me; how any time these thirty and odd months I have bin ss'd from shore to shore, and pass'd under various Meridians▪ d am now in this voluptuous, and luxuriant City of Naples: nd though these frequent removes and tumblings under climes  differing temper, were not without som danger, yet the de∣ght which accompanied them was far greater; and it is impossi∣e for any man to conceive the true pleasure of Peregrination, t he who actually enjoyes, and puts it in practise: Beleeve it , that one yeer well employed abroad by one of mature judg∣ment (which you know I want very much) advantageth more in int of usefull and solid knowledge, then three in any of our iversities: You know Running Waters are the purest; so they t traverse the VVorld up and down, have the cleerst under∣ndings; being faithfull ey-witnesses of those things which her receive but in trust, whereunto they must yeeld an intuitive nsent, and a kind of implicit faith. VVhen I pass'd through  parts of Lombardy, amongst other things, I observ'd the Phy∣gnomies, and Complexions of the peeple, men and women, d I thought I was in VVales, for divers of them have a cast of untenance, and a neerer resemblance with our Nation, then y I ever saw yet: And the reason is obvious, for the Romans ing bin neer upon three hundred yeers amongst us, where ey had four Legions (before the English Nation, or Language d any being) by so long a coalition and tract of time,  two Nations must needs copulat and mix: Inso∣much,
that I beleeve ther is yet remaining in Wales many of  Roman race, and divers in Italy of the Brittish. Amongst  resemblances, one was in their prosody, and vein of  or riming, which is like our Bards, who hold agnominations, a enforcing of consonant words or syllables, one upon the other be the greatest elegance: As for example in Welsh, Tewgris,  dyrris ty'r derrin gwillt, &c. So have I seen divers old rimes Italian running so; as Donne, O danno, he Febo affranto  In selva salvo a me Piu caro cuore, &c. Being lately in Rome, amongst other Pasquills I met with  that was against the Scot, though it had som gawl in't, yet it  a great deal of wit, specially towards the conclusion; so that think if King Iames saw it, he would but laugh at it. As I remember som yeers since, ther was a very abusive  in Vers brought to our King; and as the passages were a  before him, he often said, That if ther were no more men England, the rogue should hang for it; at last being com to  conclusion, which was (after all his railing) Now God preserve the King, the Queen, the Peers, And grant the Author long may wear his Ears. This pleas'd His Majesty so well, that he broke into a  and said, By my Sol so thou shalt for me: Thou art a bitter,  thou art a witty Knave. When you write to Monmouthshire, I pray send my respects my Tutor, Master Moor Fortune, and my service to Sir  Williams; and according to that relation which was 'twixt us Oxford, I rest Naples, 8. Octob. 1621. Your Constant Son to serve you, J. H.
XLI. To Sir J. C. from Florence. SIR, THis Letter comes to kisse your hands from fair Florence, a Citie so beutifull, that the great Emperour (Charls the fifth) said, That she was fitting to be shewn, and seen onely upon Ho∣lidayes: She marvailously flourisheth with Buildings, with Wealth and Artisans; for it is thought that in Serges, which is but one commodity, ther are made two millions evry yeer: All de∣grees of people live here not onely well, but splendidly well, not∣withstanding the manifold exactions of the Duke, upon all things: For none can buy here Lands or Houses, but he must pay eight in the hundred to the Duke; none can hire or build a House, but he must pay the tenth penny; none can marry, or commerce suite in Law, but ther's a Fee to the Duke; none can bring as much as an Egg or Sallet to the Market, but the Duke hath share therinna: Moreover, Ligorn which is the Key of Toscany, being a Maritim, and a great Mercantil Town, hath mightily inrich'd this Countrey by being a Frank Port to all comers, and a safe rende∣vouz to Pyrats, as well as to Marchants. Add hereunto, that the Duke himself in som respect is a Marchant, for he somtimes ingrosseth all the Corn of the Countrey, and retails it at what rate he pleaseth. This inables the Duke to have perpetually 20000 men inroll'd, train'd up, and payed, and none but they can carry Arms; he hath 400 Light-Horse in constant pay, and 100 men at Arms besides; and all these quartered in so narrow a compasse, that he can command them all to Florence in twenty four hours. He hath twelve Gallies, two Galeons, and six Ga∣leasses besides, and his Gallies, are call'd, The black Fleet, be∣cause they annoy the Turk more in the bottom of the Straits, then any other. This State is bound to keep good quarter with the Pope, more then others; for all Toscany is fenc'd by Nature her self, I
mean with Mountains, except towards the Territories of the Apostolic See, and the Sea it self, therfore it is call'd a Countrey of Iron. The Dukes Palace is so spacious, that it occupieth the Room of fifty Houses at least; yet though his Court surpasseth the bounds of a Duke's, it reacheth not to the Magnificence of a King's: The Pope was sollicited to make the gran Duke a King, and he answer'd, That he was content he should be King in Tos∣cany, not of Toscany; wherupon one of his Counsellors replied, That it was a more glorious thing to be a gran Duke, then a petty King. Among other Cities which I desi'd to see in Italy, Genoa was one wher I lately was, and found her to be the proudest for buil∣dings of any I met withall, yet the people go the plainest of any other, and are also most parsimonious in their diet: They are the subtillest, I will not say the most subdolous dealers; they are wonderfull wealthy specially in Money: In the yeer 1600 the King of Spain owed them eighteen millions, and they say it is double as much now. From the time they began to finger the Indian Geld, and that this Town hath bin the Scale by which he hath conveyed his Tre∣sure to Flanders, since the VVars in the Netherlands for the sup∣port of his Armies, and that she hath got som priviledges for the exportation of VVools, and other commodities (prohibited to others) out of Spain, she hath improv'd extremely in riches, and made Saint George's Mount swell higher then Saint Marks in Ve∣nice. She hath bin often ill favouredly shaken by the Venetian, and hath had other enemies, which have put her to hard shifts for her own defence, specially in the time of Lewis the eleventh of France; at which time, when she would have given her self up to him for Protection, King Lewis being told that Genoa was con∣tent to be his, he answerd, She should not be his long, for he would give her up to the devill, and rid his hands of her. Indeed the Genowaies have not the Fortune to be so well be∣lov'd, as other people in Italy, which proceeds I beleeve from their cunningnes, and over-reachings in bargaining, wherin they have somthing of the Iew. The Duke is there but Bienni∣al, being chang'd evry two yeers: He hath fifty Germans for his Guard; ther be four Centurion that have 100 men a peece, which upon occasions, attend the Signory abroad in Velvet
Coats; ther be eight chief Governours, and 400 Counsellours, amongst whom ther be five Soverain Syndics, who have autho∣rity to censure the Duke himself, his time being expir'd, and pun∣ish any Governour else, though after death, upon the Heir. Amongst other customs they have in that Town, one is, That none must carry a pointed Knif about him, which makes the Hol∣lander, who is us'd to Snik and Snee, to leave his Horn-sheath and Knif a Shipboard when he comes a shore: I met not with an Englishman in all the Town; nor could I learn of any Factour of ours that ever resided there. Ther is a notable little active Republic towards the midst of Toscany, call'd Luca, which in regard she is under the Empe∣rours protection, he dares not meddle withall, though she lie as a Partridg under a Faulcons Wings, in relation to the gran Duke; besides ther is another reason of the State, why he meddles not with her, because she is more beneficiall unto him now that she is free, and more industrious to support this free∣dom, then if she were becom his vassall; for then it is probable, she would grow more carelesse and idle, and so could not vent his commodities so soon, which she buyes for ready money, wherin most of her wealth consists: Ther is no State that winds the peny more nimbly, and makes quicker returns. She hath a Counsell call'd the Discoli, which pryes into the profession and life of evry one, and once a yeer they rid the State of all Vagabonds: So that this petty, pretty Republic, may not be improperly parellell'd to a Hive of Bees, which have bin al∣wayes the emblems of industry and order. In this splendid City of Florence, ther be many rarities, which if I should insert in this Letter, it would make her swell too big, and indeed they are fitter for Parol Communication. Here is the prime dialect of the Italian spoken, though the pronunciation be a little more guttural, then that of Siena, and that of the Court of Rome, which occasions the Proverb, Lingua Toscana in boca Romana. The Toscan toung sounds best in a Roman mouth. The peeple here generally seem to be more generous, and of a higher comportment then elsewhere, very cautious
and circumspect in their negotiation; whence ariseth the Pro∣verb, Chi há da far con Tosco, Non bisogna chi sia Losco. VVho dealeth with a Florentine, Must have the use of both his Ey'n. I shall bid Italy farewell now very shortly, and make my way are the Alps to France, and so home by Gods grace, to take a re∣view of my frends in England, amongst whom, the sight of your self will be as gladsom to me, as of any other; for I professe my self, and purpose to be ever Your thrice affectionat Servitor, J. H. Florence, 1 Novemb. 1621.
XLII. To Cap. Francis Bacon, from Turin. SIR I Am now upon point of shaking hands with Italy; for I am com to Turin, having already seen Uenice the rich, Padoua the learned, Bologna the fat, Rome the holy, Naples the gentle, Genoa the proud, Florence the fair, and Milan the great; from this last, I came hither, and in that City also appears the Grandeur of Spains Monarchy very much: The Governour of Milan is alwayes Captain Generall of the Cavalry to the King of Spain thorowout Italy: The Dnke of Feria is now Gover∣nour, and being brought to kisse his hands, he us'd me with extraordinary respect, as he doth all of our Nati∣on, being by the maternall side a Dormer. The Spaniard entertains there also 3000 Foot, 1000 Light-Horse, and 600 men at Arms in perpetuall pay; so that I beleeve the benefit of that Dutchy also, though seated in the richest Soyl of Italy, hardly countervails the charge. Three things are admir'd in Milan, the Dome or great Church (built all of white Marble, within and without) the Hos∣pitall, and the Castle, by which the Cittadell of Antwerp was trac'd, and is the best condition'd Fortresse of Christendom: Though Nova Palma a late Fortresse of the Venetian would go beyond it, which is built ac∣cording to the exact Rules of the most modern Engin∣ry, being of a round form with nine Bastions, and a street levell to evry Bastion.
The Duke of Savoy, though he passe for one of the Princes of Italy, yet the least part of his Territories lie there, being squander'd up and down amongst the Alps; but as much as he hath in Italy, which is Piemont, is a well peepled, and passing good Countrey. This Duke of Savoy Emanuel, is accounted to be of the ancient'st and purest extraction of any Prince in Eu∣rop, and his Knights also of the Anunciade, to be one of the ancient'st Orders; though this present Duke be little in Stature, yet is he of a lofty spirit, and one of the best Souldiers now living; and though he be valiant enough, yet he knows how to patch the Lions-skin with a Fox-Tail; and whosoever is Duke of Savoy, had need be cunning, and more then any other Prince, in regard, that lying between two potent Neighbours, the French and the Spaniard, he must comply with both. Before I wean my self from Ital, a word or two touch∣ing the genius of the Nation. I find the Italian a de∣gree higher in complement then the French, he is longer and more grave in the delivery of it, and more prodigal of words, insomuch, that if one were to be worded to death, Italian is the fittest Language, in regard of the flu∣ency and softnes of it; for throughout the whole body of it, you have not a word ends with a consonant, except som few Monosyllable Conjunctions and Propositions, and this renders the Speech more smooth; which made one say, That when the confusion of toungs happen'd at the building of the Tower of Babel▪ if the Italian had bin there, Nimrod had made him a Playsterer. They are gene∣rally indulgent of themselves, and great embracers of pleasure, which may proceed from the luscious rich Wines, and luxurious Food, Fruits, and Roots, wherwith the Countrey abounds, Insomuch, that in som places, Na∣ture
may be said to be Lena sui, A Baud to her self. The Cardinal de Medici's Rule, is of much authority amongst them, That ther is no Religion under the Navill. And som of them are of the opinion of the Asians, who hold, that touching those naturall passions, desires, and moti∣ons, which run up and down in the bloud, God Almigh∣ty and his Handmaid Nature, did not intend they should be a torment to us, but to be us'd with comfort and de∣light. To conclude, in Italy, ther be Virtutes magnae, nec minora Vitia, Great vertues, and no lesse vices. So with a tender of my most affectionat respects un∣to you, I rest Your humble Servitor, J. H. Turin, 30. Novemb. 1621.
XLIII. To Sir I. H. from Lions. SIR, I Am now got ore the Alps, and return'd to France; I had cross'd and clammer'd up the Pyreneans to Spain before, they are not so high and hideous as the Alps; but for our Mountains in Wales as Eppint and Penwinmur, which are so much cry'd up amongst us, they are Mole∣hills in comparison of these, they are but Pigmeys com∣par'd to Giants, but blisters compar'd to Impostumes, or Pimples to Werts: Besides, our Mountains in Wales bear always somthing usefull to man or beast, som grass at least; but these uncouth huge monstrous excrescences of Nature, bear nothing (most of them) but craggy Stones: The tops of som of them are blanch'd over all the yeer long with Snows, and the people who dwell in the Valleys drinking, for want of other, this Snow-water, are subject to a strange swelling in the Throat, called Goytre, which is common amongst them. As I scal'd the Alps, my thoughts reflected upon Hannibal, who with Vinegar & Strong-Waters, did eat out a passage through those Hills, but of late yeers they have found a speedier way to do it by Gun-Powder. Being at Turin, I was by som disaster brought to an extreme low ebb in money, so that I was forc'd to foot it along with som Pilgrims, and with gentle pace and ea∣sie journeys, to clime up those Hills till I came to this Town of Lions, where a Countrey man of ours, one Mr.
Lewis, whom I knew in Alieant lives Factour, so that now I want not any thing for my accommodation. This is a stately rich Town, and a renowned Mart for the Silks of Italy, and other Levantin commodities, and a great bank for mony, and indeed the greatest of France. Before this Bank was founded, which was by Henry the first, France had but little Gold and Silver, insomuch, that we read how King Iohn their Captive King, could not in four yeers, raise sixty thousand Crowns to pay his Ransome to our King Edward; And Saint Lewis was in the same case when he was pri∣soner in Egypt, wher he had left the Sacrament for a gage; But after this Bank was erected, it fill'd France full of money; They of Luca, Florence, and Genoa, with the Venetian, got quickly over the Hils, and brought their moneys hither to get twelve in the hundred profit, which was the interest at first, though it be now much lower. In this great Mercantil Town, ther be two deep na∣vigable Rivers, the Rhone and the Sone, the one hath a swift rapid cours, the other slow and smooth: And one day as I walk'd upon their Banks, and observed so much difference in their cours, I fell into a contemplation of the humors of the French and Spaniard, how they might be not improperly compar'd to these Rivers; the French to the swift, the Spaniard to the slow River. I shall write you no more Letters untill I present my self unto you for a speaking Letter, which I shall do as soon as I may tread London stones: Your affectionate Servitor, J. H. Lions, 6. Novemb. 1621.
XLIIII. To Mr. Tho. Bowyer, from Lions. BEing so neer the Lake of Geneva, curiosity would carry anyone to see it: The Inhabitants of that Town, me thinks, are made of another past differing from the affable nature of those peeple I had convers'd withall formerly; they have one policy, lest that their pretty Republic should be pester'd with fugitives, their Law is, That what stranger soever flies thither for sanctua∣ry, he is punishable there, in the same degree, as in the Country wher he committed the offence. Geneva is govern'd by four Syndncs, and four hundred Senators: She lies like a Bonetwixt three Mastiffs, the Emperour, the French King, and the Duke of Savoy, they all three look upon the Bone, but neither of them dare touch it sing∣ly, for fear the other two would flie upon him: But they say the Savoyard hath the justest Title, for ther are Imperiall Records extant, That al∣though the Bishops of Geneva were Lords Spiri∣tuall and Temporall, yet they should acknowledge the Duke of Savoy for their Superiour: This man's Ancestors went frequently to the Town, and the Keys were presently tender'd to him. But since Calvins time, who had bin once ba∣nish'd,
and then call'd in again, which made him to apply that speech unto himself, The stone which the builders refused, is becom the head stone of the corner; I say, since they were refin'd by Cal∣vin, they seem to shun and scorn all the World besides, being cast as it were into another mould, which hath quite alter'd their very naturall dis∣position in point of Morall Society. Before I part with this famous City of Lions, I will relate unto you a wonderfull strange ac∣cident that happen'd here not many yeers ago: Ther is an Officer call'd Le Chevalier du Guet (which is a kind of Night-guard) here as well as in Paris, and his Lieutenant call'd Iaquette, ha∣ving supp'd one night in a rich Marchants house, as he was passing the round afterwards, he said, I wonder what I have eaten and drunk at the Mar∣chants house, for I find my self so hot, that if I met with the Divels Dam to night, I should not forbear using of her; hereupon, a little after he overtook a young Gentlewoman mask'd, whom he would needs usher to her lodging, but discharg'd all his Watch, except two: she brought him, to his thinking, to a little low lodging hard by the City Wall, wher ther were only two Rooms: and af∣ter he had enjoyed her, he desir'd, that according to the custom of French Gentlemen, his two Camerads might partake also of the same plea∣sure; so she admitted them one after the other:
And when all this was don, as they sat together, she told them, if they knew well, who she was, none of them would have ventur'd upon her; thereupon she whissel'd three times, and all va∣nish'd: The next morning, the two souldiers that had gon with Lieutenant Jaquette were found dead under the City Wall, amongst the ordure and excrements, and Iaquette himself a little way off half dead, who was taken up, and coming to himself, confess'd all this, but died presently af∣ter. The next week I am to go down the Loire to∣wards Paris, and thence as soon as I can for Eng∣land, wher amongst the rest of my frends, whom I so much long to see after this Trienniall sepa∣ration, you are like to be one of my first objects; In the mean time, I wish the same happinesse may attend you at home, as I desire to attend me hom-ward; for I am Truly yours, I. H. Lions, 5. Decemb. 1621.
Familiar Letters. SECTION II. I. To my Father. SIR, IT hath pleased God after almost three year peregrination by Land and Sea, to bring me back safely to London, but although I am com safely, I am com sickly: for when I landed in Venice, after so long a Sea-voyage from Spain, I was afraid the same defluxion of salt rheum which fell from my Temples into my throat in Oxford, and distilling upon the uvula im∣peached my utterance a little to this day, had found the same chan∣ell again, which caused me to have an Issue made in my left rm for the diversion of the humour. I was well ever after till I came to Rouen, and there I fell sick of a pain in the head, which, with the Issue, I have carried with me to England. Doctor Harvy who is my Physitian, tells mee that it may turn to a Consumpti∣on, therfore he hath stopped the Issue, telling me there is no dan∣ger at all in it, in regard I have not worn it a full twelvemonth: My Brother I thank him hath been very carefull of me in this my sicknes, and hath come often to visit me; I thank God I have pass'd he brunt of it, and am recovering, and picking up my crums pace. Ther is a flaunting French Ambassador com over lately, and I believe his errand is nought else but Complement, for the King of France being lately at Calais, and so in sight of England, e sent his Ambassador Monsieur Cadenet expresly to visit our King; e had audience two dayes since, where he with his Train of ruffling
long-haird Monsieurs, carried himself in such a light garb, that af∣ter the audience, the King askd my Lord Keeper Bacon what he thought of the French Ambassador, he answer'd, that he was a tall proper man; I, his Majesty replied, but what think you o his head-peece? is he a proper man for the Office of an Am∣bassador? Sir, said Bacon; Tall men are like high Houses of four or five Stories, wherin commonly the uppermost room is worst fur∣nished. So desiring my brothers and sisters, with the rest of my  and friends in the Countrey, may be acquainted with my safe re∣turn to England, and that you would please to let me hear from you by the next conveniency, I rest, Lond. 2 Febr. 1621. Your dutifull Son, J. H. II. To Rich. Altham Esqr. at Norberry. SAlve pars animae dimidiata meae; Hail half my soul, m dear Dick, &c. I was no sooner returned to the sweet bosom of England, and had breath'd the smoak of this Town, but my memory ran suddenly on you, the Idea of you hath almost ever since so fill'd up and ingroft my imagination, that I can think on nothing els, the Iove of you swells both in my breast and brain with such a pregnan∣cy, that nothing can deliver me of this violent high passion but the sight of you: Let me despair if I lye, ther was never  long'd more after any thing by reason of her growing  than I do for your presence: Therfore I pray you make  to save my longing, and Tantalize me no longer (tis but three hours riding) for the sight of you will be more precious to me than any one Object I have seen, (and I have seen many rare ones) in all my three year T vell; and if you take this for a Complemen (because I am newly com from France) you are much mist∣ken in London, 1 . 1621. Your J. H.
III. To D. Caldwall Esqr. at Battersay. MY dear Dan. I am com at last to London, but not without som danger, and through divers difficulties, for I fell sick in France, and came so over to Kent; And my journey from the Sea side hither, was more tedious to me than from Rome to Rouen, where I grew first indisposed; and in good faith, I cannot remem∣ber any thing to this hour how I came from Gravesend hither, I was so stupified, and had lost the knowledg of all things; But I am com to myself indifferently well since, I thank God for it, and you cannot imagin how much the sight of you, much more your society, would revive me: your presence would be a Cordi∣all unto me more restorative than exalted Gold, more precious than the powder of Pearl, wheras your absence if it continue long, will prove unto me like the dust of Diamonds, which is incu∣rable poyson: I pray be not accessary to my death, but hasten to comfort your so long weather beaten friend, Lond. Febr. 1. 1621. J. H. IV. To Sir James Crofts at the L. Darcy's in St. Osith. SIR, I am got again safely this side of the Sea, and though I was in a very sickly case when I first arriv'd, yet thanks be to God I am upon point of perfect recovery, wherunto the sucking in of English air, and the sight of som friends conduc'd not a little. Ther is fearfull news com from Germany; you  how the Bohemians shook off the Emperors yoak; and how the great Coun∣sell of Prague fell to such a hurly brly, that som of the Imperiall Counsellors were hurld out at the windows; you heard also I doubt not, how they offer'd the Crown to the Dke of Saxony,
and he waving it, they sent Ambassadors to the , whom they thought might prove par negotio, and to be able to go through∣stitch with the work, in regard of his powerfull alliance, the King of great Britain being his Father in Law, the King of Denmark, the Prince of Onge, the Marq. of Brandenburg, the Duke of Boillon his Uncles, the States of Holland his Confederates, the French King his friend, and the Duke of Bavaria his near allye: The Prince Palsgrave made some difficulty at first, and most of his Counsellors opposed it, others incited him to it, and amongst other hortatives, they told him, That if he had the courage to venture upon a King of Englands sole Daughter, he might very well venture upon a Soveraign Crown when it was tendered him. Add hereunto that the States of Holland did mainly advance the worke, and ther was good reason in policy for it; for their twelve years Truce, being then upon point of expiring with Spain, and finding our King so wedded to Peace, that nothing could divorce him from it, they lighted upon this design, to make him draw his Sword▪ and engage hi a∣gainst the House of Austria for the defence of his sole Daughter, and his Gran-Children. What his Majesty will do hereafter I will not presume to foretell, but hitherto he hath given litle counte∣nance to the busines, nay, he utterly misliked it at first▪ for wher∣as Doctor Hall gave the Prince Palsgrave the Title of King of Bo∣hemia in his Pulpit Prayer, he had a check for his pains; for I heard his Majesty should say, that ther is an implicit tie amongst Kings, which obligeth them, though ther be no other interest or particular engagement▪ to stick unto, and right one another up∣on insurrection of Subjects; Therfore he had more reason to be against the Bohemians than to adhere to them in the deposition of their Soveraign Prince: The King of Denmark sings the same note, nor will he also allow him the appellation of King. But the fearfull news I told you of at the beginning of this Letter, is, that ther are fresh tidings brought how the Prince Palsgrave had a well appointed Army of about 25000 horse and foot near Prague, but the Duke of Bavaria came with scarce half the number, and notwithstanding his long march, gave them a sudden Battell, and utterly routed them; Insomnch that the new King of Bohemia, ha∣having not worn the Crown a whole twelvemonth, was forced to flie with his Qun and children; and after many difficulties they write, that they are come to the Castle of Castrein, the Duke of Branden∣burghs Countrey his Uncle: Tis news affects both Court and City here with much heavines. I send you my humble thanks for the noble correspondence you
pleased to hold with me abroad, and I desire to know by the nex, when you come to London, that I may have the comfort of the sight of you, after so long an absence. Mach the 1. 1619. Your true Servitor, J. H. V. To Dr. Fra: Manell, at All▪ Soules in Oxford. I Am returned safe from my forain employment, from my three years travell, I did my best to make what advantage I could of the time though not so much as I should; for I find that Peregri∣nation (wel us'd) is a very profitable school▪ it is a running Academy, and nothing conduceth more to the building up and perfecting of a man. Your honorable Uncle Sir Rrt Mansell who is now in the Mederranean hath been very noble to me, and I shall ever ac∣knowledg a good part of my education from him. He hath mel∣ted vast sums of money in the glass busines, a busines indeed more proper for a Merchant, than a Courtier. I heard the King should say, that he wondred Robin Mansell being a Sea-man, wherby he hath got so much honour, should fall from Water to tamper with Fire, which are two contrary Elements: My Father fears that this glass-employment will be too brittle a foundation for me to build a Fortune upon, and Sir Robert being now at my comming back so far at Sea, and his return uncertain; my Father hath advised me to hearken after some other condition. I attempted to goe Secretary to Sir Iohn Ayres to Constantinople, but I came too late: You have got your self a great deale of good repute by the voluntary resignation you made of the Principality of Iesus College, to Sir Eubule Theloall, in hope that he will be a considerable Benefactor to it: I pray God he perform what he promiseth, and that he be not over-partiall to North-wales men. Now that I give you the first summon, I pray you make me happy with your correspondence by Letters, ther is no excuse or impediment at all left now, for you are sure where to find me, wheras I was a Landloper as the Dutch-man saith, a wanderer, and subject to incertain removes, and short so∣journs in divers places before. So with apprecation of all happines to you here and hereafter; I rest, March 5. 1618. At your friendly dispose, J. H.
VI. To Sir Eubule Theloall, Knight, and Principall of Jesus Coll. in Oxford. SIR, I send you most due and humble thanks, that notwithstan∣ding I have played the Truant, and been absent so long from Oxford, you have been pleas'd lately to make choice of me to be Fellow of your new Foundation in Iesus College, wherof I was once a Member: As the quality of my Fortunes, and cours of life run now, I cannot make present use of this your great favour, or promotion rather, yet I do highly value it, and humbly accept of it, and intend, by your permission, to reserve and lay it by, as a good warm garment against rough weather if any fall on me. With this my expression of thankfulnes, I do congratulate the great honour you have purchas'd both by your own beneficence, and by your painfull endeavor besides, to perfect that Nationall College, which hereafter is like to be a Monument of your Fame, as well as a Se∣minarie of Learning, and will perpetuat your memory to all Po∣sterity. God Almighty prosper and perfect your undertakings, and pro∣vide for you in Heaven those rewards which such publick works of Piety use to be crown'd withall; it is the apprecation of Your truly devoted Servitor, J. H. London, idibus Mar. 1621. VII. To my Father. SIR, according to the advice you sent me in your last, while I sought after a new cours of employment, a new employment hath lately sought after me; My Lord Savage hath two young Gentlemen to his sones, and I am to goe travell with them: Sit Iames Croftes (who so much respects you) was the main Agent in this busines, and I am to goe shortly to Longmford in Suffolk, and hence to Saint Osith in Essex to the Lord Darcy. Queen Anne is
lately dead of a Dropsie in Denmark house▪ which is held to be one of the fatall events that followed the last fearfull Comet that rose in the tail of the Constellation of Virgo, which som ignorant Astronomers, that write of it, would fix in the Heavens, and that as far above the Orb of the Moon, as the Moon is from the Earth: but this is nothing in comparison of those hideous fires that are kindled in Germany, blown first by the Bohemians, which is like to be a war without end; for the wole House of Austria is interes∣sed in the quarrell, and it is not the custome of that House to sit by any asront, or forget it quickly. Queen Anne left a world of brave Jewells behind, but one Pero an outlandish man who had the keeping of them embeazled many, and is run away; she left all she had to Prince Charles, whom she eve loved best of all her Children▪ nor do I hear of any Legacie she left at all to her daughter in Germany; for that match some say lessened somthing of her affecti∣on towards her ever since, so that she would often call her goody Palsgrave, nor could she abide Secretary Winwood ever after, who was one of the chiefest instruments to bring that match about, as also for the rendition of the cautionary Towns in the Low-Coun∣tries Flushing and Bill, with the Rammakins. I was lately with Sir Iohn Walter and others of your Counsell about your Law-busines, and som of them told me that Master I. Lloyd your adversary, it one of the shrewdest Sollicitos in all the thirteen Shires of Wales, being so habituated to Law-sutes and wrangling, that he knows any the least starting hole in every Court: I could wish you had made a fair end with him, for besides the cumber and trouble▪ spe∣cially to those that dwell at such a huge distance from Westminster Hall as you doe, Law is a shrewd pickpus, and the Lawyer as I heard one say wittily not long since, is like a Christmasse box which is sure to get whosoever loseth. So with the continuance of my due and daily prayers for your health, with my love to my brothers and sisters, I rest, Your dutifull Son, J. H. March 20. 1621.
VIII. To Dan. Caldwall Esqr. from the Lord Savages House in Long-Melford. My deare D. THough considering my former condition of life I may now be called a Countreyman, yet you cannot call me a Rusti, (as you would imply in your Letter) as long as I live in so civill and noble a Family, as long as I lodg in so vertuous and regular a House as any▪ I beleeve in the Land both for oeconomicall govern∣ment, and the choice company▪ for I never saw yet such a dainty Race of Children in all my life together, I never saw yet such an orderly and punctuall attendance of servants▪ nor a great House so neatly kept; here one shall see nor dog, nor cat, nor cage to cause any nastines within the body of the House: The kitchin and gutters and other offices of noise and drudgery are at the ag end, ther's a back gate for beggars and the meaner sort of swains to come in at; The stables butt upon the Park, which for a chearfull rising ground, for groves and browsings for the Deer, for rivulets of water may compare with any for its bignes in the whole land; it is opposite to the front of the great House, whence from the Galle∣ry one may see much of the game when they are a hunting. Now for the gardning and costly choice flowers, for ponds, for stately large walks green and gravelly, for orchards and choice fruits of all sorts, ther ae few the like in England: here you have your on Cren pear and  n perfection, your Muscadell grapes in such plenty that ther are som bottles of wine sent every year to the King; And one Mr. Daniel a worthy Gentleman hard by, who hath in long abroad, makes good store in his vintage. Truly this House of Long-Melford though it be not so great, yet it is so well compa∣cted and contrived with such dainty conveniences every way, that if you saw the Landskip of it, you would be mightily taken with it, and it would serve for a choice pattern to buld and contrive a house by: If you come this Summer to your Mannor of Sheriff in Essex, you will not be ar off hence; if your occasions will per∣mit, it will be worth your coming hither, though it be only to see him, who would think it a short journey to go from Saint Davids
head to Dover cliff to see and serve you, were ther occasion▪ if you would know who the same is, ' 20 Mar. 1621. Your J. H. IX. To Robert Brown Esqr. Sir▪ THanks for one rtesie, is a good Vsher to bring on another, Ther∣fore it is my policie at this time to thank you most heartily for your late opious Letter to draw on a second: I say, I thank you a thousand times over for yours of the third of this present, which abounded with such varitie of news, and ample well-couch relations, that I made many friends by it; yet I am sory for the qualitie of som of your news, that Sir Robert Mansell being now in the Mediterranean with a considerable avall strength of ours a∣gainst the Moors, to do the Spaniard a pleasure, Marquis Spinola should in a hgling way, change his Master for the time, and ta∣king Commission from the Emperour, becom his servant for inva∣ding the Palatinat with the Forces of the King of Spain, in the Ne∣therlands▪ I am sory also the Princes of the Union should e so stu∣pid as to suffer him to take Oppenheim by a Parthian kind of back stratagem, in appearing before the Town, and making semblance afterwards to go for Worms, and then perceiving the Forces of the United Princes to go for succouring of that, to turn back and take the Town he intended first, wherby I fear he will be quickly ma∣ster of the rest. Surely I beleeve ther may be some treachery in't, and that the Marquis of Anback the Generall was orecom by pistol made of Indian ingots, rather than of steel, else an Army of 40000. which he had under his command might have made its par∣y good against Spinola's lesse than 10000. though never such choice Veterans. But what will not gold do? it will make a Pigmey too hard for a Gyant, ther's no fence or ortres against an Asse laden with gold: It was the saying you know of His Father, whom par∣tiall and ignorant Antiquity cries up to have conquerd the World, and that e sigh'd ther were no more worlds to conquer, though he had never one of the three old parts of the then known World
entirely to himself. I desire to know what is become of that hand∣full of men his Majesty sent to Germany under Sir Horace Vere, which he was bound to do as he is one of the Protestant Princes of the Union, and what's become of Sir Arthur Chichester, who is gon Ambassador to those parts. Dear Sir, I pray make me happy still with your Letters, it is a mightie pleasure for us Countrey folks to hear how matters passe in London and abroad; you know I have not the opportunity to correspond with you in like kind, but may happily hereafter when the tables are turnd, when I am in London, and you in the West. Wheras you are desirous to hear how it fares with me, I pray know, that I live in one of the noblest Houses, and best Air of England: Ther is a daintie Park adjoyning wher I often wander up and down, and I have my severall walks, I make one to represent the Royall Exchange, he other the middle Isle of Pauls, another, West∣minster Hall; and when I passe through the herd of Deer methinks I am in apside. So with a full return of the same measure of love, as you pleas'd to send me, I rest 24 Marij. 1621. Yours J. H. X. To R. Altham Esqr. from Saint Osith. SIR, LIfe it self is not so dear unto me as your friendship, nor Ver∣tue in her best colours a precious as your Love, which was lately so lively pourtraied unto me in yours of the fifth of this pre∣sent: Me thinks your letter was like a peece of Tissue richly em∣broderd with rare flowers up and down, with curious representati∣on, and Landskips: Albeit I have as much stuff as you of this kind (I mean matter of Love) yet I want such a Loom to work it upon, I cannot draw it to such a curious web, therfore you must be con∣tent with homely Polldavie ware from me, for you must not expect from us Countrey folks such urbanities, and quaint invention, that you, who are daily conversant with the wits of the Court, and of the Inns of Court, abound withall. Touching your intention to travell beyond the Seas the next Spring, and the intimation you make how happy you would be in
my company; I let you know, that I am glad of the one, and much thank you for the other, and will think upon it, but I cannot re∣olve yet upon any thing. I am now here at the Earl Rivers, a oble and great knowing Lord▪ who hath seen much of the World broad; My Lady Savage his Daughter is also here with divers of  children: I hope this Hilary Term to be merry in London, and amongst others to re-enjoy your conversation principally, for I e∣steem the societie of no soul upon Earth more than yours: till then I bid you Farewell, and as the season invites me, I wish you a mer∣ry Christmas, resting December 20. 1622. Yours while Jm. Howell. XI. To Captain Tho: Porter upon his return from Algier voyage. Noble Captain, I Congratulat your safe return from the Streights, but am sory you were so streighned in your Commission, that you could not attempt what such a brave navall power of o▪ men of War, such a gallant Generall and other choice knowing Commanders might have performed, if they hd had line enough; I know the lightnesse and nimblenesse of Algier ships, when I lived lately in Alicant and other places upon the Mediterranean, we should every week hear som of them chas'd, but very seldom taken; for a great ship following one of them, may be said to be as a Mastiff dog running after a hare; I wonder the Spaniard came short of the promised supply for furtherance of that notable adventurous design you had to fire the Ships and Gallies in Algier road; And according to the relation you pleased to send me▪ it was one of the bravest enterprises, and had prov'd such a glorious exploit, that no story could have paralleld; But it seems their Hoggies, Magitians and Maribotts, were tampring with the ill Spirit of the Air all the while, which brought down su a still cataract of rain water suddenly upon you to hinder the working of your fire-works; such a disaster the story tells us bfell Charles the Emperour, but far
worse than yours, for he lost ships and multitudes of men, wh were made slaves, but you came off with losse of eight men only, and Algier is another gets thing now, than she was then, being I beleeve a hundred degrees stronger by Land and Sea, and for the latter strength we may thank our Countreyman Ward, and  the butterbag Hollander, which may be said to have bin two of the fatallest and most infamoust men that ever Christendom bed; for the one taking all Englishmen, and the other all Dutchmen, and bringing the Spips and Ordnance to Algier, they may be said o have bin the chief Raysers of those Picaroons to be Pirats, which are now come to that height of strength, that they daily endam∣mage and affront all Christendom. When I consider all the cir∣cumstances and successe of this your voyage, when I consider th narrownes of your Commission, which was as lame as the Cl that kept it; when I find that you secured the Seas, and rafick all the while, for I did not hear of one Ship taken while you were abroad; when I hear how you brought back all the Fleet without the least disgrace or dammge by foe or oul weather o any ship▪ I conclude, and so doe far bter judgements than mine, that you did what possibly could be done: let those that repine at the one in the hundred (which was impos'd upon all the Levant  for the support of this Fleet) mutter what they will, that you went first to Gravesend, then to the Lands end, and after to no end. I have sent you for your welcome home (in part) two barrells of Colchester oysters, which were provided for my Lord of Colchester himself, therfore I preume they are good, and all green finnd; I shall shortly follow, but not to stay long in England, for I thin I must over again speedily to push on my fortunes: so my dear Tom▪ I am de todas ms entrans, from the center of my heart I am St. Osith, December Yours, J. H. XII. To my Father upon my secona going to Travell. SIR, IAm lately returned to London, having been all this while in a ve∣ry noble Family in the Countrey, where I found far greater re∣pects than I deserv'd; I was to go with two of my Lord Savag
Sons to travell, but finding my self too young for such a charge, and our Religion differing, I have now made choice to go over Camerade to a very worthy Gentleman Baron Althams Son, whom I knw in Sanes, when my brother was there. Truly I hold him to be one of the hopefullest young men of this Kingdom for parts and person, he is full of excellent solid knowledg, as the Mathe∣matics, the Law and other materiall studies; besides I should have beed tied to have staid three years abroad in the other imployment at least, but I hope to go back from this by Gods grace before a twelvemonth be at an end, at which time I hope the hand of Provi∣dence will settle me in some stable home-fortun. The news is that the Prince Palsgrave with his Lady and Chil∣dren are come to the Hague in Holland, having made a long pro∣gres or rather a pilgrimage about Germany from Prague. The old Duke of Bavaria his Uncle is chosen Elector and Arch▪swer of the Roman Empire in his place (but as they say in an imperfect Diet) and with this proviso, that the transferring of this Election upon the Bavarian, shall not prejudice the next heir. Thr is one Count Mansfelt that begins to get a great name in Germany, and he with the Duke of Brunswick who is a temporall Bpp. of Halverstade, have a considerable Army on foot for the Lady Elizabeth, which in the low Countreys and som parts of Germany is called the Queen of Boheme, and for her winning Princely comportment, th Queen of Hearts: Sir Arthur Chichester is come back from the Pala∣tinate, much complaining of the small Army that was sent thither under Sir Horace Vere, which should have been greater, or none at all. My Lord of Buckingham having been long since Master of the Horse at Court, is now made Master also of all the woodn Horses in the Kingdom, which indeed are our best Horses, for he is to be High Admirall of England, so he is becom Dominus Equorum & Aquarum. The late Lord Thre▪ Cranfield grows alo very powerfull, but the City hates him for having betrayed their greatest secrets which he was capable to know more than another, having been for∣merly a Merchant. I think I shall have no opportunity to write to you again till I bet other side of the Sea; therfore I humbly take my leave, and ask your blessing, that I may the better prosper in my proceedings: So I am, Your dutifull Son, J. H. March 19. 1621.
XIII. To Sir John Smith Knight. SIR, THe first ground I set foot upon after this my second transma voyage was Trevere (the Scots Staple) in Zeland, thence  sail'd to Holland, in which passage we might see divers Steeples and Turets under water, of Towns that as we were told were swallow∣ed up by a Dluge within the memory of man: we went afterwards to the Hague, where ther are hard by, though in severall places, two wonderfull things to be seen, one of Art, the other of Nature; That of Art is a Waggon or Ship, or a Monster mix of both, like the Hippocentaure who was half man, and half horse; this Engin hath wheels and sayls that will hold above twenty people, and goes with the wind, being drawn or mov'd by nothing els, and will run, the wind being good, and the sayls hois'd up, above fifteen miles an hour upon the even hard sands: they say this in∣vention was found out to entertain Spinola when he came hither to treat of the last Truce. That wonder of Nature is a Church-Mo∣nument, where an Earl and a Lady are engraven with 365 Chil∣dren about them, which were all delivered at one birth; they were half male, half femal; the Bason hangs in the Church which carried them to be Christned, and the Bishops Name who did it; and the Story of this Miracle, with the year and the day of the month mentioned, which is not yet 200 years ago; and the Sory is this: That Countesse walking about her door after dinner, ther came a Begger-woman with two children upon her back  beg alms, the Countesse asking whether those children were her own, she answered, she had them both at one birth and by one father, who was her husband; The Countesse would not onely give her ay alms, but revil'd her bitterly, saying, it was impossible for one man to get two children at once: The begger-woman being thus provok'd with ill words and without alms fell to imprecations, that it should please God to shew his judgment upon her, and that she might bear at one birth a many children as ther be dayes in the year, which she did before the same years end, having never born child before. We are now in North Holland, where I never saw so many, amongst so few, sick of Lprosies; and the reason is, because they commonly eat abundance of fresh Fish. A Gentleman told
me, that the women of this Countrey when they are delivered, ther comes out of the womb a living creature besides the child call'd Zuchie, likest to a Bat of any other creature, which the Mid∣wis throw into the , holding sheets before the chimney lest i should fly away. Master Altham desires his service be presented to You and your Lady, to Sir Iohn Franklin and all at the Hill; the like doe I humbly crave at your hands: the Italian and French Manuscripts you pleas'd to favour me withall I le at Mr. Seiles the Stationer, whence if you have them not already, you may please to send for them. So in all affection I kisse your hands and am Your humble Servitor, J. H. Trevere 10th of Apr. 1622. XIV. To' the Right Honble, the Lord Vicount Colchester, after Earl Rivers. Right Honble, THe commands your Lopp. pleas'd to impose upon me when I left England, and those high favors wherin I stand bound to your Lopp. call upon me at this time to send your Lopp. om small fruits of my forren Travell: Marquis Spinola is return'd from the Palatinat, where he was so fortunat, that like Caesar  came, saw and overcame, notwithstanding that huge Army of the Princes of the Union, consisting of forty thousand men, wheras his was under twenty, but made up of old ough blades, and ve∣teran Commanders. He hath now chang'd his coa, and taken up his old Commission again from Don Philippo, wheras during that expedition, he call'd himself Caesars servant. I hear the Empe∣ror hath transmitted the upper Palatinat to the Duke of Bavaria, as caution for those moneys he hath expended in these wars: And the King of Spain is the Emperors Commissary for the lower Pala∣tinat: They both pretend that they were bound to obey the Impe∣riall summons to assist Caesar in these wars; the one as he was Duke of Burgundy, the other of Bavaria, both which Countreys are eu∣detarie to the Empire, els they had incurr'd the Imperiall bun▪ It is'fear'd this German war will be as the Frenchman saith, de lon∣gue halaine, long breath'd, or ther are great powers on both sides, and they say the King of Denmark is arming.
Having made a leasurely so journ in this Town, I had spare hou to couch in writing a survay of these Countreys which I have now traversd the second time; but in regard it would be a great bulk for a Letter, I send it your Lopp. apart, and when I return to England, I shall be bold to attend your Lopp. for correction of my faults; In the interim I rest Antwerp, May 1. 1622. My Lord, Your thrice humble Serviv. J. H. XV, A survey of the seventeen Provinces. My Lord, TO attempt a precise description of each of the seventeen Pro∣vinces, and of its Progression, Privileges and Primitive government, were a task of no lesse confusion than labour: Let it suffice to know, that since Flanders and Holland were erected to Earldoms, and so left to be an apendix of the Crown of France▪ som of them have had absolut and supreme Governors, som subaltern and subject to a superior Power. Amongst the rest the Earls of Flanders and Holland were most considerable, but of them two he of Holland being homegeable to none, and having Friestand and Ze∣land added, was the more potent: In processe of time all the se∣venteen met in one; som by conquest, others by donation and legacie, but most by alliance: In the House of Burgundy this union receivd most growth, but in the House of Austria it came to its full perfection; for in Charles the fifth they all met as so many lines drawn from the circumference to the centre, who Lording as supreme head not only over the fifteen Temporall, but the two Spirituall, Liege and Vrecht, had a defin to reduce them to a Kingdom, which his Son Philip the second attempted after him, but they could not bring their intents home to their aym, the cause is imputed to that multiplicitie and difference of privileges which they are so eager to maintain, and wherof som cannot stand with a Monarchie without incongruity. Philip the second at his inauguration was sworn to observe them, & at his departure he ob∣lig'd himself by oath, to send still one of his own bloud to govern them: Moreover, at the request of the Knights of the golden
Fleece, he promised that all Forren souldiers should retire, and that he himself would come to visit them once every seventh year, but being once gon, and leaving in lieu of a Sword a Distaff an unweldy woman to govern, he came not only short of his pro∣mise, but procur'd a Dispensation from the Pope to be absolv'd of his Oath, and all this by the counsell of the Cardinall Granvill, who, as the States Chronicler writes, was the first firebrand that kindled that lamentable and longsome war wherein the Nether∣lands have traded above fifty years in bloud: For intending to encrease the number of Bishops, to establish the decrees of the Counsell of Trent, and to clip the power of the Counsell of State compos'd of the natives of the Land, by making it appealable to the Counsell of Spain, and by adding to the former Oath of Alle∣geance, (all which conduc'd to settle the inquisition, and to curb the conscience) the broyls began; to appease which, Ambassa∣dors were dispatch'd to Spain, wherof the two first came to vio∣lent deaths, the one being beheaded, the other poysond: But the two last Egmont and Horn were nourish'd still with hopes, untill 'Phi∣lip the second had prepar'd an Army under the conduct of the Duke of Alva, to compose the difference by arms▪ For as soon as he came to the government, he established the Blot-rad, as the com∣plainants term'd it, a Counsell of Bloud, made up most of Spani∣ards, Egmont and Horn were apprehended, and afterwards behea∣ded; Cittadells were erected, and the Oath of Allegeance, with the Politicall government of the Countsey in divers things alter'd: This powr'd oyl on the fire formerly kindled, and put all in com∣bustion; The Prince of Orenge retires, therupon his eldest son was surpriz'd and sent as Hostage to Spain, and above 5000. Fa∣milies quit the Countrey, many Towns revolted, but were after∣wards reduc'd to obedience, which made the Duke of Alva say, that the Netherlands appertain'd to the King of Spain not only by descent but conquest, and for cumble of his victories when he at∣tempted to impose the tenth peny for maintenance of the Garrisons in the Cittadels he had erected at Grave, Vecht, and Antwerp, (where he caus'd his Statue made of Canon brasse o be erected, trampling the Belgians under his feet) all the Towns withstood this imposition, so that at last matters succeeding ill with him, and ha∣ving had his cosen Pacecio hang'd at Flushing gates after he had trac'd out the platform of a Citdell in that Town also, he receiv'd Letters of revocation from Spain; Him succeeded Don Luys de Re∣quiseus, who came short of his predecessor in exploits, and dying suddenly in the field, the government was invested for the time in
the Counsell of State; The Spanish soldiers being without a head, gather'd together to the number of 160. and committed such outrages up and down, that they were proclamed enemies to the State: Hereupon the pacification of Cant was transacted, wher∣of amongst other Articles one was, that all forren soldiers should quit the Countrey: This was ratified by the King, and observ'd by Don Iohn of Austria who succeeded in the government; yet Don Iohn retaind the Landskneghts at his devotion still, for some secret deffein, and as som conjectur'd for the invasion of England, he kept the Spaniards also still hovering about the Frontiers ready up∣on all occasion: Certain Letters were intercepted that made a discovery of some projects which made the war to bleed afresh; Don Iohn was proclam'd enemy to the State; so the Archduke Matthias was sent for, who being a man of small performance and improper for the times was dismiss'd, but upon honourable terms. Don Iohn a little after dies, and as som gave out of the pox; Then comes in the Duke of Parma, a man as of a different Nation being an Italian, so of a differing temper, and more moderat spi∣rit and of greater performance than all the rest, for wheras all the Provinces except Luxenburg and Henault had revolted, he re∣duc'd Gant, Tourney, Bruges, Malins, Brussells, Antwerp, (which three last he beleagerd at one time) and divers other great Towns to the Spanish obedience again: He had sixty thousand men in pay, and the choicest which Spain and Italy could afford. The French and English Ambassadors intercding for a peace, had a short answer of Philip the second, who said, that he needed not the help of any to reconcile himself to his own subjects, and reduce them to conformity, but the difference that was he would refer to his coen the Emperor: Hereupon the busines was agitated at Colen, where the Spaniard stood as high a tipto as ever, and notwithstanding the vast expence of treasure and bloud he had bin at for so many years, and that matters began to exasperat more and more, which were like to prolong the wars in infinitum, he would abate nothing in point of Ecclesiastic government: Hereupon the States perceiving that King Philip could not be wrought either by the sollicitation of other Princes, or their own supplications so often reierated, that they might enjoy the freedom of Religion, with other infranchise∣ments, and finding him inexrable, being incited also by that ban which was published against the Prince of Orenge, that whosoever killd him should have 5000. crowns, they at last absolutely re∣nounced and abjur'd the King of Spain for their Soverain; They brok his Seals, chang'd the Oath of Allegeance, and fled to
France for shelter; they inaugurated the Duke of Aniou (recom∣mended unto them by the Queen of England to whom he was a sutr) for their Prince, who attempted to render himself absolute, and so thought to surprize Antwerp, where he receivd an illfavord repuls; yet nevertheless, the united Provinces, for so they termd themselfs ever after, fearing to distast their next great neighbor France, made a second proffer of their protection and Soverainty to that King, who having too many irons in the fire at his own home, the Ligue growing stronger and stronger, he answerd them that his shirt was nearer to him than his dublet; Then had they re∣cours to Queen Elizabeth, who partly for her own securitie, part∣ly for interest in Religion reacht them a supporting hand, and so sent them men, money and a Governor the Earl of Leicester, who not symbolizing with their humor, was quickly revokd, yet with∣out any outward dislike on the Queens side, for she left her Forces still with them but upon their expence: She lent them afterwards some considerable sums of moneys, and she receivd Flushing and the Brill for caution: Ever since the English have bin the best si∣news of their war, and Achievers of the greatest exploits amongst them. Having thus made sure work with the English, they made young Count Maurice their Governor, who for five and twenty years together held rack with the Spaniard, and during those tra∣verses of war was very fortunat: an overture of Peace was then propounded, which the States would not hearken unto singly with the King of Spain, unlesse the Provinces that yet remaind under him would engage themselfs for performance of what was Articled, besides they would not treat either of Peace or Truce, unless they were declar'd free States, all which was granted, so by the inter∣vention of the English and French Ambassadors, a Truce was con∣cluded for 12 years. These wars did so drain and discommodat the King of Spain, by reason of his distance (every Soldier that he sent either from Spain or Italy, costing him nere upon a hundred crowns before he could be rendred in Flanders,) that notwithstanding his mines of Mexico and Peru▪ it plung'd him so deeply in debt, that having taken up moneys in all the chief banks of Christendom he was forcd to pub∣lish a Diploa wherein he dispens'd with himself (as the Holland Story hath it) from payment, alleging that he had employed those moneys for the public Peace of Christendom: this broak ma∣ny great Banquers, and they say his credit was not current in Se∣vill or Lisbon his own Towns: and which was worse, while he stood wrastling thus with his own Subjects, the Turke took his op∣portunity
to get from him Tunis and the Goletta the Tropheys of Charles the fift his Father. So eager he was in this quarrell that he imployd the utmost of his strength and industry to reduce this peo∣ple to his will, in regard he had an intent to make these Provinces his main Randevous and Magazin of men of war, which his neigh∣bors perceiving, and that he had a kind of aym to be Western Mo∣narch, being led not so much for love as reasons of State, they stuck close to the revolted Provinces, and this was the bone that Se∣cretary Walsingham told Queen Elizabeth, he would cast the King of Spain that should last him 20 years, and perhaps make his teeth shake in his head. But to return to my first discours whence this digression hath snatchd me, The Netherlands who had bin formerly knit and con∣centred under one Soverain Prince, were thus dismembred; And as they subsist now, They are a State and a Province: The Pro∣vince having ten of the 17. at least, is far greater, more populous, better soyld, and more stor'd with Gentry. The State is the rich∣er and stronger, the one proceeding from their vast Navigation and Commerce, the other from the qualitie of their Countrey, be∣ing defensible by Rivers and Sluces, by meanes wherof they can suddenly overwhelm all the whole Countrey, witnes that stupen∣dious siege of Leyden and Haerlam, for most of their Towns the marks being taken away are inaccessible by reason of shelfs of sands. Touching the transaction of these Provinces which the King of Spaine made as a dowry to the Archduke Albertus, upon marri∣age with the Infanta (who therupon left his red Hat, and Toledo Miter the chiefest spirituall Dignity in Christendom for revenue after the Papacy) it was fringd with such cautelous restraints, that he was sure to keep the better end of the staff still to himself: for he was to have the tutele and ward of his children, that they were to marry with one of the Austrian Family recommended by Spain, and in default of issue, and in case Albertus should survive the Infanta, he should be but Governor only: Add hereunto that King Philip reserv'd still to himself all the Cittadells and Castles, with the order of the golden Fleece, wherof he is Master, as he is Duke of Burgundy. The Archduke for the time hath a very princely command, all Coyns bear his stmp, all Placarts or Edicts are publishd in his name, he hath the election of all civill Officers, and Magistrats; he nominats also Bishops and Abbars, for the Pope hath only' the Confirmation of them here, nor can he adjourn any out of the Countrey to answer any thing, neither are his Bulls of any
strength without the Princes placet, which makes him have alwayes som Commissioners to execute his Authority. The people here grow hotter and hotter in the Roman Cause, by reason of the mix∣ture with Spaniards and Italians; as also by the example of the Archduke, and the Infanta, who are devout in an intense degree. Ther are two supreme Counsells, the Privy Counsell, and that of the State; this treats of confederations and intelligence with for∣ren Princes, of Peace and War, of entertaining or of dismissing Co∣lonells and Captains, of Fortifications, and they have the surinten∣dency of the highest affairs that concern the Prince and the policy of the Provinces. The privat hath the granting of all Patents and Requests, the publishing of all Edicts and Proclamations, the prising of Coin, the looking to the confines and extent of the Pro∣vinces, and the enacting of all new Ordinances. Of these two Counsells ther is never a Spaniard, but in the actuall Counsell of War their voices are predominant: Ther is also a Court of Finan∣ces or Exchequer, whence all they that have the fingring of the Kings money, must draw a discharge. Touching matters of Ju∣stice, their Law is mixt between Civill and common with some clau∣ses of Canonicall: The high Court of Parliament is at Maline, whither all Civill Causes may be brought by appeal from other Towns, except som that have municipall Privileges, and are soverain in their owne jurisdictions, as Mons in Henalt, and a few more. The prime Province for dignity is Brabant, which amongst many other privileges it enjoyeth, hath this for one, not to appear upon any summons out of its owne precinct, which is one of the reasons why the Prince makes his residence there: but the prime for extent and fame is Flanders the chiefest Earldom in Chri∣stendom, which is three dayes journey in length; Ghent, its Me∣tropolis, is reputed the greatest town of Europe, whence arose the Proverb, Les flamen tient un gan, qui tiendrá Paris dedans. But the beautifullest, richest, strongest, and most privileg'd City is Ant∣werp in Brabant, being the Marquisat of the holy Empire, and drawing nere to the nature of a Hans Town, for she payes the Prince no other Tax but the Impost. Before the dissociation of the seventeen Provinces, this Town was one of the greatest Marts of Europe, and greatest bank this side the Alpes, most Princes having their Factors here, to take up, or let out moneys, and here our Gre∣sham got all his wealth, and built our Royall Exchange by modell of that here. The Merchandise was brought hither from Germany, France and Italy by Land, and from England, Spain, and the Hans
towns by Sea, was estimated at above twenty Millions of Crowns every year; but as no violent thing is long lasting, and as tis fatall to all Kingdomes, States, Towns and Languages to have their pe∣riod, so this renown'd Mart hath suffer'd a shrewd eclipse, yet no utter downfall, the Exchange of the King of Spains money and some small land trafic, keeping still life in her, though nothing so full of vigor as it was. Therfore there is no town under the Arch∣duke where the States have more conceal'd friends than in Antwerp, who would willingly make them her Masters in hope to recover her former commerce which after the last twelve years truce began to revive a little, the States permitting to passe by Lillo's sconce which cōmands the river of Skeld and lyeth in the teeth of the Town som small cross-saild ships to passe hither: There is no place hath been more passive than this, and more often pillag'd; amongst other times she was once plunder'd most miserably by the Spaniards un∣der the conduct of a Priest, immediatly upon Don Iohn of Au∣stria's death, she had then her Stat-house burn'd, which had cost a few years before above twenty thousand Crowns the building, and the spoils that were carried away thence amounted to forty Tuns of gold: Thus she was reduc'd not only to poverty, but a kind of captivity, being commanded by a Citadell, which she preferr'd be∣fore a Garrison; this made the Merchant retire and seek a more free Randevous, som in Zeland, som in Holland, specially in Amster∣dam which rose upon the fall of this Town, as Lisbon did from Ve∣nice upon the discovery of the Cape of good Hope, though Venice be not nere so much crestfall'n. I will now steer my discours to the united Provinces as they term themselves, which are six in number, viz. Holland, Zeland, Frisland, Overyssell, Gronninghen and Utrecht, three parts of Gilderland, and some Frontire Towns and places of contribution in Brabant and Flanders: In all these ther is no innovation at all introduc'd, not∣withstanding this great change in point of Government, except that the College of States represents the Duke or Earl in times pass'd, which College consists of the chiefest Gentry of the Coun∣trey, surintendants of Towns, and the principall Magistrates: E∣very Province and great Town choose yearly certain Deputies, to whom they give plenary power to deliberat with the other States of all affairs touching the public welfare of the whole Province, and what they vote stands for Law. These being assembled consult of all matters of State, Justice and War, the Advocat who is prime in the Assembly propounds the busines, and after collects the suf∣frages, first of the Provinces, then of the Towns, which being put in
form he delivers in pregnant and moving speeches, and in case ther be a dissonance and reluctancy of opinions, he labors to accord and reconcile them, concluding alwayes with the major voyces. Touching the administration of Justice, the President, who is monthly chang'd, with the great Counsell have the supreme ju∣dicature, from whose Decrees ther's no appeal, but a revision, and then som of the choycest Lawyers amongst them are appoin∣ted. For their Opidan Government they have variety of Officers, a Scout, Bourgmasters, a Balue, and : The Scout is chosen by the States, who with the Balues have the judging of all criminall matters in last resort without appeal, they have also the determining of Civill Causes, but those are appealable to the Hague. Touching their chiefest Governor (or Generall rather now) having made proof of the Spaniard, German, French and Eng∣lish, and agreeing with none of them, they lighted at last upon a man of their own mould Prince Maurice now their Generall, in whom concurr'd divers parts suitable to such a charge, having been train'd up in the wars by his Father, who with three of his Uncles and divers of his kindred, sacrific'd their lives in the States quar∣rell: he hath thriven well since he came to the Government; hee clear'd Friesland, Overyssell and Groninghen, in lesse than 18 months: He hath now continued their Governor and Generall by sea and land above 33 years; he hath the election of Magistrats, the pard∣ning of Malefactors, and divers other Prerogatives, yet they are short of the reach of Soverainty, and of the authority of the anci∣ent Counts of Holland: Though I cannot say 'tis a mercenary em∣ployment, yet he hath a limited allowance, nor hath he any impli∣cit command when he goes to the field, for either the Coun∣sell of War marcheth with him, or els he receives daily dire∣ctions from them: moreover the States themselves reserve the power of nominating all Commanders in the Army, which being of sundry Nations deprive him of those advantages he might have to make himself absolut. Martiall-Discipline is no where so regu∣lar as amongst the States, no wher are ther lesser insolencies com∣mitted upon the Burger, no robberies upon the Countrey Boors, nor are the Officers permitted to insult ore the common soldier: When the Army marcheth, not one dares take so much as an apple off a tree, or a root out of the earth in their passage; and the reason is, they are punctually paid their pay, els I believe they would be insolent enough, and were not the pay so certain I think
few or none would serve them. They speak of sixty thousand they have in perpetuall pay by Land and Sea, at home and in the In∣dies: The King of France was us'd to maintain a Regiment, but since Henry the Greats death the paiment hath been neglected. The means they have to maintain these Forces, to pay their Governor▪ to discharge all other expence, as the preservation of their Dies which comes to a vast expence yearly, is the ancient revenue of the Counts of Holland, the impropria Church living, Imposts upon all Merchandise which is greater upon exported than imported goods▪ Excise upon all commodities, as well for necessity as pleasure, taxes upon every Acre of ground, which is such, that the whole Coun∣trey returns into their hands every three years: Add hereunto the Art they use in their bank by the rise and fall of money, the fishing upon our Coasts, whither they send every Autum above 700 Hulks or Busses, which in the voiages they make, return above a Million in Herings; moreover their fishing for Greenfish and Sal∣mon amounts to so much more, and for their Cheese and Butter, 'tis thought they vent as much every year as Lisbon doth spices. This keeps the common Treasury always full, that upon any extraordi∣nary service or dessein ther is seldom any new tax upon the people. Trafic is their generall profession, being all either Merchants o Ma∣riners, and having no land to manure, they furrow the Sea for their living; and this universality of trade and their banks of adven∣tures distributes the wealth so equally, that few amongst them are exceeding rich or exceeding poor: Gentry amongst them is very thin, and as in all Democraties little respected, and comming to dwell in Towns they soon mingle with the Merchant, and so dege∣nerat: Their soyl being all 'twixt marsh and medow is so fat in pasturage, that one Cow will give eight quarts of milk a day, o that as a Boor told me, in four little dorps near Herlam, 'tis thought ther is as much milk milk'd in the year, as ther is Rhenish wine brought to Dort, which is the sole Staple of it. Their towns are beautifull and neatly built, and with uniformity, that who sees one, sees all: In some places, as in Amsterdam, the foundation costs more than the superstructure, for the ground being soft, they are con∣strain'd to ram in huge stakes of timber (with wooll about it to pre∣serve it from purifaction) till they com to a firm basis; so that as one said, whosoever could see Amsterdam under ground, should see a huge winter Forrest. Amongst all the confederat Provinces, Holland is most predomi∣nant, which being but six hours journey in breadth, contains nine and forty wall'd Towns, and all these within a days journey one
of another. Amsterdam for the present is one of the greatest mer∣cantill Towns in Europ: To her is appropriated the East and West Indie trade, whether she sends yearly 40. great ships, with another fleet to the Baltick Sea, but they send not nere so many to the Mediterranean as England: Other towns are passably rich, and stor'd with shipping, but not one very poore, which proceeds from the wholsom policy they use, to assign every Town som firm Staple commodity, as to (their maiden Town) Drt the German wines and corn, to Midlebourgh the French and Spanish wines, to Trevere (the Prince of Orenge his Town) the Scots trade, Leyden in recom∣pence of her long siege was erected to an University, which with Franiker in Frisland is all they have; Haerlam for knitting and weaving hath som privilege, Rotterdam hath the English cloth, and this renders their Towns so equally rich and populous. They al∣low free harbor to all Nations with liberty of Religion, (the Ro∣man only excepted) as far as the Iew who hath two Synagogs al∣lowd him but only in Amsterdam, which peece of policy they bor∣row of the Venetian with whom they have very intimat intelligence, only the Iew in Venice, in Rome and other places go with som out∣ward mark of distinction, but hear they wear none: and these two republicks, that in the East and this in the West, are the two re∣mora's that stick to the great vessell of Spain, that it cannot sayl to the Western Monarchy. I have been long in the survay of these Provinces, yet not long enough, for much more might be said which is fitter for a Story than a Survay; I will conclude with a mot or two of the people, wherof som have been renownd in times past for feats of war: a∣mongst the States, the Hollander or Batavian hath been most known, for som of the Roman Emperors have had a selected guard of them about their persons for their fidelity and valeur, as now the King of France hath of the Swisse: The Frisons also have bin famous for those large privileges wherwith Charlemain endowd them; The Flemins also have bin illustrious for the martiall exploits they a∣chiev'd in the East where two of the Earls of Flanders were crownd Emperors. They have all a genius inclin'd to commerce, very inventive and witty in manufactures, witnes the Art of Printing, painting and colouring in glasse; those curious quadrants, chim's and dialls, those kind of waggons which are us'd up and down Christendom were first us'd by them; and for the Mariners Com∣pas, though the matter be disputable twixt the Neapolitan, the Portugall and them, yet ther is a strong argument on their side, in regard they were the first that subdivided the four cardinall
winds to two and thirty, others naming them in their Lan∣guage. Ther is no part of Europ so hanted with all sorts of Forrener as the Netherlands, which makes the Inhabitants as well women as men so well vers'd in all sorts of languages, so that in Ex∣change time one may hear 7. or 8. sorts of toungs spoken upon their Bourses: nor are the men only expert herein, but the wo∣men and maids also in their common hostries, and in Holland the wif's are so well vers'd in bargaining, cifring and writing, that in the absence of their Husbands in long Sea voyages they beat the trade at home, and their words will passe in equall credit: These women are wonderfully sober, though their Husbands make com∣monly their bargains in drink, and then are they most cauelous. This confluence of Strangers makes them very populous, which was the cause that Charles the Emperor said, that all the Netherlands seemd to him but as one continued Town. He and his Grandfa∣ther Maximilian, notwithstanding the choice of Kingdoms they had, kept their Courts most frequently in them, which shewd how highly they esteemd them, and I beleeve if Philip the second had visited them somtimes matters had not gon so ill. Ther is no part of the Earth considering the small circuit of Countrey which is estimated to be but as big as the fist part of Ita∣ly, where one may find more differing customs, tempers and hu∣mors of people, than in the Netherlands: The Walloon is quick and spritfull, acostable and full of Complement, and gawdy in appa∣rell like his next neighbor the French: The Flemin and Brabanr, somwhat more slow and more sparing of speech: The Hollander slower than he, more surly and respectles of Gentry and strangers, homely in his cloathing, of very few words, and heavy in action, which may be well imputed to the quality of the soyl, which works so strongly upon the humors, that when people of a more vivaci∣ous and nimble temper com to mingle with them, their children are observ'd to partake rather of the soyl than the syre: And so it is in all Animalls besides. Thus have I hudled up som observations of the Low Countreys, beseeching your Lopp▪ would be pleas'd to pardon the imperfecti∣ons, and correct the errors of them, for I know none so capable to do it as your Lopp. to whom I am Antwerp, 1 Maii. 1622. A most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
XIV To my Brsher, Master Hugh Penry upon his mariage. SIR, YOu have had a good while the interest of a Friend in me, but you have me now in a streighter tie, for I am your brother, by your sate mariage which hath turnd friendship into an alliance; you have in your arms one of my dearest sisters, who I hope, nay I know will make a good wife: I heartily congratulate this ma∣riage, and pray that a blessing may descend upon it from that place where all mariages are made which is from Heaven, the Fountain of all felicitie: to this prayer I think it no prophaness to add the saying of the Lyric Poet Horace, in whom I know you delight much, and I send it you as a kind of Epithalamium, and wish it may be ve∣rified in you both. Foelices ter & amplius Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis Divulsus querimoniis Suprema citius solvet amor die. Thus English'd. That Couple's more than trebly blest Which nuptiall bonds do so combine, That no distast can them untwine Till the last day send both to rest. So dear brother, I much rejoyce for this alliance, and wish you may encrease and multiply to your hearts content. May the 20 1622. Your affectionat brother, J. H.
XVII. To my brother Doctor Howell from Brussels. SIR, I Had yours in Latin at Roterdam, whence I corresponded with you in the same Language; I heard, though not from you, since I came from Brussells, that our sister Anne is lately maried to Mr Hugh Penry, I am heartily glad of it, and wish the rest of our fisters were so well bestowd; for I know Mr Penry to be a Gentle∣man of a great deal of solid worth and integrity, and one that will prove a great Husband, and a good Oconomist. Here is news that Mansfel hath receiv'd a foyl lately in Germa∣ny, and that the Duke of Brunswick, alias Bishop of Halverstadt hath lost one of his arms: This maks them vapor here extremely, and the last week I heard of a play the Jesuits of Antwerp made, in dero∣gation or rather derision of the proceedings of the Prince Palsgrave, where amongst divers other passages, they feignd a Post to com puffing upon the stage, and being askd what news, he answerd how the Palsgrave was like to have shortly a huge formidable Army, for the King of Denmark was to send him a hundred thousand, the Hollanders a hundred thousand, and the King of great Britaine a hundred thousand; but being asked thousands of what? he re∣plied the first would send 100000. red Herings, the second 100000. Cheeses, and the last 100000. Ambassadors; alluding to Sir Ri∣chard Weston, and Sir Edward Conway, my Lord Carlile, Sir Ar∣thur Chichester, and lastly, the Lord Digby, who have bin all im∣ploy'd in quality of Ambassadors in lesse than two years, since the beginning of these German broils: touching the last, having bin with the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria, and carried himself with such high wisdom in his negotiations with the one, and stout∣nes with the other, and having preserv'd Count Mansfiels troups from disbanding, by pawning his own argentry and Jewells, he pass'd this way, where they say the Archduke did esteem him more than any Ambassador that ever was in this Court, and the report is yet very fresh of his high abilities. Wee are to remove hence in coach towards Paris the next week where we intend to winter, or hard by; when you have opportuni∣ty to write to Wales, I pray present my duty to my Father, and my
love to the rest; I pray remember me also to all at the Hill and the Dale, specially to that most vertuous Gentleman, Sir Iohn Frank∣lin. So my dear brother, I pray God continue and improve his blessings to us both, and bring us again together with comfort. Iune 10. 1622. Your brother, J. H. XVIII. To Dr. The: Prichard at Worcester House. SIR, FRiendship is that great chain of human societie, and intercours of letters is one of the chiefest links of that chain: you know this as well as I, therfore I pray let our friendship, let our love, that na∣tional ty of British love, that vertuous ty of Academi love be still strengthned (as heretofore) and receive daily more and more vigor. I am now in Paris, and ther is weekly opportunity to re∣ceive and send; and if you please to send, you shall be sure to re∣ceive, for I make it a kind of Religion to be punctuall in this kind of payment. I am heartily glad to hear that you are becom a do∣mestic member to that most noble Family of the Worcesters, and I hold it to be a very good foundation for future preferment; I wish you may be as happy in them, as I know they will be happy in you. Fance is now barren of news, only there was a shrewd brush lately twixt the young King and his Mother, who having the Duke of Espernon and others for her Champions met him in open field a∣bout pont de Ce, but she went away with the worst; such was the rare dutifulnes of the King, that he forgave her upon his knees, and pardon'd all her complices; And now ther is an universall Peace in this Countrey, which tis thought will not last long, for ther is a war intended against them of the reformd Religion; for this King though he be slow in speech, yet is he active in spirit, and loves motion: I am here camrade to a gallant young Gentleman my old acquaintance who is full of excellent parts, which he hath ac∣quir'd by a choice breeding, the Baron his Father gave him both in the University, and the Inns of Court, so that for the time, I
envy no mans happines. So with my hearty commends, and  ndear'd love unto you, I rest , 3. Aug. 622. Yours whiles Jam. Howell. XIX. To the Honble. Sir Tho. Savage, (after Lord Savage,) at his House upon Tower-Hill. Honble. SIR, THose many undeserved favors for which I stand oblig'd to your self and my noble Lady, since the time I had the hap∣pines to com first under your roof, and the command you pleas'd to lay upon me at my departure thence, call upon me at this time to give you account how matters passe in France. That which for the present affords most plenty of news, is Rochell, which the King threatneth to block up this Spring with an army by sea, under the comand of the D. of Nevers, and by a land army under his own conduct: both sides prepare, he to assault, the Rochellers to defend. The King declares that he proceeds not against them for their Religion which he is still contented to tolerat, but for holding an Assembly against his Declarations. They answer that their As∣sembly is grounded upon his Majesties royal Warrant, given at the dissolution of the last Assembly at Lodun, wher he solemnly gave his word to permit them to re-assemble when they would six months as∣er, if the breaches of their liberty, and grievances which they then propounded wer not redressed; and they say this being unperform'd, it stands not with the sacred Person of a King to violat his promise, being the first that ever he made them. The King is so incens'd a∣gainst them, that their Deputies can have neither accesse to his Per∣son, nor audience of his Counsell, as they stile themselves the De∣puties of the Assembly at Rochell; but if they say they com from the whole body of Them of the pretended reform'd Religion, he will hear them. The breach between them is grown so wide, that the King resolves upon a fiege. This resolution of the Kings is much
somented by the Roman Clergy, specially by the Celestines, who have 200000 Crowns of gold in the Arsenal of Paris, which they would sacrifice all to this service, besides the Pope sent him a Bull to levy what sums he would of the Gallican Church, for the ad∣vancement of this design: This resolution also is much push'd on by the Gentry, who besides the particular emploiments and pay they shall receive hereby, are glad to have their young King train'd up in Arms to make him a Martiall man; But for the Merchant and poor Peasan, they tremble at the name of this War, fearing their teeth should be set on edge with those soure grapes their fa∣thers tasted in the time of the League, for if the King begin with Rochell, 'tis fear'd all the four corners of the Kingdom will be set on re. Of all the Towns of surety which They of the Religion hold, Rochell is the chiefest; a place strong by nature, but stronger by Art; It is a Maritim town, and landward they can by sluces drown a leagues distance: 'tis fortified with mighty thick walls, bastions, and countersarps, and those according to the modern rules of Engin∣ry. This amongst other cautionary Towns, was granted by Henry the fourth, to them of the Religion for a certain term of years, which being expir'd, the King saith they are devolv'd again to the Crown, and so demands them. They of the Religion pretend to have divers grievances; first they have not been paid these two years the 160000 Crowns which the last King gave them annually to maintain their Ministers and Garrisons: They complain of the Kings carriage lately at Bearn (Henry the greats Countrey) which was merely Protestant, where he hath introduc'd two years since the public exercise of the Masse, which had not bin sung there fifty years before; he alter'd also there the Government of the Countrey, and in lieu of a Viceroy, left a Governor only: and wheras Navarrin was formerly a Court of Parlement for the whol Kingdom of Navar, (that's under France) he hath put it down and published an Edict, that the Navarrois should com to Tolose, the chief town of Lan∣guedoc; and lastly, he left behind him a Garrison in the said Town of Navarrin. These and other grievances they of the Religion pro∣pos'd to the King lately, desiring his Majesty would let them enjoy still those privileges his Predecessor Henry the third, and his Father Henry the fourth afforded them by Act of Pacification: But he made them a short answer, that what the one did in this point, he did it out of fear; what the other did, he did it out of love; but he would have them know that he neither lov'd them, nor fear'd them: so the busines is like to bleed sore on both sides; nor is ther yet any apea∣rance of prevention.
Ther was a scuffle lately here 'twixt the Duke of Navers and the Cardinal of Guise, who have had a long sute in law about an Abbey, and meeting the last week about the Palace, from words they fell to blows, the Cardinall struck the Duke first, and so were parted, but in the afternoon ther appear'd on both sides no lesse than 3000 horse in a field hard by, which shews the populousnes and sudden strength of this huge City, but the matter was taken up by the King himself, and the Cardinall clapt up in the Bastile, wher the King saith he shall abide to ripen; for he is but young, and they spake of a Bull that is to come from Rome to decardinalize him. I fear to have trespas'd too much upon your patience, therfore I will conclude for the present, but will never cease to profess my self Your thrice humble and ready Servitor, J. H. Paris, Aug. 18. 1622. XX. To D. Caldwall Esqr. from Poyssy. My dear D. TO be free from English, and to have the more conveniency to fall close to our busines, Mr. Altham and I are lately re'd from Paris to this Town of Poyssy, a pretty gentile place at the oot of the great Forrest of Saint German upon the River Sequana, and within a mile of one of the Kings chiefest standing Houses, and a∣bout 15 miles from Paris. Here is one of the prime Nunneries of all France. Lewis the ninth, who in the Catalog of the French Kings is call'd St. Lewis, which Title was confirm'd by the Pope, was baptiz'd in this little Town, and after his return from Egypt and o∣ther places against the Saracens, being ask'd by what Title he would be distinguish'd from the rest of his Predecessors after his death, he answer'd, that he desir'd to be call'd Lewis of Poyssy: reply being made that ther were divers other places and cities of renown, wher he had perform'd brave exploits, and obtain'd famous vi∣ctories, therfore it was more fitting that som of those places should denominat him: no, said he, I desire to be call'd Lewis of Poyssy, because there I got the most glorious victory that ever
I had, for there I overcame the Devill: meaning that he was Christ∣ned there. I sent you from Antwerp a silver Dutch Table-book, I desire to hear of the receit of it in your next: I must desire you (as I did once at Rouen) to send me a dozen pair of the whitest kidskin glov's for women, and half a dozen pair of knit's, by the Merchants post, and if you want any thing that France can afford, I hope you know what power you have to dispose of Poyssy, Septem. 7. 1622. Your J. H. XXII. To my Father, from Paris. SIR, I Was afraid I should never have had ability to write to you a∣gain, I had lately such a dangerous fit of sicknes, but I have now pass'd the brunt of it, God hath been pleas'd to reprieve me, and reserve me for more days which I hope to have grace to num∣ber better; Mr. Altham and I having retired to a small Town from Paris for more privacy, and sole conversation with the na∣tion; I tyed my self to a task for the reading of so many books in such a compasse of time, and therupon to make good my-word to my self, I us'd to watch many nights together, though it was in the depth of Winter, but returning to this Town, I took cold in the head, and so that mals of rheum which had gather'd by my former watching turn'd to an impostume in my head, wher∣of I was sick above forty days, at the end they cauteis'd and made an issue in my check to make vent for the impostume, and that sav'd my life: At first they let me bloud, and I parted with above fiy ounces in lesse than a ortnight, for phlebotomy is so much practis'd here, that if ones little finger ake, they presently open  vein, and to ballance the bloud on both sides, they usually et bloud in both arms. And the commonness of the thing▪ eems to take away all fear, insomuch that the very women when hey find themselves indispos'd, will open a vein themselves, for hey hold that the bloud which hath a circulation and fetcheth a ound every 24 hours about the body is quickly repair'd again; I
was eighteen dayes and nights that I had no sleep but short im∣perfect slumbers, and those too protur'd by potions; the tumor at last came so about my throat that I had scarce vent left for res∣piration, and my body was brought so low with all sorts of Phy∣sic, that I appeard like a meer Skeleton. When I was indifferent∣ly well recover'd, som of the Doctors and Chirurgions that ten∣ded me, gave me a visit, and amongst other things they fell in discours of wines which was the best; & so by degrees they fell upon other beverages, and one Doctor in the company who had bin in England, told me that we have a drink in England cal'd Ale, which he thought was the wholsomst liquor that could go into ones guts, for wheras the body of man is supported by two columns, viz. the naturall heat, and radicall moysture, he said, ther is no drink conduceth more to the preservation of the one, and the encrease of the▪ other than Ale, for while the Englishmen drank only Ale, they were strong brawny able men, and could draw an arrow an ell long, but when they fell to wine and beer, they are found to be much impaird in their strength and age; so the Ale bore away the bell among the Doctors. The next week we advance our course further into France to∣wards the river of Loire to Orleans, whence I shall continue to con∣vey my duty to you. In the mean time I humbly crave your bles∣sing, and your acknowledgment to God Almightie for my recove∣rie; be pleas'd further to impart my love amongst my brothers and sisters withall my kinsmen and friends in the Countrey, so I rest Paris, Decembris 10. 1622. Your dutifull Son, J. H. XXII. To Sir Tho. Savage Knight and Baronet. Honble SIR. THat of the fifth of this present which you pleasd to send me, was receiv'd. and I begin to think my self somthing more then I was, that you value so much the slender endevors of my pen to do you service. I shall continue to improve your good opinion of me as opportunity shall serve. Touching the great threats against Rochell, wherof I gave you
an ample relation in my last, matters are becom now more calm and rather inclining to an accommodation, for 'tis thought a sum of money will make up the breach; and to this end som think all these bravado's were made. The Duke of Luynes is at last made Lord high Constable of France the prime Officer of the Crown, he hath a peculiar Court to himself, a guard of a 100. men in rich liveries, and a hundred thousand livers every year Pension: The old Duke of Lesdiguieres, one of the ancientst soldiers of France, and a Protestant, is made his Lieutenant. But in regard all Christendom rings of this Favorit, being the greatest that ever was in France since the Maires of the Palace, who came to be Kings afterwards, I will send you herein his Legend. He was boru in Province, and is a Gentleman by descent, though of a pettie extraction, in the last Kings time he was preferr'd to be one of his pages, who finding him industrious, and a good wai∣ter, allow'd him 300. Crowns pension per annum, which he hus∣banded so well, that he maintaind himself and his two brothers in passable good fashion therwith. The King observing that, doub∣led his Pension, and taking notice that he was a serviceable in∣strument and apt to please, he thought him fit to be about his son, in whose service he hath continued above fifteen years, and he hath flown so high into his favor by a singular dexteriie and Art he hath in aulconrie, and by shooting at birds flying, wherin the King took great pleasure, that he hath soard to this pitch of honor. He is a man of a passable good understanding and forecast, of a mild comportment, humble and debonnair to all, and of a winning con∣versation, he hath about him choice and solid heads who prescribe unto him rules of policie, by whose Compas he steers his course, which is likely will make him subsist long: He is now com to that transcendent altitude, that he seems to have mounted above the reach of envy, and made all hopes of supplanting him frustrate, both by the politic guidance of his own actions, and the powerfull alliances he hath got for himself and his two brothers: he is maried to the Duke of Montbazons daughter, one of the prime Peers of France. His second brother Cadanet (who is reputed the wisest of the three) maried the heiress of Picardy, with whom he had 9000 l. lands a year. His third brother Brand to the great heiress of Luxemburg, of which house ther have bin five Emperor; so that these three brothers and their allies would be able to coun∣ter balance any one faction in France, the eldest and youngest be∣ing made Dukes, and Peers of France, the other Marshall. Ther are lately two Ambassadors extraordinary com hither from Venice
about the Valtolin, but their negotiation is at a stand, untill the re∣turn of an Ambassador extraordinary which is gone to Spain: Ambas∣sadors also are com from the Hague for payment of the French Re∣giment there, which hath bin neglected these ten years, and to know whether his Majesty will be pleasd to continue their pay any longer; but their answer is yet suspended: They have brought news that the seven ships which were built for his Majesty in the Tessll are ready, to this he answerd, that he desires to have ten more built; for he intends to finish that design which his Father had a foot a little before his death to establish a royall company of Merchants. This is all the news that France affords for the present, the re∣lation wherof if it prove as acceptable as my endeavors to serve you herein are pleasing unto me, I shall esteem my self happy: So wishing you and my noble Lady continuance of health, and en∣crease of honor, I rest Paris, 15 Decembris. 1622. Your most humble Servitor, J. H. XXIII. To Sir John North, Knight, SIR, I confesse you have made a perfect conquest of me by your late favors, and I yeeld my self your capif, a day may com that will enable me to pay my ransom, in the interim let a most thank∣full acknowledgment be my bail and mainprise. I am now remov'd from off the Sein to the Loire to the fair Town of Orleans: there was here lately a mixt Procession twixt military and ecclesiasti for the maid of Orleans, which is performd every year very solemnly, her Statue stands upon the bridg, and her cloths are proserv'd to this day, which a young man wore in the Procession; which makes me think that her story though it sound like a romance is very true: And I read it thus in two or three Chroni∣cles; when the Englsh had made such firm invasions in France, that their Armies had marchd into the heart of the Countrey, be∣siegd Orleans, and driven Charles the seventh to Bourges in Berry, which made him to be calld, for the time, King of Berry; there
came to his Armie a Shepheardesse one Anne de Arque, who with a confident look and language told the King that she was design'd by heaven to beat the English, and drive them out of France. There∣fore she desired a command in the▪ Army, which by her extraor∣dinary confidence and importunity she obtain'd, and putting on mans apparell she prov'd so prosperous, that the siege▪ was raisd from before Orleans, and the English were pursued to Paris, and for∣ced to quit that, and driven to Normandy: she usd to go on with mar∣vellous courage and resolution, and her word was hara ha: But in Normandy she was taken prisoner, and the English had a fair revenge upon her, for by an arrest of the Parliament of Rouen she was burnt for a Witch. Ther is a great busines now a foot in Pa∣ris calld the Polette, which if it take effect will tend to correct, at least wise to cover a great error in the French Government: The custom is that all the chief places of Justice throughout all the eight Courts of Parliament in France, besides a great number of other offices, are set to sale by the King, and they return to him unless the buyer liveth fourty dayes after his resignation to another: It is now propounded that these casuall offices shall be absolutly heredi∣tary, provided that every officer pay a yearly revenue unto the King, according to the valuation and perquisits of the oice: this busines is now in hot gitation, bu the issue is yet doubtfull. The last you sent, I receivd by Vacandary in Paris: so highly honoring your excellent parts and meit, I rest, now that I under∣stand French indifferently well, no more your (she) Servant, but Orleans, 3 Martii. 1622. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XXIV. To Sir James Crofts, Knight. SIR, VVEre I to fraight a Letter with Complements, this Coun∣trey would furnish me with variety, but of news a small store at this present, and for Complement it is dangerous to use a∣y to you, who have such a piercing judgment to discern semblan∣es from realities,
The Queen Mother is com at last to Paris, where she hath not been since Ane's death: The King is also return'd post from Bo∣deaux, having travers'd most part of his Kingdom, he setled peace every where he pas'd, and quash'd divers insurrections, and by his obedience to his mother, and his lenity towards all her partisans a pont de C where above 400 were slain, and notwithstanding that he was victorious, yet he gave a generall pardon, he hath gain'd much upon the affections of his people: His Counsell of State wen ambulatory always with him, and as they say here, never did men manage things with more wisdom. Ther is a war questionless a fer∣menting against the Protestants, the Duke of Espernon in a kind of Rodomontado way, desired leave of the King to block up Rochell, and in six weeks he would undertake to deliver her to his hands, but I beleeve he reckons without his Host. I was told a merry passage of this little Gascon Duke, who is now the oldest soldier of France; Ha∣ving come lately to Paris he treated with a Pander to procure him a urtesan, and if she was a Damoisell (a Gentlewoman) he would give so much, and if a Citizen he would give so much: The Pande did his Office, but brought him a Citizen clad in Damoisells ap∣parell, so she and her Maquerell were paid accordingly; the ne day after, som of his familiars having understood hereof began to be pleasant with the Duke, and to jeer him, that he being a visil Routier an old tried soldier, should suffer himself to be so coend, as to pay for a Citizen after the rate of a Gentlewoman; the lit∣tle Duke grew half wild hereupon, and commenc'd an action of fraud against the Pander, but what became of it I cannot tell you, but all Paris rung of it. I hope to return now very shortly to England, where amongst the est of my noble friends I shall much rejoyce to see and serve you whom I honour with no vulgar affecti∣on, so I am Your true Servitor, J. H. Orleans, 5 Martii. 1622.
XXV. To my Cosen Mr. Will. Martin at Brussells from Paris. Dear Cosen, I Find you are very punctuall in your performances, and a pre∣cise observer of the promise you made here to correspond with Mr. Altham and me by Letters. I thank you for the variety of German news you imparted unto me, which was so neatly couch'd and cu∣riously knit together, that your Letter ight serve for a pattern to the best Intelligencer. I am sorry the affairs of the Prince Palsgrave go so untowardly, the wheel of War may turn, and that Spoke which is now up may down again. For French Occurrences, ther is a War certainly intended against them of the Religion here; and ther are visible preparations a loot already; Amongst others that shrink in the shoulders at it the Kings servants are not very wel pleas'd with it, in regard besides Scots and Swissers, ther are divers of the Kings Servants that are Protestants. If a man go to ' di sato to reason of State, the French King hath somthing to justifie this des∣sein, for the Protestants being so numerous, and having neer up∣on fifty presidiary wall'd Towns in their hands for caution, they have power to disturb France when they please, and being abetted by a forren Prince to give the King Law; and you know as well as I how they have been made use of to kindle a fire in France: Therfore rather than they should be utterly supprest, I believe the Spaniard himself would reach them his ragged staff to defend them. I send you here inclos'd another from Master Altham who respects you dearly, and we remembred you lately at la pomme du pin in the best liquor of the French Grape. I shall be shortly for Lon∣don, where I shall not rejoyce a little to meet you; that English air may confirm what forren begun, I mean our friendship and affe∣ctions,
and in Me (that I may return you in English the Latin Ver∣ses you sent me) As soon a little little Ant Shall bib the Ocean dry, A Snail shall creep about the world, Ere these affections dye. So my dear Cosen▪ may Vertue be your guide, and Fortune your Companion. Paris, 18 Martii. 1622. Yours while Jam. Howell.
Familiar Letters. SECTION III. I. To my Father. SIR, I Am safely return'd now the second time from beyond the Seas, but I have yet no employ∣ment; God and good friends I hope will shortly provide one for me. The Spanish Ambassador Count Gondamar doth strongly negotiat a Match 'twixt our Prince, and the Infanta of Spain, but at his first audience ther happen'd an ill favor'd accident (I pray God it prove no ill augury) for my Lord of A∣rundell being sent to accompany him to White Hall, upon a Sunday in the afternoon, as they were going over the Tarrasse, it broke un∣der them, but onely one was hurt in the arm; Gondamar said that he had not car'd to have dyed in so good company: he saith ther is no other way to regain the Palatinate, but by this match, and to settle an eternall Peace in Christendom. The Marquis of Buckingham continueth still in fulnes of grace and favor; the Countess his Mothes sways also much at Court, she brought Sir Henry Montague from delivering law on the K. Bench, to look to his bags in the Exchequer, for she made him Lord high Trea∣surer of England▪ but he parted with his white staff before the years end, though his pu had bled deeply for it (above 20000 l.) which made a Lord of this Land to ask him at his return from Court, whe∣ther he did not find that wood was extreme dear at New-market, for there he receiv'd the white staff. Ther is now a notable stirring man
in the place, my Lord Cranfield, who from walking about the Ex∣change, is com to sit chief Judge in the Chequer Chamber, and to have one of the highest places at the Counsell Table: He is maried to one of the Tribe of Fortune, a kinswoman of the Marquis of Buckingham. Thus ther is rising and falling at Court, and a in our naturall pace one foot cannot be up, till the other be down, so is it in the affairs of the world commonly, one man riseth at the fall of the other. I have no more to write at this time, but that with tender of my duy to you, I desire a continuance of your blessing and pray∣ers. Lond. March 22. 1622. Your dutifull Son, J. H. II. To the Honble, M. John Savage (now Earl Rivers) at Florence. SIR, MY love is not so short but it can reach as far as Florence to find you out, and further too if occasion requir'd, nor are those affections I have to serve you so dull but they can clammer ore the Alps and Apennin to wait upon you, as they have adven∣tur'd to do now in this paper. I am sorry I was not in London  kiss your hands before you set to Sea, and much more sorry that I had not the happines to meet you in Holland or Brabant, for we went the very same road, and lay in Dort and Antwerp in the same lodgings you had lain in a fortnight before. I presume you have by this time tasted of the sweetnes of Travell, and that you have wean'd your affections from England for a good while, you must now think upon home (as one said) good men think upon heaven, aiming still to go thither, but not till they finish their cours; and yours I understand will be three years, in the mean time you must not suffer any melting tendernes of thoughts, or longing desires, to distract or interrupt you in that fair road you are in to vertue, and to beautifie within that comly Edifice which nature hath built without you. I know your reputation is precious to you, as it should be to every noble mind, you have expos'd it now to the hazard,
therfore you must be carefull it receive no taint at your return by not answering that expectation which your Prince and noble Pa∣rents have of you: You are now under the chiefest clime of wis∣dom, fair Italy, the Darling of Nature, the Nurse of Policy, the Theater of Vertue; But though Italy give milk to Vertue with one dug, she often suffers Vice to suck at the other, therfore you must take heed you mistake not the dug; for ther is an ill favourd say∣ing, that Inglese Italionato, è Diavolo incarnato; An Englishman Ita∣lianat, is a Devill incarnat. I fear no such thing of you, I have had such pregnant proofs of your ingenuity, and noble inclination to vertue and honor: I know you have a mind to both, but I must tell you that you will hardly get the good will of the latter, unless the first speak a good word for you: when you go to Rome, you may haply see the ruines of two Temples, one dedicated to Vertue, the other to Honor, and ther was no way to enter into the last, but through the first. Noble Sir, I wish your good very seriously, and if you please to call to memory, and examin the circumstance of things, and my carriage towards you since I had the happines to be known first to your Honorable Family, I know you will conclude that I love and honor you in no vulgar way. My Lord, your Grandfather was complaining lately that he had not heard from you a good while: By the next shipping to Ligorn, amongst other things he intends to send you a whole Brawn in col∣lers. I pray be pleasd to remember my affectionat service to Mr. Tho. Savage, and my kind respects to Mr. Bold: for English news I know this packet coms fraighted to you, therfore I forbear at this time to send any. Farewell noble Heir of Honor, and com∣mand always Lond. March 24. 1622. Your true Servitor, J. H. III. To Sir James Crofts Knight, at Saint Osith in Essex. SIR, I had yours upon tuesday last, and wheras you are desirous to know the proceedings of the Parliament, I am sorry I must write to you
that matters begin to grow boysterous. The King retir'd not long since to New market not very well pleasd, and this week there went thither twelve from the House of Commons, to whom Sir Richard▪ Weston was the mouth; the King not liking the Message they brought, calld them his Ambassadors, and in the large answer which he hath sent to the Speaker, he saith that he must apply un∣to them a speech of Queen Elizabeths to an Ambassador of Po∣land, Legatum expectavimus, Heralaum accepimus? We expected an Ambassador, we have receivd a Herald; he takes it not well that they should meddle with the match twixt his Son and the Infan∣ta, alleging an example of one of the Kings of France, which would not marry his Son without the advice of his Parliament, but afterwards that King grew so despicable abroad, that no Forren State would treat with him about any thing without his Parlia∣ment. Sundry other high passages ther were as a caveat he gave them not to touch the honor of the King of Spain, with whom he was so far ingag'd in a matrimoniall treaty that he could not go back: he gave them also a check for taking Cognisance of those things which had their motion in the ordinary Courts of Iustice, and that Sir Edward Coke, (though these words were not inserted in the answer) whom he thought to be the fittest instrument for a Tyrant that ever was England) should be so bold as to call the Pre∣rogative of the Crown a great monster. The Parliament after this was not long liv'd but broak up in discontent, and upon the point of dissolution, they made a Protest against divers particulars in the aforesaid answer of his Majesties. My Lord Digby is preparing for Spain in qualitie of Ambassador Extraordinary, to perfect the match twixt our Prince and the Lady Infanta, in which business Gondamar hath waded already very deep, and bin very active, and ingratiated himself with divers persons of qualitie, Ladies espe∣cially, yet he could do no good upon the Lady Hatton, whom he desird lately that in regard he was her next neighbor (at Ely House) he might have the benefit of her back gate to go abroad into the fields, but she put him off with a Complement, wherup∣on in a privat audience lately with the King amongst other passa∣ges of merriment, he told him that my Lady Hatton was a strange Lady, for she would not suffer her Husband Sir Edward Coke to com in at her foredore, nor him to go out at her back dore; and so related the whole business: He was also dispatching a l'ost lately for Spain, and the Post having receivd his packet, and kisd his hands, he calld him back and told him he had forgot one thing, which was, that when he came to Spain he should commend him to the Sun,
he had not seen him a great while, and in Spain he should be sure to find him: So with my most humble service to my Lord of Colchester, I rest London, Mar. 24. 1622. Your most humble Servitor, J. H. IV, To my brother Mr Hugh Penry. Sir, THe Welsh nag you sent me, was deliverd me in a very good plight, and I give you a thousand thanks for him; I had occasion lately to try his mettle and his lungs, and every one tells me he is right, and of no mongell race, but a true Mounta∣neer, for besides his toughness, and strength of lungs up a hill, he is quickly curried, and content with short Commons: I be∣leeve he hath not been long a highway traveller, for wheras other horses, when they pass by an Inne or Alehouse use to make towards them to give them a friendly visit, this ng roundly goes on, and scornes to cast as much as a glance upon any of them, which I know not whether I shall impute it to his ignorance, or height of spirit, but conversing with the soft horses of England, I beleeve he will quickly be brought to be more courteous. The greatest news we have now is the return of the Lord BPP▪ of Landass, Davenant, Ward, and Belcanquell, from the Synod of Dort, where the Bishop had precedence given him according to his Eps∣copall dignity, Arminius and Vorstius were sore baited there con∣cerning Predestination, Election, and Reprobation; as also touch∣ing Christs death, and mans Redemption by it; then concerning mans Corruption, and Conversion; lastly, concerning the per∣severance of the Saints: I shall have shortly the transaction of the Synod. The Jesuits have put out a geeing libell against it, and these two verses I remember in't. Dordrecti Synodus? nodus; chorus integer? aeger; Conventus? ventus; Sffio stramen, Amen. But I will confront this Distich with another I read in France of
the Iesuits in the Town of Dole, towards Lorain; they had a great house given them calld L'ar (arcum) and upon the river of L, Henry the fourth gave them la fleche, sagittam in atin, where they have two stately Convents, that is, Bow and Arrow; wherupon one made these verses: Arcum Dola dedit, dedit ill is alma sagittam Francia; quis chordam, quam meruere, dabit? Faire France the Arrow, Dole gave them the Bow, Who shall the String which they deserve bestow? No more now but that with my dear love to my Sister I rest. London, Aprill 16. 1622. Your most affectionate brother J. H. V. To the Lord Vicount Colchester. My good Lord, I receivd your Lopps▪ of the last week, and according to your com∣mand, I send here inclos'd the Venetian gazet: for forren avi∣so's, they write that Mansfelt hath bin beaten out of Germany, and is come to Sedan, and 'tis thought the Duke of Bouillon will set him up again with a new Army: Marquis Spinola hath newly sat down▪ before Berghen op zoom; your Lopp▪ knows well what consequence that Town is of, therfore it is likely this will be a hot Summer in the Netherlands. The French King is in open war against them of the Religion, he hath already cleard the Loire by taking Ier seau and Saumur, where Monr. du Plessis sent him the keys, which are pro∣misd to be deliverd him again, but I think ad Graecas Calenda. He hath bin also before Saint Iohn d' angeli, where the young Car∣dinall of Guyse died, being struck down by the puffe of a Canon bullet, which put him in a burning eaver, and made an end of him: the last Town that's taken was Clerac, which was put to 50000. Crowns ransom; many were put to the sword, and divers Gentlemen drownd as they thought to scape; this is the fifteenth cautionary Town the King hath taken, and now they say he mar∣cheth
towards Montauban, and so to Montpellir and Nism, and then have at Rochell. My Lord Hayes is by this time 'tis thought with the Army; for Sir Edward Harbert is return'd, having had som clashings and counterbuffs with the Favorite Luynes, wherin he comported himself gallantly: ther is a fresh report blown over, that Luynes is lately dead in the Army of the Plague, som say of the Purples, the next cousen german to it; which the Protestants give out to be the just judgement of Heaven aln upon him, be∣cause he incited his Master to these wars against them. If he be not dead, let him dy when he will, he will leave a fame behind him, to have bin the greatest Favorit for the time that ever was in France, having from a simple Faulkner com to be high Constable, and made himself and his younger brother Brand Dukes and Peers; and his second brother Cadenet Marshall, and all three maried to Princely Families. No more now, but that I most humbly kiss your Lopps▪ hands, and shall be alwaies most ready and chearfull to receive your com∣mandments, because I am London, 12 Aug. 1623. Your Lordships obliged Servitor, I. H. VI. To my Father, from London. SIR, I was at a dead stand in the cours of my Fortunes, when it pleas'd God to provide me lately an employment to Spain, whence I hope there may arise both repute and profit. Som of the Cap Merchants of the Turky Company, amongst whom, the chiefest were Sir Robert Napper, and Captain Leat, propos'd unto me, that they had a great business in the Court of Spain in agitation many yeers, nor was it now their busines but the Kings, in whose name it is followed: they could have Gentlemen of good quality that would undertake it; yet if I would take it upon me, they would em∣ploy no other, and assur'd me that the employment should tend both to my benefit and credit. Now the business is this: Ther was a great Turky ship call'd the Vineyard, sailing through the Streights towards Constantinople, but by distress of weather she was
forc'd to put into a little Port call'd Milo in Sardinia: The sear∣chers came aboard of her, and finding her richly laden, for her cargazon of broad cloth was worth the first peny neer upon 30000 l. they cavell'd at some small proportion of lead and tin, which they had only for the use of the ship, which the Searchers alleged to be ropa de contrabando prohibited goods; for by Article of Peace no∣thing is to be carried to Turky that may arm or vittle. The Vice-Roy of Sardinia hereupon seizd upon the whole ship and all her goods, landed the Master and men in Spain, who coming to Sir Charls Corawalles then Ambassador at the Cour; Sir Charles could do them little good at present, therfore they came to England, and com∣plaind to the King and Counsell: his Majesty was so sensible hereof that he sent a particular Commission in his own royall Name, to demand a restitution of the ship and goods, and justice upon the Vice-Roy of Sardinia, who had so apparently broke the Peace, and wrongd his Subjects: Sir Charles (with Sir Paul Pi∣dar a while) labourd in the business, and commenc'd a sute in Law, but he was calld home before he could do any thing to pur∣pose. After him Sir Iohn Digby, (now Lord Digby) went Ambassa∣dor to Spain, and amongst other things, he had that particular Commission from his Majesty invested in him, to prosecut the sute in his own royall Name: Therupon he sent a well qualified Gen∣tleman, Mr Walsingham Gsley to Sardinia, who unfortunately meeting with som men of War in the passage, was carried prisoner to Algier: My Lord Digby being remanded home▪ left the busi∣ness in Mr Cotingtons hands then Agent, but reassum'd it at his re∣turn: yet it prov'd such a tedious intricate sute, that he return'd again without finishing the work; in regard of the remoteness of the Island of Sardinia, whence the witnesses and other dispatches were to be fetchd. The Lord Digby is going now Ambassador ex∣traordinary to the Court of Spain, upon the business of the match, the restitution o the Palatinate, and other high affairs of State; therfore he is desirous to transmit the Kings Commission to ching this particular business to any gentleman that is capable to follow it, and promiseth to assist him with the utmost of his power, and he saith he hath good reason to do so, in regard he hath now a good round share himself in it. About this busines▪ I am now preparing to go to Spain, in company of the Ambassador, and I shall kiss the Kings hands as his Agent touching this particular Commission. I humbly intreat that your blessing and prayers may accompany me in this my new employment, which I have undertaken upon very good terms touching expences & reward: So with my dear love to
my brothers and sisters, with other kindred and friends in the coun∣trey, I rest London, 8 Sept. 1623. Your dutifull Son, J. H. VII. To Sir Tho: Savage Knight and Baronet, at his house in Long-Melford. Honble SIR, I Receivd your commands in a Letter which you sent me by Sir Iohn North, and I shall not fail to serve you in those particu∣lars. It hath pleased God to dispose of me once more for Spain, up∣on a business which I hope will make me good returns: ther have two Ambassadors and a royall Agent follow'd it hitherto, and I am the fourth that is employed in it: I defer to trouble you with the particulars of it, in regard I hope to have the happiness to kiss your hand at Tower hill before my departure; which will not be, till my Lord Digby sets forward. He goes in a gallant splen∣did Equipage, and one of the Kings ships is to take him in at Plymouth, and transport him to the Corunnia, or Saint Ande∣as. Since that sad disaster which befell Archbishop Abbot, to kill the man by the glancing of an arrow as he was shooting at a Deer, (which kind of death befell one of our Kings once in new For∣rest:) ther hath bin a Commission awarded to debate whether up∣on this fact, wherby he hath shed human bloud, he be not to be depriv'd of his Archbishoprick, and pronounc'd irregular; som were against him, but Bishop Andrews, and Sir Henry Martin stood stifly for him, that in regard it was no spontaneous act, but a meer contingencie, and that ther is no degree of men but is subject to misfortunes and casualties, they declar'd positively that he was not to fall from his dignity or function, but should still re∣main a regular and in statu quo prius; during this debate, he pe∣titioned the King that he might be permitted to retire to his Almes∣house at Guilford where he was born, to pass the remainder of his life; but he is now come to be again rectus in curia, absolutely quitted and restor'd to all things: But for the wife of him which
was killd, it was no misfortune to her, for he hath endowed her∣self, and her children with such an Estate, that they say her Hus∣band could never have got: So I humbly kisse your hands and rest London, 9 Nov. 1622. Your most obliged Servi. J. H. VIII. To Captain Nich: Leat from Madrid, at his house in London. SIR, I Am safely com to the Court of Spain, and although by reason of that misfortune which befell Mr Altham and me, of wounding the Sergeants in Lombardstreet, we staied three weeks behind my Lord Ambassador, yet we came hither time enough to attend him to Court at his first audience. The English Nation is better lookd on now in Spain than ordi∣nary, because of the hopes ther are of a match, which the Mer∣chant and comunalty much desire, though the Nobility and Gen∣try be not so forward for it; so that in this point the puls of Sp beats quite contrary to that of England, where the people are ∣vers to this match, and the Nobility with most part of the Gentry inclinable. I have perusd all the papers I could get into my hands, touching the business of the ship-Vineyard, and I find that they are higher than I in bulk, though closely prest together; I have cast up what i awarded by all the sentences of view and review, by the Counsell of State & War, and I find the whole sum as wel principall, as interest upon interest, all sorts of damages, and processall charges, com to a∣bove two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The Conde del Real quondam Viceroy of Sardinia, who is adjudged to pay most part of this money, is here▪ and he is Mayordomo Lord steward to the In∣fante Cardinall; if he hath wherwith, I donbt not but to recover the money, for I hope to have com in a favorable conjuncture of time, and my Lord Ambassador who is so highly esteemd here, doth assure me of his best furtherance. So praying I may prove as suc∣cesfull, as I shall be faithfull in this great busines, I rest Madrid, 28 Decem. 1622. Yours to dispose of, J. H.
IX. To Mr Arthur Hopton from Madrid. SIR, SInce I was made happy with your acquaintance, I have receivd sundry strong evidences of your love and good wishes unto me, which have tied me unto you in no common obligation of thanks: I am in despair ever to cancell this bond, nor would I do it, but rather endear the engagement more and more. The treaty of the match twixt our Prince and the Lady Infante is now strongly a foot, she is a very comely Lady, rather of a Flemish complexion than Spanish; fair haird, and carrieth a most pure mixture of red and white in her face: she is full and big lipd, which is held a beautie rather than a blemish or any excefle in the Austrian Family, it being a thing incident to most of that race: she goes now upon 16, and is of a talness agreable to those yeers. The King is also of such a complexion, and is under twen∣tie; he hath two brothers, Don Carlos, and Don Hernado, who though a youth of twelve, yet is he Cardinall and Archbishop of Toledo, which in regard it hath the Chancelorship of Castile annex∣ed to it, is the greatest spirituall dignity in Christendom after the Papacy, for it is valued at 300000. Crowns per annum: Don Carlos is of a differing complexion from all the rest, for he is black haird, and of a Spanish hue, he hath neither Office, Command, Dignitie or Title, but is an individuall companion to the King, and what cloaths soever are provided for the King, he hath the ve∣ry same, and as often, from top to toe; he is the better belov'd of the people for his complexion, for one shall hear the Spaniard sigh and lament, saying, O when shall we have a King again of our own colour! I pray commend me kindly to all at your house, and send me word when the young gentlemen return from Italy. So with my most affectionat respects to your self, I rest Madrid,  5. an. 1622. Your true friend to serve you, J. H.
X. To Captain Nic. Leat, from Madrid. SIR, YOurs of the tenth of this present I receiv'd by Mr. Simon Dig∣by, with the inclosed to your son in Alicant, which is safely sent. Since my last unto you I had access to Olivares the Favorit that rules all; I had also audience of the King, to whom I deliver'd two memorialls since, in his Majesties name of great Britain, that a par∣ticular Iunta of some of the Counsell of State and War, might be appointed to determin the business: the last memoriall had so good success that the Referees are nominated, wherof the chiefest is the Duke of Infantado. Here it is not the stile to claw and complement with the King, or Idolize him by Sacred, Soverain, and most Ex∣cellent Majesty; but the Spaniard when he petitions to his King, gives him no other Character but Sir, and so relating his business, at the end he doth ask and demand Justice of him. When I have done with the Vice-roy here, I shall hasten my dispatches for Sardinia: since my last I went to liquidat the account more particularly, and I find that of the 250000 Crowns, ther are above forty thou∣sand due unto you; which might serve for a good Aldermans estate. Your son in Alicant writes to me of another mischance that is be∣faln the ship Amitie about Mallorca, wherof you were one of the proprietaries; I am very sorry to hear of it, and touching any dispat∣ches that are to be had hence, I shall endeavor to procure you them according to instructions. Your cosen Richard Altham remembers his kind respects unto you, and sends you many thanks for the pains you took in freeing us from that trouble which the scuffle with the Sergeants brought up∣on us. So I rest Madrid, 5 Ian. 1622. Yours ready to serve you, J. H.
XI. To the Lord Vicount Colchester from Madrid. Right Honble. THe grand busines of the match goes so fairly on, that a speci∣all Iunta is appointed to treat of it, the names wherof I send you here inclos'd: they have proceeded so, far that most of the Ar∣ticles are agreed upon: Mr. George Gage is lately come hither from Rome, a polite and prudent gentleman, who hath negotiated som∣things in that Court for the advance of the busines with the Cardi∣nalls Bandino, Lodovisie, & la Susanna, who are the main men there to whom the drawing of the dispensation is referr'd. The late taking of Ormus by the Persian from the Crown of Por∣tugall keeps a great noise here, and the rather because the exploit was done by the assistance of the English ships that were then ther∣abouts; my Lord Digby went to Court and gave a round satisfacti∣on in this point; for it was no voluntary, but a constrain'd act in the English, who being in the Persians Port were suddenly embarqu'd for the service: And the Persian herein did no more than what is u∣suall amongst Christian Princes themselves, and which is oftner put in practice by the King of Spain, and his Vice-roys, than by any other, viz. to make an embargue of any strangers ship that rides within his Ports upon all occasion. It was fear'd this surprisall of Ormus which was the greatest Mart in all the Orient for all sorts of jewells, would have bred ill bloud, and prejudic'd the preceedings of the match, but the Spaniard is a rationall man, and will be satis∣fied with reason Count Olivares is the main man who sways all, and 'tis thought he is not so much affected to an alliance with England as his Predecessor the Duke of Lerma was, who set it first a foot 'twixt Prince Henry, and this Queen of France: The Duke of Ler∣ma was the greatest Privado, the greatest Favorit that ever was in Spain since Don Alvaro de Luna, he brought himself, the Duke of U∣zeda his son, and the Duke of Ca his grand-child to be all Grandes of Spain, which is the greatest Title that a Spanish Subject is capa∣ble of, they have a privilege to stand cover'd before the King, and at their election ther's no other Ceremony but only these three words by the King, Cobrése por Grande, cover your self for a Grande, and that's all: The Cardinall Duke of Lerma lives at Valladolid,
he officiats and sings Mass, and passeth his old age in Devotion and exercises of Piety: It is a common and indeed a commendable cu∣stom amongst the Spaniard, when he hath pass'd his gran climacteric, and is grown decrepit, to make a voluntary resignation of Offices, be they never so great and profitable, (though I cannot say Ler did so) and sequestring and weaning themselves as it were from all mundan negotiations and encombrances, to retire to som place of devotion, and spend the residue of their days in meditation, and in preparing themselves for another world: Charles the Emperor shew'd them the way, who left the Empire to his brother, and all the rest of his Dominions to his son Philip the second, and so ta∣king with him his two sisters, he retir'd into a Monastery, they into a Nunnery: this doth not suit well with the genius of an English∣man, who loves not to pull off his cloaths till he goes to bed. I will conclude with some Verses I saw under a huge Rodomontado picture of the Duke of Lerma, wherin he is painted like a Giant bearing up the Monarchy of Spain, that of France, and the Popedom upon his shoulders, with this Stanza, Sobre les ombros d'este Atlante Yazen en aquestos dias, Estas tres Monarquias. Upon the shoulders of this Atlas lies, The Popedom and two mighty Monarchies. So I most humbly kiss your Lordships hands, and rest ever most ready Madrid, 3 Febr. 1622. At your Lordships command, J. H. XII. To my Father. SIR, ALL affairs went on fairly here, specially that of the match; when Master Endymion Porter brought lately my Lord of Bi∣stoll a dispatch from England of a high nature, wherin the Earl is commanded to represent unto this King how much his Majesty of
great Britain since the beginning of these German wars hath labourd to merit well of this Crown, and of the whole House of Austria, by a long and lingring patience, grounded still upon assurances hence, that care should be had of his honor, his Daughters joyn∣ture, and grand-childrens patrimony; yet how crosly all things had proceeded in the Treaty at Bruxells, manag'd by Sir Richard Weston, as also that in the Palatinat by the Lord Chichester: how in treating time the Town and Castle of Heidelberg were taken, Man∣beim besieg'd, and all acts of Hostility us'd, notwithstanding the fair professions made by this King, the Infanta at Bruxells, and other his Ministers: How meerly out of respect to this King, he had neg∣lected all Martiall means which probably might have preserv'd the Palatinat: those thin Garrisons which he had sent thither being ra∣ther for honors sake to keep a footing untill a generall accommoda∣tion, than that he relyed any way upon their strength: And since that there are no other fruits of all this but reproach and scorn▪ and that those good Offices which he us'd towards the Emperor on the behalf of his Son in law, which he was so much encouraged by Letters from hence should take effect, have not sorted to any other issue, than to a plain affront and a high injuring of both their Ma∣jesties, though in a different degree; The Earl is to tell him that his Majesty of great Britain hopes and desires that out of a true ap∣prehension of these wrongs offerd unto them both, he will as his dear and loving brother faithfully promise and undertake upon his honor, confirming the same under his hand and seal, either that Heidelberg shall be within seventy days rendred into his hands; as also that ther shall be within the said term of seventy days a su∣spension of arms in the Palatinat, and that a Treaty shall recom∣mence upon such terms as he propounded in November last, which this King held then to be reasonable: And in case that this be not yeelded unto by the Emperor, that then this King joyn forces with his Majesty of England, for the recovery of the Palatinat, which upon this trust hath been lost; or in case his forces at this time be o∣therwise employ'd, that they cannot give his Majesty that assistance he desires and deserves, that at least he will permit a free and friendly passage through his Territories, for such Forces as his Me∣jesty of great Britain shall employ into Germany: Of all which, if the Earl of Bristoll hath not from the King of Spain a direct as∣surance under his hand and Seal ten days after his audience, that then he take his leave, and return to England to his Majesties pre∣sence, els to proceed in the negotiation of the match according to former instructions.
This was the main substance of his Majesties late letter, yet there was a postill added, that in case a rupture happen 'twixt the two Crowns, the Earl should not com instantly and abruptly way, but that he should send advice first to England, and carry the busines so, that the world should not presently know of it. Notwithstanding all these traverses, we are confident here, that the match will take, otherwise my Cake is Dow. There was a great difference in one of the capitulations 'twixt the two Kings, how long the children which should issue of this marriage were to continue sub regimine Matris, under the tutele of the Mother. This King de∣manded 14 years at first, then twelve, but now he is come to nine, which is newly condescended unto. I receiv'd yours of the first of September in another from Sir Iames Crofts, wherin it was no small comfort to me to hear of your health. I am to go hence shortly for Sardinia, a dangerous voyage, by reason of Algier Pirats. I humbly desire your prayers may accompany Madrid, 23 Febr. 1622. Your dutifull Son, J. H. XIII. To Sir James Crofts Knight. SIR, YOurs of the second of October came to safe hand with the in∣clos'd; you write that there came dispatches lately from Rome, wherin the Pope seems to endevour to insinuat himself into a di∣rect treaty with England, and to negotiat immediatly with our King touching the dispensation, which he not only labours to e∣vade, but utterly disclaims, it being by Article the task of this King to procure all dispatches thence: I thank you for sending me this news. You shall understand there came lately an express from Rome also to this Court, touching the business of the match which gave very good content; but the dispatch and new instructions, which Mr. Endymion Porter brought my Lord of Bristoll lately from England touching the Prince Palatinat, fills us with apprehensions of fear: Our Ambassadors here have had audience of this King already about those Propositions, and we hope that Master Porter will carry back such things as will satisfie. Touching the two points
in the Treaty wherin the two Kings differ'd most, viz. about the education of the children, and the exemption of the Infanta's Ec∣clesiastic servants from secular jurisdiction: both these points are clear'd, for the Spaniard is com from fourteen years to ten, and for so long time the Infant Princes shall remain under the mothers go∣vernment. And for the other point, the Ecclesiasticall Superior shall first take notice of the offence that shall be committed by any spirituall person belonging to the Infanta's family, and according to the merit therof either deliver him by degradation to the secular justice, or banish him the Kingdom according to the quality of the delict, and it is the same that is practis'd in this Kingdom, and o∣ther parts that adhere to Rome. The Conde de Monterrey goes Vice-roy to Naples, the Marquis de Montesclaros being put by, the gallanter man of the two. I was told of a witty saying of his, when the Duke of Lerma had the vogue in this Court: for going one morning to speak with the Duke, and having danc'd attendance a long time, hee peep'd through a slit in the hanging, and spied Don Rodrigo Calderon, a great man (who was lately beheaded here for poisning the late Queen Dowager) delivering the Duke a Paper upon his knees, wherat the Marquis smil'd and said, Voto a tal, aqul hombre sube mas a las rodillas, que yo no hago a los pics, I swear that man climbs higher upon his knees, than I can upon my feet: Indeed I have read it to be a true Court rule, that descendendo ascendendum est in Aula, de∣scending is the way to ascend at Court. Ther is a kind of hu∣mility and compliance, that is far from any servile baseness or fordid flattery, and may be term'd discretion rather than adula∣tion. I intend God willing to go for Sardinia this Spring, I hope to have better luck than Master Walsingham Gresley had, who some few years since in his passage thither upon the same business that I have in agitation, met with some Turksmen of war, and so was carried slave to Algier. So with my true respects to you▪ I rest Madrid, 12 Mar. 1622. Your faithfull Servant, J. H.
XIV. To Sir Francis Cottington, Secretary to his Highnesse the Prince of Wales, at Saint James. SIR, I Believe it will not be unpleasing unto you to hear of the proce∣dure and successe of that business wherin your self hath been so long vers'd in: I mean the great sute against the quondam Vice-roy of Sardinia the Conde del Real: Count Gondamars comming was a great advantage unto me, who hath don me many favors; besides a confirmation of the two sentences of view and review, and of the execution against the Vice-roy, I have procur'd a Royall cedule which I caus'd to be printed, and wherof I send you here inclos'd a Coppy, by which Cedule I have power to arrest his very person, and my Lawyers tell me ther was never such a cedule granted be∣fore: I have also by vertue of it priority of all other his Credi∣tors: He hath made an imperfect overture of a composition, and shewd me som triviall old fashion'd jewells, but nothing equiva∣lent to the debt. And now that I speak of jewells, the late surpri∣sall of Ormus by the assistance of our ships sinks deep in their sto∣macks here, and we were afraid it would have spoild all procee∣dings; but my Lord Digby, now Earl of Bristoll (for Count Gon∣damar brought him ore his Patent) hath calmd all things at his last audience. Ther were luminaries of joy lately here for the victory that Don Gonzalez de Cordova got over Count Mansfelt in the Nether∣lands with that Army which the Duke of Bouillon had levied for him, but some say they have not much reason to rejoyce, for though the Infantery suffer'd, yet Mansfelt got clear with all his horse by a notable retreat, and they say here it was the greatest peece of service and Art he ever did, it being a Maxim, that ther is no∣thing so difficult in the Art of War, as an honourable retreat. Be∣sides, the report of his comming to Breda, caus'd Marquis Spinola to raise the siege before Berghen, to burn his tents, and to pack away suddenly; for which he is much censur'd here: Captain Leat and others have written to me of the favourable
report you pleas'd to make of my endeavors here, for which I re∣turn you humble thanks: and though you have left behind you multitude of servants in this Court, yet if occasion were offerd, none should be more forward to go on your errand, then Madrid, 15 Mar. 1622. Your humble and faithfull Servitor, J. H. XV. To the Honble. Sir Tho: Savage, Knight and Baronet. Honble SIR, THe great busines of the match was tending to a period, the Articles reflecting both upon Church and State, being ca∣pitulated, and interchangeably accorded on both sides, and ther wanted nothing to consummate all things, when to the wonder∣ment of the world the Prince and the Marquis of Buckingham ar∣riv'd at this Court a friday last, upon the close of the evening▪ they lighted at my Lord of Bristols house, and the Marquis (Mr Thomas Smith) came in first with a Portmantle under his arm, then (Mr Iohn Smith) the Prince was sent for, who staid a while the to'ther side of the street in the dark, my Lord of Bristoll in a kind of astonishment brought him up to his bed chamber, where he pre∣sently calld for pen and ink, and dispacht a Post that night to Eng∣land to acquaint his Majesty how in lesse then sixteen daies he was come safely to the Court of Spain; that Post went lightly laden, for he carried but three letters: the next day came Sir Francis Co∣tington and Mr Porter, and darke rumors ran in every corner how som great man was com from England, and som would not stick to say amongst the vulgar, it was the King, but towards the evening on saturday the marquis went in a close coach to Court, where he had privat audience of this King, who sent Olivares to ac∣company him back to the Prince, where he kneeld and kisd his hands, and hugd his thighs, and deliverd how unmeasurably glad his Catholic Majesty was of his coming, with other high comple∣ments, which Mr Porter did interpret. About ten a clock that night, the King himself came in a close coach with intent to visit
the Prince, who hearing of it, met him halfway, and after salu∣tations and divers embraces which past in the first interview they parred late: I forgot to tell you, that Count Gondamar being sworn Counseller of State that morning, having bin before but one of the Counsell of War, he came in great hast to visit the Prince saying, he had strange news to tell him, which was that an English∣man was sworn privy Counseller of Spain, meaning himself, who he said was an Englishman in his heart. On Sunday following, the King in the afternoon came abroad to take the air with the Queen, his two brothers and the Infanta, who were all in one coach, but the Infanta sat in the boot with a blew riband about her arm, of purpose that the Prince might distinguish her: ther were above twenty coaches besides of Grandes, Noble men and Ladies that at∣tended them. And now i was publicly known amongst the vul∣gar, that it was the Prince of Wales who was com, and the con∣fluence of people before my Lord of Bristolls house was so great and greedy to see the Prince, that to clear the way, Sir Lewis Divs went out and took coach, and all the crowd of people went after him: so the Prince himself a little after took coach, wherin there were the Earl of Bristoll, Sir Walter Ashton, and Count Gondamar, and so went to the Prado, a place hard by, of purpose to take the air, where they stayed till the King past by: as soon as the In∣fanta saw the Prince her colour rose very high, which we hold to be an impression of love and affection, for the face is often times a true Index of the heart. Upon Monday morning after the King sent som of his prime Nobles, and other Gentlemen to attend the Prince in qualitie of Officers, as oe to be his Mayordom (his Steward) another to be Master of the Horse, and so to inferior Officers, so that ther is a compleat Court now at my Lord of Bri∣stolls house: but upon Sunday next the Prince is to remove to the Kings Palace, where ther is one of the chief quarters of the house providing for him. By the next opportunity you shall hear more, In the interim I take my leave and rest March, 27. 1623. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
XVI. To Sir Eubule Theloall Knight, at Grayes-Inne. SIR, I Know the eyes of all England are earnestly fixd now upon Spain, her best jewell being here; but his journey was like to be spoild in France, for if he had stayd but a little longer at Bayon the last Town of that Kingdom hitherwards, he had bin discoverd, for Monsieur Gramond the Governor had notice of him not long after he had taken Post. The people here do mightily magnifie the gallantry of the journey, and cry out that he deserv'd to have the Infanta thrown into his arms the first night he came: He hath bin entertaind with all the magnificence that possibly could be devis'd. On Sunday last in the morning betimes he went to Saint Hieroms Monastery, whence the Kings of Spain use to be fetchd the day they are crownd; and thither the King came in person with his two Brothers, his eight Counsells, and the flower of the Nobility: He rid upon the Kings right hand through the heart of the Town under a great Canopy, and was brought so into his lodgings to the Kings Palace, and the King himself accompanied him to his very bedchamber. It was a very glorious sight to behold, for the custom of the Spaniard is, though he go plain in his ordinary ha∣bit, yet upon som Festivall or cause of triumph, ther's none goes beyond him in gaudiness. We daily hope for the Popes Breve or Dispensation to perfect the busines, though ther be dark whispers abroad that it is com al∣ready, but that upon this inexpected coming of the Prince, it was sent back to Rome, and som new clauses thrust in for their further advantage. Till this dispatch comes, matters are at a kind of stand; yet his Highnes makes account to be back in England about the latter end of May. God Almighty turn all to the best, and to what shall be most conducible to his glory. So with my due respects unto you, I rest Aprill, 1▪ 1623. Your much obliged Servitor, J. H.
XVII. To Captain Leat. SIR, HAving brought up the Law to the highest point against the Vice-roy of Sardinia, and that in an extraordinary manner, as may appear unto you by that Printed cedule I sent you in my last, and finding an apparent disability in him to satisfie the debt▪ I thought upon a new design, and fram'd a memoriall to the King▪ and wrought good strong means to have it seconded, that in rega that predatory act of seizing upon the ship Vinyard in Sardi▪ with all her goods, was done by his Majesties Vice-roy, his sove∣rain Minister of State, one that immediatly represented his own Royall Person, and that the said Vice-roy was insolvent; I desir'd his Majesty would be pleas'd to grant a Warrant for the releef of both parties to lade so many thousand Sterills o mea∣sures of corn out of Sardinia and Sicily custom-free. I had gonf in the business when Sir Francis Cottington sent for me, and re∣quir'd me in the Prince his name to proceed no further herei, till he was departed: so his Highness presence here hath tur rather to my disadvantage, than otherwise. Amongst other Gran∣dezas which the King of Spain conferr'd upon our Prince, one was the releasment of Prisoners, and that all Petitions of grace should com to him for the first month, but he hath been wonder∣full sparing in receiving any, specially from any English, Irish, or Scot. Your son Nicolas is com hither from Alicant, about the ship Amity, and I shall be ready to second him in getting satisfa∣ction, so I rest, Madrid, Iune 3. 1623. Yours ready to serve you, J. H.
XVIII. To Captain Tho. Porter. Noble Captain, MY last unto you was in Spanish, in answer to one of yours in the same language, and amongst that confluence of English gallants, which upon the occasion of his Highness being here, are com to this Court; I fed my self with hopes a long while to have seen you, but I find now that those hopes were impd with false fea∣thers. I know your heart is here, and your best affections, ther∣fore I wonder what keeps back your person: but I conceive the reason to be that you intend to com like your self, to com Comman∣der in chief of one of the Castles of the Crown, one of the ships Royall: If you com so to this shore side, I hope you wil havetime to come to the Court, I have at any time a good lodging for you, and my Landlady is none of the meanest, and her husband hath many good parts; I heard her setting him forth one day, and giving this Character of him, Mi marido ei buen musico, buen esgrimidor, buen eserivano, excellente Arithmetico, salvo que no multiplica: My husband is a good Musitian, a good Fencer, a good Horse-man, a good Pen-man, and an excellent Arithmetician, only he cannot multiply. For outward usage, there is all industry us'd to give the Prince and his servants all possible contentment, and som of the Kings own servants wait upon them at Table in the Palace, where I am sorry to hear som of them jeer at the Spanish fare, and use other slighting speeches and demeanor. Ther are many excel∣lent Poems made here since the Princes arrivall, which are too long to couch in a Letter, yet I will venture to send you this one stanza of Lope de Vegas. Carlos Estuardo Soy Que siendo Amor mi guia, Al cielo d'España voy, Por ver mi Estrella Maria. There are Comedians once a week com to the Palace, where un∣der a great Canopy, the Queen and the Infanta sit in the middle, our Prince and Don Carles on the Queens right hand, the King and
the little Cardinall on the Infanta's left hand. I have seen the Prince have his eyes immovably fixed upon the Infanta half an hour together in a thoughtfull speculative posture, which sure would needs be tedious, unless affection did sweeten it: it was no handsom comparison of Olivares, that he watcht her as a cat doth  mouse. Not long since the Prince understanding that the Infan∣ta was us'd to go som mornings to the Casa de campo, a summer house the King hath tother side the river, to gather May dew, he did rise betimes and went thither, taking your brother with him, they were let into the house, and into the garden, but the Infanta was in the orchard, and there being a high partition wall between, and the door doubly bolted, the Prince got on the top of the wall, and sprung down a great hight, and so made towards her, but she spy∣ing him first of all the rest, gave a sheck and ran back; the old Marquis that was then her gardien, came towards the Prince, and fell on his knees, conjuring his Highnesse to retire, in regard he hazarded his head, if he admitted any to her company; so the door was open'd and he came out under that wall over which he had got in: I have seen him watch a long hour together in a close Coach in the open street to see her as she went abroad: I cannot say that the Prince did ever talk with her privatly, yet publickly often my Lord of Bristoll being Interpreter, but the King always sat hard by, to over-hear all. Our cosen Archy hath more privilege than any, for he often goes with his fools coat where the Infanta is with her Meninas and Ladies of honor, and keeps a blowing and blustering amongst them, and fluts out what he list. One day they were discoursing what a marvellous thing it was, that the Duke of Bavaria with lesse then 15000 men, after a long toylsom March, should dare to encounter the Palsgraves army, con∣sisting of above 2500, and to give them an utter discomfiture, and take Prague presently after. Wherunto Archy answered, that he would tell them a stranger thing than that: was it not a strange thing, quoth he, that in the year 88, ther should com a Fleet of one hun∣dred and forty sails from Spain, to invade England, and that ten of these could not go back to tell what became of the rest? By the next opportunity I will send you the Cordovan pockets and gloves you writ for of Francisco Morenos persuming. So may my dear Cap∣tain live long and love his Madrid, Iuly 10. 1623. J. H.
XIX. To my Cosen Tho. Guin Esqr. at his house Trecastle. Cosen, I Received lately one of yours, which I cannot compare more pro∣perly than to a posie of curious flowers, ther was therin such variety of sweet strains and dainty expressions of love: And though it bore an old date, for it was forty days before it came to safe hand, yet the flowers were still fresh, and not a whit faded, but did cast as strong and as fragrant a sent, as when your hands bound them up first together, only ther was one flower that did not savor so well, which was the undeserved Character you please to give of my smal abilities, which in regard you look upon me through the prospective of affection, appear greater unto you than they are of themselvs; yet as smal as they are I would be glad to employ them all to serve you upon any occasion. Wheras you desire to know how matters pass here, you shall un∣derstand that we are rather in assurance, than hopes that the match will take effect, when one dispatch more is brought from Rome which we greedily expect. The Spaniards generally desire it, they are much taken with our Prince, with the bravery of his journey, and his discreet comportment since, and they confess ther was never Princess courted with more gallantry. The wits of the Court here, have made divers Encomiums of him, & of his affection to the L Infanta. Amongst others, I send you a Latin Poem of one Marnieris a Valenciano, to which I add this ensuing Hexastic, which in regard of the difficulty of the Verse consisting of all Ternaries (which is the hardest way of versifying) and of the exactness of the translation, I believe will give you content. Fax grata est, gratum est vulnus, mihi grata catena est, Me quibus astringit, laedit & urit Amor, Sed flammam extingui, sanari vulnera, solvi Vincla, etiam ut possem non ego posse velim: Mirum equidem genus hoc morbi est, incendia & ictus Vinclaque, vinctus adbuc laesus & ustus, amo.
Gratefull's to me the fire, the wound, the chain By which love burns, love binds and giveth pain, But for to quench this fire, these bonds to loose, These wounds to heal, I would not could I choose: Strange sickness, where the wounds, the bonds, the fire That burns, that bind, that hurt, I must desire. In your next, I pray send me your opinion of these verses, for I know you are a Critic in Poetry. Mr Vaugham of the Golden-grove and I were Camerades and bedfellows here many moneths toge∣ther, his father Sir Iohn Vaughan the Prince his Controuler, is lately com to attend his Master. My Lord of Carlile, my Lord of Holland, my Lord of Rochfort, my Lord of Denbigh, and divers others are here, so that we have a very flourishing Court, and I could wish you were here to make one of the number. So my dear co∣sen, I wish you all happiness, and our noble Prince a safe and suc∣cessfull return to England. Madrid, 13 Aug. 1623. Your most affectionate Cosen, J. H. XX. To my noble friend, Sir John North. SIR, THe long look'd-for Dispensation is come from Rome, but I hear it is clogg'd with new clauses; and one is, that the Pope who allegeth that the only aim of the Apostolicall See in granting this Dispensation, was the advantage and case of the Ca∣tholics in the King of great Britaines Dominions, therfore he de∣sir'd a valuable caution for the performance of those Articles which were stipulated in their favor; this hath much puzled the busi∣nes, and Sir Francis Cotington comes now over about it: Besides ther is som distast taken at the Duke of Buckingham here, and I heard this King should say he will treat no more with him, but with the Ambassadors, who he saith, have a more plenary Com∣mission,
and understand the busines better. As ther is som dark∣nes hapned twixt the two Favorits, so matters stand not ight twixt he Duke and the Earl of Bristoll; but God forbid that a busines of so high a consequence as this which is likely to tend so much to the universall good of Christendom, to the restitution of the Pa∣latinat, and the composing those broils in Germany, should be ran∣versd by differences twixt a few privat subjects, though now pub∣lic Ministers. Mr Washington the Prince his Page is lately dead of a Calenture, and I was at his buriall under a Figtree behind my Lord of Bristols house. A little before his death one Ballard and English Priest went to tamper with him, and Sir Edmund Varney meeting him coming down the stairs out of Washingtons chamber, they fell from words to blows; but they were parted. The busines was like to gather very ill bloud, and com to a great height, had not Count Gonda∣mar quasht it, which I beleeve he could not have done, unles the times had bin favorable; for such is the reverence they bear to the Church here, and so holy a conceit they have of all Ecclesi∣astics, that the greatest Don in Spain will tremble to offer the mean'st of them any outrage or affront: Count Gondamar hath also helpt to free som English that were in the Inquisition in Toledo and Sevill, and I could allege many instances how ready and chearfull he is to assist any Englishman whatsoever; notwithstan∣ding the base affronts he hath often receivd of the London buys as he calls them. At his last return hither, I heard of a merry saying of his, to the Queen, who discoursing with him about the great∣nesse of London, and whether it was as populous as Madrid, yes Madame, and more populous when I came away, though I beleeve ther's scarce a man left there now but all women and children; for all the mem both in Court and City were ready booted and spurd to go away. And I am sorry to hear how other Nations do much tax the English of their incivility to public Ministers of State, and what ballads and pasquils, and fopperies and plays, were made against Gondamar for doing his Masters busines. My Lord of Bristoll coming from Germany to Brussells, notwithstanding that at his arrivall thither, the news was fresh that he had reliev'd Frankindale as he past, yet was he not a whit the less welcom, but valued the more both by the Archdutchess her self and Spino with all the rest; as also that they knew well that the said Earl had bin the sole adviser of keeping Sir Robert Mansell abroad with that Fleet upon the coast of Spain till the Palsgrave should be restord. I pray Sir when you go to London wall, and Tower hill, be pleas'd
to remember my humble service, where you know it is due. So I am. Madrid, Aug. 15. 1623. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H. V. To the right Honble, the Lord Vicount Colchester. My very good Lord, I Receiv'd the letter and commands your Lopp. pleas'd to send me by Mr Walsingham Gresley; and touching the Constitutions and Orders of the Contratation House of the West Indies in Sevill, I cannot procure it for love or money, upon any terms, though I have done all possible diligence▪ therin: And som tell me it is dangerous, and no less then Treason in him, that gives the copy of them to any, in regard 'tis counted the greatest Mystery of all the Spanish government. That difficulty which hapned in the busines of the match of gi∣ving caution to the Pope, is now overcome; for wheras our King answer'd that he could give no other caution than his Royall word and his sons, exemplified under the great Seal of England, and confirm'd by his Counsell of State, it being impossible to have it done by Parliament, in regard of the aversnes the common peo∣ple have to the alliance; And wheras this gave no satisfaction to Rome, the King of Spain now offers himself for caution, for put∣ting in execution what is stipulated in behalf of the Roman Catho∣lics throughout his Majestie of great Britain's Dominions; but he desires to consult his ghostly fathers to know whether he may do i without wronging his conscience; hereupon there hath bin a I∣ta form'd of Bishops and Iesuits, who have bin already a good while about it, and the Bishop of Segovia, who is as it were Lord Threasurer, having written a Treatise lately against the match, was outed of his Office, banisht the Court, and confin'd to his Diocess. The Duke of Buckingham hath bin ill dispos'd a good while, and lies sick at Court, where the Prince hath no public exercise of devotion, but only bedchamber prayers, and some thin that his lodging in the Kings house is like to prove a disadvantag
to the main business, for wheras most sorts of people here hardly hold us to be Christians, if the Prince had had a Palace of his own, and bin permitted to have us'd a room for an open Chappell to ex∣ercise the Liturgy of the Church of England, it would have brought them to have a better opinion of us; And to this end ther were som of our best Church plate, and vestments brought hither, but never us'd. The slow place of this Iunta troubles us a little, and to the Divines ther are som Civilians admitted lately, and the quae∣re is this, whether the King of Spain may bind himself by oath in the behalf of the King of England, to perform such and such Arti∣cles that are agreed on in favour of the Roman Catholics by vertue of this match, whether the King may doe this salva conscientia. Ther was a great show lately here of baiting of bulls with men for the entertainment of the Prince; it is the chiefest of all Spanish sports, commonly ther are men killd at it, therfore ther are Priests appointed to be there ready to confess them: It hath hapned often∣times that a Bull hath taken up two men upon his horns with their guts dangling about them; the horsemen run with lances and swords, the foot with goads. As I am told the Pope hath sent di∣vers Bulls against this sport of bulling, yet it will not be left, the Nation hath taken such an habituall delight in it. Ther was an ill favord accident like to have hapned lately at the Kings house, in that part wher my Lord of Carlile, and my Lord Denbigh were lodg'd; for my Lord Denbigh late at night taking a pipe of To∣bacco in a Balcone which hung over the Kings garden, he blew down the ashes, which falling upon som parchd combustible mat∣ter, began to flame and spread, but Master Davis my Lord of Carliles Barber leapt down a great height, and quencht it. So with continuance of my most humble service, I rest ever ready Madrid, Aug. 16. 1623. At your Lopps. commands, J. H. XXI. To Sir James Crofts, from Madrid. SIR, THe Court of Spain affords now little news, for ther is a Remo∣ra sticks to the busines of the match, till the Iunta of Di∣vines
give up their opinion: But from Turky ther came a Letter this week wherin ther is the strangest and most tragicall news, that in my small reading no Sory can parallell, or shew with more pregnancie the instability and tottering estate of human greatnes, and the sandy foundation wheron the vast Ottoman Em∣pire is reard upon: For Sultan Osman the grand Turk. a man ac∣cording to the humor of that Nation, warlike and fleshd in bloud, and a violent hater of Christians, was in the flower of his yeers, in the heat and height of his courage, knockt in the head by one of his own slaves, and one of the meanest of them, with a battle axe, and the murtherer never after proceeded against or questi∣oned. The ground of this Tragedy was the late ill success he had a∣gainst the Pole, wherin he lost about 100000. horse for want of forrage, and 80000. men for want of fighting, which he imputed to the cowardize of his Ianizaries, who rather than bear the brunt of the battell, were more willing to return home to their wives and merchandizing, which they are now permitted to do contrary to their first institution, which makes them more worldly, and less venturous. This disgracefull return from Poland stuck in Osmans stomach, and so studied a way how to be revengd of the Ianiza∣ries; therfore by the advice of his grand Visier (a stout gallant man who had bin one of the chief Beglerbegs in the East) he inten∣ded to erect a new Soldiery in Asia about Damasco, of the Coords a frontier people, and consequently hardy and inur'd to Arms. Of these he purpos'd to entertain 40000. as a lifegard for his pe∣son, though the main design was to suppress his lazie and lust∣full Ianizaries, with men of fresh new spirits. To disguise this plot, he pretended a pilgrimage to Mecha, to visit Mahomets Tomb, and reconcile himself to the Prophet, who he throught was angry with him, because of his late ill success in Poland: but this colour was not specious enough, in regard he might have performd this Pilgrimage with a smaller train and charge; therfore it was propounded that the Emir of Sdm should be made to rise up in arms, that so he might go with a greater power and treasure, but this plot was held disadvantagious to him, in regard his Ianizaries must then have attended him: so he pre∣tends and prepares only for the Pilgrimage, yet he makes ready as much treasure as he could make, and to that end he melts his plate, and furniture of horses, with divers Church lamps; this fomented som jealousie in the Ianizaries, with certain words which should drop from him, that he would find soldiers shortly should
whip them. Hereupon he hath sent over to Asias side his pavili∣ons, many of his servants, with his jewells and treasure, resolving upon the voyage, notwithstanding that divers petitions were deli∣vered him from the Clergy, the civill Magistrate and the Soldi∣ery that he should desist from the voyage, but all would not do: therupon upon the point of his departure, the Ianizaries and Spies came in a tumultuary manner to the Seraglio, and in a high insolent language disswaded him from the Pilgrimage, and demanded of him his ill counsellors. The first he granted, but for the second, he said that it stood not with his honor, to have his neerest servants torn from him so, without any legall proceeding, but he assur'd them that they should appear in the Divan the next day, to answer for themselves; but this not satisfying, they went away in a fury and plunderd the Grand Visiers Palace, with divers others; Osman hereupon was advis'd to go from his private gardens that night to the Asian shore, but his destiny kept him from it: so the next morning they came armd to the Court, (but having made a cove∣nant not to violate the Imperiall Throne) and cut in peeces the Grand Visier with divers other great Officers, and not finding Os∣man, who had hid himself in a small lodge in one of his gardens, they cried out they must have a Musulman Emperor; therfore they broke into a Dungeon, and brought out Mustapha Osmans Unkle, whom he had clapt there at the beginning of the tumult, and who had bin King before, but was depos'd for his simplicity, being a kind of santon or holy man, that is, twixt an Innocent and an Idi∣ot: This Mustapha they did reinthronize and place in the Otoman Empire. The next day they found out Osman, and brought him before Mustapha, who excus'd himself with tears in his eyes for his rash at∣tempts, which wrought tendernes in som, but more scorn and fu∣ry in others, who fell upon the Capi Aga, with other Officers, and cut them in peeces before his eyes: Osman thence was carried to Prison, and as he was getting a horsback, a common soldier took off his Turban, and clapt his upon Osmans head, who in his pas∣sage begd a draught of water at a Fountain: The next day the new Visier went with an Executioner to strangle him, in regard ther were two younger brothers more of his to preserve the Oto∣mans race, where after they had rushd in, he being newly awakd, and staring upon them, and thinking to defend himself, a robust boysterous rogue knockt him down, and so the rest fell upon him and strangled him with much adoe. Thus fell one of the greatest Potentats upon earth by the hands
of a contemptible slave, for ther is not a free born subject in all that vast Empire: Thus fell he that Entitles himself most puissant and highest Monarch of the Turks, King above all Kings, a King that dwelleth upon the earthly Paridise, son of Mahomet, keeper of the grave of the Christian God, Lord of the Tree of Life, and of the River Flisky, Prior of the earthly Paridise, Conqueror of the Macedonians, the seed of great Alexander, Prince of the Kingdoms of Tartary, Mesopotamia, Media, and of the martiall Mammaluck, Anatolia, Bithynia, Asia, Armenia, Servia, Thracia, Morta, Valachi, Moldavia, and of all warlike Hungary, Soverain Lord and Com∣mander of all Greece, Persia, both the Arabia's, the most noble king∣dom of Egypt, Tremisen and African, Empire of Trabsond and the most glorious Constantinople, Lord of all the white and black Seas, of the holy City Mecha and Medina, shining with divine glory, com∣mander of all things that are to be commanded, and the strongest and mightiest Champion of the wide world, a Warrior appoin∣ted by Heaven in the edge of the sword, a Persecutor of his Enemies, a most perfect jewell of the blessed Tree, the chie∣fest keeper of the crucified God, &c. with other such bombar∣dicall Titles. This Osman was a man of goodly Constitution, an amiable as∣pect, and of excesse of courage, but sordidly covetous, which drove him to violat the Church, and to melt the Lamps therof, which made the Mufti say that this was a due judgment faln upon him from Heaven for his Sacrilege. He us'd also to make his person too cheap, for he would go ordinarily in the night time with two men after him like a petty Constable, and peep into the Cauph∣houses and Cabarets, and apprehend Soldiers there. And these two things it seems was the cause, that when he was so assaulted in the Seraglio, not one of his Domestic servants, wherof he had 3000, would lit an Arm to help him. Som few days before his death, he had a strange dream, for hee dreamt that he was mounted upon a great Camell, who would not go neither by fair nor foul means, and lighting off him, and thin∣king to strike him with his Cimitier, the body of the beast vanisht, leaving the Head and the bridle only in his hands; when the Muf∣ti and the Hoggies could not interpret this dream, Mustapha his Uncle did it, for he said, the Camell signified his Empire, his moun∣ting of him his excesse in Government, his lighting down his depo∣sing. Another kind of Prophetic speech dropt from the Grand Vi∣sier to Sir Thomas Roe our Ambassador there, who having gone a little before this Tragedy to visit the said Visier, told him what
whisperings and mutterings there were in every corner for this A∣siatic voyage, and what ill consquences might ensue from it; ther∣fore it might well stand with his great wisdom to stay it; but if it held, he desir'd him to leave a charge with the Chimacham his De∣puty, that the English Nation in the Port, should be free from out∣rages: wherunto the Grand Visier answer'd, Trouble not your self about that, for I will not remove so far from Constantinople, but I wil leave one of my legs behind to serve you, which prov'd too true, for he was murther'd afterwards, and one of his legs was hung up in the Hippodrome. This fresh Tragedy makes me to give over wondring at any thing that ever I heard or read, to shew the lubricity of mundan great∣nes, as also the fury of the vulgar, which like an impetuous Torrent gathereth strength by degrees as it meets with divers Dams, and being come to the hight, cannot stop it self: for when this rage of the soldiers began first, there was no design at all to violat or hurt the Emperor, but to take from him his ill Counsel∣lors, but being once a foot, it grew by insensible degrees to the ut∣most of outrages. The bringing out of Mustapha from the Dungeon, where he was prisoner, to be Emperor of the Musulmans, puts me in mind of what I read in Mr. Camden of our late Queen Elizabeth, how she was brought from the Scaffold, to the English Throne. They who profess to be Criticks in policy here, hope that this murthering of Osman may in time breed good bloud, and prove advantageous to Christendom; for though this be the first Empe∣ror of the Turks that was dispatcht so, he is not like to be the last, now that the soldiers have this precedent: others think that if that design in Asia had taken, it had been very probable the Con∣stantinopolitans had hoisd up another King, and so the Empire had been dismembred, and by this division had lost strength, as the Ro∣man Empire did, when it was broken into East and West. Excuse me that this my Letter is become such a Monster, I mean that it hath past the sise and ordinary proportion of a Letter, for the matter it treats of is monstrous, besides it is a rule that Histori∣call Letters have more liberty to be long than others: In my next you shall hear how matters pass here, in the mean time, and always I rest Madrid, Aug. 17. 1623. Your Lordships most devoted Servitor, J. H.
XXII. To the Right Honble. Sir Tho. Savage, Knight and Baronet. Honble. SIR, THe procedure of things in relation to the grand busines the match, was at kind of a stand when the long winded Iunta deliver'd their opinions, and fell at last upon this result, that his Catholic Majesty for the satisfaction of St. Peter, might oblige him∣self in the behalf of England, for the performance of those capitu∣lations which reflected upon the Roman Catholics in that Kingdom; and in case of non-performance, then to right himself by war; since that, the matrimoniall Articles were solemnly sworne unto by the King of Spain and his Highness, the two Favorits, our two Ambas∣sadors, the Duke of Infantado and other Counsellors of State being present; hereupon the eighth of the next September, is appoin∣ted to be the day of Desposorios, the day of affiance, or the be∣trothing day; ther was much gladnes exprest here, and lumina∣ries of joy were in every great street throughout the City: but there is an unlucky accident hath interven'd, for the King gave the Prince a solemn visit since, and told him Pope Gregory was dead, who was so great a friend to the match, but in regard the bu∣sines was not yet com to perfection, he could not proceed further in it till the former Dispensation were ratified by the new Pope Vr∣ban, which to procure he would make it his own task, and that all possible expedition should be us'd in't, and therfore desir'd his pati∣ence in the interim. The Prince answer'd, and prest the necessity of his speedy return with divers reasons, he said ther was a generall kind of murmuring in England for his so long abseuce, that the King his Father was old and sickly, that the Fleet of shipe were already, he thought, at Sea to fetch him, the winter drew on, and withall that the Articles of the match were sign'd in England, with this proviso, that if he be not com back by such a month they should be of no validity. The King replyed, that since his Highness was resolv'd upon so suddain a departure, he would please to leave a Proxy be∣hind to ish the marriage, and he would take it for a favor if he would depute Him to personat him, and ten days after the ratifica∣tion shal come from Rome the busines should be don, and afterwards
he might send for his wife when he pleas'd. The Prince rejoyn'd, that amongst those multitudes of royall favors which he had re∣ceiv'd from his Majesty, this transcended all the rest, therfore hee would most willingly leave a Proxy for his Majesty and another for Don Carlos to this effect; so they parted for that time without the least ombrage of discontent, nor do I hear of any engendred since. The last month 'tis true the Iunta of Divines dwelt so long upon the busines, that ther were whisperings that the Prince intended to go away disguis'd as he came, and the question being ask'd by a per∣son of quality, ther was a brave answer made, that i love brought him thither, it is not fear shall drive him away. There are preparations already a foot for his return, and the two Prexies are drawn and left in my Lord of Bristolls hands. Notwith∣standing this ill favord stop, yet we are here all confident the busi∣nes will take effect: In which hopes I rest Madrid, 18 Aug. 1623. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XXIII. To Captain Nich: Leat at his house in London. SIR, THis Letter comes to you by Mr. Richard Altham, of whose sud∣den departure hence I am very sorry, it being the late death of his brother Sir Iames Altham. I have been at a stand in the busines a gond while, for his Highness comming hither was no advantage to me in the earth: He hath done the Spaniards divers courtesies, but he hath been very sparing in doing the English any: It may be perhaps because it may be a diminution of honor to be beholden to any forraign Prince to do his own Subjects favors: but my busines requires no favor, all I desire is justice, which I have not obtain'd yet in reality. The Prince is preparing for his jorney, I shall to  again closely when he is gone, and make a shaft or a bolt of it. The Popes death hath retarded the proceedings of the match, but we are so far from despairing of it, that one may have wagers thirty to one it will take effect still. He that deals with this Nation must have a great deal
of phlegme, and if this grand busines of State, the match, suf∣fer such protractions and puttings off, you need not wonder that private negotiations, as mine is, should be subject to the same in∣conveniences. Ther shall be no means left unattempted that my best industry can find out to put a period to it, and when his High∣nesse is gon, I hope to find my Lord of Bristoll more at leasure to continue his favour and furtherance, which hath been much alrea∣dy: So I rest Madrid, Aug. 19. 1623. Yours ready to serv you, J. H. XXIV. To Sir James Crofts. SIR, THe Prince is now upon his jorney to the Sea side, where my Lord of Rutland attends for him with a royall fleet: Ther are many here shrink in their shoulders, and are very sensible of his departure, and the Lady Infanta resents it more than any; she hath caus'd a Mass to be sung every day ever since for his good Voyage: The Spaniards themselves confess ther was never Princes so bravely wooed. The King and his two Brothers accom∣panied his Highnes to the Escurial some twenty miles off, and would have brought him to the Sea side, but that the Queen is big and hath not many days to go; when the King and he parted, there past wonderfull great endearments and embraces in divers postures be∣tween them a long time; and in that place there is a Pillar to be erected as a Monument to Posterity. Ther are some Grandes; and Count Gondamar with a great train besides gone with him to the Marine, to the Sea side, which will be many days journey, and must needs put the King of Spain to a mighty expence, besides his seven months entertainment here: we hear that when he past through Valladolid, the Duke of Lerma was retired thence for the time by speciall command from the King, left he might have discours with the Prince, whom he extremely desir'd to see: This sunk deep into the old Duke, insomuch that he said that of all the acts of malice which Olivares had ever done him, he resented this more than any: He bears up yet very well under his Cardinalls habit,
which hat kept him from many a foul storm that might have faln upon him els from the temporall power. The Duke of Uzeda his son finding himself to decline in favor at Court, had retir'd to the Countrey, and dyed soon after of discontentment: During his sickness the Cardinall writ this short weighty Letter unto him: Dizen me, que Mareys de necio, por mi, mas temo mis anos qué mis E∣igos. Lerma. I shall not need to English it to you who is so great a Master of the Language. Since I began this Letter, wee understand the Prince is safely embarqu'd, but not without som danger of being cast away, had not Sir Sackvill Trever taken him up: I pray God send him a good voyage, and us no ill news from England. My most humble service at Tower-hill, so I am Madrid, Aug. 21. 1623. Your humble Servitor, J. H. XXV. To my Brother, Doctor Howell. My Brother, SInce our Prince his departure hence, the Lady Infanta stu∣dieth English apace, and one Mr. Wadsworth and Father Bo∣niface two Englishmen, are appointed her teachers, and have access to her every day. We account her as it were our Princess now, and as we give, so she takes that Title: Our Ambassadors my Lord of Bristoll, and Sir Walter Astn, will not stand now covered before her when they have audience, because they hold her to be their Princess: she is preparing divers suits of rich Cloaths for his Highness of persum'd Amber leather, some embroder'd with Pearl, some with Gold, some with Silver; her Family is a setling apace, and most of her Ladies and Officers are known already; we want nothing now but one dispatch more from Rome, and then the marriage will be solemnizd, and all things consummated; yet there is one Mr. Clerk (with the lame arm) that came hither from the Sea side, as soon as the Prince was gon, hee is one of the Duke of Buckinghams creatures, yet he lies at the Earl of Bristols house which we wonder at, considering the darknes that hapned twixt the Duke and the Earl: we fear that this Clerk hath brought somthing that may puzzle the busines. Besides having occasion to make my ad∣dress
lately to the Venetian Ambassador, who is interressed in som part of that great busines for which I am here, he told me confi∣dently it would be no match, nor did he think it was ever inten∣ded. But I want faith to believe him yet, for I know Saint Mark is no friend to it, nor France or any other Prince or State besides the King of Denmarck, whose Grandmother was of the house of Austria being sister to Charles the Emperor. Touching the busi∣nes of the Palatinate, our Ambassadors were lately assur'd by Oli∣vares, and all the Counsellors here, & that in this Kings name, that he would procure his Majestie of great Britain entire satisfaction herein, and Olivares, giving them the joy, intreated them to as∣sure their King upon their honor, and upon their lives of the re∣ality hereof; for the Infanta her self (said he) hath stird in it, and makes it now her own busines; for it was a firm peace and amity (which he confest could never be without the accommodati∣on of things in Germany) as much as an alliance, which his Ca∣tholic Majesty aimd at. But wee shall know shortly now what to trust to, we shall walk no more in mists, though som give out yet that our prince shall embrace a cloud for Iuno at last. I pray pre∣sent my service to Sir Iohn Franklin, and Sir Iohn Smith, with all at the Hill and Dale, and when you send to Wales, I pray con∣vey the inclos'd to my Father. So my dear brother I pray God bless us both, and bring us again joyfully together. Madrid, Aug. 12. 1623. Your very loving Brother, J. H. XXVI. To my noble friend, Sir John North Knight. SIR, I Receiv'd lately one of yours, but it was of a very old date: we have our eyes here now all fixd upon Rome, greedily expecting the Ratification, and lately a strong rumor ran it was com, in so much Mr Clerk who was sent hither from the Prince being a ship∣board, (and now lies sick at my Lord of Bristolls house of a Calen∣ture) hearing of it, he desired to speak with him, for he had som∣thing
to deliver him from the Prince, my Lord Ambassador being com to him, Mr Clerk delivered a letter from the Prince; the con∣tents wherof were, that wheras he had left certain Proxies in his hand to be deliverd to the King of Spain after the Ratification was com, he desir'd and requir'd him not to do it till he should re∣ceive further order from England; my Lord of Bristoll hereupon went to Sir Walter Aston, who was in joynt Commission with him for concluding the match, and shewing him the Letter, what my Lord Aston said I know not, but my Lord of Bristoll told him that they had a Commission Royall under the broad Seal of England to conclude the match; he knew as well as he how earnest the King their Master hath bin any time these ten years to have it don; how ther could not be a better pawn for the surrendry of the Palatinat, than the Infanta in the Prince his arms, who would never rest till she did the work to merit love of our Nation: He told him al∣so how their owne particular fortunes depended upon't, besides if he should delay one moment to deliver the Proxy after the Ratifi∣cation was com according to agreement, the Infanta would hold her self so blemish'd in her honor, that it might overthrow all things. Lastly, he told him that they incurr'd the hazard of their heads if they should suspend the executing his Majesties Commission upon any order but from that power which gave it, who was the King him∣self; hereupon both the Ambassadors proceeded still in preparing matters for the solemnizing of the mariage: the Earl of Bristoll had caus'd above thirty rich Liveries to be made of watchet Vel∣vet, with silver lace up to the very capes of the Cloaks, the best sorts wherof were valued at 80 l. a Livery: My Lord Aston had also provided new Liveries, and a fortnight after the said politic re∣port was blown up, the Ratification came indeed complete and full; so the mariage day was appointed, a Terrass cover'd all over with Tapestry was rais'd from the Kings Palace to the next Church, which might be about the same extent, as from White-Hall to West∣minster Abbey, and the King intended to make his sister a Wife, and his daughter (wherof the Queen was deliver'd a little before) a Christian upon the same day; the Grandes and great Ladies had been invited to the mariage, and order was sent to all the Port Towns to discharge their great Ordnance, and sundry other things were prepar'd to honor the solemnity: but when wee were thus at the hight of our hopes, a day or two before; there came Mr. Killegree, Gresley, Wood and Davies, one upon the neck of another with a new Commission to my Lord of Bristoll immediatly from his Majesty, countermanding him to deliver the Proxy aforesaid, untill a full
and absolut satisfaction were had for the surrendry of the Palatinat under this Kings hand and Seal, in regard he desir'd his Son should be married to Spain, and his Son in law remarried to the Palatinat at one time; hereupon all was dasht to peeces; and that frame which was rearing so many years, was ruin'd in a moment. This news strook a damp in the hearts of all people here, and they wisht that the Postillons that brought it, had all broke their necks in the way. My Lord of Bristoll hereupon went to Court to acquaint the King with his new Commission, and so propos'd the restitution of the Palatinat, the King answer'd 'twas none of his to give, 'tis true he had a few Towns there, but he held them as Commissioner only for the Emperor, and he could not command an Emperor; yet if his Majesty of great Britain would put a Treaty a foot, hee would send his own Ambassadors to joyn; In the interim, the Earl was commanded not to deliver the foresaid Proxy of the Prince, for the desposorios or espousall untill Christmas: (And herein it seems his Majesty with you was not well inform'd, for those powers of Proxies expir'd before) the King here said further that if his Uncle the Emperor, or the Duke of Bavaria would not be conformable to reason, he would raise as great an Army for the Prince Palsgrave▪ as he did under Spinola when he first invaded the Palatinat; and to secure this, he would ingage his Contratation House of the West Indies, with his Plate Fleet, and give the most binding instrument that could be under his hand and Seal. But this gave no satisfa∣ction, therfore my Lord of Bristoll I beleeve hath not long to stay here, for he is commanded to deliver no more Letters to the Infan∣ta, nor demand any more audience, and that she should be no more stiled Princess of England, or Wales. The foresaid Caution which this King offer'd to my Lord of Bristoll, made me think of what I read of his Grandfather Philip the second, who having been maried to our Queen Mary, and it being thought she was with child of him, and was accordingly prayed for at Pauls Cross, though it proved af∣terward but a tympany, King Philip prepos'd to our Parliament that they would pass an Act that he might be Regent during his or her minority that should be born, and he would give good caution to surrender the Crown, when he or she should com to age: the motion was hotly canvas'd in the house of Peers, and like to pass, when the Lord Paget rose up and said, I, but who shall sue the Kings bond? so the busines was dasht. I have no more news to send you now, and I am sory I have so much, unless it were better; for we that have busi∣nes to negotiat here are like to suffer much by this rupture:
welcom be the will of God, to whose benediction I commend you, and rest Madrid, Aug. 25. 1623. Your most humble Servitor, J. H. XXVII. To the Right Honble the Lord Clifford. My good Lord, THough this Court cannot afford now such comfortable news in relation to England as I could wish, yet such as it is, you shall receive. My Lord of Bristoll is preparing for England, I waited upon him lately when he went to take his leave at Court, and the King washing his hands took a Ring from off his own finger, and put it upon his, which was the greatest honor that ever he did any Ambassador as they say here; he gave him also a Cupbord of Plate, alued at 20000 Crowns: There were also large and high promi∣ses made him, that in case he feard to fall upon any rock in Eng∣land, by reason of the power of those who malignd him, if hee would stay in any of his Dominions, he would give him means and honor equall to the highest of his enemies. The Earl did not only wave, but disdaind these Propositions made unto him by Olivares; and said he was so confident of the King his Masters justice and high judgment, and of his own innocency, that hee conceiv'd no power could be able to do him hurt. Ther hath occurd nothing lately in this Court worth the advertisement: They speak much of the strange carriage of that boisterous Bishop of Halverstad, (for so they term him here) that having taken a place where there were two Monasteries of Nuns and Friers, he caus'd divers feather∣beds to be rip'd and all the feathers to be thrown in a great Hall whither the Nuns and Friers were thrust naked with their bodies ld and pitchd, and to tumble among these feathers, which makes them here presage him an ill death. So I most affectionately kiss your hands and rest Madrid, Aug. 26. 1623. Your very humble Servitor, J. H.
XXVIII. To Sir John North. SIR, I Have many thanks to render you for the favor you lately did to a kinsman of mine, Mr. Vaughan, and for divers other which I defer till I return to that Court, and that I hope will not be long. Touching the procedure of matters here, you shall understand that my Lord Aston had speciall audience lately of the King of Spain, and afterwards presented a Memorial wherin ther was a high complaint against the miscarriage of the two Spanish Ambassadors now in England the Marquis of Inopifa and Don Carlos Coloma, the substance of it was that the said Ambassadors in a privat audience his Majesty of great Britain had given them, informd him of a perni∣cions plot against his Person and royall authority, which was that at the beginning of your now Parliament, the Duke of Bucking∣ham with others his complices often met and consulted in a clan∣destin way, how to break the treatie both of Match and Palatinat: and in case his Majesty was unwilling therunto, he should have a Countrey house or two to retire unto for his recreation and health, in regard the Prince is now of years & judgment fit to govern. His Majesty so resented this, that the next day he sent them many thanks for the care they had of him, and desird them to perfect the work, and now that they had detected the treason to discover also the trai∣tors, but they were shy in that point, the King sent again desiring them to send him the names of the Conspirators in a paper, seald up by one of their own confidents, which he would receive with his own hands, and no soul should see it els; advising them with∣all, that they should not prefer this discovery before their own ho∣nors, to be accounted false Accusers: they replied that they had don enough already by instancing in the Duke of Buckingham, and it might easily be guest who were his Confidents, and Creatures. Hereupon his Majesty put those whom he had any grounds to sus∣pect to their oaths: And afterward sent my Lord Conway, and Sir Francis Cotington, to tell the Ambassadors that he had left no means unassaid to discover the Conspiration, that he had sound upon oath such a clearness of ingenuity in the Duke of Buckingham, th satisfied him of his innocency: Therfore he had just cause to
conceive that this information of theirs, proceeded rather from ma∣lice and som politicall ends then from truth, and in regard they would not produce the Authors of so dangerous a Treason, they made themselves to be justly thought the Authors of it: And therfore though he might by his own royall justice, and the law of nations punish this excesse and insolence of theirs, and high wrong they had done to his best servants, yea to the Prince his Son, for through the sides of the Duke they wounded him, in regard it was impossible that such a design should be attempted without his privi∣ty, yet he would not be his own Judge herein, but would refer them to the King their Master whom he conceiv'd to be so just, that hee doubted not but he would see him satisfied, and therfore hee would send an express unto him hereabouts to demand Justice, and repara∣tion: this busines is now in agitation, but we know not what will become of it. We are all here in a sad disconsolat condition, and the Merchants shake their heads up and down out of an apprehen∣sion of som fearfull war to follow: so I most affectionatly kiss your hands and rest Madrid, Aug. 26 1623. Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XXIX. To Sir Kenelme Digby Knight. SIR, YOu have had knowledge (none better) of the progression and growings of the Spanish match from time to time; I must acquaint you now with the rupture and utter dissolution of it, which was not long a doing; for it was done in one audience that my Lord of Bristoll had lately at Court, whence it may be inferr'd, that 'tis far more easie to pull down, than reare up, for that stru∣cture which was so many years a rearing, was dasht as it were in a trice: Dissolution goeth a faster pace than Composition. And it may be said, that the civill actions of men, specially great af∣fairs of Monarchs (as this was) have much Analogie in degrees of progression with the naturall production of man. To make man there are many acts must procede, first a meeting and copulation
of the Sexes, then Conception, which requires a well-disposed womb to retain the prolificall seed, by the constriction and occlusi∣on of the orifice of the Matrix, which seed being first bloud, and af∣terwards cream, is by a gentle ebullition coagulated, and turnd to a crudded lump, which the womb by vertue of its naturall heat pre∣pares to be capable to receive form, and to be organiz'd; wherup∣on Nature falls a working to delineat all the members, beginning with those that are most noble: as the Heart, the Brain, the Liver; wherof Galen would have the Liver, which is the shop and source of the bloud, and Aristotle the Heart to be the first fram'd, in re∣gard 'tis primùm vivens, & ultimùm moriens: Nature continues in this labor untill a perfect shape be introduc'd, and this is call'd For∣mation which is the third act, and is a production of an organicall body out of the spermatic substance, caus'd by the plastic vertue of the vitall spirits: and somtimes this act is finisht thirty days after the Conception, somtimes fifty, but most commonly in forty two, or forty five, and is sooner don in the male. This being done, the Em∣bryon is animated with three souls; the first with that of Plants call'd the vegetable soul, then with a sensitive, which all brute A∣nimals have, and lastly, the Rationall soul is infus'd, and these three in man are like Trigonus in Tetragono; the two first are gene∣rated ex Traduce, from the seed of the Parents, but the last is by im∣mediat infusion from God, and 'tis controverted 'twixt Philosophers and Divines, when this infusion is made. This is the fourth act that goeth to make man, and is called A∣nimation: and as the Naturalists allow Animation double the time that Formation had from the Conception, so they allow to the ripe∣ning of the Embryo in the womb, and to the birth therof treble the time that Animation had, which hapneth somtimes in nine, somtimes in ten months. This Grand busines of the Spanish match, may be said to have had such degrees of progression; first there was a meeting and coupling on both sides, for a Iunta in in Spain, and som select Counsellors of State were appointed in England; After this Con∣junction the busines was conceiv'd, then it receiv'd form, then life, (though the quickning was slow) but having had nere upon ten years in lieu of ten months to be perfected, it was infortunately strangled when it was ripe and ready for birth; and I would they had never been born that did it, for it is like to be out of my way 30: ol, And as the Embryo in the womb is wrapt in three mem∣branes or tunicles, so this great busines, you know better than I, was involv'd in many difficulties, and died so intangled before it could break through them.
There is a buzz here of a match 'twixt England and France; I pray God send it a speedier Formation and Animation than this had, and that it may not prove an abortive. I send you herewith a letter from the Paragon of the Spanish Court Doña Anna Maria Manique, the Duke of Maquedas sister, who re∣spects you in a high Degree; she told me this was the first Letter she ever writ to man in her life, except the Duke her brother: she was much sollicited to write to Mr. Thomas Cary, but she would not. I did also your Message to the Marquesa d' Inososa who put me to sit a good while with her upon her Estrado which was no simple favor: you are much in both these Ladies Books, and much spoken of by divers others in this Court. I could not recover your Diamond has∣band which the Picaroon snatched from you in the coach▪ though I us'd all means possible, as far as book, bell and candle in point of Excommunication against the party in all the Churches of Madrid, by which means you know divers things are recover'd: So I most affectionatly kiss your hands and rest Post. Yours of the 2. of March came to safe hand. Madrid. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XXX. To my Cosen, Mr J. Price, (now Knight) at the middle Temple, from Madrid. COsen suffer my Letter to salute you first in this Distich, A Thamisi Tagus quot leucis flumine distat, Oscula tot manibus porto, Pricaee, tuis. As many miles Thames lies from Tagus Strands, I bring so many kisses to thy hands. My dear Jack, IN the large Register or Almanack of my friends in England, you are one of the chiefest red Letters, you are one of my Festi∣all Rubriques; for whensoever you fall upon my mind, or my
mind falls upon you, I keep Holy day all the while, and this hap∣pens so often that you leave me but few working days throughout the whole year, fewer far than this Countrey affords, for in their Calender above five Months of the twelve are dedicated to som Saint or other, and kept Festivall; a Religion that the London Apprenti∣ces would like well. I thank you for yours of the third Current, and the ample Re∣lations you give me of London Occurrences, but principally for the powerfull and sweet assurances you give me of your love, both in Verse and Prose. All businesses here are off the hinges, for one late audience of my Lord of Bristoll pulld down what was so many years a raising. And as Thomas Aquinas told an Artist of a costly curious Statue in Rome, that by som accident while he was a trim∣ming it, fell down and so broke to peeces, Opus triginta annoram destruxisti, thou hast destroy'd the work of thirty years; so it may be said that a work nere upon ten years is now suddenly shaterd to peeces. I hope by Gods grace to be now speedily in England, and to re-enjoy your most dear society: In the mean time may all hap∣pines attend you. Ad Litteram, Ociùs ut grandire gradus oratio, possis Prosa, tibi binos jungimus ecce pedes. That in thy jorney thou maist be more fleet, To my dull Prose I add these Metric feet. Resp. Ad mare cum venio quid agam? Repl. tùm praepete penna Te ferat, est lator nam levis ignis, Amor, But when I com to Sea how shall I shift? Let Love transport thee then, for Fire is swift. Your most affectionat Cos. J. H. March 30. 1624.
XXXI. To the Lord Vicount Col. from Madrid. Right Honble. YOur Lopps. of the third Current, came to safe hand, and being now upon point of parting with this Court I thought it worth the labor to send your Lopps a short survey of the Monarchy of Spain; a bold undertaking your Lopp. will say, to comprehend within the narrow bounds of a Letter such a huge bulk, but as in the bosse of a small Diamond ring one may discern the image of a mighty mountain, so I will endeavour that your Lopp. may behold the power of this great King in this paper. Spain hath bin alwaies esteemd a Countrey of ancient renown, and as it is incident to all other, she hath had her vicissiudes, and turns of Fortune: She hath bin thrice orecome; by the Romans, by the Goths, and by the Moors▪ the middle conquest continueth to this day; for this King and most of the Nobility proses themselves to have descended of the Goths; the Moores kept here about 700. years, and it is a remark∣able Story how they got in first; which was thus upon good record. There raignd in Spain Don Rodrigo, who kept his Court then at Malaga; He emploid the Conde Don Julian Ambassador to Barbary, who had a Daughter, (a young beautifull Lady) that was maid of Honor to the Queen: The King spying her one day refreshing her self under an Ar∣bour, sell enamour'd with her, and never left till he had deslowrd her: She resenting much the dishonor, writ a letter to her Father in Barbary under this Allegory, That there was a fair green Apple upon the table, and the Kings poignard fell upon't and clest it in two. Don Iulian apprehending the meaning, got letters of revocation, and came back to Spain, wher he so complied with the King, that he became his Favorite: Amongst other things he advis'd the King that in regard he was now in Peace with all the world, he would dismisse his Gallies and Garrisons that were up and down the Sea coasts, because it was a su∣perfluous charge. This being don and the Countrey left open to any In∣vader, he prevaild with the King to have leave to go with his Lady to see their friends in Tarragona, which was 300. miles off: Having bin there a while, his Lady made semblance to be sick, and so sent to pe∣tition the King, that her daughter Donna Cava (whom they had left at Court to satiat the Kings lust) might com to comfort her a while;
Cava came, and the gate through which she went sorth is call'd af her name to this day in Malaga: Don Iulian having all his chief kin∣dred there, he saild over to Barbary, and afterwards brought over the King of Morocco, and others with an Army, who suddenly invaded Spain, lying armles and open, and so conquer'd it. Don Rodrigo di∣ed gallantly in the field, but what became of Don Iulian, who for a particular revenge betrayed his own Countrey, no Story makes men. A few yeers before this happend, Rodrigo came to Toledo, where un∣der the great Church ther was a vault with huge Iron doors, and none of his Predecessors durst open it, because ther was an old Prophesie, That when that vault was open'd Spain should be conquered; Rodrigo slighting the Prophesie, caus'd the doors to be broke open, hoping to find there som Treasure, but when he entred, there was nothing sound but the pictures of Moores, of such men that a little after fulfilled the Pro∣phesie. Yet this last conquest of Spain was not perfect, for divers parts North∣west kept still under Christian Kings, specially Biscay, which was ne∣ver conquer'd, as Wales in Britanny, and the Biscayners have much Analogy with the Welsh in divers things: They retain to this day the originall Language of Spain, they are the most mountainous people, and they are reputed the ancientst Gentry; so that when any is to take the order of Knighthood, ther are no Inquistors appointed to find whether he be cleer of the bloud of the Moors as in other places. The King when he comes upon the confines, pulls off one shoo before he can tread upon any Biscay ground: And he hath good reason to esteem that Province, in regard of divers advantages he hath by it, for he hath his best timber to build ships, his best Mariners, and all his iron thence. Ther were divers bloudy battells 'twixt the remnant of Christians, and the Moors for seven hundreth yeers together, and the Spaniards getting ground more and more, drive them at last to Granada, and thence al∣so in the time of Ferdinand and Isabella quite over to Barbary: their last King was Chico, who when he fled from Granada crying and wee∣ping, the people upbraded him, That he might well weep like a wo∣man, who could not defend himself and them like a man. (This was that Ferdinand who obtaind from Rome the Title of Catholic, though some Stories say that many ages before Ricaredus the first Ortho∣dox King of the Goths, was stil'd Catholicus in a Provinciall Synod held at Toledo, which was continued by Alphonsus the first, and then made hereditary by this Ferdinand.) This absolute conquest of the Moors hapned about Henry the sevenths time, 'when the soresaid Fer∣dinand and Isabella had by alliance joynd Castile and Aragon, which with the discovery of the West Indies, which happend a little after,
was the first foundation of that greatnes wherunto Spain is now moun∣ted. Afterwards ther was an alliance with Burgundy and Austria, by the first House the seventeen Provinces fell to Spain, by the second Charles the fifth came to be Emperor: and remarkable it is how the House of Austria came to that height from a mean Earl, the Earl of Hasburgh in Germany. who having bin one day a hunting, he over∣took  Priest who had bin with the Sacrament to visit a poor sick body, the Priest being tyr'd, the Earl lighted off his horse, helpt up the Priest, and so waited upon him afoot all the while till he brought him to the Church: The Priest giving him his benediction at his going away, told him that for this great act of humility and piety, His Race should be one of the greatest that ever the world had, and ever since, which is som 240. yeers ago, the Empire hath continued in that House, which afterwards was calld the House of Austria. In Philip the seconds time the Spanish Monarchy came to its highest cumble, by the conquest of Portugall, wherby the East Indies, sun∣dry Islands in the Atlantic Sea, and divers places in Barbary were ad∣ded to the Crown of Spain. By these steps this Crown came to this Grandeur; and truly give the Spaniard his due, he is a mighty Mo∣narch, he hath Dominions in all parts of the world (which none of the four Monarchies had) both in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, (which he hath solely to himself) though our Henry the seventh had the first proffer made him: So the Sun shines all the foure and twenty houres of the naturall day upon som part or other of his countreys, for part of the Antipodes are subject to him. He hath eight Viceroys in Eu∣rope, two in the East Indies, two in the West, two in Afric, and about thirty provinciall soverain Commanders more; yet as I was told lately, in a discours twixt him and our Prince at his being here, when the Prince sell to magnifie his spacious Dominions, the King answer'd, Sir, 'tis true, it hath pleas'd God to trust me with divers Nations and Countreys, but of all these ther are but two which yeeld me any clear revenues, viz. Spain, and my West Indies, nor all Spain neither, but Castile only, the rest do scarce quit cost, for all is drunk up twixt Governors and Garrisons; yet my advantage is to have the opportunity to propagate Christian Religion, and to employ my Subjects. For the last, it must be granted that no Prince hath better means to breed brave men, and more variety of commands to heighten their spirits with no petty but Princely employments. This King besides hath other means to oblige the Gentry unto him, by such a huge number of Commendams which he hath in his gift to bestow o whom he please of any of the three Orders of Knighthood; which Eng∣land and France want. Som Noble men in Spain can despend 50000 l.
some forty, some thirty, and divers twenty thousand pounds per annum. The Church here is exceeding rich both in revenues, plate, and buildings; one cannot go to the meanest Countrey Chappell, but he will find Chalices, lamps and candlesticks of silver. There are some Bishopricks of 30000l. per annum, and divers of 10000 l. and Toledo is 100000 l. yearly re∣venue. As the Church is rich, so it is mightily reverenced here, and very powerfull, which made Philip the second rather depend upon the Clergy, than the secular Power: Therfore I do not see how Spain can be call'd a poor Countrey, considering the revenues aforesaid of Princes and Pre∣lats; nor is it so thin of People as the world makes it, and one reason may be that ther are sixteen Universities in Spain, & in one of these there were fifteen thousand Students at one time when I was there, I mean Salamanca, and in this Village of Madrid (for the King of Spain cannot keep his constant Court in any City) there are ordinarily 600000 souls. Tis true that the colonizing of the Indies, and the wars of Flan∣ders have much drain'd this Countrey of people: Since the expulsion of the Moors, it is also grown thinner, and not so full of corn; for those Moors would grub up wheat out of the very tops of the craggy hills, yet they us'd another grain for their bread, so that the Spaniard had nought els to do but go with his Ass to the Market, and buy corn of the Moon. Ther liv'd here also in times past a great number of Jews, till they were expell'd by Ferdinand, and as I have read in an old Spanish Legend, the cause was this; The King had a young Prince to his son, who was us'd to play with a Jewish Doctor that was about the Court, who had a Ball of gold in a string hanging down his brest, the little Prince one day snatcht away the said gold Ball, and carried it to the next room, the Ball being hollow, opend, and within there was painted our Savi∣our kissing a Iews tail: Hereupon they were all suddenly disterr'd and exterminated, yet I beleeve in Portugall there lurks. yet good store of them. For the soil of Spain, the fruitfulnes of their vallies recompences the sterillity of their hills, corn is their greatest want, and want of rain is the cause of that, which makes them have need of their neighbors; yet as much as Spain bears is passing good, and so is every thing else for the quality, nor hath any one a better horse under him, a better cloak on his back, a better sword by his side, better shooes on his feet, than the Spa∣niard, nor doth any drink better Wine, or eat better fruit than he, nor flesh for the quantity. Touching the People, the Spaniard looks as high, though not so big a a German, his excesse is in too much gravity, which som who know him not well, hold to be a pride, he cares not how little he labours, for poor Gascons and Morisco slaves do most of his work in field and vineyard;
he can endure much in the war, yet he loves not to fight in the dark, but in open day, or upon a stage, that all the world might be witnesses of his valor; so that you shall seldom hear of Spaniards employed in night service; nor shall one hear of a Duell here in an age: He hath one good quality, that he is wonderfully obedient to Government: for the prou∣dest Don of Spain when he is prancing upon his Ginet in the streets, if an Alguazil (a Sargeant) shew him his Vare, that is a little white staff he carrieth as badge of his Office; my Don will down presently off his horse, and yeeld himself his prisoner. He hath ano∣ther commendable quality, that when he giveth Alms, he puls off his Hat, and puts it in the beggars hand with a great deal of humility. His gravity is much lessned since the late Proclamation came out against ruffs, and the King himself shewd the first example, they were come to that hight of excess herein, that twenty shillings were us'd to be paid for starching of a ruff: and som, though perhaps he had never a shirt to his back, yet would be have a toting huge swelling ruff about his neck. He is sparing in his Ordinary diet, but when he makes a Feast he is free and bountifull. As to Temporall Authority, specially Martiall, so is be very obedient to the Church, and beleeves all with an implicit faith: he is a great servant of Ladies, nor can he be blam'd, for as I said be∣fore he coms of a Gotish race; yet he never brags of, nor blazes a∣broad his doings that way, but is exceedingly carefull of the repute of any woman, (A civility that we much want in England) Hee will speak high words of Don Philippo his King, but will not endure a stranger should do so: I have heard a Biscayner make a Rodomonta∣do, that he was as good a Gentleman as Don Philippo himself, for Don Philippo was half a Spaniard, half a German, half an I∣talian, half a Frenchman, half I know not what, but he was a pure Biscayner, without mixture. The Spaniard is not so smooth and oyly in his Complement as the Italian, and though hee will make strong protestations, yet he will not swear out Complements like the French and English, as I heard when my Lord of Carlile was Ambassador in France, there came a great Monsieur to see him, and having a long time banded, and sworn Complements one to another who should go first out at a dore, at last my Lord of Carlile said, ô Mon∣seigneur ayez pitie de mon ame, O my'. Lord have pity upon my soul. The Spaniard is generally given to gaming, and that in excesse; he will say his prayers before, and if he win he will thank God for his good fortune after; their common game at cards (for they very seldom play at dice) is Primera, at which the King never shews his game, but throws his cards with their faces down on the Table: He is Merchant
of all the cards and dice through all the Kingdom, he hath them made for a penny a pair, and he retails them for twelve pence; so that 'tis thought he hath 30000 l. a year by this trick at cards. The Spaniard is very devout in his way, for I have seen him kneel in the very dirt when the Ave Mary bell rings: and som if they spy two straws or sticks lie cross-wise in the street, they will take them up and kisse them, and lay them down again. He walks as if he marcht, and seldom looks on the ground, as if he contemnd it. I was told of a Spaniard who having got a fall by a stumble, and broke his nose, rose up, and in a disdainfull manner said, Voto a tal esto es caminar por la tierra, This is to walk upon earth. The Labradors and Countrey Swains here are stur∣dy and rationall men, nothing so simple or servile as the French Peasan who is born in chains. Tis true, the Spaniard is not so con∣versable as other Nations; (unlesse hee hath travel'd) els hee is like Mars among the Planets, impatient of Conjunction: nor is he so free in his gifts and rewards: as the last Summer it hapned that Count Gon∣damar with Sir Francis Cotington went to see a curious house of the Constable of Castiles, which had been newly built here; the keeper of the house was very officious to shew him every room with the garden, grotha's, and aqueducts, and presented him with some fruit; Gondamar having been a long time in the house, comming out, put many Complements of thanks upon the man, and so was going away, Sir Francis whis∣per'd him in the ear and askd him whether he would give the man any thing that took such pains, Oh quoth Gondamar, well remembred Don Francisco, have you ever a double Pistoll about you? If you have, you may give it him, and then you pay him after the English man∣ner, I have paid him already after the Spanish. The Spaniard is much improv'd in policy since hee took footing in Italy, and there is no Nation agrees with him better. I will conclude this Character with a saying that he hath▪ No ay bombre debaxo d'el sol, Como el Italiano y el Español. Wherunto a Frenchman answerd, Dizes la verdad, y tienes razon, El uno es puto, el otro ladron. Englished thus, Beneath the Sun ther's no such man, As is is the Spaniard and Italian.
The Frenchman answers, Thou tell'st the truth, and reason hast, The first's a Theef, a Buggerer the last. Touching their women, nature hath made a more visible distinction twixt the two sexes here, than else where; for the men for the most part are swarthy and rough, but the women are made of a far finer mould, they are commonly little; and wheras there is a saying that to make a com∣pleat woman, let her be English to the neck, French to the wast, and Dutch below; I may add for hands and feet let her be Spanish, for they have the least of any. They have another saying, a French-woman in a dance, a Dutch-woman in the kitchin, an Italian in a window, an English-woman at board, and the Spanish a bed. When they are ma∣ried they have a privilege to wear high shooes, and to paint, which is ge∣nerally practised here, and the Queen useth it her self. They are coy e∣nough, but not so froward as our English, for if a Lady go along the street, (and all women going here vaild and their habit so generally like, one can hardly distinguish a Countess from a Coblers wife) if one should cast out an odd ill sounding word, and ask her a favour, she will not take it ill, but put it off and answer you with some wittie retort. After 30 they are commonly past child-earing, and I have seen women in England look as youthfull at 50, as some here at 25. Money will do miracles here in purchasing the favor of Ladies, or any thing els, though this be the Countrey of money, for it furnisheth well-near all the world besides, yea their very enemies, as the Turk and Hollander; insomuch that one may say the Coyn of Spain is as Catholic, as her King. Yet though he be the greatest King of gold and silver Mines in the world, (I think) yet the common currant Coin here is Copper, and herein I beleeve the Hollander hath done him more mischief by counterfeiting his Copper Coins, than by their armes, bringing it in by strange surreptitious waies, as in hollow Sows of Tin and Lead, hol∣low Masts, in pitcht Buckets under water and other waies. But I fear to be injurious to this great King to speak of him in so narrow a com∣pass, a great King indeed, though the French in a slighting way com∣pare his Monarchy to a Beggars Cloak made up of patches, they are patches indeed, but such as he hath not the like: The East Indies is a patch embroyder'd with Pearl, Rubies, and Diamonds: Peru is a patch embroider'd with massie gold, Mexico with silver, Naples and Milain are patches of cloth of Tissue, and if these patches were in one peece, what would become of his cloak embroyderd with flower deluces?
So desiring your Lopp. to pardon this poor imperfect paper▪ considering the high quality of the subject, I rest Madrid, 1 Feb. 1623. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. XXXI. To Mr Walsingham Gresly, from Madrid. Don Balchasar, I Thank you for your Letter in my Lords last packet, wherin among other passages, you write unto me the circumstances of Marques Spinola's raising his Leaguer, by flatting and firing his works before Berghen. He is much tax'd here, to have attempted it, and to have buried so much of the Kings tresure before that town in such costly Trenches: A Gentleman came hither lately, who was at the siege all the while, and he told me one strange passage, how Sir Ferdinando Cary a huge corpulent Knight, was shot through his body, the bullet entring at the Navell, and comming out at his back kill'd his man behind him, yet he lives still, and is like to recover: With this miraculous accident, he told me al∣so a merry one, how a Captain that had a Woodden Leg Booted over, had it shatterd to peeces by a Cannon Bullet, his Soldiers crying out a Surgeon, a Surgeon, for the Captain; no, no, said he, a Carpenter, a Carpenter, will serve the tun: To this pleasant tale I'le add another that happen'd lately in Alcala hard by, of a Do∣minican Fryer, who in a solemn Procession which was held there upon Ascension day last, had his stones dangling under his habit cut off insteed of his pocket by a cut-purse. Before you return hither, which I understand will be speedily, I pray bestow a visit on our friends in Bishopsgate-street: So I am Feb. 1623. Your faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XXXIII. To Sir Robert Napier Knight, at his house in Bishops-gate-street, from Madrid. SIR, THe late breach of the Match, hatch broke the neck of all busi∣nesses here, and mine suffers as much as any: I had ac∣cess lately to Olivares, once or twice; I had audience also of the King, to whom I presented a memoriall that intimated Letters of Mart, unless satisfaction were had from his Vice-roy the Conde del Real; the King gave me a gracious answer, but Olivares a churlish one, viz. That when the Spaniards had justice in England, we should have justice here: So that notwithstanding I have brought it to the highest point and pitch of perfection in Law that could be, and procur'd som dispatches, the like wherof were never granted in this Court before, yet I am in dispair now to do any good: I hope to be shortly in England, by God grace, to give you and the rest of the proprietaries, a punctuall account of all things: And you may easily conceive how sorry I am, that matters succeeded not according to your expectation, and my endeavours: but I hope you are none of those that measure things by the event. The Earl of Bristoll, Count Gondamar, and my Lord Ambassador Aston, did not only do courtesies, but they did cooperate with me in it, and contributed their utmost endeavours▪ So I rest Madrid, 19. Feb. 1623. Yours to serve you, J. H. XXXIV. To Mr. A. S. in Alicant. MUch endeared Sir: Fire, you know, is the common emblem of love, But without any disparagement to so noble a passion, me thinks it might be also compar'd to tinder, and Letters are the proper'st matter wherof to make this tinder▪ Letters again
are fittest to kindle and re-accend this tinder, they may serve both for flint, steel, and match. This Letter of mine comes therfore of set purpose to strike som sparkles into yours, that it may glow and burn, and receive ignition, and not lie dead, as it hath don a great while: I make my pen to serve for an instrument to stir the cin∣ders wherewith your old love to me hath bincover'd a long time; therfore I pray let no covurez-fu Bell have power hereafter to rake up, and choak with the ashes of oblivion, that cleer slame wherwith our affections did use to sparkle so long by correspon∣dence of Letters, and other offices of love. I think I shall sojourn yet in this Court these three moneths, for I will not give over this great busines while ther is the least breath of hope remaining. I know you have choice matter of intelligence somtimes from thence, therfore I pray impait som unto us, and you shall not fail to know how matters pass here weekly. So with my bsa manos to Francisco Imperiall, I rest Madrid, 3 Mar. 1623. Yours most affectionately to serve you, J. H. XXXV. To the Honble. Sir T. S. at Tower-Hill. SIR, I Was yesterday at the Escuriall to see the Monastery of Saint Laurence, the eight wonder of the World; and truly conside∣ring the site of the place, the state of the thing, and the symmetry of the structure, with divers other raritles, it may be call'd so; for what I have seen in Italy, and other places, are but bables to it. It is built amongst a company of Craggy-barren-hills, which makes the air the hungrier, and wholsommer; it is all built of Free-stone and Marble, and that with such solidity and moderat height, that surely Philip the seconds chief design was to make a sacrifice of it to eternity, and to contest with the Meteors, and Time it self. It cost eight Millions, it was twenty four yeers a building, and the Founder himself saw it finish'd, and injoy'd it twelve yeers after, and carried his Bones himself thither to be bu∣ried.
The reason that mov'd King Philip to wast so much tresure, was a vow he had made at the battell of Saint Quentin, where he was forc'd to batter a Monastery of Saint Laurence Friers, and if he had the victory, he would erect such a Monastery to Saint Laurence, that the world had not the like; therfore the form of it is like a Gridiron, the handle is a huge Royall Palace, and the body a vast Monastery or Assembly of quadrangular Cloysters, for ther are as many as ther be moneths in the yeer. Ther be a hundred Monks, and every one hath his man and his mule, and a mul∣titude of Officers; besides, ther are three Libraries there, full of the choisest Books for all Sciences. It is beyond expression, what Gros, Gardens, Walks, and Aqueducts ther are there, and what curious Fountains in the upper Cloysters, for ther be two Stages of Cloysters: In fine, ther is nothing that's vulgar there. To take a view of every Room in the House, one must make account to go ten miles; ther is a Vault call'd the Pantheon, under the highest Altar, which is all pav'd, wall'd, and arch'd, with Marble; ther be a number of huge Silver Candlesticks, tal∣ler than I am; Lamps three yards compas, and divers Chalices and Grosses of massie Gold: Ther is one Quire made all of bur∣nish'd Brass: Pictures and Statues like Giants, and a world of glorious things that purely ravish'd me▪ By this mighty Monu∣ment, it may be inferr'd, that Philip the second, though he was a little man, yet had he vast Gigantic thoughts in him, to leave such a huge pile for posterity to gaze upon, and admire his memo∣ry. No more now, but that I rest Madrid, Mar. 9. 1623. Your most humble Servitor, J. H. XXXVI, To the Lo: Vicount Col. from Madrid. My Lord, YOu writ to me long since, to send you an account of the Duke of Ossuna's death, a little man, but of great fame and fortunes, and much cried up, and known up and down the World. He was revok'd from being Vice-roy of Naples (the best employ∣ment
the King of Spain hath for a Subject) upon som disgust; And being com to this Court, when he was brought to give an ac∣count of his government, being troubled with the Gout, he car∣ried his Sword in his hand in steed of a staff; the King misliking the manner of his posture, turn'd his back to him, and so went a∣way; therupon he was over-heard to mutter, Esto es para serv muchachs; This it is to serve boys: This coming to the Kings are, he was apprehended, and committed prisoner to a Monastery, not far off, wher he continued som yeers, untill his Beard came to his girdle, then growing very ill, he was permitted to com to his House in this Town, being carried in a bed upon mens shoulders, and so died som yeer ago. Ther were divers accusations against him, amongst the rest, I remember these, That he had kept the Marquis de Campolataros wife, sending her husband out of the way upon employment; That he had got a bastard of a Turkish woman, and suffer'd the child to be brought up in the Mahumetan religion; That being one day at High Masse, when the host was elevated, he drew out of his pocket a pece of Gold, and held it up, intimating that that was his god: That he had invited som of the prime Courtisans of Naples to a Feast, and after dinner made a banquet for them in his Garden, wher he commanded them to strip themselves stark naked, and go up and down, while he shot Sugar-Plums at them out of a Trunk, which they were to take up from off their high Chapins; and such like extra∣vagancies. One (amongst divers other) witty passage was told me of him, which was, That when he was Vice-roy of Sicily, ther died a great rich Duke, who left but one Son, whom with his whole estate, he bequeath'd to the Tutele of the Iesuits, and the words of the Will were, When he is pass'd his minority (Darte al mio figli∣volo quelque voi volete) you shall give my son what you will. It seems the Iesuits took to themselves two parts of three of the estate, and gave the rest to the heir, the young Duke complaining hereof to the Duke of Ossuna, (then Vice-roy) he commanded the Iesuits to appear before him; he ask'd them how much of the estate they would have, they answer'd, two parts of three, which they had almost employed already to build Monasteries, and an Hospitall, to erect particular Altars, and Masses, to sing Dirges and Refrigeriums, for the soul of the deceased Duke: Hereupon, the Duke of Ossuna caus'd the Will to be produc'd, and found therin the words afore recited, When he is pass'd his minority, you shall give my son (of my estate) what you will; Then he told the Iesuits, you must by vertue and tenor of these words, give what you will to the son, which by your own confession is two parts of three; and so he determin'd the bu∣sines.
Thus have I in part satisfied your Lordships desire, which I shall do more amply, when I shal be made happy to attend you in person, which I hope will be ere it be long: In the Interim, I take my leave of you from Spain, and rest Madrid, 13 Mar. 1623. Your Lordships most ready and humble Servitor, J. H. XXXVII. To Simon Digby Esq. SIR, I Thank you for the severall sorts of Cyphers you sent me to write by, which were very choice ones and curious. Cryptology, or Epistolizing in a Clandestin way, is very ancient: I read in Agel∣lius, that C. Caesar in his Letters to Cajus Oppius, and Balbus Cor∣lius, who were two of his greatest confident'st in managing his privat affairs, did write in Cyphers by a various transportation of the Alphabet; wherof Probus Grammaticus de occulta litterarum significatione Epistolarum C. Caesaris, writes a curious Commentary: But me thinks, that certain kind of Hieroglyphics, the Caelesti∣all Signes, the seven Planets, and other Constellations might make a curious kind of Cypher, as I will more particularly demon∣strate unto you in a Scheme, when I shall be made happy with your conversation. So I rest Madrid, Mar. 15. 1623. Your assured Servitor, J. H. XXXVIII. To Sir Iames Crofts, from Bilbao. SIR, BEing safely come to the Marine, in convoy of his Majesties Iewells, and being to sojourn here som dayes, the conveni∣ency of this Gentleman (who knows, and much honoureth you)
he being to ride Post through France, invited me to send you this. We were but five horsemen in all our seven daies journey, from Madrid hither, and the charge Mr. Wiches had is valued at four hun∣dred thousand Crowns; but 'tis such safe travelling in Spain, that one may carry Gold in the Palm of his hand, the government is so good. When we had gain'd Biscay ground, we pass'd one day through a Forrest, and lighting off our Mules to take a little repast under a tree, wee tooke down our Alforjas, and som bot∣tles of wine (and you know 'tis ordinary here to ride with ones victualls about him) but as we were eating, we spied two huge Woolfs, who star'd upon us a while, but had the good manners to go a way: It put me in minde of a pleasant tale I heard Sir Thomas Fairax relate of a Soldier in Ireland, who having got his Passe∣port to go for England, as he pass'd through a Wood with his Knapsac upon his back, being weary, he sate down under a Tree, wher he opened his Knapsack, and fell to som Victualls he had; but upon a sudden he was surpriz'd with two or three Woolfs, who comming towards him, he threw them scraps of Bread and Cheese, till all was don, then the Woolfs making a neerer approach unto him, he knew not what shift to make, but by taking a pair of Bag-Pipes which he had, and as soon as he began to play upon them, the Wolves ran all away as if they had bin scar'd out of their wis; wherupon the Soldier said, A pox take you all, if I had known you had lov'd music so well, you should have had it before dinner. If ther be a lodging void at the three Halbards-Heads, I pray be pleas'd to cause it to be reserv'd for me. So I rest Bilbo, Sept. 6. 1624. Your humble Servitor, J. H.
Familiar Letters. SECTION IV. I. To my Father from London. SIR, I Am newly returnd from Spain, I came over in Con∣voy of the Prince his jewells, for which, one of the Ships Royall with the Catch were sent under the Command of Captain Love; We landed at Plimouth, whence I came by Post to Theobalds in less then two nights and a day, to bring his Majesty news of their safe arrivall: The Prince had newly got a fall off a Horse, and kept his Chamber; the jewells were valued at above a hundred thousand pounds; som of them a little before the Prince his depar∣ture had bin presented to the Infanta, but she waving to receive them, yet with a civill complement, they were left in the hands of one of the Secretaries of State for her use upon the wedding day, and it was no unworthy thing in the Spaniard to deliver them back, notwithstanding, that the Treaties both of Match, and Palatinat, had bin dissolv'd a pretty while before by Act of Parliament, that a war was threatned, and Ambassadors revok'd. Ther were jewells also amongst them to be presented to the King and Queen of Spain, to most of the Ladies of Honour, and the Grandees. Ther was a great Table Diamond for Olivares of eighteen Carrats Weight, but the richest of all was to the Infanta her self, which was a Chain of great Orient Perl, to the number of 276. weighing nine Ounces. The Spaniards notwithstanding they are the Masters of the Staple of jewells, stood astonish'd at the beuty of these, and confess'd them∣selves to be put down.
Touching the employment, upon which I went to Spain, I had my charges born all the while, and that was all; had it taken effect, I had made a good busines of it; but 'tis no wonder (nor can it be I hope any disrepute unto me) that I could not bring to pass, what three Ambassadors could not do before me. I am now casting about for another Fortun, and som hopes I have of employment about the Duke of Buckingham, he sways more than ever; for wheras he was before a Favorit to the King, hee is now a Favorit to Parliament, People, and City, for breaking the match with Spain: Touching his own interest, he had reason to do it, for the Spaniards love him not: but whether the public interest of the State will suffer in it, or no, I dare not determine, for my part, I hold the Spanish Match to be better than their Powder, and their Wares better than their Wars; and I shall be ever of that mind, That no Countrey is able to do England less hurt, and more good than Spain, considering the large Trafic and Treasure that is to be got thereby. I shall continue to give you account of my courses when oppor∣tunity serves, and to dispose of matters so, that I may attend you this Summer in the Countrey: So desiring still your Blessing and Prayers, I rest, London, Decemb▪ 10▪ 1624. Your dutifull Son, J. H. II. To R. Brown Esq. Dear Sir, THer is no seed so fruitfull as that of Love, I do not mean that gross carnall Love which propagats the World, but that which preserves it, to wit, Seeds of Friendship, which hath little commerce with the Body, but is a thing Divine an Spi∣rituall; Ther cannot be a more pregnant proof hereof, then those Seeds of Love, which I have long since cast into your Brest, which have thriven so well, and in that exuberance, that they have been more fruitfull unto mee, then that field in Sicily, call'd Le trecente cariche, The field of three hundred Loads, so call'd, because it returns the Sower three hundred for
one yearly▪ So plentifull hath your love been unto me, but amongst other sweet fruits it hath born, those precious Letters which you have sent me from time to time, both at home and abroad, are not of the least value; I did always hugg and highly esteem them, and you in them, for they yeelded me both profit and pleasure. That Seed which you have also sown in me, hath ructified som∣thing, but it hath not been able to make you such rich returns, nor afford so plentifull a Crop, yet I dare say, this Crop how thin soever, was pure and free from Tares, from Cockle or Darnell, from flattery or fashood, and what it shall produce hereafter, shall be so; nor shall any injury of the Heavens, as Tempests, or Thunder and Lightning (I mean no cross or affliction whatsoever) be able, to blast and smutt it, or, hinder it to grow up, and fructifie still. This is the third time God Almighty hath been pleas'd to bring me back to the sweet bosom of my dear Countrey from beyond the Seas; I have been already comforted with the sight of many of my choice friends, but I miss you extremely, therfore I pray make haste, for London streets which you and I have trod together so of∣ten, will prove tedious to me els. Amongst other things, Black-Friers will entertain you with a Play Spick and span new, and the Cock-pit with another; nor I beleeve after so long absence, will it be an unpleasing object for you to see, London, Ian. 20 1624. Your J. H. III. To the Lord Vicount Colchester. Right Honble, MY last to your Lordship was in Italian, with the Venetian Gazetta inclos'd. Count Mansfelt is upon point of parting, having obtain'd it seems the sum of his desires, he was lodged all the while in the same Quarter of Saint Iames, which was appointed for the Infanta; he supp'd yestrnight with the Counsell of War, and he hath a grant of 12000 men, English and Scots, whom hee will have ready in the Body of an Army against the next Spring; and they say, that England, France, Venice, and Savoy, do contribut for
the maintenance therof 60000 pound a month; ther can be no conjecture, much less any judgment made yet of his design; Most Sthink it will be for relieving Breda, which is straightly begirt by pinola, who gives out, that he hath her already as a Bird in a Cage, and will have her maugre all the opposition of Christendom; yet ther is fresh news com over, that Prince Maurice hath got on the back of him, and hath beleaguer'd him, as he hath done the Town, which I want faith to beleeve yet, in regard of the huge circuit of Spinola's Works, for his circumvallations are cry'd up to be neer up∣on twenty miles. But while the Spaniard is spending Millions here or getting small Towns, the Hollander gets Kingdomes of him els where, for he hath invaded and taken lately from the Por∣tugall part of Brasil, a rich Countrey for Sugars, Cottons, Balsams, Dying-wood, and divers commodities besides. The Treaty of mariage 'twixt our Prince, and the yongest daugh∣ter of France, goes on a pace, and my Lord of Carlile and Holland are in Paris about it, we shall see now what difference ther is 'twixt the French and Spanish pace: The two Spanish Ambassadors have been gon hence long since, they say, that they are both in prison, one in Burges in Spain, the other in Flanders, for the scandalous in∣formation they made here against the Duke of Buckingham, about which, the day before their departure hence, they desir'd to have one privat audience more, but his Majesty denyed them; I beleeve they will not continue long in disgrace, for matters grow daily worse and worse 'twixt us, and Spain: for divers Letters of Mart are granted our Merchants, and Letters of Mart are commonly the fore-runners of a War: Yet they say Gondamar will be on his way hither again, about the Palatinat, for the King of Denmark appears now in his Necces quarrell, and Arm's apace. No more now, but that I kiss your Lordships hands, and rest Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. London, 5 Febr. 1624.
IV. To my Cos: Mr. Rowland Gwin. Cousin, I Was lately sorry, and I was lately glad, that I heard you were ill, that I heard you are well. Your affectionat Cousin, I. H. V. To Thomas Iones Esq. Tom, IF you are in healt, 'tis well, we are here all so, and wee should be better had wee your company; therfore I pray leave the smutty Ayr of London, and com hither to breath sweeter, wher you may pluck a Rose, and drink a Cillibub. Your faithfull friend, J. H. Kentis, Iune, 1. 1625. VI. To D. C. THe Bearer hereof hath no other errand, but to know how you do in the Countrey, and this paper is his credentiall Letter; Therfore I pray hasten his dispatch, and if you please send him back like the man in the Moon, with a basket of your fruit on his back. Your true friend, J. H. London this Aug. 10. 1624.
VII. To my Father, from London. SIR, I Received yours of the third of February, by the hands of my Cou∣sin Thomas Gwin of Trecastle. It was my fortune to be on Sunday was fortnight at Theobalds, wher his late Majestie King Iames departed this life, and went to his last rest upon the day of rest, presently after Sermon was don: A little before the break of day, he sent for the Prince, who rose out of his bed, and came in his Night-Gown; the King seem'd to have som earnest thing to say unto him, and so endea∣vour'd to rowse himself upon his Pillow, but his spirits were so spent, that he had not strength to make his words audible. He di∣ed of a Feaver which began with an Ague, and som Scotch Doctors mutter at a Plaster the Countess of Buckingham applied to the outside of his stomack: Tis thought the last breach of the march with Spain, which for many yeers he had so vehemently de∣fir'd, took too deep an impression in him, and that he was forc'd to rush into a war, now in his declining Age, having liv'd in a con∣tinuall uninterrupted peace his whole life, except som collaterall aydes he had sent his Son in Law: as soon as he expir'd, the Pri∣vy Counsell sate, and in less then a quarter of an hour, King Charls was proclaimed at Theobalds Court Gate, by Sir Edward Zouch Knight Marshall, Master Secretary Conway dictating unto him, That wheras it hath pleas'd God to take to his mercy, our most gracious Soveraign King Iames of famous memory, We proclaim Prince Charles, His rightfull and indubitable Heir, to be King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c. The Knight Marshall mi∣stook, saying, His rightfull and dubitable Heir, but he was rectified by the Secretary. This being don, I took my Horse instantly, and came to London first, except one, who was com a little before me, insomuch, that I found the Gates shut. His now Majesty took Coach, and the Duke of Buckingham with him, and came to Saint Iames; In the evening he was proclaim'd at White-Hall Gate, in Cheapside, and other places, in a sad showre of Rain; and the Weather was sutable to the condition wherin he finds the King∣dome which is Cloudy; for he is left engag'd in a War with a po∣tent
Prince, the peeple by long desuetude unapt for Arms, the leet Royall in quarter repair, himself without a Queen, his Si∣ser without a Countrey, the Crown pittifully laden with debts, and the Purse of the State lightly ballasted, though it never had better opportunity to be rich then it had these last twenty yeers: But God Almighty, I hope will make him emerge, and pull this Island out of all these plunges, and preserve us from worser times. The Plague is begun in White-Chappell, and as they say in the same house, at the same day of the moneth, with the same num∣ber that died twenty two yeers since, when Queen Elizabeth de∣parted. Ther are great preparations for the Funerall, and ther is a de∣sign to buy all the Cloth for Mourning White, and then to put it to the Dyrs in gross, which is like to save the Crown a good deal of mony; the Drapers murmur extremely at the Lord Cranfield for it. I am not setled yet in any stable condition, but I lie Windbound at the Cape of good Hope, expecting som gentle gale to launch out into an imployment. So with my love to all my Brothers and Sisters at the Bryn, and neer Brecknock, I humbly crave a continuance of your Prayers, and Blessing to Your dutifull Son, J. H. London, Decem. 11. 1625. VIII. To Dr. Prichard. SIR, SInce I was beholden to you for your many favours in Oxford, I have not heard from you, (ne gry quidem) I pray let the wonted correspondence be now reviv'd, and receive new vigor be∣tween us. My Lord Chancellor Bacon is lately dead of a long languishing weaknes; he died so poor, so that he scarce left money to bury him, which though he had a great Wit, did argue no great Wisdom, it being one of the essentiall properties of a Wiseman to provide for the main chance. I have read, that it hath bin the fortunes of all
Poets commonly to die Beggars; but for an Orator, a Lawyer, and Philosopher, as he was, to die so, 'cis rare. It seems the same fate befell him, that attended Demosthenes, Seneca, and Cicero, (all great men) of whom, the two first fell by corruption; the falrest Diamond may have a flaw in it, but I beleeve he died poor out of a contempt of the pelf of Fortune, as also out of an exeess of genero∣sity, which appear'd, as in divers other passages, so once when the King had sent him a Stag, he sent up for the Underkeeper, and having drunk the Kings health unto him in a great Silver. Guilt-Bowl, he gave it him for his fee. He writ a pittifull Letter to King Iames, not long before his death, and concludes, Help me dear Soverain Lord and Master, and pity me so far, that I who have bin born to a Bag, be not now in my age forc'd in effect to bear a Wallet; nor I that desire to live to study, may be driven to study to live: Which words, in my opinion, argued a little abjection of spirit, as his former Letter to the Prince did of prophanes, wherin be hoped, that as the Father was his Creater, the Son will be his Redeemer. I write not this to derogat from the no∣ble worth of the Lord Viscount Verulam, who was a rare man, a man Reconditae scientiae, & ad salutem literarum natus, and I think the eloquentst that was born in this Isle. They say he shall be the last Lord Chancelor, as Sir Edward Coke was the last Lord Chief Iustice of England; for ever since they have bin term'd Lord Chief Iustices of the Kings Bench; so hereafter ther shall be onely Ket∣pers of the Great Seal, which for Title and Office, are deposable; but they say the Lord Chancelors Title is indelible. I was lately at Grayes-Inne with Sir Eubule, and he desir'd me to remember him unto you, as I do also salute Meum Prichardum ex imis praecordiis, Vale . London, Ian. 6. 1625 Yours most affectionately while, I. H. IX. To my welbeloved Consin Mr. T. V. Cousin, YOu have a great work in hand, for you write unto me, that you are upon a treaty of mariage; a great work indeed, and
a work of such consequence, that it may make you or marr you; it may make the whole remainder of your life uncouth, or comforta∣ble to you; for of all civill actions that are incident to man, ther's not any that tends more to his infelicity or happines; therfore it concerns you not to be over-hasty herein, not to take the Ball before the Bound; you must be cautious how you thrust your neck into such a yoke, whence you will never have power to withdraw it a∣gain; for the toung useth to tie so hard a knot, that the teeth can never untie, no not Alexanders Sword can cut asunder among us Christians. If you are resolv'd to marry, Choose wher you love, and resolve to love your choice; let love, rather than lucre, be your guide in this election, though a concurrence of both be good, yet for my part, I had rather the latter should be wanting than the first; the one is the Pilot, the other but the Ballast of the Ship which should carry us to the Harbour of a happy life: If you are bent to wed, I wish you another gets wife then Socrates had; who when she had scoulded him out of doors, as he was going through the Portall, threw a Chamber pot of stale Urine upon his head, wherat the Philosopher having bin silent all the while, smilingly said, I thought ofter so much Thunder we should have Rain: And as I wish you may not light upon such a Xantippe, (as the wisest men have had ill luck in this kind, as I could instance in two of our most eminent Lawyers, C. B.) so I pray that God may deliver you from a Wife of such a generation, that Strowd our Cook here at Westminster said his Wife was of, who, when (out of a mislike of the Preacher) he had on a Sunday in the Afternoon, gon out of the Church to a Tavern, and returning towards the Evening pretty well heated with Canary, to look to his Roast, and his Wife falling to read him a lowd lesson in so furious a manner, as if she would have basted him insteed of the Mutton, and amongst other revi∣lings, telling him often, Thut the devill, the devill would fetch him, at last he broke out of a long silence, and told her, I prethee good Wife hold thy self content, for I know the devill will do me no hurt, for I have married his Kinswoman: If you light upon such a Wife (a Wife that hath more bene then flesh) I wish you may have the same measure of patience that Socrates and Strowd had, to suf∣fer the Gray-Mare somtimes to be the better Horse. I remember a French Proverb: La Maison est miserable & Meschante, Où la Poule plus haut que le Coc chante,
That House doth every day more wretched grow, Wher the Hen lowder than the Cock doth crow. Yet we have another English Proverb almost counter to this▪ That it is better to marry a Shrew then a Sheep; for though silence be the dumb Orator of beuty, and the best ornament of a Woman, yet a Phleg∣matic dull wife is fulsom and fastidious. Excuse me Cousin, that I Jest with you in so serious a busines: I know you need no counsell of mine herein, you are discreet enough of your self; nor, I presume, do you want advice of Pa∣rents, which by all means must go along with you: So wishing you all conjugall joy, and a happy confarreation, I rest London, Feb. 5. 1625. Your affectionat Cousin, J. H. X. To my Noble Lord, the Lord Clifford from London. My Lord, THe Duke of Buckingham is lately return'd from Holland, ha∣ving renewed the peace with the States, and Articled with them for a continuation of som Navall forces, for an expedition against Spain; as also having taken up som moneys upon privat jewells (not any of the Crowns) and lastly, having comforted the Lady Elizabeth for the decease of his late Majesty her Father, and of Prince Frederic her eldest Son, whole disasterous manner of death, amongst the rest of her sad afflictions, is not the least: For passing over Haerlam Mere, a huge Inland Lough, in compa∣ny of his Father, who had bin in Amsterdam, to look how his bank of money did thrive, and coming (for more frugality) in the common Boat, which was oreset with Merchandize, and other passengers, in a thick Fog, the Vessell turn'd ore, and so many perish'd; the Prince Palsgrave sav'd himself by swimming, but the young Prince clinging to the Mast, and being intangled among the Tacklings, was half drown'd, and half frozen to death: A sad de∣stiny.
Ther is an open rupture twixt us and the Spaniard, though he gives out, that he never broke with us to this day: Count Gonda∣mar was on his way to Flanders, and thence to England (as they say) with a large Commission to treat, for a surrender of the Pa∣lainat, and so to peece matters together again; but he died in the journey, at a place call'd Bunnol, of pure apprehensions of grief, as it is given out. The match twixt his Majesty and the Lady Henrietta Maria, youngest Daughter to Henry the great (the eldest being maried to the King of Spain, and the second to the Duke of Savoy) goes roundly on, and is in a manner concluded; wherat the Count of Soissons is much discontented, who gave himself hopes to have her; but the hand of Heaven hath predestin'd her for a far higher condi∣tion. The French Ambassadors who were sent hither to conclude the busines, having privat audience of his late Majesty a little before his death, he told them pleasantly, That he would make war against the Lady Henrietta, because she would not receive the two Letters which were sent her, one from himself, and the other from his son, but sent them to her Mother; yet he thought he should easily make peace with her, because he understood she had afterwards put the latter Letter in her bosome, and the first in her Coshionet, wherly he gather'd, that she intended to reserve his son for her Affection, and him for Coun∣sell. The Bishop of Lucon, now Cardinall de Richelieu, is grown to be the sole Favorit of the King of France, being brought in by the Queen-Mother, he hath hin very active in advancing the match, but 'tis thought the wars will break out afresh against them of the Religion, notwithstanding the ill fortune the King had be∣fore Mountauban few yeers since, wher he lost above 500 of his No∣bles, wherof the great Duke of Main was one; and having lain in person before the Town many months, and receiv'd som af∣fronts, as that inscription upon their Gates shew, Roy sans foy, vil∣le sans peur, a King without faith, a town without fear; yet he was forc'd to raze his works, and raise his siege. The Letter which Mr. Ellis Hicks brought them of Mountauban from Rechell, through so much danger, and with so much gallan∣try, was an infinit advantage unto them; for wheras ther was a politic report rais'd in the Kings Army, and blown into Mountau∣ban, that Rochell was yeelded to the Count of Soissons, who lay hen before her, this Letter did inform the contrary, and that Rochell was in as good a plight as ever; wherupon, they made a sally the
next day upon the Kings Forces, and did him a great deal of spoil. Ther be summous out for a Parliament, I pray God it may prove more prosperous than the former. I have been lately recommended to the Duke of Buckingham, by som noble friends of mine that have intimacy with him, about whom, though he hath three Secretaries already, I hope to have som employment; for I am weary of walking up and down so idly upon London streets. The Plague begins to rage mightily, God avert his judgments, that meance so great a Mortality, and turn not away his face from this poor Island: So I kiss your Lordships hands in quali∣ty of Lond. 25. Feb. 1625. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. XI. To Rich. Altham Esqr. SIR, THe Eccho wants but a face, and the Looking-Glass a voice, to make them both living creatures, and to becom the same body they represent; the one by repercussion of sound, the other by re∣flection of sight: Your most ingenious Letters to me from time to time, do far more lively represent you, than either Eccho or Cry∣stall can do; I mean, they represent the better and nobler part of you, to wit, the inward man; they clearly set forth the notions of your mind, and the motions of your soul, with the strength of your imagination; for as I know your exterior person by your linea∣ments, so I know you as well inwardly by your lines, and by those lively expressions you give of your self, insomuch, that I beleeve, if the interior man within you were so visible as the outward (as once Plate wish'd, that vertue might be seen with the corporeal eyes) you would draw all the world after you; or if your well-born thoughts, and the words of your Letters were eccho'd in any place, wher they might rebound and be made audible,, they are compos'd of such sweet and charming strains of ingenuity and eloquence, that all the Nymphs of the Woods and the Valleys, the Dryades, yea,
the Graces and Muses', would pitch their Pavillions there; nay, Apollo himself would dwell longer in that place with his Rays, and make them reverberat more strongly, than either, upon Pindus, or Parnassus, or Rhodes it self▪ whence he never removes his Eye, as long as he is above this Hemispher. I confess my Letters to you, which I send by way of correspondence, com far short of such vertue, yet are they the true Idaeas of my mind, and of that reall and inbred affection I bear you; one should never teach his Letter or his Laquay to lie, I observe that rule: but besides my Letters, I could wish ther were a Crystall Casement in my Brest, thorow which you might be∣hold the motions of my heart, —Utinam{que} oculos in pectore pesses Inserere, then should you clearly see without any deception of sight, how truely I am, and how intirely 27 of Febr. 1625. Yours J. H. And to answer you in the same strain of Vers you sent me. First, Shall the Heavens bright Lamp forget to shine, The Stars shall from the Azurd skie decline; First, Shall the Orient with the West shake hand, The Center of the world shall cease to stand: First, Wolves shall ligue with Lambs, the Dolphins flie, The Lawyer and Physitian Fees deny, The Thames with Tagus shall exchange her Bed, My Mistris locks with mine, shall first turn red; First, Heaven shall lie below, and Hell above, Ere I inconstant to my Altham prove. XII. To the R. Honble my Lord of Calingford, after Earl of Carberry, at Colden Grove, 28 May. 1625. My Lord, VVE have gallant news now abroad, for we are sure to have a new Queen ere it be long; both the Contract and mariage was lately solemniz'd in France; the one the second
of this month in the Louvre, the other the eleventh day following in the great Church of Paris, by the Cardinall of Rochefoucand; ther was som clashing 'twixt him, and the Archbishop of Paris, who alleg'd 'twas his duty to officiat in that Church, but the dignity of Cardinall, and the quality of his Office, being the Kings great Almner, which makes him chief Curat of the Court, gave him the prerogative. I doubt not but your Lordship hath heard of the Capitulations, but for better assurance, I will run them over briefly. The King of France oblig'd himself to procure the Dispensation; the mariage should be celebrated in the same form as that of Queen Mar∣garet, and of the Dutchess of Bar; her Dowrie should be 800000 Crowns six shillings a peece, the one moitie to be paied the day of the Contract, the other a twelvemonth after. The Queen shall have a Chap∣pell in all the Kings Roiall houses, and any wher else, where she shall recide within the Dominions of his Majestie of great Britain, with free exercise of the Roman Religion, for her self, her Officers, and all her Houshold, for the celebration of the Mass, the Predication of the Word, Administration if the Sacraments, and power to procure Indulgen∣ces from the Holy Father. That to this end, she shall be allow'd 28 Priests or Ecclesiasticks in her House, and a Bishop in quality of Al∣moner, who shall have jurisdiction over all the rest, and that none of the Kings Officers shall have power over them, unless in case of Treason; therfore all her Ecclesiastics shall take the Oath of fidelitie to His Ma∣jestie of great Britain; ther shall be a Cymitier or Church-yard clos'd a∣bout, to burie those of her Family. That in consideration of this mariage, all English Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics as Lay, which shall be in any prison meerly for Religion, since the last Edict, shall be set at libertie. This is the eighth Alliance we have had with France, since the Conquest; and as it is the best that could be made in Christen∣dom, so I hope it will prove the happiest. So I kiss your hands, being Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. Lond. Mar. 1▪ 1625.
XIII. To the Honble Sir Tho. Sa SIR, I Convers'd lately with a Gentleman that came from France, who amongst other things, discours'd much of the Favourit Richelieu, who is like to be an active man, and hath great designs. The two first things he did, was to make sure of England, and the Hollander; he thinks to have us safe enough by this mariage; and Holland by a late League, which was bought with a great sum of money; for he hath furnish'd the States with a Million of Liures, at two shillings a peece in present, and six hundred thousand Liures every year of these two that are to com; provided, That the States repay these sums two years after they are in peace or truce: The King press'd much for Liberty of Conscience to Roman Catholics a∣mongst them, and the Deputies promis'd to do all they could with the States Generall about it; they Articled likewise for French to be associated with them in the trade to the Indies. Monsieur is lately maried to Mary of Bourbon, the Duke of Mon∣pensiers Daughter, he told her, That he would be a better Husband, than he had been a Suter to her, for hee hung off a good while: This mariage was made by the King, and Monsieur hath for his apennage 100000 Liures, annuall Rent from Chartres and Blois, 100000 Liures Pension, and 500000 to be charg'd yearly upon the generall receipts of Orleans, in all about 70000 pounds. Ther was much ado before this match could be brought about, for ther were many opposers, and ther be dark whispers, that ther was a deep plot to confine the King to a Monastery, and that Monsieur should govern; and divers great ones have suffered for it, and more are like to be discover'd. So I take my leave for present, and rest Lond. Mar. 10, 1626. Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
XIV. To the Lady Jane Savage, Marchioness of Winchester. Excellent Lady, I May say of your Grace, as it was said once of a rare Italian Princess, that you are the greatest Tyrant in the World, because you make all those that see you your slaves, much more them that know you, I mean those that are acquainted with your inward dis∣position, and with the faculties of your soul, as well as the Phisno∣my of your face; for Vertue took as much pains to adorn the one, as Nature did to perfect the other; I have had the happines to know both, when your Grace took pleasure to learn Spanish, at which time, when my betters far had offer'd their service in this kind, I had the honor to be commanded by you often. Hee that hath as much experience of you, as I have had, will confess, that the hand∣maid of God Almighty was never so prodigall of her gifts to any, or labour'd more to frame an exact modell of Femal perfection; nor was dame Nature onely busied in this Work, but all the Gra∣ces did consult and co-operat with her, and they wasted so much of their Tresure to in rich this one peece, that it may be a good reason why so many lame and defective fragments of Women-kind are daily thrust into the world. I return you here inclos'd the Sonnet, your Grace pleas'd to send me lately, rendred into Spanish, and fitted for the same Ayr it had in English, both for cadence, and number of feet: With it I send my most humble thanks, that your Grace would descend to command me in any thing that might conduce to your content∣ment and service; for ther is nothing I desire with a greater Am∣bition (and herein I have all the World my Rival) than to be ac∣counted Madame Your Grace's most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. Lond. Mar. 15. 1626.
X. To the Right Honble the Lord Clifford. My Lord, I Pray be pleas'd to dispence with this slownes of mine in answe∣ring yours of the first of this present: Touching the domestic occurrences, the Gentleman who is Bea∣rer hereof, is more capable to give you account by discourse, than I can in paper. For forrain tidings, your Lordship may understand, that the Town of Breda hath bin a good while making her last will and testament, but now ther is certain news com, that she hath yeel∣ded up the Ghost to Spinalo's hands after a tough siege of thirteen months, and a circumvallation of neer upon twenty miles com∣pas. My Lord of Southampton and his eldest son sickned at the siege, and died at Berghen; the adventrous Earl Henry of Oxford, see∣ming to tax the Prince of Orange of slacknes to fight, was set upon a desperat Work, wher he melted his grease, and so being carried to the Hague, he died also: I doubt not but you have heard of Graye Maurice's death, which happen'd when the Town was pass'd cure, which was his more than the States, for he was Marquis of Breda, and had neer upon thirty thousand dollars annual rent from her: Therfore he seem'd in a kind of sympathy to sicken with his Town, and died before her. He had provided plentifully for all his Naturall children, but could not, though much importun'd by Doctor Roseus, and other Divines upon his death bed, be induc'd to make them legitimat by marying the mother of them, for the Law there is, That if one hath got children of any Woman, though unmaried to her, yet if he mary her never so little before his death, he makes her honest, and them all legitimat; but it seems, the Prince postpos'd the love he bore to his woman and chil∣dren, to that which he bore to his brother Henry; for had he made the children legitimat, it had prejudic'd the brother in point of command and fortunes; yet he hath provided very plentifully for them and the mother. Grave Henry hath succeeded him in all things, and is a gallant Gentleman, of a French education and temper; he charg'd him
at his death to marry a young Lady, the Count of Solms Daughter, attending the Queen of Bohemia, whom he had long courted, which is thought will take speedy effect. When the siege before Breda had grown hot, Sir Edward Vere being one day attending Prince Maurice, he pointed at a rising place call'd Terbay, wher the enemy had built a Fort, (which might have bin prevented) Sir Edward told him, he fear'd that Fort would be the cause of the loss of the Town; the Grave spatter'd and shook his head, saying, 'twas the greatest error he had com∣mitted since he knew what belong'd to a Soldier; as also in mana∣ging the plot for surprising of the Cittadell of Antwerp, for he re∣pented that he had not imployed English and French, in lieu of the slow Dutch who aym'd to have the sole honour of it, and were not so fit instruments for such a nimble peece of service. As soon as Sir Charls Morgan gave up the Town, Spinola caus'd a new Gate to be erected with this inscription in great Golden Characters. Philippo quarto regnante, Clara Eugenia Isabella Gubernante, Ambrosio Spinola obsidente, Quatuor Regibus contra conantibus Breda capta fuit Idibus, &c. Tis thought Spinola now, that he hath recover'd the honor he had lost before Berghen op Zoon three yeers since, will not long stay in Flanders, but retire. No more now but that I am resolv'd to continue ever, London, Mar. 19. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. XVI. To Mr R. Sc. at York. SIR, I Sent you one of the third Current, but twas not answer'd; I sent another of the thirteenth like a second Arrow to find out the first, but I know not what's become of either; I send this to find out the other two, and if this fail, ther shall go no more out
of my Quiver: If you forget me, I have cause to complain, and more▪ if you remenber me; to forget, may proceed from the frailty of memory, not to answer me when you minde me, is pure neglect, and no less than a piacle. So I rest Yours easily to be recover'd, J. H. Ira furor brevis est, brevis est mea littera, cogor, Ira correptus, corripuisse stylum. London 19 of Iuly, the first of the Dogdaies, 1626. XVII. To Dr. Field, Lord Bishop of Landaff. My Lord, I Send you my humble thanks for those worthy Hospitable fa∣vours you were pleas'd to give me at your lodgings in Westmin∣ster. I had yours of the fifth of this present, by the hands of Mr. Ionathan Field. The news which fills every corner of the Town at this time, is the sorry and unsuccessfull return that Wimbledons Fleet hath made from Spain: It was a Fleet that deserv'd to have had a better destiny, considering the strength of it, and the huge charge the Crown was at; for besides a squadron of sixteen Hol∣landers, wherof Count William one of Prince Maurice's naturall Sons was Admirall, ther were above fourscore of ours; the grea∣test joynt navall power (of Ships without Gallies) that ever spred sail upon Salt-Water, which makes the World abroad to stand a∣stonish'd how so huge a Fleet could be so suddenly made ready. The sinking of the long Robin with 170 souls in her, in the Bay of Biscay, erc she had gon half the voyage was no good augury; And the Critics of the time say, ther were many other things that pro∣mis'd no good fortune to this Fleet; besides they would point at divers errors committed in the conduct of the main design; first, the odd choice that was made of the Admirall, who was a meer Land-man, which made the Sea men much slight him, it belonging
properly to Sir Robert Mansell, Vice-Admirall of England, to have gon in case the High-Admirall went not; then they speak of the incertainty of the enterprize, and that no place was pitch'd upon to be invaded, till they came to the height of the South Cape, and to sight of shore, where the Lord Wimbledon first cal'd a Coun∣sell of War, wherin som would be for Malaga, others for Saint Ma∣ry-Port, others for Gibraltar, but most for Cales, and while they were thus consulting, the Countrey had an alarum given them; Add hereunto the blazing abroad of this expedition ere the Fleet went out of the Downs, for Mercurius Gallobelgicus had it in print, that it was for the Streights mouth; Now 'tis a rule, that great designs of State should be mysteries till they com to the very act of per∣formance, and then they should turn to exploits: Moreover, when the locall attempt was resolv'd on, ther wer seven ships (by the ad∣vice of one Captain Love) suffer'd to go up the River, which might have bin easily taken, and being rich, 'tis thought they would have defrayed well neer the charge of our Fleet, which ships did much infest us afterwards with their Ordnance, when we had ta∣ken the Forr of Puntall: Moreover, the disorderly carriage and excess of our Land-men (wherof ther were 10000) when they were put a shore, who broke into the Fryers Caves, and other Cellers of Sweet-Wines, wher many hundreds of them being surprizd, and found dead-drunk, the Spaniards came and toar off their Ears, and Noses, and pluck'd out their Eies: And I was told of one merry fellow escaping, that kill'd an Asse for a Buck: Lastly, it is laid to the Admiralls charge, that my Lord de la Wares Ship being in∣fected, he should give order, that the sick men should be scatter'd in o divers ships, which dispers'd the contagion exceedingly, so that som thousands died before the Fleet return'd, which was don in a confus'd manner without any observance of Sea Orders: Yet I do not hear of any that will be punish'd for these miscarriages, which will make the dishonour fall more fouly upon the State: but the most infortunate passage of all was, that though we did nothing by Land that was considerable, yet if we had stayd but a day or two longer, and spent time at sea, the whole Fleet of Ga∣leons, and Nova Hispania, had faln into our mouths, which came presently in, close along the Coasts of Barbary, and in all likeli∣hood, we might have had the opportunity to have taken the rich∣est prize that ever was taken on salt-water. Add hereunto, that while we were thus Masters of those Seas, a Fleet of fifty sail of Bra∣sil men got safe into Lisbon, with four of the richest Caraks that e∣ver came from the East-Indies.
I hear my Lord of Saint Davids is to be remov'd to Bath and Wells, and it were worth your Lordships comming up, to endeavor the succeeding of him. So, I humbly rest Lond. 20 Novem. 1626. Your Lordships most ready Servitor, J. H. XVIII. To my Lord Duke of Buckinghams Grace at New-Market. MAy it please your Grace to peruse and pardon these few Ad∣vertisements, which I would not dare to present, had I not hopes that the goodnes which is concomitant with your greatnes, would make them veniall. My Lord, a Parliament is at hand, the last was boisterous, God grant that this may prove more calm: A rumor runs that ther are Clouds already ingendred, which will break out into a storm in the lower Region, and most of the drops are like to fall upon your Grace: This, though it be but vulgar Astrology, is not altogether to bee contemn'd, though I believe that His Majesties coun∣tenance reflecting so strongly upon your Grace, with the brightnes of your own innocency, may be able to dispell and scat∣ter them to nothing. My Lord, you are a great Prince, and all eyes are upon your actions, this makes you more subject to envy, which like the Sun beams, beats alwayes upon rising grounds. I know your Grace hath many sage and solid heads about you; yet I trust it  will prove no offence, if out of the late relation I have to your Grace, by the recommendation of such Noble personages, I put in also my Mite. My Lord, under favor, it were not amiss if your Grace would be pleased to part with som of those places you hold, which have least relation to the Court, and it would take away the mutte∣rings that run of multiplicity of Offices, and in my shallow ap∣prehension, your Grace might stand more firm without an Anchor: The Office of High Admirall in these times of action requires one whole man to execute it, your Grace hath another Sea of busi∣nesses
to wade through, and the voluntary resigning of this Of∣fice would fill all men, yea even your enemies, with admirati∣on and affection, and make you more a Prince, than detract from your greatnes: If any ill successes happen at Sea (as that of the Lord Wimbledons lately) or if ther be any murmur for pay, your Grace will be free from all imputations, besides it will afford your Grace more leasure to look into your own affairs, which lie con∣fus'd, and unsetled: Lastly, (which is not the least thing) this act will be so plausible, that it may much advantage His Majesty in point of Subsidy. Secondly, it were expedient (under correction) that your Grace would be pleas'd to allot som set hours for audience and access of Suters, and it would be less cumber to your Self, and your Ser∣vants, and give more content to the World, which often mutters for difficulty of access. Lastly, it were not amiss, that your Grace would settle a stan∣ding Mansion-house and Family, that Suters may know whither to repair constantly, and that your Servants evry one in his place, might know what belongs to his place, and attend accordingly; for though confusion in a great Family carry a kind of state with it, yet order and regularity gains a greater opinion of vertue and wisdom. I know your Grace doth not (nor needs not) affect popu∣larity: It is true, that the peoples love is the strongest Cittadell of a Soveraign Prince, but to a great subject, it hath often prov'd fatall; for he who pulleth off his Hat to the People, giveth his Head to the Prince; and it is remarkable what was said of a late infortunat Earl, who a little before Queen Elizabeths death, had drawn the Ax upon his own Neck, That he was grown so popular, that he was too dangerous for the times, and the times for him. My Lord, now that your Grace is threatned to be heav'd at, it should behove evry one that oweth you duty and good will, to reach out his hand som way or other to serve you; Amonst these, I am one that presumes to doe it, in this poor impertinent Paper; for which I implore pardon, because I am Lond. 13 Febr. 1626. My Lord, Your Grace's most humble and faithfull Servant, J. H.
XIX. To Sir J. S. Knight. SIR, THer is a saying which carrieth no little weight with it, that Parvus amor loquitur, ingens stapet; Small love speaks, while great love stands astonish'd with silence: The one keeps a tatling, while the other is struck dumb with amazement, like deep Ri∣vers, which to the eye of the beholder seem to stand still, while small shallow Rivulets keep a noise; or like empty Casks that make an obstreperous hollow sound, which they would not do were they replenish'd, and full of Substance: Tis the condi∣tion of my love to you, which is so great, and of that pro∣foundnes, that it hath been silent all this while, being stupified with the contemplation of those high Favours, and sundry sorts of Civilities, wherwith I may say, you have overwhelm'd me. This deep Foard of my affection and gratitude to you, I intend to cut out hereafter into small currents (I mean into Letters) that the cours of it may be heard, though it make but a small bub∣ling noise, as also, that the clearnes of it may appear more vi∣sible. I desire my Service be presented to my noble Lady, whose fair hands, I humbly kiss; and if shee want any thing that London can afford, she need but command her and Lond. 11. of Febr▪ 1626. Your most faithfull and ready Servitor, J. H. XX. To the Right Honble the Earl R. My Lord, ACcording to promise, and that portion of obedience I ow to your commands, I send your Lordship these few Avisos, som wherof I doubt not but you have received before, and that by
bler pens than mine, yet your Lordship may happily find herein, somthing which was omitted by others, or the former news made clearer by circumstance. I hear Count Mansfelt is in Paris, having now receiv'd three routings in Germany; 'tis thought the French King will peece him up again with new recruits. I was told that as he was seeing the two Queens one day at Dinner, the Queen-Mother said, they say, Count Mansfelt is here amongst this Croud, I do not believe it quoth the young Queen; For whensoever he seeth a Spaniard he runs away. Matters go untowardly on our side in Germanie, but the King of Denmark will be shortly in the field in person; and Bethlem Ga∣bor hath been long expected to do somthing, but som think he will prove but a Bugbear. Sir Charls Morgan is to go to Germanie with 600 Anxiliaries to joyn with the Danish Army. The Parliament is adjourn'd to Oxford, by reason of the sick∣nes which increaseth exceedingly; and before the King went out of Town ther dyed 1500 that very week, and two out of White-Hall it self. Ther is high clashing again 'twixt my Lord Duke, and the Earl of Bristoll, they recriminat one another of divers things; the Earl accuseth him amongst other matters, of certain Letters from Rome; of putting His Majesty upon that hazardous jorney of Spain, and of som miscarriages at his being in that Court: Ther be Ar∣ticles also against the Lord Conway, which I send your Lordship here inclosed. I am for Oxford the next week, and thence for Wales, to fetch my good old Fathers blessing, at my return, if it shall please God to reprieve me in these dangerous times of Contagion, I shall continue my wonted service to your Lordship, if it may be done with safety. So I rest Lond. 15 of Mar. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.
XXI. To the Honble the Lord Viscount C. My Lord, SIr Iohn North delivered me one lately from your Lordship, and I send my humble thanks for the Venison you intend me. I acquainted your Lordship as opportunity serv'd with the nimble pace the French Match went on by the successfull negoti∣ation of the Earls of Carlile and Holland (who outwent the Monsieurs themselves in Courtship) & how in less than nine Moons this great busines was propos'd, pursued, and perfected, wheras the Sun had leasure enough to finish his annuall progres, from one end of the Zodiac to the other so many years, before that of Spain could com to any shape of perfection: This may serve to shew the dif∣ference 'twixt the two Nations, the Leaden-heeld pace of the one, and the Quick-silver'd motions of the other; It shews also how the French is more generous in his proceedings, and not so full of scruples, reservations, and jealousies, as the Spaniard, but deales more frankly, and with a greater confidence and gal∣lantry, The Lord Duke of Buckingham is now in Paris accompanied with the Earl of Montgomerie, and hee went in a very splendid equipage. The Venetian and Hollander with other States that are no friends to Spain, did som good offices to advance this Alli∣ance; and the new Pope propounded much towards it; But Ri∣chelieu the new Favorit of France was the Cardinall instrument in it. This Pope Urban grows very active, not onely in things pre∣sent, but ripping up of old matters, for which ther is a select Committee appointed to examin accounts and errors pass'd, not only in the time of his immediat Predecessor, but others. And one told me of a merry Pasquill lately in Rome; that wheras ther are two great Statues, one of Peter, the other of Paul, opposit one to the other upon a Bridge, one had clapt a pair of Spurs upon Saint Peters Heels, and Saint Paul asking him whither hee was bound, he answered, I apprehend som danger to staie now in Rome, because of this new Commission, for I fear they will questi∣on me for denying my Master. Truly brother Peter, I shall not staie long
after you▪ for I have as much cause to doubt, that they will question me for persecuting the Christians, before I was converted. So I take my leave and rest London,  3 May. 1626. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. XXII. To my Brother, Master Hugh Penry. SIR, I Thank you for your late Letter, and the severall good tydings you sent me from Wales; In requitall I can send you gallant news, for we have now a most Noble new Queen of England, who in true beuty is beyond the Long-Woo'd Infanta; for she was of a fa∣ding Flaxen-Hair, Big Lipp'd, and somwhat heavy Ey'd; but this Daughter of France, this youngest Branch of Bourbon (being but in her cradle when the great Henry her Father was put out of the World) is of a more lovely and lasting complexion, a dark brown, shee hath eyes that sparkle like Stars; and for her Physiog∣nomy she may be said to be a mirror of perfection: She had a rough passage in her transfretation to Dover Castle, and in Can∣terbury the King Bedded first with her; ther were a goodly train of choice Ladies attended her coming, upon the Bowling-green on Barram-Down upon the way, who divided themselves into two rows, and they appear'd like so many Constellations; but me thought that the Countrey Ladies out-shin'd the Courtiers: She brought over with her, two hundred thousand Crowns in Gold and Silver, as halt her portion, and the other Moitie is to be payed at the yeers end. Her first suit of servants (by Article) are to be French, and as they die English are to succeed; shee is also allowed twenty eight Ecclesiastics of any Order, except Iesuits; a Bishop for her Almoner, and to have privat exercise of her Religion, for her and her servants. I pray convey the inclosed to my Father by the next convenien∣cy, and present my dear love to my Sister; I hope to see you at Dyvinnock about Michamas, for I intend to wait upon my Fa∣ther, and will take my Mother in the way, I mean Oxford, in the interim, I rest London, 16 May, 1626. Your most affectionat Brother, J H.
XXIII. To my Unkle Sir Sackvill Trever, from Oxford. SIR, Am sorry I must write unto you the sad tydings of the dissoluti∣on of the Parliament here, which was don suddenly: Sir Iohn Eliot was in the heat of a high speech against the Duke of Buching∣m, when the Usher of the Black-Rod, knock'd at the door, and signified the Kings pleasure, which strook a kind of consternation in all the House: My Lord Keeper Williams hath parted with the Broad-Seal, because as som say, he went about to cut down the Scale, by which he rose; for som it seems did ill offices 'twixt the Duke and him: Sir Thomas Coventry hath it now, I pray God he be tender of the Kings conscience, wherof he is Keeper, rather than of the Seal. I am bound to morrow upon a journey towards the Mountains to see som Friends in Wales, and to bring back my Fathers bles∣sing; for better assurance of Lodging wher I pass, in regard of the Plague, I have a Post Warrant as far as Saint Davids, which is far enough you'l say, for the King hath no ground further on this Island. If the sicknes rage in such extremity at London, the Term will be held at Reding. All your friends here are well, but many look blank because of this sudden rupture of the Parliament; God Almighty turn all to the best, and stay the fury of this contagion, and preserve us from urther judgements, so I rest Oxford, 6 Aug. 1626. Your most affectionate Nephew, J. H.
XXIV. To my Father, from London. SIR, I Was now the fourth time at a dead stand in the cours of my fortunes, for though I was recommended to the Duke, and re∣ceiv'd many Noble respects from him, yet I was told by som who are neerest him, that som body hath don me ill offices, by whispe∣ring in his ear, that I was two much Digbified, and so they told me positively, that I must never expect any imployment about him of any trust: while I was in this suspence, Mr. Secretary C∣way sent for me, and propos'd unto me, that the King had occasion to send a Gentleman to Italy, in nature of a moving Agent, and though he might have choice of persons of good quality that would willingly undertake this employment, yet understanding of my breeding, he made the first proffer to me, and that I should go as the Kings Servant, and have allowance accordingly; I hum∣bly thank'd him for the good opinion he pleas'd to conceive of me, being a stranger to him, and desir'd som time to consider of the proposition, and of the nature of the imployment; so he granted me four daies to think upon't, and two of them are pass'd alrea∣dy. If I may have a support accordingly, I intend by Gods grace (desiring your consent and blessing to go along) to apply my self to this cours; but before I part with England, I intend to send you further notice. The sicknes is miraculously decreas'd in this City and Suburbs; for from two and fiftie hundred which was the greatest number that died in one week, and that was som fourty daies since, they are now fallen to three hundred. It was the violent'st t of con∣tagion that ever was for the time in this Island, and such as no sto∣ry can parallell, but the Ebb of it was more swift than the Tide. My brother is well, and so are all your friends here, for I do not know any of your acquaintance that's dead of this furious infection: Sir Iohn Walter ask'd me lately how you did, and wish'd me to re∣member him to you. So with my love to all my Brothers and Sis∣ters, and the rest of my friends which made so much of me lately in the Countrey, I rest London, 7 Aug. 1626. Your dutifull Son, J. H.
XXV. To the right Honble the Lord Conway, Princi∣pall Secretary of State to his Majesty, at Hampton Court. Right Honble, SInce I last attended your Lopp. here, I summond my thoughts to Counsell, and canvas'd to and fro within my self, the busi∣nes you pleas'd to impart unto me, for going upon the Kings Service to Italy; I considered therin many particulars, First the weight of the imployment, & what maturity of judgement, discreti∣on, and parts are requir'd in him that will personat such a man; next, the difficulties of it, for one must send somtimes light out of dark∣nes, and like the Bee suck Honey out of bad, as out of good Flow∣ers; thirdly, the danger which the undertaker must convers with∣all, and which may fall upon him by interception of Letters or o∣ther cross casualties; lastly, the great expence it will require, being not to remain Sedentary in one place, as other Agents, but to be often in itinerary motion. Touching the first, I refer my self to your Honours favourable opinion, and the Character which my Lord S. and others shall give of me▪ for the second, I hope to overcom it; for the third, I weigh it not, so that I may merit of my King and Countrey; for the last, I crave leave to deal plainly with your Lopp. that I am a Cadet, and have no other patrimony or support, but my bree∣ding, therfore I must breath by the imployment; And my Lord, I shall not be able to perform what shall be expected at my hands, under one hundred pounds a quarter, and to have bills of credit accordingly. Upon these terms, my Lord, I shall apply my self to this Service, and by Gods blessing hope to answer all expecta∣tions. So referring the premisses to your Noble consideration, I rest London, Sept. 8. 1626. My Lord, Your very humble and ready Servitor, J. H▪
XXVI. To my Brother (after) Dr. Howell, now Bishop of Bristoll. My brother, NExt to my Father, 'tis fitting you should have cognisance of my affairs and fortunes. You heard how I was in agitation for an employment in Italy, but my Lord Conway demurr'd upon the salary I propounded; I have now wav'd this cours, yet I came off fairly with my Lord; for I have a stable home emploiment proffer'd me by my Lord Scroop, Lord President of the North, who sent for me lately to Worcester House, though I never saw him before, and there the bargain was quickly made, that I should go down▪ with him to York for Secretary, and his Lordship hath promis'd me fairly; I will see you at your House in Horsley be∣fore I go, and leave the particular circumstances of this busines till then. The French that came over with Her Majesty, for their petulan∣cy, and som misdemeanors, and imposing som odd penancy's up∣on the Queen, are all casheer'd this week, about a matter of sixscore, wherof the Bishop of Mende was one, who had stood to be Steward of Her Majesties Courts, which Office my Lord of Hol∣land hath; It was a thing suddenly don, for about one of the clock as they were at dinner, my Lord Conway, and Sir Thomas Ed∣monds, came with an Order from the King, that they must instant∣ly away to Somerset House, for there were Barges, and Coaches staying for them; and there they should have all their Wages paied them to a peny, and so they must be content to quit the Kingdom: This sudden, undream'd of Order, struck an astonishment into them all, both men and women; and running to complain to the Queen, His Majesty had taken her before into his Bed-chamber, and lock'd the doors upon them, untill he had told her how mat∣ters stood; the Queen fell into a violent passion, broke the Glass-Windows, and tore her Hair, but she was calm'd afterwards: Just such a destiny happen'd in France som years since to the Queens Spanish Servants there, who were all dismiss'd in like manner for som miscarriages; the like was don in Spain to the French, therfore 'tis no new thing.
They are all now on their way to Dover, but I fear this will breed ill bloud 'twixt us and France, and may break out into an ill-fa∣vour'd quarrell. Master Mountague is preparing to go to Paris as a Messenger of Honour, to prepossess the King and Counsell there, with the truth of things. So with my very kind respects to my Sister, I rest Lond. 15 Mar. 1626. Your loving brother, J. H. XXVII. To the Right Honble the Lord S. My Lord, I Am bound shortly for York, wher I am hopefull of a profitable imployment. Ther is fearfull news com from Germany, that since Sir Charls Morgan went thither with 600 men for the assistance of the King of Denmark, the King hath receiv'd an utter over∣throw by Tilly, he had receiv'd a fall off a Horse from a Wall five yards high, a little before, yet it did him little hurt. Tilly pursueth his Victory strongly, and is got ore the Elve to Holsteinland, insomuch that they write from Hamburgh, that Den∣mark is in danger to be utterly lost: The Danes and Germanes seem to lay som fault upon our King, the King upon the Parliament, that would not supply him with Subsidies to assist his Uncle, and the Prince Palsgrave, both which was promis'd upon the rupture of the Treaties with Spain, which was done by the advice of both Houses▪ This is the ground that His Majesty hath lately sent out privy Seals for Loan Moneys, untill a Parliament may be calld, in re∣gard that the King of Denmark is distress'd, the Sound like to be lost, the Eastland Trade, and the Staple at Hamborough in danger to be destroied, and the English Garrison under Sir Charls Morgan at Stod ready to be starv'd. These Loan moneys keep a great noise, and they are imprison'd that deny to conform themselves. I fear I shall have no more opportunity to send to your Lord∣ship, till I go to York, therfore I humbly take my leave, and kiss your hands, being ever, My Lord, Your obedient and ready Servitor, J. H▪
XXVIII. To Mr. R. L. Merchant. I Met lately with I. Harris in London, and I had not seen him two years before, and then I took him, and knew him to be a man of thirty, but now one would take him by his Hair to be near three∣score, for he is all turnd gray. I wonderd at such a Metamorpho∣sis in so short a time, hee told me 'twas for the death of his Wife, that nature had thus antidated his years, 'tis true that a weighty setled sorrow is of that force, that besides the contraction of the Spirits, it will work upon the radicall moisture, and dry it up, so that the Hair can have no moisture at the Root. This made me remember a Story that a Spanish Advocat told me, which is a thing very remarkable. When the Duke of Alva was in Brussels, about the beginning of the tumults in the Netherlands, he had sat down before Hulst in Flanders, and ther was a Provost Marshall in his Army, who was a Favorit of his; and this Provost had put som to death by secret Commission from the Duke: Ther was one Captain Bolea in the Armie, who was an intimat friend of the Provosts, and one evening late, he went to the said Captains Tent, and brought with him a Confessor, and an Executioner, as it was his custom; He told the Captain, that he was com to execut his Excellencies Commission, and Marshall Law upon him; the Captain started up suddenly, his hair standing at an end, and being struck with amazement, ask'd him wherin he had offended the Duke; the Provest answer'd, Sir I com not to expostulat the busines with you, but to execut my Commission, therfore I pray prepare your self, for ther's your Ghostly Father and Executioner: so he fell on his knees before the Priest, and having don, the Hangman going to put the Halter about his neck, the Provost threw it away, and breaking into a laughter, told him, ther was no such thing, and that he had don this to try his courage, how be could bear the terror of death, the Captain look ghastly up him, and said, then Sir get you out of my Tent, for you have don me  very ill office: The next morning the said Captain Bolea, though  young man of about thirtie, had his hair all turnd grav, to the admira∣tion of all the world, and of the Duke of Alva himself, who questio him about it, but he would confess nothing. The next year the Du was revok'd, and in his journey to the Court of Spain, he was to pas by Saragossa, and this Captain Bolea, and the Provost went alon
with him as his Domestics: The Duke being to repose some days in S.. ragossa, the young▪ old Captain Bolea told him, that ther was a thing in that Town worthy to be seen by His Excellency, which was a Casa de Locos, a Bedlam-house, for ther was not the like in Christendom: Well said the Duke, go and tell the Warden I will be there to morrow in the afternoon, and wish him to be in the way. The Captain having obtaind this, went to the Warden and told him, that the Duke would com to vi∣sit the House the next day, and the chiefest occasion that mov'd him to it, was, that he had an unruly Provost about him, who was subject often∣times to fits of frenzie, and because he wisheth him well, he had tried divers means to cure him, but all would not do, therfore he would trie whether keeping him close in Bedlam for som days, would do him any good: The next day the Duke came with arffling train of Captains af∣ter him, amongst whom was the said Provost, very shining brave; being entred into the house, about the Dukes person, Captain Bolea told the Warden, pointing at the Provost, that's the man; so hee took him aside into a dark Lobby, wher he had plac'd som of his men, who muffled him in his Cloak, seiz'd upon his gilt Sword, with his Hat and Feather, and so hurried him down into a Dungeon: My Provost had lain there two nights and a day, and afterwards it happen'd that a Gentleman com∣ming out of curiosity to see the house, peep'd in at a small grate where the Provost was; The Provost conjur'd him as he was a Christian, to go and tell the Duke of Alva, his Provost was there clap'd up, nor could be imagin why. The Gentleman did the Arrand, wherat the Duke being astonish'd, sent for the Warden with his prisoner; so he brought my Provost en cuerpo Madman like, full of straws and Feathers before the Duke, who at the sight of him, breaking out into a laughter, ask'd the Warden, why he had made him his Prisener; Sir, said the War∣den, 'twas by vertue of your Excellencis Commission brought me by Cap∣tain Bolea: Bolea step'd forth and told the Duke; Sir, you have ask'd me oft, how these hairs of mine grew so suddenly gray, I have not re∣veal'd it yet to any soul breathing, but now Ile tell your Excellency, and so sell a relating the passage in Flanders. And Sir I have been ever since beating my Brains how to get an equall revenge of him, and I thought no revenge to be more equall or corresponding, now that you see he hath made me old before my time, than to make him mad if I could, and had he staied som days longer close Prisoner in the Bedlam House, it might haply have wrought som impressions upon his pericranium: The Duke was so well pleas'd with the Story, and the wittines of the re∣venge, that he made them both friends; and the Gentleman who told me this passage, said, that the said Captain Bolea was yet living, so that he could not be less than ninety years of age.
I thank you a thousand times for the Cphalonia Muscadell, and Botargo you sent me; I hope to be shortly quit with you for all courtesies, in the interim, I am York this 1 of May. 1626. Your obliged friend to serve you, J H. Postscript. I Am sorry to hear of the trick that Sir Iohn Aires put upon the Company by the Box of Hailshot, sign'd with the Ambassadors Seal, that he had sent so solemnly from Constantinople, which he made the world beleeve to be full of Chequins and Turky gold.
Familiar Letters. SECTION V. I. To Dan. Caldwall Esqr, from York. My dear D. THough I may be tearmed a right Northern man, being a good way this side Trent, yet my love to you is as Southern as ever it was, I mean it continueth still in the same degree of heat, not can this bleaker air, or Boreas chilling blasts cool it a whit; I am the same to you this side Trent, as I was the last time we cross'd the Thames to∣gether to see Smugg the Smith, and so back to the Still-yard: But I fear that your love to me doth not continue in so constant and in∣tense a degree, and I have good grounds for this fear, because I never receiv'd one syllable from you, since I left London; if you ridd me not of this scruple, and send to me speedily, I shall think, though you live under a hotter clyme in the South, that your former love is not only coold but frozen. For this present condition of life, I thank God, I live well con∣tended, I have a fee from the King, diet for my self and two ser∣vants, livry for a horse, and a part of the Kings house for my lodg∣ing, and other privileges which I am told no Secretary before me had▪ but I must tell you the perquisits are nothing answerable to my expectation yet. I have built me a new study since I came, wherin I shall amongst others meditat somtimes on you, and whence this present Letter coms. So with a thousand thanks for the plentifull
Hospitality and Joviall farewell you gave me at your House in Es∣sex, I rest York 30 Iulii. 1627. Yors, yors, yors, J. H. II. To Mr. Richard Leat. SIgnor io, it is now a great while me thinks since any act of friendship, or other interchangeable offices of love hath pass'd between us, either by Letters, or other accustomed ways of corre∣spondence; And as I will not accuse, so I go not about to clear my self in this point, let this long silence be tearm'd therfore a cessati∣on rather than neglect on both sides: A bow that lies awhile unbent, and a field that remains fallow for a time, grow never the worse, but afterwards the one sends forth and arrow more strongly, the other yeelds a better crop being recultivated: Let this be also verified in us, let our friendship grow more fruitfull after this pawse, let it be more active for the future: you see I begin and shoot the first shaft. I send you herewith a couple of red Dear pies, the one Sir Arthur Ingram gave me, the other my Lord Presidents Cook, I could not tell where to bestow them better; In your next let me know which is the best season'd; I pray let the Sydonian Merchant Io. Bruck∣burst be at the eating of them, and then I know they will be well soak'd. If you please to send me a barrell or two of Oysters which we want here, I promise you they shall be well eaten, with a cup of the best Clarret, and the best Sherry, to which Wine this Town is altogether adicted, shall not be wanting. I understand the Lord Weston is Lo. Treasurer, we may say now, that we have Treasurers of all tences, for ther are four living, to wit, the Lord Manchester, Middlesex, Malborough, and the newly chosen; I hear also that the good old man (the last) hath retir'd to his lodgings in Lincolns Inn, and so reduc'd himself to his first principles, which makes me think that he cannot bear up long, now that the staff is taken from him. I pray in your next send me the Venetian Gazetta. So with my kind respects to your Father, I rest York, 9. Iuly. 1627. Yours, J. H.
III. To Sir Ed. Sa. Knight. SIR, 'Twas no great matter to be a Prophet, and to have foretold his rupture 'twixt us and France upon the sudden renvoy of her Majesties servants, for many of them had sold their estates in France, given money for their places, and so thought to live and die in Eng∣land in the Queens service, and so have pittifully complained to that King, therupon he hath arrested above 100 of our Merchant men that went to this Vintage at Bourdeaux. We also take som straglers of theirs, for ther are Letters of Mart given on both sides. Ther are Writs issued out for a Parliament, and the Town of Richmond in Richmond shire hath made choise of me for their Burgess, though Master Christopher Wansford and other powerfull men, and more deserving than I, stood for it. I pray God send fair weather in the House of Commons, for ther is much mur∣muring about the restraint of those that would not conform to loan-moneys. Ther is a great Fleet a preparing, and an Army of Land-men, but the design is uncertain whether it be against Spain or France, for we are now in enmity with both those Crowns. The French Cardinall hath been lately tother side the Alpes, and setled the Duke of Nevers in the Duchy of Mantoua, notwith∣standing the opposition of the King of Spain and the Emperor, who alleg'd that he was to receive his investiture from him, and tha was the chief ground of the War; but the French Arms have d the work, and com triumphantly back over the Hills again. No more now, but that I am as always Your true friend, J. H. March 2. 1627.
IV. To the Worpll Mr Alderman of the Town of Richmond, and the rest of the worthy Mem∣bers of that ancient Corporation. SIR, I Receiv'd a public Instrument from you lately, subscrib'd by your self, and divers others, wherin I find that you have made choice of me to be one of your Burgesses for this now neer-approa∣ching Parliament; I could have wish'd that you had not put by Master Wandesford, and other worthy Gentlemen that stood so ear∣nestly for it, who being your neighbors, had better means, and more abilities to serve you. Yet since you have cast these high respects upon me, I will endeavor to acquit my self of the trust, and to an∣swer your expectation accordingly: And as I account this Election an honor unto me, so I esteem it a great advantage, that so wor∣thy, and well experienc'd a Knight as Sir Talbot Bows is to be my Collegue and fellow Burgess; I shall steer by his compas, and follow his directions in any thing that may concern the welfare of your Town, and of the Precincts therof, either for redress of any grievance, or by proposing som new thing that may conduce to the further benefit and advantage therof, and this I take to be the true duty of a Parliamentary Burgess, without roving at ran∣dum to generalls. I hope to learne of Sir Talbot what's fitting to be don, and I shall apply my self accordingly to joyn with him to serve you with my best abilities: So I rest Your most assured and ready friend to do you service, J. H. Lond. March 24: 1627.
V. To the Right Honble the Lo: Clifford at Knasbrugh. My Lord, THe news that fill all mouths at present, is the return of the Duke of Buckingham from the Isle of Ree, or as so call it the Ile of Rue, for the bitter success wee had there; for we had but a t entertainment in that sal Island. Our first invasion was mag∣nanimous & brave, wherat neer upon 200 French Gentlemen peri∣shed, and divers Barons of quality. My Lord Newport had ill luck to disorder our Cavalry with an unruly Horse he had: His brother Sir Charls Rich was slain, and divers more upon the retreat, amongst others, great Golonell Gray fell into Salt-pit, and being ready to be drownd he cryed out Cens mill escus pour ma rançon, a hundred thousand Crowns for my ransom, the French-men hearing that, pre∣serv'd him, though he was not worth a hundred thousand pence. Another merry passage a Captain told me, that when they were rifling the dead bodies of the French Gentlemen after the first in∣vasion, they found that many of them had their Mistresses favors tyed about their genitories. The French do much glory to have re∣pell'd us thus, and they have reason, for the truth is, they compor∣ted themselves gallantly; yet they confess our landing was a no∣table piece of courage, and if our Retreat had been answerable to the Invasion, we had lost no honor at all. A great number of gal∣lant Gentlemen fell on our side, as Sir Iohn Heyden, Sir Io. Bur∣rowes, Sir George Blundell, Sir Alex. Brett, with divers Veteran Com∣manders, who came from the Netherlands to this service. God send us better success the next time, for ther is another Fleet preparing to be sent under the Command of the Lord Denbigh; so I kiss your hands, and am Lond.  24 of Sept, 1627. Your humble Servitor, J. H.
VI. To the Right Honble the Lord Scroop, Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of the North. My Lord, MY Lord Dnbigh is returned from attempting to relieve Ro∣chell, which is reduc'd to extreme exigent; And now the Duke is preparing to go again, with as great power as was yet rais'd: notwithstanding that the Parliament hath flown higher at him than ever; which makes the people here hardly wish any good success to the Expedition, because he is Generall. The Spaniard stands at a gaze all this while, hoping that we may do the work, o∣therwise I think he would find som way to relieve that Town, for ther is nothing conduceth more to the uniting and strengthning of the French Monarchy than the reduction of Rochell. The King hath been there long in person with his Cardinall, and the stupen∣dious works they have rais'd by Sea and Land, are beyond belief, as they say. The Sea-works and booms were traced out by Marquis Spinola, as he was passing that way for Spain from Flanders. The Parliament is prorogued till Michaelmas term; ther we five Subsidies granted, the greatest gift that ever Subjects gave their King at once; and it was in requitall that his Majesty pass'd the Petition of Right, wherby the liberty of the free-born subject is so strongly and clearly vindicated. So that ther is a fair corre∣spondence like to be 'twixt his Majesty and the two Houses. The Duke made a notable Speech at the Counsell Table in joy hereof, amongst other passages, one was, that hereafter his Majestie would please to make the Parliament his Favorit, and he to have the honor to remain still his servant. No more now but that I continue Lond. 25. Sept. 1628. Your Lordships most dutifull Servant, J. H.
VII. To the Right Honble the La: Scroope Countess of Sunderland, from Stamford. Madam, I Lay yesternight at the Post House at Stilton, and this morning betimes the Post-master came to my beds head and told me the Duke of Buckingham was slain; my faith was not then strong e∣nough to believe it, till an hour ago I met in the way with my Lord of Rutland (your Brother) riding Post towards London, it pleas'd him to alight, and shew me a Letter, wherin ther was an exact relation of all the circumstances of this sad Tragaedy. Upon Saturday last, which was but next before yesterday being Bartholmew yeeve, the Duke did rise up in a well disposed hu∣mor out of his bed, and cutt a Caper or two, and being rea∣dy, and having been under the Barbers hands (wher the Murtherer had thought to have don the deed, for hee was lea∣ning upon the Window all the while) hee went to breakfast at∣tended by a great Company of Commanders, where Monsieur Soubize came unto him, and whispered him in the ear that Ro∣chell was relieved, the Duke seem'd to slight the news, which made som think that Soubize went away discontented; After Breakfast the Duke going out, Colonell Fryer stepped before him, and stopping him upon som busines, one Lieutenant Fel∣ton being behind, made a thrust with a common tenpeny knife over Fryers arm at the Duke, which lighted so fatally, that hee slit his heart in two, leaving the knife sticking in the body; The Duke took out the knife, and threw it away, and laying his hand on his Sword, and drawn it half out said, the Villain hath killd me (meaning as som think Colonell Fryer) for ther had been som difference 'twixt them, so reeling against a Chimney hee fell down dead; The Dutchess being with child hearing the noise below, cam in her night geers from her Bed Chamber, which was in an upper room, to a kind of Rayl, and thence beheld him weltering in his own bloud. Felton had lost his Hat in the croud, wherin ther was a Paper sowed, wherin he declared that the reason which mov'd him to this act was no grudg of his own, though hee had been far behind for
his pay, and had bin put by his Captains place twice, but in re∣gard he thought the Duke an enemy to the State, because he was branded in Parliament, therfore what he did was for the public good of his Countrey. Yet he got clearly down, and so might have gon to his horse which was tied to a hedg hard by, but he was so amazed that he missd his way, and so struck into the pastry, where though the cry went that som Frenchman had don't, he think∣ing the word was Felton, he boldly confessed twas he that had don the deed, and so he was in their hands, Iack Stamford would have run at him, but he was kept off by Mr. Nicholas, so being carried up to a Tower Captain Mine toare off his spurrs, and asking how he durst attempt such an act, making him beleeve the Duke was not dead, he answerd boldly that he knew he was dispatchd, for was not he, but the hand of heaven that gave the stroak, and though his whole body had bin coverd over with armour of proof he could not have avoyded it. Captain Charles Price went Post presently to the King four miles off, who being at prayers on his knees when it was told him, yet he never stirrd, nor was he di∣sturbd a whit till all divine service was don. This was the relation as far as my memory could bear, in my Lord of Rutlands Let∣ter, who willd me to remember him unto your Ladyship, and tell you that he was going to comfort your neece (the Dutches) as fast as he could: and so I have sent the truth of this sad story to your Ladyship, as fast as I could by this post, because I cannot make that speed myself, in regard of som busines I have to dispatch for my Lord in the way; So I humbly take my leave, and rest Stamford, Aug. 5. 1628. Your Lapps most dutifull Servant, J. H. IX. To the right Honble Sir Peter Wichts his Majesties Ambassador at Constantinople. My Lord, YOurs of the 2. of Iuly came to safe hand, and I did all those particular recaudos, you enjoyned me to do to som of your ends here.
The Town of Rochell hath bin fatall and infortunat to England, for this is the third time that we have attempted to releeve her, but our fleets and forces returnd without doing any thing. My Lord of Linsey went thither with the same Fleet the Duke inten∣ded to go on, but he is returnd without doing any good, he made som shots at the great Boom and other baricadoes at sea, but at such a distance, that they conld do no hurt. Insomuch that the Town is now given for lost, and to be passd cure, and they cry out, we have betrayd them: At the return of this Fleet two of the Whelps were cast away, and three ships more, and som five ships who had som of those great stones, that were brought to build Pauls, for ballast and for other uses within them, which could promise no good success, for I never heard of any thing that pros∣pered which being once designed for the honor of God was alie∣nated from that use. The Queen interposeth for the releasement of my Lord of Newport and others who are prisoners of War, I hear that all the colours they took from us are hung up in the great Church Nostredame as tropkeys in Paris. Since I began this letter ther is news brought that Rochell hath yeelded, and that the King hath dismantled the Town, and razd all the fortificati∣ons landward, but leaves those standing which are toward the Sea. It is a mighty exploit the French King hath don, for Rochell was the cheifest propugnacle of the Protestants there, and now questi∣onles all the rest of their cautionary Towns which they kept for their own defence will yeeld, so that they must depend hereafter upon the Kings meer mercy. I hear of an overture of Peace twixt us and Spain, and that my Lord Cottington is to go thither, and Don Carlos Coloma to com to us. God grant it, for you know the saying in Spanish Nunca vi tan mala paz, que no fuera mejor, {que} la mejor guerra. It was a bold thing in England, to fall out with the two greatest Monarchs of Christendom, and to have them both her enemies at one time, ad as glorious a thing it was to bear up a∣gainst them. God turn all to the best, and dispose of things to his glory; So I rest London, 1 Sept. 1628. Your Lordships ready Servitor, J. H.
X. To my Cosen Mr. Stgeon, at Christ-Church College in Oxford. COsen, though you want no incitements to go on in that fair road of vertu▪ wher you are now running your cours, yet be∣ing lately in your noble Fathers company, he did intimat unto me, that any thing which cam from me would take with you very much. I hear so well of your proceedings, that I should rather commend than encourage you. I know you wer remov'd to Ox∣ford in full maturity, you wer a good Orator, a good Poet, and a good Linguist for your time; I would not have that fate light upon you, which useth to befall som, who from golden Students, becom silver Bachelors, and Leaden Masters, I am far from enter∣taining any such thought of you, that Logic with her quiddities, and Quae la vel Hipps, can any way unpolish your human studies: As Logic is clubfisted and crabbed, so she is terrible at first sight, she is like a Gorgons head to a young student, but after a twelve months constancy and patience, this Gorgons head will prove a meer buggbear; When you have devour'd the Organon, you will find Philosophie far more delightfull and pleasing to your palat: In feeding the soul with knowledge, the understanding requireth the same consecutif acts which nature useth in nourishing the bo∣dy. To the nutrition of the body, ther are two Essentiall conditions requir'd assumption and retention, then ther follows two more,  and , concoction and agglutination or adhaesion; So in feeding your soule with Science, you must first assume, and suc in the matter into your apprehension, then must the memory re∣tain and keep it in, afterwards by disputation, discours, and medi∣tation, it must be well concocted; then must it be agglutinate and converted to nutriment; All this may be reduc'd to these  heads, tencre fideliter, & uti faeliciter, which are two of the happi∣est properties in a student; ther is an other act requir'd to goo concoction call'd the act of Expulsion, which puts off all that is un∣found and noxious, so in study ther must be an expulsive vert to shun all that is erroneous, and ther is no science but is full  such stuff, which by direction of Tutor, and choice of good Book
must be excernd: Do not confound your self with multiplicity of Authors, two is enough upon any Science, provided they be plena∣ry and orthodox; Philosphy should be your substantiall food, Poe∣try your banqueting stuff; Philosophy hath more of reality in it than any knowledge, the Philosopher can fadom the deep, mea∣sure Mountaines, reach the Starrs with a staff, and bless Heaven with a girdle. But amongst these studies you must not forget the unicum necessa∣rium, on Sundaies and Holy-dayes, let Divinity be the sole object of your speculation, in comparison wherof all other knowledg is but cobweb learning; prae qua quisquiliae coetera. When you can make truce with study, I should be glad you would employ som superfluous hour or other to write unto me, for I much covet your good, because I am London 25 Octob. 1627. Your affectionat Cosen, J. H. XI. To Sir Sackvill Trevor Knight. Noble Onkle, I Send you my humble thanks for the curious Sea-chest of glas∣ses you pleas'd to bestow on me, which I shalbe very chary to keep as a Monument of your love. I congratulat also the great honor you have got lately by taking away the Spirit of France, I mean by taking the third great Vessell of her Sea-Trinity, Her Ho∣ly Spirit, which had bin built in the mouth of the Texell for the service of her King; without complementing with you, it was one of the best exploits that was perform'd since these warrs began, and besides the renown you have purchas'd, I hope your reward will be accordingly from his Majesty, whom I remember you so happi∣ly preserv'd from drowning in all probability at St. Anderas road in Spain. Though Princes guerdons com slow, yet they com sure; And it is oftentimes the method of God Almighty himself to be long both in his rewards and punishments. As you have berest the French of their Sain-Esprit, their Holy Spirit, so ther is news that the Hollander have taken from Spain, all her Saints; I mean todos los santos, which is one of the chie∣fest
staples of Sugar in Brasill. No more but that I wish you all health, honor, and hearts desire. London, 26 of Octob. 1627. Your much obliged Nephew and Servitor, J. H. XII. To Captain Tho. B. from York. NOble Captain, Yours of the first of March was deliverd me by Sir Richard Scott, and I held it no profanation of this Sunday evening considering the quality of my subject, and having (I thank God for it) performed all Church duties, to employ som hours to meditat on you, and send you this frendly salute, though I confess in an unusuall monitory way. My dear Captain, I love you perfectly well, I love both your person and parts which are not vulgar, I am in love with your disposition which is generous, and I verily think you wer▪ never guilty of any Pusillanimous act in your life: Nor is this love of mine conferr'd upon you gra∣tis, but you may challenge it as your due, and by way of corre∣spondence, in regard of those thousand convincing Evidences you have given me of yours to me, which ascertain me, that you take me for a true frend: Now I am of the number of those, that had rather commend the vertue of an enemy, than soeth the vi∣ces of a friend; for your own particular, if your parts of vertue, and your infirmities were cast into a ballance, I know the first would much out-poise the other; yet give me leave to tell you  ther is one frailty, or rather ill favor'd custom that reigns in you, which weighs much, it is a humor of swearing in all your discour∣ss, and they are not slight, but deep, far fetch'd Oathes that you are wont to rap out, which you use as flowers of Rhetoric to en∣force a aith upon the hearers, who beleeve you never the more, and you use this in cold bloud when you are not provok'd, which makes the humor far more dangerous; I know many, (and I can∣not say I my self am free from it God forgive me) that being trans∣ported with choler, and as it were made drunk with passion, by som sudden provoking accident, or extreme ill fortune at play will let fall Oaths and deep Protestations▪ but to belch out,
send forth, as it were, whole volleys of Oaths and Curses in a calm humor, to verifie every triviall discours is a thing of horror. I knew a King that being cross'd in his game would amongst his Oaths fall on the ground, and bite the very earth in the rough of his passion; I heard of another King (Henry the fourth of France) that in his highest distemper would swear but Ventre de Saint Gris, by the belly of Saint Gris; I heard of an Italian, that having been much accustomed to blaspheme, was wean'd from it by a pretty wile, for having been one night at play, and lost all his money, after many execrable Oathes, and having offerd money to another to go out to face heaven and defie God, he threw himself upon a Bed hard by, and there fell asleep; The other Gamsters plaid on still▪ and finding that he was fast asleep, they put out the can∣dels, and made semblance to play on still, they fell a wrangling, and spoke so loud, that he awaked, he hearing them play on stil fell a rubbing his eyes, and his conscience presently prompted him that he was struck blind, and that Gods judgment had deservedly fallen down upon him for his blasphemies, and so he fell to sigh and weep pittifully, a ghostly Father was sent for, who undertook to do som acts of penance for him, if he would make a vow never to play again or blaspheme, which he did, and so the candles were lighted again, which he thought were burning all the while; so he becam a perfect Convert. I could wish this Letter might produce the same effect in you; Ther is a strong Text, that the curse of heaven hangs always over the dwelling of the swearer, and you have more fearfull examples of miraculous judgments in this particular, than of any other sin. Ther is a little town in Languedoc in France that hath a multitude of the Pictures of the Virgin Mary up and down, but she is made to carry Christ in her right arm contrary to the ordinary custom, and the reason they told me was this, that two gamsters being at play, & one having lost all his money, and bolted out many blasphemies, e gave a deep Oath that that whore upon the wall, meaning the pi∣cture of the blessed Virgin▪ was the cause of his ill luck, hereup∣on the child removed imperceptibly from the left arm to the right, and the man fell stark dumb ever after', thus went the tradition there; This makes me think upon the Lady Southwells news from Utopia that he who sweareth when he playeth at dice, may challenge his damnation by way of purchase. This inandous custom of Swearing I observe reigns in England lately more than any wher els, though the German in his highest puff of pasion swear by a hundred thousand Sacraments, the Italian by the whore of God,
the French by his death, the Spaniard by his flesh, the Westiman by his sweat, the Irish man by his five wounds, though the Scot com∣monly bids the devill hale his soule, yet for variety of Oaths the English Roarers put down all: Consider well what a dangerous thing it is to tear in pieces that dreadfull name which makes the vast fabric of the world to tremble, that holy name wherein the whol Hierarchy of Heaven doth triumph, that blisful name wher∣in consists the fulnes of all felicity. I know this custom in you yet, is but a light disposition, tis no habit I hope, let me therfore con∣jure you by that power of frendship, by that holy ligue of love which is between us, that you would suppress it before it com to that, for I must tell you that those who could find in their hearts to love you for many other things, do disrespect you for this, they hate your company, and give no credit to whatsoever you say, it being one of the punishments of a swearer as well as of a lyar not to be beleeved when he tells truth. Excuse me that I am so free with you, what I write proceeds from the clear current of a pure affection, and I shall heartily thank you, and take it as an argument of love, if you tell me of my weaknesses, which are (God wot) too too many, for my body is but a Cargazon of corrupt humors, and being not able to overcome them all at once I do endeavor to doe it by degrees, like Sertorius his soldier who when he could not cut off the Horse tayl with his sword at one blow, fell to pull out the hair one by one: And touch∣ing this particular humor from which I disswade you, it hath rag'd in me too often by contingent fits, but I thank God for it I find it much abated, and purg'd. Now the only Physic I us'd was a precedent fast and recours to the holy Sacrament the next day, of purpose to implore pardon for what was pass'd, and power for the future to quell those exorbitant motions, those ravings and fea∣vourish fits of the soul, in regard ther are no infirmities more dangerous, for at the same instant they have being they becom im∣pieties. And the greatest symptom of amendment I find in mee is, because whensoever I hear the holy name of God blasphem'd by any other, it makes my heart to tremble within my brest: Now it is a penitentiall Rule that if sins present do not please thee, sins pass'd will never hurt thee. All other sins have for their object, ei∣ther pleasure or profit, or some ayme and satisfaction to body or mind, but this hath none at all, therfore fie upon't, my dear Cap∣tain te whether you can make a conquest of your self in subdu∣ing this execrable custom. Alexander subdued the World, Caesar his Enemies, Hercules▪ Monsters, but he that oecomes himself
is the true valiant Captain. I have herewith sent you a Hymn consonant to this subject; because I know you are Musicall and a good Poet. A gradual Hymn of a double cadence, tending to the Honor of the Holy Name of GOD. 1. LEt the vast universe, And therein ev'ry thing, The mighty acts rehearse Of their immortall King, His Name extoll what to Nadir from Zenith stir Twixt Pole and Pole. 2. Yee Elements that move, And alter every hower, Yet herein constant prove, And symbolize all sower, His praise to tell, mix all in one for aire and tone To sound this peale. 3. Earth which the center art And only standest still, Yet move, and bear thy part, Resound with ecchos shrill, Thy Mines of gold, with precious stones, and unions, His fame uphold. 4. Let all thy fragrant flowers Grow sweeter by this , Thy tallest trees and bowers Bud forth and blossom sair, Beasts wild and tame, whom lodgings yield▪ House dens or field, Collaud his Name. 5. Yet Seas with Earth that make One globe flow high and swell, Exalt your Makers name, In deep his wonders tell, Leviathan, and what doth swim neer bank or brim, His glory fcan. 6. Yet airy Regions all Ioyn in a sweet concent, Blow such a Madrigall May reach the Firmament: Winds, hail, Ice, snow, and perly drops, that hang on crops, His wonders show. 7. Pure element of fire With holy sparks inflame This sublunary quire, That all one Consort frame. Their spirits raise, to trumpet forth their Makers worth, And sound his praise.
8. Yee glorious Lamps that roul In your celestiall Sphears All under his controule, Who you on poles up bears Him magnifie, yet Planets bright, and fixed lights That deck the skie. 9. O Heaven Chrystalline, which by thy watry but Do'st temper and refine the rest in azurd blue, His glory sound thou first Mobile, which makst all wel In circle round. 10. Yee glorious souls who raign In sempiternall joy, Free from those cares and pain which here did you annoy, And him behold in whom all bliss concentred is His laud unfold. 11. Blest maid which dost surmount all Saints and Seraphins, And raignst as Paramount, And chief of Cherubins, Chant out his praise who in thy womb, nine months took room, Though crownd with rayes. 12. Oh let my soul and heart, my mind and memory Bear in this Hymn a part, and joyn with earth and sky. Let every wight the whole world ore làud and adore The Lord of light. All your friends heer are well, Tom Young excepted, who I fear hath not long to live amongst us, so I rest, York, the 1 of Aug. 1628. Your true friend, J. H. XIII. To Will: Austin, Esqr. SIR, I Have many thanks to give you for that excellent Poem you sent me upon the Passion of Christ, surely you wer possess'd with a very strong spirit when you penn'd it, you wer becom a true Enthusiasist; for, Iet me despair if I lye unto you, all the while I was perusing it, it committed holy rapes upon my soul, me ought I felt my heart melting within my brest, and my thoughts
transported to a true Elysium all the while, ther were such flexa∣nimous strong ravishing strains throughout it. To deal plainly with you, it wer an injury to the public good, not to expose to open light such divine raptures, for they have an edifying power in them, and may be tearm'd the very quintessence of devotion; you discover in them what a rich talent you have, which should not be buried within the walls of a privat study, or pass through a few particular hands, but appear in public view, and to the sight of the world, to the enriching of others, as they did me in reading them. Therfore I shall long to see them pass from the Bankside to Pauls Churchyard, with other precious peeces of yours, which you have pleas'd to impart unto me Oxford, 20 Aug 1628. Your most affectionate Servito, J. H. XIV. To Sir I. S. Knight. SIR, YOu writ to me lately for a Footman, and I think this bearer will fit you; I know he can run well, for he hath run a∣way twice from me, but he knew the way back again, yet though he hath a running head as well as running heels, (and who will expect a footman to be a stayed man?) I would not part with him, were I not to go ost to the North. Ther be som things in him that answer for his waggeries, he will com when you call him, go when you bid him, and shut the door after him; he is faithfull and stout, and a lover of his Master; He is a great enemy to all doggs, if they bark at him in his running, for I have seen him confront a huge mastif, and knock him down: When you go a Countrey journey, or have him run with you a hunting, you must spirit him with liquor, you must allow him also somthing extraordinary for socks, els you must not have him to wait at your table; for when his grease melts in running hard tis subject to fall into his toes. I send him you but for tryall, if he be not for your turn, turn him over to me again when I com back, The best news I can send you at this time, is, that we are like to have peace, both with France and Spain, so that Harwich men your
Neighbours, shall not hereafter need to fear the name of Spino∣la, who struck such an apprehension into them lately, that I under∣stand they begin to fortifie. I pray present my most humble service to my good Lady, and at my return from the North, I will be hold to kiss her hands, and yours, so I am London, 25 of May. 1628. Your much obliged Servito, J. H. XV. To my Father. SIR, OUr two younger brothers, which you sent hither, are disposed of; my brother Doctor hath placed the elder of the two with Mr. Hawes, a Mercer in Cheapside, and he took much paines in't, and I had plac'd my brother Ned, with Mr. Barrington, a Silk▪man in the same street, but afterwards for som inconveniences, I remov'd him to one Mr. Smith at the Flower-de-Luce in Lum∣bard-street, a Mercer also; Their Masters are both of them very wel to pass, and of good repute; I think it will prove som advantage to them hereafter, to be both of one trade; because when they are out of their time, they may joyn socks together; So that I hope, sir, they are wel plac'd as any two youths in London, but you must not use to send them such large tokens in money, for that may corrupt them. When I went to bind my brother Ned apprentice in Dra∣pers Hall, casting my eyes upon the Chimney peece of the great room I might spy a picture of an ancient Gentleman, and under∣neath Thomas Howell, I asked the Clerk about him, and he told me that he had bin a Spanish Merchant in Henry the eighths time, and coming home rich, and dying a Bachelor, he gave that Hall to the Company of Drapers, with other things, so that he is accoun∣ted one of their chiefest Benefactors. I told the Clerk, that one of the sons of Thomas Howell came now thither to be bound, he answe∣red that if he be a right Howell, he may have when he is free three hundred pounds to help to set up, and pay no interest for five yeers. It may be hereafter wee may make use of this. He told me
also, that any Maid that can prove her Father to be a true Howell may com and demand fifty pounds towards her portion of the said Hall. I am to goe post towards Yorke to morrow, to my charge, but hope, God willing, to be here againe the next Terme; So with my love to my brother Howell, and my sister his wife, I rest London 30 Sept. 1629. Your dutifull Son, I. H. XVI. To my brother Dr. Howell at Iesus College in Oxon. BRother, I have sent you here inclosed; Warrants for four brace of Bucks, and a Stag, the last Sir Arthur Manwaring pro∣cur'd of the King for you, towards the keeping of your Act, I have sent you also a Warrant for a brace of Bucks out of Waddon Chace; besides, you shall receive by this Carrier a great Wicker Hamper, with two Geoules of Sturgeon, six barrells of pickled Oysters, three barrells of Bologna Olives, with som other Spanish comodi∣ties. My Lord President of the North hath lately made me Patron of a living hard by Henley, call'd Hambledon, it is worth five hundred pounds a year communibus onnis, and the now Incumbent Dr. Pil∣kington is very aged, valetudinary, and corpulent; My Lord by legall instrument hath transmitted the next Advouson to me for satisfaction of som arrerages; Dr. Dommlaw and two or three more have bin with me about it, but I alwayes intended to make the first proffer to you, therfore I pray think of it, a sum of money must be had, but you shall be at no trouble for that, if you only will secure it (and desire one more who I know will do it for you) and it shall appear unto you that you have it upon far better trms than any other. It is as finely situated as any Rectory can be, for it is a∣bout the mid-way twixt Oxford and London, it lies upon the Thames, and the Glebe-land house is very large and fair, and not dilapida∣ted, so that considering all things it is as good as som Bishopricks; I know his Majesty is gracious unto you, and you may well expect som preferment that way, but such livings as these are not to be
had every where. I thank you for inviting me to your Act, I will e with you the next week, God willing; and hope to find my Father there; So with my kind love to Dr. Mansell, Mr. Watkins, Mr. Madocks and Mr. Napier at Allsoules, I rest London, 20 Iune. 1628. Your loving Brother, J. H. XVII. To my Father Mr. Ben: Johnson. FAther Ben. Nullum fit magnum ingenium sine mixtura demen∣ti, thers no great wit without som mixture of madnes, so saith the Philosopher, nor was he a fool who answered, nec parvum, sine mixtura stultiti, nor small wit without som allay of foolish∣n. Touching the first it is verified in you, for I find that you have bin oftentimes mad, you were mad when you writ your Fox, and madder when you writ your Alchymist, you were mad when you writ Catilin, and stark mad when you writ Sejus; but when you writ your Epigrammes, and the Magnetic Lady you were not so mad; Insomuch that I perceive ther be degrees of madnes in you; Excuse me that I am so free with you. The mad∣nes I mean is that divine fury, that heating and heighning Spirit which Ovid speaks of, Est Deus in nobis agitante calescimus illo, that true enthusiasm which transports, and elevates the souls of Poets, above the middle Region of vulgar conceptions, and makes them soar up to Hea∣ven to touch the starrs with their laurelld heads, to walk in the Zodiac with Apollo himself, and command Mercury upon their er∣rand. I cannot yet light upon Doctor Davies his Welsh Grammer, be∣fore Christmas I am promiss'd one; So desiring you to look better hereafter to your charcole fire and chimney, which I am glad to be one that preserv'd from burning, this being the second time that Vulca hath threatned you, it may be because you have spoken ill of his wise and bin too busy with his hornes; I rest Westminster, 27 Iune, 1629. Your Son, and contiguous Neighbour, J. H.
XVIII. To Sir Arthur Ingram at his House in York. SIR, I Have sent you herewith a hamper of Melons, the best I could find in any of Tothillfield gardens, and with them my very hum∣ble service and thanks for all favors, and lately for inviting me to your new noble House at Temple Newsam when I return to York∣shire; To this I may answer you as my Lord Coke was answerd by a Nfolk Countryman who had a sute depending in the Kings-Bench against som neighbours touching a River that us'd to an∣noy him, and Sir Edward Coke asking how he call'd the River, he answerd, my Lord I need not call her, for she is forward enough to com of her self. So I may say that you need not call me to any house of yours, for I am forward enough to com without cal∣ling. My Lord President is still indispos'd at Dr. Nappiers, yet he writ to me lately that he hopes to be at the next sitting in York: So with a tender of my most humble service to my noble good Lady, I rest London, 25 Iul. 1629. Your much obliged servant, J. H. XIX. To R. S. Esq. SIR, I Am one of them, who value not a curtesie that hangs long be∣twixt the fingers, I love not those viscosa beneficia, those bird∣lm'd kindnesses which Pliny speaks of; Nor would I receive mo∣ney in a durty clowt, if possibly I could be without it; Ther∣fore I return you the courtesie by the same hand that brought it,
it might have pleasur'd me at first, but the expectation of it hat prejudic'd me, and now perhaps you may have more need of it than Westminster 3 Aug. 1629. Your humble Servitor, J. H. XX. To the Countess of Sunderland at York. Madame, MY Lord continues still in cours of Physic at Dr. Nappiers, I writ to him lately, that his Lordship would please to com to his own house here in St. Martins lane, wher ther is a greater ac∣commodation for the recovery of his health, Dr. Maern being on the one side, and the Kings Apothecary on the other, but I fear ther be som Mountebanks that carry him away, and I hear he in∣tends to remove to Wickham to one Atkinson, a meer Quacksalver that was once Dr. Lopez his man. The little Knight that useth to draw up his breeches with a shoo∣inghorn, I mean Sir Posthumus Hobby, slew high at him this Par∣lement, and would have incerted his name in the scrowl of Recu∣sants, that's shortly to be presented to the King, but I produc'd a Certificat from Linford under the Ministers hand that he received the Communion at Easter last, and so got his name out; Besides, the Deputy-Lieutenants of Buckinghamshire would have charg'd Big∣gin Farme with a light horse, but Sir Will. Allford, and others joyn'd with me to get it off. Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Mr. Wansford, are grown great Courtiers lately, and com from Westminster-Hall to White-Hall: (Sir Iohn Savill their Countrey-man having shown them the way with his white staff) The Lord Weston tamperd with the one, and my Lord Cottington took paines with the other, to bring them about from their violence against the Prerogative: And I am told the first of them is promis'd my Lords place at York, in case his sick∣nes continues. We are like to have peace with Spain and France; and for Germa∣ny, they say the Swedes are like to strike in to her, to try whether they may have better fortune than the Danes.
My Lady Scroope (my Lords Mother) hath layn sick a good while, and is very weak. So I rest Westminst.  5 Aug. 1629. Madame, Your humble and dutifull Servitor, J. H. XXI. To Dr. H. W. SIR, IT is a rule in friendship, When distrust enters in at the foregate, love goes out at the Postern; It is as true a rule, that , dubitation is the beginning of all knowledge; I confess this is true in the first election and co-optation of a friend, to com to the knowlege of him by quaeres and doubts; but when ther is a perfect contract made, confirm'd by experience, and a long tract of time, distrust then is meer poison to friendship; Therfore if it be as I am told, I am unfit to be your friend, but Westmin. 20 Oct. 1629. Your servant, J. H. XXII. To Dr. H. W. SIR, THey say in Italy, that deeds are men, and words are but wo∣men; I have had your word often to give me a visit; I pray turn your semal promises, to masculin performances, els I shall think you have lost your being, for you know 'tis a rule in law, Idm st non esse, & non apparere. Westmin. 25 Sept. 1629. Your faithfull Servitor, J. H.
To Mr. B. Chaworth: On my Valentine Mrs. Francis Metcalf (now Lady Robin∣son) at York. A Sonnet. COuld I charm the Queen of Loves, To lend a quill of her white Doves; Or one of Cupids pointed wings Dipt in the fair Castalian springs, Then would I write the all-divine Perfections of my Valentine. As 'mongst all flowrs the Rose excells, As Amber 'mongst the fragrantst smells, As 'mongst all mineralls the gold, As Marble 'mongst the finest mold, As Diamonds 'mongst jewells bright, As Cynthia 'mongst the lesser lights; So 'mongst the Northern beauties shine, So far excells my Valentine. In Rome and Naples I did view Faces of Celestiall hue, Venetian Dames I have seen many, (I only saw them, touch'd not any) Of Spanish beauties, Dutch and French, I have beheld the quintessence, Yet saw I none that could out-shine, Or parallell my Valentine. Th' Italians they are coy and quaint, But they grosly daube and paint, The Spanish kind, and apt to please, But sav'ring of the same disease, Of Dutch and French som few are comly, The French are light, the Dutch are homely. Let Tagus, Po, the Loire and Rhine Then vaile unto my Valentine.
Heer may be seen pure white and red, Not by feign'd Art, but Nature wed, No simpring smiles, no mimic face, Affected gesture, or forc'd grace, A fair smooth front, free from least wrinkle, Her eyes (oy me) like stars do twinkle; Thus all perfections do combine, To beautifie my Valentine. XXIII. To Mr. Tho. M. NOble Tom, You desir'd me lately to compose som lines upon your Mistresses black eyes, her becomming frowns, and up∣on her Mask. Though the least request of yours be a command unto mee, the execution of it a contentment, yet I was hardly drawn to such a task at this time, in regard that many businesses puzzle my pericranium.—aliena negotia centum per caput & circa saliunt latus. Yet lest your Clorinda might expect such a thing, and that you might incur the hazard of her smiles (for you say her frowns are favors) and that she may take off her Mask un∣to you the next time you go to court her, I send you the inclosed Verses Sonet-wise, which happly may please her better, in regard I hear she hath som skill in Music. Vpon black Eyes, and becomming Frowns, A Sonnet. BLack eyes, in your dark Orbs dothly My ill, or happy destiny, If with cleer looks you me behold, You give me Mines and Mounts of Gold▪ If you dart forth disdainfull rayes, To your own dy you turn my dayes. Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell, My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
That Lamp which all the stars doth blind, Yeelds to your lustre in som kind, Though you do wear to make you bright No other dress but that of night, He glitters only in the day, You in the dark your beams display. Black eyes, in your two Orbs by changes dwell, My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell. The cunning thief that lurks for prize, At som dark corner watching lies, So that heart-robbing God doth stand In your black lobbies, shaft in band, To rifle me of what I hold More precious far than Indian Gold. Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell, My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell. O powerfull Negromantic eies, Who in your circles strictly pries, Will find that Cupid with his dart In you doth practise the black art, And by th'enchantment I'me possest, Tries his conclusions in by brest. Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dwell, My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell. Look on me, though in frowning wise, Som kind of frowns becom black eies, As pointed Diamonds being set, Cast greater lustre out of Iet, Those peeces we esteem most rare, Which in night shadows postur'd are: Darknes in Churches congregats the sight, Devotion straies in glaring light; Black eyes, in your dark Orbs by changes dweil, My bane or bliss, my Paradise or Hell.
Touching her Mask, I will not be long about it. Upon Clorinda's Mask. SO have I seen the Sun in his full pride Orecast with sullen clouds, and lose his light, So have I seen the brightest stars denied To shew their lustre in som gloomy night, So Angels pictures have I seen vaild ore, That more deuoutly men should them adore; So with a Mask saw I Clorinda hide Her face more bright than was the Lemnian Bride. Whether I have hit upon your fancy, or fitted your Mistresse I know no▪ I pray let me hear what success they have; So▪ wi∣shing you your hearts desire, and if you have her, a happy con∣ferreation, I rest in Verse and Prose, Westmin. 29. of Mar. 1629. Yours, J. H. XXIV. To the Right Honble my La: Scroop Countess of Sunderland at Langar. Madam, I Am newly return'd from Hunsdon, from giving the Rites of bu∣riall to my Lords Mother; She made my Lord sole Executor of all. I have all her Plate and houshold stuff in my custody, and unles I had gon as I did much had been embezeld. I have sent herewith the coppy of a Letter the King writ to my Lord upon the esignation of his place, which is fitting to be preserv'd for posteri∣ty amongst the Records of Bolton Castle. His Majesty expresseth herin that he was never better serv'd nor with more exactnes of fi∣delity and Justice by any▪ therfore he intnds to set a speciall mark of his  upon him, hen his health will erve him to co to
Court, my Lord Carletn deliver'd it me, and told me he never re∣membred that the King writ a more gracious Letter. I have late∣ly bought in fee Farm Wanless Park of the Kings Commissioners for my Lord, I got it for six hundred pound doubling the old rent, and the next day I was offer'd five hundred pound for the bargain, ther were divers that put in for', and my Lord of Angle∣sey thought himself sure of it, but I found means to frustrat them all. I also compounded with her Majesties Commissioners for re∣spit of homage for Rabbi Castle, ther was 120 pound demanded, but I cam off for 40 shillings. My Lord Wentworth is made Lord Deputy of Ireland, and carries a mighty stroak at Court, ther have been som clashings 'twixt him and my Lord of Pebrock lately with others at Court, and divers in the North, and som as Sir Da∣vid Fowler with others have been crush'd. He pleas'd to give me the disposing of the next Attorneys place in York, and Iohn Lister being lately dead, I went to make use of the favor, and was offer'd three hundred pound for it, but som got 'twixt me and home, so that I was forc'd to go away contented with one hundred pecces Mr. Ratcliff deliver'd me in his Chamber at Grays Inn, and so to part with the legall instrument I had, which I did, rather than contest. The Dutchess your Necce is well, I did what your La: com∣manded me at York House. So I rest Westminster, this first of Iuly, 1629. Madame, Your Lapps ready and faithfull Servitor, J. H. XXV. To D. C. Esqr. at his House in Essex. My D. D. I Thank you for your last Society in London, but I am sorry to have found Iack T. in that pickle, and that hee had so fa transgres'd the Fannian Law, which allows a chirping cup to satiat, not to surt., to irth, not to madnes, and upon som ex∣traordinary occasion of som rencounters, to give Nature a
but not a knock as Iack did, I am afraid he hath taine such a habit of it, that nothing but death will mend him, and I find that he is po∣sting thither apace by this cours. I have read of a King of Navarr (Charles le mauvais) who perishd in strong waters, and of a Duke of Clarence that was drownd in a but of Malmesey, but Iack T. I fear will die in a butt of Caary. Howsoever comend me unto him, and desire him to have a care of the main chance. So I rest York, 5 Iul. 1629. Yours, J. H. XXVI. To Sir Thomas Lake Knight. SIR, I Have shewd Sir Kenelme Digby both our translations of Marti∣alls, Vitam quae facint beatiorem, &c. and to tell you true he adjudg'd yours the better, so I shall pay the wager in the place ap∣pointed, and try whether I can recover my self at giocod' amore, which the Italian sayth is a play to cosen the devill: If your pulse beats accordingly I will wayt upon you on the River towards the evening, for a floundring fit to get som fish for our supper, so I rest 3 Iuly, 1629. Your true Servitor, I. H. XVII. To Mr. Ben. Johnson. FAther Ben, you desir'd me lately to procure you Dr. Davies Welsh Grammer to add to those many you have, I have ligh∣ted upon one at last, and I am glad I have it in so seasonable a time that it may serve for a New-years gift, in which quality, I send it you; and because 'twas not you, but your Muse that desir'd it of me, or your letter runs on feet, I thought it a good correspon∣dence with you to accompagne it with what follows.
Vpon Dr. Davies Brittish Grammer. T'was a tough task beleeve it, thus to frame A wild and wealthy language, and to frame Grammatic toiles to curb her, so that shee Now speaks by rules, and sings by prosodie; Such is the strength of Art rough things to shape', And of rude Comons rich inclosures make. Doubtles much oil and labour went to couch Into methodic rules the rugged Dutch; The Rabbies pass my reach, but judg I can, Somthing of Clenard and Quintilian; And for those modern Dames I find they threeItal. Spanish. French. Are only lopps cut from the Latian tree, And easie tas to square them into parts, The Tree it self so blossoming with Arts. I have bin shewn for Irish and Bascuence Imperfect rules couchd in an Accidence: But I find none of these can take the start Of Davies, or that prove more men of art, Wh in exacter method, and short way, The Idioms of a language do display. This is the toung, the Bards sung in of old, And Druids their dark knowledg did unfold, Merlin in this his prophesies did vent Which through the world of fame bear such extent: This spoak that son of Mars, that Britain bold Who first mongst Christian worthies is inrolld:Arthur. This Brennus, who, to his desire and glut, The Mistress of the world did prostitut. This Arviragus, and brave Catarac Sole free, when all the world was n Romes rack, This Lucius who on angells wings did sor To Rome, and would wear diadem no more; And thousand Heroes more which should I tell This new-year scarce would serve me, so farewell▪ Cal. Apr. 1629. Your son and servitor, J. H.
XXVIII. To the right Honble the Earl of Bristol at Sherburn Castle. My Lord, I Attended my Lord Cottington before he went on his journey to∣wards Spain and put him in mind of the old busines against the Vice-roy of Sardinia, to see whether any good can be don, and to learn whether the Conde or his son be Solvent; He is to land at , one of the Kings ships attends him, and som Merchant men take the advantage of this Convoy. The news that keeps greatest noise now is, that the Emperour hath made a favourable peace with the Dane, for Tilly had cross'd the Elve, and entred deep into Holstein land, and in all probabi∣lity might have carried all before him, yet that King had honora∣ble termes given him, and a peace is concluded (though without the privity of England.) But I beleeve the King of Denmarc far'd the better, because he is Granchild to Charles the Emperours sister. Now it seems another spirit is like to fall upon the Emperour, for they write that Gustavus King of Swthland is struck into Ger∣many, and hath taken Meclenburgh; the ground of his quarrell as I hear is, that the Emperour would not acknowledg, much less give audience to his Ambassadors, he also gives out to com for the assistance of his Allies, the Dukes of Pomerland and Meclenburgh, nor do I hear that he speaks any thing yet of the Pr. Palsgraves business. Don Carlos Coloma is expected here from Flanders about the sam time, that my Lord Cottington shall be arriv'd at the Court of Spain, God send us an Honourable peace, for as the Spaniard saies, Nun∣avi tan mala paz que no fuesse mejor, que la mejor guerra. London, 20 May. 1629▪ Your Lordships most humble and ready Servant, J. H.
XXX. To my Cosen I. P. at Mr. Conradus. Cousin, A Letter of yours was lately deliverd me, I made a shift to read the superscription, but within, I wonderd what language it might be, in which 'twas written, at first I thought 'twas He∣brew, or som of her Dialects, and so went from the liver to the heart, from the right hand to the left to read it, but could mae nothing of it; then I thought it might be the Chineses language, and went to read the words perpendicular, and the lines were so crooked and distorted, that no coherence could be made; Greek  perceiv'd it was not, nor Latin or English; So I gave it for meere gibbrish, and your characters to be rather Hieroglyphicks then Let∣ters. The best is, you keep your lines at a good distance, like those in Chancery-bills, who as a Clerk said, were made so wide of purpose, because the Clients should have room enough to walk between them without justling one another; yet this widenes had bin excusable if your lines had bin streight, but they were full of odd kind of Undulations and windings; If you can write no other∣wise, one may read your thoughts as soon as your characters. It is som excuse for you, that you are but a young beginner, I pray let it appear in your next what a proficient you are, otherwise som blame may light on me that placed you there; Let me receive no more Gibbrish or Hieroglyphicks from you, but legible letters, that I may acquaint your friends accordingly of your good procee∣dings, So I rest Westminst. 20 Sept. 1629. Your very loving Cosen, J. H.
XXXI. To the Lo. Viscount Wentworth Lo. President of York. My Lord, MY last was of the first current, since which I receiv'd one from your Lordship, and your comands therin, which I shall ever entertain with a great deal of cheerfulnes. The grea∣test news from abroad is, that the French King with his Cardinal are com again on this side the Hills, having don his business in Italy and Savoy, and reserv'd still Pignerol in his hands, which will serve him as a key to enter Italy at pleasure; Upon the highest Mountain 'mongst the Alps he left this ostentous inscription up∣on a great Marble piller; A la memoire eternelle de Lovis treiziesme, Roy de France & de Navarre, Tres-Auguste, tres-victorieux, tres-heureux, Conquerant, tres-juste: Lequel apres avoir vaincu toutes les Nations de l'Europe, Il à encore triumphé les elements Du ciel & de la terre, Ayant passé deux fois ces-monts au mois de Mars avec son Armee Victorieuse pour remmettre les Princes d'Italie en leurs estats, Defendre & protegerses Alliez. To the eternall memory of Lewis the thirteenth King of France and Navarr, most gracious, most victorious, most happy, most just, a Conquerer; who having orecom all Nations of Europ, he hath also triumph'd over the Elements of Heaven and Earth, having twise pass'd ore these hills in the month of March with his victorious Army, to restore the Princes of Italy to their estates, and to de∣fend
and protect his Allies. So I take my leave for the present and rest, Westmin.  5 Aug. 1629. Your Lopp▪ most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XXXII. To Sir Keneime Digby Knight. SIR, GIve me leave to congratulat your happy return from the Levant, and the great honour you have acquir'd by your gallant comportment in Algier in reescating so many English slaves; by bearing up so bravely against the Venetian Fleet in the bay of Scanderoon, and making the Pantaloni to know themselves and you better. I do not remember to have read or heard, that those huge Galleasses of Saint Mark were bea∣ten afore. I give you the joy also, that you have born up against the Venetian Ambassadour here, and vindicated your self of those foule scandalls he had cast upon you in your absence; Wheras you desire me to joyne with my Lord Cottington and o∣thers to make an Affidavit touching Bartholomew Spinola, whither he be, Vezino de Madrid, viz. free Denison of Spaine, I am rea∣dy to serve you herein, or to do any other office that may right you, and tend to the making of your prize good. Yet I am very sor∣ry that our Aleppo Merchants suffer'd so much. I shall be shortly in London, and I will make the greater speed, because I may serve you. So I humbly kiss my noble Ladies hand, and rest Westmin, 25 Novemb. 1629. Your thrice-assured Servitor, J. H.
XXXIII. To the Right Honble Sir Peter Wicths Ambr. at Constantple. SIR, MAster Simon Digby delivered me one from your Lordship of the first of Iune; and I was extremely glad to have it, for I had receav'd nothing from your Lordship a twelvemonth before. Mr. Controuler Sir Tho. Edmonds is lately return'd from France, having renew'd the peace which was made up to his hands before by the Venetian Ambassadors, who had much labour'd in it, and had concluded all things beyond the Alps when the King of France was at Susa to relieve Casal. The Monsieur that was to fetch him from Saint Denis to Paris, put a kind of jeering complement up∣on him, viz. that his Excellency should not think it strange, that he had so few French Gentlemen to attend in this service to accom∣pany him to the Court, in regard ther were so many killd at the Isle of hee. The Marquis of Chasteau neuf is here from France, and it was an odd speech also from him reflecting upon Mr. Controuler, that the King of great Britain us'd to send for his Ambassadors from abroad to pluck Capons at home. Mr. Bulemach is to go shortly to Paris to recover the other moity of her Majesties portion; wherof they say my Lord of Holland is to have a good share; The Lord Treasurer Weston is he who hath the greatest vogue now at Court, but many great ones have clash'd with him: He is so potent, that I hear his eldest Son is to marry one of the bloud Royall of Scotland, the Duke of Lenox Sister, and that with his Majesties consent. Bishop Lad of London is also powerfull in his way, for hee sits at the helm of the Church, and doth more than any of the two Arch bishops, or all the rest of his two and twenty brethren besides. In your next I should be glad your Lordship would do me the fa∣vor, as to write how the grand Signor is like to speed before Bag∣da, in this his Persian expedition. No more now but that, I always rest Westmin. 1 Ian. 1629. Your Lordships ready and most faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XXXIV. To my Father. SIR, SIr Tho. Wentworth hath been a good while Lord President of York, and since is sworn Privy Counsellor, and made Baron and Vicount, the Duke of Buckingham himself flew not so high in so short a revolution of time; Hee was made Vicount with a great deale of high ceremony upon a Sunday in the afternoon at VVhite-Hall; My Lord Powis (who affects him not much) being told that the Heralds had fetch'd his Pedigree from the bloud Roy∣all, viz. from Iohn of Gaunt, said, Dammy if ever he com to be King of England I will turn Rebell. When I went first to give him joy, he pleas'd to give me the disposing of the next Attorney's place that falls void in York, which is valued at three hundred pounds. I have no reason to leave my Lord of Sunderland, for I hope hee will bee noble unto me; the perquisits of my place, taking the Kings see away, ca far short of what he promis'd me at my first comming to him, in regard of his non-residence at York, therfore I hope he will consider it som other way. This languishing sicknes still hangs on him, and I fear will make an end of him; Ther's none can tell what to make of it, but he voided lately a strange Worm at VVickham; but I fear ther's an impostume growing in him, for he told me a passage, how many years ago my Lord VVilloughby, and he, with so many of their servants (de gayete de cur) played a match at foot-ball against such a number of Countrey men, where my Lord of Sunderland being busie about the ball, got a bruise in the brest, which put him in a swond for the present, but did not trouble him till three months after, when being at Bever Castle (his brother-in-laws house) a quaume took him on a sudden, which made him retire to his bed-chamber, my Lord of Rutland following him, put a Pipe full of Tobacco in his mouth, and he being not accustomed to Tobacco, taking the smoak downwards, fell a ca∣sting and vomiting up divers little impostumated bladders of con∣geal'd bloud, which sav'd his life then, and brought him to have a better conceit of Tobacco ever after; and I fear ther is som of that clodded bloud still in his body. Because Mr. Hawes of Chep-side is lately dead, I have remov'd
my brother Griffith to the Hen and Chickens in Pater Noster Row, o Mr. Taylors, as gentile a shop as any in the City, but I gave a peece of Plate of twenty Nobles price to his Wife. I wish the York∣shire horse may be fit for your turn, he was accounted the best sad∣dle Gelding about York, when I bought him of Captain Phillips the Mustar-master; and when he carried me first to London, there was twenty pounds offered for him by my Lady Carlile. No more now but desiring a continuance of your blessing and pray∣ers, I rest Lond. 3 Decem. 1630. Your dutifull Son, J. H. XXXV. To the Lord Cottington, Ambassador Extraor∣dinary for his Majesty of great Britain in the Court of Spaine. My Lord, I Receiv'd your Lordships lately by Harry Davies the Correo San∣to, and I return my humble thanks, that you were pleas'd to be mindfull (amongst so many high negotiations) of the old bu∣sines touching the Viceroy of Sardinia, I have acquainted my Lord of Bristoll accordingly. Our eyes here look very greedily after your Lordship, and the success of your Embassie, and we are glad to hear the busines is brought to so good a pass, and that the capi∣tulations are so honorable (the high effects of your wisdom.) For News: The Sweds do notable feat Germany, and we hope they cutting the Emperour and Bavarian so much work to do, and the good offices we are to expect from Spain upon this redintegra∣tion of Peace, will be an advantage to the Prince Palatin, and fa∣cilitat matters for restoring him to his Country. Ther is little news at our Court, but that ther fell an ill-favou∣red quarrell 'twixt Sir Kenelm Digby, and Mr. Goring, Mr. Iermin, and others at St. Iames lately about Mrs Baker the Maid of honor, and Duells were like to grow of it, but that the busines was taken up by the Lord Treasurer, my Lord of Dorset, and others appoin∣ted by the King. My Lord of Sunderland is still ill dispos'd; he
will'd me to remember his hearty service to your Lordship, and so did Sir Arthur Ingram, and my Lady, they all wish you a happy and honorable return, as doth Lond. 1 March, 1630. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XXXVI. To my Lo: Vicount Rocksavage. My Lord, SOm say, the Italian loves no favor, but whats future; though I have convers'd much with that Nation, yet I am nothing infected with their humor in this point: for I love favors pass'd as well, the remembrance of them joyes my very heart, and makes it melt within me; when my thoughts reflect upon your Lordship. I have many of these fits of joy within me, by the pleasing specula∣tion of so many most noble favors, and respects; which I shall dai∣ly study to improve and merit. My Lord, Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. Westmin. 22 Mar. 1630. XXXVII. To the Earl of Bristol. My Lord, I Doubt not but your ordship hath had intelligence from time time what firm invasions the King of Sweds hath made into Germany, and by what degrees he hath mounted to this height, ha∣ving but six thousand foot and five hundred horse, when he entred first to Meclenburg, and taken that Town while Commissioners stood treating on both sides in his tent; how therby his Army much encreas'd, and so rush'd further into the heart of the Countrey, but passing neer Magdenburg, being diffident of his own strength he suffer'd Tilly to take that great Town with so much effusion of bloud, because they would receive no quarter; your Lordship
hath also heard of the battell of Leipsick, where Tilly notwithstan∣ding the Victory he had got ore the Duke of Saxony a few daies be∣fore, receav'd an vtter discomfiture, upon which victory the King sent Sir Thomas Roe a present of two thousand pounds and in his letter calls him his strenuum consultorem, he being one of the first who had advis'd him to this German war after he had made peace 'twixt him and the Polander. I presume also your Lordship heard how he met Tilly again neer Auspurg, and made him go up∣on a woodden leg wher of he died, and after soundly plunder'd the Bavarian, and made him flee from his own house at Munchen, and rifled his very Closets. Now your Lordship shall understand, that the said King is at Mentz, & keeps a Court there like an Emperour, there being above twelve Ambassadors with him. The King of France sent a great Marquis for his Ambassador to put him in mind of his Articles, and to tell him that his Christian Majesty wondred he would cross the Rhine without his privity, and wondred more that he would invade the Church-lands, meaning the Archbishop of Mentz, who had put himself under the protection of France; The Swed answer'd, That he had not broke the least title of the Articles agreed on, and touching the said Archbishop, he had not stood Neutrall as was promised, therfore he had justly set on his skirts. The Ambassa∣dor replied, in case of breach of Articles, his Master had eighty thousand men to pierce Germany when he pleas'd; The King an∣swer'd that he had but twenty thousand, and those should be soo∣ner at the walls of Paris, then his fourscore thousand should be on the frontiers of Germany. If this new Conquerer goes on with this violence, I beleeve it will cast the pollicy of all Christendom into another mould, and be get new maximes of State, for none can foretell wher his monstrous progress will terminat; Sir Henry Vane is still in Germany, observing his motions, and they write that they do not agree well; as I heard the King should tell him that he spoke nothing but Spanish to him: Sir Robert Anstruther is also at Vienna, being gon thither from the Diet at Ratisbon. I hear the Infante Cardinal is design'd to com Governor of the Netherlands, and passeth by way of Italy, and so through Ger∣many: his brother Don Carlos is lately dead. So I humbly take my leave, and rest My Lord, Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. Westmin. 23 Apr. 1630.
XXXVIII. To my noble Lady, the Lady Cor. Madam, YOu spoke to me for a Cook, who had seen the world abroad, and I think the bearer hereof will fit your Ladiships urn. He can marinat fish, make gellies, he is excellent for a pickant sawce, and the Haugou; besides Madame, he is passing good for an ollia; He will tell your Ladiship that the reverend Matron the olla podri∣da hath intellectualls and senses; Mutton, Beef, and Bacon, are to her, as the will, understanding, and Memory, are to the soule; Cabbage, Turnips, Artichocks, Potatoes and Dates, are her five senses, and Pepper the common sense; she must have Marrow to keep life in her, and som birds to make her light, by all meanes she must go adorn'd with chaines of Sausages; He is also good at Larding of meat after the mode of France. Madame, you may make proof of him, and if your Ladyship find him too sawey, or wastfuli, you may return him whence you had him, So I rest Westmin. 2 Iun. 1630. Madame, Your Lapps most humble Servitor, J. H, XXXIX. To Mr. E. D. SIR, YOu write to me that T. B. intends to give money for such a place, if he doth, I feare it will be verified in him that a fool and his money is soon parted, for I know he wilbe never a∣ble to execut it, I heard of a lae secretary of State that could not read the next morning his own hand writing, and I have read of Caligulas horse that was made Consull, therfore I pray tell him from me, (for I wish him well) that if he thinks he is fit for that Office, he looks upon himself through a fals glass, a trotting
hors is fit for a coach, but not for a Ladies saddle, and an ambler is proper for a Ladies saddle, but not for a coach. If Tom under∣takes this place, he wilbe as an ambler in a coach, or a trotter under a Ladies saddle, when I com to town, I will put him up∣on a far fitter and more feasable busines for him, and so comend me to him, for I am his and Westmin. 5 Iune, 1630. Your true friend, J. H. XL. To my Father. SIR, THer are two Ambassadors extraordinary to go abroad shortly, the Earl of Leycester, and the Lord M'eston, this latter goes to France, Savoy, Venice, and so returns by Florence a pleasant jour∣ney, for he carrieth presents with him from King and Queen: The Earl of Leycester is to go to the King of Denmark, and other Princes of Germany. The maine of the Embassy is to condole the late death of the Lady Sophia Queen Dowager of Denmark our Kings Grandmother: She was the Duke of Meclenburgs daughter, and her husband Christian the third dying young, her portion which was forty thousand pound was restor'd fier, and living a Widdow forty four years after, she grew to be so great a huswife setting three or four hundred people at worke, that she died worth neer two millions of dollars, so that she was reputed the richest Queen of Christendom: By the constitutions of Denmark this estate is di∣visible amongst her children wherof she had five, the King of Denmark, the Dutchess of Saxony, the Dutchess of Brimswick, Queen Ann, and the Dutchess of Holftein, the King being Male is to have two shares, our King and the Lady Elizabeth is to have that which should have belong'd to Queene Anne, so he is to returne by the Hague: It pleas'd my Lord of Leycester to send for me to Baynards Castle, and proffer me to go Se∣cretary in this Ambassage, assuring me that the journey shall tend to my profit and credit; So I have accepted of it, for I hea very nobly of my Lord, so that I hope to make a boon voyage of it.
I desire as hitherto your prayers and blessing may accompany me, so with my love to my Brothers, and Sisters, I rest, London, 5 May, 1632. Your dutifull son, I. H. XLI. To Mr. Alderman Moulson Governor of the Merchant adventurers. SIR, THe Earl of Leicester, is to go shortly Ambassador extraordi∣nary to the King of Denmark and he is to pass by Hamburgh; I understand by Mr. Skinner that the Staple hath som grievances to be redress'd. If this Ambassage may be an advantage to the Com∣pany I will solicit my Lord that he may do you all the favor that may stand with his honor, so I shall expect your instructions ac∣cordingly, and rest, Westmin. 1 Iune, 1632. Yours ready to serve you J. H. XLII. To Mr. Alderman Clethero, Governor of the Eastland Company. SIR, I Am inform'd of som complaints that your Company hath against the King of Denmarks Officers in the Sound. The Earl of Lei∣cester is nominated by his Majesty to go Ambassador extraordina∣ry to that King and other Princes of Germany; If this Embassy may be advantagious unto you, you may send me your directions, and I will attend my Lord accordingly, to do you any favor, that may stand with his honor, and conduce to your benefit, and redress of grievances, so I take my leave and rest, Westmin. 1 of Iune, 1632. Yours ready to do you service, J. H.
XLIII. To the Right Honble the Earl of Leicester at Pettworth. Mr Lord, SIR Iohn Pennington is appointed to carry your Lordship and your company to Germany, and he intends to take you up at Margets. I have bin with Mr Bourlamach, and receiv'd a bill of exchange from him for ten thousand dollars payable in Hamburgh. I have also receiv'd two thousand pounds of Sir Paul Pinder for your Lordships use, and he did me the favor to pay it me all in old gold, your allowance hath begun since the twenty five of Iuly last at eight pound per diem, and is to continue so till your Lordship return to his Majesty. I understand by som Merchants to day up∣on the Exchange that the King of Denmark is at Luckstadt, and staies there all this somer, if it be so, 'twill save half the voyage of going to Copenhagen, for in lieu of the Sound we need go no further then the River of Elve, so I rest, Westmin. 13 Aug. 1632. Your Lopps most humble and faithfull Servitor, J. H. XLIIII. To the Right Honble the Lord Mohun. My Lord, THough any comand from your Lordship be welcom to me at all times, yet that, which you lately injoynd me in yours of the twelfth of August, that I should inform your Lordship of what I know touching the Inquisition, is now a little unseasonable, be∣cause I have much to do to prepare my selfe for this employment to Germany, therfore I cannot satisfie you in that fulnes as I could do otherwise. The very name of the Inquisition is terrible all Christendom over, and the King of Spaint himself, with the chie∣fest
of his Grandes tremble at it. It was sounded first by the Ca∣tholic King Ferdinand (our Henry the eighths Father-in-law) for he having got Granada, and subdued all the Moors, who had had firm sooting in that Kingdom about 700. years, yet he suffer'd them to live peaceably a while in point of conscience; but afterwards he sent a solemn Mandamus to the Jacobin Fryars to endeavour the conversion of them by preaching, and all other meanes; They finding that their paines did little good, (and that those whom they had converted turn'd Apostats) obtain'd power to make a re∣search, which afterwards was call'd Inquisition, and it was rati∣fied by Pope Sxtus, that if they would not conform themselves by faie manes, they should be forc'd to it. The Jacobins being sound too severe herein, and for other abuses besides, this Inquisition was taken from them, and put into the hands of the most sufficient Ec∣clesiasticks. So a Counsell was established, and Officers appoin∣ted accordingly: Whosoever was found pendulous and branling in his Religion was brought by a Serjeant call'd Familiar, before the said Counsell of Inquisition, His accuser or delator stands be∣hind a peece of Tapistry, to see whether he be the party, and if he be, then they put divers subtill and entrapping interrogatories unto him, and whether he confess any thing or no, he is sent to prison. When the said Familiar goes to any house, though it be in the dead of night (and that's the time commonly they use to com, or in the dawn of the day) all doors and trunks and chests fly open to him, and the first thing he doth he seizeth the parties breeches, searcheth his pockets, and take his keyes, and so rum∣mageth all his closets and trunks: and a public Notary whom he carrieth with him, takes an Inventory of every thing, which is sequestred and despositated in the hands of som of his next neigh∣bours; The party being hurried away in a close Coach, and clap in prison, he is there eight daies before he makes his appearance, and then they present unto him the Cross, and the Missall book to swear upon; if he refuseth to swear, he convinceth himself, and though he sweare, yet he is remanded to prison: This Oath commonly is presented before any accusation be produc'd; His Goaler is strictly comanded to pry into his actions, his deport∣ment, words, and countenance, and to ser spies upon him, and whosoever of his fellow prisoners, or others can produce any thing against him, he hath a reward for it: At last after divers appa∣rances, examinations, and scrutinies, the Information against him is read, but the witnesses names are conceal'd, then is he appoin∣ted a Proctor and an Advocat, but he must not confer or advise
with them privatly, but in the face of the Court; The Kings At∣torney is a party in't, and the accusers commonly the solé witnes∣ses. Being to name his own Lawyers oftentimes others are disco∣vered and fall into trouble: while he is thus in prison, he is so abhor'd, and abandoned of all the world, that none will, atleast none dare visit him. Though one cleer himself, yet he cannot be freed, till an Act of aith pass; which is don seldom, but very so∣lemnly; Ther are few who having fallen into the gripes of the In∣quisition do scape the rack; or the Sambenito which is a streight yellow coat without sleeves, having the pourtrait of the Devill painted up and down in black, and upon their heads they carry a Mier of paper, with a man frying in the flames of hell upon't, they gag their mouths, and tie a great cord about their necks: The Iudges meet in som uncouth dark dungeon, and the Executi∣oner stands by, clad in a close dark garment, his head and face cover'd with a Chaperon, out of which ther are but two holes to look through, and a huge Link burning in his hand: When the Ecclesiastic Inquisitors have pronounced the Anathema against him, they transmit him to the secular Iudges to receave the sen∣tence of death, for Church-men must not have their hands imbru'd in bloud, the King can mitigat any punishment under death, nor i a Noble-man subject to the rack. I pray be pleas'd to pardon this rambling imperfect relation, and take in good part my Conformity to your Commands, for I am Westmin. 30 Aug. 1632. Your Lopps most ready and faithfull Servitor, J. H.
Familiar Letters. SECTION VI. I. To P. W. Esq at the Signet Office, from the English House in Hamburgh. WE are safely com to Germany, Sir Iohn Penington took us aboard in one of His Majesties Ships at Margets; and the Wind stood so fair, that wee were at the mouth of the Elve upon Munday fol∣lowing. It pleas'd my Lord I should Land first with two Footmen, to make haste to Glukstad, to learn wher the King of Denmark was, and he was at Rensburgh, som two daies journey off, at a Richsdagh an As∣sembly that corresponds our Parliament: My Lord the next day Landed at Glukstad, wher I had provided an accommodation for him, though he intended to have gon for Hamburgh, but I was bold to tell him, that in regard ther were som ombrages, and not only so, but open and actuall differences 'twixt the King and that Town, it might be ill taken, if he went thither first, before he had attended the King. So I left my Lord at Glukstad, and being com hither to take up 8000 rich Dollars upon Mr. Burlamac Bils, and fercht Mr. Avery our Agent here; I return to morrow to attend  Lord again. I find that matters are much off the Hinges  King of Denmark, and this Town. The  Sweden is advancing apace to find out Wallestein, and Wallestein  and in all apparance they will be shortly engag'd.
No more now, for I am interpell'd by many businesses; when you write, deliver your Letters to Mr. Railton, who will see them safely convey'd, for a little before my departure, I brought him acquainted with my Lord▪ that he might negotiat som things at Court. So with my service and love to all at Westminster, I rest Hamburgh, Octo. 23. 1632. Your faithfull servitor, J. H. II. To my Lord Viscount S. from Hamburgh. My Lord, SInce I was last in Town, my Lord of Leicester hath attended the King of Denmarke at Rensburg in Holsteinland; he was brought thither from Glukstad in indifferent good equipage, both for Coaches and Waggons; but he stayed som dayes at Rensburg for Audience; we made a comly, gallant shew in that kind, when we went to Court, for wee were neer upon a hundred all of one peece in mourning: It pleas'd my Lord, to make me the Orator, and so I made a long Latin Speech, alta voce, to the King in La∣tin, of the occasion of this Ambassie, and tending to the praise of the deceased Queen; and I had better luck then Secretary Nan∣ton had, som thirty yeers since, with Roger Earl of Rutland; for at the beginning of his Speech, when he had pronounc'd Serenissime Rex, he was dash'd out of countenance, and so gravell'd, that he could go no further: I made another to Christian the fifth, his el∣dest Son, King elect of Denmark; for though that Crown be purely electif, yet for these three last Kings, they wrought so with the people, that they got their eldest Sons chosen, and de∣clar'd before their death, and to assume the Title of Kings elect▪ At the same Audience, I made another Speech to Prince Frederic, Archbishop of Beme, the Kings third Son, and he hath but one more (besides his naturall Issue) which is Prince Ulri, now in the Warrs with the Duke of Sax; and they say ther is an alliance contracted already, 'twixt Christian the fifth, and the Duke of Sax his Daughter. This ceremony being perform'd, my Lord desir'd o find his own diet, and then he fell to divers businesses, which is ot fitting for me to forestall, or impart unto your Lordship now;  wee staied there neer upon a moneth: The King feasted my
Lord once, and it lasted from eleven of the clock, till towards the Evening, during which time, the King began thirty five healths; the first to the Emperour, the second to his Nephew of England, and so went over all the Kings and Queens of Christendom, but he never remembred the Prince Palsgraves health, or his Neece's all the while: The King was taken away at last in his Chair, but my Lord of Leicester bore up stoutly all the while, so that when ther came two of the Kings Guard to take him by the Arms, as he was going down the stairs, my Lord shook them off and went alone. The next morning I went to Court for som dispatches, but the King was gon a hunting at break of day; but going to som other of his Officers, their servants told me, without any apparance of shame, That their Masters were drunk over night, and so it would be late before they would rise. A few daies after we went to Gothorp Castle in Seswickland, to the Duke of Holsteins Court, where at my Lords first audience, I made another Latin Speech to the Duke, touching his Gran-Mo∣thers death; our entertainment there was brave (though a lit∣tle fulsom) my Lord was log'd in the Dukes Castle, and parted with Presents, which is more then the King of Denmark did; thence we went to Husem in Ditzmarsh, to the Dutchess of Holsteins Court (our Queen Anns youngest Sister) wher we had also very ful enter∣tainment, I made a speech to her also, about her Mothers death, and when I nam'd the Lady Sophia▪ the tears came down her cheeks. Thence we came back to Rhensburg, and so to this Town of Ham∣burgh, where my Lord intends to repose som daies after an ab∣rupt, odd journey wee had through Holsteinland, but I beleeve it will not be long, in regard Sir Iohn Pennington stayes for him up∣on the River. We expect Sir Robert Anstruther to com from Vi hither, to take the advantage of the Kings Ship. We understand that the Imperiall and Swedish Army have made neer approaches one to the other, and that som skirmishes and blows have bin already twixt them; which are the forerunners of a battle. So my good Lord I rest Hamburgh, 9 Octo. 1632. Your most humble and faithfull Svitor, J. H.
III. To the Right Honble the Earl R. from Hamburgh. My Lord, THough your Lordship must needs think, that in the imploy∣ment I am in (which requires a whole man) my spirits must be distracted by multiplicity of businesses; yet because I would not recede from my old method, and first principles of travell, when I came to any great City, to couch in writing what's most observ∣able, I sequestred my self from other Affairs, to send your Lordship what followeth touching this great Hans-Town. The Hans or Hansiatic lgue is very ancient, som would de∣rive the word from hand, because they of the society plight their faith by that action: Others derive it from Hansa, which in the Gothic toung is Counsell: Others would have it com from Han der see, which signifies neer or upon the Sea, and this passeth for the best Etymology, because their Towns are all seated so, or upon som navigable River neer the sea. The extent of the old Hans was from the Nerve in Livonia to the Rhin, and contain'd 62 great Mercantil Towns, which were divided to four Precincts: The chiefest of the first Prcinct was Lubck, wher the Archiss of their ancient Records, and their prime Chancery is still, and this Town is within that Verge: Cullen is chief of the second Precinct: Erurs∣wic of the third: and Danzic of the fourth. The Kings of Pe∣land and Sweden have sued to be their Protector, but they refus'd them, because they were not Princes of the Empire; they put off also the King of Denmark with a Complement, nor would they ad∣mit the King of Spain when he was most potent in the Netherlands, though afterwards when 'twas too late, they desir'd the help of the Ragged Staff; nor of the Duke of Anjou, notwithstanding that, the world thought he should have married our Queen, who interce∣ded for him, and so 'twas probable, that therby they might reco∣ver their privileges in England; so that I do not find they ever had any Protector, but the great Master of Prussia; and their want of a Protector did do them som prejudice in that famous difference they had with our Queen. The old Hans had extraordinary immunities given them by our Henry the third, because they assisted him in his wars with so ma∣ny
ships, and as they pretend, the King was not only to pay them for the service of the said Ships, but for the Vessells themselves if they miscarried: Now it happen'd, that at their return to Germa∣ny, from serving Henry the third, ther was a great Fleet of them cast away; for which, according to Covenant, they demanded re∣paration; Our King in lieu of money, amongst other Acts of Grace, gave them a privilege to pay but one per cent, which con∣tinued untill Queen Mories reign; and she by advice of King Phi∣lip her husband, as 'twas conceiv'd, enhanc'd the one to twenty per cent. The Hans not onely complain'd, but clamor'd loudly for breach of their ancient Privileges confirm'd unto them, time out of mind, by thirteen successive Kings of England, which they pre∣tended to have purchased with their money. King Philip undertook to accommode the busines, but Queen Mary dying a little after, and he retiring, ther could be nothing don▪ Complaint being made to Queen Elizabeth, she answerd, That as shee would not innovat a∣ny thing, so she would maintain them still in the same condition she found them: hereupon their Navigation and Trafic ceas'd a while: Wherfore the English tryed what they could do themselves, and they thrive so well, that they took the whole trade into their own hands, and so divided themselves (though they bee now but one) to Sta∣plers, and Merchant Adventurers, the one residing constant in one place, wher they kept their Magazin of Wool, the other stirring and adventuring to divers places abroad with Cloth, and other Manufactures; which made the Hans endevor to draw upon them all the malignancy they could from all Nations: Moreover the Hans Towns being a body politic incorporated in the Empire, com∣plain'd hereof to the Emperor, who sent over persons of great quality to mediat an accommodation, but they could effect nothing. Then the Queen caus'd a Proclamation to be punish'd, that the Easterlings or Merchants of the Hans, should be intreated and us'd as all other strangers were within her Dominions, without any mark of difference, in point of commerce. This netled them more, therupon they bent their Forces more eagerly, and in a Diet at Ratisbon, they procurd, that the English Merchants who had associ∣ated themselves into Fraternities in Embdn, and other places, should bee declar'd Monopolists; and so ther was a Comitiall Edict publishd against them, that they should be exterminated, and ba∣nisht out of all parts of the Empire, and this was don by the acti∣vity of one Suderman a great Civilian; Ther was there for the Queen Gilpin, as nimble a man as Suderman, and he had the Chan∣celor of Embden to second and countenance him, but they could
not stop the said Edict wherin the Society of English Merchants Ad∣venturers was pronounc'd to bee a Monopoly; yet Gilpin plaid his game so well, that he wrought under hand, that the said Imperiall Ban should not be publish'd till after the dissolution of the Diet, and that in the interim, the Emperor should send Ambassadors to England, to advertise the Queen of such a Ban against her Mer∣chants: But this wrought so little impression upon the Queen, that the said Ban grew rather ridiculous than formidable, for the Town of Embden harbour'd our Merchants notwithstanding, and after∣wards Stode, but they not being able to protect them so well from the Imperiall Ban, they setled in this Town of Hamburgh: After this, the Queen commanded another Proclamation to be divulg'd, that the Easterlings or Hansiatic Merchants should bee allowed to Trade in England upon the same conditions, and payment of duties, as her own Subjects; provided, Tha the English Merchants might have interchangeable privilege, to reside and trade peace∣ably in Stode or Hamburgh, or any wher els, within the precincts of the Hans: This incens'd them more, therupon they resolv'd to cut off Stode and Hamburgh from being members of the Hans, or of the Empire; but they suspended this dessein, till they saw what success the great Spanish Fleet should have, which was then preparing in the yeer eighty eight, for they had not long before had recours to the King of Spain▪ and made him their own, and he had don them som materiall good Offices; wherfore to this day the Spanish Counsell is tax'd of improvidence, and imprudence, that ther was no use made of the Hans Towns in that expedi∣tion. The Queen finding that they of the Hans would not be con∣tented with that equality she had offer'd 'twixt them and her own Subjects, put out a Proclamation, that they should carry neither Corn, Victualls, Arms, Timber, Masts, Cables, Mineralls, nor any other materialls or Men to Spain or Portugall. And after the Queen growing more redoubtable and famous, by the over∣throw of the Fleet of Eighty eight, the Osterlings fell to despair of doing any good: Add hereunto another disaster that befell them, the taking of sixty sailes of their Ships about the mouth of Tagus in Portugall, by the Queens Ships that were laden with Ropas de contrabando, viz. Goods prohibited by her former Proclamation into the dominions of Spain: And as these Ships were upon point of being discharg'd, she had intelligence of a great Assembly at Lubck, which had met of purpose to consule of means to be reveng'd of her; therupon she staid and seiz'd upon
the said sixty Ships, only two were freed to bring news what became of the rest. Hereupon the Pole sent an Ambassador to her, who spake in a high tone, but he was answer'd in a higher. Ever since our Merchants have beaten a peacefull and free un∣interrupted Trade into this Town, and elswhere within and with∣out the Sound, with their Manufactures of Wool, and found the way also to the White-Sea to Archangel and Mosco: Insomuch, that the premisses being well considered, it was a happy thing for Eng∣land, that that clashing fell out 'twixt her and the Hans, for it may be said to have been the chief ground of that Shipping and Mer∣chandising, which she is now com to, and wherwith she hath flou∣rish'd ever since: But one thing is observable, that as that Impe∣riall or Comitial Bat, pronounc'd in the Diet at Ratisbon against our Merchants and Manufactures of Wooll, incited them more to industry: So our Proclamation upon Alderman Cockeins project of transporting no white Cloths but Died, and in their full manufa∣cture, did cause both Dutch and German to turn necessity to a ver∣tue, and made them far more ingenious to find ways, not only to Die, but to make Cloth, which hath much impair'd our Markers ever since; for ther hath not been the third part of our Cloth sold since, either here or in Holland. My Lord, I pray be pleas'd to dispense with the prolixity of this Discours, for I could not wind it up closer, nor on a lesser bottom; I shall be carefull to bring with me those Furrs I had instructions for: So I rest Hamburgh,  20 Octob. 1632. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H. IV. To Cap. J. Smith at the Hague. Captain, HAving so wishfull an opportunity as this Noble Gentleman, Mr. Iames Crofts who coms with a Packet for the Lady Eli∣zabeth from my Lord of Leicester, I could not but send you this frendly salute. We are like to make a speedier return than we expe∣cted from this Ambassie; for we found the King of Denmark in He∣stein,
which shortned our voyage from going to the Sound: The King was in an advantagious posture to give audience, for ther was a Parlement then at Rhensburg, wher all the Younkers met. A∣mongst other things, I put myself to mark the carriage of the Hol∣stein Gentlemen, as they were going in and out at the Parlement House; and observing well their Physiognomies, their Complexi∣ons, and Gate, I thought verily I was in England, for they resemble the English more, than either Welsh or Scot, (though cohabiting up∣on the same Island) or any other peeple, that ever I saw yet; which makes me verily believe, that the English Nation came first from this lower circuit of Saxony; and ther is one thing that strength∣neth me in this belief, that ther is an ancient Town hard by, call'd Lunden, and an Island call'd Angles; whence it may well be that our Country came from Britannia to be Anglia. This Town of Hamburgh from a Society of Brewers, is com to be a huge wealthy place, and her new Town is almost as big as the old; Ther is a shrewd jar 'twixt her and her Protector, the King of Denmark. My Lord of Leicester hath don som good Offices to accommode matters: She chomps extremely, that ther should be such a Bit put lately in her mouth, as the Fort at Luckstadit, which commands her River of Elve, and makes her pay what Toll he please. The King begins to fill his Chests apace, which were so emptied in his late marches to Germany: He hath set a new Toll upon all Ships that pass to this Town; and in the Sound also ther be som ex∣traordinary duties impos'd, wherat all Nations begin to murmure, specially the Hollanders, who say, that the old Primitive Toll of the Sound was but a Rose-noble for evry Ship, but by a new Sophistry, it is now interpreted for evry Sail that should pass thorow, insomuch, that the Hollander though he be a Low-Countrey man, begins to speak high-Dutch in this point, a rough language you know; which made the Italian tell a German Gentleman once, That when God Almigh∣ty thrust Adam out of Paradise, he spake Dutch; but the German re∣torted wittily, Then Sir, if God spake Dutch when Adam was eje∣cted, Eve spake Italian when Adam was seduced. I could be larger, but for a sudden auvocation to busines; so I most affectionatly send my kind respects unto you, desiring, when I am rendred to London, I may hear from you: So I am Hamburg 22 Octob. 1632. Your faithfull Frend to serve you, J. H.
V. To the Right Honble the Earl of Br. My Lord, I Am newly return'd from Germany, whence ther came lately two Ambassadors extraordinary in one of the Ships Royall, the Earl of Leicester, and Sir Robert Anstruther; the latter came from Vien∣na, and I know little of his negotiations; but for my Lord of Leicester, I beleeve ther was never so much busines dispatch'd in so short a compas of time, by any Ambassador, as your Lordship, who is best able to judg, will find by this short relation: When my Lord was com to the King of Denmarks Court, which was then at Rhensberg, a good way within Holstein: The first thing he did, was to condole the late Queen Dowagers death (our Kings Gran-Mother) which was don in such an equipage, that the Danes con∣fess'd, ther was never Queen of Denmark so mourn'd for: This cere∣mony being pass'd, my Lord fell to busines; and the first thing which he propounded, was, That for preventing of further effusion of Christian blood in Germany, and for the facilitating a way to re∣store peace to all Christendom, His Majesty of Denmark would joyn with his Nephew of great Britain, to send a solemn Ambassie to the Emperour, and the King of Sweden, (the ends of whose pro∣ceedings were doubtfull) to mediat an accommodation, and to appear for him, who will be found most conformable to reason. To this, that King answer'd in writing (for that was the way of proceeding) that the Emperour and the Swede were com to that height, and heat of war, and to such a violence, that it is no time yet to speak to them of peace; but when the fury is a little pass'd, and the times more proper, he would take it for an Honour to joyn with his Nephew, and contribut the best means he could to bring about so good a Work. Then ther was computation made, what was due to the King of great Britain, and the Lady Elizabeth, out of their Gran-Mothers Estate,: which was valued at neer upon two Millions of Dollars, and your Lordship must think it was a hard task to liquidat such an account: This being don, my Lord desird that part which was due to his Majesty (our King) and the Lady his Sister, which appear'd to amount unto eightscore thousand pounds sterling:
That King answer'd, That he confess'd ther was so much money due, but his Mothers Estate was yet in the hands of Commissio∣ners; and neither he, nor any of his Sisters, had receiv'd their portions yet, and that his Nephew of England, and his Neere of Holland, should receive theirs with the first; but he did intimat besides, that ther were som considerable accounts 'twixt him and the Crown of England, for ready moneys he had lent his Brother King Iames, and for the thirty thousand pounds a moneth, that was by Covenant promis'd him for the support of his late Army in Germany. Then my Lord propounded, That His Majesty of Great Britains Subjects were not well us'd by his Officers in the Sound: for though that was but a Transitory passage into the Bal∣tic Sea, and that they neither bought nor sould any thing upon the place, yet they were forc'd to stay there many daies to take up money at high interest, to pay divers Tolls for their Merchandize, before they had expos'd them to vent: Therfore it was desired, that for the future, what English Merchant soever should pass through the Sound, it should be sufficient for him to Register an invoice of his Cargazon in the Custom-House Book, and give his Bond to pay all duties at his return, when he had made his Mar∣ket. To this my Lord had a fair answer, and so procur'd a pub∣lic Instrument under that Kings Hand and Seale, and sign'd by his Counsellors, which he had brought over, wherin the Propo∣sition was granted; which no Ambassador could obtaine before. Then 'twas alledg'd, that the English Merchant Adventurers who trade into Hamburgh▪ have a new Toll lately impos'd upon them at Luckstad, which was desir'd to be taken of. To this also, ther was the like Instrument given, that the said Toll should be levied no more, Lastly, my Lord (in regard he was to pa's by the Hague) desir'd that Hereditary part which belong'd to the Lady Eliza∣beth out of her Gran-Mothers Estate, because His Majesty knew well what Crosses and Afflictions she had pass'd, and what a nu∣merous Issue she had to maintain; And my Lord of Leicester would ingage his Honour, and all the Estate he hath in the World, That this should no way prejudice the accounts he is to make with his Majesty of Great Britain. The King of Denmark highly extoll'd the Noblenes of this motion; but he protested, that he had bin so drain'd in the late Wars, that his Chests are yet very empty. Here∣upon my Lord was feasted, and so departed. He went then to the Duke of Holstein to Sleswick, wher he found him at his Castle of Gothorp, and truly I did not think to have found such a magnificent building in these bleak parts; The
also my Lord did condole the death of the late Queen that Dukes Gran-Mother, and he receiv'd very Princely entertain∣ment. Then he went to Husem, where the like ceremony of Condole∣ment was perform'd at the Dutchess of Holsteins Court, His Maje∣sties (our Kings) Ant. Then he came back to Hamburgh, wher that instrument which my Lord had procur'd, for remitting of the new Toll at Gluckslad, was deliver'd the Company of our Merchant Adventurers; and som other good offices don for that Town, as matters stood twixt them and the King of Denmark. Then we came to Stode, wher Lesly was Governour, who carried his foot in a scarfe for a wound he had received at Bucksobo, and he kept that place for the King of Sweden: And som busines of con∣sequence was don there also. So we came to Broomsbottle, wher we staid for a Wind som daies; and in the midway of our voyage, wee met with a Hol∣land ship, who told us, the King of Sweden was slain; and so we return'd to London in less then three moneths: And if this was not busines enough for such a compass of time, I leave your Lord∣ship to judg. So craving your Lordships pardon for this lame account, I rest, Lond. 1 Octo. 1632. Your Lordships most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. VI. To my Brother Dr. Howell, at his House in Horsley. My good Brother, I Am safely return'd from Germany, thanks be to God, and the news which we heard at Sea by a Dutch Skipper, about the midst of our voyage from Hamburgh, it seems proves too true, which was of the fall of the King of Sweden. One Ierbire, who saies that he was in the very action, brought the first news to this Town, and e∣very corner rings of it; yet such is the extravagancy of som, that they
will lay wagers he is not yet dead, and the Exchange is full of such peeple. He was slain at Lutzen field battle, having made the Im∣periall Army give ground the day before; and being in pursuance of it, the next morning in a sudden Fog that fell, the Cavelry on both sides being engag'd, he was kill'd in the midst of the Troops, and none knows who kill'd him, whether one of his own men or the enemy; but finding himself mortally hurt, he told Saxen Way∣mar, Cousin, I pray look to the Troops, for I think I have enough: His body was not only rescued, but his forces had the better of the day; Papenheim being kill'd before him, whom he esteem'd the greatest Captain of all his enemies; for he was us'd to say, that he had three men to deal withall, a Pultron, a Iesuit, and a Souldier; by the two first, he meant Walstein, and the Duke of Ba∣varia, by the last Papenheim. Questionles this Gustavus (whose anagram is Augustus) was a great Captain, and a gallant man, and had he surviv'd that last victory, he would have put the Emperour to such a plunge, that som think he would hardly have bin able to have made head against him to any purpose again. Yet his own Allies confess, that none knew the bottom of his designes. He was not much affected to the English, witnes the ill usage Marquis Hammilton had with his 6000 men, wherof ther return'd not 600, the rest died of hunger and sicknes, having never seen the face of an enemy; Witnes also, his harshnes to our Ambassadors, and the rigid terms he would have tied the Prince Palsgrave unto. So with my affectionat respects to Mr. Mouschamp, and kind com∣mend to Mr. Bridger, I rest Westmin. 5 Decem. 1632. Your loving Brother, J. H. VII. To the R. R. Dr. Field, Lord Bishop of St. Davids. My Lord, YOur late Letter affected me with two contrary passions, with gladnes, and sorrow; the beginning of it dilated my spirits
with apprehensions of joy, that you are so well recoverd of your late sicknes, which I heartily congratulat; but the conclusion of your Lordships Letter, contracted my spirits, and plung'd them in a deep sense of just sorrow, while you please to write me news of my dear Fathers death. Permulsit initium, percussit finis. Truly my Lord, it is the heaviest news that ever was sent me; but when I recollect my self, and consider the fairnes and maturity of his Age, and that it was rather a gentle dissolution than a death: When I contemplat that infinit advantage he hath got by this change and transmigration, it much lightens the weight of my grief; for if ever human soul entred heaven, surely his is there; such was his constant piety to God, his rare indulgence to his children, his cha∣rity to his neighbors, and his candor in reconciling disterences; such was the gentlenes of his disposition, his unwearied cours in actions of vertue, that I wish my soul no other felicity, when she hath shaken off these Rags of Flesh, than to ascend to his, and co∣injoy the same bliss. Excuse me my Lord, that I take my leave at this time so ab∣ruptly of you; when this sorrow is a little disgested, you shall hear further from me, for I am West. 1 of May. 1632. Your Lordships most true and humble Servitor, J. H. VIII. To the Earl of Leicester at Penshurst My Lord, I Have deliverd Mr. Secretary Coke an account of the whole lega∣tion, as your Lordship inordred me, which contain'd neer upon twenty sheets; I attended him also with the Note of your extra∣ordinaries, wherin I find him somthing difficult and dilatory yet. The Governor of the Eastland Company, Mr. Alderman Clethero, will attend your Lordship at your return to Court, to ac∣knowledge your favor unto them. I have delivered him a Copy of the transactions of things that concern'd their Company at Rhensberg.
The news we heard at Sea of the King of Swedens death is con∣firm'd more and more, and by the computation I have been a little curious to make, I find that he was kill'd the same day your Lord∣ship set out of Hamburgh. But ther is other news com since, of the death of the Prince Palatin, who as they write, being return'd from visiting the Duke De deux Ponts to Mentz, was struck there with the Contagion; yet by speciall ways of cure, the malignity was ex∣pelld, and great hopes of recovery, when the news came of the death of the King of Sweden, which made such impressions in him, that he dyed few dayes after, having overcom all difficul∣ties by concluding with the Swede, and the Governor of Frankin∣dall, and being ready to enter into a repossession of his Countrey: A sad destiny. The Swedes bear up still, being somented and supported by the French, who will not suffer them to leave Germany yet. A Gentle∣man that came lately from Italy, told me, that ther is no great joy in Rome, for the death of the King of Sweden: The Spaniards up and down, will not stick to call this Pope Lutherano, and that he had intelligence with the Swede. Tis true, that he hath not been so for∣ward to assist the Emperor in this quarrell, and that in open Con∣sistory, when ther was such a contrasto 'twixt the Cardinalls for a supply from Saint Peter, he declard, That he was well satisfied that this war in Germany was no war of Religion; which made him dis∣miss the Imperiall Ambassadors with this short answer, That the Emperor had drawn these mischiefs upon himself; for at that time when he saw the Swedes upon the Frontires of Germany, if he had imployed those men and moneys, which he consum'd to trouble the peace of Italy, in making war against the Duke of Mantova against them, he had not had now so potent an enemy. So I take my leave for this time, being Westm. 3 Iune. 1632. Your Lordships most humble, and obedient Servitor, J. H.
IX. To Mr. E. D. SIR, I Thank you a thousand times for the Noble entertainment you gave me at Berry, and the pains you took in shewing me the An∣tiquities of that place. In requitall, I can tell you of a strange thing I saw lately here, and I beleeve 'tis true; As I pass'd by St. Dunstans in Fleet street the last Saturday, I stepp'd into a Lapi∣dary or Stone-cutters shop, to treat with the Master for a stone to be put upon my Fathers Tomb: and casting my eyes up and down, I might spie a huge Marble with a large Inscription upon't, which was thus to my best remembrance: Here lies John Oxenham, a goodly young man, in whose Chamber, as he was strugling with the pangs of death, a Bird with a white brest was seen fluttering about his Bed, and so vanish'd. Here lies also Mary Oxenham, the sister of the said John who died the next day, and the same Apparition was seen in the Room. Then another Sister is spoke of. Then, Here lies hard by James Oxenham, the son of the said John, who died a child in his Cradle a little after, and such a Bird was seen fluttering about his head, a little before he expir'd, which va∣nish'd afterwards.▪ At the bottom of the Stone ther is, Here lies Elizabeth Oxenham, the Mother of the said John, who died sixteen years since, when such a Bird with a white brest was seen about hex Bed before her death. To all these ther be divers Witnesses, both Squires and Ladies, whose names are engraven upon the Stone: This Stone is to be sent to a Town hard by Exeter wher this happen'd. Were you here, I could raise a choice Discours with you here∣upon.
So hoping to see you the next Term, to requite som of your favors, I rest Westmin. 3 Iuly. 1632. Your true frend to serve you▪ J. H. X. To W. B. Esq. SIR, THe upbraiding of a courtesie is as bad in the Giver, as ingra∣titude in the Receiver (though which you think I am loath to believe) be faulty in the first, I shall never offend in the se∣cond, while VVestmin. 24. Octob. 1632. J. Howell. XI. To Sir Arthur Ingram at York. SIR, OUr greatest news here now, is, that we have a new Attorney Generall, which is news indeed, considering the humor of the man, how hee hath been always ready to entertain any cause wherby he might clash with the Prerogative; but now as Judg Ri∣chardson told him, his head is full of Proclamations, and Divices, how to bring money into the Exchequer. Hee hath lately found out a∣mongst the old Records of the Tower, som precedents for raising a tax cald Ship-money, in all the Port Towns, when the Kingdom is in danger: Whether we are in danger or no, at present 'twere pre∣sumption in me to judg, that belongs to his Majesty, and his Pri∣vy Counsell, who have their choice Instruments abroad for Intel∣ligence; yet one with half an eye may see, wee cannot be secure, while such huge Fleets of men of War, both Spanish, French, Dutch, and Dunkrkers, som of them laden with Ammunition▪ Men, Arms,
and Armies, do daily ail on our Seas, and confront the Kings, Chambers; while we have only three or four Ships abroad to guard our Coasts and Kingdom, and to preserve the fairest Flower of the Crown, the Dominion of the Narrow-Seas, which I hear the French Cardinall begins to question, and the Hollander lately would not vail to one of his Majesties ships that brought over the Duke of Lenox and my Lord Weston from Bullen, and indeed, we are jeer'd abroad, that we send no more ships to guard our Seas. Touching my Lord Ambassador Weston, he had a brave journey of it, though it cst dear; for 'tis thought 'twill stand his Majesty in 25000 pounds, which makes som Criticks of the times, to censure the Lord Tresurer, That now the King wanting money so much, hee should send his son abroad to spend him such a sum only for delivering of Presents and Complements; but I believe they are deceiv'd, for ther were matters of State also in the Am∣bassie. The Lord Weston passing by Paris, intercepted, and open'd a Packet of my Lord of Hollands, wherin ther were some Letters of Her Majesties, this my Lord of Holland takes in that scorn, that he defied him since his comming, and demanded the combat of him; for which he is confin'd to his House at Kensinton: So with my hum∣ble service to my Noble Lady, I rest, Westmin. 30 Ian. 1633. Your much obliged Servitor, J. H. XII. To the Lord Vicount Wentworth, Lord De∣puty of Ireland, and Lord Precedent of York, &c. My Lord, I Was glad to apprehend the opportunity of this Packet to con∣vey my humble service to your Lordship. Ther are old doings in France, and tis no new thing for the French to be always a doing, they have such a stirring genius. The Queen Mother hath made an escape to Brussells, and Monsieur to Lorain wher they say, he courts very earnestly the Dukes sister, a young
Lady under twenty; they say a Contract is pass'd already, but the French Cardinall opposeth it; for they say that Lorain Milk sel∣dom breeds good bloud in France: Not only the King, but the whole Gallican Church hath protest against it in a solemn Synod; for the Heir apparant of the Crown of France, cannot marry without the Royall consent. This aggravats a grudg the French King hath to the Duke, for siding with the Imperialists, and for things refle∣cting upon the Dutchy of Bar; for which he is hommogeable to the Crown of France, as he is to the Emperor for Lorain: A hard task it is to serve two Masters; and an unhappy situation it is, to lie 'twixt two puissant Monarchs; as the Dukes of Savoy and Lorain do: So I kiss your Lordships hands, and rest My Lord, Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. VVestmin. 1 of April. 1633. XIII. To my most Noble Lady, the Lady Cornwallis. Madam, IN conformity to your commands, which sway with me, as much as an Act of Parlement, I have sent your Ladiship this small Hymn for Christmas day, now neer approaching; if your Ladiship please to put an Air to it, I have my reward. 1. Hail holy Tde, VVherin a Bride, A Virgin (which is more) Brought forth a Son, The like was don, Ne're in the world before. 2. Hail spotless Maid, Who thee upbraid, To have been born in sin, Do little waigh, What in thee lay, Before thou didst Lie-in.
3. Three months thy Womb, Was made the Dome Of Him, whom Earth nor Air, Nor the vast mould Of Heaven can hould, 'Cause he's Ubiquitair. 4. O, would e daign To rest and raign I'th centre of my heart: And make it still His domicill, And residence in part. 5. But in so foul a Cell Can he abide to dwell? Yes when he please to move His Herbenger to sweep the Room, And with rich Odors it perfume, Of Faith, of Hope, of Love. So I humbly kiss your hands, and thank your Ladiship, that you would command in any thing that may conduce to your con∣tentment. Westmin. 3 Feb. 1633. Your Lapps most humble Servitor, J. H. XIV.  the Lord Clifford at Knasburgh. My Lord, I Receiv'd your Lordships of the last of Iune, and I return m most humble thanks for the choice Nagg you pleas'd to send me, which came in very good plight. Your Lordship desires me to lay down what in my Travells▪ abroad I observ'd of the present condition of the Iews, once an Elect peeple, but now grown con∣temptible, and strangely squander'd up and down the World.
Though such a Discours, exactly fram'd, might make up a Vo∣lume, yet I will twist up what I know in this point, upon as nar∣row a Bottom as may be shut up within the compass of this Let∣ter. The first Christian Countrey that expell'd the Iews, was Eng∣land; France followed our example next, then Spain, and after∣wards Portugall; nor were they exterminated these Countreys for their Religion, but for Villanies and cheatings; for clip∣ping Coins, poisning of Waters, and counterfeiting of Seals. Those Countreys they are permitted to live now most in amongst Christians, are Germany, Holland, Bohemia, and Italy; but not in those parts where the King of Spain hath to do. In the Levant and Turkey, they swarm most, for the gran Vizier, and all other great Boshawes, have commonly som Iew for their Counsellor or Spie, who inform them of the state of Christian Princes, possess them of a hatred of the Religion, and so incense them to a war against them. They are accounted the subtill'st and most subdolous peeple up∣on Earth; the reason why they are thus degenerated from their primitive simplicity, and innocence, is their often ptivities, their desperat fortunes, the necessity and hatred to which they have been habituated, for nothing depraves ingenuous spirits, and cor∣rupts cleer wits more than want and indigence. By their profession they are for the most part Broakers, and Lombardeers, yet by that base and servile way of Frippery trade, they grow rich whersoever they nest themselves; and this with their multiplication of Chil∣dren, they hold to be an argument that an extraordinary providence attends them still. Me thinks that so cleer accomplishments of the Prophecies of our Saviour, touching that peeple, should work up∣on them for their conversion, as the destruction of their City and Temple; that they should becom despicable, and the tail of all Nations; that they should be Vagabonds, and have no firm ha∣bitation. Touching the first, they know it came punctually to pass, and so have the other two; for they are the most hatefull race of men up∣on earth; insomuch, that in Turkie where they are most valued, if a Musulman com to any of their houses, & leave his shoos at the door, the Iew dare not com in all the while, till the Turk hath don what he would with his Wife: For the last, 'tis wonderfull to see in what considerable numbers they are dispers'd up and down the World, yet they can never reduce themselves to such a coalition and unity as may make a Republic, Principality, or Kingdom.
They hold that the Iewes of Italy, Germany, and the Levant, are of Benjamins Tribe; ten of the Tribes at the destruction of Ieroboams Kingdom were led Captives beyond Euphrates, whence they never return'd, nor do they know what became of them ever after; yet they beleeve they never became Apostats and Gen∣tiles. But the Tribe of Iuda, whence they expect their Messias, of whom one shall hear them discours with so much confidence, and self-pleasing conceit, they say, is setled in Portugall; wher they give out to have thousands of their race, whom they dispense withall to make a semblance of Christianitie, even to Church de∣grees. This makes them breed up their children in the Lusitanian Lan∣guage; which makes the Spaniard have an odd saying, that El Portuguez se criò del pedo de un Iudia. A Portugues was engendred of a Iews Fart; as the Mahuans have a passage in their Alcaro, That a Cat was made of a Lions breath. As they are the most contemtiblest peeple, and have a kind of fulsom sent, no better then a stink, that distinguisheth them from others, so are they the most timorous peeple on earth, and so, utterly incapable of Arms, for they are made neither Souldiers nor Slaves: And this their Pusillanimity and cowardise, as well as their cunning and craft, may be imputed to their various thral∣do us, contempt, and poverty, which hath cow'd and dastrdiz'd their courage▪ Besides these properties, they are light and giddy headed, much symbolizing in spirit with our Apolalypticall ze∣lots, and fiery interpreters of Daniel and other Prophets, wherby they often sooth, or rather fool themselves into som illumination, which really proves but som egregious dorage. They much glory of their mysterious Cabal, wherin they make the reality of things to depend upon Letters, and Words: but they say that Hebrew onely hath this priviledg: This Cabal, which is nought else but Tradition, they say, being transmitted from one age to another, was in som measure a reparation of our knowledge lost in Adam, and they say was reveal'd four times; First to Adam, who being thrust out of Paradise, and sitting one day very sad, and sorrowing for the loss of the knowledg he had of that dependance the creatures have with their Creator; the An∣gell Raguel was sent to comfort him, and to instruct him and repair his knowledg herein: And this they call the Caball, which was lost the second time by the Floud, and abell▪ then God discover'd it to Moses in the bush. The third time to Solomon in a dream, wherby he came to know the beginning, mdiety, and coasummati
of times, and so wrote divers Books, which were lost in the gran captivity The last time they hold, that God restor'd the Cabal to Esdras (a Book they value extraordinarily) who by Gods command withdrew to the Wildernes forty daies with five Scribes, who in that space wrote two hundred and four Books: The first one hundred thirty and four, were to be read by all; but the other seventy were to pass privatly amongst the Levites, and these they pretend to be Cabalistic, and not yet all lost. Ther are this day three Sects of Iews; the Africans first, who besides the holy Scriptures, embrace the Talmud also for authen∣tic; the second receive only the Scriptures; the third, which are call'd the Samaritans (wherof ther are but few) admit only of the , the five Books of Moses. The Iews in generall drink no Wine, without a dispensation; when they kill any creature, they turn his face to the East, say∣ing, Be it sanctified in the great name of God; they cut the throat with a knif without a gap, which they hold very prophane. In their Synagogs they make one of the best sort to read a Chap∣ter of Moses, then som mean Boy reads a peece of the Prophets; in the midst, ther's a round place arch'd over, wherin one of their Rabbies walks up and down, and in Potuguez magnifies the Messias to com, comforts their captivity, and rails at Christ. They have a kind of Cupboard to represent the Tabernacle, wherin they lay the Tables of the Law, which now and then, they take out and kiss; they sing many Tunes, and Adonai, they make the ordinary name of God: Iehovah is pronounc'd at high Fe∣stivalls; at Circumcision Boys are put to sing som of Davids Psalms so lowd, as drowns the Infants cry: The Synagog is hung about with Glass. Lamps burning; every one at his entrance puts on a Linnen-Cope, first kissing it, else they use no manner of reve∣rence all the while; their Elders sometimes fall together by the ears in the very Synagog, and with the Holy Utensiles, as Candlesticks, Incense-Pans, and such-like, break one anothers Pates. Women are not allow'd to enter the Synagog, but they sit in a Gallery without, for they hold they have not so divine a soul as men, and are of a lower creation, made only for sensuall pleasure and propagation. Amongst the Mahumetans, ther is no Iew capable of a Turkish habit, unless he acknowledg Christ as much as Turks do, which is to have bin a great Prophet, wherof they hold ther are three onely, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet.
Thus my Lord, to perform your commands, which are very pre∣valent with me, have I couch'd in this Letter, what I could, of the condition of the Iews, and if it may give your Lordship any satisfa∣ction, I have my reward abundantly. So I rest Westmin. 3 of Iune. 1633. Your Lordships most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XV. To Mr. Philip Warrick, at Paris. SIR, YOur last unto me was in French of the first current, and I am glad you are com so safe from Swisserland to Paris; as also, that you are grown so great a Proficient in the Language: I thank you for the variety of news you sent me so hansomly couch'd and knit together. To correspond with you, the greatest news wee have here, is, that we have a gallant Fleet-Royall ready to set to sea, for the security of our Coasts and Commerce, and for the Soverainty of our Seas. Hans said the King of England was asleep all this while, but now he is awake; nor do I hear, doth your French Cardinall tamper any longer with our Kings Title and Right to the Dominion of the Narrow-Seas. These are brave fruits of the ship∣moneys. I hear that the Inante Cardinall having bin long upon his way to Brussells, hath got a notable Victory of the Swedes at Nordling∣hen, where 8000 were slain, Gustavus Horn, and other of the prime Commanders taken prisoners. They write also that Mon∣sieurs marriage with Madame of Lorain, was solemnly celebrated at Brussels; she had follow'd him from Nancy in Pages apparell, because ther were forces in the way. It must needs be a mighty charge to the King of Spain, to maintain Mother, and Son in this manner. The Court affords little news at present, but that ther is a Love call'd Platonick love, which much swayes there of late; It is a love abstracted from all corporeall gross impressions, and sensuall ap∣petit, but consists in contemplation and Idaeas of the mind, not
in any carnall fruition: This love sets the wits of the Town on work; and they say there will be a Masko shortly of it, whereof Her Majestie, and her Maids of Honour will be part. All your friends here in Westminster are well, and very mindfull of you, but none more often then Westmin. 3 Iune, 1634. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H. XVI. To my brother Mr H. P. Brother, MY brain was ore cast with a thick clowd of melancholy, I was becom a lump I know not of what, I could scarce find any palpitation within me on the left side, when yours of the first of September was brought me, it had such a vertue, that it begot new motions in me, like the Load-stone, which by its attractive occult quality, moves the dull body of Iron, and makes it active; so dull was I then, and such a magnetic property your Letter had to quicken me. Ther is som murmuring against the Shipmony, because the tax is indefinit; as also by reason, that it is levied upon the Countrey Towns, as well as Maritim, and for that, they say N himself cannot shew any record: Ther are also divers Patents granted, which are mutter'd at, as being no better then Monopolies: A∣mongst others a Scotchman got one lately upon the Statute of levy∣ing twelve pence for every Oath, which the Justices of Peace, and Constables had power to raise, and have still: but this new Pa∣tentce is to quicken and put more life in the Law, and see it ex∣ecuted. He hath power to nominat one or two, or three, in som Parishes, which are to have Commission from him for this Public Service, and so they are to be exempt from bearing Office, which must needs deserve a gratuity; And I beleeve this was the main drift of the Scot Patentce, so that he intends to keep his Office in the Temple, and certainly, he is like to be mighty gainer by it; for who would not give a good peece of money to
be freed from bearing all cumbersom Offices? No more now, but that with my dear love to my sister, I rest Westmin. 1 Aug. 1633. Your most affectionat Brother, J. H. XVII. To the Right Honble the Lord Vicount Savage, at Long-Melford. My Lord, THe old Steward of your Courts, Master Attorney-Generall Noy, is lately dead, nor could Tunbridg-waters do him any good: Though he had good matter in his brain, he had, it seems, ill materialls in his body, for his heart was shrivelled like a Leather peny-purse when he was dissected, nor were his lungs sound. Being such a great Clerk in the Law, all the World wonders he left such an odd Will, which is short, and in Latin: The sub∣stance of it is, that having bequeathd a few Legacies, and left his second son 100 Marks a year, and 500 pounds in Money, e∣nough to bring him up in his Fathers Profession; he concludes, Reliqua meorum omnia progenito meo Edoardo, dissipanda (nec me∣liùs unquam speravi) lego. I leave the rest of all my goods to my first-born Edward, to be consum'd or scatterd (for I never hoped better.) A strange, and scarce a Christian Will, in my opini, for it argues uncharitablenes. Nor doth the World wonder less▪ that he should leave no Legacie to som of your Lordships chil∣dren, considering what deep Obligations he had to your Lordship; for I am confident he had never bin Attorney Gene∣rall els. The Vintners drink Carowses of joy that he is gon, for now they are in hopes to dress Meat again, and sell Tobacco, Beer, Sugar and Fagots, which by a sullen Capricio of his he would have restraind them from. He had his humors, as other men; but cer∣tainely he was a solid rational man; and though no great Ora∣tor, yet a profound Lawyer, and no man better versd in the Re∣cords of the Tower. I heard your Lordship often say with what
infinit pains and indefatigable study he came to this knowledge: And I never heard a more pertinent Anagram then was made of his name, William Noye, I moyle in law. If ans be added, it may be applied to my Country-man Judge Iones, an excellent Lawyer too, and a far more Gentile man. William Iones, I moile in laws. No more now, but that I rest, Westmin. 1 Octo. 1635. Your Lopps most humble and obliged Servitor, J. H. XVIII. To the Right Honble the Countess of Sunderland. Madam, HEre inclos'd I send your Ladiship a Letter from the Lord Deputy of Ireland, wherin he declares that the disposing of the Attorniship in York, which he passed over to me, had no re∣lation to my Lord at all, but it was meerly don out of a particu∣lar respect to me: your Ladyship may please to think of it accor∣dingly, touching the accounts. ▪It is now a good while the two Nephew-Princes have bin here, I mean the Prince Elector, and Prince Robert. The King of Swe∣dens death, and the late blow at Norlingen hath half blasted their hopes to do any good for recovery of the Palatinat by land; Ther∣fore I hear of som new designes by Sea. That the one shall go to Madagascar, a great Island 800 miles long in the East Indies, never yet coloniz'd by any Christian, and Captain Bod is to be his Lieutenant; the other is to go with a considerable Fleet to the West Indies, to seize upon som place there that may countervail the Palatinat, and Sir Henry Mervin to go with him: But I hear my Lady Elizabeth opposeth it, saying, that she will have none of her sons to be Knights-errant. Ther is now professed actuall en∣mity twixt France and Spain, for ther was a Herald at Arms sent lately to Flanders from Paris, who by sound of Trumpet denoun∣ced and proclaimed open War against the King of Spain and all his Dominions; this Herald left and fixed up the Defiance in all the Townes as he passed: so that wheras before, the War was
but collaterall and auxiliary, there is now proclaim'd Hostility between them, notwithstanding that they have one anothers sister in their beds evry night: What the reason of this War is, truly Madame I cannot tell, unlesse it bee reason of state, to preve the further growth of the Spanish Monarchy; and ther be mul∣titude of examples how Preventive Wars have been practis from all times. Howsoever it is too sure that abundance of Chri∣stian bloud will be spilt. So I humbly take my leave, and rest, Westminster, 4 Iune, 1635. Madame, Your Ladiships most obedient and faithfull Servitor, I. H. XIX. To the Earl of Leicester at Penshurst. My Lord, I Am newly returned out of France, from a flying Journey as far as Orleans, which I made at the request of Mr. Secretary Wind. bank, and I hope I shall receive som fruits of it hereafter. Ther is yet a great resentment in many places in France, for the behea∣ding of Montmorency, whom Henry the fourth was us'd to say to be a better Gentleman than himself, for in his Colors he carry'd this Motto, Dieu ayde le premier Chevalier de France: God help the first Knight of France. Hee dyed upon a Scatold in Tholouze, in the flower of his years, at 34, and hath left no Issue behind, so that noble old Family extinguish'd in a snust: His Treason wa very foul, having received particular Commissions from the King to make an extraordinary Levy of men and money in Languedoc, which he turn'd afterwards directly against the King, against whose per∣son he appear'd arm'd in open field; and in a hostile posture, for fo∣menting of Monsieurs Rebellion. The Insante Cardinall is com to Brussells at last, thorow many dif∣ficulties: and som few days before, Monsieur made semblance to go a Hawking, and so fled to France, but left his mother behind, who since the Arch-Dutchess death is not so well look'd on as formerly in that Countrey. Touching your busines in the Exchequer, Sir Robert Pye we
with me this morning of purpose to my Lord Tresurer about it, and told me with much earnestnes and assurance, that ther shall be a speedy cours taken for your Lordships satisfaction. I deliverd my Lord of Linsy the Manuscript he lent your Lord∣ship of his Fathers Embastie to Denmark: and herewith I present your Lordship with a compleat Diay of your own late legation, which hath cost me som oil and labor. So I rest always, Westm. 19 Iune 1635. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XX. To my Honored Frend and Fa. Mr. Ben: Johnn. Fa. Bn, BEing lately in France, and returning in Coach from Paris to Roüen, I lighted upon the Society of a knowing Gentleman, who related unto me a choice Story, wherf peradventure you may make som use in your way. Som hundred and odd yeers since, ther was in France one Cap∣tain Coucy a gallant Gentleman of an ancient extraction, and▪ Kee∣per of Coucy▪ Castle, which is yet standing and in good repair. He fell in love with a young Gentlewoman, and courted her for his wife: ther was reciprocall love between them, but her parents understan∣ding of it, by way of prevention they shuffled up a forced Match twixt her and one Monsieur Fail, who was a great Heir: Captain Coucy hereupon quitted France in discontent, and went to the wars in Hungary against the Turk, where he received a mortall wound, not far from Buda. Being carried to his lodging, hee languished som days; but a little before his death, he spoke to an ancient Ser∣vant of his, that he had many profs of his fidelity and truth, but now he had a great busines to intrust him with, which hee conjur'd him by all means to do, which was, That after his death, he should get his body to be opened, and then to take his heart out of his brest, and put it in an earthen Pot to be bak'd to powder, then to put the powder into a hansome Box, with that Bracelet of hair he had worn long about his left wrist, which was a lock of Madamoislle Faiels hair, and put it amongst the powder, together with a little Note he had written with his own bloud to her; and after hee had
given him the Rites of Buriall, to make all the speed he could to France, and deliver the said box to Madamoiselle Faiel. The old Ser∣vant did as his Master had commanded him, and so went to France, and comming one day to Monsieur Faiels house, he suddenly met him with one of his servants, and examin'd him, because he knew he was Captain Coucy's servant, and finding him timerous, and faltering in his speech, hee search'd him, and sound the aid Box in his pocket, with the Note which expressed what was therin: He dismiss'd the Bearer with menaces that he should com no more neer his house. Monsieur Faiel going in, sent for his Cook and deli∣ver'd him the Powder, charging him to make a little well-relish'd dish of it, without losing a jot of it, for it was a very costly thing; and commanded him to bring it in himself, after the last cours at Supper. The Cook bringing in the Dish accordingly, Monsieur Faiel commanded all to void the room, and began a serious discours with his wife, how ever since he had married her, he observ'd she was always melancholly▪ and he feared she was inclining to a Consumption, therfore he had provided for her a very precious Cordiall, which he was well assured would cure her: Therupon he made her eat up the whole dish; and afterwards much importu∣ning him to know what it was, he told her at last she had eaten Coucy's heart, and so drew the Box out of his pocket, and shewed her the Note and the Bracelet: in a sudden exultation of joy, she with a far-fetch'd sigh said, This is a precious Cordiall indeed, and so lick'd the Dish saying, It is so pretious, that tis pity to put ever any meat upon't. So she went to bed, and in the morning she was found stone-dead. This Gentleman told me that this sad story is painted in Coucy-Castle, and remains fresh to this day. In my opinion, which vails to yours. this is choice and rich stuff for you to put upon your Loom, and make a curious Web of. I thank you for the last regalo you gave me at your Musaeum, and for the good company. I heard you censur'd lately at Court, that you have lighted too foul upon Sir Inigo, and that you write with a Porcupins quill dipped in too much Gall. Excuse me that I am so free with you, it is because I am in no common way of frendship, Westmin. 3 of May. 1635. Yours, I. H.
XXI. To Captain Thomas Porter. Noble Captain, YOu are well returned from Brussels, from attending your Brother in that noble employment of congratulating the In∣fante Cardinalls comming thither. It was well that Monsieur went a Hawking away before to France, for I think those two young spirits would not have agreed. A French-man told me lately, that was at your Audience, that he never saw so many compleat Gen∣tlemen in his life, for the number, and in a neater equipage. Before you go to Sea I intend to wait on you, and give you a fro∣lick. So I am, De todas mis entranas. Yours to dispose of, I. H. To this Ile add the Duke of Ossuna's Complement, Quisiere aunque soy chico Ser, enserville Gigante. Though of the tallest I am none you see, Yet to serve you I would a Giant be. Westmin. 1 Novemb. 163. To my Cousin Captain Saintgeon. Noble Cousin, THe greatest news about the Town, is of a mighty Prize that was taken lately by Peter van Heyn of Holland, who had met som stragling Ships of the Plate-fleet, and brought them to the exel: they speak of a Million of Crowns. I could wish you had been there to have shared of the Booty, which was the greatest n money that ever was taken. One sent me lately from Holland this Distic of Peter van Heyn, hich savors of a little profaness.
Roma sui sileat posthàc miracula Petri, Petrus apud Batavos plura stupenda facit. Let Rome no more her Peters Wonders tell, For Wonders, Hollands Peter bears the bell. To this Distic was added this Anagram, which is a good one▪ PETRUS HAINU'S. HISPANUS RUET. So I rest, Totus tuus, Yours whole, I. Howell. Westmin. 10 Iuly. XXIII. To my Lord Viscount S. My Lord, HIs Majesty is lately return'd from Scotland, having given that Nation satisfaction to their long desires, to have him com thi∣ther to be Crownd: I hear som mutter at Bishop Lauds carriage there, that it was too haughty and Pontificall. Since the death of the King of Sweden, a great many Scotch Com∣manders are com over, and make a shining shew at Court, what trade they will take hereafter, I know not, having been so inur'd to the Wars; I pray God keep us from commotions at home, 'twixt the two Kingdoms, to find them work: I hear one Colonell Lesley is gon away discontented because the King would not  him. The old rotten Duke of Bavaria, for he hath divers Issues abo his body, hath married one of the Emperors Sisters, a young La∣dy little above twenty, and he neer upon fourscore; ther's another remaining, who they say is intended for the King of Poland, notwith∣standing his pretences to the young Lady Elizabeth; about which Prince Razevill, and other Ambassadors have been here lately but that King being Electif must mary as the Estates will have him His Mother was the Emperors sister, therfore sure he will not offe to mary his Cousin German; but tis no news for the House
Austria to do so, to strengthen their race. And if the Bavarian hath Male-Issue of this young Lady, the Son is to succeed him in the Electorship, which may conduce much to strengthen the continuance of the Empire in the Austrian Family. So with a con∣stant perseverance of my hearty desires to serve your Lordship, I rest, My Lord, Your most humble Servitor, J. H. Westmin. 7 Sep. XXIV. To my Cousin Mr. Will. Saint Geon, at St. Omer. Cousin, I Was lately in your Fathers Company, and I found him much discontented at the cours you take, which he not only protests a∣gainst, but he vows never to give you his blessing, if you perseve in't; I would wish you to descend into your self, and seriously ponder, what a weight a Fathers blessing, or curse, carries with it; for ther is nothing conduceth more to the happines or infelicity of the child: Amongst the ten Commandements in the Decalog, that which enjoyns obedience from Children to Parents, hath only a benediction (of Longaevity) added to it: Ther be Clouds of examples for this, but one I will instance in; When I was in Valentia in Spain, a Gentleman told me of a miracle which hap∣pen'd in that Town; which was, That a proper young man under twenty, was executed there for a crime, and before he was taken down from off the Tree, ther wer many gray and white Hairs had budded forth of his Chin, as if he had been a man of sixty. It struck amaze∣ment in all men, but this interpretation was made of it, That he said young man might have liv'd to such an age, if hee had been dutifull to his Parents, unto whom he had been barbarously disobedient all his life-time. Ther coms herwith a large Letter to you from your Fa∣ther, let me advise you to conform your courses to his Counsell, otherwise it is an easie matter to bee a Prophet what misfortunes il inevitably befall you, which by a timely obedience you may
Prevent, and I wish you may have grace to do it accordingly: So I rest Your loving, well-wishing Cousin, J. H. Lond. 1 of May. 1634. XXV. To the Lord Deputy of Ireland. My Lord, THe Earl of Arundell is lately return'd from Germany, and his gallant comportment in that Ambassie deserv'd to have had better success; He found the Emperor conformable, but the old Ba∣varian froward, who will not part with any thing, till he have moneys reimbours'd, which he spent in these wars, and for which he hath the upper Palatinat in deposito; insomuch, that in all proba∣bility all hopes are cut off of ever recovering that Countrey, but by the same means that it was taken away, which was by the Sword▪ Therfore they write from Holland of a new Army, which the Prince Palatin is like to have shortly, to go up to Germany, and push o his fortunes with the Swedes. The French King hath taken Nancy, and almost all Lorain lately, but he was forc'd to put a Fox-tail to the Lions-skin, which his Car∣dinall help'd him to, before he could do the work. The quarrell is, that the Duke should marry his sister to Monsieur, contrary to promise; that he sided with the Imperialists, against his confederan in Germany, that hee neglected to do homage for the Dutchy o Bar. My Lord Vicount Savage is lately dead, who is very much li mented by all that knew him; I could have wish'd, had it pleas'd God, that his Father in law, who is riper for the other worl had gon before him. So I rest Westmin. 6 Apr. Your Lopps most humble and ready Servitor, J. H.
XXVI. To his honoured Friend Mis C. at her House in Essex. THer was no sorrow sunk deeper into me a great while, than that which I conceiv'd upon the death of my dear friend your Husband: The last Office I could do him, was to put him in his grave; and I am sorry, to have met others there, (who had better means to come in a Coach with six horses, than I) in so mean equipage to perform the last act of respect to so worthy a Frend. I have sent you herewith an Elegy, which my melancho∣ly muse hath breath'd out upon his Herse. I shall be very care∣full about the Tomb you intend him, and will think upon an Epi∣raph. I pray present my respects to Mris Anne Mayne. So wishing you all comfort and contentment, I rest Lond. 5 Mar. Yours most ready to be commanded, J. H. XXVII. To Mr. Iames Howard, upon his Banish'd Virgin, translated out of Italian. SIR, I Received the Manuscript you sent me, and being a little curi∣ous to compare it with the Originall, I find the version to be ve∣ry exact and faithfull: So according to your Frendly request I have sent you this Decastic. Som hold translations not unlike to be, The wrong-side of a Turky Tapistry. Or Wine drawn off the Lees, which fill'd in Flask, Loose somwhat of the strength they had in Cask.
Tis true, each language hath an Idiome, Which in another couch'd comes not so home: Yet I ne're saw a peece from Venice come, Had fewer thrums set on our Countrey Loome. This Wine is still one-eard, and brisk, thought put Out of Italian Cask in English Butt. Upon your Eromena. Fair Eromena in her Toscan tyre I view'd, and lik'd the fashion wondrous well, But in this English habit I admire, That still in her the same good grace should dwell: So I have seen trans- Alpin Cions grow, And bear rare fruit, remov'd to Thames from Po. Lond. 6 Octo. 1632. Your true Servitor and Compatriot, J. H. XXVIII. To Edward Noy Esq at Paris. SIR, I Receiv'd one of yours lately, and I am glad to find the delight that Travell begins to instill into you. My Lord Ambassadour Aston reckons upon you, that you will be one of his train at his first Audience in Madrid, and to my know∣ledg he hath put by som Gentlemen of quality: Therfore I pray let not that durty Town of Paris detain you too long from your in∣tended journey to Spain, for I make account my Lord Aston will be there a matter of two months hence. So I rest London, 5 May. 1633, Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.
XXIX. To the right Honble Sir Peter Wicks, Lo: Ambassador at Constantinople. My Lord, IT seems ther is som angry Star that hath hung over the busines of the Palatinat from the beginning of these German Wars to this very day; which will too evidently appear, if one should mark and deduce matters from their first rise. You may remember how poorly Prague was lost: The Bishop of Halverstat and Count Mansfelt shuffled up and down a good while, and did great matters, but all came to nothing at last. You may remember how one of the Ships-Royall was cast away in car∣rying over the last, and the 12000 men he had hence perish'd many of them very miserably, and he himself, as they write, di∣ed in a poor Hostrey with one Laquay, as he was going to Venice to a bank of money he had stor'd up there for a dead lift. Your Lordship knows what success the King of Denmark had (and our 6000 men under Sir Charles Morgan) for while he thought to make new acquests, he was in hazard to lose all that he had, had not he had favorable Propositions tendred him. Ther were▪ never poor Christians perished more lamentably than those 6000 we sent under M. Hamilton for the assistance of the King of Sweden, who did much, but you know what became of him at last: How disa∣strously the Prince Palatin himself fell, and in what an ill conjun∣cture of time, being upon the very point of being restor'd to his Country. But now we have as bad news as any we had yet; for the young Prince Palatin, and his Brother Prince Rupert, having got a jol∣ly considerable Army in Holland, to try their fortunes in Germa∣ny with the Swedes, they had advanc'd as far as Munsterland, and Westphalia, and having lain before Lengua, they were forc'd to raise the siege; and one Generall Hazfield pursuing them, ther was a fore battell fought, wherin Prince Rupert, my Lord Craven, and others were taken prisoners. The Prince Palatin himself, with Major King, thinking to get over the Weser in a Coach, the Water being deep and not sordable, he sav'd himself by the help
of a Willow, and so went a foot all the way to Minden, the Coach and the Coach-man being drown'd in the River: Ther wer neer upon 2000 slain on the Palsgraves side, and scarce the twentieth part so many on Hazfields, Major Gaeuts, one of the chiefe Com∣manders, was kil'd. I am sorry I must write unto you this sad story; yet to counter∣vail t somthing, Saxen Weymar thrives well, and is like to get Bi∣sac by help of the French forces. All your frends here are well, and remember your Lordship often, but none more oft than Lond. 5 Iun. 1635. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. XXX. To Sir Sackvill C. Knight. SIR, I Was as glad that you have lighted upon so excellent a Lady, as if an Astronomer by his Optics had found out a new Star; and if a wie be the best or worst fortune of a man, certai you are one of the fortunat'st men in this Island. The greatest news I can write unto you is, of a bloody Banquet that was lately at Liege; wher a great faction was a somenting 'twixt the Imperialists, and those that were devoted to France, a∣mongst whom, one Ruelle a popular Bourgue-master was chief: The Count of Warfuzée a vassall of the King of Spains, having fled thither from Flanders for som offence, to ingratiat himself again into the King of Spains favour, invited the said Ruelle to a Feast, and after brought him into a privat Chamber, wher he had pro∣vided a ghostly-father to confess him, and so som of the Souldiers whom he had provided before to guard the House, dispatch'd the Bourgue-master; The Town hearing this, broke nto the House, cut to peeces the said Count, with som of his Souldiers, and dragg'd his body up and down the Streets. You know such a fate befell Walstein in Germany of late yeers, who having got all the Emperours Forces into his hands, was found to have intelli∣gence with the Swede, therfore the Imperiall Ban was not onely pronounc'd against him, but a reward promis'd to any that should dispatch him; som of the Emperours Souldiers at a great Wedding
in Egra, of which Band of Souldiers, Colonell Buttler an Irish∣man was chief, broke into his lodging when ho was at din∣ner, kill'd him, with three Commanders more that were at Table with him, and threw his body out at a Window into the streets. I hear Buttler is made since Count of the Empire. So humbly kissing your noble Ladies hand, I rest Lond. 5 Iun. 1634. Your faithfull servitor, J. H. XXXI. To Dr. Duppa, L. B. of Chichester, his High∣nes Tutor at St. Iames. My Lord, IT is a welbecoming, and very worthy work you are about, not  suffer Mr. Ben. Iohnson to go so silently to his grave, or rot so suly: Being newly com to Town, and understanding that your Iohnsonus Virbius was in the Presse, upon the solicitation of Sir Thomas Hawkins, I suddenly fell upon the ensuing De∣castic, which if your Lordship please, may have room amongst the rest. Upon my honoured Frend and F. Mr. Ben. Iohnson. ANd is thy Glass run out, is that Oyl spent Which light to such strong Sinewy labours lent? Well Ben; I now perceive that all the nine, Though they their utmost forces should combine, Cannot prevail 'gainst Nights three Daughters, but One still must spin, one wind, the other cut. Yet in despight of distaff, clue, and knife, Thou in thy strenuous lines hast got a life,
Which like thy Bays shall flourish ev'ry age, While oc or bukin shall ascend the Stage. —Sic vaticinatur Hoellus. So I rest with many devoted respects to your Lordship, as being Lond. 1 of May, 1636. Your very humble Servitor, J. H. XXXII. To Sir Ed. B. Knight. SIR, I Receiv'd yours this Maunday-Thursday: and wheras amongst other passages, and▪ high endearments of love, you desire to know what method I observe in the exercise of my devotl∣ons, I thank you for your request, which I have reason to be∣lieve doth proceed from an extraordinary respect unto me; and I will deal with you herein, as one should do with his Confessor. Tis true, though ther be rules and rubrics in our Liturgy suf∣ficient to guide evry one in the performance of all holy duties, yet I beleeve evry one hath som mode and modell or formula∣ry of his own, specially for his privat cubicular devotions. I will begin with the last day of the week, and with the latter end of that day, I mean Saturday evening, on which I have fasted ever since I was a youth in Venice, for being delivered from a very great danger: This yeer I use som extraordinary acts of devotion to usher in the ensuing Sunday in Hymns, and various prayers of my own penning, before I go to bed. On Sunday Morning I rise earlier than upon other dayes, to prepare my self for the Sancti∣fying of it; nor do I use Barber, Tailor, Shoo-maker, or any o∣ther Mechanick that morning; and whatsoever diversions, or lets, may hinder me the week before, I never miss, but in case of sicknes, to repair to Gods holy House that day, wher I com before prayers begin, to make my self fitter for the work by some praevious Me∣ditations, and to take the whole Service along with me; nor do I love to mingle speech with any in the interim about news or world∣ly negotiations. In Gods holy House I prostrat my self in the hum∣blest
and decent'st way of genuflection I can imagin; nor do I be∣leeve ther can be any excess of exterior humility in that place; therfore I do not like those squatting unseemly bold postures upon ones tail, or muffling the face in the Hat, or thrusting it in so hole, or covering it with ones hand; but with bended knee, and an open confident face, I fix my Eyes on the East part of the Church, and Heaven. I endeavour to apply evry tirle of the Service to my own Conscience and Occasions; and I believe the want of this, with the huddling up, and careless reading of som Ministers, with the commoness of it, is the greatest cause that many do undervalue and take a Surfet of our pub∣lic Service. For the reading and singing Psalmes, wheras most of them are either Petitions or Eucharisticall ejaculations, I listen to them more attentively, and make them mine own: When I stand at the creed, I think upon the custom they have in Poland, and else-where, for Gentlemen to draw their Swords all the while, intimating therby, that they will defend it with their lives and bloud; And for the Decalog, wheras others use to rise, and sit, I ever kneel at it in the humblest and trembling'st posture of all, to crave re∣mission for the breaches pass'd of any of Gods holy Command∣ments (specially the week before) and future grace to observe them. I love a holy devout Sermon, that first checks and then cheers the Conscience, that begins with the Law and ends with the Gos∣pell; but I never prejudicat or censure any Preacher, aking him as I find him. And now that we are not only Adulted but ancient Christians, I beleeve the most acceptable Sacrifice we can send up to Heaven, is prayer and praise, and that Sermons are not so essentiall as either of them to the tru practice of devotion. The rest of the holy Sab∣bath, I sequester my body and mind as much as I can from worldly affairs. Upon Monday morn, as soon as the Cinq-ports are open, I have a particular prayer of thanks, that I am reprieved to the be∣ginning of that week; and evry day following, I knock thrice at Heavens gate, in the Morning, in the Evening, and at Night; besides, Prayers at Meals, and som other occasionall ejaculations, as upon the putting on of a clean Shirt, washing my hands, and at lighting of Candles, which because they are sudden, I do in the third person. Tuesday morning I rise Winter and Summer as soon as I awake,
and send up a more particular sacrifice for som reasons; and as I am dispos'd, or have busines, I go to bed again. Upon Wensday night, I always fast, and perform also som ex∣traordinary acts of Devotion, as also upon Friday night; and Saturday morning, as soon as my senses are unlock'd I get up. And in the Summer time, I am oftentimes abroad in som privat field, to attend the Sun-rising: And as I pray thrice evry day, so I fast thrice evry week, at least I eat but one meal upon Wens∣days, Fridays, and Saturdays, in regard I am jealous with my self, to have more infirmities to answer for, than other. Before I go to bed, I make a scrutiny what peccant humors have reign'd in me that day, and so I reconcile my self to my Crea∣tor, and strike a tally in the Exchequer of Heaven for my quie∣us est, ere I close my eyes, and leave no burden upon my Con∣science. Before I presume to take the Holy Sacrament, I use som ex∣traordinary acts of Humiliation to prepare my self som days be∣fore, and by doing som deeds of Charity; and commonly I compose som new Prayers, and divers of them written in my own bloud. I use not to rush rashly into prayer without a trembling prece∣dent Meditation, and if any odd thoughts intervene, and grow upon me, I check my self, and recommence; and this is incident to long prayers, which are more subject to mans weaknes, and the devils malice. I thank God I have this fruit of my forrain Travels, that I can pray unto him evry day of the week in a severall Language, and upon Sunday in seven, which in Orisons of my own I pun∣ctually perform in my privat Pomeridian devotions. Et sic aeternam contendo attingere vitam. By these steps I strive to clime up to heaven, and my soul prompts me I shall thither; for ther is no object in the world delights me more, than to cast up my eyes that way, specially in a Star-light night; and if my mind be overcast with any odd clouds of me∣lancholly, when I look up and behold that glorious Fabric, which I hope shall be my Countrey heerafter, ther are new spirits begot in me presently, which make me scorn the World, and the plea∣sures thereof, considering the vanity of the one, and the inanity of the other. Thus my soul still moves East-ward, as all the Heavenly bo∣dies
doe; but I must tell you, that as those bodies are over-ma∣ster'd, and snatch'd away to the West, raptu primi mobilis, by the generall motion of the tenth sphere, so by those Epidemicall infir∣mities which are incident to man, I am often snatch'd away a clean contrary cours, yet my soul persists still in our own pro∣per motion: I am often at variance, and angry with my self (nor do I hold this anger to be any breach of charity) when I con∣sider, That wheras my Creator intended this body of mine, though  lump of Clay, to be a Temple of his holy Spirit, my affections should turn it often to a Brothell-house, my passions to a Bedlam, and my excesses to an Hospitall. Being of a Lay profession, I humbly conform to the Constitu∣tions of the Church, and my spirituall Superiors; and I hold this obedience to be an acceptable Sacrifice to God. Difference in opinion may work a disaffection in me, but not a detestation: I rather pity, than hate, Turk or Insidell, for they are of the same metall, and bear the same stamp as I do, though the Inscriptions differ. If I hate any, 'tis those Scismatics that puzzle the sweet peace of our Church, so that I could bee content to see an Anabaptist go to Hell on a Brownists back? Noble Knight, now that I have thus eviscerated my self, and dealt so clearly with you, I desire by way of correspon∣dence that you would tell me, what way you take in your journey to Heaven; for if my Brest lie so open to you, 'tis not sitting yours should bee shut up to mee; therfore I pray let me hear from you when it may stand with your Conveni∣ence. So I wish you your hearts desire here, and Heaven hereafter, because I am Yours in no vulgar way of friendship, J. H. London, 25 Iuly, 1635.
XXXIII. To Simon Digby Esquire, at Mosco, the Em∣peror of Russia's Court. SIR, I Received one of yours by Mr. Pickhurst, and I am glad to find, that the rough clime of Russia agrees so well with you; so well, as you write, as the Catholic ayr of Madrid, or the Imperiall ayr of Vienna, where you had such honorable employments. The greatest News we have heer is, that we have a Bishop Lord Tresurer, and 'tis News indeed in these times, though 'twas no news you know in the times of old to have a Bishop Lord Tresurer of England. I beleeve he was meerly passive in this busines; the active instrument that put the white Staff in his hands, was the Metrapolitan at Lambeth. I have other News also to tell you, we have a brave new Ship, a Royall Galeon, the like, they say, did never spread Sail upon Salt-water, take her true and well compacted Symmetry, with all dimensions together; for her burden, shee hath as many Tuns as ther were yeers since the Incarnation, when she was built, which are sixteen hundred thirty and six; she is in length one hundred twenty and seven foot; her greatest breadth within the planks, is fourty six foot, and six inches; her depth from the breadth is nineteen foot, and four inches: she carrieth a hundred Peeces of Ordnance wanting four, wherof shee hath three tyre; half a score men may stand in her Lantern; the charges His Majesty hath been at in the building of her, are computed to be fourscore thou∣sand pounds, one whole years Ship-money: Sir Robert Mansell launc'd her, and by his Majesties command call'd her, The Sove∣rain of the Sea: Many would have had her to be nam'd the Edgar; who was one of the most famous Saxon Kings this Island had, and the most potent at sea: Ranulphus Cestrensis writes, that he had four hundred ships, which evry yeer after Easter, went out in four Fleets to scour the Coasts. Another Author writes, that he had four Kings to row him once upon the Dee. But the Title he gave himself, was a notable lofty one, which was this▪ Altitonantis Dei largiflua clementia qui est Rex Regum, Ego Edgarus Anglorum Basileus, omnium Regum Insularum Oceanique Britanniam circumacent is, cuncta∣rumque Nationum quae infra eam includūtur, Imperator & Dominus, &c.
I do not think your gran Emperour of Russia hath a loftier title; I confess the Sophy of Persia hath a higher one, though prophane and ridiculous in comparison of this▪ For he calls himself, The Star high and mighty, whose head is cover'd with the Sun, whose mo∣tion is comparable to the aethereall Firmament, Lord of the Mountaines, Caucasus and Taurus, of the four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris, Araxis and Indus; Bud of honour, Mirrour of vertue, Rose of delight, and Nutmeg of comfort; It is a huge descent methinks to begin with a Star, and end in a Nutmeg. All your friends here in Court and City are well, and often mindfull of you, with a world of good wishes, and you cannot be said to be out of England, as long as you live in so many noble memories: Touching mine, you have a large room in't, for you are one of my chief inmates: So with my humble Service to your Lady I rest Lond. 1 Iuly, 1635. Your most faithfull Servitor while J. H. XXXIV. To Dr. Tho: Prichard. Dear Dr. I Have now had too long a supersede as from employment, having engag'd my self to a fatall man at Court (by his own seeking) who I hoped, and had reason to expect (for I wav'd all other wayes) that he would have bin a Scale towards my rising, but he hath rather prov'd an instrument to my ruine: it may be he will prosper accordingly. I am shortly bound for Ireland, and it may be the Stars will cast a more benign Aspect upon me in the West; you know who got the Persian Empire by looking that way for the first beams of the Sun-rising, rather than towards the East. My Lord Deputy hath made often professions to do me a plea∣sure, and I intend now to put him upon't, I purpose to pass by the Bath, for a pain I have in my Arm, pro∣ceeding from a Defluxion of Rheum, and then I will take Breck∣nock in my way, to comfort my Sister Penry, who I think hath lost one of the best husbands in all the thirteen shires of Wales. So with apprecation of all happines to you, I rest London, 10 Feb. 1637. Yours while J. H.
XXXV. To Sir Kenelme Digby Knight, from Bath. SIR, YOur being then in the Country, when I began my journey for Ireland, was the cause I could not kiss your hands, therfore I shall do now from Bath, what I should have don at London. Being here for a distillation of Rheum that pains me in one of my Arms, and having had about three thousand stroaks of a pump upon me in the Queens Bath: ▪And having bin here now divers daies and view'd the severall qualities of these Waters, I fell to contemplat a little what should be the reason of such an extraordi∣nary actuall heat, and medicinall vertue in them. I have seen and read of divers Baths abroad, as those of Caldanel and Avinian in agro Senensi, the Grotta in Viterbio, those between Naples and Puteolum in Campania; And I have bin a little curious to know the reason of those rare Lymphaticall properties in them above other waters. I find that som impute it to Wind, or Ayr, or som Exha∣lations shut up in the Bowels of the Earth, which either by their own nature, or by their violent motion and agitation, or attrition upon Rocks, and narrow passages do gather heat, and so impart it to the Waters. Others attribut this balneal heat unto the Sun, whose all∣searching Beams penetrating the Pores of the Earth, do heat the Waters. Others think this heat to proceed from quicklime, which by com∣mon experience we find to heat any Water cast upon't, and also to kindle any combustible substance put upon't. Lastly, ther are som that ascribe this heat to a subterranean fire kindled in the bowels of the Earth upon sulphury and bituminous matter. 'Tis true, all these may be generall concurring causes, but not the adaequat proper and peculiar reason of balneal heats; and herein truly our learned Countryman Dr. Iorden hath got the start of any that ever writ of this subject, and goes to work like a solid Philosopher; for having treated of the generation of mine∣ralls, he finds that they have their Seminaries in the Womb of the Earth replenish'd with active spirits; which meeting with apt
matter and adjuvant causes, do proceed to the generation of se∣verall species, according to the nature of the efficient, and fitnes of the matter: In this work of generation, as ther is generatio uni∣us, so ther is corruptio alterius; and this cannot be don without a superiour power, which by moysture dilating it self, works upon the matter like a leav'ning and ferment, to bring it to its own purpose. This motion 'twixt the agent spirit, and patient matter, produ∣ceth an actuall heat; for motion is the fountain of heat, which serves s an instrument to advance the work; for as cold dulls, so heat quickneth all things: Now for the nature of this heat, it is not a destructive violent heat, as that of fire, but a generative gentle heat joyn'd with moysture, nor needs it ayr for eventilation: This naturall heat is daily observ'd by Diggn in the Mynes; so then while Mineralls are thus engendring, and in solutis principiis, in their liquid formes, and not consolidated into hard bodies, (for then they have not that vertue) they impart heat to the neighbou∣ring Waters. So then it may be concluded, that this soyl about the Bath is a minerall vein of earth, and the fermenting gentle temper of generative heat that goes to the production of the said Mineralls, do impart and actually communicat this balneal vertue and medicinall heat to these Waters. This subject of Minerall Waters would afford an Ocean of mat∣ter, wer one to compile a solid discours of it: And I pray excuse me, that I have presum'd in so narrow a compas as a Letter, to com∣prehend so much, which is nothing I think, in comparison of what you know already of this matter. So I take my leave, and humbly kiss your hands, being all∣wayes From the Bath 3 Iuly, 1638. Your most faithfull and ready Servitor, J. H.
XXXVI. From Dublin, to Sir Ed: Savage Knight, at Tower-Hill. SIR, I Am com safely to Dublin, over an angry boysterous Sea; whe∣ther 'twas my voyage on Salt-water, or change of Ayr, being now under another clime, which was the cause of it, I know not, but I am suddenly freed of the pain in my Arm; when neither Bath, nor Plasters, and other remedies could do me good. I deliver'd your Letter to Mr. Iames Dillon, but nothing can be don in that busines till your brother Pain coms to Town. I meet heer with divers of my Northern frends, whom I knew at York: Heer is a most splendid Court kept at the Castle, and except that of the Vice-roy of Naples, I have not seen the like in Christendom, and in one point of Grandeza, the Lord Deputy heer goes beyond him, sor he can confer honours and dub Knights, which that Vice-roy cannot, or any other I know of. Trafic encreaseth heer wonderful∣ly, with all kind of bravery, and buildings. I made an humble motion to my Lord, that in regard busines∣ses of all sorts did multiply here daily, and that ther was but one Clerk of the Counsell (Sir Paul Davis) who was able to dispatch busines, (Sir Will. Usher his Collegue being very aged and bed∣rid) his Lordship would please to think of me, My Lord gave me an answer full of good respects to succeed Sir William after his death. No more now, but with my most affectionat respects unto you, I rest Dublin, 3 May, 1639. Your faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XXXVII. To Dr. Vsher Lo: Primat of Ireland. MAy it please your Grace to accept of my most humble Ac∣knowledments for those Noble favours I receiv'd at Drog∣hedah, and that you pleas'd to communicat unto me those rare Manuscripts in so many Languages, and divers choice Authors in your Library. Your learned Work, De primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum which you pleas'd to send me, I have sent to England, and so it shall be conveyd to Iesus College in Oxford, as a gift from your Grace. I hear that Cardinal Barberino, one of the Popes Nephews, is setting forth the works of Fastidius a British Bishop, call'd, De vita Christiana. It was written 300 yeers after our Saviour, and Holsteni∣us hath the care of the Impression. I was lately looking for a word in Sidas, and I lighted upon a strange passage in the name : That in the Reign of Iustini∣an the Emperour, one Theodosius a Jew, a man of great Authori∣ty, liv'd in Ierusalem, with whom a rich Goldsmith, who was a Christian, was in much favour, and very familiar. The Gold∣smith, in privat discours, told him one day, that be wondred, e being a man of such a great understanding, did not turn▪ Christian, con∣sidering how he found all the Prophecies of the Law so evidently accom∣plish'd in our Saviour, and our Saviours Prophecies accomplish'd since. Theodosius answered, That it did not stand with his security and con∣tinuance in Authority to turn Christian, but he had a long time a good o∣pinion of that Religion; and he would discover a secret unto him which was not yet com to the knowledg of any Christian: It was, That when the Temple was founded in Ierusalem, ther wer 22 Priests, ac∣cording to the number of the Hebrew letters, to officiat in the Temple; and when any was chosen, his name, with his fathers and mothers, wer us'd to be registred in a fair Book. In the time of Christ, a Priest died, and he was chosen in his place; but when his name was to be entred, his father Ioseph being dead, his mo∣ther was sent for, who being ask'd who was his father, she answe∣red, that she never knew man, but that she conceiv'd by an An∣: So his name was registred in these words: IESUS CHRIST
THE SON OF GOD, AND OF THE VIRGIN MARY. This Record at the destruction of the Temple was pre∣served, and is to be seen in Tyberias to this day. I humbly desire your Graces opinion heerof in your next. They write to me from England of rare news in France, which is, that the Queen is delivered of a Daulphin, the wonderfull'st thing of this kind that any Story can parallel; for this is the three and twentieth yeer since she was married, and hath continued child∣les all this while; so that now Monsieurs cake is dough, and I be∣leeve he will be more quiet heerafter. So I rest Dublin, 1 March, 1639. Your Graces most devoted, Servitor, J. H. XXXVIII. To my Lord Clifford, from Edenburgh. My Lord, I Have seen now all the King of Great Britain's Dominions; & he is a good Traveller that hath seen all his Dominions. I was born in Wales, I have bin in all the four corners of England; I have tra∣vesed the Diameter of France more than once, and now I am com thorow Ireland into this Kingdom of Scotland. This Town of Edin∣burgh is one of the fairest streets that ever I saw (exepting that of Palermo in Sicily) it is about a mile long, coming sloping down from the Castle (call'd of old the Castle of Virgins, and by Pliny, Castrum alatum) to Holy-Rood-House, now the Royall Palace; and these two begin and terminat the town. I am com hither in a ve∣ry convenient time, for heer's a Nationall Assembly and a Parlement, my Lord Traquair being His Majesties Commissioner. The Bi∣shops are all gon to wack, and they have had but a sorry Fune∣rall; the very name is grown so contemptible, that a black Dog, if he have any white marks about him, is call'd Bishop. Our Lord of Canterbury is grown heer so odious, that they call him common∣ly in the Pulpit The Priest of Baal, and the son of Belial. I'll tell your Lordship of a passage which happened lately in my lodging▪ which is a Tavern: I had sent for a Shoo-maker to make me a pair of Boots, and my Landlord, who is a pet smart man, brought up a chopin of Whitewine (and for this particular, ther are bette
French-wines heer than in England, and cheaper; for they are but at a Groat a quart; and it is a crime of a high nature, to min∣gle or sophisticat any Wine heer.) Over this Chopin of White wine, my Vintner and Shoo-maker fell into a hot Dispute about Bishops: The Shoo-maker grew very furious, and call'd them The firebrands of hell, the Pamlers of the Whore of Babilon, and the In∣struments of the dvill, and that they were of his institution, not of Gods. My Vintner took him up smartly, and said, Hold, neighbour, there; Do not you know, as well as I, that Titus and Timothy were Bishops, that our Saviour is entitled The Bishop of our souls, that the word Bishop is as frequently mentioned in Scripture as the name Pastor, Elder, or Deacon? then why do you invigh so bitterly against them? The Shoo-maker answered, I know the Name and Office to be good, but they have abused it. My Vintner replies, Well then, you are a Shoo-maker by your Prefession, imagine that you, or a hundred, or a thousand, or a hundred thousand of your Trade should play the knaves, and sell Caltskin-leather Boots for Neats-leather, or do other cheats; must wee therfore go barefoot? must the Gentle-crat of Shoo-makers fall therfore to the ground? It is the fault of the Men, not of rhe Cal∣ling. The Shoo-maker was so gravell'd at this, that he was put to his Last; for he had not a word more to say: so my Vintner got the day. Ther is a fair Parlement-house built heer lately, and 'twas ho∣ped His Maiesty would have tane the maiden-head of it, and com hither to sit in person; and they did ill who advis'd him other∣wise. I am to go hence shortly back to Dublin, and so to London, wher I hope to find your Lordship, that, according to my accustomed boldnes, I may attend you: In the interim I rest Edenburgh. 1639. Your Lordships most humble Servitor, J. H.
XXXIX. To Sir K. Digby Kt. SIR, I Thank you for the good opinion you please to have of my fan∣cy of Trees: It is a maiden one, and not blown upon by any yet: But for the merits you please to ascribe unto the Author, I ut∣terly disclaim any, specially in that proportion you please to give them me. 'Tis you that have parts enough to compleat a whole Jury of men. Those small perquisits that I have, are thrust up into a little narrow lobby; but those perfections that beautifie your noble soul, have a spacious Palace to walk in, more sumptuous than either the Louvre, Seralio, or Escuriall. So I most affectionat∣ly kiss your hands, being always Westmin. 3 Decem. 1639. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XL. To Sir Sackvill Crow, His Majesties Ambassador, at the Post of Constantinople. Rigl Honble Sir, THe greatest news we have heer now, is a notable navall fight that was lately 'twixt the Spanierd and Hollander in the Downes; but to make it more intelligible, I will deduce the busi∣nes from the beginning. THe King of Spain had provided a  Fleet of Galeons, wherof the Vice-Admiralls of Naples and Portugall wer two, (wher∣of he had sent advice to England long before.) The design was to meet with the French Fleet, under the command of the Arch∣bishop of Bourdeaux, and in default of that, to land som treasure at Dunkirk, with a recruit of Spaniards which wer grown very thin in Flanders. These recruits wer got by an odd trick; for som of
the Fleet being at Saint Anderas, a report was blown up of pur∣pose, that the French were upon the Coasts; heerupon all the youngmen of the Country came to the Sea-side, and so a great number of them were tumbled a shipboard, and so they set saie to∣wards the Coasts of France; but the Archbishop it seems had drawn in his Fleet: Then striking into the Narrow-Seas, they met with a Fleet of about sixteen Hollanders, wherof they sunk and took two, and the rest got away to Holland, to give an alarum to the States, who in less than a moneth, got together a Fleet of a∣bout one hundred sail, and the wind being a long time Easterly, they came into the Downes, where Don Antonio d' Oquéndo, the Spanish Admirall had stayed for them all the while. Sir Iohn Pen∣nington was then abroad with seven of His Majesties Ships: and Don Antonio being daily warn'd what forces were preparing in Zea∣land and Holland, and so advis'd to get over to the Flemish Coasts: in the interim with a haughty spirit, he answer'd, Tengo de quedar∣me aqui para castigar estos Rebeldes: I will stay here to chastise these Rebels. There were ten more of His Masties Ships appointed to go joyn with Sir Iohn Pennington, to observe the motions of these Fleets, but the wind continuing still East, they could not get out of the River. The Spanish Fleet had Fresh-waters, Victualls, and other neces∣saries from our Coasts for their money, according to the capitula∣tions of peace, all this while; at last, being half surprized by a cloud of Hollanders, consisting of one hundred and fourteen ships, the launc'd out from our Coasts, and a most furious fight began, our ships having retir'd hard by all the while: The Vice-Admi∣rall of Portugall, a famous Sea Captain, Don Lope de Hozes, was engag'd in close fight with the Vice-Admirall of Holland, and after many tough rancounters they were both blown up, and burnt to∣gether. At last, night came and parted the rest; but six Spanish ships were taken, and about twenty of the Hollanders perish'd. O∣quendo then cross'd over to Nardic, and so back to Spain, where he died before he came to the Court; and 'tis thought, had he liv'd, he had bin question'd for som miscarrages; for if he had suffer'd the Dunkerkers, who are nimbler and more fit for fight, to have had the Van and dealt with the Hollander, 'tis thought matters might have gon better with him; but his ambition was, that the great spa∣ish Galeons should get the glory of the day. The Spaniards give out that they had the better, in regard they did the main work, for Oquendo had conveyed all his recruits and tresure to Flanders, while he lay hovering on our Coasts.
One thing is herein very observable, what a mighty Naviga∣ble power the Hollander is com to, that in so short a compas of time, he could appeare with such a numerous Fleet of one hun∣dred and fourteen Sails of Men of War, in such a perfect equip∣page. The times afford no more at present, therfore with a tender of my most humble service to my noble Lady, and my thankfull acknowledgment for those great favours which my Brother Ed∣ward writes to me he hath receiv'd from your Lordship in so singu∣lar a manner, at that Port, desiring you would still oblige me with a continuance of them; I rest, amongst those multitudes you have left behind you in England, Lond. 3 Aug. 1639. Your Lopps most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XLI. To Sir J. M. Knight. SIR, I Hear that you begin to blow the cole, and offer sacrifice to De∣mogorgon, the God of Mineralls: Be well advis'd before you en∣gage your self too deep; Chymistry, I know, by a little experience, is wonderfull pleasing for the tryall of so many rare conclusions it carries with it, but withall 'tis costly, and an enchanting kind of thing; for it hath melted many a fair Mannor in crusibles, and turn'd them to smoak▪ One presented Sixtus quintus (Sice-cinq, as Queen Elizabeth call'd him) with a Book of Chymistry, and the Pope gave him an empty purse for a reward. Ther be few whom Mercury the father of miracles doth favour: The Queen of Sbeba, and the King Crown'd with fire, are not pro∣pitious to many: He that hath water turn'd to ashes, hath the Ma∣gistery, and the true Philosophers stone; ther be few of those: Ther be som that commit fornication in Chymistry, by Heterogent∣ous and Sophisticall citrinations; but they never com to the Phoe∣nix nest. I know you have your share of wisdom, therfore I confess it a pre∣sumption in me, to give you Counsell. So I rest Westm. 1 Feb. 1638. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H
XLII. To Simon Digby Esquire, at the gran Moseo in Russia. SIR, I Return you many thanks for your last of the first of Ine, and that you acquaint me with the state of things in that Coun∣trey. I doubt not but you have heard long since of the revolt of Ca∣talania from the King of Spaine; it seems the sparkles of those fires are flown to Portugall, and put that Countrey also in combusti∣on. The Duke of Braganza, whom you may well remember about the Court of Spaine, is now King of Portugall, by the name of El Rey Don Iuan, and he is as generally obey'd, and quietly setled, as if he had bin King these twenty yeers there; for the whole Coun∣trey fell suddenly to him, not one Town standing out. When the King of Spain told Olivares of it first, he slighted it, saying, That he was but Rey de Havas, a Bean-cake King. But it seems strange to me, and so strange, that it transforms me to wonder, that the Spaniard being accounted so politic a Nation, and so full of pre∣caution, could not foresee this; specially, ther being divers in∣telligences given, and evident symptoms of the generall discon∣tentment of that Kingdom (because they could not be protected a∣gainst the Hollander in Brasil) and of som designes a yeer before, when this Duke of Braganza was at Madrid. I wonder I say, they did not secure his person by ingaging him in som employment out of the way: Truly, I thought the Spaniard was better sighted, and could could see further off than so. You know what a huge lim the Crown of Portugall was to the Spanish Monarchy, by the Islands in the Atlantic Sea; the Towns in Afric; and all the East-In∣dies, insomuch, that the Spaniard hath nothing now left beyond the Line. Ther is no offensive war yet made by Spain against King Iohn, she only stands upon the defensive part, untill the Catalan be re∣duc'd; and I beleeve, that will be a long-winded busines; for this French Cardinall stirs all the devills of Hell against Spain, in∣somuch, that most men say, that these formidable fires which are
now raging in both these Countreys, were kindled at first by a Ganado hurl'd from his brain: Nay, som will not stick to say, that this breach 'twixt us and Scotland is a reach of his. Ther was a ruthfull distaster happen'd lately at Sea, which makes our Merchants upon the Exchange hang down their heads very sadly. The Ship Swan, wherof one Limery was Master, ha∣ving bin four yeers abroad about the Streights, was sailing home with a Cargazon, valued at eight hundred thousand pounds, wher∣of four hundred and fifty thousand was in Money, the rest in Je∣wells and Merchandise; but being in sight of shore, she sprung a leak, and being ballasted with Salt, it choak'd the Pump, so that the Swan could swim no longer: Som sixteen were drown'd, and som of them with ropes of Pearl about their necks, the rest were sav'd by an Hamburgber not far off. The King of Spain loseth little by it (only his affairs in Flanders may suffer) for his Money was insur'd, and few of the Principalls, but the Insurers onely, who were most of them Genowayes and Hollanders: A most infortunat chance, for had she com to safe port, she had bin the richest ship that ever came into the Thames; so that Neptun never had such a morfell at one bit. All your frends here are well, as you will understand more par∣ticularly by those Letters that go herewith. So I wish you all health and comfort in that cold Countrey, and desire that your love may continue still in the same degree of heat towards Lond. 5 of Mar. 1639. Your faithfull servitor, J. H. XLIII. To Sir K. D. Knight. SIR, IT was my fortun to be in a late communication wher a Gentle∣man spoke of a hideous thing that happen'd in High Holborn, how one Iohn Pennant a young man of 21, being dissected after his death, ther was a kind of Serpent with divers tails found in the left Ventricle of his heart, which you know is the most defen∣ded part, being thrice thicker than the right, and in the Cell which holds the purest and most illustrious liquor, the arteriall blood,
and the vitall spirits. This Serpent was it seems three yeers in∣gendring, for so long time he found himself indisposed in the brest; and it was observ'd, that his eye in the interim grew more sharp▪ and firy, like the eye of a Cock, which is next to a Ser∣pents eye in rednes; so that the symptome of his inward Disease might have been told by certain exterior Rays and Sig∣natures. God preserve us from public calamities; for Serpentin Monsters have been often ill favoured presages. I remember in the Roman story, to have read how, when Snakes or Serpents wer found neer the statues of their gods, as one time about Iupiters neck, another time about Minerva's thigh, ther follow'd bloudy Civill War after it. I remember also, few yeers since, to have read the relation and deposition of the Carrier of Tewxbury, who, with divers of his servants, passing a little before the dawn of the day with their packs over Cots-hill, saw most sensibly and very perspicuously in the air, Muskettiers, harnassed men, and horse-men, moving in Bat∣tell-aray, and assaulting one another in divers furious postures. I doubt not but that you heard of those fiery Metcors and Thun∣derbolts that have fallen upon sundry of our Churches, and don hurt. Unless God be pleas'd to make up these ruptures 'twixt us and Scotland, we are like to have ill days. The Archb. of Canterbu∣ry was lately out-rag'd in his House by a pack of common peeple: and Captain Maun was pittifully massacred by his own men late∣ly; so that the common peeple, it seems, have strange principles infus'd into them, which may prove dangerous: for I am not of that Lords mind who said, That they who fear any popular Insurre∣ction in England, are like boys and women, that are afraid of a Turnip  like a Deaths head with a candle in't. I am shortly for France, and I will receive your Commands be∣fore I go. So I am Lond. 2 May▪ 1640. Your most humble Servitor, J. H.
XLIV. To my Lord Herbert of Cherbery, from Paris. My Lord, I Send herewith Dodonas Grove couch'd in French, and in in the newest French, for though the main version be mine, yet I got one of the Academie des beaux Esprits heer to run it over, to correct and refine the language, and reduce it to the most mo∣dern Dialect. It took so heer, that the new Academy of wits have given a public and far higher Elogium of it than it deserves. I was brought to the Cardinall at Ruelle, wher I was a good while with him in his privat Garden, and it were a vanity in me, to insert here what Propositions he made me. Ther be som sycophants heer that idolize him, and I blush to read what profane Hyperboles are Printed up and down of him; I will instance in a few. Cedite Richelio mortales, cedite Divi, Ille homines vincit, vincit & ille Deos. Then Et si nous faisons des ghirlandes, C'est pour en couronner un Dieu, Qui soubs le nom de Richelieu, Resoit nos oeus & nos offrandes. Then Richelii adventu Rupellae porta patescit, Christo Infernales ut patuere fores. Certainly he is a rare man, and of a transcendent reach, and they are rather miracles than exploits that he hath don, though those miracles be of a sanguin Dy (the colour of his habit) steep'd in bloud; which makes the Spaniard call him the gran Caga-fuego of Christendom. Divers of the scientific all'st, and most famous win here, have spoken of your Lordship with admiration, and of your great work De veritate; and wer those excellent notions and theoricall precepts actually applyed to any particular Science, it would be an infinit advantage to the Common-wealth of lear∣ning
all the▪ World over. So I humbly kiss your hands, and rest Paris, April 1. 1641. Your Lordships most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XLV. To the Right Honble M• Elizabeth Altham, now Lady Digby. Madam, THer be many sad hearts for the loss of my Lord Robert Dig∣by; but the greatest weight of sorrow falls upon your Ladi∣ship. Amongst other excellent vertues, which the world admires you for, I know your Ladiship to have that measure of high discre∣tion, that will check your passions; I know also, that your pati∣ence hath been often exercis'd, and put to triall in this kind: For besides the Baron your Father, and Sir Iames, you lost your Bro∣ther, Master Richard Altham, in the verdant'st time of his age, a Gentleman of rare hopes, and I beleeve this sunk deep into your heart; you lost Sir Francis Astly since, a worthy vertuous Gentleman: And now you have lost a noble Lord. We all owe nature a debt, which is payable som time or other, whensoever she demands it; nor doth Dame Nature use to seal Indentures, or pass over either Lease or Patent for a set term of yeers to any; For my part I have seen so much of the world, that if she offer'd me a lease, I would give her but a small fine for't; specially now that the times are grown so naught, that peeple are becom more than half mad: But Madam, as long as ther are men, ther must be malignant humors, ther must be vices, and vicissitudes of things; as long as the world wheels round, ther must be tossings and tumblings, distractions and troubles, and bad times must be recempenc'd with better. So I humbly kiss your Ladiships hands, and rest, Madam, Your constant Servant, J. H. York 1 of Aug. 1642.
XLVI. To the Honorable Sir P. M. in Dublin. SIR, I Am newly return'd from France, and now that Sir Edw. Ni∣cholas is made Secretary of State, I am put in fair hopes, or rather assurances to suceed him in the Clerkship of the Coun∣sell. The Duke de la Valette is lately fled hither for sanctuary▪ having had ill luck in Fonta-rabia, they say his Proces was made, and that he was executed in Effigie in Paris. Tis true, he could never square well with his Eminency, the Cardinall, (for this is a peculiar Title he got long since from Rome, to distinguish him from all othér) nor his father neither, the little old Duke of Espernon, the anci∣ent'st Soldier in the world, for hee wants but one yeer of a hun∣dred. When I was last in Paris, I heard of a facetius passage ' him, and the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who in effect is Lord High Admirall of France, and 'twas thus: The Archbishop was to go Generall of a great Fleet, and the Duke came to his House in Bourdeaux one morning to visit him; the Archbishop sent som of his Gentlemen to desire him to have a little patience, for hee was dispatching away som Sea-Commanders, and that he would wait on him presently: The little Duke took a pett at it, and went a∣way to his house at Cadllac som fifteen miles off: The next mor∣ning the Archbishop came to pay him the visit, and to apologize for himself; being com in, and the Duke told of it, he sent his Chaplain to tell him, that he was newly fallen upon a Chapter of Saint Austins de civitate Dei, and when he had read that Chapter, hee would com to him. Som yeers before, I was told he was at Paris, and Richelieu came to visit him, he having notice of it, Richelieu found him in a Cardinals Cap, kneeling at a Table Altar-wise, with his Book and Beads in his hand, and Candles burning before him. I hear the Earl of Leicester is to com shortly over, and so over to Ireland to be your Deputy. No more now, but that I am Lond. Sept. 7. 1641. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XLVII. To the Earl of B. from the Fleet. My Lord, I Was lately com to London upon som occasions of mine own, and I had bin divers times in Westminster-Hall, wher I convers'd with many Parlement men of my acquaintance; but one morning be∣times, ther rush'd into my Chamber five armed men with Swords, Pistolls and Bills, and told me they had a Warrant from the Parle∣ment for me; I desir'd to see their Warrant, they denyed it, I desired to see the date of it▪ they denied it, I desired to see my name in the Warrant, they denied all, at last one of them pull'd out a greasie Paper out of his Pocket, and shew'd me only three or four names subscrib'd, and no more; so they rush'd presently into my Closet, and seiz'd on all my Papers, and Letters, and any thing that was Manuscript, and many Printed Books they took also, and hurl'd all into a great Hair Trunk, which they carried away with them: I had taken a little Physic that morning, and with very much ado, they suffer'd me to stay in my Chamber with two Guards upon me till the Evening; at which time they brought me before the Committee for Examination, wher I confess I found good respects; and being brought up to the close Committee, I was order'd to be forth-coming, till som Papers of mine were perus'd, and Mr. Corbet was appointed to do it: Som days after, I came to Mr. Corbet, and he told me he had perus'd them, and could find nothing that might give offence; heerupon, I desir'd him to make a report to the House accordingly; which (as I was told) he did very fairly, yet such was my hard hap, that I was committed to the Fleet, wher I am now under close restraint: and as far as I see, I must lye t dead anchor in this Fleet a long time, unless som gentle gale blow thence to make me lance out. Gods will be don, and amend the times, and make up these ruptures which threaten so much ca∣lamity. So I am Fleet. Nov. 20. 1643. Your Lopps most faithfull (though now afflicted) Servitor, J. H.
XLVIII. To Sir Bevis Thelwall Knight (Petri ad vin∣cula) at Peter-House in London. SIR, THough we are not in the same prison, yet are we in the same predicament of suffrance; therfore I presume you are subject to the like fits of melancholly as I: The fruition of liberty is not so pleasing, as a conceit of the want of it is irksom, specially to one of such free-born thoughts as you. Melancholly is a black noxious humor, and much annoys the whol inward man; if you would know what cordiall I use against it in this my sad condition, Ile tell you, I pore somtimes on a Book, and so I make the dead my companions, and this is one of my chiefest solaces: If the humor work upon mee stronger, I rouze my spirits, and raise them up towards Heaven, my future Countrey; and one may be on his journy thither, though shut up in Prison, and happly go a straighter way, than if hee wer abroad: I consider, that my soul while shee is coop'd up within these walls of flesh, is but in a kind of perpetuall prison. And now my body corresponds with her in the same condition; my body is the prison of the one, and these brick-walls the prison of the o∣ther: And let the English peeple flatter themselves as long as they will, that they are free, yet are they in effect, but prisoners, as all other Islanders are; for being surrounded and clos'd about with Salt-water (as I am with these Walls) they cannot go where they list, unless they ask the Winds leave first, and Neptun must give them a pass. God Almighty amend the times, and compose these wofull divisi∣ons, which menace nothing but public ruin, the thoughts wherof drown in me the sense of mine own privat affliction. So wishing you courage (wherof you have enough, if you put it in practise) and patience in this sad sad condition, I rest From the Fleet, Aug. 2, 1643. Your true Servant and Compatriot, J. H.
LIX. To Mr. E. P. SIR, I Saw such prodigious things daily don these few yeers, that I had resolv'd with my self to give over wondering at any thing; yet a passage happen'd this week, that forc'd me to wonder once more, because it is without parallel. It was, that som odd fellows went skulking up and down London-streets, and with Figs and Reasons allur'd little Children, and so pourloyn'd them away from their Parents, and carried them a Ship-board for beyond Sea, where by cutting their hair, and other devises, they so dis∣guis'd them, that their Parents could not know them. This made me think upon that miraculous passage in Hamelen, a Town in Germans, which I hop'd to have pass'd through when I was in Ham∣burgh, had we return'd by Holland; which was thus, (nor would I relate it unto you wer ther not som ground of truth for it.) The said Town of Hamelen was annoyed with Rats and Mice; and it chanc'd, that a Pied-coated Piper came thither, who covenanted with the chief Burgers for such a reward, if he could free them quite from the said Vermin, nor would he demand it, till a twelve-month, and a day after: The agreement being made, he began to play on his Pipes, and all the Rats, and the Mice followed him to a great Lough hard by, where they all perish'd; so the Town was in∣fected no more. At the end of the yeer, the Pied-Piper return'd for his reward, the Burgers put him off with slightings, and neg∣lect; offring him som small matter, which he refusing, and stay∣ing som dayes in the Town, on Sunday morning at High Mass, when most peeple were at Church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and all the children up and down, follow'd him out of the Town, to a great Hill not far off, which rent in two, and opened, and let him and the children in, and so clos'd up again: This happen'd a matter of two hundred and fifty yeers since; and in that Town, they date their Bills and Bonds, and other Instruments in Law, to this day, from the yeer of the going out of their children: Besides, there is a great piller of stone at the foot of the said Hill, wheron this story is ingraven,
No more now, for this is enough in conscience for one time: So I am Fleet. 1 Octo. 1643. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. L. To my Lord G. D. My Lord, THer be two weighty sayings in Seneca, Nihil est infaelicius o, cui nil unquam contigit adversi: Ther is nothing more unhappy than he, who never felt any adversity: The other is, Nullum est ma∣jus malum, quàm non posse ferre malum: Ther is no greater cross, than not to be able to bear a cross. Touching the first, I am not capable of that kind of unhappiness; for I have had my share of adversity, I have bin hammer'd, and dilated upon the Anvill, as our Countrey∣man Breakspear (Adrian the fourth) said of himself; I have bn strain'd through the limbic of affliction. Touching the second, I am also free of that cross; for, I thank God for it, I have that portion of Grace, and so much Philosophy, as to be able to endure, and confront any misery: Tis not so tedious to me, as to others to be thus immur'd, because I have bin inur'd, and habituated to trou∣bles. That which sinks deepest into me, is the sense I have of the common calamities of this Nation; ther is a strange Spirit hath got in amongst us, which makes the Idaea of holines, the formality of good, and the very facultie of reason to be quite differing from what it was. I remember to have read a tale of the Ape in Paris, who having got a child out of the cradle, & carried him up to the top of the tiles, and there sat with him upon the ridg; The parents behol∣ding this ruthfull spectacle, gave the Ape fair and smooth language, so he gently brought the child down again, and replac'd him in the cradle. Our Countrey is in the same case this child was in, and I hope ther will be sweet and gentle means us'd to preserve it from precipitation. The City of London sticks constantly to the Parlement, and the Common-Councell swayes much, insomuch, that I beleeve, if the Lord Chancelor Egerton were now living, he would not be so plea∣sant with them, as he was once to a new Recorder of London, whom
he had invited to dinner to give him joy of his office, and having a great Woodcock▪ Pyserv'd in about the end of the repast, which had bin sent him from Cheshire, he said, Now Master Recorder you are welcom to a Common-Councell. Ther be many discreet brave Patriots in the City, and I hope they will think upon som means to preserve us and themselves from ruin: Such are the prayers, early and late, of Fleet, a Ian. 1643. Your Lopps most humble Servior, J. H. LI. To Sir Alex. R. Kt. SIR, SUrely, God Almighty is angry with England, and 'tis more sure, that God is never angry without cause: Now to know this cause the best way is, for every one to lay his hand on his Brest, and examin himself throughly, to summon his thoughts, and win now them, and so call to remembrance how far he hath offen∣ded Heaven, and then it will be found, that God is not angry with England, but with English-men. When that dolefull charge was pronounc'd against Israel, Perditio tua ex te Israel, It was meant of the concret, (not the abstract;) Oh Israelites, your ruin coms from your selvs. When I make this serutiny within my self, and en∣ter into the closest cabinet of my soul, I find (God help me) that I have contributed as much to the drawing down of these judgements on England, as any other: when I ransack the three Cells of my Brain, I find that my imagination hath bin vain and extravagant; my memory hath kept the bad, and let go the good, like a wide Sieve that retains the Bran, and parts with the Flour; my under∣standing hath bin full of errour and obliquities; my will hath bin a rebell to reason; my reason a rebell to Faith, (which I thank God I have the grace to quell presently with this caution, Succumbat Ratio Fidei, & captiva quiescat.) When I descend to my heart, the center of all my affections, I find  hath swell'd often with Timpanies of vanity, and Tumors of
wrath: when I take my whole self in a lump, I find that I am nought else but a Cargazon of malignant humors, a rabble of unruly passions, amongst which my poor soul is daily crucified, as 'twixt so many theevs. Therfore as I pray in generall, that God would please not to punish this Island for the sins of the pee∣ple, so more particularly I pray, that she suffer not for me in par∣ticular; who, if one would go by way of Induction, would make one of the chiefest instances of the argument. and as I am thus con∣scious to my self of my own demerits, so I hold it to be the duty of every one, to contemplat himselfe this way, and to re∣member the saying of a noble English Captain, who, when the Town of Calis was lost (which was the last footing we had in France) being geer'd by a Frenchman, and ask'd, Now Englishman, when will you com back to France? answer'd, Oh, Sir, mock not, when then the sins of France are greater than the sins of England, the English∣men will com again to France, Before the Sac of Troy, 'twas said and sung up and down the streets. Iliacos intra muros peccatur & extra. The vers is as true for sense and feet, Intra Londini muros peccatur & extra. Without and eke within The walls of London there is sin. The way to better the times, is for every one, to mend one. I will conclude with this serious invocation. I pray God ave those further judgements (of Famin and pestilence) which are ho∣vering over this populous, and once-flourishing City, and dispose of the Brains and Hearts of this people, to seek and serve him a▪ right. I thank you for your last visit, and for the Poem you sent  since. So I am Fleet 3 Iun. Your most faithfull servitor, J. H.
LII. To Mr Iohn Batty Marchant. SIR, I Receiv'd the Printed discours you pleas'd to send me, call'd the Marchants Remonstrance, for which I return you due and de∣served thanks. Truly Sir, it is one of the most materiall and solid peeces I have read of this kind: And I discover therin two things; first, the af∣fection you bear to your Countrey, with the resentment you have of these wofull distractions; then, the judgement and choice ex∣perience you have purchased by your negotiations in Spain and Germany. In you may be verified the tenet they hold in Italy, That the Marchant bred abroad, is the best Common-wealths man being properly applied: For my part, I do not know any profession of life (specially in an Island) more to be cherish'd and countenanced with honourable employments than the Mar∣chant-Adventurer, (I do not mean onely the Staplers of Hambo∣ough and Rotterdam) for if valiant and dangerous actions do en∣noble a man, and make him merit, surely, the Merchant-Adven∣turer deserves more honour than any, for he is to encounter not onely with men of all tempers and humours (as a French Coun∣sellour hath i) but he contests and tugs oftimes with all the Ele∣ments: Nor do I see how som of our Countrey Squires who sell Calves, and Runts, and their Wives perhaps Cheese and Apples, should be held more gentle than the noble Marchant-Adventurer, who sells Silks and Sattins, Tissues and cloth of Gold, Diamonds and Pearl, with Silver and Gold. In your discours, you fore tell the sudden calamities which are  to be fall this poor Island, if Trade decay; and that this decay  inevitable, if these commotions last: Heerin you are prov'd  a Prophet already, and I fear your Prophecie will be fully ac∣omplish'd if matters hold thus. Good Lord! was ther ever pee∣ so active to draw on their own ruin, which is so visible, that a  man may take a prospect of it. We all see this appa∣ently, and hear it told us every minut; but we are fallen to the ondition of that foolish peeple the Prophet speaks of, Who had eyes  would not see, and ears but would not hear. All know ther is
nothing imports this Island more than Trade; it is that great Wheel of Industry, which sets all other a going; it is that which pre∣serves the chiefest Castles and Walls of this Kingdom, I mean the Ships; and how these are impair'd within these four yeers, I be∣leeve other Nations (which ow us an invasion) observe and know better than we; For truly, I beleeve a million (I mean of Crowns) and I speak within compas, will not put the Navy Roy∣all in that strength as it was four yeers since, besides the decay of merchants ships. A little before Athens was orecom, the Oracle told one of the Areopagitae, that Athens had seen her best daies, for her Wooden walls (meaning her ships) were decayed. As I told you before, ther is a Nation or two, that ow us an invasion. No more now, but that with my most kind and frendly respects unto you, I rest alwayes Fleet 4 May, 1644. Yours to dispose of, J. H. LIII. To my honoured frend Mr. E. P. SIR, THe times are so ticklish, that I dare not adventure to send you any London intelligence, she being now a Garrison Town, and you know, as well as I, what danger I may incur; but for forren, indifferent news, you shall understand that Pope U∣ban the eighth is dead, having sate in the chair above twenty  a rare thing; for it is observ'd, that no Pope yet arriv'd to th yeers of St. Peter, who they say was Bishop of Rome twenty an five. Cardinall Pamfillo, a Roman born, a knowing man, and  great Lawyer, is created Pope by assumption of the name of In∣cent the tenth: Ther was tough canvasing for voices, and a grea contrasto in the Conclave, 'twixt the Spanish and French faction, wh with the Barberini, stood for Sachetri, but he was excluded, as  so another ; by these exclusions, the Spanish party, whe of the Cardinall of  was chief, brought about Barberio  joyn with them for , as being also a creature of the dece∣sed Pope. He  Nuncio in Spain eight yeers, so that it conceiv'd he is much devoted to that Crown, as his Predecess
was to the French, who had bin Legat there neer upon twenty yeers, and was Godfather to the last King, which made him to be Fleurdelizé, to be Flowerdeluc'd all over. This new Pope hath already pass'd that number of yeers which the Prophet assignes to man, for he goes upon seventy one, and is of a strong promising constitution to live som yeers longer. He hath but one Nephew, who is but eighteen, and so not capable of busines; he hath ther∣fore made choice of som Cardinalls more, to be his Coadjutors; Pancirellio is his prime confident, and lodg'd in Saint Peters. Tis thought he will presently set all wheels a going to mediat an uni∣versall peace. They write of one good augury amongst the rest, that part of his Arms is a Dove, which hath bin alwaies held for an em∣blem of peace; but I beleeve it will prove one of the knottiest, and difficult'st tasks that ever was attempted, as the case stands 'twixt the House of Austria and France, and the roughest and har∣dest knot I hold to be, that of Portugall; for it cannot yet enter into any mans imagination, how that may be accommodated, Though many Polliticians have beaten their brains about it. God almighty grant, that the appeasing of our civil wars prove not so intricat a work, and that we may at last take warning by the de∣vastations of other Countreys, before our own be past cure. The write from Paris, that Sir Kenelm Digby is to be imployed to Rome from Her Majesty in quality of a high Messenger of Honour, to congratulat the new Pope, not of Ambassadour, as the vulgar give out; for none can give that character to any, but a Soverain independent Prince; and all the World knows, that Her Majesty is under Couvert Baron, notwithstanding, that som cry her up for Queen Regent of England, as her Sister is of France. The Lord Au∣beny hath an Abbacy of one thousand five hundred Pistols a yeer given him yeerly there, and is fair for a Cardinalls Har. I continue still under this heavy pressure of close restraint, nor do I see any hopes (God help me) of getting forth, till the wind shift out of this unlucky hole: Howsoever, I am resolv'd, that if Innocence cannot free my body, yet Patience shall preserve my mind still in its freeborn thoughts: Nor shall this storm slacken a whit that firm ligue of love, wherin I am eternally tied unto you. I will conclude with a Distic, which I found amongst those excellent Pe∣ems of the late Pope. Quem validè strinxit praestanti pollice virtus, Nescius est solvi nodus Amicitiae, Fleet, 1 Iun. 1644. Your constant Servitor, J. H.
LIV. To the L. Bishop of London, late Lord Tresurer of England. My Lord, YOu are one of the miracles of these times, the greatest miror of moderation our age affords; and as heertofore when you car∣ried the white Staff, with such clean incorrupted hands, yet the Crosier was still your chief care; nor was it perceiv'd that that high all-obliging office did alter you a jot, or alienat you from your self, but the same candor, and countenance of mecknes appeard still in you, as whosoever had occasion to make their address to your Gates, went away contented, whether they sped in their busines, or not (a gift your Predecessor was said to want.) So since the tur∣bulency of these times, the same moderation shines in you, not∣withstanding that the Miter is so trampled upon, and that ther bee such violent factions a foot, insomuch, that you live not only secure from outrages, but honor'd by all parties: Tis true, one thing fell out to your advantage, that you did not subscribe to that Petition which prov'd so fatall to Prelacy: But the chief ground of the con∣stant esteem the distracted world hath still of you, is your wisdom and moderation, pass'd and present: This puts me in mind of one of your Predecessors (in your late office) Marquis Pawlet, who it seems sail'd by the same Compass, for ther being divers bandings, and factions at Court in his time, yet was he belov'd by all parties, and being ask'd how he stood so right in the opinion of all, he an∣swerd, By being a Willow, and not an Oak. I have many thanks to give your Lordship for the late visits I had, and when this cloud is scatter'd, that I may respite fee ayr, one of my first journeys shall be to kiss your Lordships hands: In the interim, I rest▪ The Fleet, 3 Sept. 1644. Your most devoted and ready Servitor, J▪ H.
LV. To Sir E. S. Knight. SIR, THough I never had the least umbrage of your love, or doubt∣ed of the reality therof, yet since I tell into this plunge, it hath been much confirm'd unto me. It is a true observation, that amongst other effects of affliction, one is, to try a frend; for those proofs that are made in the fawnings, and dazling Sun-shine of prosperity, are not so clear, as those which break out, and trans∣peer through the dark clouds of adversity. You know the diffe∣rence the Philosophers make twixt the two extreme colors black and write, that the one is congregativum, the other disgregativum visus: Black doth congregate, unite, and fortifie the sight; the other doth disgregat, scatter, and enfeeble it, when it fixeth upon any object: So, through the Sable clouds of advers fortune, one may make a truer inspection into the brest of a frend. Besides this, affliction produceth another far more excellent effect, it brings us to a bet∣ter, and a more clear knowledge of our Creator; for as the rising, and setting Sun, appears bigger unto us, than when he is in the Meridian (though the distance be still the same) the cause wher∣of is ascrib'd to the interposition of mists, which lye twixt our eyes and him; so through the thick fogs of adversity (which in this point are as pellucid and diaphanous as any Chrystall) we com to see God, and the immensity of his love in a fuller proportion. Ther cannot be clearer evidences of his care, than his corrections; when he makes the world to frown, then he smiles most upon us, though it be through a mask; besides, it is always his method, to stroke them whom he strikes. We have an ordinary salute in English, God blesse you; and though the verb be radically deriv'd from the Dutch word, yet it would bear good sense, and be very pertinent to this purpose, if we would fetch it from the French word blesser, which is to hurt: This speculation raiseth my spirits to a great hight of comfort, and patience, that notwithstanding they have been a long time weigh'd down and quashd, yet I shall at last ore∣om all these pressures, survive my debts, and surmount my ene∣mies. God pardon them, and preserve you, and take it not ill, that
in this my conclusion, I place you so neer my enemies: Whatso∣ever Fortune light on me, com fair or foul Weather, I shall be still Fleet, 5 of Aug. 1644. Your constant Servitor, J. H. LVI. To Tho. Ham. Esqr. SIR, THer is no such tresure as a true frend, it is a tresure far a∣bove that of Saint Marks in Venice; a tresure that is not liable to those casualties, which others are liable unto, as to plundering and burglary, to bankrups and ill debtors, to firing and ship∣wracks; for when one hath lost his fortunes by any of these disa∣sters, he may recover them all in a true frend, who is alwayes a set and staple commodity: This is verified in you who have stuck so close unto me in these my pressures; Like a Glow-worm (the old emblem of true frendship) you have shin'd unto me in the dark: Nor could could you do offices good to any that wisheth you better; for I al∣ways lov'd you for the freedom of your genius, for those choice parts and fancies I found in you, which I confess, hath made mee more covetous of your frendship, than I use to be of others; And to deal clearly with you, one of my prime arrands to this Town (when this disaster fell upon me) was to see you. God put a speedy period to these sad distempers; but this wish, as I was writing it, did vanish in the impossibility of the thing, for I fear they are of a long continuance: So I pray God keep you, and comfort me, who am The Fleet,  May 5. 1643▪ Your true frend to serve you, J. H.
LVII. To Phil. Warwick Esquire. SIR, THe earth doth not always produce Roses and Lillies, but shee brings forth also Nettles and Thistles: So the world affords us not always contentments and pleasure, but somtimes afflictions and trouble; Ut illa tribulos, sic iste tribulationes producit: The Sea is not more subject to contrary blasts, nor the Surges therof to tos∣sings and tumblings, as the actions of men are to encombrances and crosses: The Ayr is not fuller of meteors, than mans life is of miseries; but as we find that it is not a clear skie, but the clouds that drop faes, as the holy Text tells us, so adversity is far more fer∣til than prosperity, it useth to water and mollifie the heart, which is the center of all our affections, and makes it produce excellent fruit, wheras the glaring Sun-shine of a continuall prosperity would enharden and dry it up, and so make it barren. Ther is not a greater evidence of Gods care and love to his crea∣ture than affliction; for as a French Author doth illustrat it by a familiar example, If two Boys should be seen to fight in the streets, and a ring of peeple about them, one of the standers by parting them, lets the one go untouch'd, but he falls a correcting the other, wherby the beholders will infer, that he is his child, or at least one whom he wisheth well unto: So the strokes of adversity which fall upon us from heaven, shew that God is our Father, as well as our Creator: This makes this bitter cup of ffliction becom Nectar, and the bread of carefulnes I now eat, to be true Ambrosia unto me. This makes me esteem these walls, wherin I have been immur'd these thirty months, to be no other than a College of instruction unto me; and wheras Varro said, That the great World was but the House of little man, I hold this Flct to be one of the best lodgings in that House. Ther is a peeple in Spain call'd Los Pattuecos who som threescore and od yeers since wer discoverd by the flight of a Hawk of the Duke of Alva's; this peeple, then all Savage (though they dwelt in the center of Spain, not far from Toledo, and are yet held to bee part of those Aborigines that Tubal Cain brought in) being hemm'd in, an imprison'd, as it were, by a multitude of craggy huge moun∣tains,
thought that behind those Mountains ther was no more Earth: I have bin so habituated to this prison, and accustomd to the walls therof so long, that I might well be brought to think, that ther is no other world behind them. And in my extravagant imaginations, I often compare this Fleet to Noah's Ark, surrounded with a vast Sea, and huge deluge of calamities, which hath overwhelmd this poor Island. Nor although I have been so long aboard here, was I yet under Hatches, for I have a Cabin upon the upper Deck, whence I breath the best ayr the place affords; Ad heerunto, that the so∣ciety of Master Hopkins the Warden is an advantage to me who is is one of the knowingst, and most civill Gentlemen that I have conversd withall. Moreover ther are heer some choice Gentlemen who are my Co-Martyrs, for a Prisoner and a Martyr are the same thing, save, that the one is buried before his death, and the other after. God Almighty amend these times, that make imprisonment to be preferd before liberty, it being more safe, and desirable by som, though not by From the Fleet, Nov. 3. 1643. Your affectionat Servitor, J. H. LVIII. To Sir Ed. Sa. Knight. SIR, VVEr ther a Physitian that could cure the maladies of the mind, as well as those of the body, hee needed not to wish the Lord Major, or the Pope for his Uncle, for he should have Patients without number: It is true, that ther be som distempers of the mind that proceed from those of the body, and so are cure∣able by Drugs and Dyets; but ther are others that are quite ab∣stracted from all corporeall impressions, and are meerly mentall; these kind of Agonies are the more violent of the two, for a the one use to drive us into Fevers, the other precipitat us oftentimes into Frensies: And this is the ground I beleeve, which made the Philoso∣pher think, that the rationall soul was infus'd into man partly for his punishment, and the understanding for his executio∣ner,
unless wisdom sit at the Helm, and steer the motions of his Will. I thank God I have felt both (for I am not made of stone or steel) having had since I was shut in heer a shrewd fit of the new disease; and for the other, you must needs think that thirty one months close restraint, and the barbarousnes of the times, must discompose and torture the imagination, somtimes with gripings of discontent and anguish, not as much for my own sad conditi∣on, as for my poor Countrey and frends, who have a great share in my Nativity, and particularly for your self, whose gallant worth I highly honour; and who have not been the least suffe∣rer. The Moralist tells us, that a quadrat solid wise man, should in∣volve and tackle himself within his own vertue, and slight all ac∣cidents that are incident to man, and be still the same Etiam si fractus illabatur Orbis; ter may be so much vertue and valor in you, but I profess to have neither of them in that proportion. The Philosopbers often prescribe us Rules, that they themselves, nor any flesh and bloud can observe: I am no statue, but I must resent the calamities of the time, and the desperat case of this Nation, who seem to have faln quite from the very faculty of rea∣son, and to be possess'd with a pure Lycanchropy, with a Wol∣vish kind of disposition to tear one another in this manner, in∣somuch, that if ever the old saying was verified, Homo homini lu∣p, it is certainly now: I will conclude with this Distic, They err, who write no Wolves in England range, Her Men are all turn'd Wolves, O monstrous change! No more, but that I wish you Patience, which is a Flower that grows not in evry Garden; Your faithfull Servitor, J. H. From the Fleet, Decem. 1. 1644.
LIX. To my Noble frend Mr. E. P. SIR, I Have no other news to write to you hence, but that Levantan∣se los muladares, y abaxanse los adarues, The World is turn'd top∣sey turvey. From the Fleet, Jan. 2. 1644. Yours, J. H. LX. To Tho. Young Esq SIR, I Receiv'd yours of the fifth of March, and 'twas as welcom to me as flowers in May, which are now comming on apace▪ You seem to marvell I do not marry all this while, considering that I am past the Meridian of my age, and that to your knowledge ther have been overtures made me of parties above my degrees. Truly in this point I will deal with you as one should do with his Confessor; Had I been dispos'd to have married for wealth without affection, or for affection without wealth, I had been in bonds before now; but I did never cast my eyes upon any yet, that I thought I was born for, wher both these concurr'd. Tis the custom of som (and tis a common custom) to chuse Wives by the weight, that is, by their wealth: Others fall in love with light wives, I do not mean Vene∣rean lightnes, but in reference to portion: The lae Earl of Salis∣bury gives a caveat for this, That beauty without a Dowry (without that unguentum Indicum) is as a gilded shell without a kernell; ther∣fore he warns his son to be sure to have somthing with his Wife, and his reason is, Because nothing can bee bought in the Market without money. Indeed tis very fitting that Hee or Shee should have wher∣with to support both, acording to their quality, at least to keep the Woolf from the door, otherwise 'twere a meer madnes to marry:
But he who hath enough of his own to maintain a Wife, and mar∣rieth only for money, discovereth a poor sordid disposition. Ther i nothing that my nature disdaines more, than to be a slave to silver or gold; for though they both carry the Kings face, yet they shall never reign over me, and I would I were free from all other infirmities as I am from this: I am none of those Mamonists who adore white and red earth, and make their Prince's picture their Idoll that way; such may be said to be under a perpetuall eclips, for the earth stands alwaies 'twixt them, and the fair face of Heaven. Yet my genius prompts me, that I was born under a Planet, not to die in a Lazaretto. At my nativity, my ascen∣dant was that hot constellation of Cancer about the midst of the Dog-daies, and as my Ephemerides tells me, Mars was then pre∣dominant: Of all the Elements fire swayes most in me; I have many aspirings▪ and airy od thoughts swell often in me, according to the quality of the ground wheron I was born, which was the bel∣ly of a huge Hill situated South-East, so that the house I came from (besides my Father and Mothers Coat) must needs be Illu∣strious, being more obvious to the Sun-beams than ordinary. I have upon occasion of sudden distemper, sometimes a madman, somtimes a fool, somtimes a melancholy od fellow to deal withall, I mean my self, for I have the humors within me that belongs to all three, therfore who would cast herself away upon such a one? Besides, I came tumbling out into the World a pure Cadet, a true Cosmopolite, not born to Land, Lease, House or Office; 'tis true, I have purchas'd since, a small spot of ground upon Parnassus, which I hold in fee of the Muses, and I have endeavoured to ma∣ne it as well as I could, though I confess it hath yeelded me little fruit hitherto: And what woman would be so mad, as to take that only for her joynture? But to com to the point of Wiving, I would have you know, that I have, though never married, divers children already; som French, som Latin, one Italian, and many English; and though they be but poor bras of the brain, yet are they legitimat, and Apollo himself vouchsafed to co-operat in their production: I have expos'd them to the wide world, to try their fortunes; and som (out of comple∣ment) would make me believe they are long liv'd. But to com at last to your kind of Wiving, I acknowledge, that marriage is an honourable condition, nor dare I think otherwise without profanenes, for it is that Epithet the Holy Text gives it: Therfore it was a wild speech of the Philosopher to say, That if  corsasition could be without women, Angells would com down and
dwell amongst us; And a wilder speech it was of the Cynic, whe passing by a Tree wher a Maid had made her self away, wish'd, That all Trees might bear such fruit. But to pass from these mothe▪ ten Philosophers, to a modern Physician of our own, it was a mo unmanly thing in him, while he displaies his own Religion, to wish that ther wer a way to propagat the world otherwise than by con∣junction with women, (and Paracelsus undertakes to shew him the way) wherby he seems to repine (though I understand he wa Wiv'd a little after) at the honourable degree of marriage, which I hold to be the prime Link of human society, the chiefest happi∣nes of Mortalls, and wherin heaven hath a speciall hand. But I wonder why you write to me of Wiving, when you know I have much ado to man or maintain my self, as I told you be∣fore; yet, notwithstanding, that the better part of my daies are already threeded upon the string of time, I will not despair, but I may have a Wife at last, that may perhaps enable me to build Hos∣pitalls; for although nine long lustres of yeers have now pass'd re my head, and som winters more, (for all my life, considering the few Sun-shines I have had, may be call'd nothing but win∣ters) yet, I thank God for't, I find no symptom of decay, either in body, senses, or intellectualls. But writing thus extravagant∣ly, me thinks I hear you say, That this Letter shews I begin to dote, and grow idle, therfore I will display my self no further unto you at this time. To tell you the naked truth my dear Tom; The highest pitch of my aym is, that by som condition or other, I may be enabled at last (though I be put to sow, the time that others use to reap) to quitt scores with the World, but never to cancell that precious obligation, wherin I am indissolubly bound to live and die From the Fleet, 28 of Aprill, 1645. Your true constant Frend, J. H. AD LIBRUM —Sine me, Liber, ibis in Aulam, Hei mihi, quòd Domino non licet ire tuo. Ovid. To his Book. Thou mayest to Court, and progress too and fro, Oh, that thy captiv'd Master could do so.
A New VOLUME OF FAMILIAR LETTERS, Partly Philosopicall, Politicall, Historicall. The second Edition, with Additions. By JAMES HOVVELL Esq. Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St, Pauls Church-yard. 1650.
To His Highnes IAMES Duke of YORK; A Star of the greatest Magnitude in the Constellation of CHARLES-WAYN. SIR, THis Book was engendred in a Cloud, born a Captive, and bred up in the dark shades of Melan∣choly; He is a true Benoni the son of sor∣row, nay, which is a thing of wonder∣ment, He was begot in the Grave by one who hath been buried quick any time these five and fifty months: Such is the hard condition of the Author, wherin he is like to continue, untill some good An∣gell roll off the stone, and raise him up, for Prisoners are capable of a double Resurrection; my Faith acertains me of one, but my fears make me doubtfull of
the other, for, as far as I see yet, I may be made to moulder away solong among these walls, till I be carried hence with my feet forward: Welcom be the will of God and the Decrees of Heaven. Your Highnesses, most humble and most obedient Servitr. JAMES HOWELL. From the Prison of the Fleet. this May day 1647. THE STATIONER to the Reader. IT pleas'd the Author to send me these ensuing Letters as a supplement to the greater volume of Epistolae Ho-Elianae, wher they could not be inser∣ted then, because most of his papers, whence divers of these letters are deriv'd, were under sequestration: And thus much I had in Commission to deliver. Humphrey Moseley.
A New Volume of FAMILIAR LETTERS. I. To Master Tho. Adams. SIR, I Pray stir nimbly in the busines you imparted to me last, and let it not languish; You know how much it concerns your credit, and the conveniency of a friend who deserves so well of you: I fear you will meet with di∣vers obstacles in the way, which if you can∣not remove, you must overcom: A luke-warm irresolute man did never any thing well, evry thought entangles him; therfore you must pursue the Point of your design with heat, and set all wheels a going: Tis a true badge of a generous nature being once embark'd in a busines to hoise up, and spread every sayl, Main, isen, sprit!, and top sayl, by that means he will sooner arrive at his Port: If the winds bee so crosse, and that ther be such a fate in the thing, that it can take no effect, yet you shall have wherwith to satisfie an honest mind, that you left nothing unattempted to compassit, for in the conduct of human affairs tis a rule, That a good conscience hath always with∣idores enough to reward it self, though the success fall not out accor∣ding to the merit of the endeavor. I was according to your desire, to visit the late new maried couple more than once, and to tell you true, I never saw such a disparity between two that wer made one flesh in all my life; He, handsom outwardly, but of od conditons; she excellotly qualified, but
hard favord; so that the one may be compard to a cloth of Tissue Doublet, cut upon course Canvas; the other to a Buckram Petti∣cot lin'd with Sattin: I think Cloth had her fingers smutted in snuffing the candle, when she began to spin the thread of her life, and Lachesis frownd in twisting it up, but Aglaia with the rest of the Graces wer in a good humor, when they form'd her inner parts: A blind man is fittest to hear her sing, one would take de∣light to see her dance if mask'd, and it would please you to discours with her in the dark, for ther she is best company, if your imagi∣nation can forbear to run upon her face: when you marry, I wish you such an inside of a wife, but from such an outward Phisnomy the Lord deliver you, and Westm. 25 of Aug. 1633. Your faithfull frend to serve you, J. H. II. To Mr. B. J. F. B. The fangs of a Bear, and the Tusks of a wild Bore, do no bite worse, and make deeper gashes than a Goose-quill som∣times, no not the Badger himself, who is said to be so tenacs of his bite, that he will not give over his hold, till hee feels his teeth meet, and the bone crack: your quill hath prov'd so to Mr. In-Iones but the pen wherwith you have so gash'd him, it seems was made rather of a Porcupine, than a Goose quill, it is so keen and firm: You know Anser, Apis, Vitulus, populos & Regna gubernant; The Goose, the Bee, and the Calf (meaning Wax, Parchment, and the Pen) rule the world, but of the three, the Pen is most pre∣dominant; I know you have a commanding one, but you must no let it tyrannize in that manner, as you have don lately; som give out ther was a hair in't, or that your in was too thick with Gall, els it could not have so bespartered and shaken the reputation of  Royall Architect, for reputation, you know is like a fair struct long time a rearing, but quickly ruin'd: If your spirit will not let you retract, yet you shall do well to repress any more copies of
the Satyr, for to deal plainly with you, you have lost som ground at Court by it, and as I hear from a good hand, the King who hath so great a judgment in Poetry (as in all other things els) is not well pleased therwith. Dispense with this freedom of Westmin. 3 Iuly, 1635. Your respectfull S. and Servitor, J. H. III. To D. C. Esqr. SIR, IN my last I writ to you that Ch. Mor. was dead, (I meant in a morall sense) Hee is now alive again, for he hath abjur'd that Club which was used to knock him in the head so often, and drown him commonly once a day: I discover divers symptoms of regene∣ration in him, for hee rayls bitterly against Bacchus, and swears ther's a devill in evry berry of his grape, therfore he resolves here∣after, though he may dabble a little somtimes, he will bee never drown'd again: you know Kit hath a Poetic fancy, and no unhap∣py one, as you find by his compositions, you know also that Poets have lrge souls, they have sociable free generous spirits, and the are few who use to drink of Hlicons waters, but they love to mingle it with som of Lyaeus liquor to heighten their spirits. Ther's no Creature thats kneaded of Clay, but hath his frailties, extrava∣gancies and excesses som way or other, for you must not think that man can be better out of Paradise than he was within't: Ne∣mo fine crimine, He that censures the good-fellow commonly makes no conscience of gluttony, and gormandising at home, and I be∣lieve more men do dig their graves with their teeth than with the tkard. They who tax others of vanity and pride, have common∣ly that fordid vice of covetousnes attends them, and he who tra∣duceth others of being a servant to Ladies, doth baser things: We are no Angels upon earth, but we are transported with som infir∣mity or other, and 'twill be so while these frail, fluxible humors reign within us, while wee have luces of warm bloud running through our veins, ther must be ofttimes som irregular motions in us. This as I conceiye is that black beane which the Turks Alchoran
speaks of when they feign, that Mahomet being asleep among the mountains of the Moon, two Angels descended, and ripping his brest, they took his heart, and washed it in snow, and after pull'd out a black bean, which was the portion of the devill, and so re∣plac'd the heart. In your next you shall do well to congratulat his resurrection or regeneration, or rather emergency from that course hee was plun∣ged in formerly you know it as well as I; and truly I beleeve hee will grow newer and newer evry day; we find that a stumble makes one take firmer footing, and the base suds which vice useth to leave be∣hind it, makes vertue afterward far more gustfull, no knowledg is like that of contraries: Kit hath now oe-com himself, therfore I think he will be too hard for the Devill hereafter. I pray hold on your resolution to be here the next Term, that we may tattle a little of Tom Thumb, mine Host of Andover, or som such matters, so I am West. 15. Aug. 1636. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H. IV. To T. D. Esquire. SIR, I Had yours lately by a safehand, wherin I find you open unto me all the boxes of your brest; I perceive you are sorehurt, and wheras all other creatures run away from the instrument, and hand that wounds them, you seem to make more and more towards bth; I confess such is the nature of love, and which is worse, the nature of Women is such, That like shadows the more you follow them, the faster they fl from you. Nay some Femalls are of that od humor, that to feed their pride, they will famish affection, they will starve those naturall passions which are owing from them to Man; I confess coynes becoms som beauties if handsomly acted, a frown from som faces penetrats more and makes deeper impressi∣on than the fawning, and soft glances of a mincing smile, yet if this coynes and these frowns savor of Pride they are odious, and tis a rule that wher this kind of pride inhabits Honor sits not long Porter at the Gate. Ther are som beauties so strong that they are leager∣proof,
they are so barricadoed that no battery, no Petard, or any kind of Engin sapping or mining can do good upon them; Ther are others that are tenable a good while, and will endure the brunt of a siege, but will incline to parley at last, and you know that Fort and Femall which begins to parley is half won; for my part, I think of beauties as Philip King of Macedon thought of Cities, ther is none so inexpugnable but an Asse laden with gold may enter into them; you know what the Spaniard saith, Dadivas quebrant anpeñas, pre∣sents can rend rocks; Pearl and golden bullets may do much upon the impregnablest beauty that is; It must be partly your way: I remember a great Lord of this Land sent a puppie with a rich coller of Diamonds to a rare French Lady Madam St. L. that had com over hither with an Ambassador, she took the dog, but returnd the coller, I will not tell you what effect it wrought afterwards: 'Tis a powerfull sex, they were too strong for the first, the stron∣gest, and wisest man that was; they must needs be strong when one hair of a woman can draw more then a hundred pair of oxen, yet for all their strength, in point of value, if you will beleeve the Italian, A man of straw is worth a woman of gold; Therfore if you find the thing pervers, rather then to undervalue your sex (your manhood) retire hansomly, for ther is as much honor to be won as an hansom retrait as at a hot onset, it being the difficultest peece of War; by this retrait you will get a greater victory then you are aware of, for therby you will over-com your self which is the greatest conquest that can be; without seeking abroad, wee have enemies enough within doors to practise our valour upon, we have tumultuary and rebellious passions with whole hosts of humor within us, He who can discomfit them is the greatest Captain and may defie the Devill; I pray recollect your self, and think on this advice of your true and most affectionat servitor, Westm. 4 Decem. 1637. J. H.
V. To G. G. Esq at Rome. SIR, I Have more thanks to give you then can be folded up in this narrow paper, though it were all writ in the closest kind of Stenography, for the rich and acurat account you please to give me of that renowned City wherin you now sojourn: I find you have most iudiciously pryed into all matters both civill and clericall, es∣pecially the latter, by observing the poverty and penances of the Fryer, the policy and power of the Iesuit, the pomp of the Prelat and Cardinall: Had it not bin for the two first, I beleeve the two last, and that See had bin at a low ebb by this time; for the lear∣ning, the prudentiall state, knowledge and austerity of the one, and the venerable opinion the peeple have of the abstenious and rigid condition of the other, specially of the Mendicants, seem to make som compensation for the lux and magnificence of the two last: Besides, they are more beholden to the Protestant then they are aware of, for unles he had rise up about the latter end of the last century of yeers, which made them more circumspect and wary of their waies, life, and actions, to what an intollera∣ble high exces that Court had com to by this time, you may easily conjecture. But out of my small reading I have observed that no age ever since Gregory the great hath passed, wherin som or other have not repind and murmurd at the pontificall pomp of that Court, yet for my part I have bin alwaies so charitable as to think that the Religion of Rome, and the Court of Rome were different things. The counterbuffe that happen'd 'twixt Leo the tenth, and Francis the first of France is very remarkeable, who being both met at Bolonia, the King seemd to give a light touch at the Popes pomp, saying, 'twas not used to be so in former time. It may be so, said Leo, but it was then when Kings kept sheep, (as we read in the old Testament.) no, the King replyed, I speak of times under the Gospel, then, rejoind the Pope, 'twas than when Kings did visit Hospitalls, hinting by those words at St. Lewis who used oft to do so. It is memorable what is recorded in the life of Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln who liv'd in the time of one of the Leo's, That he feard the same sia would overthrow Lo, as overthrew Lucifer.
For newes hence, I know none of your friends but are at well as you left them, Hombres y Hembras: you are fresh and very frequent in their memory, and mentioned with a thousand good wishes and benedictions; Amongst others you have a larg room in the memory of my Lady Elizabeth Cary, and I do not think all Rome can afford you a fairer lodging. I pray be cauti∣ous of your carriage under that meridian, it is a searching (Inqui∣sitive) air, you have two eyes, and two eares, but one toung, you know my meaning; This last you must imprison (as nature hath already done with a double fence of teeth and lipps) or els she may imprison you, according to our Countryman Mr. Hoskins advice when he was in the Tower. Vincula da linguae, vel tibi lingua dabit. Have a care of your health, take heed of the seren's, of exces in fruit, and be sure to mingle your wine well with water: no more now, but that in the large catalog of frends you have left be∣hind here, ther's none who is more mindfull of you then Your most affectionat and faithfull Servitor, J. H. VI. To Dr. T. P. SIR, I Had yours of the tenth current, wherin you write me tidings of our friend Tom D. and what his desires tend unto; in my opinion they are somwhat extravagant. I have read of one, that loving honey more then ordinary, seem'd to complain against na∣ture, that she made not a Bee, as big as a Bull, that we might have it in greater plenty, another who was much given to fruit wished that Pears and Plums wer as big as Pumpions, these wer but filly vulgar wishes; for if a Bee wer as big as a Bull, it must have a sting proportionable, and what mischiefs do you think such stings would do, when we can hardly endure the sting of that small insected animal as now it is? and if Pears and Plums wer as big as Pumpions 'twere dangerous walking in an Orchard about the aurumnall equinoctiall, (at which time they are in their full maturity) for fear of being knocked in the head▪ Nature the
hand maid of God Almighty doth nothing but with good advice i we make researches into the true reason of things, you know wha answer the Fox gave the Ape when he would have borrowed par of his taile to cover his posteriors. The wishes you write that T. D. lately made, wer almost a extravagant in civill matters, as the afore mentioned were in natu∣rall, for if he were partaker of them, they would draw more in∣conveniences upon him then benefit, being nothing sortable either to his disposition or breeding, and for other reasons besides, which I will reserve till my coming up, and I pray let him know so∣much from me, with my commendations, so I rest Westmin. 5 Sept. 1640. Yours in the perfect'st degree of frendship, J. H. VII. To Mr T. B. Merchant in Sevill. SIR, THough I have my share of infirmities as much as another man, yet I like my own nature in one thing, that requi∣talls to me are as sweet as revenges to an Italian; I thank my stars I find my self far proner to return a courtesie then to resent an injury: This made me most gladly apprehend the late occasion of serving you (notwithstanding the hard measure I have received from your brother) and to make you som returns of those fre∣quent favors I received from you in Spain, I have ta'ne away (as you may perceive by the inclosed papers) the weights that hung to that great busines in this Court, it concerns you now to put wings unto it in that, and I beleeve you will quickly obtain, what useth to be first in intention though last in execution, I mean your main end: I heartily wish the thing may be prosperous unto you, and that you may take as much pleasure in the fruition of it, as I did in following of it for you, because I love you dearly well, and desire you so much happines, that you may have nothing but hea∣ven to wish for; In which desires I rest. White-Hall, 3 May, 1633. Your constant true frend to serve you, J. H.
VIII. To Doctor B. SIR, VVHeras upon the large theoricall discours and bandings of opinions we had lately at Gresham College, you de∣sired I should couch in writing what I observed abroad of the ex∣tent and amplitude of the Christian Common-wealth in reference to other Religions, I obtained leave of my self to put pen to pa∣per, rather to obey you then oblige you with any thing that may adde to your judgement or enrich that rare knowledge I find you have already tresured up; but I must begin with the fulfilling of your desire in a preambular way for the subject admits it. a principle all the earth over, except amongst Atheists, that  verum est a Deo, omne falsum est a diabolo, & omnis er∣ror ab homine; All truth is from God, all falshood from the de∣vill, and all error from man; the last goes alwaies under the visard of the first, but the second confronts truth to the face and stands in open defiance of her, Error and sin are contemporary, when one crept first in at the fore-dore, the other came in at the postern, this made Trismegistus, one of the great Lords of Reason, to give this character of man, homo est imaginatio quaedam, & ima∣ginatio est supremum mendacium; Man is nought else but a kind of imagination, and imagination is the greatest lie; Error therfore entring into the world with sin among us poor Adamites, may be said to spring from the tree of knowledg it self, and from the rot∣ten kernells of that fatall Apple: This, besides the infirmities that attend the body, hath brought in perversity of will, deprava∣tion of mind, and hath cast a kind of cloud upon our intellectu∣alls that they cannot discern the true essence of things with that clearnes as the protoplast our first Parent could, but we are invol∣ved in a mist, and grope as it were ever since in the dark, as if truth wer got into som dungeon, or as the old wisard said into som deep pit which the shallow apprehension of men could not fathom: Hence comes it that the earth is rent into so many religions, and those religions torn into so many schismes, and various forms of devotion, as if the heavenly Majesty were delighted as much in diversities of worship as in diversities of works.
The first Religion that ever was reduced to exact rules and i∣ruall observances was that of the Hebrews, the ancient peeple of God, called afterwards Iudaisme, the second Christianity, the third Mahometisme which is the youngest of all religions; Touch∣ing Paganisme, and heathenish Idolatrie they scarce deserve the name of Religion, but for the former three ther is this analogy be∣tween them, that they all agree in the first person of the Trinity and all his attributes; What kind of Religion ther was before the Floud, it is in vain to make any researches, ther having bin no monuments at all left, (besides that little we find in Moses and the Phaenician story) but Seths pillars, and those so defac'd, that no∣thing was legible upon them, though Iosephus saith that one was ex∣tant in his daies: as also the oke under which Abraham feasted God Almighty, which was 2000 yeers after. The religion (or Cabl) of the Hebrews was transferred from the Patriarchs to Moses and from him to the Prophets. It was honoured with the apearance, and promulgations of God himself, specially the better part  I mean the decalogue containing the ten Commandements,  being most of them morall and agreeing with the common notions of man are in force all the world over. The Jews at this day are divided to three Sects, the first, which is the greatest, are call'd the Talmudists, in regard that besides the Holy Scriptures they embrace the Talmud, which is stuff'd with the traditions of their Rabbins and Caams; The second re∣ceive the Scripture alone; The third the Pentateuch only, viz. the five Books of Moses which are called Samaritanes. Now touch∣ing what part of the earth is possessed by Jews, I cannot find they have any at all peculiar to themselves, but in regard of their mur∣murings, their frequent Idolatries, defections, and that they cru∣cified the Lord of life, this once select Nation of God, and the Inhabitants of the Land flowing with milk and hony, is becom now a scorned squandered peeple all the earth over, being ever since incapable of any coalition or reducement into one body po∣litic; There where they are most without mixture is Tiberias in Palestine which Amurath gave Mendez the Jew, whither, and to Ierusalem, upon any conveniency they convey the bones of their dead friends from all places to be reinterred: They are to be found in all Mercantile Towns and great Marts, both in Africk, Asia, and Europe, the dominions of England, of the Spaniard and French excepted, and as their persons so their profession is despicable, be∣ing for the most part but Brokers every where: Among other places they are allowed to be in Rome her self near St. Peters chair,
for they advance trade whersoever they com; with the banks of mony, and so are permitted as necessary evills: but put case the whol Nation of the Jews now living were united into one colle∣ctive body, yet, according to the best conjecture and exactest com∣putation that I could hear made by the knowingst men, they would not be able to peeple a countrey bigger then the seventeen Provinces: Those that are dispersed now in Christendom, and Turky, are the remnants only of the Tribes of Iuda, and Benjamin with som Levites which returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel: The common opinion is, that the other ten are utterly lost, but they themselves fancy that they are in India a mighty nation environed with stony rivers, which alwaies cease to run their course on their Sabbath, from whence they expect their Messias who shall in the fulnes of time ore run the world with fire and sword, and reesta∣blish them in a temporall glorious state; But this opinion swayes most among the Orientall Jews, wheras they of the West attend the coming of their Messias from Portugall; which language is more common among them then any other: and thus much in brief of the Jews as much as I could digest, and comprehend within the compas of this paper-sheet and let it serve for the accomplishment of the first part of your desire; In my next I shall give you the best satisfaction I can concerning the extent of Christianity up and down the globe of the earth, which I shall speedily send, for now that I have undertaken such a task my pen shall not rest till I have finished it, so I am Westmin. 1 Aug. 1635. Your most affectionat ready Servant, J. H. IX. To Doctor B. SIR, HAving in my last sent you somthing touching the state of Iu∣daisin up and down the world, in this you shall receive what extent Christianity hath, which is the second Religion in succes∣sion of time and truth; A Religion that makes not sense so much subject to reason, as reason succumbent to Faith: Ther is no Re∣ligion so harsh and difficult to flesh and bloud, in regard of divers
mysterious positions it consists of, as the Incarnation, Resurrecti∣on, the nity, &c. which as one sayd, are bones to Philosophy, but milk to Faith. Ther is no Religion so purely spirituall and ab∣stracted from common naturall idea's, and sensuall happines as the Christian: No Religion that excites man more to the love and practise of vertue, and hatred of vice, or that prescribes grea∣ter rewards for the one, and punishments for the other: A Reli∣gion that in a most miraculous manner did expand her self and propagat by simplicity, humblenes, and by a meer passive way of fortitude, growing up like the palm tree under the heavy weight of persecution; for never any Religion had more powerfull op∣position, by various kinds of punishments, oppressions and tor∣tures which may be said to haue deckd her with rubies in her very cradle; In so much that it is granted by her very enemies, that the Christian in point of passive valour hath exceeded all other na∣tions upon earth: And ▪tis a thing of wonderment how at her ve∣ry first growth, she flew over the heads of so many interjacent vast Regions into this remote Isle so soon, that her rays should shine up∣on the Crown of a British King first of any, I mean King Lucius, the true Proto Christian King in the daies of Eleutherius, at which time she receiv'd her propagation; but for her plantation she had it long before by som of the Apostles themselves. Now, as Christian Religion hath the purest and most abstracted, the har∣dest and highest spirituall notions, so it hath bin most subject to differences of opinions and distractions of conscience, the purer the wheat is the more subject 'tis to tares, and the most precious gems to flaws. The first bone that the Devill flung was into the Ea∣stern Churches, then twixt the Greek and the Roman, but it was rather for jurisdiction and power then for the fundamentalls of faith, and lately twixt Rome and the North-west Churches: Now the extent of the Eastern Church is larger far then that of the Ro∣man (excluding America) which makes som accuse her as well of uncharitablenes as of arrogance that she should positively damne so many millions of Christian souls who have the same common simboll of faith with her, because they are not within the close of her fold. Of those Eastern and Southeast Churches, ther are no less the eleven Sects, wherof the three principallest are the Grecian, th Iacobite, and the Nestorian, with whom the rest have som depen∣dence or conformity, and they acknowledg canonicall obedience either to the Patriarch of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Ierus∣lem, or Antioch: They concur with the Western Reformed Chur∣ches
in divers positions against Rome, as in deniall of Purgatory; in rejecting extremeunction, and celebrating the Sacrament un∣der both kinds; in admitting their Clergy to marry▪ in abhor∣ring the use of massie statues, and celebrating their Liturgie in the vulgar language; Among these the Russe, and the Habassi Emperours are the greatest, but the latter is a Iew also from the girdle downward, for he is both circumcised and christened, having received the one from Salomon, and the other from the Apostle Saint Thomas; They observe other rites of the Leviticall Law; they have the cross in that esteem that they imprint the signe of it upon som part of the childs body whn he is baptized; that day they take the holy Sacrament they spit not till after sunset, and the Emperour in his progresses as soon as he comes to the fight of a Church, lights off his camell, and foots it all along, till he loseth the sight of it. Now touching that proportion of ground that the Christians have on the habitable earth, (which is the main of our task) I find that all Europe with her adjacent Isles is peepled with Christians, except that ruthfull Country of Lapland where Idolaters yet in∣habit; towards the East also that Region which lieth 'twixt Tana and Boristhenes the ancient Countrey of the Goths is possessed by Mahumetan Tartars; but in these Territories which the Turk hath 'twixt the Danube and the sea, and 'twixt Ragusa, and Buda, Chri∣stians are intermixt with Mahometans, yet in this cohabitation Christians are computed to make two third parts at least, for here and elsewhere, all the while they pay the Turk the quarter of their encrease, and a Sultay for every poll, and speak nothing in derogation of the Alcoran, they are permitted to enjoy both their religion and lives securely. In Constantinople her self under the Grand signiours nose, they have twenty Churches, in Saloni∣e (or Thessaonica) 30. Ther are 150 Churches under the Me∣tropolitan of Philippi, as many under him of Atheus, and he of Corinth hath about an hundred suffragan Bishops under him. But in Africk (a thing which cannot be too much lamented) that huge extent of Land which Christianity possessed of old 'twixt the Mediterranean Sea, and the Mountaine Atlas, yea as far as Egypt, with the large Region of Nubia, the Turkes have overma∣stered: We read of 200 Bishops met in Synods in those parts; and in that Province where old Carthage stood, ther wer 164 Bi∣shops under one Metropolitan; but Mahometisme hath now over∣spread all there about, only the King of Spain hath a few Maritim ownes under Christian subjection, as Septa, Tonger, Oran and
others. But through all the huge continent of Afric, which it e∣stimated to be thrice bigger then Europe, ther is not one Region entirely Christian, but Habassia or Ethiopia, besides ther is in Egypt a considerable number of them yet sojourning: Now Ha∣bassia according to the itineraries of the observingst travellers in those parts, is thought to be in respective magnitude as big as Germany, Spain, France, and Italy conjunctly; an estimate which comes nearer truth then that which som make, by stretching it from one tropic to the other, viz. from the Red Sea to the We∣stern Ocean; ther are also divers Isles upon the Coast of Afric that are coloniz'd with Christians, as the Madera, the Canari, Cape Verd, and Saint Thomas; but on the Eastside ther's none but Zoeotora. In Asia ther's the Empire of Russia that's purely Christian, and the Mountain Libanus in Syria; in other parts they are mingled with Mahometanes, who exceed them one day more then ano∣ther in numbers specially in those Provinces (the more's the pitty) where the Gospel was first preached, as Anatolia, Armenia, Siris, Mesopotamia, Palestina, Chaldea, Assiria, Persia, the north of Ara∣bia, and south of India; in som of these parts I say, specially in the four first, Christians are thick mixt with Mahometanes, a also in East India since the Portugalls discovery of the passage by the cape of good hope, christians by Gods goodnes have multiplyed in considerable numbers, as likewise in Goa since it was made a Archbishoprick, and the Court of a Viceroy: They speak also of a Christian Church in Quinsay in China the greatest of all earthly Cities; but in the Islands thereabouts called the Philippinas, which they say are above 1100 in number, in thirty wherof the Spani∣ard hath taken firm footing. Christianity hath made a good pro∣gres, as also in Iaponia: in the North-east part of Asia som 400 yeers since, Christianity had taken deep root under the King of Tenduc, but he was utterly overthrown by Chingis one of his ow vassalls, who came therby to be the first founder of the Tartarias Empire, this King of Tenduc was the true Prester Iohn, not the Ethiopian King of the Habassins, as Scaliger would have it, whose opinion is as far distant from truth in this point, as the Souther∣nest part of Afric from the Northeast part of Asia, or as a Ie∣cobite is from a Nestorian: Thus far did Christianity find enter∣tainment in the old world, touching the new, I mean America▪ which is conjectured to equall, well near, the other three parts i magnitude, the Spanish Authors and Merchants (with whom  have convesed) make report of a marvelous growth that Chri∣stianity
hath made in the Kingdomes of Mexico, Peru, Brasil, & Castilia delore, as also in the greater Islands adjoyning, as Hispaniola, Cuba, Portoric, and others, insomuch that they write of one ancient Priest who had christned himself 700 Savages som yeers after the first discovery; but ther are som who seeming to be no frends to Spaine, report that they did not baptize half so many as they but∣cherd. Thus have you as compendiously as an epistle could make it, an account of that extension of ground which Christians possess upon earth, my next shall be of the Mahometan, wherin I could wish I had not occasion to be so large as I fear I must be; So I am Sir, Westmin. 9 Aug. 1635. Your respectfull and humble Servant, J. H. X. To Doctor B. SIR, MY two former were of Iudaisme and Christianity, I ▪com now to the Mahometane the modernst of all Religions, and the most mischievous, and destructive to the Church of Christ, for this fatall sect hath justled her out of divers large Regions in A∣fric, in Tartarie, and other places, and attenuated their number in Asia which they do whersoever they com; having a more poli∣tic and pericious way to do it then by fire and fagot, for they ha∣ving understood well that the dust of Martyrs were the thrivingst seeds of Christianity, and observ'd that ther rignes naturally in mankind, being compos'd all of one lump, and carrying the same stamp, a generall kind of compassion and sympathy, which ap∣peares most towards them who lay down their lives, and postpose all worldly things for the preservation of their consciences, (and never any diedso, but he drew followers after him) therfore the Turk goes a more cunning way to work, he meddles not with life nd limbe to prevent the sense of compassion which may arise that ay, but he grinds their faces with Taxes, and makes them inca∣able of any offices either of authority, profit or honor, by which meanes he renders them despicable to others, and makes their yes irksom to themselves: yet the Turks have a high opinion of
Christ that he was a greater Prophet then Moses; that he was the S of a Virgin who conceiv'd by the smell of a Rose presented to her by Ga∣briel the Angell, they beleeve he never sinn'd, nay in their Alcoran they term him the breath and word of God, they punish all that blasphem him, and no Iew is capable to be a Turk but he must be first an AB∣DULA a Christian, he must eat hogs flesh, and do other things for three daies, then he is made a Mahometan, but by abjuring of Christ to be a greater Prophet then Mahomet. It is the Alfange that ushers in the faith of Mahomet every where, nor can it grow in any place, unles it be planted and sown with Gunpowder intermixt; when planted, ther are divers waies of policy to preserve it, they have their Alcoran in one only lan∣guage, which is the Arabic, the mother toung of their Prophet, 'tis as bad as death for any to raise scruples of the Alcoran; Ther∣upon ther is a restraint of the study of Philosophy, and other lear∣ning, because the impostors of it may not be dicernd; the Mus is in as great reverence among them, as the Pope is among the Ro∣manists; For they hold it to be a true principle in divinity, that no one thing preserves and improves Religion more then a venerable big pious esteem of the chiefest ministers; They have no other guide o aw both for temporall and Church-affairs then the Alcoran which they hold to be the rule of civill justice, as well as the divine cha of their salvation; so that their Judges are but expositors of tha only, nor do they trouble themselves, or puzle the plaintiffe with any moth-eaten records, or precedents to entangle the busines, but they immediately determine it, according to the fresh circum∣stances of the action, & secundum allegata, & probata by wit∣nesses; They have one extraordinary piece of humanity to be  tender of the rationall soul, as not to put Christian, Jew, Gree or any other to his Oath, in regard that if for som advantage  gain or occasion of inconvenience and punishment any should  sweare himself, they hold the imposers of the Oath to be accessary to the damnation of the perjurd man; By these and divers oth reaches of policy (besides their arms) not practis'd elsewhere they conserve that huge bulk of the Ottoman Empire which exten without interruption (the Hellspont only between) in one cont-nued peece of earth two and thirty hundred miles, from Buda  Hungary to a good way into Persia; by these means they keep al their Religion from distracting opinions, from every vulgar fa∣cy, and Scismes in their Church, for ther's no where fewer th heer; the difference that is, is only with the Persian, and that  in fundamentalls of faith, but for priority of Government in
of Religion. This so universall conformity in their Religion, is ascrib'd as to other politic institutions, so specially to the rigo∣rous inhibition they have of raising Scruples and disputes of the Alcoran under pain of death, specially among the laity and common peeple, whose zeal commonly is stronger then their judg∣ment. That part of the world wher Mahomet hath furthest expanded himself is Asia, which as I said before, exceeds Afric in greatnes, and much more in peeple; he hath firm footing in Persia, Tartary (upon the latter of which the Musulman empire is entayld) in Tur∣comania it self, and Arabia, four mighty Kingdomes; the last of these was the nest wher that Cocatrice egge was hatched, which hath diffus'd its poyson so far and near, through the veines of so many Regions; All the Southerly coasts of Asia, from the Arabian Bay to the river Indus is infected therwith, the vast Kingdom of Cambaia and Bengula, and about the Southpart of the inhabitants of Malabar have drank of this poyson; insomuch that by no wrong computation it may well be said that Mahometisme hath dispersed it self over almost one half of the huge continent of Asia, besides those multitudes of Isles, specially seven, Moldivia, and Ceylan, the sea coasts of Sumatra, Iava, Sunda, the ports of Banda, Borneo, with divers other wherof ther are many thousands about Asia, who have entertaind the Alcoran: In Europe the Mahometanes possess all the Region twixt Don and Meper, call'd of old Tanais, and , being about the twentieth part of Europe, the King of Poland dispenceth with som of them in Lituania: Touching Greece, Mace∣don, Thracia, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosnia, Epire, the greatest part of Hungary and Dalmatia, although they be wholy under Turks o∣bedience, yet Mahometans scarce make the third part of the Inhabi∣tants. In Afric this contagion is further spread; It hath intoxi∣cated all the shore of Ethiopia as far as Mosumbic, which lyeth op∣posite to the midst of Madagascar; 'Tis worse with the firm Land of Afric on the North and West parts, For from the Mediterrane∣an Sea to the great River Niper, and along the banks of Nile all Egypt and Barbary, with Lybia and the Negro's Country, are tainted and tand with this black Religion. The vast propagation of this unhappy Sect may be ascribed first to the Sword, for the conscience commonly is apt to follow the Con∣querer; Then to the loose reines it gives to all sensuall liberty, as to have eight wives and as many concubines as one can main∣tain, with the assurance of Venerean delights in a far higher degree to succeed after death to the religious observers of it, as the fruiti∣on
of beautifull damsells, with large rowling eyes, whose virginity shall renew after every act, their youth shall last alwaies with their lust, and love shall be satiared with onely one, where it shall remain inalienable. They concu with the Christian but on∣ly in the acknowledgment of one God, and in his attribtes: With the Iew they symbolize in many things more, as in circum∣cision, in refraining from swines flesh, in detestation of images, and somwhat in the quality of future happines, which, as was said before, they place in Venerean pleasure, as the Jew doth in feasting and banquetings, so that neither of their lawes have punishment e∣nough to deter mankind from wickednes and vice, nor do they pro∣mise adaequat rewards for vertue and piety; for in the whole Al∣coran, and through all the writings of Moses ther's not a word of Angelicall joyes and eternity: And herein Christianity far ex∣cels both these Religions, for she placeth future happines in spiri∣tuall, everlasting and unconceivable bliss, abstracted from the fa∣ding and faint grossenes of sense; The Jew and Turk also agree in their opinion of women, whom they hold to be of an inferiour creation to man, which makes the one to exclude them from his Moscoes, and the other from his Synagogues. Thus far have I rambled through the vast Ottoman Empire, and taken a cursary survey of Mahomets Religion; In my next I shall tak the best view I can of Pagans and Idolaters, with those who go for Atheists; And in this particular, this earth may be said to be worse then Hell it self, and the Kingdom of the De∣vill, in regard there are no Atheists there, for the very damned soules find and feel in the midst of their tortures that ther is a God by his justice and punishments; nay the Prince of dark∣nes himself and all the cacadaemons by an historicall faith beleeve ther is a God; wherunto the Poet alludes very divinely; Nullos in Inferno est Atheos, ante fuit. So I very affectionatly kiss your hand, and rest, westmin. 17. Aug. 1635. Your faithfull ready Servitor, J. H.
XI. To Doctor B. SIR, HHaving in my three former letters washed my hands of the Mahometan and the Iew, and attended Christianity up and down the earth, I com now to the Pagan, Idolater, or Heathen, who (the more to be lamented) make the greatest part of mankind; Europe her self, though the beames of the cross have shin'd upon her above these sixteen ages, is not free of them; for they possess to this day Lappia, Corelia, Biarmia, Scrifinnia, and the north parts of Finmark, there are also som shreds of them to be found in divers places of Lutuania, and Somogitia which make a region nine hundred miles in compas. But in Afric their number is incredible, for from cape Blanc the most westerly Point of Afric all southward to the Cape of good Hope, and thence turning by the back of Afric to the Cape of Mo∣zambric, all these coasts being about the one half of the circumfe∣rence of Afric is peepled by Idolaters, though in som places inter∣mixt with Mahometans and Christians, as in the Kingdom of Congo and Angola: But if we survey the inland territories of Afric be∣tween the river of Nile, and the west sea of Ethiopia, even all that Countrey from about the north paralell of ten degrees, to the south paralell of six degrees, all is held by Idolaters, besides, the Kingdom of Borno, and a great part of Nubia and Lybia, continue still in their old Paganisme, so that by this account above one half of that immence continent of Afric is peepled by Idolaters. But in Asia, which is far more spatious and more populous then Afric, Pagans, Idolaters, and Gentiles, Swarm in greater numbers, for from the River Pechora Eastward to the Ocean, and thence Southward to the Cape of Cincapura, and from that point returning Westward by the South coasts to the out-lets of the River Indus, all that ma∣ritine tract which makes a good deal more then half the circumfe∣rence of Asia is inhabited by Idolaters; so are the inland parts: Ther are two mighty mountaines that traverse all Asia, Taurus and Imaus, the first runs from West to East, the other from North to South, and  quarter and cut that huge mass of earth into e∣quall parts, this side those mountaines most of the peeple are Ma∣hometans,
but tother side, they are all Idolaters: And as on the firm continent Paganisme thus reigns, so in many thousand Islands that lye squandred in the vast Ocean, on the East and South east of A∣sia, Idolatry orespreads all, except in some few Islands that are possess'd by Spaniards and Arabs. Lastly if one take a survey of America (as none hath done yet exactly) which is estimated to be as big as all the old earth, Idola∣ters ther possesse four parts of five; 'Tis true som years after the first Navigation thither, they were converted daily in great multitudes, but afterwards observing the licentious lives of the Christians, their greedines for gold, and their cruelty, they came not in so fast: which made an Indian answer a Spanish Fryer who was dis∣coursing with him of the joyes of Heaven, and how all Spaniards went thither after this life, Then said the Pagan, I do not desire to go thither if Spaniards be there, I had rather go to Hell to be free of their Company: America differs from the rest of the earth in this, that she hath neither Iew nor Mahometan in her, but Christians and Gen∣tiles only: Ther are besides all those Religions and peeple before mentioned, an irregular confus'd nation in Europe call'd the Mor∣duits; which occupy the middle confines betwixt the Tartars and the Russe, that are mingled in Rites of Religion with all those that have been fore-spoken; for from the privy members upward they are Christians in regard they admit of Baptisme, from the Navell downward they are Mahometans or Iews for they are circumcis'd, and besides they are given to the adoration of heathenish Idolls: In Asia ther are the Card which inhabit the mountanous Country about Mozall, between Armenia and Mesoptamia, and the Druci in Syria who are demi Mahometans, and Christians. Now concerning Pagans and heathenish Idolaters wherof ther are innumerable sorts up and down the surface of the earth, in my opinion those are the excusablest kind who adore the Sun and Moon with the Host of Heaven, and in Ireland, the kerns of the mountains, with some of the Scotch Isles, use a fashion of adoring the new Moon to this very day, praying she would leave them in as good health as she found them, this is not so gross and Idolatry as that of other Heathens; for the adoration of those glorious Celestiall bodies is more excusable than that of Garlick, and Onions with the Egyptian, who I think (with the Sicyonian) was the ancientest Idolater upon earth which he makes thrice older than we do, for Diodorus Sculus reports that the Egyptian had a Religion and Kings, eighteen thou∣sand yeers since: yet for matter of Philosophy and Science, he had it from the Chaldean, He from the Gymnotophists and Brachmans of
India, which Countrey as she is the next neighbor to the rising Sun, in reference to this side of the Hemisphear, so the beams of learn∣ing did first enlighten her: Egypt was the Nurse of that famous Hermes Trismagistus, who having no other scale but that of naturall reason, mounted very high towards heaven, for he hath many very divine sayings, wherof I think it not impertinent to insert here a few, first he saith, that all humane sins are veniall with the Gods, impiety excepted. 2. That godnes belongs to the Gods, piety to men, revenge and wickednes to the devills. 3. That the Word is lucens Dei silius, the bright Son of God, &c. From Egypt Theoricall knowledg came down the Nile and lan∣ded at som of the Greek Islands, wher 'twixt the 33, 34, and the 35 Century of yeers after the Creation, there flourished all those renowned Philosophers that sway now in our Schools; Plato flew highest in divine notions, for som call him another Moses speaking athenian; In one of his Letters to a friend of his, he writes thus, When I seriously salute thee, I begin my Letter with one God, when otherwise with many, his Schollar Aristotle commended him∣self at his death to the Being of Beings; and Socrates may be said to be a Martyr for the first Person of the Trinity: these great Se∣cretaries of Nature by studying the vast Volume of the World came by main strength of reason to the knowledg of one Deity or primus motor, and of his attributes; they found by undenyable consequences that he was infinite, eternall, ubiquitary, omnipotent, and not capable of a definition; which made the Philosopher, being com∣manded by his King to define God, to ask the respite of a day to meditat theron, then two, then four, at last he ingeniously confes∣sed that the more he thought to dive into this mystery, the more he was ingulph'd in the speculation of it: for the quiddity and essence of the incomprehensible Creator, cannot imprint any formall con∣ception upon the finite intellect of the Creature, to this I might refer the Altar which Saint Paul found among the Greeks, with this Inscription, ▪ To the unknown God. From the Greek Isles, Philosophy came to Italy, thence to this Western world among the Druydes, whereof those of this Isle were most celebrous, for wee read that the Gauls (now the French) came to Britanny in great numbers to be instructed by them. The Romans wer mighty great Zelots in their Idolatry, and their best Authors affirm, that they extended their Monarchy so far and neer, by a particular reverence they had of their Gods, (which the Spani∣ard seems now to imitate) though those Gods of theirs wer made of men, and of good fellows at first, besides in the course of their
conquest, they adopted any strange Gods to the society of theirs, and brought them solemnly to Rome, and the reason as one saith was, that they believed the more Gods they had the safer they were, a few being not sufficient to conserve and protect so great an Empire: The Roman Gentiles had their Altars and Sacrifices, their Arch∣flamins, and vestall Nuns; And it seems the same genius reigns still in them, for in the Primitive Church, that which the Pagans misliked most in Christianity was, that it had not the face and form of a religion, in regard it had no Oblations, Altars & Images, which may be a good reason why the Sacrifices of the Mass and other Ceremonies wer first instituted to allure the Gentiles to Christia∣nity. But to return a little further to our former subject in the condition that man-kind stands now, if the Globe of the earth wer divided to thirty parts, tis thought that Idolaters (with hor∣ror I speak it) having as I said before, the one half of Asia and A∣fric, both for the inland Country and Maritim Coasts with four parts of five in America inhabit twenty parts of those Regions that are already found out upon earth, besides in the opinion of the know∣ingst and most inquisitive Mathematitions, ther is towards the sou∣thern clime as much land yet undiscovered as may equal in dimen∣sion the late new world, in regard, as they hold ther must be of necessity such a portion of earth to balance the Centre on all sides, and tis more than probable, that the Inhabitants there must be Pa∣gans. Of all kind of Idolaters those are the horridest, who adore the Devill whom they call Tantara, who appears often unto them specially in a Haraucane though he be not visible to others; In som places they worship both God and the Devill, the one, that he may do them good, the other, that they may do them no hurt; the first they call tantum, the other squantum. 'Twere presumption beyond that of Lucifers or Adam's for man to censure the justice of the Creator in this particular, why hee makes daily such innume∣rable vessells of dishonor; It is a wiser and safer course far to sit down in an humble admiration and cry out, on the profound in∣scrutable judgments of God! his ways are past finding out, and so to acknowlege with the divine Philosopher, Quod oculus vesper∣tilionis ad solem, idem est omnis intellectus humanus ad Deum, what the Eye of a Bat is to the Sun, the same is all human understan∣ding to God-wards. Now to draw to a Conclusion, touching the respective largnes of Christianity and Mahometisme upon the earth, I find the first to exceed, taking the new world with the old, considering the spa∣cious Plantations of the Spaniard in America, the Colonies the
English have there in Virginia, New-England and Charibbi Islands; with those of the French in Canada, and of the Hollander in East India: nor do I find that ther is any region purely Mahometan without intermixtures, as Christianity hath many: which makes me to be of a differing opinion to that Gentleman, who held that Christianity added little to the generall religion of man-kind. Now touching the latitude of Christian faith, in reference to the differing Professors therof, as in my former I shewd that the Eastern Churches were more spacious than the Latin or Roman (ex∣cepting the two Indies) so they who have fallen off from her in the Western parts are not so far inferior to her in Europe as som would make one beleeve; which will appear if we cast them in counterbalance. Among Roman Catholicks ther is the Emperor, and in him the King of Hungary, the three Kings of Spain, France, and Poland; all Italy, the Dukes of Savoy, Bavaria, and Lorain, the three spirituall Electors with som few more; Touching them who have renounc'd all obedience to Rome, ther are the three Kings of great Britain, Den∣mark and Swethland, the Duke of Saxon, Holstein, and Wittemberg: the Marquis of Brandenburg, and Baden, the Landgrave of Hesse; most of the Hansiatic Towns which are 88 in number▪ som wherof are equall to Republiques, the (almost) seven Provinces the Hol∣lander hath. The five Cantons of Swiss and Geneva, They of France who are reputed the fift part of the Kingdom; the Prince of Tran∣sylvania, They of Hungary, and of the large Kingdom of Bohemia, of the Marchisats of Lusatia, Mravia, and the Dukedom of Sile∣sia; As also they of the huge Kingdom of Poland, wherin Prote∣stants are diffus'd through all quarters in great numbers, having in every Province their publick Churches and Congregations or∣derly severed and bounded with Diocesses, whence are sent som of the chiefest and most principall men of worth, unto their Gene∣rall Synods: For although ther are divers sorts of these Polenian Protestants, som embracing the Waldensian or the Bohennic, others the Augustane, and som the Helvetian Confession; yet they all con∣cur in opposition to the Roman Church; as also they of the Angli∣tan, Scotican, Gallic, Argentine, Saxonick, Wirtinbergick, Palatin, and elgick Confessions: They also harmoniously symbolize in the principall Atticles of Faith, and which mainly concern eter∣nall salvation, as in the infallible verity and full sufficiency of the Scriptures, divine Essence, and unity of the Everlasting God-head, the sacred Trinity of the three glorious Persons, the blessed Incarnation of Christ, the Omnipotent Providence of God,
the absolute supream head of the Church, Christ himself, justifica∣tion by Faith through his merits, and touching the nature of live∣ly faith, repentance, regeneration, and sanctification, the diffe∣rence between the Law and the Gospell, touching free will, sin, and good works, the Sacraments, their number, use and effica∣cy, the marks of the Church,, the resurrection and state of souls deceased: It may seem a rambling wild speech at first view, of one who said that to make one a compleat Christian, he must have the works of a Papist, the words of a Puritan, and the Faith of a Prote∣stant, yet this wish if well expounded, may bear a good sense, which were unfitting for me to give, you, being better able to put a gloss upon it your self. Thus learned Sir, have I exercis'd my pen, according to my small proportion of knowledg, and conversation with books, men and mapps, to obey your desire, though in comparison of your spa∣cious literature I have held all this while but a candle to the Sun, yet by the light of this small candle you may see how ready I am to shew my self Westmin. 25 Aug. 1635. Your very humble and affectionat Servitor, J. H. XII. To Mr. T. W. SIR, I Am heartily glad you have prevaild so far with my Lady your Mother as to have leave to travell a while, and now that you are bound for France and Italy, let me give you this caution to take heed of a speedy frend in the first, and of a slow enemy in the second; The courtesies of an Italian, if you suspect him jealous of you, are dangerous and so are his complements, he will tell you that he kisseth your hand a thousand times over, when he wisheth them both cut off. The French are a free and debonnaire acostable peeple, both men and women; Among the one, at first entrance one may have acquaintance, and at first acquaintance one may have entrance; For the other, whereas the old rule was, that ther could be no true frendship without commessation of a bushell of salt, one may have
enough there before he eat a spoon-full with them. I like that frendship which by soft gentle pauses steales upon the affection, and growes mellow with time, by reciprocall offices and trialls of love, that frendship is like to last long, and never to shrink in the wet∣ting. So hoping to enjoy you before you go, and to give you a frend∣ly ioy, I rest Westmin. 28 Feb. 1634. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. XIII. To Sir Tho. Hawk. Knight. SIR, I Was invited yesternight to a solemne supper by B. I. wher you were deeply remembred, ther was good company, excellent chear, choice wines, and joviall welcom; one thing interven'd which almost spoyld the relish of the rest, that B. began to engross all the discourse, to vapour extremely of himself, and by villify∣ing others to magnifie his own muse; T. Ca. buz'd me in the eare, that though Ben had barreld up a great deal of knowledg, yet it seems he had not read the Ethiques, which among other precepts of morality forbid self-commendation, declaring it to be an ill favourd solecism in good manners; It made me think upon the Lady (not very young) who having a good while given her guests neat en∣tertainment, a capon being brought upon the table, instead of a spoon she took a mouthfull of claret and spouted it into the poope of the hollow bird; such an accident happend in this entertain∣ment you know—Proprio laus sordet in ore; be a mans breath ne∣ver so sweet, yet it makes ones prayses stink, if he makes his own mouth the conduit pipe of it; But for my part I am content to dispense with this Roman infirmity of B. now that time hath snowed upon his pe∣ricranium. You know Ovid, and (your) Horace were subject to this humour, the first bursting out into, Iam{que} opus exegi quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis, &c. The other into, Exegi monumentum ae're perennius, &c.
As also Cicero while he forc'd himself into this Exameter; O fortuna∣tam natam me consule Romam. Ther is another reason that excuseth B. which is, that if one be allowed to love the naturall issue of his bo∣dy, why not that of the brain, which is of a spirituall and more no∣ble extraction; I preserve your manuscripts safe for you till your return to London, what newes the times afford this bearer will im∣part unto you. So I am, Westmin. 5 Apr. 1636. Sir, Your very humble and most faithfull Servitor, J. H. XIV. To my Cosen Mr. I. P. at Graves-end. Cousin, GOd send you a good passage to Holland, and the world to your mind when you are there; Now, that you intend to traile a pike and make profession of arms, let me give you this caveat, that nothing must be more precious to you then your re∣putation; As I know you have a spirit not to receive wrong, so you must be carefull not to offer any, for the one is as base as the other, your puls will be quickly felt, and triall made what mettle you are made of after your first coming, If you get but once hand∣somly off, you are made ever after, for you will be free from all baffles and affronts. He that hath once got the same of an early ri∣ser, may sleep till noon; Therfore be wondrous wary of your first comportments, get once a good name, and be very tender of it afterwards, for 'tis like venice glass quickly crackd, never to be men∣ded, patched it may be; To this purpose take along with you this Fable: It happen'd that Fire, water and Fame went to travell together (as you are going now) they consulted, that if they lost one another, how they might be retreevd and meet again; Fire said wher you see smoak ther you shall find me, Water said wher you see marsh and morish low grounds, there you shall find me; but Fame said, take heed how you lose me, for if you do, you will run a great hazard never to meet me again, ther's no retreeving of me. It imports you also to conform your self to your Commanders,
and so you may more confidently demand obedience, when you com to command your self, as I doubt not but you may do in a short time: The Hoghen Moghen are very exact in their polemicall government, their pay is sure though small, 4. s. a week being too little a hire, as one sayd, to kill men. At your return I hope you will give a better account of your doings than he who being ask'd what exploits he had don in the Low Countrys, answerd that he had cut off a Spaniards leggs, reply being made that that was no great matter, it had bin somthing if he had cut off his head, O said he, you must consider his head was off before; excuse me that I take my leave of you so pleasantly, but I know you will take any thing in good part from him who is so much Westmin. 3. Aug. 1634. Your truly affectionat Cosen, J. H. XV. To Cap. B. Much endear'd Sir, THer is a true saying that the spectator oft times sees more than the gamester; I find that you have a very hazardous game in hand therfore give it up and do not vie a farthing upon't. Though you be already imbarqued, yet ther is time enough to strike sail, and make again to the port, otherwise, tis no hard matter to be a Prophet what will becom of you; ther be so many ill favoured quicksands, and rocks in the way, (as I have it from a good hand) that one may easily take a prospect of your shipwrack if you go on; therfore desist as you regard your own safety, and the seasonable advice of your Westminst. 1 May, 1635. J. H.
XVI. To Mr. Thomas W. at his chamber in the Temple. SIR, YOu have much streightned that knot of love which hath bin long tied between us, by those choice manuscripts you sent me lately, amongst which I find divers rare pieces, but that which afforded me most entertainment in those miscellanies, was Doctor Henry Kings Poems, wherin I find not onely heat and strength, but also an exact concinnity and evennes of fancy: they are a choice race of brothers, & it seems the same Genius diffuseth it self also a▪ among the sisters: It was my hap to be lately where Mistress A. K. was, and having a paper of verses in her hand I got it from her, they were an Epitaph and an Anagram of her own composure and writing, which took me so far that the next morning, before I was up, my rambling fancy fell upon these lines. For the admitting of Mistris Anne King to be the tenth Muse. Ladies of Helicon do not repine I adde one more unto your number nine, To make it even, I among you bring, No meaner than the daughter of a King, Fair Basil-Ana, quickly passe your voice, I know Apollo will approve the choice, And gladly her install, for I could name, Som of less merit Goddesses became. Anna King. F. C. soares higher and higher every day in pursuance of his pla∣tonic love, but T. Man. is out with his, you know whom, he is fal∣len to that aversness to her, that he swares he had rather see a Ba∣silisk than her. This shews that the sweetest wines, may turn to the tartest vinegar; no more till wee meet, Westmin. 3 Feb. 1637. Yours inviolably, J. H.
XVII. To the Lord C. My Lord, THer are two sayings which are father'd upon Secretary Wal∣singham and Secretary Cecil, a pair of the best weighd Statesmen this Island hathbred: one was used to say at the Coun∣cell Table, My Lords stay a little, and we shall make an end the sooner: the other would oft-times speak of himself, It shall never be said of me that I will dfer till to morrow what I can do to day: At first view these sayings seem'd to clash with one another, and to be diametrically opposite, but being rightly understood, they may be very well reconcil'd: Touching the first, 'Tis true, that hast and choler are enemies to all great actions; for as it is a principle in Chimistry that omnis festinatio est a Diabolo, all hast comes from Hell; so in the consultations, contrivings and conduct of any bu∣sines of State, all rashnes and precipitation comes from an ill spi∣rit: Ther cannot be a better pattern for a grave and considerat way of deliberation than the ancient course of our High Court of Parliament, who when a Law is to be made, which concerns the welfare of so many thousands of men, after a mature debate and long discussion of the point beforehand, cause the bill to be read solemnly three times in the House, ere it be transmitted to the Lords, and there also 'tis so many times canvas'd and then presen∣ted to the Prince: That which must stand for law, must be long stood upon, because it imposeth an universall obedience, and is like to be everlasting according to the Ciceronian maxime, Deliberandum est diu quod statendum est semel: such a kind of cunctation, ad∣visednes, and procrastination is allowable also in all Councells of State and War, for the day following may be able commonly to be a ma∣ster to the day passed, such a world of contingencies human actions are subject unto: yet under favour I beleeve this first saying to meant of matters while they are in agitation and upon the anvill, but when they have receiv'd form and are fully resolv'd upon, I beleeve then nothing is so advantagious as speed; And at this, I am of opinion, the second saying aimes at, for when the weights that use to hang to all great businesses are taken away, 'tis good then to put wings unto them, and to take the ball before the bound,
for Expedition is the life of action, otherwise Time may shew his bald occiput and shake his posteriors at them in deision: Among other Nations the Spaniard is observ'd to have much phlegme, and to be most dilatory in his proceedings; yet they who have pryed nar∣rowly into the sequell and success of his actions, do find that this gravity, reservednes, and tergiversations of his, have turn'd ra∣ther to his prejudice than advantage, take one time with another: The two last matrimoniall treaties we had with him, continued long, the first 'twixt Ferdinand and Henry the seventh for Catherine of Aragon seven yeers; That 'twixt King Iames, and the now Phi∣lip the fourth for Mary of Austria lasted eleven yeers (and seven and eleven's eighteen) the first took effect for Prince Arthur, the latter miscarried for Prince Charles, and the Spaniard may thank himself and his own slow pace for it, for had he mended his pace to perfect the work, I beleeve his Monarchy had not received so many ill favour'd shocks since. The late revolt of Portugall was foreseen, and might have bin prevented, if the Spaniard had not bin too slow in his purpose to have sent the duke of Braganza out of the way up∣on som employment as was projected. Now will I reconcile the former savings of those two renowned Secretaries, with the gallant comparison of Charles the Emperor (and he was of a more temperat mould, than a Spaniard, being a Flemin born) he was us'd to say, that while any great busines of State was yet in consultation we should observe the motion of Sa∣turn which is plumbeous long and heavy, but when it is once ab∣solutely resolved upon, then we should observe the motion of Mer∣cury the nimblest of all the planets, ubi desinit Saturnus ibi inipiat Mercurius. Wherunto I will adde, that we should imitate the Mul∣berry, who of all trees casts out her buds latest, for she doth it not till all the cold weather be pas∣sed,Quodā cum Streptu as Pliny saith. and then she is sure they cannot be nipped, but then she shoots them all out in one night, so though she be one way the slowest, she is another way the nimblest of . Thus have I obeyed your Lordships command in expounding the sense of these two sayings according to my mean apprehension but this exposition relates only to publick affairs, and political negotiations, wherin your Lordship is so excellently versed;  shall most willingly conform to any other injunctions of yo Lordships, and esteem them alwaies as favours, while I am Westmin. 5 Sept. 1633. J. H.
XVIII. To Sir I. Browne Kt. SIR, ONE would think that the utter falling off of Catalonia and Portugall in so short a compass of time should much lessen the Spaniard, the peeple of both these Kingdoms being from subjects becom enemies against him, and in actuall hostility: without doubt it hath done so, yet not so much as the world ima∣gines; Tis true in point of Regall power, and divers brave subor∣dinat commands for his servants, he is a great deal lessened therby, but though he be less powerfull, he is not a penny pooer therby, for ther comes not a farthing less every yeer into his Exchequer, in regard that those countries wer rather a charge than benefit unto him, all their Revenue being drunk up in pensions, and payments of Officers and Garisons; For if the King of Spain had lost all ex∣cept the West Indies, and all Spain except Castile her self, it would little diminish his treasury; Touching Catalonia, and Portugall, specially the latter, 'tis true they were mighty members of the Casti∣lian Monarchy, but I beleeve they wil sooner want Castile than Castile them; because she fill'd them with treasure; Now that Barcelona and Lisbon hath shaken hands with Sevill, I do not think that either of them hath the tith of that treasure they had before; in regard the one was the scale wherby the King of Spain sent his mony to Italy, the o∣ther, because all her East Indian commodities were barter'd com∣monly in Andalzia and elsewhere for Bullion; Catalonia is fed with money from France, but for Portugall she hath little or none; ther∣fore I do not see how she could support a war long to any purpose if Castile were quiet, unless souldiers would be contented to take cloves and pepper-corns, for Patacoon and Pistolls. You know Money is the sinew and soul of War: This makes me think on that blunt answer which Captain Talbot return'd Hen. the 8 from Calais, who having received speciall command from the King, to erect a new fort at the water gate, and to see the townwell fortified, sent him word that he could neither fortifie nor fiifie without money. Ther is no newes at all stirring here now, and I am of the Ialians mind that said Nulla nuova, buona nuova, no news good news. But it were great news to see you heer, whence you have bin an Alien so long to Holborn, 3 Iune. 1640. Your most affectionat frend, J. H.
XIX. To Captain C. Price. Cosen, YOu have put me upon such an od intrit peece of busines, that I think ther was never  ike of it, I am more puzled, and entangled with it, than oft times▪ use t be with my Band∣strings when I go hastily to bed, and wan u a fair femall hand as you have to unty them▪ I must imput  this to the peevish humor of the peeple I deal withall; I find it true now that one of the greatest tortures that can be in the negotiation of the world is, to have to doe with perverse irrationall half-witted men, and to be worded to death with nonsence; besides as much brain as they have, is as full of scruples, as a Burr is of prickles, which is a quality incident to all those, that have their heads lightly ballasted, for they are like buys in a barrd Port, waving perpetually up and down. The Father is scrupulous of the Son, the Son of the Sisters▪ and all three of me, to whose award they referr'd the busines three severall times: It is as hard a task to reconcile the Fans of St. Sepulchers steeple which never look all four upon one point of the Heavens, as to reduce them to any conformity of reason; I never remember to have met with Father and Children, or Children a∣mong themselves of a more differing genius and contrariety of humors, insomuch that ther cannot be a more pregnant instance to prove that human souls com not ex traduce, and by seminall pro∣duction from the parents. For my part I intend to spend my breath no longer upon them, but to wash my hands quite of the busines, and so I would wish you to do, unles you love to walk in a labyrinth of Bryers, so expecting with impatience your return to London, I rest Westmin. 27 Apr. 1632. Your most faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XX. To my Cosen Mr. I. P. at Lincolns Inn. Cosen, THe last week you sent me word, that you wer so crampd with Busines, that you could not put Pen to Paper; if you write not this week, I shall fear you are not only crampd but cripled; at least I shall think you are crampd in your affection rather than your fingers, and that you have forgot how once it was my good fortune to preserve you from drowning when the cramp took you in St. Iohns Pool at Oxford. The Cramp, as I take it, is a sudden Convulsion of the Nerves. For my part the ligaments and sinews of my love to you have been so strong, that they wer never yet sub∣ject to such spasmaticall shrinkings and Convulsions. Now, letters are the very Nerves and Arteries of friendship, nay, they are the vitall sprits and elixar of love, which in case of distance and long ab∣sence would be in hazard to languish, and quite moulder away without them. Amongst the Italians and Spaniards 'tis held one of the greatest solecismes that can be in good manners, not to an∣swer a Letter with like civility, by this they use to distinguish a Gentleman from a Clown; besides they hold it one of the most ertuous ways to employ time. I am the more covetous of a pun∣ctuall correspondence with you in this point, because I common∣ly gain by your Letters, your stile is so polite, your expressions so gallant, and your lines interspers'd with such dainty flowers of Poetry and Philosophy. I understand ther is a very able Doctor that reads the Anatomy Lecture this terme, if Ploydon will dispense with you, you cannot spend your hours better than to hear him. So I end for this time, being crampd for want of more matter, and rest West. 3 Iul. 1631. Your most affectionat loving Cosen, J. H.
XXI. To my Nephew J. P. at St. Johns in Oxford. Nephew, I Had from you lately two Letters, the last was wel freighted with very good stuff, but the other, to deal plainly with you, was no so; Ther was as much difference between them, as twixt a Scots▪ Pedlars pack in Poland, and the Magazine of an English Merchant in Naples, the one being usually full of Taffaty, Silks and Satins; the other of Calicoes, threed-ribbands, and such polldavy ware; I perceive you have good Comodities to vent, if you take the pains: your trifles and bagatells are ill bestowed upon me, therfore heer∣after I pray let me have of your best sort of wares: I am glad to find that you have stor'd up so much already; you are in the best Mart in the world to improve them; which I hope you dayly do, and I doubt not when the time of your apprentiship there is expir'd, but you will find a good Market to expose them for your own and the publick benefit abroad. I have sent you the Philosophy Books you writ to me for; any thing that you want of this kind for the advancement of your studies, do but write and I shall furnish you: When I was a student as you are, my practise was to borrow ra∣ther than buy som sort of Books, and to be always punctuall in restoring them upon the day assign'd, and in the intrim to swallow of them as much as made for my turn; this obligd me to read them thorow with more haste to keep my word, wheras I had not been so carefull to peruse them had they been my own Books, which I knew wer always ready at my dispose. I thank you heartily for your last Letter, in regard I found it smelt of the Lamp, I pray let your next do so, and the oyl and labor shall not bee lost which you expend upon Westm. 1 Aug. 1633. Your assured loving Uncle, J. H.
XXII. To Sir Tho. Haw. SIR, I Thank you a thousand times for the choice Stanzas you pleas'd to send me lately: I find that you wer throughly heated, that you wer inspir'd with a true enthusiasme when you compos'd them; And wheras others use to flutter in the lower Region, your Muse soars up to the upper, and transcending that too, takes her flight among the Celestiall bodies to find a fancy: your desires, I should do somthing upon the same subject, I have obeyd, though I fear not satisfied, in the following numbers. 1. Could I but catch those beamy Rayes, Which Phaebus at high noon displayes, I'de set them on a Loom, and frame A Scarf for Delia of the same. 2. Could I that wondrous black com near, Which Cynthia▪ when eclips'd, doth wear, Of a new fashion I would trace A Mask therof for Delia's face. 3. Could I but reach that green and blue, Which Iris decks in various hue, From her moist Bow I'de drag them down, And make my Delia a Summer Gown. 4. Could I those whitely Stars go nigh, Which make the milky way in skie, I'de poach them, and at Moon-shine dress To make my Delia a curious mess. 5. Thus would I diet, thus attire My Delia Queen of hearts and fire, She should have every thing divine That would befitt a Seraphin. And 'cause ungirt unbless'd we find, One of the Zones her wast should bind.
They are of the same cadence as yours and aireable, so I am Westm. 5 Sept▪ 1633. Your humble Servitor, J. H. XXIII. To the R. H. the Lady Eliz. Digbye. Madame, IT is no improper comparison, that a thankfull heart is like a box of precious ointment, which keeps the smell long after the thing is spent: Madame, (without vanity bee it spoken) such is my heart to you, and such are your favors to me, the strong aro∣matic odor they carryed with them, diffus'd it self through all the veins of my heart, specially through the left Ventricle, wher the most illustrious bloud lyes, so that the persume of them remains still fresh within me, and is like to do, while that triangle of flesh dilates and shuts it self within my brest; nor doth this perfume stay there, but as all smells naturally tend up∣wards, it hath ascended to my brain, and sweetned all the cells ther∣of specially the memory, which may be said to be a Cabinet also to preserve courtesies, for though the heart be the box of love, the memory is the box of lastingnes, the one may be term'd the source whence the motions of gratitude flow, the other the cistern that keeps them. But your Ladiship will say, these are words onely; I confess it, 'tis but a verball acknowledgment; but, Madame, if I wer made happy with an opportunity, you should quickly find these words urnd to actions, either to go, to run or ride upon your arrand; In expectation of such a favorable occasion, I rest, Madame, Your Ladiships most humble and enchained Servitor, J. H. West. 5 Aug. 1640.
XXIV. To Sir I. B. Noble Sir, THat od opinion the Jew and Turk have of women, that they are of an inferior Creation to man, and therfore exclude them, the one from their Synagogues, the other from their Meskeds, is in my judgment not only partiall, but profane; for the Image of the Creator shines as clearly in the one as in the other, and I beleeve ther are as many female-Saints in heaven as male, unless you could make me adhere to the opinion that women must be all Mas∣culine before they be capable to be made Angels of. Adde heerun∣to that ther went better and more refined stuff to the creation of woman than man; 'Tis true, 'twas a weak part in Eve to yield to the seducements of Satan, but it was a weaker thing in A∣dam to suffer himself to bee tempted by Eve being the weaker vessell. The ancient Philosophers had a better opinion of that Sex, for they ascribed all Sciences to the Muses, all sweetnes and morali∣ty to the Graces, and Prophetic Inspirations to the Sybills. In my small revolving of Authors I find as high examples of vertue in Women as in Men, I could produce heer a whole Regiment of them, but that a Letter is too narrow a field to muster them in, I must confess, ther are also counter instances of this kind: if Qu▪ bia was such a precise pattern of continency, that after the act of Conception, shee would know her husband no more all the me of her pregnancy till she had been delivered; ther is ano∣ther example of a Roman Empress, that when she found the vessel fugheed, would take in all passengers, when the Barn was▪ full any one might thresh in the haggard but not till then▪ for fear the right Father should be discovered by the countenance of the child▪ But what need I go so far off to ake the ashes of the dead, ther are living examples enough pro and con of both Sexes, yet woman, being as I said before, the weaker vessell, her failings are more ve∣iall than those of man, though man indeed being more conversant with the world, and meeting more opportunities abroad (and oppor∣tunity is the greatest Bawd) of falling into infirmities as he follows  worldly negotiations, may on the tother side be judg'd the ore excusable.
But you are far fitter than I, to discourse of this subject, being better vers'd in the theory of women, having had a most vertuou Lady of your own before, and being now linked to another.  wish a thousand benedictions may fal upon this your second choice▪ and that—tam bona sit quam bona prima fuit. This option shall be my conclusion for the present, wherunto I ad that I am in no vul∣gar degree of affection West. 5. Aug. 1632. Your most humble and faithfull Servitor, J. H. XXV. To Mr. P. W. SIR, THer are two things which ad much to the merit of courtesies, viz. cheerfulnes and speed, and the contraries of these lessen the value of them; that which hangs long twixt the fingers, and is don with difficulty and a sullen supercilious look, makes the ob∣ligation of the receivers nothing so strong, or the memory of the kindnes half so gratefull: the best thing the gods themselves lik'd of in the entertainments they received of those poor wretches Bau∣cis and Philemon, was open hearty looks, —Super omnia vultus, Accessere boni— A clear unclouded countenance makes a Cottage appear like a Castle in point of hospitality, but a beetle-brow'd sullen face makes a Palace as smoaky as an Irish Hut: Ther is a mode in giving entertainment, and doing any courtesie els, which trebly binds the receiver to an acknowledgment, and makes the remembrance of it far more ac∣ceptable. I have known two Lord high Tresurers of England of quite contrary humors, one successively after the other, the one though he did the suters busines, yet he went murmuring, the other, though he did not, was us'd to dismiss the party with som satisfaction: Tis true, money is welcom, though it be in a dirty Clout, but 'tis far more acceptable if it com in a clean handkercher. Sir, you may sit in the chair, and read Lectures of Morality to all man-kind in this point, you have such a dextrous discreet way to handle suters in that troublesom Office of yours, wherin as you
have already purchased much, I wish you all increase of honor and ppines, Your humble and much obliged Servitor, J. H. XXVI. To Master F. Coll. at Naples. SIR, TIS confess'd I have offended by my over-long filence, and a∣bus'd our maiden frendship; I appear before you now in this white, sheet to doe penance, I pray in your next to send me an ab∣solution; Absolutions they say are as cheap in that Town, as curte∣sans, wherof 'twas said ther wer 20000 on the common list, when I was there, at which time I remember one told me a tale of a Ca∣lbrian who had bugger'd a Goat, and having bought an Absoluti∣on of his Confessor, he was ask'd by a frend what it cost him, he an∣swered, I procured it for four Pstolets, and for the other od one, I think I might have had a dispensation to have maried the beast. I thank you for the exact relation you sent me of the fearfull Earthquakes and fires which happened lately in that Countrey, and particularly about Vesuvius; It seems the huge Giant whom the Poets say was hurld under the vast mountain by the gods for thin∣king to scale heaven, had a mind to turn from one side to the other, which hee useth to do at the revolution of evry hundred yeers, and stirring his body by that action, he was taken with a t of the cough, which made the hill shake, and belch out fire in that hideous manner. But to repay you in the like coin, they send us stranger news from Lisbon, for they write of a spick and span new Island that hath peep'd up out of the Atlantick Sea, near the Tar∣cras, which never appeard before, since the Creation, and it be∣gins to be peepled already; me thinks the King of Spain needs no more Countryes, hee hath too many already, unles they wer bet∣ter united. All your frends here are well, and mind you often in Town and Countrey, as doth Westmin. 7 Apr. 1629. Your true constant Servitor, J. H.
XXVII. To Mr T. Lucy in Venice. SIR, YOur last you sent me was from Genoa, where you write that gli mariti ingravidano lr moglie cento miglia lontano, Husbands get their wives with child a hundred miles off; 'Tis a great vertue I confes, but 'tis nothing to what our East India Mariners can do heer, because they can do so, forty times further, for though their wives be at Ratcliffe, and they at the Red Sea, though they be at Madagasca, the Magors Court, or Iapan, yet they use to get their wives bellies up here about London, a strange vertue at such a huge distance, but I beleeve the active part is in the wives, and the husbands are meerly passive, which makes thm among other wares to bring home with them a sort of precious hornes, the pow∣der wherof, could one get som of it, would be of an invaluable vertue; This operation of our Indian Mariner at such a distance is more admitable in my judgement than that of the weapon salve, the ungentum armarium, for that can do no good unles the surgeon have the instrument, and bloud, but this is don without both, for the husband contributes neither of them. You are now I presume in Venice, there also such things are don by proxy, while the husband is abroad upon the Gallies, ther be others tht shoot his gulf at home. You are now in a place wher you may feed all your senses very cheap, I allow you the pleasing of your eye, your eare, your smell and tast, but take heed of being too indulgent of the fist sense: The Poets feign that Venus the goddess of pleasure, and therfore call'd Aphrodite, was engendred of the froth of the sea (which makes fish more salacious commonly, than flesh) it is not improbable that she was got and coagulated of that foam which Neptune useth to disgorge upon those pretty Islands wheron that City stnds. My Lady Miller commends her kindly unto you, and she desires you to send her a compleat cup∣board of the best christall glasses Murano can afford by the next shipping, besides she entreats you to send her a pot of the best mi∣thridate, and so much of treacle. All your frends here are well and joviall, T. T. drank your health yesternight, and wish'd you could send him a handsome Venetia Courisan inclos'd in a letter, he would willingly be at
the charge of the postage, which he thinks would not be much for such a light commodity. Farewell my dear Tom, have a care of your courses, and continue to love him who is Westmin. 15 Ian. 1635. Yours to the altar, J. H. XVIII. To Mr. T. Jackson. at Madrid. SIR, THough a great sea severs s now, yet 'tis not all the water of the Ocean can drowne the remembrance of you in me, but that it floats and flows daily in my brain; I must confess (for 'tis impossible the mind of man should fix it self alwaies upon one object) it hath somtimes its ebbs in me, but 'tis to rise up again with greater force; At the writing heerof 'twas floud, 'twas spring∣tide which sweld so high, that the thoughts of you overwhelm'd all others within me, they ingross'd all my intellectualls for the time. You write to me fearfull news ouching the revolt of the Catalan from Castillia, of the tragicall murthering of the Viceroy, and the burning of his House; Those mountaneers are mad Lads. I fear the sparkles of this fire will fly further, either to Portugall or to Sicilia and Italy, all which Countries, I observ'd the Spaniard holds as one would do a Woolf by the ar, fearing they should run a∣ay ever and anon from him. The newes here is that Lambeth House beares all the sway at White-Hall, and the Lord Deputy Kings it notably in Ireland, som that love them best, could wish them a little more modera∣tion. I pray buy Suarez works for me of the last edition, Mr. William Pawley, to whom I desire my most hearty commends may be pre∣sented, will see it safely sent by way of Bilao; your frends here are all well, as is thanks be to God, Holborn, 3 Mar. 1638. Your true friend to serve you, J. H.
XXIX. To Sir Edward Sa. Knight. Sir Edward, I Had a shrewd disease hung lately upon m, proceeding as the Physicians told me from this long reclused life, and close re∣straint, which had much wasted my spirits and brought me low: when the Crisis was past, I began to grow doubtfull, that I had but a short time to breath in this elementary world, my feaver still encreasing, and finding my soule weary of this muddy mansion, and me thought more weary of this prison of flesh, than this flesh was of this prison of the Fleet. Therfore after som gentle slum∣bers, and unusuall dreames about the dawnings of the day, I had a lucid intervall, and so I fell a thinking how to put my little house in order, and to make my last will. Heerupon my thoughts ran upon Grunnius sophista's last Testament, who having nothing else to dispose of but his body, he bequeathed all the parts therof in Legacies, as his skin to the Tanners, his bones to the Dice makers, his guts to the Musitians, his fingers to the Scrive∣ners, his toung to his fellow sophisters, (which were the Lawyers of those times) and so forth: as he thus dissected his body so I thought to divide my mind into legacies, having as you know lit∣tle of the outward pelf and gifts of fortune to dispose of, for ne∣ver any was less beholden to that blind baggage. In the highest degree of Theoricall contemplation, I made an entire sacrifice of my soul to her maker, who by infusing created her, and by creating infused her to actuate this small bulk of flsh, with an unshake confidence of the redemption of both in my Saviour, and conse∣quently of the salvation of the one, and resurrection of the other: my thoughts then reflected upon divers of my noble frends, and I ell to proportion unto them what Legacies I held most proper▪ I thought to bequeath unto my Lord of Cherbery, and Sir K. Digy that little Philosophy and knowledg I have in the Mathematicks; My historicall observations and criticall researches I made into antiquity, I thought to bequeath unto Dr. Vsher Lord Primate of Ireland; My observations abroad, and inspection into forrein States, I thought to leave to my Lord G. D.: My poetry such as it is, to Mistress A. K. who I know is a great minion of the Mu∣ses:
School languages I thought to bequeath unto my dear mo∣ther the Vniversity of Oxford: My Spanish to Sir Lewis Dives, and Master Endimion Porter, for though they are great masters of that language, yet it may stead them somthing when they read la picara Iustina: My Italian to the worthy company of Turky and Levan∣tine Merchants, from divers of whom I have received many noble favours: My French to my most honoured lady the Lady Cor, and it may help her somthing to understand Rablais: The little smattering I have in the Dutch, British, and my English I did not e∣steem worth the bequeathing: My love I had bequeathed to be duf∣'d among all my dear frends, specially those that have stuck unto me this my long affliction; My best naturall ffections, betwixt the Lord B: of Br. my brother Howell, & my three dear Sisters, to be transferr'd by them to my cousins their children: This little sack∣full of bones, I thought to bequeath to Westminster Abbey, to be in∣terred in the cloyster within the Southside of the Garden, close to the wall, wher I would have desired Sir H. F. (my dear Frend) to have inlayed a small peece of black marble, and caus'd this mot∣to to have bin insculp'd upon it, Huc usque peregrinus, heic domi, or this, which I would have left to his choice, Huc usque Erraticus, beie fixus; and instead of strewing my grave with flowers, I would have desired him to have grafted theron som little Tree of what sort he pleas'd, that might have taken root downward to my dust, because I have bin alwaies naturally affected to woods and groves, and those kind of vegetables, insomuch that if ther wer any such thing as a Pythagorean Metempsuchosis, I think my soul would transmigrat into som Tree, when she bids this body farewell. By these extravagancies, and od Chimera's of my brain, you may well perceive that I was notwell, but distemper'd, specially in my intellectualls, according to the Spanish proverb siempre desvarios  la calentura, fevers have alwaies their fits of dotage. Among those to whom I had bequeath'd my dearest love, you wer one, to whom I had intended a large proportion, and that love which I would have left you then in legacy, I send you now in this letter, for it hath pleased God to reprieve me for a longer time to creep upon this earth, and to see better daies I hope when this black dismall cloud is dispell'd; but com foul or fair weather, I shall be as for∣merly Fleet, 26 Mar. 1643. Your most constant faithfull Servitor, J. H.
XXXI. To the Right Honourable the Lady Wichts. Madam, SInce I was hurl'd amongst these walls, I had divers fits of me∣lancholy, and such turbid intervalls that use to attend close prisoners, who for the most part, have no other companions, but confus'd troops of wandring cogitations; Now, Melancholy it far more fruitfull of thoughts than any other humour, for it is like the mud of Nile, which, when that Enigmaticall vast River is got a∣gain to her former bed, engendreth divers sorts of new creatures, and som kind of Monsters; my brain in this Fleet hath bin often thus overwhelmd, yet I never found it so muddy, nor the Region of my mind so much clowded, as it was lately after notice had of the sad tidings of Master Controulers death; The newes heer∣of struck such a damp into me, that for sm space me thought, the very pulse of my bloud, and the motions of my heart wer at a stand; for I was surpriz'd with such a consternation that I felt no pulsations in the one, or palpitations in the other. Well Madam, he was a brave solid wise man, of a noble free disposition, and so great a controuler of his passions, that he was alwaies at home with∣in himself, yet I much fear, that the sense of these unhappy times made too deep impressions in him. Truly Madam, I lov'd and honour'd him in such a perfection that my heart shall wear a broad black ribband for him while I live, as long as I have a retentive faculty to remember any thing, his memory shalbe fresh within me. But the truth is, that if the advantagious exchange which hee hath made were well considered, no frend of his should be sorry; for in lieu of a white staffe in an earthly Court, he hath got a scep∣ter of immortality; He that had bin Ambassadour at the Port to the greatest Monark upon earth where he resided so many yeers an honour to his King and Countrey, is is now arriv'd at a far more glorious port than that of Constantinople, though as I intimated before, I fear that this boysterous weather hath blown him thither before his time. God Almighty give your
Ladiship patience for so great a loss, and comfort in your hope∣full issue; with this prayer I conclude my self, Madam, Your Lapps most humble and sorrowfull servant, J. H. From the Fleet, 15 Aprill. XXXII. To Mr. ES. Counsellour, at the middle Temple. SIR, I Had yours this morning, and I thank you for the newes you send me that divers of my fellow sufferers are enlarg'd out of Lambeth, Winchester, London, and Ely House: wherunto I may an∣swer you as the Cheapside Porter did one that related Court newes unto him, how such a one was made Lord Treasurer, another Chan∣cellour of the Exchequer, another was made an Earle, another sworn privy Counsellour, I, said he, yet I am but a Porter still; So I may say, I am but a prisoner still notwithstanding the release∣ment of so many: Mistake me not as if I repin'd heerby at any ones liberty; for I could heartily wish that I were the Unic Martyr in this kind, that I were the figure of one with never a cypher after it, as God wot ther are two many, I could wish that as I am the least in value, I  the last in number. A day may com that a favourable wind may blow that I may launch also out of this Fleet, in the mean time and alwaies after I am Fleet, 1 Feb. 1645. Your true constant Servtor, J. H.
XXXIII. To Mr. R. B. at Ipswich, Gentle Sir, I Value at a high rate the sundry respects you have bin pleas'd to shew me; for as you oblig'd me before by your visits, so you have much endeerd your self unto me since by your late letter of the 11 current: Beleeve it Sir, the least scruple of your love is not lost (because I perceive it proceeds from the pure motions of vertue) but returnd to you in the same full proportion; But what you please to ascribe unto me in point of merit, I dare not own: you look upon me through the wrong end of the prospe∣ctive, or rather through a multiplying glass, which makes the object appear far bigger than it is in reall dimension; such glas∣ses as Anatomists use in the dissection of bodies which can make a flea look like a cow, or a fly as big as a vulture. I presume you are constant in your desire to travell, if you in∣tend it at all you cannot do it in a beter time, ther being little com∣fort, God wot, to breath English aire, as matters are carried: I shall be glad to steed you in any thing that may tend to your ad∣vantage; for to tell you truly, I take much contentment in this inchoation of frendship, to improve and perfect which, I shall lie centinell to apprehend all occasions. If you meet Master R, Brownrigg in the Countrey, I pray present my very kind respects unto him, for I  my self to be both his, and Fleet, 15 Aug. 1646. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. XXXIV. To Cap. C. Price Prisoner at Coventry. Cosin, YOu, whom I held alwaies as my second self in affection,  now so in afliction, beig in the same predicament of sufferance
though not in the same prison as I; Ther is nothing sweetneth frendship more than a participation and identity of danger and durance: The day may com that we may discourse with comfort of these sad times, for adversity hath the advantage of prosperity it self in this point, that the commemoration of the one, is oft∣times more delightsom than the fruition of the other: Moreover adversity and prosperity, are like vertue and vice; the two fore∣most of both which, begin with anxieties and pain, but they end comically in contentment and joy; the other two quite contrary, they begin with pleasure, and end in pain, ther's a difference in the last scene. I could wish if ther be no hopes of a speedy releasement you would remove your body hither, and rather than moulder away in idlenes, wee will devoutly blow the coale, and try if we can ex∣lt gold, and bring it o're the helm in this Fleet; we will trans∣mute metalls, and give a resurrection to mortified vegetables, to which end the green Lyon and the dragon, ye Demogorgon and Mer∣cury himself with all the Planets shall attend us, till we com to the Elixer, the true powder of projection which the vulgar call the Philosophers stone: If matters hit right we may heerby get better returns than Cardigan silver mines afford: but we must not melt our selves away as I. Meridith did, nor do as your Countryman Morgan did. I know when you read these lines, youl' say I am grown mad, and that I have taken Opium in lieu of Tobacco: If I be mad, I am but sick of the disease of the time which reigns more among the English, than the sweating siknes did som six score yeers since amongst them, and only them, both at home and abroad. Ther's a strange Magot hath got into their brains, which posses∣seth them with a kind of vertigo, and it reigns in the pulpit more than any wher else; for som of our Preachmen are grown dog mad, ther's a worm got into their toungs, as well as their heads. Hodge Powell commends him unto you, he is here under hatches as well as I; howsoever I am still in fair or foul weather, Fleet, 3 Ian. 1643. Your truly affectionat Cosen to serve you, J. H.
XXXV. To the Right Honourable the Lord of Cherberry. My Lord, GOd send you joy of your new habitation, for I understand your Lordship is remov'd from the Kings-street to the Queens: It may be with this enlargment of dwelling, your Lordship may need a recruit of Servants: The bearer heerof hath a desire to devote himself to your Lordships service, and I find that he hath a concurrence of such parts that may make him capable of it; He is well studied in men, and books, vers'd in busines of all sorts, and writes a very fair hand; He is well extracted, and hath divers good friends that are dwellers in the Town, who wil be respon∣sible for him: Moreover besides this Letter of mine your Lord∣ship will find that he carrieth one in his countenance, for an honest ingenious look is a good Letter of recommendation of it self; If your Lordship hath not present occasion to employ him, hee may bee about you a while like a spare Watch, which your Lordship may wind up at pleasure. So my aym being to do your Lord∣ship service, as much as him a pleasure by this recommendati∣on, I rest Fleet, 13 Iul. 1646. Your Lpps most humble Servant, J. H. XXXVI. To Mr. R. Br. Gentle Sir, YOurs of the fourth current cam safely to hand, and I ac∣knowledg with much contentment, the fair respects you please to shew me; you may be well assur'd that the least grain of your love to mee is not lost but counterbalanc'd with the like in full weight; For although I am as frayl a peece, and as full of infir∣mities as another man, yet I like my own nature in one thing, that I could never endure to be in the arrear to any for love; wher
my hand came short, my heart was bountifull, and help'd to make n equall compensation: I hope you persist in your purpose for forren travell to study a while the world abroad; It is the way to perfect you, and I have already discover'd such choise ingredients, and parts of ingenuity in you, that will quickly make a compleat Gentleman. No more now, but that I am seriously Flt, 3 Iuly. 1646. Yours to dispose of J. H. XXXVII. To Sir L. D. in the Tower. SIR, TO help the passing away of your weary hours between those disconsolat Walls, I have sent you a King of your own name to bear you company Lewis the thirteenth, who, though dead three yeer since, may peradventure afford you som entertainment, and I think that dead men of this nature are the fittest companions, for such that are buried alive as you and I are. I doubt not but you who have a spirit to overcom all things, will overcom the sense of this hard condition, that you may survive these sad times and see better days, I doubt not, as weak as I am, but I shall bee able to doe it my self, in which confidence I stile my self, Flt, 15 Feb. 1646. Your most obliged and ever faithfull Servant, J. H. My most humble Service to Sir J. St: and Sir H. V.
XXXVIII. To Master R. B. Gentle Sir, I Had yours of the second current by Master Bloys, which obli∣geth me to send you double thanks, first for your Letter, then for the choice hand that brought it me. When I had gon through it, me thought your lines wer as leaves, or rather so many branches, amongst which ther sprouted divers sweet blossoms of ingenuity, which I find may quickly com to a rare maturity; I confess this clyme (as matters go) is untoward to im∣prove such buds of vertue, but the times may mend, now that our King with the Sun; makes his approach unto us more and more, yet I fear we shall not com yet a good while to our for∣mer serenity, therfore, it wer not amiss in my judgment if som forraign ayr did blow upon the foresaid blossoms, to ripen them under som other Meridian in the interim, it is the opi∣nion of Fleet, 3 Aug. 1645. Your very respectfull frend to dispose of J. H. XXXIX. To Mr. G: C. at Dublin. SIR, THe news of this week, have been like the waves of that boy∣sterous Sea, through which this Letter is to pass over unto you; Divers reports for peace have swoln high for the time, but they suddenly fell low, and flat again. Our relations heer, are like a peal of bells in a windy blustring weather, somtimes the sound is strong on this side, somtimes on that side of the steeple, so our Relations sound diversly as the yr of affection carries them, and somtimes in a whole volley of news, we shall not find one true report.
Ther was in a Dunkirk ship taken som months ago, hard by A∣rndell Castle, amongst other things a large Picture seas'd upon, and carried to Westminster Hall, and put in the Star-Chamber to be publickly seen; It was the legend of Conanus a British Prince in the time of Gratian the Emperor, who having married Ursula the King of Cornwalls daughter, wer imbarqued with 11000 Vir∣gins for Britany in France to colonize that part with Christians, but being by distress of weather beaten upon the Rhine, because they would not yeeld to the lusts of the Infidels, after the example of Ursula they wer all slain, their bodies wèr carried to Colen wher ther stands to this day a stately Church built for them: this is the Story of that picture, yet the Common peeple heer takes Conanus for our King, and Vrsula for the Queen, and the Bishop which stands hard by to be the Pope, and so stare upon it accordingly, notwithstanding that the Prince there represented, hath Sandalls on his feet after the old fashion, that the Coronets on their heads resemble those of Dukes and Earls, as also that ther are Rays about them, which never use to be applyed to living persons, with divers other incongruities: yet it cannot be beaten out of the belief of thousands heer, but that it was intended to represent our King and Queen, which makes me conclude with this interjection of wonder, Oh the igno∣rance of the common peeple? Fleet, 12 Aug. 1644. Your faithfull frend to command, J. H. XL. To Master End. Por. at Paris. SIR, I Most affectionatly kiss your hands for the account (and candid o∣pinion) you please to give me of the History I sent Her Majesty of the late K. her brothers reign, I return you also a thousand thanks for your comfortable advice, that having bin so long under hatches in this Fleet I should fancy my self to bee in a long voyage at Sea: Tis true, opinion can do much, & indeed she is that great Lady which rules the world; Ther is a wise saying in that Countrey wher you s journ now, that cst nest pas la place, mais la pensée qui sait la pri∣son,
'Tis not the place but opinion that makes the prison, the conceit is more than the condition: you go on to prefer my Captivity in this Fleet to that of a Voyager at Sea, in regard that he is subject to storms and springing of Leaks, to pyrates and Picaoons, with other casualties; you write I have other advantages also, to be free from plundering, and other Barbarismes, that reign now a∣broad; 'tis true I am secur'd from all these, yet touching the first, I could be content to expose my self to all those chances, so that this wer a floating Fleet, that I might breath free ayr, for I have not been suffered to stir ore the threshold of this House this four yeers; wheras you say I have a Book for my companion, 'tis true, I convers somtimes with dead men, and what fitter associats can ther be for one that is buried alive (as I am) than dead men, and now will I adventure to send you a kind of Epitaph I made of my self this morning, as I was lolling a bed, Heer lies intomb'd a walking thing, Whom Fortune (with the States) did fling Between these Walls; Why? ask not that, That blind whore doth she knows not, what. Tis a strange world you'll say, when men make their own Epi∣taphs in their graves, but we that are thus buried alive, have one advantage above others, that we are like to have a double resurre∣ction; I am sure of one, but if these times hold, I cannot ascertain my self of the other, for I may be suffered to rot heer for ought I know: It being the hard destiny of som in these times, when they are once clapp'd up, to be so forgotten as if ther wer no such men in the world. I humbly thank you for your avisos, I cannot correspond with you in that kind as freely as I would, only in the generall I must tell you, that we are com to such a pass, that the Posie which a young couple did put upon their wedding ring, may fit us in the generall, which was, God knows what will becom of us. But I trust these bad times will be recompenced with better; for my part that which keeps me alive is your Motto ther of the house of Bourbon, and tis but one word, L'Sperance. So I pray God preserve you, and Fleet,  2 Ian. 1646. Your most faithfull humble Servitor, J. H.
XLI. To Master J. H. at Saint Johns College in Cambridge. Master Hall, YOurs of the thirteenth of this instant cam safely, though slowly, to hand, for I had it not till the twentieth of the same, and the next day your Essayes were brought me; I en∣terrain'd both with much respect, for I found therin many choice and ripe notions, which I hope proceeds from a pregnancy rather than precocity of spirit in you. I perceive you have entred the Suburbs of Sparta already, and that you are in a fair way to get the Town it self, I know you have wherwith to adorn her; nay you may in time gain Athens her self, with all the knowledg she was ever Mistris of, if you go on in your Carreer with constancy; I find you have a genius for the most solid and everest sort of studies, therfore, when you have pass'd through the Briers of Logic, I could wish you to go strongly on in the fair fields of Philosophy and the Mathematics, which are true Academicall studies, and they will afford rich matter of application for your inventive spirit to work upon; by all means understand Aristotle in his owne Lan∣guage, for it is the Language of Learning; Touching Poe∣try, History, and other humane studies, they may serve you for recreation, but let them not by any means allure your affecti∣ons from the first. I shall delight to hear somtimes of your pro∣ceedings, for I profess a great deal of good will unto you, which makes me rest Your respectfull frend to serve you, J. H. Fleet 3 Decem.
XLII. To my B. the L. B. of B. in France. My good Lord and Br. ALthough the sense of my own hard condition be enough to make me melancholy, yet when I contemplat yours, (as I often do) and compare your kind of banishment with my im∣prisonment, I find the apprehension of the first wherin so many have a share, ads a double weight unto my sufferings, though but single; Truly these thoughts to me are as so many corro∣sives to one already in a Consumption. The World crys you up to be an excellent Divine and Philosopher, now is the time for you to make advantage of both; Of the first, by calling to mind that afflictions are the portion of the best Theophiles; Of the other, by a well weigh'd consideration that crosses and troubles are en∣taild upon man-kind, as much as any other inheritance: In this respect I am no Cadet, for you know I have had a double if not a treble share, and may bee rather call'd the elder brother, but , I hope I shall not sink under the burden, but that we shall be both reserved for better days, specially now that the King (with the Sun and the Spring) makes his approach more and more towards us from the North. God Almighty (the God of our good old Father) still guard you and guide you, that after so long a separation we may meet again with comfort to confer notes and recount matters pass'd; for advers fortune, among other properties, hath this for one, that her present pressures are not so irksom, as the remembrance of them be∣ing passed are delightsom. So I remain Your most loving brother, J. H. Fleet, 1 Maii. 1645.
XLIII. To Sir L. Dives in the Tower. SIR, AMong divers other properties that attend a long captivity, one is that it purgeth the humors, specially it correcteth cho∣lr, and attempers it with phlegme, which you know in Spanish is taken for patience: It hath also a chymicall kind of quality to re∣fie the dross and feculency of a corrupt nature, as fire useth to purifié metalls, and to destroy that terram Adamicam in them as the chymist calls it, for Demogorgon with his vegetables partak'd of Adams malediction as well as other creatures, which makes som of them so foul and imperfect, nature having design'd them all for gold and silver at first,, and 'tis fie can only rectifie, and re∣duc them towards such a perfection. This Fleet hath bin such a furnace to me, it hath bin a kind of Perillus Bull, or rather to use the paracelsian phrase, I have bin heer in ventre equino in the lim∣bec and crusible of affliction: And wheras the chymist commonly requires but 150 daies antequam corvus in columba vertatur, be∣fore the crow turnes to a dove; I have bin heer five times so ma∣ny daies, and upward. I have een heer time enough in consci∣ence to pass all the degrees and effects of fire, as distillation, sub∣limation, mortification, calcination, solution, descension, dealbation, rubification, and fixation, for I have bin fastned to the walls of this prison any time these fifty five moneths; I have bin heer long e∣nough, if I wer matter capable therof, to be made the Philosophers stone, to be converted from water to powder which is the whole Magistery: I have been besides, so long upon the anvill, that me thinks I am grown malleable, and hammer proof, I am so habitu∣ated to hardship: But indeed you that are made of a choicer mold, are fitter to be turned into the Elixer than I who have so much dross and corruption in me, that it will require more paines and much more expence, to be purg'd and defecated: God send us both patience to bear the brunt of this fiery tryall, and grace to turn these decoctions into aquam vitae, to make soveraign treacle of this viper. The Trojan Prince was forced to pass over Phlegeton, and pay Charon his freight, before he could get into the Elyzian fields, you know the morall, that we must pass through hell to
heaven, and why not as well through a prison to Paradise, such may the Towre prove to you, and the Fleet to me, who am From the prison of the Fleet, 23 Feb. 1645. Your humble and hearty Servitor, J. H. XLIV. To the right Honble the Lord R. My Lord, SUre ther is som angry planet hath lowred long upon the Catho∣lic King; and though one of his titles to Pagan Princes be, that he wears the sun for his helmet, because it never sets upon all his dominions, in regard som part of them he on the to'ther side of the Hemisphere among the Antipodes, yet me thinks that neither that great star, or any of the rest are now propitious unto him▪ they cast it seems more benign influxes upon the flower de lu which thrives wonderfully, but how long these favourable aspects will last, I will not presume to judge, This among divers others of late, hath bin a fatall yeer to the said King, for Westward he hath lost Dunkirk; Dunkirk which was the terror of this part of the world, the scourge of the occidentall seas, whose name was grown to be a bugbear for so many yeers, hath now changed her master, and thrown away the ragged staffe; doubtles a great exploit it was to take this town: But whether this be advantagious to Holland? (as I am sure it is not to England) time will shew; It is more than probable that it may make him careless at sea, and in the buil∣ding and arming of his ships, having no enemy now near him; besides I believe it cannot much benefit Hans to have the French  contiguous to him, the old saying was Ayezle Francois pour ton  non pas pour ton Voison: Have the Frenchman for thy frend, not  hy neighbour. Touching England, I believe these distractions of ours have bi one of the greatest advantages that could befall France, and they happened in the most favourable conjuncture of time that migh be, els I beleeve he would never have as much as attempted Dun∣kirk; for England in true reason of State had reason to prevent no∣thing more, in regard no one place could have added more to the navall power of France; this will make his siles swell bigger, and
I car make him claim in time as much regality in these narrow sea as England her self. In Italy the Spaniard hath also had ill successes at Piombino, and Porto longone: Besides they write that he hath lost Il prete, & il medico, the Priest and the Physician, to wit the Pope, and the Duke of Florence (the House of Medici) who appear rather for the French than for him. Ad to all these disasters that he hath lost within the revolution of the same yeer the Prince of Spain his unic Son in the very flow∣er of his age being but seventeen yeers old. These with the falling off of Catalonia and Portugall, with the death of his Queen not a∣bove forty, are heavy losses to the Catholick King, and must needs much enfeeble the great bulk of his Monarchy, falling out in so short a compas of time one upon the neck of another, and we are not to enter into the secret Counsells of God Almighty for a rea∣son. I have read 'twas the sensuality of the flesh that drave the Kings out of Rome, the French out of Sicily, and brought the Moores into Spain, where they kept firm footing above seven hundred yeers: I could tell you how not long before her death the late Queen of Spain took off one of her chapines, and clowted Olivares about the noddle with it, because he had accompanied the King to a Lady of pleasure, telling him, that he should know, she was Sister to a King of France, as well as wife to a King of Spain; For my part, France and Spain is all one to me in point of affecti∣on. I am one of those indifferent men that would have the scales of power in Europe kept even: I am also a Philerenus a lover of peace, and I could wish the French were more inclinable to it, now that the common enemy hath invaded the territories of Saint Mar. Nor can I but admire that at the same time the French should assaile Italy at one side, when the Turke was doing it on the other: But had that great navall power of Christians which wer this summer upon the coasts of Toscany gon against the Maho∣metan Fleet which was the same time setting upon Candie, they might in all likelihood have achieved a glorious exploit, and driven the Turke into the Hellespont. Nor is poor Christendom torn thus in peeces by the German, Spaniard, French and Sweds, but our three Kingdoms have also most pittifully scratch'd her face, wasted her spirits, and let out som of her illustrious bloud, by our late horrid distractions: Wherby it may be infer'd that the Musti and the Pope seem to thrive in their devotion one way, a chief part of the prayers of the one being, that discord should still continue 'twixt Christian Princes, of the other, that division should still increase be∣tween
the Protestants▪ This poor Island is a wofull example th∣of I hear the peace 'twixt Spain and Holland is absolutely conclu∣ded by the plenipotentiary Ministers at Munster, who have beat their heads so many yeers about it, but they write that the French and Swed do mainly endeavour, and set all the wheels of policy a going to puzzle and prevent it; If it take effect, as I do not see how the Hollander in common honesty can evade it, I hope it will conduce much to an universall peace, which God grant, for Wa is a fire struck in the Devills tinder box. No more now but that I am, My Lord, Your most humble Servitor, J. H. Fleet, 1 Decem. 1643. XLV. To Mr. E. O. Counsellour, at Grayes Inne. SIR, THe sad tidings of my dear frend Doctor Prichards death sunk deep into me, and the more I ruminat upon't, the more I resent it: But when I contemplat the order, and those Adaman∣tine laws which nature put in such strict execution throughout this elementary world; When I consider that up and down this frail globe of earth we are but strangers, or sojourners at best, be∣ing design'd for an infinitely better Countrey; when I think that our egress out of this life, is as naturall to us as our ingress (all which he knew as much as any,) these thoughts in a checking way turn my melancholy to a counter passion, they beget another spi∣rit within me: You know that in the disposing of all sublunary things, Nature is Gods Handmaid, Fate his Commissioner, Time his Instrument, and Death his Executioner; By the first we have gene∣ration, by the second, successes good or bad, And the two last▪ bring us to our end; Time with his vast sith mowes down all things, and Death sweeps away those mowings: Well, he was a rare, and a compleat judicious Scholar, as any that I have known
born under our Meridian, He was both solid and acute, nor do I re∣member to have seen soundnes and quaintnes with such sweet straines of morality concur so in any. I should think that he fell ick of the times, but that I knew him to be so good a Divine and Philosopher, and to have studied the theory of this world so much, that nothing could take impression in him to hurt himself, therfore I am content to beleeve, that his glass ran out without my jogging: I know you lov'd him deerly well, which shall make e the more Fleet, 3 Aug. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. XLVI. To I. W. Esq at Grayes Inne. Gentle Sir, I Value at a high rate the fair respects you shew me, by the late ingenious expressions of your Letter; But the merit you as∣cribe unto me in the superlative, might have very well serv'd in the positive, and 'tis well if I deserve in that degree. You write that you have singular contentment and profit, in the perusall of som things of mine, I am heartily glad they afforded any enter∣tainment to a Gentleman of so choice a judgement as your self. I have a foolish working braine of mine own, in labour still with somthing, and I can hardly keep it from superfetations, though oftimes it produce a Mouse in lieu of a Mountaine; I ust confess it's best productions are but homely and hard fa∣our'd, yet in regard they appear handsom in your eyes, I shall  them the better, So I am, Sir, Yours most obliged to serve you, J. H. Fleet, 3 Ian. 1644.
XLVII. To Mr. Tho. H. SIR, THough the times abound with Schismes more than ever ( more is our misery) yet, I hope, you will not suffer any  creep into our frendship, though I apprehend som feares therof b your long silence, and cessation of literall correspondence; Yo know ther is a peculiar Religion attends frendship, ther is accor∣ding to the Etymologie of the word, a ligation and solemne  the resinding wherof may be truly call'd a Schisme, or a  which is more; Ther belongs to this Religion of frendship  due rites, and decent ceremonies, as visits, messages and  sives; Though I am content to beleeve that you are firm in th fundamentalls, yet I find under favor, that you have lately  en short of performing these exteriour offices, as if the ceremo ll law were quite abrogated with you in all things: Frends also allowes of merits, and workes of supererogation somtimes  make her capable of Eternity: You know that pair which wer  ken up into the heaven, and placed amongst the brightest stam for their rare constancy and fidelity one to the other; you kno also they are put among the fixed stars not the ratices, to  her must be no inconstancy in love; Navigators steer their cour by them, and they are their best frends in working Seas,  nights, and distresses of weather, whence may be infer'd that  frends should shine clearest in adversity, in clowdy and doubtf times. On my part this ancient frendship is still pure,  dox and incorrupted, and though I have not the opportunity ( you have) to perform all the ites therof in regard of this rec life, yet I shall never erre in the essentialls, I am still yours  though I cannot be , for in statu quo nunc I am grown  less and good for nothing, yet in point of possession I am as  as ever Fleet, 7 Novem. 1643. Your firm inalterable Servitor, J. H.
XLVIII. To Mr. S. B. Merchant, at his house in the old Jury. SIR, I Returne you those two famous speeches of the late Queen Eli∣zabeth, with the addition of another from Badius at an Em∣bassy heer from Holland; It is with languages as 'tis with liuors which by transfusion use to take wind from one vessell to another, so things translated into another tongue lose of their primative vigor and strength, unless a paraphrasticall version be permitted, and then the traduct may exceed the Originall, not otherwise though the version be never so punctuall, specially in these Orations which are fram'd with such art, that like Vitruvius his palace, ther is no place left to ad one stone more without defacing, or to take any out without hazard of destroying the whole fabric. Certainly she was a Princess of rare endowments for learning and languages, she was bless'd with a long life, and triumphant reign attended with various sorts of admirable successes, which will be taken for som Romance a thousand winters hence, if the world lasts so long: She freed the Scot from the French, and gave her successor a royall pension to maintain his Court; She help'd to settle the Crown on Henry the greats head; She gave es∣sence to the state of Holland; She civiliz'd Ireland, and suppres'd divers insurrections there; She preserv'd the dominion of the Narrow Seas in greater glory than ever; She maintain'd open War against Spain when Spain was in her highest flourish for di∣vers yeers together, yet She left a mighty treasure behind, which shewes that she was a notable good huswife; Yet I have read di∣vers censures of her abroad; that she was ingratefull to Her Bro∣ther of Spain, who had bin the chiefest instrument under God to preserve her from the block, and had left her all Queen Maries jewells without diminution, accusing her that afterwards She should first infringe the peace with him, by intercepting his trea∣sure in the Narrow Seas, by suffering her Drake to swim to his In∣dies, and rob him there, by fomenting and supporting his Belgique Subjects against him then when he had an Ambassador resident at
her Court: But this was the censure of a Spanish Author, and Spaine had little reason to speak well of her; The French handle her worse, by terming her, among other contumelies, l'  de ses propres vassaux. Sir, I must much value the frequent respects you have shewn me, & am very covetous of the improvement of this acquaintance, for I do not remember at home or abroad to have seen in the person of any, a Gentleman and a Merchant so equally met, as in your, which makes me stile my self, Fleet 3 May, 1645. Your most affectionat frend to serve you, J. H. XLIX. To Dr. D. Featley. SIR, I Received your answer to that futilous pamphlet, with your de∣sire of my opinion touching it. Truly Sir, I must tell you that never poor Curr was toss'd in a blanquet, as you have toss'd that poor coxcomb in the sheet you pleas'd to send me, For wheras  fillip might have fell'd him, you have knock'd him down with a kind of Herculean club sans resource. These times (more's the pitty) labour with the same disease that France did during the Ligue,  a famous Author hath it prurig scripturintium erat scabies temp∣rum. The itching of scriblers, was the scab of the time; It i just so now, that any triobolary pasquiller, evry trssis agas any sterquilinious raskall, is licenc'd to throw dirt in the faces  Soveraign Pinces in open printed language: But I hope t times will mend, and your man also if he hath any grace, you ha so well corrected him, So I rest Fleet, 1 Aug. 1644. Yours to serve and reverence you, J. H.
L. To Captain T. L. in Westchester. Captain L. I Could wish that I had the same advantage of speed to send un∣to you at this time, that they have in Alexandreia, now call'd Scanderoon, when upon the arrivall of any ships into the Bay, or any other important occasion, they use to send their Letters by Pigeons, trained up purposely for that use, to Aleppo and other places; such an airy Messenger, such a volatil postillon would I desire now to acquaint you with the sicknes of your mother in law, who I beleeve will be in another world (and I wish it may be heaven) before this paper comes to your hands; for the Phy∣sicians have forsaken her, and Doctor Burton told me 'tis a mira∣cle, if she lasts a naturall day to an end, therfore you shall do well to post up as soon as you can, to look to your own affairs, for I beleeve you will be no more sick of the Mother; Master Davies in the mean time told me he will be very carefull, and circum∣spect that you be not wrong'd. I receiv'd yours of the tenth cur∣rent, and I return a thousand thanks for the warm and melting sweet expressions you make of your respects unto me; All that I can say at present in answer, is, that I extremely please my self in loving you, and I like my own affections the better, because they tell me that I am Westm. 10 Decem. 1631. Your entirely devoted frend, J. H. LI. To my Honorable frend Sir C. C. SIR, I Was upon point of going abroad to steal a solitary walk, when yours of the twelfth current came to hand, the high researches, and choice abstracted Notions I found therin seem'd to heighten
my Spirits, and make my fancy fitter for my intended retirement and meditation; ad heerunto that the countenance of the weather invited me, for it was a still evening, it was also a clear open sky, not a speck, or the least wrinkle appeard in the whole face of hea∣ven, 'twas such a pure deep azur all the Hemisphere over that I wondred what was becom of the three Regions of the ayr with their Meteors; So having got into a close field, I cast my face upward, and tell to consider what a rare prerogative the optic vertue of the eye hath, much more the intutitive vertue of the thought, that the one in a moment can reach heaven, and the other go beyond it: Therfore sure that Philosopher was but a kind of frantic fool, that would have pluck'd out both his eys because, they wer a hinderance to his speculations: Moreover I began to contemplat as I was in this posture the vast magnitude of the Univers, and what propor∣tion this poor globe of earth might bear with it, for if those num∣berless bodies which stick in the vast roof of heaven, though they appear to us but as spangles, be, som of them, thousands of times bigger than the earth take the sea with it to boot, for they both make but one Sphear, surely, the Astronomers had reason to tearm this sphear an indivisible point, and a thing of no dimension at all being compar'd to the whole world; I fell then to think that at the second generall destruction it is no more for God Almighty to fire this earth, than for us to blow up a small Squibb, or rather one grain of Gun-powder: As I was musing thus, I spyed a swarm of Gnats waving up and down the ayr about me, which I knew to be part of the Univers as well as I, and me thought it was a strange opinion of our Aristotle to hold that the least of those small in∣sected ephemerans should be more noble than the Sun, because it had a sensitive soul in it, I fell to think that the same proportion which those animalillios bore with me in point of bignes, the same I held with those glorious Spirits which are near the Throne of the Almighty: what then should we thinke of the magnitude of the Creator himself, doubtles tis beyond the reach of any human im∣magination to conceive it; In my privat devotions I presume to compare him to a great mountain of light, and my soul seems to discern som glorious form therin, but suddenly as she would fix her eyes upon the object, her sight is presently dazled and disgre∣gated with the efulgency and coruscations therof. Walking a little further I spyed a young boysterous Bull brea∣king over hedge and ditch to a heard of kine in the next pasture, which made me think that if that fierce strong Animal, with others of that kind knew their own strength, they world never suffer
man to be their Master; Then looking upon them quietly grasing up and down, I fell to consider that the flesh which is daily dish'd upon our Tables is but concocted grass, which is recarnified in our stomacks, and transmuted to another flesh; I fell also to think what advantage those innocent Animalls had of man, who, as soon as nature casts them into the world, find their meat dress'd, the cloth laid, and the table cover'd, they find their drink brew'd and the buttery open, their beds made, and their cloaths ready; And though man hath the faculty of reason to make him a compensa∣tion for the want of these advantages, yet this reason brings with it a thousand perturbations of mind, and perplexities of spi∣rit, griping cares, and anguishes of thought, which those harm∣les silly creatures were exempted from: Going on, I came to re∣pose my self upon the trunk of a tree, and I fell to consider fur∣ther what advantage that dull vegetable had of those feeding A∣nimalls, as not to be so troublesom and beholding to nature, nor to be so subject to starving, to diseases, to the inclemency of the weather, and to be far longer liv'd: I then spyed a great stone, and sitting a while upon't, I fell to weigh in my thoughts that that stone was in a happier condition in som respects, than either those sensitive creatures or vegetables I saw before, in re∣gard that that stone, which propagates by assimilation as the Philo∣sophers say, needed neither grass nor hay, or any aliment for re∣stauration of nature, nor water to refresh its roots, or the heat of the Sun to attract the moisture upwards to encrease growth as the other did: As I directed my pace homeward, I spyed a Kite soa∣ing high in the ayr, and gently gliding up and down the clear Region so far above my head, I fell to envy the Bird extremely, and epine at his happines that hee should have a privilege to make a nearer approach to heaven than I. Excuse me that I trouble you thus with these rambling medita∣tions, they are to correspond with you in som part for those accu∣rat fancies of yours you lately sent me. So I rest Holborn, 17 Mar. 1639. Your entire and true Servitor. J. H
LII. To master Sergeant D. at Lincolns▪Inn. SIR, I Understand with a deep sense of sorrow of the indisposition of your son: I fear he hath too much mind for his body, and that he superabounds with fancy, which brings him to these fits of di∣stemper proceeding from the black humor of Melancholy: More∣over I have observed that hee is too much given to his study and self-society, specially to convers with dead men, I mean Books: you know any thing in excess is naught: Now Sir wer I worthy to give you advice, I could wish he wer well married, and it may wean him from that bookish and thoughtfull humor; women wer created for the comfort of men, and I have known that to som they have prov'd the best Heleborum against Melancholy: As this course may beget new spirits in him, so it must needs ad also to your comfort. I am thus bold with you, because I love the Gentle∣man dearly well, and honor you, as being West. 13 Iune, 1632. Your humble obliged servant, J. H. LIII. To my noble Lady, the Lady M. A. Madame, THer is not any thing wherin I take more pleasure, than in the accomplishment of your commands, nor had ever any Queen more power o're her Vassalls, than you have o're my in∣tellectualls; I find by my inclinations, that it is as naturall for me to do your will, as it is for fire to fly upward, or any body els to rend to his center; but touching the last command your Ladiship was pleased to lay upon me (which is the following Hymne) if I answer not the fulness of your expectation, it must be imputed to the suddennes of the command, and the shortnes of time.
A Hymne to the Blessed Trinity. To the First Person. To thee dread Soveraign, and dear Lord, Which out of nought didst me afford Essence and life, who mad'st me man, And, oh, much more a Christian, Lo, from the centre of my heart All laud and glory I impart. Hallelujah. To the Second. To thee blessed Saviour who didst free My soul from Satans tyrannie, And mad'st her capable to be An Angel of thy Hierarchy, From the same centre I do raise, All honor and immortall praise. Hallelujah. To the Third. To thee sweet Spirit I return That love wherwith my heart doth burn, And these bless'd notions of my brain I now breath up to thee again, O let them redescend, and still My soul with holy raptures fill. Hallelujah. They are of the same measure, cadence, and ayr, as was that an∣gelicall Hymne your Ladiship pleased to touch upon your instru∣ment, which as it so enchanted me then that my soul was ready to com out at my ears, so your voice took such impressions in mee, that me thinks the sound still remains fresh with Westm. 1 Apr. 1637. Your Ladiships most devoted Servitor, J. H.
XLIV. To Master P. W. at Westminster. SIR, THe fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom, and the Love of God is the end of the Law; the former saying was spoke by no meaner man than Solomon; but the latter hath no meaner Au∣thor than our Savior himself; Touching this beginning, and this end, ther is a near relation between them, so near, that the one be∣gets the tother; a harsh mother may bring forth somtimes a mild daughter, so fear begets love, but it begets knowledg first, for—Ign∣ti nulla cupido, we cannot love God, unless we know him before; both fear and love are necessary to bring us to heaven, the one is the fruit of the Law, the other of the Gospell; when the clouds of fear are vanish'd, the beams of love then begin to glance upon the heart, and of all the members of the body, which are in a maner numberless, this is that which God desires, because, 'tis the centre of Love, the source of our affections, and the ci∣stern that holds the most illustrious bloud; and in a sweet and well devoted harmonious soul, cor is no other than Camera Omnipotentis Regis, 'tis one of Gods closets, and indeed nothing can fill the heart of man whose desires are infinite, but God who is infinity itself: Love therfore must be a necessary attendant to bring us to him; but besides Love ther must be two other guides that are re∣quir'd in this journey, which are Faith and Hope, now that fear which the Law enjoyns us, turns to faith in the Gospell, and knowledg is the scope and subject of both, yet these last two bring us onely towards the haven, but love goes along with us to hea∣ven, and so remains an inseparable sempiternall companion of of the soul: Love therfore is the most acceptable Sacrifice which we can offer our Creator, and he who doth not study the Theory of it heer, is never like to com to the Practise of it heeraf∣ter: It was a high hyper physicall expression of St. Austustine when he fell into this rapture, that if hee wer King of Heaven, and God Almighty Bishop of Hippo, he would exchange places with him, because he lov'd him so well. This Vote did so take me, that I have turn'd it to a paraphrasticall Hymn, which I send you for your Violl, having observed often that you have a harmonious soul within you.
The Vote. Oh God who can those passions tell Wherwith my heart to thee doth swell! I cannot better them declare Than by the wish made by that rare Auelian Bishop who of old Thy Oraces in Hippo told. If I were Thou and thou wert I, I would resign the Deity, Thou shouldst be God, I would be man, Is't possible that love more can? Oh pardon, that my soul hath tane So high a flight and grows prophane: For my self my dear Phil, because I love you so dearly well, I will display my very intrinsecalls to you in this point, when I ex∣mine the motions of my heart, I find that I love my creator a thou∣sand degrees more than I fear him, me thinks I feel the little needle of my soul touch'd with a kind of magnetical attractive vertue, that  alwaies moves towards him, as being her sum mum bonum, the rue center of her happines: For matter of fear, ther's none that  fear more than my self, I mean those frailti which lodg within  and the extravagancies of my affections and thoughts, in this particular I may say, that I fear my self more than I fear the Devill  death who is the King of feares. God guard us all, and guid us  our last home through the briers of this cumbersom life; in this yer I rest Holborn, 21 Mar. 1639. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H.
LV. To the Right Honourable the Lord Cliff. My Lord, SInce among other passages of entertainment we had lately at the Italian ordinary (where your Lordship was pleas'd to honour us with your presence) their happen'd a large discourse of wines, and of other drinks that wer us'd by severall Nations of the earth, and that your Lordship desir'd me to deliver what I observ'd ther∣in abroad, I am bold now to confirm and amplifie in this letter what I then let drop extempore from me, having made a recollecti∣on of my self for that purpose. It is without controversie that in the nonage of the world, men and beasts had but one buttery which was the fountaine and river, nor do we read of any vines or wines till two hundred yeers after the flood, but now I do not know or hear of any nation that hath water only for their drink except the Iaponois, and they drink it hot too; but we may say that what beverage soever we make either by brewing, by distillation, decoction, percolation or pressing, it is but water at first, nay wine it self is but water sublim'd, be∣ing nothing else but that moysture and sap which is caus'd either by rain or other kind of irrigations about the roots of the vine and drawn up to the branches and berries by the virtuall attractive heat of the Sun, the bowells of the earth serving as a limbec to that end, which made the Italian vineyard-man (after a long drouth, and an extream hot summer, which had parch'd up all his grapes,) to complain that per mancamento d'acqua, bevo del'acqua, se io havessi acqua, beverei el vino, for want of water, I am forc'd to drink water, if I had water I would drink wine; it may be also applied to the Miller when he hath no water to drive his mills. The vine doth so abhor cold, that it cannot grow beyond the 49 degree to any purpose; Therfore God and nature hath furnish'd the Northwest Nations with other inventions of beverage. In this Island the old drink was Ale, noble Ale, than which, as I heard a great forren Doctor affirm, ther is no liquor that more encreaseth the radicall moisture, and preserves the naturall heat, which are the two pillers that support the life of man; but since Beer hath
hopp'd in among us, Ale is thought to be much adulterated, and nothing so good as Sir Iohn Old Castle and Smug the Smith was us'd to drink: Besides Ale and Beer, the naturall drink of part of this Isle may be said to be Metheglin, Braggot, and Mead, which differ in strength according to the three degrees of comparison: The first of the three, which is strong in the superlatif, if taken immoderately, doth stupifie more than any other liquor, and keeps a humming in the brain, which made one say that he lov'd not Metheglin because he was us'd to speak too much of the house he came from, meaning the hive: Sider and Perry are also the na∣turall drinks of part of this Isle; But I have read in som old Au∣thors of a famous drink the ancient Nation of the Picts, who li∣ved 'twixt Trent and Tweed and were utterly extinguished by the over-powring of the Scot, wer used to make of decoction of flowers, the receipt wherof they kept as a secret and a thing sacred to them∣selves, so it perish'd with them: These are all the common drinks of this Isle, and of Ireland also, where they are more given to milk and strong waters of all colours, the Prime is Vsquebagh which cannot be mado any where in that perfection, and wheras we drink it heer in aqua vitae measures, it goes down there by beer glassfulls, being more naturall to the nation. In the seventeen Provinces hard by, and all low Gernmany, beer is the common naturall drink, and nothing else, so is it in Westfalia, and all the lower circuit of Saxony, in Denmark, Sweth∣land, and Norway; The Prusse hath a beer as thick as hony, in the Duke of Saxes Country, ther is beer as yellow as gold made of wheat, and it inebriates as soon as Sack. In som parts of Ger∣many they use to spice their beer, which will keep many yeers, so that at som weddings ther will be a but of beer drunk out as old as the Bride. Poland also is a beer Country, but in Russia, Muscovie, and Tartary they use mead, which is the naturallest drink of the Country, being made of the decoction of water, and hony, this is that which the Ancients call'd Hydromel; Mares milk is a great drink with the Tartar, which may be a cause why they are bigger then ordinary, for the Physicians hold, that milk enlargeth the bones, Beer strengtheneth the nerves, and wine breeds bloud sooner than any other liquor. The Turke when he hath his tripe full of pelaw, or of Muton and Rice, will go to natures cellar, either to the next Well or River to drinke water, which is his naturall common drink, for Mahomet taught them, that ther was a devill in evry berry of the grape, and so made a strict in∣hibition to all his sect from drinking of wine as a thing prophane;
he had also a reach of policy therin, because they should no b inumbred with luggage when they went to war as other Nation do, who are so troubled with the carriage of their wine and beve∣rages: yet hath the Turk peculiar drinks to himself besides,  Sherbet made of juice of lemon, sugar, amber and other ingredi∣ents; he hath also a drink call'd Cauphe, which is made of a brow berry, and it may be call'd their clubbing drink between meale which though it be not very gustfull to the palate, yet it is ver comfortable to the stomack, and good for the sight; but notwith∣standing their prophets Anathema, thousands of them will ven∣ture to drink wine, and they will make a precedent prayer to thei soules to depart from their bodies in the interim, for fear she par∣take of the same pollution: nay, the last Turk died of excess o wine, for he had at one time swallow'd three and thirty okes  which is a measure near upon the bignes of our quart, and tha which brought him to this, was the company of a Persian Lor that had given him his daughter for a present, and came with him from Bagdat; besides one accident that happened to him was, th he had an Eunuch who was used to be drunk, and whom he had commanded twice upon pain of life to refrain, swearing by Maho∣met that he would cause him to be strangled if he found him the third time so, yet the Eunuch still continued in his drunkenes▪ heerupon the Turk conceiving with himself that ther must needs be som extraordinary delight in drunkenes because this man pre∣ferred it before his life, fell to it himself, and so drunk himself to death In Asia ther is no beer drunk at all, but Water, Wine, and an incredible variety of other drinks made of Dates, dried Raisons, Rice, divers sorts of Nutts, fruits and roots: In the Orientall Countries as Cambaia, Calicut, Narsingha, ther is a drink call'd Banque, which is rare and precious, and 'tis the height of entertain∣ment they give their guests before they go to sleep, like that Nepen∣the which the Poets speak so much of, for it provokes pleasing dreames, and delightfull phantasies, it will accommode it self to the humor of the sleeper, as if he be a souldier he will dream of victories and taking of towns, if he be in love he will think to en∣joy his mistress, if he be covetous he will dream of mountaine of Gold, &c. In the Moluccas and Philippines ther is a curious drink call'd Tampoy, mde of a kind of Gilliflowers, and another drink call'd Otraqua that comes from a Nut, and is the more generall drink. In China they have a holy kind of liquor made of such sort of flowers for ratifying and binding of bargaines, and having
drunk therof, they hold it no less than perjury to break what they promise, as they write of a River in Bythinia, whose water hath  peculiar vertue to discover a perjurer, for if he drink therof, it will presently boyl in his stomack, and put him to visible tortures; this makes me think of the River Styx among the Poets which the Gods were used to swear by, and it was the greatest oath for per∣formance of any thing. Nubila promisse Styx mihi testis erit. It puts me in mind also of that which som write of the River of Rhine for trying the legitimation of a child being thrown in, if he be a basterd he will sink, if otherwise he will not. In China they speak of a tree called Maguais, which affords not only good drink being pierced, but all things else that belong to the subsistence of man; they bore the trunk with a nwger, and ther issueth out sweet potable liquor; 'twixt the rinde and the tree ther is a cotton or hempie kind of moss which they wear for their cloathing; it beares huge nuts which have excellent food in them; it shoots out hard prickles above a fathom long, and those arme them, with the bark they make Tents, and the dotard trees serve for firing. Afric also hath a great diversity of drinks, at having more need of them being a hotter Countrey far: In Guiney or the lower Ethi∣opia ther is a famous drink call'd Mingol, which issueth out of a tree much like the Palm, being bored; But in the upper Ethiopia or the Habassi countrey, they drink Mead decocted in a different manner, ther is also much wine there; the common drink of Barbary, after water, is that which is made of Dates: But in Egypt in times passed ther was beer drunk, call'd Zithus in latin, which was no other than a decoction of Barly and water, they had also a famous composition (and they use it to this day) called Chiffi, made of divers cordialls and provocative ingredients, which they throw into water to make it gustfull, they use it also for fumigati∣ons, But now the generall drink of Egypt is Nile water, which of all waters may be said to be the best, insomuch that Pindars words might be more appliable to that than to any other . It doth not only fertilize, and extremely fatten the soil which it covers, but it helps to impregnat barren women, for ther is no place on earth wher peeple encrease and multiply faster; 'tis yel∣lowish and thick, but if one cast a few Almonds into a potfull of it, it will becom as clear as rock water, it is also in a degree of luke∣warmnes as Martialls boy
Tolle puer calices tepidique toreumata Nili. In the new world they have a world of drinks, for ther i no root, flower, fruit or pulse but is reducible to a potable liquor, as in the Barbado Island the common drink among the English, is Mobbi made of Potato roots: In Mexico, and Peru which is the great continent of America, with other parts, it is prohibited to make Wines under great penalties for fear of starving of trade, so that all the Wines they have are sent from Spain. Now for the pure Wine Countries, Greece with all her Islands, Italy, Spain, France, one part of foure of Germany, Hungary, with divers Countries therabouts, all the Islands in the mediterranean and Atlantic sea, are Wine Countries. The most generous wines of Spain, grow in the mid-land parts of the continent, and Saint Martin beares the bell which is near the Court; Now as in Spain so in all other wine Countries one cannot pass a daies journey but he will find a differing race of wine▪ those kinds that our Merchants carry over are those only that grow upon the sea-side, as Malagas, Sheries, Tents, and Aligants; of this last ther's little comes over right, therfore, the Vinteners make Tent (which is a name for all Wines in Spain except white) to sup∣ply the place of it; Ther is a gentile kind of white wine growes among the mountains of Galicia, but not of body enough to bear the sea, call'd Ribadavia; Portugall affords no wines worth the transporting; they have an od stone we call Yef which they use to throw into their Wines, which clarifieth it, and makes it more lasting. Ther's also a drink in Spain call'd Alsha, which they drink between meales in hot weather, and 'tis a Hydromel made of water and hony, much of the tast of our Mead: In the Court of Spain ther's a German or two that brews beer; but for that ancient drink of Spain which Pliny speaks of, compos'd of flowers, the receit ther∣of is utterly lost. In Greece ther are no wines that have bodies enough to bear the sea for long voyages, som few Muscadells, and Malmes are brought over in small Casks; nor is ther in Italy any wine trans∣ported to England but in bottles, as Verdé and others, for the length of the voyage makes them subject to pricking and to lose colour, by reason of their delicacy. France participating of the clymes of all the Countries about her, affords wines of quality accordingly, as towards the Alpes and Italy she hath a luscious rich wine call'd Frontiniac; In the
Countrey of Province toward the Pyrnies in Languedoe ther are wines congustable with those of Spain; one of the prime sort of white wines is that of Beaume, and of Clarets that of Orleans, though it be interdicted to wine the Kings Cellar with it in regard of the corrosivenes it carries with it; As in France so in all other wine Countries the white is called the female, and the Claret or red wine is called the male, because commonly it hath more sulpher, body and heat in't: The wines that our Merchants bring over upon the River of Garond near Bourdeaux in Gascogny which is the greatest Mart for wines in all France; The Scot because he hath alwaies bin an usefull confederate to France against England hath (among other privileges) right of preemption or first choice of wines in Bourdeaux; he is also permitted to carry his Ordnance to the very walls of the Town, wheras the English are forc'd to leave them at Blay a good way distant down the river: Ther is a hard green wine that grows about Rochll and the Islands therabouts, which the cunning Hollander somtime used to fetch, and he hath a trick to put a bag of herbs, or som other infusions into it (as he doth bimstone in Rhenish) to give it a whiter tincture, and more sweet∣nes, then they reimbark it or England, where it passeth for good Bhrag, and this is called stooming of wines; In Normandy there's little or no wine at all grows, therfore the common drink of that Countrey is cyder, specially in low Normandy; Ther are also many beer houses in Paris and elsewhere, but though their barley and water be better then ours, or that of Germany, and though they have English and Dutch brewers amongst them, yet they cannot make beer in that perfection, The prime wines of Germany grow about the Rhine specially in the Pfalts or lower Palatinat about Backrag, which hath its Etimo∣logie from Bacchi aa, for in ancient times ther was an Altar ere∣cted there to the honour of Bacchus, in regard of the richnes of the wines. Here and all France over 'tis held a great part of in∣civility for maidens to drink wine untill they are married, as it is in Spain for them to wear high shooes or to paint till than; The Germain mothers, to make their sons fall into hatred of wine, do use when they are little to put som owles eggs into a cup of Rhe∣nish, and somtimes a little living eel which twingling in the wine while the child is drinking so scares him that many com to abhor and have an antipathy to wine all their lives after. From Backrag the fist stocks of vines which grow now in the grand Canary Island were brought, which with the heat of the Sun and the Soyle, is grown now to that height of perfection, that the wine which they
afford are accounted the richest, the most firm, the best bodied and lastingst wine, and the most defecated from all earthly grossenes of any other whatsoever, it hath little or no sulphur at all in't, and leaves less dreggs behind, though one drink it to exces; French wines may be said but to pickle meat in the stomack, but this is the wine that disgests, and doth not only breed good bloud, but it nutrifieth also, being a glutinous substantiall liquour; of this wine, if of any other, may be verified that merry induction, That good wine makes good bloud, good bloud causeth good hu∣mors, good humors cause good thoughts, good thoughts bring forth good works, good works carry a man to heaven, ergo good wine carrieth a man to heaven; if this be true surely more En∣glish go to heaven this way then any other, for I think ther's more Canary brought into England then to all the world besides, I think also ther is a hundred times more drunk under the name of Cana∣ry wine then ther is brought in, for Sherries and Malagas well min∣gled pass for Canaries in most Taverns more often then Canary it self, els I do not see how 'twere possible for the Vintner to save by it; or to live by his calling unless he were permitted somtimes to be a Brewer. When Sacks and Canaries were brought in first among us, they were us'd to be drunk in Aquavita measures, and 'twas held fit only for those to drink of them who us'd to carry their leggs in their hands, their eyes upon their noses, and an Alma∣nack in their bones; but now they go down every ones throat both young and old like milk. The Countries that are freest from exces of drinking are Spain and Italy; If a Woman can prove her Husband to have been thrice drunk, by the the ancient laws of Spain she may plead for a divorce from him: Nor indeed can the Spaniard being hot brain bear much drink, yet I have heard that Gondamar was once too hard for the King of Denmark when he was here in England; But the Spanish Souldiers that have bin in the Wars of Flanders will take their cups freely, and the Italians also; when I liv'd to'  side the Alpes, a Gentleman told me a merry tale of a Liguria Souldier who had got drunk in Genoa, and Prince Doria going horseback to walk the round one night, the Souldier took his horse by the bridle, and ask'd what the price of him was for he wanted horse, the Prince seeing in what humor he was, caus'd him  be taken into a house and put to sleep: In the morning he  for him and askd him what he would give for his horse, Sir,  the recovered Souldier, the Merchant that would have bought  yyesternight of your Highnesse, went away betimes in the morning
The boonest compagnions for drinking are the Greeks and Ger∣mains; But the Greek is the merrier of the two, for he will sing and dance and kiss his next compagnion; but the other will drink as deep as he; if the Greek will drink as many glasses as ther be letters in his Mistresses name, the other will drink the number of his yeers, and though he be not apt to break out into singing, be∣ing not of so airy a constitution, yet he will drink often musical∣ly a health to every one of these 6. notes, Ut, Re, Mi, a, Sol, La; which, with his reason, are all comprehended in this Exameter. Ut Relevet Miserum Fatum Solitosque Labores. The fewest draughts he drinks are three, the first to quench the thirst pass'd, the second to quench the present thirst, the third to prevent the future: I heard of a company of low Dutchmen that had drunk so deep, that beginning to stagger and their heads turning round they thought verily they were at Sea, and that the upper chamber, wher they were, was a ship, insomuch that it be∣ing soul windy weather they fel to throw the stools, and other things out of the window to lighten the vessell for fear of suffering ship∣wrack. Thus have I sent your Lordship a dry discourse upon a fluent sub∣iect, yet I hope your Lordship will please to take all in good part▪ because it proceeds from Westmin. 17 Octo. 1634. Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. LVI. To the R. H. the E. R. My Lord, YOur desires have bin alwaies to me as commands, and your commands as binding as Acts of Parliament; Nor do I take pleasure to employ head or hand in any thing more then in the exact performance of them; Therfore if in this crabbed difficult task, you have bin pleas'd to impose upon me about languages, I com short of your Lorships expectation, I hope my obedience
will apologize for my disability: But wheras your Lordship de∣sires to know what wer the originall Mother Tongues of the Coun∣treys of Europe, and how these modern speeches that are now in use wer first introduced, I may answer hereunto, that it is almost as easie a thing to discover the source of Nile, as to find out the o∣riginall of som languages, yet I will attempt it as well as I can, and I will take my first rise in these Islands of great Britain and Ireland; for to be curious and Eagle-eyd abroad, and to be blind and ignorant at home (as many of our Travellers are now a dayes) is a curiosity that carrieth with it more of affectation than any thing els. Touching the Isle of Albion or great Britany, the Cambrian or Cymraccan tongue commonly call'd Welsh (and Italian also is so call'd by the Dutch) is without controversie the prime maternall tongue of this Island, and connaturall with it, nor could any of the four conquests that have bin made of it by Roman, Saxon, Dane or Norman ever extinguish her, but she remaines still pure and in∣corrupt; of which language ther is as exact and methodicall a Grammar, with as regular precepts, rules, and institutions both for prose and verse compild by Doctor David Rice as I have read in any tongue whatsoever: som of the authentiquest Anna∣lists report that the old Gaules (now the French) and the Bri∣tains understood one another, for they came thence very frequently to be instructed heer by the Brittish Druydes which were the Philoso∣phers and Divines of those times, and this was long before the latin tongue came a this side the Alps, or books written, and ther is no meaner man  Caesar himself records this. This is one of the fourteen vernacular and independent tongues of Europe, and she hath divers dialects; the first is the Cornish, the second the Armonicans or the inhabitants of Britany in France, whither a colony was sent over hence in the time of the Romanes. Ther was also another dialect of the British language among the Picts, who kept in the North parts in Northumberland, Westme∣land, Cumberland, and som parts beyond Tweed, untill the whole Nation of the Scot poured upon them with such multitudes that they utterly extinguish'd both them and their language. Ther are som which have been curious in the comparison of tongues, who believe that the Irish is but a dialect of the ancient British, and the learnedst of that Nation in a privat discourse I happened to have with him, seemd to incline to this opinion; but this I can assure your Lordship of, that at my being in that Country I observ'd by a privat collection which I made, that a great multitude o
their radicall words are the same with the Welsh, both for seale and sound, the tone also of both the Nations is consonant, or when I first walked up and down Dublin markets, me thought ve∣rily I was in Wales, when I listened unto their speech; but I found that the Irish tone is a little more querulous and whining than the British, which I conjecturd with my self proceeded from their of∣ten being subjugated by the English. But my Lord you would think it strange that divers pure Welsh words should be found in the new found World in the West Indies, yet it is verified by som Navigators, as Grando, (hark) Nf (heaven) Lluynog (a fox) Pengwyn (a bird with a white head) with sundry others, which are pure British, nay I have read a Welsh Epitaph which was found there upon one Madoc a British Prince, who som yeers before the Norman conquest not agreeing with his brother then Prince of South-Wales went to try his fortunes at sea, imbarquing himself at Milford haven▪ and so carried on those coasts: This if well prov'd might well intitle out crown to America, if first discovery may claim a right to any country. The Romans though they continued heer constantly above 300 yeers, yet could they not do as they did in France, Spain and o∣ther Provinces, plant their language as a mark of Conquest, but the Saxons did, coming in far greater numbers under Hengist from Holstein land in the lower circuit of Saxony, which peeple resemble the English more than any other men upon earth, so that 'tis more than probable that they came first from thence, besides ther is a town there call'd Lundn, and another place named Angles, whence it may be presum'd that they took their new denomination heer; Now the English though as Saxons (by which name the Welsh and Irish call them to this day) they and their language is ancient, yet in reference to this Island they are the modernst nation in Eu∣pe both for habitation, speech and denomination; which makes e smile at Mr Fox his error in the very front of his Epistle before the Book of Martyrs, wher he calls Constantine the first Christian Emperour, the son of Hellen an English woman, wheras she was  British, and that ther was no such Nation upon earth cal∣ed English at that time, nor above 100 yeers after, till Hengist invaded this Island and setling himself in it, the Saxons who came with him, took the appellation of English men. Now the English speech though it be rich, copious, and significant, and that ther be di∣ers Dictionaries of it, yet under favour, I cannot call it a regu∣lar language in regard though often attempted by som choice its, ther could never any Grammar or exact Syntaxis be made
of it; yet hath she divers subdialects, as the Western and Nor∣thern English, but her chiefest is the Scotic which took footing beyond Tweed about the law conquest; but the ancient Language of Scotland is Irish, which the mountaineers and divers of the plain, retain to this day. Thus my Lord, according to my small modell of observation, have I endeavoured to satisfie you in part, I shall in my next go on, for in the pursuance of any command from your Lordships my minde is like a stone thrown into a deep water, which never rests till it goes to the bottom; so for this time and alwayes I rest, My Lord, Your most humble and ready Servitor, J. H. VVest. 9 Aug. 1630, LVII. To the Right Hon. the Earl R. My Lord, IN my last I fulfild your Lordships commands, as far as my rea∣ding and knowledge could extend, to inform you what wer the radicall primitive Languages of those Dominions that belong to the Crown of great Britaine, and how the English, which is now predominant, entred in first, I will now hoise saile for the Nether∣lands, whose language is the same dialect with the English, and was so from the beginning, being both of them derived from the high Dutch; The Danish also is but a branch of the same tree, no more is the Swedish and the speech of them of Norway and Island▪ Now, the high Dutch or Teutonic Tongue is one of the prime and most spacious maternall languages of Europe, for besides the vast extent of Germany it self with the Countreys and Kingdoms before mentioned wherof England and Scotland are two, it was the Lan∣guage of the Goths and Vandalls, and continueth yet of the grea∣test part of Poland and Hungary, who have a dialect of hers for their vulgar tongue; yet though so many dialects and subdialects be deriv'd from her, she remains a strong sinewy Language pur and incorrupt in her first centre towards the heart of Germany: Som of her Writers would make the World beleeve that shee was
the Longuage spoken in Paradise for they produce many Words and proper names in the five books of Moses which fetch their Etymology from her, as also in Persia to this day divers radicall words are the same with her, as Fader, Mocder, Broder, Star: And a Germain Gentleman speaking heerof one day to an Italian, that she was the Language of Paradise, sure said the Italian (alluding to her roughnes) then it was the tongue that God Almighty chid A∣dam in; It may be so, replied the Germain, but the devill had temp∣ted Eve in Italian before: A full mouthd language she is, and pro∣nounc'd with that strength as if one had bones in his tongue insteed of nerfs. Those Countreys that border upon Germany as Bohemia, Silesia, Poland, and those vast Countreyes North-Eastward as Russia and Muscovia speak, the Slavonic Language; And it is incredible what I have heard som Travellers report of the vast extent of that lan∣guage, for besides Slavonia it self, which properly is Dalmatia and Libinia, it is the vulgar speech of the Macedonians, Epirots, Bos∣nians, Servians, Bulgarians, Moldavians, Rascians, and Podolians, nay it spreads her self over all the Easterne parts of Europe, Hungary and Walachia excepted, as far as Constantinople, and is frequently spoken in the Seraglio among the Ianizaries; nor doth e rest there, but crossing the Hellespont divers nations in Asia have her for their popular tongue, as the Circassians, Mongrelians and Gaza∣ites: Southward, neither in Europe or Asia doth she extend her self further to the North parallel of forty Degrees; But those Na∣tions which celebrate divine Service after the Greek Ceremony, and profess obedience to the Patriark of Constantinople, as the Russ, the Muscovit, the Moldavian, Ruscian, Bosnian, Servian, and Bulgarian, with divers other Eastern, and North-East peeple that speak Slavonic, have her in a different Character from the Dalma∣tian, Croation, Istrian, Polonian, Bohemian, Silesian, and other Na∣tions towards the West: these last have the Illirian Character, and the invention of it is attributed to St. Ierom, the other is of Cyrists devising, and is call'd the Servian Character; Now, although ther bee above threescore severall Nations that have this vast ex∣tended language for their vulgar speech, yet the pure primitive Slavonic dialect is spoken only in Dalmatia, Croatia, Liburnia and the Countreys adjacent, wher the ancient Slavonians yet dwell, and they must needs be very ancient, for ther is in a Church in Prague an old Charter yet extant given them by Alexander the great, which I thought not amiss to insert heer. We Alexander the great of King Philip founder of the Grecian Empire, Conque∣ror
of the Persians, Medes, &c. and of the whole world from East  West, from North to South, Son of great Jupiter by, &c. so calld; T you the noble stock of Slavonians, and to your Language because  have been unto us a help, true in faith, and valiant in war, we confi all that tract of earth from the North to the South of Italie from  and our Successors, to you and your posterity for ever; And if any other Nation be found there let them be your slaves. Dated at Alexandria th 12. of the Goddess Minerva, witnes Ethra and the eleven Princ whom we appoint our Successors: With this rare and one of th ancientest record in Europe, I will put a period to this second ac∣count I send your Lordship touching Languages; My next shall be of Greece, Italy, Fance and Spain, and so I shall shake hands with Europe, till when, I humbly kiss your hands, and rest, West▪ 2 of Aug. 1630. My Lord, Your most obliged Servitor, J. H. LVIII. To the Right Hon. the E. R. My Lord, HAving in my last rambled through high and low Germa Bohemy, Denmark, Poland, Russia; and those vast North-Ea Regions, and given your Lordship a touch of their Languages, (fo 'twas no Treatise I intended at first, but a cursory short literall ac∣count) I will now pass to Greece and speak somthing of that large and learned Language, for 'tis she indeed upon whom the bean of all scientificall knowledg did first shine in Europe, which she af∣terward diffus'd through all the Western world. The Greek tongue was first peculiar to Hellas alone, but i tract of time the Kingdom of Macedon, and Epire had her, then sh arrived on the Isles of the Egean Sea, which are interjacent and di∣vide Asia and Europe that way; then shee got into the fifty thre Isles of the Cyclades that lye 'twixt Negrepont and Candy, and so go up to the Hellespont to Constantinople; She then crossed over to Ana∣tolia, wher though she prevail'd by introducing multitudes of Colo∣nies, yet she came not to be the sole vulgar speech any where ther as far as to extinguish the former languages: Now Anatolia is th
most populous part of the whole earth, for Strabo speaks of sixteen severall nations that slept in her bosom, and 'tis thought the two and twenty Languages which Mithrydates the great Polyglot King of Pntus did speak wer all within the circumference of Anatolia in regard his dominions extended but a little further: She glided then along the Maritime coasts of Thrace, and passing Byzantium got into the out-lets of Danube and beyond her also to Taurica, yea beyond that to the River Phosis and thence compassing to Trebizond she took footing on all the circumference of the Euxine Sea: This was her course from East to North, whence we will return to Candy, Cyprus and Sycily, thence crossing the Phare of Messina, she got all along the Maritime Coasts of the Tirrhne Sea to Calabria: she re∣sted her self also a great while in Apulia; Ther was a populous Colony of Greeks also in Marseilles in France, and along the Sea Coasts of Savoy: In Afric likewise Cyrne, Alexandria, and Egypt with divers other, were peepled with Greeks: and three causes may be alleged why the Greek tongue did so expand her self, First it may be imputed to the Conquests of Alexander the Great, and the Captains he left behind him for Successors; Then the love the pee∣ple had to the Sciences, speculative learning, and civility wherof me Greeks accounted themselves to bee the grand Masters, ac∣counting all other Nations Barbarians besides themselves; Thirdly, the natural inclination and dexterity the Greeks had to commerce, wherunto they employed themselves more than any other Nation except the Phaenician and Armenian, which may be a reason why in all places most commonly they colonized the Maritime parts, for I do not find they did penetrate far into the Bowells of any Coun∣trey, but iek'd on the Sea side in obvious mercantile places, and accessible Ports. Now many ages since the Greek tongue is not onely impaired, and pittifully degenerated in her purity and eloquence, but ex∣tremely decayed in her amplitude and vulgarnes: For first ther is no trace at all left of her in France or Italy, the Slavonic tongue hath abolished her in Epire and Macedon, the Turkish hath outed her from most parts of Anatolia, and the Arabian hath extinguished her in Syr a, Palestine, Egypt, and sundry other places; Now touch∣ing her degeneration from her primitive suavity and elegance, it is not altogether so much as the deviation and declension of the I∣talian from the Latine, yet it is so far that I could set foot on no place, nor hear of any peeple, wher either the Attic, Doric, Eo∣li or Bucolic ancient Greek is vulgarly spoken; only in som places near Heraclea in Anatolia and in Ploponesus (now call'd the Morea)
▪hey speak of som Towns called the Lacocones which retain yet and vulgarly speak the old Greek but incongruously, yet though they cannot themselves speak according to rules, they understand thos that do: Nor is this corruption happened to the Greek Language, as it useth to happen to others, either by the Law of the Conque∣ror, or inundation of strangers, but it is insensibly crept in by their own supin negligence, and fantasticknes: specially by that common fatality and changes which attend time and all other sublunary things: nor is this ancient Scientificall Language decay∣ed only but the nation of the Greeks it self, is as it wer mouldred away and brought in a manner to the same condition, and to  contemptible a pass as the Jew is: insomuch that ther cannot be two more pregnant instances of the lubricity and instablenes of man-kind as the decay of these two ancient Nations, the one the select peeple of God, the other the most famous, that ever was for Arts, Arms, Civility and Government; so that in statu quo nunc they who term'd all the world Barbarians in comparison of them∣selves in former times, may bee now term'd more than any other Barbarians themselves, as having quite lost not only all inclina∣tion and aspirings to Knowledg and Vertue, but likewise all cou∣rage and bravery of mind to recover their ancient freedom and ho∣nour. Thus have you my Lord, as much of the Greek Tongue as I could comprehend within the bounds of a Letter, a Tongue that both for knowledg, for comerce, and for copiousnes was the principallest that ever was; in my next I will return nearer home, and give your Lordship account of the Latin Tongue, and of her three daughters the French, Italian and Spanish, in the interim you find that I am still West. 25 Iul. 1630 My Lord, Your most obedient Servitor, J. H.
LIX. To the Right Honorable the E. R. My Lord, MY last was a pursuit of my endeavours to comply with your Lordships desires touching Languages, And I spent more Oyl and Labour than ordinary in displaying the Greek Tongue, because we are more beholden to her for all Philosophicall and Theori knowledg, as also for rules of commerce and commu∣tative justice, than unto any other, I will now proceed to the latine Tongue, which had her source in Italy, in Latium call'd now ompagna di Roma, and received her growth with the monstrous en∣ase of the City and Empire; Touching the one, she cam from poor mud walls at Mount Palatine which wer scarce a mile about it first, to be afterward fifty miles compas, (as she was in the reign of Aurelianus) and her Territories which wer hardly a days jour∣eys extent, cam by favorable successes and ortune of War to be above three thousand in length, from the banks of Rhine, or rather frm the shores of this Island to Euphrates, and somtimes to the Ri∣er Tigris: with this vast expansion of Roman Territories the Tongue also did spread, yet I do not find by those re-searches I have made into Antiquity that she was vulgarly spoken by any na∣ton or in any entire Countrey but in Italy it self; For notwithstan∣ding that it was the practise of the Roman with the Lance to usher in his Laws and Language as marks of Conquest; yet I believe his Tongue never took such firm impression any where, as to becom the vulgar epedemic speech of any peeple els▪ or that she was able to null and extinguish the native Languages she found in those pla∣ces wher she planted her Standard: nor can ther be a more preg∣nant instance hereof than this Island, for notwithstanding that she remain'd a Roman Province four hundred years together, yet the Latine Tongue could never have the vogue heer so far as to abolish the British or Cambrian tongue. 'Tis true that in France and Spain she made deeper impressions, the reason may be in regard ther wer far more Roman Colonies planted there, for wheras ther wer but four in this Isle, ther wer nine and twenty in France, and fifty seven in Spain, and the grea∣test entertainment the Latine Tongue found out of Italy her self, wa in these two Kingdoms; yet I am of opinion that the pure con∣gruous
grammaticall Latine was never spoken in either of them a a vulgar vernacular Language common amongst women and children; no nor in all Italy it self except Latium: In Afric, though ther wer sixty Roman Colonies dispers'd upon that continent, yet the Latine Tongue made not such deep impressions ther nor in Asia either, nor is it to be thought that in those Colonies themselves did the common Souldier speak in that congruity as the Flamins, the Judges, the Magistrates and chief Commanders did: When the Romans sent Legions, and planted Colonies abroad 'twas for divers politicall considerations, partly to secure their new acquests, partly to abate the superfluous numbers and redundancy of Rome, then by this way they found means to employ and reward men of worth, and to heighten their minds, for the Roman spirit did rise up, and take growth with his good successes, conquests, commands and em∣ployments. But the reason that the Latine Tongue found not such entertain∣ment in the orientall parts, was that the Greek had fore-stall'd her, which was of more esteem among them because of the learning that was couch'd in her, and that she was more usefull for negotiation and trafic, wherunto the Greeks wer more addicted than any pee∣ple: therfore though the Romans had an ambition to make those for∣ren Nations that wer under their yoak to speak as wel as to do what pleased them, and that all orders, edicts, letters, and the Lawes themselves civill as well as martiall, wer publish'd and executed in Latine, yet I believe this Latine was spoken no otherwise among those Nations than the Spanish or Castillian Tongue is now in the Netherlands, in Sicily, Sardinia, Naples, the two Indies, and other Provinciall Countreys which are under that King: Nor did the pure Latine Tongue continue long at a stand of perfection in Rome and Latium it self among all sorts of peeple, but she receiv'd chan∣ges and corruption, neither do I beleeve that she was born a per∣fect Language at first, but she receiv'd nutriment, and degrees of perfection with time, which matures, refines and finisheth all things: The verses of the Salii compos'd by Numa Pompilius wer scarce in∣telligible by the Flamins and Judges themselves in the wane of the Roman Common-wealth, nor the Laws of the Decemviri: And if that Latine wherin were couch'd the capitulations of peace 'twixt Rome and Carthage a little after the expulsion of the Kings, which are yet extant upon a pillar in Rome, wer compar'd to that which was spo∣ken in Caesars reign 140. after, at which time the Latine Tongue was mounted to the Meridian of her perfection she would be found a differing as Spanish now differeth from the Latine: After Caesar
and Ciceroes time, the Latine Tongue continued in Rome and Italy in her purity four hundred yeers together, untill the Goths▪ rush'd into Italy first under Alaric, then the Hunns under Attila, then the Vndalls under Gensericus, and the Heruli under Odoacer who was proclaimed King of Italy, but the Goths a little after under Theode∣ric thrust out the Heruli, which Theodoric was by Zeno the Emperor formally invested King of Italy, who with his successor reign'd there peaceably sixty yeers and upwards; so that in all probability the Gohs cohabiting so long among the Italians must adulterat their language as well as their women. The last barbarous peeple that invaded Italy about the year 570▪ wer the Lombards, who having taken firm rooting in the very bowells of the Country above 200 yeers without interruption du∣ring the reign of twenty Kings, must of necessity alter and de∣prave the generall speech of the naturall inhabitants, and among others one argument may be that the best and midland part of Italy chang'd its name and took its appellation from these last Invaders, calling it self Lombardy, which name it retains to this day: yet be∣fore the intrusions of these wandring and warlike peeple into Italy, ther may be a precedent cause of som corruption that might creep into the Latine Tongue in point of vulgarity; first the incredible confluence of forreners that came dayly far and near, from the co∣loniz'd Provinces to Rome, then the infinite number of slaves which surpassed the number of free Citizens, might much impair the purity of the Latine Tongue, and lastly those inconstancies and humor of novelty, which is naturally inherent in man who ac∣cording to those frail elementary principles and ingredients wher∣of he is compos'd, is subject to insensible alterations and apt to re∣ceive impressions of any change. Thus, my Lord, as succinctly as I could digest it into the narrow bounds of an Epistle, have I sent your Lordship this small survay of the Latine, or first Roman Tongue; In my next I shall fall aboard of her three daughters, viz. the Italian, the Spanish, and the French, with a diligent investigation what might bee the originall native Languages of those Countreys from the beginning before the La∣tne gave them the Law; in the interim I crave a candid interpreta∣tion of what is passed, and of my udiousnes in executing your Lordships Injunctions, so I am West. Iul. 16. 1630. My Lord, Your most humble obedient Servant, J. H.
XL. To the right Honble the E R. My Lord, MY last was a discourse of the Latin or Primitive Roman tongue, which may be said to be expir'd in the mark though living yet in the Schools, I mean she may be said to be de∣funct in point of vulgarity any time these 1000 yeers pass'd: Out of her urne have sprung up the Italian, the Spanish and the French, wherof I am now to treat, but I think it not improper to make a research first what the radicall prime mother tongues of these Countreys wer before the Roman Eagle planted her talons upon them. Concerning Italy, doubtles ther wer divers before the Latin did spread all over that Countrey, the Calabrian and Apulian spoke Greek, wherof som reliques are to be found to this day, but it was an adventitious no mother language to them; 'tis confess'd that Latium it self and all the territory about Rome had the Latine for its maternall and common first vernacular tongue, but Toscany and Ligria had others quite discrepant, viz. the Hetruscane and Mesapian, wherof though ther be som records yet extant, yet ther are none alive that can understand them; the Oscan, the Sabin and Tusculan, are thought to be but dialects to these. Now the Latine Tongue with the coincidence of the Goths lan∣guage, and other Northern peeple, who like waves tumbled off one another, did more in Italy then any where else, for she ut∣terly abolished (upon that part of the continent) all other ma∣ternall tongues as ancient as her self, and therby her eldest daughter the Italian came to be the vulgar universall tongue to the whole Countrey; yet the Latine tongue had not the sole hand in doing this, but the Goths and other septentrionall Nations who rush'd into the Roman dition, had a share in't as I said before, and pegg'd in som words which have been ever since irremovable not only in the Italian, but also in her two younger sisters the Spanish and the French who felt also the fury of those peeple: Now the Ita∣lian is the smoothest and softest running language that is, for ther is not a word except som few Monosyllables Conjunctions and
Propositions, that ends with a Consonant in the whole language, nor is ther any vulgar speech which hath more subdialects in so small a tract of ground, for Italy it self affords above eight. There you have the Romane, the Toscane, the Venetian, the Mi∣ltz, the Neapolitan, the Calabresse, the Genoevais, the Picmon∣lez, you have the Corsican, Sycilian, with divers other neigh∣bouring Islands; and as the cause why from the beginning ther wer so many differing dialects in the Greek tongue was because it was slic'd into so many Islands; so the reason why ther be so many subdialects in the Italian is the diversity of governments that the Countrey is squandred into, there being in Italy at this day two Kingdomes, viz. that of Naples and Calabria; Three Republicks, viz. Venice, Genoa and Luca, and divers other absolute Prin∣ces. Concerning the originall language of Spain it was without any controversie, the Bascuence or Cantabrian, which tongue and ter∣ritory neither Roman, Goth, (whence this King hath his pedigree, with divers of the Nobles) or Moore, could ever conquer; though they had overrun and taken firm footing in all the rest for many ages, therfore as the remnant of the old Britaines heer, so are the scainers accounted the ancient'st and unquestionablest Gentry of Spain; insomuch that when any of them is to be dubbed Knight, ther is no need of any scrutiny to be made whether he be clear of the bloud of the Morisco's who had mingled and incorporated with the rest of the Spaniards about 700 yeeres: And as the Arcadians and Attiques in Greece for their immemoriall antiquity, are said to vaunt of themselves, that the one are  before the Moone; the other  issued of the earth it self, so the iscayner hath such like Rodomontados. The Spanish or Castilian language hath but few subdialects, the Portugues is most considerable touching the Catalan, and Valen∣tiane; they are rather dialects of the French, Gascon or Aquitani∣; The purest dialect of the Castilian tongue is held to be in the Town of Toledo, which above other Cities of Spain hath this pri∣viledg to be arbitress in the decision of any controversie that may a∣rise touching the interpretation of any Castilian word. It is an infallible rule to find out the mother and ancient'st tongue of any Countrey, to go among those who inhabit the bar∣ren'st and most mountainous places, which are posts of security and fastnes, wherof divers instances could be produc'd, but let the Biscayner in Spain, the VVelsh in great Britain, and the Moun∣taineers in Epire serve the turn, who yet retain their ancient un∣mixt
mother tongues, being extinguish'd in all the Countrey be∣sides. Touching France it is not only doubtfull, but left yet undeci∣ded what the true genuine Gallic tongue was, som would have it to be the German, som the Greek, som the old British or Welsh, and the last opinion carrieth away with it the most judicious An∣tiquaries; Now all Gallia is not meant by it, but the Countrey of the Celtae that inhabit the middle part of France, who are the true Gaules; Caesar and Tacitus tell us that these Celtae, and the old Britains (wherof I gave a touch in my first letter) did mutually understand one another, and som do hold that this Island was tied to France, as Sycily was to Calabria, and Denmark to Germany by an Istmos or neck of land 'twixt Dover and Bullen, for it one do well observe the rocks of the one, and the cliffes of the other, he will judge them to be one homogeneous piece, and that they wer cut and shivered asunder by som act of violence. The French or Gallic tongue hath divers dialects, the Picard, that of Iersey and Garnsey (appendixes once to the Dutchy of Nor∣mandy) the Provensall, the Gascon or speech of Languedoc, which Scaliger would etymologize from Languedo'uy, wheras it comes ra∣ther from Langue de Got, for the Saracens and Goths who by their in∣cursions and long stay in Aquitain corrupted the language of that part of Gallia: Touching the Britain and they of Bearn, the one is a dialect of the Welsh, the other of the Bascuence; The VValln who is under the King of Spain, and the Liegois is also a dialect of the French, which in their own Countrey they call Romand: The Spaniard also terms his Castilian Roman, whence it may be infer'd that the first rice and derivation of the Spanish and French wer from the Romane tongue, not from the Latine, which makes me think that the language of Rome might be degenerated and becom a di∣alect to our own mother tongue (the Latine) before she brought her language to France and Spain. Ther is besides these subdialects of the Italian, Spanish and French another speech that hath a great stroke in Greece and Turky call'd Franco, which may be said to be compos'd of all the three, and is at this day the greatest language of comerce and negotiation in the Levant. Thus have I given your Lordship the best account I could of the sister dialects, of the Italian, Spanish, and French; In my next I shall cross the Mediterranean to Afric and the Hellespont to Asia, wher I shall observe the generall'st languages of those vast con∣tinents where such numberless swarmes and differing sorts of Na∣tions
do crawl up and down this earthly Globe, therfore it can∣not be expected that I should be so punctuall there as in Europe, so I am still, My Lord, Your obedient Servitor, J. H. Wystmin. 7. Iul. 1630. LXI. To the Right Hon. the E. R. My Lord, HAving in my former letters made a flying progress through the Europaean world, and taken a view of the severall lan∣guages, dialects, and subdialects wherby people convers one with another, and being now windbound for Afric, I held it not altoge∣ther supervacaneous to take a review of them, and inform your Lordship what languages are Originall independent mother tongues of Christendom, and what are dialects, derivations, or de∣generations from their originalls. The mother toungs of Europe are thirteen, though Scaliger would have but eleven; Ther is the Greek 1, the Latine 2, the Dutch 3, the Slavonian 4, the VVelsh or Cambrian 5, the Bascuence or Cantabrian 6, the Irish 7, the Albanian in the Mountaines of Epire 8, the Tartarian 9, the old Illirian 10, remaining yet in Li∣burnia, the Iazrgian 11, on the North of Hungary, the Cauchian 12, in East Frizeland, the Finnic 13, which I put last with good rea∣son, because they are the only heathens of Europe; all which were known to be in Europe in the time of the Roman Empire; Ther is a learned antiquary that makes the Arabic to be one of the mother toungs of Europe, because it was spoken in som of the mountains of South Spain, 'tis true 'twas spoken for divers hundred yeers all Spain over after the conquest of the Moors, but yet it could not be call'd a mother toung, but an adventitious toung in refe∣rence to that part of Europe. And now that I am to pass to Afric which is far bigger than Eu∣rope, and to Asia which is far bigger than Afric, and to America which is thought to be as big as all the three, if Europe her self hath so many mother languages quite discrepant one from the o∣ther,
besides secondary tongues and dialects which exceed the number of their mothers, what shall we think of the other three huge continents in point of differing languages? Your Lordship knowes that ther be divers meridians and clymes in the heavens whence influxes of differing qualities fall upon the inhabitants of the earth, and as they make men to differ in the idea's and concep∣tions of the mind, so in the motion of the tongue, in the tune and tones of the voice, they com to differ one from the other: Now, all languages at first were imperfect confus'd sounds, then came they to be syllables, then words, then speeches and senten∣ces, which by practice, by tradition, and a kind of naturall in∣stinct from Parents to children, grew to be fix'd. Now to attempt a survay of all the languages in the other three parts of the habita∣ble earth wer rather a madness than a presumption, it being a thing of impossibility, and not only above the capacity, but beyond the search of the activ'st, and knowingst man upon earth: Let it therfore suffice while I behold those Nations that read and write from right to left, from the Liver to the heart, I mean the Afri∣canes, and Asians, that I take a short view of the Arabic in the one, and the Hebrew or Syriac in the other, for touching the Turkish language, 'tis but a dialect of the Tartarian though it have recei∣ved a late mixture of the Armenian, the Persian, and Greek tongues, but specially of the Arabic, which was the mother tongue of their Prophet, and is now the sole language of their Alchoran, it be∣ing strictly inhibited, and held to be a prophaness to translate it to any other, which they say preserves them from the encroachment of Schismes. Now the Arabic is a tongue of vast expansion, for besides the three Arabia's it is becom the vulgar speech of Syria, Mesoptoamia, Palestine and Egypt, from whence she stretcheth her self to the streight of Gibraltar, through all that vast tract of earth, which lieth 'twixt the Mountain Atlas and the Mediterranean Sea, which is now call'd Barbary, where Christianity and the Latine tongue with divers famous Bishops once flourished. She is spoken like∣wise in all the Northern parts of the Turkish Empire, as also in petty Tartary, and she above all other hath a reason to learn Ara∣bic, for she is in hope one day to have the Crescent and the whole Ottoman Empire, it being entail'd upon her in case the present race should fail, which is now in more danger than ever, in  whersoever the Mahometan Religion is profes'd, the Arabic is either spoken or taught. My last view shall be of the first language of the earth, the an∣cient
language of Paradice, the language wherin God Almighty himself pleas'd to pronounce and publish the Tables of the Law, the language that had a benediction promis'd her because she would not consent to the building of the Babylonish Tower; yet this holy tongue hath had also her Eclypses, and is now degene∣rated to many dialects, nor is she spoken purely by any Nation up∣on the earth, a fate also which is befallen the Greek and Latine; The most spacious dialect of the Hebrew is the Syriac which had her begining in the time of the captivity of the Jews at Babylon, while they cohabited, and wer mingled with the Chaldeans, in which tract of seventy yeeres time the vulgar sort of Jewes neglecting their own maternll tongue (the Hebrew) began to speak the Chaldee, but not having the right accent of it, and fashioning that new learn'd language to their own innotation of points, affixes and conjugations, out of that intermixture of Hebrew and Chaldee, resulted a third language call'd to this day the Syric, which also after the time of our Saviour began to be more adulterated by ad∣mission of Greek, Roman, and Arabic: in this language is the Talmud and Targum couch'd, and all their Rabbins, as Rabby Ionathan, and Rabby Oakelos with others have written in it: Inso∣much that as I said before, the ancient Hebrew had the same for∣tune that the Greek and Latine tongues had, to fall from being naturally spoken any where, to lose their generall communica∣bleness and vulgarity, & to becom only School & book languages. Thus we see, that as all other sublunary things are subject to corruption and decay, as the poten'st Monarchies, the proudest Republiques, the opulentest Cities have their growth, declinings, and periods; As all other elementary bodies likewise by reason of the frailty of their principles, com by in sensible degrees to alter and perish, and cannot continue long at a stand of perfection; so the learnedst and more eloquent languages, are not free from this common fatality, but they are liable to those alterations and re∣solutions, to those fits of inconstancy, and other destructive con∣tingencies which are unavoidably incident to all earthly things. Thus my noble Lord have I evertuated my self, and strech'd all my sinnews, I have put all my small knowledge, observations and reading upon the tenter to satisfy your Lordships desires touching this subject; If it afford you any contentment I have hit the white I aimed at, and hold myself abundantly rewarded for my oyl and labour: so I am, My Lord, Your most humble and ever obedient Servitor, J. H. VVestm. 1 Iul. 1630.
XLIII. To the Hon. Master Car. Ra. SIR, YOurs of the 7th current was brought me, wherby I find that you did put your self to the penance of perusing som Epistles, that go imprinted lately in my name; I am bound to you for your pains and patience (for you write, you read them all tho∣rough) much more for your candid opinion of them, being right glad that they should give entertainment to such a choice and ju∣dicious Geetleman as your self: But wheras you seem to except against somthing in one Letter, that reflects upon Sir VValter Ra∣leigh's voyage to Guyana, because I tearm the gold Mine he went to discover, an ayrie and supposititious Mine, & so infer that it toucheth his honour; Truly sir, I will deal clearly with you in that point, that I never harbour'd in my brain the least thought to expose to the world any thing that might prejudice, much less traduce in the least degree that could be, that rare and renowned Knight, whose fame shall contend in longaevity with this Island it self, yea with that great VVorld which he Historiseth so gallantly; I was a youth about the Town when he undertook that expedition, and I remember most men suspected that Mine then to be but an imagi∣nary politic thing, but at his return, and missing of the enter∣prise, these suspitions turn'd in most to reall beliefs that 'twas no o∣ther. And king Iames it that Declaration which he commanded to be printed and published afterwards touching the circumstan∣ces of this action (upon which my Letter is grounded, and which I have still by me) tearms it no less; And if we may not give faith to such publick regall instruments, what shall we credit? besides, ther goes another pinted kind of Remonstrance annex'd to that Decla∣ration which intimates as much; And ther is a worthy Captain in this Town, who was a coadventurer in that expedition, who, upon the storming of St. Thoma, heard young Mr. Rawleigh en∣couraging his men in these whods, com on my noble hearts, this i the Mine we com for, and they who think ther is any other, are folt. Add heerunto that Sir Richard Baker in his last Historicall collecti∣ons intimates so much, therfore 'twas far from being any opini∣on broach'd by my self, or bottom'd upon weak grounds, for I was carefull of nothing more, than that those Letters, being to
breath open air, should relate nothing but what should be derived from good fountains; And truly sir, touching that Apologie of Sir Walter Rawleighs you write of, I never saw it, and I am very sorry I did not, for it had let in more light upon me of the cariage of that great action, and then you might have bin well assur'd that I would have don that noble Knight all the right that could be. But sir, the severall arguments that you urge in your Letters are of that strength, I confess, that they are able to rectifie any indifferent man in this point, and induce him to believe that it was no Chymera, but a reall Mine; for you write of divers pieces of gold brought thence by Sir Walter himself, and Captain Ke∣mys, and of som Ingotts that wer found in the Governours Clo∣set at St. Thoma, with divers crusibles, and other refining instru∣ments; yet, under favour, that might be, and the benefit not countervail the charge, for the richest Mines that the King of Spain hath upon the whole Continent of America, which are the Mines of Potos, yeeld him but six in the hundred all expences de∣frayed, You write how King Iames sent privately to sir VValter being yet in the Tower, to intreat and command him, that he would impart his whole designe unto him under his hand, promi∣sing upon the word of a King to keep it secret, which being don accordingly by Sir VValter Rawleigh, that very originall paper was found in the said Spanish Governours closet at St. Thoma; wherat, as you have just cause to wonder, and admire the active∣ness of the Spanish Agents about our Court at that time, so I won∣der no less at the miscariage of som of His late Majesties Mini∣sters, who notwithstanding that he had pass'd his royall word to the contrary, yet they did help Count Gondamar to that paper, so that the reproach lieth more upon the English than the Spanish Ministers in this particular: Wheras you allege that the dan∣gerous sicknes of Sir VVatler being arrived neer the place, and the death of (that rare sparke of courage) your brother upon the first landing, with other circumstances discourag'd Captain Ke∣mys from discovering the Mine, but to reserve it for another time, I am content to give as much credit to this as any man can; as also that Sir VValter, if the rest of the Fleet according to his ear∣nest motion had gon with him to revictuall in Virginia (a Coun∣try wher he had reason to be welcom unto, being of his own dis∣covery) he had a purpose to return to Guyana the Spring follo∣wing to pursue his first designe: I am also very willing to believe that it cost Sir VValter Rawleigh much more to put himself in equi∣page for that long intended voyage, than would have payed for
his liberty, if he had gon about to purchase it for reward of mo∣ney at home, though I am not ignorant that many of the co-ad∣venturers made large contributions, and the fortunes of som of them suffer for it at this very day. But although Gondamar, as my Letter mentions, calls Sir Walter Pyrat, I, for my part am far from thinking so, because as you give an unanswerable reason, the plundering of St. Thoma, was an act done beyond the Equator, wher the Articles of Peace 'twixt the two Kings do not extend; yet, under favor, though he broke not the Peace, he was said to break his Patent by exceeding the bounds of his Commission, as the foresaid Declaration relates, for King Iames had made strong promises to Count Gondamar, that this Fleet should com∣mit no outrages upon the King of Spain's Subjects by Land, un∣less they began first, and I beleeve that was the main cause of his death, though I think if they had proceeded that way against him in a legall course of triall, he might have defended himself well enough. Wheras you alledg that if that action had succeeded, and after∣wards been well prosecuted, it might have brought Gondamar's great Catholic Master to have been begg'd for at the Church dores by Fryars, as he was once brought in the latter end of Queen E∣lizabeths days; I believe it had much damnified him, and interrup∣ted him in the possession of his West Indies, but not brought him, under favor, to so low an ebb; I have observed that it is an ordina∣ry thing in your Popish Countreys for Princes to borrow from the Altar, when they are reduc'd to any straights, for they say, the iches of the Church are to serve as anchors in time of a storm; divers of our Kings have don worse, by pawning their Plate and Jewels: Wheras my Letter makes mention that Sir Walter Rawleigh mainly laboured for his Pardon before he went, but could not compas it, this is also a passage in the foresaid printed Relation, but I could have wish'd with all my heart he had obtaind it, for I beleeve, that neither the transgression of his Commission, nor any thing that he did beyond the Line, could have shortned the line of his life other∣wise, but in all probability wee might have been happy in him to this very day, having such an Heroic heart as he had, and other rare helps, by his great knowledg, for the preservation of health; I beleeve without any scruple what you write, that Sir William St. geon made an overture unto him of procuring his pardon for 1500 l. but whether he could have effected it I doubt a little, when he had com to negotiat it really: But I extremely wonder how that old sentence which had lain dormant above sixteen yeers against
Sir Walter Rawleigh could have been made use of to take off his head afterwards, considering that the Lord Chancellor Verulam, as you write, told him positively (as Sir Walter was acquainting him with that proffer of Sir William St. geons for a pecuniay par∣don) in these words, Sir, the knee timber of your voiage is money, spare  purse in this particular, for upon my life you have a sufficient par∣ for all that is passed already, the King having under his broad Seal made you Admirall of your Fleet, and given you power of the Martiall Law over your Officers and Soldiers: One would think that by this Royall Patent, which gave him power of life and death over the Kings liege peeple, Sir Walter Rawleigh should becom Rectus in ia, and free from all old convictions; but Sir, to tell you the plain truth, Count Gondamar at that time had a great stroak in our Court, because ther was more than a meer verture of a match with Spain, which makes me apt to believe that▪ that great wise Knight be∣ing such an Anti-Spaniard, was made a Sacrifice to advance the Ma∣trimoniall Treaty: But I must needs wonder, as you justly do, that one and the same man should be condemned for being a frend to the Spaniard, (which was the ground of his first condemnation) should afterwards lose his head for being their enemy by the same sentence: Touching his return I must consess I was utterly igno∣rant that those two noble Earls Thomas of Arundell and William of Pemboke wer ingaged for him in this particular, nor doth the prin∣ed Relation, make any mention of them at all, therfore I must say that envy her self must pronounce that return of his, for the quitting of his fiduciary pledges to be a most noble act, and wa∣ing that of King Alphonso's Moor, I may more properly compare it to the act of that famous Roman Commander (Regulus as I take ) who to keep his promise and faith return'd to his enemies her he had been prisoner, though he knew he went to an inevi∣able death: But well did that faithles cunning Knight who betray∣d Sir Walter Rawleigh in his intended escape being com ashore, fall to that contemptible end, as to dye a poor distracted Beggar in the  of Lyndey having for a bag of money falsified his Faith, con∣firm'd by the tye of the holy Sacrament as you write, as also before the yeer came about to be found clipping the same coin in the Kings own house at White-hall which he had receiv'd as a reward for his perfidiousnes, for which being condemned to be hang'd, hee was driven to sell himself to his shirt, to purchase his pardon of two Knights. And now Sir, let that glorious and gallant Cavalier Sir Walter Rawleigh (who lived long enough for his own honor though not for his
Countrey, as it was said of a Roman Consull) rest quietly in his grave and his vertues live in his posterity, as I find they do strong∣ly, and very eminently in you; I have heard his enemies confess that he was one of the weightiest and wisest men that this Island ever bred, Mr. Nath. Carpenter a learned and judicious Author was not in the wrong when he gave this discreet Character of him, who hath not known or read of that Prodigy of wit and fortune, Sir Walter Rawleigh, a man infortunat in nothing els but in the grea of his wit and advancement, whose eminent worth was such both in do∣mestic Policy, forren Expeditions and Discoveries, in Arts and Literature, both practic and contemplative, that it might seem at once to conq bo example and imitation. Now Sir, hoping to be rectified in your judgment touching my opinion of that illustrious Knight your father, give me leave to kiss your hands very affectionatly for the respectfull mention you please to make of my brother once your neighbor; he suffers, good soul, as well as I, though in a differing manner; I also much value that favourable censure you give of those rambling Letters of mine, which indeed are nought els than a Legend of the cumbersom lif and various fortunes of a Cadet; but wheras you please to say, that the world of learned men is much beholden to me for them, and that son of them are freighted with many excellent and qaaint passages delive∣red in a masculine and solid stile, adorn'd with much eloquence, a stuck with the choicest flowers pick'd from the Muses garden; wheras you also please to write that you admire my great Travells, my stren∣ous endeavours, at all times and in all places to accumulate knowledg, y active laying hold upon all occasions, and on every handle that mig (with reputation) advantage either my wit or fortune: These high gallant strains of expressions, I confess, transcend my merit, and are a garment too gawdy for me to put on, yet I will lay it up a∣mong by best Reliques, wherof I have divers sent me of th kind: And wheras in publishing these Epistles at this time you please to say, That I have don like Hezekiah when he shewedhis Trea∣sures to the Babylonians, that I have discovered my riches to theev who will bind me fast aud share my goods; To this I answer, that i those innocent Letters (for I know none of them but is such) fall among such theevs they will have no great prize to carry away, it will be but pettylarceny; I am already, God wot, bound fast enough, having been a long time coopt up between these Walls▪ beret of all my means of subsistence and employment, nor do I know wher∣fore I am heer, unless it be for my sins; For I bear as upright
heart to my King and Countrey, I am as conformable and well af∣fected to the government of this land, specially to the high Court of Parliament as any one whatsoever that breaths air under this Meridian, I will except none: And for my Religion I defie any creature 'twixt heaven and earth that will say, I am not a true English Protestant. I have from time to time employ'd divers of my best frends to get my liberty, at leastwise leave to go abroad up∣on Bail (for I do not expect, as you please also to beleeve in your Letter, to be delivered hence as Saint Peter was by miracle) but nothing will yet prevail. To conclude, I do acknowledg in the highest way of recogniti∣on, the free and noble proffer you please to make me of your endea∣vors to pull me out of this dolefull Sepulcher, wherin you say I am entomb'd alive; I am no less oblig'd to you for the opinion I find you have of my weak abilities, which you please to wish heartily may be no longer eclypsed, I am not in despair, but a day will shine that may afford me opportunity to improve this good opinion of yours (which I value at a very high rate) and let the world know how much I am, Fleet, 5 May, 1645. Sir, Your reall and ready Servitor, J. H. LXIIII. To Mr. T. V. at Brussells. My dear Tom, VVHo would have thought poor England had been brought to this pass? could it ever have entred into the imagination of man that the Scheme and whole frame of so ancient and well-molded a government should bee so suddenly struck off the hinges, quite put out of joynt, and tumbled in∣to such a horrid Confusion? who would have held it possible that to fly from Babylon, we should fall into such a Babel? that
to avoid superstition some peeple should bee brought to belch out such horrid prophanenes, as to call the Temples of God the Tabernacles of Sathan; The Lords Supper a Two-penny Ordi∣nary; to make the Communion Table a Manger, and the Font a Trough to water their Horses in; to term the white decent Robe of the Presbyter the Whores Smock; the Pipes through which nothing came but Anthems and holy Hymns, the Devills Bag-pipes; the Liturgy of the Church, though extracted most of it out of the Sacred Text, call'd by som another kind of Al∣choran, by others raw Porredge, by som a peece forg'd in Hell; Who would have thought to have seen in England the Churches shut and the Shops open upon Christmas day? Could any soul have imagined that this Isle would have produc'd such Monsters, as to rejoyce at the Turks good successes against Christians, and wish hee were in the midst of Rome? Who would have dream't ten yeers since, when Arch-bishop Lawd did ride in state through London streets, accompanying my Lord of London to bee sworn Lord high Tresurer of England, that the Mitre should have now com to such a scorn, to such a Nationall kind of hatred, as to put the whole Island in a combustion; which makes mee call to memory a saying of the Earl of Kildare in Ireland, in the reign of Henry the eighth, which Earl, having deadly feud with the Bishop of Casses, burnt a Church belonging to that Diocess, and being ask'd upon his Examination before the Lord Deputy at the Castle of Dublin, why hee had committed such a horrid Sacrilege as to burn Gods Church? hee answered, I had never burnt the Church unles I had thought the Bishop had been in't. Lastly, who would have imagined that the Accise would have taken footing heer? a word I remember in the last Parlia∣ment save one, so odious, that when Sir D. Carleton then Secre∣tary of State, did but name it in the House of Commons, hee was like to be sent to the Tower; although hee nam'd it to no ill snse but to shew what advantage of happines the peeple of England had o're other Nations, having neither the Gabells of I∣taly, the Tallies of France, or the Accise of Holland laid up∣on them, yet upon this hee was suddenly interrupted, and call'd to the Bar; Such a strange Metamorphosis poor England is now com unto, and I am afraid our Miseries are not com to their height, but the longest shadowes stay till the Eve∣ning. The freshest News that I can write unto you is, that the Kentish Knight of your acquaintance whom I writ in my last had
an apostacy in his Brain, dyed suddenly this week of an Impostume in his brest, as he was reading a Pamphlet of his own that cam from the Press, wherin hee shew'd a great mind to be nibling with my Trees; but he only shew'd his Teeth, for he could not bite them to any purpose. Willi. Ro: is return'd from the Wars, but he is grown lame in one of his Arms, so he hath no mind to bear Arms any more, he con∣fesseth himself to be an egregious fool to leave his Mercership, and go to be a Musqueteer: It made me think upon the Tale of the Gallego in Spain, who in the Civill Wars against Aragon being in the field he was shot in the forehead, and being carryed away to a Tent, the Surgeon search'd his wound and found it mortall; so he advis'd him to send for his Confessor, for he was no man for this world in regard the Brain was touch'd; the Soldier wish'd him to search it again, which he did, and told him that he found he was hurt in the Brain and could not possibly scape, wherupon the Gallego ell into a chafe, and said he lyed, for he had no brain at all por que si tuviera seso, nunca huniera venido a esta guerra, for if I had had any brain, I would never have com to this War: All your frends heer are well, except the maym'd Soldier, and remem∣ber you often, specially Sir I. Brown, a good gallant Gentleman, who never forgets any who deserv'd to have a place in his memo∣ry. Farewell my dear Tom: and God send you better dayes than we have heer, for I wish you as much happines as possibly man can have, I wish your mornings may be good, your noons better, your evenings and nights best of all; I wish your sorrows may be short, your joys lasting, and all your desires end in success; let me hear once more from you before you remove thence, and tell me how the squares go in Flanders: So I rest, Fleet, 3 Aug. 1644. Your entirely affectionat Servitor, J. H.
LXV. To His Majesty at Oxon. SIR, I Prostrate this Paper at your Majesties feet, hoping it may find way thence to your eyes, and so decend to your Royall heart. The forren Minister of State, by whose conveyance this com, did lately intimat unto mee, that among divers things which go a∣broad under my name reflecting upon the times, ther are som which are not so well taken, your Majesty being inform'd that they dis∣cover a spirit of Indifferency, and luke-warmnes in the Author▪ This added much to the weight of my present suffrances; and ex∣ceedingly imbitter'd the sense of them unto me, being no other than a corrosif to one already in a hestic condition: I must confess that som of them wer more moderat than others; yet (most humbly under favor) ther wer none of them but displayed the heart of a constant true loyall Subject, and as divers of those who are most zealous to your Majestics Service told me, they had the good suc∣ces to rectifie multitudes of peeple in their opinion of som things; Insomuch that I am not only not conscious, but most confident that none of them could tend to your Majesties disservice any way imaginable: Therfore I humbly beseech, that your Majesty would  to conceive of me accordingly, and of one who by this recluse passive condition hath his share of this hideous storm▪ yet he is in assurance, rather than hopes, that though divers cross∣winds have blown, these times will bring in better at last.  have bin divers of your Royall Progenitors who have had as shrewd shocks; And 'tis well known, how the next transmarine Kings have been brought to lower ebbs: At this very day he of Spain is in a far worse condition, being in the midst of two sorts of peeple, (the Catalan and Portuguais) which wer lately his Vassalls, but now have torn his Seals, renounc'd all bonds of allegeance, and are in actu∣all hostility against him: This great City I may say is like a Ches∣board chequer'd, inlayd with white and black spots, though I believe the white are more in number, and your Majesties countenance by returning to your great Counsell and your Court at White-Hall would quickly turn them all white: That Almighty Majesty who useth to draw light out of darknes, and strength out of weaknes▪
making mans extremity his opportunity, preserve and prosper your Majesty according to the Prayers early and late of your Ma∣esties most loyall Subject, Servant▪ and Martyr, Fleet 3. Septem. 1644. Howell, LXVI. To E. Benlowes Esqr. upon the receipt of a Table of exquisit Latine Poems. SIR, I Thank you in a very high degree for that precious Table of Poems you pleas'd to send me: When I had well viewd them, I thought upon that famous Table of Proportion, which Ptolomy is re∣corded by Aristaeus to have sent Eleazar to Hierusalem, which was counted a stupendious piece of▪ Art, and the wonderment of those times: what the curiosity of that Table was, I have not read, but I believe it consisted in extern mechanicall artifice only: The beauty of your Table is of a far more noble extraction being a pure spi∣rituall work, so that it may be call'd the Table of your soul, in con∣firmation of the opinion of that divine, though Pagan Philoso∣pher, the high wing'd Plato, who fancied that our souls at the first infusion wer as so many Tables, they were abrasae Tabulae, and that all our future knowledg was but a reminiscence; But under favor these rich and elaborate Poems which so loudly eccho out your worth and ingenuity deserve a far more lasting monument to preserve them from the injury of time than such a slender board, they de∣serve to be engraven in such durable dainty stuff that may be fit to hang up in the Temple of Apollo; your Eccho deserves to dwell in som marble or porphyry grot, cut about Parnassus Mount neer the source of Helicon, rather than upon such a slight suprfiecies. I much thank you for your visits, and other fair respects you shew me; specially that you have enlarg'd my quarters 'mong these melancholy Walls, by sending me a whole Isle to walk in, I mean that delicate purple Island I receiv'd from you, wher I meet with Apollo himself and all his daughters, with other excellent so∣ciety; I stumble also ther often upon my self, and grow better ac∣quainted
with what I have within me and without mee: Insomuch that you could not make choice of a fitter ground for a Prisoner,  I am, to pass over, than of that purple Isle, that Isle of man you see me, which as the ingenious Author▪ hath made it, is a far more dainty soil than that Scarlet Island which lys near the Baltic sea. I remain still wind-bound in this Fleet, when the weather mend and the wind sifts that I may launch forth, I will repay you your visits, and be ready to correspond with you in the reciprocation of any other offices of frendship, for I am, Sir, Your affectionat Servitor, J. H. Fleet, 25 Aug. 1645. LXVII. To my Honourable La: the La: A. Smith. Madame, VVHeras you wer pleas'd lately to ask leave, you may now take authority to command me; And did I know any of the faculties of my mind, or lims of my body that wer not willing to serve you, I would utterly renounce them, they should be no more mine, at least I should not like them neer so well; but I shall not be put to that, for I sensibly find that by a naturall propensity they are all most ready to obey you, and to stir at the least beck of your commands as Iron moves towords the load-stone; Therfore Madame if you bid me go, I will run; If you bid me run, Ile fly, (if I can) upon your arrand; But I must stay till I can get my heels at liberty from among these Walls, till when, I am as perfectly as man can be, Madame, Your most obedient humble Servitor, J. H. Fleet, 5 May. 1645.
LXVIII. To Master G. Stone. SIR, I Heartily rejoyce with the rest of your frends, that you are safely return'd from your Travells, specially that you have made so good returns of the time of your Travell; being as I understand, come home fraighted with observations and languages; your Father tells me tha the finds you are so wedded to the Italian & French, that you utterly neglect the Latine Tongue, That's not well, though you have learnt to play at Baggammon, you must not forget Irish, which is a more serious and solid game; but I know you are so dis∣creet in the course and method of your studies, that you will make the daughters to wait upon their mother, & love stil your old frend: To truck the Latine for any other vulgar Language, is but an ill bater, it is as bad as that which Glaucus made with Diomedes when he parted with his golden Armes for brazen ones; the procede of this exchange wil come far short of any Gentlemans expectati∣ons, though haply it may prove advantagious to a Merchant, to whom common Languages are more usefull. I am big with desire to meet you, and to mingle a days discours with you, if no two, how you escap'd the claws of the Inquisition, wherunto I un∣derstand you wer like to fall, and of other Traverses of your Pe∣egrination: Farewell my precious Stone, and beleeve it, the least grain of those high respects you please to professe unto me▪  not lost, but answer'd with so many Carats: So I rest, . 30 Novem. 163. Your most affectionate Servitor, J. H.
XLIX. To Mr. J. J. Esq. SIR, I Received those sparkes of piety you pleas'd to send me in a manu∣script, and wheras you favour me with a desire of my opinion concerning the publishing of them; Sir I must confess that I found among them many most fervent and flexanimous strains of devotion; I found som prayers so piercing and powerfull that they are able to invade Heaven, and take it by violence, if the heart doth i'ts office as well as the toung: But Sir, you must give me leave (and for this leave you shall have authority to deal with me in such a case) to tell you, that wheras they consist only of requests being all supplicatory prayers, you should do well to in∣tersperse among them som eucharisticall ejaculations, and doxo∣logies, som oblation of thankfulnes; we should not be allwayes whining in a puling petitionary way (which is the tone of the time now in fashion) before the gates of Heaven with our fingers in our eyes, but we should lay our hands upon our hearts and break into raptures of joy and praise, a soul thus elevated is the most pleasing sacrifice that can be offer'd to God Almighty, it is the best sort of inense: Prayer causeth the first showr of rain, but praise brings down the second, the one fructifieth the earth, the other makes the Hills to skip; all prayers aim at our own ends and in∣terest, but praise proceeds from the pure motions of love and gra∣titude, having no other object but the glory of God, that soul which rightly dischargeth this part of devotion may be said to do the duty of an Angell upon earth. Among other attributes o God, praescience or fore-knowledge is one, for he knowes ou thoughts, our desires, our wants long before we propound them▪ And this is not only one of his attributes but prerogative royall, therfore to use so many iterations, inculcatings, and tautologie, as it is no good manners in morall Philosophy, no more is it i divinity, it argues a pusillanimou and mistrustfull soul: of the two, I had rather be overlong in praise, than prayer: yet I wou be carefull it should be free from any Pharisaicall babling; pray∣er compar'd with praise, is but a fuliginous smoak issuing fro
the sense of sin, and human infirmities, prayses are the true cleer sparks of pietie, and sooner fly upwards. Thus have I been free with you in delivering my opinion touch∣ing that piece of devotion you sent me, wherunto I ad my humble thanks to you for the perusall of it, so I am Fleet, 8 Sept. 1645. Yours most ready to be commanded, J. H. LXX. To Captain William Bridges in Amsterdam. My noble Captain, I Had yours of the tenth current, and besides your avisos, I must thank you for those rich flourishes wherwith your letter was em∣brodered evry where; The news under this clyme is that they have mutinied lately in divers places about the Excise, a bird that was first hatch'd there first amongst you; heer in London the tu∣mult came to that height that they burnt down to the grownd the Excise house in Smithfield, but now all is quiet again; God grant our Excise heer have not the same fortune as yours there, to be∣com perpetuall; or as that new gabell of Orleans, which began in the time of the Ligue, which continueth to this day, notwithstan∣ding the cause ceas'd about threescore yeers since; touching this I remember a pleasant tale that is recorded of Henry the Great, who som yeers after peace was established throughout all the whole body of France, going to his town of Orleans, the Citizens petitioned him that his Majesty would be pleased to abolish that new tax; the King asked who had impos'd it upon them, they an∣swered Monsieur de la Chatre, (during the civill Wars of the Ligue) who was now dead; the King replied Monsieur de la Cha'tre vous a liguè qu'il vous desligue, Monsieur dela Chatre ligu'd you, let him then unligue you for my part; now that we have a kind of peace, the goals are full of souldiers, and som Gentlemens sons of quality suffer daily, the last week Judge Rivs condemn'd four in your County at Maidstone Assizes, but he went out of the world before them though they wer executed four daies after; you know
the saying in France, that la guerre sait les larrons, & la paix les a∣meine an gibet, War makes thieves, and peace brings them to the gallowes. I lie still heer in limbo, in limbo innocentium, though not in limbo infantion, and I know not upon what star to cast this mis∣fortune; Others are heer for their good conditions, but I am heet for my good qualities as your cosin Fortescue geer'd me not long since, I know none I have, unless it be to love you, which I would continue to do, though I tug'd at an oar in a Gallie, much more as I walk in the Galleries of this Fleet: In this resolution I rest Fleet, 2 Sept. 1645. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. LXXI. To Mr. W. B. at Grundesburgh. Gentle Sir, YOurs of the seventh I received yesternight, and read ore with no vulgar delight; in the perusall of it mee thought to have discern'd a gentle strife 'twixt the fair respects you pleas'd to shew me therin, and your ingenuity in expressing them, who should have superiority; so that I knew not to which of the two I should adjudge the Palm. If you continue to wrap up our young acquaintance, which you say is but yet in fasciis, in such warm choice swadlings, it will quickly grow up to maturity, and for my part I shall not be wan∣ting to contribute that reciprocall nourishment which is due from me. Wheras you please to magnifie som pieces of mine, and that you seem to spy the Muses pearching upon my Trees, I fear 'tis but deceptio visus, for they are but Satyrs, or happily som of the homelier sort of Wood Nymphs, the Muses have choicer walks for their re∣creation. Sir, I must thank you for the visit you vouchsafed me in this simple cell, and wheras you please to call it the cabinet that holds the jewell of our times, you may rather term it a wicker casknet that keeps a jet ring, or a horn lantern that holds a small taper of cours wax; I hope this taper shall not extinguish heer, and if
it may afford you any light, either from hence or heerafter, I should be glad to impart it in a plentifull proportion, because I am Sir Fleet, 1 Iuly, 1646. Your most affectionat frend to serve you, J. H. LXXII. To I. W. of Grayes Inne, Esquire SIR, I Was yours before in a high degree of affection, but now I am much more yours since I perus'd that parcell of choice Epistles you sent me; they discover in you a knowing and a candid cleer soul, for familiar letters are the keys of the mind, they open all the  of ones breast, all the cells of the brain, and truly set forth the in∣ward man, nor can the pensill so lively represent the face, as the pen  the Fancy: I much thank you that you would please to im∣part them unto Fleet, 1 April, 1645. Your most faithfull servitor, J. H. LXXIII. To Cap. T. P. from Madrid. Captain Don Tomas, COuld I write my love unto you, with a ray of the Sun, as once Aurelius the Roman Emperour wish'd to a frend of his, you ow this cleer horizon of Spain could afford me plenty, which can∣not be had so constantly all the seasons of the yeer in your clowdy yme of England; Apollo with you makes not himself so common,  keeps more State, and doth not shew his face, and shoot his ams so frequently as he doth heer, where 'tis Sunday all the : I thank you a thousand times for what you sent by Mr Gres∣ and that you let me know how the pulse of the times bears
with you; I find you cast not your eyes so much southward as you were us'd to do towards us heer, and when you look this way you cast a clowdy countenance, with threatning looks; which maket me apprehend som fear that it will not be safe for me to be longer under this meridian. Before I part I will be carefull to send you those things you writ for, by som of my L. Ambassadour Aston's Gentlemen; I cannot yet get that Grammar which was made for the Constable of Castile, who you know was born dumb, wheri an Art is invented to speak with hands only, to carry the Alphabt upon ones joynts, and at his fingers ends, which may be learn'd without any great difficulty by any mean capacity, and wherby one may discours and deliver the conceptions of his mind witho ever wagging of his toung, provided ther be reciprocall know∣ledge, aud co-understanding of the art 'twixt the parties, and it i a very ingenious piece of invention. I thank you for the co∣pie of verses you sent me glancing upon the times; I was lately perusing som of the Spanish Poets heer, and lighted upon two Epi∣grams, or Epitaphs more properly, upon our▪ Henry the eighth, and upon his daughter Queen Elizabeth, which in requital I thought worth the sending you: A Henrique octavo Rey de Ingalatierra Mas de esta losa fria Cubre Henrique tu valor, De una Muger el amor, Y de un Error la porsia Como cupo en tu grandeza, Dezidme enzañado Ingles Querer una muger a lospies, Ser de la yglesia cabesa? Pros'd thus in English, for I had no time to put it on feet. O Henry more than this cold pavemeut covers thy worth, th love of a woman and the pertinacy of error; How could it sub with thy greatness, tell me O cosen'd English man, to cast th self at a womans feet, and yet to be head of the Church? That up∣on Queen Elizabeth was this.
De Isabela Reyna de Ingalatierra Aqui yaze Iesabel, Aqui lanueva Athalia, Del oro Antartico Harpia, Del mar incendio cruel: Aqui el ingenio, mas dino De loor que ha tenido el suelo, Si para llegar al cielo No huuiera errado el camino. Heer lies Iesabel, heer lies the new Athalia, the Hrapy of the Western gold, the cruell firebrand of the Sea; Heer lies a wit the most worthy of fame which the earth had, if to arrive to heaven she had not mist her way. You cannot blame the Spaniard to be Satyricall against Queen Elizabeth, for he never speaks of her, but he fetcheth a shrink in the thoulder; since I have begun I will go on with as witty an Anagram as I have heard or read, which a Gentleman lately made upon his own name Tomas, and a Nun call'd Maria, for she was his devota; the occasion was, that going one evening to discours with her at the grate, he wrung her by the hand, and joyn'd both their names in this Anagram, To Maria mas, I would take more; I know I shall not need to expound it to you; heer unto I will add a strong and deep fetch'd character, as I think you will confess when you have read it, that one made in this Court of a Cour∣san. Eres put a tan arte Qu'en el vientre de tu madre Tu tuvistes de manera Que te cavalgue el padre, To this I will joyn that which was made of de Vaca husband to Iusepe de Vaca the famous Comedian, who came upon the Stage with a cloak lin'd with black plush and a great chain about his neck, wherupon the Duke of Mediana broke into these witty lines.
Con tanta selpa en la Capa Y tanta cadena de oro, El marido de la Vaca Que puede ser sino toro? The conclusion of this rambling letter shall be a rime of certain hard throaty words which I was taught lately, and they are accoun∣ted the difficulst in all the whole Castilian language, insomuch that he who is able to pronounce them, is accounted Buen Roman∣cista, a good speaker of Spanish: Abcia y oueia y piedra que rabeia, y pendola as oreia, y lugar en la ygrea, dessea a su hijo la vieia. A be and a sheep,  mill, a jewell in the eare, and a place in the Church, the old woman desires her son. No more now, but that I am, and will ever be, my noble Captain in the front of Madrid, 1 Aug. 1622. Your most affectionat Servitors, J. H. LXXIV. To Sir Tho. Luke, Knight. SIR HAd you traversed all the world over, specially those large continents, and Christian Countries which you have so ex∣actly surveyed, and whence you have brought-over with you such usefull observations and languages, you could not have lighted upon a choicer piece of womankind for your wife; the earth could not have afforded a Lady, that by her discretion and sweetnes could better quadrate with your disposition: as I heartily congratulat your happines in this particular, so I would desire you to know that I did no ill offices towards the advancement of the work, upon occasion of som discours with my Lord George of Rutland not long before at Hambledon. My thoughts are now puzzled about my voyage to the Baltie sea upon the Kings service, otherwise I would have ventur' upon an Epithalamium, for ther is matter rich enough to work upon: and now that you have made an end of wooing, I could wish you had made an end of wrangling, I mean of lawing, specially with your mother, who hath such resolutions wher she once takes: law is not only a pickpurse, but a Purgatory; you know the saying
they have in France, les plaideurs sont les oyséaux, le palais le Champ. les Iuges les rets, les Advocats les Rats, les procureurs les souris del' estat, The poor clients are the birds, Westminster Hall the field, the Judge the net, the Lawyers the rats, the Atturnies the mice of the common wealth; I believe this saying was spoken by an angry clyent; for my part I like his resolution who said he would never use Lawyer nor Physitian but upon urgent necessity: I will conclude with this rime Puuvre playdeur, jay gran pitie de ta douleur. Westmin. 1 May, 1629. Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. LXXV. To Mr. R. K. Dear Sir, YOu and I are upon a journy, though bound for severall places, I for Hamborough, you for your last home, as I un∣derstand by Doctor Baskervill, who tells me much to my grief, that this hectieall disease will not suffer you to be long among us: I know by som experiments which I have had of you, you have such a noble soul within you, that will not be daunted by those natu∣rall apprehensions which death doth usually carry along with it a∣mong vulgar spirits: I do not think that you fear death as much now (though it be to som) , as you did to go in∣to the dark when you wer a child; you have had a fair time to pre∣pare your self, God give you a boon voyage to the haven you are bound for (which I doubt not will be heaven) and me the grace to follow, when I have pass'd the boysterous sea, and swelling billows of this tumultuary life, wherin I have already shot divers dangerous gulfs, pass'd o're som quick sands, rocks, and sundry ill favor'd reaches, while others sail in the sleeve of fortune; you and I have eaten a great deal of salt together, and spent much oyl in the communication of our studies by literall correspondence and otherwise both in verse and prose, therfore I will take my last leave of you now in these few stanza's.
1. Weak crazy Mortall, why dost fear To leave this earthly Hemisphear? Where all delights away do pass, Like thy effigies in a glass; Each thing beneath the Moon is frayle and sickle, Death sweeps away what time cuts with his sickle, 2. This life, at best, is but an Inn, And we the passengers, wherin The cloth is layed to som, before They peep out of dame nature's dore, And warm lodgings left, Others ther are Must trudg to find a room, and shift for fare? 3. This life's, at longest, but one day, He who in youth posts hence away, Leave's us i'h Morn, He who hath run His race till Manhood, part's al noon, And who at seventy odd forsakes this light, He may be said to take his leave at night. 4. One past makes up the Prince and peasan, Though one eat roots, the other seasan, They nothing differ in the stuff, But both extinguish like a snuff; Why then fond man should thy soul take dismay, To sally out of these gross walls of clay? And now my dear frend adieu, and live eternally in that world o endles bliss wher you shall have knowledg as well as all things els commensurat to your desires; wher you shall cleerly see the re∣all causes, and perfect truth of what we argue with that incerti∣tude, and beat our brains about heer below, yet though you be gon hence, you shall never die in the memory of Westmi. 15 Aug. 1630. Your J. H.
LXXVI. To Sir R. Gr. Knight and Bar. Noble Sir, I Had yours upon Maunday Thursday late, and the reason that I suspended my answer till now, was, that the season engaged me to sequester my thoughts from my wonted negotiations to con∣templat the great work of mans Redemption, so great, that wer it cast in counterballance with his creation, it would out-poyze it far, I summond all my intellectuals to meditat upon those passions, upon those pangs, upon that despicable and most dolorous death, upon that cross wheron my Saviour suffer'd, which was the first Christian altar that ever was, and I doubt that he will never have benefit of the sacrifice who hates the harmeles resemblance of the altar wheron it was offer'd; I applied my memory to fasten up∣on't, my understanding to comprehend it, my will to embrace it; from these three faculties, me thought I found by the mediation of the fancy som beames of love gently gliding down from the head to the heart, and inflaming all my affections▪ If the human soul had far more powers than the Philosophers afford her, if she had as many faculties within the head as ther be hairs without, the speculation of this mystery would find work enough for them all; Truly the more I scrue up my spirits to reach it, the more I am swallowed in a gulf of admiration, and of a thousand im∣perfect notions, which makes me ever and anon to quarrell my soul that she cannot lay hold on her Saviour, much more my heart, that my purest affections cannot hug him as much as I would. They have a custom beyond the Seas (and I could wish it wer the worst custom they had) that during the passion week divers of their greatest Princes, and Ladies will betake themselves to som covent or reclus'd house to wean themselves from all world∣ly encombrances, and convers only with heaven, with perfor∣mance of som kind of penances all the week long; A worthy Gentleman that came lately from Italy, told me that the Count of Byren now Marshall of France, having bin long persecuted by Cardinall Richelieu, put himself so into a Monastery, and the
next day news was brought him of the Cardinalls death, which I believe made him spend the rest of the week with the more de∣votion in that way. France braggs that our Saviour had his face turnd towards her when he was upon the Cross, ther is more cause to think that it was towards this Island, in regard the rays of Christianity first reverberated upon her, her King being Christian 400 yeers before him of France, (as all Historians concur) not∣withstanding that he arrogates to himself the title of the first Son of the Church. Let this serve for part of my Apologie: The day following, my Saviour being in the grave, I had no list to look much abroad, but continued my retirednes; ther was another reason also why, because I intended to take the holy Sacrament the Sunday ensuing, which is an act of the greatest consolation, and consequence that possibly a Christian can be capable of; it imports him so much that he is made or marr'd by it, it tends to his damnation, or salvation, to help him up to heaven, or tumble him down head∣long to hell: Therfore it behoves a man to prepare and recol∣lect himself, to winnow his thoughts from the chaff and tares of the world beforehand; This then took up a good part of that day to provide my self a wedding garment, that I might be a fit guest at so precious a banquet, so precious, that manna and angels food are but cours viands in comparison of it. I hope that this excuse will be of such validity that it may pro∣cure my pardon for not corresponding with you this last week. I am now as freely as formerly▪ Fleet, 30. Aprill, 1647. Your most ready and humble Servitor, J. H. LXXVII. To Mr. R. Howard. SIR, THer is a saying that carrieth with it a great deal of cauti∣on, from him whom I trust God defend me, for from him
whom I trust not, I will defend my self. Ther be sundry sorts of musts, but that of a secret is one of the greatest; I trusted T. P. with a weighty one, conjuring him that it should not take air and go abroad, which was not don according to the rules and reli∣gion of frendship, but it went out of him the very next day; Though the inconvenience may be mine, yet the reproach is his, nor would I exchange my dammage for his disgrace; I would wish you take heed of him, for he is such as the Comic Poet speaks of plenus rimarum, he is full of Chinks, he can hold no∣thing; you know a secret is too much for one, too little for three, and enough for two, but Tom must be none of those two, unless ther wer a trick to sodder up his mouth: If he had committed a secret to me, and injoynd me silence, and I had promis'd it, though I had bin shut up in Perillus brasen Bull, I should not have bellowed it out; I find it now true that he who discovers his secrets to another, sells him his Liberty, and becoms his slave: well, I shall be warier heerafter, and learn more wit, In the interim the best satisfaction I can give my self is to expunge him quite ex alb amicorum, to raze him out of the catalogue of my frends, (though I cannot of my acquaintance) wher your name is inserted in great golden Characters; I will endeavour to lose the memory of him, and that my thoughts may never run more upon the fashion of his face, which you know he hath no cause to brag of, I hate such blatroons Odi illos seu claustra Erebi▪— I thought good to give you this little mot of advice, because the times are ticklish, of committing secrets to any; though not to From the Fleet, 14. Febr. 1647. Your most affectionat frend to serve you, J. H.
LXVIII. To my Hon. frend, Mr. E. P. at Paris. SIR, LEt me never sally hence, from among these disconolat Walls, if the literall correspondence you please to hold so punctually with me be not one of the greatest solaces I have had in this sad condition; for I find so much salt, such indearments and flourishes, such a gallantry and neanes in your lines, that you may give the law of lettering to all the world: I had this week a twin of yours, of the 10 and 15 current, I am sorry to hear of your achaques, and so often indisposition there, it may be very well (as you say) that the air of that dirty Town doth not agree with you because you speak Spanish, which language you know is us'd to be breath'd out under a clearer clyme, I am sure it agrees not with the sweet breezes of peace, for 'tis you there that would keep poor Christendom in per∣petuall whirle-winds of war; but I fear, that while France sets all wheels a going, and stirres all the Cacodaemons of hell to pull down the house of Austria, shee may chance at last to pull it upon her own head: I am sorry to understand what they write from Venice this week, that ther is a discovery made in Italy, how France had a hand to bring in the Turk, to invade the Territories of Saint Mark, and puzzle the peace of Italy, I want faith to beleeve it yet, nor can I entertain in my brest any such conceit of the most Christian King, and first Son of the Church, as hee terms himself: yet I pray in your next to pull this thorn out of my thoughts, and tell mee whether one may give any credit to this report. We are now ot-free as touching the Northern Army, for our dear Brethren have truss'd up their Baggage, and put the Twd 'twixt us and them once again, deer indeed, for they have cost us first and last, above nineteen hundred thousand pound Sterling, which amounts to neer upon eight Millions of Crowns with you there: yet if reports be true, they left behind them more than they lost, if you go to number of men, which will be a brave race of mestisos heerafter, who may chance meet their Fathers in the field, and kill them unwittingly; he will be a wise child that knows his right fa∣ther▪ Heer we are like to have four and twenty Seas emptied short∣ly,
and som do hope to find abundance of Tresure in the bottom of them, as no doubt they will, but many doubt that it will prove but um Tolosanum to the finders, God grant that from Aereans wee turn not to be Arrians: The Earl of Strafford was accounted by his very enemies to have an extraordinary talent of judgment and parts, (though they say he wanted moderation) and one of the prime Precepts he left his Son upon the Scaffold was, that he should not ddle with Church-lands, for they would prove a Canker to his estate: Heer are started up som great knowing men lately that can shew the very track by which our Savior went to Hell, they will tell you▪ precisely whose names are written in the Book of Life, whose no▪ God deliver us from spirituall pride, which of all sorts is the most dangerous: Heer are also notable Sta-gazers, who obtrude to the world such confident bold Predictions, and are so familiar with heavenly bodies, that Pelomy, and Tychobrach were but ninnies to them; we have likewise multitudes of witches among us, for in Essex and Suffolk ther wer above two hundred indicted within these two yeers, and above the one half of them executed, more I may wel say, than ever this Island bred since the Creation, I speak it with horror, God guard us from the Devill, for I think he was never so busie upon any part of the earth that was enlightned whith the beams of Christianity, nor do I wonder at it, for ther's never a Cross left to fright him away: Edenburgh I hear is fallen into a relpse of the Plague, the last they had rag'd so violently, that the fortieth man and woman lives not of those that dwelt there four years since, but it is all peepled with new faces; Don and Hans, I hear are absolutely accorded, nor doe I believe that all the Arti∣ficers of policy that you use there can hinder the peace, though they may puzzle it for a while, if it be so, the peeple which but∣ton their doublets upward will bee bettor able to deal with you there. Much notice is taken that you go on there too fast in your ac∣quests, and now that the Eagles wings are pretty well clyp'd, 'tis time to look that your ower-de-le grow not too rank, and spread too wide. Wheras you desire to know how it fares with your Ma∣er, I must tell you, that like the glorious Sun, he is still in his own Orb, though clowded for a time that hee cannot shoot the beams of Majesty with that lustre hee was wont to do: never did Cavalier wooe fair Lady as he wooes the Parliament to a peace, 'tis much the Head should so stoop to the Members. Farewell my noble frend, cheer up, and reserve your self for bet∣r days; take our Royall Master for your pattern, who for his lon∣ganimity,
patience, courage and constancy is admir'd of all the world, and in a passive way of fortitude hath out-gon all the nine VVorthies. If the Cedar be so weather-beaten, we poor shrubs must not murmure to bear part of the storm; I have had my share, and I know you want not yours; The Stars may change their Aspects, and we may live to see the Sun again in his full Meridian; in the inerim com what com will, I am Fleet, 3 Feb. 1646. Entirely yours, J. H. LXXIX. To Sir K. D. at Rome. SIR, THough you know well, that in the carriage and cours of my rambling life, I had occasion to be as the Dutchman saith, a Landloper, and to see much of the world abroad, yet me thinks, I have travell'd more since I have been immur'd and martyrd 'twixt these walls than ever I did before, for I have travelled the Isle of Man, I mean this little world, which I have carryed about me and within me so many yeers, for as the wisest of Pagan Philoso∣phers said, that the greatest learning was the knowledg of ones self, to be his own Geometrician: If one do so, he need not gad abroad to see new fashions, he shal find enough at home, he shal hourly meet with new fancies, new humors, new passions within doors. This travelling o're of ones self, is one of the paths that leads a man to Paradice; it is true, that 'tis a dirty and a dangerous one, for it is thick set with extravagant desires,' irregular affections and concupiscences, which are but od Comerades, and often times doly in ambush to cut our throats; ther are also som melancholy companions in the way, which are our thoughts, but they turn ma∣ny times to be good fellows, and the best company; which makes
me, that among these disconsolat walls, I am never less alone, than when I am alone, I am oft times sole, but seldom solitary: som ther are, who are over-pestered with these companions, and have too much mind for their bodies, but I am none of those. Ther have been (since you shook hands with England) many strange things happened heer, which posterity must have a strong faith to believe, but for my part I wonder not at any thing, I have seen such monstrous things: you know ther is nothing that can be casuall, ther is no success good or bad, but is contingent to man, somtimes or other, nor are ther any contingencies present or fu∣ture, but they have their parallels from times passed: ot the great Wheel of Fortune, upon whose Rim (as the twelve signs upon the Zodiac) all Worldly chances are emboss'd, turns round perpetually, and the Spokes of that Wheel, which point at all human Actions, return exactly to the same place after such a time of revolution; which makes me little marvail at any of the strange traverses of these distracted times, in regard ther hath been the like, or such like formerly; if the Liturgy is now sup∣press'd, the Missall and Roman Breviary was us'd so a hundred yeers since; If Crosses, Church-Windows, Organs and Fonts are now battered down, I little wonder at it, for Chapells, Mo∣nasteries, Hermitages, Nunneries, and other Religious Houses, wer us'd so in the time of old King Harry; If Bishops and Deans are now in danger to be demolished, I little wonder at it, for Abbots, Priors, and the Pope himself had that fortune heer an age since: That our King is reduc'd to this pass, I doe not much wonder at it, for the first time I travell'd France, Iewis the thirteenth (afterwards a most triumphant King as ever that Countrey had) in a dangerous civill War was brought to such streights, for he was brought to dispence with part of his Co∣ronation Oath, to remove from his Court of Iustice, from the Counsell Table, from his very Bed-chamber his greatest Favourtis; Hee was driven to bee content to pay the expence of the War, to reward those that took Arms against him, and publish a De∣claration that the ground of their quarrell was good, which was the ame in effect with ours, viz. A discontinuance of the Assemb∣ly of the three Estates, and that Spanish Counsells did praedominat in France. You know, better than I, that all events, good or bad, com from the all-disposing high Deity of Heaven, if good, he produ∣ceth them, if bad, he permits them; Hee is the Pilot that sits at the stern▪ and steers the great Vessell of the World, and wee must
not presume to direct him in his cours, for he understands the use of the Compas better than we; Hee commands also the winds and the weather, and after a storm hee never fails to send us a calm, and to recompence ill times with better, if we can live to see them, which I pray you may do, whatsoever becomes of Your still most faithfull humble Servitor, J. H. From the Fleet, Lond. 3 Mar. 1646. LXXX. To Sir K. D. at his house in Saint Martins Lane. SIR, THat Poem which you pleased to approve of so highly in a Ma∣nuscript, is now manumitted, and made free denizen of the World; it hath gon from my Study to the Stall, from the Pen to the Press, and I send one of the maiden Copies heerwith to attend you; 'Twas your judgment, which all the world holds to be sound and sterling, induced me heerunto, therfore, if ther be any, you are to bear your part of the blame. Holborn, 3 Ian. 1641. Your most entirely devoted Servitor, J. H,
THE VOTE, OR, A POEM ROYAL, Presented To His MAJESTY for a New-yeers-Gift, by way of Discourse 'twixt the Poet and his Muse. Calendis Ianuarii 1641. POEMA . THe world's bright Ey, Times measurer, begun Through watry Capricorn his cours to run, Old Ianus hastened on, his Temples bound With Ivy, his gray hairs with Holly crownd; When in a serious quest my thoughts did muse What gift, as best becomming, I should chuse, To Britains Monarch (my dread Soveraign) bring, Which might supply a New-years offering. rummag'd all my stores, and search'd my cells, Wher nought appear'd, God wot, but Bagatells: No far fetch'd Indian Gem cut out of Rock, Or fish'd in shells wer trusted under lock,
No piece which  strong fancy hit, Or Titians Pensill, or rare Hylliards wit, No Ermins, or black Sables, no such skins, As the grim Tartar hunts or takes in gins; No Medalls, or rich stuff of Tyrian Dy, No costly Bowls of frosted Argentry, No curious Land-skip, or som Marble piece Digg'd up in Delphos, or else-where in Greece; No Romn Perfumes, Buffs or Cordovans Made drunk with Amber, by Moreno's hands, No Arras or rich Carpets freighted o're The surging Seas from Asia's doubtfull shore, No Lions Cub or Beast of strange Aspect, Which in Numidia's fiery womb had slept, No old Toledo Blades, or Damaskins, No Pistolls, or som rare-spring Carrabins, No Spanish Ginet, or choice Stallion sent From Naples or hot Africs Continent: In fine, I nothing found I could descry Worthy the hands of Caesar or his eye. My wits wer at a stand, when, loe, my Muse (None of the Quire, but such as they do use For Laundresses or Handmaids of mean rank I knew somtimes on P and Isis bank) Did softly buz,— Muse. —Then let me somthing bring, May hansell the New-year to CHARLES my King▪ May usher in bifronted Ianus— Poet. Thou fond fool-hardy Muse, thou silly thing, Which 'mongst the shrubs and reeds do'st use to sing,
Dar'st thou perk up, and the tall Cedar clime▪ And venture on a King with gingling rime? Though all thy words wer Pearls, thy letters gold, And cut in Rubies, or cst in a mould Of Diamonds, yet still thy Lines would be Too mean a gift for such a Majesty. Muse. Ile try, and hope to pass without disdain, In New-yeers gifts the mind stands for the main. The Sophy, finding 'twas well meant, did daign Few drops of running-water from a Swain; Then sure, 'twill please my Liege, if I him bring, Som gentle drops from the Castalian Spring; Though Rarities I want of such account, Yet have I somthing on the forked mount. Tis not the first, or third access I made To Caesars feet, and thence departed glad. or as the Sun with his male heat doth render Nile's muddy slime fruitfull, and apt t'engender, And daily to produce new kind of creatures Of various shapes and thousand differing features, So is my fancy quickned by the glance Of His benign aspect and countenance, It makes me pregnant and to superaete, Such is the vigor of His beams and heat. Once in a Vocall Forrest I did sing, And made the Oke to stand for CHARLES my King, The best of Trees, wherof (it is no vant) The greatest Schools of Europe sing and chant: There you shall also finde Dame Arhetine id est virtuous. Anagram of Henrieta. ARHETINE, Great Henries Daughter, and great Britains Queen, Her name engraven in a Lawrell Tree, And so transmitted to Eternity. For now I hear that Grove speaks besides mine, The Language of the Loire, the Po and Rhine.
(And to my Prince (my sweet Black Prince) of late, I did a youthfull subject dedicate.) Nor do I doubt but that in time my Tres Will yield me fruit to pay Apollo's Fees, To offer up whole Hecatoms of praise To Caesr, f on them he cast his rays, And if my Lamp have oil, I may compile The Modern Annalls of great Albion's Isle To vindicate the truth of CHARLES his reign, From scribling Pamphletors who Story stain With loose imperfect passages, and thrust Lame things upon the world, t'ane up in trust. I have had audience (in another strain) Of Europs greatest Kings, when German main And the Cantabrian waves I cross'd, I drank Of Tagus, Seine, and sate at Tybers bank, Through Scylla and Charybdis I have steer'd, Wher restles Aeina belching flames appear'd, By Greece, once Palla's Garden, then I pass't Now all o're-spread with ignorance and wast. Nor hath fair Europ her vat bounds throughout, An Academe of note I found not out. But now I hope in a successfull proe, The Fates have fix'd me on sweet Englands shore, And by these various wandrings  I found, Earth is our comn Mother, every ground Ma be one's Countrey, for by birth each man Is  this world a Cosmopolitan, A free-born Bugess, and receives therby H  frm Nativety: Nor is this lower world but a huge Inne, And men the rambling pssengers, wherin Sm do warm lodgings find, and that as soon As out of natures lossets they see noon, An find the Table ready laid; but som Must for their commons trot and trudg for room:
With easie pace som climb Promotions Hill, Som in the Dale, do what they can, stick still; Som through false glasses Fortune smiling spy, Who still keeps off, though she appears hard by: Som like the Ostrich with their wings do flutter, But cannot fly or soar above the gutter. Som quickly fetch, and double Good-Hopes Cape, Som ne'r can do't, though the same cours they shape▪ So that poor mortalls are so many balls Toss'd som o'r line, som under fortun's walls. And it is Heavens high pleasure Man should ly Obnoxious to this partiality, That by industrious ways he should contend, Nature's short pittance to improve and men; Now, Industry ne'r fail'd, at last t'advance Her patient sons above the reach of Chance. Poet. But whither rov'st thou thus—? Well; since I see thou art so strongly bent, And of a gracious look so confident, Go, and throw down thy self at Caesars fet, And in thy best attire thy Soveraign greet. Go, an auspicious and most blissefully yeer Wsh Him, as e'r sh n'd o'r this Hemisphear, Good may the Entrance, better the middle be, And the Conclusion best of all the three; Of joy ungrudg'd may each day be a debter, And evry morn still usher in a better, May the soft gliding Nones and every Ide, With all the Calends still som good betide, May Cynthia with kind looks and  rays, One clear his nights, the other gild his days. Free limbs, unpysic'd health, due appetite, Which no sauce else but Hunger may excite,
Sound sleeps, green dreams be his, which represent Symptomes of health, and the next days content; Chearfull and vacant thoughts, not always bound To counsell, or in deep Idea's drown'd: (Though such late traverses, and tumults might Turn to a lump of care, the airiest wight) And since while fragile flesh doth us array, The humors stil are combating for sway, (Which wer they free of this reluctancie And counterpois'd, Man would immortall be) May sanguin o'r the rest predominate In Him, and their malignant fiux abate. May his great Queen, in whose Imperious ey Reigns such a world of winning Majesty, Like the rich Olive or Falernian Vine Swell with more gems of Cians masculine; And as her fruit sprung from the Rose and Luce, (The best of stems Earth yet did e'r produce) Is tied already by a Sanguin lace To all the Kings of Europe's high-born race, So may they shoot their youthfull branches o'r The surging seas, and graff with every Shore. May home-commerce and trade encrease from far, That both the Indies meet within his bars, And bring in Mounts of Coin His Mints to feed, And Banquers (trafics chief suporters) breed, Which may enrich his Kingdoms, Court and Town, And ballast still the coffers of the Crown, For Kingdoms are as ships, the Prince his chests The ballast, which if empty, when distres't With storms, their holds are lightly trimm'd, the keel Can run no steedy cours, but toss and reel; May his Imperiall chamber always ply To his desires her wealth to multiply, That she may prize his Royall favour more Than all the wares fetch'd from the great Mogor,
May the The Parlement. Grand Senate, with the Subjects right Put in the Counter-scale the Regall might The flowrs o'th' Crown, that they may prop each other, And like the Grecians twin, live, love together. For the chief glory of a people is, The power of their King, as theirs is His; May He be still, within himself at home, That no just passion make the reason rome, Yet passions have their turns to rouse the Soul, And stir her slumbring spirits, not controul, For as the Ocean besides ebb and flood (Which Hippocrates. Nature's greatest Clerk ne'r understood) s not for sail, if an impregning wind Fill not the flagging canvas, so a mind Too calm is not for Action, if desire Heats not it self at passion's quickning fire, For Nature is allow'd somtimes to muster Her passions so they only blow, not bluster. May Iustice still in her true scales appear, And honour fix'd in no unworthy sphear, Unto whose palace all access should have Through virtues Temple, not through Plutos Cave. May his tru subjects hearts be his chief Fort, Their purse his tresure and their Love his Port, Their prayers as sweet Incense, to draw down Myriads of blessings on his Queen and Crown. And now that his glad presence, did asswage, That fearfull tempest in the North did rage, May those frog vapours in the Irish skie, Be scatter'd by the beams of Majesty, That the Hybernian lyre give such a sound, May on our coasts with joyfull Ecchoes bound. And when this fatall planet leaves to lowr, Which too too long on Monarchies doth powr His direfull influence, may Peace once more Descend from Heaven on our tottering shore,
And ride in triumph both on land and main, And with her milk white steeds draw Charles his wain, That so, for those Saturnian times of old, An Age of Pearl, may com in lieu of Gold. Virtu still guide his cours, and if ther be A thing as Fortune, Him accompanie. May no ill genius haunt him, but by's side, The best protecting Angell ever bide. May He go on to vindicate the right Of holy things, and make the Temple bright, To keep that Faith, that sacred Truth entire, Which he receiv'd from King Iames. Salomon his Sire. And since we all must hence, by th' Iron Decree Stamp'd in the black Records of Destinie, Late may his life, his Glory ne'r wear out, Till the great year of Plato wheel about. So Prayeth The worst of Poets to The best of Princes, yet The most loyall of His Votaries and Vassalls JAMES HOVVILL▪ FINIS.
Additionall LETTERS Of a fresher Date, Never Publish'd before, And Composed By the same AUTHOR. Vt clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus. LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St, Pauls Church-yard. 1650.
To the Right Honorable EDVVARD Earl of DORSET, &c. My Lord, THe two preceding De∣dications being the one to a King, the other to a Prince, I hope this Third (consisting all of new Mat∣ter) will be the more excusable that I make to your Lpp; who, if ther were a generall Muster of Man∣kind, and due regard had to Gallan∣try and worth, would appear like a King among Princes, and a Prince
among Peers. I humbly pray, that for want of a better thing to comply with the Season, this may pass for a New-years gift, which I wish may carry with it as many good Omens, as it doth Orizons, that a thousand benedictions may fall upon you, and your Noble Family this New yeer, and all the yeers of your life, which I pray may be ma∣ny, many, many, because I have long since resolv'd to live and die, My Lord, Your most humble and obedient faithfull Servitr, JAMES HOVVEL. Calendis Ian. 1650.
Additionall Letters Of a fresher Date. I. To the R. H. Ed. Earl of Dorset, (Lo. Chamberlain of His Majesties House∣hold, &c.) at Knowles. My Lord, HAving so advantagious a hand as Doctor S. Turner, I am bold to send your Lordship a new Tract of French Philosophy, call'd L'usage de Passions, which is cryed up to be a choice peece; It is a Morall Discours of the right use of Passions, the Conduct wherof as it is the principall Employ∣ment of Virtu, so the Conquest of them is the dif∣ficultst part of Vaor: To know one's self is much, but to conquer one's self is more; We need not pick quarrells and seek enemies without doors, we have too many Inmates at home to exercise our Prowess upon, and ther is no man let him have his humors never so well ballanc'd, and in subjection unto him, but like Muscovia wives, they will oftentimes insult, unless they be check'd, yet wee should make them our Servants, not our Slaves. Touching the occurrences of the times, since the King was snatch'd away from the Parlement, the Army they say, use him with more civility and freedom, but for the main work of restoring him he is yet, as one may say, but Tantaliz'd, being brought often within the sight of
London and so off again; ther are hopes that somthing will be don to his advantage speedily, because the Gregarian Soldiers and gross of the Army is well-affected to him, though som of the chie∣fest Commanders be still averss. For forren News, they say St. Mark bears up stoutly against Ma∣homet both by land and sea: In Dalmatia he hath of late shaken him by the Turban ill-favoredly; I could heartily wish that our Army heer were there to help the Republic, and combat the Common ene∣my, for then one might be sure to dye in the bed of Honor. The Commotions in Sicily are quash'd, but those of Naples increase, and 'tis like to be a more raging and voracious ire than Vesuvius, or any of the sulphurious Mountains about her did ever belch out▪ The Catalan and Portuguez bait the Spaniard on both sides, but the first hath shrewder teeth than the other, and the French and Hollan∣der find him work in Flanders. And now, my Lord, to take all Na∣tions in a lump, I think God Almighty hath a quarrell lately with all Man▪ kind, and given the reines to the ill Spirit to compass the whole earth, for within these twelve yeers ther have the stran∣gest revolutions, and horridst things happen'd not only in Eu∣rope but all the world over, that have befallen man-kind, I dare boldly say, since Adam fell, in so short a revolution of time: Ther is a kind of popular Planet reigns every where: I will be∣gin with the hottest parts, with Afric, where the Emperor of Ethiopia (with two of his Sons) was encountred and kild in open field by the Groom of his Camells and Dromedaries, who had leavied an Ar∣my our of the dreggs of the peeple against him, and is like to hold that ancient Empire in Asia. The Tartar broke o're the four hundred mil'd wall, and rush'd into the heart of China, as far as Quinzay, and beleagerd the very Palace of the Emperor, who ra∣ther than to becom Captif to the base Tartar burnt his Castle, and did away himself, his thirty wives and children. The great Turk hath been lately strangled in the Seraglio his own house: The Emperor of Moscovia going in a solemn Procession upon the Sab∣bath day, the rabble broke in, knock'd down, and cut in peeces divers of his chiefest Counsellors, Favorits, and Officers before his face, and dragging their bodies to the Market-place, their heads were chopp'd oft, thrown into Vessells of hot water, and so set upon Poles to burn more bright before the Court gate: In Naples a com∣mon fruteer hath raised such an Insurrection, that they say above 60M. have bin slain already upon the streets of that City alone: Ca∣talonia and Portingall have▪ quite revolted from Spain. Your Lord∣ship knows what knocks have been 'twixt the Pope and Parma;
The Pole and the Cosacks are hard at it; Venice wrastleth with the Turk, and is like to lose her Maiden head unto him, unless other Christian Princes look to it in time: and touching these three King∣doms ther's none more capable than your Lordship to judge what monstrous things have happend; so that it seems the whol earth is off the hinges: and (which is the more wonderful) all these prodigious passages have fallen out in less than the compas of 12 yeers. But now that all the world is together by the eares, the States of Holl▪ would be quiet, for advice is com that the peace is concluded, and inter∣changably ratified 'twixt them and Spain, but they defer the pub∣lishing of it yet, till they have collected all the Contribution mo∣ney for the Army: The Spaniard hopes that one day this Peace may tend to his advantage more than all his Wars have don these fourscore yeers, relying upon the old Prophecie, Marte triumphabis Batavia, Pace peribis. The King of Denmark hath buried lately his eldest Son Christi∣an, so that he hath now but one living, viz. Frederic, who is Arch-Bishop of Breme, and is shortly to be King Elect. My Lord, this Letter runs upon Universalls, because I know your Lordship hath a public great soul, and a spacious understan∣ding, which comprehends the whole world; so in a due posture of humility I kiss your hands, being, My Lord, Your most obedient and most faithfull Servitor, J. H. From the Fleet, this 20 of Ian. 1646. II. To Mr. En. P. at Paris. SIR, SInce we are both agred to truck Intelligence, and that you are contented to barter French for English, I shall bee carefull to send you hence from time to time the currentest and most staple stuff I can find, with weight and good measure to boot; I know in that more subtill air of yours tinsell somtimes passes for tissue, Venice eads for Perl, and Demicastors for Bevers; But I know you have
so discerning a judgment, that you will not suffer your self to be so cheated, they must rise betimes that can put tricks upon you, and make you take semblances for realities▪ probabilities for certainties, or spurious for tru things: To hold this litterall correspondence I desire but the parings of your time, that you may have somthing to do, when you have nothing els to do, while I make a busines of it to be punctuall in my answers to you: let our Letters be as Eccho's, let them bound back and make mutuall repereussions; I know you that breath upon the Continent have cleerer ecchoes there, witnes that in the Twilleries, specially that at Charenton Bridge, which quavers and renders the voice ten times when 'tis open weather, and it were a virtuous curiosity to try it. For news, the world is heer turn'd upside down, and it hath bin long a going so, you know a good while since we have had leather Caps, and Bever shoos, but now the Arms are com to be leggs, for Bishops Laun-sleeves are worn for Boot-hose tops; the wast is com to the knee, for the Points that wer used to be about the middle are now dangling there; Boots and Shoos are so long snouted that one can hardly kneel in Gods House, where all Genuflexion and Po∣stures of devotion and decency are quite out of use: The Devill may walk freely up and down the streets of London now, for ther is not a Cross to fright him any where, and it seems he was never so busie in any Countrey upon earth, for ther have been more witches Arraign'd and Executed heer lately than ever were in this Island since the Creation. I have no more to communicate unto you at this time, and this is too much unless it were better; God Almighty send us pa∣tience, you in your Banishment, me, in my Captivity, and give us Heaven for our last Countrey, wher Desires turn to Fruiti∣on, Doubts to Certitudes, and dark Thoughts to cleer Con∣templations: Truly, my dear Don Antonio, as the times are, I take little contentment to live among the Elements, and (wer it my Makers pleasure) I could willingly, had I quit scores with the World, make my last account with Nature, and return this small skinfull of Bones to my common Mother; If I chance to do so before you, I love you so entirely well that my Spirit shall visit you, to bring you som tidings from the other World; and if you preceed mee, I shall expect the like from you, which you may do without affrighting mee, for I know your Spirit will be a bonus Genius. So desiringo
know what's becom of my Manuscript, I kiss your hands, and rest most passionately Your faithfull Servitor, J. H. The Fleet, 20 Febr. 1646. III. To Master W. B. SIR, I Had yours of the last week, and by reason of som sudden en∣combrances I could not correspond with you by that Carrier: As for your desire to know the Pedigree and first rise of those we call Presbyterians, I find that your motion hath as much of Piety as Curiosity in it, but I must tell you 'tis a subject fitter for a Treatise than a Letter, yet I will endeavor to satisfie you in som part. Touching the word  it is as ancient as Christiani∣ty it self, and every Church-man compleated in holy Orders was called Presbyter, as being the chiefest name of the Function, and so 'tis us'd in all Churches both Eastern and Occidentall to this day: Wee by contraction call him Priest, so that all Bishops and Arch-Bishops are Priests though not vice versa: These holy Titles of Bishop and Priest are now grown odious among such poor Siolists who scarce know the Hoties of things, because they sa∣vor of Antiquity: Though their Minister that officiats in their Church be the same thing as Priest, and their superintendent the same thing as Bishop; but because they are lovers of novelties, they change old Greek words for new Latine one's. The first broa∣cher of the Presbyterian Religion, and made it differ from that of Rome and Luther was Calvin, who being once banished Geneva, was revok'd, at which time he no less petulantly than prophanely applyed to himself that Text of the Holy Prophet which was meant of Christ, The Stone which the Builders refused is made the head stone of the corner, &c. Thus Geneva Lake swallowed up the Epis∣copall See, and Church Lands wer made secular, which was the white they levell'd at. This Geneva Bird flew thence to France and hatch'd the Huguenos, which make about the tenth part of that
peple; it took wing also to Bohemia and Germany high and low, as the Palatinate, the land of Hesse, and the Conederat Province of the States of Holland, whence it took flight to Scotland and England; It took first footing in Scotland, when King Iames was a child in his Cradle, but when he came to understand himself, and was manumitted from Buchanan, he grew cold in it, and being com to England hee utterly disclaim'd it, terming it in a public Speech of his to the Parliament a Sect rather than a Religion: To this Sect may bee imputed all the scissures that have happen'd in Christianity, with most of the Wars that have laceated poor Eu∣rope ever since, and it may be cll'd the source of the civill di∣stractions that now afflict this poor Island. Thus have I endeavoured to fulfl your desires in part, I shall enlarge my self further when I shall be made happy with your con∣versation her, till when, and always, I rest Yours most affectionatly to love and serve you, J. H. From the Fleet, this 29 of Novem. 1647. IV. To Sir J. S. Knight, at Rouer. SIR, OF all the blessings that ever dropt down from Heaven upon Man, that of his Redemption may be call'd the Blessing-para∣mount; And of all those comforts, and exercises of devotion which attend that blessing, the Eucharist or holy Sacrament may claim the prime place; but as ther is Devotion, so ther is Danger in't, and that in the highest degree, 'tis rank poison to som, though a most soveraign cordiall to others ad modum recipientis, as the Schoolmen say, whether they take panem Dominum, as the Roman Catholic, or panem Domini, as the Reformed Churches; The Bee and the Spider suck honey and poison out of one Flower: This, Sir, you have divinely express'd in the Poem you pleas'd to send me upon this subject; and wheras you seem to wooe my Muse to such a task,
somthing you may see she hath don in pure obedience only to your commands. Vpon the Holy Sacrament. 1. Hail Holy Sacrament, The Worlds great Wonderment, Mysterious Banquet, much more rare Than Manna, or the Angels fare; Each crumm, though Sinners on Thee feed, Doth Cleopatra's Perl exceed: Oh how my soul doth hunger, thirst, and pine After these Cates so precious, so divine. 2. Shee need not bring her stool As sone unbidden fool, The Master of this heavenly Feast Invites and woos her for his Guest, Though deaf and lame, forlorn and blind, Yet welcom heer shee's sure to find, So that she bring a Vestment for the day, And her old tatterd rags throw quite away. 3. This is Bethsaida's Pool That can both clense and cool Poor leprous and dseased souls, An Angel heer keeps and cotrouls, Descending gently from the Heavens above To stir the Waters, may He also move My mind, and rockie heart so strike and rend, That tears may thence gush out with them to blend.
This Morning Fancy drew on another towards the Evening as followeth. As to the Pole the Lilly bends In a Sea-compas, and still tends By a Magnetic Mystery, Unto the Artic point in sky, Wherby the wandring Piloteer His cours in gloomy nights doth steer▪ So the small Needle of my heart Mov's to her Maker, who doth dart Atomes of love, and so attracks All my Affections which like Sparks Fly up, and guid my soul by this To the tru centre of her bliss. As one Taper lightneth another, so were my spirits enlightned and heated by your late Meditations in this kind, and well fae your soul with all her faculties for them, I find you have a great care of her, and of the main chance, Prae quo quisquiliae caetera. You shall hear further from me within a few days, in the interim be pleas'd to reserve still in your thoughts som little room for Your most entirely affectionat Servitor, J. H. From the Fleet, 10 of Decemb, 1647.
V. To Mr. T. W. at P. Castle. My precious Tom, HEE is the happy man who can square his mind to his means, and fit his fancy to his ortune; He who hath a competency  live in the port of a gentleman, and as he is free from being a  Constable, so he cares not for being a Justice of Peace or ; He who is before hand with the world, and when he oms to London can whet his knife at the Counter gate, and needs ot trudg either to a Lawyers stdy or Scriveners shop to pay fee  squeez was. 'Tis conceit chiefly that gives contentment, and  is happy who thinks himself so in any condition though he have  enough to keep the Wolf from the door, Opinion is that great ady which sways the world, and according to the impressions  makes in the mind renders one contented or discontented. Now touching opinion, so various are the intellectualls of human reatures, that one can hardly find out two who jump pat in ne: Witnes that Monster in Scotland in Iames the 4ths reign, ith two heads one opposit to the other, and having but one bulk  body throughout, these two heads would often fall into alter∣ations pro & con one with the other, and seldom were they of one opinion, but they would knock one against the other in eager dis∣putes, which shews that the judgement is seated in the animall parts, not in the vitall which are lodg'd in the heart. We are still in a turbulent sea of distractions, nor as far as I see is ther yet any sight of shore. M. T. M. hath had a great loss at sea lately which I fear will light heavily upon him; when I consider his case, I may say that as the Philosopher made a que∣stion whether the Marine be to be ranked among the number of the living or dead (being but four inches distant from drowning, only the thicknes of a plank) so 'tis a doubt whether the Merchant Adventurer be to be numbred twixt the rich or the poor, his estate being in the mercy of that devouring element the Sea, which hath so good a stomack that he seldom casts up what he hath once swal∣lowed. This City hath bred of late yeers men of monstrous strange opinions, that, as all other rich places besides, she may
be compar'd to a fat cheese which is most subject to engender  gots. God amend all, and me first, who am Fleet, this St. Tho. day, Yours most faithfully to serve you, J. H. VI. To Mr. W: Blois. My worthy esteemed Nephew, I Received thse rich nuptial favours you appointed me fo hands and hat, which I wear with very much contentment an respect, most heartily wishing that this late double condition m multiply new blessings upon you, that it may usher in fair and go∣den daies, according to the colour and substance of your brida riband, that those daies may be perfum'd with delight and ple∣sure, as the rich sented gloves I wear for your sake; May suc benedictions attend you both, as the Epithalamiums of Stell i Statius, and Iulia in Catullus speak of; I hope also to be marrie shortly to a lady whom I have wooed above these five years, but  have found her oy and dainty hitherto, yet I am now like  get her good will in part, I mean the lady liberty. When you see my N. Brownrigg, I pray tell him that I did not think Suffolk waters had such a lethaean quality in them as to cause such an amnestia in him of his frends heer upon the Thames among whom for reality and seriousnes I may march among the foremost, but I impute it to som new task that his Muse might haply impose upon him, which hath ingross'd all his speculations; I pray pre∣sent my cordiall kind respects unto him. So praying that a thousand blisses may attend this confarreation, I rest my dear Nephew From the Fleet this 20 of March, 1647. Yours most affectionately to love and serve you, J. H.
VII. To Henry Hopkins Esq IR, TO usher in again old Ianus, I send you a parcell of Indian perfume, which the Spaniard calls the Holy erb in regard  the various virtues it hath, but we call it Tobacco; I will not y it grew under the King of Spains window, but I am told it as gather'd neer his Gold-mines of Potosi, (where they report hat in som places ther is more of that oar than earth) therfore it ust needs be precious stuff: If moderately and seasonably ta∣en (as I find you alwaies do) 'tis good for many things; it helps dige∣ion taken a while after meat, it makes one void heum, break ind, & it keeps the body open; A leaf or two being steept ore-nigh n a little white wine is a vomit that never fails in its operation: t is a good companion to one that converseth with dead en, for f one hath bin poring long upon a book, or is toild with the pen, nd stupified with study, it quickneth him, and dispels those clouds that usually oreset the brain. The smoak of it is one of the whole∣somest sents that is against all contagious air, for it oremasters all other smells as King Iames they say found true, when being once a hunting a showr of rain drave him into a pigstie for shel∣ter, wher he caus'd a pipe full to be taken of purpose; It cannot endure a Spider or a flea with such like vermin, and if your Hawk be troubled with any such, being blown into his feathers it frees him; It is good to fortifie and preserve the fight, the smoak being let in round about the balls of the eyes once a week, and frees them from all heums, driving them back by way of repercussion; being taken backward tis excellent good against the cholique, and taken into the stomack 'twill heac and cleanse it; for I could instance in a great Lord (my Lord of Sunderland President of York) who told me that he taking it downward into his stomack, it made him cast up an impostume, bag and all, which had bin a long time engendring out of a bruise he had receiv'd at football, and so preserv'd his life for many yeers. Now to descend from the substance and the smoak to the ashes, 'tis well known that the medicinall virtues therof are very many, but they are so common
that I will spare the inserting of them heer: But if one would try a pretty conclusion how much smoak ther is in a pound of Tobac∣co, the ashes will tell him▪ for let a pound be exactly weighed and the ashes kept charily and weigh'd afterwards, what wants  a pound weight in the ashes cannot be denied to have bin smoak which evaporated into air; I have bin told that Sir Walter Rawleih won a wager of Queen Elizabeth upon this nicity. The Spaniards and Irish take it most in powder or smutchin and it mightily refreshes the brain, and I believe ther is as muc taken this way in Ireland, as ther is in pipes in England; one shall commonly see the serving maid upon the washing block, and the Swain upon the plowshare when they are tir'd with labour▪ take out their boxes of smutchin and draw it into their nostrills with a quill, and it will beget new spirits in them with a fresh vigou to fall to their work again. In Barbary and other parts of Africa 'tis wonderfull what a small pill of Tobacco will do; for those who use to ride post through the sandy desarts, where they meet not with any thing that's potable or edible somtimes three daies toge∣ther, they use to carry small balls or pills of Tobacco which be∣ing put under the toung, it affords them a perpetuall moysture, and takes off the edg of the appetit for som daies. If you desire to read with pleasure all the virtues of this modern Herb, you must read Doctor Thoriu's paetologie, an accurat peece coucd in a strenuous reroic verse full of matter, and continuing its strength from first to last; Insomuch that for the bignes it may be compar'd to any peece of antiquity, and in my opinion is be∣yond , or . So I conclude these rambling notions, presuming you will ac∣cept this small argument of my great respects unto you; If you want paper to light your pipe this letter may serve the turn, and if it be true what the Poets frequently sing, that affection is fire, you shall need no other than the cleer flames of the Donor's love to make ignition, which is comprehended in this Distic. Ignis Amor si sit, Tobaccum accendere nostrum, Nulla petenda tibi fix nisi Dantis Amor. If Love be fire, to light this Indian weed, The Donor's Love of fire may stand in steed. So I wish you as to my self amost happy new yeer; may the
begining be good, the middle better, and the end best of all. 1 Ianuary: 1646. Your most faithfull and truly affectionat servant, J. H. VIII. To the right Honble my Lo. of D. My Lord, THe subject of this letter may peradventure seem a Paradox to som, but not, I know, to your Lordship when you have pleas'd to weigh well the reasons. Learning is a thing that hath bin much tried up, and coveted in all ages, specially in this last century of yeers, by peeple of all sorts though never so mean, and mechani∣call; every man strains his fortunes to keep his children at School, the Cobler will clout it till midnight, the Porter will carry bur∣thens till his bones crack again, the Ploughman will pinch both back and belly to give his son learning; and I find that this ambi∣tion reigns no wher so much as in this Island. But under favour, this word learning is taken in a narrower sense among us, than a∣mong other nations, we seem to restrain it only to the Book, wher∣as, indeed, any artisan whatsoever if he know the secret and myste∣ry of his trade may be call'd a learned man; A good Mason, a good Shoomaker that can manage Saint Crispins lance handsomly, a skillfull Yeoman, a good Shipwright, &c. may be all call'd learned men, and indeed the usefullest sort of learned men, for without the two first, we might go barefoot, and ly abroad as beasts having no other canopy than the wild air, and without the two last we might starve for bread, have no commerce with other nations, or ever be able to tread upon a Continent: these with such like dextrous Atisans may be tearmed learned men, and the more behoovefull for the subsistence of a Countrey, than those Polymathists, that stand poring all day in a corner upon a moth-eaten Author, and con∣verse only with dead men; The Chineses (who are the next neigh∣bours to the rising sun on this part of the hemisphere, and conse∣quently the acutest) have a wholsom peece of policy, that the son is alwaies of the fathers trade, and 'tis all the learning he aimes at,
which makes them admirable artisans, for besides the dextrou∣nes and propensity of the child, being descended lineally from  many of the same trade, the father is more carefull to instruct him and to discover unto him all the mystery therof; this general custom or law, keeps their heads from running at random after book learning and other vocations: I have read a tale of R Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, that being com to his greatnes he had a brother who was a husbandman, and expected great matters from him in poinc of preferment, but the Bishop told him, that i he wanted money to mend his plow or his Cart, or to buy tacklings for his horses, with other things belonging to his husbandry, he should not want what was fitting, but he wish'd him to aim no high∣er, for a husbandman he found him, and a husbandman he would leav him. The extravagant humour of our Countrey is not to be altoge∣ther commended, that all men should aspire to bocke learning: Ther is not a simpler animall, and a more superfluous member of a state, than a meer Scholer, than a only self pleasing student, he i—Tellur is inutile pondus. The Goths forbore to destroy the libraries of the Greeks and Ita∣lians, because books should keep them still soft, simple, or too cautious in warlike affairs. Archymedes though an excellent En∣gineer when Syracusa was lost, was found at his book in his study intoxicated with speculations; who would not have thought ano∣ther great learned Philosopher to be a fool or frantic, when being in a bath he leapd out naked among the peeple and cryed I have found it, I have found it, having hit then upon an extraordinary conclusion in Geometry? Ther is a famous tale of Thomas Aqui∣nas, the Angelicall Doctor, and of Bonadventure the Seraphicall Doctor, of whom Alex. Hales (our Countreyman and his Master) reports whether it appeard not in him that Adam had sinn'd: Both these great Clerks being invited to dinner by the French King of purpose to observe their humors, and being brought to the room where the table was layed, the first fell a eating of bread as hard as he could drive, at last, breaking out of a brown study he ery∣ed out conclusum est contra Manichaeos; The other fell a gazing up∣on the Queen, and the King asking him how he lik'd her, he an∣swered, on Sir, if an earthly Queen be so beautifull, what shall we think of the Queen of Heaven; The later was the better Courtier of the two. Hence we may infer, that your meer bookmen, your deep Clerks, whom we call the only learned men, are not alwaies the civillest or the best morall men, nor is too great a number of
them convenient for any state, leading a soft sedentary life, spe∣cially those who feed their own fancies only upon the publike ocke. Therfore it wer to be wishd that ther raignd not among the peeple of this land such a generall itching after book-learning, and I beleeve so many rce Schools do rather hurt than good: Nor did the Art of Printing much avail the Christian Common wealth, t may be said to be well near as fatall as gunpowder, which came up in the same age; For, under correction, to this may be part∣y ascribd that spirituall pride, that variety of Dogmatists which  among us; Add heerunto that the excessive number of those which convers only with Books, and whose profession consists in them, is such, that one cannot live for another, accor∣ding to the dignity of the calling; A Physitian cannot live for the Physitians, a Lawyer (civill and common) cannot live for Lawyers, nor a Divine for Divines; Morcover, the multitudes that profess these three best vocations, specially the last, make them of far less esteem. Ther is an odd opinion among us that he who is a contemplative man, a man who wedds himself to his study and swallowes many books, must needs be a prosound Scholler, and a great learned man, though in reality he be such a dolt that he hath neither a retentive faculty to keep what he hath read, nor wit to make any usefull application of it in common discours, what he drawes in, lieth upon dead lees, and never grows it to be broachd: Besides, he may want judgement in the choice of his Authors, and knows not how to turn his hand either in weighing or winnowing the soundest opinions: Ther are divers who are cryed up for great Clerks who want discretion. Others, though they wade deep into the causes and knowledg of things, yet they are subject to scrue up their wits, and soar so high, that they lose themselves in their own speculations, for, thinking to transcend the ordinary pitch of reason, they com to involve the common principles of Philosophy in a mist, instead of illustrating things they render them more obscure, instead of a plainer and shorter way to the palace of knowledg, they lead us through bryery odd uncouth paths, and o fall into the fallacy call'd notum per ignotius. Som have the ap to be tearmed learned men, though they have gatherd up but the scraps of knowledg heer and there, though they be but smat∣terers, and meer sciolists scarce knowing the Hoties of things, yet like empty casks, if they can make a sound, and have a gift to vent with confidence what they have suckd in, they are accounted great Schollers. Amongst all book-learned men, except the Divine to whom all learned men should be laquays, The Philosopher who
hath waded through all the Mathematiques, who hath div'd into the secrets of the elementary world, and converseth also with ce∣lestiall bodies, may be term'd a learned man: The criticall Hi∣storian and Antiquary may be call'd also a learned man, who hath convers'd with our fore fathers, and observ'd the carriage, and contingencies of matters pass'd, whence he drawes instances and cautions for the benefit of the Times he lives in: The Civilia may be call'd likewise a learned man if the revolving of huge vo∣lums may entitle one so, but touching the Authors of the Com∣mon Law, which is peculiar only to this Meridian, they may be all carried in a wheelbarrow, as my Countreyman Doctor Gwin told Judge Finch: The Physitian must needs be a learned man, for he knows himself inward and outward, being well vers'd in Au∣tology, in that lesson Nosce Teipsum, and as Adrian the sixt said, he is very necessary to a populous Countrey, for were it not for the Physitian, men would live so long, and grow so thick, that one could not live for the other, and he makes the earth cover all his faults. But what Doctor Guyn said of the common law-books, and Pope Adrian of the Physitian, was spoken, I conceive, in meriment; for my part, I honour those two worthy professions in a high degree: Lastly, a polygot or good linguist may be also term'd a usefull lear∣ned man, specially it vers'd in School languages. My Lord, I know none of this age more capable to sit in the Chair, and censure what is true learning, and what not, then your self, therfore in speaking of this subject to your Lordship, I fear to have committed the same error, as Phormio did in discoursing of War before Hanniball. No more now, but that I am, My Lord, Your most humble and obedient Servant, J. H.
To Doctor J. D. IX. SIR, I Have many sorts of Civilities to thank you for, but among the rest, I thank you a thousand times (twice told) for that delightfull fit of Society, and conference of Notes we had lately in this little Fleet-Cabin of mine upon divers Problems, and upon som which are exploded (and that by those who seem to sway most in the com∣mon-wealth of Learning,) for Paradoxes meerly by an implicit faith without diving at all into the reasons of the Assertors: And wheras you promised a further expression of your self by way of a Discoursive Letter what you thought of Copernicus opinion tou∣ching the movement of the earth which hath so stirr'd all our mo∣dern wits; And wherof Sir I. Browne pleased to oblige himself to do the like touching the Philosophers stone, the powder of Proje∣ction, and potable gold, provided that I would do the same con∣cerning a peepled Countrey, and a species of moving creatures in the concave of the Moon, which I willingly undertook upon those con∣ditions, To acquit my self of this obligation, and to draw on your performances the sooner, I have adventured to send you this fol∣lowing Discourse such as it is touching the nary World. I believe 'tis a Principle which no man will offer to controvert, that as Antiquity cannot priviledg an Error, so Novelty cannot prejudice Truth: Now, Truth hath her degrees of growing and expanding her self as all other things have, and as Time begets her, so hee doth the obstetritious office of a Midwise to bring her sorth; Many truths are but Embryos or Problemes, nay som of them seem to bee meer Paradoxes at first; The opinion that ther were Antipodes was exploded when it was first broach'd, it was held absurd and ridiculous, and the thing it self to be as impossible as it was for men to go upon their heads with their heels upwards, nay 'twas adjudged to be so dangerous a Tenet, that you know well the Bi∣shops name who in the Primitive Church was by senned of condemnation sent out of this world without a Head to go and dwell amongst his Antipodes, because he first haten'd and held that opinion; But new our late Navigators, and East-India Mariners,
who use to cross the Equator and Tropiques so often, will tell you, that it is as gross a Paradox to hold ther are no Antipodes, and that the negative is now as absurd as the affirmative seem'd at first: For man to walk upon the Ocean when the Surges were at the highest, and to make a heavy dull peece of wood to swim, nay fly upon the water was held as impossible a thing at first, as it is now thought impossible for man to fly in the aire, sails were held then as uncouth, as if one should attempt to make himself wings to mount up to heaven a la volee: Two hundred and od yeers agoe he would have been taken for som frantic fool that would undertake to batter and blow up a Castle with a few barrell of a small con∣temptible black powder. The great Architect of the world hath been observ'd not to throw down all gifts and knowledg to man-kind consusedly at once, but in a regular parsimonious method, to disperse them by certain degrees, periods, and progress of time, leaving man to make in∣dustrious researches and investigations after truth, He left the world to the disputations of men as the wisest of men saith, who in acquii∣tion of naturall truths went from the Hysope to the Cedar; One day certifieth another, and one age rectifieth another; The morrow hath more experience than the precedent day, and is oft-times able to be his School-master; The Granchild laughs at some things that were don in his Gransires dayes: Insomuch that hence it may well be inferr'd, that naturall humane knowledg is not yet mounted to its Meridian, and highest point of elevation. I confess it cannot be denyed without gross ingratitude, but we are infinitely obliged to our fore-fathers for the fundamentalls of Sciences, and as the He∣rald hath a Rule mallem cum patribus, quàm cum fratribus errare, I had rather erre with my Fathers than brothers, so it holds in other kinds of knowledg. But those times which we term vulgarly the old world, was indeed the youth or Adolescence of it, and though if respect be had to the particular and personall acts of generation, and to the relation of father and Son, they who fore-liv'd and pre∣ceded us may be called our Ancestors, yet if you go to the age of the world in general, and to the tru length and longaeuiy of things, We are more properly the older Cosmopolites: In this respect the Cadet may be term'd more ancient than his elder brother, because the world was older when he entred into it; Moreover, besides Truth, Time hath also another daughter which is Experience, who holds in her hands the great Looking-glass of Wisdom and Know∣ledg. But now to the intended task, touching an habitable World, and a
species of living Creatures in the Orb of the Moon, which may hear som analogie with those of this Elementary world; Although it be not my purpose to maintain and absolutely assert this Problem, yet I will say this, that whosoever cryeth it down for a new neotericall opinion, as divers do, commit a grosser error than the opinion may be in its own nature: For 'tis almost as ancient as Philosophy her self, I am sure, 'tis as old as Orpheus, who sings of divers fair Cities and Ca∣stles within the Circle of the Moon; Moreover the profoundest Clerks and most renowned Philosophers in all ages have affir∣med it: Towards the first Age of learning among others Pythagoras and Plato avouch'd it, the first of whom was pronounc'd the wisest of men by the Pagan Oracle, as our Solomen is by holy Writ. In the middle age of Learning Plutarch speaks of it, and in these mo∣dern times the most speculative and scientificall'st men, both in Germany and Italy seem to adhere to it; subinnuating that not only the sphear of the Moon is peepled with Selenites or Lunary men, but that likewise evry Star in Heaven is a peculiar world of it self, which is Coloniz'd and replenish'd with Astrean Inhabitants, as the Earth, Sea and Air are with Elementary, The body of the Sun not excepted, who hath also his Solar Creatures, and they are accounted the most sublime, the most pure and perfectest of all: The Elementary Creatures are held the grossest of all, having more matter than form in them; The Solar have more form than matter, the Selenites with other Astraean Inhabitants are of a mix'd na∣ture, and the nearer they approach the body of the Sun, the more pure and spirituall they are: Were it so, ther were som grounds for his speculation who thought that humane souls be they never so pious and pure ascend not immediatly after their dissolution from the corrupt Mass of flesh before the glorious presence of God pre∣sently to behold the Beatificall Vision, but first into the body of the Moon, or som other Star according to their degrees of goodnes, and actuat som Bodies there, of a purer composition; when they are re∣find theie they ascend to som higher Star, and so to som higher than that, till at last by these degrees they be made capable to behold the lustre of that glorious Majesty in whose sight no impurity can stand; This is illustrated by a comparison, that if one after hee hath been kept close in a dark Dungeon a long time, should be taken out, and brought suddenly to look upon the Sun in the Miridian, it would endanger him to be struck stark blind; so, no humane soul suddenly fallying out of a dirty prison as the body is, would be possibly able to appear before the incomprehensible Ma∣jesty of God, or be susceptible of the brightnes of his all-glorious
countenance, unless he be fitted therunto before hand by certain degrees, which might be don by passing from one star to another, who, we are taught differ one from the other in glory and splen∣dor. Among our Modern Authors that would furbish this old opi∣nion of lunary creatures, and plant colonies in the orb of the Moon with the rest of the celestiall bodies, Gasper Galileo Galilei is one, who by artificiall prospectives hath brought us to a neerer commerce with Heaven, by drawing it sixteen times nearer the earth then it was before in ocular appearance by the advantage of the said optic Instrument. Among other arguments which the Assertors of Astrean Inha∣bitants do produce for proof of this high point, one is, that it is neither repugnant to Reason or Religion to think, that the All∣mighty Fabricator of the Univers, who doth nothing in vain, nor suffers his handmaid Nature to do so, when he created the Er∣ratic and fixed stars, he did not make those huge immense bo∣dies, wherof most are bigger than the earth and sea though con∣globated, to twinkle onely, and be an ornament to the roose of heaven, but he plac'd in the convex of every one of those vast capacious spheres som living creatures to glorifie his name, among whom ther is in evry one of them one supereminent like man upon Earth to be Lord paramount of all the rest; To this haply may allude the old opinion that ther is a peculiar Intelligence which guides and governs every orb in Heaven. They that would thus colonize the stars with Inhabitants do place in the body of the Sun, as was said before the purest, the most immateriall and refined'st Intellectuall creatures, whence the Allmighty calls those he will have to be immediately about his person, and to be admitted to the Hierarchy of Angels; This is far dissonant from the opinion of the Turk, who holds that the Sun is a great burning globe design'd for the damned. They who are transported with this high speculation that ther are Mansions and habitable conveniences for creatures to live within the bodies of the Celestiall Orbs, seem to tax Man of a high presumption, that he should think all things were created principally for Him, that the Sun and Stars are serviceable to him in chief, viz. to measure his daies, to distinguish his seasons, to direct him in his navigations, and powr wholsom influences upon him. No doubt they were created to be partly usefull and comforta∣ble to him, but to imagine that they are solely and chiefly for him,
is a thought that may be said to be above the pride of Lucifer: They may be beneficiall unto him in the generation and encrease of all Elementary creatures, and yet have peculiar Inhabitants of their own besides to concur with the rest of the world in the service of their Creator. 'Tis a fair prerogative for man to be Lord of all Torestirall, Aquatic, and airie creatures; that with his harping Iron he oan draw ashore the great Leviathan, that He can make the Camell and huge Dromedary to kneel unto him, and take up his burthen, That he can make the fierce Bull though ten times stronger than himself to endure his yoke, that he can fetch down the Eagle from his nest, with such priviledges, but let Him not pre∣sume too far in comparing himself with heavenly bodies, while he is no other thing than a worm crawling upon the surface of this Earth: Now the Earth is the basest creature which God hath made therfore 'tis call'd his footstool, and though som take it to be the Centre, yet it is the very sediment of the Elementary world, as they say the Moon is of the celestiall; tis the very sink of all corruption and frailty, which made Trismegist say that Terra, non mundus est nequitiae locus, The Earth, not the World is the seat of wickednes; And though, tis true, she be susceptible of light, yet the light terminats only on her superficies, being not able to en∣lighten any thing els, as the stars can do. Thus have I proportioned my short discours upon this spacious problem to the size of an Epistle, I reserve the fulnes of my opi∣nion in this point, till I receave yours touching Copernicus. It hath bin alwaies my practice in the search and evenulation of naturall verities, to keep to my self a Philosophicall freedom, as not to make any ones opinion so magisteriall and binding, but that I might be at liberty to recede from it upon more pregnant and powerfull reasons: For as in theologicall tenet 'tis a rule, Quicquid non descendit a mont Scripturae taem authoritate con∣temnitur, qua approbatur, Whatsoever descends not from the mount of holy Scripture, may be by the same authority rejected as well as receiv'd: So in the disquisitions and winnwing of phy∣sicall truths, Quicquid non descendt a monte Ratios, &c. whatsoever descends not from the mount of Reason may be as well rejected as approved of. So longing after an opportunity to pursue this point by mix∣ture of oral discours, which hath more elbow room than a letter, I rest, with all candor and cordiall affection, Fleet, this 2 of Novem. 1647. Your faithfull servant, J. H.
X. To the Right Honble the La. E. D. Madam, THose rays of goodnes which are diffusedly scatterd in others, are all concentred in you, which were they divided into e∣quall portions were enough to compleat a whole Jury of Ladies; This, drawes upon you a mixture of Love and envis, or rather an admiration from all who know you, specially from me, and that in so high a degree, that if you would suffer your self to be adod, you should quickly find me Religious in that kind; Howsoever I am bold to send your Ladiship this, as a kind of homage or heri or tribut or what you please to tearm it, in regard I am a true vassall to your vertues; And if you please to lay any of your com∣mands upon me, your will shall be a law unto me, which I will observe with as much allegiance as any branch of Magna Charta, they shall be as binding to me as Lycurgus lawes were to the Spar∣tans, and to this I subscribe Fleet, this 10 of Aug. 1647. J. H. XI. To Mr. R. B. Esquire, at Grunsburgh. SIR, VVHen I orelook'd the list of my choicest frends to insert your name, I paws'd a while, and thought it more proper to begin a new collaterall file, and put you in the front therof, where make account you are plac'd. If any thing upon earth, partakes of Angelic happines (in civill actions) 'tis frend∣ship, it perfumes the thoughts with such sweet idaeas, and the heart with such melting passions; such are the effects of yours to
me, which makes me please my self much in the speculation of it. I am glad you are so well return'd to your own family, and touching the Wheelwright you write of, who from a cart came to be a Captain, it made me think of the perpetuall rotations of For∣tune, which you know Antiquity seated upon a Wheel in restles though not violent volubility; And truly is was never more veri∣fied than now, that those spokes which were formerly but collate∣rall, and som of them quite underneath are now coming up apace to the top of the wheel, I hope ther will be no cause to apply to them the old verse I learnt at school, Asperius nihil est humili cùm surgit in altum. But ther is a transcendent over-ruling providence who cannot on∣ly check the rowlings of this petty wheel, and strike a naile into it that it shall not stir, but stay also when he pleaseth the motions of those vast spheres of Heaven wher the stars are alwaies stirring, as likewise the whirlings of the Primum Mobile itself, which the A∣stronomers say drawes all the world after it in a rapid revolution. That divine providence vouchsafe to check the motions of that malevolent planet, which hath so long lowr'd upon poor England, and send us better daies. So salting you with no vulgar respects, I rest my dear Nephew Yours most affectionatly to serve you, J. H. Fleet, this 26 of Iuly. 1646.
XII. To Mr. En. P. at Paris. SIR, THat which the Plots of the Jesuits in their dark Cell, and the policy of the greatest Roman Catholic Princes have driven at these many yeers, is now don to their hands, which was to divide and break the strength of these three kingdoms, because they held it to bee too great a glory and power to be in one Hereticall Prince his hands (as they esteem'd the King of great Britain) be∣cause he was in a capacity to be umpire, if not Arbiter of this part of the World, as many of our Kings have bin. You write thence that in regard of the sad condition of our Queen, their Countrey-woman, they are sensible of our Calami∣ties, but I believe, 'tis the Poqulass only, who see no further than the rind of things, your Cabinet counsel rather rejoyceth at it, who, or I am much deceiv'd, contributed much in the time of the late sanguine Cardinall, to set a foot these distractions, beginning first with Scotland, who you know hath always serv'd that Nation for a brand to set England a fire for the advancement of their own ends; I am afraid we have seen our best days, we knew not when we woe well, so that the Italian saying may be well applyed to poor England, I was well, I would be better, I took Physic and dyed. No more now, but that I rest still Yours entirely to serve you, J. H. Fleet, 20 Ian. 1647. XIII. To John Wroth Esq. at Petherton Park. SIR I Had two of yours lately, one in Italian, the other in French, (which, were answered in the same Dialect) and as I read them with singular delight, so, I must tell you, they struck an admira∣tion
into me, that in so short a revolution of time you should com to be so great a Master of those Languages both for the Pen and ; I have known divers, and those of pregnant and ripe capa∣cities, who had spent more oyl and time in those Countreys, yet could they not arrive to that double perfection which you have, for  they had got one, they were commonly defective in the other: Therfore I may say that you have not spartam nactus which was but  petty Republic, sed Italiam & Gelliam nactus es has orna, you have  all Italy and France adorn these. Nor is it Language that you have only brought home with you,  I find that you have studied the Men and the  of those Nations you have convers'd withall; Neither have you couted nely all their fair Cities, Castles, Houses of Pleasure, and other places of curiosity, but you have pryed into the very mysteries of  Government, as I find by those choice Manuscripts and Ob∣servations you have brought with you; n all these things you are been so curious, as if the soul of your great Uncle who was  Ambassador in the Imperiall Court, and who held cor∣espondence with the greatest men of Christendome in their own anguage, had transmgrated into you. The freshest News heer is, that those heart-burnings, and fires of civill commotion which you left behind you in France, cover'd over with thin ashes for the time, are broken out again, and I be∣ they will be never quite extinguished till ther be a peace or uce with Spain, for till then ther is no hope of abatement of taxes;  'tis fear'd the Spanish will out-weary the French at last in , for the Earth her self, I mean his Mines of Mexico and  affoord him a constant and yeerly Tresure to support his Ar∣, wheras the French King digs his Tresure out of the bowells nd vitall spirits of his own Subjects. I pray let me hear from you by the next opportunity, for I shall old my time well employed to correspond with a Gentleman of uch choice and gallant parrs; In which desires I rest Your most affectionat and faithfull Srvitor, J. H. 9 Aug 1649▪
XIV. To Mr. W. B. HOw glad was I, my choice and precious Nephew, to receiv yours of the 24▪ current, wherin I was sory, though satisfie in point of belief to find the ill fortune of Interception which be fell my last unto you. Touching the condition of things heer, you shall understand that our miseries lengthen with our days, for though the Sun and the Spring advance nearer us, yet our times are not grown a wh the more comfortable: I am afraid this City hath foold her self in to a slavery, the Army, though forbidden to com within ten miles of Her by Order of Parlement, quarters now in the Bowells of Her; they threaten to break her Percullies, Posts and Chains to make her pervious upon all occasions, they have secured also the Tower, with addition of strength for themselves, besides a Famine▪ doth insensibly creep upon us, and the Mint is starv'd for want of Bullion; Trade which was ever the sinew of this Island doth vi∣sibly decay, and the Insurance of Ships is risen from two to ten in the hundred; Our gold is ingrossed in privat hands, or gon be∣yond Sea to travell without Licence, and much I beleeve of it is re∣turn'd to the earth (whence it first came) to be buried where our late Nephews may chance to find it a thousand yeers hence if the world lasts so long, so that the exchanging of white earth into red, I mean silver into gold is now above six in the hundred; and all these with many more are the dismall effects and concomitants of a ci∣vill War. Tis tru we have had many such black days in England in former ages, but those paralleld to the present are as the shadow of a Mountain compar'd to the eclipse of the Moon. My prayers early and late are, that God Almighty would please not to turn away his face quite, but cheer us again with the light of his countenance, And I am well assur'd you will joyn with me in the same Orison to Heavens gate; in which confidence I rest Your most affectionatly to serve you, J. H. From the Fleet, 10 of Decemb, 1647.
XV. To Sir K. D. at Paris. SIR, NOw, that you are return'd, and fix'd a while in France, an old servant of yours take's leave to kiss your hands, and salute you  an intense degree of heat and height of passion: Tis well you ook hands with this infortunat Isle when you did, and got your iberty by such a royall mediation as the Queen Regents, for had ou staid, you would have taken but little comfort in your life, in regard that ever since ther have bin the fearfullest distractions heer that ever happen'd upon any part of the earth, a Beluin kind of im∣nity never rag'd so among men, insomuch that the whole Coun∣trey might have taken its appellation from the smallest part ther∣of, and be call'd the Isle of Dogs; for all humanity, common ho∣nesty, and that Mansuetude with other Morall Civilities which should distinguish the rationall Creature from other Animalls, have been lost heer a good while; Nay, besides this Cinicall, ther s a kind of Wolvish humor hath seizd upon most of this peeple a u lycanthropy, they so worry and seek to devour one another, so hat the wild Arab and fiercest Tartar may be call'd civill men in comparison of us, therfore he is happiest who is furthest off from this wofull Island. The King is streightned of that liberty he for∣merly had in the Isle of Wight, and as far as I see may make up the number of Nebuchadnezzars yeers before he be restored: The Par∣lement persists in their first Propositions, and will go nothing less. This is all I have to send at this time, only I will adjoyn the tru respects of From the Fleet, this 5 of May, 1647. Your most faithfull humble Servitor, J. H.
XVI. To Mr. W: Blois in Suffolk. SIR, YOurs of the seventeenth current came safely to hand, and  kiss your hands for it, you mention there two others that can∣not, which makes me condole the loss of such jewells, for I esteem all your Letters so, being the precious effects of your love, which I value at a high rate, and please my self much in the contem∣plation of it, as also in the continuance of this Letter-correspon∣dence, which is perform'd on your part with such ingenuous ex∣pressions, and embroder'd still with new florishes of invention▪ I am stil under hold in this fatall Fleet, and like one in a tempest a Sea who hath been often near the shoar yet is still toss'd back by contrary winds, so I have had frequent hopes of freedom, but som cross accident or other always intervened, insomuch that I am now in half despair of an absolut release till a generall Gao delivery; yet notwithstanding this outward captivity, I have in∣ward liberty still I thank God for it. The greatest News is, that between twenty and thirty thousand well-armed Scots have been utterly routed, riffed, and all taken prisoners, by less than 8000 English; I must confess 'twas a great exploit wherof I am not sorry, in regard that the English have re∣gain'd hereby the honor which they had lost abroad of late yeers in the opinion of the world, ever since the Pacification at Berwick, and divers traverses of War since. What Hamiltons design was, is a mystery, most think that he intended no good either to King or Parlement. So with my dayly more and more endeared affections unto you, I rest Yours ever to love and serve you, J. H. Fleet, 7 May. 1647.
XVII. To Mr. R. Baron in Paris. Gentle Sir, I Receiv'd, and presently ran over your Cyprian Academy with much greedines and no vulgar delight, and, Sir, I hold my self much ho∣nor'd for the Dedication you have been pleas'd to make thereof to me, for it deserv'd a far higher Patronage; Truly, I must tell you without any Complement, that I have seldom met with such an in∣genuous mixture of Prose & Verse, interwoven with such varieties of fancy, & charming strains of amorous Passions, which have made all the Ladies of the land in love with you: If you begin already to court the Muses so hansomly, and have got such footing on Parnassus, you may in time be Lord of the whole Hill, and those nice Girles, because Apollo is now grown unweldy and old, may make choice of you to officiat in his room, and preside over them. I much thank you for the punctuall narration you pleas'd to send me of those commotions in Paris, I believe France will never be in perfect repose while a Spaniard sits at the Stern, and an Italian steers the Rudder; In my opinion Mazirini should do wisely now, that he hath feather'd his nest so well, to truss up his Baggage and make over the Alps to his own Countrey, lest the same Fate betide him as did the Marquis of Ancre his Compatriot. I am glad the Treaty goes on 'twixt Spain and France, for nothing can portnd a greater good to Christendom, than a Conjunction of those two great Luminaries, which if it please God to bring about, I hope the Stars will change their Aspects, and we shall see better days. I send heer inclosed a second Bill of Exchange in case the first I sent you in my last hath miscarried: So, my dear Nephew, I em∣brace you with both my Arms, and rest Fleet, this 20 of Iune, 1647. Yours most entirely to love and serve you while, Jam. Howell.
XVIII. To Mr. Tho. More at York. SIR, I Have often partak'd of that pleasure which Letters use to carry along with them, but I do not remember to have found a greater proportion of delight than yours afford me; your last of the fourth current came to safe hand, wherin me thought each line, each word, each syllable breath'd out the Passions o a cleer and candid soul, of a vertuous and gentle spirit; Truly Sir, as I might per∣ceive by your ingenious and patheticall expressions therin, that you were transported with the heat of tru affection towards me in the writing so was I in the reading, which wrought upon me with such an Energy that a kind of extasie posses'd me for tho time: I pray Sir go on in this correspondence, & you shall find that your lines will not be ill bestowed upon me, for I love and respect you dearly well, nor is this love grounded upon vulgar Principles, but upon those extraordinary parts of virtu and worth which I have discover'd in you, and such a love is the most permanent as you shall find in Fleet 1 of Sep. 1647. Your most affectionat Oncle, J. H.
XIX. To Mr. W. B. 3o Maii. SIR, YOur last Lines to me were as delightfull as the Season, they were as sweet as Flowers in May, nay they were far more dragrant than those fading Vegetalls, they did cast a greater sua∣rity than the Arabian Spices use to do in the gran Cayro, where when the wind is Southward, they say the ayr is as  as a persum'd Spanish Glove; The air of this City is not so, specially in the heart of the City, in and about Pauls Church where Horse-dung is a yard deep, insomuch that to cleanse it would be a hard a task, as it was for Hercules to cleanse the Augean Stable by drawing a great River through it, which was accounted one of his twelve labors: but it was a bitter taunt of the Italian who passing by Pauls Church, and seeing it full of Horses, Now I perceive (said he) that in England Men and Beasts serve God alike▪ No more now, but that I am Your most faithfull Servant, J. H.
XXI. To Sir Paul Pindar Knight, upon the version of a Italian peece into English, call'd St. Pauls Pro∣gress upon earth, a new and a notable kind of Satyr. SIR, ST. Paul having descended lately to view Italy and other place s you may trace him in the following Discours, he would no take Wing back to Heaven before he had given you a speciall visit▪ who have so well deserv'd of his Church heer, the goodliest pile o stones in the Christian world of that kind. Of all the men of our times, you are one of the greatest exam∣ples of Piety, and constant Integrity, which discovers a noble sou to dwell within you, and that you are very conversant with heaven▪ so that me thinks I see St. Paul saluting and solacing you in thes black times, assuring you that those pious works of Charity yo have don and daily do (and that in such a manner that the lif hand knows not what the right doth) will be as a triumphant Chari∣ot to carry you one day up to heaven to partake of the same bea∣titude with him. Sir, among those that truly honor you, I am one▪ and have been so since I first knew you, therfore as a small testimo∣ny heerof, I send you this fresh fancy compos'd by a Noble Perso∣nage in Italian, of which language you are so great a Master. For the first part of the Discours which consists of a Dialog▪ 'twixt the two first Persons of the Holy Trinity, ther are example of that kind in som of the most Ancient Fathers, as Apollinariu and Nazianzen, and lately Grotius hath the like in his Tragedy o Christs Passion, which may serve to free it from all exceptions. So! most affectionatly kiss your hands, and am Sir, Your very humble and ready Servant, J. H. Fleet, 25 Martii 1646.
XX. To Sir Paul Neale Knight, upon the same subject. SIR, SAint Paul cannot reascend to Heaven before he gives you also a salute, my Lord, your father having bin a star of the greatest magnitude in the Firmament of the Church. If you please to observe the manner of his late progress upon earth, which you may do by the guidance of this discours, you shall discover ma∣ny things which are not vulgar, by a curious mixture of Churh and State-affaires; you shall feel heerin the pulse of Italy, & how it beats at this time since the beginning of these late Wars 'twixt the Pope and the Duke of Parma, with the grounds, procedure, and success of the said War, together with the interest and grie∣vances, the pretences and quarrells that most princes there have with Rome. I must confes, my Genius hath often prompted me that I was never cut out for a Translator, ther being a kind of servility therin; For it must needs be somwhat dious to one that hath a∣ny free-born thoughts within him, and genuin conceptions of his own (wherof I have som though shallow ones) to enchain himself to a verball servitude, and the sense of another. Moreover Tran∣slations are but as turn-coated things at best, specially among lan∣guages that have advantages one of the other, as the Italian hath of the English, which may be said to differ one from the other as silk doth from cloth, the common wear of both Countries where they are spoken: And as cloth is the more substantiall▪ so the English toung by reason 'tis so knotted with consonants is the stronger, and the more sinewy of the two; But silk is more smoth and slik, & so is the Italian toung compar'd to the English. Or I may say Translations are like the wrong side of a Turky carpet, which useth to be full of thrums and knots, and nothing so even as the right side: Or one may say (as I spake elsewhere) that Transla∣tions are like Wines tane off the lees, and powr'd into other ves∣sels, that must needs lose somwhat of their first strength and brisknes, which in the powring, or passage rather evaporates into air. Moreover touching Translations, it is to be observ'd that evry
language hath certain Idiomes, proverbs and peculiar expression of its own which are not rendible in any other but paraphrastical∣ly, therfore he overacts the office of an Interpreter who doth es∣slave himself too strictly to words or phrases: I have heard of an exces among Limmers call'd too much to the life, which hap∣pens when one aimes at similitudes morethan skill; So in versi∣on of languages one may be so over-punctuall in words, that he may mar the matter; The greatest fidelity that can be expected in a Translator is to keep still a foot and entire the tru genuin sense of the Author, with the main design he drives at; And this was the principall thing which was observ'd in this Version. Furthermore let it not be thought strange that ther are som Ita∣lian words made free denizens of England in this discours, for by such meanes our language hath grown from time to time to be so copious, and still growes more rich, by adopting or naturalizing rather the choicest forren words of other Nations, as a Nosegay is nothing els but a tuft of flowers gatherd from divers beds. Touching this present version of Italian into English, I may say 'tis a thing I did, when I had nothing to do; 'Twas to find somthing wherby to pass away the slow houres of this sad condition of captivity. I pray be pleas'd to take this as a small argument of the great respects I ow you for the sundry rare and high vertues I have disco∣ver'd in you, as also for the obligations I have to your noble La∣dy whose hands I humbly kiss, wishing you both, as the season in∣vites me a good New yeer (for it begins but now in Law) as also a holy Lent, and a healthfull Spring. Fleet, 25 Martij. Your much obliged and ready Servant, J. H.
XXII. To Dr. W. Turner. SIR, I Return you my most thankfull acknowledgments, for that col∣lection, or farrago of prophecies as you call them, (and that very properly in regard ther is a mixture of good and bad) you pleas'd to send me lately; specially that of Nosterdamus, which I shall be very chary to preserve for you, I could requite you with ivers predictions more, and of som of the British Brds, which were hey translated to English would transform the world to wonder. They sing of a Red Parlement and white King, of a race of peeple which should be called Pngruns, of the fall of the Church, and divers other things which glance upon these times. But I am none of those that afford much faith to rambling Prophecies, which, (as was said elsewhere) are like so many od graines sown in the vast field of Time, wherof not one in a thousand comes to grow up again and appear above ground. But that I may correspond with you in som part for the like courtesie, I send you these following prophetic verses of White-Hall, which were made above twenty yeers ago to my knowledg upon a Book call'd Balaams Ass, that consisted of som invectives against King Iames, and the Court in  quo tuc; It was compos'd by one Mr Williams a Counsellor of the Temple, but a Roman Catholic, who was hang▪d drawn and quarter'd at Charing Cross for it, and I believe ther be hun∣dreds that have copies of these verses ever since that time about the Town yet living, They were these. Som seven years since Christ rid to Court, And there he left his Ass, The Courtiers kic'd him out of doores, Because they had no grass, (grace.) The Ass went mourning up and down, And thus I heard him bray,
If that they could not give me grass, They might have given me hay: But sixteen hundred forty three, Who so ere shall see that day, Will nothing find within that Court, But only grass and hay, &c. Which was found to happen true in White-hall, till the sol∣diers comming to quarter there trampled it down. Truly sir I find all things conspire to make strange mutation in this miserable Island, I fear we shall fall from under the Su∣ter to be under the Sword, and since we speak of Prophecies,  am afraid among others that which was made since the reformati∣on will be verified, The Church man was, the Lawyr is, the Sol∣dier shall be. Welcom be the will of God, who transvolves King∣doms, and tumbles down Monarchies as mole-hills at his plea∣sure, so I rest my dear Doctor, Fleet, 9 Aug. 1648. Your most faithfull Servant, J. H. XXIII. To the Honble Sir Edward Spencer Knight, at his House near▪ Branceford. SIR, VVEE are not so bare of intelligence between these walls▪ but we can hear of your doings in Branceford; That so generall applause wherby you were cryed up Knight of the shire for Middlesex, sounded round about us upon Lon∣don streets, and echo'd in every corner of the Town; nor d I mingle speech with any though half affected to you, bu highly approves of and congratulates the election, being glad that a Gentleman of such extraordinary parts and probity, as also of such a mature judgement should be chosen to serve the pub∣lic.
I return you the Manuscript you lent me of Daemonologie, but the Author therof and I are two in point of opinion that way, for he seems to be on the negative part, and truly he writes as much as can be produc'd for his purpose. But ther are som men that are of a meer negative genius, like Iohannes ad oppositum, who will deny, or at least cross and puzzle any thing though never so cleer in itself, with their but, yet, if, &c. they will flap the lie in Truths teeth though she visibly stand before their face without any visard, such perverse cross-graind spirits are not to be dealt withall by ar∣gumente, but palpable proofs, as if one should deny that the fire burns, or that he hath a nose on his face, ter is no way to deal with him, but to pull him by the tip of the one, and put his fin∣ger into the other: I will not say that this Gentleman is so per∣verse, but to deny ther are any Witches, to deny that ther are not ill spirits which seduce, tamper and convers in divers shapes with human creatures, and impell them to actions of malice, I say that he who denies ther are such busie spirits, and such poor passive creatures upon whom they work, which commonly are call'd Witches, I say again, that he who denies ther are such spirits, shewes that he himself hath a Spirit of contradiction in him, opposing the current and consentient opinion of all Antiquity: we read that both Iews and Romanes with all other nations of Christendom, and our An∣cestors heer in England enacted laws against VVitches, sure they were not so silly as to wast their brains in making laws against Chy∣meras, against non entia, or such as Plato's Ktetismata's were: The Iudaicall law is apparant in the holy Code, Thou shalt not suf∣fer a witch to live; the Roman law which the Decemviri made, is yet extant in the twelve tables, Qui ruges incantassent paenas dan∣to, They who should inchant the fruit of the Earth let them be pu∣nish'd; The Imperiall law is known by every Civilian, Hi cùm ostes naturae sint supplicio afficiantur, These, meaning Witches, be∣cause they are enemies to nature let them be punish'd; And the Acts of Parlement in England are against those that invoke ill spi∣rits, that take up any dead man, woman or child, or take the skin or bone of ay dead body, to employ it to sorcery or charm, wherby any one is lam'd, or made to pine away, &c. such shall be guilty of lat e∣lony, and not capable of Clergy or Sanctuary, &c. What a multitude of examples are ther in good authentic Au∣thors of divers kinds of fascinations, incantations, prestigiations, of philtres, spells, charmes, sorceries, characters and such like, as also of magic, negromancy, and divinations; surely the Witch of Endor is no fable, the burning of Ioan de' Arc the Maid of Orleans
in Roven, and of the Marchioness d'Ancre of late yeers in Paris are no fables: The execution of Nostredamus for a kind of Witch, son fourscore yeers since is but a modern story, who among other things foretold, Le Senat d Londres tuera son Roy, the Senat of Londn shall kill their King. The best Historians have it upon record how Charlmains Mistress inchaed him with a ring, which as long as the had about he▪ he would not uster her dead carkase  be carried out of his chamber to be buried, and a Bishop taking it out of her mouth, the Emperour grew to be as much bewitch'd with the Bishop, but he being cloyed wih his excess of favour, threw it into a pond, wher the Emperours chiefest pleasure was to walk till his dying day. The story tells us how the Waldnses in France wer by a solemn arrest of Parlement accus'd and condemn'd of Witchraft; The Malteses took Saint Paul for a Witch: Saint Augustin speaks of women who could turn men to horses, and make them carry their burthens; Danaeus writes of an enchanted staff which the Devill summoner like, was us'd to deliver som market∣women to ride upon. In som of the Northern Countries 'tis at ordinary to buy and sell winds, as it is to do wines in other parts; and hee of I could instance in som examples of my own knowledg. Every one knows what Oaus Magnus writes of Erich's (King of Swethland) corner'd cap, who could make the wind sift to any point of the compass, according as he turn'd it about. Touching Diviners of things to com which is held a species of VVitchcraft, we may read they were frequent among the Romanes, yea they had Colleges for their Augus and Aruspices, who us'd to make their predictions somtimes by fire, somtimes by flying of fowl, somtimes by inspection into the entrails of beasts, or in∣voking the dead, but most frequently by consulting with the Oracles, to whom all Nations had recours except the Iews. But you will say that since Christianity displayed her banners, the Cross hath scar'd away the Devill, and struck the Orcles dumb, as Plutarch reports a notable passage of Thamus an Italian Pilot, who a little after the birth of Christ, sailing along the coasts of Ca∣labria in a still silent night, all his passengers being asleep, an airie cold voice came to his eares saying Thamus, Thamus, Thamus, The great God Pan is dead, who was the chiefest Oracle of that Country; yet though the light of the Gospell chas'd away those great Owls, ther be som Bats and little night birds that fly still a∣broad, I mean petty spirits that by secret pactions, which are made alwaies without witnes, enable men and women to do e∣vill. In such compacts beyond the seas the party must first renounce
Christ, and the extended woman meaning the blessed Virgin, he must contemn the Sacraments, tread on the cross, spit at the host, &c. Ther is a famous story of such a paction which Fryer Louis made som half a hundred yeers ago with the Devill in Marseilles, who appear'd to him in shape of a Goat and promis'd him the enjoy∣ment of any woman whom he fancied, with other pleasures for 41. yeers, but the Devill being too cunning for him put the figure of I before, and made it 14 yeers in the contract, (which is to be seen to this day with the Devills claw to it) at which time the Fryer was detected for Witchcraft and burnt, and all those children whom he had christned during that term of 14 yeers were rebaptized, and the Gentlewomen whom he had abus'd, put themselves into a Nunnery by themselves. Heerunto may be ad∣ded the great rich Widdow that was burn'd in Lions, because 'twas prov'd the Devill had lain with her; as also the history of Lieu∣tenant Iaquette which stands upon record with the former, but if I should insert them heer at large it would make this letter swell too much. But we need not cross the sea for examples of this kind, we have too too many (God wot) at home: King Iames a great while was loth to beleeve ther were Witches, but that which happend to my Lord Francis of Rutlands children convinc'd him, who were be∣witch'd by an old woman that was servant at Belvoir Castle, but being displeas'd, she contracted with the Devill who convers'd with her in form of a cat, whom she call'd Rutterken to make away those children, out of meer malignity, and thirst of revenge. But since the beginning of these unnaturall Wars ther may be a clowd of witnesses produc'd for the proof of this black tenet, for within the compas of two yeers neer upon three hundred Witches were arraign'd, and the major part executed in Essex and Suf∣folk only: Scotland swarmes with them now more than ever, and persons of good quality executed daily. Thus, sir, have I huddled together a few arguments touching this subject, because in my last communication with you, me thought I found you somwhat unsatisfied, and staggering in your opini∣on touching the affirmative part of this thesis, the discussing wher∣of is far fitter for an elaborat large treatise than a loose letter. Touching the new Common-wealth you intend to establish, now, that you have assign'd me my part among so many choice le∣gislators, somthing I shall do to comply with your desires, which shall be alwaies to me as comands, and your comands as lawes, be∣cause I love and honor you in a very high degree for those gallant
free-born thoughts, and sundry parts of virtu which I have dis▪ cern'd in you, which makes me entitle my self Fleet this 20 of Febr. 1647. Your most humble and affectionat faithfull Servant, J. H. XXIV. To Sir William Boswell, at the Hague. SIR, THat black tragedy which was lately acted heer, as it hath fill'd most hearts among us with consternation and horror, so  believe it hath bin no less resented abroad; For my own par∣ticular the more I ruminat upon it, the more it astonisheth my imagination, and shaketh all the cells of my brain, so that som∣times I struggle with my faith, and have much adoe to believe it yet: I shal give over wondring at thing any heerafter, nothing shall seem strange unto me, only I will attend with patience how Eng∣land will thrive now that she is let bloud in the basilicall veine, and cur'd, as they say, of the Kings Evill. I had one of yours by Mr. Iacob Beue, and I much thank you for the account you please to give me of what I sent you by his con∣veyance. Holland may now be proud, for ther is a younger Common-wealth in Christendom than her self▪ No more now but that I alwaies rest Sir, Your most humble Servitor, J. H. Fleet, 20 of Mar. 1648.
XXV. To Mr. W. B. at Grundsburgh. SIR, NEver credit me if Liberty it self be as dear to me as your Let∣ters, they com so full of choice and learned applications, with such free unforc'd strains of ingenuity, insomuch that when I peruse them, me thinks they cast such a kind of fragrancy, that I cannot more aptly compare them, than to the flowers which are now in their prime season, viz. to Roses in Iune: I had two of them lately, which me thought were like quivers full of barb'd arrowes pointed with gold, that penetrated my breast. —Tali quis nollet ab ictu Ridendo tremulas mortis non ire sub umbras. Your expressions were like those Mucrones and Melliti globuli which you so ingenuously apply mine unto; but these arrowes of yours though they have hit me, they have not hurt me, they had no killing quality, but they were rather as so many cordi∣alls; for you know gold is restorative. I am suddenly surpriz'd by an inexpected occasion, therfore I must abruply break off with you for this time, I will only add, my most dear Nephew, that I rest Iune the 3. 1648. Yours entirely to love and serve you, J. H.
XXVI. To R. K. Esquire at St. Giles. SIR, DIfference in opinion, no more than a differing complexion, can be cause enough for me to hate any; A differing fancy is no more to me, than a diffring face; If another hath a fair countenance, though mine be black, or if I have a fair opinion, though another have a hard favourd one, yet it shall not break that common league of humanity which should be betwixt rational creatures, provided he corresponds with me in the generall of∣fices of morality and civill uprightnes, this may admit him to my acquaintance and conversation, though I never concur with him in opinion: He beares the Image of Adam, and the Image of the Allmighty as well as I; He had God for his Father, though he hath not the same Church for his Mother. The omniscient Cca∣tor as He is only Kardiognostic, so He is the sole Lord of the whole inward man, It is he who reignes ore the faculties of the soul, and the affections of the heart, 'Tis He who regulates the will, and rectifies all obliquities in the understanding by speciall illu∣minations, and oftentimes reconciles men as opposit in opinion, as Meridians and Parallells are in point of extension, wherof the one drawes from East to West, the other from North to South. Som of the Pagan Philosophers specially Themistius who was Praetor of Byzantium, maintain'd an opinion, that as the pulchri∣tud and preservation of the world consisted in varieties and dissi∣militudes (as also in Eccentric and contrary motions) that as it was replenish'd with such numberles sorts of severall species, and that the Individualls of those species differ'd so much one from the other specially Mankind, amongst whom one shall hardly find two in ten thousand that have exactly (though twins) the same tone of voice, similitude of face, or idaeas of mind, Therfore the God of Nature ordain'd from the beginning, that he should be wor∣ship'd in various and sundry forms of adorations, which nerethe∣les like so many lines should tend all to the same centre. But Christian Religion prescribes another Rule, viz. that ther is but
via, una veritas, ther is but one tru way to Heaven, and that ta narrow one, wheras ther be huge large roads that lead to ell. God Allmighty guid us in the first, and guard us from the se∣d, as also from all cross and uncouth by-paths, which use to ead such giddy brains that follow them to a confus'd laberinth of rors, where being intangled, the Devill as they stand gaping  new lights to lead them out, takes his advantage to seize on em for their spirituall pride, and insbriety in the search of more owledge. 28. Iuly, 1648. Your most faithfull Servant, J. H. Ut clavis portam sic pandit Epistola pectus, Clauditur Haec cerâ, clauditur Illa serâ. As Keys do open chests, So Letters open brests.
AN Index of the principall matters contained in this Second Tome of FAMILIAR LETTERS. ENcouragements to hasten a busines. 1 A strange disparity 'twixt a married couple. 2 The power of the pen. 2 dvice against detraction. 2 f the generall infirmities of men. 3 f naturall corruption. 4 f the passions of Love, and the humor of Women. 5 f a clash that happen'd 'twixt Leo the tenth, and the French King, and their witty answers and re∣plies. 6 he saying of Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, touching the Pope. 6 dvice to silence. 7 Letter of thanks, and for forgiving injuries. 8 f Religion in generall. 9 f the Religion of the Jewes, and their sev▪ all Sects. 10
Of Christianity and the difficulties that attend it. 1 England one of the first Christian Countries. 1 The cause of the first division 'twixt the Eastern an Western Churches. 1 Of the Eastern Church. 1 The extent of Christianity. 1 The lamentable decay of Christianity in Afric. 1 Of Mahometism, with the beginning and policy ther∣of. 15 The reverend opinion the Turks have of Christ, and th Virgin Mary. 16 The vast extent of Mahometism. 17 The concurrence of the Jew with the Christian an Jew. 1 Of the Pagans or Heathens Religion and their extent▪ 19 The best sort of Pagans. 20 The degrees how Phylosophy did propagate it selfe▪ 2 A comparison in point of extent 'twixt all Religions. 23 Som advices for a young traveller. Of vaine gloy. 2 Of the Arrogance of the Romanes. 2 Advice to a young soldier. 26 The fable of fire, water and fame. 26 A letter of advice to give over a businesse. 2 Of Secretary Walsingham, and Secretary Cecill. 2 A rare comparison of Charles the Emperor. 3 The Mulberry a pattern of wisdom. 3 Of the falling off of Catalonia and Portugall from th King of Spain. 3 Of extravagant humors. 3 A letter of reprehension for silence. 33
Of the virtu of letters. 33 Advice to be carefull in epistolizing. 34 An amorous Poem. 35 A letter of gratitude. 36 An apologie for women, and of their virtues and vices. 37 Of the mode of entertainment. 38 An apologie for not answering a letter. 39 A facetious tale of a Neapolitan. 39 Of a monstrous new Island sprung up in the Atlantic sea. 39 Of the fearfull earthquakes in Italy. 39 Of Gena, Venice, &c. 40 A letter of love. 41 Of Grunnius Sophista's last will. 42 Of melancholy. 44 A facetious tale of a Porter. 45 A letter of frendly respects. 46 The difference twixt prosperity and adversity. 47 A letter of recommendation for a servant. 48 What a supernumerary servant is like to 48 Advice to forren travell. 49 Of partiality of newes. 50 Of the abuse of a great picture taken at Arundell. 51 An Epitaph upon the Author. 52 An encouragement to an Vniversity scholar. 53 Of crosses and troubles. 54 Of chymicall knowledg. 55 Of Dunkirk and the taking of it. 37 The Turks prayer. 57 Of the Peace 'twixt Spain and Holland. 58 A letter of condolement and mortality. 58 The Authors apologie for himself. 59
A letter of frendly reprehension for neglect. 60 Of Qu. Elizabeths virtues and vices. 61 The French Satyr of her. 62 Of the exorbitant liberty of Printing. 62 For the speeding of a letter. 63 Of post Pidgeons. 63 Privat contemplations of the Author upon divers ob∣jects▪ 64 A remedy against melancholy. 66 A letter of complement to a Lady. 66 A Hymn to the Trinity. 67 Saint Austins notable wish couch'd in verse. 68 Of the fear and love of God. 68 Of wines in generall. 71 Of Ale, Beer, and all sorts of beverages drunk in the known world. 70 Of the Wines of Spain, Italy, France, and Germany. 74 Of the Nile water. 73 Of Metheglin, Meath, and Braggot, Sider and Perry. 74 How the Germans drink healths. 77 The difference 'twixt the Greek and German in drin∣king. 77 A strange tale of som Dutch drunkards. 77 Of toungs in generall. 78 Of the British toung and her dialects. 78 The Irish a dialect of the Welsh. 78 Welsh words found in America. 79 The ground of the appellation of Englishmen. 79 Fox his gross error at the beginning of the book of Mar∣tyrs. 79 When the English toung took footing in Scotland. 80
Of the German Toung, and the extent of it. 80 Som Persian words consignificant with the Dutch. 81 Of the Slavonic Language, her Dialects, and vast ex∣tent of it. 81 Above all other Languages the Slavonic hath two Cha∣racters. 81 A Charter of Alexander the Great, yet extant upon the walls of a Church in Prague. 82 Of the Greek Toung, her growth and Progress. 82 The pittifull decay of the Greek Toung. 83 How strangely the Greeks are degenerated above all o∣ther nations. 84 The ancient monstrous extent of the Greek Toung. 84 Of the Latine Toung and her degrees of Perfection. 85 The Greek always more esteem'd than Latine in the East and West. 86 How the Latine did refine her self. 86 Of the sundry Barbarous peeple that invaded Italy. 87 Of the Italian, Spanish and French Languages. 88 Of the Arcadians. 89 Where to find the tru ancient Speech of any Countrey. 89 Of the mother Toung of Europe. 91 A Philosophicall reason of the diversity of Toungs. 92 Of the vast extent of the Arabian Toung. 93 Of the Hebrew. 93 Languages subject to corruption and change as other things. 93 Of Sir Walter Rawleigh's Voyage to Guiana, and a judg∣ment upon't. 94 Of the Excise. 100
A facetious Tale of the Earl of Kildare. 100 Of my Lord Carleton. 100 A facetious Tale of a Spanish Soldier. 101 Frendly wishes. 101 A comparison 'twixt the case of the King of England with other Kings. 102 A Letter of respects to a Lady. 104 A caution not to neglect the Latine for any vulgar Lan∣guage. 105 Of Praises to God, and how they are the best Oblations. 106 A facetious Tale of Henry the Fourth of France. 107 America only free from Mahometisme. 18 The Alchoran brought in by the Alfange. 19 Arabic the sole Language of the Alchoran. 17 Of the black Bean in Mahomets heart. 3 Of vanity of beauties. 2 The Mendicant Friers make a kind of amends for the excesses of the Cardinalls and Bishops. 6 Of borrowing and buying of Books. 34 Canary the best of Wine. 74 Christianity more subject to variety of opinions than a∣ny other Religion, and the cause therof. 12 Advice from attempting a busines. 27 Reputation like a Venice glass. 26 A Fable of Fire, Water, and Fame. 26 Advice to a young Soldier. 26 A facetious Tale of a Soldier. 27 Two famous sayings of Secretary Walsingham and Ce∣cill. 29 Of delay in busines. 29 Of dispatch. 29 The Mulberry an Embleme of Wisdom 30
The famous saying of Charles the fift. 30 Of matches 'twixt England and Spain. 30 Of the falling off of Catalonia and Portugall from the King of Spain, and a judgment upon it. 31 The vertu of money. 31 A famous saying of Cap. Talbot. 31 Of a hard intricat busines. 32 Of the vertu of Letters. 33 A Letter of reprehension for careles writing. 34 Som amorous Stanza's. 35 A Letter of gratitude. 36 An Apology for Women. 37 Of good and bad Women. 37 Of free courtesies. 38 A courtesie may be marr'd in the Mode. 38 An Apology for silence. 39 A Tale of a Napolitan Confessor. 39 A new Island discover'd hard by the Terreras. 39 Of the Hill Vesuvius. 39 Som rarities of Venice. 40 Of the Genoways. 40 Of our Indian Mariners. 40 Grunnius Sophista's last VVill. 42 The Authors last Testament. 43 Of Melancholy. 44 A facetious tale of a Porter. 45 A modest reply of a Letter of praise. 46 A Letter of Patience. 47 Of Chymistry. 47 Of the Diseases of the time. 47 A Letter of Recommendation. 48 Of superfluus Servants. 48 An advice to Travell. 49
Of reading of Books. 40 Of partiality of News. 50 The History of Conanus and the 11000 Virgins mista∣ken. 51 Of Prisoners. 52 The Authors Epitaph. 52 Advice to a Cambridg Scholar. 53 A Letter of comfort. 54 The effects of imprisonment. 55 Of Chymistry. 55 Of Dunkirk. 56 A Letter of State. 56 A Tale of the late Queen of Spain. 57 The Turks Prayer. 58 Of Nature, Fate, and Time. 58 A Consolatory Letter. 58 A modest reply to a Letter Encomiastic. 59 A Letter of reprehension for not writing. 60 Of Q. Eliz. pro & con. 61 How the Spaniards charge her. 61 Of futilous Writers. 62 Of speeding Letters. 63 A Letter of Meditation. 64 The advantage of Marriage. 66 A Letter of Complement to a Lady. 66 A Hymn to the Blessed Trinity. 67 St. Austins wish in a Hymn. 69 Of fearing and loving of God. 68 A large Discourse of all sorts of Beverages that are us'd on earth. 70 Of all sorts of Wines. 71 The Riddle of the Vineyard man. 70 Of German and Greek Drinkers. 70
Of Sir Walter Rawleigh. 95 Of the pittifull condition of England. 99 A congratulatory Letter from Travell. 105 Of Prayer and Praise. 106 Of the Excise. 107 A Tale of Monsieur de la Chatre. 107 The power of Letters. 109 Som Spanish Epitaphs. 110 Of French Lawyers. 113 A Letter Congratulatory for mariage. 110 A Lettee Consolatory to a sick body. 113 Stanzas of Mortality. 114 Of the Passion Week. 115 A Caution for imparting secrets. 117 A Letter of Intelligence. 118 Of Autology. 120 A Letter of Consolation. 121 A large Poem. 122 Self-travell one of the ways that lead us to Heaven. 122 Ut clavis portam, sic pandit Epistola pectus: Clauditur Haec cerâ, clauditur Illa serâ. As Keys do open chests, So Letters open brests.
AN Index to the last Parcell of EPISTLES. OF the use of Passions. 1 Passions like Muscovia VVives expect to bee check'd. 1 The conquest of ones self the greatest point of va∣lour. 1 Of the wars of Venice. 2 The fearfull commotions of Naples. 2 The horrid commotions in Ethiopia. 2 Strange Revolutions in China. 2 The monstrous Insurrections in Moscovia. 2 A Prophecie of Holland. 3 A Letter of correspondence. 3 Letters compared to Ecchoes. 4 Of Heaven. 4 Endearments of love. 4 Of the Presbyter and his first rise. 5 Of Calvin his prophane appplications. 5 Of Geneva. 5 King Iames calld Presbytery a Sect. 6 Redemption the blessing paramount. 6
The Eucharist the prime act of devotion. 6 A Hymn upon the Holy Sacrament. 7 A Rapture. 8 The happiest condition of life. 9 Opinion the great Lady that rules the world. 9 Conceit the chiefest thing that makes one happy. 9 Of the strange monster in Scotland. 9 The incertain state of a Merchant Adventurer. 9 A Mariner scarce to be ranked among the living. 9 A rich City like a fatt Cheese, subject to Maggots. 10 Congratulations to a marryed couple. 10 Of Tobacco, and the virtu of it. 11 A strange cure wrought upon my Lord Scroop by a Pipe of Tobacco. 11 The way to know how much smoak ther is in a pound of Tobacco. 22 Of Doctor Thorius Paetologie. 12 The differing Modes of taking Tobacco. 12 A Distic of Tobacco. 12 Of Learning in generall. 13 Handi-crafts men may well be term'd learned men. 13 A wholsom peece of policy of the Chineses. 13 A Tale of Bishop Grosthead. 14 A meer Scholar a useless thing. 14 A facetious Tale of Thomas Aquinas and Bonadven∣ture. 14 A Speech of Alexander Hales. 14 The generall itching after Book-learning hurtfull to England. 15 Gunpowder and Printing about a time, and both hurt∣full. 15 The true learned men. 16 A jeer upon the common Lawyer. 16
Of the Physician. 16 Pope Adrian's speech. 16 Of the lunary world. 17 Antiquity cannot priviledg an error. 17 Novelty cannot prejudice truth. 17 Of the Antipodes. 17 The method how God powres down his blessings. 18 The following day wiser than the formost. 18 The Cadet older than his elder brother. 18 Of experience. 18 The prime Philosophers held ther was a world in the Moon. 19 A notable comparison. 19 VVhat kind of creatures are thought to be in the body of the Sun. 19 Of Galileo's glasse. 20 The Turks opinion of the Sun. 20 The earth the basest of creatures. 21 Of Trismegistus. 21 The prerogatives of man. 21 A letter of complement to a Lady. 22 Of frendship. 22 Of Fortunes wheel. 23 The power of God. 23 What use France hath made of Scotland. 24 An Italian saying appliable to England, 24 The old plot of the Jesuit now don in England. 24 A letter of congratulation from forren travell. 25 What a traveller must carry home with him besides lan∣guage. 25 'Tis probable the Spaniard will be to hard for the French. 25
A Letter complaining of the hard condition of Eng∣land. 27 Another of the miseries of the time. 27 A conjunction 'twixt Spain and France the wholsom'st for Christendom. 29 A letter of endearment. 30 Of Paul's Church. 31 Of translations. 33 The English and Italian compar'd. 33 Translations like wines taken off the lees and powr'd in∣to botells. 33 How the English language grows rich. 54 What is chiefely expected from a faithfull Translator. 34 Of Prophecies. 35 The strange prediction of Nostredamus. 35 Som wonderfull Prophecies of the Welsh Bards reflect∣ing upon these times. 35 A Prophecie of White-Hall. 35 A Prophecie for the soldier. 36 Of Witches. 36 How perverse men must be used in disputation. 37 All nations enacted laws against witchcraft. 37 The Act of Parlement in England against Witches. 37 The Imperiall law against witches. 37 The Judaicall and Roman law against witches. 37 Nostredamus his notable prediction reflecting upon Eng∣land. 38 A notable story of Charlemain. 38 Saint Austin and Danaeus his opinion of Witches. 38
Olas Magnus his opinion of King Ericus case that could comand the winds. 38 Of the Oracles. 38 A memorable story out of Plutarch. 38 The oath that witches use to take. 39 The famous tale of Frier Louis in France. 39 Of Rutterkin the witch that inchanted my Lord of Rut∣lands children. 39 A letter of frendly endearments. 41 England cur'd of the Kings evill. 40 Of differences in opinion. 42 Difference in opinion should not dissolve the bonds of human society. 42 One of the speciall priviledges of God Allmighty. 42 Themistius his opinion touching the worship of the Creator. 43 Of Spirituall pride the greatest engin the devill useth to destroy peeple. 43 TEAO.
THer are divers other private short leters which may be said to be as small Shallops attending greater Ships, therfore they must not be expected to carry so much Ballast: And this hath bin the usu∣all method of Epistolizing amongst the Ancients. FINIS.
To the Intelligent Reader. AMongst other reasons which make the English Language of so small extent, and put strangers out of conceit to learn it, one is, That we do not pronounce as we write, which proceeds from di∣uers superfluous Letters, that occur in many of our words, which adds to e difficulty of the Language: Therfore the Author hath taken pains to trench such redundant, unnecessary Letters in this Work (though the Printer hath not bin so carefull as he should have bin) as amongst mul∣itudes of other words may appear in these few, done, some, come; which though wee, to whom the speech is connaturall, pronounce as mo∣syllables, yet when strangers com to read them, they are apt to make em dissillabls, as do-ne, so-me, co-me; therfore such an e is superfluous. Moreover, those words that have the Latin for their originall, the Author prefers that Orthography, rather then the French, wherby di∣ers letters are spar'd, as Physic, Logic, Afric, not Physique, Logique, Afrique; favor, honor, labor, not favour, honour, labour, and ve∣ry many more, as also he omits the Dutch k, in most words; here you all read peeple not pe-ople, tresure, not treasure, toung, not ton-gue, &c. Parlement not Parliament,, busines, witnes, sicknes, not busi∣nesse, witnesse, sicknesse; star, war, far, not starre, warre, farre, nd multitudes of such words, wherin the two last Letters may well be ar'd: Here you shall also read pity, piety, witty, not piti-e, pieti-e, itti-e, as strangers at first sight pronounce them, and abundance of such  words. The new Academy of wits call'd l'Academie de beaux esprits, which he late Cardinall de Richelieu founded in Paris, is now in hand to form the French Language in this particular, and to weed it of all su∣erfluous Letters, which makes the Toung differ so much from the Pen,  they have expo'd themselves to this contumelious Proverb, The renchman doth neither pronounce as he writes, nor speak as he inks, nor sing as he pricks. Aristotle hath a topic Axiom, that Frustra fit per plura, quod fi∣ potest per pauciora, When fewer may serve the turn, more is in in. And as this rule holds in all things els, so it may be very well  in Orthography. FINIS.
