H3157 07944576 40634
THE DAWNINGS OF THE Gospel-Day, AND ITS LIGHT and GLORY DISCOVERED: By a Faithful and Valiant Follower of the Lamb, and Labourer in the VVork and Service of God, and a Sufferer for the TESTIMONY of JESUS, Francis Howgil, Who Dyed a Prisoner for the Truth in Appleby Goal in the County of Westmerland, the Twentieth Day of the Eleaventh Moneth, One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty Eight. And the Dragon was Wroth with the Woman, and went to make War with the Remnant of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12.17. And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Te∣stimony, and they loved not their Lives unto Death, Rev. 12.11. Printed in the Year 1670.
To all the faithful Friends and Followers of Christ Je∣sus in Scorn call'd Quakers. Dear Friends, THE Remembrance of the Author of these Books is fresh upon me, as I believe it is upon many more that knew him; and indeed he can never be forgotten by us, whose blame∣less and innocent Life and Conversation, when amongst us, was a good Pattern unto us; for he was a Man of a meek and gentle Spirit, and was very careful and tender to all in whom the least Appearance of Truth manifested it self, and his Travails and La∣bours were great for the Truth's sake, to beget People to the Lord, being not satisfied to eat his Bread alone, as many yet living in England, Scotland and Ireland can testifie, where he la∣boured and suffered; and he was a Man of a tender and broken Spirit, and constant in his Love to all his Brethren; and a great Care he had over all the Flock of God; and his Faithfulness to the Truth was a Crown unto him unto his latter End; and his Name for his Constancy to the Lord and his Truth shall be had in Remembrance by Generations to come: I have here drawn up a short Relation of his last Tryals and Sufferings at Appleby, which being not heretofore published, I thought meet to incert them before his Books, as followeth, and remain A Friend to all that love the Lord Jesus, Ellis Hooks. London the 3d Day of the 5th Moneth, 1676.
A true Relation of the Tryals, Sufferings and Death of Francis Howgil, who dyed a Prisoner for the Te∣stimony of Jesus, in Appleby in the County of VVest∣morland, the 10th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1668. in the 50th Year of his Age. THE said Francis Howgil about the latter End of the 5th Moneth 1663. being in the Market in Kendal about his ordinary Occasi∣ons, was summoned by the high Constable to appear before the Justices of Peace then present at a Tavern, who tendred him the Oath of Allegiance, as they said, and committed him to Prison till the Assizes at Appleby; so at Appleby he appeared, and had the same Oath tendered in the Court by the Judges, and for not taking it was indicted, only he had Li∣berty to answer to the Indictment the next Assizes, in the mean Time a Goal Delivery being at Appleby, he was required again to enter into Bond for the good Behaviour, only to ensnare and to bring him into further Bonds and for denying was committed Prisoner: A further Relation of his Tryal at two several Assizes is as followeth. Being at the Assizes, he had free Liberty of Speech and good Audience before the Judges and great Men of the Country and many others, and in∣deed the Lord made him without Fear, and girded his Heart with Strength, and opened his Mouth in Wisdom, so that he gained upon his Adversaries, for which Glory is given to God, who was a present Help to him in the time of Need. Before the Judges sate F. H. spoke to the Clerk of the Assizes, and told him, he did not know whether they expected his Appearance then or not; the Clerk said, You have done well, and that he would acquaint the Judge, and he should only engage to him to appear the next Assizes, to answer the Indictment against him, and that he should not appear in Court; Francis bid do what he would: In the mean time Sir Philip Musgrave (so called) a great Adversary to the Truth, and the great and chief Prosecutor of Fran∣cis, had informed the Judges against him, As that he was a dangerous Per∣son, a Ringleader and a Keeper up of Meetings of dangerous Consequence, and destructive to the Peace of the Nation; so then they concluded he should ap∣pear in Court; and so the Clerk informed him, and told him about what time he should be called: So the Court began, Judge Twisden gave the Charge to the grand Jury, in which he said, There was a Sort of People, who under Pretence of Conscience and Religion, who seemed to build upon the King's Declarations from Breda, and under Colour of this hatched Treasons and Rebel∣lions, and gave the Jury Charge to enquire and present such, that the Peace of the Nation might be preserved; so they impaneled the Jury,
and Francis was called to the Bar, and the Judge spake as Follow∣eth. Judge, speaking calmly to him said, The Face of things was much altered since the last Assizes, & made a large Speech to him and the Country, telling him, That all Sects under Pretence of Conscience did violate the Laws, and hatched Rebellions, not (saith he) that I have any thing to charge you with; but seeing the Oath of Allegiance was tendered to you the last Assizes, and you refused to take it; it was looked upon that such Persons were Enemies to the King and Govern∣ment; and said, I will not trouble you now to answer to your Indictment, but I must do that the next Assizes; in the mean time you must enter into Recognizance for the good Behaviour. To which F. H. answered I desire Liberty to Speak, which he had with∣out Interruption, and said as followeth. F. H. Judge Twisden, thou very well knowest upon how slender an Ac∣count or none I was brought before thee the last Assizes, where thou were pleased to tender me the Oath of Allegiance, though I believe both thee and the rest of the Court did know it was a received Principle amongst us not to swear at all, many Reasons I gave thee then, many more I have to add, if I may have Audience; for it may appear to you an absurd thing and Ob∣stinacy in me to refuse it, if I should not render a Reason; I am (said he) none of those that make Religion a Cloak of Maliciousness, nor Conscience a Cloak to carry on Plots or Conspiracies, the Lord hath redeemed me and many more out of such things; and seeing I am engaged to appear at the next Assizes, I desire no further thing may be required of me. Judge. You must enter into Bond this dangerous time, and therefore consider of it, and tell me now, or before the Assizes end. The second Day of the Assizes he was called again. F. H. Seeing thou art pleased to let me answer to my Indictment, which I am willing to do, I have been of good Behaviour, and shall so continue; but it seems a hard thing to me, and full of Severity, that seeing I am ob∣liged to appear to answer an Indictment of so high a Nature (if prosecu∣ted against me) which tends to the Loss of my Liberty for Life, and my Estate forever, I hope the Court will not envy my Liberty for five Moneths. Judge Turner said, We do not desire your Imprisonment, if you will be of good Behaviour. And F. H. pressing further that they would not put him upon giving Bond to be of the good Behaviour, knowing himself to be bound by the Truth, that he could not mis-behave himself. One Daniel Flemming another persecuting Justice had framed another In∣dictment against him for meeting, and stood up (fearing the Snare of gi∣ving Bond would not hold) and said as followeth. D. Flemming, My Lord he is a great Speaker, it may be the Quakers cannot want him. Judge, Let him be what he will if he will enter into Bond. F. H. said, he had nothing to accuse himself of, for his Conscience bore him Witness that he loved Peace, and sought it with all Men.
Judges both spake, What do you tell of Conscience? we meddle not with it, but you contemn the Laws, and keep up great Meetings, and go not to Church. F. H. We are fallen in a sad Age, if meeting together peaceably, with∣out Arms or Force or Intention of Hurt to any Man, but only to worship God in Spirit, and exhort one another to Righteousness, and to pray toge∣ther in the holy Ghost, as the primitive Christians of old, that this should be reckoned Breach of Peace and Mis-behaviour. Judge Twisden, Do you compare these times with them? they were Heathens that persecuted, but we are Christian Magistrates. F. H. It is a Doctrine alwayes held by us, and a received Principle as any thing we believed, that Christ's Kingdom could not be set up with carnal Weapons, nor the Gospel propagated by Force of Arms, nor the Church of God built with Violence; but the Prince of Peace was manifested a∣mongst us, and we could learn War no more, but could love Enemies, and forgive them that did Evil to us. Philip Musgrave stood up, and said, My Lord, we have been remiss towards th People, and have striven with them, and put them in Prison again and again, and fined them, and as soon as they are out they meet again. Then stood up John Lonther called a Justice, and said, My Lord, they grow insolent, notwithstanding all Laws and the Execution of them, yet they grow upon us, and their Meetings are dangerous. Philip Musgrave stood up, and produced a Paper (and Justice Flemming so called, seconded him) in great Capital Letters, and gave the Judge it; he told the Judge, That it hapned some Quakers were sent to Prison, and one of them dyed at Lancaster, and they carryed his Corps through the Country, and set that Paper upon his Coffin, This is the Body of such an one, who was per∣secuted by Daniel Flemming till Death. Judge, We have spent much time with you, I will discourse no more. F. H. I acknowledge your Moderation towards me allowing me Liber∣ty to speak, I shall not trouble you much longer; I shall be willing to ap∣pear to answer to the Indictment at the Assizes, and in the mean time to live peaceably and quietly, as I have done, if that will satisfie. Judge You must enter into Bond to come at no more Meetings. F. H. I cannot do that, if I should, I were treacherous to God and my own Conscience and the People and you would but judge me a Hypocrite. They weare loath to commit him, yet at last they did. F. H. turning about to the Country People said, the Fear of God be a∣mongst you all. The Hearts of People were tender towards him, and some were very lo∣ving and affectionate to him. Being thus committed on the 23d of the 1st Moneth, 1664. he was de∣tained a Prisoner about five Moneths, and a great Part of the time of his Imprisonment kept very strictly; and a Charge was given from the Justi∣ces several times, that none should be suffered to speak with him; and the Goaler (being a cruel Man) was ready to execute their Orders to the ut∣most, and kept him so close, that none were suffered to come to him, or
speak with him, but who got secretly to him, without the Goalers Know∣ledge; all which the said F H. bore patiently, and never opened his Mouth to complain: And when the time of the Assizes came, he got Liberty to speak with the Clerk of the Assizes, who told F.H. that he must prepare himself to come to a Tryal; he said, he was prepared, but thought that all he could say would little avail, he believing they purposed to prosecute him with all Severity, which proved so, as will appear by the Relation following; for indeed the County Justices, who began to prosecute him, had incensed the Judges against him before hand; however F. H. endea∣voured all he could to convince them of his Innocency, and to that End drew up the Substance of the OATH into several Heads, which he could SUBSCRIBE to, though he could not SWEAR, and delivered it to the Court, and drew up another Paper to Judge Turner, shewing him and the Court the Cause of his first Commitment, and the former Proceedings against him, and how unequal it was, that they wa∣ved the other Statutes lately made against Non-conformists, and prosecuted him upon a Statute formerly made against Popish Recusants; in the same Paper he also signified, that he was a Man of a tender Spirit, and feared the Lord from a Child, and had never taken any Oath, but once in his Life, and that was twenty Years since, and that his refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance was not in any evil Intent to the King's Person or Government, neither in Thought, Word or Deed, but meerly upon a spiritual and con∣scientious Account, and that he could not swear, being otherwise perswa∣ded of the Lord. 2. That he could not swear, seeing it was against the Command of Christ and the Apostles Doctrine. 3. He declared that he was able to make it evident to be against the Ex∣ample of the primitive Christians for divers hundred Years, and so no new Opinion. 4. That he did neither in Wilfulness nor Obstinacy refuse it, being sen∣sible of the Dammage that would come thereby, if they did prosecute him upon that Statute, he having a Wife and Children, and some small Estate, which he knew lay at Stake in the Matter; but said, if it were his Life al∣so, he could not revolt from, or deny that which he had most certainly be∣lieved in; but if any could convince him, either by Scripture or Reason in the thing, he had an Ear to hear; and therefore, all those things consi∣dered, he desired he might be dismissed from those his strait Bonds, and from their Persecution of him upon that Account: Both which Papers his Wife delivered to the Clerk, and he to the Judges, and they to the Justices before F. H. was called into the Court, which they read, in which Papers F. H. had come as near them as he could in the Truth, that he might leave them the more without Excuse; but all would not prevail with them, for they were set on to do their Utmost against him. Here followeth the Sum of their last Proceedings against F. H. and the most material Passages in open Court at the Assizes holden at Appleby the 22d and 23d of the 6th Moneth, 1664. F. H. being called to the Bar.
Judge spoke moderately and said, Here is an Indictment against you for refusing to take the Oath of Obedience, so you must plead to it either guilty or not guilty. F. H. with a Heart girded up with Strength and Courage said, Judge Turner, May I have Liberty to speak, and make my Defence, for I have none to plead my Cause but the Lord? Judge, You may. F. H. I will lay the true State of my Case before thee, and of the Procee∣dings against me from the first, seeing Judge Twisden is not here, who had Knowledge of all the Proceedings hitherto; I am a Country Man, born and brought up in this Country, my Carriage and Conversation is known, how I have walked peaceably towards all Men, as I hope my Country men can testifie; about a Year ago being at my neighbouring Market-Town a∣bout my reasonable and lawful Occasions, I was sent for by an high Con∣stable out of the Market to the Justices of Peace, before whom I went; and when I came there, they had nothing to lay to my Charge, but fell to ask me Questions to ensnare me about our Meetings; and when they could find no Occasion, they seemed to tender the Oath of Allegiance to me, though they never read it to me, neither did I positively deny it, yet they commit∣ted me to Prison; and so I was brought hither to this Assize, and then the Mittimus by which I was committed was called for, and the Judge read it, and said to the Justices, it was insufficient, nevertheless Judge Twisden ten∣dred the Oath of Obedience to me; many things I did alledge then, and many more I have to say now, if time will permit; from that time I was under an Engagement to appear at the next Assize, and so was called, and did appear at the last Goal-delivery, and a further Obligation was requi∣red of me for good Behaviour, which I could not do, lest I should be brought into a further Snare; and since that time I have been committed Prisoner these five Moneths, some of which time I have been kept under great Re∣straint, my Friends not permitted to speak to me; and thus briefly I have given thee an Account hitherto; and as to the Oath, the Substance thereof, with the Representation of my Case, is presented unto the Court already, unto which I have set my Hand, and also shall in those Words testifie the same in open Court, if required; and seeing it is the very Substance the Law doth require, I desire it may be accepted, and I cleared from my Imprisonment. Judge, I am come to execute the Law, and the Law requires an Oath, and I cannot alter it; do you think the Law must be changed for you, or only for a few; if this be suffered, the Administration of Justice i hindered, no Action can be try∣ed, nor Evidence given for the King, nor no other particular Cases can be tryed; end your Principles are altogether inconsistent with the Law and Government; I pray you shew me which Way we shall proceed, shew me some Reason, and give me some Ground. F. H. said, I shall, in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Truth is confirmed; and we never denyed to give, and still are ready to give E∣vidence for the King wherein we are concerned, and in any other Matter for the ending of Strife between Man and Man in Truth and Righteousness, and this answers the Substance of the Law.
Judge, Is this a good Answer, think you? whether to be given with or with∣out Oath? the Law requires an Oath. F. H. Still Evidence is and may be given in Truth, according to the Sub∣stance of the Law, so that no Detriment cometh unto any Party, seeing that true Testimony may be born without an Oath; and I did not speak of changing the Law; yet seeing we never refused giving Testimony, which answereth the Intent and Substance of the Law, I judged it was reasonable to receive our Testimony, and not to expose us unto such Sufferings, seeing we scrupled an Oath only upon a conscientious Account, in Tenderness of our Consciences, for Fear of breaking the Command of Christ, the Savi∣our of the World, which if he do, there is none of you able to plead our Cause for us with him. Judge, But why do you not go to Church, but meet in Houses and private Con∣venticles, which the Law forbids. F. H. We meet together only for the Worship of the true God in Spirit and Truth, having the primitive Christians for our Example, and to no other End, but that we may be edified, and God glorified; and when two or three are met together in the Name of Christ, and he in the midst of them there is a Church. Judge, That is true; but how long is it since you have been at Church? or will you go to the Church the Law doth allow of? give me some Reasons why you do not go. F. H. I have many to give thee, if thee hast Patience to hear me; first, God dwells not in Temples made with Mens Hands: 2dly, The Parish House hath been a Temple for Idols, to wit, for the Mass and the Rood; and I dare have no Fellowship with Idols, nor worship in Idols Temples; for what have we to do with Idols, their Temples and Worship? Judge, Were there not Houses called the Houses of God and Temples? F. H. Yes, under the Law; but the Christians who believed in Christ separated from these (and the Temple was made and left desolate) and from the Gentiles Temples too, and met together in Houses and broak Bread from House to House; and the Church was not confined then to one particular Place, neither is it now, many more things I have to say; the Judge interrupted. Judge, Will you answer to your Indictment? F. H. I know not what it is, I never heard it, though I have often desi∣red a Copy. Judge, Clerk, read it. So he read it, how that F. H. had wilfully, obstinately and contemptu∣ously denyed to swear when the Oath was tendered. F. H. I deny it. Judge, What do you deny? F. H. The Indictment. Judge, Did you not deny to swear? and the Indictment convicts you that you did not swear. F. H. I gave unto the Court the Substance of the Oath, as you all know: 2dly, I told you I did not deny it out of Obstinacy or Wilfulness, neither in Contempt of the Kings Law or Government; for my Will would ra∣ther choose my Liberty then Bonds; and I am sensible it is like to be a
great Dammage to me; I have a Wife and Children, and some Estate, which we might subsist upon, and do Good to others, and I know all this lyes at Stake; but if it were my Life also, I durst not do but as I do, lest I should incur the Displeasure of God; and do you judge I would loose my Liberty wilfully, and suffer the spoiling of my Estate, and the ruining of my Wife and Children in Obstinacy and Wilfulness? sure nay. Judge, Jury, you see he denyes the Oath, and he will not plead to the Indict∣ment, only excepts against it because of the Form of Words; but you see he will not swear, and yet he saith he denies the Indictment, and you see upon what Ground. And then they called the Goaler to witness and swear, that the last As∣sizes F. H. did refuse, &c. which he did; and the Jury without going from the Bar, gave in their Verdict Guilty, and then the Court broke up that Night. The next Day towards Evening, when they had tryed all the Prisoners, Francis was brought to the Bar to receive his Sentence. Judge stood up and said, Come, the Indictment is proved against you, what have you to say why Sentence shall not be given. F. H. I have many things to say, if you will hear them: 1st, As I have said, I denyed not out of Obstinacy or Wilfulness, but was willing to te∣stifie the Truth in this Matter of Obedience, or any other Matter wherein I was concerned: 2dly, Because Swearing was directly against the Com∣mand of Christ: 3dly, Against the Doctrine of the Apostles: 4thly, Even some of your principal Pillars of the Church of England; as Bishop Usher, sometime Primate of Ireland, he said in his Works, The Waldenses did de∣ny all Swearing in their Age from that Command of Christ and the Apostle James, and it was a sufficient Ground; and Doctor Gauden, late Bishop of Exeter, in a Book of his I lately read he cited very many ancient Fathers, to shew, that the first three hundred Years Christians did not swear, so that it is no new Doctrine. To which the Court seemed to give a little Ear, and said nothing, but talked one to another, and Francis stood silent, and then the Judge said, Judge, Sure you mistake. F. H. I have not the Books here. Judge, Will you say upon your honest Word they denyed all Swearing? F, H. What I have said is true. Judge, Why do you not come to Church, and hear Service, and be subject to the Law, and to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake? F.H. We are subject, and for that Cause we do pay Taxes, Tribute & Cu∣stome, and give unto Caesar the Things that are his, and unto God the Things that are his, to wit, Worship, Honour and Obedience; and if thou mean the Parish Assembly, I tell thee faithfully, I am perswaded, and upon good Ground, their Teachers are not the Ministers of Christ, neither their Wor∣ship the Worship of God. Judge, Why, it may be for some small things in the Service you reject it all. F. H. First it is manifest they are time-servers, one while preaching up that for divine Service to People that another while they cry down, as Popish, superstitious and Idolatrous; and that which they have preached up twenty Years together make Shipwrack of all in a Day, and now again
call it divine, and would have all compelled to that themselves once made void. Judge, Why, never since the King came in. F. H. Yes, the same Men that preached it down once now cry it up, so they are so unstable and wavering, that we cannot believe they are the Mi∣nisters of Christ: 2dly, They teach for Hire, and live by forced Mainte∣nance, and would force a Faith upon Men, contrary to Christ and the A∣postles Rule, who would have every one perswaded in their own Minds, and said, Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, and yet they say, Faith is the Gift of God, and we have no such Faith given; but yet they would force theirs upon us, and because we cannot receive it, they cry, You are not subject to Authority and the Laws, and nothing but Confiscations, Imprisonment and Banishment is threatned, and this is their greatest Plea, I could mention more Particulars; then the Judge interrupted. Judge, Well, I see you will not swear, nor conform, nor be subject, and you think we deal severely with you, but if you would be subject we should not need. F. H. I do so judge indeed, that you deal severely with us for Obedience to the Commands of Christ; I pray thee canst thou shew me how that a∣ny of those People, for whom the Act was made, have been proceeded a∣gainst by this Statute, though I envy no Man's Liberty. Judge, Oh yes, I can instance you many up and down the Country that are pre∣munired, I have done it my self, pronounced Sentence against divers. F. H. What against Papists? Judge, No. F. H. What, against the Quakers? so I have heard indeed; so then that Statute which was made against Papists, thou let'st them alone, and executest it against the Quakers. Judge, Well, you will meet in great Numbers, and do increase, but there is a new Statute which will make you fewer. F. H. Well, if we must suffer, it is for Christ's sake, and for well doing. Francis then being silent, the Judge pronounced the Sentence, but spake so low, that the Prisoner, though near to him, could scarce hear it. The Sentence was, You are put out of the Kings Protection and the Benefit of the Law, your Lands are confiscate to the King during your Life, and your Goods and Chattels forever, and you to be Prisoner during your Life. F. H. A hard Sentence for my Obedience to the Commands of Christ; the Lord forgive you all. So he turned from the Bar; but the Judge speaking, he turned again, and many more Words passed to the same Purpose, as before; at last the Judge rose up and said, Judge, Well, if you will yet be subject to the Laws, the King will shew you Mercy. F. H. The Lord hath shewed Mercy unto me, and I have done nothing against the King, nor Government, nor any Man, blessed be the Lord, and therein stands my Peace; for it is for Christ's sake I suffer, and not for Evil doing. And so the Court broke up, the People were generally mo∣derate, and many were sorry to see what was done against him; but Francis
signified how contented and glad he was, that he had any thing to loose for the Lord's precious Truth, of which he had publickly born Testimony, and that he was now counted worthy to suffer for it. As for the time of F. Howgil's Sickness (which he endured with much Patience and Cheerfulness) it begun the 11th of the 11th Moneth, 1668. and continued till the 20th of the same Moneth, and then he departed this Life, having then for the Testimony of Jesus been Prisoner four Years and eleaven Moneths; he was not unsensible of the Decay of his outward Man sometime before, which moved him to a Disposal of his outward Estate, and the setting of his House in Order; his Love was very dear to his Bre∣thren and Fellow-Labourers, with whom he had laboured and travailed in the Work of the Ministry; in Testimony whereof he left to each of them something, as a Remembrance of his Love, and also was mindful of the Church, and left a Legacy to be distributed amongst the poor of the Hous∣hold of Faith in the Parts where he lived. And though the time of his Departure did draw nigh, and his Sickness encreased, yet in all that time he was in perfect and good Remembrance, and oftentimes very fervent in Prayer, and uttered many comfortable Ex∣pressions, to the great Refreshment of those who were with him. And a∣bout two Dayes before his Departure, being attended by his dear Wife and several Friends, he begun to say unto them, Friends, as to matter of Words, you must not expect much more from me, neither is there any great Need of it, as to speak of Matters of Faith to you, who are satisfied only that you remember my dear Love to all Friends who enquire of me▪ for I ever loved Friends well, or any in whom Truth appeared; and truly God will own his People, as he hath everhither to done & as we have daily witnessed, for no sooner had they made that Act against us for Ba¦nishment (to the great Suffering of many good Friends) but the Lord stirred up Ene∣mies against them, even three great Nations, whereby the Violence of their Hands was taken of; I say again, God will own his People, even all those that are faithful; and as for me, I am well, and content to dye, I am not at all afraid of Death; and truly one Thing was of late in my Heart, and that I intended to have writ to G. F. and others, even that which I have observed, which Thing is, that this Generation passeth fast away; we see many good and precious Friends within these few Years have been taken from us, and therefore Friends had need to watch, and be very fihful, so that we may leave a good and not a bad Savour to the next succeeding Geneation; for you see that it is but a little time that any of u have to stay here. And often in the time of his Sickness he said, He was content to dye, and that he was ready, and praised God for those many sweet Enjoyments and Refresh∣ments he had received on that his Prison-house-Bed, whereon he lay freely forgi∣ving all who had a Hand in his Restraint. And he said, This was the Place of my first Imprisonment for the Truth here at this Town, and if it be the Place of my laying down the Body, I am content. Several Persons of note Inhabitants in Appleby, as the Mayor and others, went to visit him, some of which praying that God might speak Peace to his Soul, he sweetly replyed, He hath done it, and they all spoke well of him.
And a few Hours before his Departure some Friends (who lived several Miles from that Place) came to visit him, he enquired of all their Welfare, and prayed fervently (with many heavenly Expressions) That the Lord by his mighty Power might preserve them out of all such Things as would spot and defile. And a little after he was saying something concerning Weeks (or a time) after which Persecution should be ended; but his Weakness was so great, and his Voice so low, that it was not fully heard. A little Season after, he recovering a little Strength further said, I have sought the Way of the Lord from a Child, and lived innocently as among Men; and if any enquire concerning my latter End, let them know, that I dye in the Faith in which I lived, and suffered for. And after these Words he spake some other in Prayer to God, and sweet∣ly finished his Course in much Peace with the Lord.
George Fox's Testimony CONCERNING Francis Howgil. NOW concerning Francis Howgil, who was one of the Lord's Wor∣thies, that preach'd his everlasting Word of Life from about the Year 1652. until the Year 1668. He was convinced of God's eternal Truth, and received his Gospel in the Year 1652. the same Day that he had been preaching in the Morning in Furbank Chappel, in the Afternoon he was convinced by a Messenger of the Lord, and several others that had been Teachers were convinced by him, as John Audland and others. He had a great Acquaintance with the highest Sort of Priests, and after he did receive the Lord's Power and the Word of Life, he was a Torment to them, and he did confess to some of the Priests, that the Knowledge of God and his Truth he knew no more of whilest he was amongst them, as to the inward Enjoyment of it, then a Child of five Years old. And he and John Audland, that had received some Money for preaching at a Parish called Colton in Fornace Fells in Lancashire, when they had recei∣ved the Gospel freely, and the Word of Life from Christ, they were com∣manded of the Lord to go and return that Money back again to the Parish and People from whom they had received it, which they did, and this made the Priests more to rage and the Professors. So as the Son of God came to be revealed in him, he began to know his Command, and powerfully and freely to preach him and his Word of Life; this did he and John Audland all the Dayes of their Life after their Con∣vincement preached Christ Jesus freely, as they had received him, and turned many unto God. And no sooner was his Mouth opened, but the Priests, Magistrates and Professors began to rage against him, and began to be offended at the Word of God and the Gospel, and sometime after cast him into Appleby Goal, in a nasty stinking Prison in the County of VVestmorland, and there they kept him for a time in the latter End of the Year 1652. but the Lord God deli∣vered him out of the Mouthes of those Lyons, whom God after overtur∣ned, both Priests, Magistrates and Professors. And so after he was set at Liberty, he grew valiant and bold for the Name of the Lord, and travailed up and down on Foot, preaching the everlasting Gospel, and went to many Steeple Houses, to warn both Priests and Peo∣ple of the Day of the Lord that was coming upon them, and directing of
them to Christ Jesus, their Teacher and Saviour, and travailed a foot through the Countries to London, and was moved of the Lord, he and John Cham to go and admonish O. Cromwel after he was newly made Protector, and went to some of the Steeple-houses in London, and other Meetings, declaring to them the Day of the Lord and the Word of Life, and where they might find it. And after this he travailed through the Countries to Bristol, preaching the Word of Life, and after went into Ireland with Edward Burroughs, and preached the Word of Life there to both Magistrates, Priests and People, under great Sufferings, and many were begotten to the Lord Jesus, their Saviour and Teacher, there was Truth and Life by them. And after Henry Cromwel, the Deputy of Ireland, banished him and Ed∣ward Burroughs out of Ireland, through the Instigation of the Priests and other Magistrates; but the Lord overturned them his Adversaries also. And so continuing in the Labour of the Lord till the Year 1661. he was imprisoned at London (when the Monarchy People rose) with many others though clear and innocent from that bloody Act; for his and their Weapons were spiritual, and they sought another Kingdom: And after he and they were set at Liberty, he still continued in the Work of the Lord, travailing up and down the Nations; and coming into the North, at Kendal the Ma∣gistrates sent for him out of the Market, and tendred him the Oath of Alle∣giance and Supremacy, and because for Conscience sake he could not swear, in Obedience to the Command of Christ his Saviour, they committed him to Appleby Goal in the Year 1664. and there they kept him from Sessions to the Assizes in a smoaky Hole, and at last they premunired him; and his Body being almost spent in the Service of the Lord, being a weak man, there did he offer up his Life, as a Sacrifice of his Faith for the Lord Jesus Christ's Truth, and dyed a Prisoner for the Name of Jesus in the latter End of the Year 1668. and so laid down his Life as a Testimony against the Persecutors & Breakers of the Command of Christ; and his Blood doth cry for Venge∣ance, though he could say, The Lord forgive all h Persecutorspunc; who having the Mind of Christ, desired the Good of all, yea the worst of h Enemies, and in that Desire of the Good of all did he labour & travail, seeking their Good and their Eternal VVelfare in the Inheritance of Life, that fades not away, of which he was an Heir, and is entred into Rest, and the Possession of the same. And now this peaceable Man the persecuting Priests and Magistrates have gotten their Desire, to shut up in Prison this Servant of the Lord to Death, for obeying the Command of Christ; but how they will answer it before the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the great Judge at his Tribunal Day, which hastens apace; let them consider with themselves, for if they went into everlasting Punishment that did not visit Christ in Prison, what wll become of such as cast him into Prison in his Members. And so they made his Wife a Widdow, and his Children Fatherless, who have none to cry unto but the Lord, who will relieve the Widdow, and help the Fa∣therless. The Place of his outward Habitation was in Greying in Westmorland, a man known to be of good Report before he received the Gospel freely from Jesus, which he declared freely; and great Sufferings, and Tryals, and Reproaches, and Scorns, and hard Labours in the Work and Service of the
Lord he went through, and many vain Disputes, Priests and Professors of all Sects rose up against him, but the Lord in his Power gave him Domini∣on over them all. Who ended his Dayes in Peace in the Truth of God, and the Lord's Ser∣vice and Testimony, for his Name, and for the keeping of, and obeying the Command of Christ, his Lord and Saviour. And therefore all Friends and Brethren that are begotten by him through the Word of Life, and others live in the same Word, that lives, abides & en∣dures forever, that is a Hammer & a Fire, & as a Sword to all that is contra∣ry to that which is holy and pure; so that in the Truth, Power and Word of Life the Lord God may be glorified in you all the Dayes of your Life. And blessed are all they that aye in the Lord, they rest from their Labours, and their Works will follow them. G. F.
Richard Pinders Testimony CONCERNING Francis Howgil. AS concerning our dear Brother in the Lord Francis Howgil, the Author of these ensuing Writings, he was a Man so well known through the Churches of Christ in his Day, that much need not be writ concerning him, as by Way of Testimony to those that knew him, and his Spirit, and Manner of Life and Conversation, yet I having had a full Knowledge of him, especially in the time of his long and tedious Imprisonment in the Town of Appleby in Westmorland, where for his Testimony sake he end∣ed his Dayes, and laid down his Life as a Testimony for that Truth that he had testified of so largely, both in preaching the Gospel, and in these en∣suing Books, which he writ at several times, according as the Lord put it into his Heart, and as there was Occasion to answer Truth's Opposers; and after many Years Travails and Labours in the Work of God, he through the Envy of some great Persons in that Country was made Prisoner at the foresaid Town of Appleby, they having nothing justly to lay to his Charge, yet knowing that it was his Principle not to swear at all (Christ having for∣bidden it) they put the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance unto him, and only for refusing to swear he was premunired, they in the least laying nothing of Misdemeanour to his Charge; and when the Judge pronounced the Sen∣tence of Premunire against him, he only replyed, It is a hard Sentence, be∣ing only for the Exercise of my Conscience, but the Will of the Lord be done, and prayed the Lord might forgive them all that had any Hand in it; and so after the said Sentence being committed Prisoner, he continued a Prisoner several Years, in which time I was very conversant with him; and I must give this Testimony for him, that I never heard him in the least murmur or repine in all the time of his Imprisonment, but alwayes appeared as a Man wholly given up ino he Will of God; and when at any time we had been speaking of his long Imprisonment, constantly he would have said, The Will of the Lord be done; and such was his godly Behaviour and Conversation in the time of his Confinement, that he greatly gained the Hearts and Love of the Goaler's whole Family, and all others of the Town that knew him, and had any Acquaintance with him; and even to this Day, when his Name is mentioned, they are all ready to say, he was a Man that truly feared God, so that he left an exceeding good Savour be∣hind him in that Place: And as for the Course of his Time and Dayes in this World, I have this to say, he was born of honest Parents, and brought
up to some Learning, according to the usual Custom of the Country, and in his Youth and tender Years was one that sincerely thirsted after the Knowledge of God, and the Lord was good unto him, and gave him Dis∣coveries of divine things, unto his Soul's great Comfort; and he was an early Owner of the People of God called Quakers, and walked with them, and was alwayes ready to suffer with them, as at any time called by the Lord thereunto; he was one greatly delighted in Concord and Unity, and greatly delighted in the Company of such whom he knew truly feared the Lord; and nothing did rejoyce his Heart more then to hear the Truth prospered, and that the Churches did encrease in the blessed Fellowship of the Gospel of Christ Jesus: And when his Dayes were near spent, that Sickness and bodily Weakness came upon him, he endured it with very great Patience unto the latter End; and his dear Wife and some other Friends being with him, he spoke forth heavenly things, as one that had obtained the full Assurance of an heavenly Crown, and as one whose Heart and Soul was fully fixed upon the Lord, who was mightily seen to be with him to his very last End, his Soul magnifying of him for his infinite Good∣ness unto him all his Life long; and so he laid down his Head in Peace, be∣ing he had faithfully served the Lord in his Generation: And this is my Testimony for that faithful Servant of God, who to the Hour of his Disso∣lution bore Testimony unto the Truth; and my Soul's Desire is, his Blood in the Day of the Lord may not be laid to the Charge of some, who had a great Hand both in causing him at first to be made Prisoner, and also in the continuing of him so to the very last; but we leave things with the Lord, as knowing Vengeance belongs to him, and that he will give a Re∣ward to every one according to their Works. By one that loves the Name of the Righteous, which shall never rot, though the Wicked go down to the Grave, and are remembred no more, and by one that was a Friend and Country man of the Author of the ensuing Writings. R. P.
A funeral Verse, or Verse in Remembrance of that pious Patriot and Christian Sufferer for the Testi∣mony of his God and his Truth, Francis Howgil, who faithfully, willingly and readily gave up his Life to the Death, for the Record which he did bear concerning the Things of Jesus, and for obeying the just Commands of Christ. Christian and Moderate Reader, IN Silence I had sate, and stay'd my Pen, Yea, as one not appearing, till O then Great Pressures suffered me to take no Rest, Till that unfolded was which in my Breast Lay cabined, then with a mournful Eye Constrain'd I was to wring mine Elegy; Love mix'd with Tears made Verse of this my Theam, Tears mix'd with Love made tickling Eyes a stream, Bedewed Cheeks they then did represent, Symptoms of Sorrow weeping Eyes have sent; But yet methinks I am not as alone, There's many with me that do make a Moan; Yea, there are Thousands that do sympathize, With me they joyn, and stand in watry Eyes, When they at first do hear this sorrowing Sound, That dear F. H. his Body is laid in'th Ground: But stay, what's need of mourning, he's at's Rest, Perpetual Joyes enjoyes, forever blest, Redemption from all Pain and Sorrow, he Is now attain'd into Eternity, Heaven's Joy, yea, his Soul in solacing, The doubled Allelujah now to sing, Who was adorn'd, who richly beautifi'd, Who valiant was for Truth when he was tryd, Who stoutly did persist unto the End, A Champion like for Christ his Life to spend, Like a brave Warriour fighting in a Field, Like to a Martyr he his Life did yield, O glorious, glorious everlasting God, Praises to thee, Praise sounds to thee abroad, Who through thy great Power and wondrous Love, Who through thy great Mercy didst approve, And him didst call, even in his tender Years, So that he sought thee daily, shedding Tears;
O this doth speak thy Praise, thou living God, Who didst so early lay on him thy Rod, To bring him home, lest he should go astray, And step aside from thee another Way; Yea, this I know, that Record he did give, That from a Child he sought in God to live; Then in process of Time thou by thy Light Remov'd the Darkness of his darksome Night; Terrors O Lord from thee took hold of him, And Judgment just upon the Man of Sin; Thou cut him down with sharpness of thy Word, Which was more sharp then a two-edged Sword; Thou hewedst him all in Pieces, and him try'd, That thou mightst cause him to be purifi'd; And then O Lord the dawning of thy Day To him appeared in Beauty to array; Then did thy bright and glorious Morning-star, Yea, in his Heart arise and shine right clear; Then Lord thy Comliness to him appeared; Then Lord thy Mercy to his Soul was heard, Speaking great Peace his Soul did consolate, Thou madest him happy in a blessed state, An Instrument of Praise, Thousands give thee Thanks Lord that they his Face did ever see; Thou fed'st him in the Valleys where t'was green, Where fresh springs run, thy Love was therein seen▪ Thou led'st him nigh the Brooks and VVaters still, VVith Joy and Gladness thou his Cup didst fill; His Ministery in the Truth was great, His VVords were piercing, powerful and sweet; Yea, they were soft and tender, gentle, calm, They were as Ointment, as a precious Balm, To heal, to consolate, to cure the smart Of many a swooning, sorrowed, wounded Heart; Great was thy Love, O God, who oft instill'd, Thy VVisdom, living Vertues of him fill'd, Who through thy inspired spirit bright, Who with the Glimpses of thy glorious Light, Who with the joyous splendour of thy Day, Who with thy comely Beauty didst aray, Who many Graces didst to him impart, Yea Lord, great Things revealed in his Heart; Let these speak forth thy everlasting Praise By all who know thee now, yea, and alwayes, That thou, O living God descended down Into his Heart, and there to take up Room; So that O Lord nothing to him more dear Was then thy Truth, when once it did appear; Yea Lord, his Life, his Liberty, his all He gave up freely, when of him they call:
To Prison he resign'd till's dying Day, Truth ballanc'd all, and had the greatest Sway; Oh shall I now omit, and not rehearse His Travails, Prisons, Perils in my Verse, His Beatings, Woundings which mine Eyes have seen, His Stocking, Threatnings, Mockings which have been; All which for Truth's sake in his Time did bear, Which did confirm his Testimony clear: Rest then dear Francis, rest in thy glorious Rest, Rest in the Lord, rest now forever blest; Farewel my late dear Friend, farewel my Dear, Thy Absence causeth me a dropping Tear; Thy Countenance, thy Comliness to me More joyous was then outward Harmony; Thy good Advice, thy sound and Serious Words, Thy many Writings which to Truth records: The loving Aspect which from thee I had, When now I do remember, O I'm sad; That sweet Salute that from thy dying Lips I did receive in my Remembrance is; Thine Eyes my Hands did close, thee to thy Rest Once more I bid farewel, forever blest; Farewel, farewel, forevermore farewel, Thy Habitation's Heaven, there to dwell. A Well-willer to the Truth, who seals his Testimony that he dyed in and for the Truth. E. G.
Thomas Langhorn's & Thomas Carlton's TESTIMONY CONCERNING Francis Howgil. MAY we lament for the Death of any Man, Whose Dayes, and Years, and Life is as a Span, Then sure for this our Friend, that's now remov'd, Who was so universally belov'd▪ And if we may his Praise in Poems speak, Who universally Mens Good did seek; Of what we know we'll only testifie, Because we saw him live and also dye; To Appleby this innocent Man was brought, The Cause was Envy, Malice, or else nought, By such as thought to had him ruinated, And in his Interests themselves have stated; But God who hath the Righteous in Protection Nulls and frustrates the Wicked Ones Projection: Now our Intent in brief's to give a View, What of his Life since that time we well knew; Being thither brought, a Trap they soon prepared, Because he could not swear he was ensnared; They so delighted that Oaths should abound, That they resolv'd to force Men Nation round; And if deny, then Prisonment during Life; And thus they ruinated Man and Wife, And did expose whole Families to Distress, Making Wives Widdows, and Children Fatherless; Yea, all confiscate that they did enjoy, They by this Edict thought for to destroy; I well remember when this Trap they laid, And in the same this innocent Man betray'd;
They did insert it in their weekly News, Giving the World their Al for to peruse, And vauntingly to elevate their Glory, Said they had snapp'd him in a Premunire, Like shameless Men deluding their own Act With their vain Glory, when their Trap had snapp'd; And if they knew a Man to swear was loath, Then call him in, and tender him the Oath; Th they made Crime enough for to deprive A Man of Liberty, Estate and Life: Oh inhuman! sure they are no Men indeed, 'T Pity England any such should breed▪ They needed not for Oaths, they have anew, Such as preceding Ages never knew; Judge Turner he this wicked Sentence past On him and others, whose Bonds yet do last, Thinking thereby to terrifie the Just, Who could not live in their Excess and Lust; But their Designs and Weapons prove but vain, Their Purposes and Ends for to obtain: Lest I digress, I shall return to that Which at this Time I principally aim'd at, That is, to give a certain true Relation, And that indeed with little Reiteration, Of this my Friend unto the World's View, Who worthy is, as after I shall shew; My Heart is sad this Subject to indite, So is my Hand and Pen the same to write; Yet in the Lord I Contemplation find, Augments my Joy, and satisfies my Mind, Because his faithful Course he finished As sacredly as he his Life had led; He was a Man with Vertues pure endued, He chose the Good, all Evil he eschew'd, And from a Child religiously affected, He many a Soul to the Way of Peace directed; The Secrets of God's Kingdom he well knew, And them to many a tender Heart did shew; He did delight of heavenly things to speak In'th Fellowship of such as them did seek; He lov'd the Company of Man or Child That was not with Iniquity defil'd; The Fellowship of such as God did fear He in his Heart and Soul did love right dear▪ He was a lowly, meek and humble Mind, In that I known no Man he came behind, With Wisdom, Patience, Faith and Vertues pure He was possessed, and them retained sure;
God's everlasting Gospel he did preach, his Witness pure in many he did reach; A pratling, scribling Quaker they him call'd, Because he did confound their wise Men all: For grave Deliberation he exceeded, As grave within, as outwardly gray-headed; His mild Deportment unto every one Makes many an Heart now sad when he is gone; Yea, many a Soul to Righteousness he turned, Yea, as a Star he shone, or Light that burned; He was well learn'd in the Way and Work of God, To what he knew he alwayes faithful stood; He was a valiant Souldier for the Lord, And well knew how to handle his spiritual Sword, Of any Man he never turn'd his Back, Nor of his Faith he never made Shipwrack; Yea, when he shot his Bow abode in Strength, His even Hand did bit for Breadth and Length; These Things I say, and what I say I know, For he to me my secret Thoughts did show, He was the Minister of Christ to me, And did resolve my Doubtings inwardly, When not a Word to him I did express, Nor he before had never seen my Face; Surely he was God's Oracle to me, And spoke as though my inward Thoughts he see; And since that time I never sought a Priest, Neither was troubled with itching Ears at least; True 'twas the Gift of God in him did open, He surely hit if that his Tongue had spoken; He was no Accademian, as he said, But in our Northern Regions he was bred, Whereby this Observation may accrew, That Jeremiah prophesied true, Because he said, out of the North should come A Nation that should ruine Babylon, Confound her Gods, and break her Idols many, And desolate make her Land as ere was any, As Warriors expert at Babylon they aim, Their Arrows sharp and keen shall not return in vain. And this my Friend of whom I speak was one, Amongst many Worthies more that shot at Babylon, Which out of the North arose, a Climate that's so cold, Wherein Ezekiel saw a Fire it self unfold, Which surely will consume Babylon that whorish Woman, And all her Spots unvail by the Brightness of its Coming; The Work this Man hath wrought with others moe, Ages and Tears to come the Effect will shew;
The Arrows they have shot right sharp and keen, When they are gone will sink in'th VVhore and Queen; Succeeding Ages the Effects may see, Her deadly Wound incurable to be; Then their Memorial shall blessed stand, Who died Captives in their Native Land: And now dear Francis thou thy Life compleated, A Martyr true that never Foot retreated, Thy Fame, thy VVorth, thy Praise I cannot note, Who stood so true, and stagger'd not a Jote; Children unborn shall praise the Lord for thee, When thy heroick extant VVorks they see; Now from their nasty Goal thou art released, To where thy Joy and Peace shall be encreased; Though thou in Mesech for a long Time sojourned, And as a harmless Dove in private mourned, Being constrain'd in Kedar's Tents to dwell, No Mate whereto thy Grievances to tell, Nor add Relief to thy oppressed Soul, With their vile Deeds and Words that were so foul; Was Lot with wicked Sodomites sore vexed? Was not thy righteous Soul as sore perplexed? Had David greater Cause for to complain, Then thou hast had in Appleby to remain? Or was the Prophet Jeremiah more oppressed, Then thy poor Soul with them hath been distressed? But that thou hadst the Lord for thy Relief, Who satisfied thy Mind, and eas'd thy Grief, And now hath heard thy Cry and thy Complaint, And thee set free from under their Restraint; Let now the Teeth of the Persecutors grind, Thee for a Prey no longer they shall find; Though their Reward for such things be to come, They may be snapp'd as they snapp'd thee ere long: Sure Appleby may now its Loss bewail, It hath no more such to detain in Goal; No Man so fit your Differences to end, 'Mongst Lawyers now your Money you may spend; None so discreet, wherein to put your Trust, Your light Esteem declares your Loss is just; He well deserv'd, why was he disregarded? Why was your Love to him so much retarded? Oh! Slavery surprized, Fear was the Thing, Lest you should be counted Rebels to your King; The Proverb holds, when in Adversities, Few Friends appear, but many Enemies; This is alwayes the temporizing Strain, Sight Honesty, and Countenance prophane:
Oh sure thy poor that in thy Prison lies His Loss laments with Sobs and watry Eyes; For he to them exhibited Relief, And by sweet Counsel often eas'd their Grief; He as a nursing Father was to them, And all the oppressed that unto him came; Yea, many a Soul that him to visit came, With great Refreshment did return again; Those that in Travail Dayes and Miles had spent Him for to see, returned not discontent; Who ever sought him, and returned sad? He for all Sorts Relief and Counsel had, And what he had he freely distributed, So that his Foes his Name have well reputed; He never to his Enemies bore Grudge, Nor in his Heart no Malice he did lodge; He lov'd no Strife, but alwayes sought for Peace, He cans'd the Love of Friends and Foes encrease; There was no State nor no distress'd Condition, For which he know not Balm, or was Physician; Some may object, how do I these things know? Our frequent Intimacy them did show; He certainly was born of the Spirit above, His Life declar'd to all he dwelt in Love: I well remember when I stood him by, At Side of his Death's Red, where he did lye, His Weakness great did make my Eyes to run, My watry Cheeks he fix'd his Eye upon, I from my heart desired God would please Either by Life or Death to give him ease, Turning his Eye, by his Reply I saw, That he was ready, but he thought Death slow; It breaks my Heart now when I do remember His Care and Love, which over all was tender; Oh! the Want of him to my Soul is a Loss, et I contented am to bear the Cross, Being God's Pleasure, I dare not repine, But freely in his Will all Things resign, Because I see all outward Comforts fail, 'Tis Peace with God will only me avail; Therefore to that I shall apply my Mind The Residue of those my Dayes behind, Desiring to compleat my Course and Faith, As piously as I believe he hath, That in God's Service I my Life may spend, And his Reward my Soul may reap in'th End; Therefore we slight that persecuting Spirit, That of Eternal Life would disinherit;
For who among them now have gain'd their Peace, By persecuting him to his Decease; But their Reward in the End will sure be Pain, Though they at present their proud Will obtain: Desist I shall, Oh Lord take thou the Praise Throughout my Life of all my Words and Wayes: So farewel Reader, this I do commend Unto thy View, and shall remain thy Friend. Thomas Langhorn, Thomas Carlton.
The unchangeable Testament, and Will, and Counsel of Francis Howgil left to his Daughter Abigail Howgil. DAughter Abigail, this is for thee to observe, and keep, and take heed unto all the Dayes of thy Life, for the regulating of thy Life and Conversati∣on in this World, that thy Life may be happy, and thy End blessed, and God Glorified by thee in thy Generation; these Things I bequeath unto thee, and counsel thee ever to observe, being the chief Thing alone I have to bestow upon thee, which I prize more then outward Riches; do thou so also, and observe and keep my Sayings; and I charge thee before God, and by the Coming, of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou observe what I say, the which I am moved of the Lord to leave thee behind, and in tender Love and Affection unto thee (my Daughter) that the Lord may give his Blessing unto thee, and make thy Wayes prosperous, and thy latter End Peace. First of all know this, I was never born to great Possessions, or did in∣herit great Matters in this World; but the Lord hath alwayes endowed me with Sufficiency and enough, and hath been as a tender Father unto me, because my Heart trusted in him, and did love the Way of Righteousness from a Child; I have no great Portion to bestow upon thee of the things of this World, yet of that little which I have, and that God hath blessed me with, something I shall give thee, which I shall not mention here, but thou wilt know at my Decease; but thy dear Mother I rather commend thee unto, whom I trust will provide sufficiently for thee, unto whom my Heart hath been upright before the Lord; she had a sufficient Portion and Dowry when I married her, the which I shall be sorry much to lessen or impair, and whatever was hers (if it please the Lord I decease before her) I freely leave unto her, as was ever my Intention and Purpose, which hath not, neither shall alter (through the Strength of God) as God only knows and bears me record, and shall be manifest unto all in due time, as it is unto the Lord, who hath been with me in the midst of many Troubles, Tryals and Sufferings, and hath lifted up my Head above my Adversaries because I only trusted in his Name, which at all times I found as a Refuge and a pre∣sent Help in the time of need, and so will be unto thee, if thou fear his Name, and trust in him forever.
And now dear Child, hearken unto the Words of my Mouth, and listen unto my Counsel, ponder these things I leave behind me unto thee to ob∣serve, that thy Dayes may be long upon the Earth, and blessed and comfor∣table unto thee, and an Honour to God in thy Generation; at that time when thou wast born and brought forth was a time of deep Exercise and Trouble with me, not from the Lord, who alwayes spoak Peace unto me, and did sustain me, but by Reason of the Adversary of Mankind, who alwayes seeks to devour the Good in all, and is the Sower of Discord and Mischief in the Hearts of them who fear not the Lord, neither abide in his Counsel, in whom he enters, as any Place is given unto his Temptations, and corrupts the Mind; but though it was a great Tryal that came upon me, the Lord kept my Heart in Uprightness unto him, and gave me much Patience; so though the Earth had been removed into the midst of the Sea, and all outward things had run into Confusion, and Nature had changed his Course, the Lord gave me a Resolution and Strength, as not to be trou∣bled neither offended, because he did support me; at that time wast thou born, and therefore I was moved to call thy Name Abigail, which signifies the Father's Joy or Delight, for in thee I was comforted, that did mitigate my present Trouble; and my Counsel unto thee is, That thou remember thy Cre∣ator in the Dayes of thy Youth, and fear the Lord in thy Youth, and learn to know him and serve him all thy Dayes; first seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, it's not far from thee, it's within thee, it consists in Life and Power, and it stands in Righteousness, Truth and E∣quity, Justice, Mercy, Long-suffering, Patience, Love, Light and Ho∣liness, this is the Being and Center thereof; therefore seek not lo here or lo there without thee, in this or that outward Observation; for mny seek there, and never find it; but seek and thou shalt find, wait and thou shalt receive; if thou enquire, in what must I seek? and what must I wait in? & how must I seek? I inform thee, thou must silence all thy own Thoughts, and thou must turn thy Mind to that which is pure, and holy, and good within thy self, and seek and wait in that in the Light of Jesus Christ, wherewith thou art enlightened, which shews thee when thou dost Evil, and checks and reproves; take heed unto that, and it will shew the evil Motions and Thoughts; and as thou lovest it, it will subdue them, and preserve thee for the time to come out of Evil; for though thou be born into the World a reasonable Creature, yet thou must be born again, and be made a new Creature, or else thou canst not enter into God's Kingdom; thou must know the Seed of the Kingdom in thy self, of which thou must be born and formed again into God's Image; I have told thee God hath sown it in thee, a Grain of it a Measure of it, a Portion of it, a Measure of Light and Truth, of Righteousness and Holiness; keep in thy Mind to that, and love it, and thou wilt feel the heavenly Father working in thee nd be∣getting thee to Life through Jesus Christ, that hath enlightned thee, and thou wilt feel the Power of the Lord strengthning thee in thy little, and make thee to grow in the Immortal Seed of his Kingdom, and out grow and over grow all Evil, so that thou wilt daily dye to that, and have no Pleasure in it, but in the Lord, and in his Goodness and Vertue shed a∣broad in thy Heart, which thou wilt tast and feel within, and have Joy
and Comfort therein; love the Lord with thy Heart and Soul, even him that made thee and gave thee a Being, and all things in Heaven and Earth, and still wait for the Knowledge of him in thy self, he is not far from thee, but near unto thee, and unto all that call upon him in an upright Heart; and do thou enquire of thy dear Mother, she will inform thee, she knows him and the Way to Life and Peace, and hearken unto her Instruction; God is a Spirit, a pure Spirit of Light, and Life, and Power, he that searcheth the Heart, and shews thee when thou dost Evil, or think'st Evil, or speak'st Evil, and shews unto Man and Woman their Thoughts; that which shows the Evil is Good, and that which shews a Lye is Truth, this is within, take heed to it, this is called God's Spirit in the Scripture, believe in it, love it, and it will quicken thy Heart to Good, and it will subject the Evil; here is thy Teacher near thee, loving it▪ and if thou act contrary it will condemn thee; therefore take heed unto this Spirit of Truth, and it will enlighten and enliven thee, and it will open thy Understanding, and give thee to know what God is and to do that which is good and acceptable in his Sight; this Spirit never errs, but leads out of all Error into all Truth. O Abigail, believe my Words, they are the Words of God and Truth; be not wan∣ton, but sober minded in thy Youth, and wait on the Lord within, hear∣ken unto him, God is Light immortal, Life immortal, Truth immortal, an everlasting eternal Spirit, he speaks spiritually and invisibly within the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women; hear what he speaks, and obey his Voice, and thy Soul shall live; fear to offend him or sin against him, for the Wages of Sin are Death; therefore prize his Love in thy young and tender Years, and do thou read the Scriptures and Friends Books, and take heed unto what thou readest, to obey it, as far as thou understand∣est, and pray often unto the Lord that he will give thee his Knowledge, and open thy Understanding in the things of his Kingdom; search thy Heart often with the Light of Christ in thee, manifest and bring thy Deeds to it, that they may be tryed; and examine thy self, how the Case stands betwixt the Lord and thee; and if thou seest thy self wrong, humble thy self, and be sorry, and turn unto him, and he will shew thee Mercy, and take heed for the time to come, that thou run not into the same Evil again; keep thy Heart clean, watch against the Evil in thy self in that which shews it, therein there is Power, and thereby thou hast Power to overcome all Evil: And dear Child, mid not the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Moment, and the End is Misery; but keep under, and cross thy Will and Affection, so thy Mind will have no Pleasure in the Evil, but in Good, and thou wilt feel the immortal Seed springing up in thee, which God's Peace and Love is to: O Abigail, these are great and weighty things, not to be slighted; accompany thy self alwayes with them that fear the Lord, and fear and worship him in Spirit and Truth, and lead a holy and a blame∣less Life and Conversation, deny not them, but love them and suffer with them; take heed that thou follow not the hireling Teachers, who preach for Gain and Lucre, and abide not in Christ's Doctrine; believe them not, heed them not, they do People no Good; but thou wilt see them thy self, they have an outside Shew of Godliness sometimes, but deny the Power of God and true Holiness; remember I have told thee, who have had perfect
Knowledge of them; but be sure that thou let nothing separate thy Love from God and his People; those are his People that keep his Law, and o∣bey Christ's Voice, and lead a holy Life, and they were ever hated, and belyed, and persecuted, and evil-spoken on alwayes by bad and evil loose People, these are God's People, and his Love, and Peace, and Blessing is with them; do thou grow as a natural Branch (up among them) of the living Vine, and continue all thy Dayes in Obedience unto God's Will, and thou wilt feel Joy and Love in thy Heart, which above all things covet af∣ter, and thou shalt attain and obtain everlasting Peace, which the Lord grant unto thee, according to the Riches of his Mercy and Love, which en∣dure forever and ever, Amen. And now Abigail, concerning thy well being in this Life, this is my Ad∣vise and Counsel unto thee, love thy dear Mother, and ever obey her and honour her, and see thou grieve her not, be not stubborn nor wilful, but submit unto her, and be as an obedient Child unto her, whose Love and Care hath been too great over thee and thy Sisters, which hath brought too much Trouble upon her self; learn in thy Youth to read and write a little, and sew, and knit, and all Points of good Labour that belong to a Maid; and flee Idleness and Sloth, that nourisheth Sin; and as thou growest up in Years labour in the Affairs of the Country, and beware of Pride, and Riotousness, and Curiosity, but be well content with such Apparel as thy Mother will permit thee, and as thou mayest be a good Example unto other; be not wanton, nor wild, not light, but temporate, moderate and chast, and not forward in Words nor Speech, but swift to hear, slow to speak; and do thou alwayes live with thy Mother, and be a Help unto her, and cherish her in her old Age and latter Years, that she may be comforted in thee, and her Soul may bless thee; love thy Sisters, and be alwayes courteous to them and thy Brother Thoma, encourage one another in Good: And Abigail, if thou live to be a Woman of perfect Years, keep thy self unspotted, and let not thy Mind out after Sports nor Pastimes, the End of all those is Sor∣row, neither of young Men; if thou have a Desire to marry, do not thou seek a Husband, but let a Husband seek thee; and if thou live in God's Fear, and an honest Life and vertuous, them that fear God will seek unto thee; let not thy Affections out unto every one that proffers Love, but be considerate, and above all Things chuse one (if thou dost marry) that loves and fears the Lord, whose Conver∣sation thou knowest, and Manner and Course of Life well before thou give Consent; be discreet and wise, hide nothing from thy Mo∣ther, and she will advise thee, no Doubt, for thy Good; and if she be living, marry not without her Consent; and if thou joyn to a Husband, be sure thou love him in thy Heart, and be obedient unto him, and honour him among all, so will his Heart be more to thee, and his Love increase; grieve him not, but be gentle, and easie to be entreated, and mind thy own Business; and if the Lord give thee Chil∣dren, bring them up in God's Fear and in good Exercise, and keep them in Subjection unto thee, and be an Example of Virtue and Holi∣ness
unto them, that the Lord's Blessing thou may'st feel in Youth and in Age, and all thy Life long: O Abigail, remember these Things, keep in Mind these things, read often this Writing over, get it co∣pied over, and lay up my Words in thy Heart, and do them, so wilt thou be happy in this Life and in the Life to come; these things I give thee in Charge to observe, as my MIND, and WILL, and COUNSEL unalterable unto thee, as Witness whereof I have set my Hand. The 26th of the 5th Moneth, 1666. Thy Dear Father Francis Howgil.
A Wo Against the Magistrates PRIESTS and PEOPLE OF KENDALL, In the County of Westmorland. The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Write and declare against that Bloody Town of Kendall, and leave it without Excuse. HEar ye which pretend to be Rulers, & ye that pretend to be Teach∣ers, and ye People; the Trumpet of the Lord is sounded, gather your selves together, for I will plead with you; your Iniquities are come up before me, and your Transgression is come into mine Ears; Wo, Wo and Misery is coming upon you, you shall be as Sodom and Gomorrah, and as Admah and Zeboim, Desolation and a Cry; a Cry, Lamentation, Howling, Bitterness and Sorrow shall come upon you at unawares; the Sword of the Lord is drawn against you, it is sharpened for a great Slaugh∣ter, and you shall be cut off, because you have despised my Name, and trod∣den under Foot my Precepts, and walk after your own Wills, and the I∣magination of your own Hearts; and yet, saith the Lord, they say, I am amongst them: Wo unto you Hypocrites, I am weary of you, and of all your Profession, it stinks in my Nostrils, and I abhor it as much as if ye slevv a man; you have slain my Son, you have mocked my Prophets, and despi∣sed my messengers, vvhich I have sent early and late to forevvarn you of the Evil to come; Have I now vvrought Signs and Wonders amongst you, as ever vvas in any Day, or from the Beginning? Have not I made the moun∣tains tumble dovvn in your Sight? Have not I cause my Judgments to fall upon them that have set themselves against me? Have not I cleansed the Lepers? Have not I quickned and raised them out of the Grave, vvhich vvere dead in Sins and Trespasses? Have not I brought dovvn the Proud? Have not I exalted the Lovv? Have not I caused the vveak things to con∣found the Wise? Have not I sent Signs among you, and have sent my Servants to declare against you, as I did to Nineveh? and have you not heard it? Have not I commanded my Servants to go bare and naked in
your Sight, to be a Sign to you, that your Covering is now rent, and your Garment is to be torn, and you shall be left naked and bare, and you shall be made a Mock and Proverb to all, as my Servants have been made a Mock and a Proverb to you; all I will scatter you in my Indignation, and I will cause my Fury to rest upon you, till I have consumed you; Ye Rulers that rule by your own Wills, and ye false Prophets that cry Peace to this Peo∣ple, and all ye People that delight in Lyes, is not all manner of Wicked∣ness committed amongst you, as Pride, Covetousness, Oppression, Per∣secution, Mocking, Stoning, Imprisoning and Haling before Magistrates them who are made to do my Will, and to declare against you? Ye strive against me (saith the Lord) ye cry, a Confederacy, ye consult together, ye plot, ye call all your Inchanters against me; thus saith the Lord, ye shall be broken as Pharaoh, and go down to the Pit with Egypt, Mesheek and Tu∣bal, and all the Uncircumcised: Wo is me, the Spoiler is come up against you, and Blackness covers you, and a Consumption is entring into your Bones; my Eye shall not spare, my Hand shall not pity, but it will bring this upon you; howl and lament ye Oakes, ye Mountains cleave asunder, and all ye People, both great and small, be astonished, put on Sackcloth, put your Mouthes in the Dust; for I will make my Fury to pass over you, and none shall be able to deliver you (said the Lord) write this, let them know, but they will not hear, till I have caused my Fire to burn them up, and there be no Remedy. Written from the Spirit of the living God by me, who am a Wit∣ness for his Name, whom the World knows not, F. H.
To all you who have Eyes, and yet are blind, and who have Ears, and yet are deaf, and have Hearts and yet cannot understand; To you am I moved to declare. THE Lord is proclaiming himself to be King, and all the Moun∣tains, and every Isle, and every Oak of Bashan, and all the Cedars of Lebanon, and all who rule as Kings and Conquerors shall bow: Hear ye deaf, the Trumpet is blown, the Standard is lifted up, there is open War proclaimed between Michael our Prince, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth: Arm your selves, O ye Mountains, and gather your selves on Heaps, O ye Isles; the glittering Sword of the Lord is drawn, and a Fire is before him, and all ye will be found as Stubble, and you are all to be slain Heaps upon Heaps, and are all to go down with all the Uncircumci∣sed Rulers and People into the Pit: The Lord, the mighty Jehovah is re∣vealing himself from Heaven in Flames of Fire, to render Vengeance up∣on all the Workers of Iniquity; for you have slain the Heir of the Vine∣yard; you are killing his Prophets, and imprisoning his Saints; to you all Professors, Rulers and Priests, who say you are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan; I speak in Plainness of Speech unto you all, who live in all the Abominations of the Heathen (and yet say) you love Christ; Do not you call the Master of the House now Beelzebub? do not ye mock, and set your Mouthes awry, ye Sons of the Adultress and of Sodom, at the Light of Christ, which enlightneth every one that comes into the World, which Light did lead all Saints into Purity, and up to God, and this you call Na∣tural, and them who witness Redemption by the Son, you call Blasphe∣mers; Christ which you profess, and yet know not, was accounted by your Generation a Blasphemer; and all the Apostles and Saints were per∣secuted by your Generation, as Evil-doers, as Despisers of Government, as Disturbers of the Peace, as Leaders of the People into Iniquity, as the Off-scouring of all Things, as Sheep for the Slaughter, and many of them put to Death and in Prison by that Generation which professed God, and said, they had his Ordinances, yet slew them who professed him, and kept his Statutes; for if ye be not wilfully blind, are ye not doing the same now, mocking, haling, imprisoning, bringing before Magistrates them that witness Jesus Christ in them, and because they bear witness against all Sin: Did ever any of the Saints of God persecute imprison or hale before Magistrates, and falsly accuse any? Did ever the Saints complain to Au∣thority to guard them? Hear ye whited Tombs, ye painted Sepulchres, what Gospel is this you profess? What God is this ye serve, that must be defended with Clubs, Swords, Rulers and Carnal Weapons; the Saints,
who had the everlasting Gospel, said, their Weapons were not carnal but spiritual, and yet they were mighty through God to beat down strong Holds, even Principalities and Povvers, Thrones and Dominions; but your Gospel and Ministry can do nothing vvithout a Svvord; All People see vvhere you are, and vvhat you are doing, you run headlong to run; those vvho vvere despised by that Generation of Pharisees and Professors, vvhich you are in, vvere a burthensom Stone, upon vvhich all that opposed did break themselves; so this Generation, vvhom ye set at nought, ye shall be made to bovv and throvv dovvn your Crovvns before them, and before the Lamb, vvho is our Leader and Guider, Glory unto him forever more; its hard for you to kick against the Pricks, for vve vvitness the tvvo-edged Svvord of the Lord shall bathe it self in the Blood of his Enemies, and shall be made fat vvith Slaughter. O ye Mountains, ye shall become a plain for the ransomed to come over you; all your Pro∣fession shall be as Stubble, and you shall be left naked and bare, and no∣thing shall be able to cover you, because you are Crucifiers of Christ and the Saints: repent, that you may be hid in the Day of his fierce Anger, vvhich is to come upon all the Workers of Iniquity. Francis Howgil.
This was The Word of the Lord, Which Francis Howgil Was moved to Declare and Write TO OLIVER CROMVVEL, Who is named Lord Protector. The Word of the Lord came to me the last of the First Moneth, about the Nineth Hour, as I was waiting upon the Lord, and waiting in James's Park at London. FRiend, I was moved of the Lord to come to thee, to declare the Word of the Lord, as I was moved of the Lord, and deal plainly with thee, as I was commanded, and not to petition thee for any thing, but to declare what the Lord had revealed to me, concerning thee; and when I had delivered what I was commanded, thou questionedst it, whether it was the Word of the Lord or not, and soughtest by thy Reason to put it off; and we have waited some dayes since, but cannot speak to thee, therefore I was moved to write to thee, and clear my Conscience, and to leave thee: Therefore hear the Word of the Lord, thus saith the Lord, I chose thee out of all the Nation, when thou was little in thy own Eyes, and threw down the Mountains and the Powers of the Earth be∣fore thee, which had established Wickednesse by a Law, and I cut them down, and broke the Yokes and Bonds of the Oppressor, and made them stoop before thee, and I made them as a Plain before thee, that thou passedst over them, and trode upon their Necks; but thus saith the Lord, now thy Heart is not upright before me, but thou takest Counsel, and not at me; and thou art establishing Peace, and not by me; and thou art setting up Laws, and not by me; and my Name is nor feared, nor I am not sought after; but thy own Wisdom thou establish∣est: what saith the Lord, have I thrown down all the Oppressours, and broken their Laws, and art thou now going about to establish them again, and art going to build again that which I have destroyed? wherefore thus saith the Lord, wilt thou limit me, and set Bonds to me,
when, and where, and how, and by whom I shall declare my self, and publish my Name? then will I break thy Cord, and remove thy Stake, and exalt my self in thy overthrow. Therefore this is the VVord of the Lord to thee, whether thou wilt hear or forbear; if thou take not away all those Laws vvhich are made concerning Religion, vvhereby the People which are dear in mine Eyes, are oppressed, thou shalt not be established; but as thou hast trodden down my Enemies by my Povver, so shalt thou be trodden dovvn by my Power, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for my Gospel shall not be established by thy Sword, nor by thy Law; but by my Might and by my Power, and by my Spirit: Unto thee, this is the Word of the Lord, Stint not the eter∣nal Spirit, by which I will publish my Name, when, and where, and how I will; for if thou dost, thou shalt be as Dust before the Wind; the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and he will perform his Promise: For this is that I look for at thy Hands, saith the Lord, that thou shouldst undo the heavy Burdens, and let the oppressed go free: are not many shut up in prison, and some stocked, some stoned, some shamefully in∣treated? and some are judged Blasphemers by those who know not the Lord, and by those Laws which have been made by the VVill of man, and stand not in the Will of God; and some suffer now, because they cannot hold up the types, and so deny Christ come in the flesh; and some have been shut up in Prison, because they could not swear, and because they abide in the Doctrine of Christ; and some for declaring against Sin openly in Markets, have suffered as evil-doers; and now if thou let them suffer in this Nature by those Laws, and count it just; I will visit for those things, saith the Lord, and I vvill break the Yoke from off their necks, and I vvill bring Deliverance another VVay, and thou shalt knovv that I am the Lord. Moved of the Lord to declare and write this, by a Servant of the Truth for Jesus's sake, and a Lover of thy Soul, called, Francis Howgil.
AN ANSVVER TO A PAPER, CALLED, A Petition of one Thomas Ellyson, late Shepherd of Easington in the County of Durham, to his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all Emperors, Kings and Princes through the World. THere are many in the County of Durham that knovv that thou hast been a Shepherd lately enough, and see thee vvhat thou hast been, and vvhere thou hast been, and vvhere thou art novv, and knovv thee to be one in Nature vvith those Shepherds vvhich the Lord sent Eze∣kiel, Isaiah and Jeremiah to cry against, vvho feed themselves vvith the Fat, and clothe themselves vvith the Wooll, and that thou art one of those Shepherds that cares not for the Sheep, and art in the Nature of one of those Shepherds vvhich the true Prophets cryed against, vvhich vvere as Evening Wolves, and as Foxes in the Desart: And for the simples sake I am moved to lay open thy Deceit, that thou art one of those Foxes thou speakest of, vvhich hath Fire in their Tails; and thou art made manifest to be of old Cain's Nature, that old murthering Spirit; and vvith thy flattering Titles which thou givest unto Men, and hast Mens Persons in Admiration because of Advantage; and thou art born after the Flesh, the Son of the bond-vvoman, vvho art petitioning to me, that they may abuse their Povver, and exalt themselves over the Heritage of God▪ and thou that vvouldst have Lavvs to bind the Consciences of men to walk after thy Will, thou art Anti-christ, vvho art petitioning the Povvers of the Earth to make Lavvs to limit the Holy One of Israel: But blessed be the Lord, the Day is come that thou and all Deceivers, Persecutors and Flatter∣ers are discovered; and many see thee among Magistrates, that thy Spirit is the same that vvould command Fire to come dovvn from Heaven, to have destroyed them vvho vvould not receive them. First, Thou sayest, That Moses, who was a Commander over all Israel, that he was appointed to bear the People in his Bosome, as a nursing Father; and thou say'st, thou art a Cryer for the Remembrance of those things, that all might be carryed in their Arms now; and thou goest on and tellest them, that God will require the Government of his Church at their Hands. Rep. Moses, vvho vvas faithful and true over the House of God, vvho vvas a Figure of Christ, he did receive the Lavv from the mouth of the Lord, he acted in Righteousness; and vvhen Eldad and Madad prophesied, he
vvas not angry, as thou art; but desired that all the Lord's People vvere Pro∣phets; and all vvho vvait upon the Lord, to receive the Lavv of God from his mouth novv, and vvalk in the same, they have the same Spirit, and they vvill not limit the holy One: But thy Cry that thou callest for is, that thou would'st have them who are in Moses's stead, as thou say'st they are, for to limit the Holy One; and thou art the Deceiver the Apostle speaks of, vvhich art gone into the World, vvho vvould'st persvvade the Magistrates, that they must govern the Church; and so thou vvould'st have this Generation of Rulers to be dashed in Pieces, as all the Generations have been before them, in exalting themselves in the Seat of Christ: when as the Prophet saith, The Government is upon Christ's Shoulders; and the Scripture saith, He alone treads the Wine-press: And therefore whosoever will assume unto them∣selves to govern the Church by an outward, visible, carnal Law, shall be as sure to be broken as all the rest: The Church is in God, and is invisible; and that which is visible and natural cannot make any Law to bind that which is unlimited; but they, if they do go about to limit the Holy One of Israel, and would set themselves in his Seat of Judgment, and take away his Glory which he will not give to any, and all such as have made any Laws in their own Wills to limit Sons and Daughters, they have all been broken, as the Scripture witnesseth every where: and therefore let all Governours in England, Scotland and Ireland, and all the World, to whom thou writest, take heed how they set themselves in the room of God, and lay Yoaks upon the Necks of them who are free by the Son, and are brought by the Power of the Lord from under the Breach of all righteous Laws, or transgressing any which are holy and just: for the Law is for the lawless; the Law is not for them who are in Righteousness, but the Law is for the Transgressors, who are in Unrighteousness, and they are those that act by that Spirit which dwells in thee, who would levy Troops for the Innocent, and art vvroth, and thy Countenance falls, like Cain, and hates thy Brethren, and would have a Lavv made over the Conscience, and vvould have the Povvers of the Earth to abuse their Povver, in turning their Svvords against them vvho live in Righteousness, and declare against Unrighteousness. And further thou goest on and tellest them, This was a Law given to Adam, and so thou pervertest the Scripture by thy Imaginations: Where readest thou of such a Lavv given to Adam, that he compelled his Fami∣ly to Religion? And further thou sayest, Which Care of Government is in great neglect in this Nation; upon respect to tender Consciences, sundry Sects and Sorts of Schismaticks are suffered unsuppressed, and they sacrifice to Dan and Bethel. And thou goest on and tellest the Nobles, that it lies upon their score, that they should suppress them. Answ. That vvhich vvas given to a particular Family or People, vvhich vvas for its time, is not everlasting: So any that take up any Rule vvithout them to act by, act not by Precept, but by Tradition in their ovvn Wills; God abhors that: And thou bringest in the Old Co∣venant, vvhich vvas given to a particular People, the Jews; but novv the Priesthood is changed, and the Lavv is changed; and as for thy Lavv, vvhich thou vvouldst have the Governours of this Nation to make for sup∣pressing of Sects and Schismaticks, that vvorship at Dan and Bethel, and thou sayest this is charged upon them: But thou mightst have told them
who they had been, and where Dan and Bethel is, lest they be mistaken, as thou art, that callest Darkness Light, and Light Darkness: But all that thou art troubled at is this, that the Light of Christ in the Conscience should have Liberty; and here thou art he which is born after the Flesh, and art that Egyptian thou speakest of, which persecutes the Righteous Seed: It is true, there are Sects and Schisms too many, and Opinions, they stand all in one Ground, and thou and they come out of one Land, Babylon is the Land of your Nativity; in the Light you are seen, that thou and they are turned from the Light of Christ, and so are gone into Sects and Opinions and I∣maginations; and all the Powers without in the World cannot suppress the Root from whence these flow; none can overcome the Root from whence Heresies and Opinions come: And therefore, vain Shepherd and blind, cease thy Divining; those that thou would'st have supprest, are those that break Bread from House to House, and meet together in the Name of the Lord, as the Saints ever did; and this thou callest Dan and Bethel, because they will not come to an Idols Temple, where all the deceived in the Na∣tion worship an Unknown God; I say unto thee, thy Steeple-house (thy Idols Temple) which God never commanded, where all Lyars, Fighters, Swearers, Night-Birds and Scriech-Owls meet, and call it the House of God, and where they speak nought but the Imaginations of their own Hearts, and call them the Ordinances of God, and it the Church, that is Dan and Bethel. And as for the Magistrates which thou tellest, they ought to suppress the false Prophets, thou mightest have declared who they had been: But for the honest-hearted Magistracy and People, I shall declare a little when they came in, and who they are; Christ sayes, Many False Prophets shall arise; and Paul, Peter, John, and the rest they saw them come already then, many Anti-christ's and Deceivers; and then they came in, as the Scriptures witness, and they have deceived the Nations since; and Christ saith, By their Fruits you shall know them; and they are such as he cryed Wo against, which laid heavy Burdens upon the People, and such as were got into Moses's Seat, and were called of Men Master, stood praying in the Assemblies, and had the chiefest Place in the Synagogue; and Peter saith, They followed after covetous Practices; and Jude saith, They went after the Error of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards; and Isaiah saith, They sought for their Gain from their Quarter; and Ezekiel saith, They were such as fed of the Fat; and Zachary saith, They were as Evening Wolves; and Paul saith, They were covetous Men, heady, high-minded, and Lovers of Pleasure, and fierce Despisers of those that are good, and had a Form of Godliness, and they were Witches that turned them back to Circumcision, and false Prophets, when the Substance was come: And are they not so now, who sue for Tythes, maintain the first Priest∣hood, and bewitch People, and deny Christ come in the Flesh? Now let all judge where these are; many in the North taking away the Peoples Cows, their Pots, Kettles and Bedding; and one Priest sued one for Two Pence; and two in York-shire sued one for One Penny; and another for a Penny Half-penny; and these are they that call themselves, the Ministers of the Gospel; shame, shame, blush, howl ye Caterpillars, the Hand of the Lord is against you; and yet I would not have their Lives taken away, as thou would'st have theirs that thou callest Sectaries; but to that in thy Conscience I speak, which will let thee see, that thou hast a busie Mind, and abidest not in the Doctrine of Christ, but art among the false Prophets.
And thou and the rest of them which are Merchants, and trade with other Mens Words, which must have your Gospel and Worship defended with Swords and Staves and the Power of the Earth, you are they that spread Nets at Mispeh and Tabor; for it's neither in Jerusalem nor this Mount, but they that worship the Father, worship in Spirit and Truth: And thou that would'st confine God to a Place, to a Day, to a Time, and have him bound by a Law, and how the Saints should worship him, thou art carnal, and thy Petition carnal, and all who have any Honesty in them or Light, will see thee to be in the Generation of the Pharisees, that said, They had a Law, and by that Law he ought to dye. And whereas thou art comparing thy self and the Priests of Newcastle and Durham to Sarah the Mistress, and them who oppose you to Hagar. Answ. Sarah never brought forth Sons of Bondage, as you are; but you are truly Hagar the Egyptian, who genders unto Bondage; for you and all the Children that ever you have begotten or brought forth, are in Bondage till now; and the Lord hath raised up a People out of the Dust, to confound you and your Wisdom, and to declare against your Profession, in laying hea∣vy Burdens upon the People, and taking their Money for that which is not Bread; and be ye all ashamed, ye high Oakes, ye fat Bulls, ye Diviners, that cannot maintain your Gospel with all your Parts and Wisdom that you boast of, against those contemptible Things in your Eyes, but you must run to a carnal Sword; or to a Justice of Peace or Constable to preserve you or to have them imprisoned, Stocks and Mockings and Reproaches; this is all we have or expect from the Powers of the Earth, because we speak the Truth: Be ye ashamed, and lay your Hands upon your Mouthes; what Gospel is this they have preached? what Worship is this you give unto God, that must be defended with Clubs and Staves, Stocks and Whips, Stoning and haling before Magistrates, and yet thou would'st have them accounted Ministers of the Gospel; they who were Ministers of the Gospel, their Weapons were not Carnal, but Spiritual, and they were Mighty through God, but the Mightiness of this Generation lyes in the Magistrates Sword to defend them, and drive the People to pay them money for nought: And there∣fore let all Magistrates consider in this Nation and else-where, that you be warned how you make any Laws against the Innocent, and how you uphold those that Christ cryed VVo against, and such as the Lord sent his Prophets to declare against, lest that come upon them which the Prophet spoke, that they that help and them that are helped shall fall together. And whereas thou further flatterest them, and tellest them, That they are in the room of Abraham for ordering the House of God, to see that the Seed of Isaac be Inheritors, which is like to be deprived by the Egyptian Brood. Rep. My Desire is, that they may be guided by the Spirit of Abraham, who denyed his Country; and if they walk in the Light, they will be like him, and will see that Things be ordered in the Nation in Righteousness; but if they will take thy VVord, who is the Isaac that thou would'st should inherit, thou wilt present them Ishmael: But is it not the Inheritance of Tythes and Augmentations, and to have People to fall down to worship the Image that they have set up? that is it thou would'st have ordered; for who are of Abraham, are of the Seed which the Promise is to; and such you stir up the Magistrates and People by your Flatteries and Lyes to have a Law
to keep them in Bondage; and so them that dwell in the Light, see it is the Egyptian that thou would'st have to inherit. And further, thou art telling of some that profess high Attainments; which hath put the Kingdom in confusion and a flame; and thou sayst, they ought not to suffer the preaching of the Word to go down, nor the Sacraments to fail. There is profession enough in the Nation, but little Possession; and all who profess high things, and do not possess them, are Hypocrites: And now blessed be the Lord, Christ is come and made manifest, which is the highest Attainment; and he comes not to send Peace on the Earth, but a Sword, and he shall confound the mighty and lofty, and they that have lived at ease shall be poured from Vessel to Vessel; and now is War proclaimed betwixt Michael our Prince, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth; and all Inchanters and Deceivers, and all such as have made Merchandize of Souls, are now made manifest; and now the Nations are angry, and the men of the Earth are afraid, and now Gog and Magog compasseth the Camp of the Saints about; and the Beast, upon which the Whore rides, and the false Prophets, and as many as have traded with the Beast and the Whore are troubled; for her sorrow is coming in a day, and all the Powers of the Earth cannot, nor shall not uphold her; for she shall be made desolate and burned with Fire: and now thou and the rest of the Merchants are troubled, and are petitioning to the Powers of the Earth to uphold you; I say unto thee, and unto all that joyn themselves against the Anointed, which is now appearing, who was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore, You shall all be broken, and your eyes shall consume in their Holes: Gather your selves together, howl ye Caterpillars, strengthen your selves, build up your batteries, cast up your mounts; for a mighty and terrible one is coming up against you; his voice is as the roaring of a Lyon, he is greedy of his Prey, he shall devour at once, and he is bringing about his Determination to cut off every one that withstands him, and no VVeapon formed shall pro∣sper; the eternal VVord is preached, and the Angel is flying through the midst of Heaven with the everlasting Gospel, and by it shall Anti∣christ be consumed; And because this Gospel is declared and preached and witnessed, thou art angry: But that which thou calls preaching the VVord, is nothing but thy own Imaginations: This they have preached long enough, and what hath it done, all your divining? None hath been turned from his Iniquity. And as for thy Sacrament, thou wast complaining of the Pope's Emissaries, and here thou art one: Thou mayst return thy Word back from whence thou hadst it: And all who come to witness the word and the preaching of it; and the Body and Blood of Christ, which is the Saints Communion, and the Supper of the Lord, will deny all your Inchantment, and all your canker'd rusty worm-eaten Divination; and all powers which seek to uphold this which was and is Abomination to the Lord, they must partake of her Plagues; let all consider, God hath overturned all the Powers that have pretend∣ed to establish Religion by a Lavv, whenas they have but established a Form, a Husk, and so Satan hath crept into that; and all the Priests in this Nation, have they not transformed into every Image, vvhat vvay soever Authority and the Povvers of the Earth bend, and so have made merchan∣dize, and sold that vvhich is not Bread, and so have deceived the People.
And further thou sayst, The Apostle requires them to mark them that cause Divisions diligently. And thou goes on, and reckons up many that have been polluted in Religion, and thou sayes, he will cast her into a Bed of Tor∣ment, if they do not repent. Rep. They who are turned from the Light of Christ, are turned into Division; and they that have not the same Spirit, by which the Apostle spake, that said so, are divided from Christ, and from the Body, and from the Saints, and are in Contention: And here I charge thee and all the Priests in England, that you are divided from Christ, and turned from the Light, who prophesie for Hire, and divine for mony, who go in long Robes, who are called of men Master, who have the chiefest Place in the Assembly, and stand praying in the Synagogue, who go to Law with your Hearers, and who give Meanings upon the Scriptures, who add and diminish, who speak but that which you have gathered from other mens Words; there doth Sects and opinions, strife and division arise. And here thou art marked by many in the County of Durham, (praised be the Lord,) to be one that is divided from the Light, and causes Division, who took away Four Oxen for five Pence Halfpenny; and so they have turned away from thee, and all vvho stand in that Nature wherein thou stands: And therefore thou art petitioning that thou might have a Law to bind us under thy Witchcraft, wherein the Nations have been deceived. And it is true, God hath overturned Kings, and Princes, and Dukes, and Earls, and Emperors, for the sake of his chosen Ones; and all they vvho have made an Image like the true God, and like the Gospel, and have made a Decree, and whosoever now make a Decree that any shall fall down to worship any thing which is contray to the Light of Christ in the Conscience, God hath hewed them down, and he will hew them down, who go about to limit the Holy One, who is Lord over all, and who will have Dominion over the Consciences of men; and the time is already, when Jezabel is to be cast into the Bed of Torment, and all who commit For∣nication with her, whether they be Kings, Emperors, Dukes or Earls, they shall all go down with the Dukes of Edom into the Pit, and with the rest of the Uncircumcised, and the Saints shall rejoyce in their overthrow. And thou sayest, There is yet little doth appear in England, but the old Beast under new Habits acts his old Tragedies; and thou tells of Satans Arrows which are brought into the Nations; and thou tells of Ranters and Quakers, and Seekers and Creepers, Creatures new come from the Pit; and thou sayest they resemble Samson's Foxes, which burn up faith bred by hearing the word preacht. Rep. What hast thou, and they that call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, preached, and cryed Reformation, and have sided with all mens Wills, and flattered all the Governours and Governments that have been changed divers times within these ten Years: Have you got nothing done yet, but have travailed and brought forth nothing but Wind and Division and Contention, and one of supplanting another? And have you tried one another, and proved one another, and every one preached up what he would have had, and have brought nought to pass? what shame∣less Reformers are ye? Can you not maintain with your Gommissions and all your petitioning for God's Ministers for the North; and you had your desire, they came as thick as locusts out of the South; and cannot
you all with your preaching preach down those contemptible Creatures that thou speaks of? And as for Ranters, I deny both thee and them; for thou and they spring both from one Root. And I am one thou calls a Quaker and Seeker; and blessed be the Lord forever more, that ever I was found worthy to bear the Name in Truth; for they that seek shall find, and they that wait shall not be ashamed. And thou blind Shepherd, thou might as well have uttered forth thy venome at David, Daniel, Je∣remy, and the rest of the holy men of God, and have said, they came out of the pit: Thou proude blasphemer, God will plead with thee for deri∣ding the Power of the Lord; and thou art that Fox thou speaks of, that would be devouring and have all consumed, that thy corrupt sensual filthy Will might be satisfied: And as for Faith, thou never came to the Faith of devils, who believe and tremble; and thy Faith and thy Ordi∣nances, which are but Imaginations and Traditions of men, the Day is discovered that shall burn them up and consume all; and you shall be left naked and bare, and have nothing to cover your Nakedness, but you shall be as a Stink and a Proverb. And whereas thou saist, They preach down Ministry and means, and all but those that have Knowledge miraculously infused; and thou art offended, because we declare what the Prophets were, when they were called to prophecy; and what the Apostles were before they went to preach; and thou gathers thy Conclusions, that they will send Princes to beg, as well as the Ministry; and thou sayest, Nothing was more strongly charged upon Israel, then suppressing of false Prophets; and thou sayest, shall not Christian Princes also be zealous to Suppress them that would devour the flock of Christ? Rep. When wilt thou cease thy lying and slandering? the Ministers of Christ we own and love, which have not been nor are not Mini∣sters made by the Will of Man, and such have turned away from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, and such a Ministry we ho∣nour; but all those who stand in man's Will we deny, and are bold to af∣firm, That they run, and never were sent, and therefore they do not profit the People; and all thy means and thy mediate Choice, which is carnal, we de∣ny; for none, either by you or it, ever had their minds changed from Darkness to Light, but only brought into a Form, a Husk, a Shadow, and made Hypocrites to profess what they were not: And as for thy mi∣raculous Infusion, I deny thy Words; but this I say, None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, and that Gospel that we preach, we neither received it of Man, nor from Man, but by immediate Revelation, and unto this the Scriptures witness: I know Prophets and Ministers of Christ, which were Shepherds, and Gatherers of Summer Fruit, and Hus∣band-men at the Plow, and the same Call as ever was: God is not bound up to your Trade of Divination and Study; and by these which are base in your Eyes shall you be confounded, and be broken as a Potters Vessel: And for thy Conclusion, That we may send Princes to beg, we deny; we do not dispute who rule, whether he be a Shepherd or a Husband-man; we know, he that fears the Lord is guided by the Light of Christ, he will walk and act in Righteousnes, whether he be a Prince or a Plowman; and God is no Respecter of Persons, nor we respect no man's Person, as thou Flatterer dost; but we honour the Power that is of God, and are subject to it for Conscience sake; we are not wrangling about the Earth, we are
redeemed out of it: And as for Naash thou speakest on, who would strike out the right Eye of Israel, that shall stand for thy self; for it is the True Israelite, in whose Mouth there is no Guile, and Jew inward, that thou would'st not only strike out the Eye, but also cut off their Heads: And thou askest, Who they are that do devour the Flock of Christ? I answer, they are Wolves and Deceivers, such as I spoak of before, that abide not in the Doctrine of Christ; read thy self there, and own it. And thou goest on further, and petitionest the Noble Princes to Consider▪ that the Anabaptists have mightily prevailed in this Nation, and thou won∣derest, that the Governours have not supprest, and thou bringest an old Story to accuse them with, out of Germany, That they had Plurality of Wives, and this (thou say'st) is like to destroy the Nation. Rep. Thou art Ishmael the Son of Hagar, thy Hand is against every man, and Cain is the Root from whence thou sprangest; for thou hast murder in thy Heart, and would'st command Fire to come down from Heaven to de∣stroy, and knovvest not vvhat Spirit thou art of: And as for the Ana∣baptists prevailing, here thou hast made the Shame of your ministry ap∣pear, that it hath had no more effect upon the Peoples minds, that they have not been established, and so they have run after every Wind of Do∣ctrine; and thou vvould'st have the Magistrates to make the People live still upon Wind: And as for thy Story of Germany concerning the Baptists▪ I have great Ground to believe, that thou and thy Author may as vvell be∣lye them vvhich thou never knevvest, as to cast a Lye upon those vvhich are nearer at Hand; but if they acted any such Thing as plurality of Wives, let them bear their ovvn Shame, do not accuse the Innocent; truly, I knovv no such Baptists in the Nation; and it's no more accusation upon them, then if thou should'st accuse the Disciples vvith Judas; and this thou layest upon the magistrate to consider, lest the Nation be destroyed; filthy busie mind troubling thy self and others vvith old Stories raked out of the pit to accuse others vvith, vvhenas there is no such thing that is ovvned; and all vvho fear the Lord deny such, and I deny them, and they and all vvho act in Un∣cleanness. And thou goest on and shevvest, as thou hast stollen from other mens VVords, from the Prophets and Moses, That the Judgment of the Lord was against all Idolaters and false Prophets and Dreamers, and how they and them that served strange Gods were to be put to Death. Wo unto them, saith the Lord, that steal my Word every Man from his Neigh∣bour, and say, thus saith the Lord, whenas the Lord hath never spoken unto them; thou hast stoln other mens VVords, and shalt be judged by thy ovvn mouth and thy ovvn Lavv, that thou never hadst the VVord of the Lord made manifest, nor never did the Lord speak to thee; and therefore thou art that false Prophet, and art that Dreamer; and he that hath a Dream, let him tell a Dream, & he that hath the Word of the Lord, let him speak it: novv them that speak the VVord of the Lord from the Mouth of the Lord, as the true Prophets did and do, then thou callest to the Magistrates to put them to Death: And as for the Worshippers of strange Gods, many in the County of Durham and many other Places, let them declare vvhether they vvorshipped any but a strange God at a Distance, and vvent after dumb Idols, even as they vvere led, vvhile they follovved the ministry vvhich vvas never sent; but novv is the Lord made manifest, and the strange Gods are put avvay and
broken, and the false Prophets are seen, and the Prophet is raised up, vvhich Moses spoak of, and vvhosoever hears not his Words, shall be slain vvith the Svvord. And further thou tellest the Magistrates, That if any Hypocrite shall presume to speak a Word in the Name of the Lord, which he hath not commanded, even he shall dye, and it is an old Statute unrepeal'd. Rep. If thou knevv vvhat thou spoak, thou hast given Sentence against thy self; I charge upon thee in the Presence of the living God, that thou never heardst his Word, nor spake his Word, but in thy ovvn Name; and I charge it again upon thee, when did he ever speak to thee? that Spirit by which the Prophets of the Lord spoke, thou dost deride, and call'st it a miraculous Infusion, and so thy Spirit is another, and not the same; and that it is an old Statute, thou shalt know, that thou hast spoken in thy own Name, and what thou hast learned by Tradition; but in Christ all the Law and the Prophets is fulfilled and all Statutes, who come to witness him; he is the Law-giver, Judge and King, and all is fulfilled as he comes to be witnessed, and all strange Gods put away, even the Idols of Gold and Silver, and all false Prophets by him come to be seen, judged, condemned and slain; and thou that would'st put it upon the Magistrate without, to kill Men by a Law, and so to usurp the Power which is given to the Son, and so make them guilty of innocent Blood, thou art a Murderer: And now further, who must judge of the false Prophets, of Heresie, Schism and Blasphemy? I know thou denyest Revelation, and the rest of the Priests in England, who trade with other mens Words; and I know thou darest not say, thou art infallible, and thou hast not discerning of Spirits; the Apostle exhorted them who dwelt in the Light to try the Spirits; but he bad not them who are led by the Prince of the Air, and were Children of Disobedience, as thou art, of a covetous earthly Mind, he bad not them to try, nor them who were carnal; and therefore stop thy mouth, thou canst not discern a Lamb from a Dog, not a Kite from a Dove: And let all Magistrates who fear the Lord, either in this Nation or else-where, take heed how they judge of Heresie and Blasphemy; not that I am ignorant but that there is Heresie and Blasphemy, but that none can judge who they are, but who have an infallible Spirit; therefore it is now as it hath been, many have suffered as Hereticks, as Christ for a Blasphemer, and the Apostles as Setters forth of strange Gods, and were persecuted to Death; and ma∣ny do and are like to suffer by this Spirit that dwells in Thomas Ellyson: And therefore all you who are Magistrates, that sit as Judges and Rulers, take heed what you do, and take heed of Zeal without Knovvledge; for so Paul persecuted, and so the Jews slevv Christ the Heir; and so many vvould have their Will satisfied, but thou must be judged by all vvho dvvell in the Light, & thou that sittest as Judge over another, see that thou be judged in thy self; for to take your Knovvledge and Direction from such as these men, instead of planting you vvill be Destroyers. And thou art offended at some that hold forth new Lights and Gifts, which (thou say'st) the Word of God never taught us. Rep. All vvho are taught by the Word, vvhich is eternal, are guided in one Light; for the Light is but one, and this is no nevv Light, but the same that ever vvas; but thou that callest the Letter the Light and the Word, thou art blind and art a Hater of the Light, from vvhich the Scrip∣ture vvas declared.
And in the Conclusion thou beggest, That Schollars and Universities may be preserved for the breeding of able Ministers, to preach the Word, and hold out the Sacraments. Rep. And this is the Sum of all, that thou and the rest of false Shepherds may be carryed in the Bosome of the Magistrates, and so to preserve you, and destroy all that oppose you: As for Learning, it is Natural, I ovvn it in its Place; but that it makes and breeds able ministers, I deny it, and all those ministers; for many filthy Frogs and unclean Spirits have come out of the Universities, that have spread over the Nations, as Locusts vvithout a King; and all their Preaching and their Sacraments is carnal, and all their Ability that is got by their Trading leads People to be seven-fold mo the Children of the Devil; I speak vvhat I vvas a Witness of, vvhile I follovved the chiefest of them: And therefore I say unto you vvho are Governours, Hold not that up which the Lord hath cursed; for that which is Natural cannot lead up to God: And therefore be ye all vvarned, That you turn not back to build again that which God is destroying, who threw out one Power after another, because they would needs limit the Lord a Way to walk in: And truly, God vvill pour you out from Vessel to Vessel, till you be emptied of all, and till you give him all Power and Honour, to rule over his Church and People, that they may serve the Lord in Freedom of Spirit, and not in the Flesh; and if any vvalk dis∣orderly, and break any righteous Lavv, and vvalk in the Flesh, them exe∣cute your Lavv upon, there is your Place; but that you should prescribe a Way for God to vvalk in, he cannot, he vvill not be bound; and you, that go about to limit him to any visible Appearance, shall be broken to pieces; for his Glory he vvill not give to another. This was I moved of the Lord to write in Answer to Tho. Ellyson's Petition, and to the Magistrates: A Lover of all those that wait for the Redemption of Israel; called after the Flesh, Francis Hovvgil.
THE Fiery Darts Of The Devil QUENCHED; Or something in Answer to a BOOK, called, A second Beacon Fired, Presented to the Lord Protector and the Parliament, and subscribed by Luke Fawne, John Rothwel, Samuel Gellibrand, Thomas Underhil, Joshua Kirton, Nathanael Webb. Wherein their Lyes and Slanders are made manifest against the Innocent and those Books which have been published by them they call Quakers, owned and vindicated, and all the rest which is in that Book disowned, and their De∣ceit laid open, how they have perverted the Truth & our Words in those Books, which they cry out of as Blasphemy, that the Truth may not suffer under the Reproach of the Heathen. FIrst of all you go about and flatter the Powers and the Magistrates, and tell them, They ought to have a Care of their peoples Souls, in keeping them from Infection of Idolatry and Blasphemy; and you say, you are to inform them of the Dangerousness of great Meetings in London of Quakers, whose Opinions are Blasphemous, Paganish, Anti-scriptural and Anti-Christian, even as the former: And further, the greatest thing that troubles you, is Printing and Publishing Books, many thousands (you say) con∣cerning Blasphemous, and Heretical, and Anti-magistratical Opinions, tending to unchristian People, and disorder the People of the Nations, and to bring in Paganism, and Libertinism; and this (you say) you present unto them to provoke their zeal against them. Oh you blood-thirsty-minded men, all the Care that you would have the Magistrates to take of the People is, to destroy them, and to have them shut up in Holes and Caves, and Dens, and Prisons; and the Truth ever suffered by your Generation, and your Generation hath ever pressed the Magistrates, that they might abuse their Power, and if they will but hearken to you, instead of healing the People, they will be Destroyers, and instead, of making up Breaches, they will make deso∣late; and so you would drive them on hastily to satisfie your corrupt Will, and to uphold your Diana, and your craft, that you may make Merchandize of that vvhich hath been long enough sold and printed by you; and what hath it done? who is turned from Darkness to Light? and you that make a trade of others Writings and Words, to maintain you in your Lusts, and deceive, this you would have them to uphold▪
but as for the care of Peoples Souls, it's far enough from you, and all along in your filthy lying slanderous Book, you are made manifest to be of those that would have Fire to come down from Heaven in your Wills, to destroy all those that withstand you and your Imaginations: And therefore let all Magistrates, in whom the Fear of the Lord is, take heed how they take things from the Hands and Mouthes of them who have alwayes persecuted the Power of Truth, and called Truth Errour, and Light Darkness, and Darkness Light; and in a blind Zeal for God, de∣stroy them whom the Power of the Lord is manifest in: for so Paul per∣secuted Christ, and the Saints, and so the Jews crucified Christ, and all the Saints have suffered. And you are offended at our meeting in London; while we have been here in the City we have not been in a corner, and we challenge you and all the City in the Name of the Lord, who is dread∣full to all Lyars, and Slanderers, to shew, what are those blasphemies that you speak of, you backbiters shall have your portion with the rest of hypocrites: Opinions we deny; for the Light of Jesus Christ is spiritual, which appears and declares against all Sects, and Opinions, and Blasphemies, and all you who hate it, are in Contention, and in Opinions, and Blaspheme the Truth; and here I charge it upon you in the Presence of the living God, that you are Blasphemers, who call the Light Natural and Paganism; and the Lord will plead with you, you filthy corrupt minds, who calls the Light of Christ Anti-christian; for here in the Presence of the Lord of Hosts, I speak it, no other Light do we own to walk by, but that which is spiritual and eternal, the Light of Christ, which he hath enlightened every one that comes into the World withall; and this is not Anti-scriptural as thou calls it; for the Scriptures witness the same, and Christ bears witness of it; and no other Light do we own but the same that ever was, which was in the beginning, and which convinceth the World of Sin, and the same that led up the Saints to knovv the Father and the Son: and you that call this Paganism and Heretical, and Blasphemous, and Anti-christian; let all vvho have any Light in them judge, and let Shame cover your Faces, and Fear take hold upon you; for your Words stink, and come out of the Mouth of the Dragon, ye filthy unclean Frogs, vvhich have Poison under your Tongues. And as for the Bookes vvhich vve have printed, vve ovvn them, and are ready to lay dovvn our Lives for the Testimony of Jesus, and the Truth of them, and seal them vvith our Blood, and vvhat are vvritten in them, through the eternal Povver of God, vvhich is made manifest; and that vve have published any thing against any just Magi∣strate, let all our vvritings, and all vvho read them judge; and if bearing vvitness to Jesus Christ unchristians People, let all judge; for no other do vve ovvn, but the same Christ to Day and Yesterday, and forever; and here all your petitioning is made manifest, from vvhence it did arise and proceed, and your shame and Nakedness, and envy appears. And the Sacraments (vvhich you say you use) which is appointed in the Scripture, and Farnsvvorth in Answer to a Petition did deny them. Answer, His Ansvver vve ovvn; and I challenge you to be Perverters of the Scripture; vvhere read you of Sacraments in the Scripture? here
I charge you to be Lyars and Slanderers, and Denyers of the Scripture, and Adders to it, and the Plagues shall be added to you; and as for that vvhich you use among you is traditional and imitatory: Yet the Bread vvhich vve break is the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup we drink is the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and this is that which Paul received from him: And Baptism by one Spirit into one Body we own; the Baptism is but one, and this we own; and here you Lyars and Slanderers are seen and denyed. Another thing you call Heresie and Blasphemy, is, that we say, that Christ hath enlightened all men; but I shall lay down your own Words, and prove you Lyars out of that Book called, the General good to all People: and you say, The Light of God that is in all men; that is, to wit, natural Consci∣ence, that it is sufficient, if we give heed unto it, to discover Sin and turn our Minds towards God, and that this Light within is the Grace of God, and that it is Christ in us. Answer, Let all that reads that Book, see if you be not Lyars and Slan∣derers, and Perverters, and are in the Generation of those false Witnesses which bore witness against Christ; and here I charge you to be Lyars, Where in all the Book doth he say, that the Light of a natural Conscience is sufficient to guide to God, if it be taken heed to? or where doth it say, it discovers Sin? there is another Lye: And where doth he say, that natural Conscience is the Grace of God? there is a Third Lye; and where doth he say, that natural Conscience is Christ in us? there is a fourth Lye: Be ashamed that ever you should go and present so many filthy Lyes to Authority, that there is no Truth in at all. Oh ye dark Minds, would you be judging and prescribing what is Heresie and Blas∣phemy, and call the Light of Christ Paganisme and Heresie? But I am bold in the Name of the Lord, to declare unto you, and unto all the World, that Christ is the true Light, that hath enlightned every one that comes into the World, and that this Light is spiritual, and not natural, and it convinceth of all Sin; he shall convince the world of Sin; and whoso obey this Light which shines into the Conscience, it leads up to Christ, and out of Sin, and it turns the Mind towards God, and it shines in Darkness; but you dark sottish Children know it not; yea, you that hate it, have it, and it shall condemn you, and when the Book of Con∣science shall be opened, you shall be judged for all your hard Speeches against the Truth. Another thing you present to be Blasphemy and Heresie, is, that the Worship that is performed in England with those Ministers that sing Davids Psalms, baptize Infants, wear double Cuffes, Boot Hose toops, take Tythes, say men shall never be perfect in this World, and that say, the Letter is the Light, and the Letter is the Word; and that Salvation is in the Scripture, and that call Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Gospel, are Seducers, and no Mi∣nisters of the Word, but shew forth the Spirit of Error. Answer. All those Ministers in England which abide not in the Do∣ctrine of Christ; all those Worshippers and Worships, which are Con∣trary to the Scripture, are Heathenish, and they worship they know not what; and all such Worship is an Abomination to the true God; and I charge you and all those that would be counted Ministers in England, to
prove from the Scripture where the Saints sung Davids Conditions, and Psalms in Rhimes and Meeter; and where is there any Scripture for bapti∣zing of Infants? and whether any of the Ministers of Christ lived in pride and Lusts of the Flesh? and where any Ministers of Christ took Tythes, which belonged to the first Priesthood and the first Covenant? and so they that uphold the first, and deny the second, and the one everlasting Offering, which perfects forever them that are sanctified; and where doth the Scripture say, that the Letter is the Word and the Light? but it witnesses against you, and saith, God is the Word, and Christ is the Light, and Christ is the Gospel, yea, the everlasting Gospel; and Mat∣thew, Mark, Luke and John declared of him: and here you be witnesses against your selves, ye dark-minded men; and I charge you, that you deny the Scripture; and all those who uphold those things are in the Heathenish nature, without God in the World, in the Earth where the Devil dwells, who is an accuser of the Brethren: and doth not the Scripture and they declare it who were Ministers of Christ, that there were that ran after the Errour of Balaam, and their Hearts were exercised with covetous Practices? And were there not such that were Railers, and false Accusers, and blind Watchmen, and greedy dumb Dogs, and such as led into VVitchcraft, and Anti-christs, Deceivers? you might as well have called Christ, Paul, Peter and Jude Blasphemers and Hereticks, but you are made manifest to be them, and in the same nature that called Christ a Blasphemer, and Paul a Pestilent Fellow, and a Setter forth of strange Gods, and the Ministers of Christ Seditious, and thou mightst as well say, Christ despised a Governour, when he called Herod a Fox: And now, blessed be the Lord, the Hour of his Judgments is come; and we freely declare against all Deceit both in Magistrates, Priests and People, as they did that wrote forth the Scripture, and bear witness, to his Name, as they did, in our Measure; and we have suffered, and do suffer daily, by slanderous Tongues, such as you have; and Imprisonments, and cruel Mockings, and Stripes, and Bonds; and can truly say to the praise of his Name, We bear in our Bodies the Marks of the Lord Jesus; but we must pass through good Report and evil Report; and it is our Crown and re∣joycing to suffer for his Name; and now Gog and Magog, and all the Powers of the Earth bend themselves, and are angry, even the Nations that profess Christ in Words, and say, the Scripture is their Rule, but walk not according to it; and against all such hypocrisie are we VVitnesses, to the fulfilling our Testimony, and the laying down of our Lives, that he alone may be honoured who sits upon the Throne of David, and of whose Government there is no End, to whom be Praise forever, who shall break all your Combinations and plots, and you shall be Ground to Powder, who set your selves against him, and be dashed to Pieces as a Potter's Vessel. And now to that which you call Anti-magistratical Errours, That the Ma∣gistrates are not to have Titles of Worshipful or Right Worshipful, and that the Subjects of a Common Wealth, which is not Israel's Common Wealth, are to be disturbed, and that no Civil Government is to be acknowledged, but the Govern∣ment of the Law within us. Answ. Where readest thou or any, that any Magistrate was called Wor∣shipful
or Right Worshipful, or ever any of the Saints of God did so? he that is Righteousness and Truth, unto whom all Honour and Worship belongs, God blessed forever, we own and worship; he is no Respecter of Persons. And you filthy Flatterers, who are in the Curse, respect mens Persons and so you are razed out forever from the Faith of Christ, and from the, Faith which all the Holy Men of God lived in, that you know it not: but you false Accusers, Magistrates we know, and they are for the Punishment of Evil-doers, and for the Lavvless, for Lyars and Slanderers, such as you are, and for the Praise of them that do vvell; and vve honour such in our Hearts, and obey their just Commands, and are not like him that said he would go, and vvent not, but are subject for Conscience sake to the Povv∣ers that are of God, and are subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; but vve cannot flatter nor respect mens Persons, and deny the Faith of Christ, but are brought from under the Povver of Unrighte∣ousness by the mighty Povver of God, and are subject to all just Lavvs, vvhich stand not nor vvere made in man's Will, but obey them for Con∣science sake; and if any Lavv, vvhich is not just and equal, be required upon us, that vve cannot do, vve suffer for Conscience sake, and resist not at all, as many of our Enemies vvill vvitness for us; and therefore you false Accusers be silent; they that are subject to Israel's Common Wealth are righteous, and vvalk in Righteousness, in that vvhich is just, good and holy; and vve vvitness against all the Cananites, vvho vvalk in Unrigh∣teousness; and all vvho are Enemies to the Common Wealth of Israel must be broken to Pieces, and them that strive and contend against the Faith vvhich vvas once delivered to the Saints, and is novv witnessed (prai∣sed be the Lord) all such must be disturbed and broken to Pieces by the just, even all the unjust shall be broken: And as for that vvhich thou say'st vve say, We ought not to be subject to any Civil Government, but that which is within us; Oh thou Lyar, vvhen vvilt thou cease thy Lying? vvhere is that? I charge thee to prove vvhere that is spoken; yet this I say unto all, Moses received the Lavv from the Mouth of the Lord, and it vvas re∣vealed to him and in him, and then he vvought it vvithout, and vvas sub∣ject to it: And all vvho make Lavvs novv, and do not receive them from God, they make them in their ovvn Wills, and such as do act contrary to the Lavv of God; but that Lavv vvhich is righteous, vvhich is according to that in the Conscience, vvhich is holy, good and civil, vve are subject both vvithin and vvithout to it: And all your Subjection, which is not from a Principle vvithin, is not in Truth nor Singleness of Heart, but vvith Flattery, and your Eye-Service, and your bovving dovvn in Hypocrisie, and saying, you are subject, vvhen there is no Truth in the Heart; and so you are not subject for Conscience sake. And further you say, In Farnsworth's General Good to all People, Let eve∣ry Soul be subject to the higher Powers; by Powers is meant God, the Father of Jesus Christ, and by King, the Lord of Hosts, and that is another Blasphemy. Wo unto filthy Lyars; I challenge you, that you have perverted his Words, and would give Meanings upon them, as you do upon the Scrip∣tures; and your own dark sottish Minds cannot comprehend; and there∣fore you give your own Imaginations, and then call it Blasphemy; and
all that read that Book see if you have not belyed the Truth, and perverted his Words. Another Thing you set down for Blasphemy, That none are Ministers of God, and called by him, who are sent forth by Authority of Man, and that he that is not infallible in his Judgment, is no Minister of Christ. Answ. You might have said Paul's Words were Blasphemy; he was made a Minister, not by mens Will; and all the holy men of God and Apostles were not Ministers by the Will of man, but contrary to the Will of Man; and all who are made Ministers of man and by man, we deny, and the Scripture denies them; for what they preached, they neither received it of Man, nor from Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; and all who have and are made Ministers by Hear-say, and what they have form'd up in their Imaginations from the Scripture, with their Points and their Doctrines, which they raise in their Carnal Minds, all such we declare against; and all such who abide not in the Doctrine of Christ: and all who were made Ministers of Christ, were Spiritual and infallible; that which is not infal∣lible is carnal; and all who are guided by the Spirit of Christ are infallible, and they that are not guided by it are none of his, nor the Sons of God, nor Ministers of Christ; and therefore, all that such can judge of is nothing but imaginary; and all you who have subscribed this Book, and all such Ministers I deny: Ye shameless men, would you be trying and prescribing and set down what is Heresie and Blasphemy, and cry out of that for He∣resie and Blasphemy which you should try withall? Your Shame is laid open to all; and now your Shame, I hope, will appear to the Parliament, whom you petition; what cry you out against Books, and printing, and Blasphemy, that cannot distinguish a Lamb from a Dog? would you judge Truth by Darkness? And you are offended that there are so many Qua∣kers met in the North Parts lately, Two Thousand; yea, blessed be the Lord, there are many Thousands that see you, and never will bow to Baal, nor worship in the House of Rimmon more; and many shall not only come from the North, but also from the South, yea, in London, that now see all your Deceit, and they shall enter, and you shall be shut out; and what Truth is this that cannot defend it self? and what Religion is that vvhich cannot defend it self, but you must have all bend to your Image that you vvould set up? And now unto you who are petitioned unto, I say unto you, take heed and beware how you call or suppress any thing as Error, or how you med∣dle in the prescribing God a Way to walk in, for he cannot, he will not be limited; and I say unto you, it were better a Milstone were hanged a∣bout your Necks, then to hinder, stop, or make any Law to hinder the Passage of the Truth which is arising; and consider, the Lord hath thrown out all Powers before this, because they would needs limit the Holy One of Israel, and prescribe him a Way, and a Goverment, how he should be worshipped; and many have suffered, and what hath all come to, all the Rules that men have laid down? have they not been as the Untimely Fruit of a VVoman, and as Corn upon the House top? and for that all have
been thrown down and broken; and the Jealousie of the Lord is broken forth as Fire, and wo to them that withstand them in his Way: And now I say unto you, if you now prescribe God a VVay, and if that in the Con∣science have not Liberty, but you will go about to set Bounds to him and his People in the Worship of God, you shall be broken as a Potter's Vessel; for the Government is upon his Shoulders, and he will not give his Glo∣ry to any other; the Lord hath spoken it. And for the rest of the Books in the Beacon fired, we disown them; but I believe you have belyed them▪ as you have done ours. By one who is a Witness for the Truth against Gog and Magog, called after the Flesh Francis Howgil.
A WARNING TO All the RULERS in these English Nations. OH ye Judges, Rulers and Heads of the People in these Nations, you may read your Cloud of Witnesses, who are your Example, who persecute the Innocent, and turn aside the needy for a Thing of nought; you may read in the Scripture what they were, and what Manner of Prin∣ces, Kings and Rulers they were, who were Persecutors in all Generations; and say not in your Hearts, you are Christians, and yet walk in the same Footsteps of them who persecuted the Prophets, and them that were sent early and late to forewarn them, and stood in the Gate, and declared in their Tovvns and Cities against the Abominations that vvere committed; and Jeremy they put in the Dungeon, that his Feet sticked in the Mire, and put his Feet fast in the Stocks, and Micha in Prison, and Daniel in the Den of Lyons; and Herod and Pilate were made Friends in the persecuting of Christ, and they set him at nought; and the Priests and the Rulers conspired against him, and sought to entrap him in his Words; and the Apostles they put in Prison, in the Stocks, and whipped them, and scourged them, and commanded them to depart out of their Towns, Villages and Cities, and called them seditious and pestilent Fellows, and said, they bred Tumults in the Cities, whenas they were tumultu∣ous themselves, and persecuted, and mocked, and shamefully entreated: And novv you that are found acting in those Practices, are in the same Spirit; you may read your Cloud of Witnesses and your Example, and be ashamed▪ O England, England and Ireland! is this the Fruit of the great Profession you have made so many Years, and novv when you are proved, the best of you is as a Bryar, and the most upright sharper then a Thorn-Hedge? What is become of the Promises you made in the Day of your Calamity, vvhen Sorrovv, Fear and Oppression compassed you about on every Side? Hath the Lord broken the Yoak from off your Necks, and is your Finger becoming heavier then their Loyns? Was there so great Oppression and Cruelty acted among the Bishops and Prelates? vvere Prisons so filled? vvere there such Gins and Traps laid for the Innocent vvhen their High Commission Court vvas up? O Shame, Shame! that ever it should come in the Ears, or be reported in other Nations, that ever you should requite the Lord thus for all his Love and Mercies▪ that he should break the Yoak from off your Necks, and  your Enemies on every Side, and cut them off in his Wrath, and hath given you their Habitations to dvvell in, and the Povver into your Hans shall the Ax boast it self against him that hevvs therevvith? and will ye quite
the Lord thus for his Love? Surely these Things are come before the Lord, and a Book of Remembrance is vvritten, and all these Things shall stand as Witness against you, vvhen the Book of Conscience is laid open: But you (may be) vvill say, You know no such that suffer for Conscience sake; turn but your Ear, and listen but to every Goal and Prison in every Coun∣ty, and there may you see many of you poor Brethren stopped up in Holes, among Murderers, Thieves and Transgressors, even they vvho have born a Part vvith you in the Sufferings vvith the Nations in the Heat of the Day; and if you say, they have transgressed any Law, vvhy do you not execute it upon them, but some kept in Prison tvvo or three Years, and never called, to knovv vvhat is the Matter: But Friends, knovv this, many suffer novv for the Transgression of no knovvn Lavv, but may be have cryed out in your Tovvns against Iniquity, or have declared against the Blindness and Ignorance of some, vvho go in the Way of the false Prophets, and in the Error of Balaam: O! the Land is full of such Deceivers, as have flattered the People and her Princes, till the Lord bathed his Svvord in their Blood, and novv they are flattering you, and sovving Pillovvs under your Arm∣holes; if you say (as the Pharisees said) We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye; if you execute those Lavvs, and stand to those Lavvs vvhich were made by them that oppressed you, the same shall come upon you that came upon them, and God vvill break the Yoak from off the Necks of the Oppressed, and the Yoak shall be laid upon yours, vvho make a man an Of∣fender for a VVord; and therefore consider, a Warning to you all, and be you warned from the Lord God, to cease from oppressing the Innocent; nay, you are left all without Excuse; for I know you are not ignorant of these Things: And further I say unto you, uphold not them by your Pow∣er, who are flattering the Nations, and crying Peace, and daubing the People with untempered Morter, and telling them, they are Christians, when they are Heathens, and live in that Nature that puts Christ to open Shame; for the Hand of the Lord is against them, and Prophaneness hath gone from them, those Teachers that use their Tongues, and say, he saith, when the Lord hath never spoken to them; and therefore the People are lost for Lack of Knowledge, and there is not one among them that is able to turn any from his Iniquity: And therefore I say unto you, stint not nor limit not the Lord by your Wills, nor your Laws made in your Wills; for if you do, he which rents the Heavens, and makes the Earth reel as a Cottage, will break you and your Laws together, and there shall be none that shall be able to deliver you out of his Hand, who is pure, holy, just and true, and will not give his Glory to another; for he alone works, and who shall let, and bring his own Work to pass, and none shall hinder: And therefore take heed you strive not against the Lord, and so be broken upon the stumbling Stone to Pieces: A Lover of Righteousness, and a Friend to all just Power, F. H.
A VVARNING TO All the WORLD. WO, Wo unto all the Inhabitants; for the Lord God of Power is coming in Power and great Glory, with Ten Thousand of his Saints, to judge the Earth, and to make a Desolation; and an utter Over∣throw and a Consumption shall come upon all Flesh, and its Glory shall be stained; for all Flesh hath corrupted its Way, and gone a whoring after other Gods, and hath committed Fornication with Strangers, and Whore∣doms with the Uncircumcised, and the Land is filled with Monsters, and the living God is departed from; the Lord is grieved, the Lord is weary with forbearing, and will no longer forbear; now is he arising to excute his Judgment in the Earth, and to sift the Nations; and all shall now be put into an even Ballance, and the Wicked shall be as Dust and as Chaff, which the VVind blows away, and shall be scattered, and never more ga∣thered: For a Fire is come out of Sion, its before the Lord of Hosts, and it's tempestuous round about him; Coals of Fire are kindled by the Breath of  No∣strils, to burn up all the Stubble and Chaff, even by the Breath of his Mouth; the Lord hath uttered his Voice before his Army; for his Camp is great, as a Lyon, and is greedy of his Prey, as a young Lyon; he will not spare, but devour and de∣stroy all the Uncircumcised, and cut off from the Earth, even all the abominable: Tremble, tremble, O Earth before the Lord, and all ye careless Sons and Daughters, that live at Ease in the Flesh, in Wantonness and in Mirth, a Day of Howling is coming upon you, a Day of Sorrow and Lamentation; Howl, howl and weep, ye that spend your Dayes in Vanity, in Lust and Pleasure, killing the Just; ye Drunkards, your Throats are as an open Sepulchre, your Throats shall be dryed up and parched with the Flame of the Lord's Indignation, the Lion shall be famished; Diver's End is your Portion, you covetous greedy De∣ceivers, Oppressours, Lyars, Swearers, proud, envious, contentious Quarellers, ye vain airy light Minds, ye are  Dust▪ and will have your Portion in the Lake that burns; Tophet is prepared, Hell hath enlarged her self, the Grave stands open to receive you, the Pit hath opened her Mouth, the Deep shall swallow you up, ye rebellious and stiff-necked Generation, who fear not the Lord, but add Sin unto Sin; behold, the Day is coming, ye shall wish the Mountains to fall upon you, and the Rocks to cover you, and shall seek Death, but shall not find it: The Arm of the Lord is stretched out, the Hand of the most High is against you, you fruitless Trees that cumber the Ground, you shall be cut up by the Roots, and cast into the Fire, ye Lyars, Swearers, cursed Speakers, ye proud and covetous, double Dealers and Hypocrites, which say in Word what you are not in Deed, and make a Profession of the Name of God, but depart not from Iniquity; the Trumpet of the Lord is blown out of Sion, the
Alarm is sounded out of the holy mountain, let all the Inhabitants of the Earth tremble, a Noise of War and Rumor of VVar is heard, his Sword is furbished and brandished, to make a great Slaughter, and the slain of the Lord shall be many; Oh ye Potsherds of the Earth! will ye strive against the Lord? will ye set Bryars and Thorns in Battel against him, who shakes the Heavens, and makes the Earth reel as a Cottage, who dryes up the Face of the deep, and cuts off all the fresh Springs, and makes the Cedars fall, and pours down Snares upon the wicked, Fire and Hail, Storm and Tem∣pest, and Pillars of Smoak, this shall be your Portion to drink, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it: O foolish People & unwise, when will you seek after Wisdom; Wisdom hath lift up her Voice in the Streets, but you have stopped your Ears as deaf Adders, and say in your Hearts, we will not have Righteousness to rule over us, but we will walk as our Fathers, and worship as other Nations do, and as them whom the Lord hath cut off out of the Nations as untimely Fruit, and are perished with the Uncircumcised: Fear, fear, tremble, tremble ye careless Ones, ye hard Hearts, ye Rocks shall be broken, ye Cedars shall fall, ye strong Oaks shall be cut up by the Roots, your Root shall perish, ye Mountains shall melt, ye wild savage Creatures, that are as wild Asses upon the Mountains; a Moneth is coming, wherein you will be found, and a Day is at Hand, wherein you shall see him whom you have pierced; yea, behold the Judge of all the World stands at the Door, even of the quick and dead, and he comes in the Clouds with Power and great Glory, and every Eye shall see him, and every Heart shall melt, and all Faces shall gather Paleness, and all Knees shall smite together, and every Tongue shall confess his Judgment just, when he shall execute his Wrath upon you, and sweep you into the Pit, and blow you away with the Whirlwind of his Wrath; and then you shall be judged out of the Book of your Consciences: Therefore fear, fear and repent, repent and prize your time while you have it, and mind the Light of Christ Jesus, that shews you your Iniquities and Sins, and it love, and it will turn you from Sin and Unrighteousness to Christ Jesus, from whence the Light comes, and it love, and it will judge all your vain Actions, and bring Condemnation upon all the Deceit, and lead you to true Confession and Forsaking, and to know the Lord is pure and holy, and nothing that is evil can dwell in his Sight: And so remember you are all war∣ned in your Life time, lest you be swept away into the Pit, and perish forever and ever, and there be none to deliver you; and unto you this is the word of the living God, whether you hear or forbear. F. H.
THE FIRST General Epistle Written to the Camp of the Lord In ENGLAND. TO all the Seed of Abraham, who are Jews indeed, and Israelites, in whom is no Guile; who are of the true Circumcision, made with∣out Hands; Who are of the Off-spring of David, and of the Church or the first-born; who are the first Fruit unto God; Ye royal Off-spring of the Rock of Ages, who have come out of the everlasting Washing, My dear Brethren, called Quakers, who have eaten your Bread with Fear and Trembling, whom your Brethren have cast out; Oh how I love you; my Soul is knit unto you, my Heart and Life breathes after you; I am one with you in Suffering, and in Joy; ye are the choicest of the Flock; ye are the fairest of all the Children which are brought forth: Oh my beloved Ones! though I be among the Tents of Kedar, as without, where the Voice of the Lord hath neither been heard nor known, yet you I for∣get not, if I do, let the Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, and let me never speak more in the Name of the Lord, who is my Life, and the portion of my Cup forever: Oh! what shall I say unto you? none knows your Beauty, nor Innocency, nor Glory, but them who are redeemed out of Kindreds, and Nations, and Tongues, and People, and Coun∣tryes, who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: For the Name of my God and your God, who is living, and lives for evermore, is in your Fore∣heads; you are his Off-spring, and the Fruit that came out of the Eter∣nal VVomb, begotten by the Eternal VVord of Life which lives forever, and are nourished at the eternal Table, in the everlasting Mansion-house of my Father, which is in Heaven: None so fair; none so beautifull; none so Glorious; none so Rich; you are crowned with Love forever; you are clothed with Righteousness forever; you eat of the Tree of Life which heals the Nations, and of the Bread of Life that nourishes you up forever; and drinks of the living VVaters, which run fresh, beautiful and cool, in it you are bathed and suppled, and made white; you are builded upon a Rock, storms cannot move you, tempests cannot make you afraid; in this you have been, and are like to be tryed: Your
Armour is Righteousness on the right hand, and on the left; your City is free: The Gates stand open Day and Night; a VVolf, Lyon, nor any Beast cannot enter; no not so much as a flying-Fowl. Oh how goodly are thy Tents, O thou Seed of Jacob, the Elect whom he hath chosen! O how pleasant is your scituation! The Tower of David, Mount Sion, stands sure, and cannot be moved: O! who is a People like unto you, saved by our God that lives forever? His Love is large; he is kind; he is long-suffering; he is faithful, and keeps Covenant, and his Promises are Yea, Yea: He is the Amen, the first and the last. Come forth my dear Brethren, set forth his Praise, declare his Name among the Heathen publish his Name among the Congregations; let the Earth be filled with his Love and power, that his Judgments may be declared, and his Sta∣tutes, that they sound in the Ears of Generations to come. O ye that are convinced of the Truth of our God, wait in that which doth convince, and keep your Minds to it, and love it, and follow it whither it leads you, and it will lead you to know the Gift of God, which leads to Repentance from dead VVorks, to serve the living God, who dwells in the Immortal Light; and take heed of look∣ing back at the Pleasures of Sin you have formerly lived in, but wait upon the pure Light of Christ Jesus in Patience, that so you may see the Enmity which is against God, and it slain in you daily; that so you may see him that is the Saviour of the Soul: and take heed of rebelling against the Lord, who hath given you a measure of his true Light, to lead you from Sin if you love it unto Righteousness, from whence it comes, even from the righteous Judge of all the VVorld, who judgeth every man ou of the Book of his Conscience; and so prize the everlasting Love of God to your Souls, that you may see him who lives forever. And all Babes, who are born again, who have suffered and Pangs of Death, and know the Indignation of the Lord against Sin, and the Ter∣rour of the Lord against the man of Sin; who have roared for the Dis∣quietness of your Hearts, who have born the Indignation of the Lord, and are come to the giving forth of the Law, where there is Thundring, and Earth-quakes, and Terrour, and great Hail, and Fire, and Smoke, even such as was not since the Beginning, insomuch that you could not bear his Voice and live, nor see his Face and live. Stand still in Patience, and let it have its perfect Work in you, and hear the Indignation, ye that are in it; if you endure the Tribulation with Patience, Hope you will see, and a Time of Refreshment will come; endure the Cross, that the mortal, and earthly, and carnal may be judg∣ed, and the bad ground shaken and taken away, and that you may see the living Hope to stay your Minds upon. And ye who are enlivened, and do witness the Law of Righteousness set up in you, which is a School-master, and keeps in the Fear, stand in it, and keep in the Fear low, in Soberness and Calmness, and then you will see your Hearts purified daily, and the cursed Nature judged, which is out of its Course, and it bridled and subjected, and the Law which is pure, and holy, and eternal, which stands forever in Power and force against the Transgressor, to judge all Unrighteousness: And so wait, that you may see the Lyon tamed, and the wild Heifer yoked, and the Yoke of
Christ born and the wild Colt tamed by him, upon which never man sate before; then, and not till then, is Hosanna sung. And all wait in your Measures, dear Babes, that the Milk of the Word you may see, and be nourished by it, and grow up as living Branches about the Table of the Lord. And all you young men and Virgins, that know Virginity, keep your Virginity, you in whom the Prince of this world is judged and cast out, and the righteous Law of God revealed and given forth, in which you stand, and walk, and have Peace from him, who is the Law-giver and Judge, who hath saved you from your Iniquities, and blotted out your Sins for his own Name's sake; you who know the living Water and Spirit, of which you are born again, and witness the Birth which enters into the Kingdom of God, where no mortal or unclean Beast can come: Keep in the Life and Power of God, which limits all, and chains all under, that the Life of the Son of God may live and speak in you; and be bold; In the dread of God stand, and that which leads into Slavery, keep out. And now being made Partakers of his everlasting Love, walk worthy of his Love, and of the high Calling whereunto you are called, who hath created you in Christ Jesus, unto Holiness and Righteousness forever; that to the praise of his Grace, which you are saved by, by which you have obtained the Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified: So wait in the living Hope, and the living Faith, in which God is well pleased, in which you ask and receive of him, and are accepted of our heavenly Father; And this Faith ye know, which is a present Power, and a Shield against all Temptations, and a Helmet, and as a Fortress, by which you are preserved safe, standing in it, and putting it on in the Day of Tryal. My dear Brethren of the everlasting Kindred, and Heirs of the ever∣lasting Promise; wait all in Patience, having received an earnest of the Inheritance that never fades away; to the End abide in the Father's Coun∣sel, and at Wisdom's Gate: Ye know what I say, I write not unto you because you know not the Truth, but because you know, and are made free in your Measures by him who is the Truth and the Way, in which all our Fathers, and you also have obtained a good Report, even of all the Houshold of Faith; and take heed of the Glory of the World, and look not at Hardship; for verily, all the Suffering is not worthy to be Compared to that Glory which is revealed, and to be revealed unto all that wait and abide in Patience and Faithfulness unto the end; but be ye as good Souldiers, endure hardship, that you may receive the End of your Hope, and the everlasting Price, and the purchased Possession, and the Crown of Glory, which God will give unto you in his own Day, which is coming on towards you, if you continue in the Hope, in the Faith, and in the Love unfeigned, which thinks no ill, by which, and in which Love, we have Victory over the Grave, Sin and Death, which he hath freely shed abroad in our Hearts, unto whom be everlasting Praise forever and ever, to him which was dead, and is alive, and lives for ever∣more, the Mediator of the new Covenant of Life and Peace, in which we have Access freely to the Throne of Grace, and are accepted in him, who
is the Condemnation of all the World, who hate the Light, but your Life, the Light of the World; God blessed forever and ever. And all you Fathers, and Elders, and honourable women, who are not a few, whose Bones and Sinews are filled with Marrow and Fatness, who wait at the Altar of the Lord, and know the Mercy-seat, which hath over∣shadowed you, and the golden Vessel, in which is the hidden Manna, by which all the Children of the Lord are fed round the Table of the Lord, out of the Everlasting Treasure-house of my Father. VVatch over the Flock of Christ Jesus in every Place and Region and Quarter, where the Lord hath set you, and govern them in all Wisdom and Righteousness, that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ may be adorned; and take Care of them willingly, knowing this the Lord requires of you, and hath called you unto; and to nourish the Plants, and the young Ones, and the Babes; and that every one may know their place, and watch, and instruct in all Wisdom, and correct and reprove in the Name and Power of our Lord Jesus, that no rebellious nor sloathful may grow up, nor be harboured among you; but all in Diligence may be kept in the Fear of the Lord in their places, that the Gospel of Christ Jesus be not evil spoken of, nor the Heathen blaspheme. And therefore my dear Brethren, be diligent in the Work of the Lord so much the more, as you see the Day is approached; and the Harvest is great, and the Vineyard of the Lord is great and large, and but few La∣bourers; yea, the Lord is enlarging his Borders, and spreading forth his everlasting Truth, and stretching forth his eternal Arm over the Nations, and opening the treasures of Heaven, and bringing Rain out of his Trea∣sury, to water the Earth, that hath been parched and dry, and to make his Plants to grow. And so all wait, that you may see the power and presence of the Lord in all your Assemblies; and see that there be no Strife, nor Contention, nor Exaltation amongst you, but all in meekness, and quietness, and long-suffering and forbearance, even as the Lord hath spared and forborn you, one submitting unto another, even as you have heard and received, when the Word of the Lord came first unto you; and he that will be the greatest shall be the least; but all in meekness and lowliness of Mind serve one ano∣ther in Love, even as you have received; and the everlasting God of Life and Power be with you all, and make you grow in the living power and virtue of God, to order all things in his Wisdom, as good Stewards of the manifold Mercies of the Lord, which you are made partakers of, that he alone may be glorified throughout all the Churches of Christ Jesus e∣very where. And to you my dear Brethren & Fellow-Labourers, to whom the Word of Reconciliation is committed, & are in the Work and Ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ, and are made partakers of the everlasting Gospel of peace, which unto you is given to declare; Lift up your Voices, blow the Trumpet, sound an Alarm out of the holy Mountain, proclaim the acceptable Year, and the Day of Vengeance of our God; gird on your Sword upon your Loins, put on the tryed Armour, and follow him forever, who rides upon the white Horse, and is clothed with the same, wh makes War in Righteousness: Ride on, ride on my beloved Brethren and Fellow-Souldiers, make all plain before you, thresh on with the new threshing Instrument, which hath Teeth; beat the Mountain to Dust,
and let the Breath of the Lord scatter it; make the Heathen tremble, and the Uncircumcised fall by the Sword; the Lord of Hosts is with us, and goes before us. Spare none, neither Ox nor Ass, neither old nor young; Kill, cut off, destroy, bathe your Sword in the Blood of Amaleck, and all the Egyptians, and Philistines, and all the Uncircumcised, and hew Agag to pieces; break the Rocks, cut down the Cedars and strong Oaks, make the Devils sub∣ject; cast out the unclean Spirits; raise the Dead; shut up in Prison; bring out of Prison; cast in your Nets; lanch into the deep; divide the Fish; gather the good into Vessels, cast the bad away; bind the Tares in Bundles; cast them into the Fire; the Angel with his sharp Sickle is come; the Angel of the everlasting Covenant is come; thrust in your Sickles; reap the Earth; the Word of God is come, that divides, let all Flesh keep Silence; divide the Word rightly; feed the Lambs and Babes; fill the hungry; stop the Lyons Mouthes; feed the fat and the strong with Plagues and Judgments; declare his Name; publish his eternal Truth, which shall stand forever. Eternal Life is come, Glory to him forever; silence all Disputers and Diviners forever; trample upon all the Chaff, Dung and Mire forever, which all the Wisdom of the World feeds upon; Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World. Oh my beloved Ones, although I am the lowest and weakest among ma∣ny of my Brethren, yet the eternal Power of God is my Shield forever; the Lord of Hosts is with us; there is a Crown which none can take away, to all who have denyed all; yea, it is on our Heads; the Dread of God is with us: And truly, dear Brethren, we cannot say, that we fished and catched nothing; for many Vessels are full; nor we have not travailed and laboured, and brought forth Wind, as the false Prophets do; for we have the Seals of our Ministry, which shall be Witnesses for the Lord in Gene∣rations to come; Not unto us, O Lord, but to thy Name, be Glory forever, who hath done, and doth all for us, and in us, who is our Strength, our Glory, our Crown of Rejoycing all the Day long; for his hidden Trea∣sure is brought forth, and made manifest in earthen Vessels; unto him be eternal living Praises forever. And so all dear Brethren, Members of the same Body of Christ Jesus, by which we are set free from Sin, in the Liberty, Life and Power, in which you are made free; stand as Witnesses for the Lamb, and for the holy Nation, for the royal Seed of the true Israel of God, that it may be brought out of Captivity, to serve the Lord in the Land of the living; and the eternal God of Power and Life, of endless rich Love and Mercy, be with you all, and prosper his own Work in your Hands, that he alone may be glorified, unto whom be eternal infinite Praises, who is our Life, our King, God blessed forever and ever. And to you all my dear Brethren and Sisters, who suffer in Bonds, and Prisons, and Dens, and Holes, and suffer the Enemy to plow-long Furrows upon your Backs in Patience, and suffer stocking, whipping, buffeting, beating, and cruel Mocking, and Stripes, and Chains, and Fetters, whom the World is not worthy of, even as they did unto our Master, of whom we bear Witness, and have the Witness in our selves, even so do they unto us; but the Servant is not greater then his Lord; and therefore we that are baptized for the Dead, and stand in
Jeopardy of our Lives often, we have a Cloud of Witnesses, which endured the same; and therefore the same Baptism, and the same Cup must be drunk by all that follow him. Well, my dear Brethren, your Sufferings I know, and I know, he of whom you bear Witness, bears up your Heads, who hath called you thereunto, above all that which is done unto you, as you stand in his Will and Counsel: Well, as dear Brethren and Companions in the same Tribulation, Kingdom and Patience of the Saints, as Witnesses of the same Faith as they were which are gone before you, you are made Partakers of the same; it is made manifest and revealed in you by the same God, in which Faith they had Power, and you have Power, and endure as they did, and as he did, even the Contradiction of Sinners. Well, our God is on our Side, and takes our Part; and therefore my own Bow∣els in Patience endure, God will bring forth your Righteousness as the Sun, and your Enemies shall be ashamed; and I know, and you also know, it is for the Advantage and the Furtherance of the Gospel of Christ; and endure in Patience and long-suffering, and look not out, and the Lord in due Time will enlarge your Border; and the eternal God of Power be with you chosen Ones, for the Lord's Work you shall have your Reward; nay, he is come, and his Reward is with him; I know you have it, and witness his Power and his Presence with you: So my dear Ones, in that which limits all, and chains all, and keeps under all Deceit, dwell and abide forever in the living Power, which makes the strong Man bow down, and the Devils tremble, and the unclean Spirits roar; and the Power you know, where is your Life, that all the Powers of the Earth cannot reach; and therefore do the Potsherds of the Earth strive in vain, to set Bryars and Thorns in Battel against him, in vain do they rage; for notwithstan∣ding all that, God hath set, and will set his own Son upon the holy Hill of Sion, Glory unto him forever! Shout out for Joy, oh ye Sufferers for him, who are set free by him, and your Freedom can none take away; for he is greater then all, even him in whom ye have believed, standing in his Power, Wisdom and Counsel, who is near you, that none is able to pluck you out of his Hand; for he hath the Keyes of David, who opens, and none shuts, and binds, and none can loose, even he who rebukes the Wind and Seas, and they obey him, and causes a great Calm, and causes the Water to abate, nay, to stand of a Heap, and dryes up the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, that his ransomed Ones may go over into the Rest; and he that hath and doth believe in him is entered into the Rest, where we all meet in one in him, who is the Judge of all the World, the Light of the World, and our Life, who believe in his Name, but the Condemnation of all the World, who walk in Unrighteousness, forever and ever. For with the pure and upright he dwells, and his Throne is established in Righteousness forever and ever: And unto our God, who lives forever, shall all the Powers of the Earth bow; to whom be Glory and eternal Praise, of all his Redemed Ones, forever and ever. F. H.
O All ye Sons of Sion, and ye Daughters of the King, who is glorious within, who have waited for the Bridegroom; Oh my beloved Oes, you who have long sitten in a solitary Place, and have been as a silly Dove without a Mate, and have been as a Widow desolate, and as a parched Heath; you that have wandred up and down in the long Night of Darkness, and knew no Rest, but were as one cast off by all, and all that passed by you laughed at your Sorrow; you have been as a Hissing and as a Proverb to all, and as a Mark to shoot at by all; your Faces have been as the Tents of Kedar parched, and your Skin wither∣ed for Want of Refreshment, and as a dead Tree that bears no Fruit: Oh ye who have come through great Tribulation, and have suffered the Loss of all, the spoiling of all, even the greatest Riches, the chiefest Jewels, who have lost all your Knowledge and Wisdom, and become Fools for Christ's sake, and have parted with all, and have suffered the Indignation of the Lord to pass over all, and have drunk of the Cup of Fury at the Hand of the Lord, who have suffered Hunger, Famine, Pe∣stilence and Earthquakes, and the darkening of the Sun, and the Moon lost her Light, and the Stars have fallen, and the Pillars of Heaven have been shaken, the Earth hath been removed out of its Place as a Cottage; and you have cryed out in the midst of all this, He hath forgotten to be gra∣cious, and his Mercy is come to an End; the Womb hath been shut up, De∣solation and Sorrow, Loss of Children and Widowhood in a Day came upon you. Oh ye tossed, afflicted and not comforted, that have been as Eunuchs, dry and barren as in the Drought of Summer, that have been as Peli∣canes, and as a Dove who hath sorrowed for the loss of her Mate, and as one in Sorrow for the Loss of her first-born, who have been in Bitterness, and none could comfort you; I am one with you, your State I know, I love you eternally; yea, you are my Brethren and Sisters forever, sealed in my Heart, and engraven to be read forever; I see you, I behold you, I kiss you, and embrace you with an holy Kiss of everlasting Love, which overcomes Death and Hell, which Love thinks no ill; ye that are made Partakers of this Love, know what I say; ye that have waited for him, and wait, and suffer the spoiling of all; I am marryed unto you; I came forth of the same Womb, which is Eternity, free forever, free-born, not in Bondage, because the PRINCE OF THIS WORLD is judged and cast out, and the Glory of the Lord re∣vealed. Come forth ye Sons and Daughters of Jerusalem, which is free from a∣bove, utter forth your Voice, sing aloud, the Bridegroom is come, and is coming, and ye that have suffered the spoiling of all, rejoyce for ever∣more, lift up your Voices as Trumpets; he is come; he is covered with Righteousness, as with a Robe; his Countenance is as the Morning; his Eyes are brighter then the Sun; his Voice is Life Eternal; Salvation is
round about him; he dwells in eternal Life; Life is in his right Hand, and Joy is in his Presence, and Peace for evermore; he is a tryed Stone; he is a Rock which the Righteous fly to; he hides his under his Wings, and covers them with his Feathers: Beauty Beauty, Glory Glory, Eternity Eternity, Almightiness Almightiness, Power, Riches, Honour, Dignity and Dominion, Strength, Wisdom and Goodness, Fulness, Satisfaction, Eternal Treasure, Durable Riches, Infiniteness is his Name forever; unexpressibly I am filled with his Love and Power; he opens the Windows of Heaven; he rains his Showrs as Silver Drops, and as fine Myrrhe, as sweet Odours; he nourishes the Young; he carries the Lambs in his Arms of Love; he drives gently them that are with Young; he is true and faithful forever; he keeps Covenant; he is long-suffering and kind; who can declare his Power? I am lost in the incompre∣hensible Being of Eternal Love. Oh my dear Ones, come up hither, Fellow-Citizens of Jerusalem, which is from above, who is our Mother, which few know, but you who are written in the Lamb's Book of Life; sound forth his Praise, trumpet forth his Power, declare his Name among the People, that it may sound into the Eears of Generations to come; this is he we have waited for; this is he who hath begotten us to himself, to reign with him, the Lamb, upon Mount Sion, as Kings, and Priests, and Judges of the Prince of Dark∣ness, Death and Hell forever; Salvation, Honour and Glory be to him forever, eternal infinite Praises, Praises to him forever, who was dead, and is alive, and lives for evermore, KING OF KINGS forever; Majesty, Glory, and Power, and eternal Renown are in his right Hand forever; his redeemed Ones live forever, dwell, follow, live in him forever; no Beast can touch the Mountain where he dwells, but he dyes forever. Come away my beloved Ones, drink abundantly and be Refreshed, and praise his Name forever; Eternally I am shed and spilt among you; never so as now never to be separated out of the Eternal Oneness: sound forth his Praise; declare his Word; let it go forth as Thunder; let the Heathen bow, let the Princes of this World fall, and the Kings worship at his Feet forever; let the Disputer's Tongue Cleave to the Roof of his Mouth for∣ever; let all Flesh keep silence forever. Babylon is fallen, and become the Habitation of Devils forever; the judge of all the World hath Confounded and cursed her Language forever: God is risen, and sits upon his Throne, eternal Wisdom is come, and the Ancient of Dayes, all carnal shall be Confounded: stop all Mouths in the Dust forever. Eternity shall speak and judge forever: whom he binds is bound forever, whom he looseth, is loosed forever, whom he remits are remitted; the Devil is chained, the Grave gives up her dead, and the Sea and Hell; all is judged by him that lives forever. O beloved Ones, who are the Children of my eternal Father, who have eaten at his Table, and drunken of the new Wine in the Kingdom of God, who are nourished and dandled upon the Lap of everlasting Love, who suck at the Breasts of everlasting Consolation; your Beauty is comely, I am ravished, I am filled, I am filled with Love to you all, I am sick of Love; your Beauty hath ravished my Heart: come, sit down, my dear Lambs, together in the Fold where no Wolf can come; and let us rejoyce to∣gether,
and sound forth his Praise, who hath washed us, and cleansed us, and covered us, and made us worthy to enter into the Fold the Bride-cham∣ber, to eat with him of the Bread of Life forever, at the eternal Table of Life; the Bridegroom is come, Friends, of him I know you rejoyce great∣ly because of his Voice. And now my dear beloved Ones, follow him for evermore in the eternal Light and Life, where we were bred, brought forth and nourished, and are unknown to all the World; but me you know, and I know you in one, who is the Condemnation of the world, and in him I meet you, and leave you in his Arms; I lye down with you in the bo∣som of eternal Love, Life, Peace, Joy and Rest forever, where none can make us afraid. My Name ye know, my Voice ye know, this is to all my beloved Brethren, who are redeemed from the Earth. Francis Howgil. Bandon in Ireland, the 7th Moneth, 1655.
THE INHERITANCE OF JACOB DISCOVERED, AFTER HIS RETURN OUT OF AEGYPT: And the leading of the Lord to the Land of Promise declared, and some Information of the VVay thither. Or a Word of Exhortation to all Professors in England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all the World where this shall come, wherein the common Salvation is de∣clared, in which the Saints believed, and Deceit discovered and made manifest. Also a few Words of Exhortation to the Rulers of England and Ireland. AWAKE Oh Sion, who hath long sitten in the Dust, in Sorrow and Bitterness, and hath been covered with Ashes, and none hath had Compassion upon thee; but all the Kings, and mighty men of the Earth, who have worshipped the Beast, and received his Mark, and committed Fornication with the Whore, who sits upon many Waters, which is full of Abomination, and the Cup in her hand have all the men of the Earth drunken of, and are made drunk, and stagger, and now glory in their Abominations, and (Oh Sion) despise thy Virginity, and thy Situation, and have pulled down thy Towers, and made thee as a desolate Widow, and have gone over thee, and trampled upon thy Glory, and have made merry over thee, and have slain thy Sons and Daughters in the streets, even in Babylon, where the Whore sits as a Queen, and in Sodom and Egypt, with whom they are joyned, where the Witnesses lie slain: But the time of thy Deliverance is come, and the Years of thy Captivity are up: Arise, Oh Virgin, who art not defiled, who couldst not joyn with the Daughter of Babylon in her Whoredoms▪ Therefore they have mocked thee, and wagged their heads at thee, and have said in their Hearts, who shall deliver thee? Arise, shine forth, put on thy beautifull Garments; behold, thy King cometh in his Glory, who will adorn thee and crown thee with a royall Diadem, in the Sight of
hine Enemies, who have reproached thee; and thy reproach shall be taken away; for thy Seed shall be as the Stars in multitude; yea, they that have spoiled thee, shall be spoiled, and they that have destroyed thee, shall be destroyed; for the King is coming out of his Tent; yea, he hath lifted up his Standard against all that have spoiled thee; yea, the destroyer is come up against Babylon, and Egypt shall tremble, and the Philistines Hearts shall fail for Fear, and all the Cananites shall be cast out; and this shall be performed by the Lord of Hosts, the God of Jacob, who is now arisen in his Jealousie, and it burns as Fire against all the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, and the Sea, who have joyned their Strength together against the Inheritance of the Lord: Rejoyce for evermore all that love his Appearance, and who have waited for him, he is come, and coming, to take Vengeance upon his and your Adversaries; for he hath a Sacrifice in Babylon to perform, even to cut off all her Children, who have despised thee, oh Sion: Arm your selves, oh ye high Cedars, and mighty men, put on your Strength, and gather together all your Forces, which you have trusted in, call upon your Gods, and all your Southsayers, and Diviners together; for now he is come, and the Daughter of Sion now laughs you to scorn, and Jerusalem, the free Citizens, do wagg their Heads at you; for he will now plead the Cause of the Poor against you who have been too strong for them, and now all that hear this shall trem∣ble; For he will make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, and from it do the Law and the Prophets come forth. Awake, Oh Arm of the Lord, and put on Strength as in the dayes of old, to redeem thine own Inheritance, which hath long been by the Heathen laid waste, and hath been trampled upon by the Uncircumcised; art not thou he, which was, and is, and is to come, who wilt not give thy Glory to another? Arise and shine forth in thy Brightness thou Star of Jacob, and Sun of Righteousness, and let the Earth be filled with thy Light and Glory, that Generations to come may call thee blessed: Dry up the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea; confound the Wisdom of this World, which never knew thee, neither would own, nor receive thee; make the Diviners and Sorcerers mad, who have scattered thy Sheep from the everlasting Fold, and have healed the Hurts of thy People deceitfully, and have caused them to err, in telling them, thy Power, nor thy Arm was not to be looked for now, as in the Dayes of old, nor thy immediate voice, nor word was to be looked, or waited for now in the Earth, and so have deceived the People with their lying Divinations, which they have spoken from the Imaginations of their own Hearts, and have laid a stumbling-block in the Way, as the Son of Nebat did, who made Israel to sin. But Oh Lord, thou seest how thy own Seed lyeth scattered, and raven∣ous Beasts make a Prey upon it, and the Devourers swallow it up; there∣fore hast thou appeared in thy Love and Power, for thine own Name's sake, and wilt not suffer thy Seed to be trodden upon any longer, by the Prince of Darkness, nor his Children, whom he hath begotten in his own Image. Arise, shine forth, thou everlasting Covenant of Light and Peace, by which, and in which, all our Fathers believed, and so obtained a good Report, and were redeemed out of Captivity, to serve the Lord forever with one Heart and Mind, and worshipped in one Spirit, in which Faith
they laid hold upon the Perfect Righteousness of Christ, made manifest in them, and were justified, but hath been hid for many Generations, in the time of Anti-christ's Reign, and all the world hath wondered after the Beast, and hath received his Mark; but now is the Night far spent, and the Day is at hand, wherein all that hath been hid shallbe made manifest, and the Number of the Beast is read and known by all that are redeemed from under his Power, and now the Beast and the False Prophet, is seen, and the Man of sin, is made manifest in this the day of his everlasting Power; and the brightness of the Sun of Righteousness, who is the Light of the world, hath made him manifest, who is come and coming; Glory unto him for evermore, who alone is worthy to take the Kingdom. Wherefore all honest-hearted, in and under all Forms of Professions, who have travailed, and are weary, and all you that have kindled a Fire, and have warmed your selves at the Sparks thereof; and yet still you lye in Sorrow. Oh all ye that have panted and thirsted after Righteousness, who have wearied your selves in seeking among the dead Graves and Tombs for a Saviour, but have found no Rest, and who have followed, Lo here and there, in this Grave and the other Sepulchre, builded on this and that Sand, and still swept away; your State I know, you have no Peace in the eternal Rest; I say unto you, while you look without you, your Eyes may con∣sume in your Holes, and your Expectation fail, and you will be still com∣plaining: For your sakes who are weary, and have found none to direct your Way, a few Lines I am moved in Compassion to write unto you; and if you will not receive it, you will not believe if one should rise from the dead; for I have obtained Mercy from Christ, through his free Grace, who is risen from the Dead, and saw no Corruption; by which Grace I am saved from Sin, and cleansed from Unrighteousness, after long and sore Labour and Travail, under Pharaoh the Oppressour, from under whose Do∣minion I am brought, to worship the living God in Spirit and Truth, in his Temple, where he dwells in Righteousness forever. And for the simples sake (who have erred for Lack of true Knowledge, as I did in Times past) I shall declare unto you a little in short of my Tra∣vails in Egypt's Land, where Darkness is so thick, that f ye wait but dili∣gently to see your selves, you will fell it also. From twelve Years old I set my Heart to know that God which the World professed, and which I did read of in the Scripture, which Abra∣ham, Noah, Moses, and the Prophets, and the rest of the Fathers worship∣ped; and I did fall into the strictest Worship that was in that Part wherein I lived; and often I desired to be alone, and attended much to reading and Meditation; and then as I was sober, and serious alone, I began to see, that all the Sports and Pastimes, and such as Youth delight in naturally, were Va∣nity, and they lasted but for a Moment; and while I was in Folly and Wan∣tonness, doing of them, the Nature which was run into Transgression had Pleasure in them, but as soon as I was come from among them, I was judg∣ed in my self for what I had done, and often made me weep; then I resol∣ved in my Will, that I would never do so again, and for some time did restrain from the common Practice of those things that I had walked in; but as soon as I came amongst those again, I acted those things again, which before I did see to be Vanity, but long before that I was checked for many things; and
so I walked, often condemned in my self, when I was serious, and had no Peace; and then not knowing what to do, in much Sorrow, when I was a∣lone, I had a Desire to be alone, where I might not hear nor see any Folly acted, and did not go to the former Exercises, although something in me hankered after it; but when I yielded not unto it I was glad, and had Peace; and then I began to oppose my Fellows, with whom I had walked in Wan∣tonness; and then they began to revile me, and hate me, and scorn me; yet notwithstanding I mattered not; then I read much, and prayed in Words often, three or four times a day; but I knew not where God was, but in my Imagination imagined a God at a Distance, and so went on; and then I began to grow in Knowledge without (which is sensual) and then I was puffed up, for the World admired me; but still I was condemned for vain Words and Actions, and the Root of Iniquity grew in me; and then I followed a more strict Course, and often went five or six Miles to hear some more excellent Means (as they called it) and so did get more Words, but still I was the same, nay, worse, for Knowledge puffed me up; then along to about fifteen Years of Age, I posted up and down after the most excellent Sermons (so called) and so became acquainted with all the eminent Christians (so called) in the Region where I lived; and I was de∣spised of my Parents, and of the World made a Wonder, and great Re∣proach came upon me; but still I saw they knew nought, and it was no Matter; and so much Sorrow fell upon me four or five Years; and when I was turned within, I was judged for all my Iniquity formerly, and still my Heart was shewed to me, that it was corrupt; but as I kept within to the Light in my Conscience, I was restrained from many Actions, which I had a Will to do, and in the Instant, when I have been doing any Unrigh∣teousness in Actions or Words, in many things I was often stopped; and when I saw that I did it not, a great Joy arose in me; and when I had done any thing forwardly and rashly, I was judged; but this the Teachers said, was a Natural Conscience that kept from Sin, and did restrain it, and said, he that had but restraining Grace (as they called it) he was but a tame Devil. And so I hearkned to their Imagination, and so slighted the Light, as too low a thing, that was but common Grace that did preserve out of gross Evils, but the Saints had a peculiar Faith and Grace; and so I hearkened to them, and still I was convinced of Sin; and then they told how the Saints did believe in Christ, and so Sin was not imputed, but his Righteousness was ac∣counted to them, and so I must seek him in the Means, as Prayer and receiving the Sacrament, as they called it, and judged me a worthy Communicant; and in great Fear I was that I should eat unworthily; and none could direct me what the Body of Christ was; insomuch that one time I read all the Scripture that spoke of Christ's Suffering: And they said, I must believe he suffered for me; and I believed all that they called Faith, but yet I could not see how he dyed for me, and had taken away my Sin; for the Wit∣ness in my Conscience told me, I was a Servant of Sin, whilest I committed it; and they told me, I must not omit that Ordinance, for thereby Strength was confirmed, and Faith added; insomuch, on the one Hand they pressing it as a Duty, and on the other Hand I saw that the Scripture said, He that eats unworthily eats Damnation to himself: I was in Fear, notwithstanding none could accuse me without; yet then afterward a great Fear fell upon
me, and I thought I had sinned against the Holy Ghost, and great Trouble fell upon me. Then they said, I had not come prepared; and yet I had all the Preparation that they had spoken of; but still they were all Physitians of no value. Then I fasted, and prayed, and walked mournfully in Sorrow, and thought none was like me, tempted on every Hand; so I ran to this man and the other, and they applyed Promises to me, but it was only Words; for the Witness of Christ shewed me, That the Root of Iniquity stood, and the Body of Sin whole; notwithstanding I was kept by a secret Power from gross Evils; but still Sorrow compassed me about, and I questioned all that ever I had, which they said was Grace, Repentance and Faith. And then I told them there was Guilt in me; and they said, Sin was taken away by Christ, but the Guilt should still remain while I lived, and so brought me the Saints Conditions, who were in the Warfare, to confirm it; and so I said in my self, This was a miserable Salvation, that the Guilt of Sin and Condemnation still in me should stand; and so I was tossed from Mountain to Hill; and heard them preach Confusion, and so I mattered not for them, and said, Sure this is not the Ministry of Christ; and so I ceased long by Fits, and did not mind them, but kept still at home, and in desart Places, solitary in weeping; and every thing that I had done was laid before me, insomuch that every Thought was judged, and I was tender, and my Heart broken, and when I could sorrow most I had most Peace, for something spoke within me from the Lord, but I knew him not then; and they said, that it was Heresie to look for the Word of the Lord to be spoken now in these Dayes, but only the Letter; and so I regarded it not much, yet often I was made to do many righteous things by the immediate Power and Word of God, and then Peace and Joy sprung up in me, and Promises were spoken, That he would teach me himself, and be my God; and often I did obey contrary to my Will, and denyed my Will; but they told me, This was legal to obey out of Fear, and that was Slavery; but there was an Evangelical Obedience (as they called it) so I got above the Fear, and yet acted the former things, which they called Ordinances, and they said, that was Son-like Obedience, and Christ had done all. Then there appeared more Beauty in them called Independents, and I lo∣ved them, and so joyned my self to them, and all the Money that I could get I purchased Books with, and walked with and owned them as more separate from the World, and they prest Separation; but at last I saw it was but in Words, that they would do things, and chuse Officers and Mem∣bers of themselves, and so made themselves an Image, and fell down to it, yet there was some Tenderness in them at the first, but the Doctrine was the same with the World's Words without, of others Con∣ditions. Then they whom they called Anabaptists appeared to have more Glory, & walked more acording to the Scripture, observing things written without; and I went among them, and there was something I loved among them; but after they denyed all but such that came into their Way, as out of the Fellowship of the Saints and Doctrine of Christ, I saw the Ground was the same, and their Doctrine out of the Life, with the rest of the Teachers of the World, and had separated themselves, and made another Likeness; but still all said, The Letter was the Word and Rule, and Christ, at a Distance with∣out,
had done all; and some of them holding Free-will, others opposing, and all in the Will. But still I lov'd them that walked honestly amongst all these; but though I had seen and owned all that I had heard (except the Figure, which I saw was outward, and that was their greatest Glory; and I saw they would have all fall down to it, else no Communion; in the midst of all these and much more, which is Death to speak on, but only that all honest-hearted may see themselves where they have rested, and also may not trust any more to a Reed of Egypt) after all this no Peace nor no Guide I found; and then the Doctrine of Free Grace (as they called it) some preached, That all Sin was done away, past, present and to come, and so preached Salvation to the first Nature, and to the Serpent that bore Rule, only believing this, and all is finished; to this I hearkened a little, and so lost my Condition with∣in; but still whither ever I went, this was spoken in me, His Servant thou art to whom thou obeyes; and so I being overcome by Sin, I had no Justifica∣tion witnessed in me, but Condemnation. Then some preached Christ within, but they themselves were without, had but Words, and yet they said, All must be within (unto which my Heart did cleave) and spoke of Redemption and Justification, and all with∣in, and of God appearing in Man, and overcoming the Power of the De∣vil; and then that in my Conscience bore Witness it must be so, and I was exceedingly pressed to wait to find it so, and something breathed after the living God; and a true Love I had to all that walked honestly in what Pro∣fession soever, and I hated reviling one another, and that they should smite one another, and persecute one another, and with the Sufferer I alwayes took Part; but still I saw, though they spoke of all things within, and of a Power to come, that they enjoyed not what they spoke, for the same Fruits were brought forth; till at last, I saw none walked as the Mini∣sters of Christ, nor none that pretended to the Ministry had any such Gift, neither Pastor, nor Teacher, nor any such Members as were in the Apo∣stles time. So at last, having passed up and down, hurried here and there, I saw all the Teachers of the World, that they sought themselves, and fed poor People with dead Names and Deceit, and that they were not the Ministry of Christ; and so I saw them all in Deceit, who did not abide in Christ's Doctrine; and I got my self quit of most of them; for ever as I dissented from their Judgment, they hated me and persecuted me. So at last there was something revealed in me, that the Lord would teach his People himself; and so I waited, and many things opened in me of a time at Hand; and sometime I would have heard a Priest, but when I heard him, I was moved by the Lord, and his Word in me spoke to op∣pose, and often as a Fire I burned, and a Trembling fell upon me, yet I feared Reproach, and so denyed the Lord's Motion; and it was revealed in me to wait, and I should know his Counsel; and the Word of the Lord was in me, The Time was at Hand, when the Dead should hear the Voice of the Son of God; and it burned in me as Fire, That the Day was near, when it should not be, Lo here, nor there, but all his People should be taught of the Lord; but still my Mind ran out, and out of the Fear into Carelesness, for the Cross of Christ I knew not; and yet I say, I was wiser then my Teachers I met with in that Generation; I do not glory in it, for Condemnation is past
on it all forever; yet still I had ever, as my Mind was turned to the Light, pure Openings and Prophesies to come, and a Belief that I should see the Day, and should bear Witness to his Name; and so when things opened so fast, the Wisdom of the Flesh catched them; and so I went up and down, preaching against all the Ministry, and also run out with that which was revealed to my self, and preached up and down the Country of the Fulness that was in the old Bottle, and so was wondred after, and admired by ma∣ny, who had waded up and down as my self had, and we fed one another with Words, and healed up one another in Deceit, and all laid down in Sor∣row when the Day of the Lord was made manifest; for I was overthrown, and the Foundation swept away, and all my Righteousness and Unrighte∣ousness was all judged and weighed, and all was found too light. And immediately, as soon as I heard one declare (whose Name is not known to the World, but written in the Lamb's Book of Life forever, in eternal Record forever) as soon as I heard him declare, That the Light of Christ in Man was the Way to Christ, I believed the eternal Word of Truth, and that of God in my Conscience sealed to it; and so not only I, but ma∣ny hundreds more, who thirsted after the Lord, but was betrayed by the VVisdom of the Serpent, we were all seen to be off the Foundation, and all Mouthes were stopped in the Dust, and so we stood all as condemned in our selves, and all saw our Nakedness, and were all ashamed, though our Glory was great in the VVorld's Eye, but all was Vanity. And then after all this, I was ignorant what the first Principle of true Religion was; but as I turned my Mind within to the Light of Jesus Christ, wherewith I was enlightened, which formerly had reproved me for all Vanity, and also as I did own it, it led me into Righteousness, and when I turned to it, I saw it was the true and faithful VVitness of Christ Jesus, and then my Eyes were opened, and all things were brought to Reme∣brance that ever I had done, and the Ark of the Testament was opened, and there was Thunder and Lightning and great Hail, and then the Trumpet of the Lord was sounded, and then nothing but War and Rumour of War, and the dreadful Power of the Lord fell upon me, Plague, and Pestilence, and Famine, and Earth∣quake, and Fear, and Terrour, for the Sights that I saw with my Eyes, and that which I heard with my Ears, Sorrow and Pain; and in the Morning I wished it had been Evening, and in the Evening I wished it had been Morning, and I had no Rest, but Trouble on every Side; and all that ever I had done was judged and condemned; and all Things were accursed, whether I did eat, or drink, or refrain, I was accursed; and then the Lyon suffered Hunger, and the Seals were opened, and seven Thunders uttered their Voices; mine Eyes were dim with cry∣ing, my Flesh did fail of Fatness, my Bones were dryed, and my Sinnews shrunk; I became a Proverb to all, yea, to them who had been mine Acquaintance, they stood afar off me; the Pillars of Heaven were shaken, and the Earth reeled as a Cottage, one Wo poured out after another; and I sought Death in that Day, and could not find it, it fled from me; and I sought to cover my self any Way, or with any Thing, but nothing could; for the Indignation of the Lord was upon the Beast and the false Prophet, and Babylon came into Remembrance in that Day, the Mother of Harlots, and the Sea dryed up, and all the Merchants that traded with her stood afar off, for the Cup of Fury was poured forth, and Cain was seen, and Judas that had betrayed the Lord of Life; and I would have run any Way to have hid my self, but nothing but weeping, and gnashing of Teeth, and Sorrow,
and Terrour; and I roared out for the Disquietness of my Heart and the King∣dom was full of Darkness, I knew not the right Hand from the left, I became a perfect Fool, and knew nothing, and as a Man distracted; all was overturned, and I suffered Loss of all, in all that ever I did, I saw it was in the accursed Na∣ture; and then something in me cryed: Just and true is his Judgment! my Mouth was stopped, I durst not make mention of his Name, I knew not God: And as I bore the Indignation of the Lord, something rejoyced, the Ser∣pent's Head began to be bruised, and the VVitnesses which were slain were raised, and stopped Heaven, that it rained not in the Dayes of their Pro∣phecy; and a great Famine there was, and the Sun was darkened, and the Moon turned into Blood, and the Stars did fall, and all the Grass of the Earth withered, and every green Tree, and all the Springs were dryed up, and a great and noysome Smell, and a Plague fell upon the Earth, and the VVaters became as the Blood of a dead Man, and the Heavens passed away with her Noise, and the Elements melted, and the Earth was scorch∣ed with the Flame which proceeded from the Throne of God, and the Judgment-Seat of Christ was seen, and an Account was to be given, and then Esau was cursed, and Cain, and Judas, and Ishmael, and all the Ca∣nanites and the Egyptians went to the left Hand; and as the Judgment was pronounced, something cryed, Just art thou, oh Lord, in all thy Judgments! And as I did give up all to the Judgment, the Captive came forth out of Prison, and rejoyced, and my Heart was filled with Joy, and I came to see him whom I had pierced, and my Heart was broken, and the Blood of the Prophets I saw slain, and a great Lamentation; and then I saw the Cross of Christ, and stood in it, and the Enmity slain upon it; and the new Man was made, and so Peace came to be made, and so eternal Life was brought in through Death and Judgment; and then the perfect Gift I re∣ceived, which was given from God, and the holy Law of God was reveal∣ed unto me, and was written in my Heart, and his Fear and his Word (which did kill) now makes alive; and so it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me through Death; and so I came to witness Cleansing by his Blood, which is Eternal, Glory unto him forever, and am a Minister of that Word of eternal Life which endures forever, Glory unto his Name forever, and have Rest and Peace in doing the Will of God, and am entred into the true Rest, and lye down in the Fold with the Lambs of God, where the Sons rejoyce together, and the Saints keep Holy Dayes, Glory unto him forever. And these few things have I written for your sakes, who walk in Dark∣ness, that you may see where you are; and also ye high Cedars, who trust in the Arm of Flesh, that you may cease your Boasting, and come down from off the Pinacle where you are exalted; for the same must come upon you, if ever the Lord you know in Truth and Righteousness, even through the Death of things, in the Curse of all Knowledge and Wisdom which is from below, yea, through the Death of Death that rules in you, which must be slain upon the Cross of Christ Jesus, if ever you come to true Peace, and witness eternal Salvation. And therefore cease you Diviners and Imaginers, who have feigned a Faith, and a Christ, and a Salvation in your Imaginations, and yet that you may live in the Lust and Filth of the World, and the Customs and Fa∣shions
which perish: I say your Expectations shall fail, and you will lye down in Sorrow; for where Salvation is witnessed, the Life of Christ is witnessed; but you would have Salvation, and the Life of the Devil brought forth and lived in. But unto all such I say, This will be your Sentence, Depart into the Lake; Therefore take Warning; for it is not your good Words, without the Life of Godliness, nor your swelling Speeches, that are accepted with God; for he accepts nothing but what is of himself, and by him wrought in the Creature by his own Will and Power; and this destroyes the carnal Will, Power and Righteousness; and this work, which he work∣eth of himself, and by his Power, and in his Covenant, is perfect, and is accepted of God; and so its no more the Creature, but Christ, who is all in his Saints; and so he brings all that follow him out of his Works of Condemnation (which are acted in the disobedient Nature, and are accursed, whether praying or plowing, or whatsoever, while Cain lives, which is in the Banishment, out of the Acceptance of God) and all who follow him, who is the LIGHT, and leads all that believe and follow him into the living Works of Righteousness wrought by Christ through Faith, and is accepted and well pleasing unto God; and here all boasting is excluded, for all is of him, and from him, that works both the Will and the Deed; and here the Lord is admired in all his Works and his VVorks praise him. Wherefore all honest hearted, who travell and are weary, and have found no Rest for your Souls, I say unto you, Arise, and come away, lye not groveling in the Earth, like Moles, nor seek not to know God in your fallen Wisdom; for the Well is deep, and if you know nothing but the old Wisdom, which is corrupt and natural, you cannot come to one Drop of the living Water; therefore dwell no longer among the Graves, and Tombs, where the unclean Spirits dwell, which trouble and vex all that pass in their Way, neither dwell among the Pits, where there is no Water; he is risen, he is not there, look upward, mind that which draws you from the Earth, the Covenant of Life is made manifest, Glory unto him in the highest; his Proclamation is, Ho, every one that thirsteth, come freely and receive of him freely, without Money or Price, or any thing of yours, or self; nay, self must be denied, and that you must deny if you will receive of him, that he may be all, and you nothing; for he gives freely, and his Gift is perfect and pure, without Spot, Stain, or Mixture; and all that receive his Gift, come by it to be presented perfect to the Father. And this is making manifest to you also, who wait upon him, who is given for a Covenant of Light, and Peace, and Life, and all that receive this gift, shall come to hear glad-tidings, Peace on Earth, and Good-will to you, as you turn to the Light; and this shall be preached in you, by him who is the anointed of God, and the Messenger of the Covenant, and is sent to preach to the Spirits in Prison, and to open the blind eyes, and to set open the Prison Door, that the Prisoner may come forth, out of the Mire and Clay, to follow and wait upon him, who is the Rock of this Age, and all Ages, in which all the Fathers believed, and were justified, and did eat and drink of this Rock, and this Rock was and is Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, and hath enlightned every one that comes into the world with his true Light. Therefore I say unto you who look after Righteousness, come hither,
who are weary, and I will shew you, where you may have true everlasting Rest, which he hath shed abroad in my Heart by his free Grace and ever∣lasting Love made manifest, after a long and a dark Night, in which I passed without a Guide, and so fell into the Pit, and stumbled, and then Sorrow and Trouble compassed me about on every side, as an armed man; but now hath he shed abroad his Grace in my Heart, which saves me from Sin, and leads out of the Works of Condemnation into his Habi∣tation, where no unclean thing can enter; and this Grace hath separated me from Sin, and hath constrained me to deny my self, and follow him through the Death of the Cross, and through the Denial of all, both Country and Nation, Kindreds, and Tongues, and People, and from Wife and Children, and Houses and Lands, to publish his Name abroad contrary to my own will, and to make known unto you the Riches of his Grace, which all that wait in the Light of Christ Jesus shall come to see, and so you may see him whom your Souls love and long after, which hath long breathed after Refreshment, but none could speak a Word in Season to your Condition. Return home again, ye that in your seeking have sought among the dead, and joyned your selves to Strangers, and have got nothing but a Husk, a Shadow, and live in a Dream; you are further off, in running out, and seeking in your earthly Wisdom and Comprehension, then you were before, and have got nothing but a Report of what Christ said, and did, and how they worshipped him; and so while your eyes have been without, you never found him, whom the Saints, and all that knew him, worshipped in Spirit, and witnessed him their Salvation in them, and was their Hope; and the Ground of their Hope was manifest in them; and he that manifested his Love in them then, and was their Redeemer, he changeth not, but is the same to his Seed forever: and all who wait in the Light of Christ, the Measure of God in you, this shall come to see. Now therefore, every one that thirsts, come unto Christ Jesus, who is near you, and wait to know his Word in you, which is in the Heart, which Faith comes by the Preaching of it in you, as you diligently wait, and keep your Minds unto it; and this which shews you Sin and Evil, is in you, and makes manifest all that you have acted contrary unto it; yea, even all that ever you have done, and will search your Hearts, and is the Eye that sees the Deceit in all its transforming in you; and it will let you see, it hath often checked and called, but you have not answered its Call, and so have chosen your own Way, and so have gone from the Way, which is the Light of Christ in you, and so you run into the broad Way; and that which desired after God hath not been nourished, and fed, but hath been famished, and another hath been fed, which now is for the Slaughter: But now as ye return home to within, to the true Light of Jesus, which is that one thing, which leads all men that own it, to be guided by it, you shall have true Rest and Peace. Now Friends, there is something in man which must receive Christ, something of his own (learn what it is) which he comes to, and nothing can he joyn with, or be joyned unto, but that which is pure and undefiled; for the pure in Heart see God, and not the mortal Mind, that despiseth his Glory; for to that Mind that hunts abroad, he doth not reveal himself, that is Esau, the Blessing is nothing to him, nor that which the Covenant of God is
with, the Election he hates, and to him it is of no Price nor Value, that's the prophane Person, and Judas that betrayes him, selleth him for a Thing of naught, nor the Pearl is nothing to the Swine: Now read within every one, you that are painted with the Attire of the Harlot, trimmed and made beautiful in the Eyes of the Egyptians, this is a small Thing to you and to that Seed which the Promise is to, and the Covenant established with, is trodden upon, and is famished in the Streets of Sodom and Egypt, where Christ was and is slain, and his Witnesses suffer in the Streets, and none hath Com∣passion; is this Thing nothing to you, all ye that pass by, to slight the Love of the Father, in sending his Son a Light to you? and him you de∣spise; and as the Phrisees could not own him, they put the Time far off, and so do you, and cannot own that of him in you, to be led by it, and so follow Strangers, and still are complaining, and put Redemption to ano∣ther World; and so Satan hath deceived you in looking abroad, and there∣fore that at home is of no Price unto you; and so you run away from the draw∣ing of the Father, and from his dwelling▪ where the least in his House hath Bread enough; but to the carnal Mind, which is at Enmity with God, who seeks him in the fallen Wisdom, he is of no value, and that which was the Saints Rule is too low for you, and yet you say, the Sons of God are led by his Spirit. Now I say, Where doth the Spirit speak? doth in not bear Witness, either with or a∣gainst our Spirits, and so all Mens Spirits? and so that Nature in you, which is one with the Serpent, and nourisheth the Harlot, is exalted, and lives, and hath the Preeminence, and yet you will talk of being reconciled unto God: Now consider, while you stand not in the Counsel of God within, and wait to hear his Word, you know not the Word of Reconciliation; for he takes none into Union with himself, but they that follow him, and do what he commands, and are his Fruit and Off-spring: And therefore, O foolish and unwise! how long will you feed on a Dream that you are saved, when your Re∣bellion is open to your own Sight? To that of God in your Consciences I speak. All therefore that see your Darkness that you live in, return home, and that which is low mind, the meek Spirit, and be not forward nor rash, but stand still in Quietness and Meekness, that the still Voice you may hear, which till you come down within, you cannot hear; for the loud Voices of the Egyptians and Inchanters are so many, and Pharaoh's Voice and He∣rod's is so loud; and you whose Minds are abroad, you thinks, as they thought, it's the Voice of God; but I say, be still, he shall not cry, nor lift up his Voice in the Streets, who you must hearken unto in you, that your Souls may live; and so be low and still, if you will hear his Voice, and wait to hear that speak that separates betwixt the precious and the vile, now that which you must wait in is near you, yea, in you, the Eye that seeth, and the Ear that heareth that is of the Lord; for that which is visible is natural and carnal, and the natural Ear cannot hear the Word of the spiritual God, for that which hearkens without, that Ear must be deaf, and that Eye blind: Now that which reveals the pure spiritual God must be in you pure and spiritual; For none knows the Things of God, but by the Spirit of God; and doth not his Spirit bear Witness alwayes unto their Spirits? and doth it not so now to all that know him? So in the Light wait, which comes from God, who is Light, and dwells in the Immortal Light, which the mortal Eye cannot behold, and it will lead you to know Christ, who
is Immortal, and not carnal, but spiritual and eternal; and as you love the Light, and keep your Minds inward, then you will hear the Motion of Christ Jesus in you; and so loving it, the Good you will come to see from God; which will lead out of Sin, and sanctifie you; and the accep∣table Year you will see, and the Day of Vengeance; and this is he whom the Father hath given for a Covenant, to bring Man out of the Alienation to himself again, and to reconcile man unto himself, even by the Blood of the Cross; and he who is the Light is the Covenant, and he who is the Covenant is the Light, for they are one in him; and this Covenant of Peace is tendered unto you who are afar off; and herein is the eternal Love of God made manifest to the Jew and the Greek, and the Life of his Son to be the Light of the World, and of men; and so in the Covenant of Life abide, and you will see he is near you, the Peace-maker, the Gift of God, which presents you perfect in himself to the Father, and this Gift is free, and offered freely to all that will receive it; and yet you cannot receive the Gift in your own Wills, but through the DENYAL OF YOUR OWN WILLS, for the Light is contrary to the Will; and so you will see the Will of the earthly man and God's Will contrary; and as you receive the Will of God, you deny your own Wills, and so do the Will of another, and another guides you and leads you, and this is God's alone Work, not of your selves, but wrought by Christ in his own Way and Truth; and so the Covenant of God comes to be esta∣blished to the Seed, and the Foundation stands sure, and his Promise is ful∣filled in you, as you come to witness the Seed which is one, in whom the Promise is fulfilled. And Friends, thus must you wait to have Judgment set up within you, and this is he who is the Judge and the Light of the World; and so wait to see the Law set up within, which is added because of Transgression, to cut down, and the unjust destroyed in you, and the rebellious Nature yoak∣ed, which hath had its Liberty in the earthly, where the Beasts of the Field dwell, and so it will come to decay, and the Law works Wrath upon the Deceit in you, which hath had the Preheminence; and so you will see the Thunder, as the Seal is opened, and the Earthquakes and Lightning, insomuch as you cannot behold and live; but the Transgressor and the Transgression, which is contrary to the Law, is cut down; and when there is a Time of great Sorrow, and great Trouble, and Tryal, and Temptation, wait in Patience in the Judgment, and let the Lord's Work have its per∣fect Operation in you; and so as you turn unto him that hath smitten and wounded you, he will bind up and heal; and give up all to the great Slaugh∣ter of the Lord, unto the Cross, all that which is discovered by the pure Law of God; and as the Earth comes to be plowed up, the Seed which is sown comes up, and the Rocks broken, the Water gusheth out, and so you will see some Promises will arise in you to the Seed which is comming up out of the Grave, and so the Love of God will appear in you, and you will be stayed, and see Hope in the midst of Calamity. Then take heed that the Serpent get not that which is to the Babe, and so the carnal come to be exalted; but as you wait, you will see the Subtil∣ty of the Enemy; and Sin and Death rules till Moses, who was a faithful Servant in his House, and brings to the Law of God revealed in you, then Sin comes to be crucified, and to loose its Dominion over you, and in you,
and so you will see one brought forth under the Law, who fulfilled the Law, and now fulfils it in all those who walk after him in the Spirit, and fulfil not the Desires of the Flesh; and wait, and you will see some Pro∣phecies opened in you, and the Day-star in your Hearts, which leads to where Christ is, and Openings of the Inheritance which is to be received, and the Promise is to the Seed: And all wait in the Light, and keep in your Minds to it, and you will see John's Ministry, the Water which wash∣eth, and he is the Preparer of the Way; and turn to God, lest he smite the Earth with a Curse, and his Ministry breaks down the Mountains, and removes them, and makes a plain Way; and your Minds being turned to the Lord, and as you own the Gift of Christ given you, Repentance you will see unto Life, and then you will see something arising and shine in you, opening your Hearts, and there will be a Breathing after the Lord and his Righteousness; and standing in Obedience in the Cross, the Vail you will see rent, and you will see him that hath turned you from Sin by his free Gift made manifest in you, and he who is the Gift saves you from Sin; and so the Seals will be opened by the Angel of the Covenant and the Lamb: So all in Patience wait, and keep in the living Principle of Life, and things will open in you, even the dark Sayings of old; and that which spake Parables to the Serpent's Seed, will open the Parables to his own Seed, then you will see him whom you have pierced, even the Lamb who hath been slain since the Foundation of the World, and your Hearts will be broken, and Water will gush out of the Rock, and so Love will encrease in you, who abide faithful in your Measure, and the good and perfect Gift of God will be made manifest in you, and the Hope upon which the Soul comes to be anchored, will come to be witnessed, which Hope purifies the Heart; and as you stand in the perfect Law of Liberty revealed in you, revealed by the Spirit, which cuts down the Oppessor, and gives Liberty to his Seed, unto which the Covenant is and the Promises forever; and this Seed Christ took and takes upon him to redeem, even the Seed of Abraham, unto whom the Promise was made; and so wait, that the pure Law of Righteousness, which is Life to the Righteous, and the Seed, may be set up, and you will see all chained under, and this binds and fetters the unclean Spirits, and shuts them up into utter Darkness forever. And as you come to be redeemed from under the Bondage of Sin, and come above the Bonds of Death, and the pure Principle lives in you, there will be a Delight in you to do the Will of the Father, who hath redeemed you from Sin and its Law unto Righteousness and its Law: And all who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, wait in that which thirstth, that the Gift you may receive, which perfects forever them that receive it, and believe in it, and cleanseth and purgeth you from Unrighteousness; and this being revealed in you, as you obey it, its leads to true Peace, and will reveal in you the immortal Seed, which came not by the Will of man, but is contrary, and revealed out of man's Will, which all must witness to be born of, that inherit the Kingdom of God; and this is he who is begotten of the incorruptible Seed, which the Promise is unto, and are in him fulfilled Yea and Amen, come out of time before all time, the Son of God, who leads out of time; and this is he whom the Father revealed in Paul; and this is he of whom I am a Witness, in whom I have Redemption by the Blood of the Cross; and he is my Sanctification, Justification and
Wisdom, who is the Son of God, who came to do his Father's VVill, and now doth, where he is witnessed, who by his eternal VVord of Life hath begotten me, and made me a Partaker of his eternal Inheritance, which never fades away; Glory unto him for evermore, who is Life, and translaet∣eth all that believe and follow him in the VVork of Regeneration unto his Kingdom. So silence all you Diviners and Sorcerers forever, who believe with a Faith, and teach a faith, that none can be ever cleansed from Sin while they are here; you and your faith is denyed; for it is not the same which was once delievered to the Saints, which gave them Victory over the World, and by which they overcame: Paul a Minister of Christ by the will of God, said, the Colossians were translated into the Kingdom of God, where nothing that is imperfect can come or enter; your Preach∣ing is vain, your Hope and Faith is vain, and all your Hearing is vain, while the perfect Gift of God is not witnessed, nor the everlasting Offering which perfects forever them that are sanctified by him, even by his Word of Life and his Will, which sanctifies and makes perfect the Co∣mers thereunto, and presents all that believe and receive him without Spot. And therefore all you that love the Lord, and wait for the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, feed no longer upon Imaginations nor vain Words; cease from looking, lo here and there; for the Kingdom of God will the Father reveal in you, as you wait in the Measure of the Light in you, by which he reveals himself in his Sons and Daughters, and will bring them to his everlasting Fold and true Rest, all who follow him through the Denyal of all, and to the loosing of all for him, shall come to witness an incoruptible Inheritance, which never fades away. And now a few Words to you who would thrust your selves into the Kingdom, and would be called Christ's Disciples, and Church-members, who are gathered into Confederacies, and make a Likeness unto your selves, and are now professing the Saints Conditions in Words; How came you hither, to climb up so high in Words, when as you are what you were before, if not worse? think it not a hard Saying, for it is so among many of you; and in the Light (which is pure) you are weighed; and when one comes to try you, your Language bewrays you, that you are not what you profess; for when you are tryed by the Saints Practices, and Life that was in them, and the Injoyment they had with God, you are found so far from being any such, that you even oppose the Faith they even believed in, as some of your Pastors openly to my Face in the hearing of two hundred People, said, All the Saints dyed Sinners; and so was so far from owning the Perfect Righteousness of Christ, that he even denyed it, and said, it was Heresie; and othres of you say, you believe, That all the Grace the Saints enjoy are imperfect, yea, even Faith is imperfect; and others saying, That all the Righteousness that was wrought in them by Faith was imperfect; and others saying, while the Light of Christ Jesus condemned them, yet Christ Justified them, and yet that which was wrought in them there was Failings in it; and so you have imagined a Faith and Righteousness of your own, and such a Christ to talk on, and a Redemp∣tion, as you may live in Lusts, and be Men-pleasers, and in the Customs
and Fashions of the World, and Covetousness, and plead for Sin, and puts perfect Righteousness to another VVorld; and thus the Devil hath deceived you; and so you set up, and make Covers, but all will not hide you in the day of his Appearance; for God joyns not to that which is imperfect, neither is that true Faith which is imperfect, and which layes hold upon an imperfect Righteousness, that is such a Faith, as never was professed by any of the Saints, whose VVords you profes▪ for they had received Faith, the Gift of God, the least Measure of which was perfect; and as they stood in it, though it was but a Grain of Mustard-seed, they said to this Mountain, be removed, and it was so; and that which was in them reveal'd by the Son, led them that did believe in it, to lay hold upon Christ's Righteousness, which was and is perfect, which had (yea hath) no Spots nor Wrinckles, nor Stain; and this Righteousness was made manifest in them by the Faith of the Son, by which they were justified in the Sight of God, and came with boldness before the Throne of Christ; for in them there was no Condemnation, neither guilt, but became one with the Judge, and reconciled unto him and his Throne, and to the Lamb by him who is the Mediator, and hath made Peace betwixt them and the Father, and so were justified in the Sight of God; and this witness they had in them, that they pleased God, and were accepted of God; and this Righteousness was wrought in them, and is now the same which is wrought in the Saints, by him who is their Light and Life; and this was the Righteousness of Faith, and that which was wrought by Christ in the Saints, as they believed in him, and in the Measure of Grace received from him, which saed them from Sin, which was not of themselves, he perfected his own VVork in them, through and by Faith, and justified them, and sanctified them, and became their VVisdom, by which they were led into all Truth, out of Failings, and Imperfections, and VVeaknesses; and he became their Strength and Rock, and they were builded upon him; and as they stood upon him, the Rock, they were preserved when the VVaves did beat, and when Temptations came, and were sure and stedfast, and immoveable, and so overcame the Armies of Aliens, and quenched the Violence of Fire, and resisted the Devil, and quenched his fiery Darts, and had Victory over the Heathen, and reigned as Kings over the Beasts of the Field, and over the Deceit, and by the receiving and believing of the VVord of him, who was and is called Jesus, by which Faith came by the hearing of, they overcame the Enemies of their Souls, and him who hath the Power of Death, by the Blood of him who is eternal, who is Jesus, the Mediator of the new and Living VVay; they overcame the Dragon, even by the VVord of his Testimony, which was revealed in them; which Word of Faith Paul, who was a Minister, preached unto them, even to them who had the Word in them, and turned them to it, and as they believed in it, they were sanctifed by it, and cleansed by it, & made perfect, and then they witnessed the bringing in of a better Hope, which perfects, and makes perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, which while they stood without looking at Elementary things, and divers VVashings, and those things which were Figures of the true Tabernacle made without Hands, which stood until the time of Reformation, and then done away, to wit, the Hand-writings; and them that witness the new Covenant now, they
see them done away, and the time of Reformation is come, the same which they witnessed, Glory for evermore. And therefore all you Professors, who have builded high Towers and Castles in your Imaginations, and have told of Reformation these many Years, but you have nothing but a Hand-writing to establish your Building upon, and all your Reformation hath been but the washing of Cups, and pulling down one Thing, and set up another beggarly elementary Image, and do not witness the better Hope brought in, nor the time of Reforma∣tion, nor cannot abide that any should declare it unto you, nor believe it, nor hear it, nor while your Eyes are without, and not in the Head, you cannot see when Good comes, but are as Heathens in the Desart; and al∣though you are among the Brambles and Bryars, yet you would be coun∣ted Kings and Heads over others, and one making an Image in this Man∣ner, and another in that, of all Sorts, high and low; but all stand in the Earth, and all in one Ground, and what do they avail you? for they can∣not save; for your highest Enjoyment is imperfect (you say) what then serve these for? only for you to talk on, and this is all they serve for, and to contend and strive about one with another, and all in your Wills, while the Will of God in you is not hearkened unto, but cast behind your Backs, and so the Way of true Peace you never come to attain unto. Oh, when will you be weary of feeding upon the Wind, and of Husks among Swine, and upon that which dyes of it self? and when will you enquire after the living God, who is Power? how long have you talked of his Power to come many Years? and you are still as far of, if not fur∣ther, then you were before, and have told of the Glory of the Lord to be revealed, and of his Law being written in the Heart, and of God teaching his People himself, and of his Spirit being poured out upon his Sons and Daughters, and you cannot see that you have obtained nothing; and you have prayed, and what have you obtained? nothing; for you have asked amiss; and one comes hungry, and is still complaining, and then you that are full feed them with the old Dregs and Lees, which you are setled upon, and the old Leaven of airy Notions and Conceptions, and Wine of the sour Grape, which sets on Edge the Childrens Teeth, and fills them too full, that when the living Bread is broken, they cannot eat, nor relish it, nor taste, and so cannot enter your selves, nor suffer others to enter; and when these things are witnessed in the Life, which you have talked on so long, you cannot own them that do declare it; and when the Power of God is declared unto you, what it is, and where it is to be waited for, you cannot own it, this is too low for you; and except the Lord will come in your VVay, that you prescribe unto him, you will not look upon him, but as the Jews did, whose Eyes were without, and your fallen VVisdom cannot receive him, nor compass his eternal VVisdom. And yet you will say, The Jews did require a Sign, and were in the Adul∣tery, and the Greeks sought after Wisdom, and they stumbled; and yet you cannot see your selves in the same State: Did ever God reveal himself to the fallen VVisdom, which is learned from that Principle which is erred and gone out from God? or to the VVill of Man, which is at Enmity against God? Nay, nay, he never did nor will reveal his Counsel, but to that which is of himself, which is the least of all Seeds in the VVorld; and it is he that is born of God, that heareth God's VVord, and what is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and is nourished by the Spirit, and led by it; and so
the spiritual God reveals his Law and his Statutes to him, and his Testimo∣ny which is sure: How long have you talked of the Spirit, and worship∣ping in Spirit? and yet indeed deny its leading and teaching, and live in the Oldness of the Letter, and crying up and setting up things that are carnal, visible and elementary, and VVashing is not known from Sin, nor cleansing; and so you may see what Operation your Spirit you have talk∣ed on hath, when you are still what you were. Now the Spirit of God is operative, and works a Change in the Ground, and translateth all that follow and hearken unto it into its own Nature, when all those things you so much strive about were but a Shadow; for the Word was in the Beginning, and gave Life, and is spiritual; and when it's known and witnessed within in the Heart, it separates from Death and gives Life to all that hear and believe in it: What Christ & what Gospel is this you preach, which saves you not from Guilt and Condemnation? for the Word of the true Christ, where it is owned, cleanseth and takes away Sin; and blots it out, and destroyes the Root from whence it flows forth, and works a new Creation in Righteousness; and the Lamb of God takes away Sin, in which the Churches of Christ believed, and is Glad-tidings to all that do receive it; now none can witness Gladness of Soul where there is Guilt, which (you all affirm) is in every Christian, while in this World, and so you might see, that it's not the true Christ nor the everlasting Go∣spel you preach, but this you cannot bear; yet you say, he hath taken away your Sin; how much is Sin taken away? if you say, all, how comes the Guilt and Trouble that is in you? for if it be taken away, and his Ju∣stice satisfied, this was to make God unjust, to charge it upon you again; but I tell you, when his Witness in your Conscience con∣vinceth you, and manifests unto you, that you commit it, and reproves for it, I say, you cannot witness his Justice satisfied; for the Light is just, which is one with God, and when this condemns you, there is no God that will justifie you; but you use to say, It's all done in Christ; I ask, where, if it be not taken away? and unless you have the Witness of it in you, your Faith is vain; for he that believes hath the Witness in him∣self, which none hath, which walks contrary unto the Light, the pure Witness of Christ; for this convinceth you of Sin, and bears Witness a∣gainst you: Now shew your Witness within you, and your Assurance; I say unto you, while the Testimony of Jesus bears Testimony against you, it bears not Witness unto you, and so see your Confusion; but after you have believed in Christ (as you say) and have received all his Ordinances, if any thing after did judge you, and bring Trouble upon you, this you used to call a Temptation, and so put Light for Darkness and Darkness for Light; I say, there is no Guilt where Sin is taken away and crucified, but Peace and Rest in the holy God, who is unchangeable; and so his Wit∣ness is unchangeable, which judgeth and condemns the changeable; but you use to say, His Love is uncangeable, and whom he loves once, he loves to the End; yea, but it is to him who is begotten by the Immortal Word, which was in the Beginning, & which Word leds to the Beginning again, before the Hatred was; the Promise is to this Seed, not Seeds, as to ma∣ny, but the Seed of the Covenant, there he loves from the Womb, yea, the Womb that bears the Seed of Jacob, and the Paps that give them suck, and where this is known, as to Enjoyment, Esau is cast out and Ishmael,
and the Seed of Abraham inherits the Promise, and Edom and Moab is laid waste, and Amaleck is slain by the Edge of the Sword, and the Seed of Evil-doers cut off, blessed are they that can witness this in Truth; and till this be known, the everlasting Love of God is not known, which is stronger then Death, and Sin is Death, and where it is acted and conceived, Love is not witnessed, nor its Strength, but VVrath comes upon the Children of Disobedience, & are you not Children of Disobedience, while you break the holy Law of God, in which is Power, which is in the Heart, and bears witness against you and in you, and yet say, You cannot believe that ever you shall be able to fulfil it; if you fulfil it not, you break it, and then the Wrath of God abides upon you; but then you say, If we must fulfil the Law, what Use is Christ of? I say, he who abides forever fulfilled it, and fulfils it in them who know him and his Work, and this the Scriptures bear witness of; and herein Man comes to be justified in God's Sight, by Christ, who works all our VVorks in us and for us, and self becomes dead, and because he lives, we live also, Glory unto him forever; and therefore we cannot but lay open the Deceit of Satan, and exhort all to come up to Christ out of the VVorks of Condemnation. Oh foolish People and unwise! when will ye seek after Wisdom, and hearken that your Souls may live? How long will ye trust to the Imagi∣nations of your own Hearts? Verely verely, I say unto you, The Time is coming your building shall fall, and there shall not one Stone be left upon another that shall not be thrown down, and the Shame of Ethiopia and E∣gypt shall come upon you, and your old Garments shall be torn off you, and you shall walk naked and bare, and shall see your Shame, and the holy Nation of the Lamb shall rejoyce; and your Sorrow the Lord hastens upon you, who will not own the Cross of Christ, nor the Word of Life, which would turn you from Unrighteousness, and out of the World and its Na∣ture; but you harden your Hearts, and bend your Bowes, and shoot your Arrows against the Lord, and his anointed Ones, and take your Pat with all the uncircumcised in the Nations, in the Confederacy in the Nation a∣gainst the Lamb, yea, even with them against whom you your selves have declared, and many of you who have been a Reproach, now reproach, O! tell it not in Gath, never let it come to other Nations; shame, shame and blush at this, you who thus requite the Lord Evil for Good: Hath the Lord broken the Band of the Oppressour without? And have you not seen the Hand of the Lord against them that were Oppressours, cut off in his Wrath, and overthrown? And are not many of you the highest Profes∣sors both in England and Ireland, now acting in their Footsteps? Even you who profess Separation from the World, who have been taken from the Sheep-fold, and as you were seeking the Asses, and raised from a low Estate in the World now to Places of Dignity and Honour, and to bear Rule, and to sit as Judges among the People; and now have you forgot∣ten that you were Servants under Pharaoh, but now have taken up his Pow∣er; and have forgotten the Afflictions of Joseph, and your Fingers are becoming heavier then your Fathers Loyns, and now you are joining your Strength with the Canaanites and Egyptians against the Lord, where is the Liberty of tender Consciences you have told of, and what is become of your Reformation? Is it ended in this, like Absolon; when you are come to be Judges in the Gate, act in open Rebellion against the Lord, and now
would be Judges of him every where, and would limit him, and 'set a Bound unto him, and would break his eternal Decree, which stands for∣ever. Oh, if they who had professed no Love to God had done thus, it might have been born; but ye treacherous Hearts, your Ingratitude and Hypocrisie cannot be born, but the Lord God will visit for these Things; that you should now act by those Laws you cryed out of as oppressive and should deliver your Brethren up to the Devourer and Spoyler, who have born a Part of the Suffering in the Nation's Distress and Grief, in the great∣est Calamity; would you be thus done by? would you bear it well? I will not omplain, but I will shew you the Ground and lay it before you; that if it be possible, you may be ashamed and repent, lest the Lord also avenge himself upon you, as he did upon the Enemies before you. Have not many of you in England been acting in the Steps of the pro∣phane, when the Lord hath given you what you sought after, Liberty and Freedom in those Things? and now you labour by all your Strength and Power to oppress them who walk blameless before the Lord and men also: Oh, what! Is all your Preaching and Praying, and Fighting and Warring come to this, that none must declare the Mind of the Lord, except it be in your Way, or Will, or Time, under pain of Bonds, and Banishment, Fines and Imprisonment, Stocking, Whipping, Stoning: And you that have been Sufferers your selves, now come to be chief Oppressors and Oppo∣sers of the Lord in his Way, and all manner of Lyes and Reproaches you cast upon the Truth, and you take Part with the rest of the Priests and Deceivers in the Nation, which took Part against you when you were for the Lord, and number us among Transgressors, of every Hand to make the Truth odious to all, from the least to the greatest, and yet you would be accounted Christians; and if you say, you have thus learned Christ, I say you know him not: Can you limit the Ocean from flowing? or can you command the Wind that it blow not? or can you stop the Windows of Heaven that it rain not upon the Earth? If you cannot at all do it all, lie down; he that reproves God, let him answer it: Have you given counsel to the Lord, or have you been his Instructer? or can you limit him in his Way? if you cannot, no more shall you be able to stop his VVay, who is riding on in his Povver, and overturns all the VVorld's VVisdom, Povver and Strength, and who is able to resist him, who dryes up the Face of the Deep, and saith to the Sea, be still, and to the Mountains be removed, and they are so? and he will advance his own Glory and Power against all mens wills and Laws, which stand in man's Will, and will break all your Cords as a Bulrush, and overthrow all your Counsel, and make it even with the Earth, and Shame shall cover all his Opposers, and therefore learn Wisdom: Oh ye Potsheards of the Earth, and cease to strive against the Lord, and his Power which will be too strong for you, and you shall not be able to limit him, nor stop him in his Way, who runs his Course as a Gyant, and bruises all his Enemies Heads, and cuts them in Pieces by the two-edged Sword of his Mouth, which he hath put into the Hands of his Saints, who follow him in the War; and our Conquest is through Suf∣fering, Glory unto him forever, who hath counted us worthy to suffer for his Name sake, and to be brought before Rulers and Councils for his Name sake, that the Scripture might be fulfilled in us in this Day, as it was upon our Brethren who went before us.
And Oh ye Rulers of Ireland, who have been Professors and Affecters of Liberty, and for suppressing Cruelty, behold now the Lord hath sent to try you, and you are found in the same Footsteps when you are tryed, as them that the Lord cast out before you; and in the same Nature of the chief Priests, and Elders, and Councils, who breathe out Threatnings, and send out Warrants and Inquisitions to bind all, and to send up all bound too, be¦fore you, that so Evil (you say) may be prevented in time; and take re∣ports from the Priests and false Prophets of the Nations who are Lyars, e∣vil Beasts, whose Mouthes the Lord will stop, and bring shame upon them, who are Flatterers, and have flattered the Powers and Rulers before you, till they were all cut off, and now they flatter you, and cannot hold up their Divination without you help them; what Gospel is this they preach, when a few poor despised People, who are hated of the World, that the Sound of them makes them afraid! Oh that ever you should be so ignorant to joyn to Baal! but let him plead for himself, and they stand by their God, and their Gospel, and if they be not able to defend themselves, let them perish. But them who come in their own Name, you receive; but them who come in the Name of the Lord, and seek none of your Tythes, nor Aug∣mentations, nor your Advance, them you cannot bear should be in the Na∣tion, who are not troublesome to any, nor desire to eat any man's Bread for nought, and these you call of an evil Life: And Men who have devour∣ed their own Estates and others also, and Drunkards, and all manner of unclean Persons, these may have Liberty. Oh! do you think that he sees not your doings, and that he will not call you to an account for these things? and you must know our Country and calling; I say unto you who live in Envy and Wrath, if we declare unto you, ye cannot believe; But God gives no account of his Matters unto man, where do ye read, O ye foolish People, and slow to believe, but that the Ministers of Christ were called out from their outward Employments, into the Lord's Vineyard, contrary to their own Wills, and were Ministers con∣trary to the Will of man, and did mind the Calling of God to his own Work, both the Prophets, and Apostles, and Ministers of Christ; and also they Preached the Gospel, who were never Church-Officers in all their Life-time, as you may see, Acts 8.4. But you say, that was in a time of Persecution. And what is this Time? How many have been Persecu∣ted from Town to Town, from City to City, put in Prison, haled out of the Synagogues? as most part of the Nation of England can VVitness. And you in Ireland are following your Leaders, who are in this Gene∣ration, and fill up your measure also; but Persecution was ever blind. But you say, They suffered for well doing, but we justly; Let that in your Consciences be Judge; Would you not have judged Paul as you do us, who went into the Synagogues on the Sabbath day, and disputed, and in the Markets daily; and Christ who was their Example, and ours also, in the Synagogues he taught, and in Ships, and Towns, and Villa∣ges, and Desarts, and wandred up and down, and the Ministers of Christ had no certain dwelling-place, and the Multitudes that followed them; would you not have said, These men are evil livers? Your Gene∣ration said so then, and that they were Sowers of Sedition and Heresie, and Ring-leaders of Sects, and Setters forth of Strange Gods, and are accused to be the Disturbers of the Peace, and were in Tumults often, as we
have been; and they said, that they were not worthy to live; and now the same you say. As Instance, a Warrant given out at Dublin in December, 1655. to fetch up, and send up bound to Dublin, all that are called Quakers; and all these things and much more, you who sit as Rulers and Judges of the Nation of Ireland, have charged upon us, and have required the Justices every where to examine us on these things, and to lay them to our Charge, and to see what Testimony we have, or Letters of Recommendation: (Isay), What testimony had the Ministers of Christ, from the Rulers or high-Priests then? they were false Apostles which were made by man's Will; and the Apostle said, Need we Letters of Recommendation as others have? And of what Church we are in England; we are of that which is in God, begotten by the Preaching of the Gospel of the Son of God, which all the Hirelings, and them you uphold by a Popish Law, call Heresie; and there is that in every mans Conscience, which is the Letters of our Recommen∣dation: And you say, we are not of any settled Principle; I say, we are grounded and settled upon him who is the Rock of Ages, and stand in his Counsel both sure and stedfast, and cannot be moved; Notwithstanding all the rage of the Heathen, we are in Peace, Glory unto him for vermore, who is the World's Tormenter, and the Breaker of Death's Covenant, and Hell's Agreement, and disquiets the Devil's Peace, and torments them who plead for his Kingdom: And you accuse us, we make open and publick Disturbance, to the Grief of the godly and sober People, and Scandal of Religion, if we come and declare the Mind of the Lord (as it is revealed in us) in publick, and declare the Word of Life, in Truth and Soberness; and then you hale him out, and Stock, Whip, Prison, and persecute; and what Religion is this that is among you? who stop your Ears, and as the Jews did with Paul, run upon us, and rent our Clothes, and yet you call us Disturbers. Are not these Practices found in most of your Idols Temples, into which the Hirelings creep, and call a Church; and all those Practices among you are found, and we are ashamed of you and your Practices, that these things should be found among you, after so manifest an Appearance of the Lord's Wrath against them; and are these godly? to that in all your Consciences I speak: One haling, another beating, another punishing, and rending our Cloathes, and Prisons, and Revilings, and cruel Mocking, and false Accusing, and Stoning; are these God-like, or like God? Oh! be ashamed: And you that are so soon grieved, you are not God-like, who is long-suffering; and his Saints, who were God-like, did bear and forbear one another. And these Parish Teachers, which you hold up in Ireland, I challenge them all in the Name of the Lord, who lives forever, that in all their publick Worship (as they call it) and them also, that they are not like God, not any of his Ministers, nor any thing that ever they practice: And therefore I say, Come forth and vindicate your Practice, and let your God come forth, and be tryed, and lay open your Practice and your Prin∣ciples to the World, and stand by them if you can, and for shame never run to the Magistrates to help; you learned Rabbies, you great Orators, come forth, and stand and prove your selves before the People, and mani∣fest your Strength and your weapons, and that God that answers by Fire,
let him be God; you have confessed our God answers by Fire, for its kindled among you, and the Word, which is Fire, we have declared, and many have heard it, and have believed, and answered it, and now it burns▪ and you shall not be able to quench it; post and run as fast as you can, dig as deep for Counsel as Hell, call up all the Powers of Dark∣ness, you shall not be able to quench the Fire that is kindled, If we should hold our peace, the Stones of the Wall would cry out against you. And therefore I say unto you, all you Parish Teachers, and all you that uphold them, arm your selves with all your Strength, call your Diviners together; for we proclaim in the Lord's Name (who hath rent the Hea∣vens, and is come down, and his Tabernacle is with men) open War we declare, and sound the Trumpet of our God out of the holy Mountain, all the Earth shall tremble before him, and the Mountains shall melt before him, why should we not be discovered to you? we are sent forth to take Peace from the Earth, and to warn all to the Battel of the great Day of God; for now he is arisen in his Power and Glory, and his Kingdom is come, Glory unto him forever; and we are Witnesses of it, and it's not of this World; and we have denyed the World, and follow him who hath a Bow and a Sword, and makes War in Righteousness, and none is able to stand before him; therefore gather your selves on Heaps, O ye Potsherds, and make a Confederacy among the People, arm your selves, cast up your Mounts and Batteries, strengthen your selves, and trust in the Arm of Flesh, and say, None can come near us; Verily I say unto you, you shall be made level with the Ground, and all your Sorcery shall be laid o∣pen, and Anti-christ is discovered by the Brightness of the coming of Christ; our Eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts in his Glory, and all your Glory; ye Tellers of Dreams and Diviners, shall be made as a Dunghil, and your Renown shall perish from the Earth, the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. And now a few Words unto you, O ye Heads and Rulers of the People in Ireland, who sit in Judgment; remember from whence you are raised, and how great Deliverance you have had, and how manifest the Lord hath appeared for you, to deliver you out of the Hands of your Enemies, who despised the Lord and all Righteousness, and they were numerous and great, when you have been in great Streights, and they said in their Hearts, We will swallow them up; and then the Lord in the Day of your Distress deli∣vered you, and hath given you their Possessions, and Dominion over them, and hath setled you in Peace, and you that have been low hath he exalted to bear Rule, and expects from you Righteousness, Justice and Equity, and to be as Feet to the lame, and Strength to the weak, and to break off every Yoak of Oppression from the Neck of the poor and oppressed, and to relieve your Brethren, and entertain Strangers, remembring you were many of you Strangers in this Land, which now is given you to possess; I say, take heed unto your selves, how you act according to the Customs of the Nation and your own Wills, nor the customary Worship of the Nation, which the Lord laid by, and wasted and scattered all them that pretended themselves Teachers of the People; was there any of them that stood in the Gap, or turned People from their Iniquity, till the Lord
broke out in his Wrath as Fire, and laid the Land waste, and the House of their God waste, which you burnt up; and will you now joyn with Moab? and will you build again those things which you have once de∣stroyed? then you make your selves Transgressors; think not thus in your Hearts, that the Lord hath given you Dominion over the Nation, to walk after your own Wills, and joyn unto Deceit, and that you may establish those things again, which the Lord was wroth with; and if you hold up those by your Laws, and your Power, and your Pri∣sons, and your Sword, which is the People of the Lord's Curse, I speak of the Teachers who are in Balaam's Way, and greedy dumb Dogs, who can never have enough, and bestow the Nations Tythes, and Lands, and Riches, which is the Lord's Treasure, upon them, that they may cry up Deceit, and flatter you, both you and they will fall to∣gether. And Friends, I am plain with you, the Hand of the Lord is against them, and all the Power of the Nations shall not save them from his Indignation: And therefore be wise, O ye Rulers, and do not you think to take Counsel against the Lord, and prosper, nor prescribe not the Lord a Way; for his Thoughts are not as your Thoughts, nor his Wayes as your Wayes; For he hath chosen the weak Things of this World to overthrow the Mighty; your Eyes have seen this without, and he hath re∣vealed his Will to them and in them, whom you look upon but as weak things and base things, and in them he is making known his E∣ternal Power, to overthrow the World's Wisdom and Might, which is in the Fall and Curse, from whence all Heresies, and Blasphemies, and Sects, and Opinions flow and come forth, and he is bringing his own Work, his mighty Work to pass, even to overthrow and overturn all the Power of the Beast and the false Prophet, and shut them into the Pit, and the Decree is gone forth, and sealed, and shall not be altered, though all the Powers of Darkness joyn against him; and although you should make a Law, as the Jews did, to take away the Life of Christ, yet it did but little avail them; for he hath carried on his Work through all Generations, notwithstanding all Opposition, and this is he in whom we trust; and do not you think that you are able to limit the Lord, by whom he must declare his Name, or how, or where, or in what time, but in his own VVay and Time; and if he command and will us, all mens VVills must be broken, though still the holy men of God suffeed as such, and so accounted as Disturbers of Peace; I say, the Devil's Peace must be broken; and though the false Prophets of his Nation cry Peace unto you, when you walk in the Imagination of your own Hearts; and though you cry peace unto them, yet one is come and coming to take peace from you; for all your Peace and Agreement that you make a∣gainst the least Appearance of God in his Servants, it will be dashed to pieces. And if they were to depart from the presence of God, who fed nor the Saints, neither clothed them, nor visited them in prison, but were to depart with the Devil and his Angels into everlasting Fire; what will be∣come of you, who instead of clothing encourage the people to rent them off us, and instead of feeding us, give Command to depart, because we are Stangers, and instead of visiting them in prison, you put them in
prison, and send for them one hundred Miles, to be dragged to your prisons, and before your Judgment-Seat, in whom he is made ma∣nifest. And now, O ye Council at Dublin, your Order hath so gratified the Devil, and all the prophane in the Nation, that they judge your Order was not large enough, as that they had not Liberty to banish them who have been long Inhabitants in the Nation, and therefore they tell you their Readiness to fulfil your Orders upon this Account, and desire your Directions what to do further; yea, you have made all Lyars, Drunkards, cursed Speakers and prophane rejoyce, and have strengthned the Hands of the wicked, and so Judgment is turned backward, and Righteousness cannot enter; but all these things are recorded, and you shall one Day re∣member what you have done. And Friends, it's nothing to us; we lay down our Heads in Peace; not∣withstanding, if it had been done by them who had never professed any thing of Liberty of Conscience and Tenderness, it might have been born, but here your double Hypocrisie is made manifest. Oh that ever you should be so led! but why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain Thing? for he will exalt his Son upon the Hill of Sion, and then wo unto them that have joyned their Power to uphold the Beast and the false Prophet; for all must go into the Lake together, where the Worm dyes not, nor the Fire goes out, to be tormented with the De∣vil and his Angels forever. And therefore I say unto you, Repent, and turn to the Lord, and seek Judgment and Righteousness, that so you may judge for the Lord, and break off all Oppression, and entertain the Strangers, who seek not yours, but the Good of the Nation, and that all people might know the Lord, and worship him in Righteousness, that so your dayes might be prolonged, in the Land, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth might rule over you in Righteousness, and that he alone might be exalted in the Nations, which hath not been known for many Generations, but only all have lived with the Name, without his Life and Power, in Deceit, and all Manner of Un∣righteousness, and the Lord is wearied, and will ease himself of his Ad∣versaries, and his Glory shall no longer be given to another. Cork in Ireland, the 8th of the 11th Moneth, 1655.
AN EPISTLE TO THE Church of Christ BEING MY BRETHREN, WHO ARE MADE PARTAKERS of the RICHES OF THE LOVE of GOD, IN Christ Jesus In and About the CITY OF LONDON. DEar Brethren, who are called to be Saints by the Word which pro∣ceeds from the Throne of God & the Lamb, in which you have be∣lieved, and denyed your Country, and followed the Calling of the Lord, and are become Children of Abraham, and Children of the Promise Grace and Everlasting Peace be encreased amognst you, who have believed the Testimony of his Son, and are made Partakers of the common Salvati∣on, which was delivered unto the Saints, and now made manifest in this his own Day, according to his Everlasting Love to his Seed, which Seed we are, which are come up out of Egypt, from whence he hath called his Son; great is my Love unto you all, and it's the Love that I love withal, which is stronger then Death, and hath broken the Covenant of Death, and now is become a broad River, from whence Streams of Refreshment flow, which make the Heart glad, and the Soul to rejoyce in the Land of the living. Oh my dear Ones, who are anointed with the holy and living
Oyl, which he was and is anointed withal, who is the Life you have re∣ceived into your Hearts, which teacheth you all things, and is the Truth which abides forever; and as you abide in him, and he in you, you are made Partakers of Eternal Life, and because he lives, you live also: Now dear Ones, having set your Faces towards Sion, and towards the holy Ta∣bernacle where he dwells, look not back, but all mind your Leader and Captain, who hath chosen you to follow him in the War, and to be Par∣takers of his Glory and Crown, as they are faithful to his Commands, which are not grievous to them who deny themselves; therefore you all have known the Terrours of the Lord, and the Indignation of the Almigh∣ty, while you were in the disobedient Nature, and in time past, when you were in the Alienation, and without the Knowledge of the true God in the World, and worshipping dumb Idols, even as you were led by the E∣nemy of God, who ruled in you; and seeing while you were in that Na∣ture, captivated unto divers Lusts, which the Wrath of God hath come upon, and you having tasted of the Cup of Wrath, and that with the li∣ving God nothing that defiles can have Fellowship, but with Doubting and Trouble, and with Fear and Condemnation in you, and not true Peace nor Assurance you did witness then; but now being changed in your Minds, by hearkning to his living Word, which killed you, while Sin ruled, which brought Wrath, and works Death now to the disobedient; but now hath he changed your Minds, and brought you subect, and hath subjected the Adversaries under your Feet, who have believed in him, and have given up all to the Death of the Cross: Oh my dear Ones, stand all in that pure Freedom and your Measure, which hath been obtain∣ed through the Death of the Cross, and which Peace and true Liberty you have already obtained, hath been purchased at a dear Rate; and there∣fore dwell every one in that Measure, and be diligent in the VVork of the Lord, and press on, that all may be subject by him, who is the Light and Guide, that he alone may have the Preeminence, who is the Head of all Principalities and Powers, in whom you have believed, and received the VVord of his Power, which is eternal, to whom be Glory and Praise fr evermore, which VVord (after it had judged and condemned Sin in the Flesh) now gives pure Peace and Life to all who believe in it, and are judged by it, and it seals you, and is the Spirit of Promise, and bears witness in your Spirits, as you act according to its VVill; and therefore now all der Friends, being all sensible of your Guide and Teacher, shut him not up in a Corner, but wait, that his Word may be preached for a Testimony to all the World and the Nations of the World▪ that so the End of it you may come to see in you, and the utmost Part of it may be given in Possession to the Son, that he may alone be glorified. And all DEAR FRIENDS, wait in Patience, and be circumspect every one over your own Hearts, that there be no fainting nor looking back amongst you, but that you may all keep out that which would lead you into the Rebellion, and it may be cut off, that so you may come to the End of your Hope, the Salvation of your Souls; and watch one over another in the living, and not with the Evil, but cover one another, and bear one another: and if any fall by Temptation, admo∣nish
and restore them in Love, and let not Strife nor Contention be among you, but all be low meek and gentle one to another, that so no Pride, nor Presumption, nor fleshly Exaltation may be amongst you, but that you may every one walk as Ministers of Righteousness in your Place, and so preach Righteousness in the Earth, that the Lord alone may be glorified, who is enlarging his Kingdom in this the Day of his Power; and in his Strength we run, and are not weary, fulfil our Joy, and grow up as living Branches of Righteousness, and bring forth Fruit in him who hath called you, and begotten you by the Word of his Power to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of the dead incorruptible, which hath changed you from Death to Life; my Desire is to you, and my Heart is enlarged when I think upon you, and my Prayers are to the living God, whom I know hears, for you, that you may all walk to the Praise and Glory of his Grace, which hath saved you from Sin, and will save you, as you abide in it, and will be sufficient for you, to keep you single and without Stain, and present you perfect before the Throne of God, which is Grace: God Almighty of Life and Glory be with you all, my dear Brethren, and preserve you all in the Arms of his living and eternal Power, that you may all have Do∣minion by the Blood of God, which is Life Eternal, over all Sin, and be cleansed by it from all Uncleanness, and so receive the Eternal Reward, the Inheritance with the Saints in Light, which is the Inheritance of Jacob, over which God reigns forever, and blessed are they that come to witness this: Forever the Lord of Life be with you all, and preserve you under his Everlasting Shadow, that so you may be brought to see the Lord, and be ever with him, who lives forever and ever, and unto whom be Glory and Praise forever, Amen, Amen. Dear Friends, Glad would I hear from you, that my Bowels may be refreshed; for our Labour and Travail hath not been a little, and our Suffering in this desolate Land; my dear Brother E. B. whose Love I know is dear to you all, I have not seen towards five Moneths, I am in Hope I shall shortly; the Work of the Lord prospers abundantly (blessed be the Lord) in such a wicked Generation as this is▪ but Hell hath open∣ed her Mouth against us, and all is on Fire, Councils, and Head, and Tail, Rulers, Officers, Priests, and all the Heathen are on an Vp∣roar, and so we must pass through Fire, and Hail, and Pillars of Smoak; pray that we may be preserved for the Work where∣unto he hath called us, to gather the rest that are scattered, and to turn them to the Shepherd and his Fold, that they may lye down with you in the same Everlasting Fold; and herein we war, and strive, and fight with Beasts; but strong is the Lord,
who hath covered us, and girded us with his own Armour, and hath taught our Hands to War, and our Fingers to fight in this the Day of his Power, unto whom alone be Glory and Praise forever and ever. Your dear Brother in the living Fellowship and Brotherhood, which all that come to know, must lay down their Life to come into it. F. H. Cork, the 18th of the 11th Moneth, 1655.
A LAMENTATION FOR THE Scattered Tribes. Who are exiled into Captivity, and are now mingled among the Heathen, and are joyned to the Oppressor, and refuse to return. Presented unto all the separated Congregations, under what Name or Form soever, in Love to the Lost. SHEWING The Difference betwixt them that were separated by the word of Faith, and them who have separated themselves in Immitation from the Letter: And how they differ both in Doctrine, in Matter, in Form; and so not the same with the Churches of Christ in the Unity. The Difference between the true and false Ministry. The Difference betwixt the Faith which is feigned, and the Saints Faith. The Difference betwixt true and false Hope. A few words to the Ministry in all Sects, and to all the mingled People who dwell in the Land of Darkness, and are tossed up and down, and know not where the Power is, which is of God, which gives victory. A few VVords for your Information. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish Things for thee, and they have not dis∣covered thine Iniquity, to turn away thy Captivity, but have seen for thee false Burthens and Causes of Banishment, Lam. 2.14. By a Servant of Truth, and a Friend to Righteousness, who suffers with the Seed, which is held in Oppression, waiting and labouring for its Return. F. H. Printed in the Year 1675.
THE CONTENTS. Concerning the Word of Christ, which the Apostles and Ministers preached, who had it in them revealed, which did gather them into one that believed in it, and its Effect and Operation that it had. The Difference shewed betwixt that Ministry, and the Ministry of them that preach the Letter for the Word. The Difference between them that were separated by the VVord, and them who have separated themselves. The Difference shewn betwixt them that are taught of Christ, and them that fol∣low the Principles of Darkness, that lead into Error. The Difference betwixt the Faith which is feigned, which is the VVorld's, and the Saints Faith. Concerning Hope, and the Difference betwixt true and false Hope. True Faith, how its wrought, and what it is, and its Operation. A VVord to all the Ministers of the World in all Sects, and to all People in every Sect. A few words to all you who put out the eye, through long accustoming unto Sin, who are near utter Darkness. With some Information to them who are tossed, and find no Rest, nor know not where the Power of God is, that gives Dominion over Sin, the Power declared, and the Way to Peace.
A LAMENTATION FOR THE Scattered Tribes. TO all you who profess the Name of our Lord Jesus in Words, and make mention of his Words, and of his Ministers Words, who had the everlasting Gospel and the Word of Reconciliation, and of those Practices which the Churches of Christ had in their Day committed unto them, after they were gathered out of the World, and had denyed it and its Nature, and were not comformable to it, but were changed in their inward man, and fruits of Righteousness were brought forth, and they were as Lights in the World, and did bear witness against the World, that they were evil, and said, they were of God, and had the Witness in themselves, and were bold to say, the whole World lay in Wickedness: To you, who are called separated Churches and Fellowships, under this or that Name, to you I write; my Soul pities you above the rest of the World; and in Love to those Desires which were once among you, I write; that so, if it be possible, you may come to see your selves, and the Foundation on which you stand, that those Desires which were after God begotten, may not wholly be slain, extinguished and betrayed, through the Subtilty of the Serpent, whose wayes are crooked, and whose Subtilty is great, to keep man under his Power. This I have to say unto you, There was and is a Zeal in you, but not according to Knowledge; bear my Words, and judge that in your selves which would be angry: There was that which shewed you the National Way of Worship under Episcopacy, and Prelacy, and Presbytery, which is one in the Ground and Nature that this was, the broad Way, and not according to the Mind of the Lord, neither was it according to Precept, nor the Practices of the Churches of Christ; which is clear from the Scripture: Now you seeing this was not accoding to Christ, nor his Ministers, nor the Churches, you began to separate from them into this or that Body, under this or that Name, as a Body separate from the World and their Worship, because you found in the Writings of that which is called the Gospel, People be gathered out of the World; now your Eyes being still without, you conformed to their Practices, as you judged both in matter and manner; and Practising those things which you read in the Scripture, that the Churches Practised; and so some Zealous did go forth and gather people together in this or that Form; and here was your beginning; and so here you set up your Rest, that you walk according to the most exact Pattern that is Visible or Written: yet since this you do not
agree, but are divided in your selves; one sets up this, and another that thing, which you in your Reason judge right: Now many things I might write unto you, which you cannot bear; but rather in Love a few Words, that you may see the vast Difference betwixt your Assemblies and Churches, and the Churches, which you say, is your Example. And first of all, I will shew in the Ground how far you fall short, al∣though it may be you may hate my instruction, yet I say, Suffer me a little; for I am one who have obtained Mercy, after a long and a sore Travel, and tossed up and down in great Tempests, but at last entered into the everlasting Rest, and do not desire to contend with you; for out of Debates carnal I am brought; but rather in love to the Honesty in you all, which is not of this World, I speak. First, they received Power from on high, and Commission given to preach the Gospel to all Nations, (I speak of the Ministers of Christ); and those things which they had heard, and seen, and felt, and tasted of, and had handled of the Word of Life, which Life was manifest in them, this they preached, and were sent to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power unto God's Power; and as many as received and believed the Word which they preached, which was the Word of Faith. and Faith was begotten by the Preaching of it, and they heard and learn∣ed of the VVord of Life; Faith came by hearing that VVord; and this VVord which they preached unto them, was nigh them, in their Mouth and in their Heart, which as People turned to it, and received it, and believed, so a Change was wrought in the Hearers of it; and they were turned from dead VVorks unto the Measure of the living God; and they separated from the Temple, and left Circumcision, and all those things of the first Priest-hood, which were commanded by God, and out of the VVorld's VVayes, Fashions, Customs and VVorships, and came to see the worshipping in Spirit and in Truth was that worship God required; and the Ground of their Separation was not from any literal Command or Precept; for all that was written there, was flat against it; but they which were Ministers of Christ, which had believed in him, preached him, the Substance, and the Measure of him and of his Grace which was in them unto whom they preached; and this was the Apostles Witness in their Hearts, unto which they did commend themselves in the Sight of God, which is a great Mystery; and they are not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit: Now in these few words before written, with much more I could write, compare your Ministry and your Members gathered, and you will see you differ in the Ground in the first; for your Command you take from the Letter, and so are Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit. 2. Ye preach the Letter for the Word of Faith, which they did not, as is plain in their own Writings, without adding. 3. Them whom you gather, it's but into Conformity to the Letter, and to that which is visible, which all may be done in the Will of man, which is fallen from God; and see if it be not so with you, both Pastors and Members, not witnesses of that VVord which they preached, which did beget Faith in them that received it, and believed in it, which Faith was in them, wrought by the Power of God, which gave them Assurance, and their Assurance was in them, and their Hope in them, brought in
and wrought by the Operation of the Spirit; which the preaching of the Letter, Sound, or Declaration only of that which was in them, never works Assurance, nor true Faith, nor Hope: And now consider, where had your Ground of the Knowledge of God been, and your Gospel, and your Faith, and Hope, if you had not had the Letter? I speak not to up∣braid you, but to the Light of Christ Jesus I speak, which will let you see how far short you are, and that you must come back again to the first Principle; and now you may see, if it had been the same Word or Com∣mand, it would have the same Effects as it had, and Change into its own Nature all that received it; now see whether a Change be wrought in you or not; some of you, yea, many running back after the Foot-steps of the Priests, preaching for Hire, and upholding the Idols Temple, if you can get into them, and in the Customs of the World; nay, most of you not come to yea and nay in your Communication, but one with the world in all or most of things, differ only in Words and Names; and your Gospel you have preached, hath not begotten such a Faith as was in them that had the Gospel; not to respect Persons; nor none dare own cleansing from Sin in the Body, but call that a Delusion; but the Word and Faith which they preached and received, gave them Victory over the World, Sin and Death, and by its Power made them more then Conquerors, and their Hope purified their Hearts; but you cannot believe that ever you shall be made free from Sin, nor have not hope in that, and therefore are ignorant of the Body of Christ you so much talk of, which made them clean and free from Sin. Secondly, your Doctrine is the same with the World; your Hope, your Faith, your justification is all at a Distance, grounded upon the Report of Christ dying at Jerusalem, and of their Report that knew him; and believing this, you call it Faith, and so are one with the Faith and Hope which the World hath; for the Report of Christ's Righteousness, what he did suffer, and wrought in the Saints, if this be the Ground of Salvation, then why have you separated from the World? If you say, Because the world hath not right to the Ordinances; I say, Doth not Faith in Christ give Interest to all his Ordinances? And if this be onely your Faith, the World hath as good an Interest as you; so why do you separate from them? And so you shall see the Matter is the same with the VVorld, of which your Fellowships consist: and the Name of Christ is a great My∣stery, which they were sent to baptize in, who knew his Name; his name is not Letters and Syllables, and using these; this with the lips speaking over, is not to baptize into his Name; And so Friends, in Love I spek unto you: There was such as separated themselves, and were sensual, and had not the Spirit; and so there was no Difference betwixt them and the World; for they are Clouds without Rain; appeared VVells, but hd no VVater in them, seemed something, but were but a Shew: Friends, your foot-steps I know, your ground I know, and your Compass and your Measure, yet I shall not glory over you, nor boast my self against you; but rather, to inform your Minds, that you may not build upon a Foundation which will moulder away: And now boast not your selves in your Ordinances, as VVater, bread and Wine, which is but elementary, and was never but a Sign; and in the Day of Ap∣pearance of Christ, the Elements shall melt with servent Heat; and
while you stand here, and have Confidence in these things, your Sun will set in Obscurity, and you shall know the old Heavens and Earth will pass away with a Noise; which when you come to know and hear, your Hearts will fail for Fear; for this I say to the highest of you, If you build upon any thing, or have Confidence in any thing which stands in time, and is on this side Eternity and Being of Beings, your Foun∣dation will be swept away, and Night will come upon you; and all your gathered in things, and taken on, and imitated, will all fail you. Many more things I might write, time would fail me to utter; but these few among many, I have written, that you may compare your selves with the Ministers of Christ then; and the Gospel which they preached, which were separate from the World in the Ground and Nature; and if you see your selves in the Light of Christ in your Consci∣ences not to be the same, neither in Matter nor Manner, let not a deceived Heart lead you aside any longer. Further, I say, they were sent out for the gathering in of the Saints, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers; yet all was by the Spirit. Now if you deny the Command of the Spirit, or cannot witness it, but from the Letter take it up, and talk of it, because the Scrip∣ture speaks of it; then your Ministry is not that Ministry. Again, this End was the Ministry sent forth for, for the perfecting of the Saints, which it did, which not one of you dare own, nor dare say your Ministry shall, nor never did; and so not the same, nor hath not the same operation; and so is not the same Faith nor Word which they preached. And now to you who are called Members in all separated Societies, and yet in Babylon and Egypt, spiritually so called, where the Seed is held in Captivity; I say, come forth of her, and return to your Maker, from whence you are erred, and cast off your Garments of Self-Righteous∣ness; and those Coverings you hide your selves under, must all be rent; they will wax old; yea, your Heaven shall wax old as a Garment, and your Stars will fall, and your Towers will be demolished, and all your Buildings will fall; and your Strength will fail, and Egypt cannot save you; why gad you abroad? why trim you your selves with the Saints Words, when you are ignorant of the Life? return return to him that is the first Love, and the first-born of every Creature, who is the Light of the World, which Light will shew you, that to return back again is the Way from off the Mountains of Leanness and Poverty, where you feed upon Wind and Husks; and now return home to within, sweep your Houses all; the Groat is there; the little Leaven is there; the Grain of Mustard-seed you will see, which the Kingdom of God is like; and you will see from whence you have erred, from the true Shepherd Christ, the Light of the World, who hath enlightened you with his Light, which Light will shew you Sin, and let you see what rules in the Mind and Heart, which Light will let you see the Way out of the World, and will judge Sin in you, and bind it, and give you Power over it, and this is the true Shepherd; and if you say, you love him, manifest your Love unto him, by following his Light revealed in you, which leads into the true Separa∣tion from Sin unto the Lord, to see his Presence near you, who will guide you with his Eye; the Light is the Eye of the Body; and here you will
see your Teacher not removed into a Corner, but present, when you are upon your Beds, and about your Labour, convincing, instructing, lead∣ing, correcting, judging, and giving Peace to all that love and follow him; therefore haste I say, come away, while the Lord is near at Hand, while his Grace shines with you; & he waits, and hath waited long to be gracious; and you have kept him out so long, his Locks are bedewed with the Drops of the Night; his Spirit shall not alwayes strive, that that checks and strives against Sin is it, in Love follow it, let it lye in your Bosom Day and Night, make it your Comapanion; I pity you, I pity you, my Bowels are trou∣bled for you, I am pained for the Seed's sake; therefore all slight not this Love, quench not the Spirit, put not that which reproves Sin away, own it, that Sin may be seen, and the Man of Sin may be revealed by the Bright∣ness of Christ, whose Coming is as Light shines from East into the West, discovers all dark Pathes, and the twining of the Serpent, and the crook∣ed Wayes of the old Dragon by this Light; and if thus you wait, you will see the day revealed in you which the Scripture speaks of, which shall de∣clare all things, and make manifest the hidden things of Esau, who hunts abroad, and is a Man of the Field, whose Mind is abroad; and you whose Minds are abroad, hunting after savoury Meat, to please the Flesh withal, you are of his Birth, you will be laid waste, and the Mount in which you dwelt: Therefore all prize your time and your Visitation; if you will return, come, that he may heal your Backsliding, and receive you; if you resist the Light, Misery will be your End, and you will lye down in Sorrow. This have I written in Love to all your Souls, who am one who did drink of the Cup of Fornication, and have drunk of the Cup of Indignation, but now drink the Cup of Salvation, where Sorrow and Tears are fled away, and yet am a Man of Sorrows, and well acquainted with Grief, and suffer with the Seed, and travail, that it may be brought forth of Captivity, F. H.
The Difference shewn betwixt them that learn of Christ, and are taught of him, and them that follow the Principle of Darkness, that leads into Error. HE that stumbles at the Light, stumbles at the Door, and his Mind is erred from the Truth, and he follows his own Will, and walks af∣ter the Imaginations of his own Heart, without a Law or a Guide to his Feet, and so falls into Snares and Temptations, and into the noisome Lusts, which do hurt and annoy the Spirit of Grace, which should lead and guide man up to God, out of the Fall and Transgression: He that sees not with the Light, he is blind; for the Light is the Eye of the Body, and makes manifest the Light of the Body, which cleanseth from Sin, and leads to the Body, where Christ is the Head, where the Unity stands in one, by which all come to be united by one, who is the Light and Life of men, and come to the one Baptism; and all who wait in the Light that is pure, come to know the Name of the Father and the Son, which is one; and here is the one Baptism seen and received; and all that come to be baptized into his Name, come to be baptized into his Nature, and come to see the Word which was in the Beginning; and there is no other Name, but the Word, which sanctifies and washes: So all that know not this Baptism, nor this Word, nor this Name, know not Salvation from Sin, but live in the Rea∣sonings and Imaginations, and know not that Water which is the Gift of Christ, nor the Spirit which is given to every one to profit withal, of which a man must be born, else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and all who deny the Light wherewith Christ hath enlightened eve∣ry one, deny the Gift of God, which leads to Repentance, and so live in Sin: Repentance is the Gift of God, and this is the Gift of the Father, which was promised, the Light of the World; and all that receive not, and believe not in the Light, they are in the old Nature; and he that is not born of the Light, is not born of God, for God is Light; he that is not born of the Light, knows not the Virgin's Womb, where the Man-child is born & conceived, nor the Day of Christ, nor cannot discern his coming, but looks for Signs and outward Observations, Lo here, and there, in the outward, and is in the Unbelief, & discerns not the Kingdom where Christ reigns, which is not of this World; all outward things are of this World, and who live and have their Hearts exercised in them, know not that which leads to before the World, and to the End of the World, and know not the true & faithful Witness, the Beginning of the Creation of God; and all that wait not in the Light, wait not in the Grace of God, but wait in that which turns the Grace into VVantonness; there Christ suffers, and is denyed, and another is owned and learned of, and another Teacher; and where the Grace of God is not taught and learned of, Ungodliness is not denyed; but Ungodliness is denyed, where the Grace teacheth; and where another thing is hearkened unto and learned of, that which is not like God is lear∣ned, and Deceit is brought forth, and the Child of Fornication, which must not inherit; and all who learn of this Nature, they are blind, and ignorant of the Will of God, and so know not the Doctrine of Christ, but
their Eyes are without in the VVorld, where the fale Prophets are gone out into the VVorld; and there are the Errors, and the Sects, and Judg∣ments, which are many, and the Opinions which are out of the Unity, and there vain Imaginations and vain Thoughts lodge in the Heart, and there the Light of Christ is not known, but the VVoman speaks, which ought to learn in Silence, who was first in the Transgression: And all you that put the Letter for the Light, are blind, and call it the Word and the Go∣spel, you err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the Power of God; for the Word of God is the Power of God, which is Immortal & Eternal; and all that which is visible stands in time, and cannot lead to know him which was before time, in the Beginning: And so all you who are in your Earth∣ly carnal Minds, imagining a Rule without you and a Word without you, you have not learned of him who is entered within the Vail, you are hun∣ting upon the wild Mountains and Forrests, and know not the Voice of the true Shepherd, who saith, Learn of me, whose Word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart; and thou that hast not hearkened unto this, a Separation thou didst never see, but Darkness is upon the Face of the Deep, and the Word of God is not known, by which the Heavens and the Earth were made, and all things therein are upholden by the Word of his Power, which Word of Power is seen by them whose Minds are turned within; and there the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart are by it dis∣cerned and seen, which Word is quick and powerful, and discerns the Se∣crets of man's Heart, and is as a Hammer, to break the Rocks and the hard Hearts, and this is Immediate and Eternal; and all who know not this, your carnal Mind stands wholly in you, and your hard Hearts are unbro∣ken, and the Mountains are unleveled, and you walk in the crooked Waves of the old Serpent in Subtilty and Deceit, and stand covered before the Lord, and the strait Pathes of Righteousness you have not known. Therefore awake out of Deceit and Security, all Sorts of People, where you have been making your Rest in the Lap of the Adulterer, and have drunken of the VVine of Fornication, and of the old Dregs of Unrighte∣ousness, whereby the whole man in enflamed, and the whole Course of Nature is set on the Fire of Hell, and Filth and Abomination lodge in the Heart, and you talk of the VVord of God, and of the Law of God, and of the new Covenant, and yet never see any thing in you, which you can own to guide you, which is contrary to your VVills, which is the VVill of God. All Sorts of Professors, whether Presbyters, Independents, Baptists, or of what Name soever you are called by, who say, you are separated; let me ask this, what are you separated from, and what separated you? If you deny the Sufficiency of the Spirit's teaching alone, and it to be the Rule and alone Guide unto God, who is separated from Sinners, and beholds them afar off; I say, you who cannot own that which shews you your vain Minds and vain Thoughts, and that discerns the Thoughts, if you cannot own this, the VVord of God you never knew, nor the Law writ∣ten in your Hearts, nor the VVord of Separation, and all are in your Imagi∣nations and vain Conceivings, in your fleshly Minds, here and there setting up an Image raised from a dead Letter, and founded on your Earthly Ima∣ginations, and they stand in the Vallies of vain Hopes; and there is no Life
in nothing you worhip and set up, neither Sight nor Hearing; and every one of you worship a dead thing, and that which makes not the Comers thereunto perfect; but you are all pleading for Imperfection and Sin in the Body, and all joyn together to oppose the Life and Power of God, which the Saints ought to press after; and they that stand in the Counsel do ob∣tain Victory, and witness of his Righteousness, which is perfect. Are not many of you turning into the old Bishops Road, who would tye all unto their Idols Temple, or Parish-Church (so called)? and are not many of you going about to stop all from hearing any but you, under Pain of Excommunication? Oh the gross Darkness you are led in, and the wilful Blindness, who have taken up your Rest in that which is carnal and without, where all the Hypocrites may come; verily, I say unto you, your Rest will be but as the leaning upon a bowed Wall, or as a Reed of Egypt; for the Ground of Iniquity stands whole, and the whole Body of Darkness is not removed, the Earth is whole, the Fallow Ground is not plowed up; Thorns, and Bryars, and fruitless Trees, which cumber the Ground of the Lord, are not cut down; and so the Works of Condem∣nation you are none of you brought from under, but self stands, and your Wills are alive, which are at Enmity against God; only talking of a Christ at a Distance, and his Righteousness as far from you as betwixt Earth and Heaven; and here is your Justification, applying this unto your selves, while you are disobedient to the Grace of God in you; this is your Faith and your Rest, and this Faith all the World hath, and this Hope; but this Faith cannot justifie, nor not one of you hath Assurance who hath but this, who doth not witness God's Righteousness brought forth in you, which is wrought by the Word of Faith, which is incorruptible, which justifies, and gives Assurance, and is witnessed through the Death of the Cross. And therefore I cannot forbear but to declare your Ignorance, and shew you your Deceit you lye in, and your ragged Vails you hide your selves un∣der; for I know your Peace you have is that which will not last: And therefore be not secure and careless, nor obstinate, but lay down your Crowns at his Feet, and come out of your Ease, and Rest, and fleshly Ex∣altation, puffed up by the Wisdom of the Flesh; and that which you have gathered in, and not Witnesses of the same wrought in you, all for the Fire; yet a little while, and time shall be no longer, for the End of time shall come upon all your Strength, and all your Rest in the Flesh, and Ease in your Beds that you have made, shall be taken away; you have slain those Desires in you which were once after God, and now follow the Plea∣sures of the Flesh, and have set up such a Worship over every one of you, as you can live at Ease, and in Pleasures, and in Pride, and vain-Glory, and Covetousness, and are Men-pleasers, and Respecters of Persons, and yet your Justification stands sure, and your Faith which you hold, and this Faith is Reprobate, which leads into the Works of Darkness: Oh you are high, you are strong Warriours for the Prince of Darkness, and greater Opposers of the Power of the Lord then they that have professed less, who are gone before; verily this is fulfilled in this Generation, Pub∣licans and Harlots enter the Kingdom, and come to sit down with Abraham▪ Isaac and Jacob, and you are shut out.
Will he accept you for your Words? will he accept you because you eat his Bread and drink his Wine? and one of you is hungry, and another Company of you plead, that your Communion must now be as much Wine as you can drink; and this is Gods ordinance, you say. Oh ye blind and slow of Heart to believe! Is not Parphar, and Damascus, and Jordan, and all the Water his, and the Cattel upon a thousand Hills? is he behold∣ing to thee for thy lame and blind Sacrifice? will he accept you for these things while your Wills stands, and while you hate to be guided by his Light and Spirit, which cleanseth the Inside? shall I not say, as Paul said of Circumcision, It's neither Baptism, or not being baptized; it's neither breaking of Bread, nor drinking of Wine, neither your Observances and Washings, your Prayers nor your Fasts, your feigned Communion and Fel∣lowship, but a new Creature, that God requires; not outward washings, nor things carnal, which none of these things make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, nor the coming unto these doth not purifie nor make the Answer of a good Conscience; while you do not witness that which makes you Partakers of the divine Nature, you have no Fellowship with the Father nor the Son, but only sacrifice to your Nets, and feed upon Ashes, and would take those things which were but Figures, to oppose the Substance, as the Jews did, and never look for him to be revealed in you, who is the End of the Figures, and the End of the Law for Righ∣teousness, and the End of the Prophets, who now is not worshipped in the Oldness of the Letter, nor in Figures, but in Newness of Spirit, and in the new and living VVay which he hath consecrated for all them that come to him, and believe in him, and come to within the Vail; Heb. 10.20. Nay, these things which you call Ordinances, as you practice them, are not so much as the Image of Heavenly things; and though you come to them Year by Year, & Week by Week, they do not make you that are Comers thereunto perfect, for if they did, then there were a Necessity for the Continuance of them: But now to that of God in all your Consci∣ences I speak, which shall witness in the Day of the Lord, that your Consciences are no more purified, nor you made any more perfect, then the first Day you took them up: And this I say unto you in love to your Souls, I know no more of the Power and Presence you do witness among you in these things, then if you worshipped in the Temple at Jerusalem, and urned Incense, and Offered Sacrifice and Burnt-offerings, which Christ said, was left unto them desolate; and verily in the Day of the Lord's Account, you shall bear witness unto me, that I speak not in mine own Name, although you cannot believe; I say, the Lord is departed out of these things, and the Gentiles and Heathen, who know not God, have now all these things to tread upon, and all also to feed upon; but this I say unto you, Sacrifices and offerings without, which are Carnal and Elemen∣tary, and perish with the using, he will not have; but he is come, whose Flesh is the Life of the Saints; and his Body is known, which is prepared to take away Sin; and it was witnessed of him, and he is come to do the Will of God; and this is he in whom the Father is well pleased, who is the Light of the World, and hath enlightned every one that comes into the world; and whoso is not led by the Light, he is not led by the Son; and there is no Offering, but in the Light, that is accepted, nor nothing which is well pleasing to God, but what he now Commands, who is
entered to within the Vail, into the Heavenly Tabernacle; and you whose Hearts the Vail is over, and Flesh is over, unturned to him you are, and his Face do not see, nor his Mind do not know; and now his worship is no more outward and Carnal, but spiritual and everlasting: And all you that cannot own the Measure of God in you, which shews you his Teachings and Doctrine, the offering up of that which is perfect, you do not know, nor the offering up in and by the eternal Spirit you do not know, and so do not know purging away Sin; but still you are Checked & Condemned in your selves, notwithstanding your large Phylacteries and long Garments of Self-righteousness, and Selfishness in Performance in your wills, from Imitation; yet all of you confess the Guilt must remain, because none of you are come from under Condemnation, there∣fore you judge all is so: Ah, ah! miserable Redemption and Justification is this; what Redemption is wrought among you, when the Light in your own Consciences shews there is Guilt; and you are under the Power of Pride, and Covetousness, and Envy, and Wrath, railing and slandering them that bear witness against your deceit, and have not Power over your Tongues, nor over your Thoughts, but are led captive by him that works Unrighteousness; nay, so ignorant are you, most of you, that you know not what it is that is in Captivity, and what it is that wants Redemption, nor what it is which the Gospel is preached to, and purity of Spirit you do not know. Verily I say unto you, all whose minds are not turned to the Light of Christ, which will let you see, notwithstanding all your Righ∣teousness and Fulness, which you judge you have attained to, there is one thing you lack yet, you that have kept all the Commands in the Letter, which few of you have done, you must sell all, and give to the Poor; and yet before you witness a Disciple of Christ, you must take up the Cross of Christ, which you all stumble at, and it is Foolishness to you, as it was to your Generation, who were in your Nature, who sought to be justified by the Works without them; and even you are the same, look that God accepts you, because you have conformed to the outward Part of the Law or Scripture, and if that will not do, then you look to be Justified by the Righteousness of one you have heard of without you, and even then, when you your selves are found Sinners, and so would make Christ a Minister of Sin: How long will you speak these Things, and how long shall the Words of your Mouth be as a strong wind? doth God pervert Judg∣ment, or doth the Almighty pervert Justice? Job 8.2, 3. shall not he that  dye? and is not he that commits Sin, of the Devil? doth God justifie him that's of the Devil? nay, he shall condemn him; the Gospel is not preached to that Seed, but the Day of Vengeance, and Tribulation, and Wrath upon every one that doth Evil; and whom he Condemns▪ he Justifies not; and whom he redeems, he redeems out of Sin, and creates them, that they may walk to the Praise and Glory of his Grace; them that praise Grace, and glorifie Grace, walk in it, and are under it, and it hath Dominion over them; and their Ungodliness and worldly Lusts are denyed, and Holiness and Righteousness is brought forth, and the Image of God is restored. Oh! how long shall Death talk of the Fame of Wisdom? how long shall a deceived Heart lead you aside? how long will ye be bind? how long will ye hearken to your Imaginations? is any redeemed out of Sin, where
sin rules, and where it is acted, Grace reigns not; is not this the Grace of God which Condemns man's Will, and Self, and the Lusts of the Flesh! and you that are in your Wills, and Self in every thing standing, doth not the Grace Condemn you? how then, or by what are ye Justified? but this hath been a Piece of your Divinity, when that in your Consciences Condemned you, looking up to Christ Justified at a Distance: Oh you vain minds is not the Light of Christ one with Christ? is Christ divided from his Spirit, or against himself, or in himself? when that his Light Condemns, and his Spirit reproves thee for Sin, doth he Justifie? doth not his Spirit bear VVitness in the Spirits of them that are sanctified? and is not this the Spirit which Convinceth for Sin? and as thou actest Sin, it reproves thee, and bears witness against thee, then how should it bear witness to thee? and so you may see all of you, who tell of Justification by Faith, that you are in a Dream, and not in the Faith that Justifies; for he that is Justified by Faith which is true, he hath the VVitness in him∣self; now if thou be reproved in thy self for Sin by the Light of Christ, where is thy witness in thy self? shew it. For them that are saved by Grace, and justified by Faith, self and self-will, and the Lusts of the Flesh, and Disobedience to the Grace of God is judged and condemned, and self-Righteousness, Tit. 3.5, 6. Not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, Ephes. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it's the Gift of God; and them that receive and believe in the Gift of God are justified; and Grace is the Gift of God, which teacheth to deny Ungodliness, and them that are taught by this, it teacheth and leadeth out of all Sin; and so Re∣demption from Sin is witnessed, and Justification is witnessed, and the Gift of God, which is the Spirit of Promise, sals the Assurance in the Heart; but where Sin is committed, Grace reigns not through Righte∣ousness; and thou that art here, art under the Law, and under Wrath and Condemnation, and art not under Grace that justifies through Faith▪ and so your Cover being taken off, see your Shame all, and blush, and re∣pent. The Difference betwixt the Faith which is feigned, which is the Worlds and the Saints Faith. NOW your Faith, which leads you not to believe that you can ever be freed from Sin, this Faith is Reprobate, and brings forth no good Works, but dead Works, and is not the Life of the Just, but te Life of the Unjust, which leads not to overcome the Evil and the Works of the Devil, nor leads not into the Rest which is in God; for you speak your own WORDS, and think your own THOUGHTS, and have not ceased from your own Works, but worship in your Wills, act in your Wills, speak in your Wills, and are your own, and do notice an overcoming of Sin, but a growing into it, into Deceit more and more▪
and looking all is done for you; and you believe Christ hath done all, and hath fulfilled the Law for you, and yet do witness nothing done in you, nor the Law fulfilled in you, nor Sin destroyed in you, and yet you say, you lay hold upon the Righteousness of Christ by Faith. Oh! what Righteousness is that you lay hold of, which is imperfect, & leads not out of Imperfection? that is not true Faith that layes hold on a Righ∣teousness which is imperfect; and all of you say, all that is in you, there are Defects and Imperfections in it; yea, even the Graces and Gifts of God, you say they are imperfect; then consider, if you see Imperfection in all those Things you have laid hold on, and have received, then you know not Faith, nor Grace, nor the Gift of God, which is perfect, but believe in a Dream of a thing done, and an Apprehension of a Thing at a Distance without you, imagining you are eating, but when you awake you are hungry; imagining you are saved, but when you enter into your Hearts, see nothing witnessed, nothing done▪ nor redeemed from nothing; your Faith and Hope stand in Words, and that is all; preaching the Let∣ter over, and proving that which is proved, and was proved in them that witnessed the Life of those Things in them that are written; but nothing is proved in you, but apply their Righteousness, which was the Righte∣ousness of Faith and of Christ, which was in them, wrought through Death, to you that are alive in Sin, Lust, Pride, Enmity, Malice and Deceit, yea, even to the Head of the Serpent, and so would be covered in your Iniquity, and saved from Guilt, Condemnation and Wrath; but to be cleansed from Sin you regard not; for if you own that Word, Faith, and Hope which is of God, it will slay and kill that Life forever, and de∣stroy all your Wisdom which stands in the earthly Nature; and therefore I say unto you, repent and cease from your Way, from your vain Concei∣vings, and all be uncovered, and you will see the first Principle you have to learn: So all your Faith which is out of the Light is seen, which you gather in from the Letter, and not wrought in the Light, it leads not out of the World, nor to above the World; but all who have Faith, work in the Light, and Mortification, Sanctification and Holiness is brought forth in Purity, Uprightness, Meekness, Temperance, Patience and the Fruits of Righteousness; for it is not dead, but the Just Man lives by it, and his Works appear in the World, and is as a Light, but your Faith which is dead, talks of it; and when you are vewed in the Light, no Fruits of Righteousness grow in you, your Hope and Faith is vain, and it will not save you from Condemnation in the Day of the Lord; and because you find written in the Scriptures, That by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh can be justified; therefore you would exclude the Work of Grace, and the Righ∣teousness of Faith, and the Life of Christ, which brings forth Fruits, and all Faith is dead without VVorks; for as the Body lives not but it moves and acts, no more is Faith living except it move; and so you whose Faith stands in VVords, and in things taken up in the Fallen VVisdom, which you read without you, that Faith is reprobate unto every good VVork, and is vain; for the living is not witnessed, nor the dead raised in you to Life, nor the lost Sheep found, nor that which hath been driven away brought back; but the Earth yet closeth the Blood, and the Earth in you covers the slain, and the Grave you see not opened, nor the dead raised
incorruptible; and so you are unchanged; but the corruptible lives, and the mortal, and draws you after it, and is exalted, and the Head not known, who is the Life of men, nor exalted; and so he draws you not, nor leads you not, but you are led by your own wills, and another girds you not. nor the Gird of Strength is not at all known but in words; and so the old man is alive, uncrucified with his Deeds, but his Deeds are brought forth; and so by your Fruits you are known. Concerning Hope, and the Difference betwixt true and false Hope. AND to all Sorts of Professors I shall clear my Conscience to you all, and finish my Testimony, that I may dwell in Peace with the Lord, who hath commanded me to bear witness to his Name; and his Love also constrains me; and in Love to the Seed of Israel, who are Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh, who are of the true Circumcision, that they may come out of Captivity, from among the lying Inchanters, Sorcerers and Diviners, where they have been long held Captive, and the Heritage of the Lord laid waste; and therefore you whose Hope is with∣out you, it's vain, whose Hope stands without, in these Things which are week, as the Apostle said of the Law, which made nothing perfect, be∣cause of the weakness and unprofitableness of it, which stood in washings; and Signs of the true Tabernacle they were, yet they did not make per∣fect; so I say unto you, your Bread, VVine and Water, which were Fi∣gures of a more Heavenly Thing, they do make nothing perfect, but the bring∣ing in of a better Hope, Heb. 7.18, 19. And so while you have Hope in any thing without you, you stand in that which is imperfect, and contend about that, but look not for the Hope to be brought in, by which you might draw near unto God, Christ, the Hope, the Light; and while this you own not to lead you, the Light, you cannot draw near unto God, but he will slay you, and kill you, notwithstanding all your Words; and all that walk in the Light come to see the Hope brought in, and this Hope pu∣rifies the Heart, as Christ is pure; and then by it and through it there is a drawing near unto God, and an Access to him with Boldness; for where the lively Hope is, there is no Guilt, then there is Boldness; and so you whose Hope is in Words without, and not in you, you forget God; all that forget the Light, forget God; your Hope is the Hope of the Hypocrite, which shall perish, whose Hope shall be cut off as a Spiders Web, Job 8.14. And all your Hope, which doth not purifie the Heart, and give you Victory over Sin daily, is the Hope of the wicked, Job 11.20. But the Eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and their Hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost.
True Faith how it is wrought, and what it is in its Effects and Operations. Now concerning Faith, it is begotten in the Heart of man, by preach∣ing of the eternal Word, which Word is nigh, in the Mouth and in the Heart; and all that come to hearken to the Word which is pure, and re∣ceive it, and believe in it, come to see Faith revealed, by which they draw near unto God; and this is begotten by the Word of Faith, which is the Word of Christ, which Word is Spirit and Life to all that receive it, and by it are the Mountains removed, and Sin overcome, and Victory witnessed over Sin, Mat. 17.20. and this Faith is pure, and leads into Purity, it is the Gift of God, and leads all towards God that have it, and it is perfect; and all that stand in it, come to have the Will of God perfe∣cted in them, and that which is imperfect comes to be done away, and the Just live by it, Heb. 2.4. and in it, and by it, and through it is the Righ∣ousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, Rom. 1.17. and all that do witness the Birth which is from above, which is born of God, which sins not; Faith is the Life of this Birth, which is just, and the Son of God lives by it, who doth the Will of God, as it is written, The Life that I now live, is by the Faith of the Son of God; and all who have it, and believe in this, shall never dye; for by it is Translation witnessed from Sin, Death and Condemnation into the immortal Life, and by it is God's Righteousness revealed, and well-pleased is he with all who walk in it; and where this is not, his Wrath and Displeasure arises; and all who stand in the least Mea∣sure of it are perfect, and come to be free from Sin; for it brings and re∣veals the Righteousness of God, which justifies, sanctifies and mortifies, even the Righteousness of God, which takes away Sin, and purges the Heart from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; and thus Remission of Sins comes to be witnessed, and man justified by the Rightousness of Christ, which is the Righteousness of Faith, wrought in the Creature by the eter∣nal Spirit and VVord, which are one; and thus Assurance comes to be made manifest; for it bears witness, and is the true Evidence of the ever∣lasting Substance which is brought in; and Sin, and Self, and all Iniquity come to be seen, revealed, judged, condemned and cast out, and God's Righteousness comes to be the Life of a Believer, even the Life of Christ, which is immortal, by which man comes to be redeemed and purchased unto God, and not his own, but becomes Servant to him, and obedient to him, whose Life is given, and laid down, and revealed, to redeem his own Seed; and all that come to see this, come to prize his Love, and walk in his Fear, and have the Shield of Faith, by which they are defended from the Enemy of their Souls, and his Temptations are resisted, and the fiery Darts quenched, and so the Enemies come to be subdued; and this Faith is present Power against all Sin; and all that keep in it, out of Doubts and Distrusts, and Consultations, and Murmurings, come to be preserved; and all that have this Faith do believe the overcoming of all Sin, and walk from Faith to Faith; and they are daily renewed in the Lord's Strength, and come to have Victory, as they keep in it, and so remain in the true Rest with. God forever, which none that live in Sin shall ever come to at∣tain unto.
A Word to all the Ministers of the World in all Opinions and Sects, and to all your People in every Sect. THE Lord is risen in his Glory, and is arising in his Power, to tread down the Mountains; all Nations make way, make way, and all ye Isles be removed, all ye high Walls fall down, and all ye strong Tow∣ers be rent asunder, all ye strong Gates fly open, ye fenced Cities fall, ye mighty Men of Valour bow; your Hands shall grow feeble, you mighty Warriours for the Prince of Darkness, a Day of sore Distress is coming upon you; the Princes of Tyre shall no more rejoyce; ye Dukes of Edom shall fall by the Edge of the Sword; ye Daughters of the Philistines shall no more rejoyce, nor ye Daughters of Moab, who have been at Ease from your Youth, shall no more take Pleasure in your Delicacies; for the Earth is growing thin and feeble, where all your Renown and Glory lay; the Root is cursed from whence your Joy hath sprung: God is risen, and bla∣sting all with the Breath of his Mouth, and Darkness shall cover all your Pavilions, and Leanness shall cover your Faces, who have rejoyced at the Captivity of the holy Seed; for now is he arising, as a Gyant that runs his course, and shall tread down the Earth, and Blast all its glory; and will fan the Nations, and all the Uncircumcised in Heart shall be as Chaff, for now is the Lord bringing his determination upon the whole Earth, to cut down all the Gods of Gold and Silver, and spoil all your pleasant Pictures and Images which stand in the Earth, which you have worshipped in your Hearts; yea, the Lord of Life hath a Sacrifice in Babylon to perform, to confound her Languages, which are many, and to slay all her Children in the Place where they have slain the Seed of the free-born: Wo is me, what will become of you ye Shepherds, who have nourished People in∣to the Nature of Swine, and led into the Nature of Dogs, and have driven away the Sheep from the Fold, and have begotten nothing but Subtilty and Deceit in Peoples Minds, have made them wise to do evil, and subtil to deceive, and cunning to turn away from Righteousness; yea, many of their Ears you have bored, and they have sold themselves to be Bond-slaves unto you and to their Lusts forever; a woful Reckoning will you make to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who is coming to take an Account of all, what they have done and brought, and what Sheep they have ga∣thered in; the Bill is drawn against you all, you Hirelings; the Cup of Vengeance will be your Reward; not one Lamb have you brought into the Bosome of the Father nor one Sheep into the Fold, but have scattered them; so that by deceiving them so long with your strange Voice, they have for∣got the true Shepherd's voice; for into a Wolfe's Nature you have nourish∣ed them, and they are become wild, and now love no Fold, no Bond nor Limit, but love to lye down with you upon the Mountains of Iniquity, Pride, Lust and Deceit, where all the wild Beasts of the Field play; and they are all gone out of the Way, into the crooked Pathes of Unrighte∣ousness, and they follow your Example who lead them; and this will be proved against all you Shepherds, who are idle, who love the Fleece, and feed upon the Fat, and seek for your Gain from your Quarter; the Blood of Souls will be your Charge, guilty will you all be found, your Mouthes stopped, the Light in your Consciences shall be the Lord's Witness, bound will you be, and cast into Darkness.
And you that have set up your selves to be Teachers, who pretend Se∣paration from the World, who have run in your Wills, and have gathered to Worship an Image with a more beautiful Face; you are strong, you are fat, you shine, you are full, you appear as Oracles, at which them that seek after Knowledge seek unto; you are painted over with Names and Colours, and appear of a comely Hue; your Cup is golden and beautiful to behold to the earthly Wisdom, and desirable to drink of; yea, many have drunk of it, and are drinking of it, and they come to grow tall, and strong as Horses in Battel, and as rampant as Lyons, and as Behemoth, who thinks he can drink Jordan dry: But one thing you have left behind you, and that is, the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God: Now is the Lord coming to fan you, and to weigh you; how came you hither, to tell of Justification, and of being saved by the Righteousness of Christ, when you will not own the Simplicity of the Gospel, nor the meek Principle, to guide you into the Lamb's Nature? your flock is not so speckled as the former, and yet they feed in the same Pasture, where Knowledge, the Tree of Knowledge is the food, which nourishes them into a strange Nature, and turns them farther into Degeneration: Wo is me for you all, who are leaders, and you who are thus led; upon the left Hand among the Goats you will be turned, who hate the still small voice, that you cannot abide to hear in you; therefore you are erred for lack of true Knowledge, and you shall go into Captivity with them that go into Captivity; for you have lost the Key of Knowledge, and you are setting up and seeking to open with another thing then the Key of David; but you must either have that, or else where the Saints Life is you cannot come, although you are reaching at it with your sensual Wisdom, but farther it flees from you. Oh! when will ye be weary of feeding upon Ashes, of Wind and Air, which puffs up your fleshly Minds? when will ye seriously consider what ye enjoy of God, and what you possess of him? are you not lost in your selves, in and about that which you account a great Part of Obedience unto your God? Are not some of you, who are called baptized Persons, differing about the form? some baptizing into this, some into that, some sprinkling, some dipping, some plunging; where is your Example for these things? nay, do not the most of you conclude no Salvation without it, although in Words some of you will deny it? And as for that you call your Supper and Com∣munion, which is but carnal and earthly, you have none of you the form; one of you is for eating before Supper, another after Supper, another for as much Bread and Wine as you can eat and drink; and so your God is your Belly, and you mind earthly things; and instead of remem∣bring of Christ's Death, you crucifie him afresh, one with lust, another with envy, another with Pride; and so instead of coming to the Table of the Lord, you feed at the Table of Devils, and nourish the flesh, deceit and uncleanness; and as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, by making likenesses, so do you resist the Spirit of the Lord, because it comes not ac∣cording to your carnal Will, nor your vain Conceptions; and so deceit leads you all, and the Cross of Christ you know not, and those things you have formerly declared against, you now take up; some pretend send∣ing out to preach, and take Tythes, others crying out against them in Words, and yet uphold them, and pay to the Priests, whom you say are
not Ministers of Christ; and so waste the Lord's goods to uphold deceit, and betray the Just in your selves; and not one of you will suffer for that you judge your Principle; and now you begin to creep into the Idols Tem∣ples, and worship there, and seek to the Powers of the Earth to uphold you; and one of you preaching up Free-will, another down, another an Election of Persons, and yet you never knew true Faith, which is without Respect of Persons; another Company of you dreamig of personal Reign in your carnal Imaginations, and judge just such a God and a Christ as your selves, that you may live in Pride, and Lust, and filthy and earthly-mind∣edness, and Envy, and yet talk of reigning with him; but of being bap∣tized into his Death, you know nothing, nor suffering with him you know nothing of, nor of bearing his Reproach daily, nor of suffering the spoil∣ing of all, and denying all for him, this you are Strangers to; you that tell of exercising your Gifts, you have no Gift but acquired by long raking in the Letter, and the Exercise of your carnal Wit and Knowledge in Con∣tention and Strife; you have treasured up a great deal of Stuff in the earth∣ly Memory, and this you call a Gift of the Spirit; and such an one you make a Pastor or an Apostle of, and he begets into his Image, but still in the Curse, and makes Proselites in the same Likeness, leads into Sorts and O∣pinions from the true Gift of God; for who hath a Gift, it exercises him first, and then he declares unto others of those things which the Gift of God hath wrought in him; and he that knows the Gift of God is led out of his own Way, Will and Time, into his Will from whence it comes: and here is the Ministry Christ alwayes blessed, not in their own Wills, but in his Will, and this wrought a real Change in People, from Satan's Power unto God's Power; and so in all your Separation, self shines in all you have, not the Form, much less the Power: Another Sort tell of a Power to come, and of a greater Glory to be revealed, and a more glorious Ministry then hath been yet; yet your Eyes are without, and the Glory you look at is in great Words, and your Expectation will fail; for you neglect the present Measure of Christ's Gift, that leads to Repentance, and that you are got above, and this is too low a thing for you, you judge, because you heard of this and talked of it, therefore you are past this; but I shll say unto you all, Adulterers and Adulteresses, come down from off your Mountain of Exaltation, exalted above the Door and the Cross, and you that are here are Thieves and Robbers, your Minds are without, feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and imitating, the best of you in your fallen Wisdom; and your Foundation is upon Report, as the Vagabnd Jews were; in the Name of Jesus that Paul preached, they would cast out un∣clean Spirits, and they were Sorcerers; and what are you now? who on∣ly preach of Christ, that Paul, and Peter, and John, in the Name of that Jesus they declared of, and his Righteousness they spoke of, but know not his Name in you, nor his Power, nor his Righteousness, but in Tradition, Imitation, and conforming in the earthly Will; here is all your Wor∣ship, all of you calling the Letter the Light, the Word, the Gospel; nay, some of you so impudent as to call it Spirit and Life: And so now you are made manifest and seen; and your God, and Worship, and all your Pro∣fession is tryed by the Light, is seen, comprehended, weighed and judged with the Light; and all this will be too narrow to cover you in the Day of the Lord, which is coming as a Thief upon all the World, who make men∣tion
of the Name of the Lord, but not in Righteousness: And therefore strip you, make you bare, be uncovered, cast off your ragged Covers, whih will rust and wax old, and mind the first Principle, the Light that shews you Evil, and own it, to lead you and guide you out of Sin, or else I testifie unto you, you shall dye in your Sins, and Wrath Eternal will be your Portion, except you repent, and cease from your vain Thoughts and Words, and wait to see the Law of God revealed in your Hearts, that may shew you Sin, and condemn this Nature in the Transgression, and do it away, and slay you, and quicken another thing, which is dead in Trespasses and in Sins; and while you sin, the Image of God is dead, and Christ suffers: So while you have Time, prize it. To all you who put out the Eye, through long and accustoming unto Sin, who are near utter Darkness. ANd you mingled People of Babylon and Egypt; who are in Darkness, and love to be so; who are blind, and love to be so; who wallow in your Iniquity, and love to be so; who live at Ease in the Flesh, in Pleasures and Wantonness, you are dead while you live; you have taken up your Rest in the Earth; you are inlarging your Barns, you are cieling your Houses, and you are building with hewed Stone and Cedars, and are laying House to House, and Land to Land, and are making your selves great in the World, and seeking a Name among men; you are swallowed up of the Earth, and you go upon your Bellies, you feed upon Dust: Wo unto you that are here, you have your Consolation here, you lay up your Bags, where Thieves break in and steal, your Garments are moth-eaten, your Gold is rusty, and your Silver is cankered; and there is your God which you worship, which you have set up, and wor∣ship in your Heart: And when you have over-reached your Brethren, and cheated, and oppressed, and defrauded your Brethren, and are grown rich, then you say, God hath given you all this; whenas you have stolen it, and got it in Usury, and Oppression, and Deceit; and when you have it, Spend it upon your Lusts, and by your Greatness grind the Face of the Poor, when you are become strong in the Earth, and have spread out your Boughs so broad, that nothing can grow that is near your Shaddow, and yet talk of God at a distance; but you know him not, but live in Carelessness and Ease, and Liberty of the Flesh, and pleasing the carnal Mind; the Mighty Day of the Lord is at hand, which shall come as a Thief upon you, and require all your Souls at your Hands, and take them away; and then whose shall all these things be? And all you poor blind People of the World of all Sorts, who follow the blind Guides and Teachers of the World; who know not the Path of Righteousness themselves, but live in Covetousness, Pride, Oppression, seeking for their Gain from their Quarters in the steps of their Fore-fathers the false Prophets, which the Lord declared against by Jeremiah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Hosea; and Christ cryed out against such blind Guides as led the blind, and the Apostles declared against such, whose Hearts were exercised with covetous Practices; and them you set up for your Teach∣ers, who are not taught of the Lord; and they walk in the Broad way,
and you follow their example; and yet you have a green Tree to worship under, which seems beautiful in your Eyes; you talk of a God and Christ, and of his Gospel, and Ordinances, but know him not, nor his Will, nor how he will be Worshipped, but according to the Customs and Fashi∣ons of the Nations, as the Heathen do; and follow the Traditions of men, and live in Pride and Fulness, and at Ease, Lust, and Envy, in Covetous∣ness and Double-mindedness, in Drunkenness and Riotousness, Sports, Pastimes, Pleasures, Gaming, Playing, nourishing your Hearts as in a day of Slaughter; wanton, wild, in Swearing, Lying, cursed speak∣ing, in foolish jesting, in filthy Communication, in Laughter and Folly, which is Madness: the dreadful God of Heaven and Earth is arising in his Power, and his Day is coming upon you, that shall rip up your Hearts, and you shall see that you are Heathens, and know not God, although your Idol-Shepherds and Hirelings have told you, you were Christians, because you came one day in seven, and heard a few Words spoken from the Imagination of their own Brain, and all the Week long and Year long live in Carelesness, and in all the Abominations before mentioned, and many more; and yet you hate to be reproved, and hate to be reformed; Dreadfull is the Day that is coming upon you, all sorts of carnal Professors, and vain Talkers, and busie Minds, which talk of that you cannot witness: Terror, Terror, Dread and Wrath, Ven∣geance in Flames of Fire, will God rain upon the ungodly, and Snares, and turn them into Hell, with all them that forget God: Think on this, Oh all you careless, wanton, earthly-minded People, whose God is your Belly, who glory in your Shame, who mind earthly things, and turn his Grace into Wantonness, and sport your selves as in the Day-time; and never consider your later End, and slight the day of your Visitation, and so dye in your Sin, and will lie down in everlasting Misery, except you repent. Terrible and dreadful is the day that is coming upon all the World, and all you who make mention of the Name of the Lord, but not in Righteousness, in the many Sects, and Opinions, and Judgments, in Babylon, Confusion, and Error; the Lyon hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord hath spoken, who can but Prophesie? the Lord hath roared out of Sion, and uttered his Voice from Jerusalem; he will send a Fire in the Gardens that you have made, and consume all the Thickets round about it; and you shall be ashamed of the Oakes that you have chosen, and of the Trees you have worshipped under, and the Groves where ye have commited Fornication with other Lovers; and have for∣saken the Lord, and joyned your selves unto Idols; and now, your hearts are become hart, and you will have none of the Wayes of the Lord, nor will that Christ should reign over you; for you hate his Light which shews you Sin and Evil, and would turn you from it, and out of Blind∣ness and Ignorance, but your wills lead you, and the crooked Wayes of the Serpent you follow; but now is the time near finished, all your Joy shall be at an end, and all your Lovers shall forsake you, and you shall mourn and howl, ye careless People, who live in Deceit, and are wise to do Evil, and mighty to work Wickedness, but to do Good have no Un∣derstanding. Awake, awake, Arise, arise, and stand all up to Judgment; let the Heathen be awakened; for the Lord shall roar out of Sion, and utter his
Voice as a Whirlwind; and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, and the Mountains shall melt at his Presence, and all the Hills shall melt before him, and all the Isles shall flee away at his Presence, who is risen to take Vengeance upon all the ungodly, and all shall be slain before him: Assem∣ble your selves, and come all ye Heathen, and gather your selves to∣gether round about; for the Lord will plead with you as in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, and there will he sit as Judge, to give every one their Portion according to their Work. Awake, all you that are asleep, and stand up to Judgment; the Angel of the Covenant is come, and the time of Harvest draws neer; the reaper is come with his sharp Sickle, and is come, for the Press is full, and the Fats overflow; for their Wickedness is great; Multitudes, Multitudes shall be slain, and bound in Bundles, and cast into the Lake, and into the Valley of Decision: the Sun and the Moon shall withdraw their shining, and the Stars shall fall and loose their Light; yet a little while, and time shall be no longer, but you will be swept into the Pit, where shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, and overturned as Sodom and Gomorrah; and you shall know there is a God, who is pure and holy, who will judge you not according to your Words and feigned deceitfull Hearts, but in Righteousness. And so all dread his Name, and fear him, and tremble before him, and bow your selves, and submit unto him, lest your Perish forever from his Pre∣sence, and be tormented with the Devil and his Angels in the Lake of everlasting Fire. And all you ungodly, think on this; for this shall be the Portion of your Cup forever, who slight the day of Gods Love and Visitation, and turn his Grace into Wantonness; his long-suffering shall come to an End, and his Spirit will not alwayes strive with you; and then he will arise in his Wrath, and take Vengeance upon his Enemies, and bind the Tares, and the Briars, and Thorns in Bundles, and cast them into everlasting Fire, where is perpetual Exilement from the Presence of God, and from the Lamb forever and ever, and from the Light of his Countenance; and this as the Lord lives, will come upon all who are not cleansed from Sin, and purged from your Iniquity; and destruction is of your selves; it is not because there is not Balm enough in Gilead, nor no Physician, not because you have no Grace nor Power; but because you despise it, and will not come to Christ, who is the Light, lest your Deeds should be reproved; nor mind that which is given unto you, to lead you out of Sin▪ and so the one thing needful you heed not; and you that do not, will lie down in everlasting Misery and sorrow, World without End. And now to you that are tossed, and find no Rest for the Sle of your Foot, but are still led aside into Pollutions and Sin, and know not how to come forth, nor where the Power is. CEase gadding abroad, and seeking in that Principle which leads you further from God, and from your own Wisdom and Reason, which is in the Fall, and in the disobedient Nature, for there you can never find Peace, nor the Way that leads unto it; all that you have heard, you see still there is one thing lacking▪ and you are unsatisfied; and while your
Eyes are without, his Power you know not that gave the Saints Domini∣on; and the further you enquire in the natural fallen Wit and Reason, the further you are off the first Principle that leads to know God: Now I say unto you all, Christ Jesus, who is anointed of God to preach glad tidings to the poor and to the captive, who in the Dayes of his Flesh declared and preached the Kingdom of God was near, yea, in them; I say unto you now he preaches by his Spirit in the World, and he is now in the World, and this is he that convinceth the World of Sin, and shews thee thy evil Deeds by his Light in thy Conscience; and as thou waitest upon that Light that is given from God, it will open thy Understanding, and let thee see all that ever thou hast done, and will bring Trouble upon thee, and a true Sensibleness of thy Condition, and will bring Wrath upon that Nature in thee which is corrupt and contrary to the Light; for the Light is of the Nature of Christ Jesus: And so thou wilt come to see, as thou waitest in the true Light wherewith Christ hath enlightened thee, two Seeds, and each of these Seeds hath a Nature, and they are one contrary to the other in their Natures; the Nature of the one is to work Unrighteousness, and of the other, to bear Witness against Sin, and also works Righteousness; and these two are contrary; the one leads into Bondage the Just, and the other leads into Bondage the Unjust; the one is the Image of God, the other the Image of the Devil; and if thou waitest in the Light, thou wilt see two striving in the Womb; and here is Nation against Nation, and King∣dom against Kingdom, and these are at Variance, and the Life of the one is the Death of the other: Now that which lets thee see that Cain and Ishmael are goodly Children, who are of the first Birth, yet they must not enter, nor have any Share with the Seed of the Free-woman, but must be cast out; and therefore another Seed must be witnessed, which the Pro∣mise is to; who are born again, are born of that which is pure, of the living Water, and that washes from Sin and Uncleanness, and also of the Spirit, which is Life; they that are born of this, enter into the City where no unclean thing enters; for God takes nothing into Communion with himself, but that which is made holy, and cleansed, and purged, and pu∣rified by the Operation and working of his Spirit, which Spirit is Life to them that receive it, and it reproves them that receive it not; and this is in the World, and reproves the World, yet the World receives it not, and so lyes wholly in Wickedness, in Darkness and Blindness. Now unto you that have but any stirring or Desires begotten in your Hearts afer God or his Truth, that so you may know the Power of God, which gives Dominion over Sin; hearken a little, and I shall declare unto thee, if thou have an Ear to hear Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the World, and hath lightened every one that comes into the World by his true Light; and this is it that shews thee thy evil Deeds, and the Vanities of the World, and shews thee what is evil, and discovers unto thee all things that ever thou hast done, and will check thee when thou dost any thing contrary to it, and judge thee for that which is past, and this is the Gift of God; and as thou turnest thy Mind to it, it will turn thee from Sin and Evil unto Jesus Christ, from whence it comes; and this is present with thee; and as thou hearkenest to this, thou seest God is pure, who is present, and by the Light takes notice of all thy Actions and Performances, with what Heart thou dost them, and offerest them up in; and this will let thee see,
if thou regardest Iniquity in thy Heart, all is Abomination to the Lord; therefore keep unto this, and it will shew thee Sin and Evil before thou commit it; and as thou standest in the Counsel of the Light, thou standest in the Counsel of Christ; and his Power preserves thee, for the Light is Power; all that hearken not unto another are preserved out of Sin & Temp∣tation and Pollution, and see an overcoming by the Power of Christ which is present; and here is a Guide to all your Minds, who have wandered here and there, and have found nothing; here you come to know the Doctrine and Teaching of Christ, which leads into all Truth all that believe in it and receive it; and so it will change you out of Pride and Wantonness, out of Covetousness & Earthly-mindedness, and from Sin it will lead you, and from the Pathes of Unrighteousness into Righteousness, which is the pure Path of the Lord, which all come to enjoy Peace in, who walk in it; but the Cross of Christ must be taken up daily, or else you cannot walk in the Way of the Lord: And so to the Cross all come, and to the Yoak, that you may see the wild Nature bound under and limited, and your vain Thoughts judged out, and you may come to see the straight Way, where no Lyar can enter, nor no ravenous Beast, nor no unclean, but they come all to be kept out: And so as you love your Souls and the Way of the Lord, mind the Witness of Christ in you; and if you go from it, and despise it, it will follow and pursue you, and you shall never know Peace; while you stand in Disobedience to the Grace of God and the free Gift of God, you can never see Redemption, nor know God's Power, which he gives unto all that receive him; and you cannot receive his Gift, but self and self-will must be denyed; and so the Will of Christ, which is the Will that wills in the Light, and works in the Light, and reveals Sin by the Light, and declares Righteousness through the Light; and here the coming of Christ comes to be seen, and his Day comes to be known, which Abraham saw; but through Death this comes to be read and known: And so turn all to this here, the Word you will hear, which is pure and powerful; it se∣parates, as you hearken unto it, and divides between the precious and the vile in you all who love it; and it's nigh thee, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, and discerns thy Thoughts; and here thou wilt learn, as thou waitest in Patience of the Son, in whom the Father is well pleased; and if thou hearkenest to any other, it's the false Prophet, which leads thee to Error, and so the Displeasure of God will come against thee forever, until thou return: Blessed is he that hears, receives, considers and prizes the Offers of Grace and the Day of God's everlasting Love, and owns the Gift of God in him revealed, which leads to Repentance, and works a Change in the Heart and Mind of all that believe in it, and gather up into its Na∣ture all that wait in Diligence, and believe in it; and so the Day of Redemption comes to be seen and known, out of Death, out of the grave, and Immortality comes to be brought forth, and Incorruption comes to be put on; and they that witness this can truly say, we have found him whom our Souls love, and do not look for any other. Blessed is he that hears and considers, and waits to be made Partaker of God's Righteousness revealed, that Justifies all that receive it, and believe in it, & they by it come to be Pillars in the House of God forever, & follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, where pure Peace is enjoyed forever and ever.
THE Measuring Rod OF THE LORD Stretched forth over all NATIONS, AND THE LINE of TRVE JVDGMENT Laid to the Rulers thereof: Wherein all Governours, Rulers, Potentates & Pow∣ers are measured, and all Governments and Laws weighed in the true Weight, wherein they all may see how far they are de∣generated from the Law of Righteousness and the Rules of Wisdom, which was in the Beginning, before Tyranny, Persecution and Rebellion shewed it self. Also shewing the End that will come upon all those Rulers and Govern∣ments, Rules and Laws that have been made in the Apostacy, which is to be all overthrown, and all that which is acted out of God's Power to be thrown down by him, unto whom all Power is committed. Shewing also, that they in whom the power of God is made manifest can∣not be subject to any Usurper, or to that Power which is gone from the Life of God. Also, an Advertisement to all the Rulers upon the Earth, that they may wait for the Restorer to be revealed in the Nations, to make up the Breaches, and to crush that down which hath made the Breach, that so Righteousness may cover the Earth, and Gladness of Heart may possess the People. Published for the Information of all the Rulers upon Earth. By one who waits to see the Kingdoms of the World to become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, that he alone may rule forever and ever. F. H. Printed in the Year 1673.
THE Measuring Rod OF THE LORD Stretched forth over all NATIONS, LIsten oh World! hearken O Earth, and all the Inhabitants there∣of; give Ear, oh all Nations that are therein, and all the Isles thereof, draw near ye Potentates thereof, ye Emperours, Kings, Earls, Dukes, Nobles Principalities and Dominions; my Mouth shall speak the Thing that is right, and my Lips shall utter forth Understanding; my Tongue shall declare unto you the Counsel of the most high▪ and what he is bringing to pass in the latter Dayes; he that is higher then the highest hath said, he that is greater then the greatest hath spoken; the whole World lyes in Wickedness, and thick Darkness is over the World; his Way is perver∣ted, his Counsel is despised, and all Nations are out of Order, notwith∣standing the Multitude of their Counsellors, and notwithstanding all their Wisdom, yet Folly is brought forth in the midst of the Nations. Because they have asked Counsel, and not at the Lord, and taken Ad∣vice, and not at the holy One; therefore Violence is set up as an Ensign, and Wickedness runneth down as a River, and Cruelty and Oppression as a mighty Stream, the whole Earth is full of Folly and Madness, and all the People thereof are degenerate and grown out of the Image of God into a monstrous and strange Nature; the Prophets are all Fools, the Diviners thereof are mad, and they being degenerate themselves from the Life of God, have led them into further Blindness, Darkness, Ignorance and De∣ceit, and have made the Word of Truth of none effect through their Tra∣ditions, and have taught for Doctrine the Precepts of Men, and the Tra∣ditions of them who are out of the Faith, and out of the Life, and out of the Power of God; and the Counsellors they have established Wickedness by a Law, they themselves being estranged from the Life of God; therefore Violence is broken forth into the Earth as a Flood: And now all Kings, Rulers and Potentates of the Earth, who have given their Power to the Whore, who sits upon many VVaters, and the VVaters are Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations; yea, all Nations have been drunk with the Cup of her Fornication; and being all gone forth from the Life which
the Prophets and the holy Men of God lived in, and were established in; Nations and become as VVaters, reeling to and fro, hither and thither, un∣setled, unstable, there the VVhore hath her Seat; and all having drunk of her Cup of Iniquity and Fornication, even of Mystery Babylon's Cup, and are inflamed therewith, and so reel to and fro as the VVaters, and are as the Waves of the Sea unstable, by her who hath made all Nations drunk, and by them who have been made drunk with her (even all Nations, Kin∣dreds, Tongues and People) have the Prophets been slain, and the VVit∣nesses slain, and none to bury them not in Mystery Babylon, who is drunk with the Blood of the Saints; and they that have drunk of her Cup of For∣nication, even all the Kings, Nobles and Potentates of the Earth, they have acted the like, and have slain the Appearance of God, whereever it hath been brought forth; and the red Dragon hath stood ready to devour the Heir, which is born of Mystery Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all who are born from above, who are Heirs of the Promise of eternal Life; and the Powers of the earth have joyned their Power to the Dragon, who cast out Floods of Venome after the Child, which is brought forth by the Woman, which is clothed with the Sun; and now the Powers of the Earth take Part with the Dragon, and their Authority and Dominion that they execute is by his Power, which arises out of the bottomless Pit, and shall go into Perdition; and he hath deceived the Nations long, and all have exercised their Power against him who is the Heir of the Promise, the first-born of every Creature, who is higher then the highest, and great∣er then the greatest, and have changed his Laws, and made them void, and have set up the Law of Sin and Death, and have established unrighteous Laws by the Power of Darkness, in which all Nations have been involved, since the Dragon hath Power; and whosoever would not obey those Laws and Customs and Constitutions, the Dragon hath had Power, and they that have joyned to him, for a Time to kill, to imprison, to destroy; and they who have been exalted have had thought to weary out the Saints of the most high, and to root out the Memorial of the Just, that he and all his Adherents might reign forever in the Kingdom of Unrighteousness, and in the Dominion of Darkness, which is the Devils dwelling Place and Resi∣dence forever, who is at Enmity against God and the Children of Light, which worship God in Spirit and Truth, in Life and Righteousness, Now is the Time drawing near, and he who is the Desire of all Nations appeareth; the Ancient of dayes is coming, whose Throne is established in Righteousness forever, who will break the Head of the Dragon, and will lay hold upon him, and chain him up, that he deceive the Nations no more: And all you Emperours, Kings, Dukes, Earls, Nobles, Lords and Potentates, who have joyned to him, your Kingdom shall be rent from you, and your Hands shall grow weak, that you shall not be able to defend your selves against him, who travails in the Greatness of his strength who is coming up against you, as a Lyon greedy of his Prey, and will de∣vour at once all his Enemies, that thought in their Hearts to reign forever, and to settle themselves in iniquity forever; now the Time draws near, when he will put down the Authority of the Dragon, and of the Beast, and the Beast with many Heads and Horns, and their Rule shall come to an End, and he will dash you one against another as broken Pitchers, till you be consumed and brought to nought, and be worn out as a moth-eaten
Garment, and will overthrow your Laws and Customs, which are made in the Night of Ignorance and Blindness, and will change your Customs and the Times, and will reduce the Earth again into its first Purity; and you that have ruled, shall serve and be tributary; and as you have had a time of rejoycing over the Witnesses (who have troubled your earthly and devilish Peace) and slain them as Sheep for the Slaughter, a time of Mourning is coming upon you, when you shall say, alas, alas! for your Glory shall pass away, and your Renown shall wither; and for your Dominion, which shall grow so weak, that you shall not be able to resist him who travels in the Greatness of his Strength, and treadeth the Winepress of the Wrath of God, who is mighty and strong, to judge the Whore, and all they that have committed Fornication with her, and have drunk of her Cup, and are inflamed with Adultery, and cannot cease from Sin, but burn in Envy against the Appearing of the Manchild, who is Heir of the Promise, yea, of Life everlasting, born here to the Inheritance which is incoruptible, unto whom all Power belongeth, both in Heaven and Earth, who will subdue the lower Power and Powers of Darkness, and tread them under Foot; and all who act from that Power which is below the Life, below the Truth, below the Light, that power will he (and all whom he brings out of the Grave, and raises above the Grave) tread down under foot, which stands but in the Earth where∣in dwells Unrighteousness. Although thy Teachers and Diviners in thee oh Earth, who preach a Divination of their own Brain, and from the Imagination of their own Hearts, have made you believe, oh you Powers of the earth, who are in the Fall, in the Transgression of the Life, that you were the higher Powers, every Emperour, King, Duke, Earl, Nobles, Lords, and that all were to stoop to your Wills, how contrary soever they have been to God; but you and they must know, there is one higher then the highest, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who alone will judge the Hearts of his People, and their Consciences; for he will not give his Glory to another, although you have long usurped it, since the dayes of the Apostacy, and would have had all to bow to that Power which hath transgressed the Life, and is gone from the Power of God, Oh! long hath been the Night of Ignorance and Darkness, and great hath been the Apostacy in the earth, since the Dayes of the Apostles, and since the false Christ's and false Prophets entered into the World, which Christ said, should come, and cry, lo here, and there, and should deceive many, yea, all the world wondered after the Beast, and John saw it all lay in Wick∣edness, and the time that Christ prohesied of came to be fulfilled in the dayes of John, and he saw it, Mat. 24.23, 24. that many false Prophets and Antichrists, were gone out into the World, out from the Life, out from the Truth, out from the Light, wherein the Saints had Fellowship, who wrote forth the Scriptures; and he said, They were gone into the World: and he said, the whole World lay in Wickedness; and so they went from Holiness into Wickedness, and from the Father's Love into the Love of the World; and Peter and Jude, who lived in the same Age, they saw them that went in the Error of Balaam, and in the Way of Cain, and in gainsaying the Power, being turned from it like Corah, and also their Hearts were exercised with covetous Practices, So John saw they were
come, 1 John 2.18, 19, Little Children, it is the last time, as you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know, it's the last time; and Peter saw that false Apostles should come, who should make Merchandise of the People, and prophesied of it, as you may read 2 Pet. 2.2, 3. and in the 14, & 15. verses, you may know them by their fruits, having eyes full of Adultery, and cannot cease from Sin; be∣guiling unstable Souls, and Hearts they have exercised with covetous Practices; and they were the cursed children; and these had forsaken the right Way, Christ, the way and his Command also, Freely ye have received, freely give, and they laboured to keep the Gospel without Charge, who were true Apostles; but these false Prophets, deceitful Workers, Anti∣christs and false Apostles, they were gone in Balaam's Way, after the wages of Unrighteousness, in Cain's Way, in Corah's Way, in Antichrist's Way, out of Christ's Way; and these false Prophets, false Apostles, they spoke swelling Words of Vanity, and did allure through the Lusts of the Flesh; and they like the rest of the false Prophets gone before them, cryed Peace, and promised Peace unto others, while they run with them into Riotous∣ness, and while they put into their Mouthes; and these promised Liberty to themselves and others, while they themselves were Servants of Corruption: and Jude bore witness, that they were turned from the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, and Wantonness, even from the Grace that taught them to deny Ungodliness, and was sufficient to preserve them from these Errors before mentioned; but they went from it, and the Light and Life of men, and denyed him, and owned another, even him who abode not in the Truth (the Foundation of God) but went out of the Truth; and so are bottomless or without Foundation, and there is the very Center, Ground and Residence of all the false Prophets, Antichrists, Deceivers, all comes from or out of the bottomless Pit, and leads to perdition. And Paul, if not in that age, yet in the next age after lived, and he saw the Mystery of iniquity already begin to work, 2 Thes. 2.6. and Paul an Apostle of Christ wrote to Timothy his Son, that the Spirit spoke expresly, some should depart from the Faith, and they should speak Lyes in Hypocrisie, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. and in the 2 Tim. he gave him notice, what Fruits they should bring forth, they that departed from the Faith, Chap. 4. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. yea, a great Apostacy from the Faith there was, while Paul was yet living; for he writes to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. This thou knowest, that all they which were in Asia, be turned away from me; and there were a great People in Asia; for great persecution he suffered in Asia, and stayed two Years in Asia, Acts. 19.10. In somuch that all they that dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Lord, yea, and divers great men, and of the chief of Asia were his Friends, Acts 19.21. so it's manifest, there were a great people; for Acts 19.26. not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath perswaded, and turned away much people▪ said Demetrius; and Paul writing to the Corinthians, saith, 1 Cor. 19.19. The Churches in Asia. salute you; and Jhn writes to seven, Rev. 1, 4. Rev. 11. and as was said before, all were deceivers from the Faith, even all they that are in Asia are turned away from me, and the Apostle wrote to Titus; Titus, 1.10, 11. That there were many unruly, and vain Talkers and deceivers, who subverted whole Houses, teaching the things they ought not, for filthy Lucre. And John, who wrote the last in the Revelations, he writes, that the
whole World wondered after the Beast, and his Power was so great, that it was said, Who is able to make War with the Beast? and they worshipped the Beast, saying, VVho is able to make War with the Beast? Rev. 13.3, 4. and the Beast that arose out of the Sea, having seven Heads and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns, and upon his Head the Name of Blasphemy, and the Dragon gave him his Power, his Seat, and great Authority, and he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; and it was given him to make VVar with the Saints, Ver. 6.7. and to overcome them; and Power was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations; and all that dwell upon the Earth, Ver. 9. shall worship him, whose Names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life, slain from the Founda∣tion of the world. This Beast receiving his Power and Authority from the Dragon, hath prevailed; he rose out of the Sea, the Waters upon which the Whore sits; and the Waters are Kindreds, Tongues and People; and the Beast arose out of the Seas also, that the whole World wondered after, and worshipped; and John saw this coming fourteen or fifteen hun∣dred Years ago; so that in a few Ages after the Apostles all was worn out, the Life lost, the Dragon had Power, the Beast had Power, and all won∣dred after him, and the Whore had made all Nations drunk with her For∣nication, and then she came to sit upon many Waters, Kindreds, Tongues and People; here are the Waters; here is the Sea out of which the Beast rose, who received his Power from the Dragon; and this is he, who upon his Head had the Names of Blasphemy; and all Kindreds Tongues and Na∣tions, whose Names were not written in the Lamb's Book, they who ho∣noured the Beast, and worshipped the Beast, and said, who is able to make war with him? admired his Power, and submitted unto him; and he hath had power, and hath prevailed against the Saints, did overcome them, and the Dragon hath made War with the Seed, which keep the Com∣mandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, all this was seen many Ages ago; and what Work the Dragon hath made in the Nations and in the Earth, where he hath had Dominion and prevailed; and what a raging the roaring Lyon hath kept in the Earth is evident, seeking to destroy them in whom the Seed remained, and to destroy them in whom the power of God was, or the least Measure; and so the false Prophets, Deceivers, Antichrists which went out then, which the Apostle saw, they cryed up that power which was from the Life of God, and have cryed it up for the higher power, and said, all ought to be subject to it, and said, who is able to make war with the Beast? for the false Apostles, Deceivers and Anti-christs went from the Grace of God, and from the Light, and from the power of God, into the World, and into that Nature which all Kindreds▪ Tongues and People walked in, and into the Power that acts the Children of Diso∣bedience, and joyned with that Power upon which the Whore sits▪ and they taught Nations and People to admire this Power, and to admire the Beast, because of his Heads, Horns, Crowns and Names, and hath wrought Mi∣racles before the Beast; and this power, which the Beast had received from the Dragon, this power admires the false Prophet, and the false Prophet the Beast; so that none could buy nor sell, nay, nor live, but that had his Mark, or the Number of his Name; and so all have been in utter Darkness, and the deeds of darkness have spread themselves over the Earth; for the Whore who is adulterated from God, and the Dragon, and
the Beast, and the false prophet, all have acted from that power, which is below the Truth, and below the Life, which power is at Enmity against the Truth and the Life, and against the Light; and this power overspread all nations, the Sun being set, night came over all, and the shadow of death over all Nations, and a Vail and a Covering hath been spread over all; and so out of the midst of thick Darkness all have acted this long and dark Night of Ignorance in the Apostacy, wherein the Dragon hath had power, and the Beast, and that power hath been admired and set up, which hath transgressed the Life; so that any who have been zealous for the Truth, and have kept the Testimony of Jesus, and the Spirit of prophecy, the false prophets in all Nations, who are from the Testimony of Jesus, have cal∣led to the Beast, to slay, and to kill, and to destroy the Seed of the Wo∣man, which is clothed with the Sun; and so the Beast exercising his pow∣er, which is from below, hath killed and destroyed them who were sub∣ject to the higher power. And what torturing, massacring and persecution, what burning and strangling there hath been, what cruel Deaths many have been put to, over all Nations, and in all Nations where the Beast hath had power, who makes War against the Life, so that the Streets have run with Blood; and all being gone from the Life and Power of God, they set up themselves to be Judges over Mens Consciences; and they who were in the Error, they cryed out of Heresie; and they that are gone from the Truth into a Lye, the Ground of Blasphemy, they cry out of Blasphemy; and under the Horns of the Beast, and under the Heads, and the Crowns of the Beast, what Cannons, Constitutions, Edicts and Laws have been in all Nations? what Traps, Gins and Snares have been laid in every Nation; yea, every Horn hath pushed, and every Head hath lifted up it self against Christ the Head, and every mortal Crown hath advanced it self against the Crown of Glory, and against the immortal Crown; so that it might be said, as Eli∣jah said, The Altar of the Lord hath been broken down, and his Prophets and his Witnesses slain, none have escaped the Rage of the Beast. Yet there have been a few who have kept their Garments clean, and were not defiled with Women, nor with the Harlot, those who feared the Lord, and durst not offend the righteous Law of God in their Consciences, but have denyed whole Councils, who were erred from the Faith, and all the powers of the Earth in which the Beast bore Rule, but rather chuse to suffer cruel Deaths, then to let go the profession and possession of their Faith, whose Blood cryes under the Altar, How long, O Lord, holy, just and true, will it be ere thou avenge our Blood; which Blood and Cry is entered into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, who will speedily take Ven∣geance on the Nations, and dash them one against another, and will break down that power which hath slain the Witnesses, yea, and hath gainsaid the power of God, and all Nations who are from the Life, in which the holy Men of God lived, and in that Nature still which persecuted the Life of God, wherever it did appear in any Measure; yea, swelled up and climbed to the very Top of Iniquity, which is Satan's Crown and Glory; and the Priests, and they that went out from the Light into the World in John's dayes and Peter's dayes, who then taught for filthy lucre, and did subvert whole Houses from the Faith, ever since that time have spread themselves over the Nations, and have begotten people into a Form and into an Image without the life, and so have worshipped the Beast and his Image.
And the deceit being entred then, and Images then being set up, one on this wise, another on that, and some have had an image of many mixtures, such an Image as the Priests of England, Scotland and Ireland worship, and have got a Law to guard it, that whosoever will not bow to it, the Furnace is heat hotter to throw them into it. Object. And if any say, Why I say so, or how do I make that appear? Ans. I answer thus, the Cardinals, Jesuites, and other Romish Priests had a Law made to protect their Idol, the Mass, and if any spoke to him that was sacrificing to the Image or Idol, then three Months Imprison∣ment; but now if any declares against the Image that the Priests of England, Scotland, and Ireland have set up, every one is to pay five Pound, or six Months Imprisonment in a House of Correction, and there be tortured, and whipt, and shamefully intreated, near to the Loss of Life; nay, it's now so much the more hotter now then ever. None must come near the House of their Idol God or Image, but must be counted a Breaker of the Peace; nor speak to a deceiver, and say he is so; nor a Hireling, and say he is so; nor to a covetous Priest, and say he is so, and can for proof bring half of his Parish to witness the Truth of this; but if he speak the Truth never so clear, he must to Prison, or pay five Pound, or the House of Correction, and there be whipt, and stocked, and fettered, and chained and tortured; and so ti is manifest, that those Magistrates, who had a Hand in making of this Law, have outstript the Magistrates in the time of Q. Mary, when the Pope had Power in his height in these Nations. And the Priests now, in these Nations, who have set up their Image of many Mixtures; and one Year they make one, and another Year ano∣ther, and what that Power likes the best, that is gone out of the Life and Power of God, that they present to the Authority of the Nation as an Image of a more comely Stature then the former, and then Authority maks a Law to guard it; and so it may truly be said, as it was said to Israel, Hath any other Nation changed their God, but Israel had changed from the Living God, to them by Nature which are no Gods▪ And so have these Nati∣ons gone from God, the Fountain of Life, and from the Power of God, and have set up an Image in which is no Life in stead; nay, they are not content with their Image, but it grows old, and then patch up another of many Mixtures; one while the Mass, that was held forth as their publick Profession, and then Prelacy, and the Book of Common-Prayer, and then Presbytery, and the Directory, mixt and made up of Ignorance, Blindness and of the Fragments of Popery, and their own invention; and this now is set up for all to bow to, one while one thing, which they call Faith, and another while another, and heaps of confused Confessions, but are all out of the Life, and from the true Faith. And now they have manifested themselves to have no Faith, and to be without Faith, and are unagreed upon it; instance that which is called the humble Petition and Advice, presented to O. P. by the late Parliament, that there may be a publich Confession of Faith made and recommended, as the publick Profession, and also that none may speak or write against under a Penalty; but this Image the Lord hath by his immediate Hand from Heaven curst, and confounded them that would have founded it, before it ever came to be set up: Ah silly silly! that
ever they who should profess Godliness, should so shame themselves and all their Teachers; for the teachers are not agreed yet of their Faith, so they have either no Faith, or else many Forms which are feigned, and in this they are not yet agreed; and so being out of the true Faith, in which the Saints had Fellowship, in the unity of the Faith, they are all in Distraction and Confusion, Head and Tail in the Jarr, in the Strife about Words, and a form of Words: And how many Confessions, and Forms, and Images are there set forth, and people still Ignorant of the Mystery of Faith, which is held in a pure Conscience, and want that which is the Evidence of things not seen, and want that which should let People see him who is invisible? And oh! how are People lost in the midst of these feigned formal Divinations? and how are the Rulers in most Nations lost in the midst of their Counsels, being gone from that which should be a Terror to Evil-Doers, and should be for the Praise of them that do well. And what if all people in all Nations were constrained under a Penalty to hold such a Form of words, and to consent to such a Confession? Doth this any more but make Hypocrites, when a man is not first perswaded of those things in his mind by the Spirit of Truth? Is this any more, but Feignedness? How long hath the God of this World blinded the Eyes of People, whole Cities, Towns, and Countryes, because they have got∣ten a formall Confession, made by a Priest, who is out of Christ's Do∣ctrine, in the Steps of the false Prophets, and in the Practice of the false Apostles and deceitfull Workers; and when they have made a Confession, of a Catechism, as they call it, and have gotten over the Words, and can say them over, now judge they have Faith, and are sound Christians, when they are Ignorant of the first Principle or of Faith towards God, and so are carried on in the Mist of Darkness and Ignorance, and know not yet Repentance from dead Works. Object. But some of the Rulers and Potentates of the Earth may say, We have not persecuted them for well-doing, but for Heresie, and Blasphemy, and Sowers of Sedition, and because they have not sumitted to obey our Constitutions and Laws. Answ. Deceit hath never wanted a cover hitherto, neither hath or can the Serpent want Subtilty, for it's nature by which he liveth. Nebu∣chadnezar made a Law, that whosoever would not obey, should be cast into the Furnace, and might not all his Magistrates have said to Shrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that they were not subject to the King's Decree, and therefore judge they suffered Deservedly? and did not the Jews, who were Uncircumcised in Heart say, when they took up Stones to stone Christ, We stone thee not for thy good Works, but thou being a man makest thy self God and the Jews stoned Paul and Stephen, and put Peter? and John in Prison, they said they were movers of Sedition, and Ring-leaders of Sects, but the Chief Priests, and the false prophets, had al∣wayes their Hands in conspiring against the Life of the Just; but perse∣cutors were ever blind, and yet were so conceited, that they saw, that they said to Christ, are we also Blind? but the Seed of falshood hath sitten as Judge long, and hath laid the Heritage of God waste, and hath set it self in God's Temple as the true heir, and Judged the heir not worthy to live, and Thousands of Thousands have been put to Cruel Deaths, and a
numberless number hath suffered since the Apostles dayes, and since the Apostacy came in, yet these which have done these things would be called Christian Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice, and those Teachers who have called to the Rulers to punish such as Hereticks, and Seducers, they would be counted the Ministers of Christ, and such Nations who are out of the Life, they would be counted Holy. Oh! nay; Christ came not to destroy Mens Lives, but to save them; and all you Rulers in all Nations, who go under the Name of Christendom, who are upon the Earth, and all you Teachers that are therein, whose Actions, Lives, Doctrines, Principles and Practices are contrary to the Life of Righteousness, and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the Practice of the holy Men of God, you are all out of Christ's Nature, and out of the divine Nature, in the Dragon's Nature, and in the corrupt Nature, in the Nature in which all the disobedient and rebellious are in, who are Heirs of Wrath and eternal Vengeance; therefore repent ye of your Iniquity, and tremble before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who is roaring from his dwelling Place, and uttering forth his dreadful Voice, at the Sound thereof all Nations shall fear, and be astonished; and the fenced Cities, in which you dwell, shall be horribly afraid. Behold the time of restoring is come and coming, and the Year of God's Controversie with Sion's Enemies is approaching near you, and he who sits and judges in Righteousness hath shewed himself, and will rule over the Heathen as with a Rod of Iron, and will pour forth his Plagues upon all the Families of the Earth, that call not upon his Name, but despise it and trample upon it; the Earth is filled with Violence, Cruelty and Oppres∣sion; yea, it is broken forth as a Flood, and the Nations are covered with Unrighteousness as with a Garment; the Beast hath exercised his Power, and hath overcome and prevailed long over the Heritage of God, and the Mountain of the Lord's House is made desolate, all is void and without Form, Deceit enthroned, Truth trampled upon, Judgment turned back∣ward, and the Devil reigns a King, Equity hath found no Place, Mercy is shut out of Doors, Cruelty is entertained, Temperance and Moderati∣on have no Residence; Lust, Uncleanness, Excess, Riotousness and Wan∣tonness are loved, as though they were the Way to eternal Felicity; Pride, Hypocrisie and Dissimulation are taken Pleasure in; Sobriety and Meek∣ness have no dwelling Place, but are thrown aside; Folly and Madness are set up as the greatest Wisdom, and the Wisdom which is from above coun∣ted the greatest Folly; the Fear of the Lord is slighted, God's pure Law thrown behind their Backs; the Nations and the People therein are com∣passed about with Darkness as a Wall, and with Ignorance as a Curtain, and with Blindness as with a strong Fence; they are situated in the Region of Death, and at the Side of the Pit, and yet say, No Evil shall come near us, nor Sorrow touch our Tabernacle, and are in a dead Sleep of Security, wrapt up in the Slumber of Iniquity, involved in utter Darkness, folded up in the deep Pit of Ignorance, and desire not the Knowledge of Wisdom, neither to walk in her Path; but her Way is grievous unto them, and the Eye-lid of the Morning is unto them as the shadow of Death. Nevertheless he that weighs all things in an even Ballance, before whom all Nations are but as the Drop of a Bucket; he is appearing in his Power, and thundring from his holy Place, who will make the Nations
shake as an Olive Leaf, & the Isles tremble before him, who is uttering forth his Voice as the Sound of many Waters, which shall make all the Poten∣tates and the mighty of the Earth bow; the Eye-lids of the morning are opened, and the Sun is rising to his Height, and the dark Air is scattering by the Breath of his Mouth; and so all things shall appear in the Earth as they are, and every thing under the Face of the Heaven shall be brought to Light, and all the Powers of Darkness discovered, and the Works and Workers of Iniquity shall no longer be hid, but shall be discovered by the Light of the Son of God, and shall be judged and condemned by the Life of Righteousness; and blessed are they who know a hiding-Place in him, when his overflowing Scourge passeth over the Nations, which is already made ready to execute his Judgment upon the Heathen, that know him not: Oh! who may abide his Presence, when he appears in his Power Majesty and Glory? all the ungodly of the Earth shall be as driven Stubble before his Bow, and shall flee before him, nevertheless the Pursuer shall overtake, and the Destroyer shall lay hold upon them, and all the ungodly shall hear the Sentence, Go ye cursed from the presence of the Lord into the Pit of Everlasting Destruction. And when this Day comes upon the Nations, all your Prophets, Di∣viners and Teachers, who are out of the Life of Christ, who have flatter∣ed you and told you, You were the higher Power, and you must sit as Judges in the Things of the Father, and Lord it over the Consciences of People, and prescribe the Lord a Way and a Limit in your several Nations and Dominions, they shall not be able to deliver themselves neither you; but the Helper and the helped shall both fall together; the Strengthener and the strengthened shall grow feeble, and their Loins weak, so that they shall not be able to stand before him who is the higher Power, and the greatest Dignity, who will rule over all Usurpers, and over all the Chil∣dren of Pride; the Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophet and Teller of Lyes, shall have their Portion in the Lake that burns. Then shall the ransomed of the Lord, and the righteous Seed, whom the Nations have slain and persecuted, the Prophets and holy Men of God, and all that have been slain for the Testimony of Jesus, rejoyce over the Deceit; and it shall be sung in that Day, The Lord God omnipotent reigneth who will ascend above all Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominions, and tread down all under his Feet, that the Earth may be filled with his Glory; and behold, he cometh quickly in a Moment, and suddain Destruction shall be upon his Enemies, and the Breath of his Mouth shall make all melt away that hate the Lord, and their Remembrance shall rot forever and ever. Therefore oh all ye Powers of the Earth, who are the Sons of fallen Adam, whose Power ariseth out of the Earth, in which the Devil dwells, and the Serpent feeds, who bear Rule, but not by the Lord, who sit as Judges in the Earth, and yet your Judgment is from the Earth and from below, know this, you shall all be judged with the Just, and all your un∣righteous Decrees, Laws, Constitutions, Ordinances and Edicts, which are made in the fallen Wisdom, you and they both together will be cast a∣side as a Thing of nought, and must all be judged with the Just: There∣fore repent, and turn to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that you may know his righteous Judgment set up in your Hearts, and the Spirit of In∣justice and Error purged out of your Hearts, or else you judge not for God;
for all the Laws, Constitutions and Ordinances, which are made in the fallen Principle and fallen Wisdom, to have all these in the Head or in the Memory, so that he may act in a Nation or Kingdom according to the Letter of a Law prescribed in a Nation, that doth not at all make a Man an able Minister of Justice, or a Magistrate for God; for the Root being unholy, corrupt and erroneous, from whence those Laws were given forth, the Branches are unholy also; the Ground being corrupt, the Tree bad, the Fruit is bad also; and so all Nations who are degenerate from the Life of God, their Laws and Constitutions do alwayes imbondage the regenerate; so the Heart being deceitful and unrighteous, such Laws pro∣ceed forth, which do oppress the upright in Heart; and all or most of the LAWS in all Nations are received by Tradition from Generation to Generation, since the scattering of ISRAEL, who received the Law from God's own Mouth, by the Hand of Moses, a Magistrate of the Lord, and a Judge over Israel▪ and so Heaps of Decrees, Statutes and Ordinances there are in the Nations, which do not answer that of God in the Conscience of every man; and so that which is pure of God in the Conscience of every one cannot be subject to those Laws and Traditions, but rather suffer (as many Thousands have done) cruel Deaths and great Oppression all this dark time of Anti-christ's Reign and of the Beast in all nations since the Apostacy, and Death reigning over all the Sons of the first Adam in the Transgression, Death hath breathed forth it self upon the Face of the Earth; for Sin entering, and Death by Sin, it rules in the Heart, and exerciseth his Power, which stands in Unrighteousness; and so all Mankind in all their acting can do nothing for God, but against him, and against his People, who are redeemed out of the Region of Death; and so all Law-givers, Law-makers and Laws, which stand in the Will of man, and in the unrighteous Principle, will the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Restorer of Mankind, utterly overthrow, abolish and take away their Power; for the Law-giver shall come out of Sion, whoever in all Nations that ever come to see him, must see him come from thence, whose Appearance shall be as a Lamp that burns, and he shall change the Customs, the Times and the Laws, and overthrow all them that stand in the Curse; for he shall lead out of Death, and out of its Path, and from under the Law of Sin and Death, that all that hear him, and come to be subject to his Law, shall deny all those Laws in the very Ground, and bear their Testimony against them, which stand in that nature that transgres∣seth the Life: And therefore give Ear all Nations, and all Emperors, Kings, Monarchs, Lords, Judges and Rulers of the Earth in all Nations, he is come and coming, whose Right it is to judge the Earth in Righte∣ousness, and the People with Equity, even he unto whom all Judgment is committed, and he hath appeared as the Son of God in the North Region of the World, in Power, Majesty and great Glory, and hath made the Mountains melt before him, and he hath dryed up all the Springs of Ba∣bylon, and hath made the Cedars bow, and made the Trees of the Forrest to shake, and the study Oaks hath he cut up by the Roots, and turned a pleasant Land into a Wilderness, and hath made the Wilderness to blossom, and hath changed the Customs already, and hath broken Death's Cove∣nant, and hath overthrown the mighty men, yea, even the Horse
and his Rider, and hath taken off their Chariot Wheels in the Day of Bat∣tel; and it hath been a dreadful day and a sore Slaughter, as in the dayes of Gibeah, or as in the Valley of Jehoshaphat; and a sorrowful day hath come, and great mourning, as Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo; for one Poste hath met another, and the news hath been, Babylon is taken at both Ends; and he hath over-run the Multitude of Egypt, and trampled upon them, as the prancing of Horses in Battel, so that the mighty are fallen by him, and the strong have not been able to help themselves against him who hath come as one that trod the Wine-press, and now hath overturned the Powers of Death, Hell and the Grave, and hath broken Death's Co∣venant, and will put an End to all changeable Laws, and hath and will establish his Law, which endures forever and ever: And now hear, all that are left unspoiled are angry, and all that worship the Beast, are left unslain, blaspheme him, and speak Evil of his name, and of his won∣drous Works which he hath done in this day, as in the Land of Egypt, and in the Fields of Zoan; for he hath turned the Waters into Blood, and hath cut all the fresh Springs, and hath slain the first-born of Egypt, at which Pharaoh and all his wise men and all the Egyptians are angry, and still resist the Lord, till they will, with the rest who have resisted him, be swallow∣ed up of the deep. And now, O nations, who are situated under the whole Face of the Hea∣ven, he is coming up against you as a Giant refreshed with Wine, and shall run his Course, and none shall be able to stop his Way, and shall come as Israel after the Slaughter of Edom, with their Garments red; and he tra∣vails in the Greatness of his Strength, and shall make all nations desolate, who have given their Power to the Beast, and will break their Covenants, and throw down their Traditions which are Heathenish, and is bringing a Handful out of the north Country, who have been Eye-witnesses of his Power, Majesty and Glory, and of his noble Acts, and though but a Hand∣ful, yet they are blessed, and his Increase shall be great; for they shall sub∣due nations, and Kings shall be tributary to them, and they shall be his Witnesses to the Ends of the World, and shall publish his Righteousness from Generation to Generation, and bear their Testimony of him, who lives forever and ever, who is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, our Righ∣teousness, who hath broken open the Seals of the Deep, and hath made the Springs of Life to flow forth, as though it issued out of a Womb, by which his little Ones are refreshed, and grow in Strength; Honour and Glory to him in the highest, whose Judgments are just, holy, pure and equal forever and ever. Oh, who can stand before him, who hath uttered forth his Voice before his Camp, and it's very great? devouring Fire is before him, and it is tempestuous round about him, and his Sword devours much Flesh, and all the Ungodly shall be slain, heaps upon Heaps, so that there shall be none left to bury the dead; a glorious high Throne hath he erected, and he sits thereon, and judge in Righteousness, even he before whose Face the Hea∣ven and the Earth shall fly away, and the Sea be dryed up; Oh! who can dwell with devouring Fire? who can dwell with everlasting Burning? who can stand when he appears? when he draws out his Sword of Justice all Nations shall grow pale, and all the Rulers feeble, and the Warriour
shall not find his Hands in the Day of Battel, when they encounter with the Almighty; for his Sword shall be fatted with Slaughter, and all Nations who resist shall become soaked with Blood. Oh! he is dreadful; who can stand when he appears, who is a consuming Fire? Therefore all Rulers in Nations, and Potentates of the Earth, fear and dread his holy name, and bow unto his righteous Scepter, lest you be cut off, and perish with the uncircumcised, who have resisted him, and go down into the nethermost Hell forever; for assuredly the day of your fan∣ning and trying is near; arm your selves, put on your Armour, see if you be able to stand in the day of the Lord; oh nay, you will all be as Dust before the Whirl-wind, and shall be scattered in the fierce Anger of the Lord; and all your changeable Laws, Constitutions, Customs and Tra∣ditions, which are brought forth from the changeable Principle, which is gone out from the Life; and all your turning of things upside down shall be as the Potter's Clay; for he unto whom the eternal Being hath commit∣ted all Judgment, which he hath appointed to judge in Righteousness, is ap∣pearing, and come and coming, who sits as a Refiner's Fire, and sits as Judge among the Gods, who will not give his Glory and Honour to any other. And so all you that bear Rule, and not by him, who is the true Light which enlightneth every Man that cometh into the World, your Power is from another, even from him who is to be condemned with the Light; For by me (saith the Lord) Kings rule, and Princes decree Justice; and such as were obedient unto his righteous Law written in their Hearts, as David, Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and the rest of the holy Kings and Princes, who were guided by that which was just and unchangeable, they ruled by his Power, and decreed Justice, and answered that which was just in eve∣ry Man's Conscience, which is one with that Power in which they ruled, and from whence they acted, and so a Terror they became to none but Evil-doers, who were out of the Power, and out of the Truth, and in that Nature which stood up against that Power by which the Princes decreed Justice; and so with the Power of God all these Rulers, Rules and Go∣vernments, which are not according to the Power of the just God, are to be abolished at the coming of him, whose Day shall come, and in his Pow∣er and Glory he shall appear, which shall darken, dazel, extirpate and ut∣terly destroy all, Root and Branch together, who is out of his Power, and against it; so there shall be a very great overturning, such as hath not been from the Beginning, neither shall be ever hereafter. And then shall the Restorer be seen, who shall restore the Earth into its first Purity, and there shall be Judges as at the first, and Counsellors as at the Beginning, then shall the Earth enjoy her Rest, and the Nations their Sabbath; for the Lord of Glory hath considered it, and he hath listened, and a great Cry is heard out of all Nations, of the poor and of the oppressed, and of his Creatures which he hath made, how they have been chopped to Pieces, as Flesh for the Pot, and grownd to Dust, as though they had not been God's Workmanship; and his Seed in all Nations hath been in great Captivity, whose Sighs, Groans and Tears have pierced through the Clouds, and is entered to the Throne of God, who is now arising to plead the Cause of the poor and the needy; and now wo to the World, and to all them that have born Rule, but not by the Lord.
An Advertisement to all the RULERS upon the Earth. THere is one only God, the Creator and the Bringer forth of all things, whose Way is equal, and whose Judgments are Just▪ whose Law is righteous, whose Statutes are pure, answering his own pure Witness in every Man under the Face of Heaven in all Nati∣ons upon the Earth; so as every Man in all Nations upon the Earth comes to own God's pure Witness in himself, placed by the Lord, he shall be made to confess unto the righteous acting of those Rulers who rule in Righteous∣ness by the righteous Law of God; but where any Ruler is not ruled him∣self by that which is pure of God, which condemneth Self and Self-actings in himself, he bears Rule, but not in God's Dominion, and so layes Yoaks upon a Nation, Countrey or People, to make all submit to his Will, De∣crees and Ordinances, and to deny that which is pure of God in themselves, and then joyn to his Deceit; and thus Iniquity gets Head, and is set up as a Rule, and the Law of God, both in the Ruler and the ruled, is thrown behind their Back; and so Deceit leadeth, and the changeable Mind act∣eth it self out in every thing that it hath to do withal; and so Tyranny and Oppression spreads over a whole Nation, and the Just suffer in it. And hence it is that there are so many several Laws, Ordinances, Con∣stitutions, Traditions and Customs among Men in many Nations, Coun∣tries and Regions, one differing from another, and Heaps of Confusion, that hardly in any Nation, or few in a Nation know what is Law, there is so much Variableness and Changeableness amongst the Law-makers, one while setting up, another while pulling down; and as Deceit advanceth it self in any particular Ruler, then there must be a Law made, and a Pe∣nalty upon the non-performance, as Death, Banishment, Torturing, Whip∣ping, Racking, Imprisonment, Fining, to the utter Destruction of many; and all the Ground of this is, because the Rulers are gone from that of God in themselves, and then act in their own Wills, and by their Craft and De∣ceit, which stands in the Ground which is cursed, and call this Christian Policy and Wisdom, and Cruelty becomes a Law, and the Devil keeps his Dominion in the Earth, and Deceit gets a Cover, and hides it self. Now it was not so from the Beginning; for as God is one, and his name one, his Law is one, which is pure, equal and unalterable, and endures forever and ever; now Man being made in God's own Image answered the pure Law of God, and being God's Image was one with the Law, and the Law was not against him, but was his Life and Joy, and he had Power to obey it, for he was of its own nature; for as God is pure and holy, and the Image which he brought forth Man in was pure and holy, and that which was Man's Guide and Rule was pure and holy; here was Unity and Pu∣rity, and he that created, and Man that was created, were in Unity, and then there was no Wo, no Condemnation, no Sorrow, no Death, no Tribulation, Anguish nor Wrath, revealed against Man, who was the Image of God, and he stood in the Dominion of God, and had Dominion over that which was contrary; here was no Tyranny, here was no Cruelty, no Prisons, no Envy, no Persecution, no killing nor destroying, no de∣frauding,
no Jar, no Strife, no devouring, but all God's Creation at Uni∣ty, and Man at Unity with God, being Partakers of his Dominion, where∣by all the Earth was in Order, and in that Wisdom which changed not; and here Man had Dominion and Power, and ruled in God's Authority, and was guided by the higher Power, and while he was subject to it, Death had no Power over him; now this was before Sin entered, and before Death entered, and before Enmity had appeared in the Earth, but now was the Lord King, Law-giver and Judge, who ruled in Righteousness, and man being subject to him, there was no Law against him, nor no Guilt of any Thing; for Transgression was not known in the Earth, and there was no Curse, but all was in Unity and Peace, no Changeableness, but all was in the Covenant, all the Workmanship of his Hand was united unto him, and all that he had made was blessed, and all the Creation were Partakers of his Blessedness, and all stood in the Covenant, by which every Creature re∣ceived Power, Virtue and Dominion; here was one Mind, and here was no double, no Variation, no Mutation nor Change, but the Dominion of the everlasting God was felt, which endures forever and ever; and any o∣ther Thing was not seen in the Earth, but man crowned with Honour, Dominion and Dignity, wherein could be nothing but rejoycing and pure Peace and Joy; now no Evil was known, neither was there any such thing, but Goodness possessed the whole Earth, and Righteousness breathed forth it self in all Things in the Circumference thereof, and all the Works of his Hands pleased him, and Man made Partaker of his Pleasure, and was accepted and not rejected: Thus in Part I have shewed unto you the State of the Earth, and of Mankind, and the Glory of God's Creation, and the Blessedness thereof; but if I could declare unto the whole World, from Years End to Years End, I should fall short, and Words would be want∣ing, to express the Felicity & Happiness in which Man was brought forth, neither shall any be able to see into those Things, or to declare certainly of those things, who come not beyond time, to him who is eternal, who gave them a Being. But after man had taken of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and had eat of the Fruit thereof, and consented to the Beguiler and to the Serpent, Sin entered, and Death by Sin, man lost his Dominion, and be∣came subject to another, and another had Power over him; and now the Course of Nature was set on the Fire of Hell, the Curse entered, and man dead while he lives; and in that Day he eat did dye, and Death breathed forth it self in the Earth, and Cain is brought forth in his own Image, to wit, in the Image of him who was gone out of God's Dominion, and he became a Murderer, and slew him that was accepted of God; and here appeared now the Enmity, and its Life was to destroy, and to murder, and to kill Abel, who believed and offered up a Sacrifice, and Cain offered in the Unbelief, and was not accepted; so Abel who was Just lived by Faith; but Cain who was in the Envy and in the Wrath, this Life was Death to him and to his Nature; and so all who are out of the Faith are dead while they Live. Now after the Transgression, in Process of time, when the Seed of fal∣len Adam began to increase in the Earth, being driven out from that Pre∣sence of the Lord, they spread over the whole Earth, and sought many In∣ventions, being gone from that of God in themselves, by which they were
united unto him, having broken his Covenant, and joyned in Covenant with Death, Death acts forth it self against the Seed, which is not of its Nature, and alwayes sought to imbondage it, and to kill it, as Cain did Abel, and Esau Jacob, and Ishmael did unto Isaac and unto his Seed. Now the Seed unto which the Promise was, received the Law from the Mouth of the Lord; and they that persecuted the Seed invented and made Laws of their own, according to that Nature in which they lived, and so became Heathenish in their Fashions, Laws and Customs, and Cruelty grew up as it was nourished, and leavened into its own Nature, and Unbelief grew into a mighty Stature, and Monsters were brought forth in such a strange Shape in every thing that the Enmity did appear in, as had not been seen in the Earh before; and so man being gone astray from the Life of Righteousness, every thing is abominable, and of a stranger Nature that he brings forth; yet take notice of this, that as the Seed unto which the Promise was, who were in the Faith, and obeyed through Faith, they had a Law, so they in Unbelief had also a Law; as the Seed worshipped the living God, through a lively and a living Faith, and so sinned not in so doing, the Seed of the Serpent imitated a Worship, and worshipped in Death and Unbelief; and as the Laws of one were equal, such as David and Solomon, the other were unequal, such as Jeroboam and Rehoboam; and as the one set up Equity by a Law, the other made a Law to set up Iniquity. And the Seed sought not their own Honour, but the Honour of him who was their Reward; but the Seed of the Evil-doer sought himself and his own Honour; and as the Spirit of the Lord breathed forth it self, and spoke the Truth in the Power of God, Deceit uttered forth Lyes in Hypocrisie, and in the Power of Death; and as the upright lived unto God in the Spi∣rit, Deceit lived unto the Flesh, and unto him who hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil; and as they fulfilled the Law of God, who were led by the holy Spirit of God into all Truth, the other followed their own Imaginations, and answered the Deceit and foolish Mind, and they whose Understanding was darkened loved them, and had Pleasure in them. So it may be truly said, Many Nations, Rulers and ruled sit in the Region of the shadow of Death, and the living God is forgotten among them, and one against another, they are seeking one anothers Ruine, and all in the Violence and in the Cruelty. Therefore all Rulers and Potentates of the Earth, Magistrates and Go∣vernours under the whole Face of Heaven, hearken unto the Words of my Mouth, and listen unto Understanding, that you may be Partakers of the Happiness and Felicity which God is shedding abroad now in the ter Dayes, that so the Restorer you may know in your Regions, and the De∣liverer in your Nations, and the Maker up of the Breach in your domin∣ons that he who is the desire of all Nations may be revealed among you. He which must restore is not born of man, nor cometh not to a People or a Nation in the Will of man, neither seeks he himself, but the Glory of the Father, who hath sent him to seek and to save that which is lost, and to heal the Breaches, and to destroy that which hath made the Breach, that so all Nations who receive him, and believe in him, may be reconciled un∣to him, and one to another, that the Earth may enjoy Rest, and the Regi∣ons Quietness; therefore all be warned not to look forth in your Wills; for there you will not receive him, but slight him, as many before you have
done, and so lye down in Sorrow, and weary your selves in Vanity, and lye down in Infamy, and never come to see his dignity. Now he of whom I declare unto you is the Son of God, who is the Light of the World, and the Life of Man, and hath lightned every man that cometh into the World, which Light, wherewith all men are enlightened, is not contrary to the Law of God which indures forever, but one with it, and this will let you see Violence, Treachery, Murder, Envy, Wrath, Maliciousness, Drunkeness, Whoredom, Lying, Cursed speak∣ing, Stealing, Defrauding, Cheating, Cozening, Riotousness, Pride, Arrogancy, Emulation, Contention, Strife, Hatred, Persecution, Cruelty & Oppression; I say the Light which comes from Christ, by whom the World was made, will shew you that all these things is Sin and evil in the sight of God, and also will let you see there is a ground from whence these, and all other evils, proceed, which ground is in all the Sons of men, in the Transgression, till it be removed, and these things before mentioned, be the fruits that grow from it, and bud forth themselves in all Nations, and in every man, in every Nation; so the Earth is filled with Violence, and the Grapes are as Sodom, and the Fruit as Gomorrah, whom God overthrew, and till these things be done away, and these fruits wither, and the root from whence they arise be removed out of every particular man who is a Ruler, he cannot be a Blessing to a Nation, neither rule for God in a Nation, neither will he, or can he be a Terrour to all these things before mentioned. While he himself is in those; for he cannot destroy his own Life, neither will Iniquity set up Righteousness, nor the Worker of Iniquity advance Christ. Therefore listen to the words of my Mouth, and despise not Counsel, lest you perish among Fools, and go down to the horrible Pit, where there is everlasting Misery unto all Perpetuity. Now God that made both Heaven and Earth, and all things that there∣in are, he is Light, and with him is no Darkness at all, he never changes his Purity, nor alters his righteous Decrees, his Eye is pure, and alwayes fixed to behold all the Works of the Sons of men, and he search∣es the Heart of man with his eye, and pierceth through the secret places, and is near to every man, although man do not see him, he is invisible, and eternal, and his Law indures forever, and the unalterable decree, by which Sin is judged and reproved in the World, and in every particular man; and every man who hearkens and hears the Words of the pure Law, which judges all Sin in man, receiveth the Sentence of Death in himself, and is judged by the righteous Words of his Mouth; and so Sin in the particular comes to be condemned, and all these changeable things are trodden under foot, which are acted and brought forth from the change∣able mind of man; and so all Laws, Constitutions and Decrees, which are made in the Will of man, come to be thrown down by his righteous Law, which proceeds out of the Mouth of the righteous God, who is Light; and so as his unchangeable and unalterable Decree comes to be set up in every particular Ruler and Governour, and himself judged with the just, he comes to bear his rule for the just, and answered that which is just in every man, and no longer can he act against well doing, but is a Leader, and an Incourager of it in all; and is a terrour to the un∣just,
and so comes to know the Dominion again which man lost through Disobedience and Transgression. Now all you Powers of the Earth, wait, that you may come to see that, and feel it revealed in your selves, to wit, the Law of God from the Mouth of God, that so you following it, Sin may be judged in your selves; and you come to know the one Lord, the Lawgiver, which leads man back out of Sin and Transgression by his Son, whom he hath sent into the World, that all men through him might believe in the Father, and be restored out of Sin and Transgression unto Life eternal, where Death hath no Entrance: And so all who wait upon the Light of the Son of God, and are obedient to it, they come to feel his Power and his Decree, which cannot alter its Property or Verity; and all who come to be guided by it, you will come to see that which unites you unto God, and one Na∣tion to another, in the Covenant of God: Oh! that all your Eyes were opened, that you might see that which belongs to your Peace and the well-being of all Nations, that so the Power of the Flock might be re∣freshed among you; and this I speak unto you, a Change must be wit∣nessed in your selves, before you will cease acting in the changeable Mind; now the time draws near, the Lord will try you; for the Earth must be lest without Excuse, and he will have all warned, for God will no longer be limited; and therefore take heed how you gainsay any or resist any, who may declare unto you the Counsel of God, and cause them not to be persecuted or hurt; but all be calm and moderate, and learn Wisdom from above, from him who hath enlightned you, that you may come to deny your selves, and follow him who condemns all Self-actings and Self-will in man, and all Customs, Laws, Worships and Traditions, that are made in the Will of man, that so he unto whom all Power is com∣mitted may be feared, and worshipped in Spirit, in Life, Truth and Righteousness, that so all Sedition, Rebellion, Treachery and Unrigh∣teousness may be cleansed out of the Earth, and that all quarreling, fight∣ing, contention may end, and people come out of that which the sword is against, that so the Swords may be beat into Plowshares, and the Spears into Pruning-hooks, that so Violence may be done away, and Cruelty swept out of the Nations, that the Dominion of God may be set over all, and his Truth advanced above all, that the Kingdoms of the World may become the Lord's, and his Christ's; and blessed are they that stoop unto his Scepter, who judges the Nations in Righteousness, and the people with Equity, who is the Salvation of all his people for evermore, and a hiding Place in the day of Trouble. LONDON, the 20th of the 2nd Moneth, 1658.
SOME OF THE MYSTERIES OF God's Kingdom DECLARED, As they have been revealed by the Spirit THROUGH FAITH. For the Information of all such who have erred for Lack of true Knowledge in their Judgments, and have perished for Lack of Understanding; to the Intent, that they may for the Time to come wait in that which gives the true Knowledge of God, and of his Kingdom, and of the Mysteries thereof, which come to be revealed through Faith to the upright in HEART. Also, for the Confirmation of such who are made Partakers of the like precious Faith. By one who is made Partaker of the Riches of his GRACE, and of the SALVATION which is in Christ Jesus, revealed through the SPIRIT. F. H. The Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him
The Particulars treated on in the following DISCOVRSE. I. WHat the Day of the Lord is, and to whom it hath appeared, and how it is seen and discovered. II. What it is, and what it will be to the wicked declared. III. What it is to the Righteous, and how he appears to them, and whether we are to look for it while in the Body, resolved. IV. Where it doth appear, and how it cometh, and how it is to be looked for declared. V. What the Spirit of the Lord is, and how it comes to be received, which disco∣vers the Things of God. VI. How the Spirit of Truth worketh and operateth in them who are convinced, and yet have not obeyed it, shewed. VII. How the Spirit of the Father worketh in them who hearken to it, and are in some Measure made Partakers of its Power, shewn. VIII. Unto whom the Spirit of the Father bears witness, and seals Assurance of the Father's Love and of Justification with God, declared. IX. What the Grace of God is, which is free, and to whom it hath appeared, and where all are to wait to receive it. X Whether all have received the Grace of Godor no, and whether it be a suffici∣ent Teacher in it self, demonstrated. XI. Some Objections answered. XII. A Word to the wise Men of this World, who are glorying in the Sound of Words. XIII. Also another to them who are glorying in outward Appearances, and wor∣shipping visible Things instead of the Life. XIV. The Kingdom of God and his Christ declared in some Measure, as it is re∣vealed by the Spirit, what it is, and where it is to be waited for, and how it comes to be revealed in them that believe. XV. Divers Objections answered.
TO THE READER. Reader, IN Times past, in the Night of Ignorance, when Men groped in the dark as blind Men, since the Apostles Dayes, and out of thick Darkness have spoke darkly of the Things of God and of his Kingdom, and written many things about the Things of God and of his Kingdom, which have fed the dark Minds of many, who are unconverted unto God: And seeing how many People are confused in their Minds, and err in Judgment, and have lost the Key of Knowledge, which should give an Entrance into the Mystery of God's Kingdom, and open their Hearts; therefore in Compassion unto them who are thirsting after the Lord to find him, these few Things I was moved to write for the sakes of those who have no Place to rest in or upon, to the Intent, that all may wait in that through which God reveals his Mind, and manifests his true Knowledge in Man; and these Things that I have written, as they were revealed to me and in me by his pure Spirit, if thou waitest in the Manifestation of the Spirit, these Things thou wilt see to be Truth, though hid and vailed from the World that lyes in VVickedness, as thou comest out of its Nature: I have not written for to please Men of corrupt Minds, who glory in VVords and outward Appearances, and glory in natural Parts and in Sounds, and are erred from the Life; but to the simple-hearted, and for the strengthening of the weak, and for the understanding of the simple; and that which thou seest in the following Discourse which thou canst not close with, let it alone, and judge nothing before the Time, in thy Wisdom that is earthly, or in thy Reason; but in that, and to that of God in thee, I desire to be approved, and to nothing else, and shall be made manifest in the day of the Lord, that is dawning in the world, and many have seen it to appear in Power and Glory; wait thou in thy own particular, that thou may'st feel thy own Condition, and see thy own State; and that which lets thee see thy own Condition, will let thee see the Lord, and what I have declared of him to be true. I am thy Friend in Truth, and wish Good to all Men. F. H.
SOME OF THE MYSTERIES OF God's Kingdom DECLARED, As they have been revealed by the Spirit THROUGH FAITH. THE Lord God of the whole Earth, who lives forever, even the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and Jacob, whose Throne is esta∣blished in Righteousness forever, who rideth upon the Heavens, and shines forth in his eternal Excellency from the Firmament of his Power; he is manifesting himself in his Power, as in the dayes of old, and revealing his Righteousness, as in the Years past, and pouring forth his Spirit upon his Sons and Daughters, according to his Promise; and they that believe come to be made Partakers of the Blessing of the everlasting Hills, even the Lord, who appeared at Sinai unto Moses his Servant in the Bush, who rose up from Mount Seir, and shined forth in his Brightness from Mount Paran, and came with ten thousands of his Saints, even he from whose right Hand went a fiery Law, so that the People could not behold his Glory; the same is he who hath now appeared in this the Day of his Power, and is appearing, whose Glory shall dazel the Eyes of the World, whose Brightness shall make dim all the World's Glory, and stain its Wisdom, and shut it up in utter Darkness, that it shall not appear to have any Existence or Being; and the Shadow of Death shall fly away; and all the haughty and lofty Prin∣ces of this World shall be horribly afraid; the Beasts shall go into their Dens when the day appears, and the Lambs of the everlasting Fold shall come forth, and be fed in the fat Valleys, where the Springs of Life com∣pass about all the Banks, and rejoyce in their Shepherd, and shall say, The Lord is my Shepherd, which many at this Time do admire, and say, What hath the Lord wrought? who have seen his Wonders in the dayes of old, and have seen his noble Acts, which the Fathers have told of, who are fallen asleep, and are at Rest in the Lord; and now many is God bringing to see what they witness to be true, and to have the same fulfilled in themselves; Honour and Praise unto him forever, who is the Stay & Strength of all his People forever: And the day of the Lord is broken, and the Light hath ap∣peared, that manifesteth all Things which are reproveable; and the Day-Star is arisen in the Hearts of many, and they are come to see that fulfilled
in their Hearts, which Peter exhorted them to wait for, and to take heed unto the sure Word of Prophecy, until the day appeared, and did dawn in their Hearts; which day when it appears, and to whom it appears, discovereth all things, and maketh all things manifest, as it is declared by the Spirit of Truth in the Scripture of Truth, and every Man's Work shall be tryed, of what Sort it is, and of what Nature it is; and this day hath appeared to ma∣ny, Praises to the Lord, who have waited for it, and now they see every thing in its Ground and Rise, and every tree and fruit is seen according to its kind, whether good or bad, and every Man's Work is obvious to every one who are in the day, and upon whom the Morning of Righteousness hath appeared, and the Sun of Righteousness hath shined upon, whereby that is seen in every one (by the Light which is truly called day, by the Lord who causeth it to spring from on high) which is reproveable and condem∣nable, and also whatever is justifiable and unreproveable is seen by the day of the Lord appearing in the Heart. The Day of the Lord, what it is, and to whom it hath appeared discovered, and how it is seen. GOD is a Spirit, his day is spiritual, and is seen with a spiritual Eye, it's pure Light, pure Brightness, the pure shining forth of the Lord in his glorious Excellency, the pure shining forth of Eternity, Life putting forth it self in its Brightness, Holiness shedding it self abroad in its Glory, Purity spreading it self in its immeasurable Excellency, and can only be seen as it is in it self by the Children of Light that are born of it; there is a natural day, there is a spiritual Day; the natural day receives its Bright∣ness from the Sun, the spiritual day receives its Brightness from the Sun of Righteousness, by whom it's brought forth, without whom nothing was or is made or brought forth, but by him who is the Fountain of Life; and as the natural day receives its Clearness from the natural Sun, and is dis∣cerned by the natural Eye of a natural Man, and all things natural are seen and discovered by and in the natural day, and are perspicuous and ob∣vious to him that hath his natural Sight; even so from the Sun of Righ∣teousness, the Lord of Glory, Light and Purity, the day of God receives its Brightness, and is issued out from him by the Rayes of his Brightness, and is discerned and seen only by the spiritual Eye of the spiritual Man, who is the Image of the Father, brought forth in Life, and in his own Na∣ture and Quality (that is to say) from God the Father of Life, by Christ Jesus the Life of men, the Light of the World, and this is the Birth which is born from above, which is of the Nature of the Father and the Son, and of the day, and he only comes to behold this day, and discerns all things of the Father's Kingdom by it, and likewise discerns all the hidden things of Dishonesty, and the Works of Darkness, which are brought forth by the Prince of Darkness, who is shut up in eternal & utter Darkness, which is his dwelling-place forever, which is his Residence, and shall be the Residence of all the Workers of Iniquity that bear his Image forever. Object. But some may be ready to say, It is not yet appeared, and all things
are not yet made manifest, and that Day is not yet come, neither hath appeared in this Age to any. Answ. What if a man that is naturally blind say, that there is no Light in the day nor in the Sun, because he sees none; is therefore there no Light in the day nor in the Sun? And what if all things be alike unto him, day and night, so that he can distinguish nothing, doth this therefore make void their seeing, who do see with the natural Eye both the Sun & the day, and hinder them from Distinguishment or Discerning? And what if they who are spiritually blind, and are Children of the Night, say, they see nothing, nor behold nothing of the day of the Lord, or of the Discovery of the Things of God, or of his glorious Appearance, which many wit∣ness; doth this therefore make their Sight void, or the Discovery of the things void to them who have seen into the Things that be of God's King∣dom? the Unbelief of some doth not make the Faith of them that do be∣lieve void, God forbid. What the Day of the Lord is, and what it will be to the Wicked, declared. AS I have said, though the day of the Lord be pure Light and Bright∣ness in it self, and mixeth not with the Night, which is of a con∣trary Nature, because the Lord in the Beginning separated them, and set a Decree which will last unto all Perpetuity, and that which limited the Bounds and Circumference thereof now is the same; I say, though the day of the Lord be pure, and keep its Purity, Property and Nature, and is still one and the same in it self (for nothing can alter its Purity) yet it is a day of Blackness & Gloominess, and a notable terrible day unto the wick∣ed, who hate its Appearance, and hate the Light, Children of Falshood and of Deceit, whose Deeds be evil, it makes them and their Deeds ma∣nifest; there it is unto them, as it is written in a certain Place, The Eye∣lids of the Morning are unto them as the Shadow of Death; the Appearance of the Lord affrights them, and they would run from it, as a Thief that dig∣geth through a Wall, and breaketh open a House in the Night, when deep Sleep is upon men; but when the day appears, that discovers his Actions, he is afraid, because he will then (if he stay there) be seen: and all that live wantonly upon Earth, whose Hearts are set to seek after Wickedness as for hid Treasure, the day of the Lord will steal upon such as a Thief, and will come as upon a Thief; and they being Children of the Night, and bringing forth the Fruits of Darkness, contrary to the Light, they will have their Portion in utter Darkness, and eternal Vengeance will com∣pass them as a Wall, and Fury as a Fire that devoureth all the Fewel, so shall the ungodly perish, and have their Portion with Hypocrites. Think on this all you Railers and Revilers of the Light and of the Ap∣pearance of God, and repent; for as the wild Ass that snuffs up the Wind, and they that seek will not weary themselves with her, yet a time cometh when she may be found and taken; even so all the ungodly, though they may run as a wild Ass, and traverse their Way as a Dromedary, yet the Moneth cometh, and the day cometh, they will be overtaken in the midst of Security, and they shall not escape: And though the Children
of this World, and Teachers of this World, and Professors of this World, who profess the Scriptures, have prayed for the day of the Lord; yet when it comes, it will be as hot burning Fire, and devouring Fire, and they will fall as Stubble, and as burnt Mountains before it, and will not be able to abide; for as I said, whatsoever is reproveable, is manifest by the day, the Light which is eternal, in which God appears; and it shall appear even to the wicked, to the ungodly, they shall be made manifest; that which is manifest, is not hid, but seen, and brought too Light, and beholden: So all you Hirelings, who preach for Hire, and you people that love to have it so, you shall not be hid; all Gain-sayers of the Truth, you shall be found out, all shall be convinced of their ungodly Deeds, and hard Speeches, and that which makes your deeds manifest will be the day, and that will convince you; for even the wicked shall see his Appearance, although to Condemnation, Shame, and Contempt, They shall see him, whom they have pierced: And know further, even in the wicked God hath a Witness, which is pure, which checketh often, though they heed it not, because the God of the World hath blinded their Eyes; yet when Christ the Life shall appear, he will make that see in the wicked which they have put out, and the God of the World hath blinded; yet he by his Power will open even the Eyes of the wicked, and they shall see him and his coming in Dread, and his pure Appearance, which shall make them horribly afraid, and his Day and Appearance will be to their Sorrow: Although they would not see, yet they shall be made to see, and to hear that which they would not hear, when God sounds his Trumpet, to give warning to all; that the dead both small and great may arise, some unto everlasting Life, and some unto Shame and everlasting Contempt: All that have hated his appearance shall see, though they would not; Put not this far away, all deceitfull Workers, Drunkards, Lyas, Swearers, Whores and Whoremongers, Adulterers, Idolaters, who worship your own Imaginations, and all Railers, Mockers, and proud wanton disdainful People that live in Wantonness and Pleasure, Time-servers, Flatterers, Men-pleasers, cursed Speakers, vain Talkers, foolish Jesters, fierce Despisers of those that are good, who are come out of the Pollution that you wallow in; his Appearance will be to their joy, but to your Shame and eternal Misery, except you speedily repent. What the day of the Lord is to the righteous, and how he appears to them, and whether any are to look for it while in the Body, resolved. THe appearance of God who is eternal Life in his day, in his im∣measurable Light, a great Joy and rejoycing to the righteous; for there they come to behold him who is unto his people an everlasting Light, and in his Light they come to see Light; and in his day he reveals the secret Mysteries of his Kingdom in them, who see his day appear in their Hearts, which maketh all things manifest, even the Secrets of the Lord, and his hidden Treasure, and his durable Riches which never canker nor rust, but is fresh, and keeps its pure Image and Impression, and is still the same; by which all the righteous who have waited for Gods
Appearance, come to see him and his Riches, as it written, This is he we have waited for, let us rejoyce and be exceeding glad; why? what, is he come that you have waited for? yea, come, and his Reward is with him; and they that see him come, find Contentment in him, and in his Re∣ward; and what is the Reward? Joy, Gladness, Peace of Conscience, Assurance of God's Love sealed in their Hearts by the pure Spirit of the Lord, the Streams of Life flowing forth continually from the great deep, which refresh and keep cool in the greatest Extremity and Heat of Temp∣tation; and this is enjoyed by them that have waited, and do wait for it, even in the Body; they bare witness of him and of his coming, the Dis∣ciples; what was their witness? The Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding: Of what? of God, of his Day, of his Appearance, of his Power, of his Wisdom, of his Kingdom, of Hpe, of Faith, of Assu∣rance, of Peace, of Joy, of Comfort and Consolation: what in this life? yea, a Cloud of witnesses I might bring in former Ages, and a Cloud of Witnesses I might bring in this Age, blessed be the Lord; But my Wit∣ness is nearer me, that giveth me Assurance, and is surer to me then all their Witnesses, although they be all true: Abraham the Father of the faithful, and of the righteous, who believed God, and was accepted, he saw Christ's day, and was glad; Say literall Professors, that's by Faith; yea, what else? by Faith he and ll that ever saw Christ and his day, or the Father, they saw him by Faith; By Faith they saw him who was invisible, Isa. 12.2. Behold, God is my Salvation, he also is become my Salvation; what, dost thou enjoy it already? yea, he is become: And Simeon, who waited for the Consolation of Israel, Luk. 2.30. Now let thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation; And this he said, who knew God's Comfort and Consolation; as our Suffering for Christ doth abound, even our Consolation in Christ doth much more abound; and they were made Partakers of his Divine Nature, and sate together in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus: For heaven is his Throne, and they that are in him, and enjoy him, who is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, know Peace, and Rest, and Salvation both from Guilt and Act of Sin: And the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews; After he had purged away our Sins (speaking of the Attonement) the everlasting high Priest, he sate down on the right Hand on the Majesty on high. He saw beyond Sin, even him who had purged away Sin; and this comes to be made manifest unto them and in them, that believe by the Spirit of Jesus, who is Christ the Lord, the Arm that brings Salvation; and is the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that believe, who begins it in his day, and perfecteth in his day; for he works in the day, as he himself said, Hitherto my Father worketh, and I worke, but the Night cometh when none can work: So that he destroys the Work of the Devil, which is his Work in man; which they that are come to his day feel and see the handy-work of God in themselves, and his own works praise him; for they onely can; and they that are not come to the day, know not God's Work in themselves, and they who have not yet heeded that in themselves which manifesteth all things reproveable, neither that which doth reprove, they are not come to know the Ap∣pearance of the glimering of Light, or of the day yet in themselves, which the Saints witness in them, even all they that are sanctified.
Where the Day of the Lord doth appear, and how it comes, and how it is to be look∣ed for, declared. THey that gaze abroad, whose Eyes are abroad, cannot see his Ap∣pearance, nor his day which appears; he that knoweth not where∣in it consists, knows not how to look for it, no more then the Jews, who were Scripture-Professors and learned Men, knew wherein the Kingdom of God did consist, even no more do the litteral Professors, whose Faith is founded on the Letter, and upon that which is visible, know what I say: First, All must know wherein it doth consist; it is eternal Brightness shed abroad through all Things, which pierceth through and searcheth the secretest Place, even that which is invisible, and maketh manifest all things, and the Nature of every Thing by the day of the Lord comes to be seen, and it appears in the Heart; they were to wait for the day to dawn, and to break forth in their Hearts, and to wait for its Appearance there, and that is it which is to be waited for and upon, that which maketh Evil manifest, and brings it to Light, and declares against that which is contrary to its Nature, and so the day cometh to dawn, Christ, the Covenant of Light, God's Gift, who is sent and anointed of God to preach, and to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, and also the day of Vengeance he pro∣claims in the Heart; for he comes not to bring Peace, but a Sword, and his Sword is the Sword of the Spirit, it's that which divides and discerns the Intent of the Heart, and his day discovers the desperate Wickedness of the Heart; and where he finds no Faith in the Heart, he kindles a Fire in the earthly Heart, and executeth his Vengeance; and his day unto such is a day of great Perplexity, their Spirits come to be woun∣ded, the Heart comes to be made faint, and Sorrow comes to fill their Hearts, and Trouble to be felt; and in this State are all who are uncon∣verted, he finds no Faith, no Hope in the Heart, therefore he comes and takes away Peace: Many have talked of the day of the Lord, but when it comes to draw near them, they will not abide it; whatsoever makes manifest is Light: Now the day makes all Things in every one manifest, and when Deceit is seen, and Wickedness brought to Light, then they that have done Evil cannot abide, but would run to any Thing, rather then abide the day, or to see the Lord of Life appear in his day to execute Vengeance upon his Enemies, and to destroy his Adversaries, and to kin∣dle an unquenchable Fire to consume all his Enemies; and who have not seen this yet in themselves, never have seen the Day of Salvation nor of Gladness; and this made the Prophet cry out, Who may abide the Day of his coming? And many have been Eye-Witnesses of the dreadful Day of the Lord, which hath appeared, wherein all Peace hath been hid from their Eyes; and all that ever came to see the Day of Joy and Gladness, first did know the Terror and terrible day of the Lord in themselves; therefore said the Apostle, We knowing the Terror of the Lord, do perswade Men; now it cometh not with Observation, lo here or there, so the Pharisees looked the Kingdom should come, when Christ told them it was within them; so I say, if ever any do behold the bright shining forth of eternal Life, thou
must wait in that which is pure of God, through which he will manifest his day, and his Power in his day in thee: as thou keepest in thy Mind to that which manifests unto thee Evil, and shews thee Good, thou wilt see how it appears; Even as the Light shineth from the East unto the West, so is the coming of the day of the Lord; and the Eye which is spiritual es it, and the Power & the Glory of the Lord comes to be seen in the day which is pure and spiritual in the Heart; and the Eye which is pure doth behold when it comes, where it comes, and how it comes, and it's hid from vul∣turous Eyes, and from their Eyes which are fall of Adultery, and cannot cease from Sin: Now the day of the Lord cometh not where the carnal Mind may imagine, nor when Man will, neither according to the carnal Desire of the carnal Heart, neither according to the evil Eye that looks out can it be seen, but is seen in God's own Light, and by the Measure of God's holy Spirit: And as the day of the Lord is a Mystery, the Spirit of the Lord is the only Discoverer of it; None know the Things of God, but by the Spirit of God; and the day of the Lord and his bright shining forth in the Heart of Man, is one of the glorious Things of God, which only the Spirit of God doth give the Knowledge of to Man and in Man, and not the Letter nor the Scripture; for the Jews had the Letter, and they had neither heard God's Voice at any Time, neither ever did they see his Shape, neither did they see the day of the Lord, nor the Power, neither in a Word did see or perceive God, or any of the Mysteries of God's Kingdom at all, but dreamed, imagined, thought and conceived of Things in their Minds, their foolish Hearts being darkened; for the further a Man draws from the Light, his Heart comes to be more dark, and their Understanding closed up and shut up, that they cannot behold the Lord, neither his Glory, which is revealed only by God's holy Spirit, which Spirit is near Man, though he see is not. What the Spirit of the Lord is, and how it comes to be received, which discovers the Things of God. THE Spirit of the Lord is pure, holy, equal, Purity it self, Holiness it self, Equity it self, and is one with the Father and the Son (the Father, Word and Spirit are one) it's Life, it's pure Power, ure Strength, Purity it self, which mixeth not, neither joyneth to any Thing but that which is of its own Nature; it's an immeasurable pure Substance, it's Life issued forth, an active living Power, and is everlasting, alters not, chan∣geth not, keeps its Holiness, its Purity forever, it is unsearcheable, unfa∣thomable, undeclarable, Words are all too short, too narrow to declare its Excellency and Glory, but only as it makes it self out to them that be∣lieve, and opens it self, and sheds it self abroad in them that wait upon it; it is revealed in its own Purity, manifest in its own Power, and received in its own Light, felt in its own Virtue; the living Father of Life himself is manifest by it, and appears in his Power, Majesty and Excellency through it to man and to the Sons of men, to the righteous and unrighteous, to god∣ly and ungodly, to the upright and to the deceitful, to the Children of Darkness and to the Children of Light; that which searcheth the Heart
of man, and sees through all things, and maketh manifest all Things even the hidden Things of God, and the secret Works of Darkness, and re∣proveth for all Evil, all Iniquity; that is the pure Act of the Spirit, which convinceth every man; and as the Creature comes to joyn to it, it ariseth and shines forth more clearly, and maketh it self known in its Power and Operation, its Power comes to be felt, it checks and reproveth, judgeth and condemneth all Actions which are done and past, and brings them to the Creature's Remembrance; and as it is waited upon and hearkened un∣to, it sheds it self abroad in its own pure Brightness, and ringeth all things to Light, even all the Deeds of Darkness, and maketh manifest the Intents of the Mind, and manifesteth all things reproveable: Now as there is a waiting upon the pure Appearance of it, and the Mind be still and quiet and calm, the Creature comes to feel, and sensibly know his own Con∣dition, he sees his Mind is alive to other Things and other Lovers, and not to God, and so he sees himself dead to the Things of God's Kingdom, and in the Loss, and in the Fall, and in the Transgression; now this which shews the vain Motions and vain Thoughts, and checketh them, is an Ope∣ration of the Spirit, and Purity comes to be felt working in the Heart; and as it is loved and obeyed, it leadeth and converteth the Heart to the Lord, and draweth towards it self, out of Unholiness, and from under the dark Power, and brings that under; and so it ariseth in its Strength, as it is believed in and waited upon, and judgeth and condemns for all Evil; for it is the Discoverer of the Mind of the Lord to the Sons of Men, or the Father by it makes known his Mind to and in the Creature, and doth discover the Things that be eternal in their true Property and Nature, which only they that have the Spirit, and have received it, and are brought out of the Sensuality, come to discern him who is invisible, and the things that belong to everlasting Happiness, which are not seen by a natural Eye, neither received by the Spirit of the World, who never received the things of God, neither the Testimony of them who were in the Life: Now all that come to receive it, that is to say, the Spirit of Truth, must wait in that which is pure, unto which it joyns; it joyns not to the corrupt Man, neither to the sensual Heart, neither to the vile Affections, neither unto them whose Eyes are full of Adultery, which cannot cease from Sin, nei∣ther to the Seed of Falshood, neither to the corruptible Birth, neither un∣to that which is born of the Flesh, nor unto the Will of the Creature; yet notwithstanding, though it joyn not to these, yet it is near man, even the natural man; its Manifestation, or the shining forth of its Brightness, maketh all these things manifest before-mentioned to be evil; and thus far the Spirit of God hath appeared to the World and all Mankind, as to convince the World of Sin, yet still it remains in its own Purity; and while the Heart of any man is taken up with that, and joyned unto that which the Light reproves, that is to say, the Worker of Iniquity, that man hath not received the Spirit, neither is made Possessor of it, nor en∣joyes it; but it stands off man, and from man, at a Distance, shewing the Worker of Iniquity and the Works of Darkness, and manifesting to the Creature in its Light, and letting him see unto whom he is joyned; for so far as a man denies himself in acting or joyning to that which the Manife∣station of God's Spirit, shining forth in its own Purity, in him reproveth, so he comes nearer, and comes to joyn in some measure to the Spirit of
Holiness, or the holy Spirit, and to receive it, and to feel the Power of God in some small Measure, though but weakly working in him, to the pur∣ging out those things which the Spirit lets him see is evil, which hath been reproved in him, and so in some Measure feels in himself what to wait up∣on, and where to wait, and in what, even in that which gives every one a feeling of their own Condition within, and opens their Understandings. How the Spirit of Truth worketh and operateth in them who are convinced, and yet have not obeyed, shewed. THough God who is a Spirit, hath appeared by his manifestation unto all, yet all have not received it, he that hates the Light, hath not received it, The Eye-lids of the morning are unto him as the shadow of Death; that which manifesteth and bringeth to Light all evil, the evil-doer likes it not, heeds it not, receives it not, but still is without God in the world, that lies in Wickedness, and without the Spirit in death, and Dead in Trespasses and Sins, a Sepulcher, in which the just lies slain; in this state God is not remembred, there is no Remembrance in the Grave, nor thanks in the Pit, yet Light shines in Darkness; and a man unconverted yet convinced, is that Darkness, and that which convinceth him is the Light; so Light shines in Darkness, in man, in the greatest Darkness; and this may convince all vain Disputers, who say, every one is not enlightned, neither that the Spirit of God hath appeared to all; good men have it, bad men it's near them; they that bring forth the fruits of Darkness, and bring forth the Deeds of Darkness, they are lighted, yea, they that are in Darkness, and are Darkness, the Light shines in them, the Spirit of God shines there in Darkness, manifesteth their Darkness; here man is Darkness; the Ephesians were Darkness, in the unconverted Estate, yet had Light shining in them, Eph. 5.8. the Spirit's manifestation they had, but were not led by it; once they were without God in the world, but after it was turned unto, it shewed them their Darkness, and it leading their minds, they came to be made Light in the Lord, who is that Spirit, whose Manifestation hath appeared to all; so all are without Excuse; for he had not left himself without a Witness; and they that have not God's witness to be theirs, (that is to say) to possess it; they have no Faith nor As∣surance in God at all, but that which should bring Assurance of Salvation unto them, it assures their Condemnation, and also reveals Sorrow. Now as every one is turned to the Measure of God's holy Spirit, and keeps his Mind unto it, he comes to feel and to see its Reproof; and so as the Mind is kept still into it, it arises in its Purity, and shines forth in the Heart in more Brightness, still checking man for Disobedience, still judging; and as it is listened unto, it appears in Strength, and layes every man's heart open, and lets him see how full of Unrighteousness he is, how full of Imagination he is, how his Heart is full of vain and idle Thoughts, and how lust aboundeth in the Heart; this makes his Trouble to increase: and his Sorrow to multiply; and this is alwayes present, none can run from it, but it follows him, and shall pursue every one to the Pit who
obey it not, and kindle his Torment; and whatsoever the mind may run into, to take Pleasure for a Moment, and the heart be exercised in, yet this Measure of God's Spirit is alwayes present to condemn it, and judge a man for it; so the Strokes of the Almighty are still heavy upon his Back, being still in the Disobedience of the Spirit; it never bears witness unto any man in that State, but God through it still sounds the Alarum of War and Terror in his Heart, so that Fear compasseth him about on every Side, and though for a Moment, the cry may not be heard, and through Dis∣obedience it may seem as dead as unto him, yet if ever the Mind be but still, and a man sober and calm, and ever mind what he is doing, it ap∣pears again; and though a man may take up something, and perform something which is called religious, and pray in Words, and read, and talk of the Scriptures, and may take up some carnal outward Ordinances, and there content himself for a time, yet still the Witness of God's holy Spirit, for that shews him his Hypocrisie, and that he seeks a Cover to shelter himself under, that he may live in Disobedience, and be at Ease in the Flesh, but all in vain; for there is no peace within, but the Mea∣sure of God's Spirit still shews him he serves Sin, and follows his own Will, and in this Will brings forth a Worship, and this is Will-worship; nay, if a man should practice all those things which others who were in the Life performed, and were accepted, yet this will not satisfie, God hath no Pleasure in this, no more then if one slow a man, or blessed an Idol, or killed Baal, all is Abomination to the Lord; and though a man may sin so far against the Light of Christ in his own Conscience, that the Light be to him as though there were no such thing, yet all this will not do; for the Lord will thunder from his holy Place, though thou hast stopped thy Ear as to him, and closed thy Eyes, yet he will make thee hear and see, and will cause his Terror to strike into thy Heart, so that Dread shall compass thee about as a Wall, and thou shall be afraid for that which thou shalt see and hear; and though the Spirit strives long, yet being still disobeyed the long-suffering of God comes to an End concerning him that hath been unfaithful, and then his Wrath is kindled as Fire, which shall burn to the lowest Hell, into which all the rebellious and stiff-necked shall be cast, and have their Portion forever among all the Children of Dark∣ness; therefore all who have been convinced long, and still are, by God's holy Spirit, of the Way of Truth, and yet have not submitted to the leading of the Spirit; think on this (for it's the Lord's Truth which I declare unto you) or else eternal Misery will be your End. And if thou still persist on after the Imaginations of thine own Heart, and in thy rebellious Will, thou quenchest the Spirit and the Motions thereof; and though it be Life in it self, yet is as dead unto thee, who art in the gainsaying, resisting that through which God's eternal Power is manifest in them that believe; and thou wilt grow insensible and past feeling, and become as seared Flesh, and be sensless as to the things of God, and Hardness of Heart will come upon thee, and thou wilt be as a Stone which cannot be melted, and Wo will be unto such, where the Spirit of the Lord in them ceaseth to strive with them, having so long rebelled a∣gainst and gainsaid the pure drawing of it, that so the Lord is grieved and wearied with their Impenitency, that he gives them up to their vile Affe∣ction, and to follow the Imaginations of their own Heart (who received
not the Truth in the Love of it) but in the Enmity still remain obstinate, doing Despight to the Spirit of Grace, his long-suffering comes to an End, and his fierce. Wrath comes to be kindled against such, and that which would have led them out of the World, into true pure everlasting Peace, now becomes their Tormentor, and they banished from his Presence, and shut up in Eternal Misery, where the Fire is kindled by the Breath of the Lord that burns forever, the Sentence of Condemnation being past upon them, because they had Pleasure in Unrighteousness, and have sold themselves to do wickedly, and crucifying the Appearance of God in themselves, which Appearance though it lives in the Fountain of Life, yet crucified by thee who art out of the Life, yet lives still forever in it self, to be thy Condem∣nation eternally. How the Spirit of the Father worketh in them who are turned to it, and have ta∣ken heed unto its Manifestation, and are in some Measure Partakers of its Power. THere are Differences of Administration, but the same Lord; and there are Diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are Di∣versities of Operations, but the same God which worketh all in all: Now the Spirit of Truth, which is Life in it self, putteth forth its own pure Act, not only to convince and detect him that transgresseth its Appearance, and manifesteth Evil which hath been committed by Man, but also being tur∣ned unto, and waited in, it shews Man when Motions and Temptations unto Sin arise; and as the Creature is still, and waiteth in that which ma∣nifesteth and singly keeps in his Mind to it, it sheds abroad its Power, and vanquisheth and subdueth those Lusts which do arise, and condemns the Ground from whence they arise; and it purely draweth the Mind after it, and secretly worketh and breatheth forth its pure Life in him that waiteth in Patience and in Stilness, not heeding the vain Thoughts and Imaginations that rise in his Heart, but rather heeds the Manifestation of the Spirit, at whose bright Appearance all the vain Desires come to be extinguished, and there comes to be a Hunger begot within, to be made Partakers of its Pu∣rity and of its Nature; for God through the Operation of the eternal Spi∣rit lets forth his Power, which turneth and changeth the Heart, and cuts asunder and divides betwixt a man and those Lovers that he hath joyned un∣to; and makes a Separation within, and carries a man further from those things which the Measure of the Spirit reproves, and this leads nearer un∣to God: And so they that do believe in the Measure of God's Spirit, come to feel what Repentance from dead Works is, and the Works and the Wor∣ker are seen, and who it is that hath wrought is manifest in the Light; and as there is a diligent waiting upon it, there is nothing that passeth through the Mind, but it discerns and gives a Discerning unto every particular Heart, who singly and quietly wait upon it; but yet after the Spirit of Truth in some measure be felt, and its living Testimony in something, yet it may be a long time before there be a clear Distinguishment in the Under∣standing, so that one cannot clearly discern its Movings from all other false Motions and high Imaginations which are above; and hence it is, that the
hasty and forward Minds follow their vain Motions, which lead them in∣to Deceit, and then the Questioner gets up, and then they question all that ever the Spirit hath made manifest unto them before; a Vail then is drawn over, and the Enemy lodges in the Vail and in the Darkness which is en∣tered; and then as soon as any hearken within to that which is the upper∣most, and doth abound, the Enemy that lodges in that presents Motions, as to obey this and that, and all is Deceit: So therefore all are to keep back, that they may sensibly feel between the pure Motions and drawing of the Spirit, and the vain Thoughts that arise out of the earthly Heart; and when any thing doth arise which the Light doth not bear Witness to, it's not to be followed nor heeded, but a quiet still waiting, that things may be cleared to the understanding; and for Want of this many have run out, and have brought forth Satan's Work, and acted things forwardly in their Will, and so have clean lost the true Sence of that which should guide their Minds, and have followed the Spirit of Error, & have caused the pure Spirit of the Lord to be evil spoken of; but as there is a keeping back, and a quiet waiting out of willing or running and haste, it arises purely and stilly in the Heart, & shines forth in Brightness in the Heart, so that it giveth per∣fect Evidence and full Testimony of it self, that there will be no doubting nor questioning of its Motion; for it will apparently shew forth it self in its own transparent Brightness, with full Assurance of his own Will; and then after it be clearly seen and its Motion, then keep under all reasoning, and keep out all questioning, and give not Way to Temptation, and that which moves of the Lord of Life, will carry thee through in its own Ope∣ration and Power, to accomplish the Will of God, and so thou wilt have Peace being obedient, and thy Strength will be renewed; for as any is brought to submit unto the Will of God when it is known, and comes to obey by Virtue of its own Power, that which is contrary unto God's Spirit in thee comes to loose its Strength, and to decay, and be weakened; but as any disobey the pure Motion of God's holy Spirit after it be known, the Enemy is strengthned, and that which is of the Flesh nourished, and the Spirit comes to be quenched, that which would give thee Power, if thou submittest to it; but yet know this, the Spirit in it self never loseth its Pu∣rity, neither can be quenched in it self, but will bear its pure Witness a∣gainst thee, and none shall be able to stop its Reproof; thus the Diversity of its Operation comes to be known, as it is hearkened unto, obeyed, lo∣ved and believed in, it puts forth its pure Power, and gives Strength, and seals Peace to the obedient; but disobeyed and resisted, it condemns, judg∣eth, reproves and seals Condemnation to the disobedient, and yet there is no Variation in it self, for it is alwayes one and the same. But as it operateth upon different Natures or Objects unto which it joyns, or stands at a Distance from, that is to say, the good Ground it cau∣seth to bring forth Fruit unto God, and the cursed Ground, out of which Bryars and Thorns do arise, it kindles a Fire in, that shall not be quench∣ed; but as there is a Submission unto its pure Operation, it burns up and destroyes that which hinders the Growth of the Seed, and it purgeth the Hearts of them that have Confidence in it from all Filthiness both of Flesh and spirit, and worketh up the Creature into its own Frame and Nature, and fashions, and makes and moulds all that are in the Faith into the Image of the Father, and so the Father's Love comes to be shed abroad in the Heart; and as Wrath was revealed through the Spirit and Condemnation, so
now the PEACE of God comes to be enjoyed, and his CONSO∣LATION shed abroad largely, in which there is pure Rejoycing for∣ever. Unto whom the Spirit of the Father bears witness, and seals Assurance of the Fa∣ther's Love, and of Justification with God, declared. None have the Witness of God's Spirit bearing witness to them and in them, who have not believed in the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, by whom alone Life is begotten by the powerful Operation of Christ in them that believe in him, who is eternal Light it self, whose Word is Spirit and Life, by which the new Crea∣ture is framed and formed in them that believe, unto whom he maketh manifest his Power; for unto him who is the Life of men, is all Power committed both in Heaven and Earth; for nothing was made or created, but by him, neither is any turned from Sin, but by him and by his mighty Power; without him is Death, in him is Life, and the Life is the Light of men: So that none but they that are born of the Light, and are begotten by him who is Light, can have the Spirit of Christ, who is Light, to bear Witness unto them, neither the Assurance of the Father's Love; for only they that are born of the spirit, and walk after the Spirit, are justified by the Spirit of the Lord; for the Assurance of his Love is not made manifest to his Enemies, but unto them that are born and brought forth in his own Image, in his own Likeness and Nature, which is pure and incorruptible, without Stain or Defilement, the holy Seed, which is Heir of the Promise who know the living Hope, which purifies the Heart, and bringeth the Answer of a good Conscience unto them that feel and witness the washing of Regeneration, and have known in themselves the clean Water pour∣ed forth upon them, which hath taken away the Stains, Spots and Ble∣mishes, and the Defilements; for where these are not washed out, and the Heart cleansed from them, and that believed in, wherein God's All suffi∣ciency is felt, and his Power made manifest, there cannot be Assurance of the Father's Love in the Heart nor in the Soul, neither doth the Spirit of the Father bear witness unto such, nor assure their Justification; but on the contrary, where Sin remains unsubdued, and not taken away, the Spirit of the Father condemneth the Sin, and the Creature now is joyned to it, and is become one with it; for no Sin is brought forth, but there is a Con∣sent and an Assenting to the Instigation of the Devil, although when a Temptation ariseth, either within or without, there may be a resisting and a striving against it for a little, but the Heart not being kept close to the Spirit, the Enemy often enters, and so captivates the Understanding, then there is an Agreement and a joyning to the Adversary; and so the spirit pronounceth the sentence of Condemnation upon him who is joyned to the Harlot, and becomes one Flesh, and joyned unto strange Flesh, which is not the Flesh of Christ, the Seed; and that which joyned and consented to drink of the Cup of Fornication, must drink of the Cup of Indignation and Terror, and bear the stroke of divine Justice, and lye in Patience un∣der it, till that be cut down which hath joyned to Deceit, before there can
be the Remission of the Transgression, or the Creature justified in the sight of God; for sin is not blotted out of the Book of God's Remembrance, till it be turned from and repented of, neither doth the Creature stand clear in the sight of God, when God judges in righteous Judgment, which the Light in every ones Conscience shall answer; Now he that is born of God sins not, for the Seed of God remains in him, which is Life: And as the Creature joyns to that seed which is Heir of the Kingdom and of the Crown Immortal, he comes to be made Partaker of its Virtue and Operation, which seed is Christ; and by his Power, by which he limiteth the seed of the serpent, and weakens his strength in the Creature, as man cometh to be∣lieve in his strength unto whom all Power is committed, the Covenant with Death is broken, and that Agreement that the Creature hath made with Death comes to be disanulled by the Arm and Power of the Lord, and so the Creature comes to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and the new man comes to live, or the new Creature, which is born of God, which sins not, comes to be framed and fashioned in the Image of the Fa∣ther, and the Father's Love is manifest unto him and in him, and he hath the Assurance in himself: The Babe that is born from above, of the Spirit which is from above, of which he is born and brought forth of the Just by the Just, he is justified by the just God, and the just Witness of the Spi∣rit sealeth this in him; and he hath the Record of his Justification; For there are three that bear Record in the Earth, the Water, the Blood and the Spi∣rit; and he that is born of that which is pure in it self, hath the Witness of all these three in himself, for they agree in one; that which one beareth Witness to and for, the other doth the same, and the Record, Testimony and Witness of all these three hath he that is born from above: Moreover, there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Spi∣rit, and these three are one: So he that is born of the Father, and be∣gotten of the Father, in Christ the Seed, through the Spirit, he, and he alone comes to feel the Father's Love made manifest in him, and is justified in the Sight of the Father, and hath the Record of all these Witnesses be∣fore-mentioed in himself, so that he hath his Assurance and Evidence near him and in him, the seal of the Father, the seal of the Spirit: And so when the Adversary comes to tempt and to assault, and would raise up Doubts in the Mind, the Evidence is near, which puts him out of all Doubt that he is in the Love of God; and blessed forever, and happy are all they who have waited for these Things, and have felt these Things, and are Witnesses of these Things; for Flesh and Blood hath not revealed these Things: Now let every Man that reads this prove himself, and try himself, whether he be in the Faith or no, and whether he have the Evidence of the Spirit or no, that he is born of it, and knows a Birth that sins not, because the Seed remaineth in him, who is kept by the Power, that the evil One touch him not, kept in Salvation and in saving Health, alive unto him who hath brought him forth to Life, to drink of the Cup of Blessing, and of the Cup of Salvation, which nourisheth and refresheth up unto Eternal Life them that continue in the Faith.
What the Free Grace of God is, and unto whom it hath appeared, and where all are to wait to receive it, declared, as it hath been revealed by the Spirit. THe Grace of God is pure, and is the free Gift of God, and it is per∣fect, it is the Appearance of Christ, it is a Beam of Righteousness shining forth, it is a Measure of God's Strength and Power issued out from himself, and a Proportion of his Treasure, Vertue and Sufficiency which comes to be shed abroad in all them that believe in it; it's that through which God maketh known his Will, and teacheth us by it, and reveals his saving Health through it to them that are taught by it, and through it; them that believe in it, are builded up in the Truth, and become a Habitation for God; no man doth any thing to purchase it, none need say, Where may I get it, or how may I know its teaching? it's near thee, it is in thee, it hath appeared to all men, it shews Ungodliness in the Heart of man, by its Brightness; yea, to all men it shews the Moti∣ons unto Sin; and that which is not like God in Motions, Words or Actions it draweth the Heart of man from them as with a Cord; it shews the Lusts of the Heart and Mind, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; it never joyned to Sin; nothing can alter its Purity or Property, as in it self it is alwayes one and the same; it is perfect, and will be alwayes so; it stands off, and at a distance from that which is corruptible and imper∣fect, and yet beholdeth it; and although some that have turned to it, be again turned from it, and may turn it, as in themselves, into Wanton∣ness, yet it keeps its Purity, and still reproves thy Wantonness, and will lay it before thee, and will shew thee how thou hast abused the Appearance of Christ, and hast marred his Countenance and his Face, and reprove thee for it; many have been the Talkers of it in this professing Age, but knew not of what they spoke, neither ever informed the Mind of man, where it was to be waited for, neither how it might be known, or how, or what the Operation of it was, but have cryed up their own Imaginations we are justified by his free grace, from all Sins past, present and to come, and in this conceit thousands have been led into the Pit of Darkness, while out of thick Darkness they have cried up, we are justified by free Grace in Christ, while the free grace of God's Gift, which should have taught them, they never heeded at all, but got up into Conceitedness, and Carelesness, and Presumption, out of the fear of God; and pretending Justification, while they themselves were the Servants of Sin, and bond-slaves to corruption, and this is the State of thousands at this day, and they that have been Publishers and Preachers of free grace: Now when the thing it self comes to be witnessed and declared what it is, and as it is, and where it is; now they say, it is not Sufficient to teach any the Know∣ledge of God, but from all such foolish Doaters, and blind guides, and ignorant shepherds, is God bringing many Sheep home, which they have driven away, and they would now Kill them that are fed and taught by the gift of God, and sayes it's not Sufficient, and so make them to dislike their Food, and dislike their Shepherd, so would make them deaf and blind, and then they might lead them into any Desart, and feed them
among the Swine, who wallow in the Mire, in filthyness, and Lust, and Pleasure, and Ungodliness, and so beguile the Sheep, and scatter them from the Fold, and lead them from the True shepherd, and from his Appearance, which is his grace, and from the shepherds Voice, which is the Word of his grace, which is able to save the Soul. Oh all you Blind guides, and you that call your selves Orthodox-men and Ministers, and all you that have been preaching free grace in words; and now when God hath given them that have waited upon him an understanding to declare the thing it self, that you have spoken of; now you cry, it's not a sufficient Teacher: Now let me ask you a question, if that which teach∣eth to deny Ungodliness, and shews it, be the grace of God, and the gift of God, then how say you, it's not a sufficient Teacher? if it be not a sufficient Teacher, then why did the Apostle commit them, and com∣mend them to the Word of his grace, which was able to save their Souls? and whether is not that which is able to save the Soul, a sufficient Teacher? Answer ye wise men, and ye litteral Rabbies, if that which shews sin and Temptations be not sufficient, then declare you, and let us see your skill in the Mysteries of God; but to return unto them, in whose Minds there is a Desire to be informed, seeing then that God's free grace, which is his pure Appearance, hath so far manifested it self, or God through it shews sin, and teacheth from sin, that which teacheth from sin is holy, and that which leadeth from worldly Lusts is pure, and that which saves from sin is grace, which is saving in it self; and God hath so loved the World, as that he hath sent his Son into the World; and he was and is the Light of the World, and hath shed abroad his grace, and hath made it appear to all; and all that wait upon it, and come to be taught by it, feel its Assu∣rance; so all are left without Excuse: Therefore wait in that which hath appeared in thee, that which shews the Lusts, and Thoughts, and Moti∣ons unto sin, this is God's gift, God's grace, this is sufficient, though all men in the World say, it is not sufficient, yet this makes not my Faith void; neither thine who hast received it; but thou hast the Witness of thy Faith in thy self, which giveth pure and perfect Feeling of the Ope∣ration of the Spirit of the Lord; and all are to wait within, to hear him who condemns sin in the Flesh within, which by his grace shews man his trans∣gression and Insufficiency in himself, and by the Word of his grace saves all them that believe in it out of Sin, and giveth Dominion over Sin; and this comes to be revealed in the Heart of man, and there must it be waited for in that which is pure, that it may be received, and there the Opera∣tion of it comes to be known, and its Vertue partaken of by all that do believe in it, and receive it, and are subject to it, they see and feel God's Salvation revealed through it to their Souls, and know where their Strength lies, not in self-acting, but in the free Gift of God, the Gift of Righteousness, the righteous Gift, by which Justification cometh upon all that believe.
Whether all have received the Grace of God or no, declared; and whether it be a sufficient Teacher in it self, to wit, that Grace that hath appeared to all, if it be received, demonstrated. THis wise Generation, whose Wisdom is below the Wisdom of God, have confounded Peoples Minds with Distinctions, as that there is a two-fold Grace: First, That which they call common, which they say hath appeared to all men. Secondly, That which thy call Special and Saving, which hath only appeared to the Saints: And by giving heed to these Distinctions, in Times past many Years ago, I lost my self and my Guide, and went from the Appearance of it in my self, to hearken to a thing at a Distance from me, and heeded not that at home which was near, because it was called common and insufficient, and so suffered great Loss; and there I am moved by him, in whose Sight I have found Favour and Mercy and Grace, to declare the Truth, as the Lord hath made it manifest to me and in me, that all who seek after the Lord may be infor∣med, and know where to wait upon the Lord; for unto that Grace which shewed me Evil, and Temptations unto Evil, I was made to go back unto, after many Years Profession (which they called common and insufficient) before ever I found the Lord, or felt his living Power again; For the first they ground upon the Letter, as they judge, where it is said, He causeth the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall upon the Just and the Unjust; and where it is said, In him we live, and move, and have our Being, Health and Strength, and an Understanding in things natural, and by which men come to see gross Sins and Evils; but that which they call Special, is that which the Saints are saved by, and are established in, in Righteousness, and receive the Remission of Sins: Now he that causeth the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall, and giveth Health, Strength and Nourishment to all things living that are visible in the outward visible Creation, and that discovereth gross Sins and open Evils to man, the same is he who is the Life of the Soul, the same is he that sanctifies, and purifies, and saves them that believe; and it's the same Virtue and Power that upholds the natural man in his pure Nature, that upholds the spiritual Man, and by which he liveth unto God; it's the same Grace, I do not say, the same Measure; for the same Virtue and Power, by which all things that are visible and living were made a∣live, and subsist in their Station and Covenant and Bound, where they are set and placed; the same Grace, Strength, Power and Sufficiency uphold∣eth the heavenly Bodies, and moveth and acteth in a higher Sphere or Degree, and preserveth all that believe, and are quickened by him who is the Power of God in heavenly Places; and the same Power and Virtue that discovereth the dark Places, and hellish Places, and the horrible Pit, it's the same Power, Life, Strength and Virtue that leadeth all that be∣lieve into the Land of the Living, into the holy Place, into the peaceable Habitation, into the holy Mountain, and into the heavenly Tabernacle made without Hands: And in few Words, he that discovereth open Sins, the same Grace and the same Purity discovereth hidden and secret Sins, though the Measure of its Purity shine in one more then another, be∣cause
them that are in the Unbelief the Darkness overshadows, and the Mountains are high, and the Vail is thick, and the Clouds are many, and the Air dark, so that its Resplendency and Brightness is not seen, because of the Vail which shadows it, that it hath not much Entrance; but in them that believe, and have received that Grace, and are joyned to it in which they believe, it renteth the Vail, and maketh the Shadow to fly away, and scatters the Clouds, and breatheth forth it self in Purity, and makes the Air clearer, so that its Brightness shineth more purely forth to them & in them, because the Heart is more open to receive its Virtues in, yet the same Pu∣rity and Virtue remains still, and the same Grace keeps its Purity and Pro∣perty in it self, and its Power and Sufficiency is alwayes the same, though it do not appear so to the Creature: So this I say, and is my Testimony of the Grace of God, which is the Gift of God, which hath appeared in some Measure, more or less unto all men, and convinceth and shews gross and open Evils, even the same Grace by its Virtue and Power leadeth from the least or impurest Thought, and shews the secretest Evils that lodge in the Heart, Unbelief, and also every Temptation unto Sin; and this shall be witnessed to be Truth by the whole Earth in the Day of the Lords Ap∣pearing, and is now witnessed by all the Children of Light who believe, with whom I have Fellowship in the pure, living, sufficient perfect Grace of God, which is God's free Gift, which in some Measure hath appeared to all, whereby all are left without Excuse; and herein is the wonderful Love of God made manifest to all Mankind; and all that turn to his Grace, will see he hath long waited to be gracious in his Grace, which is near, that all Mankind might be Partakers of his Bounty, Love, Mercy, Fa∣vour and free Gift, by which Justification cometh upon all that believe. Therefore my Bowels and Heart are more open in this unto all, because many have erred for lack of Knowledge, and have wandred aside, because they have not found a true Guide: Therefore in dear Love unto all upon the Face of the Earth, where this may come, I write and let out my Bo∣som into this thing, that they may also be Partakers with me of the free Love of God, and the free Grace of God, by which I am saved, and know the Wall which is Salvation, and the Gates which are Praise, which the Saints are compassed about with, and entered in at; and for the sake of such who thirst after God and the Knowledge of him, I write for their Infor∣mation, and not to satisfie critical men, nor them who are in the Philosophy and vain Deceit, who are swollen big in their fleshly Understanding, and puffed up in their earthly Minds; for by such I desire not any Testimony, neither Acceptation. But now to come to speak of that which many are doubting about, that is to say, the Grace of God which bringeth Salvation, which hath appear∣ed to all Men, whether this be a sufficient Leader and Teacher, if it be re∣ceived; but in Order to the thing in Hand, let all take Notice of this that when I speak of the Sufficiency of Grace, and that it is a sufficient Teacher, I do not speak of it distinct from Christ, or of a thing separated from the Power of God, but one with it and him from whence it comes; for as he is Salvation it self, so the Grace of God is of the same Nature, by which he manifests himself and his Salvation to them that believe, and also re∣veals his Witness in them; for where the Appearance and Presence of Christ is manifest, there is his Power and Strength manifest, either to
Condemnation or Salvation; and though his pure Appearance and Pre∣sence is one in it self, yet them that have marred his Countenance, and pierced him, his Presence alwayes hath been, and will be very dreadful and terrible; but unto them that believe, and have continued with him in his Temptation, and have suffered with him, and have longed for him, his Appearance and Presence will be amiable, beautiful and lovely, sweet, pleasant, delightful, desirable, glorious and admirable, so that they who have seen it, have been melted into Tears, and dissolved as into Water, because of his Love and Beauty, who is the chief of ten thousand: Oh! that all that long after him may wait for him in Patience, in that wherein he will appear, they shall see him, whose Sight will be a Recompence for all longing, and thirsting, and desiring, and waiting; the Sense of long∣ing and thirsting will be taken away, when he that makes glad the Heart appeareth, who lifteth up the Light of his Countenance, and maketh whole them whose Hearts have been broken for him whom their Souls lo∣ved: Therefore all wait, and think not the time long; keep in your Minds to his Grace, which is his Appearance, and him you will feel and see, and be satisfied, and say, This is he we have waited for, let us rejoyce and be exceeding glad; for now he is come, and his Reward is with him, to give every one that wait upon him in Purity full Contentment and Satisfaction, where Peace comes to be felt, and Joy unspeakable, which is full of Glory. And though God, out of his everlasting Love unto the Sons of Men, hath followed Man, and hath called him to return, yet that Nature which is above in Man, which hath transgressed the Life, doth alwayes resist the drawing of the Lord, and is not subject to the Law of God, neither to the Grace of God, which teacheth to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that have beset and compassed the Creature about, as a thick Cloud, and alwayes make War against the Soul, that till there be a listening unto tha which sheweth Ungodliness, which hath Power in it self, none have Pow∣er neither Dominion over that in themselves which leads into the Trans∣gression: Therefore, though God, who is Salvation it self, hath let out himself so far, and hath appeared in his pure and perfect Grace unto all men, yet all have not received Grace; for though the Lord proffers his Gift intentionally, that the Creature might receive it, and so have Benefit, and partake of its living Virtue and Operation; yet while that hath Pre∣eminence in Man, which is contrary to Grace, that will never receive it, because it is contrary to the Life of the corruptible, and takes its Life a∣way, and mortifies and slayes the Enmity; therefore all must be still and quiet, and wait in that which is pure of the Lord, that they may feel that raised up (which receiveth Grace) above the corruptible Thoughts and Desires of the carnal Mind; but many who talk of free Grace have put no Difference betwixt the precious and the vile, but have put them upon do∣ing and working who are in the Enmity, and Curse, and in Death, and so have brought forth dead Works; notwithstanding all Performances, they being dead to the Life of God, another acteth in them, even he which hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil, and so have not known that which was precious in themselves, could not minister unto that which was precious in others, but have been Ministers of Death, and have ministred to Death; and so Death nourishes it self in all them who are not yet come to the Separation, to see betwixt the precious and the vile.
Now though all have not received Grace, so as to save them from the committing of Sin, the Fault is not in God; Israel would have none of my Counsel, they stopped their Ears; Neither is the fault in the grace which hath appeared unto all men; Neither is it because of its Imbecillity and Weakness; but because it is not hearkned unto, and waited in, and obey∣ed, believed in, and received: For this is eternal Truth, which shall for∣ever stand, the least Measure of the Grace of God hath Power in it self to save man from committing of that Evil or Sin which it shews man; and as it is received, the Power comes more and more to be made manifest, where all that believe come to be preserved out of Evil. Object. But some have said, and now say, There is common Grace, and preventing Grace, and restraining Grace, and saving Grace, and the former, that hath appeared to all, but the latter hath appeared to the Saints, and to the Elect onely. Answ. Grace is God's pure and perfect Gift, and is but one thing; I speak not of Quantity, but of Quality; not of so much, as that the Fulness of Grace hath appeared to all; but of a Measure of that Fulness which is in Christ, the Head, although I do not divide the least Measure from the Fulness in Quality or Nature, for it's one and the same; for that which shews a man he should not lye nor swear, that is as pure, according to its Latitude and Proportion, as that which shews a man all that ever he hath done; and that same Grace which leads a man from Drunkenness and Excess, is as pure, and of the same Kind and Nature, as that greater Pro∣portion which leadeth a man from all Sin; I speak what I have seen from the Father, though the dark World cannot receive it: But people have been blinded and darkned with Sounds and Distinctions, which men coyn and frame in their natural Reason, and by their natural Parts, which are out of the Life, although I do not condemn natural Parts, which are purely natural, if they keep their Bounds and Compass, that is to say, to the Mannagement of natural Things of the visible Creation; but the things of God's Kingdom are of another Quality and Nature, and cannot be reached unto by the natural; but as I said, men through Distinctions and Names have wracked Peoples Minds, and confounded their Under∣standing, and have led them into a thick Wood or a Wilderness, so they know not where to get forth, neither what the thing is of which one speaks, because not being spoken through the enticing Words of mans Wisdom, which darken the counsel of God; Now that which shews a man Evil after it be committed, is the pure Appearance of God: And that which shews a man the Temptations, when they arise, that is the same; now this they call Common; and that which preventeth a man, and keeps him back, that he lend not his Heart, nor put forth his Hand to commit Evil, but restrains a man from it, is not that saving out of evil; and that which stops the Adversary in his Way that he enter not, but preserveth the Creature out of Defilement, and saves him from it, is not this saving? is not this the same thing that the Apostle, who was well acquainted with the Grace of God, and of its Operation, wrote of to Titus? That Grace of God which brought Salvation, which had appeared, and doth now appear to all men, which taught them self-denyal, to deny worldly Lusts, and also to live godly, or like unto God in this present World, and now doth the same; is not this sufficient to believe in, and sufficient to save?
Now I do not say but there is a greater measure let out unto them that are converted unto God, then is to them that are convinced of their Evil by the same Grace, yet still it is one and the self-same thing; one Gift, yet a greater Measure of one and the same pure Vertue and Power which is given to them that obey the Life, which is already made manifest by its Appearance unto all. Object. But some will be ready to say, that this is Errour, and that which is contrary to the Scripture, and to orthodox Teachers, that the Grace which is saving, is near all men, and hath appeared to all men. To that I answer, Though grace be saving in it self, even the grace that hath appeared to all men, and may be truly called saving grace, yet to them that believe not in it, neither are taught by it, it convinceth and shews Evil, and checks and judges for it; yet there is no Variation nor Change in the Gift of God, but as it worketh upon different Objects; for Faith and Unbelief are two different things, as Light and Darkness are different; and so the Word of his Grace is the Savour of Life unto Life, (that is to say) unto them that believe, and is the Savour of Death unto Death, unto them who are in the Unbelief, who indeed are dead while they live, yet here is the same Grace, and the same Word of Grace, yet here are different O∣perations; so the Lord killeth and maketh alive, yet the same Lord; the Spirit convinceth of Sin, and reproveth for Sin, and also consolates and comforts; here is Diversity of Operations, yet the same Spirit, which never alters. Object. But further, some may say, If that it be saving Grace, or at least a degree, and a Measure of saving Grace, that hath appeared to all men, then how is it that all are not saved by it. Answ. Because I would all stumbling blocks were removed away, that the Path might be made plain, that all might come to believe in that which is God's Gift, in which there is Power and Sufficiency; therefore I am constrained by the Grace of God to declare of it, and to bear witness to it thus largly, which I know will be to the Edification of all that hun∣ger after Righteousness. All are not saved by it, because they believe not in it, neither are taught by it, yet its Validity, Power and Vertue, is nevertheless in it self; and though them that are careless and heedless, say, We feel no Power nor Sufficiency in it to save us from Sin, yet this makes not void their Confidence who have receied it, and know its Power, which hath given them Power, and also Sufficiency to do the Will of God; what though Unbelievers, who are in the Alienation, say, there is no Beauty in Christ, neither Frmnor Comliness; this makes not his Glory void, who is the express Image of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; the Disciples saw it, and bore Record of him, who were in the Faith, and the Pharisees said, he had a Devil, who were in the Unbelief; but in brief, this is my Testimony, that the Grace of God, the perfect gift of God, which shews Ungodliness, and leads from Ungodliness all that are taught by it, is a sufficient Teacher of it self, I mean, as the Power of Christ through it is made manifest unto all them that hearken to it; Paul a Minister of the word of Reconciliation, who was rapt up into the third Hea∣ven, where he saw things unutterable, came to be tempted and buffetted with the Messenger of Satan, and Fear and Doubting rose up in him, and he prayed unto God thrice, and this answer was given unto him, my grace
is sufficient for thee; so this is evident to all Understandings, who are open∣ed by the Lord, that which shewed him the Temptations, and Satan's Messengers, and Satan's Buffetings, was sufficient to preserve him, and so is it for all who singly are kept to it and in it, sufficient to shew Ungod∣liness because of its Purity, and to lead from worldly Lusts by its Power, and to teach the Will of God, and to live like unto God in this present World; and this Testimony I bear of it, and to it, even what I have felt, and tasted, and handled of its Sufficiency, and Vertue, and Power of its Operation, for the Confirmation of the same Truth, which is believed by many Brethren, and also for the Information of them who thirst after the Lord, and for the Opposition of all the Gain-sayers and Opposers of it; which Testimony I commend to that of God in every man, which will wit∣ness me herein in the Day of God, when all Hearts are opened, and all Falshoods and Truth is made manifest, in the mean time shall rest in that which I have declared of, in which there is pure and perfect Peace. A Word to you wise Men of this World, who are glorying in the Sound of Words, and worshipping outward Appearances; to all wise and literal Professors, who think you are worshipping God aright, who think to search into the deep Things of God by your natural Wisdom, Learning, Parts and Study. GOD hath broken open the Seals of the great Deep, where the won∣derful unalterable things of God are revealed, from whence eternal Wisdom is flowing forth to his little Ones, whom he hath sanctified from the Womb, and his Power and Glory he is shedding abroad, and making it to flow forth, as though it issued out of a Womb, by which Power and Wisdom you are all weighed, even by one who is swadled about with Righteousness, and girded up with the Girdle of Truth; you are all mea∣sured as with a Span, and are all weighed as with a Scale; all your Parts, Tongues, Languages, Interpretations, Significations, Wisdom, that are come to be enjoy'd by them who have believed in the true Light that light∣eth every Man, which rounds you all as an Heap, and measures you all as with a Line, your Breadth, Length, Height and Depth; your Parts, Tongues, Languages and Interpretations are all but natural, Words are but empty Sounds; although there be many Languages, and each have an Interpretation and a Signification, they are all short to declare the Life, the immeasurable Being of eternal Life, you with all these are on Heaps, disjoynted one from another; your Rhetorick, Philosophy, your framed and despised Disputations, your Tongues, and the Significations of all Tongues cannot know the Mind of the Spirit, neither know the Original of eternal Salvation by all these; and so not knowing the Signification of the living eternal Spirit in your selves, you invent, study, devise, form and frame up things in your carnal Minds, by the Strength of your learned, studied, devised Parts and framed Speeches, and have fled the whole World with your dark muddy Conceptions, and have led all out from seeking after the living Wisdom of God, which is from above▪ which was before your Tongues and Languages were; and they have sucked in your Conceptions and Distinctions, and your devised Fables, and your imagi∣ned
Worship, that many have lost the Sense of any thing of God in them∣selves, to guide them; and when you have come as far as you can in those things, and have devised in your Minds by the Strength of those Parts na∣tural, you are farther from the Knowledge then before; and all that hear you, and suck in your Conceptions and Imaginations into their Hearts, they are farther off God's true Knowledge then they were in the Day in which they came out of their Mother's Womb; it's a Lamentation to see how People are gone out of the pure Simplicity which is in Christ, into Subtilty and Deceit, stuffed up full, brim-full of that which must be all poured out as Water, before they and you all come to the least Measure of God's true and saving Knowledge: Oh! a dreadful Day is come upon many, and it lingers not, but will come swiftly as a Thief upon you who have taken away the Key of Knowledge, and give People that which will not open, and tell them of a litteral carnal thing that must give them En∣trance; you and all they will be shut out together among the Uncircum∣cised as Fools, though you count your selves wise Men, your Wisdom will perish, and your Honour will be laid in the Dust; the time hastens, it is the Word of Truth to you all. And you litteral Professors, who have got the Scripture into your Head, and into the carnal Mind to talk on, and are run into so many Heads, you are almost past numbring, and have exalted so many Horns, yet the Num∣ber is read, the Number of the Heads of the Beast, and the Number of his Name; you have taken up things, and are exalting a visible shadowish Practice, and neglect the Life, and are making Idols of those things which were but a Figure and a Representation in their purest time; now you (like the Pharisees) are limiting the Lord, that if he will not appear unto you in those things that you have prescribed unto your selves, and fetched in from the Letter, and gotten it into the fleshly Part, which is heaped up as a Mountain in many of you, so high above God's pure Witness in you, and so high above the Appearance of God in you, that you have quite lost the Sight of that in your selves which should give you the Knowledge of the living God, and make you sensible of his pure Presence; I say, if he appear not in the Way you would limit him to, in those things you would confine him in, you cannot receive him; the Lord open your Understan∣ding, that you may see your selves, and how frothy, vain, light and wan∣ton you are, one with the World in all things in the very Ground, pre∣tending Liberty in Christ, and Priviledge in him, when you may see you are Servants to Corruptions, and to many noisome Lusts, that make War: Again, what are all outward Appearances any more but as a Curtain, or as a Vail, and as a Shadow, in Respect of Christ, God's Righ∣teousness within? But you are filled so full of your Apprehensions of his Righteousness at a Distance, that you have forgotten all at home, and your own Conditions: for his Righteousness will not be a Cloak for your Self-Righteousness and Unrighteousness; and if Christ be not formed in you, God's Righteousness, and live in you, and act in you, and work his Work in you, you are in the Self-Righteousness, and a Talk of Imputation will not save you, while you are not in that Capacity, Nature and Faith, unto whom his Righteousness is imputed: Are you not weary with tumbling up and down among the earthly Hills, among which you have situated your selves? Do you not see your Land grows barren, and your Possessions dry, and
your Worship dead, Heaven rains not on you, the Bottles are stopped, the Dew falls not on you, you wither daily, as a Stick without Sap? what, have you found that which will last unto Perpetuity? Oh! nay, it's rusted already, it's cankered already, it's moth-eaten already, it's fading, the Glory is staining, the Renown of all earthly things is fading, and all terrestrial Appearances, though never so glorious, they are all to cease; a Consumption is coming, Blasting is near, there will be no more Glory in these things; they will fly away as a Shadow when the Sun arises, your Riches are wasting; when will ye seek after that which endures forever? I pitty you who have had Breathings after God, and have sate down at Ease in that which is not eternal; be warned, return home, consider, see what Corruption thou hast Power over now, which had once Power over thee; dost thou rest in that Faith, that thou shalt never be cleansed here? that Faith is curst, it's reprobate, it's rather properly Unbelief; it's not the Faith of God's Elect, by which they were sanctified, and overcame the wicked One in themselves by the Power of Christ, who is able to save, and manifest his Ability in all them that believe in the Light, which they are enlightened withal, through which he manifests himself to the Crea∣ture, and makes known his Power in the Creature, to redeem the Soul out of Death, and to redeem the Creature from under the Bondage of Corruption, to serve him in the free Spirit of God, in which the Sons are made free from Sin, from the Act and Guilt, they become the Temples of the holy Ghost; how far you are from this many of you consider, who are yet Temples of Uncleanness, and a Habitation for many noisome Lusts; repent, and mind that which empties you of your Thoughts and Conceit∣edness, that you may know Poverty of Spirit, that the Kingdom may come unto you, and be yours in Possession, else you are everlastingly miserable; and this is the true State of many of you, own it, and repent, that if it be possible, you may find a Door of Mercy yet opened unto you, and that you may enter in thereat; for it is not setting up and conforming to a vi∣sible Practice without that will justifie you (while that which is in the Transgression, and hath transgressed the Life, and hath disobeyed the Light in your Consciences is Head in you, and above the pure) that will not recommend you unto God, neither can you have any Access or Accep∣tation with God in that State, till you come out of the Waters, upon which the Whore sits, which are unstable and boisterous, and reel to and fro, and unsetled, which are all to be dryed up, and all the Springs cut off that nourish; and you must come to the Rock, before you know any thing that will endure, to build upon, which Rock is Christ, who abides for ever; but you are all gone from that which should give the Knowledge of him in your selves, and do not retain him in your Knowledge, neither that which gives the Knowledge of him, the Light of his Spirit, which shineth in your Hearts, making manifest in your Hearts the Intention of your Hearts, when Motions unto Evil do arise; this must you all come to, before God's Salvation or Redemption you come to know in your selves, or have the Witness of God's holy Spirit, without which there is neither Seal, nor Evidence nor Assurance enjoyed or felt of the Love of God: The Time of restoring is come, and many are restored again into God's Cove∣nant, and are delivered out of the Jaws of Death, and feel him who is the Healer of the Nations, and the Restorer of the desolate Places to dwell
in; but first you must come to see those Places made desolate wherein the wild Nature lodges, before you come to have a Share in the Restoration; come off these barren Mountains, where you are feeding, to Christ the Life of Men, who hath lightned you, and wait in it, that you may feel his Mind in your selves, and the Signification of the Spirit of Truth from your own Spirits, or else you will still err for Lack of Knowledge, and perish for Want of Understanding, and so lay down your Heads in Sor∣row. The Kingdom of God and of his Christ declared in some Measure, as it is reveal∣ed, what it is, and where it is to be waited for, and how it cometh to be re∣vealed to them and in them that believe, that all who are waiting for it may know wherein it consists, and so receive the End of their Hope, and the End of their Expectation, and know the Dominion which hath no End. THE Lord hath prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his King∣dom ruleth over all; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and without End; God is a Spirit, his Kingdom is spiritual, his Habita∣tion is sutable to his own Nature; he is immortal, his Kingdom is so▪ he is Light, his dwelling Place is so, a pure Situation in which there is no Uncleanness, nor ever shall be; It's eternal Dignity, it is an immu∣table Being, that remaineth alwayes in its Purity and Pleasantness, Eter∣nally glorious; it consists in Power, in Righteousness, in Purity, in Joy, in Hope, in Peace, in Life, in Vertue eternal, in Quietness; it's a quiet Habitation, it is a incomprehensible, unsearchable, and indeclarable; Words are too short, they are but as Sounds, as Vails; It is unexpressible, in its is the Treasure-House of Wisdom, out of which all that believe in him, (who is the King of eternal and immortal Glory) come to receive of his Wisdom, of his Life, of his Power, Vertue, Righteousness, and come to enjoy him, who is the Fulness that filleth all things, whether visible or invisible, whether terrestrial, or coelestial; his Power is over all, his Dominion is over all, who is eternally Blessedness it self, and Felicity it self, who makes all that believe in him to partake of his Kingdom, of his Grace, of his Power, of his Dignity, of his Dominion, and of his Glory caelestiall; but these things are hid from the World, who are not re∣deemed from the Earth, neither never look to be while they are in the Body; Unto such I say, God's Kingdom you shall never see nor enjoy, while you are in that Faith which is reprobate, but may be truly called Unbelief, although you imagine a Glory, and a Kingdom in your earthly Minds, and dream of a thing to come, sutable unto that wherein your Glory now standeth; but that will all fail, and those Imaginations will be confounded, and dissolved into nothing, because they are centered in that which is out of the Truth, Christ, and so are without Ground or Bottom, and are out of that which should give you the Sight and Know∣ledge of God in your selves and his Kingdom. Christ when he taught them that followed him, exhorted them, that first of all they might seek the Kingdom of God, even while they were in the Body, Mat. 6. and 39. the Pharisees were gazing abroad in their earthly
Knowledge, although they had the Scripture, that declared of Gods Kingdom, yet they knew it not; and this Generation is the same, who are in the same Nature, and in the same Wisdom, which is earthly and litteral, and they are imagining, as the Jews were, and are lo here, and lo there, in this Observation and the other, and look to see it there; Nay, Christ said, The Kingdom of God is within you, to the Pharisees; And he bad them and others seek it first; what strange Doctrine was this, might the Pharisees say; he saith, The Kingdom of God is within us, and yet bids us seek it? Need we seek that which is in us, may Professors say? Yea, it's like a Pearl hid in the Field; it's like a Grain of Mustard-seed among many great Seeds, which is not easily found; it's like a Piece of Silver lost in the House among much Rubbish, till that be swept away thou wilt not find it; thou must dig deep, sweep clean, search narrowly before thou find it; although he said to the Pharisees, The Kingdom of God is within you, he did not say, they were Possessors of it, or that it was theirs; but to the Disciples, whom he taught to pray in Faith, thy kingdom come; and they came to find it, that which they prayed for, that Pearl, that Groat, that Grain of Mustard-seed, which it was like: and having found it, and believed in it, he said unto them, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. And in Luk. 6.20. And he lift up his Eyes on his Disciples, and said, blessed be ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God: They had seen it, and were Possessors of it, it was theirs: And Christ said unto his Disciples, There are some of you standing that shall not taste of Death, till ye see the Kingdom of God come in Power: And his Words were fulfilled; they declared what they had felt and seen; and some of them say, The Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power: And Paul to the Romans writes, Rom. 14.17. who were also made Partakers of the same Power and the same Kingdom, he spoke his Knowledge of, and said, Its not Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. And the Colossians, who had waited for it, and believed in that through which it was revealed; the Apostle was in the same Faith, Colos. 1.12. and 13. Who hath made us meet Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; who hath delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and hath transformed us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; and those things were seen in the Body, and witnessed in the Body: And the Apostle to the Hebrews saith, He that believes in entred into the Rest. And this and all these things were feeled within by the Seed immortal, the Birth immortal, and they that witness the Birth immortal to live in them: One said, Who hath made us joynt-heirs with Christ, who is the Kingdom of eternal Glory, and they were Joynt-heirs with him of the Kingdom that fades not away: And all that ever come to see the Kingdom of God in the Spirit, which is spiritual, must wait in the Spirit, and in its Manifestation, that so God, and his Kingdom, and the things of God's Kingdom, may be felt, and seen, and enjoyed in the Spirit which is Glorious. Object. All this which thou hast spoken, may some say, is the Kingdom of Grace; and that we hold there is a two-fold Kingdom, the one of Grace here, the other of Glory hereafter, which none comes to enjoy Glory nor any Part of it in this Life, or in the Body. Answ. People have long been blinded with confused Distinctions about Names; and being full of imaginary Thoughts and Conceptions, have
brought forth foolish and unlearned Distinctions; and that which God hath joyned together, they would separate: Grace is glorious, and Glory is gracious; he that can receive it let him; the Kingdom of God, which was like a Grain of Mustard seed, afterwards it became a great Tree; the tree in its Strength, and Glory, and Height is more glorious then when it's in the Seed, yet the Seed and the Tree are in Nature, and Quality, and Kind one; if the Kingdom be in Dominion, in Purity, and Power, and Glory, is not here Unity? yet a greater Measure, yet still the Dominion is one, the Power one, the Glory one, and the Thing one, wherein Grace standeth, and Glory standeth, wherein the Kingdom stand∣eth; grace is glorious, Eph. 1.6, 7. Having predestinated us unto the Adoption of Children, to the Praise and Glory of his Grace, wherein he hath made us accep∣ted in the beloved: In the Father's house there are many Mansions, Places in the Kingdom of God, there are many heavenly Places; and they that walked to the Praise of his Grace, came to sit also in heavenly Places, Eph. 2.9. through Grace, Salvation, through Grace Glory comes to be reveal∣ed in the Earth, Isa. 6.3. The Earth is full of his Glory; he that makes Hea∣ven and Earth glorious, is Glory it self, from whence Grace and every Degree of Glory receives its Being; the least Measure of God's Strength and Powers is glorious, and to be gloried in, in the Lord, by all that have seen it; things might be declared which God hath revealed, which are not lawful for me now to utter; for as one Star differs from another in Glory, yet all glorious, even so is it with the Children of the Resurrection, who are quickened, and made alive, and raised from the Dead, and fashioned like unto his glorious Body, Partakers of the Glory of God, of his Kingdom, of his Power; the power is his, in which the Kingdom stands, the king∣dom his wherein Glory stands, the Kingdom, Power and Glory stand all in him who is the glorious God, and the God of eternal Glory, who is revealing his Power, his Kingdom and his Grace, and his Glory unto all that patiently wait upon him, in that which yet is as a Grain of Mustard-seed; they will come to feel his Presence, his Power and Glory revealed in their Hearts, through the Spirit, and enjoy God in his Kingdom, in his Power, and in his Glory, and through Faith shall see the Weight of Glory, which the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ will reveal unto all that patiently wait for his Appearance, and in his Appearance. Object. But some will cry out, Grievous Blasphemy and Error; what, I think you look for no other glory but in this Life, nor for no other Kingdom, but what you Enjoy in this Life; (thus I know dark Spirits Reason.) Answ. The Saints looked not after any other glory but that which stood in eternal Life; and in the immortal Life, and in the uncorruptible Life; and the Country they sought after, was that which God was the Maker and the Builder of, and they looked and waited to receive of his Power, in which the Kingdom standeth, and did in this Life (I do not say the full Weight of Glory) and to know and injoy, and to be made Partakers of his eternal Dominion and Authority, is that which all his Saints in Measure witness, and in due time, came to enjoy through Faith; for by Faith they saw him who was invisible, and the things of his Kingdom, which are invisible, spiritual and eternal; but to speak of the carnal corruptible Life in the Flesh, who are dead while they live there, that Life, neither the Kingdom, nor the Power, nor the glory of God is revealed to them,
not till after the Death of that Life, and till after the Death of him who hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil, which ruleth in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, whom all the Mystery of God's Kingdom is hid from, their Eyes, and ever shall while in that state; and so let the Serpent be blind; and they that have an Ear to hear, blessed is that Ear; for the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto many, and the Salvation of God, and the Power of his Christ is seen by many, Honour and Praise unto him everlastingly, who is the only Potentate, that puts down all Au∣thority under his Feet, that God may be all in all; but first every one must come to feel in himself the Kingdom, which is as a little Grain, in himself, and in it believe, before any can come to know the Kingdom, or wherein it consists, and after it be known in its Measure, yet this is far short of glory in the Fulness; so many may come to be partakers of the power in some measure, yet this is far short of the eternal Weight of Glory; He that believes is entered into the Rest, and made Partaker of the heavenly Gift, and of the heavenly Power, and of the heavenly Grace, which is glori∣ous, and doth witness a heavenly Place in Christ Jesus, and yet many Enemies to be subdued, and much of the heavenly Habitation, which they see not, which comes to be revealed, as there is an abiding in the Faith, which stands in God's Power, in which the Kingdom stands, the Myste∣ries of God and of his Kingdom, come in due time to be revealed; through Death they come to be known, (that is to say) through the Death of Death; for Israel, the true Type, after they passed over Jordan, and had taken Jericho and Aie, and had made an Enterance into the land, yet there were many Enemies to be subdued, and much Land and possessi∣ons, which they were not made Partakers of long after, even so after there be of the true Rest enjoyed and possessed, and an Enterance made into, yet there are many Enemies to be subdued, and much of the heavenly In∣heritance to be enjoyed by them that stand in the Power which giveth Dominion over Sin, the Devil, Hell and the Grave, and they come to be made Partakers of God; and so the Enmity being slain, man comes to enjoy God, who is eternal Life, and comes to receive the Crown immortal, which God the eternal Power and Strength giveth in due time to them that wait in Patience and in Faith, through which the immortal Inheri∣tance comes to be revealed to all the Children of Light. And so to conclude in few Words, this I say unto all, who are longing after God, and waiting to feel his Power, keep in your Minds to the pure Measure of God's holy Spirit, and therein wait to see his Kingdom, and his Dominion, and to be made Partakers of it, which brings the World to an End; and will let you see to the End of it too, before it was, and him who is now glorified with the Father in the Kingdom of God, with the same glory he had with the Father before the World began; and whoso comes to the End of the World, and to the Beginning again, comes to see him and his glory, and the Kingdom of glory which fades not away, which whoso come to enjoy, are eternally happy.
AN Epistle to Friends IN LONDON, A Servant of Jesus Christ unto all the chosen, obedient and faithful Friends and Brethren in and about London, wisheth an Increase of Righteousness, Faith, Obedience, Patience, Love, Peace, Mer∣cy, Long-suffering, Humility, Knowledge, Wisdom, Virtue, Life, Pow∣er, Immortal Happiness and Felicity among you all, and in you all, that you may know and feel an Increase in the Increase of God, that your Joy, Rest and Peace may be full in him, who is Eternal Life it self, who hath brought and is bringing Immortality to Light, through the Gospel, unto all and in all who receive it and believe in it, which is the Power of God unto Salvation unto all that believe, and by it alone is the Remission and Forgiveness of Sins witnessed; and in no other Name but this, who is the mighty Power of God is Eternal Life witnessed; nor Victory and Do∣minion over Sin, the World and the Devil, but by Christ Jesus, the Word of God, the Power of God, by which Power alone is Strength and Victo∣ry witnessed over Death and the Grave, by all that believe in him, and re∣ceive him, to them he gives Power to become the Sons of God, and to receive an Inheritance with the Saints in Light, among them that are sanctified. There∣fore dearly beloved in the Lord, fulfil our Joy, who have laboured and travailed amongst you, and have declared unto you the Gospel, which is preached unto every Creature under Heaven, and the common Salvation, which was delivered to the Saints, who are at Rest in the Lord, and now again de∣livered and declared unto us in this his own Day of Mercy, Love and Grace, and the Revelation of his Righteousness, that they without us might not be made perfect; for all make up but one Body, and if a Mem∣ber want, the Body is not perfect: And you your selves are our Witnes∣ses, That we preached unto you Christ the Lord, which we were made Partakers of, and only our selves your Servants for his sake; and the Lord is our Witness, and that of him in you all is our Witness, that we followed not devised Fables, nor through enticing Words of the Wisdom of Man declared we unto you, nor handled the Word of Truth deceitfully, but in much Fear, and Soberness, and Tenderness unto all in whom there was any Ear to hear, or any Desire in their Hearts after the Lord; neither did we seek to exercise Dominion over you, but rejoyced when any had Dominion in the Lord over Deceit, and when they reigned we reigned also; but they who reigned without us, and not in the Lord, and
would have entred through Deceit and Craft any Way into the Vineyard of the Lord, and have spoiled the Plants, and would have subverted from the Faith, we could give no Place unto that, no, not for a Moment; to them who have made the Offence of the Cross to cease, and glory in the Flesh, and would lead all thither again, and have made Havock of the Flock of Christ, for whom he dyed, and would have had them to have lived and reigned who put him to Death, and counted that which cleansed from Sin a vain and a low thing; unto such I am wholly without Compassion, but wait to see the righteous Indignation of the Lord fall upon them, who have re∣sisted the Holy Ghost, and have done Despight unto the Spirit of God, Misery and eternal Vengeance will be the End of such, and the upright shall rejoyce. Therefore, dearly beloved of the Lord, who are obedient unto the Word of his Grace, these things are come as a Tryal, that none may henceforth glory in Man, nor in any thing, but in the Lord, the Life it self, and in them who are in the Life, and every one may keep to their own singly, and so they will not be easily moved; and you whom the Lord hath kept in the Hour of Tryal and Temptations, that you joyned not with the Error of the Wicked, prize his Love, and keep low, stand in Awe of the pure presence of the Lord, else you will know his Wrath will be kindled against you again; but the Fear, Awe and Dread of the Lord keeps you clean, clear and pure in his Sight; mind all the first Love, and that which keeps your Hearts open and tender to the Lord, and one to another; put away all Strife and Contention; watch not for one anothers halting, for that which would rejoyce in that is in the Transgression it self; dwell in Love and Peace one with another; take heed of Security and Carelesness and Ease in the Flesh; for then Poverty, Dryness and Barren∣ness will be among you, and the Womb will be shut that brings forth the Children which the Lord delights in; but all feel the Life and the Power of God, and let your Faith stand in it alone, and they that trust in it shall never be moved; for there you will be preserved out of the Changeable∣ness and changeable things, which adulterate the Mind from God, who never changeth; for God, who is, pure stands off at a Distance from that Heart which goes a whoring after other Lovers; there the Bed is defiled, there he will not lye, nor his Love he will not manifest to the unchast Heart, nor to the strange Flesh; for Whoremongers and Adulterers he will judge, and the Mother of Harlots must be cast into a Bed of Torment, and they that commit Uncleanness with her; but the Virgin feel, the Bride wait to know, the Lamb's Wife, who is all glorious and pure, without Spot, and there you will see the joyning and betrothing in Purity and Righteousness, and the Marriage which is honourable, and the Bed undefiled, where the Lamb lyes in the Bosome of his Spouse all Night, there Unity and Purity in the Love undefiled and eternal is seen: The things I write unto you are spiritual, and as you wait, you will feel and know in the eternal Wisdom the Mysteries of the Kingdom, and you will know the Holy Ghost, & the Womb of the Virgin which he overshadows, and see the Conception, and feel him who is conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin, who was and is called the Immanuel, who saveth his People from their Sins; and then you will know Christ formed in you, and him that forms, and the Womb in which he is formed, the first born of every Creature, which is a great Mystery; but through Death this is
seen, felt, heard and understood: But he that hath the Key of David, opens the Door of the Treasure-house of Eternal Wisdom, and unto every one he gives a Measure, according to the good Pleasure of his Will, who wait upon him, and are faithful, of his Wisdom and Knowledge, and past find∣ing out by the Children of Disobedience, whose Wisdom is corrupt; but unto all, and in all, and upon all that believe, he pours out of his Spirit of Life, of Wisdom, of Purity and Power a Measure, and in the Measure all that wait have Unity with him, who is the Fulness of all Things, and of his Fulness receive Grace for Grace; and his Righteousness, Love, Wisdom, Mercy and Fulness are revealed, from Faith to Faith; and as you believe, so are you near to him, whose Wayes cannot be measured; and more and more as you grow in the Faith of him and in him who hath enlightened you, and shined in your Hearts, more of his Love, of his Pu∣rity, Holiness, Wisdom and Glory you will see, feel and understand of him, and from him, who is invisible & eternal, blessed forever & ever, Amen. So Friends, all pass on towards the Mark, that you may know Com∣pleatness in him, who is all fair, and not one Spot in him, altogether lovely; and you who know his Love and the beloved, hold him fast for∣ever, and let him not go, nothing can separate but an unchast Heart; and as you joyn unto any strange Flesh, or Idols, or other Lovers, and so draw your Love from him, be sure of this, he will hide away his Countenance from you of Love, and then Sorrow will fill your Hearts: So look not into Egypt again, nor to what you have parted with, nor the Glory nor Pleasure of Sodom, left you be turned into a Pillar of Salt (remember Lot's Wife) there are many of the same Nature with her, which are near you in that City, which are as Examples, that ye may forever beware, lest the same Root of Bitterness spring up as hath done among many, upon whom nothing is to be expected, but a daily fearful looking for the just Judgments of God in flaming Fire, as a Recompence of Reward for their ungodly Deeds and hard Speeches against the Truth and the Servants of it: But all abide in the Cross, that the Nature out of which the Lusts and the War arise against the Lord, and against your Souls, may wither, dye and be worn out; and so you will see more Rest and Peace in and with the Lord; and he that hath begun will finish, he that hath brought to the Birth will bring forth, for in him there is Strength; all Power is committed to him, both in Heaven and Earth; he will work Righteousness in the Earth, and preserve all in Peace in heavenly Places in himself forever, who believe in his Power. And so Friends, this I must needs say, If you be straitned, it is in your own Bowels, as sometimes I have said when I was present with you, even the same I write now, Destruction is of self, and Barrenness is of self, and Deadness and Disobedience is of self; but as you believe in him who is near, and in his Grace and the Word of his Grace, self is judged, and bruised under, and you will feel him who is the first and the last to en∣large your Borders, and make your Mountain strong, and your Heritage goodly, and your Ground fair and pleasant, where the pleasant Fruit of Righteousness is brought forth, which grows in the Valleyes of Righte∣ousness, where the Beds are green, and the Garden is which gives a sweet Smell, and where all that dwell, live and abide are fresh, beautiful and lovely in the Sight of the Lord, & in the Sight of all the Children of Light forever. Friends, above all things keep low, and none to judge of your selves
nor think of your selves above what is meet; take heed of Conceitedness, and Pride, and Exaltation, and Presumption, and of gainsaying and resist∣ing them who have laboured amongst you in Word and Doctrine, whose Example you have daily as a Pattern before you; let no Boasting be, nor Contentions, nor Strife, nor Emulation, nor Surmising, but in Singleness of Heart all dwell, and bear and forbear one another, and let the same Mind be in you as was in Christ Jesus, and so Peace will be in your Dwellings, and Rest and Prosperity in your Habitations, and Plenty and Riches from above of the heavenly Wisdom will be multiplyed in your Meetings, and the pure Presence of God and his Power will compass you about, who are of an upright Heart to the Lord, that so you may be as Examples and Pat∣terns of Holiness and Righteousness in your Generation, that your Enemy may confess God is among you of a Truth: And so the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ rest and abide amongst you all, that you may continue to the End, which is the Desire of him that shall rejoyce in nothing more, then in all your Prosperities in the everlasting Truth of the Son of God, Heir of all Things, blessed forever and ever, World without End. A Servant to the least for the Truth's sake, F. H. Let this be copied by any that are free, and read in and among all Friends at Meetings, as is convenient, in and about the City.
Mystery Babylon THE Mother of Harlots DISCOVERED, Her RISE, and when, With many of Her SORCERIES; With her Merchants of divers Orders and Ranks, and Merchandize of divers Sorts these ma∣ny hundred Years. Also her last Merchants with their delicate Merchan∣dise discovered; in Answer to a Book tituled, The Di∣rectory for the publick Worship of God through England, Scotland and Ireland, which is now the chief Traffick her last reformed Merchants trade with in all these Nations. Published by F. H. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no Man buyeth her Merchandize any more, Rev. 18.11. And every Ship-Master, and all the Company in Ships, and Sailers; and as ma∣ny as trade by Sea stood afar off, and they cast Dust on their Heads, and cryed, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great City, wherein were made rich all that had Ships on the Sea, for in one Hour she is made desolate, Rev. 18.17, 19.
Mystery Babylon THE Mother of Harlots DISCOVERED, Her RISE, and when, With many of Her SORCERIES; IN the End of the primitive Times, when the Apostles had finished their Testimony committed unto them, and had gathered many out of the World, and converted many unto God; and many were established in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ (which purifieth the Heart, and gi∣veth Victory over the World) and were led to the Beginning, before the World was made; and the Churches which were in God, which had re∣ceived the Anointing, by which they knew all things, even the invisible things of God, and the Mysteries of his glorious Kingdom, which God, through the Spirit did reveal unto them, which Spirit they had received, being begotten of God, by which Spirit they called him Father, and by which Spirit of Truth, which was manifest from the God of Truth in their Hearts, they were led into all Truth, and became Sons of God, and Heirs of the Promise; and this Spirit was their Direction, and led them to worship God aright, to obey and glorifie him and his Name, which brought Salvation unto them; and into this Spirit they were all baptized by the one Spirit into one Body; and in this one Spirit they met and wor∣shipped God, and were of one Heart and of one Mind, and did know their Director near them and in them; and the Time did come when they wor∣shipped neither at Jerusalem nor at Samaria, but in the Spirit and in the Truth, wherein the Father was glorified, and came to see that fulfilled which the Prophets bore Witness of, even him in whom all the Prophets end in, Christ made manifest in them, the Hope of Glory, whose Voice they heard from Heaven, by which they were quickened and raised from Death to Life, by the effectual working of the mighty Power of God, which wrought in them that did believe; and they were in the Unity of the Faith, by which all their Hearts were purified who held it, which is a Mystery held in a pure Conscience, by which they received an Assurance, and were made Partakers of the Promises, and became Inheritors of Life, Light and Immortality, and Heirs of the Promise, and Joynt-heirs with Christ; and they sate together with him in Heavenly Places, and eat with
him, and drank with him in the Kingdom of God, which stood in Power and in Righteousness, Joy and Peace, and did not look like the Pharisees, lo here or there, but first felt it (as a Grain of Mustard-seed) in themselves, or as a Corn of Wheat, which afterwards springs up as a Blade, or as a Ear of Wheat to Ripeness, to a full Corn; and they did walk from Faith to Faith, from Strength to Strength, and did appear before God in Sion; and the Hebrews were come to Mount Sion, from whence God shi∣ned out in perfect Beauty, who became their Satisfaction and Peace, who had revealed his Son in them, whom God had made unto them Justificati∣on, Sanctification and Wisdom; and so they knew one God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, the one Spirit into which they were all baptized, into which they all did drink, by which all that did believe were sanctified, and did receive the Inheri∣tance among the Saints in Light; and this was the Church that was in God, which was begotten by God the Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, in the lively Faith, and in the lively Hope, by which their Souls were an∣chored, and they established in the Truth, that made free, and they had received the Spirit of Prophecy, and did speak one by one, according to the Revelation of the Spirit (which led out of Confusion into Order) and they being in the Power of God, did walk by its Order, in the Order of the Gospel. And now was the Woman cloathed with the Sun, who had the Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head, and the Moon under her Feet, who stood in that which was unchangeable and immutable; and now was the Man-child brought forth which was to rule the Nations, and was revealed to the Church which was in God, and he was the Head by which all the Members of the Body were united together in one, and reconciled to the Father in one, and by his Obedience Justification did come upon all that did believe. But since the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and the Man-child was caught up unto God, the Midnight of Darkness came upon the whole World, and the Sincerity was lost, and the Image of God lost, the Heir caught up out of the World's Sight; Faith was lost, Hope lost, the Spirit lost (the Saints Rule and Direction) and then the Whore appeared, and made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornication▪ and they stag∣gered and reeled to and fro, hither and thither, having lost the Spirit, be∣came all Waters and unstable; and all the World wondered after the Beast, which then arose after the primitive Times, and after the Apostles Dayes, and admired him, and worshipped him, who killed the Woman's Seed, and made War against it. And then the Whore made Decrees (who was gone from the Law-giver) and she made Confessions of Faith, and Articles of Faith, being out of the Power of God, who is the Author of true Faith, being guided by the Power of the Dragon, she made Orders of Worship, and gave Directions for Worship, having gotten on the free Womans Attire, the Outside, the Scriptures, the Form of Godliness; but afterwards became more abomi∣nable, having both lost the Power and the Form, worshipped the Devil's Power and the Dragon's Power, and came forth in the Image of him, and reached out the Cup of Fornication, and made the Nations drunk with her Inchantments and Sorceries; and she drunk the Blood of the Martyrs, the Blood of the Prophets, and them that kept the Testimony of Jesus,
the Spirit of Prophecy, and then prescribed Forms of Worship, Forms of Prayer, and made Creeds, and Faiths, and Articles of Faith, and many Faiths; having lost the Order of the Gospel, she made many Orders, and sent out many Merchants to carry abroad her Traffick and her Merchan∣dize to the Nations; and whole Ships were filled full of it, Vessels full of it, which went upon the Sea, and rode upon the Waters, upon Kindreds, Tongues, Nations and Peoples, who received of her Merchandize, and bought of several Sorts of Merchandize, which the several Merchants traded with, who had several Orders prescribed then (as Popes, Cardi∣nals, Jesuites, Fryars of many Orders, and Monks of many Orders, Je∣suites of many Orders) and all these carryed their several Wares and Traf∣fick; and many more Tradesmen, many more Merchants, whom she sent out with her Merchandize, who have been made rich by her Merchan∣dize; and other Merchants were Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Deacons, Arch-Deacons, Pryors, Covents, Vicars, Commissaries, Chapters, Chancel∣lors, Vice-Chancellors, Doctors of Divinity, Batchellors of Divinity, Doctors of Art, Masters of Art, Batchellors of Art, Priests and Curates, by which they were made rich, and abounded in Treasure. And the Beast, whom all the World wondered after, compelled all to worship him, both small and great, upon which the Whore rides, the scarlet-coloured Beast, which hath guarded all her Merchants, and made all Nations buy their Ware, and hath compelled all People to buy the Whore's Sorceries, even all the invented and heathenish Trumperies which the Whore hath patched up, and their Merchants painted over, which they have patched up, some from the Jews, some from the Heathen, some from the Saints Words, mixt with their own Imaginations and Deceit, and have holden forth these as the publick Worship in the Nations, Kin∣dreds, Tongues and Peoples, their many Creeds, many Confessions of the Faith, many Catechisms, and many Forms of Worship; and when the People are weary of one Sort of Merchandize, then brings another in more deceitful and worse; and the Beast hath compelled the Nations to buy it, and to hold it as the publick Profession of the Nations, though never so unsound and rotten, though damnable Doctrines, and Doctrines of De∣vils, though invented and heretical Opinions, invented since the Apostles Dayes; yet cryes the Beast, The Church had ordained it, and the ancient Fathers have agreed upon it, and the Councils have confirm'd it, and the Divines have ratified it, and the Bishops, and Arch-Bishops, and reverend Fathers have confirm'd it, and recommended it for Orthodox and Au∣thentick. And therefore sayes the Beast upon which the Whore rides, (the false Church) the Mother of Harlots, If you will not agree to it, you are Here∣ticks; for the Church has Power to censure you, to excommunicate you, and to curse you, and to deliver you up to Satan; and then the Beast ha∣ving made Laws for the Sale of the Whore's Sorceries and for the guarding of her Merchants, and their ships, If you consent not to the Articles of the Faith, and Confessions, you break the Law of the Nations, and are not subject to Authority; and now you are not punished for Religion sake, nor for Christ's sake, nor the Gospel's sake, but as Evil-doers, and Trans∣gressors of the Laws of our Kingdom or Nation: And thus the Mother of Harlots which got up since the Apostacy, who hath drunk the Blo
of the Saints, and shed the Blood of the Martyrs, and slain the Witnesses, and hath put many to cruel Deaths, She saith, I am clear, we kill none for Conscience sake, we persecute none for the Gospel's sake, nor Christ's sake, nor for Religion sake; but you suffer as Hereticks, and you have transgressed the Law of Kings, Emperors, Councils, and Parliaments, and are Enemies to States, and Governments, and Rule, in breaking their wholsom Laws (cryes the Harlot, who hath lost the Savour; and her Merchants, which calls that which stinks and is corrupt, wholsome; and so saith the Beast) We persecute you not for Religion, neither in Persons, Liberties or Estates; but the Church hath recommended this Doctrine; these Articles of Faith, these Creeds and Pater-nosters, this publick Worship, or that Mass-book, or that Common Prayer-book, or this Di∣rectory, and are not they the fittest to judge of Religion, who have the Tongues, and the Original? and are fittest to give Meanings and Inter∣pretations of the Scripture? And therefore we make a Law, that the Mass-book shall be holden out for the publick Profession of these Nations, as the Pope, Cardinals, Je∣suites and Fryars think it fit; and that the Common Prayer-book be holden forth as the publick Worship, which the Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Deacons, Arch-Deacons have recommended unto us, as that which is consonant and agreeable to the primitive Times, and to the Church which hath been established so many hundred Years, and whosoever will not consent and perform all the Rites and Ceremonies, let him be indicted, and let him be presented, and let him be cited and appear before a Bishop, and let him imprison him, and fine him, and take away some of his Estate, and excommunicate him; and then it's fit that the Secular Power take Notice of him for transgressing of their Law, and pillory him, or cut off his Ears, or stigmatize him, and banish him, and let his Estate be confiscate to the King or Prince, against whom he hath transgressed; for he suffers as an Evil-doer, and hath brought this upon himself, because he would not be subject to our Church-Orders, and to the laudable Customs of our Nati∣ons or Country. And say, some other of the Whore's Merchants who are of another Order distinct from the rest, and carry other Sorts of Ware, and traffick with other Sorts of Merchandize, and some newer Fashion, which is liker to bewitch People; they cry out to the Rulers of the Earth to propa∣gate their Trading and their Merchandize, and say, It were fit that some Doctors and Orthodox-men were called together to consider and consult about their Trade, and what Sort of Ware or Traffick will most bewitch People, and inchant their Minds, that so her Ships may go on the Sea; for if Kindreds Tongues and People will not buy her Ware, her Ships cannot go, and their Trade will go down; if ever Nations come to the Rock, or People come to some Estability, or know the precious Treasure, and the heavenly treasure in the earthen Vessels, they will buy no more of us; if the Sea be dried up, that no more a gallant Ship can pass thereon nor never a Gally with Oars, then we shall all turn Bankrupts, and then may we cry, Alas, alas! we that have been made rich, are now become poor; therefore what do we do? let us take Counsel together; and if any tell, That they have obtained the heavenly Treasure, and are come to the durable Riches, and to the Treasure that cankers not, and they have found it in
themselves; then let us cry out, it's Heresie, and damnable Doctrine: and if any man shall say, That they need no man to teach them, but the A∣nointing that dwells in them, by which they know all things; then let us give our Vote with one consent, that that's a Delusion, and let us frame Ar∣guments, and say, that that cannot be, you want Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, ad the Original, by which you should expound the Scripture, and know the Meaning of it; and therefore you to conclude that you have received the Anointing is dangerous Doctrine; let us pronounce this man as a Heretick, for he will infect People. And furthermore, if any say, That the Lord is become his Teacher, and he needs no man to teach him, but knows the Lord to be his Shepherd▪ then let us cry out of this, as dangerous Doctrine, and cry to the rest of the People that buy yet our Merchandize, that he holds hereticall Opinions, and despises the Ministry, and the Ordinances, and the Doctrines of our reformed Churches; or if any say, That the Spirit of the Lord is a sufficient Teacher, to lead his People into all Truth, without outward Means, as natural learning, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and the ancient Fathers, and old Authors, and so make void all our Arts and Parts▪ which are the Foundation of our Divinity, then let us cry in the Ears of all the People, and in the Ears of the Rulers, and the Powers of the Earth, that this is Blasphemy and Error, and ought to be supprest. And furthermore, if any shall say, That he believes he shall be made free from Sin in this Life by the effectual working of Chrst (the mighty Power of God) which condemns Sin in the Flesh, and destroyes the Works of the Devil; then let us cry, Heresie and Blasphemy, and let us tell them, that the holiest that ever were upon the Earth sinned, and that the Body of Sin was uncut down in them; and let us prove it by Paul's Words, he complained of a Body of Sin, and was never in any other Condition while he lived upon the Earth; and so it may be, we shall keep them in Blindness, that they will continue and trade with us; and if any say, They are come to the Bap∣tism of the Spirit, the one Baptism, into which all the Saints were aptized, in which all other Baptisms end, and so being come to this deny all the Figures, and the Baptism of Infants; then let us cry out, that they are Sectaries, and deny the Ordinance of God, Infants-Baptism, and let us give them some Scripture, how that Christ took up little Children in his Arms, and blessed them, and how he hid his Disciples go out into all Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father Son and holy Ghost, and may be with an Inference or two, or two or three Consequences, raised from this and the like Scriptures, we shall make their Eye blind, that we shall put off this counterfeit Ware yet a little while. And if any shall deny our Church or Chappel, and call it an Hol Tem∣ple (which God never commanded to be built) then let us bring some Scriptures, how that God commanded a Temple to be built at Jerusalem, and how the Jews had Synagogues, and how God commanded Store-hou∣ses to be built for God's Service and Worship; and it may be such a Proof as this will satisfie them, that they will come to our Shop another Time, at the Hour appointed for the Sale of our Wares, when the Marke-Bell rings, and the Wares are ready to be set out; and so by this Means we may hold on our Trade a while: And if any shall deny David's Psalms to be sung in Rhime and Meeter, and with Organs and Pipes, to be an Ordinance
of God in Gospel Times; then let us bring them some Scriptures and some Fathers, and tell them, in the Church of Corinth, that he that had a Psalm might sing; and it may be they will know no Difference between a Psalm which was given forth by the Spirit, & the Psalm which is gotten by Tradi∣tion from another; and let us bring a Proof out of Revelations, That they that were redeemed from the Earth played upon the Harps, and sung a new Song; and it may be they will see no Difference between them that are in the Earth, and them that are redeemed from the Earth, and so we may keep up this still as an Ordinance invented by our Mother Mystery Babylon. And let this be agreed amongst us, now when many of us are assembled together, whose Lively-hood and Riches stand only in the merchandizing of our Mother Church, that to whatsoever Place we sail in our Ships, if any be heard to say, That the Spirit of the Lord ought to move first, before any Teacher, Minister or Believer ought to pray, that so they may pray with the Spi∣rit, and in the Spirit, in publick and in private, whether with many or few, that so without the Spirit none can be edified; let us all agree to this, that it be voted down as an Error; and let us do what in us lyes to prove from Scripture, that set Forms of Prayer are lawful, and are an Ordinance of God; and let us bring the Lord's Prayer, called by our Mother-Church the Pater noster, and see what that will do, and also Hosea 14.2. Take with you Words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take away our Iniquity, and re∣ceive us graciously; so with a Deduction from these and the like Scriptures, we may happily prove, that a set Form of Words, invented by our Church (or any of us that trade with her Merchandize) that this is an Ordinance of God, and ought to be practised publickly and privately, and is accep∣ted with God, although the People have not received the Spirit, as they had in the primitive Times; and if this will not satisfie, then use some pre∣valent Argument, as our reverend Brother and Fellow-merchant with us, Mr. Samuel Bolton in the like Case in Hand used this forcible Argument. Though you cannot command the Wind (said he) yet you may spread your Sails▪ and see what such an Argument as this will do; but if they will not be content with this (as it may be they will not) in England, Scotland, Ireland and Holland, and some other Parts, who are more quick-sighted then some other Places where we merchandize; if we cannot stand it out against them, that none can pray to God aright, but he that is come to the Spirit▪ and knows by the Signification of it what to ask, then let us grant them the thing, if we cannot help it, if Common-prayer, Forms of Prayer will not go off as they use to do amongst our Customers, then let us agree to them (but let that be the last Shift) that without Faith or the Spirit it is impossible to be accepted or heard of God; yet before this be granted, let us strive as much as in us lyes by forcible Arguments from the Scripture (if so be they will not allow the Authority of ancient Fathers, nor of our Cannon-Books) how that there is a Platform laid down in Scripture, and the general Heads of true Prayer are laid down in an Orthodox Method in the Scriptures, that is to say, Confession, Petition, Intercession, Suppli∣cation, with giving of Thanks; and if this will not stave them off from speaking so much of Prayer by the Spirit and with Understanding (for i will be a grievous thing if we let this Ordinance fall of set Form of Prayer which our Mother Mystery Babylon hath allowed so many Years, and ra∣fied and confirmed in several great Councils, as Nice and Lateran, and di∣vers
others) and if nothing will serve them but Prayer by the same Spirit as was in the primitive times (before we lose them quite) let us grant it them in Words, that Prayer by the Spirit is only acceptable. And reverend Brethren, let us all agree not to be idle, but diligent, read the Scriptures, and pack them up together, a deal of Exhortations, Re∣prehensions, Admonitions and Prophecies, and read some old Authors, as Irenes, Ambrose, Cyprian, Jerom, Bazal, Austin, Origen, Damizin, and it's not amiss if we take in Luther, Calvin, Menno and Beza, and some o∣ther late modern Writers; and so by much reading and Meditation our Actions will be whetted up and quickned, and those Words which we read often will lodge in our Memory, so that we shall be able to pray half an Hour ex tempore, or an Hour and an half upon a Fast-Day (for that is the best Traffick that goes off such Dayes as those) without Tautologies or Reiterations; and so though we pray several Times, and in several Places, as before Kings, or Councils, or a Synod, or Classis, Merchants of our own Order, yet by this Means we shall be fitted for all Places and Time, to sute the Business which we are about; and if any question the thing, let us say, we pray by the Spirit as it gives us Utterance; but now this is the last Beast of our merchandize, which is as Gold, and Silver, and precious Stone, and Pearl; if this will not go off, as upon the Account of the Spirit, or spiri∣tual Worship, or a spiritual Ordinance, then there is little Hope of driving any more Trade, or getting any more sale with these men; then let us cry to the Magistrates, they are new fangled and giddy-headed, and delight in Novelties, and are erroneous Schismaticks and Hereticks, and are fa∣ctious and seditious, which if they be let alone, and not be timely checked and reproved, they will overthrow us Merchants (call'd by our selves Mi∣nisters) and not only us, but also both Church and Common-Wealth. And furthermore let us agree, reverend Brethren, in Unity and Peace, and strive all with one Consent to be furnished with such Merchandize as will sute with the Countries and Regions where we traffick, as Kings, Princes, Protectors, Parliaments, and Councils, Noble men, Gentlemen, and also take in the common People (if happily we can please them all) be∣cause that by the last mentioned we receive much of our Subsistance; yet if any of them do not like our Merchandize, it is the least matter of them▪ for then we have a King, a Prince, a Protector or a Parliament to appeal to; and if we can but satisfie them with Merchandize, upon Petition they will make us a Law, and set a Compass upon every one of our Ships to ride in at Sea, and they will command every Parish to buy our Merchandize, and if they will not buy it, at the worst compel them to give us our Price, whether they receive our Merchandize or Traffick or not, but if they will not (having a Law to guard us) we can take it from them, whether they will or no; and if at any time any seem obstinate, and refuse to pay us Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer Dues (which may be come to the Value of 18 d. or 2. s.) we can take a Pot worth 7 or 8 s. or a Pan, or a Kettle; and if they shall neglect to pay us a Mortuary, which hath been an Ordinance ordained by our mother Mystery Babylon seven or eight hundred Years ago or upwards, if they will seek to disannul such a laudable Custom, then we can sue them for it in a County-Court, and get 20 or 30 Shillings Dammage; and if any of the common People refuse to pay us our Tythes, which belong unto us Church-Officers, which were given
unto us by our Mother, who sate upon the scarlet-coloured Beast at the least 13. hundred years ago, that if our Tythe come to 40. s or 3. l. we can go to a Chapman or two, who resents our Commodities, and they will give us a Warrant for treble Dammages, and then we shall get some Bai∣liffs (who are our Church-Members) and take away a Yoke of Oxen worth 8 or 10 Pounds; or a Horse or a Cow worth ten or twelve Pound; and if the Tythe come to 5 or 6 Pound, then we can take five or six Cows, and a score of Sheep, and half a score of Swine, and thresh the Corn out of his Barn, and take it away, and take away the Feather-Beds, and Cur∣tains, Court-cloaths, and Blankets, Rugs, Sheets, Kettles, Brewing-furnance, or the Rayment which the Family wore; and if we judge it too little to satisfie our insatiable Desires, take Pin-cushions, or if it be but half a Cheese, as our reverend Brother Alexander Bradly, in the Parish of Elm∣stone, in the County of Kent, from Robert Minter of the same County and Parish; And in thus doing there will be little loss or detriment to us: And if any refuse to give us a Tythe-cock of Hay, or a Shock of Corn; (having the Power of the Earth of our Side) we can pull down the Hedges, and break open the Gates, and fetch away a Wain-load or two, or as much as we think fit, as many of our reverend Brethren of our Order have lately done; which are good Precedents to Posterity that may come after us; and if any with whom we have traded (who are Neigh∣bours) do think much at us, we can call them Hereticks, and say, they are Enemies to the Church and Common-wealth, therefore why do you pity them? But reverend Brethren, it is not with us now in the North Regions of the World, as it hath been in time past, about two or three hundred Years ago, neither as it is with the rest of our fellow-Merchants in Italy, Rome, Jerusalem, Arabia, Greece, Portugal, Spain, Hungaria, France, and the rest of the Regions, where our Mother sits as a Queen, the People being all as asleep at Midnight, any old, dark, rusty cankered Ware will go off there at a good rate, and for Ave-maries, or Pater-nosters, Te Deum, or a Magnificat Anima, or the like, or some other Charm in an unknown Tongue, or a Story of St. Damisen, or St. Benedict about Images, or a story of St. Francis of his converting of Wolves and Bears; or speaking an Hour from some old-Fathers, and call it the Word of God, and meddle not with the Scripture at all; for a story of the Lady of Laurette, or the image of the Virgin Mary, and of what Miracles they have wrought, which the Members of the Mother-Church believe for good Doctrine, and receive these or the like, as Crosses, Crucifixes, Pictures, Beads and Images, and such other like Merchandizes of the baser Sort, are all brought and received, without Question, as Merchandizes of great worth, and things belonging to Happiness and Felicity; but alas! it is almost Day, and the Night is far spent, and the People in these Northern Regions are come past Mid-night, some towards the dawning of the Day, and they question our Merchandize, and with some the Night is quite over and they are come to the Day-break, and to the rising of the Sun, and with those there is no hope of trading, (though with the best of all our Commodities) though with Cinamom and Odours, and Oyntment, and Frankincense, yet they will buy none of our Ware, nor there's no Hope of trading with them any more; for they are come to know the Pearl
which is more precious then Rubies, and the heavenly Treasure that doth not rust, and the Word which is sweeter then the Honey and the Honey comb, there's no Hope of them; but this is the Misery, they will not be content with what they have found, but impart it to others, and so beget a Dislike in other Peoples Minds to the best of all our Merchandize. However, them that are gone from us, and deny our Mother and her golden Cup, and deny all her Merchants, great and small, not only them that trade in Wood, and Vessels, and Brass, and Iron, but even them that trade with the best Merchandize, as Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Pearls, fine Linnen, Purple, Silk and Scarlet; however let us excommunicate them, and give them up to Satan, and let us call to the Beast with his se∣ven Heads and ten Horns, who is scarlet-coloured, dreadful and terrible, and let us accuse them of Heresie, Schism and Blasphemy, and call them Seducers, Deceivers and false Prophets, and let us brand them with Names of Reproach, as Sectaries, and say, they are seditious and rebellious and mu∣tinous, and they are Enemies to Church and State and all good Govern∣ment, Peace-breakers, factious and pestilent Fellows, that bring all the Nations into an Uproar; and if that will not do, let us petition to Kings, Princes, Dukes, Parliaments, Protectors and Councils, that some speedy and effectual Course may be taken for suppressing of these Hereticks, and for stopping of these blasphemous Doctrines, as that the Steeple-house is not the Church, and sprinckling of Infants no Ordinance of Christ, and singing of Psalms by Tradition no Part of the true Worship of God; and it may be shall get some Law or Act of Parliament against them; or call them Vagabonds, and get them whipt abroad, and put in Prisons, while we take away their Oxen and Goods at home▪ and so by this Means it will stop others (whom we traffick withal) that they will not dare to hearken unto them; for if they will not buy our Wares, and take our measures by a Glass in Love to it, yet because of Fear of Imprisonment, or Loss of their Goods or E∣states, they will be constrained to trade with us. But alas! it is otherwise with us now then it was in Queen Mary's Dayes, when Mass, Mattens and Even-songs, Processionings, Ave-maries, Creeds and Pater-nosters took up most Part of the Time, and went off among Peo∣ple for spiritual Worship at a good Rate; neither is it with us now, as it was in the Dayes of Bishop Laud, our great Metropolitan, and the rest of our Mother's Merchants▪ then would Common Prayer translated out of the Mass-Book into the English, and Creed, Letany, Pater-noster, with a Lord have Mercy upon us, or we beseech thee to hear us good Lord, forty Times over in a Quarter of an Hour, with some of David's Psalms turned into Meeter by Hopkins and Sternhold, Masters of Musick, sung with Organs, with Cho∣risters and Boyes, with bowing to the Altar, and such like Merchandize, which was then precious in the Eyes of our Mother's Children; then who∣soever would not be obedient to all the Rites and Ceremonies, we bran∣ded them with the Name of Puritans and Non-conformists, and haled them before Sessions, Courts and Magistrates, cited them to appear before the Bishops, served them up to the High-Commission-Court, before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal [falsly so called] and there the Flesh was gnawn to the Bone, and Ears cut off, stigmatizing and burning with Irons, Im∣prisonment and Banishment: Now as People came nearer the Day, they began to suspect all this, as not to be the spiritual Worship of God, having
no Ground nor Footing from the Spirit of Truth, nor Example from the Scripture, nor from the primitive Churches; then they over whom our mother once reigned, began to question her, whether she was the Lamb's Wife, yea or nay? And whether our Predecessors and Brethren were the messengers sent out by the true Church, yea or nay? And whe∣ther the Ordinances and Practices were the Institution of Christ and his Apostles, yea or nay, in the primitive Times? And the Day dawned upon them, and the Spirit came to be revealed, and did shine into their Hearts, and they began to search the Scriptures, and to compare the true Church (which was cloath'd with the Sun, and crown'd with the Crown of twelve Stars) with our mother Mystery Babylon; and they began to compare the Apostles and ministers in the primitive Times, with our Predecessors, Ba∣bylon's merchants; and also compared the Institutions and Ordinances which were delivered to the true Church, with the Institutions, Rites, Ceremonies and Inventions of our mother Mystery Babylon; and so they found all out by the Revelation of the Spirit, and by searching of the Scrip∣tures, they found out the Rise of our mother, after the Woman was fled into the Wilderness, and that she sate not as a Queen upon Nations, Kin∣dreds, Tongues and Peoples, till after the Woman did fly away upon the Wings of an Eagle into the Wilderness, for a Time, Times and half a Time; and likewise they found out, that our Predecessors and Fellow-merchants were not like the ministers of Christ in the primitive Times, neither our Doctrines and Ordinances like the Ordinances and Doctrines which were once delivered to the Saints, before ever we merchants set sail, or floated in a Ship on the Sea: And so finding our City to be raised up in its Glory, since the Glory of God was lost in the Earth; and finding our Queen Mystery Babylon ruling in our City, since the Lamb's Wife fled; and finding us merchants to receive her Traffick from her City, since the Faith was lost that once was delivered to the Saints; and did see our Creeds, and Beliefs, and Pater-nosters, our Prayers, and our Hymns, that they are quite another Thing, which was Part of her Traffick, they have concluded, (and that upon infallible Grounds) warranted by a Cloud of Witnesses in the Prophets and Apostles, that our mother is a Whore, and her Predeces∣sors are her merchants, and that our Ordinances are, and Traffick hath been invented by some of our mother's children, which are Apostates, and they have found us out: And now alas! a Ship will be hardly able to ride any more upon the Waters, nor the Sea will hardly bear up our Vessels any more; the Nations, the Kindreds, the Tongues and the Peoples are almost dryed up, especially in the North Regions they will not buy our merchandize any more, our Ships are like to stand still, and our merchan∣dize is like to be all shipwrackt; therefore let us take counsel, lest all the Sea dry up, and we all sit down in Solitariness, and our Song be turned in∣to wo worth the Day, misery and alas. Therefore now it behoves us all, reverend Brethren, who are of this last Edition (tything Presbyters) to deny our mother in her greatest Fornicati∣on and Adultery, since she hath committed Fornication with Kings and Nobles, and since all Nations have drunk of her cup; but yet let us own her three or four hundred Years after the Ascension of Christ; for then though she was inclining to Adultery, and it lodged in her Heart, yet it was not so openly known then, but only to a few, and then she held Part
of the Form of Godliness, and had Part of the true Church's Attire and Ornaments on the outside; and so let us all agree to stick close to her here, and vindicate her then and her merchandize (the Form of Godliness) for if this Traffick will not go off, we are at an End; for either this must serve in the North Regions of the World, or we must pull down our Sails, and let our Ships stand still on dry Land; let us put on a Resolution, there is some Hope that this may serve a while; for that our Mother was a true Church three hundred Years after Christ, hardly any in this will gainsay us; and let us deny all the Popes, Cardinals, Legates, Fryars, Monks, Jesuites, Seminaries, and all their several Orders (which are one distinct from another) and let us deny the rest of our Fellow-merchants, or rather Fathers (which did ordain us to be Merchants to trade at Sea) seeing that kind of Merchandize which they then traded with (which they received from our Mother) will not go off now; for Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People now will not buy that kind of merchandize which hath not the Face of Purity upon it; and though we were made Ministers by them, yet now when they are grown out of Date (a Parliament having voted them down) it's not safe for us to hold them up, nor none of their Wor∣ship nor Merchandize; so we having a distinct Order of our own, and are ranked into another Fellowship, distinct from the Fryars and the Monks, let us keep our Fellowship one with another; and so we may set up our selves, and so may bring Honour to our mother Mystery Babylon under a∣nother Name; and so let Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Arch-Deacons, Deans and Chapters, Prelates, Vicars and Curates be denyed; and seeing the traditional Traffick (before mentioned) will not go off, and all the Forms of publick Worship have been contrary to the Scriptures, and contrary to the primitive Times, and seeing we cannot hinder People from seeing of it, therefore we must let it all pass, and deny both them and it (at least in the hearing of them whom we trade with) therefore let them merchan∣dize with it in some other Country, for our mother, where she hath more Reputation, and where the Beast hath more Power; and the Time may come, if we can but perswade People, that they cannot understand the Scriptures, nor come to know the mind of Christ without our Original, Hebrew; Greek and Latine, in some Time, it may be, this Traffick will go off, if we can keep People but ignorant enough, that so we may be a means to bring our mother and her messengers (that she hath sent forth) into more Reputation then they are: Notwithstanding, though the Day be dawn∣ed, and every man's Work made manifest of what Sort it is, yet it is well enough, that we receive the maintenance which our mother Mystery Ba∣bylon gave unto our former merchants, as Tythes, Oblations, Obventions and Offerings, Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-dues, and Mortuaries, twenty Shillings for a funeral Sermon, ten Groats at the Grave, twelve Pence an Hour for ringing of Bells, and such other like Commodities that befall us; and besides all this, we have got something out of Bishops Lands, and Deans, and Chapters, and Prebends Lands, some good Augmentations out of those; so that all the merchandizing and Traffick lyes in our Hands, and all the Wages that our mother gave to other Officers and Ambassadors of several Orders (which to speak plainly, is the very Reins and sinnews of our Gospel which we preach) and therefore, if we cannot keep the People blind, but they will see our Error in most Things; yet while we have the Powers of
the Earth to make us a Law, that all may be forced an compelled to pay that unto us which our mother, the Church gave us, when she was in her Exaltation, while this is kept up, we shall carry about her Ships, and mer∣chandize; though the People have no great Heart to it, we shall cry out to the Magistrates, to compel them to buy it, or else the People will turn Atheists and Barbarians, and however get our Price. Yet now, reverend Brethren, seeing we cannot keep the People in Ignorance and Darkness, nor hinder the Day from dawning, nor the Sun from rising, while it is but even yet Twy-light, let us work and carry about our Traffick; for the best Sort of Merchandize which our Mother hath, will hardly please now; for now it comes to that, that nothing but spiritual Ordinances will be accepted among People now; therefore we, which are of the tything Presbyterian Order, though we have denyed our Mother in some of her Sorceries, and though we have denyed the Bishops, our Fathers, and Ordinances, and their established Form of Worship, we being Heirs apprent to their Inheritance, and Revenews, and wages; now we being come to Maturity, and go under the name of Reformers, yet let our Mother Mystery Babylon's Wages stand unalterable, as the Law of the Medes and Persians; and though the Professions of publick Worship have been denyed and abolished, let us perswade the Magistrates and Rulers, that if they abolish our Tythes and set Wages, then the Gospel will cease to flourish in these Nations; and though the Mass-book, or book of Common-prayer, and the Letany will not go off for Gospel any longer, we shall set somthing else up in its stead to be called the Gospel; And be∣cause we have not the immediate Spirit, nor an infallible, neither ever look to have, its requisite, that we prescribe some Form or Directory of Worship, to be as a Rule of Direction to all of our Order; and if we can get a Parliament to make an Ordinance for the Recommendation of it to the Nations, as the publick Worship of God, then we may trade yet with our Merchandize; and whilst our set Wages is not altered, the matter is of less Moment; and though the Directory should be discommended, as it is recommended, and our Form should go down, and another thing should be established instead of it, yet it were lawful for us to joyn to another; and though they should accuse us for Time-servers, and Men∣pleasers, yet we have a Cloud of Witnesses, as in Edward the 6. and Henry the 8. how many hundred of our Fellow-merchants denyed driving a trade with the Mass-book; and likewise in the Dayes of Queen Mary many thou∣sands owned the Mass-book as the publick Worship of God, which was then holden out. Again, how many thousands of our Fellow-merchants denyed the Mass-book, or publick Profession, Doctrine and Discipline, and joyned to the book of Common-Prayer, and the Letany, as the publick Profes∣sion of the Worship of God; and now of late Years we have denyed it our selves; and so we which are of this Order can dispence well enough with this, seeing that we trade with some of our Mother's Merchandize under another Name, and so the Matter is less grievous, because the Orders and Ceremonies about Worship are retained still in our Directory under another Habit and Guise; and having these Witnesses before mentioned for our Example, and if any seem to contend with us, this will take the Edge off People, (seeing it's no new thing with us, to set our Sails which Way so∣ever the Wind blows) and it may be, we may bring them a Scripture or two, and an Inference from it, for a Cloak, as, to submit to every Ordinance
of man for the Lord's sake, and let every Soul be subject to the higher Power; so Henry the 8th. while he stood, he was the higher Power, and so Mary, Elizabeth, James and Charles, they were the higher Power, while they stood, and they did ordain, that sometime the Mass-book should be the publick Worship, and some time the Common-Prayer-book should be the publick Worship, and now the Directory a Plat-form of publick Worship; it may be, these and the like Arguments (to them that are dim-sighted) will take Place for some time. But there is one thing above all, which ought to be considered of by us, who are allowed to be publick Merchants (seeing that we must go under the name of Reformation, for that is our Flag we carry in our Ships) seeing that generally People of the most under∣standing will not allow of any preaching to be effectual, to the converting of Souls, but that which is ministred by or from the Spirit; for the reading of old Homilies which served in our Predecessors Dayes, will not serve now, or if we should speak some Hebrew or Greek, or Latin in an unknown Tongue, they will conclude, that is rather the Wisdom of the Flesh, and from natural Wit, rather then from the Spirit; and therefore it is not much amiss, if we conclude to let some of the Ancient Fathers pass, and not mention them, because it is holden generally, that they lived in an Apostatizing time, and so it will not be effectual in the Audience of People: And so for Austin and Cyprian, Jerom and Beda, Origen and Dama∣zin, their Traffick will hardly go off, for they will conclude, it's rather by Art and Study that we preach, then by the Spirit; and so we being fallen into such a dangerous time as this is, now in the break of Day, when men begin to be quick-sighted, and will not onely espie Hills, but also Motes; therefore, all we which are Merchants of this Order and Rank to our Mother Mystery Babylon, had need to trade with the best Merchan∣dize, as Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and fine Linnen, and silk, and Scarlet; and so let this be agreed upon by us all, that we study hard, and read the Scriptures, and other modern Divines, which are Orthodox, that so, if need require, every one may preach extempore; for else it will not go upon the Account of the Spirit, and so have Words to fit at all Times, Occasions and Seasons as before Protectors, Parliaments and Councils, or Noble men, or Classis, or Synods, or the like; and every one labour by Study and Art to raise many Doctrines from one Scripture, and make many Uses, and Tryals, and Motives; and so carnal people's minds will be affected with such dex-Tterity and Readiness, so that we shall clear our selves from Clamour, (which some of our Merchants have fallen under, because of their Negligence) and if any should accuse us for studying and patching up our Sermons out of divers Authors mixt with Scripture, and our Inventions, then bring such a Scripture as that, 2 Tim. 2.15. Study to shew thy self approved unto God; it may be, some blind Peo∣ple will take that for a good Proof; and such a word as that, Study to be quiet; and because the word Study is found in Scripture, therefore with a Consequence or two we may prove in the Ears of people, that studying of Sermons is lawful; and if any question our set Wages and Heir, be sure, that all with one accord do study to vindicate this; for this is the Life and Sinnews of the Propagation of our Gospel. And now Reader, I shall give thee an Account of the principal and chief Traffick, which is established for the Publick Worship amongst those
that are called Gospel-Professors; the general heads whereof are laid down in a Directory of the Publick Worship in these three Nations of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland; and the general Heads of that which they purpose to traffick with, is laid down in their Directory (so called) and what Traffick is of less Moment, may be ushered in, time will make manifest; and in their Preface to their Bok, they say as follows. Directory. That the Liturgy hath been a great Means to encrease an idle Mi∣nistry, from puttng forth themselves, for putting forth the Gift of Prayer, which Christ pleaseth to furnish all his Servants with, whom he calls to that Office. Answer, So then by this Conclusion all their former Fathers and Fellow∣merchants were not sent out by Christ, because they contented themselves with set Forms of others made to their Hands; and if all whom Christ called to this Office be furnisht with the Gift of Prayer, then this must needs follow, that they that have no Gift of Prayer are no Officers of Christ; well, their Part being acted, and the Exit being come, let him go off the Stage, and thou shalt see the gifted men come on next. Direct. In the assembling of the Congregation together, the Direction is, that the People do reverendly compose themselves to joyn in the Ordinance of God, which is then coming in Hand, as it is written in the 11th Page of their Book. Answ. Here they are putting Self to perform the Ordinance of God, which whosoever comes to perform aright, or joyn with the Assembly of the righteous, they must deny themselves and all their own composings. Direct. The next Thing is about reading the Scriptures, and Expsition of them; and in their expounding they are to take heed, that preaching and other Ordnances be not streightned. Answ. As for reading the Scripture, it is a thing so harmless, honest, just and good, that I wish that all their whole Ordinances (so called) had been all waved, and given Place to this; and if it were read oftener to the People, without adding or diminishing, the Understandings of People would be more opened, then by their cloudy and dark patched up Speech∣es, which is called preaching; but preaching I am not against, that is to say, to declare the Mind of God, as it is revealed by his Eternal Spirit, to and in them that speak; and why do you prefer one Part of your Wor∣ship before another? Was not a Psalm in the Church of Corinth accep∣table unto God, when it was sung in the Spirit, and with Understanding, as good as Interpretation? And was not Prophecy as acceptable as speak∣ing with Tongues? If your expounding, so called, of the Scripture be by the Spirit of God, why should that give Way to sprinckling of an Infant, till the Spirit cease to speak in him that spake by it? Direct. The next Piece of Merchandize is, of their publick Prayers be∣fore Sermon, and to pray after this Manner, to acknowlede your great Sin∣fulness by your Original Sin, which makes you liable to everlastng Damnation, and doth defile your best Actions, if it were not restrained by God's Grace, as in Page 15. Answ. What! is original Sin unwasht away? and is a deprived Nature alive, that poisons all your Faculties, and defiles your best Actions? What, is not this tken away yet? then you have confounded your Orthodox Do∣ctrine, or else never have been baptized when you were Infants; for did not you use to say, that when an Infant was sprinckled, That he was regene∣rate, and born again, and ingrafted into the Body of Christ's Congregation?
And furthermore, to give Thanks to God on this wise, We yield thee hearty Thanks, that it hath pleased thee to regenerate this Infant, and to receive it for thy own Child by Adoption, and to incorporate this Child into thy own Congrega∣tion; then seeing that all that are baptized are regenerate, as you say, how is it original Sin and the Guilt is not taken away? and how is it that the best of your Actions are defiled? for Regeneration is a cleansing Work, and the Actions of the regenerate are pure and holy, but your best Actions are defiled, then you are not regenerate by your own Doctrine; and if Sin be restrained by God's Grace, then Actions do not defile; for Grace is one, that which restrains, and that which saves; for it's written, By Grace you are saved; and if you are restrained from Sin, or saved by Grace, then your Actions would not be defiled; what cankered rusty Merchandize is this? but I shall proceed to shew more of the like Nature. Direct. The next Doctrine is, to confess your actual Sins, the Sins of your Ma∣gistrates, Ministers and whole Nation, and how that you have broken all the holy just Laws of God, doing that which is forbidden, and leaving undone that which is injoyned, and not only ignorantly, but presumptuously, against the Light of our Minds, and Checks of our Consciences, but also despsing God's Forbearance, and standing out against all the Offers of Grace in the Gospel. Answ. Was not the baptized Infant incorporated into a holy Congrega∣tion? and now you confessed you were a sinful Congregation, not on∣ly ignorant, but presumptuous also, and have sinned against the Light of your Minds, and the Light of your Consciences; what! is there any thing in your Minds or Consciences worth taking Notice of? what! will the Light in the Conscience shew Sin, and reprove for it? then how is it, that you Merchants of this Rank cry out against it as Delusion and heretical Doctrine, when any exhort them, that they sin not against the Light of their own Consciences? and if you stand out against all God's Invitations and Offers of Grace, then are you none of Christ's Ministers; and never blame me for calling you Babylon's Merchants; for the Ministers and Dis∣ciples of Christ, they came at Christ's Invitation, and Peter and Jhn left their Nets, and followed Christ when he invited them; and they resisted not the Offers of Grace, but received it when it was offered, and were sa∣ved by it; and if you walk so unworthy of him in your selves then repent, and cease carrying abroad such Trumpery as this to deceive the People withal. Direct. In the sixteenth Page you Reformers say, You ought to bewail your Blindness of Mind, and Hrdnes of Heart, and Unbelief, Impenitency▪ Secure∣ness, Luke-warmness and Barrenness, and not endeavouring Mortification, nor to keep your Garments unspotted. Answ. You had need to bewail your State indeed, if this be it; but see that you be not Hypocrites, to confess that before the Lord and your Con∣gregation; and if any say, you are hard-hearted and Unbelievers, you de∣ny it again, and so make your Lives transgress, and your Tongues utter forth Deceit; what! are you such a Company of blind Minds, and hard-hearted, impenitent, unbelieving, secure, luke-warm and barren, whm God will spue out of his Mouth, who do not so much as endeavour after Mortification, nor to keep your selves unspotted, and have broken Pro∣mises, and Vows, and Covenants? O that ever such a Company as you should carry a Ship to Sea, or think in your Hearts to give Directions to o∣others
to reform, when you are unreformed your selves, and full of Un∣belief! what People will take Directions at such a Company of Heart-blind Guides as you? If this be Reformation, what is Deformity? the wise in Heart may judge of this Merchandize. Direct. Yet you say notwithstanding in the 18th page, Let us draw near to the Throne of Grace, and incourage our selves with hope of a gracious Answer of our Prayers. Answ. He that sits upon the Throne of Grace, before whose face the Heavens and the Earth shall fly away, he will reject your Offering, not∣withstanding all the Encouragement you may take to your selves; and how can you have Hope to receive a gracious Answer? it's but the Hope of the Hypocrite, you that are blind in Mind, and hard in Heart, and do not so much as endeavour after Mortification; David a messenger of God, said, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my Prayers; and you that are so presumptuous, and are so full of vain Hopes, as to think, that God will hear your Prayers, who are in Unbelief, and endeavour not after Mortification; he will send you empty away. Direct. The next Doctrine is about preaching the Word, the subject of his Sermon is to be some Text of Scripture, sutable to some emergent Occasions, and he may go on in some Chapter or Psalm, as he shall think fit. Answ. Here Reader, thou mayest take notice, these Artificers, of the last Edition have Traffique of divers Sorts, to fit the several Places and Occasions; as when they come before some Princes, or Courtiers, or some Convocations, or Counsels, then some great swelling Words, and new coyned Expressions, and Rhetorical Speeches, and Philosophical Phrases, this will go off at a good rate; and by this the Merchant may procure his Discourse to be printed, which may procure his Fame and Renown among ignorant People; besides, it may be he gets Profit by printing his Sermon, setting all set-Wages, Tythes, and Salleries aside; but if it be amongst poor country People, or an odd Corner of the Land, then any ordinary Traffick, (a Sermon, which it may be he hath sold four times over) this will go off among ignorant people, and make them more ignorant; and as you say, a Text out of the Psalms, or any other Scripture, as the Minister shall think fit, will serve to treat upon; Reader, thou mayest take notice, that here is no notice taken of the holy Ghost, or Spirit, what it thinks fit; but what he that preaches hath ready must go off, and count∣ed as fit for that People. Direct. And in the 36th page your Direction is to the Merchant, not to rest in general Doctrine, but come to particular Application, which is a Work of great difficulty to himself, requiring Prudence and Moderation, and to the natural corrupt man it will be very unpleasant. Answ. The Doctrines and the Applications of the natural corrupt man will not be profitable nor powerful at all upon the Hearers, neither will disarm the Thoughts of the Heart at all; and you that give Prescriptions to natural corrupt men what to preach, who set them about performing the Work of God (that know it not) are very ignorant; for the natural man understands not the things of God, and the corrupt man in Heart sees not God; and he that understands not the things of God, must needs preach a Divination of his own Brain: Well, let who will take this Traffique, the Children of Light will have none of it; it may be,
such Husks as these will satisfie a Herd of Swine, and so let them take it. Direct. And you say, He that preaches, is to be perswaded in his own Heart, that all that he teaches is the Truth, and that he is to walk before his Flock as an Example. Answ. How is he like to be perswaded in his own Heart, that sins pre∣sumptuously against the Checks of his own Conscience? And you set Ex∣amples indeed, but they are but bad ones; would you have your Flock to follow your Example? would you have every one of your Flock to have a long Gown, or a long Robe, and make them all like Cardinals, Princes? Would you have every one to have a Ring on his finger, and a company of Points at his knees, like a Beasom, and a company of Ribbons and Cuffs, like a Fidler? Or would you have any of your Flock to come and fetch away a Yoak of your Oxen, or a couple of your Horses, or take his Teem, and come into your Field, break down the Hedges, and throw open the Gates, and load his Waggon with Corn, if one could not pay it him for Conscience sake? Or would you be sued up two hundred Miles into a Court for a Tythe Hen, worth four Pence or six Pence, and thrown into the Fleet a Year or two, for four or five Shilling? Many such Evidences and Examples we have from you, you late Reformers; but to the Light in all Consciences I leave to judge (which you have presumptuously sinned against) what Examples you are to your Flocks. Direct. And now Reader, I come to Prayer after Sermon, and thou shalt see what Traffick is there; The Ministers are to give thanks for the bless∣ing received, as Eleion, Vocation, Adoption, Justification, and Hope of Glory; and likewise to turn the Heads of his Sermons into some few Petitions, and after to pray for the Preparations for Death, and to entreat of God to forgive the Iniqui∣ty of your holy things. Answ. Here, Reader, thou mayest see as bad Merchandize as the Story of the Lady of Lauretta, or the Story of Saint Francis, which the begging Fryars, your fellow-merchants traffick withal. First, you give thanks for Election, Vocation Justification, and Hope of Glory, and afterwards pray for the Forgiveness of the Iniquity of your holy things; How are your things holy, when they are full of Iniquity, and sinful? Is that which is holy, Iniquity and sinful? Or is that which is Iniquity and sinful holy? Are they Elected, Justified, Adopted, and Sanctified, whose Sins are not blotted out, whose Iniquities are not forgiven? let the wise in Heart judge of this Dream: What! are not they well prepared for death, that are Elected, Adopted, Justified and Sanctified, but they must needs have your Prayers full of Iniquity? will that prepare them better? What ignorance is here? And where learned you this Article of Faith, to turn the Heads of the Sermon into Petitions? let the wise Judge; Was not Prophesie one thing, and Prayer another? But now Pphesie must be turned into Prayer, and Prayer into Prophesie; Sermons into Petitions, and Petitions into Sermons; what mangl'd Traffick is this? Direct. In the 38th Page, Ths kind of Prayer fore-mentioned ended, a Psalm may be sung, if it be convenient, if some other Ordinance doth not follow. Answ. Then it seems that your Psalm is no Ordinance, but if it be, it must give Way however if the Priest think fit; God must have no Pray∣ers at that Time; it may be sprinckling of an Infant may serve in stead.
Direct. And now I come to the great Ordinance, Infants Baptism (falsly so called) in the 40th Page, The Minister is to use some Words touching the In∣stitution, how that it was instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, that Infants should be baptized, and that it is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and of our grafting into Christ, and of our Union with him, and of Remission of Sins, Regeneration, Adoption and eternal Life. Answ. Reader, take notice, Christ never sent them forth as Ministers to tell Lyes, as to say, he ordained that which he never did; and further∣more, take notice, that the Spirit of the Lord is turned out of Doors, there is no Place for it; outward Water, with which the Infant is sprinckled hath taken up the Authority and the Work of the Spirit; the Minister of Christ declared, that the Spirit of Promise, and the Spirit of Truth, was the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and Remission of Sins, Regeneration and Adoption, and that the Faith and the Spirit are the Seed of Eternal Life; but these Reformers have excluded both, and have set up a beggarly Element in the room; let the spiritual Man judge what kind of Traffick this is. Direct. And in Page 42. That Children by Baptism are received into the Bosome of the Church, distinguished from the World. Answ. Now what Kind of Church yours is, and what Kind of a Bosome your Church hath, distinct from the World, the wise in Heart may judge; you have confessed, that Magistrates, Ministers, and the whole Nation, do not so much as endeavour after Mortification and a Newness of Life, and that you are blind, hard-hearted, full of Unbelief, impenitent, secure and luke-warm, and have not so much as endeavoured to receive Christ into your Hearts by Faith (as in the sixteenth Page of your Directory may be seen) and how your Church, and the Bosome of it, is distinct from the World, if your Church be as you have said, the understanding may judge; for you that are impenitent, and full of Unbelief, and have not received Christ into your Hearts, you are of the World, and your Bosome full of Deceit, and are none of the Church of Christ. Direct. And moreover, the Minister that baptized the Infant (which is a Popish Invention, and not an Institution of Christ) however he is to press it upon People as such an one, and to exhort them to look back to their Baptism, and to repent of their Sins against God, and to stir up their Faith. Answ. Said ye not even now, that Baptism with Water was an ingraft∣ing into Christ, and of Regeneration, and of eternal Life, and he that is baptized hath the Seal of all this; and yet they are to repent of their Sins? and how should their Faith be stirred up, that have none, which yet have to repent? what blind Doctrine is this, that these blind Merchants of this last Edition have given out for a Platform? Direct. In Page 44. The Minister is to joyn Prayer with the Word of Institu∣tion, for sanctifying the Water to this spiritual Use. Answ. Mark Reader what Sorcery is here; was not the Water instituted in the Beginning by the Word, and gathered together into one Place by the Word? and then it was sanctified & holy; and how became it unholy again? & how hath the Water transgressed, that it is become unholy, that it needs sanctifying again? But instead of sanctifying it, you abuse it, and would make it serve for that End which God never ordained, viz. to be a Seal of the Remission of Sins, a Seal of Regeneration and eternal Life; all which
is contrary to the Scripture, contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and con∣trary to the Precepts of the Ministers of Christ, but are indeed Instituti∣ons of your Mother Mystery Babylon. Direct. And now I come to the Celebration of your great Sacrament of Bread and Wine; you say in Page 48. We judge it convenient to be done af∣ter the Morning Sermon, and that all the ignorant and scandalous are not fit to receive this Sacrament. Answ. And why after the Morning Sermon, ye great Reformers? If you intend that Christ's breaking of Bread, and giving the Cup to his Dis∣ciples, that this must be your Foundation for your Sacrament, that was at Supper in the same Night he was betrayed; and if he had judged it more convenient, why could he not have given it them after some Morning Ser∣mon? what Example have you for so doing? it may be Saint Gregory, Be∣nedict or Damasen, or some other of your Mother's Merchants: And if they be unfit that are ignorant and scandalous to receive this Sacrament (as you call it) then none more unfit then your selves, none more ignorant and scandalous, who have left that undone which God hath injoyned, and have done that which he never commanded, and that not only out of Ignorance, but also presumptuously against the Checks of your own Consciences, and Motions of his holy Spirit! what, not so much as endeavoured after Mor∣tification or Newness of Life, but are a blind, hard-hearted, unbelieving and impenitent People, witness the sixteenth Page of your Directory; and if such as you be fit to receive this Sacrament (as you call it) I know none unfit to receive it. Direct. In Page 50. The Minister is to warn all that are ignorant, and scan∣dalous, and prophane, that live in any Sin or Offence against their Conscience, that they come not to this holy Table; and on the other hand, to encourage and assure them of Refreshment and Strength by coming to this Table, if they desire a further Progress in Grace. Answ. Whom do you call ignorant, prophane and scandalous? Is not he a scandalous Person that sins presumptuously, and against the Checks of his own Conscience, and God's holy Spirit? And if such be prohibited, all you Reformers are excluded; and if you do come, you are like to have no Refreshment or Strength here (if your own Doctrine must stand good for Refreshment and Strength) which you promise to them that have a De∣sire after the Progress in Grace; but say you of your selves, we have no Desire after Mortification or Amendment of Life, and so you are without Hope, come or not come: Furthermore, Bread and Wine was a Seal of Eternal Life (before you said) and now Refreshment and Strength is pro∣mised to the weak; I say, as the Apostle said to them who discerned not the Lord's Body, but came unworthily, For this Cause many are weak, and many are sick, and many are fallen asleep; and though they have come to your Table, they have come sick and weakly, and have gone away so, and have found your Promises and Assurances of no Effect at all. Direct. And now I come to the Consecration, The Minister is to begin the Action with blessing the Bread and Wine, setting them aside for this holy Use. Answ. I say, Bread and Wine was sanctified by the Word, for that End and Use that God created them, that is to say, for the Nourishment for Man, and they were holy and good before ever the Priest touched them, as it is written, Unto you that believe are all Things clean; but if you set them
apart for any such End or Use, as to be a Seal of Remission of Sins, Rege∣neration and eternal Life, then you convert them, or rather pervert them to that End which God never intended; but this is like the rest of your idolatrous Merchandize. Direct. In Page 55. Then after the Sacrament is taken, the Minister is to put them in Mind of the Grace of God held forth in the Sacrament, and to entreat for Pardon for the Defects of the whole Service. Answ. The Church of Rome, your Mother, saith, that the Body and Blood of Christ is held forth in the Sacrament, and you say, the Grace is held forth in the Sacrament, and the Seal of Eternal Life; what! do you think to make it the Fountain of Life, from whence all Good comes? And in the Conclusion of all the whole, a Sacrifice must be offered up for the Defects of your whole Service; what pitiful blind Merchandize is its? before it was a Seal of the Vocation and Election, eternal Life, and Pledges of Adoption; and by it the Comers thereunto are not made perfect, but are full of Defects, and sinful, and your whole Services full of Iniquity, and Sin, and Defects; will not any, who hath but the least Sight, abhor your hypocritical Sacrifice, and your mouldy, rusty, cankered Traffick? And now their holy Ordinance and their most holy Things are ended in Defect, in Sin and Iniquity; and these Worshippers the more they offer, the more they sin; and how the rest of their Ordinances will end, thou may'st judge, before thou pass any further. Direct. And now I come to the Sanctification of their Sabbath, The whole Day (you say) is to be celebrated, as being the Christian Sabbath. Answ. If you intend the first Day of the Week, where is that called the Christian Sabbath? The Sabbath in the first Covenant was given for a Sign of the Christian Sabbath, which was to be revealed, when they cea∣sed from their own Works, Words and Thoughts, then the rest was to be known, the Christian Sabbath; and whether is the Christian Sabbath a visible or invisible thing? But stay Sirs, do you keep this Day (which you call a Christian Sabbath) holy to the Lord? Is not this your Market Day, upon which you sell your Traffick, one or two Glasses for twenty or thirty Shillings a Day, besides what you get for sprinckling of Infants? Do you not speak your own Words, nor think your own Thoughts, nor work your own Works? If you say, you do not, how comes it to pass that there are all these Defects in your Performances, and all this Iniquity in your holy Things? I hope you dare not say, that Defects are from God, or that Iniquity or Sin is of God; and if you have not a Male in your Flock, let sacrificing or offering alone, and do not think that God will be pleased with your lame, blind, maimed, defective Sacrifices, neither with your strangled Things, nor your Swines Flesh; so I say unto you, repent, and learn to be reformed in your selves, before you prescribe Rules for others, lest both you and them that follow you fall into the Pit; & because the Mer∣chants of this Rank and Order do love to be medling with every Thing, wherein there is Hope of any Thing to be got, they will try all kinds of Merchandize, and so present they their Direction about Marriage to any who will take their ignorant Counsel. Direct. They say, Marriage is no Sacrament, nor peculiar to the Churh of Gd (and they say) we judge it expedient that it be done by a lawful Ministr, and to be published there Times, before it be solemnized, by the said Minister.
Answ. If you mean by Sacrament an holy thing, then Marriage is either holy or unholy; if unholy, then fit to be done by none; if holy, why is it not proper and peculiar to the Church of God? if they who are Mem∣bers of the Church of God may marry (in the Lord, and in the covenant in which man was made) the male and the female; then what hath any to do with it, who are not of the Church of God? and what hath the Church of God to do with them that are without? and what hath a Priest to do with this? where was Abrahams and Sarahs Priest when they were married? and where was the Priest to solemnize the marriage of Isaac and Rebeccah? and of Zachariah and Elizabeth? and because you say it is not peculiar to the Church of God, whether were these of the Church of God before mentioned? but what hath the Priest to do to publish it three times, like a Bel-man for the loss of a Horse or Cow through the Market? or rather, why ought not the Man and the Woman both, in the fear of the Lord (if they be moved thereunto by the Lord) publish their own in∣tentions? And moreover, their joyning together in the Church of God, when the members of the Church of God are present; but this frustrateth the Priests 5 or 10 s. and his Clerk 6d. or a Shilling more or less as they can get. Direct. Further more, they say, It may be done any time of the Year, but on a Fasting-day, or on the Lord's Day. Answ. Why are these Dayes prohibited? if Marriage be a holy thing, or an honourable thing, why may it not be done in the Fear of God, and the Power of God, why not on any Day? were Dayes made for man, or man made for Dayes? your ignorant Predecessors, the Pharisees judged as you do, that it was not expedient or convenient, that he should heal a Daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound, on the Sabbath day; And now they say, that the honourable Estate of Marriages, is the Covenant of their God; and before it was laid, It was not peculiar to the Church of God if entering into a state of Marriage be the Covenant of God, and if the Covenant of God be peculiar to the Church of God, then what is the reason (you Reformers) that Marriage is not peculiar to the Church of God? And now take their directions (who hath a desire to Trade any more with their Merchandize) concerning the visitation of the Sick. Direct. The party sick is to send for the Minister timely and seasonably before their understanding fail them; and if the Minister suspect the party of Ignorance, he shall not examine them in the principles of Religion, especially touching Repen∣tance and Faith, and to make known unto him the danger of deferring Repentance. Answ. If he be such a one who is the sick, as hath traded much with the Priests Merchandize, if he be capable of understanding, there is some hope he may give the Priest 5 Pound, or ten Pound; and it hath been high time for the Minister to have shown him the danger of deferring Re∣pentance before now, (when he is like to go out of the Body) not to have deferred his exhortation till this time; and if the party be ignorant, it were more time to inform him about the Principles of Religion, and Repentance, and Faith, then to have him make answers to that which he knowes nothing of; and then you conclude, if desired the Minister shall pray for him to this Effect. Direct. Confessing and bewailing Original and actual Sin, and the miserable condition of man by Nature, and that God would give him an evidence of an interest in Christ, and the Seal of Eternal Life by Christ.
Answ. In Sin you began, and in Sin you will End; complaining of origi∣nal and actual Sin before you know what it is, and holden on till you come to the Grave, and never depart from it; and what! must not the Minister pray except he be desired? it seems they alwayes must please other mens desires, rather then mind the Spirits motion in themselves; And what! is interest in Christ yet wanting, and evidence, and Seal of eternal Life yet wanting, and it may be the party 40 or 50 Years old? What, was not this man baptized when he was an Infant; and have not you said, in the 48 page and 45 page of your Directory, that Water-baptism is the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and of being ingrafted into Christ, and of Regene∣ration, Adoption, and eternal Life; and what, is the evidence and Seal lost now; useth not this to be the doctrine amongst you, once in and ever in Christ, and whom he loves once, he loves to the End? and hath not this man partaken of the Sacrament, and eaten the Flesh of Christ, and drank his Blood, and a Church-member (as you call it) and is his Evidence now to seek, and the Seal now wanting? utter Darkness is your dwelling Place. Direct. And now we come to the Directory for solemn Fast, That when some great and notable Judgment is inflicted upon some People, or apparently evi∣dent, or when some special Blessing is to be sought or obtained, then solemn Fasting is a Duty that God expects from a Nation and People, and they are to abstain from all Food, and from worldly Labour, and Discourses, and bodily Delights, and rich Apparel, and Ornaments, and such like (although lawful at other Times) and gorgeous Attire, and lascivious Habits, and if any such Thing be, the Mi∣nister may reprove them at a Fast. Answ. To fast unto the Lord, is not to set a Day apart by the Will of man, but by being moved thereunto by the Lord, and not to hang down the Head for a Day like a Bulrush, nor to smite with the Fists of Wickedness, but to loose the Band of Wickedness, and let the Oppressed go free: And as for gorgious Attire, Rich Apparel and Ornaments, it's no where found so much as amongst you Steeple-house Fasters; and for Delights and Plea∣sures and these Things, which you say is lawful at other times, that which so judgeth, will not forsake them in your set Times; and if they be law∣ful at any time, then the Apostles Exhortation is made void, who said, Not in Gold, nor costly Array▪ nor broidered Hair; that which abstains from them one day, and takes them up another day, is Hypocrisie and Deceit: And as for your Abstinence from one set Meal in a day, and it may be go to a Banquet or a Riot the next day after, this is Abomination to the Lord: And how should the Minister reprove any for Pride, when it may be hath as many Points at his Knees as a Beasom, Ribbons and Cuffs, and a long Robe to his Heels, and a broad Hatband, enough to cover one most Part down the Waste, if it were spread out; and who do you think will receive this man's Reproof for Pride, that thus is gorgiously attired? And what do you judge this man will have on the Thanksgiving day? Direct. The next comes on the Performance of the Worship, which is reading, preaching, with singing of Psalms, fit to quicken the Affections, and especially Prayer, wherein Sin is to be confest, with several Aggravations, and with greater Inlargement then at other Times. Answ. You that have nothing to quicken your Affections, but to turn David's Cryings and Tears into a Song, and sing, You roar for the Disquiet∣ness
of your Hearts, and as Men distracted, when your Hearts are whole and unrent; and you that think to be heard for your feigned Confessions, and if you speak from your Hearts (as you say the Ministers ought to do) there is no such Hypocrisie and Deceit among any People, as among you, who do that which is forbidden, and leave that undone that is commanded, and pre∣sumptuously sin against the Light of your own Consciences, as you confess, and do not so much as endeavour to receive Christ into your Hearts, nor so much as endeavour after Mortification and Newness of Life: And how can you think for your multitude, and Inlargement of Words, and seem∣ing Importunacy, God will hear you for your much Babling? many hy∣pocritical Fasts have been made, which I have observed, as well as some other men, what would be the End thereof, the Beginning thereof was Feignedness, and the Performance thereof like them that Amos speaks of, that howled for their Corn, Wine and Oyl, and mocked God, and drew near with their Lips, but their Hearts were far from him. Direct. But to proceed, Such Texts ought to be used for preaching, that may best work the Hearts of the Hearers into Humiliation and Repentance, and the Minister is to exhort before they depart, that their Assembly may improve their whole Life to the Glory of God, by re-inforcing themselves and their Families in all private Resolutions towards God, which they professed in publick. Answ. You that have no other things to bring people to humility and repentance, but by a Text (as you call it) of Scripture, which you may judge in your carnal minds will do it, and pick and chuse too, the Scripture where you like: What! was not the Scripture spoken forth by the Spirit of God, and cannot be broken? And one Scripture is as good as another, and is as effectual as another; but none is effectual without the Spirit, which is that which leads to Repentance, and brings down the Pride of the Transgressor; and except People come to receive the Spirit, and believe in it, which convinceth them of Sin, and leads them to Re∣pentance, all your stirring up, and composing, and re-inforcing, will do no Good at all; and re-inforcing of self began your Fast, and there it will end, without Christ, which whoso comes to follow, deny them∣selves, and otherwise taught, then to take the Kingdom by Force: And concerning their humiliation, thou hast heard, and mayest judge, Reader, what their Thanksgiving will be like the rest. Direct. The Minister is to make some pithy Narration of God's Deliverance, and sing some pertinent Psalms, and choose a pertinent Text to the Occasion. Answ. The Thanksgiving doth not arise from any Sensibility that people feel in themselves; but it arises from the pithy Story, as they call it, of the Minister, and likewise from his devised Sermon, which hath fed the carnal Minds, to rejoyce in Words without the Life, and then ring the consecrated Bells, and get Bonfires, and eat and drink, and satisfie the flesh; and these are the Thanksgivings, and the Rejoycings that the World makes over the Witness in themselves. Direct. And now I come to the singing Psalms, and their Mass-house, the place of their Worship, and so I have done with their Traffique: First, they say, that singing of Psalms publickly in a Congregation, with a tunable Voice, is a Christian's Duty. Answ. Where it was injoyned by Christ, or any of his Ministers, I am ignorant, and yet the Scriptures I know, but no where read in it, that
singing of Prophesies, and Prayers, and other mens Conditions, turned into Ryme and Meeter by Poets and Masters of Musick, in an inverted Tune, (in the same Mind which invents Tunes for Ballet-mongers) and to sing such Conditions amongst proud, wanton and disdainful People, covetous, envious, and such as have not so much as endeavoured after Mortification, or newness of Life, (as generally your Parochical Congregations are) as you have confest in your Directory for publick Worship; this is no way accounted as a Christian's Duty; for whose Souls are not brought out of Death, cannot praise the Lord; and you confess, Ministers and Congre∣gation, that you are blind in Mind, hard in Heart, full of Unbelief, Impenitency, Luke-warmness, and Barrenness, not endeavouring to receive Christ into your Hearts, your State is Howling and Lamentation, and not rejoycing; yet singing with the Spirit is owned, and with understanding. Direct. And now we come to the place of publick Worship: They say, It is not unlawful or unconvenient for Christians to meet together in the place which was dedicated to Idolatry, or consecrated to an idolatrous Use, yet we hold it requisite, that the Places of publick Worship should be imployed, and continued to that use. Answ. And upon what Account, do you count it lawful, convenient and requisite to meet in an Idol's Temple, or a Mass-house? your Ac∣count will be but slender and poor, which will be without Example from the Saints: Did Josiah or Hezekiah, when they had broken down the Altars of Baal, and thrown down the high Places, did they say, it's requi∣site and convenient, that our Priests, and the Levites, and the Congre∣gation, do meet at the Altar of Baal, or at the high places? Or did the Apostles bid the Gentiles, who did believe, go to their Idols Temple again, and say, it was a convenient Place to worship the true God in? And have you forgotten that Exhortation or Precept, Abstain from every Appearance of Evil? And though some know an Idol is nothing in the World, how be it there is not in every man that Knowledge; and is it not yet called by most of you yet, The House of God, House of Prayer? But as you did begin, so will you end, to carry no Traffiqe, but for your Mother, Mystery Babylon. And thus, Reader, I have led thee through many things, from the rise of the Whore, and through the most of her merchants, and through the most of her Traffique merchants, of divers orders and Ranks; but I find them all to trade with nothing but Inchantments and Sorceries, which hath long bewitched the Nations; but the time is come, that she is manifest, with her Merchandize and Sorceries, and turned from, by me and many thousands more, which is my exhortation to thee, that so thou mayst come to the Church, which is in God, and to the Elect assembly, and to know the Seed which is heir of the promise, and of the Life which is without end: Which Mystery Babylon, with all her merchants, have sought to Destroy, since she got up to ride upon the Beast, who hath compelled all, both small and great, to worship him, and also all Nations to buy the Whores Merchandize and Traffique, which hath deceived the Nations, and bewitched them; but the time is come, that she shall be hated of her Lovers, and they shall forsake her; and her Merchants shall say, Alas! alas! which day is dawning and dawned, which discovers the Whore, the Beast and false Prophet, with all their Sorceries, and the Lamb shall reign, and the holy men of God and Prophets shall rejoyce over her, when the smoak of her Torment ascends up forever and ever; which the Lord hasten saith my Spirit, Amen.
A Warning to Friends to beware of such who had de∣parted from the Faith. FRiends and Brethren, who have heard, believ'd and received the Word of Truth, as it is in Jesus, and kept the Word of his Patience, which will preserve all that abide faithful in this Day of Tryal and Hour of Temptation, wherein Satan is let loose for a Season, to try them that dwell on the Earth, even to try your Faith and Patience and Love, that you may be made manifest unto all that love the Lord, my Bow∣els earn after you all, and my Spirit is vexed in me for the Lord's Inheri∣tance, which the old Dragon, which was and is a Deceiver, seeks to de∣stroy and root out: But all who stand on the Rock, and are built thereon, the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against you; therefore dear Friends, be more circumspect and diligent, because dangerous Times are come and coming, wherein many shall depart from the Faith, and give heed to the Deceit of their own Hearts, and will endeavour to subvert and overthrow the Faith of some, and will labour by all Means to make your Hope vain, and your Faith void; and they themselves having made Shipwrack of Faith, and put away that far from them, which works the Answer of a good Conscience, and now seek to devour all and destroy all, especially the weak and unstable Minds; but blessed are they that are not offended, and that turn not aside for a Thing of nought, after lying Vanities, which the Wrath of God will come upon, and be revealed upon to the utmost, because they have not the Truth; and this could not have come upon them, but that they take Pleasure in Unrighteousness, whose Hearts are filled with Mischief, and the whole Course of Nature set on the Fire of Hell, being filled with Unrighteousness, and now it pours out of their unclean Vessels, to defile all who come near it or touch it: Friends, I say, all be awakened, for this Spirit could not have come forth nor appeared, but first there was a Departure from the Faith, and then giving heed to the lying Spirit and Doctrine of Devils, their Un∣derstandings being darkened, have brought forth these Fruits, whereof all that dwell in the least Measure of Truth will be ashamed; and there∣fore give no Place to the Devil, nor to none of their lying deceitful Con∣fusion, nor enter not into consulting with it, none have done or shall do, but they shall be defiled; dwell in that which savours Words, & the Ground from whence they come, and that discerns Spirits; take heed of feigned Words, and feigned Humility, and feigned Tears, and feigned Joy; touch not, taste not, handle not, but all keep your Garments clean, lest you be turned out of the Lord's Camp, as they are, and be a Vexation to the Chil∣dren of Light, which would be a Lamentation: And therefore having seen the Deceit, and having heard it judged with the Life of God, which answers that of God in every Man, and being warned, and your Eyes have seen, and your Ears have heard that which the least Measure of God cannot but abhor; therefore stand not gazing, and wondring, and sparing one, and accuse another; for from Head to Tail it is all accursed, and cur∣sed is the Father of it, and the Womb that brought it forth, from this time
forth and for evermore; and all that shelter under it, who have been diso∣bedient, here shelter; and all who would have the Offence of the Cross to cease, that so they may glory in the Flesh, will find a Shelter here, but the End is Death and Bitterness, & greater Tribulation then before will come, which the Lord will hasten, that all who have turned the Grace of God in∣to Wantonness, may receive a just Recompence of Reward, Flames of ever∣lasting Wrath, which shall never be quenched; never heed it; the same came in the Apostles time, after they had planted, the Devourer entred, and there arose from among them that had believ'd, Men speaking perverse things, and were proud, self-willed, treacherous, high-minded and pre∣sumptuous, of which Generation these are the same, who are turned from the Truth, Life and Power of God, after their ungodly Lusts, and having started aside from the holy Commandments of God, and having slain God's Witness, now make merry, and call it greater Glory, this will God con∣found; for thus is the Enmity got up again, which is not of himself, but of another, and he will not give his Glory to another; keep out all feigned Love and foolish Pity, and all Imitations, and all sloathful Spirits, and all those that run gadding up and down in Idleness and Foolishness, and are not diligent in their Places, all such Practices are denyed; and therefore every one be diligent in your Places and Callings, and there abide; and all wait to have your Minds stayed, that you may adorn the Truth by a chast, sober and holy Conversation, and your Lives preach, and answer the just in every Man, that so Truth may be exalted above all Deceit. And Friends, keep your Meetings on the first Day at your several Places, where you might hitherto have waited in Stilness and Quietness, but it hath not yet been prized as it ought, and you may all yet learn, and see all those that run up and down, being heady and self-willed, that still run after Words, and never come into the Obedience of the Truth, and now are turned out where they were before, nay worse; and a Fan will yet come, and all that stum∣ble at the Cross shall all fall, and they that get above it deny the Power of God: But Friends, since the Truth hath been declared among you, you have not known a Want, and that makes the careless and the full now to loath Manna, the least of which if you had had in Time past, would have been accepted unto you: And so now all you who have kept your Gar∣ments clean, whom the Lord hath preserved out of the Snare of the Ene∣my, below, and dwell in Love, in Meekness and Peace one with another, and grow up in the Wisdom of God and Life of God; and now see that all keep in the Fear, look to your own every one in Particular, that you may savour and discern all Deceit, and keep the Faith, that so you may see Victory daily; and do not talk of things above what you enjoy; and let none think of himself above what is meet, and he that is least shall be Mini∣ster: And so the Lord God of Life preserve you all in Uprightness that you may come through all this Mud and Dirt, and may find your Strength renewed, and the Power of the Lord more made manifest; the Desire of my Soul is to the Lord for you all; fulfil my Joy in your Obedience to the Truth, as it is made manifest in you; and the God of Life and Power be with you all, who are of an upright Heart. I am yours, as you continue in the Faith, which hath been declared and re∣vealed in as many as have believed. F. H.
THE Invisible Things OF GOD BROUGHT TO LIGHT BY THE REVELATION OF THE ETERNAL SPIRIT, Who was an Eye-Witness of the Wonders of the Lord in the Beginning. Wherein is declared the Felicity of all Things in the Beginning, and the sad Estate of all Things after the Transgression. How all the reformed Churches (so called) in Christendom are yet in the Apostacy. The Estate of the true Church before the Apostacy, and her State in the Apostacy, and the Glory that shall appear after the Apostacy. By one who believes God will shine out of Sion in perfect Beauty again after the dark Night of Apostacy. F. H. The Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun as seven Dayes; and he will destroy in this Mountain the Face of the Cover∣ing cast over all People, and the Vail that is spread over all Nati∣ons, Isa. 25.7.
AN EPISTLE TO THE Reader or Readers TO the upright-hearted Reader in all the Regions of the Earth where∣in this may come, who have walked in the Thick Fogs and Mists, which have arisen out of the bottomless Pit, which have been raised up since the Transgression, which have dimmed your Eyes, and hurt your Sight, so that you could not behold the pure caelestial Being, nor him that dwells in it, whose Presence gives Life, nor any thing within the Vail, be∣cause the Vail hath been spread over all Nations, and it hath been so thick, that it hath been hard for any to rent it; and the Night of Apostacy and Darkness hath been so long, since the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and since the Manchild which was born hath been caught up to God, that few or none for these many Ages past have come to see the End of the Night, but have mourned without Hope, and few or none have seen or have been able to discern the time of the Woman's Return out of the Wil∣derness again, into which she fled; and few or none have seen to the End of the times, after which she should return; & Mens Sight in the Apostacy hath been so dim, and in the Vexation, that when the Man-child, which was caught up unto God, would appear again, few have had Faith to believe, or Sight to behold him, or an Understanding to discern of the times: But Praises be to the Lord God everlasting, who hath opened, and is opening the Windows of Heaven, and showring down his Wisdom as a mighty Rain, and his Knowledge as the Morning Dew, and an Understanding is pouring forth, as the Water out of the Bottles of Heaven, and as the Water Spouts, so that Ages, Times, Things, Dayes and Years are mea∣sured and seen. And him that was before all things is beholden, by whom all things were made, who hath been as in a far Country, all this long Night of Darkness; but the time is fully expired, and now is he returning, and his Appearance is as a Morning without Clouds, as clear as the Sun, and as pure as Christal; and now is he scattering the Clouds, Fogs and Mists, as with the East Wind; and his pure Breath clears the Air; and by his Arm which is mighty, is he renting the Vail of the Covering, according to his Promise, and revealing himself in his naked Glory, that the solitary may rejoyce, and the feeble may be comforted, and them that have erred may come to a good Understanding; what I have writ thou must read me only in that which is invisible and eternal in thy self, else I am sealed from thee, my Words are a Riddle; the Dreamers of this Age in the Apostacy say,
Immediate Revelation is ceased, and not to be looked for; yet I must needs bear my Testimony against them all; for what I have here written I nei∣ther received of Man, nor from Man, nor Books, nor other Words, but by the Eternal Spirit, who saw these things, and was an Eye-Witness of them, and God through it hath revealed them in me and to me, that I might bear my Testimony of the hidden things of God, which are eternal; al∣though I have made Use of the Scriptures, and the Saints Words, and ci∣ted some, it is not for my sake, but thine, who readest, that so every Truth may be confirmed by two or three Witnesses; if thou wait to know and find the Key of David, who opens, in what I have declared, thou wilt see the State of things before the Fall, and after the Fall, and how all Men in the Fall have corrupted themselves in all Administrations; thou wilt see the State of the Church before the Apostacy, in the Apostacy, and what shall be after the Apostacy; and if thou cannot reach into the things, as they are declared, judge them not before the Day appear in thy self; for till then, they will be obscure to thee; but as it appears in thee, thou shalt bear me Witness that these are holy faithful and true, and have and shall be fulfilled, in that which is immutable, I bid thee farewel. F. H.
The chief Particulars or Heads in the ensuing Dis∣course treated upon, and opened by the Spirit of the Lord, who was an Eye-Witness unto these Things. 1. THE Work of the Lord declared, which was in the Beginning, when the Word was with God, and man in the Image of God. 2. Although the Heavens and the Earth were created, and all Things therein finished, yet the World was not begun, that lay in Wickedness, which the De∣vil is the God of, neither was Christ the Mystery hid, nor the Lamb slain. 3. The understanding may read the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, and also may see the sottish doctrine of the Apostates. 4. An Objection answered. 5. Another Objection answered. 6. How Peace, Joy and Delight possessed every Thing that God had made; how every Thing which he had formed glorified him with one Consent in the Begin∣ning. 7. How Man lost his State, and Dominion, and Unity with God and all the Crea∣tures; and how the Lamb came to be slain, and the World that lay in Wick∣edness came to be framed in Man after the Tempter entered; how endless Mi∣sery came in upon all after the Transgression. 8. How Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and how Man is dead while he lives, and all are dead Works that he acteth; and the States of all the Sons of Men and their Works may be seen in the Fall. 9. Three Objections answered about this Particular. 10. Self-Righteousness, Deeds of Darkness also, and dead Works, are to be condemned also, and Man who acteth them in the Fall. 11. An Objection answered, as to the present State of the Ministry of the Nati∣ons, their Practice and their Worship. 12. An Objection, as to the Churches, so called, and their Worship in the Na∣tions. 13. The dark and blind Doctrines of the Ranters denyed. 14. An Objection about reading the Scriptures, and conforming to the outward Practice of the Saints informer Ages. 15. How all Men upon the Earth in the Degeneration and in the Fall have cor∣rupted themselves, and been Idolaters in every Administration, being gone from the Life and Power of God in themselves, and having lost the Power of God, Man can neither worship, honour nor obey God aright. 16. A few Words to that which is called Christendom, who profess Christia∣nity. 17. Something about Water-Baptism to both Priests and Separatists. 18. Something about Rome in the Apostacy, and all their Worship in the Degene∣ration. 19. The Protestants or reformed Churches, so called, not yet come out of the Waters, nor from under the Beast's Power.
0. The Presbyters and Independents are yet under Anti-christ's Reign, in the Apostacy, and have among them yet the Attire of the Whore. 21. How the Woman that travailed in Birth, who was clothed with the Sun, and brought forth the Man-child fled into the VVilderness, when the Dragon had Power, and the Man-child was caught up unto God. 22. How the VVoman comes out again, and when, and he that was caught up un∣to God descends again, and appears again to take the Rule to himself, and how he makes VVar with the Dragon and all the Apostates, and overcomes them. 23. How the Glory of the Lord shall appear after the Apostacy, greater then before, and the Ministration into which them that follow the Lamb shall be brought, shall be more spiritual and coelestial then before; for that shall appear, in which all visible Types and Shadows end in, and shall be the last that is to be expected by the Sons of Men, the Sight of which hath appeared, which yet cannot be uttered.
THE Invisible Things OF GOD BROUGHT TO LIGHT. The Work of the Lord declared, which was in the beginning, when the Word was with God, and was the Fathers delight, and man made in the Image of God, and lived in the Lamb's Power, and he was mans Life, and this was before the Transgression of these declared, as God hath manifested them by his Spirit. IN the beginning was the Word; and the Word was with God; and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning before the Foundation of the Earth was laid, or the Hills were framed, he was with the Father, and was the Fathers delight, and he delighted in the Father, and the Father in him, then did the morning Stars sing together, and the Sons of God shout for Joy. In the beginning were the heavens created, and the Pillars thereof set; and the Earth was framed by the Power, and all things both in the Heaven and in the Earth were created by the Power, God's Son; every Beast of the field, every fowl of the Heaven; and the decreed place for the Sea was broken up, and all things that moveth therein were created by the Word and by the Power, and man was made by the Power, and in the Power, and he was the Image of God; as it is written, In the Image of God created he him, Male and Female created he them, and he had dominion over all the Works of his Hands, over every Beast of the field, which were created by the Power, over the Serpent, among the rest, which was created by the Power, and was good, as he was made in the Power; and by the Wisdom they were all brought forth, and man made in that Wisdom that brought them forth, who was better then them all, and was made Partaker of the Power and of the Wis∣dom more then them all, and by the Wisdom called every thing, as it was in its Nature, so named he every thing, and the Dominion he had was in the power, over all things, over all the Creation of God, which wa good, and the earth and all things that are therein, the Tree of Knowledge good, that stood in the Garden also, but not for Food; so these be the Generations of the Heavens and the earth, in the Day when Gd
created them, they were all good, made and created by God in the Power eternal, which is good, unchangeably good, without Variation, and the unchangeable Power, in which and by which they were made, moved in them all, and they all received Virtue and Power from the Power, God's Son; and the Power moved in them all, and shined through them all, and ran through them all; and they were all to abide in the Covenant in which they were made, and not any to move or act without the Power, but only as the Power, which was the Life of them all, moved them and acted them, and so Goodness possessed them all; for all were Partakers of the Goodness of God, and it was the Life of them; and they were none of them to move nor stir, but as the Life of men, the Power by which they were created, moved them, which was God's Son; the Heavens and the earth were finished, and all things that therein are, and they were all good; and this Saying was true then, which was spoken by Christ, the Power, many Generations after, I in them, and thou in me, and all was perfect in one, the Father was in the Power, the Power was in the Father, and all the Creatures in the Power; now was the Father glorified, now was the Son glorified, now was man in Dominion, in Power, crowned with Honour, Lord over all the Works that God had made in the Power; and now the whole Family, both of Heaven and earth bowed their Knees to the Lamb, to the Power; and this was then fulfilled, At the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow▪ both of Things in heaven and Things in Earth; and his Name was now the Word of God, and this was in the Beginning, and the Word of God is the power of God; and now both the caelestial Bodies and the terre∣strial Bodies were all subject to the Power; and all the Works of the Lord's Hands were finished, and he rested, and all things, both in Heaven and earth rested in the Power, and all kept holy Day, and rejoyced. Though the Heavens and the Earth were created, and all things wrought and finished, yet the World was not begun, that lay in Wickedness, which the Devil is the God of, neither was the Power, which is Christ, the Mystery, hid, neither was the Lamb slain yet. Now after all was made and created, and were good, and blessed, and endued with Power, Life and Vertue, according to the Purpose of his hea∣venly Will, which is eternally pure, yet was not the Lamb slain, nor the Mystery hid, which is the Power, which is Christ; for what should slay him, or what should hide him? he that reads let him understand; this that I speak of cannot be reached to with that Wisdom that stands in time, which was not in the Beginning with God, that is shut out; but the wise in Heart shall understand Knowledge, and the prudent shall know what hath been in the Beginning, and of his wonderful Works in the Dayes of old, and of the Mystery which was before the World began, when the Lamb was in Glory, the Son in Glory, Christ in Glory, the first born of every Crea∣ture, and was born before the World began; he that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear; when all that God had made, and brought forth by the Word, by the Power, was blessed, and stood in the Power; then did the Lamb sit in his Throne, then was he the Delight of God, and God in him, and all that was made by him rejoyced in him; here was Love, here was Glory, here was Purity, Unity, and a sweet Harmony, Joy, Peace, Love, eternal Life, God's Power ran through all, all was good; Christ was not now hid, he shed himself abroad, and all things were Partakers of his Pow∣er,
in which they were made; here was Happiness, Blessedness, Joy, Do∣minion, everlasting and eternal Felicity, Innocency, Purity and Perfecti∣on, and man in it, God in it, the Lamb in it, man in it after his own Image, the Mystery of Godliness was not hid, there was nothing to hide it, or o∣vershadow it, no Vail, no Covering; but Righteousness was manifest, and was the Covering of all, Innocency the Cloathing of all, Purity the Robe of all, and Life the dwelling Place of all; and all the Works of his Hands rested with the Father, with the Lamb, with the Word, with the Power, with Christ in Glory, with the Father in the eternal Glory, whereby all was upheld, in Purity, Unity, Harmony, answering the pure Will of God; and man had Power to answer the Will of his Maker, which he received from God the Father of Life, by the Power in which he was made, and to abide in the Will of God forever; and herein he, and all things in Hea∣ven, and the whole Family thereof, and all the holy Host of God bowed to the Lamb's Power, and he reigned, and the Angels were subject to the first-born of every Creature; before the Angels or before any thing was made, he was, his Age who can declare; or his Generation? his Age runs parallel with Eternity, with Immortality, & came from the eternal Womb, and from the Bosome of the Father, where he is, even where he was be∣fore the World began; he that reads let him understand; now the Pow∣er ruling in all, and over all, all were in Peace, and was blessed. Now the Angel stood in his Power, moved in his Power, and all the caelestial Bodies went in and out at his Command, and moved not, nor stirred not, but when he moved; and this was then fulfil∣led, let all the Angels worship him, and so they did, reverenced him, and were subject to him, sang and rejoyced in him, triumphed in his Power, and all the holy Host moved at his Command, and marched on in his Strength to perform his Will, and to accomplish his everlasting Purpose, and to fulfil his eternal Decree, and gave Glory to him who sate upon the Throne of Righteousness, and judged in Righteousness forever, and ru∣led in Righteousness forever; there was Joy in Heaven, the Father rejoyced, the Son rejoyced, the Angels rejoyced, the Morning Stars sang, the Sons of God shouted for Joy, the holy Host gave Praise, and all praised in the Firmament of his Power, in which they stood, moved, walked, lived and accomplished the pure, perpetual and eternal Decree of their Maker: Moreover, the terrestrial Bodies were all subject to him, he reigned in all over all, moved all, gave Life to all, and was the Life of Adam, of the Male and the Female; and then was this fulfilled, even then, which was spoken in time, though by him who was before all time, who was the Life of all things; I say, he lived then, and because he lived Man lived al∣so, for he was his Life; now Christ, the Power, reigned over all, and all in the Lamb's Power were subject in a sweet Harmony, answering the pure Will of their Lord, their King that lived forever, who was upon his Throne in the Heavens; and now his Kindgom was over all, there was Joy in Heaven, there was Peace on Earth, the good Will of God was done in Earth as it was in Heaven: Oh beautiful, oh glorious, oh comely, oh admirable, oh incomprehensible was the Glory! my Tongue cannot ex∣press, and time would fail me to declare the eternal Excellency which God hath revealed by his Spirit, and that which I see is not lawful now for me to utter; now were no Mountains nor Hills to hide the Mystery,
but it shined upon all, in all, over all, and above all, was not hid; as I said, there was now no hiding Place, that could or did overshadow the Mystery of Godliness; for the Eyes of all things looked upon him, whether Cae∣lestial or Terrestrial, and all and every thing, according to its Kind rejoy∣ced in the Light of his Countenance, and of his Power was glad, and glo∣ried in him, for then there was not another; he that can hear let him: Now the Earth rejoyced, and the Floods clapped their Hands; now the great Deep smiled, and all things that were therein, the Springs thereof laughed, which flowed forth as though they had issued out of a Womb; now every thing that had Breath and lived, praised the Lord, neither was there any thing but bowed and submitted to their Maker, and he Lord and King over all, yet in eternal Glory; yet let the wise in Heart understand, this was in the Beginning, and though it was in the Beginning, yet this was when the Heavens and the Earth were created, and all Things that therein are, even then the Lamb of God was alive, and the Son of God glo∣rified with the Father, and Man in Happiness and in pure Perfection, with∣out Sin, in Innocency; for nothing that was nocent or hurtful had yet ap∣peared, neither was there any such Thing in all that God had made. Here the Wise may learn, and they that have a good Understanding may read the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, and also see the dark sottish Doctrine of the blind Apostates, who have lost the Power, and are keeping People ignorant of the My∣stery of God. NOw this hath been a common Doctrine, and received to be orthodox, and as they call it, authentick, that while we are in this Life, there cannot be an overcoming of all Sin, nor no Expectation of it in this Life; and their main Ground hath been this, because we have natural Bodies. Now I say, had not Adam a natural Body when he was in Purity and Perfection, in Innocency, in Paradise, in the Garden, yet was this any Hinderance to him to answer the Will of his Creator? No; For as the Soul, Spirit and Body was moved by the Power, out of which Power he was not to stir, then I say, he had Ability to perform the will of his Maker in the Body; for as he was created by the Power in the inward man, that led about the natural and earthly or outward form according to its will which Will was pure, and kept the Body acting in its Place in the Power, for then I say, all was good, for the Celestial Power in which he was made, moved the whole man, according to its Will; and while he stood in the Power, he was in Innocency, and Purity, and without Blemish, and in the Power was his Health and Peace, and he knew no Evil. Obect. But some may say, What is this as to the Confutation of the Doctrine which hath been taught, as to the Freedom from Sin in this Life? Answ. This declares that there was such a thing in being, to wit, a na∣tural Body, and an earthen Vessel, and yet without Sin, as he stood in the power; for the earthen Vessel was good, as all the rest of God's creation was in its Place to serve the Power, as the rest of God's Creatures did in the Beginning; and who ever comes to know that state again, may come to glorifie God in Soul, Body and Spirit, though in the Body, in this taber∣nacle;
but take their own Phrase for the clearing of the thing, not to be freed from the committing of sin in this Life, I say, in the corruptible Life or the Life of Unrighteousness, which may be properly called Death, there is no freedom from Sin, neither of Soul or Body or Spirit; but who comes to know Regeneration or the Life of men, in which Adam was created in the Beginning, in that incorruptible Life, there is no Trans∣gression, and if he live in man; the Body is dead because of Sin, and I know none who have preached any other Life, who have spoken by the Spirit of God, in which freedom from all Sin is obtained, but onely the Life of Christ, and whosoever comes to know the Lord from heaven, who ruled over all in the Beginning, and was the Life of all, and all moved in his Life, before the fall, whether they were things visible or invisible, and that same Power or Life of Christ, the Lamb of God, who was alive then, if he live in man, and man come to be guided by his Power, as in the beginning he living in man, the Soul, Body and Spirit being quickned by his Power, and raised from under the Bondage of Corruption, then Death hath not power over man (but Life) and because he lives in them, they live also, their Souls to praise him, and their Bodies, and the Mem∣bers thereof to be Servants of righteousness, and so that unbelieving Do∣ctrine of the World is turned into the Pit, and Truth is set above it. Object. But further it will be objected, That our Bodies are not like Adams, in innocency, we are in the Fall, and therefore we say, they hinder from being freed from all Sin, and ever will, while upon Earth. Answ. That the naked Truth may appear to them, that seek after true Knowledge, I answer freely, that I grant that the Soul lies in Death, and the Creature is subject to Vanity, and the whole Creation groans in travail and in Pain, and waits for the manifestation of the Son of God, and the Redemption of the body; and in this State is all mankind upon the Face of the whole Earth in the first Adam, but he who is the se∣cond Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who was in the Beginning, and is now what he was, and shall be forever; I say, as man comes to believe in the Son who hath Life in himself, and he comes to be revealed in man, and man subject to his leading, he brings the Soul out of death, to have Union and Communion with himself, and restores the Creature from his Bondage, and breaks the Bond, and knocks that down which hath imbon∣daged, and so changes the Body, I do not mean the form of the Body, but the quality and Nature thereof, for the Form of Adams body was not changed, but the quality▪ & it was degenerated from its pure Nature where∣in it glorified God, as he stood in the Power; so I say, Christ who is the Life of men, the true Light which lighteth every man that comes into the World, he changes all that follow him into his own Nature, & restores the Creature into his first estate again into Purity, that like as the inward man is renewed and restored by the Power, and serves the Power, so the Members of the Body, are also yielded Servants unto Righteousness, and they receive Vertue and Power, from the Power the Life, and so the whole man comes out of condemnation, to glorifie his Maker, and the Will of God is done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, and he saves to the utmost them that come unto him; now if he save the Soul and not the Body, then h saves not to the utmost; But this is a high State; blessed are they who wait in the Faith, to the end are happy, that they may see and know
the redemption of their Souls, and also the redemption of their body; For I deny redemption in the Grave, or in Death, or after this Life; for the holy men of God never mention a cleansing from Sin in the Grave, nor after men be Dead, for they that have served Sin in their Life time, & served the Devil as long as they live, and have yeelded their Bodies to be Temples, for Uncleanness, while they live upon the Earth, eternal Misery will be their Portion, and not redemption: Think on this, you who are holding this forth for an Article of your Faith in the World, among poor Ignorant People, that they must not expect redemption from all Sin in this Life, and so leads them on to Perpetual Misery, Misery will be your End, and in the day of the Lord you shall Witness this to be true; But to return to the Beginning again, where there was no sorrow, but pure Joy and Peace both in Heaven and Earth, but I go hither and thither, as the Spirit leads, and shall speak as it gives Utterance, though but here a little and there a little, yet shall it be in Truth and Righteousness. How Peace, Joy and Delight possessed every Thing that God had made, every Thing which he had formed glorified God their Maker with one Consent in the Beginning, before the World was framed, that lay in Wickedness. NOW the Lord rejoyced in all the Works of his Hands which he had made, and rested, and all that he had made rested in the Power, whe∣ther Caelestial or Terrestrial, and rejoyced in him, walked in him in the Motion of the Power, of the Life, they were happy, and partook of the Life that endures forever and Happiness immortal, and knew no Evil, for there was none; there was no Hell yet prepared, Tophet yet was not or∣dained, neither the Devil had yet any Being at all, there was no Wrath, no Sorrow, no Condemnation, no Death, Vexation, Grief or Perplexity, no Pit of Darkness, no Angel of the bottomless Pit, no Shame, no Tri∣bulation, no Anguish nor Pain, no Misery; and in a Word, there was nothing that did destroy; but all in Quietness, in Peace, in Life, in Pow∣er, in Wisdom, glorifying him which sate upon the Throne, the Lamb, who was living, and the Life of the Male and the Female, and of every Thing that God had made by the Power, subsisted in the Power, and in the Motion thereof was good, purely good; and here was the Goodness of him who was eternally good, manifest in all, above all and over all, God blessed forever; even then the Heavens rejoyced, and the innumerable Company of Angels were hearty glad, and all the holy Host sang for Joy with a living Voice, which none that stand in Time ever yet heard, or can learn; then the Earth and all Things therein that moved and had Life, were in pure Solace and Mirth, and pleasant Joy unspeakable, all knit together in Unity and Harmony in one Consent, as one Family, and were one Bo∣dy, and there was Health in the Body, and it was pure, and comely, and perfect, and pleasant to behold, crowned with Dignity, covered with Righteousness, beautified with the Comliness of the Lamb, who was the Life of all; and now Man had Right to the Tree of Life, while he moved in the Power, and went not out. Oh happy State! oh beautiful State! oh admirable State! eternal Feli∣city,
oh glorious State! Life it self, the Life of all, and all in the Life, mo∣ving in the Power, and man had right to the Tree of Life, while he lived in the Lamb's Power, had Unity with his Maker, and with all the Creatures that God had made, and was in God's pure Dominion and Au∣thority, and ruled all, over all things that God had mde, in God's Wis∣dom; thus in short was the State of all things in the Beginning, as they were created and brought forth; and these be the Generation of the Hea∣ven and of the Earth, and of all Things that therein are, in the Day when God created them, when the Father was glorified, when the Son was glo∣rified, and when Man was in Glory and Honour and in Dominion, crea∣ted in the Image of God, and yet there was no Evil; Time would fail to speak of the State of all Things in the Beginning, as it was, and as it is revealed by the Spirit of Truth; but in that which I have declared, they who have a good Understanding may take a Glimpse of the happy State of all Things, as God hath revealed them by his Spirit, which I never recei∣ved of nor from man, but by the Holy Spirit of God, which was in the Be∣ginning with God, which saw all this, and was an Eye-Witness of this before the World, that lyes in Wickedness, began; and he that hath an Ear, let him hear, and blessed is his Ear. How Man lost his State and Dominion and Unity with God and all the Creatures; and how the Lamb came to be slain and the VVorld that lyes in Wickedness came to be formed and founded; and how the Curse came, and the Wo upon the Ser∣pent, which was blessed before, and upon Man and Woman, and the Ground that received the Temptation, which was blessed before, in the Motion of the Pow∣er, came to be cursed; and how endless Misery came in upon all in the Trans∣gression, declared to them who have a good Understanding. NOW the Serpent was more subtil then all the Beasts of the Field; for that was his Nature in which he was created, and it was good in the Motion of the Power; and therefore Christ said, Be wise as Serpents, yet as harmless as Doves; and though the Serpent was wise and subtil, more then all the Beasts of the Field, till he acted & moved without Command∣ment, and out of the Motion of the Power, he was not cursed; he that can receive it let him; but he moved in the Subtilty and Wisdom, out of the Light, out of the Power, and went out of the Truth, out of his Place, without Commandment or Authority from the Power, and acted and spke of himself, out of the Power, and out of the Truth, as it is written, Joh. 8.44. When he speaketh a Lye, he speaketh of his own, for he is a Lyar, and the Father of it; now he knew there was a Law and Command, not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; for God had forbidden it; now he went out of the Power without Commandment, of his own Accord, without Motion; now he went and talked with the Woman, and she was good before, being in the Motion of the Life and Power, she also looked out, and not in the Power, and reasoned with him out of Power, contrary to Commandment, beyond the Command, or before the Power, and said unto the Serpent, We may eat of all, but the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, we may not eat, lest we dye; this she knew, and the Serpent
knew; now the Tree of Knowledge was good in the Powers Motion, though not to live upon, or for Food, for it was not good for Food; therefore God, the Truth, the Life, the Power, did forbid to taste of it, or to eat of that Tree, but the Serpent out of the Power, and the Woman out of the Power hearkened to him that was out of the Truth, who turned the Truth that God had spoken into a Lye, she joyned to the Tempter, and hearkened unto him, and eat of the Tree of Knowledge without the Pow∣er, and she looked out, and the Eye ran out from the Life, from the Pow∣er, and was deceived, and did eat of the Knowledge without the Power, without the Life; and she also tempted the Man, and the Temptation en∣tered into a Ground which was blessed before and good, in the Motion of the Life, of the Power; but she having transgressed, contrary to the Command, and the Man received it, contrary to the Command, without the Motion of the Power, or the Life that all was to move in; he also going out of the Power, received it in, and fed upon Knowledge without the Life, with∣out the Power, out of the Truth, he became one with the Woman, one with the Serpent, who went out of Truth, and abode not in it, and they all were disjoynted and cut off from the Life and the Power; and here was the Beginning of the Father of Lyes, and of him who spoak of himself, out of the Power, out of the Truth, and his Beginning is without Foun∣dation; now he that is wise in Heart, read his Generation, or who made him; now appeared the Angel of the bottomless Pit, and not before, and made War against the Power, against the Lamb; and so the Heart of Man was turned away from obeying and feeding upon the Power, to obey and feed upon Knowledge without the Life or Power; and here was the first Transgression, out of the Power and the Motion of the Light, which made all Things good; and so as this Knowledge was fed upon and grew, Man dyed unto the Life, unto the Power and Wisdom and Dominion that he had over all that God had made, he lost, and so dyed unto the power, and lived upon Knowledge without the power, and now became afraid of the power, because he was in the Transgression of it: And thus the Serpent who was most subtil, went out of the Truth, and acted in Sin, and led in∣to Transgression; and so there became Fear where there was none, and Shame where there was none, and Nakedness where there was no Naked∣ness, before the power was dyed unto, which was their Clothing in Righ∣teousness, and there was a hiding place sought by him, who before Iniqui∣ty needed no hiding place; and this is the Foundation and Beginning of that Seed in the Transgression, which shall call to the Mountains to cover them, and to hide them from the Wrath of the Lamb. Oh how is Man degenerated now, and grown quite out of the pure Quality, and Kind, and Nature, in which he was made; now afraid of the Power that made him, which before he had Union with, and was his Life, and gave him Dominion; and this fulfilled upon Man, he was planted a Noble Vine, a holy right Seed, now become a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine; now when the Lord appeared and ex∣amined him, and Man knew his Fault that he had acted against the Power, yet that which acted in Transgression would excuse; here is the Fruit of the Devil's Work, transgress, and then hide and excuse it, and so the VVoman put it off to the Serpent, he was the Beginner of it; but if she had stood in the Power, he would have had no Place, nor his Counsel; but they all went out of the Light and Life in∣to the Knowledge, without the Power and Life, and so the Curse came upon all;
now the Man cursed, and the Ground for his sake, and the Woman cursed, in Sor∣row to bring forth, and the Serpent cursed, the Beginner of Inquity, cursed above all the Beasts of the Field, to go upon his Belly, and Dust to be his Meat forever, and an Enmity put between the Seed of the Woman and his Seed forever, and an Eternal Decree passed against him forever, and he made VVar against the Seed of the VVoman, which the Lord promised to bruise his Head; now came the misera∣ble Estate in, that which led him into Transgression grew, and he in it, and to be at Unity with it, then came Hardness of Heart, and then came the VVorld to be founded in his Heart, and he grew in the Heart, and he grew in the devouring beastly Nature, to follow the earthly Imaginations of his Heart, and became earth∣ly, and fed upon that which the Beasts of the Field fed upon; and now the Lamb came to be slain since the Foundation of the VVorld; now was Man driven out from the Tree of Life, and out of the Garden, and could no way come there a∣gain, he had no right to it, the Lamb being slain, and was cut off, to wit, Man, from him which before gave him Peace, and from the Power in which he was made, he was driven out from, and the Sword set, that go what way he could, he could not come into the Life again; the Image of God lost, then the joyful Day was lost, and Rejoycing in the Lord at an End; then the Day of Peace was finished, and perpetual Misery and Wo came in; then Unity with the Lord of Glory gone, and now Shame and Contempt came, and woful misery. Now Hell was formed, and the bottomless pit sprang up, and the An∣gel thereof ruled and advanced, and the Lamb slain; and now the lake was prepared, and Tophet ordained; now came the Day of Anguish, of pain, of Wo, Sorrow and Misery, Blackness and Darkness, Terror, Hor∣ror, Fear on every Side, and the Day of great perplexity, Dominion lost, power lost, Authority lost, peace lost, Joy lost, Health lost, Unity lost with God, and Unity lost with every Creature, and endless Misery brought in; Alas, alas! what is become of him who was the Son of God? now become as the Beasts that perish, now a Vessel of Wrath, a dishonourable Vessel. Oh unspeakable Loss, forfeited all, Life and all, gone into, plunged in∣to the deep Pit of endless Misery, driven from the Presence of the Lord from Blessedness and Happiness into Cursedness and Misery, never to come to Life again, but through the loss of Life; man in Honour, in Dominion, partaker of Eternal Riches, and the durable Riches, now turned out of all, and become vile in the Sight of the Lord, and hath forfeited Life and all, Eternal Life; and he who was in perfect Freedom become a Bond∣man, a Slave to the Devil, and to noysome lusts; he who was Lord over all, now became a Servant to all and every Creature; he who was in Do∣minion in the power of God, now became base and vile; he who was the Image of God, now became the Image of the Devil; he who was Heir of Life and Felicity, now became Inheritor of Death and endless Misery; he that was partaker of the unchangeable Love, now partaker of Wrath; he that was in the Covenant of Life, in which he had Union with God, and all the Angels, and all the holy Host of God, now hath Union with un∣clean Spirits, which are cursed from the presence of the Lord forever; he that had Union with all God's Creatures, hath lost the Union with all, be∣ing gone out of the power in which all were created, and moreover now in Enmity to it, and joyned to him who hath the power of Death, which is the Devil, and now draws Iniquity as with a Cart-rope, and Vanity as
with a Cord; and he who was joyned to the Lord and to the Lamb, now joyned to the Dragon, who makes War against the Lamb; he that had Union with the Seed, the Heir of all Things, now hath Union with the Seed of the Serpent, the first born of Wickedness, Heir of Condemnation and everlasting Vengeance, who is driven from the Lord's Presence, and curst forever, and to be tormented from the Presence of the Lord forever. Now the World set in the Heart, and the Heart gone out after earthly Things, even Things that perish, and now his Life grew in that and after that which fadeth, his Delight on transitory Things, in Lust, in Pleasure and Wantonness, delighting in the Flesh, hath forgotten God his Maker, and now dishonours him: Oh let the Heavens mourn, and let the Earth be without Joy, let Hills lament, and the Valleys be grieved, let Gloomi∣ness cover the Face of the Deep, let the Floods be sorry, and Springs la∣ment, let all that is movable take up a lamentation, and let it be for a lamen∣tation forever; Misery is spread over all, the Earth is polluted and defiled and all is out of Order, disjoynted from the Lord, and great Confusion and Perplexity is come upon all, and the whole Creation groans and travails in Pain, in Grief and Sorrow, and all is made subject to Vanity; the Op∣pressor bears Rule, the land mourns, the lamb is slain, the Serpent and his Seed rejoyceth and triumphs, all is filled with Violence, the Seed suffers, the Lord is grieved, the Angels mourn, the proud and presumptuous are now counted happy, and now the Worker of Iniquity set up to be a Ruler and a law-giver now to man, and in man, who before had the Lord to be law-giver and his King; Oh woful Change! oh sad State! oh deplorable Condition! gone from Honour and Glory into perpetual Misery and Con∣tempt: And here all the whole Earth and all Mankind may read them∣selves, as in a Glass, in what State they are in in the Fall, in the first Nature, in the Disobedience; Time would fail me to express the Misery and the sad State of all Mankind in the Curse; yea, it is unexpressible, and undecla∣rable, and unfathomable, and incomprehensible by the Sons of men in the Unbelief; but God hath revealed to me by his Spirit that which is now spoak, and he shall bear me Record that my Witness is true; also that of God in every man's Conscience, when the Book of Conscience shall be o∣pened, and the Secrets of all Hearts revealed, shall bear Witness that this is true. How Sin entered, and Death by Sin into the World, and now Man dead while he lives, and all are dead Works that Man brings forth, wherein the State of all the Sons of men may be seen, and their Works in the Fall. NOw the Serpent being more Subtil then all the Beasts of the field, in presumption of himself, moved without the Power, and formed a thing without the Power, and began his Work, and brought a lye; being gone out of the Truth, Sin conceived, and a Lye conceived, he is the Father of it, and not the Power; he spoke of himself, who was gone out of the Light, motion or the Powers acting, man also his Eye being abroad out of the Life and Power, let in the Temptation upon him; but if he had stood in the Power, as God had ordained him, and commanded him
and had not moved out of it, he would have seen when the Serpent, o any other thing had gone out of the Power, and have still had Dominion over it; and though it was Evil in the Serpent to Tempt, who moved without Commandement from the Lord; yet if man had stood in the Power, he had kept him out; and it had been no Sin to him, neither condemned should he have been; and so that blind Doctrine of the world, and the Teachers thereof is a lye, who have said and taught that God ordained him to Fall, and upon this account, that so Christ might be reveal∣ed, and that his Son might be honoured; for if man had not Faln, say they, there had needed no Saviour. This is Ignorance and Blindness; he created man in his Image to stand in the Power, and ordered and Commanded him so to do, and to Glorifie him, who made him to stand in the dominion over all the Works of his Hands: And this doth not make Christ useless, or of no use; yea, he was of use before, and was his Life, and the Life of all things, and what if I say Salvation, the wise will understand; the unlearned will say, what need their Salvation, when there is no Sin? yes, there needed Salvation and Preservation, in that State that he was made in, that he might be upholden in that state, and saved from any thing that might hurt him in that State, so as to weaken him, that he might not have Power to fulfill the Will of God, and to glorifie his Maker. Object. But some may say, He was not saved and preserved, but was Created and left to himself, to order himself, whether he would stand or Fall. Answ. I say, whose was the fault, that he was not preserved, and saved in that state, was it in God? nay; and that he was left to himself, is also as false, and Unlearned; he left him in the Power, and in the Dominion everlasting, and Commanded him to stand there, and he was not to go out of it, but to act in the Motion of the Word, and in the Power by which he was made, which was Christ, who was glorified with the Father be∣fore the World began; I say according to God's appointment and Ordi∣nation, man was not left to himself, but to stand in the Power and authori∣ty of the Word, wherein man had power to fulfill the Will of God, and keep all in Order according to God's appointment, but he going out of the Power, contrary to God's command, giving heed to the Woman, and the Serpent, who were gone out of the Command before; I say he of his own accord going out, when the Power commanded him not to Hear∣ken to any such thing, but on the Contrary forbad him, so let in a Lye, and believed the VVoman, and the Serpent, and so went from his Preser∣vation, and Protection and Salvation, and so was catched in the Serpents Snare, who abode not in the Truth. Object. But then some may say, He had a voluntary Will to do as he would, and was not that will good? Answ. The will was good in it self, as it stood and went out in the Lifes Motion, but moving or acting contrary to the Motion of the Life, was not good; for that was out of God's Order, and Appointment, for no∣thing in man or without man, of all that God had made, was to stir or act without Commandments; now the Son was not honoured by man's Falling, but both the Father and the Son was Dishonoured, and now the Son or power was not revealed by the Fall, but vailed as from men; so the foggy Mists of Darkness are scattered, & the blind doctrines of the VVorld and VVaste.
Object. Some will be ready to say, how dost thou say, he was in Dominion everlasting? then how should he fall? that lasted but a while. Answ. I say, he was made by the Word which abides forever, and in it which was in the Beginning with God, and was God, and God's Son and his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Throne is established in Righteousness forever and ever, and in it self it is what it was ever, and after the Fall retained the same Power and Authority in it self, and so will do forever; Man's Power stood in it only, out of it he had none, so going out of it, dyed to it, and not any more Power to do, or to will, or to or∣der, or to rule any things but by it; but he lost the Feeling of it, and the Guidance of it, the Virtue of it and Life of it, and became dead to it, and alive in his Heart and Mind to another Power, to wit, the Power of De∣ceit, and to the Power of him which hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil; so God is clear, no Fault in him nor in the Power, nor Weak∣ness in the Dominion and Authority which he had, but Destruction meer∣ly, wholly and only of himself, and he is to bear his own Burthen. Thus man receiving in the Devil's Conceptions, who was gone out of the Truth, and became one with it, feeding upon Knowledge without the Life (this was evil) thus Sin entered, and Death by Sin, man cut off from the Power, from Life, from the Dominion which he had in the Power; now man is dead while he lives, and in the Day he eat he dyed, dead to the Power, dead to the Life, dead to Good, dead to Truth, dead to Purity, dead to Righteousness, estranged and alienated from it; the Grave covers him, Death hath Preeminence, and bears rule, and not Life, and he gone into its Nature, and loves it and imbraces it. Oh sad Life! oh sad State! now his Life cursed, which is Death, he cur∣sed▪ all his Actions cursed, all his Conception cursed, all his Works cur∣sed, labouring in Sorrow, in Travail, and Pain, and Grief, and Sweat, and Perplexity: Now all may as in a line read the happy Estate of Man before the Fall, the sad and deplorable Estate in the Fall, which who can declare, or who can measure, or who can demonstrate the miserable Estate of man, dead in Trespasses and Sins? and Life swallowed up of Death, Death and Destruction lives, and man in it; and now in the Grave God is not remembred, but forgotten. Now the World set in the Heart, and the Earth in the Heart, the Heart becomes earthly and vain, Thorns and Bryars spring up, and the Earth covers the slain; now Death lives, and man lives in; and one with the enmity, and in enmity against God, who was before his Life, man now in Chains of Darkness, when any thing moves Heaven-ward, the Power of Death draws the Mind down again into the Pit of Darkness; now the Na∣ture of all things in the Earth set in the Heart, Beasts, Rocks, Hills, Moun∣tains, Dogs, Swine and brutish Creatures, and man becomes brutish and vain, they have all Dominion over him, he is a Slave to all, all rules o∣ver him, and Death grew, and dead Works brought forth, he cannot now perform any thing whereby he can purchase the Love of God, nor give a Ransom for his Soul; now the Root of Bitterness grew, and the Enmity, and man in Lust, and when his Lust is crost, or his Will crost, then the Enemy which liveth in him riseth, he would kill that, and destroy that, imprison that, and bring it into Bondage, that the enmity might be Lord over all, and bring the innocent into Bondage, that which is nocent is set up, and the higher De∣ceit
grows in the Heart, the more Stir it makes, and the greater Destructi∣on of that which crosseth it; and here came in Oppression, Murder, Cruelty, Tyranny, Prisoning, Imbondaging, Revenge, Maliciousness and Envy, Rage, Fury, Headiness, Pride; this is all in the Curse, and springs up from the Foundation of the World in the Heart, and so being given Way unto and loved, grows in Strength, and Iniquity multiplies, and the Beast grows, and the Name great and numberless; the Serpent's Root spreads forth it self, and sprouts out in the earth, and comes to grow great, and is admi∣red; now the Deeds of Darkness and the Works of Darkness come to be ma∣ny, Envy, Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Riotousness, Sporting, Covetousness, Defrauding, Cheating, Maliciousness, Theft, Dissimulation, Feignedness, Hypocrisie, Witchcraft, Cursed Speaking, Railing, Reviling, Filthy Communication, unsavoury Speeches, Wantonness, Lightness, Foolish Jesting, Idle Talking, Vain Babling, Back-biting, Swearing, Lying, Cursing, Blasphemy, Slandering, Pride, Arrogancy, Vain Boasting, Contention, Strife, Emulation, Mischief; these and many more are now the Fruits of the degenerate Plant, and dead Works, and the Works of Darkness in man, who was once a no∣ble Plant, a holy right Seed, now the Fruits of Sodom and the Grapes of Gomorrah, whom God destroyed and overthrew, are brought forth, and the whole Earth is filled with Violence; and these be the Fruits that grow, and are become great over all Nations, which are wrought by the Devil, the Father of Lyes, who spoke of himself, and works of himself, in the Dark, in the Night, out of the Light, out of the Day, who went out of the Truth, and now worketh in all the Children of Disobedience, who are out of the Light, and out of the Power; and here are all the Sons of fallen Adam in the Curse, under the Wo; and these be the Works that are wrought and brought forth, which have stained the Earth; and the Father of them, and man in whom they are wrought, and the Works them∣selves, are all for Condemnation, never to be numbred among the Saints in Light, nor among their Works. Self-righteousness, Deeds of Darkness also, and dead Works, which though they be not counted as bad as the former by them that act in them, yet they are to be con∣demned also, and man who acts them, being in the Fall. CAin who was the first begotten in the Full, the Similitude, Likeness and Image of Adam his Father, who had transgressed, and disobey∣ed, and lost the Power, and became dead to it; Cain, I say, his express I∣mage, out of the Faith, out of the Power, he brought a Sacrifice, and of∣fered in the same Nature he slew his Brother with, and envied him (who was in the Faith, and was accepted of the Lord through Faith in the Power of God) I say, in this Nature he offered, and was not accepted, for he was in the Imitation, out of the Life, out of the Power, in Feignedness, and this was self, and not the Lord that moved him: The Jews in the Prophets Time, who were in Cain's Nature, in Envy and Maliciousness, grinding the Faces of the poor, and oppressing the needy, and chopping them in Pieces, as Flesh for the Pot; they brought Sacrifices, Oblations, Burnt-Offerings, kept Fasts, Sabbaths and New Moons, and all these Things,
and lyed, swore and dealt falsly, and left no room for the poor, and yet they said, the Lord was among them; the Lord sent his Servant the Pro∣phet to tell them, the Lord was weary of them and of their Oblations; why? they were out of the Faith, out of the Life, out of the Power, and Deceit lodged in their Hearts, Covetousness, Envy, Murder, Oppression, and Violence, as ravening Wolves hunting for their Prey; the Prophets prophesied for hire, their Priests bear Rule by their Means, and people were one with it, and liked it, and loved it should be so, the End of those things was Misery, the Judgment of God came upon them, they were scattered among their enemies, their prophets slain, and for their sake Sion became as a plowed Corn-field, and Jerusalem a Heap; and now he that offered an Ox was no more accepted then if he slew a man, no more then if he blessed Chemosh, Ashteroth or Baal, all was Sin, and to be condemned by the power, out of which they were gone: The Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's Time, great Worshippers, devout Men, devout Women, zea∣lous Men for Temple, Priests, Tythes, Dayes, Sabbaths, Oblations, and were acting all those Things that were commanded in or about the Wor∣ship of God, yet Christ said unto his Disciples, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter the King∣dom of God; they might have said (which at least they did in their Hearts) this Man sayes, he is the Son of God, and yet saith, and teacheth his Disci∣ples another Righteousness then is commanded in the Law, and moreover tells them, Except their Righteousness exceedours, they cannot enter into God's Kingdom; where is there in all the Earth any better Righteousness then ours? we do not as the Heathen worship Idol-gods, we keep the Sabbaths, and purifie our selves, and pay Tythes, and keep the Ordinances, given by the Lord to Moses and our Fathers; well, these Things they were do∣ing, but they were but dead Works; they were out of the Faith, out of the Power, and had not God's Word abiding in their Hearts, from which their Power and Ability should have come, to have answered the will of God; here was self-righteousness, although they did the outward things, which were commanded of the Lord, yet they were dead works; their Temple left desolate, worship desolate, Jerusalem compassed about with Armies, not one Stone left upon another, which was not to be thrown down, & they scattered among the Heathen, their Priests slain, and their Ob∣lations ceased, Plagues and Judgments pursuing whithersoever they went; did all those things save them from wrath? all their works, dead worships and self-righteousness save them? were they accepted? oh nay, rejected, a Seed of Falshood, a crooked Generation, an hypocritical Generation; these things with many more which I could instance, all shewing, that Man in the Transgression of the Life, of the Power, whether he sinned, or wrought that which he might judge was righteous, yet they were but dead works. Obect. But some may say, What sayest thou to their Generation of Ministers, Preachers and Ordinances? we live in a Gospel-time, and are under Gospel-Or∣dinances, and they teach, that Man is redeemed by Christ from Sins past, present and to come; and the Ordinances that we practise now, I hope you will not call them dead Works. Answ. I say, the Ministry in these Nations, made by man's will, and by the will of the Flesh, and that are seeking their Gain from their Quarter,
and are suing Men at Law, and throwing Men in Dungeons and Holes, to the Loss of some mens Lives already, and hundreds have been and are like to be spoiled, only to uphold their greedy devouring Nature, who have ravened, and devoured like evening wolves some mens Estates wholly, and sometimes taken ten fold the Value, who raven from place to place, from one end of the Land to another, and into other Nations also, for filthy Lucre, or a greater Benefit; I say, they are in the Fall, in the Transgression, Death rules in them, over them, and they are Ministers of Death, and never brought any to God; but of them many other Brethren, who are in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, have born a large Testimony, which any considerate, wise, prudent and reasonable man may see them to be Mi∣nisters of Death, demonstrated by many sound Grounds and unanswera∣ble Arguments, and the Scripture of Truth clearly bearing witness to the same; and so I refer the Reader to those things, and shall content my self at present in what I have said in this particular: Now as to the Worship, or Ordinances or Practices themselves I come unto, and shall speak no otherwise of any thing, then God by his eternal Light and Spirit hath made me understand in the true Ground of things, else I know well how to be Silent. Now this I say, to all Sects, Opinions, and Fellowships (though they be divided into many Heads or Societies) man acting or performing any thing of worship, Ordinance, or any practice whatsoever, which the Scripture declares hath been or ever was, though they should do it in the same manner, sutable in every Circumstance to that which others did, till all or every man come to believe in the power again, which man went from in the Transgression, all that he doth is Self-righteousness, and dead Works, Preaching dead, Prayer dead, Baptism dead, their Com∣munion dead, their Conferences dead, their exhortations dead, their Fasts dead, their Offerings like as if one had offered a dead Beast under the Law, or a Lame Lamb, which had been abomination; even so I say, till man come to that which he hath lost in the Transgression, till man find the Power, the Life, the Light, the Messiah, and feel him in them, to Work, move, and lead, guide, and act, all will be accounted with the Lord, Self-righteousness, dead Works, dead Fruit, and if all would exa∣mine and try, they might see the Nations almost spread over with dead men in Adam, and dead Works abound, and coverings which God will Rent, and lay all waste together, false Rest, imitated Forms, and repre∣sentations without Life, I say till men come into the Power again that Adam went from, and so died in that Day, cannot do any thing well-pleasing to God; and whosoever comes to that again, passeth every step through Death, and denyes himself and all Self-actions, self-righteousness, and must come to be bare and Naked again, even as he was before he came out; he and his wife were Naked and were not ashamed: Self-acting was not known; now Self-will, Self-worship, Self-righteousness; nay, they moved in the Power, Righteousness was their covering, and as I said before, there was no shame; I might speak largely in this thing, and truly my Tongue is the Pen of a ready writer: Oh that all had an Ear to hear that their Soul; might live, and that every one might be unbottomed, of his false rest, false and feigned Hope and Faith, and of his own ragged Garment, and let go his Self-righteousness, and his dead Works, and come to Christ the Life of men again, that man hath run from, that so he might have Life and Peace
Object. But some would say, That thou wouldest have all upside down, an unchristian the Nations, and unchurch Churches, and throw down all our Wor∣ship and then what should we do, all would be as Heathens and turn into Atheism. I say a time of fanning and sifting and trying is come, when nothing shll stand but that hath the Image, stamp, and Character of the living God upon it, and all that which hath been brought up, and raised up, since man hath been in the Transgression, must be turned down into the Pit again, and all that have got a Name of Christian, and wants his Life, to live among them and in them, shall be scattered as Clouds with the  wind, and all imitated Worships, and will-Worshippers, and the feigne Faith, and the feigned Hope shall be confounded, and all will-worships and Worshippers will be overturned, who are not come yet to the true Light that lightens every man that comes into the World; and till man comes to the Light, and tryes his deeds and works by it, he never sees what he is doing, nor what he is working, nor what he works; and so all that man doth here in the unbelief; it is but Sin or Self-righteousness, which is brought forth by him who abode not in the Truth, in the Unbelief, and so who be come to the Power which was in the Beginning, before Sin entered, and death by Sin, hath and doth mea∣sure all deeds, and all works, and man that is in the loss, in the Fall, and sees that a dead man cannot act a living work, nor bring forth living Fruits unto God, nor living works of Righteousness, being in the Unrighteous∣ness, neither the fruits of Faith, being in the unbelief, neither the works of the Day, being in the Night, neither the works of charity, being in the Enmity; in a word, without Christ the Power, the Light, the Life, which was glorified with the Father before the world began; I say the said it himself, who is the Beginning of the Creation of God, the first born of every creature) he said, and his Testimony will be found true, without me ye can do nothing, nothing that is well-pleasing to the Lord, nothing that ever shall be acceptable; and here is the true State of all the Earth discovered, and all mankind drove out from God, miserable, Naked Hpeless, Helpless, Faithless, and so can do nothing as to the glorifying of God his Maker, or to the ordering of any thing in the Creation to his glory, having lost his Dominion and God's Wisdom, and this being c∣sidered seriously by all, and brought to the Light in all, and their Deeds tryed by it, would make the losty bow, and the Stout-hearted fear, and the conceited sit down in Solitariness, that they should so long deceiv their own Souls, with a conceit of Righteousness and redemption, wh as Death yet reigns in them, and over them, and not Life eterna▪  the Devil is a distinct being from God, and his Works are distinct▪ an his Deeds, from the Works of God, and neither he nor his works  be numbred among the works of God; but he and they tha  him, and fellow him who is our of the Truth, they, their work  wht ort soever they may seem unto men to be, whose Eyes the  hh linded) so I say all is to condemned, and shut out from God's  rever, and to be Destroyed by him who is a consuming Fire▪  all the Righteousness of man burned, as combustible stuff in . Ad by what hath been said, the Principle of that  become vain in their Imaginations and foolish▪  being Darkned) and are seen, and their Principle overth As that Light and Darkness is one, and good and Evil one▪ and
Righteousness one, and Truth and a Lye one, and that God is all and doth all, and whatever is done is of God, and that there is no Evil but to him that thinks it so, and it is only a false apprehension of things, and that there is no such thing as Sin, and that Sin is nothing: Unto all these things I might speak, but the understanding Reader may by what is before writ∣ten, see each of these plainly declared, and the true Ground of things laid down as the Spirit gave utterance, and this shall at present suffice in this Matter. Object. But some may object further, and say, Will not reading the Scrip¦tures and conforming to the practice of the Saints in the use of his Ordinances, will not this make us accepted, and bring us out of the Fall, and make us good Christians? Answ. No; while Death hath dominion in man, and over man, and the vail over the Heart, man doth not understand the Mystery of God's Kingdom, neither understands the Scripture, which was spoken from the Spirit of Truth, or any thing of Truth, as it is in Christ; for none understands the things of God, but by the Spirit of God; so that every man that comes to have a good understanding, must come to know the pure Spirit of God in him, to direct him, and inform him; (which Spirit) was the Original of the Scripture; for the holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; & without the holy Ghost in some measure be known, and that which is infallible, the sayings, the writings, the Scriptures cannot be understood, & because of the want of this, all the Earth is run into Heads, and Sects, and Opinions, and large Treatises and Volumes, and expositions have been written, and yet differing one from another, and all from the Spirit, and in all these particular Sects, Persecuting one another, and Envying one another, and hating one another, and would compell others to believe what they believe in what they say, if they had but power; and for proof of this, it is most evident in the Scripture of Truth, and in latter Ages since the Apostles, it hath been, and it is evidently seen, both among the Papists and Protestants, and among all them that are called the refor∣med Churches; but all this is in the Fall, and in the Transgression, and in the Apostacy, and is an evident token, that they are all under the Power of the Beast, whom makes War against the Lamb; so all compellati∣on, and they that do compell, are not Worshippers of the Lamb, but of the Beast which is to be destroyed, and cast into the Lake. For the Jews under the first Covenant had the Scriptures, the good and wholsome Words of God, and the Prophets, and read the Law and the Prophets on the Sabbath dayes, and yet the Vail was over their Hearts, and though they did perform many things commanded▪ yet they being erred from the Spirit, did not understand of what the Scripture spoke, nor know him nor his mind, to wit, Christ, of whom the Scriptures spke, neither were they accepted of God, but reproved and Rejected by Christ himself, who said, they erred, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; doubtless they did know the words naturally and read them, but the Spirit's mind in so speaking they knew not; and Jude re∣proves all such, and said, what they knew, they knew naturally as wor it Beasts, and in that Knowledge, they corrupted themselves, and therfoe Peter well said▪ many things were herd to be understood, which the unlearned wrested (they that were ignorant of the Spirit of the Father▪ and
had not learned of God, who is a Spirit) they, I say, perverted and wrested the good and wholsom Words of the Scriptures, and were no more accep∣ted of God, then if they had never heard the Words, nor read them at all; and as for the Jews conforming to the outward Commands, when the Vail was over their Hearts, and their Hearts Uncircumcised, these things did not make them any whit more accepted then the Heathen, so the Christians since Christ's time, in the Apostles days, and after the Apostles dayes, who held the form of Worship, and the form of Godliness, and the outward part of Worship, and hold and retain it in that part which is above the Seed, and deny the Power, this no more makes a Christian inward, then outward Circumcision made a Jew inward; neither any of these things do recommend any unto God, but are covers made, and rests formed, from that part which is above the Seed, and so man comes to be Counselled in those things, when alas he is Miserable and Naked, and hath not the righteous Garment on, which should make man accepted of the Father, through the beloved, God's Righteousness. How all men upon the Earth, in the degeneration, and in the Fall, and in the Transgression, have corrupted themselves, & have been Idolaters in every ad∣ministration; (being gone from the Power) in which man had the Ability, Power, and Wisdom to Worship God aright, and honour the living God of Heaven and Earth. IN the State and Condition which man was created in, when he was the Image of God, and lived in the Power of God in which he was crea∣ted; he in that Power (which was his Life) had Wisdom and Understanding and Power to worship the living God, and to glorifie his Maker, the which thing I have treated on before; but being gone from the Power, & grew in Knowledge without the Power, his Thoughts became vain, his Imaginati∣ons vain, and his Desires earthly and corruptible; and so the Creatures were worshipped in his Heart, and not the Creator (the Life of the Creatures) and he bowed to the Creatures, and they had Dominion over him, and that Nature began to grow and multiply in all the Earth, and that Seed that was at Enmity with God, and against the Seed, which is Christ, and few there were that called upon the Name of the Lord in Truth and Righteous∣ness, although some, yet few, one in a Nation, or a few in an Age, nay, in many Ages; and men multiplyed in the Earth, and Wickedness multi∣plied also, and Idolatry and the Seed of the Serpent grew great; And God saw the Wickedness of man, that it was great in the Earth, and that the Thoughts and Purposes and Imaginations of his heart were only evil continually, Gen. 6.5. And the Earth was filled with Violence, Cruelty and Oppression, and the living God forgotten, and not worshipped; but on the contrary, they follow∣ed the Imaginations of their own Hearts, and bow'd down to every corrup∣tible thing, and to every Creature, and did not worship the Lord God in their Hearts, till the Lord was grieved at the Heart, and repented that he had made man; and this was before the Flood: and after the Flood, when the Earth was a little multiplyed, Iniquity grew in the Earth, and the cur∣sed Seed sprang from Ham's Stock, of whom was Nimrod, the Hunter before the Lord, the Beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, of the which became
great Idolaters; and of this Seed came the Philistians, who were uncir∣cumcised, who were Heathens; and the Jebusites and Gargasites, and the Canaanites and Hivites, and their Generations were great in the Earth, and they were great Idolaters, and committed Idolatry with Stocks and Stones, and with Brick, having forgotten the Lord, they began to work exploits in the Earth, and to build Cities, and Babel; having forgot the Name of God, they would have got a Name in the Earth, and builded a Tower, whose top might have reached to Heaven; but the Lord, whom they had forgot, scattered them; and this was the Seed of evil doers, whom God scattered, and drove out of Canaan, who were great Idolters, and gave it to Abraham, who feared the Lord, and to Jacob, and to his Seed, to possess. And when Transgression grew, he added a Law (the Sence of God's Power and Wisdom was so lost in man, and they so gone from his Wisdom, that a Law was added after Israel came out of Egypt) which was outward, and written in Tables of Stone, wherein was the Statutes and the Com∣mands, that they should only worship him, and that they should not make them Gods of Gold and Silver, neither the Likeness of any thing in Heaven and Earth; yet nevertheless, that uncircumcised Part which kept the Seed in Bondage, and that corruptible earthly Nature that ruled in them, made Gods like the heathen Egyptians, and they made a Calf, and bowed to the molten Image, and forgot God, and provoaked him to Anger, till many of them were consumed in his sore Displeasure, and tempted him, and lusted, and eat and drank, and rose up to Play, and committed Whore∣doms with the Creatures, and abused them; and therefore the Lord sent his Prophets, and rebuked them; they abused the Gold and the Silver, the Stone and the Wood, which were good Creatures, but not to make Gods of, nor Images thereof, nor Idols to draw away their Minds from the Lord; but they in whom the Seed was not made manifest, they worshipped ded things, and Likenesses of things, which were not Life it self, and so trans∣gressed the Law, acting from that Part, and living in that Nature which the Law was against (which was added because of Transgression) to limit the Transgressor, and to slay him, and to bruise that under, till the Seed came up that fulfils the Law; but the Seed of the Serpent had so much Rule in them whom God had often delivered out of the Hands of their E∣nemies, so that many perished, Corah and many Princes, and many Thousands of Israel, who followed their own Inventions, and were cut off in God's sore Displeasure, being gone from that which was upright, in which man was created, and following their Imaginations, and out of that mind formed Idols and Images, and set them up, and answered that Part in themselves which transgressed the Seed, and not that which doth over∣throw all Idols and the Ground thereof: And after they were come to the Land that God had promised them, they were commanded not to worship Idols, as the Canaanites did (that were Ham's Stock) who was accursed, and set up cursed Idols, yet nevertheless breaking the Law which was to limit that Part which had transgressed; that which was contrary to the Law was set up in themselves, even the Nature of the Canaanites, Gentiles and Heathen, and then they worshipped the Heathens Gods, nor else formed Gods and Idols and Images of their own, and worshipped Baal, Ashteroth and Chemsh, and the Sidonians Gods, and every Nations Gods & I∣mages where they came; and so the Lord sent his true Prophets▪ who
feared his Name, and worshipped him, to declare against them, even the House of Israel, a distinct People from the Heathen, great Professors. Ezek 14.4. They set up Idols in their Hearts, and put a stumbling Block of Iniquity before their Face, the Lord said he would answer them according to the Multitude of their Idols, they being gone into Vanity, they hearkened to the Idols that spae Vanity. Zech. 10.2. And baked Bread, and rosted Flesh with Wood, and of the same made a God; and they transgressed at Dan, at Bethel, at Gilgal; yea, their Idols stood in their Hearts, and they formed such without as were sui∣table to their Hearts, as you may read through many Ages and Generati∣ons before the Flood, and after the Flood, in the Wilderness, in Canaan, and in the Nations where they were scattered. Hab. 2.18, 19. What pro∣fiteth the graven Image, and the molten Image, and Teachers of Lyes? wo unto him that saith to the Wood, awake, to the dumb Stone, arise, it shall teach; be∣hold, it is laid over with Gold and Silver, and there is no Breath at all in th midst of it; seek not to Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, for Gilgal shall go into Captivity, and Bethel shall come to nought. Furthermore, they corrupted themselves in those things which God had commanded (which were Commands in their time) and made Idols of those things which were but Figures or Shadows of good things to come, which they should have waited for; for as the Brazen Serpent, Temple, Offerings, Oblations, Tythes, Priests, Sabbaths, New Moons, Solemn Feasts, Circumcision, Passover; and all these things were given to be ob∣served till the Seed came (the end of all these things and of the Law for Righteousness) but Christ, the Seed, the Heir of all things, when he came (after many Prophets had declared of him, from Moses to Samuel, from Samuel to John) they exalted those things above him, and neglected him, who had Life in himself, and would not come unto him, that they might have had Life; and then their Temple, Priests, Sacrifice, Oblations became Idols, and their Practice became Idolatry, and so are in Blindness to this Day; and so in the Dayes of Christ they held up those things, and were counselled in their Works, and Observances, and Dayes, and Times, and came not to believe in him in whom all Dayes end in, and so continued in their large Observations all along in the Apostles Dayes, and did as they had done in the Dayes of the Prophets, slew the Prophets that were sent of the Lord, and set Dreamers, and such as prophesied for Hire, and divined for Money, and said, no Evil should touch them; and they said, the Law should not depart from the Priests Mouth, nor Vision cease from their Pro∣phets, but believed their Lyes, and prophesied of Wine and strong Drink, and cryed Peace to them that God's Controversie was against, and so per∣secuted the Apostles from City to City, and from Place to Place, till the Wrat of God came upon them, and Jerusalem compassed about with Ar¦mies, and not one Stone left upon another, and for their sakes Sion became a ploed Corn Field, their Temple burnt, their Priests slain, their Sacrifi∣ces ceased, their Oblations at an End, and they scattered among the Hethen, and they and all their Idols and Worship blasted and cursed from God, and from being a Nation to this Day; and thus hath the Lord brought Shame and Contempt upon all through all Ages, who have worshipped the Works of their own Hands, or that have holden up any Figure or Representation, and have set it up and exalted it above the Life, and with it have oppose the Power, the Life▪ in which all Figures, Types and Representations end
in: And thus far I have passed through Generations, and also through Administrations, that all who have a Desire of the true Knowledge of God may see, that Man in the Degeneration, being out of the Image of God, corrupts himself in all things, and maks Idols of all things, being from the Life in which Man hath Power only to fulfil the Righteous Will of God. But to descend and come nearer to our Age, because all that which is called Christendom will say, this is nothing unto them, because they hold not up the Heathens Images nor the Jewish Idols, nor the Jewish Types and Worship, and therefore they are no Idolaters; when John the Prophet came and preached repentance in the Wilderness of Judea, which was a preparer of the way, he Baptized in Jordan, and many believed and Repented, and were Baptized, and Christ also was Baptized, and so was he Circumcised, and eat the Passover, and observed what was written, because he came to fulfill all Righteousness, and also bad his Disciples hear them that sate in Moses Seat, for he was not yet Sacrificed up, nor Glori∣fied; I say, John Baptized not in his own Name, but bore Witness unto Christ the Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World, who came after him and was preferred before him, whom John said, should Bap∣tise them with the holy Ghost and with Fire, and many of Johns Disciples followed Christ the true Light, that lighteth every one that cometh into the World, and John was not Offended at them for following of Christ but rejoyced; take notice of this, you Baptizers who are offended with them that follow Christ, the Light that lighteth every one that cometh in the World, and Excommunicate them like the envyous Jews, out of your Assemblies, and say, they are deluded, and are so far from Johns Spirit, that in stead of bearing your Testimony to him, who is the (Light) that you would bind them up, and Counsel your Disciples not to go after him, The true Light that lighteth every man (the Christ of God) I say to you, you are in the Idolatry, who prefer your water before the (Light) but John bore witness to Christ the Light, & said he was preferred before him, and some Imitaters and Idolaters say the Baptism of water is the door, or En∣trance into the Church of God, when as Christ saith, He is the door, none comes into the Fold but by him, and none comes to the Father but by him, and he is the way; so who sets up another entrance unto God, or into the Fold, or into the Church, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, sets up an Idol, and prefers an Idol, above the Life, and so are in the Idolatry; But let none mistake, that I say Water is an Idol, nay, it is a good Creature of God, or that I say, Johns Baptism with Water was an Idol, nay, he was in the Power and Spirit of Eliah, and his Baptism a Figure of a good thing which was to come, which afterward was received by the Disciples, and Christ's words made good unto them; John indeed Baptized you with Water unto Repentance, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, not many dayes hence; that was Christ's Baptism. I am not Igno∣rant of the many and great Contests in this Age, that have been about these things, and I know many Scriptures that speak of Baptism, all which I have searched narrowly, with the Measure of God's Spirit given unto me, into the true Ground of things, and the true State of each admi∣nistration, and in this thing I am satisfied fully, that the Baptism with Water was John's Baptism, and not Christ's, and the Baptism of the Spirit
Christ's, and now John's; I have no desire to Wrangle or Jangle about words, or contest about Shadows, but that all may come to know him in whom all Ministrations end in, and there will be Peace and Satisfaction (to wit, in Christ). But to say something to the main Basis and Foundation which Priests and Separatists build much of their Arguments upon, the last of Matthew and the last Verse, Go, teach, and baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost; as for all the Priests about their baptizing of Infants, here is no Ground at all; for here is first teach, and then baptize, and here is no infants neither; and so I know what Consequences have been drawn from this by the unlearned in their Imaginations; but them that have the least Measure of true Light will not take a Consequence to build a Founda∣tion on, for this is contrary to their own Rule, they say, the Scripture is their Rule, then their Consequence is not the Rule; and if the Scriptures be the Rule, let all People of your Parishes know, if you can by the Scrip∣ture shew, when John or any Disciple of his or Christ's baptized Infants, and taught them Principles of Religion twenty Years after; but they are willingly ignorant that see not you to be Idolaters; and as for the Baptists Separates, who build upon this for their Water-Baptism, they are as ground∣less as the Priests, and all their Agruments are as invalid as the rest; for here is baptizing the Nations in the Name of the Father, in the Name of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and any who are judicious or wise, and are in any Measure of God's pure Wisdom, will not say, that the Name of the Father is Water, or the Son or holy Ghost is Water; the Name of God is, I am, and a strong Tower, and the Name of the Son is the Word, and the Word is the Power; but this is not Water; but further they say, the Disciples had received the holy Ghost, and did baptize with Water after, and they were baptized with Water after they had received the holy Ghost; and they bring divers Scriptures to prove this. I shall not deny but Peter baptized with Water, and Paul two or three Families, and thanks God he baptized no more; and said, he had declared the whole Counsel of God; and he makes not mention in all his Epistles, that Baptism was any Part of his Command; neither in all his Counsel to the Churches any where, doth he exhort either to Timothy, Titus or Apollo, or any of the Brethren, to baptize with Water; but as for Peter's baptizing with Water, I know no more Command he had then Paul; as for the Commission which Matthew writes of, Mat. 28. & 19. and that Mark men∣tions, Mark. 16.15. there is no Water; and so it's the Baptism of John, I grant, and Christ bearing Witness to John, that he was a Prophet, and did baptize many▪ and therefore he or they, in Honour to John's Ministry might baptize some, as well as Paul did circumcise Titus, and then in 1 Cor, 7.19. said, It was nothing; and again in another Place, Neither Circumci∣sion nor Uncircumcision did avail, but a new Creature; and because it was a Fi∣gure which People did not idolize so much then, as they did Circumcisi∣on, for the Weakness of the People for a time; and the wise in Heart may understand, that when any Representation or Figure outward was set up, it was not easily denyed again, nor an easie Thing to be laid down, when the thing signified was come; for many of the Jews believed in Christ, and were said to be Brethren, and yet they came from Jerusalem, and troubled the Church of Galatia, and would have brought them under the Figure
[Circumcision] again, and the Apostle in Gal. 4. asks them, Now when ye know God, why turn ye again to the beggarly Elements [Circumcision] obser∣ving Dayes, Moneths, Times and Years? I would ask the moderate a Que∣stion, whether Water be not an Element, and pertains only to the elemen∣tary Part in man, which is to pass away and be dissolved, when the Seed is raised up, whose Nature is not elementary, but caelestial? I shall say no more to them at this present who are contentious, who are so zealous for their Water upon so weak a Ground, but take heed, that while you are striving about your outward Water, you neglect not the washing of Regeneration and the cleansing of the Spirit; many have been baptized, but which of you have received the holy Ghost? there is not one among you dare own or wit∣ness an infallible Spirit, but count it an Error, that any should speak, or wit∣ness, or look to enjoy any such thing in these Dayes; well, I say unto you, your Day is a Day of Darkness, and Gloominess you live in, and thick Darkness covers your Tabernacle; for whoever have received the holy Ghost or Spirit of Truth in any Measure, are led by that which is infalli∣ble, and not fallible; and if you look not for this, ye are no Sons, not∣withstanding all your washing the outside; For as many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God; and this is witnessed, Praises to the Lord forever; the Lord is unto his People an everlasting Light; and this is the Sum, that Water is owned to be a Figure of the one Baptism, and was an Element, and pertained to that which is elementary; but the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, and be dissolved in the Day of the Lord, and then the Seed comes up, which is Heir of the Promise, which is nourish∣ed with the VVater of Life, which is not an Element nor elementary, but is caelestial, and springs up in them that believe unto everlasting Life, and come to be born of the Water and the Spirit, and enter into God's King∣dom, Dominion, Power, Life, Wisdom, Excellency and eternal Glory; happy is he that believes and abides in Patience unto the End. Now since the Dayes of John, the Kingdom of God hath been preached, and as many as were ordained to eternal Life believed; and many in the Day when Christ was manifest in the Flesh believed, unto whom he de∣clared the Mind of the Father, and by him was the Father glorified; he fulfilled the Law, and did many Works and Miracles by the Power of the Father, and herein was the Father glorified, and them that did believe in him, their Faith was strengthned; and he opened the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God to his Disciples, and bore witness, and prophesied the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of all their Worship, and said, No more at Jerusalem nor at Samaria, but the Time was coming, when they that worshipped the Father, should worship him in Spirit and Truth; and declared against the Pharisees Righteousness, and said to his Disciples, Except their Righteous∣ness did exceed the Pharisees, they could not enter the Kingdom of God; and yet the Pharisees performed all the outward things commanded, but were in the Idolatry, and did not believe in the Life: Now he declared of his Suffering many things, and also how he would go away, and how he would come again, and would not leave them comfrtless; but these things were hart to be believed then by his Disciples; and further he told them, he must be betrayed, and suffer, and rise again; and when the Hour was come that he was betrayed, when he was with his Disciples▪ even the same Night he was betrayed, he took Bread, and broke it, and blessed it, and said, take and
eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, this do in Remembrance of me; and after he took the Cup, and after he had supped saying, this is the Cup of the New Testament in my Blood, as often as you drink it, do it in Remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. And Matthew, Mark and Luke delare the same, and this was real Bread and real Wine, which was a Representation of that which was to be enjoyed in the Spirit, and never intended for any further thing but as a Figure or a Representation of the Bread of Life, and of the Cup of Blessing which afterward they came to be Witnesses of, and as oft as they eat and drank, they did shew forth the Lords Death till he came: Now this was practised among the Disciples after he was risen from the dead, and did converse with them at many times, and exhorted them, and comfor∣ted them, and instructed them, and told them, that they should be Witnes∣ses of his Name unto the Ends of the Earth, and gave them Commandment to teach all Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son and ho∣ly Ghost, and did promise to be with them to the End of the World, and told how the Comforter would come, and that the Father would send him in his Name▪ even the Spirit of Truth, which was with them, and should be in them, to be their Teacher, Leader and Guide, and bring all things to their Remembrance: Now that which he gave them as a Figure, and to be a Sign unto them of the clearer Manifestation of himself, which afterward came to be fulfilled and they Witnesses of it, who grew up in the pure invisible Being, and did see the Mystery, through the Revelation of the Spirit, which did more clear∣ly shew unto them the Mysteries within the Vail; for as I said of Water, it was a Sign of a good thing to come, so the Bread and the Cup was also a Sign of a good thing to come, as all outward Figures were; but they that did believe, and grew up in the Faith, in the Seed, Christ, they came to see the Substance, in whom all Figures end, and had Communion with him within the Vail, after he was ascended where he was before; now the Apostle he spoke as to wise men, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And Ver. 17. For we being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one Bread; mark, all they that did believe, though they were many, yet they were one Bread and one Body, and were all Parta∣kers of that one Bread, which Bread was the Flesh of Christ. Joh. 6 48. I am the Bread of Life. And Joh. 6.51. I am the living Bread that came down from Heaven, if any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever, and the Bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World: Now I speak unto wise men, and let the Wisdom of God (in them manifest) judge what I say; for where the Body of Christ is witnessed, and the Flesh of Christ known, they know that which all the Figures end in; the Manna that God gave no Israel in the Wilderness, they dyed that did eat thereof, which was as pure a Type of the hidden Manna, as lively a Type as Bread outward, which was but a Type of the Flesh of Christ; and both they that did eat the Manna, and they that eat the Bread outward, and drank the Cup outward, are both dead; but he that eats the Flesh of Christ, and drinks the Blood, lives forever; and he that eats the hidden Manna hath overcome Death, and lives forever, and feeds upon the Bread of Life, feeds upon eternal Life. Now this is a Mystery to the Papists, who are Idolaters, who have sprung
up in the Apostacy, though they have Scriptures as it was to the Jews, John 6.52. who strove among themselves, and said, how can this man give his Flesh to eat? And so the Papists, who strive about the Flesh of Christ and his Blood, and yet have the Scriptures; and they say, it's in the Bread and in the Wine, after Consecration; and so they worship the Imaginations of their own Hearts, not discerning the Lords Body, and have Killed thousands, and taken away the Lives of thousands, because they would not confess their Idol to be of God. And the Protestants, they are setting up the Bread and the Wine, and contenting themselves therewith, and are making an Idol of it, and come not to discern the Body of Christ; but one saying, he hath a carnal Body; and another, a Fleshly Body; another, a Mystical Body; and another sayes, his Body is divided from his Members; and so speak out of thick Darkness, their own Imaginations, and have no communion with the Body of Christ, neither know the Flesh of Christ, which is the Bread of Life, which is given for the Life of the World, John 6.51. And as Godliness began to work, and the Mystery thereof in the dayes of Christ and the Apostles, wherein the Lord discovered much of his Wisdom and Power, and manifested his pure Presence, and poured out his Spirit plentifully upon Sons and Daughters, and fulfilled that which Joel prophesied of, Joel 2.28. which came to be fulfilled after Christ's ascension, Acts 2.17. and They received the Holy Ghost, and spoke the wonder∣ful Things of God, as they were revealed by the Spirit, which shed it self abroad among them that waited for it; so also the Mystery of Iniquity began to work even in that time, and as the Apostles laid the Foundation of Truth, and declared the Truth, Christ to be the Foundation, even so the Mystery of Iniquity did Work, and a Beginning, or a Foundation of error was laid by them, who were gone out of the Truth, the false Prophets, Deceivers Anti-christs, who were Professors and Preachers, but they were such as were Covetous and Greedy of filthy Lucre, and made Merchandize of Souls for dishonest gain, and denyed the Power of God, Christ, and were Enemies to the Cross, and gloried in the Flesh, and spake Swelling words of Vanity, and did all live in the Lust of the Flesh, and were proud Boasters, and denyed the Lord that bought them; for denying the Power of God, they did deny Christ, though in Words they preached him, as this Generation, who are their Off∣springs do out of Strife and Contention, as the Apostles writes, and they held the Form of Godliness but denyed the Power; and they were they that once were Convinced of the Truth, and came into the form of Truth, but denyed the Power of Truth; but were in Craft and Deceit, and they subverted whole Houses from the Faith, and led them back into the World, into Unbelief, in the Apostles dayes, and yet had a worship, and did Worship, but not in the Power, not the Life, and this began to work, and wrought more cunningly, and Subtilly in the latter Times: And the Apostle Paul in many of his Epistles, John and Peter and Jude, declare against them, and Paul prophesied of them before his departure, of grievous Wolves, which should spring up, which should not spare to make Havock of the Flock of Christ; so the false Apostles, Deceivers, Anti-christs, and deceitful Workers, they went out then, and did what they could to lead Disciples after them into the World; inwardly they were ravened from the Spirit, and were gone from it into the Earth, into the world, and served not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Bellies, and the God of the world which is the Devil, and they went into the World, and the World received them; and then they and their Disciples turned against the Saints, and they held Truth in Words, and the Form for a wile, but it was in Unrighteousness; and here was the beginners, and the beginning of the Apostates, and of the Apostacy; it was began in the Apostles dayes, by them that went out of the Truth, out of the Light, and were ravened from the Spirit, and erred from the Faith, and were Enemies to the Power of God, and these were the beginners and the Layers of the Foundation, and then it grew, that root of Wickedness faster then the Truth; for the Jews resisted, and the Heathens resisted, and the Apostates and false Prophets resisted, and they that were Apostatized they resisted, and they caused many to Stumble, to Err, to make Ship-wrack of their Faith, and so the World went after them, the World, the Nations, the Kindreds, the Tongues, and the People went after Kings, Princes and Potentates of the Earth, and in pro∣cess of time they had over-run all and Killed the Saints, the Woman fled into the Wilderness, and the man-Child was caught up unto God; then all Nations who were gone from the Rock became as a Sea, reeled to and fro, Unstable, Unsetled; what were they like to settle in the Sea? then a great beast arose with his seven Heads and ten Horns, and the Whore which had Defiled the bed, and She sat upon the Beast, and She reached out her Cup of Fornication to the Nations, and all Nations were Drunk with her Cup, and then the Beast made War, and the Nations were Drunk, and they loved the beast and received his Mark, became Cruel, and pushed at the Saints, (and followed him) and made War with them, and the Whore she drank the blood of the Saints, and the Dragon appeared, and with his Tayl, drew the third part of the Stars after him to the Earth, the false Prophets they are the Tail of the Dragon, who were gone from the Testimony of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy, and drew after it the third part of the Stars from the Firmament of his Power into the Earth, Rev. 12.4. The man Child was caught up unto God, which was to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron; and the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where God hath prepared a place for her, and then the Dragon went out and made War with the Remnant of her Seed, to wit, the Woman's Seed. And so out of the Sea arose the Beast, out of Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and Peoples, which are Waters, and the Dragon gave Power to the Beast, and his Seat, and great Authority, Rev. 13.2. And all the World won∣dered after the beast, ver. 3. and▪ ver. 4. They Worshipped the Dragon which gave Power to the beast, and the beast likewise; and now the world cryed (which wondered after the beast) who is able to make War with the beast? and ver. 6. He opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme hs Name and Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, and he made War with the Saints, and did overcome them, and all that dwelt upon the Earth wor∣shipped him, whose Names were not written in the Lamb's Book of Life. And the Beast deceived the Nations, and them that dwelt on the Earth, and now Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations, and all the World which wondered after him; they who had lost the Image of God, now became the Image of the Beast, that blasphemed God and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; and now the Kings of the Earth that had drunk the Whore's Cup of Fornication, and the Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues and People, who were become the Beast's Image; now the I∣mage of the Beast spoak, and caused as many as would not worship the Beast and the Image should be killed; take notice of that, all who are cal∣led Christians, it was not Gods Images, who compelled to worship, or else be killed, but it was the Beasts Image; and wheresoever Compulsion nd killing is exercised and practised, they worship the Beast. Chap. 13. Ver. 16. And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive a Mark in their Forehead, or in their right Hand, and none might buy or sell, but he which had the Beast's Mark, or his Name, or the Number of his Name; here was Worship, but it was the Beast's Worship, and idolatrous Worship, and the Dragon's Worship, who sought to de∣stroy the man-child, which all the Angels are to worship; all this Wor∣ship is in the Apostacy. So let all take notice of this compelling, causing, forcing, killing and destroying about Worship, all they that so do, yet are worshipping the Beast on which the Whore rides; and this is that Generation who slew the Lamb, and they are of the World; and this is the Dragon's Brood, who sought to devour the man-child; and this is the Serpent's Seed, and a Seed of Falshood, who made War with the Remnant of the Seed of the Woman, through all Ages unto this Generation; and so all that which is called Christendom, is more or less under the Beasts Power, and hath his I∣mage, even to this Day; and yet some of them are professing the Saints Words, and imitating their Actions, who were Followers of the Lamb, and kept the Faith; now this that John saw, as come in, did grow Decei∣vers, Anti-christs, false Prophets, who were before, and troubled the Churches Galatia and Corinth, and made Havock, brought in Deceit, and infected many, as Coloss. Pergamus, Sardis and Laodicea, Rev. 3. But now all Nations were erred, and gone from their Maker, their Husband, and did drink of the Cup of the Whore, and were adulterated from the Life, Faith and Power, and now worshipped the Beast, and the whole World went after him; there was some of his Adultery, Whoredom and Forni∣cation in the Apostles Dayes, and some had drunken then; but now Na∣tions, Kindreds, Tongues and People drunk the Cup of Fornication; and now Jezabel, who slew the Prophets, and drunk the Blood of the Saints she reaches out her Cup, Kings, Merchants, noble men, great men, Na∣tions, Kindreds, Tongues and People were made drunk, the man-child sought to be devoured, Floods cast out after the Woman, the Saints Blood drunk, the World worships the Dragon, and the Beast and his great Au∣thority, and wonders after him; now Jezabel, the VVhore, who made the Nations drunk, she prophesies, all the Nations made drunk with her Cup of Fornication, and drinks in all her false Doctrines and devised Fa∣bles; now she is as a Queen; now the Nations worship; after a Beast ari∣seth, she gets upon him and rides, she and the Beast become one, she drinks the Blood of the Saints, the Beast makes VVar, compels, kills, being of one mind with the VVhore; none to buy or sell, but they that have his Mark or his Name, or at least some of the Number of his Name; and who were not defiled were killed (or sought to be killed) this is since the Apostles Dayes? So now we have found the Whore, her Beginning in the Apostacy, having lost the Faith and Power that the Saints were in, we
have found out the Rise of the Beast in the Apostacy, since the Apostles, that all the World wondred after and worshipped. Now Rome, we have found thy Foundation, and the Beginning of thy Rise, and see how thou art elevated; we have thee, and all that sprang out of thy Stock and Root, betwixt this time and the Apostles, and we read beyond thee, though thou boast thy self of Antiquity, and glory in thy Councils and Convocations; for thy Proof we have sounded thy Bot∣tom, I have thee and all the Apostates sprang from thee betwixt me and the Apostles; the Anti-christs, false Prophets, Deceivers, false Apostles, they began, they laid thy Foundation, who went out from the Apostles, and denyed the Cross of Christ and the Power of God, and the Apostle prophesied of their Increase; here thy visible Members began to gather, and they went out into the World, and the World received them, accor∣ding to Christ's Saying, out of the Light, out of the Power, out of the Faith, out of the Life that the holy men of God were in, being ravened from the Spirit, whored from the Life, they went out in an outward Dress, had a Shew, a Form of Godliness; the Nations received the Cup, and Kings of the Earth, the Nobles and the mighty men thou boasts of, they drank of thy Cup, and were inflamed with Adultery after thee; and then the Nations over which the Whoredoms spread, Kindreds, Dominions, Tongues, Nations and Peoples became Fornicators, all became as a Sea, rolling, tossing, foming, raging, casting up Mire and Dirt, unstable, reel∣ing; then the Kings, the great men, thy Nobles, who were Rulers over the People, being drunk with the Nations Cup of Fornication, they sprang up as a great Beast with so many Heads and Horns, and their Teeth became as Lyons, their Feet as Bears, and then thou begannest to ride in the Nations, and to sit as a Queen: then thou associatedst they drun∣ken Fornicators together; then thou began to usurp Authority, and sitedt as Judge over the Heritage of God, and of the Saints, of the Apostles, and of them that kept the Testimony of Jesus; then thou beganedst to kill and destroy, and suck the Blood of the Saints, and to be drunk with it; and then thy Kings, whom thou callest Converts and Christians, having drunk∣ken thy Cup, they formed Laws, and made Laws to guard thy Whore∣doms, and Adulteries, and Idolatries; then thy became they Executio∣ners; and what thou saidst was good, the Beast maintained, and what thou condemnedst by thy Councils for Heresie, they became Executioners of; then came in compelling to worship by the Beast that rose out of the Sea; and then thou cryedst Hereticks, and condemnedst the just; and then thou got'st a Cover; thou wouldst not kill, but the Beast must upon whom thou ridest; then if there were any that kept their Virginity, and the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; which was in the Apostles Dayes, then thou condemnedst them for Hereticks; then the Beast compelled, and caused to worship; but if they would not bow to his Image, then thy Merchants cry up, they despise Governours and Rulers, when thy Doctrine and thy Lawes are corrupt; then the Beast must kill; then he blasphemes the God of Heaven and his Tabernacle; and then thou sayedst, thou killest none, but the Beast must (upon which thou rides) and shall have a whole Council to confirm it to be lawful; and now thou call'st thy self the Catho∣lick and Apostolical Church, and thy Seat, the Apostolical Chair, and the Ru∣lers
and Leaders, Defenders of the Faith: Nay, we find thee contrary to the primitive Church, and thy Seat and Chair is raised up since, and thy Bed of Whoredoms made since, and the Kings and Rulers in thy Domini∣ons are become Defenders of thy Idolatries and VVhoredoms, and are in∣deed the Beast that makes VVar with the Saints, and hath prevailed, and Truth overcome; but he is risen who is able to make VVar with the Beast, and to take the VVhore, and to burn her Flesh with fire, for he is able to judge her; and the Beast's VVeapons and thine are carnal, but the Lamb's and the Saints are spiritual; and so thy Doctrine and Practice is quite ano∣ther thing, patched Stuff, some brought in from the first Priesthood, some borrowed from the Jews, as thy Altars, thy Vestiments (that thy idola∣trous Merchants wear, when they celebrate thy great Idol, the Mass) and the rest borrowed fragments from the Heathen, and the rest invented in the Night of Darkness; and all that you have is invented Trumpery, as bad as the Heathen; all your Crosses, Altars, Crucifixes, your Cells, your Lent, your Fasts, your Feasts, your Hair-cloth, your Images, Pictures, your Reliques of dead mens Bones, your Tythes, your Offerings, Oblati∣ons, Obventions, your Tapers, Beads, your holy VVater, your bapti∣zing of Infants, your Purgatory, your praying for the Dead, your visiting of old VValls and old Tombs, and rotten Sepulchres, your Pilgri∣mages, your Inquisition; all this is come up since the Apostles Dayes, and thy consecrated Bread and Wine, which thou callest the Body and Blood of Christ, about which Idol thou (and all that have drunken the Cup of For∣nication) and the Beast hath slain Thousands of men in your Blood-thirsty Cruelty; and all your Works you call meretorious, they are all dead, and will be sentenced by the Lamb (who is risen) to be self-Righteousness; and so we have found out your visible Church had no being, but since the Apo∣stacy, since the Apostles Dayes; and you are erred both in Doctrine and Practice; and all your Ordination of your Ministers, your Schools and Colledges are all in the Will of man, all this is in the Fall, in the Trans∣gression, and under the Curse. Obj. Some of the Protestants or reformed Churches (so called) may say, We like this well, that you declare against Popery, we agree with you in that; but we have renounced the Whore's Cup, and have denyed all the Powers of the Beast long since. Answ. Although many of you Priests have denyed your Mother, because some Kings and Rulers, or Dukes and Magistrates have cast off the Yoak, and they protect you, and give you Maintenance, yet we cannot but re∣member you of your Genealogy and Descent, and your Doctrine and Pra∣ctice shall prove it, and make it manifest, and that you take Part with the Beast, and worship his Image, shall be evidenced more and more, even be∣fore this Generation pass away; are not you a Stem sprung from the same Root? do not the Fruits you bring forth evidence it, and Pracrice demon∣strate it? If you grant that Rome is apostatized from the Faith which the Apostles were in, and their Practice (you must not deny your Fathers) who made the Bishops, and ordained them; did not the Pope, who ordained you Ministers of Priests; did not the Bishops, who set up your Mass-house with all the Pictures and Crosses in and upon them, which you call your Church? who established Tythes, Offerings, Oblations, Easter-Reckon∣ings, Midsummer-Dues? did not the Pope first, and them that were sub∣ject
to his Power? who invented Schools and Colledges to fit you for the Ministry, and qualifie you for the Ministry, as you say? is not this set up in and since the Apostacy began, your set Wages, your baptizing of In∣fants, your consecrated Bills, which the Pope hallowed, or his Emissaries? do not you preach up the Letter for the VVord, and the Letter for the Go∣spel? and are not you calling your Bread and Wine a Sacrament? which Word you have received from Rome, your Pulpits and your Hour-Glasses, your Cushions, your black Robes and long Robes, false Prophet like, your funeral for the Dead, like the Popes Exequies for the Dead, your devour∣ing Widdows Houses, and suing men at the Law, your haling them to Courts and Prisons, your taking away mens Goods by force, three-fold, yea, ten-fold that which you claim, and from them that you work not for; neither dare you say, this was the Apostles Practice, or any of the primitive Churches; if you say yea, all that know the Scripture, or the least of God in them, or to open their Understandings, they will see you nearly related to Rome, and to the Apostates, and Deceivers, and false Prophets of old, and that you are greatly inflamed with the Whore's Cup; and did not the holy men of God speak as they were moved by the holy Ghost and divine Inspiration, and as the Spirit of Truth revealed it self in them? and do not you all, Head and Tail, deny any such thing to be now? and further conclude, that it's a great Error to look for any such thing? then be convinced in your selves, you are Apostates, and apostatized frm that Faith, Hope and Spirit that was in the primitive Times, and now read old Authors, it may be twenty or thirty Books, before you can get an Hours Discourse patched up, to hold you dreaming till the Glass be run; and dare you be so impudent and confident as to say, that you are not Apo∣states? and are you not Followers of the Beast? and have you not his Mark? and bear you not his Image? do not you count that Disorder, which the Apostles and the Churches counted Order, If any Thing was revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his Peace? are not you apostatized from this Order, and cry; Take him away, and yet you would be called Apostlical? well, these things being true, and obvious enough to behold to any who know any thing of God; I need not say much more in this thing, but all wise men will come out from among you, and out of Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, which hath made you and your Root and Genealogy drunk with her Fornication; and this is my Call, to separate from her and you, that are in the Apostacy; and wait to know the Word which was in the Beginning, and the Gospel which was preached to Abraham, which en∣dures forever, whose joyful Sound is come forth in Power and great Glo∣ry, which will shake the foundation of your great City, even Mystery Ba∣bylon, and not leave one Stone upon another, which shall not be thrown down; and then the holy men of God shall rejoyce, and the Saints of the most high shall sing, they that have been as Sheep for the Slaughter, shall reign over the Earth, and shall say, The Lord God Omnipotent reigns, and let us rejoyce and be glad, and he hath taken to himself great Power, and is coming to gather his Lambs out of your Mouthes, and to feed in a Pasture you never saw, which was manifest to the Saints in Light, before you Apostates sprang, and shall be again, when you and all your dark muddy Traditions and Inventions are gone down into the Pit, where there is no Remembrance. Object. But it may be the pure Reformed Church of Scotland (as it hath
been called) and the old Episcopal and Prelatical Priests of England, who have borrowed their Images to set up here, will be ready to say, We have denyed the Whore, and the Beast, and the Apostacy, and we have pure Reformati∣on; we have denyed Bishops, which were made by the Apostate, the Pope, and now we have setled all things according to the primitive Church. Answ. There never did spring up any Deceit, since the Apostles or before, but it called it self by the best Name; as for the Priests of Scotland, their Doctrine and Practice is made manifest, and their Reformation by their Principles, which I refer the Reader to, intituled, The Principles of the Priests of Scotland, their Reformation, and discipline is nearly related to the Spanish Inquisition; for their Doctrine, they say, Grace is not free, and Faith is not without Sin, and the Letter is the word of God, and that they are Cursed that say, there is Light within which will lead up to God; and as one said, although it meant Christ; and if any will not submit to their words, and conform to their Practice and Traditions, then they call a Counsel together, as their fore-fathers at Trent, and pronounce him a Heretick, and within these few Years Banished them, or else took their whole substance outward from them; and if any out of Consci∣ence could not submit unto their Invented Tradition, then if he ever came to have any converse with them again, he must have a Pennance before he could get an Indulgence from them, like the Pope; and furthermore, if any deny them, because they are out of the Doctrine of Christ, and are contrary to the Scripture, then, as I said, they Excommunicate them, and charge all People neither to buy nor sell, nor eat nor drink with them, nor work for them; and so the Beasts Power is exercised, compelling to come to their Mass-houses; and as for the denying the Bishops, then you have denyed your Fathers that begat you, and Ordained you, then you have no Ordination; but may be, you have Cryed so for setling your Gospel, you have got a Committee to ordain you, or one Company to lay Hands on another; but when receive ye the holy Ghost? Oh that is an error in your Church, but are not you got into the old Cathedrals (so called) and into the Steeple-houses, and the old Mass-houses, and where you had, may be 20 Pounds, or Forty in the Year, now you have gotten a Hundred, it may be two; heres Reformation indeed; well, we must needs remember you of your race and Stock, the Apostates since the Apo∣stles dayes, and the former Practices which is found among the old Prote∣stants and Papists, is among you, and you are still Drunk with the whore's Cup, and are crying for Cain's Weapons to guard you; well, I say, you are part of the Dragon's Tail, that draws to the Earth, and to the Pit, which will be the end of all Idolaters and Apostates, except they come to Repent. And as for the Independants Churches, so called, you are a Branch of the same Root, you have declared against the Bishops and court Prelates, and said, they were in error, and many of you declared against them for Pluralists, because they had too great Benefits, and declared against Ty∣thes, as to be Anti-christian, and whoso received Tythes, denyed Christ come in the Flesh, who are wheeled about, and now take them your selves, and Creep into the old Mass-houses, and have taken that up which you condemned in others, and so have made your former Testimony void, and all sober People see your Hypocrisie and Deceit, who have gathered a company together, which you call Select People, or Members of your
Church, and you exclude the rest, who have as good right to your Ordi∣nance, as you, for they profess Christ in Words as you do; And yet you will receive their means, whom you judge not capable of your Ordinance; and your Church will no more maintain you, then it would maintain them that you have denyed in Words, if you had not the Beasts Power to compel, your Vineyard would Starve you, your Gospel and your Preaching is one with the former, and the People is the same in Nature they were before; you have got Bishops Lands, Augmentations and Stipends more large then your fore-fathers had, for the most part, and sue Men at the Law, and hale them before Judgments Seats, and take away their Goods, whom you loook upon to be in error; yet this stands as good with you as any Article of your Faith, to force, to compel, to Sue, to hale into Prison, to take away their Goods, and get a Scripture for your Cover, and say, He that Preacheth the Gospel must live of the Gospel, and them that neither hear you, nor receive you, neither believe your Gospel; yet you conclude, it's lawful to take their Goods; and if you cannot get them, hale the party into Prison; are not you drinking still the Whore's cup? and do not you follow the Beast? and do not you own that Law to be Just, that compels People to pay Money to you, who deny your Ministry, and are none of your Sheep? and are not your Ordinances and Worship Imitated Things from the Scripture, the Saints words, and yet out of their Life and Practice, are not you in the Apostacy? have you not your Profession, and Confession of Faith to make year after year, as the Magistrate changes? doth not this Evidence, that you are Unstable, and are yet in the Waters, upon which the whore Sits, and situated in Babylon, the Mother of Har∣lots, who yet makes you Drunk, and that makes all the Filth and Vomit appear in the Earth, that Stains the Earth, and your Idols corrupt the Earth; & all Separates under what Name soever, who have not denyed the Ground of Apostacy, but are in the Apostacy, for all Sects since the Apo∣stles dayes, have taken up some part and left another, since the Life hath been lost, and the Power lost, all hath been in the Idolatry; and the Prote∣stants who have denyed the Papists, yet they have not denyed them in the Ground of their worship, but have retained some part, and have kept some part of their worship; and all Sects sprung out of the Protestants, in them all there is some part remaining; for they have not denyed the Ground of the worship set up in the Apostacy, the Whore's cup is Drunk of, and the Dragon hath Power, which sought to destroy the man-Child, and made war with the Remnant of the Seed of the Woman, who was Clothed with the Sun; you all stick yet in Babylon, and the best of you all, are but yet in the Suburbs thereof. For since the Apostles dayes their Foundation hath been either Tradi∣tions, Imitations, Inventions of their own, or Borrowed things from the Jews in the first Covenant, or at the best, the Letter hath been the ground of their Faith and their Foundation, which they have twined and transla∣ted this way and that, according to the wit and Reason of every particular Sect and Opinion, and according to the understanding of their private Spirits; now all these buildings, and Towers that mn have builded up in the Apostacy, they would fasten upon the writings of the holy men of God, and so have raised an Imagination of their own, and so would have the Scripture prove what they say; and the writings of the Apostles, the all call the Gospel; and the word of Faith, and the Light of the Gospel,
and the Foundation and the Tryer of Spirits, and the Touch-stone and say, it's the Foundation of their Faith and Religion; and so are all in the distraction, one Envying another, and Persecuting one another about the words of Truth, spoken from the Spirit of Truth, which cannot be un∣derstood again but by the same Spirit; and so all them that have not the Spirit of Truth, are in the Apostacy: And all Sects, Judgments and Opinions that have risen up since the Apostacy from the Faith, that was once delivered to the Saints, when the woman Travailed and brought the man-Child, which after, because of the Dragon's Power, fled into the VVilderness, and her Child caught up unto God, all the Faith and wor∣ship, that since is sprung up, since the VVhore hath sitten as a Queen in Majesty, is all denyed, the Ground of their Worship, Laws, Traditions, Inventions, and all their invented Practices, and Forms, and Images, and Likenesses are denyed and disowned, as to be the Dress and Attire of the Whore, which hath allured People through her enticing pretences, and shews of Holiness, when indeed all is but spiritual Adultery, and this must be all turned under again, the Whore's flesh Burned, and her Attire plucked off, and her Nakedness appear, and her shame to them that have committed Fornication with her, and they shall be ashamed of themselves, and of her, and abhor themselves, and abhor her, and Destroyed shall she be; and the Lamb's Wife shall be beautified, and come out of the secret Place, into open View, out of the Solitary Wilderness, into the beautiful place that the Lord will bring her into, and the time, times, and half time is out, the thousand two hundred and threescore Dayes are at an End; and he bears witness of it, who saw her fly away upon Eagles Wings into the secret place, which was prepared for her, for these Dayes and Times appointed: and I say, he that knows the Counsel, of the most High (in this matter) can account the time, times, and a half, and the Dayes; and what shall be after the dayes be expired, which is at an end; blessed is he that sees, believes, and Understands, he shall see that which yet hath not appeared, neither can it be believed by the most, though it were declared; but yet a little while and the Earth grows ripe, and an Ear will be opened in many who cannot yet hear, and for a little while in this I shall be silent, and Treasure up that which the Spirit hath revealed, till the time be fully accomplished, which God hath determined, and then his Glory shall be revealed, and all the former things which have lived since the man of Sin hath been Exalted, shall all dye; and an utter Consumption shall be of all the changeable Laws made since the Apostacy, and the many changeable Dresses of the Whore, and Attires in which she hath appeared, and Imagi∣nary worships into which all have run since they were Apostatized from the Faith; all this shall be disannulled, and come to an End, and be Blasted forever, the Spirit of the Lord saith, Amen. How the Woman that was clothed with the Sun, and had the Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head, which did flee into the Wilderness, comes out again, af∣ter the great Whore is judged, and her Child that was caught up unto God, comes to appear again. NOW after the time, times and half a time, after the thousand two hundred and threescore Dayes, she returns, after the Whore is judg∣ed,
and the great City Babylon is fallen, which hath made the Nations drunk, and brought forth Children in Fornication, who had drunk the Blood of the Saints in the Apostacy, after the Whore was judged, and the Voice was heard in Heaven of much People, that sang Halelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, who witnessed to the Righteousness of God's Judgment: And a Voice came out of the Throne, saying, praise our God all his Servants, and ye that fear him both small and great, Rev. 19.5, 6. And I heard as it were the Voice of many Waters, and as a great Multitude, and as the Voice of a mighty Thunder, saying, Halelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth; the Whore is now judged, the Mother of Harlots condemned with all her In∣chantments and Sorceries. Now the Lamb's Wife appears, who is the Mother of the man-child which was caught up unto God, she that was cloathed with the Sun, with the glorious everlasting caelestial Light, she is both the Mother and the Wife; he that hath an Ear, let him hear; Now Jerusalem, that is from above (spiritually so called) who was the Mother of all the Saints before the Apostacy, she appears again, and comes to be the Wife of the Lamb, and the City of the Saints, and the Mother of them that are born from a∣bove; this shall be and is made manifest to some; but a numberless Num∣ber shall see it, and the Day hastens greatly, and she is appearing again, and her solitary Garments shall be put off; and as she was beautifull (before the VVhore made the Nations drunk) clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon under her Feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars upon her Head (and though she became Child-less, and also as a VViddow, and the Remnant of her Seed slain and destroyed) so shall she appear again in Glory and Beau∣ty as before, and shall be made ready, yea, mine Eye hath seen it; she is making her self ready, as a Bride for her Husband, and unto her is grant∣ed, that she shall be arrayed in fine Linnen, clean and white, even arrayed in the Righteousness of the Saints, which is not self-Righteousness, the Gar∣ments of the Harlot and her Lovers; but in the Righteousness of Christ, the Lamb, her Husband and Child also, and she shall now bring forth ma∣ny more Children, though her Seed hath been slain, yet a numberless Number shall appear, and ten Thousand Thousand shall be brought forth by her, and glory in her, and reverence her, and rejoyce in her forever, and they shall be all clad in the same Robe which the Husband, the Lamb is clothed withal, and the same, the Lamb's VVife, this VVoman is l∣thed withall, and the same shall all the Children by clothed withal, the fine Linnen, the Righteousness of the Lamb, which was dead and slain since the Foundation of the World, but now alive, and lives for evermore; and here a heavenly Family appears now after the Apostacy, and this shall be seen by all that have an Eye, that can see through and beyond the Smoke of the Pit; that hath darkened the Air, while the Beast and Dragon have had Power; but now hath her Child appeared again, the man-child hath appeared again; and he that was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, saw whi∣ther he was taken up to the Throne of God, Rev. 12.5. and on the same Lord's Day he saw him after the Woman was fled, and the Remnant of her Seed was made War with, and slain in the Earth, where the Dragon had Power: He that was in the Spirit saw him alive again after he was caught up; so he that is in the Spirit now on the Lord's Day, sees the same man-child, who was brought forth by the Woman, who was to rule the Nat∣ons, but was caught up to the Throne of God, before he came to rule
and then the Dragon ruled, the Beasts and false Prophet, the Whore, the Mother of Harlots, sate as a Queen, and the Woman, the Mother of the Heir, fled into an obscure and a retired Place, and was hid, times and dayes (as I said before) but as she appeared again in Beauty, so the man child, the Heir, he appears also in Glory, Majesty and Power, and John saw him, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sate upon him was called faithful and true, and he doth judge and make War in Righteousness, his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, on his Head were many Crowns, and he had a Name written that none knew but himself, and he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called, the VVord of God. And now the Woman's Seed is increased again, after the Dragon and the Beast's War, and now they become an Army, and follow the Lamb their Leader, who is anointed with Honour, Glory, Majesty and Renown, Strength, Power▪ Wisdom, Joy and Gladness above all his Fellows, yet his Followers are anointed too, and the Seed of the Woman, the Inhabi∣tants of the City of the great King, they are clothed with the same Gar∣ment and Armour, and ride on in Power, Strength and Majesty after him, and they are clothed, and shall be with the Garment of their Mother, and the Garment of their Captain, their Head; and as he rode on in Innocen∣cy, so they ride on after him; and the Woman was in Heaven that tra∣vailed, and the Child was born there, though he was to rule the Nations of the Earth; and so whoso are of this Woman's Seed, who are born in the City of the great King, Jerusalem, unto which the Hebrews were come, Heb. 12.22. before the Apostacy, & before the Woman fled, so now the same City comes to be seen again, and the Children are born of their Mother, the Lamb's Wife, who is joyned to him, and is to be so forever in the ever∣lasting Covenant; so they being heavenly Children, redeemed from the Earth, from under the Dragon's Power, they follow the Lamb, the Word, God's Power, Rev. 19.14. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him, upon white Horses, clothed in fine Linnen white and clean, and out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, and with it he shall smite the Nations: And now comes he to rule them with a Rod of Iron; he was brought forth long be∣fore, but was caught up to God again, and the Dragon, Beast and Whore and false Prophet ruled the Nations, and killed the Saints; but now he ap∣pears again after the Apostacy, and a great Host with him, and the Wo∣man also and her Children are many, and they all follow the first born; and now comes the Wo to the Dragon and Whore, Beast and false Pro∣phets, and unclean Spirits, and on them that worship Devils; and now shall he tread the VVine-press of the VVrath of God Almighty; and he hath on his Vesture and on his Thigh written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And now appears an Anel standing in the Sun (which the VVoman was clothed with) and he cryed with a loud Voice, saying to all the Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, come, and gather to the Supper of the great Day of God; and now must the Flesh of the Kings, and Captains, and Nobles, and Flesh of migh∣ty men, who had drunk the Whores Cup, now must drink of the Wine of God's Wrath: And the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make VVar against him that sate on the white Horse and his Army; and the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, that wrought Miracles before him, and the remnant were slan that took Part with the Beast, by him that sate upon the horse, and his Army, whose Sword proceeded out of h Mouth, and all the Fowls were filled with their Flesh; the Whore is burnt be∣fore,
the Beast, the false Prophet and his Army now slain, and their Flesh eaten by the Fowls of Heaven, and now the Blood comes forth to the Horse Bridles. And now the Angel descends, having the Key of the bottomless Pit, from whence the old Dragon, the Serpent, the red Dragon, the Devil came; there is his Beginning, there was he brought forth, and there he grew up (he that reads, let him understand) out of the bottomless Pit; for the Na∣tions were never deceived till he appeared, and he appeared, as I have said before, after the Heaven and the Earth was made, and all things therein (I say, after) he was not before, he deceived Eve in the Garden, now he is grown old, and so is truly called, the old Dragon, grown into a Body of Deceit; well, now must he be taken, and bound, and cast into the bottomless Pit, from whence he came, that he deceive the Nations no more, Rev. 20.1, 2. and all this War is in the bringing out of the Aposta∣cy, and in Order to the Lamb and the Saints everlasting Reign in Heaven, and over the Earth forever. This I have seen, and my Heart rejoyceth, and my Mouth shall praise the Lord; and the Woman (I say) is appearing, and she is cloathed with beautiful Garments, and the holy Child, the Man child, hath appeared, and is manifest again among the Saints, and in them; and the Lamb which hath been slain since the World began, is alive, and behold he lives for e∣vermore; and now many are his Followers, and an innumerable Compa∣ny shall ride on after him, who is King of Kings; and now is God fulfil∣ling that which John saw in the Lord's Day, which should come to pass; the Work is begun, he hath appeared, out of whose Mouth proceeds the two-edged Sword, which shall hew down all the Dragon's Army, the Beast and his Followers; and though the Cry be yet among many, who shall make war with the Beast? and who shall speak against his Prophets? Yet a lit∣tle while, and Fear shall come, and their Vaunts and Boasts shall be turned into Doubting, and dreadful Fear on every Side; for Jacob shall be as a Flame, and Esau and all his Race shall be as Stubble; he that reads, let him understand the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, and the whole Work of the Lord, which shall shortly come to pass. The Manifestation of God's Glory shall be as great after the Apostacy as ever it was in any Age before the Rise of Anti-christ, and the Ministra∣tion (into which them that follow the Lamb shall be brought) shall be as spiritual, holy, caelestial and divine as ever was before; for the End of all your outward visible Appearances shall come, which the Whore hath deck∣ed her self with, and Life it shall be known in the Body, and God enjoyed, worshipped, glorified and honoured in that which shall never alter, but a∣bides forever; and this shall be and is the last Ministration that ever shall appear among the Sons of men. We who are come out of the Apostacy, know what was before, and see what shall be after, the everlasting Gospel of the Son of God, shall be Preached again to them that dwell on the Earth, the same that was preached to Abraham, before either old or new Testament was written; the later all Sects since the Apostacy call the Gospel, and so greatly manifest their Ignorance, for that were to make two Gospels, to call the Scriptures the Gospel, or that which is written, and they who so err in their Judgments, are yet among the Smoke of the Pit, and are yet under Anti-christ's reign, and are ignorant of him who is the saving health of the Nations; And he
living, Infallible, true, lasting, and everlasting Spirit of the Father shall be poured out again, and many now witness it, and a numberless number shall witness it, and the Time hastens; And the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Sion, and many who are redeemed from the Earth, and from among men, which shall be the first Fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, and they shall sit with him, and shall Reign with him, and have Power over Sin, Temptation, and the Devil, Hell and the Lake, and this is to come to pass, and is coming to pass, and hastens greatly; and the Voice out of Heaven shall be heard, as the Voice of many Waters, and the Voice of Harpers harping with their Harps, and the new song shall be sung, the pure Song of the Lamb shall be sung by all, who are redeemed from the Earth in every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People, who have heard, believed and received the joyful Sound of the everlasting Gospel again, and now they shall fear God, and Glorifie him, and Honour him, even they who have feared the Beast, and glorified him in the Apostacy, they shall deny his Power, and own the Lamb's Power, and Worship him that sits upon the Throne of Righteousness, who lives forever and ever, and is eternal Life it self; the worship shall be now in Spirit and Truth, where the Dragon cannot come, neither the Beast, Harlot, false Prophet, nor Anti-christ, nor none of his followers can come, and herein the Mi∣nistration shall be more Glorious, after the Apostacy then it was before; the Worship stood before in many outward Visible things, and Represen∣tations, and outward Performances, and Ordinances, and I manifestly say, the Dragon, Beast, Whore, and false Prophets and Apostates took up these things, and Nations and Kindreds, and Tongues, and People who drunk of the Whore's cup, and all that were gone from their Maker their Husband, they have been and are acting and performing, Imitating, like Jannes and Jambres; but since the dayes of the Apostles, they cor∣rupted these things, and have made Idols of them, and Painted themselves with them, and have got the Sheeps Cloathing: Therefore now will the Lord appear and manifest his Power, Life and Glory in a way more invisible and pure, then before, and more divine, Caelestial and Glorious, where never an Hypocrite shall tread in the Path; and so the restoration is a Mystery that shall be after the Apostacy, the Glory is not to appear in external things, for there the Mother of Harlots hath hid her self long, which hath made all Nations Drunk; but the Cloathing of the Lamb's wife and of the Bride, shall be another thing then the attire of the Harlot, for the Spouse of the Lamb shall be arrayed, in the same attire, that the Lamb is cloathed withall, and with the same Vestment, and the Taber∣nacle of God is to be with men, and he shall dwell in them, even the Lord that Spirit, and shall walk in them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and in them, and Sorrow shall be done away, and Tears wiped away, and that done away which was the cause of Sorrow, Rev. 21.3. and 4. and there shall be no more Death, nor crying, nor any more Pain, for the former things are passed away, to wit, Death, which entred in by Sin, it shall be de∣stroyed, and the Earth out of which the second Beast arose, and the Sea, out of which the first Beast did arise, and upon which the Whore sate, and Hell, and the Lake which was prepared, and raised up, when man was degenerated from the Lord, they shall be Destroyed, and he also which hath the Power of Death, which is the Devil, he shall be
destroyed and his Works, (the cause of scorn) and then they shall see the Lord face to face, even them that have but seen him darkly, as in a Glass, or as in a Cloud, they shall see his pure living countenance, which giveth Life, and Death, and Hell shall be cast in the Lake of Fire, and whosoever is not found written in the Lamb's Book of Life must be cast into the Fire. Then the new Heaven and Earth shall be seen, and the heaven∣ly City, which shall come down from God out of Heaven; which no mor∣tal Eye shall behold, neither shall be able to behold, which hath twelve Foundations, and twelve Gates, and the Glory of God shall be upon her, and her Light shall be as a Stone most precious, and as clear as Crystal, yea all things visible are too short and not to be compared to it; for in it there need neither Sun nor Moon to shine in it, for the glory of the Lord shall lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof, and all who have been par∣takers of this Glorious Ministration, shall walk in the Light of the Lamb; there shall be no Night, nor the least appearance of a Cloud or Darkness, but transparent Brightness, and Glory which shall be permanent, durable and everlasting; for the Lord God and the Lamb is the Temple of the City in which the Saints shall Worship him that sits upon the Throne for ever∣more, and shall give unto him Glory, and Honour, and Dominion, and eternal Praises for evermore, who alone is worthy, who lives forever in eternal Glory, and everlasting Light and Brightness for evermore. And his Face shall be seen, in whom all Figures, Representations and Shadows end in, and the pure River of Water of Life, which is as clear as Crystal, which proceeds out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; and all who have kept the Word of his Patience shall drink thereof, and be nourished up in Immortality and Life everlasting for∣ever; and the Tree of Life, that stands in the Paradise of God, them that have overcome shall eat thereof, and live forever; and the Na∣tions, Kindreds, Tongues, People and Regions, who have heard, be∣lieved and received the everlasting Gospel, shall know his Saving Health; and the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be seen, and his Servants shall serve him, who is their Lord and King, who lives forever; and they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads, and the Lord God shall give them Light, and shall be un∣to them an everlasting Light, and they shall reign with him forever and evermore, over the Whore, Beast, false Prophet, Antichrists, Deceivers, Seducers, the Pit, Death, Hell and the Grave, and shall triumph in his Strength over all the Powers of Darkness, and sing Praises to him that abides forever; these things are true and faithful, and shall be fulfilled, and the time is at Hand; blessed are they that wait and watch, that they may discern the Signs of the times, and the coming of the Bridegroom, that they may enter into the Chamber of est, and into the Palace of eternal Life, into the City of the gre King, to sit with him, and eat with him, and rejoyce with him in the Glory Eternal, which was before the World began, and shall be when it shall be no more; the End hastens; he is blessed that is come and coming to the End of It; for that which is immutable and eternally glorious shall appear; the Lord hasten it, saith my Spirit, Amen. F. H.
DARKNESS AND IGNORANCE EXPELLED BY THE Light shining forth, AND THE Appearance of the Day, In Answer to a Book called, INNOCENTS NO SAINTS. Publish'd by one Edward Dodd, wherein he hath labour'd to prove Tythes lawful, and Tything Priests and Hirelings to be the true Mi∣nisters of the Word, and the Mass-house the Church, and calls Idolatry Civility, and Heathenish Complements Courtisie, and hath per∣verted many Scriptures. His Deceit laid open, his Vindication made void, and his Argument con∣founded, and Truth laid open in all these Particulars, for the sake of the upright in Heart, who rejoyce in Truth's Prosperity. By one of the Lamb's Followers, who makes War against the Head of the Dragon, and against the Rear of the Beast. F. H. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no Man buyeth her Merchandize any more, Rev. 18.11. And cryed, when they saw the Smoak of her Burning, saying, what City is like unto this City! Rev. 18.18.
DARKNESS AND IGNORANCE EXPELLED THE man-Child which was caught up unto the Throne of God, when the red Dragon sought to devour and Destroy him, hath appeared again in Power and great Glory, after the long and cruel Tyranny of the Dragon, wherein she hath killed the Saints, and hath prevailed against them; and hath made great War, Spoil and Havock of the Remnant of the Womans Seed, this 13. or 14. hundred Years, and hath compelled all both small and great (whose Names have not been written in the Lamb's book of Life) to Worship him, and the Beast, unto whom he hath given great Authority to Kill, and to Destroy whosoever wor∣shipped the God of Heaven, that so they might be worn out, and all the Earth might Worship him, and fear him, and extol him, and his Autho∣rity. Now the time, times, and half being near an end, that John saw the Woman should be retired in the Wilderness, she appearing again in her beautifull Garments, and her heir and her Seed appearing again in after the long Night of Darkness. Now when the Lord in this the day of his Power is appearing again, and the man-Child that is to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. Now the Dragon, Beast, VVhore, and false Prophet, and all the Mystery of Iniquity, Gog and Magog, and all the Apostates, Deceivers, and Mer∣chants of Babylon that have traded upon the waters, upon which the whore sits, they are all up in Arms, every one with his weapons, which he hath formed in the bottomless Pit, is now set in array against the Lamb who is risen; the Priests, Hirelings, and Babylon's Merchants, who have got so great gain by Sea, they have given the first on-set in the Front, of the black Army of the Dragon, and this six or seven Years have made a great Noise, and have raised so much Smoke out of the Pit, that they have darkned the Ayr, and made it cloudy, and have filled the Earth with a great Noise, that many have admired what the Issue would be, and what the event might prove, and that many who have waited in Patience, have seen the Lamb appear, and have seen his rising in Majesty, and hath prevailed: And many of them who have the first on-set grow weary, seeing the Battel grows too hard against them, and the Lamb and his followers prevail. And now comes on the Tail of the Dragon as the reserve, and the rear of the Beast, among whom Edward Dod appears, and he thinks to prevail, and get himself a Name, and to do exploits; but alas! all his
weapons are but the old broken Bows, and the Spears that are strewed up and down the Field of confusion, which we have run over and over, and Trample upon, and esteem them no more then rotten Wood: He hath raked up those things which have been answered over and over, and that which the rest of the Dragon's army hath vomited up before, in the Beginning, he hath licked up, and now Vomits it out again, and casts out Floods of Poysoned Words, false Accusations, and arrogant Reproa∣ches, and proud, Disdainful, Speeches, as though his Tongue were his own: And like one of Ishmaels Brood, Scorning and Deriding at Innocen∣cy, and saith, he hath laid down some of our Tenets, and named them, and shamed them. All sober People who know any thing of God, will see thou hast shamed thy self, and not us, in uttering forth thy Folly: And thy Title of thy Book demonstrates what is within it, the Beginning is Scorn and Derision, the end is Folly and Madness, and many ignorant words uttered forth from a corrupt Heart and unbridled Tongue, which is bent to do Mischief, and to speak falshood; but lest thou shouldst Glory in the old rotten broken Weapons which thou hast taken up, which were formed by thy Leaders, and not by thee, which we have answered again and again, and have over-run them as Stubble; which answers have cleared the Truth to all sober People, that they see all your Weapons are but Carnall, and not spiritual, and they have no might in them at all to stand against the Truth, nor them who are made free by it, whose weapons are spiritual and mighty through God, to beat down strong Holds of Dark∣ness, and the Towers of ignorance. Many are beat down already, and the Lamb is risen, and upon the white Horse, and a numberless number is following him, who rides on after him, who shall subdue the Nations to himself, and break the Yoak of the Ungodly, and deliver the Oppressed, and no Weapon that is formed against him shall Prosper: I say, lest thou shouldst boast, I shall return these Lines in answer to thy Book. Thy Book thou Titlest, A pair of Spectacles for a dark-sighted Quaker. I say, thy Spectacles are more like to make ones sight dimmer, then through them to be made to see, they are such wooden Ones; but the Quakers see before thee, and beyond thee, and comprehend thee, and have received Eye-salve, whereby their Eyes are opened to see thy Deceit, & the deceit of the Treacherous Generation, with whom thou art joyned, and thy Rejoynder and Vindication of Samuel Smith, whom thou calls Minister of the Word at Cressage, in the County of Salop; thy Vindication of him, and thy pleading for him, will not bring much Honour to neither him nor thee; and though thou and he both joyn hand in hand in deceit, yet you shall not go Unpunished. Thou tels the Reader Of wandering Planets who have left their Station▪ who have stepped upon the Stage in the County of Salop, who are come forth in this Apostatizing time. All who have a good understanding, may clearly see not only in the County of Salop, but also in every Corner of the Land, many wandering Stars that have no habitation in the Firmament of God's Power, but are Tossed up and down, and are as waters, Unstable, Tossed to and fro with every wind; and the change of one Magistrate, or head Governour, will make them all change their form; and as thou callst it, Metamorphize them into another shape, witness the many publique Teachers, and Parish-masters,
and Tything Priests in the dayes of Edward the sixth, Henry the 8. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth's dayes, and now of late in the Bishops dayes, when the Magistrates voted down the Bishops, all or most of the Priests denyed their Fathers, and their Institution; and though they ordained them Ministers, yet they still seek after their seats and Benefices, and there thy Reader may see the Metamorphosed chang∣lings, and the Apostates; and I do believe the County of Salp abounds with such like; and they have been on the Stage long, and have acted such a part in every Generation, as would please the present Authority, or Power, whether they were Papists or Protestants, Prelatical or what∣soever; but E. D. the Exit will come, and when the Day appears, the Beasts must go into their Dens again: and thou confessest you live in Apostatizing times; thou that art among the Apostates, and in the Aposta∣tizing Age and time, would accuse others: Nay, thou must hold thy Peace, and leave pleading for Apostates, and for the Fashions of the Heathen, which have got up since the dayes of the Apostacy, which the whole scope of thy Book is full of nothing else; and we cannot permit or allow them who are in the time of Apostacy, and who are one with the Apostates, which have wandered after the Beast, since the Dayes of the Apostles. I say, we cannot allow such as you to be Judges; for we are come out of the Apostacy, and to before the Apostates, and to before the wandering Stars, and thou hast mist it much that tells the Quakers are they. Edward, I tell thee, we are come to the everlasting Gospel again, and have received it, and it's the Power of God, which was to be, and is to be preached again to the Nations after the Apostacy. And as for the Book called, Malice stript and whipt, I have seen it; and he Spirit of thy Mr. Smith, whom thou callst Reverend, thou hast elevated him as high as the Pope; but E. D. what is the Reason thou reverencest him so much as thou dost to thy Reader? And in the tenth page thou saist, many Souls depend upon his Ministry; and thou, blessest God, for the wor of God you enjoy in that Congregation. Thou hast extoll'd him too highly, or else he hath wronged thee grievously; for thou saist, thou hast profited much by him: Thou mayest call to mind a certain time, when he preached (as you call it) out of the 13 of Luke, and when he spoke of the Parable of the mn that planted a Vineyard, and 3 Years looked for Fruit; and Sam. Smith, whom thou so adorest, said, he had sought for Fruit from your Congregation this 7 Years at Cressage, and had found none, he shall be an evidence for me against thee, that thy glorying of him is Vain; and it's manifest he is one the Lord sent his Prophet to declare against, who hath run, and the Lord never sent him, therefore he hath not profited you at Cressage at all; lean Souls are they like to be that depend on him.
In the first Observation, as thou callst it, thou hast extracted the Heads of Samuel Smiths Book into five particulars, which thou sayst, we are ashamed to Answer, or else know not what to say for our defences. I say unto thee, Boast not, when thou purst on thy Armour, but when putst it off; for the Victory may be doutful. THe first particular, That the Nationall Ministers do maintain the true worship of God, and the Doctrine of Christ according to the revealed will of God. Answ. So saying, and so doing were something; the true Worship of God is in Spirit and in Truth, which is not Lo here, and lo there, nor in outward Observations, but in Life, in Power, and in Truth: But to be brief, both the Doctrine and Practice of the National Ministry in general, is contrary to the Scripture, which thou callst the Word of God; (as for Instance) their sprinkling of Infants, their teaching Men to Swear, and calling it part of the Worship of God, which is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, who said, Swear not at all: Their singing David's Psalms put into Meeter, by Poets and Ballad-mongers, singing them in their inven∣ted Tunes, which pleaseth the carnal Mind; their studied discourses, which you call Sermons, Invented from the strength of natural wit, and not speaking as they are moved by the holy Ghost, which the Ministers of Christ in all Ages did. In these, and many other things which I could instance, they are out of the Doctrine of Christ; And in a word, your whole Worship differs both in matter and manner, from the Saints Worship in the Primitive Times. But seeing we have denyed the National Ministers divers Years ago, and have laid down our Grounds and Reasons to the World, wherein we have charged them, that their practice is contrary to the Scripture; unto which Grounds and Reasons, not one Parish-master in England hath yet Vindicated themselves these six years. And unto that Book called, The Grounds and Reasons why we deny the Priests, if the Reader be not satisfied concerning them, there he may see how they err, both in Doctrine, and Practice, contrary to Scriptures. To the second and third Particulars. That the present Government of the Nation is the Ordinance of God; and that the Ministers bringing Offenders before the Magistrate is not Persecution. As for the present Government of the Nation, the lawfulness thereof is not to Question by us; but many who are Governours, and should be Executors of the Law, have acted contrary to the Law, (being stirred  by the Priests, who bite with their Teeth, if one put not into their Mouths) and have caused the just to suffer by giving Judgment  the, in their wills, contrary to Law, or else according to those
which hath been made in the Will of man, in the Trangression, under which we have suffered for the Truth's sake, and therein have peace. And as for Ministers bringing Offenders before Magistrates, that is an usurped Authority, to make a Minister a Magistrate; but Edward, what was the offence? because a company of People came to Cressage, and de∣clared the Word of Truth in your Streets; and what if it had been in your Assembly; this was no offence in the Church of Corinth, where all might speak one by one, although it's become an Offence in your Mass-house at Cressage; but the Reader may judge in whose steps thou and thy Priest walkes; you have done the offence, and then accuseth others to the Magi∣strates as Offenders; Let shame cover your Lips, you Impudent men. Hath not Samuel Smith in his own Narration in his Book, said, that William Parrat Constable, and Humphry Daile Church-warden, according to the Ministers direction did pull down the Quakers Speaker, charging some to secure him? And others also of your own County, secured by the Instigation of the Priest, by his own Confession, in the fourth page of his Book. And here he and the rest of the Society at Cressage, who had a Hand in this hing, are manifest to be in the steps of the Pharisees, whom Christ cryed Wo against, which cast out of their Assemblies, and haled the Dis∣ciples before the Magistrates; and like the Envyous Jews that cryed, Help men of Israel, for these men turn the World up-side down; but you are worse then they. The Priest was the first fomenter of the Breach of the Peace, the Constable and Church-warden his Executioners, and yet thou tells of the Quakers being offenders. Now all sober People will see your Envy and Decit, and that you are in Cain's way, and by your false flattery and Deceit, would justifie the Magistrate for your own ends, and cause them to turn the Sword against the Guiltless, which should be against the Transgressor. And who was in the Transgression, the Reader may easily judge by that which is fore∣mentioned, and yet the Priest, and you of his Congregation, would make People believe that you did not Persecute: the Priest did give order to pull down the Speaker, the Constable and Church-warden they acted, and secured your own Neighbours as Prisoners, your own Congregation Swearing against them the breach of the Peace, and getting them shut up into Prison, and Sentence given against them, and yet thou wouldst have this called equal proceedings; but to that of God in all Consciences, I leave to be Judge in this thing. In the fourth and fifth Particular thou saist, We have charged to be Envious and Bitter, and Malicious against the most eminent Ministers of the Land. Them whom thou calls eminent Ministers, have charged us with many false things, and have written many false things against us, for which thou and they, in the Dreadful day of the Lord, shall give an account: Envy, Bitterness, and malice is put away from us, and we Envy no man, but speak the Truth in Soberness; and yet to say, a lyar is a Lyar; or a Deceiver, a Deceiver; or an hypocrite, an Hypocrite, when they are so, is neither Railing nor Malice: Christ, in whom no Guile was found, he said, They were a Generation of Vipers, and they were of their Father the Devil, who were in Envy, and went about to Kill him. And the Apostle was not envious when he said, O full of all Subtilty, thou child of the Devil, to
one who was doing the Work of the Devil; and many such workers we find, and many Venomous Spirits who shoot out poysoned Arrows, even bitter Words, and these we must reprove sharply. And those things which thou layest to our charge, take to thy self; for the ground of Iniquity is in thy Heart, from whence thou hast uttered forth all these Disdainful, Proud, and Scornful words, of which thou shalt be Convinced, and also reproved when the Lord searcheth thy Heart, when he brings Anguish and Perplexity upon thee, then shalt thou confess to his righteous Judgment; and so thy five Principles I have answered, which thou sayest, thou hast brought into thy Book to fill up the Blancks; they had better have been blancks still, then have spoiled so much Paper with thy Lying, Disdainful, Scribles, which are not worth the answering. In the third page thou saist, Thou wilt restate the reputation of the Ministry of England to be Minister of Christ; And for proof, thou hast brought Col. 1.7. and Rom. 15. Those words prove that Epaphras was a faithful Minister, and that Paul was a Minister of Christ to the Gentiles; but what hath this proved as to the National Priests? nothing at all; and if thou hast no better proof then this, to bring them into Reputation, instead thereof thou wilt bring defamation upon them; and when thou shouldst prove them Ministers, thou provest that Paul and Epaphras were Ministers; will not the least in the Truth see thee to be a busy-body? but Fools will be medling: Then thou art offended that we call them Priests for receiving of Tythes; I say it's the most proper; for none but Priests and Levites did receive Tythes, and how long since is it, since they generally called them∣selves the Tribe of Levi? For never Minister of the Gospel, nor of the word of Reconciliation, either received Tythes, or commanded that they should be payed, neither reproved any for not paying; but said, the Priest-hood was changed, and the Law was changed by which Tythes were due; but thou goest on, and makest a sound Argument as thou judgest, and sayst, Abraham paid Tythes to Melchisedeck before the Law; And thou askest, how he did give it, either by the Law of Nature, which is called the Law of Reason, or by the Light within, or by Revelation. Thou speakest thou knowst not what; where readest thou of the Law of Nature, called the Law of Reason, except it be in the devised Fables and Stories of the Priests? But what doth this prove? Gen. 14. Abraham gave the tenth part of the Spoil which he had taken from his Enemies, but Melchisedeck first brought forth Bread and Wine to Abraham and his com∣pany, and greeted Abraham and his company Kindly, and Blessed him, and Abraham freely gave unto him the tenth part, Melchisedeck desired none; But dost thou judge, that if Abraham had given him none, that he would have taken by Force the tenth part of the Spoil from him? Now what doth this prove for the Tything-Priests of this Nation? they must first do as Melchisedeck did, if they will have Melchisedeck for an Example, he Blessed Abraham, and brought forth Bread and Wine unto him and his Army; but which of the Priests have done so, which have received Tythes; which is not a gift of the People, but a forced thing from them? If this must be thy proof for Tythes by the gift of Abraham, then let the Priests cease forcing and taking them, till People be freely willing to give them, and then there will be no complaint: But let us Reason a little further of this matter; Would Melchisedeck have taken the tenth,
if Abraham had not given it him? Or when did Melchisedeck, or any be∣fore the Law take away the Peoples Oxen, Cows, Horses, Sheep, Pots and Pans, and Bedding upon which poor people lie, three-Fold, four-Fold, and sometimes ten-Fold; that they claim, or sue People to Courts, throw them into Prison till Death, as many Evidences we have in this Nation? either give us a Precept, or an Example before the Law, or under the Gospel, or else stop your Lying Mouths, and clamorous Tongues forever. Dost thou and the rest of the Priests think that we are so Ignorant, that we know not the Original of the Tythes in these Nations? a thing invented to fill the Popes Coffers, and the rest of the Clergies budgets, seven or eight hundred Years after the Ascension of Christ? All which Tythes and Oblations, and Obventions were invented in the Apo∣stacy, since the dayes of the Apostles, and since the Woman fled into the Wilderness: And the man-Child was caught up to God, when all the World wondred after the Beast, then they had their rise; And when the Kings and Rulers of these Nations did drink of the Whore's cup, then they made Laws to compel the Nations and the People therein, to pay the Whore's Merchants; and the Pope's Locusts, which he sent over the Nations, to fill the Earth with their Deceit, which Laws stand yet in force as though they were some Divine institution; but both the Tythes and the Law, by which they are compelled to be paid, we deny, and bear our witness against, as to be things which hold up the Devil's King∣dom; and the Gospel which the National Ministry holds up and preaches, hath no more ability in it to procure a Maintenance for them, then the Papists Gospel did for them: So, to be brief, the Priests have the Popes Wages forced by a compulsory Law, made and ratified by them who owned the Popes Supremacy. Furthermore we assert, that Tythes were never due by divine Ordina∣tion, but only to the Priests and Levites in the first Covenant, nor never were commanded to be paid but in the Land of Canaan; and whoso upholds the Ordinances of the first Priest-hood, denyes the Ordinances of the second: So this Commandment to pay Tythes now to them, who are neither of Aaron's nor Levi's Tribe, and by us who are not in Canaan temporal, nor of Israel according to the Flesh, the Commandment by which Tythes were due in the first Priest-hood, reaches not unto us. And after Christ's Ascension, not one of the Apostles either commanded or required any such Practice of the Saints, either to Colossia, Corinth, Antioch, Philippi, Perga∣mos, or the rest of the Churches in Asia. So that it's evident to all judicious men, that this is quite another thing got up in the Apostacy, which no Minister or believer ever did own, who were Witnesses of the second Covenant; but any who are not satisfied in this thing by what I have said, which much more I could say, concerning this thing; but I refer them that are not satisfied, to a Book called, The great Case of Tythes stated, published by A. P. In thy fourth and fifth page, thou art pleading for Master-ship for thy Ministers, and so by thy own Argument thou hast proved them out of the Doctrine of Christ, who said, to his Ministers, call no man Master, nei∣ther be ye called Masters; but to oppose this, thou brings John. 3 10. how Christ said to Nicodemus, art thou a Master in Israel? And then thou va∣porest, and saist, these are not the Words of Mr. Baxter, and Mr, Smith,
but Christs. In some Translations it is Ruler in Israel. In another, Teacher in Israel: But it may be, some who coveted after mastership as thou dost, have put in Master for Ruler & Teacher; but grant the word Master Christ testified that the Jews and Pharisees that they were called of men Master, and reprehended them for it: And if he did say to Nicodemus, art thou a Master? he spoke but in their Language, not with approbation of their being so called; for it's manifest he gave a contrary Command to his Dis∣ciples, and the Commands of Christ did not contradict one another. And as for Richard Baxter and Samuel Smith, whose Works thou sayest, do witness for them beyond thy Testimony. As for R. B. his Works are manifest to be works of Darkness, many false Lyes and Reproaches he hath cast upon the living Truth of God, and hath been a great opposer of the straight Way of the Lord, for which the Lord will plead with him & you all in the day of his Righteous Judgment. And as for S. S. let his own Testimony evidence what his Work is, who said, in the Congregation at Cressage, he had looked for Fruit seven Years among them, but found none: So it's manifest, he is such a Workman as may be ashamed of his work. In thy sixth and seventh page thou sayest, The Pharisaical Quakers make void the fifth Commandment, because they do not put off their Hats to Political and spiritual Fathers, as thou callst them; and thou heapst up a great deal of Scripture to no purpose, not one word in them all doth prove any such thing, as putting off Hats either to Fathers, Spiritual or Temporal, and so thou art a preverter and a wrester of it to thy own Destruction; and thou cites Rom. 13.7. to prove putting off Hats, render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute; and this is the Tribute of the Nation, thou sayest. And the 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, this thou bringst. Ignorant Block, shew us either plain Scripture, or example from the Saints, where it is commanded or commended, or from any Ordinance of man, or else cease thy foolish Clamour, and learn a Bridle for thy Tongue, and cease thy foolish Inferences. If the Magistrates had no better Tribute then putting off the Hat, they would soon be poor Ru∣lers: And whereas thou callest it Civil worship, doffing the Hat, and bowing the Knee, I know no more civility in it, then if thou shouldst put off thy Coat or thy Doublet to every one thou meetest with; And most of this which thou calls civility, is the most practised by them who are the Rudest, Vainest, and the Phantastickst proud Anticks in the Nations, who are full of Flattery and Deceit, and vain Complements; and to a proud Fel∣low with a gay Cloak, or powdered Hair, and a deal of Silver lace dawbed upon his Cloaths, then off goes the Hat, and the Knees bow, and your Servant Sir, and your Servant my Lord, or your most humble Servant,  thrice humble Servant; when if he were commanded to do Service to such a one, would not do any thing material, but disdain him; And meet then with a plain man, who will not Complement, and then sirrah, and numannerly Clown, and be ready to Fight; and this Spirit rules the most in those men, who are so full of their Complements, that begets one another into Pride and Deceit, and provoke one another by their bad Example in∣to deceit, like Drunkards, drinking one to another, to make one another Drunk, it's like thou wilt call this civility too: And if thou wilt plead, its the Custom of the Nation, doffing Hats, and Bowing.
The customs of the Heathen are vain, and many in Israel who feared the Lord, were not to walk after the Customs of the Nations; for this Deceit was not from the beginning and who ever comes to be a follower of Christ, who received no Honour of men, neither respected Persons, will deny this deceit. Take him for thy example, rather then a company of Fidlers, and Roysters, and Ruffins, who are without the fear of God; and Christ, who is the Saints Example, he said, How can you believe, that seek and receive Honour one of another: So then, they were Unbelievers who sought and received Honour one of another; and wouldst thou and the rest who live in deceit, bring the custom of Unbelievers, and the practice of Unbelievers among the Saints, who are believers, and follow Christ their example? I say, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of Christ. The next piece of Deceit thou art pleading for, is bowing to one another the Knee, and Titles of Honour, wherein the Devil hath a great hold among people. Gen. 44.14. This thou bringst to prove Bowing; Judah and his Brethren came to Joseph's House, and they fell on the Ground; This is an example indeed. Wilt thou take another; the same Brethren of Joseph sold him when he was a Boy; was that a good act? If thou sayst nay; I say one is as much commanded and commended as the other; for that same that doth Violence, it's the same that respects Persons; but Abraham bowed to the Children of Heth; what of that? So did Joseph Swear by the Life of Pharaoh, and both Joseph and Abraham were good men but they were never the better for these Actions, neither the one nor the other: But then thou brings a Scripture, and thou saith, it must stop our Mouthes, Gen. 49.8.10. And thou saist, this may Teach us, if we be of Jacob's Seed and houshold, To bow to the God of Jacob our King; and why should this stop our Mouthes? But the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law-giver from between his Feet till Shilo come: So he was to Rule, to wit Judah, till Shilo came; why should this stop our Mouths? Shilo is come, and hath opened our Mouths, and the Scepter is departed from Judah long since; both them that bowed to Judah, and Judah that was once Bowed unto, they are both Bowed under, and Shilo is set above, and now he must be bowed unto; go learn what that means. It was answered agaist Bowing, the second Commandment prohibits it, Thou shalt not bow down to them; but the answer satisfies thee not. Thou saist, Doth ths forbid civil respects, or Idolatrous worship? That which callst civil respects is Idolatrous worship, putting off the Hat, and bowing the Knee to a man with a gay Cloak, or a Gold Ring, or a company of Ribbons, or a long Gown: To bow down to such, because of the Attire, is respecting of Persons, and Idolatry; but you are fallen into a far worse state then respecting of Persons; for you respect Cloaths, and doff your Hats, and bow your Knees to them with fine Rayment; And let the man in vile Rayment or poor Attire go by without either Cap or Knee, and for all thy civility thou so greatly plead∣est for, and courtesie, if he put not off his Hat to thee, it may be thou wilt call him Sirrah, Rogue, or Clown, for all thy civility. Again, put on the Poor man good Attire, and a fine Cloak, and a gold Ring, then you change your note, and say, If it please your Worship, or lie your Honour, your humble Servant Sir.
Now here is not only respecting of Persons, which is Commission of Sin, but respecting the Creatures, and Worshipping the array which is upon a man's back, which is idolatry, and not civility, which is to be condemned; Yet civility and courtesie I own, which is so indeed, and in Truth; but that which the World calls civility and courtesie, is Hypo∣crisie and Idolatry: And for Salutation, thou saist, we seldom use; and thou bringst Scripture to prove, that Christ and the Saints saluted one another. Their Salutations are owned, and such Salutations are practised by us in uprightness of Heart, and true Love without Feignedness; but we can∣not do as you do, bid a man God-speed, when he is not doing the work of God, nor say Farewell to them who are in their Evil deeds; nor as the Wrld doth, with thier Good-evens, and Good-morrows, and takes God's Name is Vain; and if one do not answer them according to their Light Vain Mind, they will fall a Rayling and Beating; all such Spirits we deny, and their Salutations. In thy second Observation. Thou saist, Do not we prove, that places of Christian Assemblies to be a Church, and thou bringst many Scriptures to no purpose. Thou bringst the first of Kings, vers. 8. and 1 Cor. 11. For the Glory of the Lord shall fill the House of the Lord. And thou answerest, and saist, not the Steeple-house, but the Church: There thou hast added to the Scripture, and divers other Scriptures thou bringst, wherein the Temple was called the House of God and the Store-houses were called the House of God, Mal. 3.10. All which Scriptures I own; but they are nothing to thy purpose; that the Temple was called the House of God, and the Tabernacle the House of God, and the Store-houses the House of God, this is granted. These were made and builded according to the Command of God, wherein the Lord's Trea∣sure was which sed the Poor, the Fatherless, and the Widow, and the Priests and Levites that Ministred unto him; which Temple, Priests, Store-houses and Tythes, were Figures and shadows of good things to come; which when the good things did come, the Figures ended. But when did God command your Idols Temples to be built? and what are they a Figure of? That which thou shouldst have proved is, that your Steeple-houses where you meet, any where in Scripture are called the Church of God. Thou and thy Master Smith art offended that we call the place you  in, a Steeple-house, and say. Take heed that no such Languae be spkn again as Steeple-house. Why nt? Have not these Houses Steeples? But we shall call it truly and properly as it is, the Mass-house, which hath the Crosses standing upon them yet, or an Idol's Temple, which was  for the Idolatrous Worship, and for the Idol Mass, and other superstiti Ceremonies; your Windows full of Pictures, your Walls full of Images, and Monks faces, and bear the Popish Names, as St. Anthony, St. Clemen, St. Dunstns, and St. Patrick, and St. Maryes, and the like. You blind Men, full of Ignorance, perverters of the Scriptures, which would bring the Scripture to prove your Idolatrous Mass-house to be a Church, and call it the House of God, and Temple of God, when the first Founder was an Apostate; and you who hold it up, and call
Church, are of his Brood, and are dead Stones, which worship in the dead House, and know not what the Church of God is; and yet you say, to what end should we bring Scripture, to prove any thing by to these men? take it not into your Mouths, except you bring it for a better End, to make People believe that the Prophets and Apostles, when they spoke of the House of God, and the Church of God, spoke of your Idol-Temple, or ever intended or meant your Steeple-house, or old Mass-house. And thou saist, Few of the Ministers in England thou believest henceforth will have any thing to do with us, for we are blind Leaders of the blind. I believe they see sufficiently they have come to great loss, and see their Weapons have not prevailed, but are become all like broken Bows, in which there is no Strength, which they may all lay down in the Field of confusion, where they set their Battel; but the Lamb hath prevailed, and his Weapons are Spiritual, and they who follow him are skilfull to handle the Sword, and are able to make War with the Beast and all his followers; and many are overcome, and the rest shall be subdued, and the day hasteneth greatly, that they shall Melt away that hate the Lord. And as for Christ's saying, Let them alone, they are blind Leaders of the blind. This he spoke of thy Generation, the Pharisees, who were called of men Master, and loved greeting in the Streets and Market-places, and stood praying in the Synagogue, in whose Foot-steps the Priests of England are, which Christ cryed Wo against, and now they are seen to be blind Guides, and Leaders of the Blind; for they whose Eyes Christ hath opened, have ceased from such, and now bear their Testimony against such. In the eleventh page thou goes on in thy Blindness and Ignorance, plead∣ing for your publick Worship, the old Mass-house, set up by the Injunction of the Pope; And you have taken their Houses in your Hands, and scold against them in it, when you are in the same Nature: And thou bidst us read what Conspirators and Enemies of God use to do, in Psalm 83.3, 4. they said, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in Possession. This was spoken of the Heathen, of Gebal, Anmon, and Amaleck, and the men of Tyre; who devoured, and destroyed, and sought to destroy the Store-houses and Synagogues that were used in the first Covenant: And thou mayest take the Applications home to thy self, and to the Generation thou art pleading for: Have not the Papists good Ground to plead with in this behalf? Were not the Abbies, Monasteries, Mass-houses▪ Tythes, Oblations, and Obventions, Easter-Reckonings, Peter-Pence, the Papists and Jesuits maintenance? And did not Henry the eighth, who was the first establisher of your Religion in this Nation, did no he take them away from the Papists? and then the Priests, who denyed their holy Father the Pope, got their Tythes and the maintenance, and took the Mass-houses into their Hands, and the Tythes and Easter Reckonings: And if thou callst these God's Houses, and this God's maintenance for his Ministers which maintained Popery; then thou hast brought all these Scriptures against thy self, and thou art in a great Transgression; and your Schools and Colled∣dges, which thou ignorantly callest the Schools of the Prophets, like an unlearned man, and Schools of Piety, then the Papists were Prophets, and they were Pious; For these Schools and Colledges were invented by
them, and you have gotten these from them, to wit, the Mass-house, Schools, Colledges, Tythes, Oblations; the Papists maintenance, and their Hire, and this is lawfull in your Eyes, and yet you will call them Impious and Idolators: Are not the things the same in your Hands as they were in theirs? but these things are quite another thing then was in the first Covenant; these things are not to be paralled with the Synagoues, Temples, Store-houses, Tythes under the Law; for these were invented since the Apostles dayes; and the Apostates, who went from the Life, in∣vented them, when all wondered after the Beast, and never mention a word of the Scripture, as to think to prove these invented Trumperies; for the Scripture never intends, nor them that spoke it forth, to patronize your deceit in these things. Object. But it may be thou mayst say, Though these things fore-mentioned were set up by Idolaters, and the places were made for an Idolatrous Service, and the Maintenance and Hire were to maintain Idolatrous Priests; but now they are Converted to a better use, and they are convenient to meet in, and convenient for our Ministers Maintenance. Answ. Did ever any of the Ministers or Apostles of Christ, go into the Jews Temple or Synagogues to Worship, after Christ was ascended, except it was to declare against them, and to bring People off them? or did they take the Jewish Priests maintenance, which was commanded to be paid of God? or did the Ministers of Christ exhort the Jews that believed, to build a Temple or a Synagogue to worship in? Or did any of the Mini∣sters of Christ go in the Temples of the Gentiles to Worship, or into the high places of the Jews? Or did they receive the Idol Priests maintenance, or the Jewish Tythes, or eat that which was Sacrificed to Idols? If nay, where is your example? I know you dare not plead Commandment from the Lord for these things. Might not the Jews, when they had broken down the Altars of Baal, and destroyed the Images and high Places, and the beauty of them, have said, these are convenient places for Worship, let us now worship here for conveniency; and that maintenance and Offerings that was offered to Idols, let's take them, and give them to our Priests and Levites, and let us Offer them unto God? If these things had been justifiable then, yours are justifiable now; but if Condemnable▪ then, yours condemnable now; and so let your Mouths be stopped, and spek no more so Proudly, nor bring no more such Impertinent, Proofs and arguments for your Deceit; for that is enjoyed that weighs you all, and can judge all your Deceit. And for Barlarism, and Heathenism, and Heresie thou speakest on, which layes the Lord's Vineyard waste, it's brought in, and dwells among you, and the Fruits are manifest in most of your Steeple-houses, or Mass-houses, as witness your Ringing of Pans, Candlesticks, Frying-pans, throwing Water, and rude behaviour, which hath been used by your Church-members, as Fighting, Beating, Punching, tearing of Cloath, haling out of your Assemblies, them that come in the Name of the Lord; and these be the Fruits of Barbarous Heathens, which are not brought forth any where but among you; but it may be thou wilt call this civility and courtesie, and the Tribute of the Nation: And for Heresie both in Do∣ctrine and Worship, none are to be compared unto you, for Unsoundnes & ignorance; for I look upon you as the Tail of all the People in the Nation
And the Vineyard of God that thou speakst on, is no where laid waste so much as among you Mass-house Worshippers; for you are like Bryars and Thorns, Scratching, Rending, tearing and hailing, and are as a Field untilled, and as a waste howling Wilderness, that knows not when good comes; and that your Ministers are those proud, Phantastick Spirits, that have taken up them to preach, who deny an immediate Call. Neither are they approved of his Church which is in God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth; but only they are approved by man, and by the Colledges, which were invented by the Pope, where more Deceit and foolish Fop∣peries are practised, then in any Society in the Nation besides; for them that deny an immediate Call, and an infallible Spirit, I deny them to be any Ministers of Christ, and so doth the Church of Christ who meet in his Name; but such are your Ministers, therefore we have turned from them many Years ago. And the next thing thou art offended at is, that a Woman spoke in a meeting near Conil; what if ten had spoke, if they had spoke by the Spirit of the Lord, what offence had it been? Did not God promise by Joel, that he would pour forth his Spirit upon his Daughters, and they should Prophesie? and wouldest thou stop them? And Priscilla instructed a Minister, better then any of your Parish Tything Priests, to wit, Apollo. And had not Philip three Daughters did Prophesie? And were there not Women with Clement, that were fellow-Labourers in the Gospel? (And what, though she that was in the Transgression was to keep silent in the Church?) Doth it therefore follow that they are come out of the Trans∣gression, are to be silent in the Church? Is this good Logick Edward? If Christ be in male, and in the female, may he speak in the male, but not in the female? Doth not the Apostle say, The Man is not without the Woman, nor the Woman without the man, but both in the Lord? And if the Woman be in the Lord as well as the man, may not the Lord speak in her? Art thou one of them that wilt Limit the Holy one? What if he speak in a dumb Ass, and reprove the Madness of the Prophet Balaam? And if he should do so now, to reprove the mad Prophets that are in Balaam's Way, loving the Wages of Unrighteousness now, as he did then? will you re∣prove God? He that reproves him shall answer it; and he that Gain-sayes either Son or Daughter, shall Perish in the Gain-saying. And now I come to thy third Observation. The third Observation. Thy Eye being evil, thou canst not see when good cometh; and thou art one of them who watchest for Iniquity, that thereby thou mayest Blas∣spheme the Name of God and his Truth, which thou art out of: And as for our Tenets, which thou sayest, thou hast named and shamed; thou no more knows us, nor our Tenets, then thou knowest from whence the Wind comes, and whither it goes: For all our words are as a Parable to thee, and thou knowest not what we say, although thou hast Catched and Snatched up some of our words brokenly to quarel with; yet we are hid∣den from thee, and a Gulf is between thee and us, that as thou canst not apprehend nor Comprehend; but first a terrible Day must come upon
thee and those things which thou hast laid down to be our tenets, thou doubtst whether they be or no, manifest by thy own words. If we say so and if hold so, thou hadst better have been certain before thou hadst shewed thy self too Imperious and arrogant, of shaming them, when thou knowest not whether we hold them, as thou hst laid them down in thy own words, the shame at last will come upon thy self; and that Rash, hasty, Raging Spirit, by which thou utterest frth all this Mudd and Dirt, every one may see in this Observation thy deceit manifest. And the first thing that thy dark Mind Stumbles at, is, that some have said, That they that have the Spirit of God are equal with God. He that hath the Spirit of God, is in tha which is equal, as God is e∣qual, and his wayes equal; And he that is joyned to the Lord is one Spi∣rit, there is unity, and the unity stands in equality it self. He that is born from above is the Son of God, and he said, I and my Fa∣ther are one. And when the Son is revealed, and speaks, the Father speaks in him, and dwells in him, and he in the Father. In that which is equal, in equality it self; there is equality in Nature, though not in Stature. Go learn what these things mean, the understanding and Learned will know what I say, and this is neither damnable nor Blasphemous; but on the contrary, it is saving and Precious to them that believe. And thou concludest, Though they be glorified in Heaven, yet are not equal with God. Here thou Blasphemest; the Son is glorified with the Father, in the same Glory he had with him before the World began; the Glory is in Purity, equality, Immortality, and eternity; but for thy proof thou bringst Pal. 86 8. For who among the Gods is like unto our God? And again, There is none like unto thee, O Lord! Here thou hast gone about to prove more Gods then one in Heaven: Were the Gods glorified in Heaven, which were not like the living God? Or were they in heaven, which were not like the Lord? What Blasphemy is this? They that are in heaven are like him, in his Image, and not like any other; but in the World there are Gods many, and Lords many, but that is not in heaven: there are no Gods nor Lords in the World, nor in the Earth, that is like the living God, and living Lord of Heaven and Earth; And many such non-sensical Phrases hast thou uttered, and foolish Impertinences; and thou hast scarce cited one Scripture, but thou hast either misapplyed, or wrested, and pervert∣ed, being very ignorant and unlearned; and thy Masters, for whom thou contend'st, will never receive much Honour nor credit by thy writing, or Vindication of them. But to the second Particular, which thou calls our tenet, is, That Christ Jesus is not glorified in his human Nature, and that he hath no real Body, but hs Mystcal Body, and this thou sayest is contray to Scripture, Luke 24.3, 9. and As 3.20. John 17. And in this thou sayest, we are shamed. I say thou hast shamed thy self, and hast cited those Scriptures to no purpose at all, none of all these speak of human Nature, or Mystical body, but this I say, he is glorified with the Father in a spiritual Body, in the same Glory he had with the Father, before the world began. And the same Jesus which was of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh, and the Son of God according to the Spirit, is glorified with the Father, the
man Christ Jesus, he is sate down at the right Hand of God; But if tho; meanest by Human, a carnal Body, or the same Flesh that thou hast on deal plainly with us, and nakedly, the next time thou or any of thy Tea¦chers write, and prove us by Scripture where the Church is called his mystical Body; or where hast thou got these new coyned words, as Hu∣man Nature, and mystical Body? Correct thy Pen, and let no such Popish Phrases come in Print again, lest thou shamest thy self more, instead of shaming of us: And thou concludest, If any say, here he is, or there he is on Earth, believe them not. Where learnedst thou this Article of Faith, I pray thee shew me? Is he not both in Heaven and Earth? How should he restore the Earth and all things into their purity, if he must not be manifest in the Earth? What! wilt thou confine him to, or in a place? Doth not his Presence fill Heaven and Earth? Is he divided from his Presence? But may be thou wilt say, as thy Generation doth, that he is in the Earth by his Spirit, and in Heaven in his Body or Person, distinct from his Spirit. If so, then you divide Christ, and a Person without a Spirit, and not Christ. I will aske thee a Question; No man hath Ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven; Where was the Son of man, or the Man Christ, when this was spoken? If thou canst see this, thou mayst be ashamed to shut Christ out of the Earth, or from among his Saints, where his Presence, his Arm, his hand and his Power is, which is not divided from his Body; but I know thou art deaf, and canst not hear what I say, and thou bringst Heb. 10▪ 12. After he had offered one Sacrifice, sate down at the right hand of God; that is, saist thou, In his human Nature. The shame is come upon thy self, who hast added thy own Imagination; and let all see whether the Scriptures speak of Hu∣man Nature; but thy folly must be manifest to all. Thy third Particular that thou namest, and as thou sayest shamest, is, If we say we are without Sin, we deceive our Selves. Thou hadst better have en∣quired perfectly whether we said so or no, before thou hadst undertook to reprove upon so doubtfull terms, and thou bringst Prov. 20.9. For who can say my Heart is clean. He can say so, and speak Truth, whose Heart God hath cleansed by the Blood of Christ from all Sin: And then thou bringst Job 9.20. If I justifie my self, my own Mouth shall condemn me. That's true, we justifie not our selves, neither self; but deny self, and self is con∣demned, and Christ, God's Righteousness is become our Justification. And then thou bringest Paul, Phil. 3. Not as though I had already attained, but follow after, that I may apprehend. What of that? he was in his growth, and was come to that which was perfect, and did believe to attain to the Stature of a perfect man. And then thou saist, I tell you, you are not perfect, your contempt of the Ministers of Christ, and perverting the Doctrine of Christ are characters of Sin. That shall stand for thy self, and thy Masters whom thou art joyned with, who set up Popish trumpery instead of the Ordinance of Christ; and set up the precepts of men, introduced in the Apostacy, for the Doctrine of Christ: And then thou concludest, the Scripture hath concluded all under Sin, all in the first Adam; but I hope the Scripture doth not con∣clude all under Sin in the second Adam; neither doth conclude him under Sin that's born of God, who Sins not. And if thou makest any such conclusion, thou givest thy verdict for the Devil, and not for God: then
thou sayest, I am not pleading for Sin. Thou art pleading for nothing else but for Sin and Imperfection, in which the Devil's Kingdom stands; and thou sayest, thou hast cause to cry out, O wretched man that I am! So thou hast indeed; hast thou repented of thy Drunkenness? How long is it since thou fell'st off a Bridge, being Drunk, and broke thy Leg? but it is like, for thy good Service done to thy Master, in writing this lying scrole, he will give thee an Absolution for that Transgression. The fourth Particular which thou call'st our Tenet, is, That we deny the Scripture to be the Word of God; And thou hast brought many Scriptures to prove that they are; but they are as impertinent to the thing, as thy for∣mer about the Steeple-house, or Mass-house. Thou hast brought many Scriptures, Jer. 37.8. how they are called the words of the Lord, who ever denyed that? but the Word spoke the words, and the Word is greater. 2 Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by divine Inpiration. I deny that, some was spoken by the Devil, and some by wicked Men, and I hope thou wilt not call that divine Inspiration. Then thou may be wilt conclude, I deny the words of Paul to Timothy. I deny the Word Is, it is an Addition of the TRANSLATOR, which Word alters and varies in the true sense of that Scripture; but all Scripture given by Inspiration of God, is profitable for Doctrine, &c. But knowest thou no dinstinction between Inspiration and Tradition? You have it by Tradition; the Saints by Inspiration. It's a dead Letter in it self, and as it is spoken from your Mouthes, who speak of it by tradition; but from them that were Inspired, the living Spirit uttered forth living Words; But what is all this to prove the Scripture or writings to be the Word of God. And then thou cites 2 Cor. 2.4.7. Not handling the Wor deceitfully. What doth this prove? nothing at all; and all the rest that thou hast cied is nothing at all, but what we have answered over and over many times, wherein all that have any understanding in the Knowledge of God are satisfied: That which thou shouldst have proved by the Scripture, is, where the Scripture, or writings, or Letter, doth title it self the Word of God? It is granted, they are the words of God? and the Words of Holy men Inspi∣red: So in thy own words, I say, take thou notice, though thou art con∣fident and presumtuous, in this thou hast shamed thy self, and not us; the Word was before either Scripture, Writings, or Bible was; which Word is greater, and gave them a Being: And thou that wouldst set that which is brought forth by the Father, above the Father, art out of the Apostles wisdom, speaking a similitude; He that builds a House, receives more Honour then the House. Now to call the Scripture the Word, is to give as much honour to the House, as to him that builded it; but in a word, this I say, whatever the Scripture doth testifie of it self, or call it self, that I own it to be: And if any man call it another thing, it shall testifie against him; and so thou that hast gone about to set up the Word which were spoken in time, above or equal with the Word, that was before all time, art Ignorant, and Unskilfull in the Knowledge of GOD, and silence would better become thee. In thy last page thou sayst, How often have we been called upon, to make known to the World what we hold, and what we would have? Are you the men raised for this Work alone, to cry down Tythes, and speak against Lace, Ribbons, and Cuffs? Is there nothing for us to do? Then this declare, that this is enough to Salvation.
I say, we have declared more in the World then they do receive or believe, and we have published the Will of God to the Earth in many things, and shall further proceed as the Spirit of the Lord shall direct us: And that which we would have, is, the old Dragon chained, and the Whore burnt with Fire, & her Merchants cease Trading, and the Sea dryed up, upon which she sits, and upon which the Merchants Trade, and the Beast and all the false Prophets, Deceivers, and Anti-christs, which have all had their rise since the Ascension of Christ, we would have these be all shut in the Pit again; and we would have the Lamb to Reign, and the everlasting Gospel to be preached again, the Power of God; and we would have the Earth restor'd; and we would have everlasting Righte∣ousness to reign in the Hearts of People, and Laws as at the first, and Counsellors as in the Beginning, who judge not for rewards; and Mini∣sters, such as were in the Primitive times, who will preach without Tythes, Hire, and set Wages, and without the Popes maintenance. If thou canst receive these things, I will shew thee further, it may be hereaf∣ter, if I hear any more from thee. And we are the men that are raised up for the Work, to declare against Pride in the Ground, and also in appear∣ance, as against Lace, Cuffs and Ribbons; And thou askest, if there be nothing else? Hast thou denyed these, and the Spirit that leads to the abuse of God's Creatures? when thou hast, I will shew unto thee there is something else to be done▪ but if thou dost not obey that which is manifest, why wouldst thou know more, to add to thy Condemnation? And we do not say, that casting off these things is all that is required to Salvation: thou bidst us declare if there be any thing else; so I shall, so that thou hearken to it, and receive it, else thy Condemnation shall be greater then if I had written nothing. Thou must repent of all thy Sin, and turn from it, and know the Judgment of God for it, and deny thy self in every thing; and lay down thy Life also, and take up his Cross daily, and be Crucified to the world, and cease from all thy own Words, actions and Thoughts, and come to taste of Death, before thou come to know him to live in thee to be thy Salvation; canst thou do this? when thou witnessest this done, then thou shalt know further what God requires; but a Terrible day will come upon thee, before these things be fulfilled in thee; though thou be more stout then thy Fellows, I know him who is able to break thy Horn which thou hast exalted against the Lamb of God and his followers. And for thy Exhortation, Not to feed on Husks, take it home to thy self, for thou hast nothing else to feed upon; the Words of the Saints at best, without the Life, or else some innovated, invented Trumpery of the Whore, of whose Cup thou hast Drunk, makes thee speak forth all these Venomous words against the Life and Power of God in his People. And thou concludest, What thou hast written is as much for Conversion as Refutation. Both alike indeed, for thou hast done neither; but hast conceived and brought forth wind, and spent thy time for nought. Alas poor man▪ tellest thou of Converting, who art not come out of the Gross pollutions of the world, who art not ceased from Drunkenness, and art pleading for Mass-houses, Tythes, Hirelings, and Popish inventions, and art offended we should declare against Ribbons, Cuffs, and Lace? what
shouldst thou convert any to, except to make them two-Fold more Chil∣dren of the Devil? And what shouldst thou refute or confute? Wilt thou say, one shall not Steal, and dost thou? wilt thou say, one should not be DRUNK, and art thou? and wilt thou say, one should forsake all Sin, and yet say, none must be cleansed from it, but be al∣wayes Miserable men, and wretched men? Be first Convinced in thy self, and turn from thy evil Deeds, before thou tellst any more of convert∣ing or refuting any; For the Day hastens when all shall be set in Order before thee, what thou hast done, and thou shalt receive according to thy work; and thou shalt see then this work to be for Condemnation, which thou hast published against the Truth, which shall, and must abide for∣ever; and they that are in it, and walk in it, shall be everlastingly Happy, and shall Reign as Kings and Priests unto God forever; and over all Deceit, and shall live to Confound all the Children of falshood in all their devices. F. H.
THE Popish Inquisition NEWLY ERECTED IN NEVV-ENGLAND, WHEREBY THEIR CHURCH Is manifested to be a DAUGHTER OF Mystery-Babylon, Which did drink the Blood of the Saints, who bears the express Image of her Mother, demon∣strated by her Fruits. Also, their Rulers to be in the Beast's Power, upon whom the Whore rideth, manifest by their wicked com∣pulsary Laws against the Lamb and his Followers, and their cruel and bloody Practices against the Dear Servants of the Lord, who have deeply suffered by this Hypocritical Generation. Published by a Lover of Mercy and Truth, and an Ene∣my to Envy and Cruelty, F. H.
TO THE READER. GReat hath been the Havock and Spoil that the old Dragon hath made since he was thrown out of Heaven, and ma∣ny have been the Floods that he hath cast out after the Woman, and great have been the Waves which he hath made to rise up in the Sea; yea, the Nations that have been as Waters he hath ga∣thered on a Heap, and made them burst out in a foaming Rage, to overflow and to drown, and to swallow up the Woman, which was made to flee into the Wilderness for many Dayes, having a re∣tired Place there, which God hath prepared for her, for a Time, Times and half a Time; and the Remnant of her Seed hath he made War with every where, and hath also given great Authority to the Beast, who rose out of the Sea, to kill with the Sword, to cut off, and to destroy all that worshipped him not and his Image; and he hath had Power over both small and great, and hath killed them, and hath compelled them, and forced them to worship him, and all whose Names have not been written in the Lamb's Book of Life, have worshipped him; for all have wondered after him, and all the Nations have drunk of the Whore's Cup of Fornication, and have been inflamed therewith; and all have partaken with her in her Whore∣doms, the Kings, the Rulers, the Noble Men, the Captains, and all, both small and great, who have drunk of her Cup, have made War, and hated the Free Woman and her Seed; and all the Deceivers, False Pro∣phets and Seducers have traded with her Merchandize, and have decei∣ved the Nations with her Sorceries, and they have the Sheeps Clothing, the outside, and are inwardly avened. And in the ensuing Discourse thou wilt see great Professors, whom many did judge had been come out of Mystery-Babylon many Years ago, to wit, the Church∣es of New-England, who cryed up Reformation, thou wilt see them making War for their Mother Mystery-Babylon, for they are her Off-spring, manifest in every Circumstance, by their Visage and Countenance, by their Doctrine and Discipline, by their Practice and Fruit, by their Spoil and Violence, by their Cruelty and Blood-shed; their Mother drunk the Blood of the Saints, and so are they drinking of the same; and the Beast roars in that Na∣tion,
which rose out of the sea, upon which the Whore rides; and he is in great Majesty there, as ever hath been since the Apostles Dayes, and breathes out Threatnings, that none must buy or sell, who hath not his Mark in his Forehead, or in his right Hand; and who hath not some of his Names of Blasphemy, they must be killed, or tortured, or banished, robbed and spoiled, censured with the Whore's Censures, and then destroyed by the Beast, who calls himself the Highest Power, whenas his Authority is from the Dragon, who was cast into the Earth, and exerciseth his Rage; and the Beast by his Authority would root out all, and destroy all that keep the Testimony of Jesus, and are obedient to his Will. F. H. Reader, In this Book F. H. gave a Relation of some of the great Sufferings of the Lord's People in New-England; but the Relation being far short of what is since received, which is intended to be shortly printed at large, I have omitted the Account he gave in this Book, referring the Reader for a fuller Satisfaction to the Book at large when it comes forth. E. H.
THE Popish Inquisition NEWLY ERECTED IN NEVV-ENGLAND, THE Devil, who was a Lyar and a Murderer from the Beginning, who abode not in the Truth, who spoak of himself (and not from the Commandment of God, or the Motion of Truth) who is curst from the Presence of the Lord forever, who hath alwayes made VVar since he went out of the Truth) against God and all the Children of Truth, and he is that Seed who hath made War with the Heir of all Things, and against the Woman in all Generations, which brought forth the Heir, the Man-child; and since he hath usurped Authority, to wit, the Serpent, all the Earth hath been filled with Violence, where he hath born Rule; God did not appoint him to be Lord, nor to be a Law-giver over man, nor over a∣ny of God's Workmanship; but he was to be ruled over by man, who was made in the Image of God; but when he came to usurp Authority of him∣self, contrary to the Command of God, he became curst, and man also, who became subject unto his usurped Authority, which he should have ruled over by the higher Power, in which he was made, and had Power and Authority over all the contrary; but being gone from the Power, and joyned to him who moved without the Power, they both became Ene∣mies to the Power, and so came to be cursed by the God of Power forever, and then became at Enmity to the Power of the endless Life, and fed upon Dust, and that which is corruptible, which shall have an End: And now the Serpent and his Seed in the Transgression, striveth and resisteth against him who is the higher Power, with all their Strength, and all the Wea∣pons formed in the bottomless Pit, by which Weapons he hath prevailed since the Lamb hath been slain, and hath brought all the Creation into Bondage, which hath been subject to his Authority, which is out of the Truth; and he doth not only make VVar against the Seed (by whom Sal∣vation is revealed to the Ends of the Earth in them that believe in him) but also he labours to destroy God's VVorkmanship, and to deface the Crea∣tures which God made, and formed by the VVord of his Power: And thus all the Sons of Adam in the Transgression, having shaken Hands with the Prince of Darkness, do fulfil his unrighteous Decrees (being gone from the Power of God) although man sees that the Way of the Serpent is un∣equal, yet he hath not Power to resist in that Nature; and so all are in Cap∣tivity, and Bondage, and Slavery unto the noysome Lusts which the De∣vil instigateth and suggesteth into the Hearts of all the Children of Diso∣bedience,
and so Fruits of the Flesh and of Darkness are brought forth, to the Dishonour of the Lord of Heven and Earth; and herein the Devil re∣joyceth, and the Seed of the Evil-doer taketh Delight, and thereby his Strength encreases, by drinking Iniquity as Water; he is nourished up in the Region of the Shadow of Death, and strives to bring all thither to take up their Habitation, and to be Servants to the Prince of the Air, who was a Murderer from the Beginning. And so Adam, when he had lost the Image of God, and when the He∣ritage of God was laid waste in himself, he begat a Son in his own Image, who was Cain (a Murderer) who was of that wicked One that went out of Truth, and he rose up in Envy, and slew Abel the Just, who was of the Seed: And here's the Off-spring and the Fruit of the Seed of the Serpent; for as God is Love, and all that are begotten by him live in Love, and all the Creatures that he did make were to serve one another in Love, in the Covenant of Life and Love, in which they were made; so the Devil lives in Envy, and all his Children, and leads into Discord, and perverteth all the Creatures from that End for which God made them, to serve his End, whose Life stands in Discord, Envy, VVrath and Unrighteousness, and whatsoever is e∣vil; and herein are the Children of God made manifest, and their Works, and the Children of the Devil, and their Works; they that love God, dove the workmanship of God, and cannot hate his Brother, but hath Eternal Life abi∣ding in hm; but he that is of the Devil, destroyes God's wormanship, kills his Brother (a Man-slayer) and hath not the Love of God dwelling in him: And this Sed of the Serpent hath spread it self forth over all the Earth, since the Transgression, both amongst Jews and Gentiles, Professors and prophane, them that had the Law, and them that were without the Law; them that have had the Scripture, and them that had no Scripture; and in that which is called Christendom, as well as they which are called Hethens; as well amongst the highest Professors, as amongst the gssest prophane, in all Times since the Founda∣tion of the world, that the Lamb hath been slain, and the Seat of Iniquity raised up; and this Seed hath been made manifest by its Fruits throughout all Aes and Times, throughout all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Regions, Countries and Kingdoms: And by the Fruit which is brought forth in New-England, they themselves may read their Stock and Off-spring, and Fruits, and Doings (which is brought to Light, and evident) elsewhere declared, that so when they come to view over their VVork again, Shame may cover their Faces, and Astonishment fill their Hearts, that such Fruits should be brought forth by them who are so high Professors of God in VVords, and of the Scriptures, to be the Rule of their Obedience and Faith; now shall you be tryed by the Scripture, your Rulers, your Teachers and your Church-members, and the Life of the Saints that gave forth the Scripture, will stand a witness against your Doctrines and cursed Practices for evermore; you may read your example, Cain▪ Herod, Murderers, and Men of Blood, the per∣secuting Jews, who were zealous for God, as they thought, who perse∣cuted to Death, and said, They had a Law, and by that Law Christ ought to dye; but you are worse then they; for you had no Law which would take hold upon the righteous and faithful witnesses of God, till you had made one, or invented one▪ and digged down to Hell to ask Counsel of the Prince of Darkness, your God: And further you may read your Example, Nim∣rod, who came of the Stock of Ham, who was cursed as well as the Serpent,
as well as Cain; and your Thoughts are vain, like the Thoughts of your Fore-fathers, the Pharisees, whom Christ prophesied of to his Disciples, and said, The Time would come when they should hle them out of the Synagogues, and persecute from City to City, and speak all Manner of Evil of them, and should go about to kill them, and yet think they did God Service; so void of Under∣standing hath the Seed of the Serpent alwayes been in all Generations, which Words of Christ are fulfilled among you Professors of New-England, who are thinking (as they did) that you do God Service in killing his Mem∣bers, and you are come to that time, your Fruits have made it manifest: Oh! could you have believed in times past, if it should have been told you, that you, above all People, should be the greatest Persecutors, and exceed∣ed in Wickedness, and Cruelty, and Hard-heartedness the Papists, the Turks, the Heathens, who make little or no Profession, in Comparison of you, and yet that you should exceed them in Rage, Cruelty and Madness? It is an Abhorrency to all sober People; you have stained the Earth, and defiled your Land with Blood, and have caused the Name of the Lord of Heaven and Earth to be blasphemed among the Heathen, by your wicked, ungodly, barbarous and brutish Actions; and you are in that Nature, and in their Steps which killed the Prophets, and mocked his Messengers, and shamefully entreated his Servants, upon whose Heads all the Blood-shed from Abel to this Day, will be required. But blessed be the Lord, whose Arm hath been stretched forth, and hath gathered Thousands out of that Nature which is cursed from God forever, and hath revealed his Salvation unto them, and the everlasting Gospel, which is to be preached again after the Apostacy, and hath made us Parta∣kers of it (to wit) the Power of God; and so we see unto whom the Arm of the Lord is revealed, that all Nations since the Apostacy have drunk of the Whore's Cup, and are bewitched with her Sorceries; and therefore according to the Command of the Lord, and the Motion of his eternal Spi∣rit, we have born our Testimony against the Apostates and Deceivers (who retain the Words, and have lost the Life and Power) to the Intent that all that believe in the Light which Christ hath lighted every man withal, that People might wait to receive Power from on high again (which all the Sons of Adam have lost in the Transgression) that as many as receive the Power may come out of Transgression; and for this End hath God chosen and separated many, contrary to their own Wills, and from whatsoever was dear unto them in the outward, to deny it all, and to answer the pure Motion of God's Spirit, whithersoever he leadeth, and in so doing many have found the Power and Presence of the Lord going with them, and be∣fore them, and he hath prospered his own Work in their Hands, and hath brought many out of Sodom and Egypt, and out of Mystery-Babylon, to Christ, the Mystery, and to the Mystery of Faith, which is held in a pure Conscience. And we were not ignorant of this, what Opposition we should receive from Anti-christ and his Ministers, Satan and his Messengers, and how that the whole World lay in Wickedness, and how that Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People had drunk the Whore's Cup, and how that all Hire∣lings, Deceivers, false Prophets and Seducers would withstand; neither were we ignorant that the Beast's Power, which got up in the Throne of Iniquity and Exaltation, since the man-child was caught up unto God, and
Wman fled into the Wilderness, wherein he hath compelled all, both small and great, to worship him: Neither were we ignorant of his Strength, and of his great Authority that he had in the Nations, and how that the VVhore (the false Church) rode upon him; and also we knew that the Nations were as VVaters; nor of the great VVaves which would lift up themselves; nor of the multitude of Merchants which make Merchandize of Souls for dishonest Gain, who are greedy of filthy Lucre; nor of the mul∣titude of Ships, in which they carry their merchandize and deceitful ware; neither were the Servants of the Lord (who have thus deeply suffered as else-where is made mention of) of the Spirit that ruled in the Professors and Teachers of New-England, Notwithstanding all this (which was seen be∣fore) we consulted not with Flesh and Blood, but were obedient to the hea∣venly Call, and stood (given up to the Lord in Life or in Death) to finish the Testimony which God hath put into our Hands, that so many may be brought to know the living God revealed in themselves, that so they with us, and we with them may rejoyce in him who is becoming the King and Law-giver, and the exceeding great Reward of all his People, to whom be Glory forever and ever, Amen. AND now the Devil being let loose for a little Season, he rages, and goes into utter Darkness, and fetches up all the Powers of Dark∣ness, and they combine together to fortifie his Kingdom, that so none but he (who was a Murderer from the Beginning) may have any Rule in the Town of Boston, or the Jurisdiction thereunto belonging; and now he thinks his Kingdom is sure. The last Piece of Work which the Rulers have done for their Master, is as followeth. An ACT made at a GENERAL COURT held at Boston the 20th of October, 1658. Whereas there is a pernicious Sect (commonly called Quakers) lately risen, who by Word and Writing have published and maintained many dangerous and horrid Tenets, and do take upon them to change and alter the received laudable Customs of our Nation, in giving civil Respect to Equals, or Reverence to Superiors,  Aions tend to undermine the civil Government, and also to destroy the Order of the Churches. The People called in Scorn Quakers, are risen up from under the Powers of Darkness, and they are come forth from the rising of the Sun, where the Morning hath appeared without Clouds, and though set at nought by you, yet they are a mighty People, and of the Royal Off-spring, even f  Family, who is the first-born of every Creature, and the Heir of  things; the Shout of a King is among them, who is greater then  Apollyon; his living Presence is with them, and they shall come up  Hypocrites and Dissemblers as Mortar and Clay; and though you  orns high, & push every Way with them against the Lamb &  yet your Horns shall be broken by him who is their King, by  of Salvation, which is now lifted up far higher then the Horn
an Unicorn, and you shall be as Ashes under their Feet: we are not igno∣rant of the swelling of the Sea, nor of the Strength of the Beast which hath risen out of the Sea; we were not ignorant of his Strength in New-England; but he is brought among the Quakers, and dwells in their Tabernacle, who is able to make War with the Beast and his Followers; though you have cast up your Banks very high, and fortified your selves, as the Pope by his In∣quisition, yet you must be gone over, and made level, and yet not by Clubs nor Staves, nor Whips, nor hot Irons, Cain's Weapons, the Weapons of the Murderer, which you have taken up, which shall be broken; though your Bows be as Steel, yet they shall be broken by the Arm of the Lord (the Quakers Strength) And what are the horrid Tenets and dangerous things they hold out, that you open your Mouthes so wide? The horrid and dan∣gerous Tenet is, They alter the laudable Customs of our Nation; would'st not thou judge Reader, when there hath been so many great Words and Ac∣cusations, that some capital Fact would be laid down? But behold the capital Fact, the Quaker will not put off his Hat, nor his Coat, nor none of his Clothes to his Equals, nor to a persecuting Fellow, who hath a few Buttons and a few Ribbons, who calls himself a Superior; and here is a Crime indeed, which deserves Banishment and Death, nothing below this will be able to satisfie Justice for this Crime, by the Judgment of the Law∣makers of Boston: And when became this such a laudable Custom, that it is worthy of so much Praise? Ye blind and ignorant People, have you not read the Scripture, He that respects Persons, commits Sin, and he that hath Mens Persons in Admiration, will transgress for a Morsel of Bread? And ye never learned this of Elihu, this laudable Custom (as you call it) he said, I know not to give flattering Titles to Man, for in so doing my Maker would take me away; but Envy hath eaten out all Knowledge out of your Hearts: And is this your Church-Order, to take away mens Beasts, Kettles, Pots, Sheep and Pewter? Or is this your Order, to fine men five Shillings every Day they come not to your Synagogue, or because men cannot break the Command of Christ, and swear among a Company of cruel, covetous, blood-thirsty men, to fine them five Pounds? Tell the Nations when this Order was made in the Churches, among all the Orders and Directions that Christ and his Apostles gave to Believers and to the Churches to be observed; I never read of any such as these: Oh Ignorance, Folly and Madness! what fine five Pounds a piece, if they will not joyn with you in Worship, nor come to hear a covetous Hireling dream an Hor! what, banish them that will not come to you! what, put to Death if they come again! Greater Cruelty never appeared among all the persecuting Emperors of Rome in the greatest Apostacy. Well, if this be your Church-Order, it is Time for the Lord to arise and scatter you, and blessed shall he be that bears his Testimony for God against you, though to the Loss of his Life, his End shall be Peace. By denying all established Forms of Worship, and by withdrawing from orderly Church-Fellowship, allowed and approved by all Orthodox Professors of the Truth, and instead thereof, and in Opposition thereunto, frequent Meetings themselves, insinuating themselves into the Minds of the simple, or such as are least affected to the Order and Government of Church and Common-wealth. You that have established such a Form of Worship, and such an Assem∣bly as this, that if any come into your Assembly, and speak the Word of the
Lord, for the Edification of the Hearers, so that Peoples Minds may be in∣formed, you pull them out by the Hair of the Head, and stop their Mouthes with Napkins or Gloves; and if any reprove him that doth so disorderly you send him to Prison, and fine him; it is time to withdraw from such disorderly Assemblies as yours are: And if this be the Order of your established Form, approved of by Orthodox Professors, then the Church of Corinth was not Orthodox; for there one might speak one by one, that all might hear, and be edefied, and comforted; but this is accound Disorder in your Church, and by your Rulers; and they that walk accor∣ding to that Order, approved of among the Saints of old, must ber the Name of disorderly Persons, and the Sentence is, Prison, and be fined and be whipped: Indeed Amaziah the Priest of Bethel was of your Priests mind, and of the Mind of your Rulers and Assemblies; you may read your Ex∣ample, when Amos (the Herdsman) said, The Songs of the Temple should be turned into howling, and prophesied against such a Generation as you are, Hear this, ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to fail, Amos 8.4. There is your Example (ye Rulers of New-England) who take away poor Peoples Estates & Goods, and cast them in stinking Holes, & tear their Flesh from off their Backs, as you have done to many poor People, who are dear to the Lord, Amos 8.7. Hearken what the Lord's Sentence was to such a People, The Lord hath sworn by the Excellency of Jacob, surely I will never forget any of their works, ver. 8. Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? And it shall rise up wholy as a flood, and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt; read the 9 and 10. I say, Amaziah was of your Mind, he sent to Jeroboam, and said, Amos had conspired against Be∣thel, and the Altar (their Church-Assembly) and against the Land, so that it was not able to bear his Words, Amos 7.10. And just like the King and Priests then, so are you now, Church and State is like to be overthrown (say you) by the Quakers (Herdsmen and Plowmen) no Orthodox Di∣vines, nor Orthodox Professors, but seditious, say you (like as the envi∣ous Jews, who falsly accused the Apostles in the same Words) And say you, They frequent Meetings of their own; why not? did not the Apostles and Saints meet from House to House? went they to the Temple at Jeru∣salem, or into the Jews Synagogues (after Christ was ascended) to worship? Ye ignorant men, and yet cry, Scripture is the Rule of Faith and Obedience; how is the Scripture your Rule now? when any worship God any where, but where you meet, banish them, fine them five Shillings, and ten Shil∣lings, and five Pounds a Day, and if they return, Death; where is your Rule? The Generations to come will number you among Fools, as men that have lost your natural Understanding, through your Madness and En∣vy which one Day you will repent of. Whereby divers of our Inhabitants have been infected, notwithstanding all for∣mer Laws, made upon the Experience of their arrogant and bold Obtrusions, to disseminate their Principles among us, prohibiting their coming in this Jurisdicti∣on, they have not been deterred from their impetuous Attempts, to undermine our Peace, and hazard our Ruine. And what! have all your unrighteous Decrees done you no Good? All your lying and invented Expressions in your Laws, to make your matter heinous, not accomplished your Purposes? Hath not your Law for five Shillings a Day brought all to your Confederacy? nor ten Shillings a Day, nor fetching away their Beasts, Pots and Kettles, will not all this hinder
them, but they must depart from you? Will not all the Whippings a∣gain and again (as John Endicot, your Governour▪ did confess to his own Shame, that you had done) will not all serve? Call all your Inchanters together; and see, something is the Matter more then ordinary; and can∣not all this you have done deter them from your Jurisdiction? Yet you resolve to make another Law, and try what that will do; now you have covenanted with Death, and have shaken Hands with the Destroyer and Murderer; sure enough your Peace is undermined, for else all these hor∣rid cruel Enterprizes you would never have followed (which you have be∣gun) and Ruine, and Wo, and eternal Misery, and everlasting Sorrow is to them that are in that Nature you live in, which is cursed from God for∣ever. For Prevention thereof, this Court doth order and enact, that every Person or Persons of the cursed Sect of the Quakers, who is not an Inhabitant of, but is found within this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no Ma∣gistrate is at hand, any Constable, Commissioner or select man, and conveyed from Constable to Constable, to the next Magistrate, who shall commit the said Person to close Prison, there to remain (without Bail) unto the next Court of Assistance, where they shall have a legal Tryal. Now comes up the Rear of the Beast, and the Reserve of the Prince of Darkness, to back and fortifie all the wicked Enterprizes they attempted before; who gave you Power to order & so to enact, to apprehend without Warrant? So you have made every man a Magistrate and a Ruler in your Jurisdiction; and I believe, if they should kill, or take away the Life of any▪ you would give them an Absolution: Is this the Example of Christ, or any Church-Members, or any Christian Magistrate? And why do you call them a cursed Sect of the Quakers? You have cursed them whom God hath blessed, whom no Weapon that is formed against shall prosper: And as for your legal Tryal, we know your Rule, your own wicked, proud, arrogant, imperious and envious Wills, and this must sit as Judge and Tryer. Well, you have now set your selves against the Lord in your Strength, having the old Dragon for your Leader; will this serve you? the Angel of the everlasting Covenant hath a Chain in his Hand to bind him, and to dissipate your wicked Counsel, and confound you in the midst of your Devises. And being convicted to be of the Sect of the Quakers, shall be sentenced to be banished upon Pain of Death. You who are banished from the Presence of God your selves▪ and are in Cain's Way, Vagabond, driven out into the Earth, where the Dragon dwells, you would banish them out of the Earth, whom God hath shewed his Face and Presence unto; and you are a Sect which hath risen from the great Whore (your Mother) who hath made all Nations drunk, she that did drink the Blood of the Saints; and you are the Fruit of her Womb and are like your Mother; you have drunk the Blood of the Saints, whom God hath sanctified and washed by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ; and now you are grown so blood-thirsty, that nought but Banishment and Loss of Life will satisfie your Rage; your Cup shall be filled with the Wine of the
Wrath of God, which shall be poured forth without Mixture, and tha will be your Portion to drink. Reader, still take notice, all these Laws mentioned in this Book, and the fierce Censures and Punishments inflicted upon the Servants of the Lord, is, because they will not complement (like flattering Courtiers, and Roysters and Fidlers) and use flattering Titles to men, who are in Unbelief, who seek Respect and Honour one of another (which is below) and be∣cause they cannot joyn with them in their Hypocritical Assemblies, nor partake of the Table of Devils (who destroyes mens Lives) nor drink the Whore's Cup (which hath drunk the Blood of the Saints) and this is a Fact worthy of Banishment and Death in the Account of these Blood-suckers. And now they come to their own Inhabitants, and thou shalt hear their Judgment concerning them, and thou shalt see how they love their Neigh∣bours. And that every Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction, being convicted to be of the aforesaid Sect, either by taking up, publishing or defending the horrid Opinions of the Quakers, or the stirring up Mutiny, Sedition or Rebellion against the Go∣vernment, or by taking up their absurd and destructive Practices, viz. Denying civil Respect to Equals and Superiors, and withdrawing from our Church-Assem∣blies, and instead thereof frequent Meetings of their own, in Opposition to our Church-Order. Now all may see how these men love their Neighbours as themselves; and here is a great deal of aggravating high boasting Words, packed up to∣gether in this unrighteous and ungodly Act, as Sedition, Rebellion, and ab∣surd and destructive Principles; and (like Scolds) they make a great Noise and Clamour, but if thou enquire into the Fact, is it not puting off the Ht, and disowning their Assemblies? and (in their Account) Banishment and Death is Punishment little enough for this Transgression: These men would set up their Assembly as Nebuchadnezar's Image, and whosoever will not bow must into the Furnace, or be banished, robbed, spoiled and killed; or like Jeroboam's Calf at Dan and Bethel; and if Israel will not come to Dan, or Amos cry against Bethel, Amaziah will cry to the King. He hath uttered Sedition and Rebellion among the People, and he hath conspired against the King, and the Land cannot bear his Words: And is not this the same Language, They will not come to our Church, our Assemblies, but they meet of themselves, and oppose us, and breed Mutenies, Sedition and Rebellion in the Government: These Priests of New-England and Rulers would have banished all the Apo∣stles, and have killed Paul and Steven, who said, God dwelt not in Temples made with Hands, neither was worshipped in Temples made with mens Hands, and drew People out of the Temple into private Houses & Fields, and by the Sea side; and these men would have killed Christ (the same Generation did) in whose Foot-steps they are; he said, Neither at Jerusalem, nor at Samaria, but they that worship the Father, worship him in Spirit and Truth; might the Jew have replyed, Was not the Temple builded by the Command of God? And is it not so agreed upon by the whole Nation of the Jews? And wilt thou say that God is not worshipped? thou art mutenous and rebellious: And the Samaritans might have said, Ths is the Mount we met in, and it is agreed upon by our Ru∣ers and our People, and it is the laudable Custom of our Country and our Assembly
and dost thou teach thy Disciples to separate from Jerusalem, & from this Mount? then thou art seditious, and a Mutiner, and a Stirrer up of Rebellion, an Ene∣my to our Nation and Country; and wilt thou respect no man's Person? Nay (said the Pharisees, tempting) we know thou respects no man's Person, what say'st thou of Caesar? they might have said, What, wilt not thou respect thy Equals and Superiors? then thou art not civil, and art against the laudable Custom of our Country, which all our approved Orthodox Men do allow of, thou must be banished and if thou return, Death. or by adhering to, or approving of any known Quaker, and the Tenets and Practices of the Quakers, that are opposite▪ to the Orthodox received Opinions of the Godly, and endeavouring to disaffect others to civil Government and Church-orders, or condemning the Practice and Proceeding of this Court against the Quakers. Now if any (lie Nicodemus) would come but by Night (who are yet no Quakers) if the Rulers and Priests of New-England know of you, you must out of the Synagogue, and be Banished, and if return, be put to Death; for this is an Orthodox received Opinion, to banish and kill them that come not to their Assembly, and put not off the Hat, then the Orthodox recei∣ved Opinion of the Church-Members of New-England is Banishment, and if return Death; and he that justifies the Practice and Proceedings of that Court, is not justified of God: What, Whippers, Robbers, Spoilers, Killers and Destroyers, Marrers of the Workmanship of God, Wrestlers with Flesh and Blood, Blood-suckers? He that justifies you, is condemned of God; he that condems your Court, and Proceeding, and Practices, will God (and all the holy Angels) justifie, and the Church of God. It may be you will call this Rebellion, and so it is against the Prince of Dark∣ness, from whence you have received your Authority. Manifesting thereby their complying with those, whose Design is to overthrow the Order established in Church and State, every such Person, upon Conviction before the said Court of Assistance, in Manner as aforesaid, shall be committed to close Prison for one Moneth, and then unless they chuse voluntarily to depart this Jurisdiction, shall give Bond for their good Behaviour, and appear at the next Court, where continuing obstinate, and refusing to retract and reform the fore∣said Opinions, shall be sentenced to Banishment upon Pain of Death; and any one Magistrate, upon Information given him of any such Person, shall cause him to be apprehended, and shall commit any such Person to Prison, according to his Discre∣tion, until he come to Tryal, as aforesaid. And here is an End of their wicked Law, which must come to an End. You that build up a Nation with Iniquity, and a Church (so called) with Blood, who lay Traps for the Feet of the Innocent, and make Laws to de∣stroy mens Estates, and to banish Men from the Earth, which is the Lords, and the Fulness of it; and further more, make Laws to destroy mens Lives, and shed Blood; Wo and Misery is to your Church and State, and the righ∣teous God of Heaven and Earth will plead the Cause of the Innocent and Needy, and overthrow that which you have established; and if they will not recant (as you call it) which is to deny Christ before Men, then Ba∣nishment and Prisonment, and their Estate wasted, and they destroyed, then you think you are secure; your Laws are cursed, your Religion cur∣sed,
and your Enterprizes cursed; what is not your Gospel able to defend it self, but you must take up the Beast's Weapons, Cain's Weapons (the Murderer) the Devil's Weapons, to defend your Church and State, car∣nal Weapons, hellish Weapons, the Dragon's Weapons? Hath your de∣ceitful Merchants, the hireling Priests) made you believe that this is an Or∣thodox received Opinion? They received this out of the bottomless Pit, and the Weapons (with all that handle them) shall go down thither again, and the Lamb shall reign over the Beast and his Followers; though you have established Wickedness by a Law, and think your selves secure, yet God will provoak you, that the Rottenness of your Hearts may be brought forth, and that all your Deceit may be made manifest, that all that fear the Lord may come out from amongst you, for Wo and Misery shall compass your Tabernacle, and the Dread of God is against you. AND the next thing whereby the Devil and his Ministers fortifie themselves, are certain Articles exhibited by them (like the Pope's Inquisition, although they are full of Ignorance and Blasphemy) and these they intend to impose upon any man, and if they answer not according to their blind Understandings, then they say, They are con∣victed as Hereticks, and must be sent to Prison, and if they do not retract, banished and whipped in the mean Time, and his Estate made Havock on, and then banished, not to return upon Pain of Death, and if he do return, to be put to Death; and this is the Fruit of their Orthodox received Principles, and of the laudable Custom of New-England. And now I come to the Articles. 1. If any Person or Persons, besides their refusing to come to the publick Assem∣bly of divine Worship, shall either deny the blessed Trinity of Persons in the di∣vine Essence. Answ. And is this one of your Orthodox received Articles? Then the Pope is as Orthodox as you; and what is there to be found, or can be ex∣pected in your publick Assemblies, amongst a Company of envious Men, whose Hearts are filled with Envy, whose Hands are defiled with Blood: Divine Worship, say you, like Wolsey, Bonner, and that bloody Crew, Divine Service, said they; but you might more truly have said, Human Invention and vain Tradition: And Trinity of Persons in the Divine Es∣sence; where learned you this Article? from the Pope, from the Mass-book; yet the Father, Son and Spirit are owned, and these three are one; and the Father, Word and Spirit, and these are one; but I challenge all you Orthodox Professors, to shew me from Scripture, where the Holy Ghost (or Spirit) is called a Person; be ashamed of your Ignorance, ye illiterate men. 2. Or shall deny the Person of Christ to be distinct from the Father and the Holy Ghost, or shall deny the Person of Christ to be distinct from every Be∣liever.
Answ. Do but mark the Madness and Confusion of these mighty Rab∣bies, before there must be three Persons in one Essence, and now Christ must be distinct from the Father and the holy Ghost, before in God, and now distinct from God; this is damnable Doctrine, which hath been brought in since the Apostacy; for the Scripture saith, God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself; how was he distinct from the Father, when the Father was in him? And I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and I and my Father are one; Nay (say New-England Doctors) They are distinct; and the Fulness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily: Now prove you that the Father and the holy Ghost are distinct from Christ; or how is Christ's Person distinct from every Believer, when he that is a Be∣liever hath him revealed in him, and he that is a true Believer eats his Flesh, and drinks his Blood? How is he then distinct? What nearer Union can there be exprest? Is that distinct from a man, that he hath in him? But it may be they will say (as the rest of the Dreamers do) he is in Belie∣vers by his Spirit, distinct from his Body; then I say, Christ is not divided; a Person without a Spirit, or distinct from the Spirit, is not Christ; but this blind Doctrine came up since the Apostles Dayes, and was counted as Orthodox by the Councils at Nice and Lateran, a Company of Apostates, and hath been counted by the Beast's Followers, a great Point of Divi∣nity. 3. Or deny the Manhood of Christ to be a Manhood distinct from the Manhood of any other Man. Answ. The Man Christ Jesus, who was of the Seed of Abraham, accor∣ding to the Flesh, and the Son of God according to the Spirit; his Flesh is distinct from you who live in ENVY, whole FLESH is as the Flesh of Horses, and as the Flesh of Dragons, who devour; you know not the holy Flesh of Christ, but the Man of God doth, who is born of the Spirit, and the Flesh of Christ is his Meat; and they that believe in him are Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh; you ignorant Dream∣ers, how then is his Flesh distinct? But you do feed upon Ashes, as your Father doth (the cunning Serpent) for God's Wisdom is hid from you. 4. Or shall deny the Scripture, or the written Word to be the Rule. Answ. We own the Scriptures, which you ignorantly call the written Word, as though all the Scriptures were but one Word; the Word is Christ, which was revealed in the Saints, which spake the Words forth; and he is the Way and the Rule of Life to them that believe, and his Spirit is the Leader and Guider into all Truth, and the Rule of Obedience; and you are they that deny the Scriptures, and the Rule of holy walking; you own it in Words, and in VVorks deny him, witness all your fore-mentio∣ned Deeds of Darkness; and Hypocrites and Dissemblers cry, Scripture is the Rule of Faith and Life, when their Life that they live in stands in Sin, Wickedness and Deceit. 5. Or shall openly revile either Church, or State, or Church-VVorship, Church-Officer, or Ordinances divine, or the publick Assembly of the People of God, to worship him according to the Prescription of the Gospel.
Answ. Your Church, and State, Church-Officers, and Ordinances, and Assembly, and your Worship is manifest to be a Place where Dragons are, who sting, devour, kill and destroy God's Workmanship; and he that speaks for you, God will condemn him; for he that justifies you justifies the wicked, and that is an Abomition to the Lord: And let the Nation see your Prescription (in that which you call your Gospel) where Christ commanded the Churches, or gave his Disciples such Prescripts as these; If the rest of the Jews or Gentiles will not come to your Assemblies, fine them 5 s. a Day, and 10 s. a Day, or 40 s. a Moneth, and if any speak any where in my Name, but where you meet, let him that speaks be fined 5 l. and if they will not pay, fetch away their Goods, Beasts, Horses, break open their Houses, and take Hatchets, and beat down their Doors, and take the Names of them that meet, and ble them to the Court, and there fine them 5 l. a Man, and send them to Prison, and load their Backs and Stripes, and whip them severely; and if any refuse to doff his Hat, and will not say, Reverend Mr Peter, and Reverend Mr Paul, and Reverend Mr John; or if it please you, Mr Mark, or Mr Andrew and Philip, then go you to the Judgment Seat, and tell the Magistrates, and let them indict them, and put in a great deal of aggravating Words, as Muteny, Sediti∣on, Insurrection, Rebellion, and the like; and let them say unto them, you are against the laudable Custom of our Country; and last of all banish them, and if they return again, put them to Death, and let them say, as Richard Bellinghom (the Deputy Governour of Boston) said to John Copeland, John Rous and Christopher Holder, We commanded these Men not to come again, but they returned again in Contempt of the Magistracy and Ministry, and so whatsoever comes upon you, Loss of Ears, or Loss of Life, your Blood be upon your own Heads. I say, let the Regions know your Prescript in your Gospel and your Rule of Life for these Practices, and then you will convince the Qua∣kers, and satisfie all People. 6. Or shall entertain any such in a Way of Conventicle or private Meeting, or shall resort unto the Conventicle of any such who are known Refusers to come to the publick Worship of God in the publick Assembly. Answ. These Men would have banished Paul, he was a Man publickly known to refuse to go into the Temple and Synagogues, except to lead People out of them; and yet they have got his Words in their Mouthes; and these Men would have imprisoned the Church of Corinth, and Galatia, and Thessalonica, and the Church of Antioch, for they met in Houses, and denyed the rest of the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Temples of the Gen∣tles; and they had private Meetings, and often by the Sea-side, and Moun∣tains, and other Places; and although Bishop Laud be dead, his Spirit speaks and acts in New-England; he made such Articles as these against Conventicles, and told of the laudable Customs and Worship of the Nati∣on; but these Men have far exceeded him in Cruelty; they have done more Wickedness in one Year, then he in seven. 7. Or shall openly contemn, revile, or disobey, or diswade others from yield∣ing Subjection to the Christian Magistrate, as at present established in this Ju∣risdiction. Answ. Shame and Contempt is already come upon the Magistrates of
that Jurisdiction, and shall more and more encrease, who rules not for God, but for the Murderer; and they who have established Wickedness by a Law, none can be subject to them nor their Laws for Conscience sake, for they that do, wrong their own Souls; but rather bear their Testimony against, and suffer under it, till God arise and plead their Cause; it may be they will call this Sedition and Rebellion. 8. Or being questioned by lawful Authority, shall refuse to give direct An∣swers, or plain, to the afore-mentioned Particulars, together with their obstinate persisting in any of the premised Delinquencies. Answ. So here is an End of the Inquisition; if they will not give plain Answers, then to Prison▪ but in Plainness, that is, if they will not accuse themselves, then to Prison; so whether answer or not answer (directly or indirectly) all is one; if they answer contrary to these Articles, then Hereticks, to prison, and whip them, and fine them 5 l. and if they will not accuse themselves▪ but answer as the Lord shall give them to answer (when asked by such Tempters as these) then they conclude their Answer is not plain, but indirect; and if they say nothing at all, then conclude them guilty, send , cut off their Ears, whip them with Ropes, whip them  their Goods, banish them from their Estates and  eturn▪ put to Death, and then say, Whether  ome to you, your Blood be upon your own Heads:  he said the like as Richard Bellingham. Cause of the poor of the Flock; for  the Pride of their Hearts, and blaspheme thy , and them that thou hast redeemed they seek to two Letters (of John Endicot's and Richard Billing∣ham  of Envy and inveterate Words, and sent to some (like  strengthen their Hands in Wickedness; the Letters answered as follow. JOhn Endicot Governour of Boston, and Richard Bellingham, who have made your selves mnifest by your Actions and Carriages, by your Papers and Writings, to be of the Serpent's Seed, who makes War with the Lamb and his Followers, who joyned with the Dragon, and casts out Floods after the Woman, and the Remnant of her Seed, to destroy her and them, that so you might rule in the Kingdom of Darkness without Mo∣lestation. Richard Billingham, thy inveterate Words and thy persecuting Spirit, the Sound of which hath reached as far as old England; you that were Cryers out of Persecution and Cruelty in times past, are now become as cruel Persecutors as any of the Beast's Followers; you fled the Cross of Christ here in England, when you were proved and tryed, when you should have born Witness for God in your Generation; and now that which fled the
Cross, persecutes them that take up the Cross, and follow Christ in the strait Way (which you never yet set Foot in) and that Nature which was to be limited by the Cross of Christ, you carryed with you into New-En∣gland, and now it manifests it self by your bloody Cruelty and insolent Wickedness which you have acted, which makes your Names and Practi∣ces to stink amongst all sober People, and are become as cruel and brutish as the barbarous Heathens; and Papists Inquisitors are short of you in Cru∣elty, Madness and wicked Inventions; and now ye rejoyce in Iniquity, as though it were the high Way only to Felicity. Richard Billingham, thou say'st, Thou art glad to hear of Mr Gurden's careful and faithful Proceedings against the incorrigible, obstinate, roguish Quakers. As for Gurden, he is manifest to be one of the same Race with thee, in Cain's Way, in Envy and Wrath, and hath manifested his Folly in the County of Suffolk, so that all sober People abhor and detest his Practices, and is counted no other then a peevish, wilful, blind, ignorant Man, be∣fore whose Face the Fear of God is not; and his Proceedings will never bring Honour to him, but rather Infamy, and Reproach, and perpetual Shame; and truly, the least of the Children of Light (and them that have but Moderation as Men) are ashamed of his Practices, both superior and inferior; and thou that rejoycest, and art glad of his Proceedings (and also some other whom thou writest to, which are one with thy Spirit) thy rejoycing is not good, and thy Joy shall be turned into Mourning, & Shame shll cover thy Face, when the Lord God of Heaven and Earth ariseth in his righteous Judgment, then Shame and Confusion shall cover your Faces. Thou say'st, They are a formidable People, and not to be neglected; for many follow their pernicious Wayes. I say, they are a People whose Beginning hath been but small▪ who have come through great Tribulation, whose End shall be great; they are the Heritage whom God hath chosen to place his Name in, and to reveal his Power unto, and to be Witnesses of his Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth; and they are, and have been, and shall be a  nto all their Enemies; and though thou may'st seek to oppose, and use all thy Diligence, and neglect no Oportunity to withstand them, yet it is but as if thou should'st set Thorns and Bryars in Battel against the Lord. Thou say'st, If the Lord hath given these Hereticks Commission to kill the Witnesses, they are malignant enough to make it the mst direful Execution that ever befel God's People. Hereticks are they that deny Christ, the true Light that lighteth every Man that cometh into the VVorld, amongst whom thou (with Jhn En∣dicot) and the rest of the Blood-thirsty Men in New-England, whose Ma∣lignity hath appeared, whose Cruelty hath surpassed and super-abounded many that are gone before you; and the VVitness you have killed in your selves, and the VVitnesses you seek to destroy without you; and your Ex∣ecution against both the VVitnesses hath been as wicked as most of the Persecutors of old, who have plowed long Furrows upon the Backs of his People, so have you done with your VVhips and Stripes, again and again (by your own Confession) which hath not only teared the Flesh of God's People, but reached to their Sinnews and to their Joints, and yet would be
called Christians: Oh full of Ignorance and gross Stupidity! Christ came not to destroy Mens Lives; but to save them; and you pretend your selves Rulers and Christian Magistrates, & would not be accounted men of Blood, and instead of saving, you seek to destroy, as your Actions have made ma∣nifest against William Brend, a Man fearing God, a sober Man, known to many of the Inhabitants of the City of London to be a just man in his Ge∣neration, in causing one hundred and seventeen Stripes (and upward) to be executed on his Body by a pitcht Rope, as though he had been a Block or a Stone, altogether insensible; Shameless men, and full of Impudency and Hard-heartedness, in whose Hearts there is no Remorse nor Fear of God; witness your cutting off the Ears of John Copeland, Christopher Hol∣der and John Rous, men fearing God, and as well educated as your selves, and for no Transgression at all of any Law of God, neither of any of your own; but when you had none that could reach to be a Cover for your Cru∣elty, you go into the nethermost Hell to invent Laws Christians are asha∣med of, and all sober People detest it; and so let your Actions bear witness to your Faces; and let all sober People judge who are in the Malignity, and who are Slayers of the Witnesses. And these Quakes by open Profession (thou say'st) tend to ruin all Christian-Society, compassing Sea and Land to that End. Thou vomitest out thy Rage, and castest up Mire and Dirt (like a raging Wave) but thy Bond is set; that which the Quakers profess, tendeth to the uniting all that believe unto Christ, and one unto another in Love, and Unity, and Peace, in Meekness, Long-suffering and Patience; but all such Societies that thou art of, who art associated with Death and Hell, and in Confederacy with all the Army of the Beast, who is full of Rage, Venome, Insolency and Wickedness, whose Heart is set on Fire of Hell, which makes all this Flame and Smoak ascend out of the Pit, where thou and the rest are associated with the Residue, and have your dwelling-Place. And thou say'st, Their Religion is to speak Rebellion and Sedition in the Pre∣sence and to the Face of Authority. God will confound thy lying Lips, and bridle thy deceitful Tongue, and cause Sorrow to fill thy Heart in the Day of his righteous Judgments, for all thy hard Speeches, false Accusations, slanderous Words; all so∣ber People in England, Scotland and Ireland know thee to be a Lyar: All People in every Sect have been Stirrers up of Parties, and have (in one thing or other) striven to rebell against that Power which hath gone about to limit them in their Ends; but the People (scornfully reproached) called Quakers, have born all, have suffered under all in Patience, and have let many Floods go over them, and many Waves compass them, and yet have rested in Patience, knowing that it is better to suffer Wrong, then do Wrong; though I tell thee, the Quakers (so called) might more justly (in the three Nations) claim Property and Liberty for the Exercise of their pure Consciences, and also their Persons and Estates, then any other Peo∣ple in the three Nations besides; for they are they that have stood by the Authority in time of greatest Danger, in time of the Bishops, when Per∣secution was the greatest, which you (like Cowards) fled from, they staid in the midst of it, hearing their Testimony against the gross Ignorance of them who exercised Lordship over the Heritage of God in that time; and also in the late Wars in the three Nations, there are few of them but have
joyned with them that cryed up Reformation, and seemed to seek after righ∣teous things; and their Fidelity to righteous Government, Magistracy and Ministry is manifest to all unbiassed Spirits; and though now at last, when we expected free Liberty for the Exercise of our Consciences, and Preservation of our Persons and Estates (which had been a just Recom∣pence for all our sore Tryals, Travails and Labours) but behold, a Troop of Robbers have laboured to nip and spoil the Plant of Renown, which God is bringing forth, and have made Havock of our Estates, and cry up the Powers of the Earth to stand by them for their own Ends, only to maintain their covetous greedy Practices; & behold the Priests of these Nations, they are now, as they have been in former Generations, Fomenters of Mischief, Stirrers up of Sedition, and Patronizers of Rebellion, and seeking to make Parties to hold up their Deceit, and call upon Authority to persecute, and tell the Magistrates, they ought to do so, and teach them to abuse their Power, to the provoaking of the Wrath of God against a Nation or People. And thou say'st, In the Presence of Authority they labour to make the Ma∣gistrate to be a Man of Blood. Thou ignorant man, who hast lost thy natural Reason, will a Magistrate (who is become a man of Blood) become advantagious to us? But ra∣ther have not we suffered? And would not you be counted bloody Magi∣strates? then cease your shedding of Blood, your whipping, your beat∣ing, your burning, and stigmatizing, and cutting off Ears; for else your own Actions have and will evidence and demonstrate you to be men of Blood, and you will be recorded amongst the blood-thirsty and cruel Per∣secutors, and you can expect nothing from the Hand of God but severe De∣struction. And thou say'st, They encourage People against lawful Authority, not regar∣ding their Lives, so they may attain their Ends. Would you be counted lawful Authority? what Sword of God hath authorized you to turn your Sword against the innocent and upright? and many love not their Lives to the Death, to finish their Testimony against the Dragon and his Power, the Beast and his Authority, which would com∣pell all (both great and small) to worship him; and were you not blind, you might see that you are his Followers, and not the Lamb's Followers. Thou say'st, Was there ever State so bereaved of Reason, as to suffer such Things, the Honour of God, the Safety of Religion, the Peace of the Country in∣vaded by these Emissaries of Satan? You are that State that is bereaved of Sense, and bereaved of Reason, who think to defend your Religion by Clubs and Staves, Can's Wea∣pons, and think to bring Honour to God by killing his Servants, and de∣facing his Workmanship which he hath made, and are amongst the Phari∣sees recorded, who thought they did God Service, when they went about to kill his Members; and are not your thoughts the same, you blind and slow of Heart to believe? And shall not the Magistrate be as confident to punish, as they to offend capita. What is the Offence? you had no Law till you had made one, to sa∣fie your wicked End and your insatiable Cruelty; and though you  be confident that this will stop the spreading of the Truth of God over  Earth, you shall know (ye Potsherds) your Confidence will fail, and Truth shall go over you (Hills) as a Flood.
At this Time (thou say'st) we have twelve Quakers in Prison in Boston. To thy Shame be it spoken, who give such Entertainment to Strangers, and to Men of your own Nation; you are far from Abraham's Spirit, and Jacob's or Job's Spirit, who opened his Door to the Travailer, and enter∣tained the Stranger; and you are out of the Law of God, who command∣ed to entertain Strangers; and were not you once Srngers in that Land? and do you thus requite the Lord for his Kindness, as to shut them up in Holes, and Dens, and Caves, and (Pharah-like) have your task masters to exercise your Cruelty upon them? Oh unheard of Cruelty and unparl∣lel'd Wickedness! the Memorial of your Cry will not easily be blotted out, but will sound into the Ears of Generations to come; and the Record of you will be Unthankfulness and Ingratitude; and your in human Cruelty hath appeared to your own Neighbours, who have resided long amongst you; Men of great Age and of Fame in your Country for Uprightness have be∣come your Prey; and this is fulfilled amongst you, which was spoken of by the Prophets, her Princes are as ravening Wolves, who are greedy of their Prey, who gnaw not the Bones till the Marrow. Thou say'st, They prevail much. They have prevailed, and shall prevail; for strong is the Lord of Hosts that is with them, and goes before them, whose Arm compasses them about and refresheth them, and preserves them in Patience in the midst of all your Cruelty; for no Weapon that is formed against him (whom they bar Witness of) shall prosper; and every Tongue that riseth up in Judgment against him will he condemn. Thou say'st, There be two Jews amongst them. What if there be? used not you (and the rest of the Clergy) to pray for the Conversion of the Jews? and are you now angry if any of them be turned from Darkness to Light? But none can escape thy slanderous Tongue without Reproach. Thou say'st, The Juncture between the Jesuites and these Hereticks is strong. Thou art nearer joyned to the Jesuites then the Quakers; for they and you in New-England are working one and the self-same Work; will not most People in the Regions know thy Lyes? is it not publickly known in many Countries, that two of the Quakers were imprisoned by the Pope and Jesuites at Rome lately, and have been put in the Inquisition, and one of them prisoned till Death, and the other remains in Prison under cruel Bonds to this Day; and now read whether the Juncture between the Jesuites and you be not great, who are acting in one and the self-same Work, and bring forth one and the self-same Fruit, the Apples of Sodm, and the Grapes of Gomorrah, whom God destroyed, which will be the End of all the wicked, except they repent. There is more Danger (thou say'st) in this People to trouble and overcome En∣gland, then the King of Scots and all the Popish Princes in Germany. Thy Tongue is set on Fire of Hell, which makes thee utter orth all these horrid Lyes, and false Accusations, and bitter things against the Lord and his People; and will not all sober People in England see thy Envy? hath not England had sufficient Proof of our Fidelity? And thousands in England shall be Witness for us against thee and all thy false Accusations.
Thou say'st, They strengthen all Disconents against the present Government, and hath all Plots, and encourage all Combinations and Insurretions. The present Government of these Nations will be a Witness for us against thee, that (amongst all the People in the Nations) we have been most pas∣sive and suffering; and the Discontents, and Plots, and Combinations from time to time, have been among the Presbyter-Priests and their Faction, of whose Stock and Off-spring you are. And further thou say'st, They vent horrid Blasphemy against God, which ought to be persecuted with the severest Censures. Thou art of that Generation that called the Master of the House Beelze∣bub, and in the Steps of the persecuting Jews, who said, He hath spoken Blas∣phemy, what need we any more Witness? But how can we speak Evil, or blaspheme him who is our Life? And in the Day when he ariseth to judge all the Earth in Righteousness, he will justifie us, and clear us, and con∣demn thy Malignity, and thy hard Speeches, and vain Thoughts, which lodge in thy corrupt Heart, from whence all these unsavoury Words have been uttered forth; and is that New-England Divinity to teach Persecution, that thou art so impudent to own it in Words? that which persecutes with the severest Censures, is of the Devil and is in Cain's Way; and dost thou lay down this for a Dctrine in England, to appease the Wrath of God to∣wards it? I say, Persecution and severe Censures is that which kindleth the Wrath of God against these Nations, and did overtake the Bishops and all their Confederacy, and overthrew the Nobles of the Land, the ancient and the honourable, which were the Head, and all the false Prophets which were the Til, and that same Wrath shall be over you, who are of that Stock and Off-spring, manifested by the deadly Actions, and Chara∣cters of most horrid and wicked Cruelty, which the Lord God will con∣found and blast, and set his Truth above it all. And John Endcot, thou say'st, The Quakers trouble us very much, though we cause them to be whipt, and sent away again and again, yet they return again. Thou may'st see there is another Spirit in them then was in you, when you fled from Old England (from under the Bishops) you would suffer no∣thing for the Truth, and therefore were you given up to the same Spirit that was in the Persecutors here in England, this is entered into you now, and become ten-fold stronger; but now he that is stronger then all hath appeared, and is coming to trouble you, and disquiet you of your Rest, which you have taken up in the Earth; what hath your Gospel (and the Ministers thereof) no more Strength in them to convince the Gain-sayers, then Gain-sayers have to seduce them that are in the Truth? the Day of your Trouble is come, and the Beginning of Sorrows is kindled upon you, and a greater Wo follows after; for the Rod of God is stretched out over you, and shall reach unto you, and turn your Counsels backward, and confound you in the midst of your Combinations; where did any Christian-Magi∣strates whip and imprison any for Religion's sake or Conscience sake, or our off their Ears? where is your Law? did any Minister of Christ perswad the Magistrate it was lawful for him to do so? Give us some Evidence▪ and let us see your Rule, and by what Authority you do these things, and fron whence you have your Authority; I am sure God never authorized it, Christ, nor his Ministers, nor no Christian-Magistrate (that ruled for God) never countenanced any such thing, as to whip again and again, to be
with Ropes, till men fall down as dead, till mens Flesh becomes as Jelly, as some of your own Nation have said; and shall not the Saints be bold to tell you, that this is of the Devil, who was a Lyar and a Murderer from the Beginning, in whose Foot-steps you are, who shall receive a Reward according to your Works? And thou say'st, Divers of you do think, that unless the Court doth make a Law to banish them, & not to return upon Pain of Death▪ the Colony will not be rid of them. Nay, nor then neither, though you make Covenant with Death, and A∣greement with Hell, and shake Hands with the Prince of Darkness, your Covenant shall be broken, and your Confederacy disanulled, and you con∣founded in the midst of your Counsels; what! have you your Law yet to make to serve your Turns? It seems you act not by the Law of God (which is made already) which is equal, just and good, and is for the Transgres∣sor of Justice, Goodness and Equity, but takes not hold upon the just, e∣qual nor good; but you must now have another invented to satisfie your envious Minds, and to accomplish your wicked Determinations; and you that think to make a Law to banish, and to put to Death, your Thoughts are vain and wicked, and God will bring them to Judgment, and con∣demn you for them; for Christ came not to destroy Mens Lives, but to save them; but the Devil makes Laws to destroy, and not to save: Read your Example, and let Shame cover your Faces, and Astonishment fill your Hearts, that you should become so brutish and vain in your Thoughts, as to think to limit the Lord of Heaven and Earth: Can you command the Wind that it blow not? can you stop the Bottles of Heaven that they pour not forth Wa∣ter? If you cannot, no more can you limit the Lord: And if you make any such Law, to banish or put to Death, it will procure the Indignation and Wrath of God more speedily, then if all the Popish Princes that are in the WORLD did enter into the midst of your Land: But this is come to pass, that your Hypocrisie and Deceit might be made ma∣nifest in the Sight of the Sun, and that all men may see what Prfession of Words is, without the Life of Christ to rule in Men: If it should have been told you (when you fled from this Nation) what you would do (in the time to come) against God and his Servants, you would have said (with Hazael) Are we Dogs? But the Heart of Man is deceitful (unconverted) and your deceived Hearts have led you aside. Thou thinkest they are the worst Hereticks. Thy Eye being blinded, and thy Understanding darkened, and thy Heart full of Envy, how should'st thou think otherwise? But thy Thoughts shall be discovered to thee, and thou shalt be convinced of the Evil of them. Thou say'st, One (whom many think is a Jesuite) pressed for a Conference with one of our Teachers, called Mr Norton, but the Quaker was quickly weary of it. You live by your Thoughts, and know nothing; if he had been a Jesuite, it's like he might have had more Favour from you; and the Minister might be very bold, knowing before-hand no Evil was like to befall him, having the Rulers (with their Clubs) on his Side, the Prison-Doors and House of Correction ready to receive the Quakers, the Goalers and Task-masters with their Whips, and butcherly Fellows with their Knives, to cut of their Ears, at the Pleasure and Wills of a Company of envious men, before whose Face the Fear of the Lord is not: But it is like you will make the
Quaker weary soon, if he would look out at your Cruelty, if you did (as sometime some of your Priests and Rulers caused to be done in New-En∣gland) stop Napkins in their Mouthes, and bound Keys over their Mouthes, that they could not speak, and boast, and say, The Quaker had nothing to answer: Well, all these things are recorded, and are written as with a Pen of Iron, and they are engraven where they shall not be blotted out; and you are registred among the Uncircumcised, with Mesech and Tubal, the great Princes of Gog, which make War against the Lamb & his Followers; but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory, and you shall be trod∣den as Ashes under the Soles of their Feet, for they shall melt away that hate the Lord. Reading, the 16th of the 12th Moneth, 1658. F. H.
THE WORKS OF DARKNESS Brought to Light▪ AND REPROVED, IN Answer to divers false Doctrines and Principles of John Wells of St. Ives (so called) in Hun∣tingon-shire. Concerning the Word, and the Gospel, and the Way to Christ, and the Tryal of Spirits, and the Light which lighteth every Man, and the Ministers Maintenance. His vain Arguments and Proofsmade void, and Truth manife∣sted in all these particulars. Also some Queries propounded to John Wells to answer. By him that loves the Truth as it is in Jesus. F. H.
THE WORKS OF DARKNESS Brought to Light, HE that hates the Light (as it is written) will not bring his Deeds to the Light, lest they should be reproved and made manifest, of which Sort John Wells, a pretended Minister of the Gospel at St. Ives (so called) in Huntington-shire, is, who hath declared and pub∣lished unsound Doctrines, contrary to Scripture of Truth, which were asserted by him, and taken from his own Mouth, and the Reply thereunto sent, and his Doctrines reproved, as to be unsound and inconsistent to a true Minister of Christ, the which Paper of Information and also of Re∣proof, John Wells, in Vindication of his former Assertions, hath divulged abroad in his Parish, as in Answer to the said Paper delivered unto him, and also in Vindication of his former Doctrines, which Paper of his hath been read up and down by his Auditors, as some great Oracle which could not be gainsayed; and he never yet sent his Answer unto them, who con∣tradicted and reproved his aforesaid Doctrines and Principles, unto which his Answer did properly belong; it could never yet be purchased or obtain∣ed from him or any of his Auditors; and all this he hath done, lest his Works should be brought to Light, and his Deceit should be disco∣vered, and his Kingdom weakened, which stands in Darkness; but seeing that there is no Work of Darkness must be hid, but must all be brought to Light, and be discovered in the Day; there∣fore is his Paper come forth by another Hand, that he and his Work might be tryed and reproved, and that the ignorant might see his Confusion, and also that Truth might be made manifest to the Understandings of People, that they may no longer continue in Ignorance and Blindness, now when the Lord is shining forth in his Brightness, and revealing his Glory from the rising of the Sun. His first Position is, That Eternal Life is to be found by or in the Scriptures. II. They are the VVay and Means which God hath discovered for the obtaining of it, viz. Eternal Life. In the Vindication of his foresaid Assertions, he saith▪ he will explain him∣self, and saith, That God is pleased by his Infinite Grace and VVisdom to continue this excellnt Plot of Redemption by his Son, and then concludeth, how shall we believe in him of whom we have not heard? therefore was God pleased by the Scrip∣tures
to reveal Jesus Christ, and none can ever come to the Knowledge of Chrst, but in or by the Scriptures: This man talks like a Heathen Politician rather then a Minister of Christ, who tells of an excellent Plot of Redemption; for he who is the Redeemer, was with the Father, & was his Delight before the World began, which in due time was made manifest, by what means the Fa∣ther pleased, who is that unlimited Spirit, which cannot or will not be con∣fined to this or that thing; for Moses was a Believer, and a Follower of Christ, and Christ was revealed to him, that through Faith he saw him that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. And then was there no Scripture, and the Shep∣herds and the wise men of the East, they were directed by the Star; And lo the Star which they saw in the East went before them, till it came and stood over where the young Child was, & when they saw the Star they rejoyced with exceeding great Joy, Mat. 2.2▪ 9, 10. And here is no mention made of Scripture, so to confine the Lord to this or that Way, to this or that Form, to this or that Appearance, as John VVells would do, is to limit the holy One of Israel; and the Scripture saith, As the living Father hath Life in himself, so the Son hath also Life in himself, to give to whmsoeer he will; and the Scripture saith further, none know God, nor the Things of God, save by the Spirit of God; so that this is a true Saying, and worthy of Acceptation, that eternal Life can be found no where, but where it is, and eternal Life is in the Son of God, and thou and the rest of you Professors, who look for eternal Life in the Letter, you are seeking the living among the dead; for the Scripture saith, he that hath the Son hath Life, but not he that hath the Scripture, hath Life, for there are many which have the Scripture, the Writings, or written Words, and have not the Son, neither eternal Life; for the Pharisees had the Words and the Scriptures, and never heard the Voice of God at any time, neither had they the VVord of God abiding in their Hearts, and yet they had the Scriptures and Writings of Moses and the Prophets in their Minds; so that it is manifest, they had neither found God, Christ nor eternal Life notwithstanding, though they had Moses and the Prophet: And as for the Apostle's Words in the Romans, it's manifest that they might hear the Scriptures, and the Writings of the Law and Prophets, and yet not believe in Christ, who is eternal Life, neither hear the Word of Faith which the A∣postle preached, and exhorted all to attend unto, which was nigh in their Hearts, and in their Mouth, which Word discovereth the Intents of the Heart, and separateth betwixt good and evil Thoughts of the Heart, and good and evil Words in the Mouth, which Word they that had the Scrip∣tures, who have thought (as thou dost) to find eternal Life in the Scrip∣tures, did not listen neither hearken unto; and so eternal Life was vailed from them, and not revealed in them; and yet I say unto thee, we are not vilifying the Scriptures, as thou falsly judgest; for if the Spirit of Truth, through which God and the deep things of God are discovered, if it plese to manifest eternal Life, or any thing that pertains thereunto, through the Words which have been spoken before by it slf, and now brings in thoe VVords again, and opens them in any Believer's Heart, and gives him to nderstand them and the things of God through any of the VVords of the Scripture, this is not excluded; but to limit Life, or the Spirit to this or that or the other thing, true Believers dare not do: For God, who is e∣ternal Life, manifesteth his Mind to the Creature, how, when, where, and by what he will; who art thou that would'st limit him? and thou that
know'st Christ no other VVay then by the VVords without thee▪ know'st him not at all no more then the Pharisees, who had the Words, and yet were ignorant of the Life. Then thou to confute thy former Words say'st▪ That we must not think that thou judgest that eternal Life lyeth in Words or Sentences, but eternal Life is found in or by the Scriptures. What reasonable or understanding man can judge or think of thee other∣wise? is not the Scripture Writings? and do not Writings consist of Syllables, VVords and Sentences? And if thou lookest not hat eternal Life is found in the Scriptures, VVords and Sentences, thu thy Assertion is made void and false; for eternal  is in the Life that spoke forth the VVords, and those VVords are a certain Sound, or a Declaration of that Life, but not the Life it self. And thus having laid down the Meaning of thy VVords, thou sayest, Thou wilt draw an Argument of the Truth of them from Joh. 5.39. where thou sayest, Christ brings an Argument from his VVords in ver 37. who produceth the witness of hs Father, that he was sent of God. And ver▪ 3. thou sayest, That Christ saith, Go and search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal Life, for they are they that testifie of me: So thy Conclusion is, That by the Scriptures eternal Life is to be found, because by them Christ is to be found. In Joh. 5.31, 33, 36, 37. he produceth Testimonies that he was sent of the Father, and saith, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is true; likewise he produceth the Father and John for his Testimony; and in ver. 39. to the End of the Chapter, he saith, Moses and the Prophets  of him; but in ver. 46. he saith unto the Pharisees, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; but he doth not say, that eternal Life was found in Moses's VVritings or VVords; now the 39th Verse tho hast perverted, and thy Argument falleth into the Pit from whence it arose; for the Pharisees thinking to have eternal Life in the Scriptures, doth no more prove that eternal Life is to be found in the Scriptures, then Paul (when he made havock of the Church of God, and persecuted the Believers from City to City, and thought he did God good Service) dth prove tht he was doing the VVork of God, and therefore thy Ignorance is manifest: The words in the Greek Copy are,  rendered on this wise, You do search the Scriptures, because in them yu think o have eternal Life, and they are they that testifie of me: This was spoken to the Pharisees and Un∣lievers; and Christ did neither approve of their sarching with that Mnd which envied the Life, therefore he reprehends them for their Thoughts, which were gazing at the words, and looked not at the Life, which the words testified of; and therefore they were reproved in ver. 40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have Life: And so thy Affirmation from thse words▪ and also thy Conclusion is false, and denyed; and so the Charge stands stil good against thee. Further thou goest on and sayest, That neither I nor you▪ nr any man could ever have found Christ, or come to him, but by the Scriptures; and then milet this the Conclusion, That the Scriptures are the VVay for the obtaining Life. Both thy Assertion and Conclusion are false; for Christ was discovered to Moses by Faith, and Abraham saw Christ and his Dy by Faith, and
the Shepherds by the Star which led them where the Child was; and so for thee to conclude all like thy self, is Presumption without Knowledge; and Christ was revealed by and through his Spirit to the Saints in Light, and yet the words testifie of him; and many have the words; and yet they are a sealed Book, and are not any way or means unto them, as to the Dis∣covery of Christ, so that Christ said unto a learned Generation, You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; and yet they were frequent Readers of the Scriptures, yet ignorant of the Spirit through which God maketh manifest his Mind, and maketh known his will, by what way and means he pleaseth, to the Sons of Men: Yet this we say, that God may make manifest his Son by his Spirit what way he will, and yet the Scripture is not excluded, for the things of God are spiritually discerned; and the natural man may have the words, as the Pharisees had, without the Spirit: But this is the Sum, all this striving is to set up the words above the Spirit, and the Scripture above the Life. And thou goest on, and sayest, That thou wonderest that men should not be able to distinguish Christ to be the way, and the Scriptures to be the way. I say, there are not two wayes, but one way and one Life, and none comes to the Father, but by the way, and he is the way and the means too; for he is said to be the Leader of his Flock, and of the Sheep of his Pasture, unto whom he giveth eternal Life; eternal Life is found in him, out of him there is none; and them that seek without him, shall never find the way to Rest; and thy many Distinctions of way and way do cast a Mist before Peoples Eyes, and do darken their Understandings, and would lead them from the one way of Life. And thou askest how those Scriptures can be reconciled? Cor. 1.11. Other Foundation can no Man lay then that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Ephes. 2.20. And are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ him∣self being chief corner-Stone, ver. 22. in whom ye also are builded. These two Scriptures are reconciled already, and were never at Enmity nor at Discord; for he which had the word of Reconciliation committed unto him, write them both; dost thou think he laid one Foundation to the Corinthians, and another to the Ephesians? Christ was the Foundation to the Corinthians, and no other could be laid; and were not all the Saints Ci∣tizens of the Houshold of God, builded upon this Foundation, and so be∣came a Habitation of God through the Spirit? But thou would'st have two Foundations, as thou hast laboured to prove two Wayes, and eternal Life to be found in two distinct things, as that eternal Life is found in Christ, and that eternal Life is found in the Scriptures; and then hast brought all this striving to nothing, and say'st, That we must not imagine that eternal Life lyeth in Words or Sentences: I say, if thou had'st not ima∣gined so thy self, thou would'st not have made all this Contest for Scrip∣ture or Writings, consisting of Words and Sentences except thou judgest, as some of thy ignorant Brethren have done, that eternal Life and the Scrip∣ture is inseparable; or that the Scripture and the Spirit cannot be separated: And if thou judgest so, then these that have the Words and Sentence of the Scripture, have eternal Life and the Spirit, and such dark Doctrines the Land hath been filled with; thou wouldst make Distinctions betwixt way and way, Light and Light, and put Distinctions where there are none,
and yet where the Spirit distinguisheth, thou either cannot or wilt not; that doth not distinguish betwixt a visible & an invisible, betwixt that which is given forth in time, and that which gave forth the words, which is Life it self, which was before all time. Next thing thou comest unto, The Scripture is the Gospel, and the Scripture is the Word of God; and this thou countest great Ignorance for any to oppose: and thou sayest, Thou supposest that we do not know what the word Scripture meaneth; is it not the Gospel, that (thou say'st) was preached by Christ and his Apostles? and what they preached was written, and may be called the Word of God, for it is full of Power. It may more then be supposed that thou art ignorant, for thou hast really manifested it, that gross Darkness covereth thee, and Blindness hath hap∣pened to thee through thy Unbelief; and it's really apparent, that thou knowest not what the Word Scripture meaneth, who callest it the Gospel, and the Word; hast thou not learned to distinguish betwixt the Subject declared of, and the Declaration; betwixt a man which speaks, and the Words which come from a man; betwixt that which is visible, and that which is invisible; betwixt that which may be seen which is temporal, and that which is everlasting and eternal? The Scriptures are writings, which may be seen and read with a natural Eye or Ear, but that which the Scripture declares of, cannot be seen with a Natural Eye; neither heard with a Natural Ear: Knowest thou no difference betwixt a Creator and a Creature? Is not that which createth greater then that which is Created? And was it not the eternal Power that gave the words a being, or thou hadst never had them? And were it not ignorance for any man to say, that the Creature were the Creator? Judge in thy self: For thee to call that which is brought forth, by the Name of that which brought it forth, is great Ignorance: And is it any Derogation unto the Creature to call it by its own Name? But it is dero∣gation to the Creator to call the Creature by the Creator's Name; so for thee to call the writings the Power of God, or the Gospel, or word, is to attribute that to the Declaration, which properly belongs to the thing de∣clared of, which is far greater in Magnitude, in Glory and Excellency, in Power and Virtue; insomuch that the Apostle said, when he had spo∣ken largely of the Power of God, and of his unsearchable Riches, he cry∣ed, O the Height, and the Breadth, and the Length, and the Depth thereof was to speakable, or could not be spoken, which was unsearchable, and past find∣ing out! The Declaration or the Scripture may be enjoyed, and not the Power of God, which is the Gospel of Christ. That the Holy Scriptures were given by Inspiration, and thou sayest, It is full of Power, and therefore sayest, It is the Power of God, and that it's able to make wise unto Salvation; and thou hast done well, that thou hast not left out (through Faith in Christ Jesus) as some of thy Brethren used to do. And thou sayest, It's a sad Argument against the Scripture to say, that the Gospel was preached to Abraham, before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. The Scripture was given by divine Inspiration, 'tis freely granted, and s of no private Interpretation, and is able to make wise unto Salvation, rough Faith in Christ Jesus; for without Faith in him it hath no Power in  to make wise unto Salvation, witness the Pharisees and the Jews outward ow▪ for they had the Scripture-Promises, as thou callest them, which thou
callest the Gospel and the VVord, yet they were not turned changed, nor sanctified, nor knew not the new Birth, as many do not now, who have the scriptures, or writings, or words written; and so thine is a private In¦terpretation, who callest that the Power of God, and the Word of God, and the Gospel, which one may have and not have the Gospel, or the Word, or the Power of God; for Proof, Joh. 5.37, 38. And it's no Argument against the Scripture to say, the Gospel was preached to Abraham, or as thou sayest to Adam; but it is an Argument to prove that there was a Go∣spel, and that the Gospel was preached, before that which you Parish-Teachers use generally to call the Gospel, which is Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and the Epistles written to the Churches, which you raise Do∣ctrines from, and Arguments from, and sell to People for money, and call it preaching of the Word, and preaching of the Gospel: what! dost thou think we are not come past Midnight? Is not the Night over, and the Mor∣ning sprung forth in Brightness without Clouds, wherein we now discover betwixt the Husk and the Kernel? the Husk will feed Swine, but Men must have Bread; and a sound without will not serve to administer Life to the Soul; and now no longer Talkers of the Gospel will be received, or can feed the hungry, but it's he that eats of the Flesh of Christ, that hath eternal Life in him. Thou sayest, Thou wilt remove a gross Mistake from us, who think that you cry up the Letter of the Scripture, and separate the Word from the Spirit; for we own the Spirit going along with the VVord, for the VVord and the Spirit are uni∣ted as the instrumental Cause, and Christ and his Spirit in the Gospel is the prin∣cipal Cause. The gross Mistake is not upon our Parts, but yours, in that you think that the Scriptures or the VVritings are not separated from the Spirit; we know the VVord and the spirit is one, and cannot be separated; but here lyeth the Mistake, in putting the sentences, or scripture, or VVords of Declaration for the word, and then say, they cannot be separated from the spirit, that is another Mistake on your Part; for if you so judge, then this must needs follow, that they that have the words or scripture, have the spirit; if they be inseparable; and why makest thou such Distinctions be∣tween the word Christ and his spirit? they are one; and that which is the principal Cause of every good thing brought forth, useth what Instrument he will to effect it; we know the Word, and the Spirit doth convert and convince, and bring to Christ, and Salvation through him, that we know; but doth the Scripture, convince without the Spirit? And is not the Spi∣rit and Power of God often wanting? Doth the Scripture convince then, or convert, or bring any to salvation? And we know there is union be∣twixt the Word and the Spirit, for they are one, and that which is attri∣buted to the one, is to the other; the Word sanctifieth, and the Spirit sanctifieth; but the Question is still unanswered, and the Charge stands still good against you, Whether the scripture sanctifies without the Spirit? or whether is the Spirit and the Scripture so united together, as that when a Hling, or a Deceiver, or a false Prophet speaks the Words of Scrip∣ture, that the Spirit must needs go along with it, and cannot be separated from it? And thou sayest, The Scriptures are the Word of God, as it is a Declaration of what God would have us do, and therefore God hath declared his mind, Heb. 1.1.
God who spoke in times past by the Prophets, hath in these dayes spoken by his Son: And thou bringst Isaiah 38. The Word of the Lord came to Isaiah say∣ing &c. Were it not a gross Absurdity to say, that this word of the Lord was Christ in the New Testament? The Word of the Lord endures forever, and by it the Heavens and the Earth were framed, and the things that are therein, and without him was nothing made that was made; and we can and do distinguish betwixt the word and the Declaration; and what a declaration is that, which con∣sisteth but of one word? a Declaration consists of many words; and its an improper Speech to call that which consists of many words one word; and that in Heb. 1. was spoken after the Ascension of Christ, and the Voice from Heaven by his Son, I question whether thou hast heard or read; and we can distinguish betwixt the words of Isaiah, and the Word of God; and betwixt the words of Jeremiah, and the Word of God; Jer. 1.2. The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah unto whom the Word of the Lord came; and there see if thou canst distinguish betwixt the words of Isaiah and Jere∣miah and the word of God; and how many words can properly be called one word? and why is it an absurdity to say, that the word of the Lord, or the Power of the Lord, came upon Isaiah, or the Father through the Power or through the word did speak unto Isaiah? and is not the Power of God Christ, and Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God in the New Testament? Now see thy own absurdity, and Glory not when thou puts on thy Armour, but when thou puttest it off. As for John 12.4, 8. He that rejecteth me, and rejecteth my words, &c. where the VVords of Christ and Himself are distinguished, thou sayest. I say Yes, and therefore thou hast brought this Scripture against thy self, and likewise this the word that I have spoken, shall judge you at the last Day, and thou sayest, this must make us Tremble; nay, why should we Tremble at this, we are one with his words, and his words are not against us: And thou hast brought all these Scriptures against thy self, and fightest with thy own shadow; for all the words which God and Christ and the Apostles have spoken we own; and now learn thou to distinguish betwixt words and Word, for all that thou hast said to prove the Scripture to be the Word of God, amount to just nothing, but that it is the word as it's a Declaration, and what a Declaration that is (the wise will judge) which is but one word. And now when thou hast Vindicated thy self as thou judgest, thou goest to make War abroad, to see if thou canst get any into the Pit of Darkness with thy self; and now thou fallst upon the stum∣bling Stone and the Rock of Offence, which will break thee to Pieces, the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World, who is a sufficient Saviour, Leader, Guider, and Director of all they that do believe into all Truth; and he treads the Wine-press alone, and there's none besides him; but thou art climb'd up into the Judgment-seat, and say'st, Let us see what this Light is; and so thou gives Judgment and despi∣ him, like Herod and his men of War, that set him at nought; and so
upon thy Examination and judgment thou hast concluded it Natural, Rom. 1.19, 22. yet thou sayest, it will discover God, and then contradictest what thou hast said; and saist, That it was hard for them to find out the true God by it, and bringst a Proof, when they knew God they Glorified him not as God, but became Vain in their Imaginations, &c. It's yet a Question that may be asked thee, By what Nature they knew God, and did the things contain∣ed in the Law, seeing the Law is Just and good and Holy, and the fault was not in that which led them to know God, but in that which led them to become vain in their Imaginations, and not to glorifie him as they knew him, and so their foolish Hearts came to be Darkned, and so thou art one in thy judgment with him whom I met with of late, who said, The Light which every man was enlightned withal would lead to know God, and teach a man that he should not do to others, but what and that he would have others do to him it would lead from Lying and Stealing, and discover the Creator, and God's Om∣nipotency and Eternity; and yet said, this Light was to be understood in Oppo∣sition to the Light of the Spirit, and contradistinct to the Spirits Light: And after he had confessed that it would teach all these good things aforesaid, he said, it was Darkness, yea, worse then Gross Darkness: And so thou Concludest and sayest, We should never have known or believed the Covenant of Grace, or that we should be born again, had not God revealed them to us by the Scriptures: Thou runs too fast to lay a good Foundation; by what Scrip∣ture did God reveal to Adam, The Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's head? or by what Scripture did Moses see Christ, for he must needs see him before he could follow him? and what Scripture did reveal unto Abraham Christ and his day, wherein he rejoyced? And so he that did reveal, doth reveal, and will reveal Christ the Covenant of Grace, and the New Birth by what way as he pleaseth according to his Power, not∣withstanding all thy limiting. And thou sayest, To say, that every one that comes into the World, is lighted with the Light of the Spirit (is the falsest thing that can be) for then every Heathen hath the Light of the Spirit, who never somuch as heard or knows whether there be a Christ or Spirit, and thou bringst, Ephes. 4.18. that the Gentils understandings were Darkned, being Alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance that was in them, and sayest, surely these men were not Born without a Light. It is very like that I must be Registred in the Calender as a Blasphemer or a Heretick, but however I must not heed that, but must indure Reproa∣ches, and suffer contradictions from such as thou who call'st the Letter the Light, the Letter the Word, and the Letter the Gospel, as all along in thy Paper is clearly manifest thou contendest for it, and so thou art like to condemn and dissallow of the Light in all men, in every man, or in any man, but however thou hast given Judgment, That it is the falsest thng that can be, that every one is lighted with the Light of the Spirit; And why is it the falsest thing that can be? Thou wilt confess that every one is lighted with the Light of Christ; and where didst thou learn that great distinction betwixt Christ's Light, and the Spirit's Light? we do not say▪ that the Light in every man doth discover Christ unto every man tha
cometh into the World, but that the Light of Christ waited in, believed in and received, would discover Christ unto every man, is owned▪ the fault is not in the Light, but in him that loves it not, whoe deeds are Evil▪ and seeing that God is no respecter of Persons, Why may not the Heathen and the Gentiles have the Light of Christ, or the Light of the Spirit, seeing that he who is the Light of the World, is given for a Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, and to the Heathen whose Eyes are blind, to open their Eyes and to open their understandings, seeing that both Jew and Gentile are concluded under Sin, and there is no difference? And if he be not given to the Gentiles or Heathen for a Covenant of Light, as well as to the Jew, how is it said, He is rich unto all? is he the God of the Jews and not of the Gentiles also, Rom. 2.29. seeing that they that believe in the Light, are justified, both the Circumcision and Uncircumcision? and in Rom. 4.7, 8▪ 9. Cometh this blessedness upon the Circumcision only, or upon the Uncircumcision also? so that it's evident that Christ, the Covenant of Light and Life, the Gift of Righte∣ousness, who is come into the World for this end, that all through him might believe, that whoso believeth and receiveth the gift of Righteous∣ness, Justification cometh upon all, and he who is the Gift of God and Covenant of Light, is a propitiation for the Sin of the whole World, and the World is taken in Opposition to believers, and yet he is come a Light into the World, to Convince the World of Sin, and of Righteous∣ness and Judgment, and them which thou callst Heathens and Gentiles, who had not the Law were accused or Convicted, which is the Operation of the Spirit; compare Rom. 2.14▪ 15. with John 16.8 9. That which was in the Gentiles did accuse or convict them, this Christ called the Spirit which Convinced and convinceth Unbelievers; And hath not the Grace of God that brings Salvation appeared to all men? And who art thou, that makest Exceptions? and though the Gentiles or Heathen, do not know Christ or the Spirit by the Name of Christ and the Spirit, yet knowing that which accuseth and excuseth, that which Condemneth and Justifieth, they have the thing; and though the Ephesians being Alienated and Darkned, it was not because of the insufficiency of the Light or the Measure of his Spirit, but because they were Alienated from it, and stangers to it; and I say, nay, these men were not born without Light, neither was the Blindness of their Hearts, because of its insufficiency, but because they loved it not, but hated it, and so became Alienated and Darkned. For sayest thou, VVhere the Spirit is, there are the Fruits of the Spirit. I say, the Spirit may be where it is striven against, or resisted and gain∣sayed, and there appear little Fruits, yet notwithstanding the Sprit hath its Operation in all Believers, and Convincement and Reprof is as truly an Operation and an Effect of the Spirit, as Assurance, Consolation and Peace is an Effect and Operation of the Spirit to them that believe. And then thou concludest, If Christ be in all, then all must be saved, or else Christ must go to Hell.
I will ask thee a Question, go learn what it means, though he be not in the Reprobate, what is that which reprobates him? Christ was in Egypt, yet the Egyptians were not saved by him; Christ was in Jerusalam and in Ga∣lilee, and yet not many Galileans nor they at Jerusalem believed in him, or were saved by him. I will ask thee another Question, go learn what it means; What is that which damns the damned? And what is that that kindles the Fire of Hell upon them? And at last, when thou hast vilified and mocked Christ and his Light, thou cryest with the Jews, Away, away with this deluding Light, and cryes, To the Law, and to the Testimony, and so in the drunken Spirit reeleth and staggers, and knowst not what thou sayst; didst thou not say a little before, That the Law was Light, and that which accuseth for Sin, and convin∣ceth of Sin▪ and excuseth and bringeth Peace to the Obedient? Is not this Je∣sus's Testimony, or the Testimony of Jesus? And thou cryest, Away, a∣way with this as Delusion; and this is all the Tune thou playest on thy bad-stringed Instrument, Letter is Light, Letter the Word, and Scripture is the Rule, the Scripture is the Gospel, and Scriptures the Testimony, and Scripture is the Tryal of the spirit, and thou hast tryed Christ the true Light that enlightens every Man, and with thy falle Judgment hast con∣demned him. And thou say'st, Thou wilt try our Spirit, and our Fruits, and Contradicti∣ons, and Impiety, Falsity and Blasphemy. Alas vain Man! thou hast condemned the spirit of Truth, that convin∣ceth the World of sin, and accuseth for evil-doing, and excuseth, and gi∣veth Peace to them that continue in well-doing, and hast condemned this under the Name of Deluding Light, and hast cryed, away with it, away with it; and thou that set'st this at nought, may'st well set us at nought; and if Christ and his spirit be reproached we must bear they Reproaches, and at last they will turn upon thy own Head, when thy will be too heavy a Burthen for thee to bear: Thou tellest us, That thou hast been begging of God for an eternal Interest in Christ, and that thou hast examined thy Heart, whether Christ be in thee, or nay; but thou tellest us not whether thou hast got Assurance; thou may'st beg long enough with that spirit that hates the Light, which reproveth thee for Evil, and never be heard; and thou may'st examine long, and never come to true Tryal, while thou hatest that and deridest that which should try thee; for I am sure, if thou either hadst got Interest, or had'st known that Christ did live in thee, thou would'st not hate him in others, nor vilifie the least Appearance of him in any; and therefore be low in Heart, and talk no more so exceeding proudly, for the Lord will thunder from Heaven upon his Enemies, pour Contempt upon Princes, and make them wander in the Wilderness, where there is no Way, and will exalt the Horn of his anointed above all Deceit.
And thou say'st, We threw great Reproaches upon the faithful Ministers of Christ, that they preach for Hire, and Balaam-like covet the Wages of Unrigh∣teousness. And thou say'st, It is true, we do receive a Maintenance, and such an one as was freely bestowed on us, and setled by many Laws. And thou say'st, If you preached for Hire, you wronged your selves much, who could get far greater Means or Estates by other Employments, then Mi∣nisters have; and if thou should'st never receive Penny more for thy La∣bour, thou would'st never leave off preaching the GOSPEL, so long as thou hast a TONGUE to speak, or other Abilities to preach the GOSPEL. We do not reproach the faithful Ministers of Christ, neither do we say, that they Preach for Hire, nor go in Balaam's way, neither that their Hearts are exercised with covetous Practices; for we know it is incon∣sistent with a true Minister of Christ, who hath received freely, and Ministers freely, and alwayes Labours to keep the Gospel without charge; and as for the Maintenance which you say, was given you freely, and setled by many Laws, We must mind you of the Author thereof; you cry out of the Pope as Anti-christ, of Jesuites, Monks, and Friars as Ido∣laters, and that which he gave unto his Emissaries and Ministers, you have gotten into your Hands, as Tythes, Gleab lands, Oblations, Obventions, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer dues, which were setled by Laws when the Mother of Harlots, that Rid upon the Scarlet-coloured Beast, which hath Compelled all both small and great to Worship, and to pay all the foresaid things in the time of his Reign, while Christ's Ministers have been put to Death, and the Witnesses slain, and yet the aforesaid Popes Maintenance is not Anti-christian with you. And with what Face can you or your Parish Ministers say, That the Maintenance is freely bestowed upon you, whenas there are so many living Examples in this Nation, especially within this seven Years, which bear Witness against you? What Havock and Spoil hath been made by a company of greedy Priests in this Nation of late? What haling and Sueing, what throwing in Holes and Dungeons? What Havock you have made of mens Estates with your Bayliffs, and the Bil-men, driving away Cows, Horses, Sheep, Swine, Pots taken, and Pans, the poor Peoples Bedding and Apparel, which amount to very great Sums, some times for three Pounds claiming, by force have taken away 20 l. and sometime for 5. or 6 l. drive away Goods worth 40 l. and one lies now in Prison but for a Groat demanded for Tythes; so that the very Earth Groans to be delivered of you, which will Vomit you out, and yet all this forcing must needs go upon the Account of free Maintenance; and I know not what Employments you can take up, which will be either Serviceable to God or to the Creation, by which you can get 2. or three Hundred pound a Year, as many of you have; and who dost thou think will believe thee or thy Testimony, That you will
Preach freely, if you never receive a Penny? How many Parish Steeple-houses in England and Wales stand empty, who have but a little Maintenance belonging to them? as twenty or thirty Pound per annum? who hath had a Call thither to Preach that which you call the Gopel; or where there was not something to be got more or less? I have not heard of any amongst you called thither, although the Number a∣mount to a very great deal; I desire from my Heart that you were Tryed a while, and that you were left to your Gospel, to see how you can live of it, and then in preaching freely, you would manifest your selves to be something like the Ministers of Christ, and till certain proof be had of you, there is few will believe you. But thou sayest, In the mean time we have a sufficient Authority to ex∣pect a Maintenance from the 1 Cor. 9.7, 11. and Tim. 5.17. And we ask nothing but our own, and them that will not give it us, are under the breach of a Commandment, which saist, thou shalt not Steal; and thou sayest, I have spoken once for all, though I could have said ten Times more, and that thy Soul Tremles to think, under what sad Judgments and Delusions we are; but thou shalt Pray that God would deliver us out of the SNARES OF SATAN. The first of the Corinthians 9. Tim. 5.17. is no Authority for thee, as to receive Hire or Wages; I ask thee, how long hast thou been at St. Ives, so called? And were they not all counted Christians before thou camest thither, except thou hast sprinkled some few Infants since thou comest there? or else what hath been thy Work there? and the People of St. Ives may consider where thou hast gone about to War, since thou camest thither, that thou requires Cost and Charges; Dost thu think that getting into an old Mass-house in a Town, and sit Dreming over a company of People thirty or forty Years is going a War-fare? or to require Maintenance of them, who own thee not for a Shepherd, and to bring Scriptures, and say, He that feedeth a Flock may eat the  of a Flock? But doth this give Toleration for thee to clip or Shear them that are none of thy Sheep? Dost not thou come here under the breach of a Command, Thou shalt not Steal? Dost not thou count the Quakers Deluded, and Hereticks? And will it not be delusion in thee to re∣quire or take maintenance of them, who are none of thy Sheep, and to pull Grapes off them that are none of thy Vineyard? And thou hast spoke enough except it had been to better purpose: and thou mayest Tremble indeed to think, if thou dost but consider what Ignorae and Delusion thou art under; for this is the Sun of all thy Doctrine, The Letter is the Light, the Writings are the Gospel, the Writings are the Word, and the Words written are the Way, and the Letter is the standing Rule, and concerning Christ the true Light that enlighteneth every man, thou hast cryed with the Pharisees, Away▪ away with it, for it is a delud∣ing Light, and that every man hath received a Measure of the Spirit, is the falsest thing in the World.
These and the like Doctrines thou hast declared, which I hope the People of St. Ives will take notice of, and turn away from such blind Guides as thou art, who art truly in Balaam's Way, and in the Way, and Steps, and Practices of the false Prophets and false Apostles, and such as gain-sayed the Truth, and held it in Unrighteousness; but the Day is made manifest, that hath discovered thine and all your De∣ceit and Hypocrisie, and will rent your Covering, that you may ap∣pear as you are, that all that fear the Lord may depart from you, and thou must repent of thy evil Deeds, and condemn thy false Doctrines, before thou canst pray acceptably, either for thy self or others; for thou canst not be heard of the living God, whilest this Broth of Abominable Things is in the Vessel, in which the Lord hath no Pleasure.
John VVells, seeing thou say'st, thou dost understand Scriptures much better then us, answer these Que∣ries concerning the Scripture, as follow. I. WHat was the Jezabel that did begin to teach, Rev. 2.20. and called her self a Prophetess? II. What was the Witnesses slain that prophesied in Sackcloth and Ashes, and who slew them? Rev. 11.3; 7. III. What was the Woman that fled into the Wilderness? Rev. 12.6. What was the Wilderness she fled into, whether an outward Wood, yea or nay? and what was the Time, Times, and half a Time that she was nourished from the Face of the Serpent? Rev. 12.14. IV. What was the Beast the Dragon gave his Power to, that made War with the Saints, and killed them, and had Power over all Kindreds, Tongues and Na∣tions? Rev. 13.2.7. V. Were not the Tongues ye Orthodox Men) which the Beast in the Dragon's Power had Power over? and is not this since the Apostles Dayes? VI. What is the Whore that sits upon the Beast, that all Nations have drunk of her Cup of Fornication? and what is that Fornication? and what are the Kings of the Earth that have committed Fornication with her? Rev. 17.1, 2, 3. VII. What, and where is that Babylon which must fall? and what is the Bride that prepares her self for her Husband? Rev. 18.2. Rev. 19.7. VIII. What are all the Beast's Names, Marks, Horns, Images and Crowns? Rev. 13.1. Rev. 14.8, 9, 11. IX. What are those Tongues that John the Divine calls Waters, whereon the Whore sits? whether or no they are not ye Orthodox Men? yea or nay, whose Tongue is your original? Rev. 17.15. X. What are those Tongues John saith, People must be redeemed from? Rev. 5.9. and was not Pilate an Orthodox, who set up an Inscription over Christ's Head in Letters of Hebrew, Greek and Latin? Luke 23.38. XI. Was not all the Earth of one Language and Speech before Babel? and a Naturals make a Divine? Gen. 11.6. XII. Are nt Tythes, Gleab-Lands, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer Dues, Churching of Women for Money, Sprinckling Infants, and marry∣ing for Money, Burying for Money, preaching over the Dead for Money and Preaching by the Hour-Glass, and making Ministers at Schools, got up since the Dayes of the Apostles, the Popes Cup? and have not ye drunk dwn all they Things? XIII. And is not all this persecuting and prisoning People about Worship, Church, Religion, Ministry and Maintenance, the Popes Cup? and have ye not all drunk it? and hath it not got up since the Apostles Dayes? XIV. All ye carnal weaponed Men, and apostatized from the Apostles▪  said, we wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, who said, our Weapons are not carnal, but spiritual; and art not thou one of them that seek Gain from the
Quarter, and bears Rule by thy Means, divines for Money, and teacheth for fil∣thy Lucre, teach for Hire, and for the Fleece, which the Prophets and Apostles cryed Wo against? Mic. 3. Jer. 5. Isa. 56. Ex. 34. XV. Art not thou one of them that serves not our Lord Jesus Christ, but thy own Belly, that if People put into thy Mouth, give thee Tythes, and Means, and Gain, and filthy Lucre, thou wilt serve them; if not, thou wilt not? is not this for thy Belly, and not for Christ, who said, Freely ye have received, freely give; and they that did so, wad nothing, though Christ sent them amongst VVolves? Mat. 10.8, 16. XVI. What was the Field the Merchant-Man looked his Pearl in? and where is it? Mat. 13.45, 46. XVII. And where is the bottomless Pit, whose Smoak hath darkened the Air? and where is the Air? Rev. 9.2. XVIII. What are the Tongues the Gospel is to be preached to? whether it be not to you (Orthodox Men) who call them your Original? Rev. 14.6. XIX. What is the false Prophet and Anti-christ inwardly ravened from? and what is the Sheeps Clothing that they wore? Mat. 7.15. XX. What is the Anointing in People to teach them, that they need not any Man to teach them, but as it teacheth them, spoken of in the first Epistle of John 2.20, 27. XXI. What is the Light that shines in the Heart, that gives People the Know∣ledge of God in the Face of Jesus Christ? 2 Cor. 4.6. XXII. Is any a true Christian, but who hath the Law of God in his Mind and in his Heart, and need not say to one another, know the Lord? was not this that that differed from the Jews, who had the Law without them? have any of these Talkers of Christ the Apostles Words, Makers of Trades of them, Life, except they eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood? have ye eaten tht? and doth a∣ny Man eat that that doth deny the Light, that hath enlightened every Man that comes into the World? Heb. 8.10, 11. John 6.53, 54, 55. XXIII. Were not the Steeple-houses, which ye call the Churches or Temples, the old Mass-houses, which ye creep into▪ yea ar nay? XXIV. Was Ezra's Pulpit set up in the Temple and Synagogue, ye or nay, or set up in the Street before the Water-gate? and how many might stand upon it? and whether it was like yours, yea or nay? Nehem. 8.3, 4. XXV. And were not your Colledges set up by the Papists, to make Ministers by? and whether your Colledges and Steeple-houses have not the Papists Names to them? and were not the Jesuites the Tribe of Black-coats? whether ever, yea or nay, thou hast deserted at all the Habit wherewith thou wert dstin∣guished? XXVI. Whether dost thou own and believe that Christ doth enlighten every man that cometh into the World, yea or nay? John 1.9. XXVII. Whether ever any Minister of Christ did imprison any for Main∣tenance? but on the contrary, they should covet no Man's SILVER, and they that were covetous crept into Houses, had the FORM, and denyed the POVVER, whether or no they were not to be turned away from? 2 Tim. 3.5, 6. XXVIII. And whether or no they are Ministers of Christ, that swear, see∣ing Christ saith, Swear not AT ALL; and James saith, Above all things my Brethren swear not? and whether or no they are not false Brethren that
do SWEAR, that fall into the Condemnation? James 5.12. Matthew 5.34. XXIX. Whether ever any Minister of Christ imprisoned for Tythes, seeing Christ saith, Freely ye have received, freely give? and whether ever any Mi∣nister of Christ runs to the Powers of the Earth for Maintenance, seeing the Apo∣stle saith, He that feeds the Flock shall eat of the Milk? whether these Things be the Fruits of the Spirit, in suing men for Tythes and Maintenance they do no VVork for? and if so, shew the Example by Scripture; if not, are they not to be turned away from? 1 Cor. 9.7. XXX. Whether any of the Disciples of Christ carried Bag, but Judas the Thief and Betrayer of the Just? John 2.6.
THE Mouth of the Pit STOPPED, AND THE SMOAK That hath arisen out of it SCATTERED BY THE Breath of Truth. IN Answer to a lying Story called Hell broken loose, or the History of the Quakers, published by Thomas Vnderhil, a Seller of the Whore's Merchandize, otherwise called a Book-seller. His Lyes returned upon him, his Accusations answered, and his Envy declared, and Truth cleared from all his Re∣proaches. By one that waits to see Death and Hell cast into the Lake of Fire, with the Beast and the false Prophet. F. H.
THE EPISTLE· Thomas Underhil, THou Seeds-man of Lyes, and Slanders, and false Reports, whose Hell is broken loose, and is spreading, where the Banks are not set, nor the Bounds; and thy greatest Madness and Rage is at them that tremble at the Word of God, and work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and thy Lyes, and Slanders, and false Reports we understand are set on Sale in such a Man's Shop, to get Gain upon the Innocent, and the Ground is seen, and the Earth, in which thou may'st sow thy evil Seed, and thy Lyes, Slanders, and false Reports, who art a Man fitted, whom the Devil hath found out to go on in his Will, and to do his Work; for a long Time hath he been fitting of thee, and for a long Time hath the Seed been sown in thee, and now it is growing, and buds forth, and Hell is broken loose; but thou art taken (and the Hell) who art the Seeds▪ man of the Devil, that sows Lyes, the Prince of Death; but all is and shall be ta∣ken, and cast into the Lake of Fire, the Hell, the Devil, the Author of thy Work, and thou, except thou speedily repent: Was there ever such Thing heard or seen, that Thomas Underhil should gather up Lyes, Slanders and false Reports, and set them to Sale at the Star in Pauls Church-yard, as he calls it? There is a Re∣fuge of Lyes of his for any to shelter under, that are given up to believe Lyes, but that will not save you from the Storm nor the Wrath of the Almighty, but the Beesome is witnessed, that sweeps all the Refuge of Lyes into the Fire, and brings the Lyar to Judgment; and thou wilt become a Shame and a Stink to all modest and sober People, the Witness in thy own Conscience shall witness it. And dost thou think that the Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland do not begin to see your Priests, and such as thee, that hold them up, and such as thee callest Converts? What a Stink and a nasty Smell there is in your Streets, in your Towns, in your Steeple-houses, as though you had never heard Talk of God and Christ; your Na∣tures are so unchanged, and your Priests haling up and down to Courts and Assizes, and cast into Prison till Death for their Bellies and their Mouths such they do no Work for, & your Prisoning and Persecuting for not swearing to the Priests Bill, and the Priests rude Miltitude breaking the Windows, breaking up Meetings, and breaking the Heads of People, the Servants and Messengers of the Lord, that you are almost become like a Field of Blood, whipping such as warn you to repent; and here Hell hath been broken looe, and thou art a Seeds-man of him that is out of the Truth, who art an Encourager with thy Lyes and Slanders of these Persecutors but thy own Words shall be thy Burthen. G. F.
THE Mouth of the Pit STOPPED, AND THE SMOAK That hath arisen out of it SCATTERED BY THE Breath of Truth. IT is written, He that watcheth for Iniquity shall be cut off, and the Wick∣ed shall come to an End; although the Long-suffering of the Lord be great, who waiteth that Men might return, and cease to work Iniqui∣ty, and to strive against his Holy Spirit, by which he reproveth the World of Sin and the wicked of their Transgressions, and to this End hath he given a Measure of his Spirit to every Man (though contemned and de∣spised by the wicked, that they might see themselves, and be humbled for their Iniquity, and repent of their Transgressions, yet notwithstanding such is the Obstinacy of many, as that they hate the Reproof of Instructi∣on, yea, the Scorne and the Fools, unto whom Wisdom cryeth, Return at my Reproof, so that all are left without Excuse; yet notwithstanding, though they reject the Mercy and Love of the Lord, and gainsay his Holy Spirit, though they do for a while persist in their Wickedness, yet this shall be the End, the wicked shall not go unpunished; of that certain Te∣stimony is given, that God hath appointed a Day, wherein he will judge the Secrets of all Hearts by Jesus Christ, according to the everlasting Go∣spel, which was declared, and now is published again by them that are come and coming out of the Apostacy; and in that Day thou Thomas Underhil shalt be convinced of thy ungodly Deeds, and of thy hard Speeches, and false Accusations, and reproachful Calumniations and Slanders, and of many false things which thou hast charged against a People whom Christ hath redeemed by his most precious Blood, which thou shalt be judged for in that Day, when Terror shall fill thy Heart, and Wrath come upon thee, from whence thou shalt not be able to flee, though thou may'st call to the hard Rocks and to the high Hills, which are in the Transgression, whose Hands thou would'st now strengthen against the Just▪ and blind their Eyes, that so they might receive thy false Suggestions and Instigations, and so would'st perswade them to stretch out their Hands against them which are to be preserved and cherished, who are dear unto the Lord, as the Apple
of his Eye, but the Lamb of God, who taketh away the Sins of the World, who is arisen and arising in his Power and Might, to make War in Righ∣teousness against the Beast and his Power, the Mother of Harlots and her golden Cup of Fornication, against Anti-christ and his Men of War, a∣gainst the Dragon and his Army, and he is travailing in the Greatness of his Strength, who shall subdue the Nations to himself, and break all the Un∣godly that stand in his Way as a Potters Vessel; and behold a numberless Number have taken Part with him, who rides on in the Power & Strength of his Might, the least of which thou shalt not be able to stand before, but shall vanish as Smoak, and be consumed as Stubble before the Fire, which shall burn up all the Ungodly, and melt them all away that hate the Lord, then shalt thou call to the Rocks and to the Hills, from whence thou now look∣est for Salvation, that thou mightest be preserved in Safety still in Babylon, where is thy Habitation, and in the Region of the Shadow of Death, which thou hast taken up for thy dwelling-Place, and that they might suppress that which thou callest Heresie and Blasphemy, which hath invaded thy Kingdom already, and put out thy Light, and is staining that which thou gloryest in, and is bringing Contempt upon thy Mother's Merchandize, of which thy Shop is filled with Books of curious Arts, and made up in the Imaginations of Men of corrupt Minds, many of which are good for nothing but for the Fire, which have bewitched People from the Simpli∣city of the Gospel, and have darkened Peoples Understandings, and brought a Mist and a Cloud over Peoples Hearts, so that the Sun of Righteousness could not be seen to arise in the Hearts of People; and now thou (with the rest of Babylon's Merchants) which have long trafficked with their Sor∣ceries, art angry, because thou hast had a share in her Merchandize, and hast gotten Gain by selling of such Traffick, which is as unsavoury Salt, good for nothing, but to be trodden under Foot of Men, thou cryest, like Demetrius for his Shrines, Great is the Goddess Diana; and thou with other who have got Gain and a Trade by the aforesaid Inchantments of the Har∣lot and her Merchants, thou cryest, The Church, the Church, the Ministry, the Ministry, and Religion, the National Ministry, which when the Matter is enquired into, what the Church is, it is found to be no other then the Mo∣ther of Harlots, who hath sitten upon the Waters these many hundred Years, and the Ministry is no other but them that are in Balaam's Way, and such whose Hearts are exercised with Covetous Practices, and such as the Prophets and Apostles declared against, who sought for their Gain from their Quarter, and who taught those Things they ought not for filthy Lu∣cre: And for Religion, it is nothing but a Profession in VVords at best, without the Life, or else some old Traditions, human Inventions, and in∣novated Customs, which have been brought in since the Apostacy; but I say, because of thy gainful Craft, thou art now busied, as thou hast been divers Years, not only against the Quakers, but against others who have se∣parated from your hypocritical VVorships, and deceitful Formalities, and for this End thou hast bended thy Tongue to tell Lyes, and thy Ear is open to mischief, that thou mightest get any Thing to accuse the Truth withal, and to set up and promote thy long Trading with Deceit; what! have not the Hills and the Mountains, Parliaments, Protecctors formerly gratified thee, that thou art so covetous and greedy of Persecution and Blood-shed? Though thy insatiable Desire hath not been satisfied, neither I believe ever shall, yet thou shalt not go unpunished; and when Judgment comes upon thee, then may'st thou call to the Rocks and to the Hills to cover thee, and hide thee from the Wrath of the Lamb, and from the Presence of his ho∣ly Host, but they shall not be able to save thee.
What! hath not all the Beacons that thou hast fired given sufficient Warning to all the Dragon's Host, and to all the Beast's Army, and to all the Harlot's Merchants, and to all Babylon's Children, that they might come out all to Battel? they have been Fired these five Years, hast thou not gotten all thy Host up together by thy Books, which formerly thou calledst so, to withstand the Lamb and his Followers, that thou art come on again with a fresh on-set, to see if thou canst stop the way of Truth, that People might not receive it? for that is thy End in writing this lying History, as thou thy self hast confest: alas poor Man! is this all thy strength that thou art able to make up, and are these all the Weapons of thy war-fare, a company of vain Arguments out of the Priests Books, which have written as thou hast done against the Truth, and old Stories which thou hast received out of our Adversaries writings, which thou hast heaped up together to fill Peoples minds which Prejudice, that they might not receive the Truth? dost thou think this is like to prevail? a company of broken bowes and shattered Spears, and lame Chariots, whose Wheels have been often taken off, which we have over-run and Trampled down, that few will have any trust to these, or this is but to set Bryars and Thorns in Battel against the Lord. Thy Book thou callst, Hell broke Loose, or a History of the Quakers, publish∣ed to preserve Christians against formality of Religion and Apostacy▪ and to the intent that thy Book might not grow old nor stick upon thy Hands, as such other moudly stuff hath done, thou saist, London Printed in the Year 1660. and so hast Printed a lye in the Frontis-piece of thy Book; thy Book by that time, thou may'st hang up with old Almanacks or sell for waste Paper, and if thou beginst with a lye and Scorn, how dost thou think that this will be an Antidote (as thou callst it) against formality and Apostacy? Is not a Lyar an Apostate? is not he that pleads for Popish Trumpery a formalist in Religion without the Power? he that reads but thy Title page may see what thy Book is within, if he go no further, the Covenant of Death is not yet broken in thee, and the agreement with Hell is not yet disannulled, and therefore all this Smoke is come out of the Pit in which thou delights to dwell. And is this such a worthy Piece in thy account, that thou must needs shelter it under the Wings of the Officers, of the Army of England, Scot∣land and Ireland? art thou so great a Friend to them? and in thy Book tell'st them they were the in-let of Heresie and Blasphemy, who art but yet an Episcopal stem, or at best a Presbyterial Branch. I believe many a∣mongst them will savour thy Spirit, and know what Uniformity and uni∣ty thou art for, which may be more properly called deformity and Enmity, and so thy Flattering Epistle when they see thy Spirit will hardly merit thanks, and so that wicked Spirit which could not be satisfied in the time of the former Parliaments, and Protectors, still persists in the unsatiable desire to see if the Army will gratifie thee and turn Persecutors; but thou hast mist it far in crying a confederacy to the reverend Pastors or Priests of Scotland; the Army knows right well, or at least might do, that the Priests of Scotland, whom thou so reverencest have been alwayes Hind∣erers, and Obstructors of the Way of God and of his Work these divers Years, instance two o three Hundred of them before the sight at Dunbar, who Prophesied all like Zedekiah for the poor Scots against the English
Army to go up and Prosper; and Cursed them and Excommunicated them and gave them up to Satan and for Distruction; but such Prophets were made fools, and their divinations were Madness; and God gave a sufficient Testimony against them and their deceived Followers, which I hope the English Army have not  forgotten; and for the Scotish Priests and their Doctrine and Practice, 'tis so grosly ignorant and abominably Prophane, as I believe many of the Army do right well know; but such as are not satisfied, I refer them to a Book called, The Doctrines and Principles of the Priests of Scotland, wherein may be seen their deceit, and how some of them have said, they had Reason to curse the Magistrates from morning to Night, because that Allowance was granted unto any, to Worship God in Spirit and Truth who could not be subject to their Traditional unifor∣mity; and thou tellest the Army in thy Epistle, That ruin is like to come upon all Religion and Piety, if God prevent it not by you, or some other way; they may see what Religion thou art of, which may be rather called Irre∣ligious and Impious, the Government of Religion and Piety lyes upon the shoulders of him, who is a wonderful Counsellor, and mighty to save, and able to defend them that are subject to him, and wouldst thou have the Souldiers or any others intrude themselves into Christ's Throne, unto whom all Power is committed both to make Religious and preserve pious them that do believe in him, this were to derogate from the Honour and Power which belongs to Christ, who is the Head of the Church, who will not give his Glory to another; and let all take notice of this, that whosoever hath sought to take Honour from him, and glory from him, he hath laid their honour in the Dust, and their Glory is become as the moth-eaten Garment, as hitherto it hath been evident; and thou tellst them, They know the Scripture is God's written Word and a Holy perfect rule of Faith and Practice, and that it holds out that Christ is now in his human glori∣fied Body in Heaven. If thou hadst said, the Scripture are the Words of God written, thou hadst said something; for the Word of God is one thing, and the Words are another, though the words are a Testimony of the Word; and the Word and the Spirit which is one, which gave forth the Words, are the perfect Rule and Foundation of Faith, which was before the Words, and is greater then the Words, as we have often declared to thy dearest Gene∣ration, though they would not hear; and where doth the Scripture hold forth a Human glorified Body in Heaven? thy deceit and ignorant mind holds out a Human glorified Body; we say according to the Scriptures, that Christ's Body is spiritual, and he is raised a spiritual Body, and is Glorified in a spiritual Body, and in a Heavenly Body, which thou never knewest, neither art like while the Nature lives in thee, in which thou now stands. And thou say'st, in thy Epistle, that one day in seven, should be set apart for rational Souls to mind the things of Eternity. And which is that Day that thou wilt set apart? some of Babylon's Mer∣chants have cryed up one day, and some have cryed up another day, and some have called the seventh day the Sabbath, and some have called the first day the Sabbath, and whether was Sabbaths made for Man▪ or Man for Sabbaths, and whether was dayes made for man, or man made for
dayes? all time is in the Hand of the Lord, and they that have Commu∣nion with him do mind the things of Eternity every day; and so they come to know the day of the Lord, in which rest is given to the Soul, and the Creature hath rest, though he labour in the Creation, when that is done away in himself which hath Opprest; thou may'st go learn what this means. In thy Post-script (as thou callst it) thou saist, If any shall take offence for thy seeking to civil or Military Power to Support Religion, thy defence is, & thy belief is, That thou ought to seek to the higher Powers to support Religion; and this is the Liberty of thy Conscience, and that this thou may do, more acceptably then they who Cross their own profest Opinion as they have done of late Years by motions, Counsels, Books, and Papers, which they have delivered for these many Years for he pulling down the Ministry and Steeple-houses, and that their importuning the Magistrate to pull down Ministry and Worship is a yielding of the Cause. I say, thy belief is without the true Foundation, and so may properly be called unbelief, and thou errst in thy Judgment, who seekst to civil or Military Power to uphold Religion, which as I said before belongs to him who is the higher, and highest Power; Civil and Military Officers are not for making Religion, or setting up Religion, but are to keep the Peace, and to stop the Violent-doer, and to be a Terror to Evil works and work∣ers, and a Praise to them that do dwell; and that is their place to govern in Righteousness, but not to exercise Lordship over the Conscience, which Power belongs only to Christ; and as for them who have delivered Books and Papers and words and writings to them who are in Authority, to pull down the Ministry and Steeple-houses, or publick Ministry and Worship, if thou intendest the Quakers, as I believe thou dost, thy Arrows being shot only at them; we have delivered, or caused to be delivered divers Book and Papers, wherein we have shewed them the grievous Suffering of the People of God, by the heavy Oppressions which they did suffer un∣der, because of the Hirelings Wages and upholding of Mass-houses, things which have been introduced since the Primitive times in the Apostacy, which aforesaid things have been guarded and upheld by Laws, made in the Beast's power; now to make null those Laws which were the Ground of many Oppressions▪ and an offence to many tender Consciences, this is not to pull down Religion; and that Ministry which can be pull'd down by taking away of Tythes and forced maintenance, is no Ministry of Christ, but Ministers of Anti-christ, and to deny paying to Steeple-houses, Clark-Wages, burying for the Dead, and such other like invented Things, which many have groaned under, is not to pull down Religion: for this I say to thee, and that which I can say to all, which no reasonable or e∣quitable man will deny to be equitable or Just, take the Hireling Ministry to thee, and give him the fifth part of thy Estate if thou wilt, and erect thy Steeple-house like Babel's Tower, but trouble not us with none of these things: and for declaring to the Magistrates that these things ought to be done away, and the Law by which they stood, which was made in Trans∣gression ought to be taken away, this is not to pull down the Ministry nor true Religion, but to overturn deceit and Invocation, which hath Obstru∣cted
and hindered pure Reformation which hath been talkt on, for these are but the rotten Raggs of the Whore's Menstruous Garment; so thy de∣fence is made void and ours standeth true, that the Magistrate or Military Power hath nothing to do, to Prescribe any form of Religion to bind all unto, for this is an Intruding into those things that belong not to them. Thou say'st, That thou dost freely and sincerely affirm, that thou hast not knowingly wronged the Quakers in the least, but dost engage thy self to make good every Thing thou chargest against them, that shall require it of thee. That we shall see afterwards, how thou wilt make good that which thou hast charged some with; hast thou not knowingly wronged us, when thou hast brought all those which thou countest Hereticks all Europe over, and some Parts else, and whatsoever they did or said must be imputed un∣to us; I know thy Envy in Times past, with the rest of the Priests, was as much aganst them who were separate from your Assemblies, as now a∣gainst us; and all these Things that thou hast raked up in this Book, out of Histories of Germany, of New-England, which I am not credulous to re∣ceive from thy Mouth, no more then I shall thy History (as thou callest it) of the Quakers; for thou who wilt lye of them which are so near thee, may re∣port many Untruths at a Distance; and these Things the hireling Priests were wont to charge upon the Baptists and Independents, but now we are become the Object of all your Reproach, and your Butt to shoot at, but we are in that which the Devil cannot prevail against, neither the Gates of Hell. In thy third Chapter thou say'st, Thou wilt treat of the Predecessors of the Quakers▪ and thou reckonest up Simon Magus, Menander, Saturnus, how he taught that Marriage and Generation was of Satan, and Arrias, who denyed the Divinity of Christ, and Pelagius a Monk, who held that a Man without the Grace of God was able to fulfil all the Commandment of God, and of Basilides, that he taught that it was not Jesus, but Simon of Cirene that was crucified in his Shape. These are none of our Predecessors, take them to thy self; and whether hast thou not knowingly wronged us in these Things? and how wilt thou make every Thing good which thou hast charged us withal? These things fore-mentioned and many more, which I shall pass over, as not to trouble the Reader with, in which thou hast charged us falsly, wherein thou art required to make good the Charge, or else cease thy clamorous Tongue; these that thou hast reckoned up, you use to call them Arians, Saturnians and Pelagians, but now thou hast made them all Quakers. In thy 13th Page thou manifestest what Spirit thou art of, thou tellest of the Old Church-Government being taken away (to wit, the Common-Prayer-Book, tken out of the Mass-Book) then began Sects to arise: So that it seems, thy chief Reformation and Religion is but the Old Lithurgy, which is little bet∣ter then the Mass; and the Ministers the old corrupt Bishops, that the Earth groaned with the Burthen thereof, whose Ordination and Call is from the Pope, their Original, and from the Church of Rome, your Mother, from
whence these State-hirelings, which burthen the whole Creation, sprang forth; thou would'st have all confined unto this dark Mist, and compelled to worship according unto those Popish Traditions held forth for publick Worship in that time. Further thou bring'st a Heap of Lyes out of Baxter, a Man at Enmity a∣gainst all Goodness, who hath written many lying Books against the living TRUTH, for which the Lord God will call him and thee to Account. Thou set'st down some of that which thou call'st our Principles in the 16th Page, How that we deny all Officers in a Common-wealth; and how we deny all Relation, as Brother and Sister, Magistrate, Master, Father, Mother, Son and Daughter, Husband and Wife, and that Husband and Wife should part assun∣der, and that all Things should be common; all these things shall turn upon thy own Head; and now to the Light in thy Conscience I speak, which thou despisest, whether thou hast not wilfully wronged us? And I re∣quire of thee, according to thy Promise, to make these things good; but I believe thy Proof is out of our Adversaries Books, Baxter's and the Priests of New-castle, which things have been answered, and their Lyes turned upon their own Heads. In the 17th Page, thou hast gathered some Words and Sentences out of our Books, many of them are so evident and manifest Truths to all that are come to a good Understanding, that they need no Vindication, for they will vindicate themselves, and have an evident Witness in every ones Con∣science that believes, so far as thou hast truly transcribed them; and ma∣ny of those Doctrines and Practices, which thou hast set down as Errors, the Scripture will bear witness to, and the Example of the Saints Evidence and the Judicious will receive with Gladness of Heart, and by it thy en∣vious Spirit will be made manifest to all where thy lying Story shall come. In thy 30th Page, thy Lips being accustomed to utter forth Lyes and Deceit, thou proceedest and say'st, That the Quakers say that a man is justi∣fied by the Merit of good Works and inherent Righteousness; and how that we hold the real corporal Presence of Christ in many Places at once, and overthrow the Articles of Christ's Humanity; and further thou say'st, That Christ is Corporally in Heaven: But for Proof I expect none from thee, for thou speakest as though thy Tongue were thy own; and I charge thee to instance where in all our Writings we have said, that a man is justified by inherent Righteousness, or where thou find'st real corporal Presence? or where is it written in the Scripture, that Christ is corporally in Heaven; yet the man Christ is at the right Hand of God, from whence he shall appear to thy Judgment and Condemnation, except thou repent, and Christ, God's Righteousness, must be revealed within, by which the Saints are justi∣fied. In thy 31st Page thou tellest of the Actions and Manners of the Quakers, and thou say'st, They will not put off their Hats before the highest Authority▪
and how they stood covered, and Thoued and Theed the Chair-man and Members of Parliament, to the great Dishonour of the Authority of England, as ever was admitted: This shows that the Authority of England hath in times past been out of the Authority of God; and in the same Authority which we find mentioned in the Scripture, before whom the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles were brought before, though many of the Magistrates then were out of the Power of God, yet they did not reprehend them for Want of Hats, or Caps, or Bowings, or saying Thee or Thou, and it seems the Committee and Members of Parliament did count it no Dishonour, though thou dost, who art a Busie-Body; but Fools love to be med∣ling. Then thou proceedest on and say'st, They will not petition Men, no not the greatest Power, witness all their Addresses to the Protectors; and also tells, How a Quaker in Hartfordshire swore against them that pulled down the House where the Quakers met: It is not consistent with them that are in the Truth and in the Power of God, to come with feigned Petitions, full of Flattery and Deceit, which answereth not God's Witness, but rather the wrong Part, which would be courted and flattered, which holds under the Just, neither can they who are in the Truth make such feigned complemental Addresses, as the hireling Teachers from all Quarters of the Nation did to the late Protectors, who flattered them, and told them, they would stand by and lay down all for that which they asserted, and called one of them Jo∣shuah, and the other Moses, and said, They committed the keeping of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ unto them, and such like Blasphemies; but as soon as the Wheel turned about in the next Moneth, call them Traytors, Ty∣rants and Usurpers; and these were your stinking Addresses and your feigned Supplications, which all sober and understanding People were asha∣med of; and thy Priests, which thou callest Ministers, and their Confe∣derates, which thou callest Christians, have flattered them, and bowed under every Deceit, and turned with every Wind, instance in the Dayes of Edward the 6th, Henry the 8th, Elizabeth, and Mary, and Charles, and when these were overthrown, which you used to call God's anointed, then you strike in with what thing soever arises, as instance one Parliament af∣ter another, and then for Protectors, and then no Protectors, but a Par∣liament; and thus have you flattered each of the Rulers, though never so unjust, till the Wrath of God hath sunk the most of them, because they have hearkened to Flattery and Deceit, and had not their Ears open to them with whom the Counsel of God is; we have counselled them oft▪ and have fore-warned them in all Plainness and Nakedness of Heart, though our Counsel hath been rejected, yet God hath fulfilled our Testimony thus far upon them all: And as for the Quaker in Hartford-shire, who (thou say'st) Swore against some who did abuse him and the Quakers; I do believe he was one of thy own Generation, and lately one of your Popish Parochial Congregations, instituted first by Pope Dionysius, although the man was more moderate then the rest, and did grieve to see his Neighbours abu∣sed, and sober people disturbed, and the House broken down, and Blood shed, and that by the Justification of thy Sir T.H. the man not being con∣vinced of the Unlawfulness of an Oath, did give Testimony against the
riotous persons and evil-doers, and against him who encouraged them in it; and shall he be condemned by thee, who actest the same thing? was it evil in him, and is it righteous in thee? Although I do not justifie the thing, for it is known to many thousands in the Nation, that the Quakers will not swear upon any Account, lest they should fall into Condemnation; but there are none can escape thy slanderous pen, who loveth Uprighntess & Truth; but all thy Smitings in the Dark will at last fall upon thy own pate. Further thou goest on and say'st▪ We cry up Liberty of Conscience, but are not willing to give it to others, because thou say'st, many Thousand Times some Mi∣nisters have been disturbed by them in their Religious Exercises: That Liberty which we would enjoy our selves, the same we can and will allow unto all men, which is most equitable; and though we have gone into the Steeple-houses and old Mass-houses, and declared against Idolatry and Deceit, For∣mality, Feignedness and Hypocrisie, or spoken the Words of Truth and Soberness, either in Exhortation, Admonition and Reproof, this was the manner of the Apostles of Christ, whose Consciences were exercised in purity towards God; but that which was Order in the Churches of Christ, is counted Disturbance by you Mass-house-worshippers, and yet you would arrogate unto your selves the Name of a Church, and yet are out of Gospel-Order; you are for the Liberty of the Flesh, and not for the Li∣berty of a pure Conscience. Thou say'st, The Quakers are grievous Lyars, and thy proof is, that Ri∣chard Hubberthorn said, That the wicked are not to read the Scriptures, and E. Burroughs saith, The wicked and ungodly are to read the Scriptures, and not the godly; and thou say'st, In this they have not both spoken Truth. We know no Lye is of the Truth, but of the Devil, who abode not in the Truth; and we are redeemed out of Lying by the Truth, which hath set us free, and thou art found the Lyar thy self; for both the Words of R. H. and of E. B. thou hast perverted and not spoken the Truth, as afterwards may be made more manifest. In the 35th page of thy lying Story, thou say'st, The Quakers have suc∣ceeded much, and have prevailed in these Nations, and beyond the Seas; but thou hopest where-ever thy Book shall arive before them the People will so well know them as to abhor any further Acquaintance with them: Here thou hast manifested thy Spirit to be like the envious Jews, who crucified the Lord of Life, and persecuted the Apostles from City to City, sometimes running before them with their Lyes, and sometimes after, to oppose them, and to stir up the Vagabond Fellows and ruder Sort of people to oppose and abuse them, yet notwithstanding, the Truth prevailed, and many believed on the Name of Christ through their Words which they published unto them; we have found the like Opposition, not only from Strangers, but also of our own Country-Men, and have had many such lying Stories as thine sent before us, and spread over the Nations; and yet God hath carryed on his Work, notwithstanding all Rage, Opposition and Cruelty it hath prevail∣ed, and shall prevail, for so is the purpose and Will of God; and they who
shall see thy Book, who are but reasonable men, will abhor and detest thy envious Spirit, and Truth shall be more advanced, and that shall be ful∣filled, the Remainder of the Wrath of Man shall turn to the praise of God. Thou sayest, They are a very cruel Bloody People, if we may Judge the Lyon by his Paw, or what is abundantly in their Hearts. God will confound thy lying Lips and thy deceitful Tongue; whose Blood have we shed? can we not say, and that of a Truth, and have our Testimony by Gods witness in every man, that we are clear of the Blood of all men? Nay, on the contrary, hath not our Blood been spilt in your places of Worship, which you account Holy, and have not many suffered in Bond until Death, by the reason of the Oppression of the Blood hirsty Priests of this Nation? and thou mightst well have been silent if thou hadst not had an impudent Face; have not we much to lay to your charge and that truly? what dost thou Judge of thy godly Ministers in Lancashire and Cheshire, whom thou callst the Valient Captains of Christ's Army, which preached up the People in∣to Rebellion upon pain of Damnation? And others said, except they went to the Randevous, it was much if they were saved; And others said, the Nations must be purged with Blood, to shed the Blood of all those that withstood them; And others said, if God would stand as a Newter, they had men enough; and such Blasphemous Words and Doctrines were uttered, which are too tedious to relate, and all this Quarrel they said, was against the Quakers: Now let the Reader Judge the Lyon by his paw, and what is in these mens Hearts, by their Words and Actions before mentioned. And now to conclude this in thy own wrods, what would not these men do if they had Power to their will? But the Power of the Lord God preserves the Innocent, and is against all the Workers of Iniquity; I shall not trouble the Reader with what Priest Ford, and Fowler of Read∣ding hath gathered up out of Priests Books, which they have Vomited forth against the Way of Truth, nor what Tho. Underhil hath licked up and vomits out again, which is but that which hath been Vomited up be∣fore; so that it may be said, of them all as the Prophet saith, Their Tables is full of Vomit, and filthy spewing covers them all; all which things hath been answered over and over, but that Swine love to be wallowing in the Mire, and Doggs love to lick up their Vomit, and the Envy of the wick∣ed will not cease till he be cut off, nor the evil Eye for watching after mischief till it be put out; And now Tho· Underhill and the rest of thy party, who resist the Spirit, if I would recriminate, might not I more justly and truly bring many thousands bad Examples acted by your party, who are accounted Christians, and charge them all upon you, then all these things in thy Lying Story, which thou hast brought against the Quakers. If I should go from Parish to Parish, as thou hast done from one end of the Land to another, and so also beyond the Seas, and should I rekon up all the Fornicatours and Adulterers, all the Thieves and Murtherers, all the proud and covetous, all the Fighters, Brawlers, Railers, Drunkards, cheaters and defrauders, and should charge all these upon the Presbyter, what a Volume I might make, And were not this a just Retaliation? wouldst
thou count it an equal thing, or would it be accounted Just in the sight of sober Men, if I should charge the moderate and guiltless with these things before-mentioned? then Judge thy self for thy Envy and Foolishness and let thy Mouth be stopped forever, for accusing those whom God Justifies. In the 38 page, in thy Observation on the whole History, That one may talk much of God and Christ, and of the things of Religion, and all in Vain; and how the coming in of Unbelief shuts out Truth, Faith and Piety, and the great danger the Nation is in by being overturn with Hypocrisie and formality in Reli∣gion, and how many have the form of Godliness, but deny the Power. He whose Eye is open may see the intent of thy History is to resist the Power of Truth, and to strengthen deceit; and this shall stand for thy own lot, and for the Congregations and Assemblies thou art pleading for, who at the best are but in the Subburbs Babylon, who talk of God and Christ, and of the Spirit, and of Religion, but all in Vain; for nothing is brought forth among you but formality, deceit and Hypocrisie, and Error and Unbelief; and a form of Godliness hath long covered the Nation, and Truth, Faith and Piety hath been rejected, and the Power of godliness; but now hath the Lord appeared, and hath rent the Vail, and manifested the deceitfull Workers and Hypocrites, and though thou be observant as to others Foot-steps, yet thou hast not viewed thy self, neither pulled the Beam out of thine own Eye, neither hast discovered thy Envy, nor the murderous Spirit that rules in thy Heart, from whence all these muddy Waters flow forth, and all this Fog and mists arise, which darkens the Air, which whosoever receives in, their understandings come to be Dark∣ned; but all that fear the Lord will see out of thy corrupt Heart all this mischief, which thou hast long been Treasuring up doth now come forth, upon which the day of Wrath will come, both upon thee and it. Thou saist, The Quakers have no reason in the World to Boast of their suffer∣ings as they do, for thy have suffered as Evil-doers, for being uncivil to Magi∣strates, and disturbing God's People in their Assemblies, and for being busie-bodies and some other known Wickedness, and all their chargin Courts and Justices with Persecution falls flat to the Ground. We are no Boasters, but rejoyce in our sufferings for Christ's sake, neither are we weary, but are willing to bear and suffer, till the Lord arise and plead our Cause, and our sufferings are Recorded, and the Lord hath considered them, though men would not, and hath overturned many and Rebuked many for our sakes, and it is he that Justifies us, and who art thou that Condemns us? the Testimony of our Innocency and the causeless suffering, hath a Witness in many thou∣sands Hearts, who are not like thine as Flint; and what uncivility hath any to lay to our charge, as against Mgistracy? whom have we wronged, or what Violence have we done to any, except thou Judge that incivility, because we do not Complement, Bow and flatter, and make feigned Ad∣dresses, like thy Generation? and this, your Highness, and the other, your Excellency, and another, my Illustrious Lord, and the next Week or next Month call them Traytors, Tyrants and Usurpers; and as I told thee before, that which was order among the Churches, is accounted Distur∣bance by thee, which evidently manifests that you are in the Apostacy, and out of the Christian Religion, which was Professed and Practiced
among the Primitive Christians; and for any known wickedness among us, I am out of all doubt, if thou hadst any thing, thou wouldst preach it upon the House top; known wickedness hath God redeemed us from, which thou yet Wallowst in and yet takest delight in; And therefore all these known Wicked & abominable falshoods & Lyes are come forth, besides the abusing of our words, and false representing what we have written as our Doctrines to the World; and this thou hast done, sometimes added to our Words, and sometimes detracted from them; and sometimes addest thy own Collections, & then presentst them to publick view as our Errors and Blasphemies; and as for Courts and Justices, Magistrates and Ru∣lers, many of them hitherto have ruled by the Dragon's Powers, and not by the Power of God, & in that many have incouraged the Evil-doers, and have not listned to the cry of the Oppressed; therefore hath the Lord God overturned them, and their day is past, and our charges against their Wickedness and Persecution, neither our Testimony, neither our suffer∣ings have fallen to the Ground, but stand as a Record against them. And thou saist, It is high time for all the redeemed Ones, and sanctified Ones, and Children of Grace, the Favourites of Heaven, Honest, Godly, sincere Christians, Children that will not Lye to improve their intrust in God, for this sinful divided Nation. What dost thou own any to be redeemed and San∣ctified, or to be Children of Grace, or that do not lye? and yet cryest out of Perfection as Blasphemy, or that any should come to or live by that which is perfect; if thou excludest the Quakers to be any of these, they will not findm any redeemed, Sanctified, Honest, Godly, sincere Chri∣stians; and all your Improvement and your intrust which you have in God and in Christ, will but amount to a small dram; you all of you hitherto as you have said, have improved your intrust, and have sought God, as you have said, by your Prayers and Humiliations for the suppressing of that which you call Heresie, and yet you have had no answer, neither hath he listned nor will he listen nor bow down his Ear unto, because your Hearts are full of Abominations; and as for relapsing into Popery, you never came out of it, witness the Priests Popish Ordination, their Popish Attire, your Popish Mass-houses, your Cross and Bells, your Popish Tythes, Easter-reckonings, and Mid-summer dues, your Popish Colled∣ges, your Popish Crosses, and your Popish Images in and about your Idols Temple, and because of the holding up of these things, the Hearts of many of God's People are made sad, and because you would hold up your Religion by Swords and Clubs, and Persecute others who dissent from you in this, you are one with the Papists; And is this all thy Re∣formation that thy godly Ministry can bring forth? You have travailed in vain, and spent your strength for nought, and because of these things the Hand of God is against all in the Nation who hold them up; and who is he that can alter the Counsel of the Lord? and God will not be reconciled to the Nation till these things be done away, because of these things and many more grievous Oppressions which have been holden up; therefore God hath broken them in the midst of their Counsels, and confounded them in the midst of their devices, and will confound and overthrow all deceitful Workers, and unprofitable talkers, such as thou art, and one Hill shall fall after another, till there shall be a great plain, that the ran∣somed of the Lord may walk over, and Worship the Lord together in
Spirit and Love and Truth, in Joy and gladness of Heart, even as when Israel kept the Feast of Tabernacles. And now I shall come to let the Reader see, how thou hast falsified our Words which thou hast added thy own Imaginations to, and then hast quoted our Books to make People believe they are our words, whenas they are thy own forged lyes, the which I shall return upon thee. First, Thou sayest George Fox, In Truth defended saith, that Preaching the Word, Praying and singing are no Appointments of Christ, whenas he saith no such thing, but the Hireling Priests divinations and feigned Prayers and other mens words in Rhime and Meeter are the Inventions of men, and not the Ordinances of Christ. Secondly, Thou saist, E. B. In Truth defended saith, The Priest taking Tythes in the time of the Law was Evil, and proved them to be false Prophets and Deceivers; Whenas he saith quite contray, that the Priests took Tythes under the Law, according to the Command of God, but now the Priest∣hood was changed, and the Law was changed; and them what Preach for Hire, and seek for their Gain from their quarter, or take Tythes, are in the steps of false Prophets and Deceivers, and no Ministers of Christ. Thirdly, That it's dangerous for the ignorant and Unlearned to read the Scripture, and the Ministers of it are the Ministers of Death: Now thou hast detracted from the Words; There it is said, that it is dangerous for thee to take the Scripture to War against the Saints withal, and to make a trade with it, and give carnal Exposition, and then sell them for Money. Fourthly, Thou tellest of one Master Kellet in Lancashire and his Que∣ries; Whether did not Christ Institute his last Supper with Bread and Wine? and R. H. saith, the Bread which Christ called his Body is his Church, which words thou hast mangled and perverted, as thou hast done the most thou hast medled with, and there is no such man as Master Kellet; the words are these in Truth's Defence, p. 103. Christ did not peak of Bread and Wine, but he took Bread and brake it, and said, This is my Body; and we wit∣ness the breaking of the Bread which is the Body, and in this answer there is not one word of Church. Fiftly, E. B. In answer to Firmin, his words thou hast perverted, and would bring this as a contradiction of R. H. thou saist, He allows only the Wicked and Ungodly to read the Scripture, such as the Scribes and Pharisees and not the godly; And not the godly is thy own Addition: he spoke con∣cerning the Scribes and Pharisees, who thought to have Eternal Life in the Scripture, he saith, this was spoken to the Pharisees, and not to believers, yet Believers are not excluded from reading the Scripture, for them it per∣tains to, and they understand it; but thou art like the Spider where the Bee gathers Honey, gathers that which is corrupt, and in thy conclusion of thy Story thou takest in Hand to supplicate God; and thou saist it is for the help of them that need it, this thou might have spared till the old Prelates had come up again, it may be some Synod of them will add to the Book of Common-Prayer thy late Service and Worship; dost thou think the Lord will hear thy Hypocrisie and Lyes, without returning his Judgment on thy Head? Thou tellest of some that set light of Christ, and his Blood, and Word: thou art one of them that set light of Christ, and count his Blood as a vain thing,
as thy own Words in thy Book shall testifie, where the Reader may observe, when we have testified of the true Light, which lighteth every Man that co∣meth into the World, who is the Way to the Father, thou hast set down out Words for Blasphemy and Error, when divers of them are the Words of Scripture, and none of them but the Scripture will testifie unto against thee; and as for the Blood of Christ, and the Blood of the everlasting Co∣venant thou countest a vain thing and an unholy thing, even which clean∣seth from Sin, and bears witness against it, and subdues it, and makes them that receive it Conquerers over Sin; but thou that cryest out against Perfection or Freedom from Sin, and countest this Error and Blasphemy, thou denyest that which sanctifieth and cleanseth from Sin, and countei it unholy and vain; and so if the Lord should hear thee, and grant that thou prayest for, Destruction would come upon thee, and thou art one of the formal Professors that had Need to repent of thy Deceit, before thou canst pray unto God, either for thy self or others; but Enmity and Wick∣edness lodges in thy Heart against the Lord and the VVay of Truth, and thou hast resisted the Counsel of the Lord against thy self; and therefore VVoes, Plagues, Thunders and Storms are truly thy Portion, and nothing else must thou expect, which undoubtedly will come upon thee, except▪ thou repent, and it will be hard for thee to find a Place of Repentance, for it is yet hid from thine Eyes: So I have answered thy lying History, by which thou would'st inchant Peoples Minds, and have discovered thy Deceit and thy Poison, which thou hast put in that thou callest an Antidote, that so the Simple may not be deceived with thy Lyes and Cheats, neither the innocent betrayed; only I shall return a few of thy Lyes upon thy own Head, which thou hast forged up against the Quakers out of thy corrupt Heart, and out of the lying Stories of the Priests, with whom thou art in League, but he that sits in Heaven laughs you to Scorn, and all whose Eyes the Lord hath opened, will have thy lying Story in Derision, and loath thy Enmity, and testifie against thy Spirit, as not to be of God: And because thou hast said in thy Advertisement to the Reader, That thou hast not knowingly wronged the Quakers in the least; I say, thou hast either knowingly or ignorantly wrong∣ed them, and of both thou must repent before thou findest Mercy▪ and be∣cause thou tell'st the Reader, thou wilt make good every Thing thou hast char∣ged against them to any who require it, I do require thee to make these ensuing Things good. 1. That the Quakers deny the Death and Ascension of Christ. 2. That we deny the Divinity of Christ. 3. That the Priests under the Law, that took Tythes, did Evil, and for it were counted false Prophets and Deceivers. 4. That a man is just fled by the merits of his own good Works. 5. That the ignorant may not read the Scriptures. 6. The Quakers are a carnal and bloody People. 7. That the Quakers are bewitched and possessed by the Devil. 8. That Christians are worse then Beasts. 9. That the Body of Christ is not in Heaven. 10. That Christ as man had his Failings. 11. That man is not reconciled to God until he can stand by his own Power . 12. That Christ was a single man, true man and dyed for us.
13. That without the Grace of God a man may keep the Commands of God. 14. That they deny the Relation of a Father, a Brother, or a Wife. 15. That all that the Quakers have suffered is for evil-doing, being Male∣factors. These among many others thou art required to prove, and to make good, as thou hast promised, or else forever stop thy lying Lips, & own thy Con∣demnation for thy Envy and false Aspersions; and these things I lay at thy Door as Lyes, see how thou wilt clear thy self in the Sight of them unto whom thou hast written thy Story; many filthy and ungodly Stories are besides in thy Book, which I shall not trouble the Reader, or cumber his Mind with thy filthy Stuff, but in what already declared, thy Deceit will be made manifest and laid open, and Truth cleared from thy Lyes, and that will be Satisfaction to him who desires that all who love the Lord may be kept out of the Snares and Temptations of the Devil, who goes about like a roaring Lyon, seeking whom he may devour; and thou may'st see whose Foot-steps Thomas Underhil hath trode, who hath ranged up and down from Age to Age, from Nation to Nation, from one Region to another, to fetch up Lyes and fabulous Stories to resist the Truth withal, whose Reward will be according to his Works. FRiend, consider what thou hast done; Oh how hast thou brought a Vail of bad Report upon thy Name amongst all that fear God? and how hast thou hurt and wounded thy self by thy own Wickedness? and the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, The Wickedness of the wicked shall slay him▪ what! hast thou no better Use to make of thy time▪ then to spend it with inventing Mischief against a despised People, that seek not the Hurt of my one, but thirst and wait for the glorious Appearance of the Son of God? And what thou hast sought to do against them shall be the Weight upon thy own Conscience in the dreadful Day of God, whose  Judg∣ments thou canst not escape. Alas for thee, poor man, thou secue Child of Babylon, whose Strength is Weakness, and whose Wisdom is meer  in the Sight of the Lord: the Children of Sion do not fear thee, neither do they regard thy Revilings, for they dwell in a safe Habitation, and  at perfect Rest, and are above all thy fiery Darts, which in thy Envy  shootest against them, and thy Reward shall be according to thy Work and the multitude of men shall not be able to deliver thee from the Wrth that cometh against thee from the Lord; and all the false Prophets and Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, with whom thou hast taken Part against the  and his Fllowers, they shall be a broken Reed for thee to lean  why? Alas, the Determination of the Lord is against them, and the Day of their Sorrow is approaching; and hadst thou been wie for Gd, and for thy own Soul, thou would'st not have endangered thine own Sul on Report: and I am not altogether unacquainted with Ecclesiastical Histri their Defence; and though we have no Goals▪ Prisons, Stocks, nor Whips, nor yet any unjust or cruel Way of dealing towards you, as you have  against us, yet we have the Lord to be our Armour, and he is the only Rock of our Defence, and he is stronger then man, and in him we trust▪
and what are all thy Lyes and Slanders unto us? And what though Balaam for a Gift may seek Enchantment against us, yet there is no Divination found against the Elect Seed; and seeing thou hast gone in Balaam's Path, thou shalt reap his Reward, who art an Enemy of Righteousness, and a Perverter of the right Way of God, whose End will be Wo and Misery: Wherefore consider, O thou vain mortal man, that must dye and come to nothing; wherefore hast thou set thy self against God, and heaped up thy Multitude of envious Words, Lyes and Slanders against his People? What is the Fruit of such a Work, but eternal Vengeance from the righ∣teous God? And though thou art come in the End of the Battel, and hast helped Gog and Magog, according to thy Strength, yet Friend, our City can∣not be shaken, its Foundation cannot be removed; and what art thou, vain ignorant Creature, that hast fought against God and his People?
THE HEART OF New-England HARDENED THROUGH VVICKEDNESS: In Answer to a Book entituled, The Heart of New-England rent, published by John Norton, appointed thereunto by the General Court. The Doctrine of the Quakers Vindicated, his Arguments made void, his Ignorance manifested, and his lying Doctrine brought to Light, and judged with the Word of Truth, and Truth cleared from his Aspersions and Slanders By him that waits to see the Throne of Righteousness exalted above all Deceit. F. H. And the rest of the Men which were not killed by the Plagues, repented not of the Works of their Hands, neither repented they of their Murders, nor Sorce∣ries, nor worshipping of Devils, Rev. 9.20, 21. NOW when the Lord of Life and Glory is appearing in his Power, as in the Dayes of old, and his Goodness, Mercy and Truth, as in the Years past, and the Riches of his Grace and Salvation, which he maketh to flow forth, and spring forth from the great Deep; now when he is manifesting his Light from his holy Habitation, and his saving Health from his dwelling Place, that the Sons of Men might be Partakers thereof, and praise him who liveth forever and ever, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation unto them that believe; the Pit of Darkness hath al∣so opened its Mouth, and out of it many Unclean Spirits do arise, and Fogs and Mists of Darkness, Ignorance and Error are also arisen out of it, to
hinder the Light from shining, and to darken the Air, that the Sun of Righ∣teousness might not be beheld, and would dam up the Way, that the Springs of Life might not refresh the City of God and his tender Plants, that so the Prince of Darkness and the King of the bottomless Pit might not lose his Dominion; for this End hath he mustred up, and is mustring up all his Men of War with their several Weapons, and all the Engines of Wickedness, to resist the Lamb of God, who is risen to make VVar in Righteousness, that so the Kingdom of Darkness might still be established, and the Subjects thereof live at Ease and Peace in Egypt and Sodom, where Christ and the VVitnesses are slain; I say, for this End hath he sent out his Men of VVar, to resist the VVork of the Lord, which is to destroy the Devil's VVork; one of his Champions, more stout then his Fellows, is come out with his VVeapons of VVar, which are most of them borrow∣ed, and not his own, and the City in which he hath encompassed him∣self is a Refuge of Lyes; but however, he appears with the Face of Au∣thority, and subscribes himself, John Norton, Teacher of the Church of Christ at Boston in New-England, who was appointed thereunto by the Order of the General Court; his Book he calls, The Heart of New-England rent at the Blasphemies of the present Generation, or a brief Tract concerning the Doctrine of the Quakers, shewing the destructive Nature thereof to Religion, Churches and State. Now whether John Norton was appointed of the General Court to be Minister of Boston, or he was appointed by the General Court to tell Lyes, how the Heart of New-England is rent, whether he intends should be be∣lieved, the Reader may judge; for his VVords may be understood of both: However, John Norton hath manifested his Master, that it was not Christ, who appointed him to be Minister at Boston, but the General Court that appointed him; neither was it Christ o his Spirit that set him to work to publish Lyes to the VVorld, that the Heart of New-England was rent, but the General Court; neither was it Christ nor the General Assembly that ordered him to write this Book, which he calls, A Tract concerning the Do∣ctrine of the Quakers; but the General Court they have ordered thee to tell Lyes, and thou hast received thy Commission, and actest it, and shewest it to the World, and the Sign thereof is, By the Appointment of the General Court; before we go any further, men of Understanding will judge whose Minister, whose Souldier, whose Warriour John Norton is, and at whose Appointment and Commandment he ministers and wars, and hath clear∣ed himself to be no Souldier of Christ no Minister of Christ, but appoint∣ed to minister and to war at the Appointment of the General Court; and so what will be brought forth by him in his Tract, as he calls it, afterwards, as to minister Grace to the Hearers and Readers, the Reader may judge, see∣ing that he is a Minister by the Will of Man, and his Work is appointed by the General Court: And doth John Norton believe that People will re∣ceive his Testimony, as that the Heart of New-England is broken and rent, whenas the Blood-thirsty Cruelty, and barbarous Actions, and inhuman Act of Cruelty, and the noisome Smell, and a bad Example have you gi∣ven to the World, and the LAVVS and APPOINTMENTS and ORDERS of that General Court of BOSTON and NEW-ENGLAND stink in the Nostrils of all sober People, which is sounded through the
World, and your State is as it was with Israel, when Blindness happened unto them through their Unbelief, the Effect of it manifested their Apo∣stcy▪ the Judges then judged for Rewards, the Priests preached for Hire, and Prophets divined for Money, and the People loved to have it so in their nbelief, and then did the Rulers grind the Faces of the Poor, and chop them in Pieces, as Flesh for the Caldrn, even as you have done, banished some from their Habitations, some from their Wives and Children, and some you have seized upon their Lands, taken away their Goods by the Appointment and Order of your Courts, by which thou art made a Minister, and ap∣pointed to tell these Lyes, and to utter forth Deceit to cover your VVick∣edness, and to strengthen the Devil's Kingdom and the Subjects thereof, against Christ and his Kingdom, who came not to destroy Mens Lives, but to ame them, who came not to lay Burdens, but to take off Burdens, who  not to destroy the Poor and Needy, but to relieve the Oppressed: And have not your General Courts done all this and much more, which they may see and behold with Confusion of Face? And when they have whipt them and scourged them, fined them and imprisoned them, seized upon their Lands, taken away their Goods, wasted their Estates, banish∣ed them upon Pain of Death, and when nothing had remained of all their Estates, have ordered their Children to be sold for Bond-slaves, and this by the Appointment of the General Court, and for no other Cause but be∣cause they would not put off their Hats to their Equals, or come to your publick Assemblies. Oh un-heard of and unparallel'd VVickedness! the Name of your General Courts, and the Appointment and Ordinances thereof will be crowned with Infamy and Reproach from Generation to Generation; but this is come to pass, that your Hypocrisie might be made manifest, and your Skirts uncovered, that your Shame might appear, and that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, They eat up my People, as Men eat Bread: Are these the Fruits, Symptomes and Chacters that your Hearts are rent and broken in New-England, or are they not rather manifest Tokens that your Hearts are like Adamant, (or like the ne∣ther Mill-stone, or like Flint, which is harder then ordinary Stones, in which there is no Remorse or Reluctancy? And is not this your State, as it was with Israel when their Hearts were hard? Doth not Christ say, By their Fruits the false Prophets are known, and the Tree is known by its Fruits? And have not you brought forth the same Fruits? Do not your Rulers and Teachers rule and teach for Reward? Nay, are they not worse? Have not you taken Money from them whom you judged Malefactors, to pay your Servants for doing of your VVork to your Marshals, and your bloody Task masters and wicked Executioners? O shameless Man, and full of Impudency, that ever thou durst put Pen to Paper, or that the Ge∣neral Court should ever appoint thee to tell the Nation, that your Heart was rent in New-England; but the Terror of the Lord and the Dread of God you mst all know, before your Hearts be rent, which are yet impe∣netrable and hard, or else all these wretched Manifestations and Fruits thereof would never have appeared; but one of thy Generation, if not thy self▪ saith, That a Company of Thieves, Fornicators and Fellons may cry out of deserved Punishment as Persecution as well as we; God hath cleared us and redeemed us from those things▪ but is not putting off the
Equal, or not joyning or coming to your Congregation, that they deserve Punishment suitable to Thieves, Fornicators and Fellons, but Persecutors & Blood-thirsty men were ever blind; for Christ, the Prophets and Apostles▪ & the Holy Men of God, who suffered for the Testimony of a good Consci∣ence, were ever reputed Transgressors, and judged that they suffered de∣servedly by them who caused them to suffer; Christ was crucified betwixt two Thieves, and Herod the Governour and his Men of War set him at nought, and he was numbred amongst Transgressors, as it is written of him, and so were all his Followers by them that were in Cain's Way, and in Ba∣laam's Way, and so hast thou, with the rest of Babylon's Merchants▪ these divers Years numbred us amongst Transgressors, every Sect and Opini∣on hitherto hath joyned us to that Opinion or Sect which was contrary to them; but thou would'st marr our Countenance more then any, thou hast not found a Generation bad enough to number us with in this Age, but are gone back a thousand Years, to fetch up Men and Doctrines and Princi∣ples, and would'st fasten them upon us, and so to represent us odious to People; thou might'st have spent thy time better then to have raked in those old mouldy Histories, in which I see thou art better acquainted then with the mind of Christ; but I shall not trouble the Reader with thy Sto∣ries, neither vindicate their Doctrines and Principles, which were count∣ed Hereticks; these men are dead and gone, thou might'st have let them pass, and have medled with things that pertained to thy own Generation, but that thy dead mind feeds upon dead things; and to tell thee and the World plainly, that thou which wilt lye, and lay Things to their Charge which they never knew nor maintained, which may be are living and can reprove thee for thy Falshood and Deceit in this Generation, thou mayst well speak falsly, and lay Things to their Charge which they never main∣tained, which are at such a Distance as 1600 or 1000 Years ago; and if the Adversaries of these men did write their Principles, and set down their Errors and Blasphemies, as I believe many of them did, I do less credit their Report, and am not altogether unacquainted with Ecclesiastical Histories, from whence thou hast had these Stories, although now I count the time just lost which I spent in those things; and though thou judgest that we vilifie the Scripture, yet I prefer it above and before all the Ecclesiastical Histories that I have read; I shall not trouble the Reader with thy old He∣terodoxes, as thou callest them, of the Heads of Religion, there are mary that know those things as well as thy self: And as for Praxes, Sabeler, Nestorius, Crinthius, Eutichus, no with Quintinius, Swenkfield, Muncer, David George and John of Leyden, what are these to us? and what are their Principles to us? Something they spoke which was real Heresie, if the Histories be true, wherof I much doubt, because many such as thy self were the Authors thereof; and something it may be was Truth▪ which might be vindicated, not because they held it, but because it is Truth in it self: and as for thy comparing of them to us, and their Principles to ours, doth not at all detract or invalidate Truth, as it is in it self; for corrupt Minds may speak true Words, and that which is Truth in it self, yet not live in the Life thereof, they are judged, though the Truth in it self stands clear, and so wht as they were in their Principles & Practie, in Life or in Doctrine, must they give Account for: But thou, like the rest of the Hireling Priests
of England; use alwayes to be confuting your Adversaries when they were at a great Distance, when they were dead, and could not reply, or at such a Distance that they could not hear; and you are such valiant Champions, for the most Part, as to Disputation, except you have Club-men and Pri∣son-doors standing open, to fight or to shut them in, you will hardly enter into a Dispute publickly, or it may be, if they be afraid that they shall be worsted, and their Deceit laid open, put a Key in the Mouth of one, as some did in the Mouth of Humphrey Norton, when he was with one of thy Bre∣thren, and then cry, The Opposite or Quaker hath nothing to say for himself; and such dark muddy Stories you used to fill up your Hour with, as to con∣fute Arrius and Pelagius, men that were Hundreds of Years dead, and no such Principles holden in a Nation, and such dead Stories you fill Peoples Minds with; and confute the Pope, when your Elbows were leaning upon the soft Cushions on the Pulpit, and twenty or thirty Shillings for such a dead Story as you told People; but when have you gone amongst them, and reasoned of the Things of the Kingdom of God into their Dominions, and convinced them by sound Doctrine, and yet you will say, Christ said, Go into all Nations, and preach, and plead that for your Commission, and it may be stay fourty Years over an hundred Families. As for the Heterodoxes of the Quakers concerning the Heads of Religion, as thou hast set down, this I say to thee and to all the World, we do not hold them because any Man before did hold them, or may hold them after, but because God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, which also may be confirmed by the Testimony of the Scripture of Truth. As to those which thou settest down as our Tenets, I shall answer on the Lord's Behalf for Truth's sake, and for the rest, thou may'st take them home to thy self. First, Concerning the Trinity thou say'st, The confess the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and yet they deny the Trinity, and those to be three distinct Per∣sons; for Confutation of this thou bringest Heb. 1. & 3. He is the express Image of his Father's Person. Thy Trinity is an old Popish Term, and we love to keep to sound Words; but by Trinity I suppose thou meanest three and thy own Words shall con∣fute thee; thou confessest we say, there is Father, Son and Hly Ghost, and yet but one God, or one Eternal Being or Substance, in which they all subsist; but thy Word distinct is thy own, and not the Spirit's, yet to distinguish betwixt Father, Son and Spirit we deny not▪ and as for Heb. 1. it is in another Translation rendered, The express Image of his Sustance; for Peron is too gross a Word, as to express an Eternal and Divine Being in; and if thou dost hll three distinct Substances, thou errest in they Judgment; for that were to make three Gods. Secondly, They deny Christ to be God and Man in one Person, and Christ to be a distinct Person from the Father, and they acknowledge such a Christ as un∣christs Christ: and when they say, Christ manifest in the Flesh, they mean not as the Scripture, but fallaciously. Answ. We say according to the Scripture of Truth, and not according
to thy Fallacy, that In the man Christ did the fulness of the God-head dwell, and God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, and he saith, I and my Father are one, and the Father the Son and the Spirit subsist in one Eternal Power, Life and Glory, which thou with all thy stupid Generation are Igno∣rant of; and that Christ we acknowledge is such a Christ as is able to save to the utmost them that come unto him, and receive him, and believe in him, and is such a Christ as is able to raise them that have been Dead, and such a Christ giveth eternal Life to them that believe; And so that Christ that we own doth not un-christ Christ, but by your Doctrine who plead Imperfection and the continuation thereof, and a continuation in Sin for term of Life, as one of thy own said, Sin will dwell in the House till the House he pull'd down, speaking of the natural Body, which some other of thy own Generation have called the Body of Sin, and so it is you that hold such a Christ as un-christ's the true Christ in thy own Words; and when didst thou enter into our Thoughts, and into our Heart, or with what dost thou search, that thou sitst as Judge over the Heart, who knowest not Judgment in thy self, nor what Spirit thou art of, and so thy lyes and deceit are turned upon thee; when we say, Christ manifest in the Flesh, we say, that Holy thing which was brought forth and born of a Virgin, and Conceived of the Holy Ghost, in whom the fulness of the God-head dwells, in whom the Eternal Power of the Father was manifested, that he was the Christ, which was manifested in the Flesh, and Justified in the Spirit, Preached among the Gentiles, seen of Angels, and received up into Glory, and this is according to the Scripture of Truth, and thy Judgment must be judged. Thirdly, Concerning the Scripture considered as the Rule of Life, They deny the Scripture or written word to be the rule of Life, and they make the Spirit without the Scripture to be their guide, they account Church, instituted Worship and waiting upon God for the Efficacious presence and Operation of the Spirit of Grace, in the Ministry of the Word and Sacrament, for Conversion and Edfication to be Idolatry, and the Political order of Church Officers and Members they affirm to be an Image. Answ. Concerning the Scripture, we say, they are Scriptures of Truth and words of Truth spoken from the Spirit of Truth, that which gave them a being is greater then they, as he that Creates is greater then they, that are Created, which is perferred above and before, and yet no Di∣minishing or Detracting from the Creature; so the Spirit is greater above and before the words, and yet this doth not Diminish, neither Derogate from the Scripture; these and the like sound Words we have spoken to thy deaf Generation, yet a Spirit of slumber being upon them all, they could not hear that which gives Life, and bringeth to Life, and preserves in the Life, is a rule and a Guide to them that are enlightned, the Sons of God who were quickned by the Eternal Spirit of their Father, and of Christ, and raised from Death to Life; this was their rule, as it is written as many as are the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God, and we say, it is a sufficient rule of it self, and thou may'st as well count the rule of the Sons of God Heterodox, and Heretical, and the Apostles Position, who said, as many as are the Sons of God are led by it, and Christ promised unto Believers the Spirit of Truth to lead them into all Truth, and to bring things to
their remembrance, and to guide them in the Path of Righteousness; what has Envy and Madness eaten all the good out of your Hearts? yet the Scripture is not so excluded by us as thou Judgest, though we say the Spirit may lead and direct with it, or without it, yet not contrary to it; for the Spirit doth, will and may take up what thing it pleaseth to manifest it self and its mind unto the Creature, and who art thou? and what art thou? any thing but an Egyptian who wouldst limit it, and tie it to Paper and Ink, to words and Syllables, sounded and written in diverse Tongues, Languages and Characters; they that appointed thee for a Minister never knew God's Work, and we know that there are several Ministrations and several Operations, yet the same God and the same Spirit who manifested it self, and formeth and Ordaineth things according to its Heavenly will, to represent its Heavenly mind to the Creature, and that which Christ hath Ordained and Instituted to be Worshipped in, waited in, and his pre∣sence seen in, and the Operation of the Spirit of Grace in the work of the Ministry, which is for Conversion and Edification, is dearly owned by us, as that whereby we have found the Lord and his pure Presence through this or that thing, and without and beyond all Creatures or visible Appear∣ances, and this is not accounted Idolatry by us, as thou falsly say'st, which God will Judge thee for, in the day when he appears to take Vengeance, upon his Enemies in flames of Fire; and thou that talkes of trying the Spirit by the Letter knowest no more of God then a Horse, but what thou knowest naturally; the Jews had it, and they tryed and Condemned him for a Blasphemer, and the Apostles for breakers of the Law and makers of it void; and so condemned the Lord of Life, and the Spirit by which the Prophets and Apostles were led, even as thou dost with us; and I never heard of any Political order of Church Ordinance or Officers or Ordinances not of the most dark and Sottishest Merchants of Babylon, that ever spoke or wrote yet; there was sundry Gifts given, and sundry Institutions in the Primitive times which were single things, of things of a more Heavenly and Coelestial Nature which were to be made manifest: He gave some gifts to be Prophets, some Evangelists, some Apostles, some Pastors, some Teachers; but these were Ministerial for the Work and Service which he had appoin∣ted, but this was all by one and the same Spirit, but I never heard of any Political order of the Officers, or Political Ordinances ordained in the Pri∣mitive Churches; but it seems you have got such in New-England; in the Church of Rome, so called, I have heard of the order of Benedict, of Francis and Austin, and the like, and of several Ordinances Instituted by their Mother to perform; but I never heard of any such as a Political order of Officers and Ordinances before, and this may be called an Image indeed, and nothing in the world but deceit, and is no Herodoxy; that ever such a Blind fellow as thou, should put Pen to Paper, who hast crept so into the Mudd and Dirt, that gross Ignorance and Darkness is in all thy words▪ But the least of the Children of Light will see thy Ignorance, so that I need not say much. Concerning the Magistrate, they own none are lawful Magistrates, who are not of their Way, their non-acknowledgement of the Magistrate, as now establi∣shed, in all Christian States is more then manifest.
Answ. If thy Aspersion were full proof, no more need be said, but the Judicious will not easily believe thee; that there is a State of Magistracy is granted by us, and that a true Magistrate that Rules well, and Rules in the Power of God, and is a Terror to evil-doers, and a Praise to them that do well, and are as nursing Fathers, who preserve mens Persons and Estates from devourers, as a Father preserves a Child from injury, these are Ordained of God, and such we are subject unto for the Lord's sake, and for Conscience sake, and to every Ordinance of man which is consi∣stent with the Honour of God and a pure Conscience, but I believe you have few of them in New-England, who are rather like Bears and Lyons, tearing and rending their Estates, and rend and Tear their Flesh, and gnaw it like evening Wolves that the Prophet speaks of; and wouldst thou have this counted as God's Authority? and we tell thee and all the World in singleness of Heart and unfeignedness, that our way is Christ, the way to the Father, the Truth and the Life, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, and all that Rule not in his Power, Rule in the Devil's Power, in the Dragon's Power, in the Beast's power, who made War with the Lamb, and killed the Saints, and compelled them to Worship; and herein they that Rule in the Power of God and for God are manifest, and them that rule in the Dragon and Beast's power; for they that Rule in the Power of God answer God's witness in every man, and reach to that by his Act of Justice in the Transgressor, and he restraineth the Evil-doer with∣in, and limiteth that, and preserves the Creature as much as in him lies from harm, and his Estate from destruction, and also saveth the Innocent, Meck and Harmless from the violence, and from beating and fighting, and from them that would Destroy their Persons and Estates; and herein the Magistrate that Rules in the Dragon's Power and in the Beast's power, he is also made manifest, he reacheth not God's witness by his Governing, he lets the Transgressor live, and is not a Terror to evil Works and workers, but a Terrour to them that do well, & exercise a pure Conscience towards God and man, and it may be cannot go into the House of Rimmon, neither can bow to Baal, nor be subject to that which another may set up in his will and in his Pride, then he afflicts the Body, the Creature, and mars God's workmanship, and defaces it, and doth Violence to the Crea∣ture, and rends away his outward substance, and saith, for his Autho∣rity, It was so ordered at our General Court. I must tell the, the false Church, the Mother of Harlots has ridden long upon the Scarlet-coloured Beast, which has been made drunk with the Blood of the Saints, whose Gar∣ments have been red with Scarlet colour; and I know no where in any Christian State (so called) where he reigns in more Power then in New-England, and you ride upon the Beast, which hath risen out of the Sea, which is amongst you, and the Beast carries you, your Church, on his back, bears it up; for all your Weapons are but carnal, and that which wrestles with Flesh and Blood, which the true Church wrestles not with, nor with Creatures, but with spiritual wickedness and Principalities and powers of Darkness in the Creature, and threw that down and saved the Creature alive, and redeemed it, who was in Captivity. Oh, sottish Children! when will you learn Wisdom? and when will you hearken to reproof of Instruction which is the way to Life? but remember this, the
Beast shall be taken alive with the false Prophet, and them that have wrought Miracles before him, and then shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. They pretend to act from an Infallible Light within them, and profess Perfe∣ction in Degrees in this Life, and publish smart Invectives against Ministers who teach the contrary. Answ. We pretend to nothing but to that which God hath given us through his free Mercy, which we have a true Right unto, having recei∣ved him, as the Father hath tendered him, to be a Light to open our Eyes, and to be a Leader unto us and all his People, and to be God's Salvation e∣ven to the Ends of the Earth, to them that receive him; and he is that in∣fallible Light which the Father sent into the World, that all men through him might believe; and he is the true Light that lightneth every man, though every man hath not received him, the Fault is not in the Giver, nor in the Gift, but in them that will not receive; and he that is the Life of all men, hath lighted every Man that cometh into the World; and he is in us, our Hope, and our Glory, the Riches of the Gentiles, and the Riches of all them that do believe; he is our VVay, and our Life, and Peace, I say, all Glory unto him forever, though thou debasest him, and settest him thus at nought; and for his sake we can bear Reproaches, and become Fools, in that we have obtained that in which true VVisdom stands and Life eternal: And what, is this Heterodox, to profess Perfection of De∣grees in this Life? is not this Orthodox? Used not you, and do not you generally hold Perfection in Part or Parts? and is not that which is per∣fect in Parts, perfect in Degrees? He that feels Victory over one Sin by Christ, the Power of God, hath not he some Part in that which is per∣fect, and of that which is perfect? And if he witnesses Victory over more, is not he come to a greater Degree or Degrees of the Life which is perfect? And he that knows the Blood that cleanseth from all Sin, is not he perfect and compleat in him who hath made him so? But art thou so offended at Perfection, that thou dost not admit of any Part or Parts, Degree or De∣grees thereof, that thou set'st this down as a Blasphemy? And it's time indeed to reprove you sharply, who are puffed up in Pride, and know no∣thing, who teach contrary to the perfect Life of Christ, or any Degree or Degrees thereof to be attained unto; thou art perfect in VVickedness, and a perfect Minister of Anti-Christ, & a perfect Heathen, and it's time to bear Te∣stimony against you, & lay you open, & your Deceit in the Sight of the Sun, that them that have but the least glimering of the Light may behold you; a pitiful Church is that like to be, which thou art Pastor of, by Appoint∣ment of the General Court, who cryest out against any Degree of the per∣fect Life of Christ in this Life to be obtained or enjoyed, a Minister of Sin, a Minister of Satan and Unrighteousness, that is thy Name, own it. In the ninth page thou art going about to prove thy Trinity, as thou callest it, and thou say'st, The Father is a distinct susistance, and the Son is a distinct Subsistance, and the Holy Ghost is a distinct Subsistance; and thou bringest John 5. There is another bears Witness likewise, speaking of the Ho∣ly
Ghost; he calls him another; and this another (thou say'st) is intelligible of the Essence, and then say'st, What is more manifest then another Subsitance, and another Subsistance speaks distinct Subsistances, and thou say'st, The Spirit is called the Band of Trinity. Answ. Another is not understood of another being of another Life or a∣nother Substance, but is understood of another Manifestation or Operation of the same God, who subsists in the same Power, in which the Father, the Son and the Spirit subsist, as I said unto thee before, another, as to di∣stinguish of the Operation and Work of the Spirit and of the Son, we do not refuse; but to make three distinct Essences and Beings is Ignorance and Error, as thou say'st, Another is intelligible of the Essence, and so thou hast made three Essences, three Subsistances, three Persons, and three Gods; but we say, there is but one God, and there are three that bear Record in Hea∣ven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one: Now as for Subsistance and Essence, they are unsound Words, coined of your selves, from your dark Imaginations, in which there is no Truth at all, but to cast a Mist: Now where the Holy Ghost is called a Person in the Scripture, I have never read, and where it is called The Band of Trinity, I have never heard of before thee; and so thy blind ignorant Conclusions and Sophisti∣cal arguing will have little Place with them that are come to know the Teachings with the Spirit, and also keep to a Form of sound Words, which thou canst not. And thou say'st, He that sendeth and he that is sent are distinct; and so the Father sending the Son, and the Son sent of the Father, and the Father and the Son sending the Spirit, and the Spirit sent by the Father and tho Son are di∣stinct Subsistances, and not the same. He that sends and he that is sent may be distinguished, but he that sendeth and him that is sent are not so distinct and afar off one another, but that him that sendeth is with him that is sent, and so God was in Christ reconciling the World, and then how were they distinct one from the other; and by him were all things made; and Christ was not so distinct or afar off at a distance when the Heavens and the Earth were made, so that it is truly said, with∣out him nothing was made that was made; and the Spirit of God, which may be distinguished in Regard of its Operation, yet it was not absent or di∣stinct from the Father and the Son in the Creation, neither is absent from the Son in the Regeneration or Work of Redemption. And then in thy Answer to an Objection which thou makest thy self, How the Doctrine of Life was communicated vocally by the Patriarchs, but it is not so now; and in thy Answer thou say'st, The Scripture is not necessary absolutely, but it being God's Will to communicate Life through the Scripture, hence the Scripture is necessary; and then thou say'st, Not the Letter without the Mind of the Author, nor the Spirit without the Scripture, and that the Words in the 17th of John 22. That they may be one, as we are one, these Words give an un∣certain Sound (thou say'st) and further thou say'st, Surely they are under  Rule of Lfe who have not the Spirit, since the Canon of the Scripture is close, so far is the Spirit from being a Rule of Life, that to us it is not the Spirit, except  move in the written Word.
Answ. Gross Darkness is thy dwelling Place, and out of thik Darknes all this pitiful Confusion cometh; the Doctrine of Life was communicated according to the VVill and Mind of God, sometime by Dream, sometime by Vision, sometime by Revelation to the Patriarchs and Believers from Abel till Moses; and by Faith they were Followers of Christ, and doubt∣less, they did communicate in their Generation those hings that were ∣nifest unto them by the Spirit, which was the then Rule and Guide to the Feet of the upright in the way of Peace before any Scripture was writt; and if the Scripture be not necessary absolutely, thou hast said as much as we say; therefore we speak of a Rule and a Way which is absolute neces∣sary, without which no man can know the Father, or the Son, nor the Way of Peace, but by the Spirit of Truth, which gave orth the VVords of Truth, which may manifest and doth maniest it self as it will, when, where, and how it will; for it is unlimited, and it will not be limited by its own VVords, as to Sound, but may speak VVords which it never spoke before; as for instance, Paul by the Spirit said, The second Adam, the Lord from Heaven is a Quickening Spirit, which none of the Scriptures before-written speak in these very VVords; and if the Spirit be not Spirit with∣out the Letter, then where the Letter is wanting, the Spirit is wanting, and consequently, them that have the Scripture have the Spirit, which were no less then Ignorance and Darkness to say; and what Rule are they under, who have not the Spirit or no Measure of it; there is but the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error, and they that are not ruled by the Spirit of Truth, they are ruled by the Spirit of Error, though they may have the words, to fight with and quarrel about without the Life; but last of all, thou hast in plain words set the dead Letter before the living Spirit, and say'st, That the Spirit is no Spirit except it speak by the Scripture; and if the words of Christ in John 17. give an uncertain Sound, it is but to thy deaf Ear, and to thy blind Understanding; for he spoak soundly and certainly, and prayed to the Father, that as the Father and he were one, so they als might be one, being guided by the one Spirit of the Father in the Son and that they might live in the Unity of it, and have Unity with one another in it, and with the Father and the Son. In thy 15th page, though thou hast set up the Letter for a perfect Rule of Life, yet here thou throwest it down again, and say'st, It is to be uner∣stood as including Consequences; for the greatest Part of Scripture is Conequen∣ces, and the Scripture cannot be true without Consequences; for Thomas and Mary are neither cmmanded Obedience or forbidden Diobedience, for we no where read, thou Thomas or thou Mary are therein commanded Obedience, or forbidden Disobedience, such an one by Name do this or that. Answ. I told thee the Spirit of God is unlimited, and whether it speaks of Degrees or Measures of a greater or less thing, or whether it speaks the greater first and the lesser after, whether it speaks from Major to Minor, or from Minor to Major, or what may truly follow, either from the greater to the less, or from the less to the greater, it is all Truth; but thy Conse∣quences are no Part of this, the Spirit still demonstrates its own Mind by what words and Terms and Expressions it pleaseth, and will not be limit∣ed or confined to this or that Form of words; and thou errest grosly, nei∣ther
knowing the Scripture nor the Power of God; and thy Consequen∣ces are false; for there are the individual Persons or Names of Thomas and Mary, both commanded Obedience, and forbidden Disobedience; and if thou hast never read this in Scripture, I inform thee and instruct thee, thou may'st read John 20.16, 17. where Jesus saith unto Mary, she turned her self, and said unto him Rabboni, which is to say Master, Jesus said unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended; here is a Prohibition, and forbid∣ding that she should not touch him; Secondly, here is a Command of Obe∣dience, But go unto my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; and in the same Chapter thou may'st read in ver. 27. where Christ spoke unto Thomas by Name (after his Re∣surrection) Then said he to Thomas, reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands, and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side; here was a Command to be obeyed, and be not faithless, there is a Prohibition or a forbidding of Unbelief; and so thy Foolishness is manifest; and Ignorance of the Scripture, some of it, thou sayest, is an uncertain Sound, and the Scriptures fore-mentioned thou hast denyed, or else never hast read it, and so art unacquainted with thy Rule, which thou quarrellest and fightest so much about. And then thou comest and say'st, Thou wilt vindicate some Scriptures, and citest 1 John 9. That this was the true Light which lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, hence they affirm that there is a Light in every man, which being followed is an infallible Guide, and that this Light which lighteth every man is the Rule of Life, and not the written Word; thy Answer is, The Sense of the Text is notoriously false, and thy Reason is, If Christ, the true Light that lihteth every man be the Rule, then Righteousness should be by the Law; for the Light which is in every Man is not Gospel-Light, but there is a natural Light or the Light of Nature, which is to be construed in Opposition to spiritual, and the Light of Nature and the Light of the Spirit are contra-distinct; and by this Light of Nature there is a Difference put betwixt that which is good and bad, and it will teach us not to lye nor steal, and it will lead to the Knowledge of one God, and yet it is in Opposition to one Spirit, and it will lead to know Eternity Omni∣potency, and it will lead to know the Creator, yet it is contra-distinct to the Spirit. Answ. The Scripture needs none of thy Vindication, for thou hast defa∣med it, and sayest, Christ's Words are an uncertain Sound, and thou hast said, that neither Mary nor Thomas was commanded Obedience; thou may'st look back of thy Lyes, and repent of them; and why is the Sense of the Text utterly false, that Christ was the true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the World without Exception; and why is this ut∣terly false, if he be fllowed, that he who is the true Light is an infallible Guide, and the Rule of Life? Hath he not enlightned every man that co∣meth into the World? If thou makest Exceptions where the Spirit makes none, then thou pervertest the Scripture; doth not he say, I am the Light of the World; the World in the Scriptures Account is set in Opposition to Believers; for Believers are not of this VVorld, but are redeemed out of it; as for Example, God so loved the World, that he sent hs Son into the World, that whosoever did believe in him might not perish, but have Everlasting Life;
for it is manifest that the Saints and Believes had Life given , that followed Christ, and were his Sheep; and saith Christ, I put them forth, and go before them, and give unto them Eternal Life; and he said to them who had not Eternal Life, While you have the Light believe in it, that you may be the Children of it: And is not Christ, God's Righteousness, who is given for a Covenant of Light to the blind, and dead, and lame, and to the dumb, to open their Eyes, to quicken them, to make them leap as an Hart, and their Tongue to sing and utter forth Praise? we say, Righte∣ousness is not by the Law, but by Christ, that lighteth every man, who is the End of the Law; and why is not the Light which lighteth every man Gospel Light, seeing it is said, Go preach the Gospel in every Creature under Heaven; go learn what that means? And if Natural Light must be con∣strued in Opposition to Spiritual, and the Light of Nature contra-distinct to the Light of the Spirit, then it must needs be sinful; for that which op∣poseth spiritual Light, and is set in Opposition against its leading, must needs be sinful; and that which is contra or against the Light of the Spirit, must needs be sinful; and then if it be as thou hast said, and if this must be the true Sense of that Scripture, that it must be understood of natural Light, and that natural Light thou construest in Opposition to spi∣ritual, and say'st, It is contra-distinct to the Light of the Spirit and in Opposi∣tion unto it: That which is against the Spirit's Light, or the Light of the Spi∣rit, must needs be Darkness, sinful and evil; and yet thou hast confessed, It will teach that none ought to lye or steal▪ and to know one God▪ and the Crea∣tor, and Eternity, and Omnipotency, and yet it must be taken in Opposition to the Spirit, and contra-distinct from the Spirit; that which leads to know the Creator, and Eternity, and Omnipotency is that Spirit of God, through which God and the Things of God are revealed; and that that teaches that a man should not lye, that is Truth; and that that leads from Sin▪ and accuses for Evil-doing, and convicts, that is the Spirit's Light, as it is written, He shall convince the World of Sin: And so thou like a man who hth lost all Aim, ramblest up and down in every By-Path, and like a blind man gro∣pest, but canst not enter into the Treasure-house of Wisdom; thou hast called the Light that every one is lighted with, the Righteousness of the Law, and no Gospel Light, and in Opposition to spiritual, and contra-distinct to the Spi∣rit, and in a Word, hast made of it at the best Construction but bad and evil; and then when thou hast done thou confesest, That it will put a Dfference be∣tween Good and Evil, and shew that God is to be worshipped, and Eternity is known and Omnipotency; and are not these the deep Things of God? And so Babylon is the Land of thy Nativity, and thou reelest and staggerest up not and down like a drunken Man, and wouldst be a Teacher, and knowest not whereof thou affirmest, nor of what thou spekest. Further thou say'st, That th little Light there is is much miscarried and thy Reason is, because it is mannaged by the reignin Power of Darkness, and the Judgment of Man is corrupt; and then thou goest on▪ the Light of Nature sice the Fall is not to be compared (say'st thou) with the Light of the Image of God before the Fall, and it hath no Proportion with Gospel Light, but is gross Darkness, nay, is worse then gross Darkness.
Answ. And how did the Light miscarry, thou blind-man, and when did the reigning power of Darkness manage it, seeing that there is no fellow∣ship betwixt Light & Darkness, and the Light which every man is lightned with hath born witness against Darkness, and the Reigning Power of it; and though the Judgment of man be corrupt, his miscarriage is because he hath not minded the Light, and because he hath turned his Back on it, and then Sin entered, and then came to Reign in the Power of Darkness, and corrupted the Heart; and this hath made man miscarry; and though thou sayst, that the Light which lighteth every man, is not compared with the Light of the Image of God before the Fall, and hath no Proportion, I'le tell thee a Riddle, go learn what it means, the Light of the Image of God before the fall is the same in it self after the fall, and holdeth its pro∣portion, and is no whit lessened or diminished in its purity in its self, al∣though fallen man do not see it, neither can behold it, because Sin hath entred and Death by Sin, and that is it which obscureth the Image of God from man, and it's Light, yet the Light shined in Darkness, but thou concludest it is Darkness, yea worse then gross Darkness, and thou bringst a proof to prove it, ye were Darkness, the Apostle doth not say, that the Light which shined in darkness, was darkness or worse then gross Dark∣ness, as thou ignorantly saist; but he said, the Ephesians or the men of Ephesus were darkness, and not the Light in them, which shined in Darkness, though the Darkness comprehended it not; but how now John Norton, what will the General Court of Boston say, when they see thy confusion laid open, and the Deceit made manifest to thine and their shame and igno∣rance? thou confest in the 16. page, That it would lead to know God and the Worship of God, and Teach not to Lye and Steal, and so forth, and to discover some of God's Attributes, as Eternity, Omnipotency, and the like, here was some good in it in thy own account, but now its become gross Darkness, in the 18. page, and worse then gross Darkness, and so hath made as bad if not worse then any Principle that is in a Beast; and it may truly be said of thee even in thy own Phrase. —Qanta sub nocte Jacebat Nostra dies— But now thou comes to a further Interpretation of 1 Joh. 9. and thou saist, The Light which we are enlightned with, it is either the Light of Nature, the Light of Reason, or the Light of saving Grace, and the Light enlightening is either the Word considered as the second Person, or Christ the Son consiered as Incarnate. Answ. It seems that thou knowest not which it is, but Guessest like a blind-man, and like a wild Archer shoots at Randome; and why dost thou make such distinction betwixt the Word the Son of God, and Christ the Son of God, thou madest but three Persons in the Trinity before, but it seems by thy arguing thou wouldst now make four; And as for thy Cl∣le ive and distributive Light, the distinctions is that which would cast a Mist before People Eyes, and thou bringst the Judgment of Calvin, Beza, and Piscator, and others, that as concerning Man endued only with the Light remaining since the Fall, they conclude him to be Darkness and un∣able to comprehend the Light, or to improve it to Salvation, their Judge∣ments
are more sound then thine, though thou wouldst bring them to strengthen thee, that the Son of God hath not enlightned every man, they confess, the Man in the fall is in Darkness, and Darkness is over him, and in that he is not able to comprehend the Light which is in him; and as to the Improvement of it, in the Darkness man hath not Power to improve it to Salvation, but what doth this invalidate the Light which is in Dark∣ness? the Power of improving is in the Light, being turned to again and received; and what if I say, it is the Light of Life in its self, though thou deny it? I knowest what I speak; for in him was Life and is Life, and that Life is the Light of men, and the Light of the World, and so that Light, which every man is lighted with, is of the Life and from the Life, and so may truly be said, to be the Light of Life in it self, though man in the Transgression doth not feel it so as to him, but may truly say, it is the Light of Condemnation, because he feels it so in the Operation thereof, being in the Transgression, it convicteth, reproveth, accuseth and con∣demneth for Evil, and therefore it cannot be the Light of Life to him, till it be received, closed with, obeyed and followed, and then the back is turned upon the Transgression, and man is come out of the Darkness; and there∣fore the Apostle spoke well, and understandingly, according to Know∣ledge, that which was ordained for Life wrought Death in him, that was because the Law was against him, and he in the contrary Nature to it, the ignorance of many wise Men (so accounted) in this Generation is such, that when they see or feel contrary Effects, they judge there must needs be contrary Subjects or Objects, because there are different Effects; for now the same Light which shews Evil and accuses for it, and Judges for it, there is one Operation, and excuses him that loves it and obeyes it, here is another Operation, that which Convinceth the World of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment, and that which consolates and gives Peace to the Believer, is the self same Spirit; so here is not two Spirits or two Lights; so that he which kindles a Fire in the Earth, and appears in flames of Fire, and rendereth Vengeance upon all them that obey not the Gospel, which is the Power of God, here is one Work or operation of Christ, the same bringeth Peace, Joy, and gladness, and refreshment, and makes the springs of Life to bubble up in them that believe, here is an∣other Operation, yet the same Christ; these things I write to inform thee, and all where this may come, that that is truly an Appearance of Christ, which sheweth Sin and condemns it in a measure, and he alone is the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, and if all Judgment be committed to the Son, then to be Judged for Lying, for Stealing, and for wronging any man, it is the Work of Christ, and the Work of the Son. Oh man! thou hast much to Repent of, and thy Ignorance is great, which hast called, Christ the Light or the Light of Christ, or the Light of Life, Darkness, and contra-distinct to the Spirit, and worse then gross Darkness; so this is thy conclusion against the first of John & the 9th, that Christ hath not enlight∣ned every man, or all men that come into the World, but all men so quali∣fied of every sort; so then by thy conclusion the first of John and the 6. verse gives an uncertain Sound, like the 17th of John and 22th so then its Qualifi∣cations of men that procures Light from Christ, and so its not of Grace but of debt, but if it be of debt, which is owing unto a Person so qualified,
then it is not of Gift, but thou err'st in thy Judgement, for it is by the gift of Righteousness that Justification comes upon all that believe, it is not this or that Qualification before their conversion, which is any cause of God's enlightening them, but it is the free Love of God unto man with∣out Exceptions, or respect of Persons that he hath lighted every man, to the intent, that all and every man might see his Error and depart from it, and turn to him that shews him it, who would have all men saved and come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and such is the large Love of God unto whole Man-kind, which thou wouldst restrict and bind up to such and such Persons so Qualified, as though Qualifications of Persons were a Meritori∣ous cause, wherefore Christ was Bound to give them Light, this is rank Popery, and not according to the Doctrine of Godliness. And thou citest 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, where∣unto you do well that you take heed, as unto a Light that shineth in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your Hearts; hence it is inferred, thou say'st, that after the Reception of the Spirit there is no need to attend to the Scripture; and so thou goest on and say'st, the Word of Prophecy is the Scripture of the Old Testament, that thou art to take heed unto, until the Day dawned, and the Day-star arised in their Hearts, and that until signifies forever. Answ. And here thou art in Confusion, I know none that make any such Inference but thy self; for the Scripture is seen most clearly, who know the Day dawn, and the Day-star arisen in their Hearts; and first thou say'st, We are to understand the Word of Prphecy the whole Scripture; and then in the same Page say'st, That Peter expounds the Word Prophecy of the old Te∣stament only; so then Peter's Exposition by thy Account and thine is diffe∣rent; thou say'st, he spoke of the old Testament, and thy Interpretation is of the whole Scripture; but thou hast mist it, both of Peter and thy self; for Peter wrote to People in that Epistle in several States, yet they all might be said to be Believers, according to a Proportion of Faith given unto them; and in that which thou hast cited, 1 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy; here is to be understood, first, a sure Word, secondly, a more sure Word; for the Apostle in that Chapter speaking of their Diligence towards them that did believe, and declared unto them, That they had not followed devised Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but are Eye-Witnesses of his Majesty, verse 16. and heard the Voice from this excellent Glory, this is my beloved Son, in hm I am well-pleased, when we were with him in the Mount: This was as sure a Word to the Apostles as any that ever the Prophets had spoken before was to them; & so the Old Testament could not be more sure then this which they heard from the excellent Glory; but this was not so sure unto them to whom Peter wrote; and this was only the Apostles Declaration, but the Word of Prophecy, unto which he exhorted them, was nearer then any of the Prophets Words or the Apostles Testimony of what they heard in the Mount: the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prphecy, to wit, that which bears witness against Sin, and to Righteousness, from this the Prophets spoke, and this was that publick Thing or Spirit, and they that speak not from it, speak from a private Spirit of their own; and this Word
of Prophecy, or that wherein they could see or foresee Things to come, they were to take heed unto, as unto a Light which shined in a dark Place, and this was the more sure Word which he directed to, which in all thy Book thou quarrelest against, and through this they saw the Apppearance, and knew the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in Power and great Glory, and did see the Day dawn, and the Day-star arise in their Hearts, and they were to attend to this, not only before, but also after; for by the Word of his Testimony the Saints did overcome: And so all thy Interpretations are false, and thine is the private Interpretation, and not from that sure word of Prophecy which the Prophets and Believers took heed unto, and through which they interpreted Things truly, according to the Mind of God. As for the Story of false Teachers arising and prevailing among People, and what the signal Nature is; and thou say'st, They are sent as Scourges and as Judgments to them who have not received the Truth in the Love of it; and thou bringest a Scripture, I came in my Father's Name, and ye received me not, John 5. but if another shall come in his own Name, him you will re∣ceive. It's manifest that thou comest not in his Name nor in Christ's Name, and if not so, in thy own Name thou comest, by the Appointment of the Ge∣neral Court at Boston; and so there will few believe thy fabulous Stories, which are not worth rehearsing, which will cast a Mist before the Eyes of them who cannot see through thy Deceit; and the Sum is (thou say'st) of all, that the Doctrines of Devils audaciously disseminated, pretending themselves to be sent of God, are signal Signs of evil Times. The Doctrines of Devils have long been audaciously seminated by numerous false Teachers and false Prophets, as Christ foretold in Mat. 23. & 24. which John saw come, 1 John 2.18. Little Children it is the last Time, ye have heard that Anti-christs should come, and even now there are many, and they have ruled long in most Parts of the Earth, that John said, The whole World wondered after the Beast; and this hath been a sad Time these thirteen or fourteen Hundred Years, wherein the true Church, the Wo∣man cloathed with the Sun, hath been in the Wilderness, in a solitary Place, exiled because of the Beast's Power, and the Dragon's Power, and the false Prophets Miracles, and because of the Doctrines of Devils, have made it a sad Time and an evil Time, such as thou hast taught, viz. That the Light which every Man is lighted with is gross Darkness, and worse then gross Darkness, and that Christ left Political Officers, and hat the Lord's Supper  a visile Po∣litical Church Ordinance, and that Baptism is a visile Political Church-Ordi∣nance, and that it is Blasphemy to hold Perfection f Degrees in ths Life, and that none can be cleansed from Sin while upon Earth: These and the like Do∣ctrines of Devils have been sown, which thou now audaciously seminates by the Appointment of the General Court at Boston; but the Time draws near an End, the Night is far spent, and the Day is at Hand when the Beast shall be taken alive, and the old Dragon laid hold on, and the Mother of Harlots burned with Fire, and the false Prophets, which have wrought Miracles before the Beast, and have cryed, as thou cryest him up in New-England, Who is able to make War with him, who hath shed the Blood of the
Saints of the most high God, which will lye as a Stain upon your Political Church, as thou callest it, which will not easily be washed away; the Time of your Mirth in Sodom & Egypt is near an End, though you strength∣en one another, and make merry, yet Wo will come when all these be∣fore-mentioned go down alive into the Pit together; and when the Sea is dryed up, that your Traffick will not go off, then Alas shall be the Note of her Merchants, who have traded with her Sorceries and Witchcrafts, and have made People drunk, that they have reeled and staggered, and have been all like a Sea, unstable, and have not known the Rock of Ages, upon whom all that do believe are established. Thou say'st, The Gospel is a Constitution or Effet, tempered of the Grace of God and of the Blood of Christ. Answ. The Gospel thou knowest not, but buildest with thy untempered Morter, and unseasonable VVords; and what is the Gospel an Effect of? it is not only an Effect of an Operation, but it is that which operates, and is the Power of God, which will confound all this Mud and all these dy Traditions, which you mix with the Scriptures, and call them Go∣pel. And now thou comest to the destructiveness of the Doctrine of the Quakers to Religion, the Churches of Christ and Christian States, be∣cause thou say'st, It appears in this from the Nature of the Oject they single out to fight against, as the Trinity, Christ, the Scripture, Order oth Civil and Ec∣clesiastical, as instituted in the Gospel. As to those Principles I have answered before in part; but dost thou tell of Civil Order in your State or in your Political Church, as thou callest it? is that to be counted a Civil State, who destroyes the Creatures, God's VVorkmanship, and destroyes Mens Estates, and sells their free-born Children as Bond-slaves? dost thou judge that these Rule well according to the Appointment of God, who is a Terror to them that do well, and an Encourager of Violence and Cruelty? as your late Actions have sufficiently evinced: And as for the Order of your Political Church, we have heard of it, that you are as a Company of wild Bears, rending and tearing▪ and stop Gloves and Napkins, and bind Keys over their Mouthes, that they may not speak the Word of Truth amongst yu▪ contrary to Primi∣tive Order: And as for the Doctrine of the Quakers many who know it better then thee, know it to be dstructive to nhig, but to the Doctrine of Anti-christ, and such ungodly Doctrines as thou hast laid down in this Book, as that that Light which Christ hath enlightned every one withal is gross Darkness, and worse then gross Darkness and that the Supper of the Lord is a visible Political Ordinance, and suh black Doctrines as these our Doctrines are destuctive unto. And further thou goest on and tellest, The Work against Order is Policy a∣gainst Policy, the Policy of Hell against the Policy of Heaven. Answ. It seems your Order stands in Policy both in your Church and State, and in Craft, Fraud and Deceit; and thou judged that Heven stands
in Policy too, but he that sits in Heaven laughs you to Scorn, with all your Deceit and Policy. And now thou comest to thy Proof, and say'st, That Doctrine that denyes Obedience to Magistracy in his due Subject, in Effect denyes the Order of Magi∣stracy; but their Doctrine denyes Obedience to Magistracy in its due Subject, therefore their Dorine denyes the Order of Magistracy. Answ. The Major and Minor are both false; for we own Magistracy in its due Subject, which stands in the Power of God, and in the higher Pow∣er, and that which leads into Order, and out of Confusion and Destructi∣on; and thou must not think to fasten Stork and Muner upon us for thy Proof, what they did stands upon their Account, and not upon ours; and that mischievous Spirit of thine is that which presseth on the Magi∣strate to abuse his power, and to intrude into those Things which belong not to him, to keep up your confused Babel, which thou callest a Politi∣cal Church, which must all be scattered with the Breath of his Mouth, and with the Brightness of his coming, whom thou yet judgest to be gross Darkness. In thy 18th page, and in the 44th page thou speak'st, That visible Politi∣cal Church, Church-Officers and Church-Ordinances are Gospel Institutons, ap∣pointed by Christ to continue to the End of the World, and that Command which Paul gave to Timothy is to be kept, and that visible Political Church Estate is to continue to the End of the World. Answ. I see thou art ignorant of God, Christ, Heaven, Church, Church-Officers, Ordinances and Institutions; the Churches of Christ were established by and in the Power of God, and the Ministers thereof ministred, walked and ruled in the Power of God, and the Ordinances and Institutions of the true Church of God are pure and spiritual, but the Church that thou art pleading for the Continuation thereof, is a Political Church, Political Ordinances, Political Officers, Political Institutions, Political Pastors and Teachers, the Lord's Supper a Political Ordinance, Bptism a Political Ordinance; the spiritual Counsl which Paul gave to Timothy about the Elders of the Church, and about the Holy Practice which they were to walk in, and the godly Conversation, this thou calls Political; nay, furthermore thou saist, Heaven stands in Policy; and in thy fourth Chap. say'st, To Christ belongs the Prerogative of being the only Politician; these and the like damnable Doctrines and Heresies thou hast uttered forth, and these must be proved from the first of Tim. 3.15. and Chap. 4. did Paul when he wrote to Timothy▪ when he gave him direction about Elders and such as took care of the Church of God, did he say, a Bishop is a Political Officer, and must be blameless? or did he say, a Dea∣con is a Political Officer, and must be grave? And therefore Reader, thou may'st read these Scriptures, 1 Tim. 9.14. 1 Cor. 14.33. and thou maist see this Sophister, and this man that is void of understanding, who cryeth up the Scripture for a Rule of Life, and yet holds such a Church, such Pa∣stors, such Officers, such Ordinances, such Institutions, which the Scrip∣ture makes no mention of, and therefore this man having made a Mon∣strous Body, a Politick Church, he imagines a Head like it, and therefore Blasphemously saith, Christ is the greatest Politician; much I need not say
unto this black Dark stuff, which is to be confounded, which is imagina∣ry and Deceit, which the wrath of God must scatter; but this I say to thee, there were no Officers in the Church of Christ, but they were Mi∣nisters made so by the Spirit, and were made so by the Holy Ghost, and were Ministers of the Spirit and not of the Letter, and some were Elders, and Ruled in the Church and Churches, which was Sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, and these were spiritual, and not Political; but thou hast cleared and quitted your selves from being any such Church, and that which you call the Sacrament, which thou callst Visible and Political, and bringst 1 Cor. 12. for thy proof; did Paul say, as often as ye eat this Political Bread, and drink this Visible Political Cup, shew forth the Lord's Death till he come? and did Christ when he sent his Disciples to Preach and to Baptize in the 28th of March. 16. which thou plead must continue until the end of the World? did he send them and say, go and Teach and Preach the visible and Politick Word of the Kingdom, and Baptize them with visible Political Water, and that this should continue to the End of the World? And little marvel if the Throne of Satan be ex∣alted among you, and such Ministers as thou who Ministers deceit, and Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, art set to be a Teacher, and appointed so by the General Court, who canst not speak a Form of sound Words, but like a Phylosopher, a Star-gazer, an Astrologian or a Stage-player, which them that read thy Book, will see thy Tract frothed with such black dark Sentences which are like Enchantments. As for Beckold and Knipperdlling, and Quintinius and Poquius, thou mightst have taken up thy Pen ere now, and not have brought all this ramb∣ling stuff out of the History of the Germans, which thou wouldst cast upon our Backs; the Bishops used to cast it upon your Backs, and you upon the Baptists backs, but now we must bear all; and thou in Envy unto us, that thereby thou mightst represent us Odious to the World, hast made them all Quakers, and saist, they are our Predecessours, take them to thy self, and joyn them to your Political Church, and your Political Ordinances, and your Politick Doctrines, which is of the same Nature with theirs, which you maintain and uphold with carnal Weapons, as they did theirs. And last of all, thou art coming to the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion under the Gospel, and thou saist, Notwitstanding manifold Evils prevail, and the Wiles of the Devil are great and malignant, and Heresie which is a horrid aspect; yet thou saith, There is Balm in Gilead, & a Physician there, and the Balm and the Physician is that thou say'st, God hath armed the Ma∣gistrate with Civil Power for defence of Religion, through the Concurrences of Divine Benediction, and the Magistrate is to vindicate the Truth of God, and also exercise  Power for curing the Offenders; and for his proof he brings 1 Tim. 1.20, of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered up unto Satan. Answ. It seems your Gospel that you Preach hath not Power in it to prevail against Heresie, neither your Weapons are able to prevail which are but carnal; and so the Power to suppress Heresie and Convince Gain-sayers, is wholly without you, & though you Censure and Excommunicate
and deliver up to Satan, as you say, yet you being in Satan's Power, that which is against you hath Power over you; and therefore you are fain to Cry up the Beast's Power, which alwayes made War with the Saints un∣der the Name of Hereticks, and you say, that in exercising of his Power is but defensive; I say, yes▪ it is offensive and destructive to the Goverment of Christ and his Prerogative, unto whom all Power belongs both in Heaven and Earth, and the Goverment lyes upon his shoulders, who is a wonderful Counsellor, of whose Goverment there is no End; and he is able to defend his Church; and furthermore to take away thy Objection is willing, and furthermore hath promised to keep his Church that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and therefore thou who wouldst have the Civil Magistrate to intrude into those things which belong not to him, would have them Usurpers and Traytors unto Christ the Prince of Peace, and the King of his People, and head of the Church his Body, unto whom absolute Power and Soveraignity belongs and Glory, which he will not give to another: And as for all the proofs which thou bringst of the Magistrates under the first Covenant, they are all invalid, as to the second Covenant, for all the Kings & Magistrates in the first Covenant what as they did in and about Religion, as to the punishment of the false Prophets, and them that had familiar Spirits and Wizards, they were but Typical as in reference unto Christ the second Covenant, who hath another way to kill the false Prophets and to make War against Heresie and Blasphemy, and against all Sorcerers, Deceivers and Anti-christs, by the two-edged Sword, which proceeds out of his Mouth, with which his Enemies shall be slain, who will not that he should Rule and exercise his spiritual Power against his spiritual Enemies; Is not Heresie an Errour, an inbred thing? And is an outward Sword like to reach to that? Therefore though thou mayst press the Magistrates, or them whom thou callst so by their Cocerive power, as thou callst it, and promise to them divine Benediction, like the Pope, for making of Laws against that which thou and others may Judge Blasphemy and Heresie, and Execute them with Whips and Ropes and cutting off Ears, and destroying the Creature, yet this doth not reach to Heresie and Blasphemy, and all the Balm and Physick that you have in New-England, wherein your Hope standeth, as hath yet appeared, are your Knotted whips and pitched Ropes, Banishment and Death; here is Balm and Physick indeed with destroyes the Creation; And what! was Paul a Magistrate who Censured Hymeneus and Alexander? or else what dost thou bring this for? Thou framest an Objection, and also an Answer, That the interposal of Authority in matters of Religion is violation of Liberty of Conscience; thy An∣swer is, Church Authority is Authority, were this Objection good, the Church may not then, thou sai'st, Authoritatively deal with any of her Members for hold∣ing forth or Teaching of false Doctrine, contrary to Gal. 5.12. and Rev. 2.20. Answ. The Objection is good enough, the interposing of Civil Autho∣rity in matters of Religion, is a leading them beyond their Line, for that which is ordained for the ordering of Civil things, is not to intrude into that which is beyond its Sphere; And why may not the true Church Authoritatively deal with any of her Members for holding forth false
Doctrine? What dost thou think that Paul in the fifth of the Galaians, when he wished that they were even cut off that troubled them, that he would have had them Killed, or beat with pitched Ropes? or would he have had the Galatians to have denyed them, and have them exercised their Authority in the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ? And dost thou bring? Rev. 2.20. to prove that Thyatira had no Power in the Authority of God to have thrown out, and Judged Jezebel? This was their fault, because they suffered her, who called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce, and to eat things Sacrificed to Idols, or thou judgest they wanted some Magistrate to kill her Authoritatively? And if the Church may not deal with the Members Authoritatively, who makes defection from the Faith, why have you Excommunicated and thrown out so many for Hereticks in New-England? Thou sai'st, Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty for Errour and Heresie are two things; and the Errour of Conscience is a Liberty to Bondage, and thou bringst, They shall put you out of the Synagogues, John 16. and to think to mur∣ther the Saints was Service unto God, was not from Conscience but Errour of Conscience; but the Object thou sai'st, Subjected to the Coercive Power must be some act of the outward man; and further thou sai'st, There is a difference bet∣ween quiet Heresie and turbulent Heresie, Schism and Sedition. Answ. It is true, Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty of Error and He∣resie are two things, but these lye both without the Power and the Line of any Civil Power, as Civil Power to reach unto, the one he should encou∣rage, that is to say, them who exercise a pure Conscience towards God and towards Man; and as for the other, Error in Judgement, it's beyond the Power of the Civil Magistrate to rectifie, but as it puts forth it self in outward Acts of Wickedness, as to kill, steal, murder, adultery, de∣frauding, cozening and cheating in outward things, then the Sword reacheth to the Act outward, but can reach no further; and as for Heresie, Schism, Sedition, turbulent and quiet, as thou makest distinctions, they are all in the Ground, and you have had too many such Thoughts in your Hearts, as that you did God service with all your whipping, cutting off Ears, beating with Ropes, casting out of your Assemblies, and not only so, but out of your Country, and banishing them from their Wives and Children, and all this you have done, and think you have done God good Service, and have cast them out and said (as the Prophet spoke of your Generation, whose Hearts were hardned) let the Lord be glorified; these things you have to repent of before you know or will feel Remission of Sins from the Lord, though thou saiest, you know it belongs not to the Magistrate to compel any Man to be a Believer, nor to punish any for not believing, but Hereticks, turbulent Hereticks, we believe belong unto him to punish; and who must be Judge of turbulent Hereticks? is not an Heretick an Unbeliever? and if the Magistrate ought not to punish an Unbeliever, then not a Heretick; for a Heretick is an Unbeliever; and they who are in the Power & Authority of God, can deny such a one, and judge him out by the Power of God; there is his Punishment according to that which thou callst Gospel-institution, and beyond that, or any further Act upon such a one, we do not read of in all that which is call'd the New Te∣stament, neither that Christ, his Apostles or any of the true Churches or
Officers or Believers ever commanded or commended, or exhorted any to stretch forth their Hand against the Person of any who were Hereticks re∣ally so, and Blasphemers really so; and therefore see, there s neither Command, Precept nor Example; doest not thou wretchedly err in pressing on them which thou callest Believers, to act such wretched Acts of Cruelty, as you have done, and thou vindicaest them in tast ir Du∣ty? It's true, we read of the Beast and of the Dragon, wh mde Wr against the Saints and killed them, and of Mystery Bbylon and of Sodom and Egypt where Christ was slain, and the Witnesses slain; now if thou wilt take these for Proofs and for a Ground thou myest, and so all thy twisting and twining and vain Arguments fall to the Ground; and doth not the Church of Rome account all you as Hereticks? and is not their Judgement that they ought to punish you wih corporal Punishment? and is not this your Judgement also, page 78. that the Magistrate ought to proceed gradually? That is, to inflict Punishment by Degrees with lin∣gring Tortures, like their Inquisitions? and wherein doth thy Doctrine differ from theirs in this? take them to thee and thy Doctrine; for thou art but a Stem sprung out of the same Root, and actest from the same Prin∣ciple, and yet I tell thee and all the World, I am not pleading for any matter of Fact, or for Breakers of the Law that is righteous; for the Law is good if a Man use it lawfully, it is against Murderers, Man-stealers, and Stealers of the Creatures, for Idolaters and Defrauders, and Cheaters, and every Act or Fact deserves punishment suitable to the Transgression; now had it not been more reasonably done of thee to have produced the Fact of the Quakers in New-England, which hath deserved all these brba∣rous Tortures, then to declare them and publish them as Offenders in Matters of Fact, and have none to lay to their charge? and I challenge thee and the rest of thy Adherents to produce some matters of fact which the Quakers have done, which is contrary to any righteous Law of God, or else own your Condemnation and repent; and thou must not think, that this poor Tract of thine, which is full of Deceit and Confusion, Error, Blasphemy and Madness, though thou publish it by the Appointment of the General Court, that it will cover your Wickedness, or hide you from being discovered to moderate People, neither will shelter you in the Day of the Lord. And thou say'st, It concerneth New-England alwayes to remember, that originally they are a Plantation Religious, the Profession of Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline is written upon your Fore-heads, that after New-Eng∣land hath now shined Twenty Years, should now go out in the Snuff of Mora∣lianism. Answ. There was something amongst some of you, but you fled the Cross, as I told you before, and so that Spirit which persecuted you in the Bishops Time got up in your selves; and that which once you had, while you were under Affliction here, you have lost, not only the Pwer of Godliness, but the Form thereof, and also of sound Words; and now as to matter of Religion, it is rather become a Place of Ostridges, Owles and Satyrs; and for Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline written in your Fore-heads, if it must be tried by your Rule, and if it be the same Twenty Years that it is now, I have not heard more of Unsoundness in Do¦ctrine,
Worship and Discipline which I have read on in many Ages, but especially in the Scripture; and truly your shining now is turned into Blackness, and your Sun is set, and your day is darkness, and your Light is gone out as the Snuff of a Candle; because this man boasts of their Do∣ctrine, Worship and Discipline, take a few things out of many, and be∣hold them in the Light of the Lord, and compare them with the Scrip∣ture; and so I leave them to thy Judgment. 1. First, speaking of the Trinity, he saith, God is a distinct Subsistance from the Son and the Spirit, and that the Son is distinct Subsistance from the Fa∣ther and the Spirit in the nineth Page; and because it is said, The Father shall give you another Comforter; this another (he saith) is intelligible of the Essence; so then the Son is a distinct Subsistance and Essence from the Fa∣ther, and the Spirit is a distinct Subsistance and Essence from the Father and the Son; so here are three distinct Essences. 2. And that the Spirit of God without the Letter is no Spirit; that which ob∣ligeth a Man to obey a Command of God is one Power, and that which strength∣ens him, and enables him to obey, is aothr Power, page 12. and that Christs Words in Joh. 17.22. give an uncertain Sound (which are these, That they may be one, as we are one.) 3. That Scripture is a perfect Rule of Life, but not without Consequences. 4. That Thomas and Mary are no where mentioned in Scripture, neither are commanded Obedience, nor forbidden Disobedience, contrary to Joh. 20.16, 17.27. 5. That that Light which teacheth a Man there is a God, and to worship God, and that Parents are to be honoured, and that a Man shall not lye nor steal, and that which discovers the Creator, his Eternity and Omnipotency, is to be constru∣ed in Opposition to spiritual Light, and contra-distinct to the Light of the Spirit, pag. 16. 6. That the Light which is in every Man hath much miscarried, whilest that it is mannaged by the reigning Power of Darkness, pag. 17. 7. That that which lets a Man see that he should not do to others what he would not have others do unto him, and shews a Man ought not to steal nor to lye, and that which discovers Eternity and Omipotency; this ideed (saith he) is Dark∣ness, it is worse then gross Darkness, pag. 18. 8. Christ enlightens no Man wth the Light of Life, but them that are so, and so qualified. 9. That the Gospel is a Constitution or Effect, tempered of the Grace of God and the Blood of Christ. 10. That the visible Political Churches, Political Officers, Political Worship and Administrations are Gospel-Institutions, or appointed by Christ, pag. 41. 11. That there is Policy in Heaven, pag. 42. 12. Pastors and Teachers are Political Church-Officers. 13. That the Lord's Supper is a visile Plitical Ordinance. 14. That Baptism is a visible Political Church-Ordinance. 15. That to Christ belongs the Prerogative of being the only Politician. 16. That there is much Darkness in the Hearts of all Children of Light in this Life. pag. 42. Likewise at a Lecture at Boston John Norton taught, That the Justice of God is the Armour of the Devil.
Take a View of thy Doctrines again, and be ashamed and blush, and repent of thy Deceit and false Doctrines and lying Stories, and cease to per∣vert the Way of the Lord; for all this which thou hast waded through will little advantage your Kingdom, neither all this Covering which thou hast made will not vindicate your wicked Practices, nor shelter you from the Storms, and Thunders▪ and Plagues, and Terror, and Wrath, which is to be poured upon all his Enemies; and then thy Order from the General Court will stand thee but in little stead, when the Terror of God comes upon thee, and when the witness of God is awakened in thee, to bring all thy Iniquities to Remembrance, and thy Deceit that hath been hid to the Light, then shalt thou see that thou hast not let thy self only against Man but also against God and his dear Servants, whom he hath redeemed by his precious Blood, who know a Habitation, unto which you cannot reach with your Clubs, Whips and Ropes, and their Habitation is as the Muni∣tion of Rocks, their Bread is sure, and their Water doth not fail; and hap∣py are they who suffer for the Truth's sake, for they shall receive Honour and Glory, and Immortality, and the Crown of Life, which he hath laid up for all them that endure the Cross, and despise the Shame, which will be given in the Day of his glorious Appearance to them that keep the Word of his Patience, and the Word of his Testimony committed to them unto the End. London, the 12th Day of the 11th Moneth, 1659. F. H.
AN INFORMATION AND ALSO ADVICE TO THE ARMY On both Parts, and this present Committee of Safety NEVVLY ERECTED, And to the late PARLIAMENT, And also to all People who seek Peace and Righteousness, and are for the Good Old Cause, so much talked on. This is presented by him who stands off and from all Self-Interests and Parties, and wisheth that the Wisdom of God may guide you all, and Division and Destruction may cease. F. H. WHat, is there not a wise Man among you, who seeks not himself, but the Good of all, that you so blow the Sparks on every Hand, and exasperate the Spirits one of another, and rather are for Strife then for Healing? And would ye have the Fire kindled, to rise up in such a great Flame, as both to destroy your selves, and many innocent People in the Nation? What, is every one seeking to gratifie his Interests and Party, and to satisfie his Will? And is there none that seeks that the Will of God may be done in Earth, among the Sons of Men; that God might once de∣light to do us good, and settle these Nations in Peace and Freedom, as men and as Christians.
I. Consider; hath not this been the End which hath been proposed by all good men, who have not sought themselves, but have ventured all, that this might be accomplished, which if it had been, or were, or could be attained unto, would be a perfect Recompence and Satisfaction of all, and to all, who have sought it in their Heart, viz. Freedom from Oppression in their Persons and Estates, which hath not been, by Reason of the many wicked Laws which have been imposed, to satisfie the Self-Interests of some particular Men, which did imbondage all other: Secondly, Liberty and Freedom of Conscience in the Exercise of their Consciences to Christ, who is God's Anointed, according to the Manifestation of his Light and Spirit to them, unto whom and before whom all must give an Account, and be judged; but this hath been hitherto hindered by them who have re-assumed a Power, and have usurped Authority to themselves, and have made laws to the imbon∣daging of the dear and precious People of God in these Nations, though you have been talking of the Good Old Cause, these are not revocated and over-turned, by which very many suffer to this Day. II. It is not Names, Titles, Denominations and VVords that we look after, and which will effect the Thing proposed, which while some have been contending after, have let got the Thing in Hand, and have lost it, and so set up a particular Interest, and it clothes it self with the Words and fair Speeches, but nothing is brought forth; and so by fair Speeches and Flatteries the People have been deceived and cheated. III. Should not all Rule and Authority be for the Good and Safety and well-being of a Nation or Common-wealth, and not to set up an arbitrary Power in their own Wills, to rule in Tyranny and Oppression, to satisfie their own to the imbondaging of all the People? And when any Power or Authority have deviated or swerved from this, they became no other but Tyrants and Oppressors; for the Thing intended being lost, the Ruler or Rulers rule no more for God, neither he account them such (whatsoever they may ac∣count themselves) and therefore hath raised another Thing to overthrow that Power, as hath been evident in this Nation, in these many Revolu∣tions, although that Power which was first in being, which was ordained for the End aforesaid, being swerved from the thing, might say to that which rose up against it, That it was Rebellion and Treason, and declare it to be such in the Ears of the People, as hath been done by divers, which is in the Memory of most, so that I need not instance, when I say it was not so accounted by the Lord; and he hath given a Testimony of this by the overthrowing the former, and raising up the latter, and hath stood by it, while it stood in his Counsel. IV. Was not Israel governed sometime by Judges, sometime by the Elders, and sometime by Kings? And while they stood in the Counsel of the Lord, and the people hearkened to them, was not the Lord among them, and sometime raised up unlikely Means, as to Man's Wisdom, as David a Shepherds Boy', and Gideon a Thresher, and he was made a Judge, and a Redeemer of Israel out of their Slavery; but mind this still, while
they stood in God's equal Counsel, which led to do equally to, and for the Good of all, according to God's Institution and Appointment, then they were blessed; but when either Ruler, Governour or Governours went from the Power of the Lord, in which they only had Authority to rule, and to do justly, when they went from that, and became corrupt in their Minds and Hearts, and Blindness came upon them, as it is said, Blindness happened to Israel through their Unbelief; and what was the Effect thereof▪ The Judges judged for Rewards and Gifts, the Prophets prophesied for Hire, and the Priests divined for Money, and the People loved to have it so, and the End thereof was Misery; for God raised up another Thing, and overthrew the Judges, Prophets, Priests and People, the Ancient and Honoura∣ble, that were the Head, and the false Prophets, which were the Tail. V. Is not the same Blindness happened to England? When will her Ru∣lers, Judges, Prophets, Priests see their Error? Is it ever like to be a free Nation till all act freely for God, without imposing heavy Burdens, and giving as much to one Officer, imployed in the publick Service, as would serve twenty, and make so many of them too? When will these Things be done away, that every one may be approved & manifest, how he loves his Nation, or how he seeks the Good thereof, by laying out himself freely, and acting freely, without so much Chargeableness to the Nation, I do not mean the Souldiery, but Men employed in civil Affairs, and the Ministry, who would be counted godly and painful, to publish freely, or else be silent. VI. So now many are so doting on the Name of a Parliament, as though it were essential, or the Name to be the Foundation of Government, and cry up the Priviledge of Parliament, as some have done Prerogative, and would fight about a Name in their Heat and Passion, and loose the thing in∣tended, though they be the Representative of the People, to do Good to the people, and not Hurt, thy are accounted as good Servants to God, and to them that elected them; but if they would so soon as got together, set up a particular Interest, which serves to the imbondaging of the whole, and then cry up their Priviledge to do what they list; then it is no Rebelli∣on in God's Account, neither in the Account of Just Men to call them away, when they do not perform the thing intended; but if they will not hearken to the Cry of their Masters (the People) but it may be call them Rebels or Traytors, if they should be turned out, because they have clothed themselves with the Name of HIGHER POWER, when alas! they are gone from that in which their Power, Priviledge and Authority stood. VII. And this I have to say to that Part of the Army who stand so much on the Name of Parliament, and would seem to oppose all the rest, whe∣ther Army or the People from whence their Power did at first arise, when they accomplish not the End that they meet for, neither intended so to do, but to set up some and make the rest alwayes Sufferers, if you should take part herein, and manage your VVeapons for a Sound or a Name, or for
something that may sute you, though damnifie many Thousands; it will not go well with you; for God looketh not as man, neither judgeth he according to man's VVisdom; therefore be not rash, nor hsty o shed Blood upon this Account, but take Counsl in time, lest an out-stretched Arm stop you in your way to your Detriment and Hurt, & you may repent too late; it is not your declaring in words for the Good Old Cause, neither your Proclamations nor Declarations in good words, neither taking God to witness that will satisfie the People, who have been and are present Suf∣ferers; we have had enough of that, from all the former Asserters of Li∣berty in words, but the thing is not done; so be less in words, and more in Action, and Deeds for Righteousness; and though you may seeming∣ly retort the Sayings of this Army in England upon them, how they recei∣ved Commissions from the Parliament, and promised to be faithful to them, and did that they repented of, that such things should get up to rule and have Dominion, as were acted by the two late Protectors, whom the Par∣liament and you judged Usurpers, and so you take Advantage at this, to spread forth this to their Reproach in the Nation; this is not brotherly done, neither is that Spirit that will forgive, and suffer long, but is heady: Though they did receive Commissions and promise to be faithful, yet the End I believe was still Premised by them, as to be Servants to them for the foresaid End, the Good Old Cause. 1st. Freed as men from Oppression. 2dly. As Christians, from being imposed upon, either by ancient Laws, or Laws which hereafter might be made, which hindred the aforesaid Cause and End, of all the travail, expence and suffering in the Nation, which they would never have done; therefore the Army in putting a stop to that which did retard and draw back from that End aforesaid, in God's Sight, and in the Sight of illuminated men, is no Rebellion no Treachery. IX. And as for the long Parliament by whom God did Good Things, & Great Things, in the overthrowing that power which was deviated from the aforesaid End; yet the Ax must not boast it self against him that hew∣ed only with it for a time to accomplish his End, and when he pleaseth take up another Instrument, and let the first lie still: VVhat they did, they had the Approbation of God and good men, yet they went not through with the work purposed and intended; and though they were called to∣gether in a time of Straits, when that which had obstructed through Flat∣tery and Ambition was taken away, yet still you who were the members of the Old Parliament remaining, were called together for to help to accom∣plish the aforesaid End, and to carry on the Good Old Cause; but truly you sticked in the Mire, and did not run cheerfully, but had your Ears open to them that could complement and flatter, and their Business you would hear, and return them thanks, but them who had been your dearest Friends in your former Straits, coming in all Love and Humility, and re∣presented their sad suffering unto you, of their long Imprisonment, and how above twenty dear precious men suffered till Death in prison for that Grand Oppression of Tythes, these could not be heard: And again, when a Representation came unto you from many Thousands, who were faithful Men to the Common-Wealth, and had alwayes been, it was laid by as waste Paper, or as a thing of no validity and worth, when others received
thanks from you in Words, and a seeming Approbation of things of far less Importance. Furthermore, certain who had been Officers in the Army in the Nation, and in Ireland, this fourteen or fifteen Years, came to you to present the Sufferings and Grievances of that Nation unto you, and in seven or eight Weeks Time you would neither hear nor regard their Suit unto you, neither take notice of it, neither return an Answer; but when a Compa∣ny of greedy hireling Priests came from Leicester-shire to sound their trum∣pet in the House, and to tell you they had not engaged with the rest of their Brethren in Cheshire, and Lancashire, with George Booth, they were immediately called in, and thanks returned, as though they had done some great Service for the Nation, but them who were your real Friends, called Quakers, when diverse of them represented the sad sufferings of the People of this Nation, from diverse Parts thereof; not only from one Sort of People, but all except one (viz. the Presbyterians) instead of tak∣ing off the heavy Yoak thereof, the Oppression whereof hath reached Hea∣ven, even to the Throne of God, and he hath considered it, though you would not, but instead of removing it, have established it, for which he was wroth with you; you have lost your Crown, and he hath laid you by, as men who would not accomplish his End, and let his People go free; and let me tell you, it was rashly and proudly done of you, after so many valiant Officers, who had waded through a Sea of Troubles, though I shall not say but they sought themselves too much, which I hope God will give them to see: They had done great Service for the Nation, and considered what might best conduce, for the welfare of the Army, and for the Nation's good and Safety, and to present it to you, desiring your Concurrence therein; and though they did send among their Quarters for subscriptions, they knowing before hand except it carried some bulk, or at least seemed a matter of Concernment, you would take less notice of it, that you should in your heat and passion, being filled with Jealousies, vote out these Officers at their return from performing the faithful Service to you & the Nation, it was an unworthy Gratification, and to put in others less ca∣pable, only to exalt your own Power and rather to draw back to Bondage, then going forward to perfect the business aforesaid; for these and many more Instances that I might lay before you, it was just with the Lord to remove you, and not to prosper you, and to overturn you, because you stood not in his Counsel, neither hearkned to them who would have wished you well, with whom God's Counsel is, and it is just you are tur∣ned out; and let me advise you, and despise not my Counsel; for the Counsel of the mighty hath failed; take counsel at a Shepherd, or a Man of low Degree, be you quiet and seek not Revenge, neither blow the Sparks, nor kindle heat in Peoples Minds, neither provoke the Army t Blood-shed; but rather diswade them, and wait to see what the Lord will do, if he will raise up any to perfect that long desired and hoped for End, Freedom and Liberty in the things that are just, as Men, and in the things of God without Imposition; and if you live to have your Share a∣mong the People, in this it will be well; and you may have no cause to re∣pent of your being still and quiet, though you may have cause to repent of your Rashness, and of the things before mentioned.
X. And you of the English Army, who were dissatisfied with the Pro∣ceedings of the late Parliament against you, I wish there be not too much Self in you in the thing, rather for your own Advancement and particular Interest, then that the Good Old Cause (profest) was not carried on by the Parliament, according to your Desire and the Peoples Expectations: If Self-Interest was the Cause, as it is to be feared there was so much of that, you will be crossed in your Expectation; for that is the thing which hath obstructed the thing intended all along, since the thing was asserted, that will soon be made manifest; and there remains a Ground in your selves, which I believe will hinder the End proposed, which must be done away, before you can do much for God, though you may profess and declare in Words much, which may take with some for a while, yet it will not satisfie long: I wish in my Heart Good to you all; but there is something stands betwixt you and good things; you would, like the rest, please all Men, but that cannot be; stand to the Good, and let your Actions answer the Witness of God in the worst: And you say in your Declaration, You have an Intention to take away Tythes, and settle some Way for a godly preaching Mi∣nistry; I say, they will need none of the State's or Common-wealth's Maintenance: And if you shall take them away, and settle any thing by way of Compulsion upon the People for any Ministry, you leave us in Bon∣dage, and we must declare against that, as against Tythes, and we cannot pay, neither the one nor the other for Conscience sake: And you who are the Committee of Safety newly erected; yea, many of you have seen, or at least might have seen what hath hindered the End proposed; you have a Day of Visitation, God will try all Sorts of Men, if any will be faithful to the End: therefore this I say to you and the rest of the Army, throw down all those corrupt Laws made about Religion, Mass-houses, Clerks▪ Wages, forced Maintenance, and meddle not with it; for that thing broke all Parliaments and Councils hitherto, and so will it do you, if you meddle with it; leave all People free, without Imposition of any Maintenance to a∣ny, or else you do nought; let everyone be free, let every Judgment maintain their own, & leave People free as to the VVorship of God, only to Christ, who is Head and Ruler of his Church, and Lord over the Conscience, and is his alone Right, which if you shall not do, he will throw you down al∣so: Therefore let him have Room and VVay, or else that which resist∣eth will be cut off: And this is God's VVord unto you all, Take Heed of gratifying any to the imbondaging of others; let Tythes and forced Maintenance go down; and if for the Good of the Nation or Common-wealth (as in Things civil) all with a free Heart will most readily and willingly assist you for the Good of the Na∣tion: Stand not puzling about Business not worth mentioning, nor striving who shall be greatest, but remove the present Oppressions, and that which is the Cause there∣of; satisfie the Nation with Deeds, Words will not; with Things, not with Names, that will not; and it is not a King, a Parliament, a Protector, a Coun∣cil or Senate we look at, will do the Thing: Neither People be ye wedded and glewed to Names; he that purposeth Righteousness and Equity in his Heart, and walks after it, is that which God will bless and prosper; for when Kings, Parlia∣ments and Councils are gone from the Power of God, they are for the Thral∣dom of a Nation, and not for its Liberty; but this I fore-warn you, what∣ever you do, meddle not in the Things of God, or about Religion, let that alone, and you will more readily serve the Necessity which the present Affairs call for, and
the common civil and equal Liberty of all Men: Oh that you had Wisdom, and the Counsel of the Lord were with you! how soon might Things be established? Then would you do more in one Day then in ten, while you consult with your Rea∣son, and the old corrupt Laws, many of which are good for nought but the Fire. Thus I have in all Faithfulness cleared my Conscience unto you, as the Lord presented Things to me, and happy are they that can receive them; for in this I am not alone, for many Thousands will bear Testimony hereunto: So I rest in the Peace of God, which no Man can hinder me of. Subscribing my self a faithful Friend to the Common-wealth and all the good People therein, F. H.
ONE Warning more UNTO ENGLAND, BEFORE She give up the Ghost, and be buried in the Pit of Darkness. To awaken the Inhabitants thereof out of their deep Sleep, to see themselves what Misry is coming upon them through their Degeneration and horrible Ingratitude, that the People therein may be left without Excuse in the Day of the Lord. By him that pities thee in this languishing State, F. H. OH England! Is thy dry Land all become a Sea? Is not thy Mountains from whence thou hast look'd for help, cast all into the Waters, and Floats up and down, and is driven up and down, and carried a∣bout with every Tempest, insomuch that hardly any dry Land appears any where in thee, but all like raging Waves, and like Boisterous Floods which have no Bounds, but over-flow all the Banks, which fill all with slime, Mire and Dirt? Oh Nation! whither art thou Posting? and after what dost thou so hastily pursue? Hast thou chosen Madness for thy Crown, and Folly for thy Diadem? Hast thou fixed thy Eye upon the Land of Darkness, that thou so hastily runs? Art thou become benum∣med, and altogether past feeling? Hath not the Lord intended good unto thee, but thou rejects it? Did not the Lord break off the Bonds from thy Neck, and take the Burdens from off thy shoulders, that thou mightst have been a Free People, that thy People might have been a free People, that thou might have served the Lord God in Truth and Righteousness, and mightst have been established by his Free Spirit, that Righteousness might have run down the Land as a Stream, and Equity as a River, that violence
might have been done away, and the heavy Yoak removed, that so the Nation might have rejoyced in God's saving Health, which he was about to shower down as a mighty Rain, that the Land might have been refreshed, & that the People thereof might have rested under the almighty Shadow of the Lord, that every one might have eat the Fruit of his Labours with Joy, and have been satisfied therewith, and every Precept of Man have been ta∣ken off the Conscience; and that Yoak which hath limited the Lord, would the Lord have broken▪ that so his People might have rejoyced in him and in his saving Health: But Oh Nation, how art thou betrayed? the treacherous Dealers have dealt treacherously with thee, and have robbed thee of thy Glory and of thy Crown; and now art thou like to be crown∣ed with Infamy and Reproach, and to be as a Hissing-Stock, as a Proverb and a By-word to all the Nations; who will rejoyce in thy Calamity, and be glad at thy Destruction; and because the Love and Mercy of God was ma∣nifest in thee more then to any Nation of late besides, therefore the Nati∣ons were angry at thee; but now seeing thy base Ingratitude & Unthankful∣ness for all the Kindness of the Lord unto thee, which thou hast wonderfully abused, which hath been a Cause which hath provoaked the Lord against thee, because thou hast chosen the Way of Death rather then Life, and chosen Darkness rather then Light, and therefore art thou hurled and tos∣sed in all this Sea of Confusion; and what will the Nations say who are round about thee, Is not this the Nation from whence Light did shine forth, that is now filled with Darkness? Is not this the Nation which was strong and mighty, that is now bcome feeble? Is not this the Nation, the Fame of whose Righteousness was spread far, that is now filled with Violence and Cruelty? Is not this the Nation which made the Nations and Isles about to tremble, whose Hands are become so weak that they cannot help themselves? Is not this the Nation whose Sound and Fame for Liberty as Men in the Nation, and as Christians without being imposed upon, which the Lord was bringing to a perfect Freedom, who now are putting the Yoak of Bondage upon the Inhabitants Necks, and laying heavy Burdens upon the Necks of the righteous, and are imposing Things upon the Consciences of his People, whom God would have set free? Oh this causeth the Name of the Lord, which hath appeared in thee, to be dishonoured, and the noble Acts which the Lord hath done in thee to be vilified: O England! what shall I compare thee unto? thy State is sad; Oh! what might I do to make thee sensible thereof? thou art as a Ship in the midst of the raging Sea, whose Mast is lost, whose Tacklings are broken, and the Men all dead, and nothing left but a bare Hull, ready to be blown with every Gust of Wind upon every Rock, and art wholly like to be split, ne∣ver more to be builded up; it may truly be said of thee, as it was once of Israel, when they had revolted from the Lord God, and followed after the Imaginations of their own Hearts, The Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint, and every Member which should move in the Body is become feelde and be∣nummed; thy Breach is great, who can heal thee? or who can bind thee up? what is there no Balm in England? is there no Physician there to heal the Breaches and Wounds of this People? what, not one wise man among all her Rulers? are they all like wild Bulls in a Net, fit to be taken and de∣stroyed? not one Interpreter amongst all her Prophets, which can disco∣ver the Disease? not one Physician that can apply a healing Medicine to
these grievous Wounds? What not one Leaf of the Tree of Life amongst you all, by which the Nations are healed! not a healing Spirit amongst Ten Thousands of England? Oh sad and deplorable is thy State! for all is out of Order; and it may truly be said of her Rulers, of her Priests and her Prophets, and of her People, as it was said of Israel, when they had forsaken the Lord, and Blindness happened to them through their Unbelief, A People laden with Sin and Iniquity, they are all gone out of the Way, there is not one that doth Good, no not one; a Seed of Evil-Doers, a treacherous Genera∣tion, a false-hearted People, who eat up Iniquity as Men eat Bread, and drink it up as Oxen Water: Oh Nation consider, thou art upon thy languishing Bed, and thy Eyes are almost closed, and thy Ears stpped, and thy Un∣derstanding bested, all thy Vitals are decaying, the Characters and Symp∣toms of Death are upon thee, the Form of thy Countenance is changed, the Flower of thy Beauty is passing away, old Age and Decrepedness is co∣ming upon thee, all thy Joynts are growing feeble; what wilt thou now do in a Day of Adversity? whether wilt thou go in the Day of Calamity which is approaching? the Grave is opened to receive thee, and thy En∣mies stand ready to bury thee in Silence, that thee and all thy Glory may be trampled upon, and that thy Memorial may dye and rot, and thy Re∣nown be shut up in the Pit of Oblivion; the Fellers stand ready to cut thee down as an abominable Branch, and to cast thee into the Fire to consume thee, and to make a final End of thee, and to destroy all thy pleasant thing; the Lord is grieved for thee, and the Spirits of his People are made sad; for they feel the Weight of Iniquity, and the Load of Transgression, which will sink the Nation, if it be not turned from; but the Lord will ease him of his Enemies, and avenge him of his Adversaries, and will sweep away the Refuge of Lyes and the Lovers of them into the Pit of Destruction; and the Day hastens when they that exalt themselves high, even upon Pi∣nacles, shall be brought low, and many Hills hath God made one with the Plain, and many more yet shall be made a Plain, that the Glory of the Lord and his Interest may be exalted. Oh England! consider thy former Dayes, and call to Mind th Years past, and consider in what State thou wast twenty Years ago, and what Com∣plaints filled every Corner of the Land, by Reason of the heavy Yoaks that were lid upon the People, by Reason of mny wicked Laws, which were made by Men of corrupt Minds, not only upon the Estate of Men, but also upon their Persons and Consciences; and the Cry of many innocent People was great, and reached through the Clouds. And what Innovations and Impositions were made upon tender Consci∣ences by those called Bishops, which the very Land groaned with the Bur∣den thereof, who were but a Stem sprung from that corrupt Root of Rome, and most of their Worship, Canons & Constitutions they had from thence; nd what Intrusion and Popish Stuff was ushered in daily upon the People n this Nation, which they groaned under, and compelling and forcing a∣bout the superstitious Rites, and Ceremonies, and foolish Fopperies which hey brought in as religious Matters, and what lazy Drones they upled, reading a Piece of the old Mass-book in English, and calling it Divine Ser∣vice, and judged them Hereticks who opposed all this muddy dark Stuff,
which the People were vexed with, and their Souls grieved, and the Lord grieved and vext, insomuch that the Lord heard the Cry of the Oppressed▪ and did appear in his Power and Strength in many People, to bear witness against the aforesaid Evils, which were growing upon the Nation, which tended to Bondage and Thraldom, both as concerning Mens Persons and Estates, and also their Consciences, which Bondage they were weary of, which Yoaks the Lord brake, and gave a total Overthrow both of the one and of the other; and many upright in Heart did rejoyce, and with un∣wearied Pains did travail through a Sea of Troubles, not minding the pre∣sent Difficulty, but rather eying the End, Freedom and Liberty; and ma∣ny precious Men ventured their Lives, and lost their Blood, and consumed their Estates, and offered willingly of their Substance in the Time of need, that they might accomplish the aforesaid End, Liberty and Freedom as Men, according to the equal just Law of God, and Freedom as Christian, without being imposed upon either by Men or Laws, which was a Prize which the Lord did intend should be put into the Nations Hand, as a Re∣compence for their former Sufferings, in which all the upright would have been satisfied; and therefore they who have been Obstructors and Hinder∣ers of this Thing, have the greater Sin and Load upon their Backs, which hath sunk many of them. But alas! when the Obstructions were taken out of the way, and there was a little rest, Covetousness did get up, and Pride in the Hearts of the Rulers, and them in Authority, in the Hearts of the Souldiery, especially the Officers of the Army, most of which God had raised from a mean Estate to a great Dignity; You forgat the Lord, and did divide the Spoil a∣mongst you, and so became full and Fat, and then kick'd against the Lord and neglected his Service to, pursue that which God had put into your Hands; but getting into Places of Honour, became as bad, if not worst▪ then many that were cast out before you, and then laboured to set up your own Interests and not the Interest of the Nation, and to set up a Form of Re∣ligion, and another deceitful Image, and not the Interest of Christ Jesus▪ for he could have no room among you: It grieves my Heart, and ▪ the Spirit of the Lord God in me, to consider what Tenderness, and ∣vency, and love there was in former Years, to the appearance of Gods Truth, Life and Light; and now it's become the chief Object of  Scorn, and the whole bent is to turn Christ's Interest out of the  and to destroy the Sheep of his Pasture, whom he hath Redeemed  his most precious Blood, to lay your Sins before you, and your Transg∣sions in your sight, that you may see what you have done. Oh People of England! Was it only a Form of Government, or such and such a Government in Name that ye pursued after? or was it not the Thing it self, Freedom it self, Liberty it self, Righteousness it self▪ th the heavy Yoak might be done away? which as to any of the last I do: say, but they might have done it, if they had stood in God's fear. and  his Counsel, for it is not this or that Title, or Form of Government, which is only Essential to the well-being of a People or a Nation  have had tryal of many Names, and what do you enjoy yet that which you look'd for? Oh nay! you are defrauded, you are cheated, you are ∣bed and Spoiled of that which the Lord God did intend you, by Tree∣rous and false-hearted Men, whose Words have been smooth
and their Hearts full of rottenness, and through fair Pretences  Liberty and Freedom, and Sanctity and Holiness, People have been led up and down like Horses, and tossed up and down like a Tennis-ball. Or was it a Form of Religion which might be set up by this or that Par∣ty, that tender People did seek after, so as to be Bound to this or that Form by an outward Law, by compelling and forcing? Was it not Reformation according to the Scriptures which was spoken of, and intended by the up∣right-hearted? and behold how have we been Cheated here! Was this the Liberty of Conscience that was pursued after, to set up Popish Tythes, which no true Christian can Pay for Conscience sake? Or to set up a Company of Men to be Teachers, to learn seven Years the Art of Speak∣ing, to borrow their Words from Homer or Aristotle, and Heathen Au∣thors; or to take up a company of Errors decreed at Chalcedon, Nice, Latren or Trent, for Articles of Faith, or to get words from Astrologers and Southsayers, and mingle this with the Scripture, and call them, The Gopel, and to have set Wages by a Law given unto them, and to have Traditions of Men brought in for the Ordinances of God; such as the Baptizing of Infants, which Claudius Espencius, a Popish Bishop confessed that this was to be believed by Tradition, for it could not be proved by Scripture, that such a Company I say, as these should be forced upon the Nation as God∣ly Ministers, and their invented Worship to be acknowledged as Divine, and to maintain the old Mass-Houses, and Pay Clerks Wges, which the Scriptures make no mention of, and all this must go in the Name of Pure Reformation according to Scripture; and to gather Money from House to house to buy Bread and Wine, and then a Priest to patter a few Words over it, and then say, it's Cnsecrated, and call it a Sacrament; and that Priests should have Money for Marrying of People, and for Baptizing of Infants, or for Burials, or to pay for the Ground, in which the Dead is buried; this was reprehended and Condemned by the Council of Trent in the height of Popery in the Year, 1547. & many such bad Impositions are daily holden up, and they that hold them up must be accounted as Godly Mi∣nisters; and many more things of this Nature are continued, which is so far against the Consciences of many whom God hath enlightned, so that they are a great Offence: Oh this is quite contrary to that which was in∣tended, and that which is the worst of all, many of these things are forc'd upon the People by a Law. And now Oh Heads of the Nation! how do you think to be believed, or who can trust you any more? Obligations, Covenants Oaths and Promises all broken and falsified; and as soon as you had rest, when you had time to have Prosecuted the aforesaid things Declared for, purchad at a dear rate, through much expence, and Blood-shed, and Sufferings, you let most of all their corrupt Laws stand, many of which are ood for no∣thing but Fire; and it became as hard (if not harder) to obtain any Right by Appealing to the Law, or Judges thereof, then it was before; and the vast Lands and Revenues of your Enemies you divided amongst you, and sold it at inconsiderable Values, and giving great and large Sums to a com∣pany of Dreamers and blind Watch-men; and so wasted that which might have well maintained an Army in the Nation for many Years▪ as though the Work and the lives of many precious men, and the shedding of the
Blood of Thousands, had been only to purchase Wages for the greedy Priests & Hirelings who can never have enough, & so all the precious Trea∣sure which became a booty and a prey for you, is exhausted and gone, and greater Pressures upon People then was before, and now the Nation more in Poverty and need then ever, and the People more inthrawl'd in Bondage then ever; And Queen Mary's Act for guarding Jesuites and the Mass, stands yet in your Law Books, as though it were a heavenly Oracle, and yet you cry out of Popery; and so when your Hearts were not right with the Lord, he set you one against another, and you came to be devidd a∣mongst your selves, and set up and pull down, and Ordain and Repel, and so brittle and changable, that none did lean upon you but he was hurt by you; and yet every Party crying like Absolom, Oh that I were a Judge in the Gate, how Righteously would I do! And so every Party have Stolen away the Hearts of People after them for a while, and at last betrayed them; and thus every one hath been seeking his own Interest, and not the Lord's, till the Lord hath left you, and the Line of Confusion is stretched forth over you, and you bring forth the Stones of Emptiness; And every Party when he is got up into the Seat of Government, seeks Veangence on him that hath Opposed him, and Blowes the Sparks which sets all of a Flame, and only for Self, and Honour, and Exaltation, and Interest; and thus have you led People up and down like Animals till they are weary; and say, It was better with us in Egypt, though in hard servitude, then to have Yoaks multiplyed upon us, and cannot see when they will Cease: Oh how Un∣stable are you in your minds, and run like a swift Stream till you be lost, and know not how to return; And Flattery and Deceit, that must go un∣der the Name of Civility; and one while calling this his Highness, and the other his Excellency, and the next Moneth proclaim him Tyrant and Traytor; And so if the Wills of a Party be but crossed or opposed, though Honoured a Week afore for good Service, and Applauded, and in a mo∣ment then proclaim him Traytor, and so betray one another, and are Treacherous one to another, and in Rage would eat up one another: Are you like to help the Nation, and Decree one Week, and throw down next Week; and so run to and fro like Drunken men; and how are you like to do any thing that's good? The Lord hath tryed most sorts of Men, especially the great Ones, and the Heads of the People, and they are be∣come just all Dross, and little or no Vertue is found in them all; and so is the Nation like to be established in Freedom, while Policy, Craft, and Treachery, and Wrath are the chiefest Instruments in the Work? but the day of many is past, wherein they might have done good to the Natin, and to the People of the Lord therein; but their Sun is gone down, and their day is done (and Night come upon them. And Oh People! will nothing satisfie you but Egypt again, that you run so fast that way, that you have forgotten all God's wondrous Works in this Land? will nothing but the Iron Furnace satisfie you, and the heavy Yoak of Bondage, which you in former Years complained of? Are you grown altogether insensible of the things that belong unto your Peace, that you lost after that which will destroy you, and enthrawl you forever? You have had many Warnings from the Lord, and your State hath been clear∣ly declared unto you, but have lost all Fervency and Zeal, you are become
dry, dead, careless and secure, and now would be content to make a Co∣venant with Death, and shake Hands with Deceit upon any Terms, if so be that your Wills were satisfied; and the Heart of Unbelief being got up in you, and a departing from the living God, you seek Peace and Settle∣ment in another thing where you are never like to be established: what stands your hopes upon the sandy Foundation of unstable men? Have you not sufficiently yet tryed all that, that it hath proved as a broken Reed, and as a Bubble which passeth away? Oh is it not high time to look upon the Lord, and to eye him? have not men of high Degree proved a Lye, and men of a low Degree proved Vanity? Have you not looked long e∣nough for Salvation from the Mountains of the Earth, and are they not all melted and hurled into the Sea? Are they like to deliver you, who cannot deliver themselves? are they like to settle you, who are unset∣led themselves? are they like to bring Peace unto you, who know not the Way thereof? are they like to put an End to Wars and Strife, who are in the Variance, and Strife and War against the Spirit of the Lord in themselves, and against one another, every one striving that his heady Mind may be satisfied? is that it which is like to make the Nation free, when that which tends to true Freedom is counted by them Bondage? hath not this and the other Party promised great things, and have they not all laboured in vain, and spent their Strength for nought? And is not the Nation further off from Establishment in Righteousness, then it was sixteen Years ago? and is not more Hypocrisie and Deceit abounding and encreasing, who use good Words for a Cloak of Maliciousness, and fair Speeches to deceive the Hearts of the simple? and have not many been deceived hore? and are they not all become broken Bows in which there is no Strength? Oh what Brittleness, Giddiness and Madness, and Instabi∣lity among the People, just carried about as a Tempest, blown up and down with every Wind? and Oh how do People feed upon Wind, and the airy Breath of corrupt men, which vanisheth away as Smoak, which hah brought no Deliverance at all, but rather led farther and farther into sla∣very? Oh what are your Spirits so heightned in? and what is it in which you so greatly rejoyce? is it not in that which the Lord God hath blasted, blown upon and it is withered? your Rejoycing is not good, and it stirs up the wrong Part in People, to rejoyce in Vanity, and to take pleasure in Folly: what have you made Captains, and are you turning again into Egypt? Do you love Pharaoh's Power so well, and the wise mens Counsels so well? and were it not just with the Lord to let you go back into perpetual slave∣ry, and chuse your delusion, seeing you make your Necks as an Iron si∣new, and are so stout-hearted against the Lord? If you never attain unto that which God intended unto you, blame not the Lord; for you have made your selves unworthy thereof, by neglecting the Counsel of the Almigh∣ty, & despising them with whom the Counsel of the Lord is; and therefore it is just to bring one Bramble after another to rule over you, and one Bryar af∣ter another to scratch, and rend, and tear you; many have born your bur∣den long, and have been prest with your Transgressions, and the Souls of the Righteous have been vexed from year to year, to see you despise the
Loving-kindness of the Lord, and the tender Offers of Mercy; but the Burden at last must come upon your own Shoulders, which will bow you down; and then shall you see the Lord would have healed you, but you would not; the Lord would have healed your Breaches, but you would not because the Way did not suit with your peevish, pettish, crooked Minds, and therefore you are like to be bowed down under that which you have chosen, as Asses under a Burden; and you will suffer your Eyes to be put out by the Uncircumcised, and have given your Strength to the Beast, and now must you grind as Samson at a Mill, and they that exercise Rule over you, will make Sport with you. Be awakned out of your deep Sleep, and shake the Spirit of Slumber off you, that so you may come to see the State that you have plunged your selves into, and the little Inch of Time that is yet left you, prize it, and wait to feel the Witness of God arise in you, above that Rashness and Wilfulness which doth so easily beset you, and eye the Lord God, and look for Salvation from him, for else neither Person, Family nor Nation is like to be established; have you not run far enough? are you not yet weary? have you obtained any thing by look∣ing after Men, but Breach upon Breach, and one Vexation after another, the Line of Confusion being stretched out over all, and stones of Emp∣tiness brought forth, which is never like to do good, or to be a good Foun∣dation to build upon; for Salvation must be brought to a Nation by a People that are saved by the Lord, who have the eternal God for their Rock and Refuge, who have the Lord for their God and King; for they know how to rule in Righteousness, who have denied them selves and all self-Interests: take but a View of your Leaders, and see in what they have denied themselves, or their own Interest; and that Person or Man can never be for the general Good of all People, neither for the Com∣mon Freedom of the Nation, who seeks himself; and they that know not the Judgment of the Lord against Evil in themselves, are never like to judge righteously among the People, but will turn it backward, and let E∣quity fall in the Streets, and the poor and the needy suffer, and will let the Yoak of Bondage lye upon their Necks whom God hath made free, and count the Proud happy, and they that work Wickedness, they will set them up: Oh! the Lord is grieved, and his Spirit is vexed these divers Years at these things, and therefore hath he poured Contempt upon the mighty, and is bringing a Consumption upon all the Honourable of the Earth, and will make them all as burned Mountains; and while your Eyes are upon them for Help, your Expectation shall be frustrated, and your Hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, and this is the Word of Truth unto you all, which shall not pass away unfulfilled. And thou false & treacherous Ministry of this Nation, who only hast the Power of the carnal Sword to hold thee up, and wast made & constituted to be a ministry by a carnal Commandment of Man, you have been the chief Incendiaries of much of these Commotions, Stirs, Uproars and Broils, War and Strife; how have you twined, and turned. and wheeled about like Weather-Cocks, and flattered every Horn of the Beast which exalted it Self though but for a little season; & like as your Fore-fathers did in former years, so have you done in the latter years, flattered and set up every thing and Image, which though there was nothing it in at al, no Life
nor Breath, you have cried it up for the higher power while it stood and would work your Drudgery, and satisfie your Interest; and if it went not on as you would have it, then you have cried it down, and them that you counted the higher Power, and have said, It hath been by God's Ap∣pointment; the next Week, Usurpers and Traytors, and Countenancers of Error and Blasphemy, and have kindled a Fire among People, and set them up in a Rage one against another: and when your Deceit was like to go down, then cried Religion was despised, and the Gospel was like to fall, and to be extinguished: Come let us reason together a little; is reading old Writers (whom you call Heathen) seven Years, and other latter Popish Writers, and Aristotle's Philosophy, any Part of the Gospel? and to frame up a Speech adout Religion, out of your old Commentaries which were made in the Night of Ignorance, and to mix Scripture with them, is this the Gospel? and to get a Patent from a Protector, a Parliament, or a Com∣mittee to preach at such a Place, is this like Gospel? may be a great Seal at it, and then stay whether the People would have you or no, and force Maintenance from them, and plead your Letters-patent for your lawfull Call, like an Indulgence from the Pope, and to claim all the Tythes of a Parish, and all Oblations, Obventions and Mortuaries; is this like the Gospel, or like the best reformed Churches you talk on in that you call your Covenant? and to set up the old Mass-houses, baptized Bells, Hour-glasses, Clerks to say Amen, Church-wardens, is this like the reformed Churches? and to gather money from House to House to buy Bread and Wine, and then mutter a few Words over it, and give it to People on the mid-day like a Dinner, and call this the Lord's Supper, or a Sacrament; and to baptize Infants, and get Money for registring a Name, and call this an Ordinance of God; is this like the reformed Churches in the primitive times? and to take Money for marrying of People, is this Gospel-like? to preach over the dead, and observe other Cereonmies like the Popes Exequies, is this like the best reformed Churches? Nay, which of all the reformed Churches (so called) who are broken off from Popery in something, have not deny Tythes? Is there any Ministers among all the Protestants in Eu∣rope, but they have wholly relinquished Tythes, as to be no Gospel-main∣tenance; as Germany and the Eastern Countries, France, Geneva and Swit∣serland, and many others? yet these treacherous Priests of England boast of the Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline beyond all, and these must go under the Name of Godly learned Ministry, and if this be Godly, what is Ungodly? if this be learned, what is Ignorance? and to stay at a Village Twenty or Thirty Years if there be gain enough, if this be La∣boriousness, what is Idleness? and what Havock and Spoil have you made within these twenty Years in this Land, more then the corrupted Bishops did before? Oh what Havock have you made, and Spoil of Mens Estates in this Nation within these few years, which were called years of Liberty; if the Chronicles were searched amongst all the Protestants in Eu∣rope, the like parallel could not be found, neither hath there been the like Wickedness acted; many dyed in prison for denying your insatiable De∣sires; and because you demand Things contrary to the best reformed Churches, which you say you press after; you must deny all the things before mentioned, before any judicious man will believe; and therefore
it is in vain for you to cover your selves with a Cloak of Hypocrisie▪ for God hath opened an Eye in Thousands, that you will never be able to blind, though you stir up Smoak, and Dirt and Dust, and Fogs and mists of Ignorance that darkens the Air, yet they will see through it, and by the Breath of his mouth in whom they have believed, it will all be scat∣tered, but however it is just with the Lord to let loose upon your backs the old Prelates and Bishops to be Tormenters of you, and make you Drudges and Slaves, as you were formerly; and it is just with the Lord to let the Dragon's Power over you all again, and to bring a Scourge up∣on you, and the People that have hearkned to your Lyes and Deceit, that the Helper and they that are holpen may fall together; that the Blind and they that have chosen the Blind for a Leader, may both fall into the Ditch together, into the Pit that they may never rise again. Yet know this Oh Nation, and the Inhabitants therein, there is a Peo∣ple in thee which is precious, and so accounted of the Lord, that have not joyned to your Back-sliding, but have kept their Integrity and their first Love, neither have they joyned to your Brittleness and Instability, neither have they sought themselves, but the Good of the Nation, and all the People therein; and though they have had many Provocations, as from the cruel and merciless Cruelty of Self-seeking Men, yet they have born and suffered, knowing Vengeance belongs unto the Lord, who in his Day will recompence Fury upon his Adversaries, and scat∣ter them as the Wind scatters Clouds, and so are in Peace and Qui∣etness under the Shadow of him who hath brought them forth with a mighty Hand and out-stretched Arm, notwithstanding all Oppositi∣on, which hath been very great, even by all Parties and Interests hi∣therto, and little or no Regard hath been had to this People; but they have been as for a Prey, and for a Spoil unto all, and unreasonable Men have plowed long Furrows upon their Backs, and they have had no Helper in the Earth; but on the contrary, every one hath lent his Hand to bow them down, and tread upon them as Ashes under the Soles of their Feet, and yet no Evil to lay to their Charge, but false Surmises, and receiving the false Representations of corrupt Men, who Hearts have gainsaid any Appearance of Good that ever appeared, if it crossed their ignorant corrupt Minds: What hath this People come to harm thee, O Nation, that thou makest them thy Butt to shoot at, and they are become the Object of your Scorn and Derision? What▪ have they plotted or contrived Rebellion? Have they gone out upon their Enemies, and sought Vengeance against them, as every Party hath done else besides? Except it's become a Crime to speak the Truth, and bear Witness against the Hypocrisie and Deceit of Treacherus Men, and to lay their Iniquities before them, that they may see, and be ashamed, and turn from their Evil, which hath provoaked the Lord to Anger, and because of their Rejection of God's Counsel, they can∣not be established: And for the Sake of this Remnant, he will con∣found and overthrow on the right Hand and on the left all that rise up a∣gainst them, though they should never open their Mouthes, as to plead their Innocency, yet the Lord will, and condemn them that rise up a∣gainst them, and plead the Cry of the Oppressed that cry unto him
Day and Night, which the Lord hath heard and considered, and is come down▪ and hath begun his Work, though man doth not see it, and hath poured forth a Spirit of Confusion upon them who have Ill-will to the Lambs of Christ's Fold: and who shall act any Thing further, as to think to root out the Heritage of God, their Counsel shall be turned backward, and their Enterprize cursed; for God he hath determined to lay the Top-Stone with Shouting, and that which he is building he will fi∣nish; and of a Truth this is the Family which he hath chosen, which his Love is unto, and his Power amongst, and their Adversaries will God re∣buke for their Sake. Therefore O Nation, consider and take this one War∣ning more▪ that thou proceed not further to thy Hurt, and thou repent when it is too late.
ONE OF ANTICHRISTS VOLUNTIERS DEFEATED, AND THE TRUE LIGHT VINDICATED: In Answer to a Book called Ignis Fatuus, published by one R.I. wherein he vindicates Edward Dod and Samuel Smith (of the County of Salop) in their Lyes, Folly and Wickedness, and hath added more of his own, with divers of his false Doctrines, Lyes and Slan∣ders, &c. brought to Light and reproved. As that the Law of the Spirit of Life is imperfect, and not fit to be a Christian Rule, and also, Human Nature may be taken for the regenerate Part of Man, and the Soul, &c. and likewise calls Idolatry Civility, and Heathen∣ish Complements Courtesie. His Vindication made void, and his Weapons broken, and he taken Cap∣tive, and left with E.D. and S.S. among the Slime-pits of Siddim, near Sodom, with his Ignis fatuus. By F. H. a Witness to the perfect Law of the Spirit of Life. The Wicked are estranged from the Womb, they go astray as soon as they be born speaking Lyes. AMngst all the Opposers of the Truth that yet have appeared a∣mong the black Army of the the old Dragon, who like the Philisti∣ans have alwayes defied Israels God, and also their Camp, through their ostentation and Boasting, and with their Clamorous loud Crye in the Ears of the People, like Rabshekah, to dish earten and dismay Israel; none hath appeared more out-ragious and virulent then one who Sub∣scribes himself, R. I. who in Vindication of his Brethren in Iniquity, E∣ward Dd▪ Drunkard, and Samuel Smith an uprofitable Talker, other∣wise called a Minister at Cressage, who hath preached that which he calls the Gospel these divers Years, and yet sees no Fruit at all, and yet this im∣pudent R. I. whom I believe to be another Dreamer like him, for his Language doth manifest him to belong to Mystery Babylon, the great City▪
the Mother of Harlots, he saith, One may Minister and preach the Gospel, and the People not be profited at all, as Samuel Smith hath done at Cressage; And he saith further, that they are barren Professors, yet saith R. I. that S. S. need not be abashed at it; And for instance he saith, Was Pauls Preaching of less credit, because there were many Runnagates, in the End shewed themselves Hypocrites? yet this comparison will not excuse S. S. neither E. D. nor R. I. who would cover them with an old patched Cloak, some Pieces he hath scraped up out of Esop's Fables, a Book full of Lyes, and altogether com∣pacted and patched up of fictions, and some out of Ovi and Seneca, Hea∣thens in their own account, and the like frivolous Stories, and Plato▪ and Diogenes, they must serve for a covering, if it will, to the two former Op∣posers of Truth: but stay R. I. Did Paul stay seven Years in any place, and saw no Fruit? And though there were many Unbelievers among the Jews, notwithstanding the publication of the Word and the miracles of Christ, yet some believed; and though the Apostles and Ministers of Christ la∣boured in the Work of the Lord, yet some believed and clave unto them▪ but there is no Fruit at Cressage at all, but they barren Professors, as R. I. saith; but if ths will not serve, tke another of R. I. his arguments; that God sends his Word sometimes for the hardening of People, and upon this account, S. S's teaching and Ministry must be kept in credit. A sad thing for the People of Cressage, that they should Hire a man for seven Years together, and pay him Wages for hardening of their Hearts, and for counting them barren Professors, yet I judge, S. S. E. D. and R. I. counted them fruitful, and abounding in Zeal and fervency to God, when they came into the Meeting of the Quakers, some ringing Pans, some Candlesticks and Frying Pans, and throwing Water, like People void of Understanding, and saith this R.I. these yielding a better sound then the Quakers; So that thou mayst see what will not this R. I. Vindicate, and what Wickedness as can be acted and spoken, here they may look for a shelter, rather then they shall want a Guardian (as Pictures, Images, Crosses, Cuffs, Ribbons, Lae; and such other like things invented by the Devil, to draw People from serving and Worshipping the living God) R. I. will Patronize them all, being brought forth, and when they are not brought forth he will reach forth his Hand to help to elevate Iniquity, and to under prop the Devil's Kingdom, which is exalted in the Children of Disobedience, as all along may be seen in his Fabulous Scrole, called Ignis Fatuus, when like his two Brethren be∣fore him, he goes about to Vindicate Idolatry, Images, Hirelings Mass-houses, Cuffs and Ribbons, Tythes, Flattering Titles, and vain Customs, and Popish Practices, Pride, Persecution, and Lying; all those things he pleads for, and hath used many vain Arguments and false Interpretations of Scri∣pture, so that the two former, it may truly be said, they have done wick∣edly▪ but this R. I. Exceeds them all, who is so stout-Hearted against the Truth and Power of God, that whatsoever he can invent in his corrupt Heart against it▪ and gathers up the rest of the Priests lyes that they have Vomited up before▪ and cast in the Face of Truth and enders them as good proof▪ and some Scriptures perverted with Eop's Fables, and Ovid, and Diogenes's Stories▪ and upon such materials he hath framed his Book (called Ignis Fatuus) which he hath writ in Vindication of E. D. his Book called, A pair of Spectacles for a Dark sihted Quaker, and S. S. Malice Stripped and
Whipt, three Pamphlets whose Title will discover what the Substance of their matter is, and whose Work they drive on, so that I need not say much, some of them Vindicating Persecution, and incouraging the Rude behaviour of the People, another mocking at Innocency, and scorneth them who Tremble at the Word of the Lord; and last of all, R. I. who hath made a Fortress for both the other, and hath cast up a heap of confused Dark∣ness to guard his Brethren, he mocks at the Light within, and calls it Ignis Fatuus; and the Law which is Light which God hath Promised to write in his Peoples Hearts, this he calls an Imperfect thing, and therefore to be ruled, and not fit to be a rule of the Saints, as may be seen in the 55th page of his Book, and so hath spoken contrary to the Spirit and Scripture of Truth, Prov. 6. and the Law of the Lord, which is the Law that endureth forever, this saith, R. I. is imperfect and the Letter or Law without written is perfect, and is a standard as R. I. saith, for all Controversies, then if it be so perfect and so fit to decide all Controversies, why doth R. I. borrow his proofs and raise his Argu∣ments from Esop's Fables, Ovid's Stories, Plato's and Diogenes's discourses, and to omit Seneca, because R. I. saith, Ambrose hath reckoned him in the Bead∣row of Saints, it may be with Saint Dominick, and Saint Patrick, Saint Fran∣cis, and some other of the Popes Canonizing; but however, I shall let many of his Envious and frivolous and impertinent Arguments pass, as thing of no Validity or worth, being they have been Answered over and over by many Hands, and all the Fortresses and strong Holds thrown down, so that to any Judicious man they will appear, to be but Rubbish, however R. I. would be gathering together the Rubbish again, and would make it appear as goodly a fabrick as he can, when indeed there is no thing in it all; so thou may'st see Reader, in R. I. his Vindication of this Mouldy cankered Ware of Babylon which he would hold up, his own Folly, Ignorance, and Errour made manifest in the ensuing discourse of his Doctrines, and most of his Principles thou may view and see, which I have taken up and answer'd, and his Confusion and Blindness thou mayst see, and also view the Spirits that acts this Man, and how this man is like to Convince any who hath not Power over his Tongue, but lets it run to utter forth the deceit that proceeds out of his own corrupt Heart, thinking thereby to blind Peoples Eyes that they should not see, how Ignorant and Light, vain, and Treacherous, these Priests are, who would monopolize all into their own Hand; nay, though God commanded and move by his Spirit, yet this must not speak nor declare the mind of God, except these Priests will al∣low of it, (in whom the Welfare of all People lies, if thou wilt believe R. I. in the 11 page of his Book, yet if these count it disorderly for any to speak as h1 hath received of the Lord, from his Spirit) it must go for such, and be accounted such, as disorderly. In the Epistle to the Reader R. I. saith, such Schimaticks as these Qua∣kers, have torn the Church in Pieces, and its Authority condemned, and the Ministry slighted, and false Religion advanced. Answ. It seems that the Church that R. I. is of, is none of the true Church which is built upon the Rock (Christ), which the Gates of Hell prevaileth not aainst, neither any weapon that is formed against it, can prosper; but R. I. his Church is torn in pieces and may be prevailed against; sure it is but Babylon, whose Stones must be scattered, and whose Building
must be thrown down, & it is but the Whrs Are that is sending off, that her Nakedness may appear, and her Deceit made manifest; and the Au∣thority which is condemned and reproved, is no Authrity but the Autho∣rity of the Beast, upon which the false Church hath riden, and hath cl∣led it by the Name of the higher Power; and the Ministry is but such as traffick with the Whore's Sorceries, by which she hath deceived the Nati∣ons, and this indeed, and those Ministers indeed are slighted by us because we know him who is the Minister of the everlsting Covenant, whose Spi∣rit is manifest according to his Promise, to lead his People into all Truth; and so the Religion which standeth only in the Traditions of Men, and in Idolatry, such things as R. I. goeth about to maintain, as Images, Crosses, and Piures, Mass-houses, Hireling Prsts, Popish Tythes and Ppish Ceremo∣nies, which R. I. so much pleads for, all these are slighted, as not to be consistant with the true Religion, or the true Church of Christ. Yet nevertheless saith R. I. in his Epistle, I have adventured voluntarily to side with those that contend for the Truth aganst the Quakers, and yet in the same Epistle, saith, He was moved of the Lord thus to declare Answ. What Confusion, and Lying, and Blasphemy is here? hath R. I. adventured voluntarily in his own Wilfulness and Perversness, to take part with those Contenders against the Truth, in which the Quakers live and worship, and God must be made the Author of this, and all the Heap of Lyes and Confusion, which is declared and uttered forth in his Ignis fa∣tuus, which if no more were said then hath been, were answer enough un∣to his railing Discourse; and yet what Impudency this Man hath to say, he was moved of the Lord, when as he hath confest, he hath voluntarily took part with the Contenders? so that it is manifest to all reasonable men, who set thee on work, and whose Work thou hast been doing, for which thou shalt be sure to receive a Reward, in the mighty Day of the Lord. And R. I. saith, Forasmuch as their counterfeit Coin hath been offered to me for good Slver, I thought it fit to nail it to the Market pst, that it might not decieve others, and instead thereof I have here made a tender of other Money (viz.) this ensuing Treatise, which I doubt not, but it may pass with Truth's ap∣probation. Answ. That which R. I. calls counterfeit Coin, was made publick by our selves, and it hath been and shall be received by them that know God's I∣mage, and the inscription of the Spirit, and though R. I. hath denyed it when it was proffered to him, the Value and Worth of that which hath been proffered to him, is no worse; For though a Price be put into the Hand of a Fool, he regards it not. And now Reader thou shalt see what kind of Coin he hath tendered, and how thou judgest it may pass with Truth's Approbation, as hereafter will be made manifest in his further Discourse. Wherefore Reader, saith R. I. Have not so great Regard to the Authority of the writer, as the Truth of the Matter written by him, who was moved of the Lord, as th to declare against those who are Adversaries to Truth. Answ. Indeed the Authority of a writer, or of that which is written, is of no great moment, seeing he is but one of Anti-Christ's Voluntiers, who hath not only belyed them that feared the Lord, but also hath uttered forth many damnable Doctrines, and yet would fasten all these upon the Lord so that his Deceit might be of more Authority, and none might question
the matter thereof, because the Lord alwayes moveth to Truth and Righte∣ousness, and so R. I. is one of them that hath taken the Name of the Lord in vain, which will not be holden guiltless, but will be found guilty, when the Searcher of all Hearts shall make all things manifest. And then R. I. further saith, That sprinkling of Infants is commanded by the Scrptures, and is a Seal of the Covenant; and Baptism of Infnts is that which answers to Circumcision; for Mortification of the Flesh and Remission of Sins, and Admission into the Church, are sealed unto Infants by sprinkling, or that which R. I. calleth baptizing. I say, Baptism of infants is a Popish-Tradition, as hath been proved by di∣vers, so that of it I need not say much; but where it is commanded in the Scripture as R. I. saith, Coll. 2.11, 12. is but a bad Proof for R. I. for the Collossians were circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, and they were buried with him in Baptsim, baptized into the Death and Suf∣ferings of Christ, such a Baptism as the Priests never Administred with their Hands, and the Spirit of the Lord was wont to be the Seal of the Covenant to them that do believe, but now it must be turned out of doors, for visible Water hath taken up its Place in R. I. his Judgement, which is currupted; & how doth sprinkling answer to Circumcision, the Males on∣ly were circumcised, and not the Females? and why do you sprinkle Fe∣males, if Baptism must answer to Circumcision, and if the Extent of the one must be as large as the other: And as for Mortification of the Flesh and Re∣mission of Sins; that which mortifies the deeds of the Flesh hath Life in it, and that gives a living Testimony within, & Remission sins of is in the Blood of Christ, and the Seale thereof is by the Spirit unto them that believe, but this popish tradition hath taken up all in R. I. his Account, if his Argu∣ment be true; nay the Papists themselves, who are as zealous for sprink∣ling of Infants as R. I. or any of his Brethren can be, yet one of their own Bishops (at a Council in France, of both Protestants and Papists, at Pisoy 1561.) Claudius Espencius saith, many Things are to be believed by Tradition only, as the Baptism of Infants, which cannot be proved from Scripture; but this R. I. would have the Scripture to be a cloak and a cove not only for Po∣pish traditions, but for his own invented imaginations, which he hath set forth to blind the People withal. The next Thing that R. I. goes about to vindicate, is Swearing, which their Ministers teach Men to swear; which ought to be in Rightousness and Truth, and for his Proof he brings Deut. 10.20. and saith, Christ only pro∣hibits rash and vain swearing, and superfluous Oaths. Answ. Unto this much hath been said and answered already by many pens, and so that in the Answer thereof I shall be brief; in the first Cove∣nant it was lawful to swear in Truth and Righteousness, and likewise all rash and vain Oaths under the Law were forbidden; but Christ who is the End of the Law for Righteousness, who is greater then the Prophets, and greater then Moses and Solomon, and greater then the Angels, unto whom they all worship, he saith expresly, Swear not at all; now whereas R. I▪ and thers have said, Christ only in these Words prohibits vain Oaths, or false Oaths, then he had reproved nothing but what the Law had repro∣ved, but he saith, it hath been said of old Time, thou shalt not forswear thy self, but saith Christ, I say swear not at all, so that it is manifest, that all Oaths are forbidden by him, who is the Oath of God; and why saith R. I. it is not
contrary to the Gospel of Christ for to swear, and yet doth account the writings which is called the New Testament, the Gopel, wherein Christ hath expresly forbidden it? and therefore those Ministers that teach men to swear, are not the Ministers of Christ, but teach those things that are repugnant to the Gospel of Christ; For he that breaks one of the least of the Commands of Christ, and teacheth others so to do, is least in the Kingdom of God. The next thing that R. I. would vindicate, is their of singng David's Psalms, in invented Tunes, such as pleaseth the carnal Mind, and for his Proof he brings Mat. 26.30. They went out, and sung a Hymn; and Paul and Silas sung in Prison; and singing is divine Worship for the Praise of God, and the Comfort of our Souls; and it is a Soul-ravishing, and Heart-raising Ordiance. Answ. It is acknowledged, and alwayes hath been by us, that Praises belongs unto the Lord, and that they that are made alive, whose Souls are raised out of Death, can, and do praise the Lord, and they that sig with the Spirit and with Understanding, are acceptable unto God; and they that are in the Spirit, do that which the Spirit moveth unto, and so wor∣ship in the Truth, and are accepted of God; and Christ, and Paul, and Silas, and many more praised the Lord, and many now do praise the Lord, and he that hath a Psalm may sing; but what of all this? what doth this prove for R. I. and the Mass-house-fingers? and what doth this prove as to the singing of them that are void of Understanding. who sometime sing, I go mourning all the Day long, and just at that moment are singing; and what doth R. I. think it cannot be a Psalm except it be in Meeter, or doth he think it is not accepted, except it hath a Tune with so many stops; and to sing David's Prayers, and call it Praises, is this with Under∣standing? and even to return R. I. his Words upon himself; A more un∣grounded Opinion was never invented by the Devil; for them to sing, or to pretend to praise God, whose Souls lye in death, and do not know what it is to partake of God's Benefits, neither the unsearchable Gift; this kind of singing and Immitation doth not comfort the Soul. but burden it, and this doth not raise the Witness, but killeth it, and you make merry over it; and this kind of singing must be turned into howling and lamen∣tation. And saith R. I. Our Worship doth not differ neither in whole, nor in Part, in matter or in manner from the Saints Worship in the Primitive Times. Answ. This Man's Confidence, or rather Impudence, is in Opposition to Knowledge and Wisdom; for it were easily proved, that it neiher in whole, nor in Part, neither in matter nor manner agreeth with the Primi∣tive times, as for Example, it is no where recorded in the Scripture▪ that any Apostle, Minister, or Ministers, did take a little Water and did sprinkle a few Drops on a Child's Face, & called this an Ordinance of God and say, it is a Seal of the Covenant, and Mortification and Remission  Sins, neither any such Doctrine did they declare; neither did any of th Ministers and Apstoles of Christ; cause People to buy them Bread an Wine, and then give it the People back again, a Bit of Bread and a Sup  Wine at the middle of the Day, and call this the Lord's Supper, or a gre Sacrament; neither had they Bells in their Churches to call People togther; neither had they soft Cushions, and Pulpits, and a Hour-glass  by them; neither did the Primitive Churches prohibit, or limit th
Spirit of the Lord God amongst any, but if any was moved to speak any thing, or had any thing revealed from the Lord, the first was to hold his Peace. These and many more things you differ in, both in matter and manner, which largely hath been declared by other Pens, and so in this I shall be brief; neither had the Ministers of the Gospel their Maintenance by force; neither had they Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, Mortuaries, Mo∣ney for Churching of Women, Marriages, nor for the Burials of the dead, nor Money for funeral Sermons, neither did they preach over the dead: All these and abundance more of such like invented things, was never practised nor found amongst the Churches before the Apostacy; which things considered may cause R.I. to blush that ever he durst be so impudent, as to say, they differ not, neither in the whole nor in part, in matter nor in manner, from the Primitive Churches; and until such Time as R. I. and his Brethren contenders can clear themselves of these things, let them not think any whose Eyes God hath opened can receive them for a Church of Christ; nay, most of the parish Ministers hold up those practices which the Papists did deny, as money for Marriages and Burials, Baptism, the Sacrament, or the Ground in which the dead were buried, this was re∣prehended and condemned by the Council of Trent, in the height of all po∣pery, 1547. Saith R. I. It seems these Tythes are a great matter to many, or rather a great trouble for them to pay the Ministers, though Abraham paid Tythes of all to Mel∣chizedeck before the Law; and this proves E. D. his Argument, as saith R. I. That it is contrary to the Light and Law of God to with-hold them from the Mini∣sters, because they were given by Abraham before the Law. Answ. Yea, it is great matter with many to pay Tythes, and a great trou∣ble too, because he that confesseth Christ is come in Flesh, cannot uphold the shadows of the first Covenant, which belonged to a changable Priest∣hood, having no other Portion among their Brethren, which was given unto them for the Service which they performed unto the Lord, and like∣wise were a Twelfth Tribe, and near a Twelfth Part of the People; and now the Law being changed, and the Priesthood changed, and the Cove∣nant ended, and the Ordinance thereof abolished, that such a Company of covetous Men, as the Parochial Priests generally are, that they should claim the Tythes that belonged to this Priesthood, and not to do the Work that they did, and yet have a Portion among their Brethren in this Land, nei∣ther are they the Three Hundredth Part of the People; & that such a Com∣pany, I say, as these should claim the Tenth Part of all the Encrease in the Land, this is a great matter, and a thing not consistant with the Law of God, neither Equity or Reason, And it is but a poor and feeble Argument neither of E. D. or R. I. that because Abram gave the Tenth part of the Spoil to Melchizedeck before the Law, that therefore it must be a binding thing to all Generations to pay the tenth part as due to such as are neither after that order of Aaron, neither after the Order of Melhizedeck. Abram gave the tenth, and that but once, and freely, and Melchizedeck brought forth Bread and Wine to Abram's Army and we may as justly, and upon as good Ground, demand Bread and Wine for our whole Families of the Priests, as the Priests can demand the
tenth part of our Substance from Abram's gift to Melchizedeck, and say, It is against the Law of God, Nature and reason, as E. D. and R. I. doth conclude by their feeble Arguments, which they make upon Abram's giving the tenth's, for if the Example of the one be binding, then he example of the other is also as binding; Abram gave the Tenth part of he Spoil and that but once, and Melchizedeck demanded none, then why do he Priests who are Usurpers claim it every Year? and where they cannot get it freely, as few will give it them, who Witness Christ come in the Flesh, then they take it by Force and constraint; or would Melchizedeck have plead∣ed with Abram (as this ignorant R. I. doth) that the Spoil was none of his own? as he saith, Tythes are no Man's own? or as I said before to E. D. would Melchizedeck have taken away Abram's Oxen, Cowes, or Hor, Sheep, or Camels, if he had not given him the tenth part? Or did any of the Ministers of Christ require or demand, force or constrain any Maintenance whatsoever from any, which this R. I. saith, They differ no∣thing from, neither in whole nor in part, in matter or manner, neither in Practice; but saith, R.I. This is nothing to the purpose, unless it could be proved that the Apo∣stles might have had Tythes, which they could not being Persecuted. Yet it is something to the purpose if you take them for an Example, as you say you do; and though it be granted the Apostles were Persecuted from place to place, and sometimes went from place to place when they were not Pere∣cuted, which R. I. would have Condemned for runnagates, if he had lived in that time: But without all Controversie, if it be a duty now to pay Tythes unto the Ministers of the Gospel, then it was a duty in the Apostles time, that though the Rulers were Persecutors, yet the Apostles would have minded them, whom they had begotten into the Faith, of their duty but we find no mention neither by Commandment, Reproof or Exhorta∣tion, unto any of the Churches, about any such thing, and so thy Ar∣gument R. I. is foolish and Frivolous; for it may be easily proved, that Tythes were never demanded, not for 7 or 8 hundred Years after the A∣scension of Christ. And R. I. saith, The Apostles took whatsoever was given them, and th satis∣fies the Ministers Conscience to take Tythes which the Magistrates give them, so they may of such Maintenance live of the Gospel. Answ. If the Apostles took nothing but what was given them, then this shames your forcing, and also you seek it of them who receive you not, which manifests you are out of the Apostles example, and though it satisfies your Consciences to take Tythes (which thou sai'st, the Magi∣strates give you) both of them that own you, and them that own you not; yet I believe it would not have satisfied the Apostles of Christ, if any Magistrates would have sent them back to the Jews, who Believed not, or the Gentiles, who received them not; this they would not accounted as a free Gift; though this divers hundred Years many Rulers have Drunk of the Whore's cup, and have given their Authority to the Beast, and have forced and compelled to a Worship, and also to give to the Whore's Mer∣chants, yet this is but bad proof that they ought to have done so; and the Apostles never counted this living of the Gospel, to live of Tythes & forced Maintenance, which none of the Ministers did receive, or ever will. And so for shame call in thy Ignis Fatuus again, in which thou hast published so
many Lyes, among which is one, (which will stand as a record against thee) (viz.) That ye differ not in Doctrine and Practice, matter and manner, neither in whole nor in part, from the Apostles and Primitive Saints. And this is another Lye, that Timothy and Titus was settled in a parochial-like way in their Quarters. Nay the Parochial Quarters is all People, Old and Young, Believers and Unbelievers, between such a Water and such a Wall, or bewixt such a Hedge, and such a Dih. And because thou saidst, I had not named the Apostate that builded your Mass houses, I shall take away the occasion of thy Clamouring this, and tell thee who invented your Parishes, and your Parochial way, (viz.) The Pope Dyonsius, which it may be thou wilt calculate among the Bead-row of Saints, for his great de∣votion, as thou saidst, Ambrose did with Seneca. The next Thing that R. I. contends against, is no less Thing then the Do∣ctrine of Christ, and yet it may be he reckons himself as one of his Mini∣sters, and yet he raises Arguments strongly against the Doctrine of Christ, viz. Be not ye called Masters; but it may thou wilt say, as one of thy Ge∣neration said lately of some of the Doctrine of Christ, that these Words give an uncertain Sound, and therefore they must have an Exposition, and it is this, That Christ condemneth Ambition and Superiority over our Brother's Religion and Faith. Answ. Then all your parochial Ministers, by thy own Exposition, fall under Condemnation; for this is a Point of our Faith, that if we be moved of the Lord and by his Spirit, to come into your Assemblies, to speak the Word of Truth, that we ought to speak it, and you ambitiously would ar∣rogate unto your selves Superiority over our Faith and Religion; like as we believe, that we ought not to give flattering Titles to Men, neither to give Maintenance unto them, of whom we are perswa∣ded and do believe are no Ministers of Christ: And in these and many more Things that pertain to Religion, Faith and Godli∣ness, you ambitiously and proudly have arrogated unto your selves Su∣periority over Religion, Faith and Consciences: Therefore repent of it, and see you do so no more, lest you fall into Condemnation: And as for calling any man Master, who is our Master we own, and it is the Practice of such as are Servants; but to call him Master who is not our Master, is to speak an Untruth, or else to give flattering Titles, and we have not so lear∣ned Christ; but enough of this hath been spoken by divers, so that I shall pass on, and touch a Word about Complements, and doffing off Hats, and bowing of Knees, a Thing that R. I. and his Brethren so dearly love, that they are loath to part with it, and these things we believe we ought not to do; and although R. I. doth confess, that none ought to usurp Authori∣ty or Superiority over his Brother's Faith, yet notwithstanding he hath forgotten his own Exposition in a Moment, and falls a wrangling about Hats and Caps, Knees and Complements, which we cannot do for Con∣science sake. And saith R. I. If the Quakers will not put off their Hats, because it is a Cu∣stom, or bow the Knee, because they are abused, they must not eat or drin, because it is abused by Gluttons and Drunkards. Answ. A pitiful lame Argument; we eat not, nor drink not because it is a Custom, nor wear Apparel, but because of their Service and of Neces∣sity;
and yet I would have R. I. know, that we have learned to di∣stinguish betwixt a thing that may be customary, and good in it self, and a Custom which is vain; and the Saints did not salute one another because it was a Custom, but because their Hearts were joyned to one another in Love and in Truth; but for doffing the Hat, and bowing the Knee to a Fellow with a Feather, or a Woman with a Fan, or a Gold Ring, or poudered Hair, this is a vain Custom, and the Antiquity of a thing doth not prove the Goodness of it, neither Customariness the Worth of any thing, not be∣cause a Multitude of Roysters and Ruffins do practise such things, that there∣fore they are lawful; for we know broad is the Way that leads to Destru∣ction, and many there that enter in; and we have learned not to follow a Mul∣titude to do evil, though R. I. be untaught. But saith R. I. When Salutations are observed with a good Decorum, they are like a Hand-dial, which shews what Order the Wheels observe within, and the A∣buse of any Thing doth not abolish the Use thereof. Answ. Now what R.I. doth count a good Decorum, Reader, thou may'st judge by what he hath before pleaded for, for doffing off Hats, bowing the Knee, and saying, Your Servant Sir, or if it please your Highness, or if it like your Excellency, with such feigned Practices, and this is the Decorum which is counted civil; and so Reader thou may'st observe how the Wheels run within. It so came to pass that I was amongst a Company of these that would be called Ministers of the Gospel, in Number no less then ten, and in the Room I was when they all came in, and they courted, and bowed, and scraped with their Feet, with their Hats to the Ground many of them one to another, and reeling up and down the House in this Manner, and one striving to outstrip another in Complements; and though they had all Intentions to sit down, yet they strave among themselves who should be last, and in this Posture they continued half an Hour together, at the which I admired, and indeed was ashamed, that men who professed Godliness should be found in such Transgression; and it is like R. I. will count these Civil Salutations with a good Decorum; and now Reader, observe again how the Wheels went within, and what they did drive after, but to gra∣tifie one another in Deceit, with these kind of Decorums, like Stage-play∣ers and Fidlers; and thou errest, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; when that which was commanded by God came to be abused, they came utterly to be abolished; as the brazen Serpent came to be idolized, it was taken away, though there was no Command for so doing, but they might have pleaded the former against them; likewise the Temple com∣manded to be built by God, and was to have continued forever, yet being abused and made an Idol of, it was utterly abolished, and was left unto them desolate, and the Glory of God did not appear in it as before; and because of the Iniquity of such a Company of Priests, Sion became as a plowed Field, and Jerusalem became Heaps, and the daily Sacrifices ceased, and not one Stone left upon another of the Temple that was not thrown down: And so for thee or any other to plead Custom or Antiquity and Examples, which were neither commanded nor commended, as to be standing and a binding Rule to all Generations, demonstrates thy great Ignorance and Blindness,
and manifests thee to be one who pleases the Spirit of the World, in whom the Love of God dwells not. The next thing that R. I. falsly accuseth, and impudently affirmeth a∣gainst the Quakers is, That they deny honour to Superiours, and to them to whom it is due, and so blaspheme the Name of God and his Doctrine; and further say'st, Charity, though shooting at Random, cannot miss the right Mark. Answ. It is one thing what God accounteth true Honour, it is another thing what R. I. counteth Honour: True Honour is to obey the Com∣mands of Superiours, who rule in the Power of God, and this the Quakers do, submitting to all the just and equal Commands which are required of them that rule in the Power of God, and this is not to blaspheme the Name of God and his Doctrine; but this Fellow would have accused the Apo∣stles, as his Generation did, who put them out of the Cities, charging them to speak no more in the Name of Jesus, and then when the Apostles return'd plead their Authority, saying, Did not we command you to speak no more in his Name, and now you are disobedient, blaspheming the Name of God and his Doctrine: Is this Good Reasoning R. I. And Charity shoots not at random, neither misses the Mark, but it is pure, and singles out its Obect to joyn un∣to, and joyns not unto Deceit; but this is R. I. his Charity, to think well of them that are doing Evil, and joyn to them who are doing the De∣vil's Work; but this Man honours Charity as he doth the Scriptures, he saith, Charity shoots at random, and the Scriptures are the true Cards, as here∣after thou shalt see. And saith R. I. F. H. labours to disgrace, if not to deface our Churches, he like a cunning Gamster knows how to alter the Course of true Cards, the Scripture, as R. I calls them. Answ. Because F. H. would have them to take away their Crosses, and Pictures and Images, which were set up in the time of gross Idoltry, this R. I. counts graces and adorns their Churches, and so he is joyned to Idols, I shall let him alone; and the Reader may see how R. I. honours the Scrip∣tures, when in one Place he pleads for the same Titles to be given unto them, which are given to God, and saith, No Man can dshonour Christ by gi∣ving as honoura le Titles to the Scriptures as to God or Christ; then by his own Argument he hath brought a great Dishonour to God and Christ and the Scripture, by giving them so base a Title as the Name of Cards, and so in going about to exalt his own Imaginations, he hath vilified the Scriptures of Truth. And saith R. I. To call Steeple-houses Churches, is no Addition to the Scripture, but a true Exposition thereof; and what if there be some Reliques of Idolatry in our material Temples, is there are some Reliques of Sin in our living Temples,  they therefore be called Idol-Temples? Answ. The Temple in which the Jews worshipped was builded by the Command of God, which all these Steeple houses cannot be compared un∣to which were invented and set up in the Apostacy, since Men have depar∣ted from the Faith, and ruined into Formalities and Idolatry; when Christ was offered up the everlasting Offering, them that did believe in Christ e∣parated from the Temple; and the Gentiles who believed separated from their Idols Temples, and they met together in Houses, which we do not
read of were filled with Pictures, Images and Crosses, and Steeple-houses were not then invented; and the Council of Nice, divers hundred Years after the Apostles, decreed that Images and Crosses were to be pla∣ced in the Churches, and also worshipped; and there is the Original of those things which R.I. saith do grace and adorn their Church; And if some of the reliques of Idolatry do abide in your Temples, then it demonstrates that you are in the same Spirit they were that set them up: And if your Temples take their Denomination from the People that meet therein, as R. I. saith in page 32. then they may be truly called Popish Houses and Mass-houses from the People that meet therein; and if the reliques of Sin abide in your living Temples, and bear rule there, then they that defile the Temple will God destroy, for Holiness becomes the Habitation of his Huse for∣ever; and 1 Kings 8.11. will be but a bad Proof for thee, For the Glory of the Lord shall fill the House of the Lord, for that is the Temple, blind man, which was commanded by God, and the Glory of God did appear there; but if this will not serve, we must have another Proof, Psal. 76.2. In Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling-place in Sion, which may be understood allego∣rically of our Temple, saith R. I. Doth the Glory of the Lord fill your Mass-houses, you glory in Deceit and in Pride, and your Glorying is not good, and thy Allegory is false; though his Tabernacle was in Salem, and his Dwelling in Sion, and his Presence in the Temple; is yours the Temple, or Salem, or Sion, or the Tabernacle? if not, for Shame pervert not the Scripture, nor bring it to cover your idolatrous Practices, which R. I. pleads for, and saith, Images, Pictures and Crosses may be continued in some Places; and it is like R.I. would count it Sacriledge to take them away; he is far from the Exhortation of the Apostle, Abstain from every Appearance of Evil, and hate the Garment that is spotted with the Flesh. And R.I. saith, I plead not for Baal, nor for proud phantastick Spirits, and yet a little while after saith, that putting off Lace, Ribbons and costly Apparel, may be putting on of Pride: Now who will believe this R.I. that he pleads not for Baal, when he pleads for Pictures, Crosses and Images, for Cuffs Ribbonds, Lace, and costly Apparel: Now Reader thou may'st observe by R.I. his De∣corum, how the Wheels go within. And further R. I. saith, It is utterly unlawful for any Christian whatsoever, gifted or not gifted, to preach the Word in the Name of the Lord before the Church publickly assembled, unless they be ordained and set apart by the Church for such a Work. Answ. this man is far from Moses's Spirit who wished that all the Lord's People were Prophets. and would not forbid Eldad and Medad to prophe∣sie in the Camp, which was a publick Assembly, and Israel then the Church of God, and R. I. hath made too hasty a Conclusion, who would prohi∣bit all from speaking the Word of God, if they wanted outward Ordina∣tion; then Paul was a great Transgressor, who consulted not with Flesh and Blood, neither with any other of the Brethren, nor went not up to Je∣rusalem for Orination, but preached three years the Word of God▪ and then afterward went up to Jerusalem, and saw none except Peter and James, and no Ordaination as we read of; and afetrward went into Syra and Cili∣cia, and furthermore saith, he that was not known by Face to the Churches of Judea: So who ordained him all this time; for there were no Churches of
the Gentiles, but what he had planted then, and so they could not ordain him, Gal. 1.17, 18, 19, 21, 22. And who ordained Apollo; but it may be that R. I. will say, that Paul was ordained at Antioch, Acts 12.2. but I would have R. I. to understand, that here was seventeen years that he preached publickly before that, and where was his Ordination? Many of the Brethren who were scattered abroad in the Persecution that was at Je∣rusalem, went every where preaching the Word of God, and when or where were these ordained? And who ordained the Brethren that were persecuted after Steven's being put to death, who travailed as far as Phe∣nicia and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the Word, and the Hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and were turned unto the Lord, Acts 11.19, 20, 21. yet these things I bring not as to deny but that many went out with the consent of the Church, and many were or∣dained; and many were ordained Elders who were grown up in the Truth and established, who had received the holy Ghost, by whom many were confirmed and strengthned in the Faith; but what is all this R. I. to your Or∣dination? and who ordained you, the Pope, a Bishop, or a Council, or a Par∣liament, and what are they you ordain? Such as learn the Art of Speech seven years at Oxford, who have read Homer and Aristotle, Plato and Dioge∣nes, and learn to play on a Fiddle; these are no Mechanicks, but gifted Men indeed, and qualified, and fit to be ordained and made Ministers, Pa∣stors and Elders, to carry abroad the Traffick of Mystery-Babylon; but this R. I. is very peremptory, and saith, it is utterly unlawful for any that are gifted to preach the Word, contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine, who saith, as every one hath received the Gift so let him administer; and not such as R. I. would have to be Ministers, who have learned an Art to speak, and this must be called a Gift, and a Qualification, and a fit Man to be a Pastor, and thus they have ordained one another, and have set up a Trade of preaching, and with their confused Stories have filled the World with Darkness. And as concerning an infallible Spirit, saith R. I. None except Christ who was without sin, can challenge it, or lay claim to it, and I may say of such Runna∣gates and wandering Stars, as this F. H. and the Quakers are, as John did, 1 John 2.9. They are gone out from us, because they were not of us, Answ. However this R. I. hath cleared himself and the rest of his Bre∣thren for being Ministers of Christ; for they do not only deny an infallible Spirit, neither look to be made Partakers thereof, but quite shut out all the Saints from enjoying it; and though in Christ the fulness of the Godhead dwelt, who was full of Grace and Truth; he is the Root from whence all that believe come to be made partakers of his Virtue, and so many of his Members may lay claim to it, as they have received it by a free Gift, according to the Promise of Christ, I will send you the Spirit of Truth, whch shall lead you into all Truth; and the Apostle had received the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, who had freed him from the Law of Sin and Death, and the Sons of God had received it; and they were led by it, and the Mi∣nisters of Christ were made Ministers of it, who hath made us able Mini∣sters as it is written, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, and that Spirit was in∣fallible and true, and that Spirit which they declared of, was an unerring Spirit; and as they were led by it, they erred not, but were kept by it that
the Evil one touched them not, and they spoke from it, and ordered the Church in it in the wisdom of God: But what do these Men minister from, who wait not to be made Partakers of this, but deny that ever any had it, or ever shall have, & so are but a company of Dreamers, and tell their dream that they dreamed in the Night, or at best steal the Words from their Neighbour, and say, Thus saith the Lord, when God hath never spoken to them. And though thou mayest say we are Runnagates, because we sit not dreaming over thirty or forty Families twenty years, but travail from City, & from Country to Country to publish the Word of Truth free∣ly, as the Apostles & Ministers of Christ did; we must by such as this R. I. and his Brethren, who have gotten Holes and Nests in the Earth to creep into, be counted as Runnagates; & though John said, They are gone out from us because they were not of us, this he spoke of them who went out of the Light, in which he and the rest of the Disciples had Fellowship with God, and one with another; and they that went out from this, went into the Spirit of the World; and you are such as they that are gone out already, and blas∣phemously call the Light of Christ Ignis fatu; and so all that fear the Lord will come out from you, and out from Babylon, where the Blood of the Prophets hath been shed, and the Witnesses killed; you who deny an infallible Spirit, are like to be in blindness, and follow the Spirit of Error, for you have nought else to cleave unto. And further R I. saith, when the Lord said by Joel, that he would pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and his Daughters should prophesie; the Prophet speaks not of a ghostly Power to open the Kingdom of Heaven, given by Christ to his Apostles and Successors but of an extraordinary Measure of enlight∣ning Grace, and a more copious effusion of the Spirit, and also to Pastors to whom more is given, more is required; and this Text doth not prove that all Sheep shall be Pastors, and all Schollars Teachers. An. Nay, this Text doth not prove all Sheep to be Pastors, neither all that are taught to be Teachers; for all are not Prophets neither Pastors nor Teach∣ers; for as Christ said, the Labourers are but few, but this Man's afraid that there should be too many, & indeed there are too many hireling Loiterers▪ that are ready to supplant one another for filthy Lucre; & though many may be said to believe, yet all have not received the Spirit of prophecy, or a Gift to be Pastors, but only they to whom it is given of the Lord for the Work sake, yet notwithstanding, they who have received it ought not to be limited, ei∣ther Son or Daughter; for they who do quench the Spirit, and dpise Prophecy, as this R. I. doth, and how should he do otherwise, seeing he hath denyed the infallible Spirit, from which all the Ministers ministred, and all the Prophets prohesied, and spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; but R. I. saith, the Prophet spoke not of a Ghostly Power to open the King∣dom of Heaven; if by ghostly Power he means the Spirit's Power, as I be∣lieve he will not deny, then was it not by a spiritual Power Sons & Daugh∣ters prophesied; and did not this Power open the Kingdom of Heaven? and if it be a more copious Effusion of the Spirit which is given under the Gos∣pel then the Law then how is it that R. I. would straiten or lessen the effu∣sion thereof under the Gospel; for there were Daughters that prophesied under the Law, and many Sons that spoke by the Spirit of God; but now all must be confined to the Letter, and your Pastors now have far less
of the Spirit, if any at all, who speak from the Strength of natural Parts, and deny the unerring Spirit, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men. And R. I. is so grieved at this infallible Spirit, or this Spirit of Prophecy, that he cannot endure that a Daughter should prophesie, or speak by the Spirit of God in the Assembly of the Saints, and the main stress of his or their Argument is, 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep Silence in the Church; for it is not permitted for them to speak; and if any Woman speaks in the Church it contradicts the Spirit, and though they have a Gift, they ought not to improve it in a disorderly Way. Aosw. That which hath been said in this particular unto E. D. is suffici∣ent. to them whose Eyes God hath opened, but this R. I is one of the Evil Beasts that the Apostle speaks of, whose Mouth must be stopt. And so I further say, that the Apostle writ to the Church of Corinth, which were Believers, which few will deny, but that it consisted both of Men and Wo∣men, and he expresly saith, Ye may all prophesie one by one; and furthermore, if a Woman prophesie with her Head uncovered, dishonoureth her Head; so that it is manifest that there were Women did prophesie, and also laboured in the Gospel; but saith R. I. That was but in a private Way, or amongst some few; this had been lawful or orderly in R. I. his account; and if she might speak to two or three, or twice two or three it may be, as there is in many houses, is not this called a Church; and doth not Christ say, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in the midst of them: Moreover, was not that a Church which was in Aquilla and Priscilla's House? 1 Cor. 16.19. and was not Priscilla a Daughter that did prophesie? What, must Priscilla go out of her House in which was the Church if she had any thing to speak by the Spirit? was it lawful to speak without doors and not in the House? and if she might speak in her House, then she spoke in the Church, and R. I. would have said she contradicted the Spirit of God; and is not Christ one in the Male and in the Female? and is not male and female both one in Christ Jesus? is Christ's Power, & the Spirit's Authority any whit less effi∣cacious or powerful when he speaks in the female? or is it the Sex only that addeth or diminisheth from the authority of the Spirit, thou ignorant man who art void of the Knowledge of God? & was not Mary a Woman, and did not she preach Christ's Resurrection to the Disciples, and were not they the church? but this it is like will not satisfie R. I. his unreasonable mind; who doth not believe that a woman may prophesie or speak in the church; for this would contradict Paul's saying; not at all, I grant Paul's words to be true, this was spoke occasionally to one church, concerning them that were unlearn'd untaught of the Spirit, that usurped Authority over the man, and such as were disorderly, whose Spirit was not subject to the Prophet, and what must this be a binding Example, as to quench the Spirit, and limit the Lord from Generation to Generation, as to bind or limit them, who are in sub∣jection to their Husband, and who usurped not Authority? for it is one thing to have Authority, and another thing to usurp Authority; now they that are come to feel the Power of God, and thereby be moved to speak, the Power gives her Authority to speak, but she that is not in the Power, nei∣ther doth feel the Motion of the Spirit, such a one Usurps Authority, and is unlearned, and such and they only were prohibited by Paul, and no other;
for if it had been extended unto all, then the Women before mentioned had been Transgressors; and likewise further for the satisfaction of all, An∣na a Prophetess, the Daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of  com∣ing into the Temple gave thanks unto the Lord, and spake of Christ unto all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, and that was in a publick Place, and in a publick Congregation, Luke 2.36, 37, 38. And last of all, if E. D. and R. I. will not confess that the Meeting near Cond, in which the Women spake, was a Church, which F. H. justifies, then E. D. and R. I. have lost their Cause, and wrangled about nothing, and the thing pro∣ved against them both (viz.) That a Woman declaring, speaking or pro∣phesying by the Spirit of the Lord, and in the Authority of God, is a law∣ful, and a commendable, and a justifiable Act in the Sight of God, and all the Children of Light; and therefore cease your foolish clamour, and let no such ignorant stuff come in Print again, lest your Folly be more and more made manifest, and the Stone fall upon you which will grind you to Powder. The next thing which R. I. quarrels about, is a Lye, which Ed. Dod asserted, that some of the Quakers should say, they were equal with God, un∣to which F. H. replied and said, he that hath the Spirit of God is in that which is equal, and he that is joyned to the Lord is one Spirit; there is Uni∣ty, and that Unity stands in Equality, and these Expressions saith R. I. of∣fer Violence to God and his Glory. Answ. This R. I. is so in Love with the Spirit of Error, for he hath de∣nyed the infallible Spirit, and is in such Love with an unequal Spirit, that he cannot endure to hear that any should be joyned to the Lord in an e∣qual Spirit, and so quarrels with plain Scripture, and saith, it doth Violence to the Majesty of God; the Spirit of the Father and the Spirit of Truth is an equal Spirit, and they that are led by it, and are in it, are in that which is Equal, and so are joyned to the Lord, and are nearly related to him▪ but that I said or any other, that the Creature is Equal to the Creator, in Pow∣er, or in Glory, is false and a Lye, and let E. D. and R. I. know, that Lyars are for the Lake. R I. saith Chrst is glorified in  human Nature and human Nature and Flesh may be understood f the regenerate Part, and human Nature may be understood both of Soul and Body, and this may confute F. H. that doth contend against human Nature, and goes and tells another lye, as every pge is filled with some, and saith, F. H. saith Christ hath no real Body. Answ. This man speaks out of thick Darkness, and intrudes into those things he hath not seen, being vainly puft up in his fleshly mind; I said unto E. D. that Christ was the Seed of David, according  the Flesh, and according to the Spirit, the Son of God; And furthermore said, and now say, that Christ is glorified in a spiritual Body, an incorruptible Body; and so by incorruptible Bdy and spiritual Body, according to R. I. his dark understanding, must also be understood human Nature; and again, human Nature may be understood of the Soul. O dark and Sottish man! what art thou like to confute, who saith, The human Nature may be taken for the Soul, and also it may be taken for Flesh, and also it may be taken for the Re∣generate part; and thus like a blind man hast lost all aim, thou runnest-Rambling up and down in every by-Path; but how shouldst thou do other∣wise,
seeing thou hast denyed that Spirit that doth not Err? and all wouldst have all others to deny it, and saist, that none may lay claim to it, al∣though God hath Promised it, to give the Spirit of Truth to lead his Peo∣ple into all Truth; and if into all Truth, then out of all Error, but this Doctrine of Christ comes too near Perfection for R. I. to own, which is a Doctrine so offensive to him, that he cannot endure to hear of it, or that ought should be Perfect, and therefore he hath condemned the Law of the Spirit of Life, and saith, it is Imperfect, as may be seen in the 55th page of his Book, and if Flesh, and the Regenerate part of man, and the Soul, may all be understood by human Nature, then they are all one, and then the Soul is Human and earthly, but the Soul is spiritual and immortal, and Flesh and Blood inherits not the Kingdom of God, and the Regenerate part is that which is begotten and brought forth by the Immortal word of Life, and that which born of the Spirit is Spirit, and so the ignorance of this man is made manifest; and so R. I. may take his lye home unto himself, as that F. H. deny real Body of Christ, for F. H. hath said, and now saith again, and that according to Knowledge, that Christ hath an incorruptible Body, and a Glorious Body, and a spiritual Body, and in this Body is Christ glo∣rified with the Father, and human Nature is no where taken for a spiritual and incorruptible Bdy, in the Scripture's account, as this R. I. and his blind Tribe do imagine, and yet the Flesh of Christ is owned, and the Word that was made Flesh the Saints know and do feed on, by which they are nourished up into everlasting Life; and so I say unto thee, as I did to E. D. when thou writes again, speak plainly, if by Human Nature, thou intendst a carnal Body, or the same Flesh thou art on, and thou wouldst divide the Flesh of Christ from the Spirit, wouldst divide Christ, and Christ is not divided; and thus he goes Quarreling on, and heaps Lye upon Lye, and saith, that F. H. saith, Christ hath no real Body, but hs Mystical Body, which Thing is thy own and never affirmed by me, either in Word or Writing, and so repent of thy Lyes, and for shame call in thy Book, lest the Judg∣ments and Plagues of God be multiplyed upon thee. And further saith, R. I. How do the Quakers condemn themselves, when they so proudly boast themselves, as the Pharisees did, to be clear from Sin, who need not Christ's Righteousness for their Justification; how then can they say, that Christ's righteousness is their Justification, when they are so Righteous in their own Eyes? for Christ hath not Promised to Justfie any, but those that confess their Sins. Answ. We have confest our Sins, and also departed from them, and not like you feigned Hypocrites, who are confessing from Year to Year with your feigned Lips, and your Hearts never turned to the Lord from Iniqui∣ty, and takest the Name of Christ's righteousness to be a Cloak to cover your Iniquity withal; and we do not say, that we have no need of Christ's righteousness for our Justification, for if we should say so, we should be Lyars like thy self, for we have need of Christ's righteousness, for he is our Life, who is called, The Lord our Righteousness, he is our Justifier, and who art thou that condemns any? but the false accuser of the Brethren, for Christ's righteousness is our covering, and we are not righteous in our own Eyes, but in the Eyes of him who hath made us so; and we never said, that we have not Sinned; and so we have not made God a Lyar, as
this vile Slanderer would make men believe through his false Aspersions; for we say, we were once Darkness, but now are we Light in the Lord, and he who is our Light and Life, is our Justification and Righteous∣ness, and his Blood cleanseth from all sin, and the Power of God keep∣eth us, That the Evil one toucheth us not, and yet all Boasting excluded. And the further R. I goes on the lower he sinks towards the bottomless Pit, and there we shall find him at last before we have done with his Book, and speaks out of thick Darkness, like a Man that never saw the Sun, who hath altogether taken up his dwelling Place in Death's Region, and as though that were the Land of his Nativity, as thou shalt see Reader by what ensues. R. I. saith, Though it be said, he that commits Sin is of the Devil; not that the Devil can claim him for his own, or that he is in his Possession, but he is Captivated of the Devil, and over-Powered. And for his proof he brings, Peter was cryed up to be a Saint, and at that same time when he was Cryed up to be a Saint, Christ called Peter a Devil, and that must be understood a Saint hath Sinned. Answ. He that is Captivated by the Devil, hath gone from the Power of God, and he that commits Sin doth the Devil's Work, and he may claim him for his Work-man; and he that is over-powered is brought into Cap∣tivity, and he that carryes into Captivity hath the Captive in his Posses∣sion, as it is written, his Servants you are to whom you obey, and he that com∣mits Sin is the Servant of Sin. And these black confused Distinctions R. I. maketh to make People believe that they are Saints of God, when they are the Devil's Captives, and that they are in the Possession of Christ, who yet do the Works of the Devil who is an Enemy to Christ, & thou know'st no more for Saint then thou know'st of a Devil, who saith, that Peter at the same time that Christ called him a Saint, called him a Devil; for thou must know, that Matthew recorded many things, it may be in one Chapter, which were acted and done, and spoken in many Dayes and Weeks, for when Peter confessed Christ to be the Son of God, he was in the Faith, and Christ said, Flesh and Blood had not revealed that to him, but at this time had spoken little of his Sufferings; and it is written, Mat. 16.21. from that time forward began Jesus to shew unto his Disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many Things, and be Kill'd, and rise again the third Day; So that it is manifest, that here was distance of time and space betwixt Peter Confession of Christ, and of his rebuking of him; however the Unbelief was gotten up in Peter, and he that had need to be taught, came to be a Rebuker of him who was a Teacher, this was another State then the for∣mer; but of these things R. I. is ignorant, and let the Serpent feed upon Dust, for I desire to give him no other food. And further, R. I. saith, Though Saints Sin not Devil-like unto Death, yet if any man say, he hath not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, he, saith John, is a Lyar, and the Truth is not in him, for when all is done the best men are Men still, and the best Earth is Earth ever, and will bear Nettles and Brambles; and if these things were well considered by F. H. he would not accuse me and E. D. for pleading for Sin or Satan, for we plead against those who say, they have no Sin. Answ. This R. I. is so in love with Sin, that by his Arguments which
he makes, one would judge that he accounts it as necessary as his  food, and these are strange kind of Saints that R. I. would make, at the best they are still but sinners, and unsanctified; but they that are called to be Saints, who are begotten by God the Father, and preserved in Christ Je∣sus, they are sanctified and made clean through the washing of Regenera∣tion, and through the Sanctification of God's holy Spirit, which dwelleth in them, by which they have Power to mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh, and to overcome, and to be made Partakers of the Promises; but here lies the difference in R. I. his Account, betwixt his Saints and his Sinners, The Sinners sin Devil-like, yet the Saints sin not Devil-like; I say, they that sin are in one Nature, notwithstanding R. I. his blind Distinctions; for they that sin are liker the Devil then God, and liker his Image then God's I∣mage; for God's Image consisteth in Righteousness and true Holiness; and the Devil's Image consisteth in Unrighteousness, Sin and Unholiness; and now Reader thou mayest judge whose Image R. I. his Saints bear, and if thou be one that canst plead against them who are born of God and sin not, and who are cleansed from all sin by the Blood of Christ, then R. I. will ranck thee with E. D. and himself in his Bead-row of Saints, as he calls it. And if any man say, he hath not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's trans∣gression, he is, saith John, a Lyar; Nay, it is R. I. that saith it and not John, and so R. I. is the Lyar; for the Scripture saith on this wise, Rom. 5.14. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had [not] sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression; so that it is manifest, that there were many that Death reigned over, and yet they sinned not after the simi∣litude of Adam's Transgression; but this R. I. will accuse every man, with whom he hath a mind to quarrel, and will not only tel Lyes himself, but publish false Doctrine, but he will bring the Saints for his Author, and John saith not, if any man say he hath no Sin: And thou that saeyst, when all is done, the best men and the best Earth, will bear Nettles, and Brambles, and Pricks; as I said to E. D. so I may to thee, thou hast given thy Verdict for the Devil, and not for God and his Saints, for They that are born of God sin not; and they that are cleansed by the Blood of Christ from all Sin▪ and are clear in his Sight, and are kept by his immortal Word, which dwells in them, that the Evil one touch them not, but have overcome the Wicked one; and the best Earth is that wherein righteousness dwells, which R. I. is altogether a Stranger to, and that brings forth no Bryars, nor Brambles, Nettles, nor Pricks, for that Grund is curst▪ so this man by his devilish Doctrine, hath made the coming of Christ of none effect, and the Blood of Christ of none effect, and so hath denied the Work of Re∣demption to the best of Men, and Deliverance to the Creature who hath travailed in pain: This Dreamer is far contrary to the Prophet Dan, who saw by the Spirit of prophecy (which this R. I so deadly hates, both in men and Women, that if it be not allowed of by such as he, i mst  speak, nor they by it) this Prophet I say, testified of the coming of the just one, and of his Work, that he should make an End of in▪  Tangression, and bring in everlasting righteousness; but saith R. I. Th best Men are Men still, and the best Earth Earth ever, and the best Saints Sinners▪ though they si not Devil-like, and Nettles, and Brambles, and Pricks they  all bring forth▪ Now if this Doctrine be true, how is the Soul
of Death? and where is the restauration of the Creature from under the Bondage of Corruption? and where is the redemption of the Seed, which is Heir of the Promise? Nettles, Brambles and Bryars cumber the ground, and choak the Seed, and these things F. H. hath well considered, and I see more and more that thou art a Pleader for Sin and Satn, and imperfection, for a Spirit of Error, for Images, Pictures and Crosses, for Cuffs, Ribbons and Lace, for Nettles, Brambles and Bryrs, and art a Man that doth lay claim to the utmost Borders of the Devils Kingdom; and a greater Ser∣vant of his Master I have not met with long, whose Reward will be accor∣ding to his Works. And the Lye being the cheif cognisance of his Master, in which he greatly glories in, he goes on and saith, Another Error of the Quakers is, they do not believe the Scriptures to be true, because they deny them to be the Word of God; for if they believe what the Scriptures say of themselves; and they say of themselves, that they are the Word of God, and for his proof he cites, Mark 7.13. Rom. 10.8. 2. Cr. 2.17. 1 Pet. 1.25. Answ. The Scripture we own to be true, and whatsoever the Scriptures say of themselves▪ that we own them to be (to wit) a Declaration, Scrip∣tures of Truth, holy Scriptures, the Words of God, of Christ and of his Apostles, a Treatise; and for his proofs I could whlly refer them to the reader to examine them himself, and to discover the ignorance of this R. I. who tenders these Scriptures aforementioned for sufficient proof, as that the Scriptures call themselves the Word of God: as for Mark 7.13. making the Word of God of none effect by your Tradition, he doth not say of ma∣king the Word of God, the Scriptures of none effect, neither doth he sy▪ you make the Scriptures which is the word of none effect by your Traditions; and as for Rom. 10.8. The Word is nigh thee in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, and this is the Word of Faith which we preach; here the Apostle saith, the word is nigh thee in thy Heart, but he doth not say, the Scriptures is nigh thee in thy Heart, which is the Word of God: And 2 Cor. 2.17. For we are not as many which corrupt the Word of God, he doth not say, we are not as many that corrupt the Scriptures which are the Word of God or the Word of God which is the Scriptures: And as for 1 Pet. 1.25. But the Word of the Lrd endures forever, and this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto yu; he doth not say, the Scriptures endures forever, or this is the Word, the Scriptures, which by the Gospel is preached unto you: And as for 1 Thes. 4.15. For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we whch ar , and remain unto the coming of the Lord shll not prevent them which are asleep; he did not say, this we say unto you by the Scriptures, for there was not such a Scripture written before▪ and therefore we sy this unto you by the Word of the Lord: And what a foolish Mn is this, to assert his own Imagi∣nations, and then imagines the Scriptures will prove it? and what n improper speech were this, to call twenty housd Sentences one word; and it is called a Declaration? and what a Declation would that be tht consisteth but of one word; but enough of this hath been published before concerning the particular by divers hands, so I shall be brief▪ however R. I doubts his proof already that it will not satisfie F. H. and therefore he thought good to make this Conclusion upon him▪ That he doth not believe the Scripture at all; and though F. H▪ say, that these Sciptures are nothing at all to prove that thing; to deny his Imaginations is not to deny the
Scripture; but F. H. believes what the Scriptures say of themselves, and doth not deny the Scriptures at all, but R. I. his Lye and also his false Con∣clusion. And further saith R. I. The Scripture was delivered to the Church in wri∣ting, that it might be an infallible Standard of true Dctrine, and a determiner of Controversies, and the Saints rule of knowing God, and living to him. Answer. Reader, take notice, here is no room for the Spirit at all, the Scriptures and writings have taken up the room of it in R. I. his account, for it hath lost its Office, if his Doctrine be true, the Letter is become the infallible Judge and standard to try Doctrine, and a Determiner of all controversies, and of the Saints Rule of knowing God, and living to him, and indeed is become all in this man's Account, then what doth R. I. bring Esop's Fables, Ovi's fictions, Plato's and Diogenes Stories, in this Contro∣versie to joyne with this infallible rule; and because he hath the Scrip∣tures so high to be a tryer of Doctrines without the Spirit, doubtless is the Cause here is no mention made of it; and so he shall be Judged by his Rule; in the 42th page take his Exposition upon the Words of Joel, I will pour out of my Spirit upon Sons and Daughters, and they shall Prophesie; This is not meant of a ghostly Power, but of an extraordinary measure of enlighting Grace. Igno∣rant man! is not Ghostly Power or spiritual Power, an Extraordinary measure of enlightning Grace? and was it not a spiritual Power, and an extraordinary Light the Prophets Prophesied by? But it is this Mans mean∣ing that must be the Standard when all comes to all, and the Determiner of Cases; and he speaks contrary unto his own Rule, as may be seen through his whole Book, who hath either added to the Scriptures, or per∣verted them, or otherwise given his false Interpretations, or Villified them in calling them the True Cards; and so though he extolled them in Words, he denyes them in Practice; The Jews tryed Christ's Doctrine by the Scriptures, and udged him a Blasphemer, and a breaker of the Law, and the Apostles Seditious; and so though a man have the Scripture, and have not the Spirit, it is all as a sealed Book, wherein such Unlearned men as this R. I is cannot read; and therefore he saith, in his 55th page, That it is a great fault in us, because we say, the Law of the Spirit of Life is the Rule, and so like him, will not say, it is imperfect, as he doth, and so saith R. I. it is not fit to be a rule, & so Blasphemously he detracts from the Autho∣rity and Power of the Spirit, and like Anti-christ and his Ministers sets the Letter above it, and calls it, Living and an infallible standard, and saith, Th Scripture inclines the Heart unto obedience; and like a Drunken man this R I. reels up and down, and contradicts himself: Before he said, The Law of the Spirit chiefly gave Power to conform to the Rule, and wihin four Lis Contradicts himself, and saith, The Scriptures incline our Hearts to the Oe∣dience of the Rule, and the Scripures it self hath caused us to know it, as we have it from the Church, it is a probable aid, and yet giveth but a confused Belief with a light Impression. Answ. It is probable enough indeed that thy Faith is confused, and the Faith of your Church, and that makes thee utter forth all this confused Heap, but in what hath been said, the Spirit of this man and his Doctrines will be manifest to all, whose Eyes God hath open∣ed; and so will depart out of his Paths, and not give heed to his fabulous Stories.
It is true saith R. I. There i an inward Law written in our Hearts, called the Law of the Spirit of Life, Rom. 8.2. And there is the outward Law written in the Scriptures; now the outward and external Law is properly the rule of a chri∣stian Life, and not the inward and internal Law; for the outward is perfect, in that it declares in what is the Will of God, and in what it is not, but the inward Law received and written on the Heart is imperfect; and therefore unfit to be our rule, the Law within is that thing that is to be ruled, Psal. 17.4. The outward Law is therefore the rule. Answ. This Man would set the sun by his Dial, as it might be said, al∣though he confess in the very same page, that the Law of the spirit of Life giveth Power to the Creature, yet now it is become imperfect, and not fit to be a rule; this man like one unlearned, sets the Law which was written in Tables of stone, which the Apostle calls the Ministration of Condemnation and was glorious, this he sets above the Ministration of the spi∣rit of Life, which the Apostle saith, is much more glorious; but nay saith R. I. the Law written in the Heart is iperfect, and not fit to be a rule, but to be ruled; contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine; and so this R. I. is tryed by his own infallible standard, to be a Deceiver, who teaches contrary to that which he calls his Law and Testimony; and the Law which is outward, is the Law of the first Covenant, which made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. 7.19. Therefore the Lord sd by the Mouth of the Prophet, Behold the Dayes come that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, not according to the Covenant I made with them when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, when I was as a Husband and unto them, which Covenant they brake, but I will write my Law in their Heart, and put my spirit in their inward Parts, I will be to them a God, and they shall be unto me a People, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.9, 10. Now this blind man, who gropes as at noon-day, saith, This is imperfect which is written in the heart; and so faulty with him, and therefore to be ruled o∣ver; and the other which is outward is perfect, and faultless, and so ought to be a rule; but saith the Apostle contrary to R. I. If the first covenant had been faultless, there had been no place for the second, which second the Apostle saith, is a better Covenant, and stands upon better Promises; but yet saith R I. this is not the rule, nor fit to be a rule: And furthermore the Apostle said, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, and this was their Rule; and the Law of the Spirit of Life made the Apostle free from the Law of Sin and Death, and the new Creatures Rule, by which they were led into all Truth, and as many as did walk in it, out of all Sin: But nay, saith R. I. It is not fit to be a Rule, for this is imperfect, and is that thing to be ruled, and for his Proof brings Psal. 17.4. By the Word of thy Lips I have kept me frm the Path of the Destroyer; and how doth this prove that the Law in the Heart is to be ruled, thou ignorant man, who utterest forth nothing but Deceit and Error? and so the Scriptures declare against thee; for they say, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightning the Eyes, Psal. 19.7, 8. For the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, Prov. 6.23. and the Com∣mands of the new Covenant are spiritual and not carnal, and they are per∣fect and fit to be a Rule & Guide to all them that believe in a perfect Way, and not as this R. I. saith, unfit to be a rule because of their imperfection, and
would in his blind Distinctions, cast a mist before Peoples Eyes: And all may judge not only of this R. I. his Mistake, but of his wilful Impudence, in preferring that which is visible and outward, and may be seen, which was given forth in time (viz.) the Commands outward, and the Letter outward, above the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is invisible, spiritual and eternal: And as I said to S. S. so I may say to thee, Lean Souls are they like to be, who receive such damnable Doctrine as this for Atticles of Faith; but however Reader thou mayest take notice of R. I. in his Epistle to the Rea∣der, he saith, the Quakers Money is counterfeit Coin, which he hath nailed on the market-post, and instead thereof hath tendred other Money; and that thou mayest see what kind of other Money the Priests is, and what Image it bears, by the Principles here discovered, which is altogether Tin and Dross, and reprobate Silver, which will be received by none but them whom the God of this World hath blinded the Eyes of, that they should not see the things that belong unto their Peace. And Edward Dod being sensible that he and all his Stuff, or he and all his Arguments were carried captive, and became a Booty and a Prey, he is glad that any will step in and rescue him, and flattereth R. I. and saith, I am engaged to you, to imbrace you as a precious Friend, that of so weak Princi∣ples as mine, have raised so perfect a Structure, so absolute, rational and demon∣strative, that more need not to be done. Answ. R. I. his Vindication hath not redeemed E. D. his Principles at all, but rather hath laboured in vain, and spent his Strength for naught, and hath brought forth such a Birth as sober men will blush at, made up of Ignorance, Blasphemy, Derision and Lyes, which they that have the least Moderation will abhor and detest; and the Principles of E. D. and R. I. are not only weak and feeble, but wicked and impious, as is ma∣nifest in what hath been declared; and the Structure that R. I. hath made, is but builded with untempered Mortar, Lyes, Falshood, Error, false Doctrine, which the stormy Wind of the Lord will rent, and scatter, and confound; and exalt his Truth above it all; But Edward Dod saith, What can be said to reduce such a People? I know not, since so many convincing Ar∣guments cannot prevail; alas poor! Men whether would you reduce us, or bring us back, to the slime Pits of Sodom where Edward Dod fell with his Stuff, or turn us back again to Images, Pictures and Crosses, to Mass-houses, Hirelings and Tythes, to Lace, Ribbons and Cuffs, which both E. D. and R. I. have strongly pleaded for, as faithful Servants to their Master, who would not have him loose a Foot of his Territories; howe∣ver Edward Dod hath resolved to continue one in Life and death with R. I. who hath shaken Hands with the Prince of darkness, and made a Cove∣nant with death, which must be broken; and though S. S. E. D. and R. I. joyn Hand in Hand, yet the wicked shall not go unpunished; fore-very one shall receive a Reward according to their Works. And so I have done with R. I. his Book called Ignis fatuus, whose Ar∣guments▪ false doctrines, errors and lyes are disolved into nothing; his  made void, his Ignorance made manifest, his false do∣ctrine brought to Light, and reproved by the Word of Truth; only I shall
return him a few of his Lyes back again, for him  the second time, and repent of them, and remember the Sentence for all Lyars is, The Lake that burneth, Rev. 22.15. First, That their Worship differs not in whole nor in Part, in Matter nor in Manner from the Churches in the Primitive Times. Secondly, According to the Scriptures their whole Worship is framed. Thirdly, That Jezabel was never more madder against the Prophets, then these Quakers are against Christ's Ministers. Fourthly, The Quakers contemn Magistracy, and infect the Common-wealth with Faction. Fifthly, That the Quakers burnt some Houses at Oxford. Sixthly, That Timothy and Titus were setled in a Parochial Way in their Quarters. Seventhly, That F. H. complains of the Darkness of the Sun, when the Fault is in his own Eyes. Eighthly, The Quakers deny Honour to Superiours, and to whom it is due, and so blaspheme the Name of God and his Doctrine. Ninethly, F. H. would never have cryed out of Deceit, but a Purpose to de∣ceive the more. Tenthly, That the Quakers bid open Defiance to the Worship of God. Eleventhly, That J. N. did say, that he was as just, and holy, and good as God. Twelfthly, That F. H. said, That Christ Jesus was not glorified in Heaven with a real Body. Thirteenthly, Human Nature is taken for the regenerate Part of Man, and the Soul. Fourteenthly, That the best Men (though regenerate) bear Nettles, Bram∣bles and Pricks. Fifteenthly, There is an inward Law, called the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is imperfect, and not fit to bear rule, but to be ruled. Sixteenthly, And the Scriptures lead us to the Spirit, and encline our Hearts to the Obedience of the rule. Seventeenthly, And F. H. prefereth Ignis fatuus before the clear Light of God's Word. Eighteenthly and lastly, when he hath spoken all these Lyes, and pub∣lished them in Print to the World, he blasphemously saith in his Epistle to the Reader, Have not so much regard to the Authority of the Writer, as the Truth of the Matter written by him, who was moved of the Lord thus to declare. So all these Lyes with many more, and all these damnable Doctrines which he hath uttered forth against the Truth; these things he would fa∣sten upon the Lord's Motion, and so make him the Author of Iniquity▪ and a Cloak for his ungodly Speeches against them who love the Truth as it is in Jesus, who have suffered many Reproaches for its sake, and have been kil∣led
all the Day long by this Generation, amongst which R. I. is, who hath bent his Tongue to Mischief, and his Lips to utter forth Deceit; and as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, so hath this R. I. resisted the Truth, be∣ing a Man of a corrupt Mind, and concerning the Faith reprobate; but he shall not proceed much further, for in what he hath written his Folly will be manifest unto all men, and them that fear the Lord will depart out of his Foot-steps, which lead to the Chambers of Death, and from those dark Paths in which R.I. treadeth, which lead into utter Destruction. Westmoreland, the 15th of the 4th Moneth, 1660. F. H.
To all Friends and Brethren who have been called of the Lord into that Place of New-England, to bear your Testimony for the Lord, to the answering of his Witness in every ones Conscience. FOrasmuch as the Lord through his infinite Love and Goodness▪ which he hath manifested amongst the Sons of Men, hath called you and fitted you for his Work and Service which he hath to do, you being made Partakers through the Love of God unto you, of the like precious Faith with many Brethren, which giveth Victory over the World, and supporteth all them that keep it in the Day of Tryal: My Heart's Desire is, that you may all fulfil the Will of God, and answer his End in sending you thither, that so you may receive your Reward; my Heart is drawn out unto you in true Love, being sensible of the many Oppositions that you have met with, and may meet with, by Reason of the Strength and Pow∣er of Darkness in those Parts, where Satan's Throne is exalted; keep all near the Lord, and feel his Power in your selves, which giveth Dominion and Victory over all the World, and over all fading Things, which pass away; and so you will feel his Strength daily renewed in you, to carry you above all Opposition, and his Pre∣sence to go before you, and his Righteousness to be your Reward; so will you be pre∣served in the Peace of God, and feel his Life present, to refresh you in the Time of Need; and as your Tryals, and Travails, and Sufferings for Christ do abound, so your Strength, and Joy, and Peace, and Consolation will also much more abound from his Life manifest and revealed in your Hearts; keep in the Power of the Lord, over all Deceit, and know your own Image in every one, to whom you joyn; and let no Deceit come near you, which may get the Words, and not be subject to the Power; for those will betray you, and rise up in Rebellion against you, and glo∣ry over you; for that only which can receive you through the Cross, will stand by you, and the other, who may receive the Truth in Words into the earthly Part, will stumble at the Cross, and so get a Knowledge above the Cross, these will blow away as Chaff: Keep in your Innocency, and every one in your own, and there you will come to be setled and established as Trees, whose Roots are spread in the Earth, which cannot easily be plucked up, nor a Tempest blow down; you know where the Entrance was unto your selves into the Sheepfold, into the true Rest, thither bring all, and keep all down to that, to the Measure of God's Spirit, through which eternal Life is revealed, and the Things of God's Kingdom made manifest; and they that would climb up any other Way, must come down again, and them that walk in any other Way, must come back again, and they that would strive to en∣ter in any other Thing, are shut out forever; for you know there is no Communion or Concord with the Spirit of God, which is pure, and that which resisteth it, and gainsayeth it, that Wisdom must perish, it's from below, that Knowledge must fade a∣way, and come to nothing: So never heed the Subtilty and cunning Craftiness of the Enemy, which would twist and twine every Way to gainsay the Truth, and make a Noise in an airy Sound, which may satisfie corrupt Minds, who vilfie the
Truth, and set the Corner-Stone at nought; look not at them, nor never heed, that you know in whom you have believed, and no other Foundation can be laid, then that which is laid already for all to build upon, throuh which they that do believe are made a glorious and an holy Habitation for God, through the Spirit; and any that declare another Way, another Door, another Life, then he that is the Light of Men, is accursed: So feel hs Eternal Power, the Power of his Resur∣rection in your selves, to subdue and bring under all  Enemies, which would hinder your Enjoyment of his Life; but he is a tryed Stone, and they that have tryed him, have found him elect and precious, and his Faithfulness, Power and Might, Love, Life and Glory endures forever and ever, throughout all the Ge∣nerations of the Just, who are Eye-Witnesses of his Coming, Power and Glory, which God out of his Everlasting Love and Kindness hath revealed unto Thou∣sands, and his Coming is known in Ten Thousands of his Saints, and also with them, and they with him, to judge in Righteousness, and to make War with the Sword that proceeds out of his Mouth, which slayes the wicked, and brings Death and Destruction upon Death, that so Life, Immortality and Eternity may be brought to Lighc in the Hearts of the Sons of Men, that they may see his saving Health, and feel him, and have Union with him, who is the Author of Eternal Salvation in all that believe, which Salvation God hath shed abroad richly in the Hearts of his People, and his plenteous Redemption, which many are made Partakers of, and therein their Souls are satisfied, and their Flesh rests in Hope, and their Hearts are filled with Joy and Gladness; and he which hath revealed this will perfect his own Work (which he hath begun) in them that believe, and keep the Faith unto the End, shall see the Top-Stone brought forth with Shouting and Victory with Joy. Therefore Dear Friends and Brethren, look not out, neither faint when you are tempted and tryed, but eye the Lord, who is near to deliver, and to administer Strength in Weakness, of which I do not doubt but you have felt, whose Arm is made bare, to save and to defend all the upright in Heart in the Hour of Tryal, and in the Time of Temptation, and your Work shall not be in Vain, for that whch is mi∣nistred from the Life shall not pass away unfulfilled, but every one shall answer, and bear Witness unto it in the Day of the Lord: So in the Long-suffering and in the Patience and Meekness all dwell, and in Love with one another, and bear with one another, and strengthen one another, and be subject one to another in the Truth, knowing your Works are one, and the Message one, which you have all to bear Witness of; impose not upon one another, but leave every one free, to the free Spirit of the Lord in himself, to be directed and guided in his Service; and judge all that down which would beget into Strife, for that Spirit will not gather unto God, but scatter; there hath been Hurt done already in that Place in striving and Contention, which hath done Hurt; for they that should be Builders, should not bite one another, and devour one another, and so come to destroy them selves and others; for that which would be greatest must be least, and he which is least and Servant of all shall be exalted; for with the humble God dwells▪ and the lowly he leads in the Way of Peace; for we are not sent to preach our selves, nei∣ther to set up our selves, but the Lord's Christ, who humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, and gave his Life a Ransom for many, and he is our Example, and he alone is to be exalted, and to have the Preeminence, and they that exalt him, he will exalt, and they that honour him, he will honour, and self is excluded, and glorying and boasting excluded by all the Children of Wisdom, and that alone to be gloryed in which crucifies to the World, and leads to Unity with God, and Fel∣lowship
with Christ in the Eternal Rest. The Arm of the Lord be wth you all, and keep you in hs Wisdom, that you may finish your Testimony in Faithfulness▪ and be clear of the Blood of all Men, and so lay down your Heads in Peace, when the Work is finished which the Lord hath appointed unto you, that you may come to in∣herit the Crown of Glory, which fadeth not away, and be Partakers of God's eter∣nal Excellency, which doth excel eternally all the Glory of the World and the Re∣nown thereof, which fadeth away. We have received divers Letters from divers of you, and also we have heard how two dear Brethren have given up their Lives as a Sacrifice unto the Lord, whose Life and Death was precious in his Sight, in which I heartily rejoyce, that they suffered so valiantly and boldly for his Names sake, who laid down his Life for them, and by it they are redeemed up unto God, to live with him in that Life and Love which is everlastingly pure and satisfactory, of which I am most certainly perswaded they had an Enjoyment of and Assurance, and thereby had Joy and Peace and strong Consolation in him who hath reconciled all Things unto himself in one, who is the Head of the Body which he hath redeemed, which is his Church, by the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, by which every Member thereof is com∣pleated, and presented Perfe in Jesus Christ, our Light and Life, our Crown and Rejoycing, to whom be Glory forever and ever, Amen. And be tender and watchful over them that are convinced, and let all your Lives preach before them, and be their Example in all Things, and keep them all down to their own, that they may feel the Power of the Life immortal, which you have born Witness of; and exhort all to Stedfastness, and not to look out at the Rage of the Enemy, for that hath appeared which must conquer, which cannot be subject to the Wills of corrupt Men,: Christopher Hlder is arived here, who decla∣red unto us the Affairs of the Gospel in those Parts, and all the Letters which came over unto our Hands will be sent carefully as they were directed: So the ever∣lasting God of Life & Power be with you all, is the Prayer of him whom God heareth, Who is your dear Brother in the Suffering and Long-Suffering of God, and in the Fellowship of the Gspel of Peace. F. H.
THE DECEIVER OF THE NATIONS DISCOVERED, AND HIS CRUELTY Made manifest. How he hath deceived the Nations, and wrought his Works of Darkness more hiddenly under the Mask of Higher Power & Ho∣ly, Church, and so persecutes the Righteous Seed, and makes them suffer under the Name of Evil-doers in these latter Dayes. More especially his Cruel Works of Darkness laid open & reprov'd in Mariland in Virginia, and the Sad Sufferings of the Servants of the Lord there by his Cruel Instruments. Sent back unto them again, that they may view their Work again, and repent, and be ashamed, lest the Wrath of God sink them into the Pit, as it hath done many before them, who have opposed the Lord. GReat and many have the Tryals and Sufferings been of the Faithful Witnesses of God in all Generations by the Seed of Evil-doers, who would not that Righteousness should reign, and Truth have the Dominion, because then the Glory of their Kingdom, that standeth in Fals∣hood and Deceit, would be stained and blasted, and not be had in Honour and Admiration: Therefore the Devil, who was a Lyar and a Murderer, and an Oppressor from the Beginning, hath labour'd by all his Power to deceive Mankind, that he might exalt his Throne and Kingdom (which consisteth wholely of Iniquity) in the Hearts of the Sons of Men, that so he might be honoured and worshipped, and his Unrighteous Decrees fulfilled, and
himself admired above the true God, which made both Heaven and Earth, and all things that are therein, who alone ought to be worshipped and ho∣noured above all, who is blessed forever, whose Kingdom stands in Righteousness, Equity, Truth and Peace forever: Therefore Satan be∣ing cursed and banished from the Presence of the Lord forever, being full of Enmity, Wrath and Rage, Murder, Madness and Fury, in which he lives, envying the Happiness and Felicity of them who worship the true God, hath laboured to deceive, and lead the Hearts of the Sons of mn aside from the holy Commandment of God, to believe a Lye, and to trust in lying Vanities, and to lead them into his Kingdom of Darkness, and in∣to his own devilish and hellish Nature, and hath prevailed over many, and overcame them, and hath made them subject to his Power, to fulfil his Will, and to do his Work; and multitudes have been led into the broad Way, in the Paths of Darkness, and into the Region of the Shadow of Death, and Death covers them as a Garment, and the Shadow of Death as a Pavilion; and the Works they work are the Works of Darkness; and although they live as Creatures upon the Earth, yet they are dead whilest thy live unto any Good, being wholely swallowed up of Death, and that acts in them, and he who hath the Power of Death, who is called the De∣vil, the Evil-doer, contrary in all his Actings unto God and all Goodness; and he having wrought in the Hearts of disobedient Children his Works, and begotten them to his Nature, and filled them with Unrigh∣teousness, which is the Food of Evil-doers, they bring forth his Work, and work his Work in the Earth, and labour to destroy the Creation, and to subvert it from that End for which it was made, and also to deface the Image of God, and to destroy it wherever it appears, and the Creature in whom it is and bears rule; and thus since the Transgression, when he hath prevailed, he hath filled the Earth with Darkness and with Violence, and hath set up the Seat thereof, and strives that it might be exalted forever; and in former Ages he hath wrought in his Instruments Ministers and Sub∣jects, and then they did his Work, and brought it forth, and opposed the Servants of the Lord, and did Violence unto them that fulfilled his Will, and testified against the World that their Deeds were evil, Evil-doers who hate reproof have sought to destroy them that testified against their evil Deeds; as Cain that wicked One begotten in the Transgression, yet a Wor∣shipper and an Offerer of Sacrifice, rose up, and slew his Brother; and many have gone in his Way, and then the Devil's Kingdom began to in∣crease and grow great, and then they that were Subjects of it made the Just to suffer, as all along till now is manifest by the Scripture of Truth, and yet them who made them to suffer would never acknowledge that it was for well-doing, but for evil-doing; and thus the Devil hath covered him∣self, as not to be known by the Name of evil-doer; and thus hath he blind∣ed his Subjects, in making them believe they were doing good, when they acted all manner of Unrighteousness; and they that suffered for the Truth's sake were accounted as Evil-doers by this blind Generation; and so all the Holy Men and faithful Witnesses of God in former Generations, all the Prophets and holy Martyrs, who loved not their Lives unto the Death (by the Seed of evil-doers) were counted evil-doers, and killed as such in their Account; and such is the mysterious working of Satan, the next Genera∣tion
will take up the Words of them that have been killed before, and suffer his Messengers to take their Words, and admire them that are gone before, while they are doing the same Work, and killing and destroying the righteous Seed, as before; as the Pharisees garnished the Sepulchres of the Prophets, and crucified the Son of God as a Blasphemer, unto whom all the Prophets bore witness, and yet adored and cryed up the Law and the Prophets in Words, and hated their Life; and so the Apostles & Ministers of Christ, after Christ's Ascension, were accounted Blasphemers, seditious, tumultuous, pestilent and factious, and were stoned, and censured as Evil-doers by Councils and Rulers and Heads of the People; and many suffer∣ed as Evil-doers in the Account of them who made them suffer, and as Transgressors of Laws, and Customs, and Statutes, were accounted al∣wayes such by the Seed of Evil-doers. And so the Devil having got the Name of higher Power and of chief Ruler, hath made many wicked and ungodly changeable Laws, and them that could not be subject unto them for Conscience sake, although they do Violence to none, they must be judged and condemned as seditious and Traitors and mutenous. And since Mystery-Babylon the Mother of Harlots hath been exalted as a Queen, riding upon the Beast in Majesty, and hath gotten a golden Cup in her Hand, and the Name of a Church, and her Children have got on the outside, the Sheeps Clothing, and hate the Life; she hath drank the Blood of the Saints, and so did never the Lamb's Wife, nor never will: So under the Name of higher Power and holy Church, all the Blood of the righte∣ous hath been spilt, and the dear Servants of God have suffered in this time of Anti-christ's Reign, as Traytors, and seditious, and tumultuous, and Peace-brakers, in the Account of the Dragon and Beast, who sits in the Seat of Violence, and in the Throne of Iniquity, and crowned Pride and Cruelty, which hath got the Name of higher Power, without being in it, and so live in Deceit and a Lye. And the false Worshippers and abominable Sacrificers, whose Hands are full of Blood, and Hearts full of Rottenness, who have taken up the out∣ward Dress and Attire of the free-woman, and painted themselves withal, that they might deceive the Nations; this hath got the Name of Holy Church, as though she were the Lord's Spouse, when indeed on her Head are written the Names of Blasphemy, and she hath drunk the Blood of the Martyrs, and censured them who have kept the Testimony of Jesus to Death, Exile and Banishment, and hath made Havock of the dear Servants of the Lord, and hath vilified the Lord's Spouse, and made the Lamb's Wife fly into the Wilderness, whilest she hath raised her City with Blood, and hath laid the Foundation thereof in Iniquity, and hath raised her self into Honour, by slaying and killing, and by her Sorceries and Inchantments, and hath made the Nations drunk therewith, and they admire thee; but thy Downfall is coming, and the Day hastens that Calamity shall take hold of thee, and thy secret Parts shall be discovered, and thy Loathsom∣ness shall appear, and thy Lovers shall hate thee, and shall drink in no more of thy bewitching Inchantments, and thou shalt no more be called holy, but abominable and prophane, and thy Glory shall be turned into Dung, and thy Excellency into Mire, and thy Decrees shall be made void, and
utter Misery shall be thy End, and them that have suffered shall triumph and rejoyce over thee forever; for God is risen, who judgeth righteously, and will reward her double according to her Works; and the Beast that hath arisen out of the bottomless Pit, who hath arrogated unto himself the Name of higher Power, shall be taken and cast into the Lake, and all those tyranous, cruel, wicked, changeable, murderous Laws, which he hath made and forced upon Men, to uphold the Power of his Dominion, shall be trodden under Foot, and be had in Contempt and Dishonour by all the Followers of the Lamb, who is gone out conquering and to conquer, and shall subdue his Enemies and overcome them, and slay the wicked by the Sword that proceeds out of his Mouth. And Oh what a Havock hath the Devil made in the Earth, since the Dayes of the Apostles, since he hath got the Form of Godliness, and hath transformed himself into all outward Appearances of Worship, and Anti-christ hath been exalted above the true God in the Earth, and hath turned Christian in Name, and hath preached Christ in Words, and hath covered himself with the Sheeps Clothing, the outside that he might not appear as he is, an Enemy to the Power and Life of the true God, that so he might deceive, and hath deceived Thousands; for since the Dayes of the Apo∣stacy, that the Power and the Life hath been lost, the Devil and Anti-christ have turned Law-makers, and Law-givers, and Law-executors, and Rulers of Nations and Kingdoms, & have made Spoil in the Nations, under that Name of higher Power; nay further, Anti-christ hath turned Church-Member, nay, Church-Officer, Preacher, and a great Ordinance-man, a Preacher, a Prayer, a Singer, a Baptizer, a Worshipper of the strictest sort in the Nations, and hath taken up the visibles Actions and Practices of the Disciples, Apostles, Ministers and Believers, so far as they have been outward, and now in these things, and by this stolen cover deceives Peo∣ples and opposes the true Christ and his Life and Power and coming in the Spirit, and yet notwithstanding all this large Philactary and long and large Garment, yet the in-side is Devilish, Hellish, Murderous, Cruel, ravenous and devouring; And who will but look back and take a view, from the Beginning of the Devil's Kingdom, until Christ was manifest in the Flesh, shall finde these things true, that under the Name of higher Pow∣er, and under the Name of Holy Church, he hath destroyed the Nains and hath laid waste God's Heritage, and hath defaced his Image and de∣stroyed his Workmanship, and hath laid all the Blame upon the Righteous Seed, and condemned them for Evil-doers, for not being subject to Autho∣rity, for Law-breakers, and for Seditious and Tumultuous▪ and for Heresie and Errour and Blasphemy, and as Ungodly; for all the Righteous Pro∣phets and Believers in former Time, were Judged, and suffered as Un∣godly, in the Account of the Devil and his Agents, as though he and his Instruments had been the greatest Friends of God and of Believers. And who will but view the Scriptures of Truth, from the manifesting of Christ in the Flesh till his Ascention, and also afterward, may see that the Devil under the Name of higher Power, and under the Name of Au∣thority hath made Spoil and Havock of men and their Estates, and hath killed and destroyed the Just as Evil-doers, and have exacted upon the Righteous by wicked Impositions, and Cruel corrupt Laws made to up∣hold
his Authority, which standeth in Darkness; And the false Church, under the Name of a Holy Church, hath sentenced them as Blasphemers, as Erronious, and as Enemies to God, who kept his Commands and did the Will of our Heavenly Father, as the blind Jews in their ignorance judg∣ed Christ as a Blasphemer, and as an Enemy to the Law, and Crucified him, and Persecuted the Apostles, and put them in Prison as Seditious and Tumultuous, and as Pestilent, and assaulted the House of Jason, and beat and abused, Scourged and Whipped them with Stripes, and loaded them with Reproaches, and haled them before Magistrates and Rulers, and falsely accused them, and followed them from place to Place, and stirred up the ruder sort and cryed out, Help men of Israel, for they turn the World upside down, and so Persecuted them from City to City, as Evil-doers. And after the dayes of the Apostles, when there was a defection made from the Faith, and the Power was denyed and lost, yet the Form retain∣ed, then Mystery Babylon began to rise, and the Murderous City began to be builded, and the Nations to drink of her Fornication, and swallowed down her deceit; Then began the Nations to be Waters, and Kindreds and Tongues to reel to and fro; Then all became as a Sea with Waves and Boisterous; then the Beast rose out of it, and he got the Name of Au∣thority and higher Power, and then turned against the Righteous, and made Laws in the wicked Nature, that all that would not be subject to him must be killed, and they were Killed under the Name of Evil-doers, for that Title they must bear; and both the Beast, the first and the second, with the Mother of Harlots, shed the Blood of the Saints as Erronious, Seditious, Blasphemous; & all this long Night of Anti-christ's Reign they that keep the Testimony of Jesus have been Killed, Destroyed, Persecuted, some as being Enemies to the Higher Power, and some as Law-breakers and Seditious, and some as Erronious and Dangerous; so these many hundred Years hath the Devil been exalted, and Anti-christ advanced under the Name of Christ, and under this Title have killed and wasted the Creatures, and destroyed the Creation, by the Name of Higher Power, and by the Name of Holy Church, and by the Name of Christians hath devoured and destroyed Thousands by Cruel Deaths, Tortures, Blood-shed, Fining Prisoning, Hailing to Prison, Whipping, Scourging the Righteous as Malefactors and Evil-doers, them that were dear in the eyes of the Lord, and were not defiled with the Abominations of the times, and all them that bore Testimony to Righteousness, were condemned for Unrighteous, and censured as evil-doers; and thus in short all may see how the Devil hath disguised himself and transformed himself into the likeness of Truth, as an asserter of Righteousness, and a Vindicator of Holiness, and so hath de∣ceived the Nations, and led them into Blindness, that he might hold up his Kingdom and Government in the Earth, and that he might be Worship∣ped and Honoured above the True and living God, and who hath but taken a view of the Ecclesiastical Histories, of the affairs of things since the Apostacy, may clearly see that great and many have been the sufferings of the Righteous by this Generation of Evil-doers, who have got the Name of Higher Power, and also of Holiness, and so have turned against the Saints and faithful Witnesses of God, who lived in the Life and Power
thereof, and have shed their Blood, and made Havock and Spoil of God's Heritage, and have destroyed his Workmanship, and have made the Hearts of the Righteous sad, whom God never made sad. But what need I go backward to Ages and Generations past to demon∣strate this, when our Age and Generation bringeth forth so many and sad Evidences of these things, which if the Sufferings and sad Persecutions were summed up of these seven Years last past in England, a larger Volumn might be made then hath been in many Years past; and yet this Spirit which hath made them suffer, hath pretended more Righteousness then before, both in that which is called Church and State; but the devilish Enmity of that which would be call'd the higher Power hath been such, which hath trans∣cended the cruel Actions of the Beast in former Dayes, & under the Name of Holiness, and Propagation of Gospel and Religion, the Power of God∣liness hath been despised, and them that have walked and lived in it have been set at nought and persecuted, imprisoned, whipped, scourged, af∣flicted and tormented, and have been killed all the day long; but many of them who have been the Actors of these Cruelties, they are sunk as a stone into the Sea, and God hath overturned that Horn, and broke it off, although it exalted it self high a while, and reigned one Hour with the Beast, in com∣pelling & forcing the Righteous by their wicked Instructions & unrighteous Decrees: But Reader, if thou wilt hear the Beast's Judgment & the Harlot's Censure, they will tell thee, This hath been done only to that People who were not subject to the higher Power, nor to the Faith of the holy Church; and there∣fore though they have been afflicted and have suffered, yet it was not for well-do∣ing, but for Evil, and so it is just upon them, and that as hath been done, it hath been for the Glory of God, and for the Peace of the Nation; but the greatest Deceiver never wanted a Cover, nor the greatest Transgression an Excuse to hide its Deceit: And now when the Lamb hath appeared to make War in the Earth with the Beast & his Followers, Gog & Magog gather together, & all the Powers of Darkness with their whole Strength are mustered up to withstand, and the Dragon, Beast, Whore and false Prophet, all joyn in one Battel to resist & to keep their Kingdom: Reader, thou canst not be ignorant of the War that is begun in England, and the Battel hath been hot for a short time, and though the Oppression hath been great upon the Beast and the Whore's Party, yet their Power is weakened, and their Strength more feeble; for the Lamb prevails, and his Followers shall overcome, although the Way by which he and they overcome, even by Suffering, the VVorld will not own, yet happy are they who love not their Lives unto the Death, and that do suffer the spoiling of their Goods for his Names sake and his Truth's sake, their Reward shall be great. And now Reader, thou shalt see what Rage the Devil is in, who hath got the Name of higher Power, and the Mother of Harlots, who goes under the Disguise of holy Church in America; of the Dragon's Power thou hast heard in New-England, how he hath compelled, or at least would compel all to be subject unto him, or else would kill, banish, and destroy, and lay waste all that will not bear his Image, and receive his Mark; and the Harlot which is decked, there she hath shed the Blood of the Saints, because they would not drink her Cup of Fornication, so seek to destroy and to lay waste the Heritage of God, and to root out the Righteous; and all they have done unto the dear Servants of the Lord, must go upon the Account of Evil doing; and o
the Seed of Evil-doers thou may'st see is one in their VVorks, in their Judgment, in their Practice in all Generations. And the Indians, whom they judge to be Heathen, exceeded in Kindness, in Courtesie, in Love, in Mercy unto them who were Strangers altogether unto them, and not of their Nation nor People, which is a Shame to the mad rash Rulers of Ma∣riland, that have acted so barbarously to their own People, and them that came to visit them in the Name of the Lord, that instead of receiving them and the tender Visitation of God's Love, wholly rejected them, and made Order after Order, and VVarrant after VVarrant, for prisoning, banishing and whipping of them who came unto them in the Name of the Lord; in such Heat they were, that I have seen fifteen VVarrants out against one Man in a little Time, and in one Province, the which I shall not trouble the Reader with, all which VVarrants are for taking of one Man, and the Accusations or Things laid to his Charge, the same as that the old Enemy of God used to accuse withal, dangerous to their Province, and destructive to their Church, a seditious Person and a Blasphemer, and so though none of these Things were true, yet he must suffer with the rest, who stood in God's Counsel, and did his VVork, and testified of him; all that hath been done must go upon the Account of Evil-doing: And thus the Devil hath holden up his Kingdom in all Ages, by laying Things to the Charge of them that did the VVill of the living God, that thereby he might cover himself, and that People who are in Ignorance might believe they suffered as Evil-doers, that so he might keep his Kingdom in Peace, and all People subject unto his Power of Darkness. And Oh what Havock and Spoil have these Rulers in Mariland made up∣on their own People and their own Inhabitants in a short Time? what fi∣ning & Force have they used? & what Spoil have they made of many poor Peoples Goods? and how have they exceeded in Cruelty? and what tor∣turing, and prisoning, and whipping and scourging have they made (not only of Strangers, whom they ought to have received and entertained, e∣specially seeing they sought not themselves, but the Good of them all and their Country) but also upon their Inhabitants? And how have they grinded the Faces of the poor, and instead of protecting them in that Pro∣vince, and saving them from VVrong, have themselves been the chief In∣struments of doing them Harm, and wronging them, and oppressing them, and yet not for Evil-doing, it may be for not doffing a Hat, or because they cannot learn to be swift to shed Blood; and these are become so great Crimes in these Mens Sight, that five, or seven, or ten Pounds, or more, which are great Sums among poor People, will not satisfie for such Offences, as they look upon them: But what! have they no weightier Matters to call Coun∣cils about, but to make Laws and Orders in their proud envious Nature, to fine them who cannot flatter nor complement? these are no Rulers for God, but for the Beast, and, and in his Power they act and have done all these wicked Things, for which the Lord God will plead with them, when he riseth in his Power, to make the Mountains melt, and to shake terribly the Earth, and plead the Cause of the Poor, who have no Helper in the Earth, and yet this would be counted a lawful Authority, and the higher Power, whose VVorks demonstrate them to be from the lowest Pit of utter Dark∣ness, and their VVorks to be VVorks of Death and Darkness; and the
God of the World having so blinded there mens Eyes, they think it is for the Glory of God, and the good of their Country, as the Jews did, thought they did God Service when they shamefully intreated his Servants and Messengers, and abused them that were sent unto them in the Name of the Lord; and as though making spoil and doing of Violence, and devour∣ing and wasting the Estates of their inhabitants, would be for the well-being and good of their Country, and enrich their Plantations, when they that bear a Part of the common charge thereof, and have been indu∣strious as for the Benefit of the whole, are thus made a prey and a Spol of: Verily, verily my Heart is grieved, and my Spirit is vexed because of these doings; Oh! this stains your Glory, and causeth the Name of the living God to be dishonoured among them that make no mention of it as you do, neither profess Knowledge of him, nor Worship of his Name as you do; for they may well judge, if to bring forth such barbarous ac∣tions of Cruelty, and Oppression, and Violence, be the Fruit that Chri∣stians bring forth, that they will never be Christians; for there is a Prin∣ciple in the Indians and Heathens, which abhors this, and if these Actions bring Honour to God, they may well conclude never to serve your God, and that such Oppression should be acted among your own People, and up∣on the People of your own Nation, they justly may conclude, you to be ignorant, and your Government nought: Oh! this causeth a bad Savour in the Nations, and these are bad Examples to others; for this strengthens the Hands of the Wicked, and provokes others to Wickedness, and also will bring a Judgement upon you; for Sin is a Reproach to any People, and the Wages thereof is Death and Destruction. Therefore, Oh you Rulers and Heads of the People, who should be for the praise of them that do well, and for the help of the upright, and for nourishing of the poor and needy; repent you of what you have done, and confess to the Lord your great evil, least his hand be utterly turned against you, and you become as chaff before the Wind, and as stubble before his Bow, & be utterly destroyed and cut off; consider what you have done, & how all this hasty furious Work hath not at all advantaged you; for there is a Seed that God will gather in those Isles to himself, out of the Deceit of the World, and out of the vain Customs and Fashions of your Country, and out of a feigned Profession without the Life, to worship him in Life and Spirit; and though you should seek to withstand the Lord as you have done hitherto with a high Hand, your Contrivance shall come to nought; nay though you would strengthen and harden your Hearts yet more, and say in your Hearts as the rebellious Jews of whom the Prophet spoke, Though the Bricks be fallen down, yet we will build with hewen Stone; though what you have done doth not stop that which you would do, and so go a∣bout to invent further mischief, as those uncircuncised Men of New-England have done, and should proceed to further Blood-shed, at last it would come upon your selves, and you would be plunged into misery; for the Cove∣nant with death must be broken, and the agreement with Hell disannulled, and the Strength and Power of darkness overthrown, and Innocency, Life and Truth set above it all; for let me tell you, that there is no Wea∣pon formed against this People that shall prosper, though you may prevail
against their Persons and Estates, yet the Spirit which is their Life and Leader is invincible, therefore be ashamed and repent, and view over your Actions and condemn them, and proceed no further to your hurt, lest greater Misery come upon you. Oh! The cruel Sufferings which this poor People called Quakers have undergone, and not for evil doing, but for keeping Faith and a good Con∣science, which many have put away, and made Shipwrack of, else all these inhumane, barbarous, cruel works of darkness could never have been brought forth, which have shamed their Government, and their Professi∣on, which all that have any Knowledge of God cannot but abhor and say, Oh! my Soul come not into their secrets, neither tread in their Paths; for these marks are not the marks of them that rule in the Power of God, neither these spots the spot of his People, but marks of the Beast, and marks of the Harlot, who hath forsaken her Maker the Lord of hosts, and now is gone after other Lovers, and the Children that she brings forth are the Children of Fornication, and as the Prophet saith, As is the Mother so is the Daughter; as is the Church, so are the Members, all corrupted and gone out of the Way, so that the Lord hath no Pleasure in them, neither his Presence known among them; for if it had, they would have trembled to have acted any of these cruel things against them who are turned to the Lord out of Cruelty, Deceit and Violence, which would have been a Blessing to your Country, but this is fulfilled, He that departs from Iniquity maketh himself a Prey, and becomes a Butt for all the Arrows of the ungodly to be shot at; but blessed are they that have on the Armour of God, they enter not there, neither do hurt the Life; for by Faith in the Light are all the fiery darts of the wicked one quenched, the Bows of the ungodly broken, though they be as Steel, and their spears snaped assun∣der, the Armies of the Aliens put to flight, and the edge of the sword e∣scaped; and this Honour have all the Saints, who dwell in that which keepeth the Heart clean, and do overcome through Faith, and through Suffering. And therefore all that fear the Lord in that Place, heed none of these things; for this is the Cup that all must drink of, who come to drink of the Cup of Salvation, this hath been the Portion which they have had, in the World Trouble, but in the Life Peace, and Christ who hath enlightned you is that Life; wait all that you may feel him to be your Portion, and then notwithstanding all outward Sufferings you will say, and that from a true feeling. My Lot is fallen in a fair ground, I have a goodly Heritage; and this God will give you to enjoy, if you continue faithful and stedfast to the End in the Will of him who is near you to direct you, and guide you in the Way of Peace and to lift up your Heads above all Opposition, and make you more then Conquerors over Death, and the Power thereof, and over the Grave, and over all that which hinders the Love of God from be∣ing revealed unto your Souls, which as you wait in the Patience▪ strength from the Lord will be administred unto you, to carry you through the fire, and through the water, and through the floods, and you shall be preser∣ved, and neither burnt nor drowned, for his care will be over you, who sits upon the floods, and the Winds and the Sea obey him; and therefore my dearly beloved ones, unto whom the Lord hath reached in those Parts,
and whom he hath visited in this  Day of his Power, wherein he is ex∣alting his Name which hath long been debased in the Nations; and his Sal∣vation in the Earth, and the uttmost Parts shall be a Possession for his Son, who hath long suffered and born the Iniquity of the People, and hath suffer∣ed because the Sheep have been astray, but now is the Lord bringing them back that have been driven away, and them that have been scattered, that he may feed them, that they be no more a Prey to the Foxes and evil Beasts which have devoured them, prize the Love of God in that he should follow you with his Love, and send his Servants unto you, to call you home who were gone astray, and to give up their Lives freely that you might be made free, and to suffer that you might be brought out of prison; now I say, you having heard and believed the Truth, keep down all that which would lead you to question again, and look not out at Sufferings and Difficulties; for this I testifie unto you must be the Cup that all must drink of, who come to enter in at the strait way, and blessed and happy are all they who give up all freely to his heavenly Will, for the same we passed through before we came to see the Reward, and to reap Joy; there is a time of Winter, wait in the Patience and be not offended, because nought but Barrenness and Bareness apppears for a while within; when Summer comes the desolate shall rejoyce, and the thirsty land shall become a land of Springs, at which the Flocks shall drink, and the Herds shall be refreshed; and heed not the winter storms without, neither the boisterous Floods he will rebuke the Wind and the Sea, and they shall obey him, and the Spring you shall see; so keep the hope, the Anchor, and there will be a stay for your Hearts in time of Danger, and you will see the storm over, and the wind still, and then the shower of Righteousness shall descend upon the ten∣der Plant, and the Rain, the gentle showers which he brings out of his Treasure will refresh the inheritance of the Lord which hath long been dry, and the Dew will distill upon the tender grass, and the Brightness of the Sun will refresh the Heart and make it glad, these things are true and faithfull, and God will vouchsafe them unto you as you all abide in Pati∣ence in the Cross to all the mortal; it shall dye, and Immortality and Life you will see brought to Light through the Gospel, and the Love of God is to you, and the Thoughts of his Heart was towards you for good, as God shewed unto me five years ago, where I saw Virginia a beautiful Garden▪ up∣on whch the Sun did shine most pleasantly, and the Air was clear, and the Glory of the Lord did overshadow it, even to my Amazement, at which my Heart was glad, and my Spirit rejoyced in the God of the whole Earth; and see∣ing the Lord hath begun his glorious Work among you, and is shining forth as from mount Paran in his excellent Beauty, keep all your Hearts pure, and your Consciences clear, that you may see him, for so is his Pro∣mise, The pure in Heart shall see God, and to see the presence of God that gives Life, and the Light of his Countenance is that which maketh glad the Heart; therefore as the beloved of God put on Manhood▪ never heed the Dragon's Power, neither the Beast's threats, neither the Harlot's cen∣sures, but be valiant for the Truth upon Earth, for the Lamb is arisen, who shall tread down his Enemies in his Wrath, and make them all as burnt mountains, and his Fellowers with him, and his Host is number∣less, and their Voice shall be as many waters, which shall bring Dread
upon the Nations, who worship the Beast, and have received his Mark, and make the Hypocrites tremble; and they all march on in his Strength, and do not break their Ranks; follow him, for the Victory is his, it's decreed in Heaven, who shall reverse it or alter it? and all that follow shall triumph in his Strength, and their Enemies shall be as Ashes under the Soles of their Feet; and his Weapons are spiritual, and so are all his Followers, and they are keen and sharp, and they shall wound the Head of the Kings Enemies (who is the Lord, our Righteousness) the God of all Grace fill you with Pa∣tience and Long-suffering, that you may, as good Souldiers, fight the good Fight of Faith, that you may be crowned with Immortality and Life ever∣lasting, which God, the Lord of Life and Glory will give unto all them that love the Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Desire and Pray∣er of him that desires the Good of all which stand nearly related unto the Houshold of Faith. Westmorland, 1660. F. H.
SOME OPENINGS OF THE WOMB OF THE MORNING: To all the Princes of Germany and People, who profess the Name of Jesus Christ in those Dominions, this is sent as a free Gift, in true Love unto those Nations. Wherein the State of the true Church is discovered with her Foundation, and Mystery-Babylon and her Foundation, that all may try themselves, upon what Foundation they are, and whether they belong to that City, which is to be made desolate, or to the Lamb's VVife, which shall be married unto him forever, in everlasting Righteousness. And the Way and the Entrance into the true Worship, in which God is well pleased, discovered unto them who are weary, that they may come to Rest, and to know that wherein Peace and Felicity consisteth. THe Mighty day of the Lord is approcahing, wherein the Secrets of all men's Hearts shall be manifested, even from Him that sits upon the Throne, to him that is the meanest Servant, and every Bond∣man, and every free-man, the Circumcised, and Uncircumcised, the Professor and the Prophane, their Works shall all be discovered, and all their deeds shall be brought to Light, and every one shall be Judged, not according to what he hath seemed to Profess, but what he is in reality and in Truth, so shall he be reckoned and accounted of by the Lord; for every man's Works shall be tryed of what sort they are, and the reward shall be according to every Man's Works, in Truth and in Righteousness, not ac∣cording as fallen man judgeth, nor according as he calls right, but accord∣ing to the Righteous Judgment of the everlasting God, in whom Truth, Life and Immortality resides forever. Now when this day Approacheth, which is near at hand, when the Thought of all Hearts shall be revealed, then many who have ruled, shall
see they have not ruled in the Authority and Power of God, and therefore must receive a Recompence, and give an account of their Steward-ship unto the Lord, and them that have served and obeyed, shall see that their Obe∣dience hath been more for fear of Wrath and to please Men, then to serve and please the Living God, whose Throne is established in the Heavens, whose Kingdom is over all, how be it, Man whose Eyes were Blind, the Sons of Adam in Transgression, in the fallen State, know not the King∣dom, nor his Throne further then by report and hear-say, and Traditions and Customs, though by him Kings Rule, and Princes Decree Justice, yet few do know him, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the God of the whole Earth, neither do they know that in themselves, in which Justice is decreed, who are rather continuing Ruling in an usurperd Estate then ruling in the Power of the Lord, which would be a Terror to Evil-doers; but fallen Man calls well-doing, Evil, and Evil, good; and so Judges and Rules according to that in his own Eyes, so punishes and af∣flicts them who do that which is evil, as it appeareth in his eyes, though it be good in the eyes of the Lord. And upon this Account the Righteous have suffered, and such as are dear unto the Lord, have been made a prey of through many Generations, from Cain downward, who slew his Brother▪ and who are in the first birth Born of the Flesh judge that Evil which is born of the Spirit, and their Wayes evil who walk in the Spirit, and their Worship evil, who worship in the Spirit; and thus many Kings of Judah and Israel made the Righteous Seed to suffer, when they were revolted from the Lord, then they set up their own Imaginations, Decrees and Laws to be observed, who laid the Commandments of the Lord waste, and made Havock of them that kept them, and caused such to suffer as Evil-doers, and as Traytors, as Factious and Rebellious in the sight of all the People, as Jeroboam, Ahab, Ahaziah, Re∣hoboam, and divers others; and the Princes and Dukes of Edom made War against Jacob and his Seed unto which the Promise was, and the Blessing was, and so accounted them vile that were pretious in the sight of the Lord, and reckoned them Righteous, that were vile in the Eyes of the Lord. And since the Kingdom of Heaven hath been Preached, and Christiani∣ty, the Name thereof hath been in Reputation, and the Gospel hath been published abroad, and the Uncircumcised have got the Sound, and the un∣regenerate have got the Fame, and the Unconverted have got the Name of Christians, and yet alwayes turn against them that were in the Nature of Christ; these have made the Righteous to suffer, and killed the Children of the free-Woman, the true Church, the Lamb's Wife. And know ye this, that since Christ hath been Preached, and since the true Church hath been brought forth, there hath been a great falling away by many from the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, by which Faith they had Victory over the World, and Conquered spiritual Enemies, and overcame the Grave, and witnessed Victory over it; Now the Words of them which had this Faith are retained, and the Form of the out-side Practices was held for a while, but the Power was denyed; And Paul saw many such getting up to a Head, and growing into a Body in his time, who had the Form but denyed the Power, who subverted whole Houses
who were covetous and Heady and high-Minded then, and lovers of Pleasures more then lovers of God; and this kind of false Apostles, and Satan's Messen∣gers, and false Prophets, that Christ said should come, Mat. 24. and John saw already come in that Age, and Peter, Jude, and divers others wrote of, and yet these were Preachers of the Name of Christ, and got the form of Words, and the Name of Gospel, and yet denyed the Lord that bought them, and redeemed them, as in 2 Peter 2.1. to wit, him in whom was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; Thus they denyed the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, and yet would be preaching up the Name of Christ and Jesus in Words, but denyed the Life, which is a Mystery, and many followed their Pernicious wayes, by whom the Truth was Evil-spoken of, these were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, which mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh, and so lived in the Flesh, and yet had the good Words, the Sheeps cloathing, the out-side, but were Erred and ravened from the Spirit, greedy after filthy Lucre, greedy after Covetousness and worldly Honours, greedy after Pleasures; and these false Teachers went out into the World from the Light, and from the Life and fellowship of the Gospel, which is a Mystery, and from the Saints Communion, and from the Apostles fellowship, and from The true Church in God, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, and then withstood the Apostles, and spoke all man∣ner of Evil of them, and falsely accused them to be in Bondage; and these separated themselves, and crept into Houses, and lead many away Cap∣tive, and Captivated their Understanding, Captivated the minds of those that were laden with Sin and divers Lusts, who were ever learning, but ne∣ver came to the Knowledge of the Truth, in which the discerning is. And these became great Teachers, and the whole World went after them, and proselyted many into their false Faith which was Fained, and into that Hope which was but as a Spider's webb, and into a Profession of Christianity without the Life of Christ, and those went into the World, and those that were in the Perishing state wondered after them, and admi∣red them, and set them up, who admired them because of Advantage, and received them, and so held up one another in Deceit, and so grew in∣to a Body, and got the Name of a Church, though they were adulterated from the true Faith, and run away from Christ, the true Husband after other Lovers, and yet because the Name of Christ and Christianity had a good Sound, therefore they retained the Name for a Cloak that they might not be discovered; And so many Children and false Christians which were not begotten and Born again of the Light Immortal, and of the Immortal Word of Life were brought forth, and these were adulterated Children, and Children of Fornication, and Children of falshood, who would Lye, as the Prophet said, as the Mother was, so was the Daughter, and so are the Children. And here did the false Church, and false Members arise, and false Chri∣stians and false Children grew Numerous, in so much that they spread them∣selves over Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Languages, and People, and so came to be a Universal Visible Church, though indeed an deceitful and abominable Harlot, who spread her Feet unto every one that passed by, as it is easie to make appear; neither did she retain long the Practice and form of the true Apostles, but joyned themselves to the Heathen, and
took in their Practice, and mixed themselves with the Jewish Worship, and took in their Types, Figures, Shadows, Dayes, Fasts, and Feasts, and mixed all these things together, and at last called those Inventions, the Apostolick Institutions, and Ordinances of the true Church, and so came the Nations to be Cheated; then she reached forth her Golden Cup of For∣nication, her fair out-side to the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Peo∣ple, and they were made Drunk, and there they Stumbled, Reeled and Staggered, till at last they became all like a Sea, like Waters which swell and roar and Foam, and stand at no stay, take notice of this, here was the false Church's Foundation, laid in the Waters, upon this was the fear of the Mother of Harlots, which John saw fourteen hundred Years ago, but the Foundation of the true Church, which was before this, was Planted in Christ in the Apostles dayes, and was builded upon the True Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the World, upon Christ, the Power of God, the Corner-Stone, the Rock of Ages, and the Members of her Body which were Elect and Precious, a few at Corinth, at Jerusalem, at Asia, at Antioch, at Colos, Ephesus and other places, who believed and were changed into their Hearts by the word of God, which the Ministers of Christ preached, which was in their Hearts; and them who came to be established in the Truth, in Meekness, Patience, Long-suffering, who walked together in Love (to wit) in the Love of God, which was shed a∣broad in their Hearts, became a Habitation for God through the Spirit, and Christ was the Head of this Body, and ruled over it, and in it, and by him were they led, and were subject to him who was their Husband and Shepherd, Who preserved them and ordered and provided for them, Who gave unto them the Bread and Water of Life, and reached unto them the Cup of Salvation and Blessing, whereby they came to be Nourished and grew in Wisdom and Knowledge, Obedience and Subjection, and in the Power, and in the Dominion, so were more then Conquerers, thorow him that was their Law-giver, King, Judge and Saviour, and these, as I have said, came to know the Truth, Christ, in their Hearts, ruling, and this was the seat of the true Church. And herein is the true Church of God and her Seat and Members mani∣fested, and the false Church her Seat and Members manifested, the one up∣on the Rock, the other upon the Sand; the one in the Life, the other on the Words without Life; the Seat of the one amongst those that were established in the Truth, who bore the Image of Christ, and did walk in Love, and the Seat of the other was in the Waters, and upon the Waters, and upon un∣stable Minds, and upon them that were in Cain's Way; and the Seat of the one upon them and among them who had received freely of the Lord, and Ministred freely out unto others of that which they had received, but the Seat of the other upon them and among them that went in Balaam's Way, who were greedy of filthy Lucre, and followed after Gifts and Rewards; the Seat of the one upon and among them who had submitted unto the teachings of God's holy Spirit in them, the Seat of the other upon them and a∣mong them who had Erred from the Spirit, and Quenched it, and cryed Revelations were ceased, who went in Corah's Way, in the Gain-saying and resisting of the Holy Ghost; the one upon them that were in the Power of God, the other upon them who had the Form, but denyed the Power; the one
among them who were the Servants of Righteousness, the other amongst them, whose Throats were as an open Sepulchre, whose Feet were swift to shed Blood, and Eyes full of adultery, who could not cease from Sin; the one among them who took up the daily Cross of Christ, and denyed themselves, and the o∣ther among them, who followed their own Wayes, and not the Cross of Christ, but denyers of it; the one amongst them, who were Crucified to the Flesh and the deeds thereof, the other among them, that were alive in the Flesh, and following the Affections and Lusts thereof. So much more I might say, according to the Wisdom given of the Lord, but by what hath been said herein you may see the differences betwixt the true Church of God, and the Mother of Harlots, betwixt Jerusalem which is above, a Mystery, and the Mystery of Babylon, and betwixt The Bride of the Lamb's Wife, and the Harlot that hath run from her Husband, and the differ∣ences of the Members of each Body, and the differences between each Seat made manifest by their Effect and Fruits which is brought forth by each sort; so read your selves, whether you are in the Apostacy, or out of the A∣postacy, whether of the Members of Christ and of his Body, or of Anti-christ, and so Members of the Harlot, and of her Body; to the Measure of God's Spi∣rit in all your Consciences, as you take heed to it, will give you a true Understanding. And so when these Waters, Nations, Tongues, Kindreds and Peoples came to be drunken with the Cup of Fornication, not only the Common sort of People, but also the Kings, the Captains and Nobles, were polluted amongst all these professing Christians, who had the Name of being Chri∣stians, but (are not) arose the great Scarlet coloured Beast, who had the Names of Blasphemy written in hs forhead, with seven Heads and ten Horns, Perfect cruelty and great Strength, who compelled all to Worship him; and here was the Beginning of earthly Powers, who came to meddle and compel in Spiritual Matters, and the Kings of the Earth gave their Aid, force and Strength to the Beast, who compelled all both great & smal▪ whose Names were not written in the Lamb's Book of Life, to Worship him, and he Killed the Saints and Persecuted them which kept the Testimony of Jesus and the Word of God, and the false Church which had laid her Foundation and sate as a Queen, got upon the Beast, and travelled in the greatness of his Strength, & made War against the free-Woman the Lamb's Wife, & made her flee into the Wilderness, for two times and a half; and all this was since the Apostles dayes, that so now they that boast of Visibility and Universality al∣wayes since the Apostles dayes, by this Argument they overthrow them∣selves; for that which hath alwayes been so Visible, in Power, Force and Strength, and so Universality seen and spread over all Nations, Kind∣reds, Tongues and People, cannot be the Church of Christ, for she hath been in the Wilderness, and Christ the Head of his Church, the Body, com∣pelleth none by carnal Weapons to Worship the Lord, but he that takes hold of the Sword, shall Perish by the Sword; and he said again, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you, and Pray for them that Persecute you▪ and this is he who is the higher Power, unto whom all Power is given both in Hea∣ven and Earth, and unto him the Spouse is subject, and the Body is subject, and they fear him and Honour his holy Name, for he is worthy to be Praised, and to receive all Honour, Glory and Strength forever.
But the Beast compelleth all, who rose up out of the Waters, and be∣came great and cruel, which had a Mouth speaking great Things and Blas∣phemy, and he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and them that dwell in Heaven, and he made War with the Saints, and overcame them; read the Book of the Revelations; and this Beast had Pow∣er over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, and Kingdoms (which are the Seat of the false Church) which devoured and killed the Saints, who have been cryed up for the higher and highest Power, and all who dwelt up∣on the Earth, whose Names were not written in the Book of Life, cryed out, who is able to make war with the Beast? and whosoever did not receive the mark of the Beast, rich or poor, high or low, bond or free, might not buy or sell, but were killed and warred against, and herein is the Power of God made mani∣fest, and the Power of Antichrist, the Followers of the Lamb, and the Fol∣lowers of the Beast, the Worship of the Lamb, and the Worship of the Beast; the War with the Lamb and his Followers, and the War with the Beast and his Followers; and the Lamb maketh war with the Sword of his Mouth, which is the Sword of the Spirit, and the Word of God, and so do all his Followers, who overcome spiritual Wickedness in high Places, and conquer the unclean Spirit, and subdue the Kingdom of the Devil, and the Powers of Darkness, and yet hurt not the Creature; For Christ came not to destroy mens Lives, but to save them; and herein again is the Beast and Dragon, and their Worship and Followers, made manifest to be quite diffe∣rent unto the former; for he compelleth to his Worship by his cruel Laws, Imprisonment and lingring Torments, and by his carnal Swords and wea∣pons, which never can subdue spiritual Enemies; and he kills men, and stricks at the Creature, and so destroyeth the Saints Bodies, which are God's Tabernacles and Temple, and Temples of the holy Ghost; this never reaches to the pulling down of Deceit in any, wherein lieth the true Pow∣er; but the Lamb doth not so, but slayes the Enmity, and saveth the Creature. And we never read that Christ ever gave Command to his Disciples, neither did his Disciples give any such Command to the Churches which were planted, that they should force any to their Worship, either Belie∣vers or Unbelievers▪ but alwayes taught the contrary, that as every one had received the Gift of God (Christ) so let him walk, and as every one belie∣ved in his own Heart, and was perswaded in his own Mind by the Spirit of the Lord, was to walk accordingly, did obey and observe, or else he sin∣ned; for the true Church of God and Ministers of Christ took no pleasure to make men Sinners; For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. But Oh how many have the false Church, and Beast, and the Kings and Princes of the Earth forced to receive these things, as Institutions and Ordinances of God▪ and to observe many things which have been put upon People as divine Worship, or as some heavenly Observations, when alas ma∣ny did not believe with their Hearts, neither were perswaded (thereto) by the Spirit of God in their own Minds and Consciences, and yet through Force and compelling, prisoning and cruel torturing, many have yielded and condescended to their Worship, and so have been made to sin against the Lord and their own Souls▪ and thus instead of making Christians in∣deed, thousands of Hypocrites have been proselyted this way, and many
others through Weakness, rather then to suffer, have sinned against their weak Consciences, by this forcing way, or compelling way; the City of Babylon hath been reared up by this means, and the false Church hath got∣ten a great corrupt Body, and glories in her Seat, and sitteth as a Queen o∣ver Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, having perswaded the Kings and Nobles of the Earth, that they ought to defend this Holy Church, and to keep her Ordinances unviolated, or else they should be in Danger of her Curse and of her Excommunication; and thus the Devil himself hath armed himself every way, & Antichrist hath fenced about his Throne, as to the gain∣ing of the Powers of the Earth on his side, and for Fear of being discovered he hath taken up the outside-profession of Christianity, yet the VVolf's Nature is brought forth and is tryed, which worries and kills the Sheep; and to speak plainly and truly, since the Power of God hath been lost and disregar∣ded, which mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh in Men, and the Form of Words retained, and the outside Observances taken up by the false Church, she hath gotten more Members by the Kings of the Earth, who have drunk of her Cup, and are baptized into her Spirit by their cruel forcing, and owning all to a Conformity to their holy Church, as she hath called herself, then by any sound Doctrine, or holy example, or good Practices that she hath shewed forth to the Nations. And Oh how have the Kings of the Earth, and the Princes thereof been made slaves and Drudges to this Harlot, to make Lawes for her, and to re-inforce them upon the People, to the destroying of many Bodies and Souls to patronize, and hold up their Sorceries, and to keep up her In∣chantments in Reputation among the People, and in so doing the false Church hath so flattered and called thir Princes, who had drunk of her Cup, Defenders of the Faith, and Propagators of the Gospel, but if any did fail of observing her invented Institutions, then what dreadful Excommu∣nications, and Woes, and Curses have been threatned against them, and how many Princes have been deposed of their Crowns as Hereticks, and Rebellions have been raised against such to overthrow them and their People, and therein you have had sufficient proof, many of you Princes of Germany. These things I write unto you, desiring your good in that which pertains to this Life, and of that which is to come, and that you might truly see your selves, whether you are not drinking of this Cup of Fornication? yea or my: Or whether you are not yet giving your Power to the Beast? yea, or nay; is there not a form of Worship without the Life and Power? then that is but the VVhore's Cup; is there a seeming Shew of holiness among you, and do you not enjoy the Life and sum and substance of all Shadows? then that is but the VVhore's Cup, the outside fairly garnished▪ but Rottenness is at the Heart; do you compel to worship? then that is the Beast's power, that is not Christ's Power, nor of the higher Power, you must deny that, the true State and Power that any Prince hath allowed him from God, in which he may expect a Blessing upon himself and People, is in that he ruleth well in things appertaining to men, and things civil which pertain unto this Life, and unto the Kingdoms of Men upon Earth, and to be for the punishing of evil-doers, as of these murderous man-slayers, man-stealers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Cozeners, Cheaters, Defrauders and Vi∣olent-doers; and the Sword is to be turned against all these things, and to keep down such things in every Nation and Government, and that eve∣ry
Punishment be in Equality sutable to the crime and Fault, not exceed∣ing it; and thus Princes and Rulers whoso rule, rule for God, and this is an Ordinance of God; but MysteryBabylon the false church is far from these things, who hath perswaded Rulers, Princes and Nobles, that they must rule as Magistrates in the Church of God, and in Christ's Govern∣ment, in things appertaining to the Conscience, hath taught them to usurp Authority in those things; but God hath anointed Christ to be Lord and King, and hath given him to be Head of the body, which is his Church, and to rule in the Hearts and Consciences of the Sons of Men, and he is the alone Lord and King there, and no outward King, nor Prince nor Governour upon the Face of the Earth hath any thing to do there. Object. But some may say▪ Ought not they who denyed Christ's Commands be compelled to worship and obey according a he taught? Answ. As Salvation belongs to him alone, so Vengeance belongs to him also; and as he communicates Power to them which believe and obey the Gospel, so also by the Breath of his Mouth will he slay the Wicked, and Vengeance is his, and he will repay it; and all they who will not have him to rule in their Hearts, and unto the disobedient it shall be said, and shall be done, they shall be brought before him and slain; and that by which he slayes the Disobedient, is by the Breath of his Mouth, which is sharper then any two-edged Sword, which reacheth to that which the outward Sword and forcing Power cannot reach unto. Object. But farther it may be objected, Were not the Kings of Israel and Ju∣dah to compel Men to keep the Commandments and Statutes of the true God, and to restrain them from worshipping of false Gods, and to stone to Death false Pr∣phets and Blasphemers? and may not the Kings and Princes of the Earth do the same now? Answ. To which I answer, it is true, the Kings of Israel and Judah were to do so under the first Covenant (which made nothing perfect) who did not see to the End of Things that were to be abolished; and as the first Priesthood and Sacrifices and Offerings were Figures and Shadows of the good Things to come, even of the everlasting Sacrifice, and of the ever∣lasting Offering; so the Kings of Israel and their Governments were Types and Figures and Shadows of the King of Kings, and King of Saints, and their Government a Shadow of the Government which was to be without End, and their compelling outward, and punishing outward, of Christ subduing all his Enemies, and killing Blasphemers, and stoning of them, and slaying of them with his spiritual Sword, that would not have him to rule over them; but now the King of Righteousness being come, his Law is inward, his Kingdom is spiritual, his Service spiritual his worship spiritual▪ his Weapons spiritual, with which he slayes his Enemies▪ & the Glory which the Father hath given to him, he will not give to another; and herein the Kingdom, the Power, the Authority & the Weapons are of a more excellent Nature then the others were, and his Soveraignity and Greatness excelleth the other, and it is Truth as it is in Jesus▪ and so all Kings and Princes now are in another State then the Kings of Israel and Judah were; for the Sub∣stance is come, and the King of eternal Glory, the true Light that lighteth
every Man that cometh into the World, hath all Power committed to him; so for any to intrude or take upon them to do that which the Father hath committed unto him, is absolute Usurpation; and though the false Church and the Merchants thereof, and many which would be counted Rabbies in it, have spurred on and pressed on Princes to their Hurt▪ as to usurp Au∣thority over mens Consciences in Faith and Doctrine; this will be their Reward certainly from the Hand of the Lord at the last, VVho hath requi∣red this at your Hands? For Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, whose Pow∣er and Authority was great, as to the Things of God, went far beyond any temporal Prince, who had begotten many to the Faith, who said, that he and some others were not Lords over their Faith, nor over mens Conscien∣ces, but as it is said, left every Man to be fully perswaded in his own Mind by God's Spirit, him which he had testified of, which he said, God had given a Measure of to profit withal, and none knows the Things of God, but by the Spi∣rit of God; then good Reason it is, that all should be left to that which is the absolute and only means, by which God, and the Things of God, and the Worship of God comes to be known: what will the Church of Rome say to this, or the Pope say unto this, who sayes that he is Peter's Success∣sor? Are not Things imposed upon People, as to be believed, which are contrary to the Scriptures, & for which there is no Scripture nor Example, but only because Peter's Successor hath said so, and the Church said so? and if another believe not so, he is then counted an Heretick▪ and hath been proceeded against as an Heretick; instance that one thing about Bread and VVine, which is called a Sacrament, which the Church of Rome hath held for Doctrine these many hundred Years (to wit) That after VVords of Con∣secration by a Priest, the natural Bread and VVine becomes substantially the real Body and Blood of Christ, which Doctrine is so inconsistent with the Faith of God's Elect, and so contrary to the Scriptures, and also to sound Reason, that none but they who are wilfully ignorant can believe; and yet because many could not believe this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, many have been racked, tortured, burned and put to cruel Deaths; and is not this to be Lords over mens Faith, and to Lord it over mens Consciences, and so intrude and rule in mens Hearts, and regulate mens Judgments, which only belongs to God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth? And therefore all Princes, Governours and Rulers, learn Wisdom and Understanding to rule with the Wisdom of God, which comes from above, and cumber not your selves with that which God expects not from you, neither doth he require of you to be Lords over his Heritage; neither do you meddle nor intrude into those Things which he would not have you to meddle withal; nei∣ther let any perswade you, under any Colour to drive on their own De∣ceit, promising to you in so doing, therein you do God good Service, or press you on to persecute any about spiritual Matters. Now I say unto you in the Name, and Power, and Authority of God's Spirit, they that compel to any Worship, or force to any Worship, whe∣ther true or false, or punish and put to Death any for not worship∣ping truly, or for worshipping falsly, he is to this Day under the Anti-christian Reign, who hath exalted himself, and sets himself in the Tem∣ple of God, and sits as Judge thereof, that which belongs only to the Lord's Christ, and so intrenches upon the Soveraignity which belongs to Christ,
the King of Righteousness, and such will do Violence to the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom. Therefore all Kings, Princes and Potentates of the Earth; who profess the Name of Christ Jesus, cast off those heavy Yoaks, which the false Church and Harlot have perswaded you to put your Necks in, only to raise her City, and to put off her Merchandize, and to make the Church of the free Woman, the Church of Christ, suffer; and this above all Things hath brought great Detriment and Hurt unto you Princes and People of Germa∣ny, for they have been led by a blind Zeal to do that which they have been perswaded unto by her which hath sate as a Queen, and as the Lady of King∣doms, and a Mistress over God's Houshold, to do that which hath provoak∣ed the Lord against them, whereby their Dominions have been rent from them, and many of the dear Lambs have causelesly suffered, and many of their Subjects have been evily entreated, and some have been put to Death, so thereby have lost the Hearts of the People by such Actings, only to satisfie the blood-thirsty Mind of her that hath drunk the Blood of the Saints. Therefore ye Kings and Princes of the Earth, and Emperours, and all People who have been beguiled, through the falshood and Sorceries of this false Church, who have Drunk of her Cup of Fornication, and have given your Strength and Power to the Beast, and so have wrought their Works and not the Lord's, shake off the Yoak from off your Necks, and draw back your Authority and Power that you have given to the Beast, who hath Killed and compelled all to Worship him, and all People to buy the Whore's Sorceries; shake off her Inchantments and Witch-crafts, and intangle∣ments, and stand upon your own Legs, and come to wait upon the Lord, and upon the Light of the Lord, which you are lighted withal, that so you may answer God's End, and rule for the Lord, and keep Peace among all People under your Dominions, and then it will be easier for you to do that when you leave all men's Consciences free to the Lord, and every man to that of God in him, according to which every man must be judged, and then People will be more ready to obey your just Commands, which are for Peace and Prosperity, which are for the welfare of a Nation and Coun∣try, for since the Apostles dayes, the Apostacy hath come and covered them, and many People have been forced into a Worship, and unto Ser∣vices, and unto a Religion by outward compulsary Laws, and by the out∣ward Sword, and great Penalties and Imprisonments, if not subject to their Commands, and all this hath come up since the Apostles, and spread it self over Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, in the mid-Night of Darkness have many Countryes been vassaled; and this I testifie you all, that this is no true Christian Religion, nor in Christ's way; search diligently and read through the Writings of the Apostles and Saints in the Primitive time, and see if ever the true Church of Christ, or the Ministers thereof, Christ or his Apostles, gave any such Commandment, or did ever lay any such in∣junction upon they that believed, Rulers or Governours, or others, as to force or compel them to believe their Worship, or Forced, Killed, or Banished them that Opposed, but unto the contrary they Exhorted all, and Commended every one to that in their own Consciences in the sight of God, and so left them unto that which they knew would inform their Under∣standings,
and perswade their Minds, and when they were informed and perswaded of the Truth of what was declared, then they pressed Obedience, not by any force or Awe, but they knew that they which would not be O∣bedient unto that of God manifested in them, they should be judged of the Lord, and never have Peace; and this brought down the disobedient and Re∣bellious Spirit, and the Gin-saying Spirit, and yet saved the Creature alive, and herein were the Ministers of the second Covenant more Excellent then the first. Therefore Awake, ye Princes of Germany out of the Spirit of Slumber, and shake your selves out of your deep sleep which hath been upon you, and wait upon the Light of the Lord in all your Consciences, that you may come to see the day of the Lord God, which is now a dawning, and dawn∣ed, that so you may distinguish between the Precious and the vile, and al∣so of every Work, and Action, and Worship, you may truely discern of what sort and kind they are of, for he that doth not Witness the quicken∣ing Spirit which enlivens the mind unto God, and deads it unto Sin, his Works, actions, and worship is but of a bad Sort, these are the Works that must be burnt with Fire, and that is the Worship which God is not pleased with, which is performed from the earthly corrupt part in man by Tra∣dition, all this kind of Profession is God's Controversie against, and this kind of Professors, and this kind of false Church is God's Anger kindled against, and hath been dishonered by this deceitful kind of Christianity, and the Name of God hath been more dishonoured then by the Heathen, who have not Professed any part of Christianity at all; yea, what wicked Barbarous Inhumanites have been brought forth by this false Church, who got the form at the first, and denyed the Power; Oh! what Killing, Murdering, Blood-shed, Persecuting, Destroying the Creatures, laying whole Nations desolate, and whole Countries waste, who could not con∣form to their Hypocrisie, and invented Injuctions of Men; Oh, what Pride, and Arrogancy, Covetousness, fraud and deceit, Cosening and Cheating, envying and hating, Cursed speking, filthy Communicati∣ons, Oaths and Drunkenness, and Riotousness, Whoredoms and Un∣cleanness have been brought forth so aboundantly, that the very Heathen are not found in the like Practices; and well might they conclude, if the God of the Christians be such an one as leads his People into such Practices, then they would never believe in him, nor Worship him in the Christians wayes; for these Practices have hardned their Hearts, and made them out of love with the Name of the Living God. Oh! a bed of Torment is prepared for this Abominable Harlot, who hath denyed Christ her Husband, who hath enlightned every man that cometh into the VVorld with a Measure of his Light, John 1. and the day hastens that her Flesh must be Burnt with Fire, and all her Lovers shall hate her, and the Kings, and Nobles, and mighty Men of the Earth, which have committed Fornication with her, shall withdraw their Love from her, and assist∣ance from her, who have given their Power to her, and so have made them selves as Waters, so that it is Just with the Lord God to bring the Heathen and Uncircumcised over the Nations again, for there more justifiable in the sight of God, then these who Profess him in Words, and yet are Re∣probate unto every good VVork.
Therefore come out of Babylon all People and Potentates of the Earth, and drink no more of her Cup of Fornication, and receive no more of her Traditions nor inventions for the Ordinances of Christ, and partake no more of the Sins of this false Church, which hath drunk the Blood of the Prophets, and slew the Saints under the Name of Blasphemers, and under the Name of Hereticks, as the Jews of old did, who had the Words of the Prophets without the Life, and were in Error themselves, and in the Blasphemies, who killed the just One, and Crucified Christ as a Blasphe∣mer, and the Members of his Body as Hereticks, Plagues and Woes are pre∣pared of the Lord God, and Thunders, Storms and Tempests are to be poured upon the Seat of this Whore, and the Seat of the Beast, for dreadful is the day of the Lord which is coming upon all Flesh, which shall wither as Grass, and the hlls shall melt, and the Rocks shall cleave, the high and lofty shall bow, the strong Men shall be afraid, Terror shall come upon all Hypocrites, and fearfulness and weak∣ness upon all the Mighty and Valiant, and upon all that have Warred and striven with carnal weapons, and all Worshippers in the Flesh, the Sword of the Lord shall come over all, which is ready furbished, and brandished, which shall be soaked in the Blood of Bulls, and the strong, and the Fat, and the Mighty, and the slain of the Lord shall be many; for the notable Day of the Lord God is appearing, such a day as hath not appeared since the Apostacy; for God's Controversie shall be with all the Inhabitants of the Earth, at the Sound thereof the Nations shall be afraid, and the Isles shall Shreek, and the Mighty men shall fail, for God hath determined to cleanse the Earth of all the fruitless Trees that cumber the Ground; and to makeh overflowing Scourge pass throw the Nations, to sweep away the Re∣fuge of Lyes, Idolatry, and Superstition, Will-worship, vain Human Traditions of men, and to make all Flesh to bow before him. Therefore all People who look to escape the Judgement of the Lord God which is coming upon the Nations; flee, flee for your lives out of Babylon, out of Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called, hasten and come out to meet the Lord God, lest you be overthrown in those cursed Cities, whose Sins have reached up to Heaven; make haste and come out, and be not upon your reserves, and consult not with Flesh and Blood, partake no more of her Sins, lest you partake of her dreadful Plagues, and of the Cup of the Lord's fiery Indignation, which is the Portion of all the Inhabitants of that City; for they shall drink it. And all ye Princes and People in Germany, who are called reformed, who have denyed the Church of Rome in some things, and who judge you are come to a good Degree of Reformation, I must needs say unto you, that the Reformation, & your Departure from her is yet but weak, poor and feeble, and you are come but a little way; I may say unto you as the Prophet said, you must rise and go from that which you are now in, which you judge to be the Worship of the true God, for it is not your Rest; indeed you have de∣parted, and cast off some things which are but circumstances, you stick still in the old Ground, and if you take not heed, the Leaven of the Whore's Sorceries which is yet among you, may quickly leaven you all again into one Lump, and bring you back again within the Walls of that bloody City; and you that are Princes will not want Temptations to draw you back to associate your selves again with the Church of Rome, that now thereby you may be strengthned against the heathen; for if you should enter into any Asso∣ciation
with them, or give any consent unto such Temptations, you do but go down into Egypt for Help, then will your latter End be worse then your Beginning, and your Bondage and Thraldom will be greater then it was before; and I must tell you plainly the Lord will pare the Heathen, and ex∣alt their Horn, and they shall be as a Scourge, and as the Lord's Battle-axe, to bring down the Pride and Haughtiness of that blody City, which hth drunk the Blood of the Saints, and they that have yoaked others shall now be yoaked, and they that have cruelly tyrannized over others shall be tyrannized over, and that which hath led others into Captivity, Bondage and Thraldom, shall go into captivity, bondage and thraldom, and the Heathen shall rule over it. Therefore ye that are called Protestant Princes, or Reformed, and to all People within your Dominions look not back for help from spiritual Sodom; Oh let it never enter into your Hearts; you are yet in the Suburbs of that City; therefore come further off, and out from it, for you still retain too much of the Government of that City, and too much of their Form, Or∣dinances, Institution and Doctrine, and judge them to be Apostolick and Catholick, but wait you to know the Power of God in your Assemblies, which changes the Mind and Heart within, for bodily exercises profiteth little, you have had Tryal enough of that, but what Life and Power do you enjoy, which was from the Beginning before the World began? Is there no forcing and compelling amongst you about Religion, and Hire for your Ministers? And do you not limit and stop that which the generality cannot agree unto, and brand it for Error and Heresie? and is there no killing about Religion, nor making men suffer about matters in Religion? may every one speak freely of the things of God, what he hath received freely of the Lord, as they did in the Primitive Times, when the Church was in Purity? Forcing ought not to be amongst you, and you put too great a Price up∣on outside things, which at the best are but Shadows of spiritual things which are to be revealed in the Heart; and know you this, that they that worship the Lord aright, worship him in Spirit and in Truth; and they who come to witness the New Covenant, come to know the Law of the Spirit of God, and the Life revealed in their Hearts, by which the Sons of God are led into all Truth, and they need not go back to the Tables of Stone, nor to literal Precepts for a Rule; for their Rule is within (to wit) the Spirit of God, which the Father hath promised to pour forth upon his Sons and Daughters, by the Mouth of his Prophets, and that they need not say, know the Lord, for all shall be taught of him, from the least to the greatest, who are come to the everlasting Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling which purifies the Heart, and sprinkleth the Consciences, which speaks bet∣ter things to all them that receive it, then the Blood of Abel. There hath been in those Parts some stirring of the Lord amongst you, but the Power of God hath been much abused, and great runnings out have been amongst you▪ and many have followed their own devisings, and one hating another, and have erred from the Spirit, and there have been Factions and great Breakings amongst you, and many seeking themselves until Darkness hath come over again, and so are come to be setled into a dead Form, so that little of the Presence of God is found in all your Assem∣blies; nevertheless though all these things are so, yet the Lord's Love is reaching towards you again, and a Visitation, and a Day of Mercy there
is yet held forth; Oh happy and blessed will you be if you do not despise nor reject it, and be not offended in the lowest Appearances of Christ to the Sons of Men, wherein a greater Glory is revealing, and shall be revealed, then hath been since the Apostates entered in. Now the Way wherein God doth purpose to make known his Mind, and his hidden Riches, and communicate his Heavenly Mysteries, will be in a more hidden, secret and spiritual invisible manner, then yet ever hath ap∣peared; for hitherto Deceit hath transformed it self, and Satan's Messen∣gers have conformed, and Antichrist hath imitated, and the unconverted have been worshipping, observing and practising of outward things with∣out the moving of the Life; so that Antichrist hath gotten into every out∣side Appearance, and by this means hath sheltered himself with a colour and shadow; and the Devil the Enemy of all Mankind hath kept his King∣dom whole by covering himself with the Words, Shadows and Outward Performances: And now take but a View over all those Kingdoms that are called Christendom, and see how much of the Life of Christ is brought forth, and how little of the Image of God is manifested, and the Kingdom of God revealed among people which stands in the Power and Life of Righte∣ousness; therefore the full time of the Lord is come, wherein every Word and Work shall be tryed, and the Secrets of every man's Heart shall be made bare, and the root and ground of every Action shall be weighed: And Wo will come upon all who are covered with the words and outside shews, and cloathed with outward Performances, and not with the Spirit of the Lord God. Therefore Friends and People, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, of these things we have a blessed Cloud of VVitnesses, whom God hath now raised up in this the Day of his mighty Power, wherein God hath shined forth in Brightness: From his holy Habitation are these things seen which have lightned the Earth, from his dwelling Place he hath given forth his Word, and great is the Company of them that publish it, and there shall be many more; for a numberless number shall hear it, yea the dead that are yet in the grave shall hear it▪ and by it shall come to live; and we are a great Number who have travailed through many dry Places and barren Wildernesses, who have had the tryal and tast of all outward professions, and visible Worships, and external Performances, and visible Ordinances which are contained in hand writings, and we have waded through all these things with a great deal of Diligence, and strict Observancy; and we have travailed many Years with great Pain, that so we might have found Rest and Refreshment to our Souls, that so we might have sitten down in it, and as Seekers and Travail∣ers who are weary, were willing to lend an ear unto any who have but said, come hither and here is Rest; and one hath cryed, lo here, and another hath cryed lo there; and so we wearied our selves at last, from Mountain to Hill, and spent our Strength for nought, for none could truly inform us where we should find him whom our Souls loved, and whom our Hearts panted after, and our Bowels yearned. Until at the last the Eyes of many were opened by the Lord, who saw that eternal Life was not to be found in any external visible thing, and do know that all they who are exercising themselves after those things in the exactest & strictest manner, cannot be made perfect as pertaining to the Con∣science; and all these great Talkers of the Fame of Christ, and of his Glo∣ry
and Power, Miracles and Works, and of his Death, Obedience and Sufferings; the bare Report and Sound of these things doth no good at all, to him who feels Sin hath full Power and Dominion in his Heart; so that the Life of Christ must be felt within, enjoyed and possessed within, and re∣vealed in the Light, or else he cannot stand justified in the Sight of God, nor clear when he judgeth, neither can he find Rest nor Peace for his Soul, so I am one who have found Mercy and Favour at the Hand of the Lord, a∣mong many Thousands to be a Witness of that Life which was with the Father before the World began, which is now manifested in the Hearts of Thousands of his People, destroying the Works of the Devil, and bring∣ing in everlasting Righteousness. So the Love of God which is shed abroad in my Heart, through the Bow∣els of Compassion which I have unto all Mankind, knowing that all in the first Adam's State are lost in the Fall; I do now give forth these Lines, and say unto all, seek not the Living among the Dead, not in dead Forms, not in dead Graves, not in dead Worships, neither in dead Performances; for the Lord is risen out of all these things, and is sate down in Glory, in a living holy Habitation, and now his Appearance unto the Sons of Men is in a more spiritual manner, for I have fully tried already what is in all these external things; and because I know and have seen his Appearance, therefore I speak to the informing of all, how they may come to find him who is the Desire of their Souls, and the Salvation thereof, I say, listen and hear, that your Souls might live; for Christ is that eternal, incorruptible, pure, un∣changeable, immortal Life, which hath ligtned every man that cometh into the World, John 1. yea, he that hath enlightned every man with his true Light, he is that eternal and immortal Life; so that I say unto you all, high and low, who desire Rest unto your Souls, cease from your wil∣ling, cease from your running, cease from your own Performances, cease from worshipping you know not what, and cease from seeking in that Na∣ture which the Lord hides himself from, and come ye to learn of Christ, and sit at his Feet, even at the lowest Appearance of him, even at the low∣er End of the Table must you come, before you can be exalted; for thou must be contented to sit down there, that which climbeth high, and exalts it self, God will bring down, and that which manifesteth Sin is Light, and that which reproveth Evil is the same, and what is reproved in the Heart of man, is manifested by the Light of Christ; so keep in all your Minds to this, and stop all other Motions in your Minds, and keep down all Thoughts and Reasonings in the mind; and so keep to few Words, and be slow to speak, and swift to hear, then will you come to know the hea∣venly Voice of Christ, the quickning Spirit, which divideth assunder, and separateth betwixt the precious and vile in THOUGHTS WORDS or DEEDS; and shews you the Ground of each; and as you love this Light which Christ Jesus hath enlightned you withal, and bring your Deeds to the Light which Christ hath placed in your Con∣sciences, which is God's faithful Witness,, if unto it you take heed, then you will feel his Power in you at all Times near at Hand to help you, and to subject every vain Thought and every vain Desire▪ and bring them into Captivity; and this is the Word of Faith which is nigh in the Heart, which doth discern the Thoughts and Intents and Purposes of the mind, before ye
act or speak them forth; I say, hearken ye unto this, that Faith may be be∣gotten in you; and here you will all know your Teacher present and Shep∣herd, and him that said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, who will give Rest unto your Souls, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, saith Christ; and then you will come to see the Differences between the motions of the Flesh and the motions of the Spirit within, and come to know each Birth, and know what must enter, and what must not enter; and all who follow this Light, which Christ the Light hath enlightned them withal, shall come to know the Immanel and Bishop of their Souls; for he that hates the Light which he is enlightned withal, he hates Christ, and he that hates the Light, hates that which▪ is the Gift of God in him; and he that believeth not in the Light, is reproved by the Light, and judged already in himself by the Light of the Word; and Justification cannot be witnessed where there is Reprehension and Reproof, by him that is the Justifier. And whoever receiveth Christ, must receive him as the Father hath tendered him; for he is given for a Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, in whom the Gentiles should trust, and to rejoyce at the Brightness of his ri∣sing, and the Isles should be glad, and wait for his coming▪ a Leader of his People; and Justification is not felt in the Heart of any man, but where his Leadings are known and obeyed, and none can come out of the Regions and Shadows of Death, but as Christ is closed with, the true Light, who hath enlightned every Man that cometh into the World, for he is appointed of the Father a Leader out of the World; and all that follow the Light that they be enlightened withal, deny themselves for it judges self-Love, and self-Actions, and self-Righteousness; and here the Cross of Christ you will come to know; which slayes the Enmity, that which crosseth the carnal corrupt Part in man, and takes it up and bears it; and herein you will come to know what it is to be crucified to the World, and the Lusts and Af∣fections thereof, and the World within; and the Cross being known and loved, which is the Power of God, the carnal Mind, which is Death, co∣meth to be slain within, and dyeth to the Fashions of the World, and the goodly Noise thereof that passeth away; but that which maketh it pass a∣way endures forever, the Word of the Lord, which was in the Beginning: So mind that which endures forever, and take diligent heed, and watch against the carnal Mind and worldly Thoughts, and keep them down and so Power you will come to receive in the Light, to rule over all that which hath ruled over you; and then you will come to know a transforming of your Minds, and that which quickens and enlivens your Hearts to God and crucifies you to Evil; and here is the Way in Part declared by which all must come to the Father, to the Kingdom, to the Power, and to the Glo∣ry there, which is by Christ the true Light, who hath enlightned every man that cometh into the World, who is the Way, the Truth it self, the Love it self, who is one with the Father. And here you will come to know the Minister of the Taberncle▪ which God hath pitched, and not man, and his Ministry, and the Operation of his Spirit; that which reproves for Evil is the Spirit of God, wait all that you may receive it, for it is given unto all, but all have not received it; God is kind and bountiful unto unto all, and herein is every man left with
out Excuse; he that receives it, receives Power to come out of that which it reproveth for, and thus it is known by its Operation; and as any errs from it, and takes not heed unto it, it checks him, but as it is loved and closed with, it gives Peace and Joy, and brings Comfort, and this is ano∣ther Operation. And now cease from all Teachers which are only Ministers of the Letter and Ministers of others Words made ready to their Hands, for such can never turn any to God, and from all such who preach for Hire, Gifts and Rewards, these are all out of the Doctrine of Christ in Balaam's Way, and the false Prophets Way, and not in the Apostles and Ministers of Christ's Way, who testified Freely of that which they had received Freely, and from all such Teachers as take Tythes, which deny Christ come in the Flesh, for that Priest-hood is changed, and the Law is changed, and the Jewish Priest in the first Covenant, which had a Law to take Tythes of the People, is changed, and a better Hope is brought in, and there is not ano∣ther Law to be given forth, which commandeth such a Maintenance for Gospel Ministers, and though such Ministers may tell you of the means of Grace, and that you must attend upon their Teachings and Discourses, which they call means, which are but dead Stories, and feed but the cor∣rupt part in the carnal Mind, the Grace is near you, even the free Grace of God, the saving Grace of God that hath appeared unto all, and yet all are not saved by it, because they have not received it, nor love it, but all they that love it, are taught to deny all Ungodliness, and improving of it is the means to obtain more of it; and whenever you are Tempted unto Sin, the Grace of God which sheweth you the Temptations will save you, that you enter not into it, nor defile your Consciences thereby; and this Grace is God's free gift unto all mankind, and is in man, and is the means where∣by he that loves it comes to be saved from the Power of the wicked One, that he touch him not. And all must come into silence, for the Earth must keep silent, and all Flesh must be silent before the Lord be known within, or his Voice heard; and so all hasty, heady Teachers and Speakers, which know not the Lord's Voice, cannot profit the People at all; and all these tellers of Dreams and dreamers dream in the Night; but what is the Chaff to the Wheat? but he that hath heard God, and knows his Voice, and his Word▪ which is a Spi∣rit, may speak it freely, and that will answer the just in all People, and the Witness of God will testifie in all Consciences to the Truth thereof, and feels the Power of it, and will remember it when the dreamers that dream will be forgotten. And all ye that are broken into many Opinions, and Sects, and divers Judgments, wait that you may know that which will unite you to God, and one unto another, that you may come all to be of one Heart and of one Mind and of one Soul, into the Unity of the one Spirit, as the Saints of old were in; and many there are now unto whom the mind of the Lord is known, blessed be the Name of the Lord forever; and that you may all come to know him that healeth the Nations, and leadeth out of Wars, and maketh them to cease to the End of the Earth; for VVars (saith the Apo∣stle James) proceed from Mens Lusts; and so wait in the Light which Christ hath given you for Power from God to be revealed in you, which killeth
the Lusts in your selves, That your Swords may be broken into Plow-shares▪  your Spears and VVeapons of War into Pruning Hooks; then the Occasion and Ground of War is gone, then you will come to be Follwers of Christ, who came not to destroy mens Lives, but to save them, and to love Enemies, an bless them that curse you, and do Good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you, and this is the Way to conquer the Spirits of your Enemies: Therefore stop not your Ears, nor slight  the Day of your Visitation; for the joyful Sound of the everlasting Gospel is now to be preached again unto all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Peo∣ple; and towards you in Germany is that coming wherein Remission of Sins is obtained, and Life and Immortality is brought to Light, and blessed and happy will you be, if you be found worthy to receive it, which many Na∣tions and People have put away from them, and thereby have made them∣selves unworthy of everlasting Life. And now this is a Message of Love, and a free Gift unto you the Princes and People and Rulers in Germany, that you may all be warned to be in a Readiness to meet the Lord in his Judgments, and also to receive the tender Proffers of Life and Salvation to you and your People; Nation, Rulers and ruled may be happy, and so come to witness Blessedness and Peace in all your Habitations, which the Lord hath brought many unto in this the Day of his mighty Power, wherein he hath shewed himself in the Earth, and made many Witnesses of his noble Acts, and of his wondrous Works that he hath done amongst us, to the Intent they may be Testimonies there∣of, that other Nations may be invited to taste and see how good and graci∣ous the Lord is, who is the Light of his People, and how pleasant the Way is that lighteth every man that cometh into the World; and these Things I testifie unto you, who have tasted how good and pleasant his dwelling-place is, and how precious the Fold of the Lord is, and how green and plea∣sant are his Pastures, into which he leadeth his Sheep, unto them hath he given everlasting Life, and perfect Assurance of his Love forever. These Sayings are faithful, holy, just and true, and blessed is he that hath an Ear to hear, and a Heart ready to receive & understand tha which is now declared of, they, even they shall be Witnesses of the same Glory in themselves, and not only believe because of the Sound and Rept there∣of, but see, handle and understand these things in their own Hearts▪ and feel it in their own Breasts: So this is God's Visitation of Love to you  Oh prize it, lest it pass over your Heads, and you never attain unto the Comfort of that which belongeth unto your eternal Rest and Peace. From one who loves the Lord and all the Children of the Light, and  the Salvation and Welfare of all Men, who is at perfect Unity with  the Creation of God. F. H. From England, the 26th of the 1st Moneth, 1661.
THE GLORY OF THE True Church DISCOVERED, As it was in its PURITY IN THE PRIMITIVE TIMES: ALSO A Manifestation how and when the Apostacy came, and how long it hath continued in the Church; ROME proved to be in it, because she differs in Doctrine and Practice from the Church of Christ in the Apostles Dayes. Published for this End, that People may be informed, and their Understandings opened, to discern the Times and Seasons, and see the Difference between the Lamb's Wife and the Mother of Harlots. By one who desires that all may come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved, and walk in the Light of the Lord. F. H.
TO THE Reader or Readers. GReat hath been the Wisdom which God hath shed abroad in the Hearts of his People, and made known unto his Servants through Ages, wherein he hath made known his Mind and Will at sundry times, and in divers manners, sometimes by Types, sometimes by Shadows and Representations, sometimes by Dreams, sometimes by Visions, some∣times by Prophecy, & there was not the least Ministration, but it had a Glory in it; and the one living God manifested his Mind unto the Sons of men, who feared his Name in every Generation, and shewed unto them, and signifi∣ed his mind unto them, what he was, and shewed unto them, how he would be worshipped; and they that were obedient unto that which was made manifest in every Age and Ministration, found Acceptance with the Lord, and the Peace of God in their Hearts: After man had transgressed and gone from his Maker, and lost the Guide of his Youth, and broken God's Co∣venant, then Blindness came upon him, and a Vail was betwixt him and his Maker, and man increased and grew in an earthly Part, and lusted after earthly Things, which fed and increased that Part, and the Image of God was lost, in which the Creature delighted; yet notwithstanding such was and is the Love of God towards his Creation and to his Workmanship, that he did not utterly cast off man forever, but followed him, to draw him back again out of the Transgression, to have Unity with him who was his Maker; and when man was gone unto Darkness, the Lord stooped so low as to come near him, and to that State he was in, and made a Covenant with man (when mans Heart was outward upon outward Things) and gave him Commands outward, and Statutes and Ordinances outward, that he might worship therein, which were Shadows and Types of some better Things to come; and these were the Ordinances of the first Covenant, which per∣tained to the changeable Part that was above the Seed, but they typed forth more heavenly Things, which were to be revealed in due Time; and when the Seed came to be manifested and raised up, they had an End, and the Cloud passed away, and the Day did spring forth in Clearness, and he brought forth which restored all that believe unto God (viz.) Christ Jesus, then did God more clearly manifest himself in the Earth through his Son, who had the Will of the Father, and declared it, who rent the Vail, and put an End to the Shadows, and blotted out the Hand-writing, and ended the Types and Figures; and all that believed in him, who was the End of them and the Sum of all, he overthrew the Nature in them which was changeable, unto which they pertained until the Time of Reformation, which was when he was sacrificed up a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and they that did believe and received him, came to be the Sons of God, and declared the Mind of God as it was revealed, and as the
Spirit gave Utterance; and many did believe, and did grow up, and be∣came of one Heart, Mind and Soul, and worshipped God with one Accord, and in the Spirit and in the Power of the Father, and separated from the Jewish Worship and the Form thereof, and met together in the Power of God, and glorified God, and spoke of the Things of his Kingdom unto all that waited for it freely, and the Lord was honoured by them, and glori∣fied in them: But soon after the Mystery of Godliness was brought forth, the Mystery of Iniquity began to work, and opposed the Work of the Lord, and transformed into the Similitude and outward Appearance and Form, and yet lived in the Flesh, and there began to be an Apostacy and a Devia∣tion from that Glory and Power which was once revealed, and Anti-christ wrought with Signs and lying Wonders, and got the Words, and hated the Life and Power, and them that appeared in it; and then they that were under his Government and Reign hated the Reign of Christ, and said in their Hearts, We will not have him to rule over us, though in Words they confess him, and then persecuted and drove the true Church into the Wil∣derness, and set up Imitations, and Inventions, and Traditions, and vain Customs, which they have called Apostolical and holy Institutions, which are contrary unto primitive Institutions and Ordinances, only brought in by them when Darkness began to spread over the Earth, when the Bish∣ops in the first three hundred Years after Christ began to contend about Dayes, and Times, and Meats, and Drinks, and Rome began to claim Superi∣ority over all Churches call'd Christian, & the Pope became as a Law-giver. I have led thee through divers Ages and Times, as briefly as possible may be, to single out the Original and Beginning of those things, and who were the first Ordainers of them betwixt this and the Apostles Dayes, which are now accounted as holy Institutions: The State and Glory of the true Church in this Treatise thou wilt see before the Apostacy, and the State in the Apostacy, how she fled into the Wilderness, and how Mystery-Babylon was raised, and the false Church called her self visible; many of her Do∣ctrines and Practices which are contrary to the primitive Church are here discovered, and the Authors and Formers made known, whereby thou may'st come to see a Difference in the Ordinances of the true Church, and the Traditions and Inventions of the false Church, which are too much contended for in this Day by them who say, They are come to the true Refor∣mation, according to the Primitive Times; but thou wilt see (as thou com∣parest their Practices with the Primitive times) to be quite contrary, and to be but Smoak, and that which has darkened the Air, clouded Peoples Understandings, and hath led them into Ignorance and Darkness, so that the Way of Truth hath not been discovered unto many; but the Lord is a∣risen, and that which comprehends time is made manifest, and all that which hath got up in the Apostacy is viewed and seen, and laid open to the View of all, that they may depart out of these things, which are but the Inventions and Traditions of Men, in which Eternal Life is not to be had: Read with Meekness, and in that which is spiritual in thy self▪ through which the things of God are made manifest, for with that I have U∣nity, and in that as thou livest and walkest, I bid thee farewell. F. H.
The principal Heads treated upon in this following DISCOURSE. 1. THE State of the Church from the Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, to the End of the Apostles, briefly discovered. 2. The entring in of the Apostacy, and the Declination from that Purity and Doctrine, Worship and Practice, downward unto this present Age and Time. 3. The Reformed and Separated Congregations called Parochial, proved in the Apostacy, compared with the Primitive Times in Worship and Practice. 4. A few Words unto all, how they may come out of the Apostacy to the true Church which is in God, the Lamb's Wife. 5. Concerning Baptizing or sprinkling Infants. 6. Concerning the Sign of the Cross, and ordaining of Parishes and Parochial Churches. 7. Concerning Swearing by the Gospel, as it is called, and Kissing the Book, and Bishoping of Children, the first Authors shewn. 8. Concerning Fasts, and Feasts, and Holy Dayes, their Institutions and Foun∣des in the Apostacy. 9. Concerning Priests Vestures, and Garments, and Bells, their Authors Shewen, which are Practised amongst Christians as Apostolick Institutions. 10. Concerning the Mattens, and singing of Psalms by Course in Musical Tunes, and Supplications, and short Prayers called Letanies, their Authors shewn. 11. Concerning the Passover and the Lord's Supper, and the Ceremonies about it. 12. Concerning Ministers, and their Office under the Law, and under the Gospel. 13. Concerning the Ten Persecutions under the Heathen Emperours, and how divers Vain Traditions and Institutions got up among the Christians in those Times, and Constitution among the East and Western Churches, after the Apostacy was entered in the first 300 & 400 Years after Christ. 14. Of the Decrees of the Church of Rome and Ordinances, which are held as Apostolick Institutions. 15. Concerning the General Councils since the Apostles Dayes, which belonged to the Church of Rome; their Decrees not infallible, but are contradicting one another. 16. Concerning the Worship of God, and whether Kings and Rulers ought to compel in Spiritual Things, declared, and some Scriptures cleared, and divers Objections answered about this Thing. 17. Concerning Oathes in the first Covenant, and the Lawfulness thereof; and the Unlawfulness thereof discovered in the New Covenant in the Gospel-times, though the Apostates mingle Ordinances of both together. 18. Tythes in their first Institutions, unto whom they were one according to the Command of God, declared; and that Tythes are no Way lawful to be recei∣ved,
neither sought for by any who are Ministers of the New Covenant and the Everlasting Gospel, proved out of the Scripture and Antiquity. 19. Respecting of Persons, and Complemental Bowings, and worshipping of one another, and flattering Titles, are no good Manners, but are in the Transgression, and have been anciently reproved and condemned. 20. University and Schools of Natural Learning are of no Use, as to the ma∣king of Ministers of Christ in the Primitive Times, but a Thing introduced and brought in in latter Ages by the Apostates, who had erred from the Spi∣rit, who admired and set up Natural Languages and Philosophy, that there∣by they might be furnished to make Discourses, Speeches and Sermons, to get Money by; and as they are holden up at this Day, are made an absolute Idol; and as to their Practice, it's generally known to be prophane, and no Way meet to advance the Church of Christ.
THE GLORY OF THE True Church DISCOVERED As it was in its PURITY IN THE PRIMITIVE TIMES: CHAP, I. The State of the true Church, from the manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, to the End of the Apostles Dayes, briefly discovered. GOd according to his determinate Will, and everlasting Counsel, in the Fulness of time, sent his only begotten Son into the World, to be the Light of the World, and to be a Leader to the People, and to be a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World; who obeyed the VVill of the Father in all things, according as it was testified of him by Moses and the Prophets, and as it was said by David concerning him, In the Volumn of the Book it is written concerning me, I come to do thy Will O God, Psal. 40.7. and so he did as it was written of him, he fulfilled all Righte∣ousness, and ended all the Types, and Figures and Shadows, and VVorship of the first Covenant, as the Apostle testifieth of him, Heb. 7.21. The Law was changed, and the Priesthood changed, in that they were but Figures and Shadows of good things to come; and in regard that they were faulty, and did not make the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Con∣science, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, and the better Covenant, to wit, the Covenant of Life and Peace, which the Prophets by the Spi∣rit had testified of from Moses to Samuel, and till John, and John likewise bore Testimony of him who was the Lamb of God, that took away the sins of the VVorld, John 1.29, 36. And now he being come to whom the Prophets testified, who was not made by a carnal Commandment as was Aaron, and the rest of the Priests under the Law, but after the Power of an endless Life, offered up himself once for all (putting an End to all the
Offerings of the first Covenant) for the perfecting them that are Sanctifi∣ed, Heb. 10.14. Now he being come into the Fulness of time manifest, according to the Testimony of the Prophets, he fulfilled all things which the Prophets testi∣fied of him and his VVorks did testifie of him that he was the Son of God; now he declared the VVill of the Father, and discoursed with them who were Doctors and Ministers of the Covenant, declaring unto them divers times, and shewing unto them in divers places, that the Kingdom of God was at hand, and to be manifest in Power, and testified of himself, and the Father also with him, and his Works declared the same, that he was the everlasting high-Priest, which put an End to all the first Priesthood, Cove∣nant and Ordinances thereof; and he preached the Word of the Kingdom, and declared against them who sticked behind in the Figures, and Types, and Shadows, and did reprove them, to wit, the professors of the first Co∣venant, who were Searchers of the Scriptures, and said, you will not come unto me, that you may have Life; I am the Bread of Life that came down from above; and came to fulfil the Law, and all Righteousness, and to publish the Word of Faith, which did not make void the Law, but esta∣blish it which was new: And so he said, while you have the Light, believe in the Light, that you may be the Children of the Light, and this he spoke to the Pharisees, which had the Law and the Prophets, and were acting in the Types and Figures, which are Shadows of the thing it self, but not the very thing, but he preached the very thing; the Word of the Kingdom, the Word of Power, the Word of Life, and many were quick∣ned by it in their Hearts and Minds, who believed and heard the Voice of him who was the Son of God, and so came to live, who could not be made alive in the exercising themselves in the Ordinances, and many believed in him, and he chose unto him Disciples who believed in him, and sent them out to preach Repentance, and to begin at Jerusalem, though they were the chiefest Professors and Ordinance-Men, and were for Conformity to the Ordinances of the first Covenant, yet Repentance was to be preached to them, and the first Principles of Religion, though they had been and were the greatest Professors and Observers of the Ordinances of the first Covenant that were in the Earth at that time: And afterwards he sent out Disciples, and gave them Commandment to preach, & disciple all Na∣tions in the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, and these which he sent out to preach the Gospel, unto whom he gave Power to cast out De∣vils, and work Miracles, prophesied after a Season the Word of the King∣dom, both to Jews and Gentiles, according as the Prophets had testified; and these who were sent out and made Ministers by the holy Ghost, and received Gifts from the holy Ghost, for the Work of the Ministry, they preached not up the Ordinances of the first Covenant, but preached Christ the everlasting Covenant, and the Power of God, and the VVis∣dom of God for the Remission of Sin, and the word of Faith they decla∣red in the Mouth and in the Heart, and went not to Tables of Stone to di∣rect People thither, but to bring People to believe in him, who was the Light of the World, and lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, that all Men through him might believe. And many did believe in him who was the Covenant, and did believe
through the Apostles words who were commissionated, and fitted for the work of the Ministry, and through their words which they declared, ma∣ny did believe, both of Jews and Gentiles, and as many of the Jews as did believe, separated from the Temple, Priests, Sacrifices, Ordinances of the first Covenant; and they met together in Houses and other Places, Ats 20.7. Chap. 28.30, 31. And the Gentiles which believed, separated from their dumb Idols; after which they had been led formerly; and from their Temples, and ceased any more to offer unto Idols, and they met to∣gether at certain Places, in Towns and Cities, not only at Jerusalem, but also at Antioch, Colosse, Thessalonica, Corinth and divers other Places, which were long to enumerate, Acts 11.9. chap. 17.1, 2. chap. 18.4. But now mark this, that by which the Apostle gathered them from the Jewish Temples, and Priest-hood, and the Gentiles from their Idols Tem∣ples, was by the Preaching of the everlasting Gospel, to wit, not the Law, nor the Ordinances of the first Covenant, but the Power of God and the word of Reconciliation; for the first Covenant of the Jews made not the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; Neither the Gentiles, Idols Temples nor Worships, made them perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, but rather made them worse and more corrupted, Heb. 9.9. But the Preaching and publishing of the Word of Reconciliation that did, it was committed to the Disciples, it was received and believed in by ma∣ny, both Jews and Gentiles, as at Ephesus and elsewhere, and they were made a Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephes. 2.22. Now mark this, they preached not up the Leter of the Law, nor that which was written in Tables of Stone; for the first Priest-hood that was ended, and the Ministry of that, and the Vail was over their Hearts while Moses was read, and their ability stood not in the Litteral knowledge, or in that which was written; But they were able Ministers of the New-Testament of the Spirit, and so all that did believe both Jews and Gentiles, who received the word of Faith, which was nigh in the Muth and in the Heart, Rom. 10.8. they grew up in the Knowledge of God, and of his holy Spirit, and great Gifts grew amongst them, as of Prophecy, of spea∣king with Tongues, of Interpretation, and there was diversity of gifts, and diversity of Operations, yet all by the same Spirit, which the Apostles were made Ministers of, and which they that did believe and receive, and recei∣ved gifts from it, and knew the Operation of it, which wrought in them mightily to the throwing down the strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. And the principa∣lities and Powers of Darkness, and to the Translating and changing of them from Darkness to Light, and from Satans Power, to the Power of God, even into the Kindom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. And several Congregations in divers Places were all one Body, whereof Christ the Life was the Head, in which they had believed, and of whose Power they had tasted, grew up in Knowledge, and Wisdom, and gifts; and the Day of Christ approach∣ed which Abraham saw; And they exhorted one another, and admonished one another, and when they met together at several Places, every one ac∣cording to the Gift of God, as he had received (not from the Letter but from the Spirit, did and might administer to the Edification one of ano∣ther, and to the building up and comforting one another, in the most holy Faith, which gave them Victory over Sin, which Faith was wrought in
them by hearing of the Word that was nigh them, in the Mouth and in the Heart, which was the Word of Consolation, which was in the Beginning. Moreover, when they met together, they might Prophesie one by one, and every one Exercise his own gift to the edification and Comfort of the Body, as the Spirit did lead them in Order, and if any went out from his Measure, he was judged by them that were in the Spirit. Furthermore, they that had believed the Gospel, which was published to them for remission of Sin, they grew up into great Enjoyments and At∣tainments in the righteous Life of Christ, which was manifest in them: And though first they knew the Ministration of Condemnation, and the sentence of Death, yet afterwards came to know the Ministration of the Spirit, and the sweet Assurance and Testimony of it, bearing Witness to the Spirit, that they were the Sons of God, and they were made Heirs according to the Promise. Heb. 6.17. and were made joynt-heirs and co-heirs with Christ, in the Kingdom which is Immortal which faes not away, and did dome to know Mount Sion, and the City of the living God, Heb. 12.22. and it were large to speak of the Glory and the Transcendent Excellency of the Church of Christ (which became a purchased Possession to him) in the Primi∣tive Times, or the first hundred Years after the manifestation of Christ in the Flesh. But take notice of this, that they that were sent out, who had received freely, of the Father, of Christ, and of the Spirit, Ministred freely, as they had received freely, without making any Covenants, or enquiries after worldly revenews; but went from City to City, Preaching the Gs∣pel of Christ freely, as they hd received without any condition frm the People; And as many as believed and received the Gospel, did Mini∣ster freely, their Hearts being open unto them, who had declared unto them spiritual Things, Acts 4.34. Mat. 10.8. &c. So that we read of no compulsion, or forcing Maintenance from any of the Cities, whether they believed or not believed; the Father took care of such Harvest-men, and and what they received was given freely, and there was no Complaint, though often they denyed that which was proferred to them, and thir Cre was to make the Gospel of Christ not Burdensome, or chargeable, but rather their Hands should Minister unto their Necessities, Acts 18.3. Again, though divers gifts were given unto the Disciples before and af∣ter Christ's Ascension, as some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some E∣vangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, and some Elders or Bishops; yet they were all made Ministers by the holy Ghost, yet it were large to speak of the Power, and of the Wisdom, and of the Enjoyments of God in that day and time, and of the Gifts, and of the order which was in the Church at that time. But in a Word, the Son of God was made manifest, and gave them an Understanding, and they knew him that was true, (Truth it self) and Christ was revealed in them, and manifested to them, the Hope of their Glory, Col. 1.27. Furthermore, they come to see over the new Moons and Fsts, and Feasts, and Dayes, and Times, and Meats, and Drinks, and none could judge of them, or ought to judge of them in those Cases, for they saw the Body Christ, for the man-Child was brought forth, and the Woman was
Cloathed with the Sun, who had the Crowd of twelve Stars upon her head, who brought forth the holy Child Jesus, who saves his People from their Sins; In whom all Shadows, Types, Figures, Representations end: This in short was part of the Glory of the Primitive Church, which would be large to speak of, as it was in the first State of its Purity; But hereafter some fuller thing the Lord may bring forth in his own time and day. CHAP. II. Concerning the entring in of the Apostacy, and the Declination from the Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Practice, and when it began, downwards from the entring of it in, until this present Age and Time. CHrist the true Prophet, which Moses spake of, whom the Lord raised up, and manifested in the Fulness of time, he prohesied and declared of false Prophets that should arise, Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets that shall come unto you in Sheeps cloathing, which are inwardly ravening VVolves ver. 16. ye shall know them by their Fruits; and in Mat. 24.11. But many false Prophets shall arise and deceive many, and this came to be seen and ful∣filled in the Age of the Disciples; and Joh testified, 1 Jhn 2.18. Little Children, it is the last times, as ye have heard hat Antichrist should come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last times; they went out from us, but were not of us, chap. 4.3. So they entred in then, and went out from the Light, from the Power of God, which the Apostles preached for the Remission of Sins; and Jude testified against such as were entred in, who were in Cain's way, that were degenerated and killed, and in Balaam's way for Gifts and Rewards, and yet preached up the words which the Apostles spoke (but for filthy Lucre) and had Mens Persons in Admiration because of Advantage: And Peter said, that false Prophets and false Teachers should arise, that should bring in damnable Heresies, that should deny the Lord that bought them, and many should follow their pernicious Wayes, 2 Pet. 9.22. And the Apostle wrote to Timothy the Bishop or Overseer, that the Spirit spoke expresly, that in the last times some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisie, forbidding to marry, and abstain from meats, &c. 1 Tim. 4. And again Paul in 2 Tim. 3. saw the Apostacy coming in, and perillous times should come, that men should be lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, without natural Affection, Truce-breakers, false Accusers, despisers of them that are good, Traytors, heady, high-mind∣ed, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, men of orupt minds, reprobate concerning the Truth, having a Form of Godliness, but deny∣ing the Power; and as the same Apostle saith in another Place, were E∣nemies to the Cross of Christ; and these went out into the World, and this is 1400. Years ago and upwards: Then the Mystery of Iniquity began to work and wrought, and they went out and did not preach up the Jews Religion, the Ordinances of the first Covenant, but they preahed Christ in Words, and transformed into the Form of the Apostles Words▪ but de∣nied the Cross, and spoke those things they ought not, for filthy Lucr
Sake; and there was the Beginning of the Hirelings that care not for the Flock, and those went out into the World, and many followed their per∣nicious Wayes, and there held the Form, but denied the Power, and o indeed preached another Gospel, and they lived in the Liberty of the Flesh & held people in the Liberty, yet proselyted them into a kind of Faith which was feigned; and these kind of false Apostles, and deceitful workers, led many after them, and there was the beginning of the Apostacy, and they published these things in the World; and when the Name of Christ came to be in Reputation, and the preaching of the Gospel to be in Request, then they for filthy lucre went out with the Words, and retained the Form, not the Jewish Form altogether, but the Form of the Saints worship and practice, which were in the Church of Christ, which were elect and pre∣cious; and they grew to such a Head, and to such a Body, and became such a Number, and yet Gainsayers, and in Cain's Way; for they were out of the Power, and out of that which mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh, and they spread themselves over Nations and Kindreds, over Tongues and people, and Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and people, have now got the Name of a Church, and the Seat thereof came to be great, the false Church, the Harlot, Mystery Babylon the Mother of Harlots, which had denyed the Husband Christ, the Power of God, her Seat was set upon Na∣tions, Kindreds, Tongues and People, and these were her Seat, and John said these were the Waters, which he saw the Whore or false Church sit up∣on; and she turned, and all her Children against the free Woman, the Lord's Spouse, the Lamb's Wife, and made her flee into the Wilderness, for a Time, Times and half a Time, and she reached forth her Golden Cup (a fair out-side) but full of Fornication within, and she claimed Christ to be her Husband, and sate as a Queen, and the Kings of the Earth, John saw in the Revelation, drink of her Cup, and bewitched by her Sorceries; and then all the Nations becoming Water, and unstable, being drunk with Fornication, staggered up and down, and reeled up and down, and stood in nothing, being out of the Power which should have stablished them▪ and then a great Beast arose (out of these Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, and People, which are these Waters) with seven Heads and ten Horns, and then these Apostatized Disciples or Ministers which preached for fil∣thy Lucre, and them that believed them, sheltered them under the Beast, and cryed, who is able to make War with the Beast? And the Kings of the Earth gave their Strength to the Beast, which arose out of the Waters; and now the false Church gets upon him (these that had the Form of God∣liness out of the Power) and rides upon the Beast, and he carries her, and hath done this many Years, and she hath travailed in the greatness of his Strength; and then Laws began to be made about Religion, and then be∣gan compelling; we heard of none in the Primitive times, nor in the true Church; but now the false Church calling her self by the Free-Woman's Name, and getting on the outward Dress, and Habit, and Attire, saith▪ I am she; have I not the Form and Ordinanes which were practised in the Apostles Daves? who doubts of that, may look into the primitive times▪ and see that I am conformable to the Form which was amongst the first Christians in things that are outward, and thus she hath deceived the Na∣tions, Rev. 18.23.
Now Rome look to thy Beginning, and read thy Original, and view thy Antiquity: VVe will grant thee every Dram, and every Hour of time these thirteen hundred Years, and prove thee to be in the Apostacy in Doctrine and Practice from the primitive time, after the first hundred Years after Christ was manifested in the Flesh: And Christendom look a∣bout thee; for thou art measured, and thy Compass is seen: If Natios, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and People have drunk the VVhores Cup, since John's Dayes, as will be made manifest, then what Cause hast thou Rome, to boast of Antiquity, and Universality? for that doth the soon∣er prove thee to be a Harlot then the true Church; and thy Universality which hath long been boasted of, proves thee no more to be the true Church of Christ, then the Sea can prove it self to be a Rock; for if Nati∣ons, Kindreds, and Tongues, and Languages, and People universally, be the Waters that the Whore sits upon, and the Beast rose out of the Wa∣ters: Now read thy self; we have measured thee as in the Hollow of a Hand, and we have thee in the Apostacy, clear thy self when thou canst; if the Beast compelled all both small and great to worship him, and made War with all that bore not his Image, then we have thee between us and the Apostles time as in a press; for no such compelling was in the true Church, by any Ecclesiastical or Secular Power; instance if thou canst from the Apostles writings any such thing, or where Cain's weapons were lifted up; or Creatures, Men and VVomen killed by the Sword, or de∣stroyed with lingring Torments in the time of the Apostles: Now in that it hath been said, the Church hath been universal, to that more might be said; Europe or some Parts adjacent is not all the Earth, and it is no where found since the Apostles, that killing, and compelling, and forcing, hath been but by thee, and them that are at the best, but in the Suburbs of thy City, which afterwards I shall in brief descend to: And so it is evi∣dently known, that thy church (so called) hath been upheld, more by cru∣elty and force then any sound Doctrine, or Practice agreeable to the Apo∣stles Dayes; though thou mayst wipe thy Mouth and say, I am clear, we persecute none to Death, we have a Beast to ride upon, and will make war for our City, and will compel to our VVorship, and Institutions, we will cry him up for the higher Power, and we will frighten People, that who resists this, resists the ordinance of God; and he will kill, and destroy, and compel, and force, and we shall be clear; and he will call us the holy church, and we will call him the higher Power; and so it is clear and e∣vident by what hath been said, that thou art in the Apostacy, as hereafter shall be manifested by Name and Practice. First, Thy Ministers are not according to the Ministers of Christ in the primitive times; their call not such, their practice not such: They were made Ministers in the primitive times by the holy Ghost, and by the Spi∣rit, but yours by natural Parts, Tongues, Arts, Philosophy and Study, and packing up old Authors together to make a little discourse of, and this must be called the Gospel. Secondly, the Ministers of Christ they preach freely, not for Gifts and Rewards, and Tythes, but you have brought in Judaism, Tythes which belonged to the first Priesthood, your Oblations, Obventions, your Mor∣tuaries, and these Invented and introduced things, to maintain your Mi∣nisters by.
Thirdly, The Ministers of Christ did not compel any at Corinth, Thes∣salonica, Macedonia, or any other Church, to give them such and such maintenance by Force, who received not their Doctrine; but you compel and force, and have made that which you call the Gospel chargeable to the Earth where you have Power, 1 Cor. 9.18. Fourthly, Your Doctrine is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the primitive times, as that the real and substantial Presence of Christ's Body & Blood (after the Consecration of Priests) is in the Bread and Wine, which may corrupt, so doth not the Body of Christ; you do contrary to Christ's Doctrine, who saith, he that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, shall live fore∣ver, John 6.56. but you that eat that which you call his sustantial and real Body and Blood, both it and you shall corrupt. Fifthly, Of the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, this Sacrifice doth no good at all; for where there is no Blood, there is no Life, and where there is no Blood, there is no Remission, saith Paul, Heb. 9.14. and so your Sa∣crifice is abominable, and an Idol, and such an one as there is no mention made of in the Scriptures. Sixthly, Of your Litturgy, and publick Prayers in an unknown tongue, this is an unprofitable and a vain Worship, and this is like your unbloody Sacrifice▪ herein you are like Barbarians one to another, and how should they that worship with you say Amen, when they know not what you say? your praying in an unknown tongue is contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine, who said, 1 Cor. 14.18. I thank my God I speak with Tongues more then you all, ver. 19. yet in the Church I had rather speak five Words with my Understanding that I might teach others also, then ten thousand in an unknown Tongue. Seventhly, Your Doctrine of Purgatory, an invented and an imagined thing, as to cleanse from Sin; this is contrary to the primitive Doctrine▪ The Blood of Christ cleanseth from all Sin, John 1.7. and your distinctions of mortal and venial Sin, is to blind People withal, For the Wages of Sin is Death, Rom. 6.23. Eighthly, Of worshipping and invocation of Angels, and Saints, as Mediators between us and God; this is contrary to the Primitive Do∣ctrine, there is one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, 1 Tim. 2.5. and he alone makes Intercession for all them that believe Heb. 7 25, and the Angel reproved John, Rev. 22.8, 9. when he would have Worshipped him, and said unto them, See thou do it not, for I am thy fel∣low Servant, &c. and the Prophet said, thou art our Father, though Abraham know us not, and Israel be ignorant of us, Isa. 63.16. Ninethly, Of Reliques and sacred Images, this is contrary to hat the Lord spake by the Prophets, Lev. 26.1. Ye shall make you no Idols nor graven Imae, neither rear you up a standing Image, neither shall you set up any Image of Stone in your Land, to bow down unto it. Deut. 6.22. Neither shalt thou set thee up any Image, which the Lord thy God hateth; Ezek. 6.4. and your Images shall be broken; and Rom. 1.23. there they were Condemned that changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image, made like to corruptible Man, &c. Thus you may plainly see your Idolatrous Image Worship is forbidden, and condemned in the Law, Prophets, and New-Testament, and as for your Relique worship, you have neither command or Example for it from Christ nor his Apostles.
Many more things might be enumerated, which are found among you in the Apostacy, as your Voluntary poverty, and feigned Humility, and your wilful Vows, and many more things which are ound to be cotrry to the Church of Christ, which must be turned from, and denyed, if ever you come to know the everlasting Gospel which is to be preached again to the Nations, by which they must be brought out of all this Apo∣stacy. Furthermore, as to the practice and Discipline of the Catholick Church (as it is called) which pleads for Authority, we find it not consonant and agreeing to the Church in the Primitive times, the first hundred Years after Christ. As for the vestiments your Priests wear at certain times, one on this manner, another on that, your Ecclesiastical men, or Church Officers of several Ranks and orders, such we find not in the Primitive times, in that which may be truly called Primitive. And for the invented Holy-dayes, and their Eves, for Fasting and Feast∣ing, we find no such in the Primitive Times, and such a Service for such a Day, and such a Worship for such a Day, we find not in the first hundred Years after Christ. And for your Lent, which one of your Fathers invented, and this was his Ground, because God had the tenth of the increase of Tythes due to himself, and for his Ministers under the Law, therefore it was necessary that the tenth part of Dayes should be allowed as Tythes to the Lord: Oh! Gross ignorance, and palpable Blindness, mid-Night it self came upon you in the time of your Visibility, when the True Church was fled into the Wilderness; As though the Lord was not the Lord of all Dayes, and as though all dayes were not his, and to be used to his Glory. And your prohibiting Meats, and distinguishing of Meats, one Holy for such a day, another for such a day, Flesh one day, and Fish another day, as though there were not the Flesh of Fish, or one thing were clean, and another Unclean. And this invented Trumpery hath been observed for Catholick and Apostolick Doctrine, but by whom? we must needs tell you, by the Na∣tions, Kindreds and Tongues, and People, upon which the Whore sits, and out of which the Beast rose. And we will grant you antiquity enough this many hundred Years, and yet we will prefer the Primitive Times be∣fore you, and bring their Doctrine and Practice to reprove you, though we do not desire to go in Cain's Way, and to kill Creatures that are out of the Doctrine of Christ, and contrary to Apostolick and Catholick Do∣ctrine, which wrestled not with Flesh and Blood but with spiritual wick∣edness, whose Weapons were not carnal but spiritual, and yet they hd great might in them, and threw down by these weapons, that which ne∣ver could be by carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. Again, your forbidding to Marry, which is reckoned by the Apostles Doctrine to be a Doctrine of Devils, and contrary unto that the Apostle's Doctrine was, Marriage is Honourable in all Estates, the Bd undefiled, Heb. 13.4. And seeing you plead Peter was at Rome and Peters Chair, and that the Bishop of Rome doth succeed him, and hath the Keys as Peter had; Why
do you exclude the chief Bishops as you account them, from Marrying, and divers other Orders, seeing Peter had a Wife, and seeing that it is Catho∣lick, and Apostolick Doctrine, (before you could claim the Name of visi∣ble Church) that a Bishop should be the Husband of one Wife, and should not be Covetous, nor no striker, nor given to Wine, nor filthy Lcre, &c. But since the Bishop of Rome hath Appropriated to himself, to be the Head of the Church, and the chief-Bishop over all he Catholick Church it hath been manifested how much covetousness▪ and covetous Practices have been Acted, as Money for Pardons and Indulgences, and get Money for the living and the dead, and the invented Purgatory hath filled your Cof∣fers, and your Meritorious works have been Sold at a dear rate; Insomuch that a poor Woman who hath lost her Husband, and he deceased, must pay ten Shillings for a mortuary, that he may be Prayed for, or some of your Merits may be accounted to him, which you have in store as a Stock to sell to any, who come with a Prize in their Hands. And from whence have you all these Tythes have you not borrowed them of the Jews? and yet you are no Jews? and such things we do not read among the Jews were Tythable, Pigs, Eggs, Hens, and Geese; to omit greater matters, and the Smoak passing up the chimneys, and that which you call your Peter-Pence. And this is contrary to the Catholick and Apostolick Doctrine, which Peter would have been ashamed to ever have mentioned, either a∣mongst Jews or Gentiles. And now I would ask you a Question or two, seeing John saw the true Church flee into the Wilderness, the Woman that was cloathed with the Sun, who brought forth the Man-child; what cause have you to boast of Visibility, or Universality? Now when were you in the Wilderness? if your Church hath not been so, then it Demonstrates, that your Church is not the Woman cloathed with the Sun, for she did fly into the Wilderness as with the Wings of an Eagle. Secondly, Whether hath your Gospel been universally & publickly preach∣ed these sixteen hundred Years, or nay? And is it the very same that was Preached in the first hundred, or two hundred Years, seeing that John saith, that all Nations did drink of the Whore's cup of Fornication? And then Nations were Waters, seeing he saith, the Gospel shall be preached again to Nations, Kindreds and Tongues; which clearly demonstrates, there was a time when the everlasting Gospel was not preached to the Kindreds & Tongues, which are the Waters, upon which your Church is Situated; And it is evidently manifested, that yours hath been another Gospel then that which was preached in the Apostolick Church, and in the Catholick Church, the first hundred or two hundred Years after Christ was manifested in the Flesh: Much might be said, to Demonstrate the Truth which is in Hand, that there hath been an Apostacy, the Beginners thereof came forth in the Apostles dayes, and afterwards grew into a Body and became like a great Sea, which according to the best Ecclesiastical writer, which have given a Narrative of the first five hundred Years, declared that there was great loss within 300. Years; but in five hundred Years or less, the very Power of Godliness was denyed, and very much of the Form. And though your pleads Antiquity for a Thousand Years for these things aforementioned, which they would be hard to prove; For although it should be granted them, yet we will joyn issue with them in this thing, and are able to prove
all these Doctrines and Practices, not to be as it was in the first two hun∣dred Years, (except they will own such as taught the Doctrine of Balaam, and taught the Doctrine of Devils, and went in Cain's and Chore's Way) for an Example. It were not hard to prove the introducing of all these things before men∣tioned, and how they have come in by degrees, one Council that rose out of the Waters, ordaining this, another ordaining that; and so have risen up into this great Body of Darkness, some of the Practices borrowed from the Jews, and some from the Heathen, and some invented of themselves in latter Ages; so that the Worship that was in the Spirit and in Truth, in Christ's and the Apostles dayes, is turned from, and such a numberless Number of vain Traditions, Ave-maries, Creeds, and Pater-nosters, and such a deal a do as there is about their unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, that they are glad to be counted by their beads on strings, as many very well know. By all that which hath been said, may easily be Collected, that there hath been a great Deviation and Apostacy from the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive times: thus far as I am descended, I leave it to the Reader to judge, and compare these things with the Churches Doctrine and practices in the first hundred Years after Christ, and if these things be found invented, and without footing or Ground, then let them that are informed depart from them. CHAP III. But now to descend a little further, nearer unto our own Age, to speak some∣thing to them, which I believe, look upon themselves to be Catholick and Apostolick in Doctrine and Practice, according to the Primitive Time and Order, and that they are totally come out of the Apo∣stacy. THis I have to say to you, which is my Judgment and Belief, and that upon good Ground, that you are in many things in the Apostacy, as hereafter I shall demonstrate; and to tell you nakedly and plainly, we look upon the Reformation which was made in denying the Church of Rome, to be but very weak, and poor, and feeble, and imperfect, compa∣ratively with the Doctrine, and Practice, and Order in the primitive times, insomuch that we judge upon good Grounds, that it cannot be parallel'd with the Church in the primitive Times, which I have spoken of before, in that you have denyed the Pope to be the Head of the Church, and so are called Protestants; so am I, knowing that Christ is the Head of the Church, and ought to rule by his spiritual Scepter, and his eternal Power in the Hearts and Consciences of People, and in and over the true Church which is his Body, whereof he is the Head; and let all take heed who do intrude and take upon them that which belongeth to the King of Kings and King of Saints, as to matter of Headship, Regulation or Government, for all pow∣er is committed unto him in Heaven and Earth, and the Father hath given it to him, and will not have any other have that Glory; but whosoever
seeks it, must be condemned, and his Glory he will not give to another; for the Lamb is worthy of Glory and Strength: And though the Church of Rome be generally acknowledged to be in the Apostacy by them that are separated from them, and that upon good Ground; yet I say, the Sepa∣ration is in some little or small part, more in Name then Nature, more in Form then in power, more in some circumstantial things then in the very Ground it self; and very many of these Doctrines, practices, Dicipline and Order (as they call it) I find to be upholden, practised and contended for, which are found in the former, I have mentioned. First of all, to instance that which is generally holden out by the refor∣med Protestants, is, that the Writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and several Epistles, is the Gospel which the primitive Disciples and Mi∣nisters preached and published, and which people did receive, and by belie∣ving the Sound thereof were accounted Christians and Believers. We would have all to know, the Gospel was preached to Abraham be∣fore Matthew or Mark, or any of the Apostles writ a Word: Moreover, we would have all to know, that Christ had preached glad tidings to the captives, and some of the Disciples had preached the Word of the King∣dom, before Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, or John had wrote a Word; my Reasons are divers; Matthew, Mark, Luke and John must needs hear and see that done which they testified of, before they writ; and if Mat∣thew, Mark, Luke and John be the Gospel (the Writings of them I intend) then the Disciples could not preach it before it was given forth; and if the Epistles be a part of the Gospel, this the Disciples could not preach before it was written; for Paul succeeded and was converted after divers of the Apostles had preached the Gospel; so then doubtless the Disciples and A∣postles had something to say and declare and publish, before any of the New-Testament was written; and it is manifested that they were not sent out to preach the Law, nor the Ordinances of the first Covenant, after Christ was offered up, the End of the first: So then there was something and is something which was preached by them, and is to be published now to all that are made Ministers by the holy Ghost, and that is in few Words, the Power of God, which was before the New Testament (so called) though the Words declare of it, but is not it: Now they went and discipled in the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, which is a Ministry far be∣yond the written or declarative Sound, or indeed is a spiritual and invisible Thing, which the Apostle, Acts 26.18. declaring his Message which he had received by the holy Ghost, saith, I was sent to turn them (viz. the Gentiles and Jews, and them of Arabia, and else where he soiourned) from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power unto God's Power, that they that believed in the Light, and received the Power of God, which he preached to them, might receive Remission of Sins; for Remission of Sin was only preached in his Name; and there is no Name under Heaven, by which Men can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus; though the Apostles spoke according to the Motion of the Spirit, in divers Words, calling him the Gift of God, the free Gift of Righteousness, the unspeakable Gift, the true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God, which Wisdom and Power they had received; and because the Son of God was revealed in them, the Apostle said, I am a Deb∣tor
to the Jews and the Greeks, Rom. 1.14. And he having received  freely of the Father, he went to the Jews, and went to the Greeks, to the Gentiles and Heathen, where the Name of this Gift, and Power, and Je∣sus had not been named, and published freely without Gifts and Rewards, and the Necessity did lye upon him, 1 Cor. 9.16. and the Love of Chrst, which was shed abroad in his Heart, constrained him, and made him reckon himself as a Debtor unto all, because of the abundant Loving Kind∣ness and Riches of God's Love, and Grace, and spiritual Gifts which he had received, he longed, and thirsted, and travailed to communicate it un∣to others. Largely I might speak of this hidden Mystery, as to demonstrate what the Gospel of Christ was and is, but in what I have already said, they that are any thing spiritual minded will judge, that the Law and the Prophets, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and the Epistles, were not the everlast∣ing Gospel, but it was a thing beyond and above, and before any of these writings were, although they all in their several Ages, bore Testimony of it (viz.) the Power of God, which condemns Sin in the Flesh, and mortifies the Deeds thereof, and gives Victory over it, and taketh up all that believe in it into one Life, Power and Virtue, into pure Peace, and heavenly Contentment, and perfect Satisfaction: So you who are calling the Letter the Gospel, or the New Testament writings the Gospel, I would ask you a Question also, When was there a time since the first hundred Years after Christ, or in that time till now, that these Words and Wri∣tings have not been spoken and preached, bought and sold as a Gospel, not only in the church of Rome, but also among them that are separated from her, even until now, this hath been preacht to Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; and if the writings be the everlasting Gospel, then how doth John say, or why did he so say, that the everlasting Gospel should go forth again, and be preacht again after the Apostacy, or to bring out of the Apostacy? But it clearly implies the Word had been preached, and published; and the temporary Writings which were given forth at divers times had been preached up for Gospel these many Hundred Years, which many have received by tradition; but the Power of God, and the Gift of God, by which and from which the Ministers of Christ in all Ages mini∣stred, hath been wanting, if not altogether lost, for the most part among them that are called Christians; then what is the Quarrel betwixt you and the Romanists? it is but in translation at the most, and while words & translations and Versions have been contented about, the everlasting Gospel hath been hid, therefore all People are upon heaps, and the Nations like waters rowling up and down in Instability; now the reformed Ministry (so cal∣led) are in many things in the same practice with the former: You deny an immediate Call, and set up an outward Ordinatin, and a Form of lay∣ing on of Hands without the holy Ghost, ordaining such and such who have some Skill in natural Tongues, or some Words of Oratory, to be a subject matter to make Ministers upon; and that which they preach in Words, which hath been long held in the Form without the Life, you call the Gospel; and these are confined to a Parish, as the former to such a Cloyster, and such a Monastery; and these preach for hire, and Gifts, and Rewards, and for Maintenance, and kept up all the aforesaid Wayes, and
maintenance, as lawful, and will make People believe it is according to Gospel-Institution, when alas! it is but the Pope's Tythes, Oblations, Obven∣tions, Mortuaries and Prayers for the dead, keeping up the Wages, but de∣ny the Work; And Tythe of all things, as Pigs and Geese, Hens and Egs, Apples and Cherries, and Turnips, and all, nothing excepted; this is a feeble thing, as to hold out to People for Gospel-mantenance, and the Preachers of the Gospel are ashamed of it. Furthermore, they that will not give it, sue them at Law, throw them into holes till they dye, take away ten-fold that which is claimed, say the man is not subject to Gospel order, denieth Ministers Maintenance; this hath been Crime enough to take away the Estates and Lives of Men; all this is in the Apostacy. And seeing it is said, we are under a Gospel Administration, and Ordi∣nances; what do you wih Organs, Whistlers and Pipes, in any part of your Services? this pertained to the Jews, and not to the primitive Church; and what do you do with Surplices, Tippets and Hoods, and other strange kind of Garments? it may be the high-Priest's Garments, or the Priest's Linnen Ephod, or linnen Breeches, must be brought in for a Gospel-proof, and for an Apostolick Ordinance; and what do you with the Pope's Lent? and why should the Pope's Lent be among the reformed Protestants churches, forbidding Meats and Drinks? and why forbidding Marriage in Lent? and who ordained these Dayes? what have they been borrowed from the Heathen? or are they looked upon to be such Dayes, as used to be cited in the Calender for the Dog-dayes, which have been brought from the Heathen, & stand to this Day in too much credit among Believer, so called? And why is one Day preferred before and above another, and some counted holy-Dayes, as though some others were unholy-dayes? and why such a Collect, and such a Gospel, and such a Chapter, and such a Psalm, mincing and cutting and severing the Scripture in Pieces and Shreds? Is this like Apostolick Doctrine? truly Friends many things we have to say if you had an Ear to hear, and that upon good Ground we can speak, that we look upon all these things to be feeble, and poor, and beggerly things, and have no agreement, or congruity with the primitive times. And should People be limited or stinted to such a certain Form of words, called Service, or Prayer, and divine Worship? was that ever reckoned divine Worship that was not from the divine Spirit? But it may be you will say the Words are good, or some of them; I am not speaking about Words, but the Spirit, from which every Service ought to be performed to the Lord God; and the primitive Christians prayed in the Spirit, and with Understanding, and sung with the Spirit, and with Understanding, 1 Cr. 14.15. And there were some that knew not what to pray for as they ought, but the Spirit helped their Infirmities, Rom. 8.26. But you know what to pray for, and how much must be said on such a Day, or such a time, and if there be a Homily or a Sermon, Letany must be missed. Now, I say, if it be divine Worship, or any thing wherein God is ho∣noured, and the People bettered, nothing of it ought to be wanting. But these things the primitive times do not countenance; but when the power was lost, and the Life gone from, and the Spirit erred from, these things have come into the latter dayes, which have been very peril∣lous
times, as to them who have kept the Apostolick Faith, and in the Order of the Primitive Church. Many more things we could instance which are practised, as for Di∣scipline and Order, and some for Necessity, which have no Affinity or union at all with the primitive Churches, but rather are things which are too near of kin unto her that sits as a Queen upon the Waters, whose Flesh must be burnt with Fire, who hath drunk the Blood of the Saints; and how many of the Lord's servants have suffered in and about these things, not only in the Church of Rome, but also by them which have been called reformed, many have known and are living Witnesses thereof. And all these Temples, Bells, Hour-glasses, Pulpits, and Cushions, Altars, Tables, and Fonts, which are things that pertain not to them that look they are come out of the Apostacy; but the spiritual minded see over them, and be∣yond them, and before these things; and also see through the Spirit of pro∣phecy, the time when they shall be no more adored, worshipped and ho∣noured; but God shall be feared in the hearts of the Sons of men, and Glory shall be given to him, and he shall be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, as he was in the Primitive Times, when the Beast, and the false Prophet, and they that wrought Miracles before him, and all they that have cryed who is able to make War with the Beast? and have cryed, worship him, all must be taken alive, remember that (alive) in their Strength, and cast into the Lake, and the Mother of Harlots shall be made desolate, her Cup of Fornication thrown under Foot, the Kings of the Earth shall deny it, and to give their Strength any longer to the Beast; and then shall that be fulfil∣led, Rejoyce ye Prophets, and holy men of God, and ye that have suffered; for the Hour of his Judgement is come, and as she hath served the Saints, so shall she be served, and rewarded double, and the day hastens, and the times and Seasons we see and know, as God hath made them manifest: The man-child is descended again, who hath right to rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron and break the ungodly in pieces as a Potters Vessell, and stamp the residue of his Enemies under his Feet: And the Church is com∣ing out of the wilderness again, who leans upon the Breast of her beloved; who is cloathing her again with Beauty instead of Ashes, and putting upon her again the beautiful Garments of Glory and Excellency, even his own Righteousness; and they that see it their Hearts shall be made glad, and their Souls rejoyce in God, and their Flesh rest in Hope; for the time is come when she must appear again, which hath been retired, and hid in a Place which God had prepared for her, while the false church sate a Queen, and the Apostates as Princes, and their Merchandise sold at dear rates; but their Jy shall be turned into Mourning, and alas, alas, shall be the cry of them tht have been in Glory with her, for her Frankincense, Odours and sweet Perfumes, and Scarlet, and Purple, and Gold, and Silver, and Wood, and Tin, and Iron, and Brass, none will buy any more, none of  amb's Followers, nor none of the true Church's Children, who worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the Flesh, neither in any outward Ap∣pearance, but in the hidden Life of God, but in the immortal Life, which he hath brought to light through his blessed Gospel, which he hath caused to be published again, the oyful Sound whereof many captives have heard, and are glad, and a numberless Number shall hear the joyful Sound there∣of,
and shall enquire after the Brightness of the rising of the Sun▪ There∣fore all Apostates, Hills and Mountains, make room, make Way, the Lord is risen in Power, and in Glory, which shall dazle the Eyes of all the Earthly, and shall extinguish and put out the very Brightness and the Glory of all invented worships, in the apostatized ages, and shall bring them that believe in the everlasting Gospel, to Stability, to the Rock of ages, to the Valley of Achor, to Mount Sion, to the Blessing of the everlasting Hills; and blessed are they that hear, and believe, and waite to be made Parta∣kers of that which the Lord is about to do in the Earth, as he hath shewed, and foreshewed to his Servants the Prophets. CHAP. IV. Now a few Words to shew unto all how they may come out of the Apostacy, to be Members of the true Church, which is in God, the Lamb's Wife. SO far as God did appear in any Age or Generation, or manifest him∣self unto the Sons of Men in any Shadows, Figures, Representations, or outward Appearances, the evil Spirit, and Serpents Seed, and Evil-do∣er, alwayes took up the Form of the Thing, when it came into Reputati∣on, as largely might be demonstrated and instanced through all Ages and Generations, till the Closure of the Apostles Writings, something whereof hath been briefly hinted at before, so in this I shall be very brief. The Jews held up the Types and Figures of the first Covenant, and the Ordinances thereof, and opposed Christ, the Light, the everlasting Co∣venant, and also the Publishers thereof: Moreover, when the Name of Christ came to be spread abroad, then false Apostles and deceitful Wor∣kers, who were Enemies to the Cross, and to the Power of God, they preached Christ out of Contention and Envy, and for filthy Lucre, and by wicked Practices made the Name of Christians odious among the Hea∣then, as it is this Day, and caused the worthy Name by which the Saints were saved, to be blasphemed by their ungodly Practices, Rom. 2.24. When the Apostle gather'd together many that believ'd, and setled them in the Order of the Gospel, and the Order came well to be accounted of, and the Conversation of the Saints of good Account amongst many, divers false Prophets and deceitful Workers got up; and as the Apostles met in Houses, and the Saints met together in Houses, the false Apostles they crept into Houses, and held the Form, as I said before, and denyed the Power, and they were to be turned away from by the Apostle's Exhortation to Timothy. Now since the true Church fled into the Wilderness, the false Church came into Visibility, and to sit as a Queen upon the Waters, the Nations and Peoples, other things have been brought in, other things are brought in and invented, which were not constitutions of Christ or the primitive Churches; and these the World hath wondered after in the dark Night of Apostacy; and the Worship hath been made up and compacted, part∣ly from the Jews Worship, partly from the Heathen, and partly from them∣selves, being corrupted, and the Scriptures perverted every Way to prove all this Deceit.
Now many have judged to relinquish the former superstitious Practices, and to come and to take up the Form and Practice again in the outward, as it was in the Apostles Dayes, is to come out of the Apostacy; let all know this, the outward Court of the City was given to be trodden under Foot of the Gentiles, to pollute and defile it; and many may wait there, and look there in the polluted Court, and in the outside, that hath been defiled; and many may visit the Sepulchre, and wait for Christ when he is risen, and so look for him to appear in that which he is risen out of; the Jews at their Temple, when it is left desolate; the Crhistians (so called) may glory in their outward Court, though it be defiled, and so defiled as God will not appear there again; for he hath another Way manifested himself unto the Sons of Men. And now that Worship that God requires, that Service that he requires, and that Glory wherein he will manifest himself, is, and will be in the Spi∣rit, which all People are to wait for, which come to witness Restoration, and to come to the End of the Night of Error, to the Bride, the Lamb's Wife again: Now a Measure of God's Spirit being given to every one to profit withal, which shews them Sin and Transgression, and will lead out of it, which shews formal Worship, and how Deceit hath transformed in∣to them, and leads them that believed in it out of that which is polluted, and out of Deceit, to Christ, the sure Foundation and mighty Power of God, and to know God's Peace and Good-will to all Men: And that which must restore all People, and bring them out of the Apostacy into Purity, and to have Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and one with another as it was in the primitive times, is the mighty Power of God alone, which must be waited for, and believed in, and received, and made manifest in the Hearts of the People, or else they cannot come out of the Apostacy, nor see to the End of those Things that are to be abolished; and this is that which must be witnessed by every Man that comes to be a living Stone of the holy City, and a living Son of the free-Woman, and true Member of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which God hath caused to descend, which is the Mother of all the Saints, and the Womb that brings them all forth, and the Breast at which they all suck, and are satisfied and nourished up to ever∣lasting Life. These Sayings are faithful and true, and blessed is he that heareth, belie∣veth and receiveth them. And this is a Testimony of the People called Quakers, whom God hath brought out of the Apostacy to the Beginning again, to see the Brightnes of the Day of the Lord, wherein there is not a Cloud. Furthermore, it is manifest how many Things have been introduced and brought concerning Worship and Ordinances, and are taught to be Do∣ctrines of the primitive Times, whenas they be brought in by Men of cor∣rupt Minds in latter Ages, which had lost the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and had lost the Gospel-Order, and compelled People by outward Law to submit unto them; and yet all those Things they would fasten up∣on the Scriptures, and bring some Scripture, which they pervert, as a Cloak and a Cover to blind People withal; but I shall descend to some Particulars.
CHAP. V. Concerning sprinckling Infants. AND first concerning Baptizing or Christening Infants (as it hath been called) which is without prescribed Command or Example, commanded or ordained by Christ or his Apostles, although many in these latter Ages have wrested the Scriptures, thinking thereby to make their own Inventions to be reckoned or accounted to be the Ordinances of God; and the main Ground which the greatest Rabbies have given, hath been from these or the like Scriptures, Go teach and baptize all Nations, Mat. 28.19. But this is nothing at all to prove baptizing of Infants; here Teaching was to go before Baptizing, or Discipling, as the Words may be rendered, for they were not like to be Discipled which were untaught; now Infants not being capable of teaching, so are not capable of being made Disciples; now to baptize Infants, or sprinckle them with Water which are untaught, and not capable of being Disciples, is a ridiculous Thing, and to do it so as the Church of Rome uses it, and they who are separated from them, is contrary to the Scriptures; and there is no mention made of Water at all, nor Infants; and their other Scriptures they have offered for Proofs, to prove this an Ordinance of Christ (and why) only because Christ took up Children into his Arms, and blessed them, and because he said, Whosoever enters into the Kingdom of God, must enter as a little Child; these Scriptures have been tendered for good Proofs, but the spiritual-minded will judge of the Weakness of them who offer these Things for a Proof: But a∣gain, it hath been said and accounted Orthodox, that Baptism came in the Room of Circumcision; but how they will prove it is yet unknown to many; for the Scriptures make not mention of any such thing; for one Type did never type out another, but every Type typified a Substance: Now Circumcision was a Type or a Figure, and cutting off the Fore-skin, was a Figure of Circumcision and cutting off the Fore-skin of the Heart; now Baptism with Water is a Type or Figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. which typed out the spiritual Washing or Regeneration; and if Baptism of Infants came in the room of Circumcision, then how do they agree in a Parallel? the Males were only circumcised, and why are the Females now baptized, if Baptism came in the room of Circumcision. Another Thing which hath been alledged for a Proof, is that which Christ spoke to Nicodemus, John 3.5. Except a Man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; from whence it hath been inferred by many, that Baptism of Infants was absolutely necessary to Salvation; Christ spoke of that which did regenerate and make anew, and cleanse the Heart, and of the clean Water which the Prophet Ezekiel spoke of, which he would pour upon his People; visible Water cleanseth not the inside, neither doth regenerate; but the Water which Christ giveth to every one that thirsteth, to drink, is the Water of Life, and this wash∣eth the inside, and cleanseth the Heart, and this is the washing of Regene∣ration, which whosoever comes not to know, cannot enter in the Kingdom
of God, because that which is deled is shut out; but they tha do not lok after the Substance, have made an Idol of the Figure; but the Church of Rome themselves, which were the first Inveners and Setters up of this hu∣man Institution, have said, That this mst be received by Tradition, and not from the Scriptures, because it could not be approved as a Commandment; witness Claudias Esponti,Claudius Espontius ordained at a Council at Pysoy in France, that Infants Baptism should be receiv'd by Tradition, because it could not be proved as a Command from the Scriptures. a Po¦pish Bishop, at a Council at Pysoy in France, 1500. and yet this Doctrine hath been held out to the Na∣tions for Catholick and Apostolick, which the pri∣mitive Churches made no mention of, neither the Apostles taught any such Doctrine, but was preached up by such who went out of the Light, and from the Power into the Nations, which be∣came as Waters; for the first Ordainer of Baptism of Infants, and that they should have a God-father and God-mother, was Ignatius, Bishop of Rome, long after the Apostles Dayes, when Rome was got up into Pride,Ignatius Bishop of Rome was the first Ordain∣er of Infants Baptism, & that they should have God-fathers and God-mothers, &c. & claim∣ed Authority over all Christian Churches, to impose upon them whatever they listed for Doctrine; and such dark things as these have been brought forth, whereof mention might be made of many Things; and what unsavoury Words, as God fathers and God-mothers, are used not only amongst them, but also amongst the Protestants to this day; who is God's Father, or who is God's Mother? is this Apostolick Doctrine? as though God was begotten by Generation; indeed, is it not Blasphemy to affirm such things, and also to hold up such things? all which demonstrates these things to be in the Apo∣stacy: And therefore you who profess your selves that you are come out of the Apostacy, and are reformed Churches, for Shame leave off practi∣sing and pleading for the upholding such things which the Scriptures do not own, or else the Practice of the Saints in former Ages will judge you. And it hath been reckoned as absolute necessary to Salvation,Victor Bishop of Rome instituted, that Children might be christened by Lay-men & Lay-women in case of Necessity. and therefore Victor Bishop of Rome did institute, that the Children might be christened by a Lay-man or Lay-woman in time of Necessity, be∣cause Infants were often in Danger, as Polydore makes mention, Lib. 4.
CHAP. VI. Concerning the Sign of the Cross, and ordaining of Parish Churches. LIkewise the Sign of the Cross, and the Chrisme, are invented things which are in the Apostacy, and therefore you who Profess your selves Reformed, for shame leave off these things, and come out of them, and deny them. Secondly, Parishes, and Parish-Churches, which were Ordained and builded in the Apostacy, and dedicated unto Saints, which stand to this day both in the Church of Rome, and in the reformed Churches so called, and Church-Yards, which they call Holy and Consecrated Ground to bury their Dead in, this is an invented thing and Superstitious, and yet it stands as an Apostolick order both among Papists and Protestants in the Primitive times, in the dayes of the Apostles; the Scriptures make mention of the Jews Temple at Jerusalem, and of the Gentiles Idols Temples in which they Worship; the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who published the Word of Reconciliation, and Christ the substance of all Figures, they gathered them that did believe of the Jews from the Temple and Temple-worship, and the Gentiles from their Temples and Idols, to Worship God in the Spirit, and they met together in Houses; we read of no Parish-Churches dedicated to Saints, nor Consecrated Ground, for they knew the Earth was the Lord's, and the fulness thereof, and was clean and good and Blessed to them that believed, and there was no dividing into Parishes then, nor no compelling; then Corinth was not divided into a Parish, An∣tioch, Philippi, Thessalonica, Philadelphia; and Smyrna, and the rest, were not all made into Parishes, neither were them that believed not, compelled or forced to come to the Christians Meeting at Antioch, Philippi, Thessa∣lonica, Philadelphia, or any other place that we read of in the Scriptures; and the Apostles were not confined, nor their Spirits were not so strait as to stay over one hundred or fifty Families twenty Years, and call that their Parish between such an Hedge and such a Ditch, and such a Water, and such a Way, as Parishes are now divided into; though I say, they had Houses to meet in, and preached the Word, and brake Bread from House to House, and sometimes by the Sea-side they Congregated, and some∣times on an Hill, and at certain places they met together to Worship God, they went not back to the Jews Temple nor Gentiles Idols Temples, neither forced any of their Maintenance as to minister unto them; by which all may see that these invented Churches and Church-Yards for Holy ground, and Parishes, are not Apostolical, nor was no Catholick nor Universal thing then in the Primitive times, neither was there any command given to the Christians to do any such thing, neither Reprehension for not doing such things. The first Church or Temple that we read of was consecrated by Pius Bishop of Rome,Pius Bishop of Rome built the first Temple af∣ter the Apostacy, in Ho∣nour to Prudentia. in ho∣nour to the Virgin Prudentia; and afterwards Ca∣listus made a Temple to the Virgin Mary a place beyond Tibris, and instituted a Church-Yard in
Apius his Street, and called it after his own Name;Dionysius in the yea 267. divided bth Rome and other Places int parishes and Diocesses for Bishops. And Dionysius in the Year 267. divided both in Rome and other places, Churches and Church-Yards to Curates, and made Parishes and Diocesses to Bishops, & commanded that every man should be contented with his Prescript Bonds, and there was the Beginning of Parishes, Churches and Church-Yards, consecrated Ground; and in Process of time when all Nations had drunk of the cup of Fornication, the Nations began to imitate their Mother, and to build and consecrate Temples and Churches and Church-Yards, to this Saint, and the other Saint, as is too too manifest through Christendom to this Day; And here's the rise of Holy Parish Churches, which of late have been preached up for the House of God, and the House of Prayer, which bears the Name yet by which the Pope Baptized them, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint Mary, Saint Hellen, Saint Katharine, Saint Gregory, Saint Maud∣len, Saint Alnban, Saint Anthony, Saint George, Saint Margret, Saint Dun∣stans, Saint Clement, Saint Christopher, Saint Giles, Saint Martin; and Paint∣ing and Garnishing these Houses with Images and Pictures, and hanging of Flowers and Boughs and Garlands; this came from the old Heathen, who Sacrificed to Saturn and Pluto; and this hanging up candles, and their Candlemas dayes, this came of the Gentiles and Pagans; who Honoured their false God Saturn, and their Altar which they have builded in this Temple, and their Tables upon which they offer and set their Sacrifice, these Boniface the third commanded, that they should be covered with Linnen clothes, and here was the Beginning of these kind of Orders▪ so that as I said before, most of these things in and about the Worship, which hath been since the Reign of Anti-chirst, and since the Whore hath sat as a Queen, they have been either borrowed from the Jews, or else from Pa∣gans and Heathens, and the Mother of Harlots hath put these things off for Apostolick Institutions, these many hundreds of years, and divers other Things which are in and about the Parish Churches, your many Crosses in and about them of Wood and Stone, your Baptized Bells, and consecrated Pulpits, and Fonts, and hour-Glasses, and soft Cushions to Preach on; all these the Scriptures make no mention of, not in the Chri∣stian Churches, the first two hundred Years after Christ. Now Protestants who have denyed the church of Rome and their Pra∣ctices, which was contrary to the Primitive and the Scriptures, look about you, and see how you are sticking in Babylon, and buying yet the Merchan∣dize thereof; and as for your Holy Ground, called your church-yards, which you only judge fit to bury the Dead in, and would compel all to come thither, because there are many Officers in and about this Temple, who are greedy of rewards, so that they would not miss any thing that might be commodious unto them; and so would compel all to come there for their Gain; but, Abraham was the first we read of that made any place of burial in Hebron,Abraham and his Wife buried in Hebron, in a piece of Ground he bought. which he bought of Ephron an Hittite for thirty shekels of Silver, and there was he and his Wife buried, and this was no Parish-Yard, neither did he leave any Priestor Clark (that we read of) to receive Wages & Fees, & for Ringing a
Bell, and reading and singing over the Dead; and so for shame, you who Profess the Scriptures, and the Apostolick Order, & Institutions of Christ, come out from among all this Trumpery, and wait that you may come again into the Order of the Gospel, and the Primitive order which hath been talked of these many years, and yet not known. CHAP. VII. Concerning Swearing by the Gospel, and kissing a Book, and that which is com∣monly Confirmation or Bishoping Children, things invented contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, and are in the Apostacy. IN the first Covenant the Jews were commanded to Swear by the Lord, and Oathes were observed by the Jews that were in the first Covenant, which was faulty, Heb. 8.7. which Ordinance did not make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience; and so there came to be an End of that Covenant, and the better was brought in, which stood upon BET∣TER PROMISES, and then the Priest-hood Law, first Cove∣nant, and the Ordinances thereof (which were only to continue till the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10.) by Christ the everlasting Covenant came to be made manifest the everlasting Offering, who perfected them that are Sanctified, who is the Oath of God, the end of Oaths, and of all strife and contention; his Doctrine was, Swear not at all, Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. neither by the head nor Feet, nor Books, nor Gospel, nor any other thing, but that yea should be yea, and nay nay, in all things; and James an Apostle of Christ Jesus who knew the New Covenant which was ever∣lasting, which saw over the Ordinances of the first Covenant of the Jews, saith, above all Things my Brethren Swear not at all, neither by heaven, nei∣ther by the Earth, nor by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your nay, Nay, lest you fall into Condemnation, James 5.1, 2. and this was Apostolical and Catholick Doctrine in the Primitive Churches. But afterwards the Faith being lost which once was delivered the Saints, and the Power lost, they began to set up Oaths again, imitating the Jews, and bringing the commands of the Jews who were under the first Covenant, as their Ground; But this was in the Apostacy. And Justinian the Emperour appointed first, that men should Swear by the Gospel,Justinian, the Empe∣rour ordained that men should Swear by the Gos∣pel, or Book called the Gospel, & lay their hands thereon, and Kiss it, say∣ing, So help me God. or Book called the Gospel, and lay their Hands thereon, and Kiss it, saying, So help me God; and here Christendom may see who are in the Apostacy, and who were the first instituters of this Swearing, and the man∣ner thereof, which the Teachers of these latter Ages do Ignorantly Press for an Ordinance of God, In the Primitive Times, they that had the Word of Reconciliation, who had received the holy Ghost, and Gift of prophecy, and were made able Ministers of the Spirit, who had discerning, and saw by the Spirit, who were fitted for the Work of the Ministry, and fit to be Elders and Helpers
in the Church; they laid hands on them in God's Power, and they recei∣ved the holy Ghost; but now since the Apostacy came in, this kind of I∣magination of laying on of hands, one Hypocrite upon another, who are out of the Power, who have not received the holy Ghost, neither they up∣on whom their hands were laid, but afterward it came to be a custom, and a holy Rite to be performed upon Children. Silvester Bishop of Rome ordained, that all that were christned Churches and Chalices,Silvester Bishop of Rome ordained that all Churches should be chri∣stened, and should be a∣nointed with oyl. should be anointed with Oyl; and Fabianus commanded that it should be renewed every Monday and Thursday: Clement the first ordained, that Children that were christned, should be anointed with Chrisme, and he also instituted the Sacrament, as it is called, of Confirmation, or as it is now called, Bishopping,Clement Bishop, or∣dained confirmation of Children, and said none was a perfect Christian if he wanted this; and thus children should be smote on the cheek, sign∣ed with this Cross. and did suppose that no man was a perfect Christi∣an if this Rite and Ceremony was omitted; and for this cause it hath been judged, and looked up∣on as catholick Doctrine, both by the Church of Rome and the Protestants, that the holy Ghost is more plentifully given them by the hands of the Bishop, and on this wise in the first institution thereof it was only administred by the Bishop; First he asked the Name of the child, making the Sign of the Cross in his Forehead, saying, I sign thee with the Token of the Cross, and confirm thee with the Chrisme of Salvation, in the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, &c. and smote the Child on the cheek softly; but if of greater Age which was to be confirmed, the Bishop gave a sharper Stroke, that he might remem∣ber this great Mystery; and here you may see how these things came in, and the Traditions, and Inventions and Precepts of Men have been, and are taught for Doctrine, and Apostolick Institution, many of which are upholden in the reformed Churches, so called, unto this day, and so Peo∣ple are kept in Blindness, in a Multitude of Traditions, and heathenish customs, and their minds led out from seeking after the living God. CHAP. VIII. Concerning Fasts, Feasts, and Holy-dayes. THE Jews in the first covenant had many Fasts, and Feasts, and Ho∣ly-dayes, as the Sabbath, and Feasts of the New Moon, and Passe∣over, and Feasts of unleavened-bread, Pentecost, the Feasts of Tabernacles, and the Feast of Dedication, which are largely shewed in the Books of Mo∣ses; all which things, as the Apostle saith to the Hebrews, were but Shadows of things to come, and not the things themselves, which only continued till the time of Reformation, and till the better Hope, which brought in the better Covenant, which stood vpon better Promises: Now in the Primitive Churches they came to see the End of these things, and were brought to him that was the Substance, in whom all Figures and hadows
do end, Col. 2.16.17. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink, or in respet of a holy day, which are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body is Christ: Now afterward when they minded the Form more then the Power, they ran out into those things with many additions, some borrowed from the Heathen, and some by their own Invention, and then press them as Apo∣stolick Ordinances upon Christians, which things stand in force with ma∣ny until this Day, too too much among them that are called reformd. Victor Bishop of Rome about the year 196. decreed, that Easter should be celebrated and kept on the Sunday, from the 14th. Day of the first Moneth, which is March, to the 22d. of the same; now the Jews kept it sooner, and so it is without ground from the Jews Practice, and meerly an Inven∣tion of their own, which led People back into dayes, and about what time they judged any thing to be done, which Christ or the Apostles did, they invented a day and time to keep for it, as to reverence Sunday in Ad∣vent, Nativity, Circumcision and Epiphany, Purification of Mary, called Candlemass, Lent, Palm-Sunday, Monday and Thursday on which Christ washed his Disciples Feet, as it hath been imagined; Good-Fryday, Easter, Pentecost was kept by the Jews; and this they would hold out for an Apostolick Example to Christians;At Lyons in France they appointed Holy-days to encrease their Religi∣on. and for all the former Dayes they were invented with many more which have been brought in since and so they were decreed and ratified at a Council at Lyons in France, that such days, as either the holy Saints departed this Life, or did any notable deed, a day should be kept holy as they said in that Council, for the encrease of their Religion; there were also other days instituted, the Feast of Saint Stephen and Innocents by Pope Boniface the fourth, and likewise John-Bap∣tist,Boniface the fourth or∣dained Stephen, Inno∣cents, Laurence, Mi∣chael, Martin, John-Baptist and all Saints to be kept holy. Corpus-Christi day was ordained by Urba∣nus the fourth. Silvester Bishop ordain∣ed Lammas-day in me∣morial of Peter's pains. and that which they call Lady-day, Laurence, Michael and Martin, and generally of all Saints, and these were his Institutions which are practised by the Church of Rome, and practised among the Protestants to this Day. Likewise that which is called Corpus-Christi day, this was made a holy-day and dedicated by Urban the fourth; Silvester assigned the day of Advincula Sancti Petri, commonly called Lammas, in memo∣rial of Peter's pains and persecution; Felix the first to magnifie the glorious commendation of Mar∣tyrs, made a Statute that a yearly Oblation should be had in memorial of them; and Gregory would that Mass should be said over their Tombs or Graves:Gregory ordained that Mass, or short pray∣er should be said over the Tombs of the dead. now Priests read the original of your ser∣vice over the Graves of the dead, and see if this be Apostolical. The Fast of Wednesday and Fryday was appoint∣ed, the one day Christ was crucified, and on Wednesday Judas purposed in his Mind to betray him. Gregory was he that ordained that neither Flesh, Gregory appointed nor any thing that had affinity with it,Gregory appointed Wednesday and Fry∣day should be fasted. as Cheese,
Milk, Butter, Eggs, should not be eaten on such days as were Fasts, and here came in this Doctrine of Devils. Soul-mass-day, this was begun by Odilo that was Provost or Provincial of Cluniacensis Order,Soul-mass-day was ordained by Odilo. upon the Occasion he heard about Etna, the burning Mountain of Sicily oftentimes great Lamentati∣ons and Cryings, and Weepings were heard, which he supposed to be the Weepings of evil Spirits that bewailed because the Souls of dead men were taken from them by the Petitions and Sacrifices of well-disposed Christians; therefore he appointed his Covent to make a general Oblation for All-Souls, the next Day after the Feast of All-Saints; and this great Institution was ordained about the Year 1002. and so all whose Eyes God hath opened, will see all this Heap of Invention hath been practisee since the Beast rose out of the Sea, and the Whore hath sate upon the Wa∣ters, which is since the Apostles Dayes. CHAP. X. Concerning Priests Vestures and Bels, which are practised among Christians as Apostolick Institutions. THE Jews high Priests had Vestments, and the rest of the Priests who offered Sacrifices and Oblations at the Temple and Tabernacle, Lev. .6, 7, 8, 9. & 13. And Aaron the Priest had a Coat girded with a Girdle, and clothed him with a Robe, and put a linnen Ephod upon him, and put a Breast-plate upon him, and a Mitre upon his Head; and Aaron's Sons had Coats with Girdles and Bonnets, as was commanded by the Lord; and in chap. 16.4. and he put on a linnen Coat and linnen Breeches, with a Coat and Mitre, and girded it with a Linnen Girdle, and these were the holy Garments, and these Garments were to be put off in the Holy Place; and divers other Garments and Vestments, which were worn by the Priest a∣bout the Temple-Worship and Sacrifice, which were Shadows of better things, and of more holy Garments; but this was in the first Covenant, that made nothing perfect which was faulty, and was to continue until the time of Reformation: But Christ being come, and offered up, all Sha∣dows had an End, and they preached up the everlasting Offering, and him who offered up himself once for all: Now Christ sent out his Disciples without great Provision as to Attire; for they were to take neither Staff, nor Srip, nor Shoes, nor Money, nor Brass in their Purses, and yet they were to go among them that were like Wolves, renting and tearing, de∣vouring and destroying, and there was no great Likelihood of obtaining any earthly thing from such, while in that Nature; but the Apostles li∣ed by Faith, Mat. 10.9, 10. and Luke 10.3, 4. and they were not to take two Coats; and the Apostle in his Travails was often in Necessities, in Hunger, and Cold, and Nakedness, and did not go in costly Array, nor in disguised Habits, but in his old Age wore sometimes a Cloak among the Churches, which he sent for to Troas, an ordinary Garment, 2 Cor. 4 8 9, 10. & 6.4. to ver. 11. 2 Tim. 4.13 and John the Baptist, who was a great
Prophet, had a Coat made of Hair, and a leathern Girdle about his Lyons, Mat. 2.3. and the primitive Christians wandered up and down in Sheep-Skins and Goat-skins, being destitute, of whom the World was not wor∣thy, Heb. 11.37, 38. But after the Apostles Decease, deceitful Workers and evil Beasts, and they that abode not in the Doctrine and Ordinances of Christ, went out into the World, and the World went after them, and so lost both Power and Form of Godliness, and invented things, some from the Heathen, and much from the Priests under the Law. Sextus the first commanded that the Corporis should be of linnen Cloath only,Sextus commanded that no Lay-People should touch the Priests Gar∣ments. and that of the finest and purest, and forbad that Lay-men should handle the hallowed Vessels, and namely, Women were prohibited hallowing the Priests Vestures, and Altars, and Cloathes, Diversity of Vestures of sundry Orders, were much, what taken from the Example of the Hebrew Priesthood, was practised and ordained by Stephen Bishop of Rome; and Sabinianus decreed first that the People should be assembled together to hear Service at cer∣tain hours by ringing of Bells;Sabinianus ordained that People should come together to hear Service by ringing of Bells. John 22d. Bishop or∣dained Bells to be tolled three times a day. and John the 22d. Bishop of Rome ordained that Bells should be tolled every day three times, and that then every man should say three times Ave-Mary, as Polidore saith, Lib. 6. The Invention of Bells was from Imitation of the Hebrews, because the high Priest had in the Skirts of his uppermost Garments, little Bells to ring when he was in the holy Place within the Vail. And the Banners and Trophies which are hung up in Churches, were taken from the Heathen, which did bear them to signifie the conquest of their Enemies; & these have been set up in the Churches, so called, by some of the Bishops of Rome, to declare as they said, the Triumph of Christ over Death and Hell. Now all Nations who are called Christians, look to your original, and from whence these Practices have risen, and those things are continued, even amongst the Protestant Churches, are either from the Jews, or from the Heathen, or from the apostatized Bishop of Rome long af∣ter the days of the Apostles; and so these Hoods and Surplices, and Caps, and Bonnets, and Cowls, and Tippets, and Miters, and Canonnical-Coats, and Girdles, and divers strange attires; it is like to prove these things we must have Aaron's Breeches brought in, and the linnen Ephod, and his Son's Girdles, and Coats and Bonnets, and the high Priest's Mitre, and all these Candlesticks for a Gospel-proof.
CHAP. X. Concerning Mattens, and inging of Palms by course in musical Tunes, and Sup∣plications and short Prayers, called Letany. THE Jews under the Law had many Officers which belonged to the Temple-Worship, among which were Singers, as the Sons of Corah, and the Sons of Asph, and Erahites, and the chief Musicians, &c. and di∣vers Psalms were given forth by the Spirit of God, by David and others upon several occasions, sometimes after Victories, and sometimes when he felt the Presence of God, and the working of his Power; and who were Eye-witnesses of his wondrous Works, as the rest of Israel were ma∣ny times, as at the Dedication of the Temple, and also when they came out of captivity, Neh. 7.44. & 12.27.42, 43. Psal. 149.3. & 150.3, 4. and all these singers of Songs pertain to the Temple, and the first Covenant and to that Priesthood which could not continue, by reason of the Faulti∣ness thereof, Heb. 8.7. and because all these things did not make perfect, a pertaining to the Conscience, and was to continue but for a time▪ until the time of Reformation, and then an End of the Temple, Priests and Worship, of the Singers, and Porters, and Organs, and stringed Instru∣ments, as in matter of Worship, an End was put to all these when, he was offered up that perfecteth forever them that are sanctfid. And the Christians, and true Believers in the Primitive times, who had received the Spirit, in which they did rejoyce, in and with what Words the Spirit was plesed to utter, and they tht had received the holy Ghst did joy in the holy Ghost, and they that did sing, sang in the Spiri, and with the Spirit, and with Understanding, from the feeling of the living which they had in their hearts of God's Preence, and his Assurance; and he that had a Psalm might sing, but all th Church did not sing together; a Psalm was a Gift of the Spirit, every one had it not; there was diversity of Gifts, and diversity of Operations; Prophecy, Interpretation, and a Psalm, were Gifts which were received from the Spirit, and not by tradi∣tion, 1 Cor. 14.15. Ephes. 5.19. James 5.13. And they that overcame, and were redeemed from the Earth, who had followed the Lamb, who had gi∣ven the Victory over Sin, Death and they Grave, the sang a new Song, which none could learn, but those whose Names were written in the Lamb's book of Life, Rev. 1.2, 3. & 19.1, 6. and these were the Songs of the Redeed which God had delivered out of their Enemies Hnds, and they were wit∣neses of his wondrous Works, and praised the Lord in the Spirit, and with understning, and did not get a Form of Words, of Davi's Words which he spake after his Victories, and Triumphs over his Ene∣mies; and also they prayed in the Spirit, and with Understaning, and spoke as it gave utteranc, and as they were moved by the holy Ghost, & were not limited, as how short, or how long but a the Spirit gave Utter∣rance, and not limited to hours, and set times, but when the Spirit of God which they had received moved thereunto, and then their Prayers were accepted, and were as sweet Incense, Rev. 5.8. & 8.3, 4. and were not
stinted to set hours, but as they saw in the Wisdom of God, and were mo∣ved by his Spirit. But since the Apostacy that the Spirit hath been lost by many, and the Power, & some of the Form retained, and then they began to imitate three times a day, and seven times a day, but Mttens at set times, and hours was appointed by Hierome, as Polidore and others say.Singing of Mattens at set times Hierom ap∣pointed. Also the Heathen they had Mattens, as Apu∣leus saith, which they sung at divers times of the day, and so sorted the Hours of the day for Sacrifi∣ces, which they did offer unto their Idols. Pelagius the second commanded Priests to say them daily.Pelagius the second, was the first that command-Priests to say them daily, and said, as the just man falleth seven times, so by instant Prayers and Mattens he might as often rise and amend. Urbanus the second, ordained the Mattens called the Ladies Mattens, to be said daily, and confirmed them in a Council which he had at Mount Clear in France; and Damasus Bishop of Rome gave Commandment, that Mattens should be said or Sung in all Churches, and added Gloria Patrito the end of every Psalm. Damasus also instituted that Psalms should be said or sung by Course; Damsus also commanded that the Creed should be said every hour: And Vitilianus invented the decent times wherewith the Hymns be Sung, and joyned the Organs; but there were divers and sundry manners of Prayers, and Forms and Mattens, and singing, devised by many, as Bennets Monks had one use, and Bernard another, and Dominicks Brethren had one order by themselves, and every Provincial Bishop made a several use in his Diocess, and all was confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. Telesphorus appointed that Lent should be kept before Easter,Telesphorus appointed that Lent should be kept before Easter and fasted. and added another Week to it, which we call Quinquagsima, and this Week he commanded Priests to Fast more then the Laity; and thus one runs into one Invention af∣ter another, and hath brought in all this mountain of Darkness, so that the Practice of these things since the Apostles dayes hath been much what corrupted, and Imitation at the best without Life, and are either from the Jews and their Worship, or from the Heathen, or from their own Inventi∣ons and Imaginations, which are many, in their Mattens and their Pray∣ers; that at last Beads were glad to be got to tell them; and so all who view these things and see them to be in the Apostacy, come out from among them, and them that are joyned to Idols let them alone, and keep your selves from them, and compare but the Worship and Practice of the Primitive times in the Apostles dayes, with all this which hath been brought in since, part of which is here Demonstrated; & much more might be said, but you will see that these Practices are not Apostolical, neither a∣greeable with the purest times, but People have been corrupted with them and made two-fold worse then before. And as concerning the Mass and Letany which are used in many Congregations,Concerning Mass & Le∣tany, many Authors patch∣ed it up at sundry times. there hath been so many Authors about patching them up, that they are almost past numeration, but take a short
hint of the forming of them up near unto the Apostles time; although they did celebrate the Sacrament as it was called, it was done with little mixture or Ceremony, but only repeating the Words of Christ, and after the Consecration they joyned to it the Pater-noster; Celestinus ordained some Prayers that the Priest should say when he revesteth himself to Mass, or putting on his Cloaths, and began Juica me Domine, &c. And in the Church of Greece they sang when the People Assembled together; Damasi∣us instituted the confession at the Beginging of the Mass; and Gorgius cau∣sed confession to be said nine times over in the Latine-Church; Gregory in excelsis is ascribed unto Telesphorus and Hilarius; and also Telesphorus or∣dained Epistles and Gospels, and Damasis divided them as they are read at this Day in the reformed Churches; and Anastsius ordained that Peo∣ple should stand at the Gospel; Marcus ordained the first Part of the Creed to be read after it was made by the Council of Nice, and the second Part, and Spiritum Sanctum, that the Council at Constantinople composed; Euti∣chianus instituted the Oertory to be sung while the People offerd some∣thing to the poor; Galesius mde the Prefaces, in the Beginning they used but one; Ansekius added the Sanus out of the Prophet Isaiah; burning of Incense, that which was occupied in the old Testament by Aaron, and the Panims in their superstitious Rites; Leo the third ordained it to be had in the Latine-church, and privity of Mass, called the common, was made by divers Persons, as Galatius made Te igitur, Satitious added Communicantes, and Alexander made Qui pridie, Hanc igitur, Leo joyned to it; Gregory annexed three Petitions in the same, Dies qui nostros, &c. Innocentius, Priests in the upper Part of the Church called the Quire, should kiss one another, that Pax should be born to the People; blessed with hands & chalices came out of the Hebrew ceremonies, Christ at his Ascension blessed his Disciples, and Surgi∣us from this ordained Agnus Dei seven hundred Years after Christ's Ascen∣sion, to be sung of the clergy at the time of communion, and often turning the Priest to the Altar and wheeling about when he saith Dominus vobiscum, or Oratis Fratres, these came from the Hebrew Rites; when the Mass is ended the Deacon turns to the People, and saith, Ita missa est, which words are borrowed from the Pagans, they were used in the Sacrifices of Isis, that when the Sacrifices were done, this was the watch-word that the People might depart, and of this sprang the custom of singing, Ita missa est, signifying that all Service was ended. Mass is an Hebrew Word, signifies an Oblation and Sacrifice, with all circumstances concerning the same. Alexander inhibited that they should not sacrifice but once a Day. Telesphorus ordained three Masses to be said n Christmas-day, the first at Midnight when Christ was born; the secod in the Morning when the Shepherds visited him, the third further on the day▪ as at the third hour. Foelix decreed that Mass might be said but in Pla∣ces consecrated, and none were to meddle with the Mysteries of consecra∣tion but the Priest. Anaclets ordained that no Mass should be said but in the Presence of two at the least, lest the Priest should say in vain to bare walls, Dominus vobiscum, the Lord be with you, whn none were present; and so on this wise, one Piece and Scrap was added to another, with much more, which I shall not trouble the Reader with, by which Peoples minds have been drawn from attending on God's Spirit, to hearken to these fool∣lish
ceremonies and invented charms, and so have been led in Ignorance, and into the Region of the Shadow of Death, where many have taken up their habitations; and Babylons Merchants have traded these many hun∣dred Years with such Merchandize, under the Name of Apostolical Or∣dinances, and holy Institutions. CHAP. XI. Concerning the Passeover and the Supper. THE Passover was a command of God by Moses unto Israel, while they were in captivity in Egypt, which God manifested his wonderous Works in the Land of Egypt, and in the Field of Zoan, for their deliverance, Exod. 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. That every family shall take to them every man a Lamb according to the House of their Fathers, a Lamb for an House, and where the Fa∣mily was little, the Neighbours were to joyn with him, ver. 21. Then Moses called for all the Elders of Israel, and said unto them, draw out and take a Lamb according to your Families, and kill the Passover, and ye shall take a bunch of Hysop, and dip it in the Blood that is in the basin, and sprinkle the lintle and the two side-Posts of the door with the Blood, and none of you shall go out of doors until the Morning, ver. 22, 23. The Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he sees the Blood upon the lintles and Posts, he will not suffer the Destroy∣er to come into your Houses to smite you, and ye shall observe  thing as an Or∣dinance for thee and thy Seed forever, ver. 24. And it shall come to pass when the Children shall say unto you, wht means this Service? ye shall say, it is the Sa∣crifice of the Lord's Passeover, who passed over our Houses in Egypt, and smote the Egyptians: And this was the Ordinance which was performed, and this is that Passeover which Christ sent his Disciples to prepare according to the time Prescribed, because it became him to fulfil all Righteousness, and he being not yet Sacrificed up, the Offering was not ended; but now he being offered up, this is to be Witnessed in the Spirit, and in the Hearts of his People who were marked and bear his Spot, when a destroyer comes to Execute vengeance upon the Wicked, he passes over his Seed which bears his Image. And when Christ came with the twelve and sate down in the place appointed in the even, the same Night he was betrayed; And he said unto them, I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I Suffer, Luke 22.15, 17, 19. And he took Bread▪ and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto them, saying, this is my Body which is given for you,  do in Remem∣brance of me, likewise the Cup after Supper, saying, this is the Cup of the New-Testament for you in my Blood, ver. 20. and this he gave as a Sign and a token to the Disciples, that as often as they did eat the Bread, and drink the Cup, they should remember him, and it should show forth his Deth till he came again; and this was Practised by the Disciples, according as Christ had said unto them, therefore the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 11.23. That I recei∣ved of the Lord, that delivered I unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same Night he was betrayed, took Bread, and brake it, and said, take eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; after the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, this Cup is the New-Testament in my Blood, this do ye, as
often as ye do it, in remembrance of me, ver. 24, 25. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye shew forth his Death till he comes; and so he put∣teth them upon Examination, ver. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this cup, ver. 29. For he that eats and drins unworthily, eateth and drinketh Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body; But Believers grew in the Knowledge of the Mystery, which was revealed through the Spirit, and came to see beyond these outward things and things visible, 2 Cor. 4.28. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things that are seen, are Temporal, but the things that are not seen, are eternal: So that which was given for a sign to be observed in remembrance of Christ till he came, was visible, to wit, the Bread and the Cup, which he gave to the Disciples at Supper, which they were exercised in for some time▪ in the time of Weakness, while their Eyes and minds were much outward; but they came to look at things which are beyond time, and things they saw which are not seen in time, but things that were Eternal, and this they fed upon; and so the Corinthi∣ans grew up in the Life, and knew the Flesh of Christ and his Blood, and they did eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and had Life in them; now they which eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, need nothing to put them in Memory of that which they already enjoy and Possess, and so the Apostles brought them to a further examination, not to look at things visible, but to examine themselves, whether they were in the Faith, for he that is in the Faith, is not in that which is visible, Prove your selves, know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. Now they who came to witness Christ in them, knew the Resurrection and the Life in them, and Witnessed the Life of the Son of God to live in them, and they in it, and this was a further State then looking at visible Things, which were in remembrance only of his Death; and blessed are they who have an Eye to see, and an Heart to believe these things. And now the Apostle spake unto wise Men, and bad them udge what he said, 1 Cor. 10.15. So that Novices, or they that were young, or Babes, had hrdly been able to discern if he had spoken such things to them, but he spoke to wise men, which could judge of what he said, and ver. 16. thus he said, The Cup of blessing that we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? ver. 17. For we being many are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one bread; and that one Bread was Christ, who said, I am the Bread of Life, and this they witnessed, and these are great Mysteries and they whose Eyes are towards visible things, cannot see them; and what a Nise and a Stir hath been made these many hundred Years, and what killing and persecuting about things that are seen. And since the Mystery hath been lost, and the Key which opens the my∣stery, how People have waded in the dark till they have lost themselves, and are sunk down into utter Darkness, as hath been manifest about visi∣ble things which do corrupt▪ how many have been killed about this Bread and this Cup, which are visible, since the Apostles Dayes? and how ma∣ny Institutions and Laws have been made about this▪ and have fought like Swine about the husk, and discern not the Life, neither the Lords Body? It is endless to declare what stir they make about this Bread, and this
Wine in the Church of Rome, which I shall not now stand to particularize much; but however, after the Priest hath consecrated it, they conclude it to be the very Body and Blood of Christ, and yet a thing which may be seen, and that is a temporal thing, and so give it Names past nume∣ration. And what work have they made about times and dayes, when it was fit to be received? and how many Decrees have been made about these things. Anacletus caused a Decree to be made, that all were to come to it under pain of Excommunication; and Victor denounced that those should be interdicted from all Service, when they should receive the Sacrament that would not be reconciled to their Neighbours of all Grudges and Ha∣tred; again, Clepharanius one hundred Years after Analetus, command∣ed that all that professed Christ, or bare the Name of Christians, being of the Age of twelve or fourteen Years, should at least once a year at Easter receive the blessed Sacrament; Fabianus decreed that they should receive it three times in a Year; and Innocentius the third, decreed it should be kept in the church, that it should be ready at all times, lest they that were sick should want to spiritual comfort of it; and Honorus the third confirmed the same; and Austin concluded the Eucharist to be of absolute necessity for Infants. And what a stir hath been in the reformed churches so called about this? and what disorderly work, and what high Imputations they have gained to it, whenas they commanded the Parishes to buy it, and then sell it them again, that the Priest must have a Offering at Easter, also a token of a piece of Lead, a token that they are at Unity with the Priest, or else they may not have their Bread and Wine again for which they paid before, and this hath been called a great Mystery. HAP. XII. Concerning Ministers and their Office under the Law and the Gospel. BEfore the Law was given forth, there were divers did offer Sacrifice and builded Altars unto the Lord, as Seth, Abel, Melchizedeck, A-, braham, Isaac and Jacob, who were Guiders and Directors of People in the Way of Righteousness, who instructed their Families in the Fear of the Lord; but after the Law was given forth, Aaron and his Sons and they were to offer Sacrifice according to the command of the Lord, and to per∣form the Worship that God had appointed for that Time and Age; at the Tabernacle and Temple there were Levites who bore the Ark, and look∣ed to the Vessels, and pitched the Camp, and divers other Services, as Sing∣ers, and Readers of the Law and Prophets on their Sabbath Dayes, and Porters, and the like, and all these pertained to the First Covenant and Priesthood, which was to have an End, both the Priesthood and the Law and the Service thereof; for it was but to continue till the Substance came. Now Christ being come to the End of the Law, for Righteousness unto all that believe, made after the Order of Melchizedeck, and not by a car∣nal
commandment, he offered up himself once for all, and became the Au∣thor of eternal Salvation unto them that believe, put an End to the first Worship and Priesthood. Before he was offered up, he chose Disiples unto him, twelve and also seventy, and endued them with Power, and many did believe through their Words, and they were not Men of great parts, but as they were fitted by the holy Ghost, that gave them Utterance; and they were sent out, not to preach the Law, but the Word of the Kingdom; and many did believe and grew, and were confirmed in the Faith; and after Christ▪s Ascension, the holy Ghost was poured forth upon them in a more ample Manner, and it did bring to their Remembrance, as Christ had foretold, and they received great Gifts for the Work of the Ministry; some were Prophets, some A∣postles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, and all made Mi∣nisters by the Spirit, for the Work whereunto they were chosen, and ma∣ny were converted and did believe; then they that had the Word of God to publish, travailed as they were led and moved by the Spirit, to publish the glad-tidings of the Gospel; and when the Believers were many, and many young in the Faith, they ordained Overseers or Bishops, or Elders, who were sound in the Faith, to watch over them that were begotten; but mark, they were approved men; and faithful, and of blameless lives, not given to Covetousness, neither did tyrannze over them in rigour, but were apt to teach and instruct in Love & Gentleness; and they that had been ancient Labourers in God's Work did so, who had received a Gift to mini∣ster unto others, and as to be helpers in the Work of the Gospel, and all that were ordained, were ordained by the holy Ghost, although it is true they had the consent of the Brethren, and the church in that thing; and there were also Deacons ordained, which served to look to the Widows, and for the Ministration of the poor, and these were faithful men, and had also a Gift; Stephen was one full of the holy Ghost, and these were helps unto the Apostles; also there were some faithful Widows, who were Ex∣amples to the younger Women, and to instruct them, and to be Patterns unto them, and were as a Body knit together in Love, and served the Lord; and strengthned one another in the Faith, and served one another in Love, and all these forementioned served the Lord freely and willingly, and not for Rewards, and Gifts, and Benefices, and earthly things; n short this was the State and Glory of the church in that time, and these are the Min∣sters we read of in the primitive times. But since the Apostacy hath entred in, and the power of Godlines hath been denyed, there is such a numberless number of Names crept in; we never heard of them, and so many Offices▪ and yet none of that Work done which the ministers of Christ did, but certain new invented things rought in for Worship and Service, and the Power despised, and men seeking Of∣fices, and great Titles, and great Benefits, and great Revenues, and the Heritage of God is laid waste, and the Earth become like a Wilderness un∣planted with good, and the Sheep and scattered: And so all may compare these ensuing Names and Offices with the Apostles dayes, and the primi∣tive Church, and see if they be alike. First of all the Pope, his Holiness, Christ's Vicar, Universal Bishop, Metropolitane Bishop, Lord Cardinals, which were but Priests at the
first, ordained to baptize the Heathen, who came to Rome when the Seat thereof began to be had in Honour; but now they are swelled big, and be∣come Princes, and the only Men to govern States; also Monks of divers Orders, and Fryars of divers Orders, Hierom's order, of Austin's Order, Gregory's order, Carmalite Fryars, Cross or Crouchet Fryars, of Dominis order, of St. Francis's order, Bennet's order; and all of these orders sprg up, and were ordained in the midnight of darkness, within this four hun∣dred Years at the most, as were easily proved; and Trinity order, and Brigandine order of Jesuites and Hermits, and Anthony's order, and Clunisen∣cies order; and Nuns sprung up, first of one St. Clara, one order, then Brigi∣dia a widow to the time of Urban the fifth in the Year 1370. And all these kind of orders were destitute of the true order of the primitive Church▪ and their Service was appointed by them that ordained them; and these practi∣sed the patched Inventions that were given them for Worship, which have not concord with the primitive Doctrine, but borrowed from the Jews or Heathen; & all these kind of Offices and Officers, have been acting their parts this many years, and have led People into superstitious Blindness, and fur∣ther from the Lord then ever. But to come to the reformed Churches, so called, and there is so many Officers and Names, but few that do accord with the Apostles times either in Name or Nature; as Metropolitan-Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Lord-Bishops; we heard not of Lord Timothy, or Lord Titus Bishops, before mentioned; but to come on to other orders, Arch-Deacons, Deans and Chapters, Preen, and these must attend on some old superstitious Buildings call'd Cathedrals or Minsters, and there perform a Service somewhat like the former, and these are enjoyned their Service like the Levites and Priests of old, by turns and course, as once in a moneth or two it may be, and have a hundred or two hundred pounds in the year for the same, and hardly stir from thence till they dye, except some greater advance offer it self; also Commssa∣ries, Procters, and Apparetors, and these are subsrvient to the former then Chancellors, Vice-chancellors, Doctors of Divinity, Bathellrs of Divi∣ntty, Doctors of Art, Masters of Art, Batchellors of Art, Graduates, Under-Graduates, and these belong to the former; then Prelates, Parsins, Vicars, Priests, Curates and Church-Wardens, all which Titles and Names and Offi∣cers, if they be but compared with the Scripture, there will be hardly any parallel, either concerning Office, Work or Doctrine: And notwith∣standing all these Orders and Sorts, who are fitted by humane Learning, or natural Study, though divers years exercised therein, are not skilled in the Word of Righteousness, neither have the Tongue of the learned to ad∣minister a Word in Season to the weary, nor to turn the Sinner from his Sins; and thus the Form of things, Titles and Names are holden up, but who seek after the Power of God? or to be made able Ministers of the Spi∣rit? Litteral Ministers enough while maintenance lasts, but the Minist∣tion of the Spirit few are acquainted with; and if there be any such it is well if he be not persecuted; so in that which I have said, the understand∣ing will see, that there hath been a great Apostacy since the Apostles dyes in the Ministry, in Doctrine, in Worship and Practice, divers of which I have touched upon, to the Intent that they that enquire after the Lord, may depart out of the midst of Ignorance, and come to worship Gd in
Spirit and Truth, and in the Temple made without hands, and be joyned to the Church which is in God, which the Gates of Hell prevail not against; though many will claim Authority from the Apostles, few will own their Life, neither walk after their Example; so take but a few more Instituti∣ons which are called Apostolick to this Day, among them called Christi∣an Churches. Cletus the third Bishop of Rome, was the first that wrote this Title, that is; Greeting and Apostolick blessing, he ordained the order of Priesthood. Everastus the fifth Bishop of Rome, ordained that Priests should be ho∣noured, and that they should be shaven. Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome, ordained that Matrimony should be only solemnized, and that the married should be blessed with the Priest, there was the beginning of being married by Priests. Sixtus about the year 114. after Christ, the seventh Bishop of Rome, ordained holy water, and ordered that it should be strowed abroad in chri∣stian Houses, and when the People met to worship. Telesphorus the eight Bishop of Rome, ordained that the communion should be laid upon an Altar, and that lay-People should not touch the ho∣ly Vessels, nor the holy Garments of the Priests; he ordained Lent, which was to be kept by the Clergy in the year one hundred forty two. Higinus the nineth Bishop, ordained the Communion to be celebrated three times at Christmas, and that Lent should be fasted. Pius about the year 147. after Christ, the tenth Bishop, ordained that chrisme should be ministred as baptism, and that children should have God-fathers and God-mothers; here was the beginning of this great Ordinance, and he ordained that Easter-day should be kept on the Sunday. Urbanus the seventeenth Bishop of Rome ordained church-yards to be hal∣lowed, and forbad Marriage of Priests. Pontianus the eighteenth Bishop, Ordained that Psalms and Mattens should be sung in Church Night and Day, to drive away Evil Spirits. Sixtus the twenty fourth Bishop in the Year 222. after Christ, ordained that Priests should wear Holy Garments, as Cuffs and divers others things in imitation of Aaron, and then came up Surplices; he commanded Images to be set up in Churches. Foelix the twenty sixth Bishop of Rome ordained division of Parish church∣es and Diocesses to Bishops. Leo the Emperour gave commandment, that all Images and Pictures of Saints should be takenout of the Churches for the avoiding of Idolatry, but the Bishop of Rome withstood the Emperour; the Emperour for his con∣firmation of taking of Images away, called a Council of Bishops, about three Hundred and thirty, and they ordained and Decreed, that all Images should be taken away, and burned in the year 740. But in the Year 762. Gregory the third called a Council together at Rome near a thousand Bishops, and condemned Leo the Emperor, and three hun∣dred Bishops for taking Images out of the Churches, and yet the former Council and this, all of one Faith and Church, which they use to say could not Err, and the latter Decreed, they should be adored and Worshipped with all Reverence. Boniface the eighth, he gave License to Mendicant Fryars to hear the private Confession of Sins, that People should confess to them.
Pope Alexander gave commandment that the Sacrament should be made of the Sweet Bread, and commanded that Water should be mingled with Wine. Innocentius the third ordained, that People should confess their Sins to a Priest once a Year, at the least. And these kind of Decrees stand for Apostolical to this day among the Apostates; and the Reformed churches, so called, do own many things that are too near a Kin to them, and press them for Ordinances and Holy Institutions; yea, in many Countries, the self-same Things are both owned and Practised in many Particulars, which I have mentioned be∣fore in other parts of this Book, and are looked upon as divine Service and holy Worship, which the Ministers of Christ, who have the Word of Re∣conciliation to publish, are ashamed of knowing them to be such things as ne∣ver was Practised nor holden out by Christ or his Apostles, but are brought in since Darkness hath over-spread the Earth, and the Power of God hath been lost; And at the first Institution thereof, though there might be some shew of a good Intention in the Formers of them, but now they are become absolute Idols; and however, at the first, some of these things mentioned might seem to some to be indifferent, yet now being prest of Necessity, as the Ordinances of God, they are become Idols, and ought to be thrown away, and departed from, by all that profess the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the Worship of God in the Spirit. For the Lord God hath drawn away his presence out of all formal and visible Appearance, since Anti-christ and the false church hath got them on for a Garment, and to cover themselves withal, to the deceiving of the Nations; And now in this the day of his Power hath Appeared in a more Mysterious▪ and secret and hidden way, and in a more spiritual Appearance, into this deceit cannot enter nor Transform, therefore all Babylons Mer∣chants are angry, and Anti-christs followers are full of Wrath, and the Dragon casts out floods after the heir, and her that brings him forth, and makes War with the Seed, but the Lord is putting on her beautiful Garments, and Marrying her to himself, and she shall Reign, and her Seed, who are born of the Spirit, when she that sat as a Queen upon the Waters shall have an End▪ and the Dragon shall be laid hold on, and Chain∣ed up▪ and the Beast and false Prophet be cast into the Lake forever. Blessed are they who keep in the Faith and Patience till these things be fulfilled, their Hearts shall rejoyce, and their Tonue Praise the Lord, and Magnifie him, whoe Throne is established in the Heavens, and his Kingdom is over all. And although there was a defection from the Faith and Practice of the Apostles in the first two hundred Years after Christ, yet doutless there were many who lived and died in the Faith, and suffered as Martyrs in the time of the great Persecutions by the Heathen Emperors, and many who could not, nor did not Sacrifice to their Idols, suffered Death, and under-went cruel Torments by the Heathen who were in the Dragon's Power, for the Testimony of a good Conscience, for confession of Christ Jesus▪ and al∣though divers of the Bishops of Rome, and other places, did bring in things which they instituted as matter of Worship, and so People were darkned by them, yet in the ten Persecutions by the Heathen Emperours, many suf∣fered Death, and Thousands of the christians besides; but Deceit crept
in by degrees, and invented things were brought in by the Leaders of the People, but these things that were invented, were prest to be observed in their Diocesses and Parishes which they had made and sate down in, but there was little compelling yet, till the Dragon gave his Power to the Beast, and it was 650 Years before ever the Bishops of Rome did climb up unto their height, as to claim the Title of the Universal Bishop or head of the church, or challenged Supremacy over all christian Churches; yet be∣fore this time abundance of Darkness was entred in, and the Power was much lost, and divers innovations were brought in for Ordinances, divers of the Jews ceremonies, and divers of their Institutions which belonged to the first Priest-hood, and these were prest upon the Churches by seve∣ral Leaders or Bishops, as Apostolick Ordinances, which had no concur∣rence with the Primitive church in the first hundred Years after Christ, as hereafter may be shewn in divers things wherein they were Aposta∣tized from the Life and Power of God, and from the Practice of the Saints mentioned in the Scripture, and of the churches, planted in the Apo∣stles dayes. CHAP. XIII. Something concerning the ten Persecutions by the Heathen Emperors of Rome. FOR the first three hundred Years after Christ, who was born in the Reign of Augustus Caesar then Emperour of Rome, and was rejected and Crucified by the Jews in the seventeenth Year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar then Emperour of Rome, who Reigned eight Years after Christ was cruci∣cified, whom Pilate gave Sentence against, and delivered to the Jews, the said Pilate was banished by the Emperour, and afterwards he killed him∣self, in which time Stephen the Martyr was stoned to Death by the Jews, and the same day Stephen was Stoned, (Dorotheus saith) Nicanor one of the Deacons suffered with two thousand Christians more in his Reign; about this time Paul was converted. The next Emperour that succeeded Tiberius Caesar, was Caesar Caligula, who commanded his Image to be set up in the Temple at Jerusalem to be Worshipped as God; Herod who Mocked Christ with his Souldiers, and set him at nought, was banished, and died miserablely; he likewise put forth Caiphas the High Priest, and afterwards in the forth Year of his Reign Caligula was slain. Claudius Nero succeeded him, and Reigned thirteen years, a grievous Tyrant, and an hater of all Good; by him was James the Son of Zebedee Mar∣tyred, and Simon, and Parmens the second of the seven Decons Martyred and Thoms who preached to the Medes and Persians, was slain with a dart in his Reign; about this time Simon Zelotes who Preached in Africa, was crucified, Andrew and Matthew, the one crucified, and the other slain with a Spear; Matthias and Philip the one was crucified, and the other Stoned to Death. About the 62 year after Christ, James the Son of Alpheus called the Bro∣ther of Christ, was Stoned to death, with many more, and Mark slain at Alexandria.
Domitius Nero began his Reign about the sixty seventh year after Christ, he Reigned fourteen years Emperour of Rome, under him was the first of the ten Roman Persecutions, he caused the Christians of all Ages, Sects and sorts to suffer; he commanded Rome to be set on Fire in twelve places, and to avoid the infamy thereof, he accused the Christians with it, and caused them to be persecuted and put to Death; and in the latter end of his Reign, Paul was put to Death for the Testimony of the Faith of Christ. In the year sixty nine, this Nero was afterwards proclaimed by the Senate of Rome an Enemy to all Mankind, and condemned to be drawn through the City, and to be Whipt to Death, for fear of which he fled, and afterwards slew himself, and the Church had Rest for a season from Persecution af∣ter him. In the ninety sixth year began Domitian the Emperour to Reign, who began the second Persecution, who was a Blasphemer against God, and an Idolater; In his dayes was Simon Bishop of Jerusalem crucified, and John the Evangelist banished into the Isle of Patmos; but after the Death of Do∣mitian he was released by Pertinax; this Domitian the Emperour fearing the coming of Christ again, commanded that all that could be found of the stock of David in Jewry should be slain, and many false Accusations were brought against the Christians, and the Inquisition was this, Swear the Truth, whether thou art indeed a Christian, and if they confessed, they were condemned, and put to Death for that alone. Clement succeeded Anacletus the Bishop of Rome, and after him Everistus who was martyred under Trajanus in the 102 year after Christ. In the Reign of Trajanus the Emperor, began the third persecution of the Chri∣stians, Simon who was said to be Christ's kinsman, was Bishop of Jerusa∣lem, and Ignatius Bishop of Antioch who suffered Martyrdom in the Reign of Trajanus, in the year 111. with many other of the Christians who were destroyed in this persecution; the churh of Rome was not so highly exalt∣ed as afterwasd she usurped Authority; neither were the Officers thereof nor Bishops so corrupt as afterwards they came to be both in Doctrine and Practice. Marcus Antonius Verus began the forth Persecution, in the year 162. in whose time a great number who professed Christ, suffered cruel Deaths in Asia, and in France, and other parts, among whom was Polycarpu the Bishop of Smyrna; this persecution continued thirteen years: The church had some rest under the Reign of Lucius Antonius Comadus, and then the Christians began to wrangle and jangle about the celebration of Easter, and about Observations of Times and Feasts, and run into things outward, and contended about them, and so weakned themselves, and hurt one a∣nother. Alexander Bishop of Rome succeeded Everistus, and Telesphorus succeeded him likewise, and Higinus, and Pius, and Ansatus Soler, and Elutherius; all these were Bishops of Rome, but many things began to creep in in their time, but being kept under by the Roman Emperors, they did not get much outward Power, because they had no outward compelling Laws, to force their Institutions in divers things which were contrary un∣to the former Apostles Practices, yet notwithstanding there was something of Truth, and of the Power of it kept, and they testified against the Idola∣try of the Heathen, and so suffered death.
Severus succeeded in the Empire about the year 195. under whom was the fifth Persecution against the Christians, who reigned eighteen years; in the beginning of his reign he was somewhat favourable to the Christi∣ans, but afterwards through the malicious suggestions, and accusations of wicked men, he was so enraged and incensed against the Christians, that by proclaimation he commanded through the Empire, that no Chri∣stians any more should be suffered, whereby a great number were destroy∣ed and killed, as Eusebius saith in his 6th. Book about the year 205. This Se∣verus the Emperor was slain in Brittain about the year 214. and was buri∣ed at York. Aurelius Alexander Severus began his reign about 224. at this time the Church had gotten some rest from Persecution, at this time the Christians had gotted some House or Place to meet in, in this time of rest in Rome, and the Cooks and Tiplers challenged it to belong to them, the matter being brought before the Heathen Emperor Severus, he judged it to be more honest and reasonable, that this Place should be continued to the Christians to worship God in, then that the Cooks and Victualers, and Tiplers should enjoy it; by this all may understand that there was no great Minsters, Steeple-houses, or Places called Churches erected in Rome unto this time for the Christians, although there is so much ado in this time a∣bout Steeple-houses, and Minsters and Parish-churches, within this latter Age, by them that are run into visible things have been so strongly pressed for a house of God. and a holy Church; so that in this time the Christians had no Mass-houses with Steeples, and Crosses, and Bells, and Organs, standing East and West, which are pleaded for to be decent and holy In∣stitutions, yet notwithstanding the Moderation of this Emperor, Galistus and Urbanus Bishops of Rome were put to death, but yet the Bishops of Rome did not arrogate to themselves to be universal, and these were not called Popes, though divers superstitious things crept in, and were allowed by the said Bishops, and they were declining from the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles in the first century, and this was about the year 226. Maximinius the next, was chosen Emperor rather by the wilfulness of Souldiers, then the Will of the Senate, he caused the sixth Persecution which was great against the Christians, especially against the Leaders and Teachers, hoping that when they were smitten, the Sheep would soon be scattered, this was in the year 237. Pontianus Bishop of Rome was banish∣ed by this Emperor, and many more christians suffered under this Empe∣ror, and were put to death, and more it is likely would have suffered, but the Lord shortned his dayes, and his Tyranny, for he reigned but three years. The next Emperor was Gordianus in the year two hundred and forty, who was more moderate towards the christians, so that the sixth Perse∣cution ceased, but after he had reigned the space of six years he was slain by Philip the succeeding Emperor, Philippus who slew Gordianus, who was called the first christian Emperor who slew Gordianus and began with blood, he with his Son Philip govern∣ed the Empire seven years; about the year 246. it is said this Philip with his Son and Family was converted by Fabianus and Origen; it is said that both he & his Son were slain by Decius one of his own Captains, and though
being the first that brought in Christianity into the Imperial seat, but the name of Christianity would not save him, being out of the Nature, be∣ginning with blood, it was required at his Hands, and Anthetius Bishop of Rome after Pontanius; Damasus saith, that this Bishop was put to death, because he recorded the deaths of the sufferers, and here was the Begin∣ning of that which they call the Legend of Martyrs in the Chucrh of Rome. The seventh Persecution began by Decius who succeeded Philippus in the Year 250. by whom was moved a terrible Persecution against the Christi∣ans, which is noted to be the seventh Persecution. Fabianus being a mar∣ried man, and had a Wife, was chosen Bishop of Rome; this Doctrine of Devils forbidding to marry was not yet brought in, which the Apostle to Timothy prophesied of, no not in the Church of Rome, nor for two hun∣dred and fifty Years after Christ; so the Emperor Decius put him to death, and gave forth a Proclamation that all that professed the Name of Christ should be put to death. Origen suffered many bonds, wrackings, torments for Religion, yet afterwards it is said he sacrificed to Idols, and was exco∣municated, yet afterwards repented: And Nicephorus saith of this Perse∣cution under the Emperor Decius, that it was easie to number the Sancs of the Sea, as them that suffered under him. Cheremon a married Bishop fled with his Wife into the Mountain of Arabia, and never was seen more; the prohibition of Ecclesiastical men, or Ministers marrying was not yet begun, no not in the Church of Rome, although they plead Antiquity for their Institutions and Practices; the Emperor reigned but two Years, and was slain by the Barbarians; about this time divers Bishops suffered, and others were condemned to mettal mines: Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was banished; these had no Power yet to give forth Laws or Inquisitions nor to force things upon People; for they had not the outward Authority then, though divers things which were unsound crept in by little and lit∣tle, even among them: About the year two hundred and fifty five Vale∣rianus together with his Son Gallienus came to be Emperors, who reigned together; at first they were moderate to the Christians for about two or three years, insomuch that in the Emperors Court there were many Chri∣stians; but afterwards being moved by an Egyptian, was stirred up to per∣secution, which was about the year two hundred fifty nine this Emperor was stirred up to persecute the Christians, which was the eighth persecu∣tion, being instigated by the Egyptian, who was great in his court, telling the Emperor that the Christians were the cause of all the Evils of Famine nd Plague upon the Empire; divers Bishops and many hundreds were put to death besides; Stephanus suffered with six more that were leading men; also Lawrence suffered, who was pinched with Fire-Tongs, and laid upon an Iron Grate or Grid-iron red hot, and so broyled to death. In the sixth year of the Reign of Valerianus, Gallianus having lid for the space of three years in prison which Claudianus and Bossa his Wife, were pt to Death for being Christians; likewise Fructuosus Bishop of Tarraconia with two Deacons were burned the same year for being Christians this Valerian the Emperor reigned seven years, and was taken in the War by the King of Persia, who made him his block to take horse on to his dying day; and though the Christians in this time were much darkned, yet they
were much more justified in the Sight of God then the Heathen Emperors, who came all or most of them to a woful End of their Cruelty, and Tyran∣ny, and Murder; for the Hand of the Lord who distributes Justice equal∣ly to every man according to his Works, found them out; and Gallianus the Son of Valerianus, who joyned with his Father in persecution, had many earthquakes, and thirty Rebellions and Insurrections raised in his time, in the Empire in nine years time, and this stopt their persecuting of the Christians somewhat; and after Gallianus the Emperor succeeded Clau∣dius, who reigned two years, and after him Quintilianus the Brother of Claudi∣us, who continued only seventeen Dayes, about the year two hundred seven∣ty four, in this time the Christians had some rest from Persecution. The nineth Persecution began under Aurelianus, who began his Reign mildly, but soon after moves the nineth Persecution, about this time many Christians suffered, and some of the Bishops of Rome, and Sixtus, and Di∣onysius, and many others in the middle of his Reign, there was a Council of the Christians at Antioch, the Emperor seeming not to be against it, nor them, but afterward he was about to seal an Edict for further Persecution of the Christians, but he was so terrified with thundring and lightning, that it stopt his Tyranny, in the sixth year of his Reign he was slain about the year 276. After him succeeded Tacitus, who reigned but six Moneths, and Flori∣anus reigned next, who reigned but sixty Dayes, and after him reigned Marcus Aurelius Probus, who reigned six years and four moneths, in this time there was no Persecution, but the Christians had rest as in matters of Religion, but he was slain by his Souldiers in the year two hundred eighty five. Carus with his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus succeeded Probus in the Empire, the Reign of which Emperors continued in all but three years Carus was slain with lightning, and Numerianus was also slain▪ & Carinus the other Son reigned alone in Italy with much Wickedness, who afterwards was slain by the hands of the Tribune at Rome; so that from the latter end of the Reign of Valerianus, unto the Reign of Dioclesian. there seeming to be about forty four years, in which there was little Persecution of the Christians, but they had rest and enjoyed their Worship in quiet, and they were kept under Sufferings, and the Law, and did not exercise Authority over the Consciences of the rest, as afterwards they did, when they came to have Power in their hands, although as I said before, divers things were brought in by the Bishops of Rome in this time, which were much dis∣agreeing with the Apostles Dayes, yet they held part of the true Worship, and bore a Testimony against the open prophaneness, and cursed Idolatry, and pride of the Heathen Emperors, who killed one another for the Impe∣rial Seat; and in this Testimony that they bore for God, I believe they were accepted, and had peace with God. The tenth Persecution began under the Reign of Dioclesian▪ which was in the year 289. this was the last Persecution against the Christians, which was horrible, and grievous, that never was any Persecution before or since comparable to it, for the time which it continued, which was the space of ten years together, though there were more Emperours which had a Hand in this Persecution, yet Principally it beareth the Name of Dioclesian
this Diocletian the Emperour took unto himself Maximinius to be Partner with him in his Empire, those two Emperours chose two others to them∣selves, that is to say, Gallerius and Constantius, whom they called Cesars; Gallerius was sent into the East-parts against the Christians, and Constantius to the West to Britain, these two last Reigned moderately, and did not Per∣secute the Christians for about 19 years, so they Prospered in their Wars abroad, but afterwards by reason of their Victories were puft up with Pride in their Hearts, they Ordained a triumph at Rome, after which tri∣umph Diocletian gave Commandment that he himself should be Worshipped as God, and said, he was Brother to the Sun and Moon, and so command∣ed the People to kiss his Feet, which afterwards when the chief Bishop of Rome got up into Pride, and claimed Superiority over all the Christian Churches, having got the Authority of the Dragon, commanded the Emperours, and Kings then to kiss his Feet, and so in this the Pope hath imitated the Heathen Emperour, who was the greatest Persecutor that ever we read of; But to return to Diocletian, he began a great and grievous Persecution of the Christians which was the nineteenth year of his Reign; in the year of Christ 103. he commanded all the Meeting places of the Christians to be Spoiled, and the Books of the holy Scriptures to be burn∣ed, he sent out a Proclamation for casting all the Bishops and Elders into Prison in his Empire, and constrained them by several Torments to Wor∣ship Idols; and so great Persecution there was among the Christians, and grievous Torments they suffered, because they would not offer Sacrifice to Idols; one Noble man at Nicomedia pluckt down the two Emperours Pro∣claimations against the Christians, not fearing the Emperours who were then in the City, for which Act he was put to most bitter Death afterwards they were so mad, that they sought to destroy all the Christins in the World, it can hardly be expressed with Words what numbers suffered, and what Blood was shed throughout all the Regions, and they cast the Christians among the Lyons, Bears and Leopards, who were kept hungry for that purpose, and them that the wild Beasts would not devour, they slew them with the Sword, and threw them into the Sea. Cerena the Wife of Dioclesian he killed, because she was a Christian; two thousand were Burnt in one place, many suffered in Phrygia; and were burnt with the whole City, in this Persecution; likewise in France, Spain and Britain, so that some Rivers were Coloured with Blood, one thousand slain some∣times in one day, and they slew them by ten, twenty, sixty, and some∣times an hundred Men, Women and Children. Damasius, Beda, Oratius, Honorus, and others do testifie, that there were slain in the space of one Month seventeen thousand Persons; likewise Peter Bishp of Alexandria, and three hundred more were slain with Axes there; Mauritius was slain with 6666. Victor with 360 were slain in the City of Troy; the Christians notwithstanding all this Persecution did increase, and though a Cloud was over many, and Darkness entred in, in part, respectively to what had been in the first Century, yet they were the best Witnesses for the Lord in their Generation, and the Christians did increase, so that the two Heathen Emperours were tryed with Persecuting, and gave up their Empire, and led a private Life, having Reigned one and twenty Years, which was in the Year 305. these two latter Emperours Maximinius and Constantius who
were called Caesars, now became the Emperours of the whole, one in the East, and the other in the West. Maxentius was set up Emperour by the Souldiers, and goes against Maximinius the Emperour, who sent Severus his Son to War against him, which Severus being slain, Lycinus Caesar was chosen in his room, so that Maximinius, Constantius and Maxentius continued the tenth Persecution after Dioclesian and his partner had given over, saing Constantine, and especially his Son Constantius were kind to the Christians; Constantius chused those who refused to offer Sacrifice and commit Idolatry to be in his Court, and Banished the Heathen Idolaters as unfit for his Service that were Traytors to God, and this was about he year 311. On the other hand, Maximinius the Emperour and his partner were very Wicked in Idolatry and Cruelty, God struck him with a great Plague in the Belly and secret Parts, which putrifying broke out with Swarms of Lice, which caused such a stink that the Physician could not endure the same, wherefore he slew the Physician, and by the anguish of his Disease, he slacked Persecution, making confession that his Persecu∣ting of them had brought this upon him, and so acknowledged his Offence and the Infidels divers exalted the God of the Christians, yet afterwards being incensed against the Christians, this Emperour set up Decrees afresh to Persecute the Christians, whereby many Bishops & others were Martyred; here was no titles of Lord-Bishops & Arch-Bishops not yet in the first three hundred Years, neither was there any Pope then that did lay claim to Su∣premacy over all the Churches, neither had these Bishops whole Countries and Provinces for their Maintenance, neither all Rome, Constantinople, An∣tioch, and Jerusalem, and all People therein for their Diocesses▪ but them only of the Christians who believed▪ in each of those places; but after∣wards in the great Persecution there followed great Famine and Pestilence on the Heathen, whih caused the Persecutin to cease, and caused Maxi∣minius to revoke his Decrees, and punished the Inchanters that incensed him against the Christians; Maximinus who was joyned in the Empire with Di∣oclesian, who laid down the Government of the Empire, endeavoured to have slain Constantius the Emperour, that he might have got up again into the Empire, but failing of his enterprize, was slain of Constantius, Max∣entius this time Reigns wickedly and Tyrantly at Rome, which caused the Romans to intreat Constantine to come against Maxentius for his Wickedness, who made War against him, and upon a Bridge made of Boats over the River Tyber, he was intrapped by Constantine, and drowned in Tyber▪ and thus the Righteous Judgment of God at last came upon them for their Blood and Cruelty, as a Recompence and a reward for their Deeds, but Constantine set forth Decrees of favour to the Christians. Marcelliuns was Bishop of Rome about the tenth year of Dioclesian, in the Persecution he Sacrificed to Idols▪ & was excommunicated by three hundred Bishops, but afterwards was killed in the Massacre of Dioclesian. Marcellus succeeded, & one Lucina a rich Maid of Rome dying, made Marcellus her Heir, and gave him all her Substance, and from that time saith Pollidore Lib. 1. the Bishops of Rome were greatly inriched, and he began to grow up in earthly Honours higher and higher. But Constantine the Emperor, about the Year 318, caused a Cross to be made of Gold and precious Stones, and to be born before his Army instead
or a Standard, when he went to fight against Maxentius, Maximinius and Licinius, these were the last Persecutors of the Christians in the Roman Mo∣narchy, which this Constantine did vanquish, and set the Christians at Li∣berty, who had been persecuted about three hundred Years; and so after∣wards this Cross others began to imitate, and set up in their Churches, and became a flat Idol; notwithstanding after this some Persecution was stirring in the eastern Countries, yet in Rome and the western Parts there was no general Persecution for many Years, & also in the East Part he sub∣dued those Tyrants; & we read of no Persecution against the Christians, un∣til the Time that John Wickliff suffered, which was when the Spirit of the Heathen was entered into the Bishops of Rome and Popes, who had retained the Name of Christian, but lost the Life and the Power, he began with Fire to persecute the Members of Christ. But long before this Time the Wisdom and Power of God was much lost among many of the Bishops of Rome, and also divers others, that the A∣postacy was entered in, and they made great Contentions about Easter, and about Dayes which should be fasted, and some were for two, and some were for three, and some were for forty Dayes; all the Churches of Asia, and their Bishops were for keeping it the fourteenth Moon, as Eusebius saith, lib. 5. For Asia observed the Feast of Easter, and they called a great Coun∣cil together, and decreed that it should be observed the fourteenth Moon, upon what Day soever in that Week the Moon fell, and appointed fasting-dayes; and Meetings and Synods in all Parts met together about this trivi∣al Matter in the Year 199. at Rome likewise there was a Synod gathered together, wherein Victor the fourteenth Bishop was President; and the eastern Churches decreed it the Day aforesaid, and Fastings before it, and a western Church decreed it to be the Day wherein Christ rose from Death to Life; but Victor Bishop of Rome, with the adjoyned Congegati∣ons, pronounces flatly all the western Churches to be excommunicated Persons, and gives them up to Satan, so that it became a Proverb, That the Bishop of Rome must judge all, and be judged of none; this was about the year one hundred ninety nine after Christ, when they had respite from Perse∣cution: And Ireneus Bishop of Lyons, he was of Victor's Mind, that it ought to be celebrated on the Sunday only, yet reproved Victor Bishop of Rome, Peter's Successor, as they say, for cutting off all the Churches of God in Asia for such a trivial Thing. And Polycarpus and Anicetus contended about trivial Things, and al∣though there was much Good in them both, yet this weakened the Chri∣stians, and led the Minds of People out into the Observance of outward Things, and neglected the Life and Power. Luius the two and twentieth Bishop of Rome, about the year 255, and Stephanus who succeeded him, a great contention in their Time about bap∣tism; the Matter was, whether they that returned from any Heresie shall be re-baptized, or be received in with Prayer, and laying on of Hands on∣ly; and so here was a great jangling and contention about outward things, which were getting up as Idols; and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage judged that Hereticks had no Way to be purged from Error, but by Baptism, but Ste∣phan was greatly offended with Cyprian for this. After Stephen Sixtus succeeded, and Dionysius writes unto him, how that
all Cilicia, Cappadocia, Gallatia, and the bordering Nations, how grea Synods had decreed, that they would not communicate with them, be∣cause they re-baptized Hereticks, and saith further, the greatest Synod of Bishops hath decreed, that such as renounce any Heresie, should first be in∣structed, and then washed and purged of their impure Leaven; and thus they wrangled and angled about Things with one another, and brake into Fractions, notwithstanding many of these Men suffered under the merciless Cruelty of the Heathen Emperors; likewise they excommunicated one a∣nother, and called Councils, and censured one another, and hurt the spread∣ing of Truth amongst them that believed in the Name of Jesus; all this is to shew that they were declining and coming to Loss in this Time, though so near the Apostles Time, and though they suffered under the Emperors, and found Peace with the Lord, yet many Practices and Institutions were made, which are not according to the primitive Times, which ought not to be binding to all Generations afterwards because of the Antiquity of them, as the now called Church of Rome would have all to receive as Apo∣stolick Doctrine. But to return to Constantine the Emperor, when Peace was established in the empire, he set forth a general proclamation or edict, not constraining therein any Man to any Religion, but giving Liberty to all Men to exercise their Religion, whether Christians or others, which Thing was taken well by the Romans and all wise Men; this Licinius joyned with Constantine in the Government of the empire, & seemingly favoured the Christians, & joyned with Constantine in setting forth an edict for the Christians Liberty, yet after∣wards he had great Hatred towards Constantine, and conspired his Death, reecting the Christin Rlgion, and persecuted them, who said, He would become an Enemy to the Christians, for that in their Meetigs and Assembles they prayed not for him, but for Constantine; so cast the Christians into Pri∣son, and persecuted them within his Dominions, and many were put to Death; but at length he was slain, after several Battels between him and Constantine, by the Souldiers, in the year 324. Constantius the Emperor, the Father of Constantine dyed a natural Death, and was buried at York; Dioclesian dyed at Salena, as some say, by his own Poyson, in the year 319. he was the chief of the seven Tyrants in the tenth Persecution; Maximi∣nian the second, who was hanged at Mazlla by Constantine, in the year 310. Thirdly, Galerius, who was plagued with a terrible Disease; Seve∣rus, the fourth, was slain by Maximinian, the Father of Maxentius, the wicked Tyrant, who was banished by Constantine in the year 318. The sixth was Maxentius, who dyed not long after, in the year 320. Lastly, Licinius was overcome by Constantine, and slain about the year 324. And thus the Lord plagued the Cruelty of the Heathen Emperors, who knew not God, but hated his Appearance, and rewarded them according to their Deeds. The Christians in these three hundred years, wherein were the ten Per∣secutions, they were Sufferers under the Power of the Dragon, who ru∣ed in the Emperors, and then they were not Persecutors, having not the outward Power in their Hand; but when they had the outward Power, then they turned Persecutors, especially the Bishops of Rome, when they
had the outward Power on their Side, then they were wore then Constantine the great, who gave Liberty to all Christians and others, to worship God without forcing of any, as their Actions following afterwards make it ap∣pear; for being countenanced by the Emperor, they grew proud and lord∣ly, and increasing in Power and outward Authority, though set up at first by the Emperor, at last excluded him from having any Authority or Pow∣er over the See of Rome, as after a Season may be made appear. In the year 367 Damasus was Bishop of Rome eighteen years. Also in the first three or four hundred years before ever the Bishop of Rome did get so high, as to be called Universal Bishop, Abundance of Dark∣ness spread over, and Abundance of Idolatry and superstitious Things were invented, and Abundance of Orders, as Fryars, and Monks, and Monasteries, and Nunneries, wherein they were diverted from the Order of the Gospel, and a great Apostacy came in. In the year two hundred sixty two Anthony is called the Father of the Monks, who followed the Example of Paulus born at Thebes in Egypt, who retired himself to a private cave under the Foot of a Rock in the seventh Persecution of Decius; and one called Basil is said to be the first that built Monasteries, and ordained Vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, and these are called the Monks of Basil's order, and are bound to abstain from all kind of Flesh, and here began this Doctrine of Devils, contrary to the Doctrines of the Apostles of Christ; the next that prescribed Orders was Augustine, born in the Year three hundred fifty, this Order was called Au∣stin-Fryars, they wear a Leathern Girdle to distinguish them from the Monks; the first Order of the Fryars was Mendicants; the third that pre∣scribed Orders was Benedict in the year four hundred seventy two, and out of this Order did spring the Monks of Benedict; and divers other Orders which I have mentioned before in the former Part of the Book; the fourth that prescribed Orders was Francis of Assis, these were called Franciscans or Grey-Fryars; their Rule and Order was confirmed by Innocent the third, these are the fourth Order of Fryars-Mendicants or begging-Fryars, and from this Order sprung Fryars-Minories, or Capucien-Fryars; Minories were ordained by Franciscus de Pola, and Capuciens were ordained by one Matthew Basa of Acona; the Jesuites were first founded by Ignatius Loyola, born in Navar, these were first confirmed by Paul the third. The Nuns first Author was one Clara the Daughler of Assis, who for∣sook her Father's House, and devised an Order of Religious Women, who vowed Poverty and Virginity, they were confirmed by Honorius the third; but many of these, and their practice which are contrary to the primitive time being before mentioned in this book, I shall let them pass, and so re∣turn to the Bishops of Rome; but divers contentions and sects began to break forth, and the Bishops not only of Rome, but of Alexandria and Ni∣comedia, and Miletus, and one clashing against another; Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and Eusebeus Bishop of Nicomedia, and many Bishops in other places joyning one to one side and one to another, and envying one another insomuch that as Eusebius saith, a man might have seen not only the pre∣sidents and chief Rulers of the churches envying one against another with spightful opprobrious Terms, and also the multitude severed into parts, that the christian Religion was openly derided of all men, and so called
Councils and Synods, and condemned one another, and excommunicated one another as Hereticks, and so went out of the Long suffering and pati∣ence, and Forbearance which the Apostle exhorted unto. And so no less then four hundred years many run wholly out into con∣tention about Dayes, Meats, and Drinks, some running this Way, and some that Way, and forging things upon the Apostles and the Churches in Asia, saying, that John the Disciple gave them an Order to observe Ea∣ster the fourteenth day of the Moneth, and Rome and the Western parts al∣ledge Peter and Paul for their Author how they left them this tradition, both alike true; for this came up more by custom, then any Injunction from the Apostles, or tradition either; for they condemned such things in their Life time, and called them beggerly Rudiments, such as inhabit at Rome, they began to make Fasts, and fasted three Weeks before Easter, excep∣ting the Saturday and the Sunday: Illyricum, Greece and Alexandria began their Fasting-dayes six Weeks before Easter, and that they call forty dayes fasting, or Lent, others begin seven Weeks before Easter, yet in all the while they use Abstinency but only fifteen days, and have intermission a∣mong these dayes, and yet call these forty dayes fasting, or Lent; so that they disagreed in the time, disagreed in the Moneths, disagreed in the Dayes and Times, and in the Abstinence, and contended about these things, as for Life and Death, and excommunicating one another, and judging one an∣other Hereticks, and at last when they got Power, killed one another, and stirred up the Emperors one against another, and this in the 350 or 400. years after Christ. And all this fasting was but from some Meat, as though some had been clean, and some had been unclean; some abstained only from Flesh and fed only upon Fish, and all other creatures; others upon Fish and Fowls of the Air, affirming their Original is of the Water, and so no Flesh; and other some fasted till nine of the clock; and then eat of divers Sorts as they plea∣sed; and here was their Fast and their Lent, about which was all this con∣tention and Stir, all which Practices are condemned in the Apostles Wri∣tings, and such Ignorance and Hypocrisie; for the Kingdom of God stands not in Meats and Drinks, and yet the Protestants, and they that call them∣selves Reformed, will needs press these things as holy Institutions, whenas it is manifest, when the Christians in former dayes began to judge one another about these things, and strive▪ and bite one another, and devour one ano∣ther, they lost the Power, and then Mystery-Baylon began to rise, these things became her Merchandize, and these Practices came to be called Chri∣stianity, which Christ and his Apostles would have been ashamed of. And about the Sacrament great contention arose, as about the time and manner, some did receive the Bread and Wine every Sabbath-Day, yet Alexandria and Rome do not use it: yet the Egyptians oyned to Alexandria, and the Inhabitants of Thebes they had an other Order, they did receive it when they had banquetted, and filled themselves with Delicates, and then received their Communion, and they judged one another in these things: In Thessaloniea, Macedonia, and Hellas in Achaia, they baptize only on the Easter-holy-dayes: Likewise in Hells, Jerusalem and Thessalica, their Ser∣vice they said with candlelight; likewise in Caesaria, Cappadocia, and at Cyprus the Priests and Bishops expound the Scripture on the Saturdayes,
and Sundayes by candle-light, as Socrates saith, Lib. 5. In this time it is said, the Customs and Observations were so many, that none were able to find two that did retain one Order of the Service. At Caesaria in Cappa∣docia, they receive not into Communion such as sin after Baptism, and even so the Macedonians in Hellespont did the same. The Phrygians allow not of two Marriages: The original Authors of so great Diversity of Services, Rites and Customs, were Bishops which governed their Churches at seve∣ral times, and such as do like of such Practices, have commended them to posterity for Laws, and such vain and frivolous contentions did arise in this Age, whereby it is manifest, the Apostacy from the Life and Power of God was great, and God's Wisdom, and the Unity of the Spirit was wanting, and Philosophy and customary Practice was their chief Founda∣tion; and one Bishop exiled another, and complained to the Emperors, and banished one another, and so the Sheep were made havock of, and starved nd scattered, and the Name of Christ and Christians came to be evil spo∣ken of by the many factions and contentions that were among them. But to return to the Bishops of Rome after the Reign of Constantine, in which Persecution ceased, many superstitious Injunctions and Idolatrous Practices were set up in the first five hundred years, which I shall not much trouble the Reader with further then what is already said; but divers o∣ther things were brought in afterwards, more gross then the former. Gregory called the Great, the Bishop of Rome, of whom it is said, of all that went before him, he was the basest or worst, and of all that cme after him, he was the best; It is he that brought in this Title among the Roman Bishops, to be called the Servant of God's Servants; but by his practice, he proved a Lord over God's Servants consciences, and over their Faith; he made an Act that Priests should not Marry a Wife, and he ordained a Book, called, the Service or Letany, which goes under the Name of Grego∣ry's Mass-book, to be received in all Churches. After the death of him, Sabinus was Bishop, who continued scarce two Years, he was the last of the Roman Bishops, who had not the Title of Uni∣versal Bishop, or Head of the Church, he was the last of sixty five Bishops before the first Pope, he died in the year six hundred and five. Palagius the first, was the 69 Bishop of Rome, in the year 355. he Ordain∣ed that Hereticks and Schismaticks should be punished with Temporal death; there was 65 Bishops before Boniface the third, who was the first Pope, and since there hath been 179 Popes. Boniface the third (who succeeded Sabinus,) was the first Pope, he Reigned but one Year, and did more hurt in that year then Gregory could do in many, before he obtained of the Emperour Phocas that he and his Suc∣cessors after him in the See of Rome above all other Churches should have the Preeminence, & that the Bishop of Rome should be the Head of all the churches of Christ in Christendom; alledging this frivolous and reasonless Reason, that Saint Peter had left to Saint Peter his Successors in Rome the Keys of binding and loosing; for before this Constantinople, Asia, and other Churches, their Bishops had some stroak, and divers times many of the Bi∣shops of Rome were reprehended by the rest, but now obtaining this De∣cree of Phocs, he began to take head over all other churches, and this Phocs to aspire to the Empire of Rome, he murdered his own Master,
Mauritius the Emperor and his children; so Phocas somewhat fearing, and willing to have Boniface's Favour, gratifies him and condescends to all his Petitions, and grants him to be universal head-Bishop over all christian churches, and there was the first Rise of the Pope; but Phoc for his Mur∣der was justly rewarded, for Heraclius the Emperor cut off his Hands and Feet, and cast them into the Sea; but Rome would not so soon loose her Supremacy once given, as the Giver lost his Life, and ever since that time the Popes have holden, defended and maintained the same by all Force, Pollicy and Cruelty that possible can be; this was in the Year six hundred and six, and so the Bishop now became Pope; his rise was not because of his Holiness, or Righteousness, or Doctrine, or holy Practices suitable un∣to Peter, whom he saith he succeeded for his Doctrine and Practice; Peter had condemned the same things before Boniface was; but his Rise was by a heathen Emperor, who had command over a great Party at that time, and so by the Force of his Edict he claims Authority. Vitilians, the eleventh Pope, in the Year 657. he confirmed that Pra∣ctice which was set up before by some other of the Bishops of Rome, that Organs should be set up in Churches. Paschal in the year 817. was the first that appointed Cardinals to be in Number 70. Adrian the third, the 47th Pope, in the year 884. ordained that the Emperor of Rome from thenceforth should have no more to do with the E∣lection or Confirmation of the Pope, but that it should be left wholly to the Roman Clergy; so that which first gave the Pope Power, to wit, the Em∣peror, he now throws off the yoak, and if the Emperor please not him, hath stirred up the People to mannage War against him, and against divers Princes, as may be seen in the Histories of latter Ages. Sergius the third was the first who ordained bearing of Candles in the Feast of the Purifiction of Mary, thence called Candlemas-day. Celestine the second, in the year 1143. was the first Inventer of cursing or anathematizing any who received not his Ordinances with Bell, Book Candle. Innocent the third 1198. was the first that brought in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and imposed auricular Confession upon the people. Clement the fifth 1350. was the first that sold Indulgences and Pardons. Sixtus the fourth, 1471. brought in the Beads to be numbred when they prayed, and authorized the Ladies Psalter. Leo the tenth, in the year 1553. set Indulgences and Pardons on sale in Germany and France, which things caused Luther in Germany, and Zuinglius among the Switzers to write against the Pope's Ministers, and afterwards questioned many points of popish Doctrine, upon which the Pope burned Luther's Writings, and condemned him for an Heretick, and Luther burned the Pope's Canon-Law at Wittenberg, and declared the Pope to be a Per∣secutor and a very Anti-christ. The Inquisition began first in Spain▪ which was set up by the Papists there to terrifie the Moors, who had inhabited Spain for 760 years, and so long Spain was governed by the Emperor of the Mors in Africa, until the year 1492. And after this time the Inquisition began against the Moors, which was not so cruel at first as afterwards it began to be against the Protestants,
and is now accounted the greatest Violence and Torture, and the greatest Tyranny and severest kind of Persecution upon the Earth, insomuch that many Papists abhor the very Name and Mention of it, and to the Death withstand the bringing in of this Slavery amongst them; the Extremity and Rigor of this Inquisition until the year· 1609. In Philip the third King of Spain's Time, notwithstanding though the Moors did make a Shew of the Papists Religion, because of the Inquisition, yet eleven hundred thou∣sand of them were forced to quit the Country, it was so dreadful: And all these kind of Ordinances and Institutions before-mentioned, compare them with the Scriptures, and the Cruelty and Severity which hath been exercised towards them who could not receive them, none who have their Eyes open in any Measure, but must needs conclude, that all this is in the Apostacy; and so all who profess Reformation, flee from these things, and from this Spirit, and from this Church, who forces and kills all them that oppose, who are under his Power; and why should any plead for the hold∣ing up of those Practices as good and warrantable, whereas so many have been killed about them, and so many have been led from the Life and Pow∣er of Godliness, while they received and practised these humane Inventi∣ons, and vain and customary Traditions for the Doctrine of Christ, and for Apostolick Ordinances? and must it not needs be concluded, them who would tye People up, and bind Men to observe such and such things as are mentioned before in this Book, and persecute for not observing, that they are they who draw back to Perdition, and keep People from laying hold upon eternal Life? Many more vain Practices and Doctrines, which have been brought in since the Apostles Dayes, might be mentioned; but in that which is said already, the understanding will see that there hath been a great Apostacy, both in Life, Doctrine and Practice from the Apostles Time downward until now, and that which is called the Catholick Church in Rome is in it; and likewise divers of them who are separated from her stick too much in these Things because of the Custom, Tradition and An∣tiquity of them. In part I have shewn their Antiquity and their Rise, and also shewn that which is more ancient then they, from which they have swerved, to the Intent that all may come out of Babylon, and drink no more of the Cup, nor buy no more of the Merchandize, nor wear no more the Harlots Cognizance, nor the false Churches Attire, but that all may come to see before this Heap of dark Confusion, and beyond the vain Obervati∣ons which have been introduced, which make no Man through the Obser∣vation thereof more acceptable unto God, but rather two-fold more like Children of the wicked one, who abode not in the Truth.
CHAP. XIV. Something further of the Decrees and Ordinances of the Church of Rome, which are holden out for Apostolical Ordinances. POpe Paul, about the Year 757. condemned the Council at Constantinople for condemning worshipping of Images; he wrote a Book of the wor∣shipping and Utility of Images, calling them the Lay-mens Calender. Pope Adrian, about the Year 770. cloathed the Image of St. Peter with Silver, and covered the Altar of St. Paul with a pall of Gold, and condem∣ned them for Hereticks, who kept Peter and Paul's Doctrine, which de∣clared against Idols. Pope Nicholas, about the Year 858. enlarged the Popes Decrees, equal∣ling them to the Writings of the Apostles, he decreed that Service should be said in Latine. And although by the Emperor the Pope was first elected, yet now ha∣ving got Head, did climb up so high in Power, and Pride, and Arrogancy, endeavoured that no Emperor should be crown'd without his Leave in Ger∣many. And Pope Clement the fifth excommunicated Andronicus Peleogus Empe∣ror of Constantinople as an Heretick, because he would not suffer the Greek Church to appeal to Rome. And when any Kings or Princes had displeased him, he hath excom∣municated them, and given away their Kingdoms to some other, teaching their People to rebel, and also instigating other Princes to make War a∣gainst them, and to kill one another for trifles, and if any displeased him, he caused many Kings to do Penance, and to pay great Sums of Money to get an absolution from Excommunication; and the Rule and Power of the Empire which gave him first his being to be Universal Bishop, and to be called Pope, he hath raised War often against, and if he like not the Election of the Emperour, he hath deposed them, and one he brought in∣to such Subjection that he caused him to hold his Sirrop, a thing that the Emperour was not accustomed with, he happened to hold it on the wrong side, for which he received a sharp Reproof by his holiness. Likewise some difference being between Pope Innocent the fourth, in the Year 1250. and the Emperour Frederick the second, the Pope would not be Reconciled, though the King of France strongly interceeded, and of∣fered full satisfaction for all pretended Wrongs, would go out of his Empire, if the Pope could not endure him there, never to return into Europe again, so as that his Son with the Popes Approbation might but Succeed him in the Empire, which the Pope would not do. And how England and divers Nations have been troubled with his Op∣pression, is well known, and what exactions and great sums of Money here have been enhausted and squeezed out of his Dominions where he  Power, the Nations well remember, to maintain the Pride of his Court at Rome, which abounded with all manner of Vitiousness, inso∣much
that it was grown to that height, that Vincentius Clement the Pope Legate, said, it was now too late, and past reforming. But to take the Legate's own words as follow, against his Master the Pope and his Court, W. H. in his Book called a Description of England in the 136 page, saith thus, that this Vincentius Clement in the year 1452. be∣ing Legate for the Pope, was here in England about the Pope's business, and hearing that the Clergy had given the King two tenths for the repaying f his losses which he had sustained in France, and for the recovering of Bour∣deaux; this Legate Vincentius coming into the Convocation House, he earnestly required the Clergy to be no less favourable to their Spiri∣tual Father the Pope, and their Mother the See of Rome then they had been to his vassal and inferiour, meaning the King; and in his Speech in the Convocation he shewed them how that his Holiness the Pope, was much disturbed and daily in danger of his Life by Cut-throats, Varlots, and Harlots, which did much abound as he said in Rome; but the Clergy in the Convocation slighted his Speech, and said, how should we contribute to∣wards the Suppression of such, whereas he and such as you, continually uphold them? I grant saith the Legate that there wanteth just Reforma∣tion of many Things in the City of Rome, which should have been made sooner, but now is it too late and past reforming; never the less I beseech you send the Legate to write unto his holiness the Pope, to request him that he would abandon and leave that Babylon which is but a sik of Mischief and of all Ungodliness, and keep his Court elsewhere in some place of better Fame; and this is the Legate's Testimony of the Seat of the Mother Church of Rome. Besides many of her own Members in England in the Year 1245. do ma∣nifest what Action has been upon this Nation, as may be seen in a Suppli∣cation, written in the Names of the Nobles and Commons of England to Pope Innocent the fourth, shewing how many Subsides and Taxes had been levied and sent out of the Realm, and how they had been liberally paid, they complaining also how he sent Italians and forraigners to possess the Churches and Benefices in England, who had no regard of Peoples Soul▪ and so were no good Shepherds as they said; and how the Italians received threescore Thousand Marks a Year, besides other Vails and Excises, he do reap more Rents then the King himself, and so when he could no  his subsides, and raise all the Sums which he exacted from Year to Year, Pope Innocent perswades the French King, to make War with the King of England, for his not condescending to the Pope in all things, although he was then one of his Sons, and of his Church, but enough of this▪ it were lrge to enumerate the Actions and Cruelties, the Oppressions which have been done in that which is called Christendom, since the Emperour  unto the Pope his Power, and how much Idolatry, Superstitin.  and Doctrine of Devils hath been spread over the Nations these many hun∣dred of Years, and how many have been put to cruel Death▪ for not  and conforming to the said Doctrines and Practices, Injnctions and Ordinances, and how many this false Church hath stirred up  another, and Destroy one another about these things, which have  put upon People under the Name of Divine Authority, and holy
and Apostolical Institutions; by what as it is written, all may see that these things are in the Apostacy, and in the Fall, in the curse, and in the Night of Darkness, wherein all this Wickedness hath been wrought by the false Church, which the Lord God will reward double, and dry up  Waters under which she sits, and make her Seat desolate, and throw down her Pride who hath drunk the Blood of the Martyrs, and shed the Blood of the Saints, and devoured the Lambs of Christ, and made Merchandize of Souls; and therefore all who are in part departed from her, stay not in the Suburbs, but come out of her City, and the Adjacent places there, that ye be not partakers of the Judgment which is to come upon her▪ But Oh! abundance of Darkness remains yet in the Nations, and even in the Protestant Churches, who hold up things yet which were invented by her, insomuch that one belonging to the Church of Rome, Dionysius Petavius a Cardinal, layes claim to the ceremonies which were practised in England in the Bishops time; For, saith he in his Book called the History of the World, the Religion of England and Doctrine is Calvinism, the Doctrine of Geneva, but the Ceremonies are of Rome, as they were practised in England in the Year 1640. In the time of Leo the fourth, Edelwolphus King of England went to Rome, for performance of a Vow that he had made, and was courteously receiv∣ed and accepted by the Pope Leo; For which cause he ordained a tribute to be paid yearly to the Pope, to wit, a Peny sterling for every House in England that kindled a Fire. Now Protestants look to your Easter-reckon∣ings, you have denyed the Popes Supremacy, and yet Vicars and Parsons receive his Tribute of every House that kindles a Fire, and this stands yet as a good and wholsome Institution amongst you. And so for shame, let all that profess Reformation, and the Doctrine of Godliness, and the Faith of Christ, and the Practice of the Apostles s their example, come out of things which the Harlot hath invented, and say, as Abraham said to the King of Sodom, that he would not take a Shoe-lat∣chet, least he should say, he had made Abraham Rih: So let them that profess Reformation, not keep a shoe-latchet, nor one lap of the Whores Garment, nor any piece of her Ornaments, that she may not Boast any more that we are made rich by her Merchandize; so purge out Horn and Hooff, and all the old leven out of your Hearts, and out of your Assembles, and come to believe in Christ the true Light, that lighteth every one that comes into the World, that he may be your Law-giver, whose Institutions are Spiritual, and his Ordinances heavenly▪ which makes , and clean, and pure the comers thereunto: and so let the old Romish  foolish Ceremonies about Worship alone, many of which are  from the Heahen; and judge not any for dearting from them  Per∣secute none for not observing of them; for whoso do, will maniest themselves to belong to the City which is to be overthrown▪ and to be in the Apostacy, and not Members of the true Church of Christ, the Lamb's Wife. And many more things which stand yet amongst them called Christi∣ans▪ as set discourses have been set up called Hmilies. And the aforesaid W. H. shews the grnd here re they were ▪ Some complained that their Churches and Universities were
Error, (as many are at this day, by which there was a want of able Pa∣stors; four Sermons were appointed by publick order in the Yar onely, and certain Homilies were devised by learned Men, and confirmed for sound Doctrine by the Clergy, who made them, and the Authority of the Prince which Homilies were appointed to be read by Curates of a mean under∣standing, and them that had but mean pay, as five Mark or twenty Noble a Year, of which sort we had many in England in the year 1640. I desire we have no more, lest more ignorance abound; and these Homilies were to be read after a certain number of Psalms read, and the Letany, and an Epistle and Gospel, and it may be Athanasius or Nicen Creed, and this was the Worship which hath been holden out even amongst the reformed as spiritual Worship; all which while People have been exercising themselves in those things, they had been further and further off from God and the Knowledge of his Truth, which is manifest to them that believe not, by the Injunctions and Ordinances of men, but by the holy Spirit which leads out of all Error, Superstition and Deceit, and all that believe in it come to be taught of the Lord, and Worship in that which is pure, and are acceptable in his sight. CHAP. XV. Something concerring the general Councils since the Apostles Dayes, though they have been all of one Faith, and though i hath been said, the Church could not err, all which of the several Councils belonged to the Church of Rome, yet see the Difference. IN that which some call a Council or a Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15. when some Dissention arose, because of some of the Pharisees that be∣lieved, and yet would needs judge it needful for all that believed to be cir∣cumcised; so they that stuck in the outward Types and Figures, would needs lay Yoaks upon the Necks of them who where come to the Substance. So the Apostles, Elders and Brethren coming together, seeing how the State of the Matter stood, not disputing years together, as the Council of Trent forty years; but they, as they saw in the Wisdom of God, sent some chosen men from Jerulalem to the Gentiles, to certifie the Gentiles by the Spirit of the Lord, that they abstained only from Meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from Things strangled, and from Fornication, from which if you keep your selves, you shall do well, Acts 15. they pressed not upon them the Ordinances of the Jews, neither the Custom of the Gentiles in the be∣lief, which since this the Church of Rome hath done; and divers Councils appertaining to her have cumbered People with multitudes of Things and heavy Yoaks, some brrowed from the Jews in the Unbelief, and sme from the Heathens in the Unbelief, and prest their Institutions and Inven∣tions as Ordinances of Crit upon all the Members of the Church, which are so many and so innumerable and all contrary to the primitive Church▪ and they have been of the Natre of those Councils that David speaks of, Pl. 2. who took Counsel aainst the Lord, and against his anointed, and that was a Council which condemned the Son of God, Christ Jesus; and these
Councils, though Rabbies and great men, yet they erred from the Life: But to come downward, among the Doctors and Bishops of that which they call the Catholick Church, the Council that was held at Carthage under Cy∣prian decreed, that those who were baptized by Hereticks ought to be bap∣tized again, which others called Error, and that Council's Proceedings were condemned: The Nicene Council decreed flat Idolatry about wor∣shipping of Images: The Council of Constantinople condemned that Pro∣ceeding and their Decrees: The Council of Basil, as Albertus Phigius saith, decreed against all Reason, and against the Scriptures▪ The Council of Arminium decreed for the Armenians, that Christ was not God: The Council of Calcedon, which was one of the four that Gregory the great com∣pares to the four Gospels, that the Decrees were as sure, and Constitu∣tions as certain and Infallible as the Scripture, yet Pope Leo did not stick to condemn it and all them as unadvised; and these Councils have been one against another, and the multitude of their Votes is brought for great Proof, not only amongst the Romanists, but also amongst them that are se∣parated from them; so Councils have erred, and have opposed one ano∣ther; yea, and the Popes and Biops of Rome to Leo the fourth abro∣gated and made void the Acts of Adrian, and yet they both said, they were Peter's Successors and infallible; and Stephanus Bishop of Rome made void the Acts and Decrees of ; and Sabinian the Pope com∣manded that Gregory's Mass and all Pope Gregory's Writings should be burnt; and all of these said, they had the Keyes to bind and loose, and yet one bound that which another loosed, and another loosed that which the former had bound, and yet all these clmed Infallibility: The Council of Carthage decreed, that the Bishop of Rome would not be called high Priest, nor chief of Priests, nor the Head of the Church; but following Coun∣cils have stiled him, chief Priest, chief Bishop, and Head of the catholick Church. The Eliberine-council decreed, that no Images should be set up in the Churches, nor worshipped, nor the Walls painted; likewise the council of Constantinople before mentioned decreed, that Images were not to be ffered in the Churches or Meeting-places; but on the other Side, the se∣cond Nicene-council determined, that Images were not only to be placed in the Churches, but also to be worshipped, and the Pope said, that Images were to be Lay mens Calendars: The latter council under Julius the se∣cond did repeal the Decrees of the Psan-council: The Basil-council deter∣mined that a council of Bishops was above the Pope; but the Lateran-coun∣cl under Leo decreed, that the Pope was above the council, and they decreed, also, that he that should hink otherwise; should be held for an Heretick; and yet the Bishops and and Abbots in the Council of Basil aforesaid de∣creed, that they that judged that the Bishops were not above the Pope, were Hereticks; and yet these Councils the Church of Rome layes claim , to be of their Faith and Church, and yet one making void what another hath decreed; the same Council did with an uniform Consent remove the Pope Eugenius, and put Amidius in his place; but Eugenius vilifies the Coun∣cil's Decrees, and condemns them: The Council of Trent commanded that Bishops should teach the People, and should have no more Benefit for Preferment then one Place; but since they have made this Decree void,
and now whole Countries are too little, and the Protestants imitate the same, and do not teach the People; and so of what Validity have these Councils been worth? or of what Force hath the Decrees been of mutable Men, who have been tossed up and down like Waters? I nominate the several Convocations and Councils that have been amongst the reformed Churches, as they are called, and their Synods, one while decreeing this, the next throwing it down again; and yet all these will lay claim to be Mi∣nisters of the true Church, and persecute as Hereticks to Death them who own not their changeable Decrees and mutable Institutions; but such hath been the Arrogancy and Pride of her that hath set as a Queen upon the Waters, that she must be the only Judge, and then the Prophets must be slain. Pope Julius said, no Council is of any credit, unless it be confirmed by the Church of Rome: And Boniface the eighth saith, that no Man in the World can be saved, unless he be subject to the Roman Church: And Pope Paschal thus said, as though (said he) any Council could make Laws for the Church of Rome, and all Councils do subsist by it, and receive their Strength from it, and that which the Pope approveth or disapproveth: And so all Confederacies and Councils of Men, who are out of the Life and Power of God, do decree that which brings the Seed of God into Bondage: Now Rome look to thy Infallibility and Universality, which thou so much cryest up, and thy Unity, one while sets up one thing, another time throws it down again, when it will not serve particular Interests; and what a Stir hath there been amongst them that call themselves reformed in these latter Ages, one setting up this, and another that, sometimes this Service for a Worship, then the next calls it idolatrous, and then another Service, and this Ceremony, and the other Ceremony, and this Pater-noster, and the other Creed, this Catechism and the other Catechism, these Articles of Faith, and the next Synod makes them void, and so leads people into Di∣straction and Madness; and this Canon and the other Institution, one while it's Idolatrous, another while Sacred and Holy: And thus people have been led up and down many Generations, to and fro, up and down, and Persecution about changeable, mutable and alterable things, and the Life, which redeems out of the World up unto God, hath been sought after; and so all that look to have Peace, and to enjoy the Testimony of God's blessed Spirit, come out of this Babylon, this City of Confusion, whose Seat is erected upon the Sand, whose Foundation is laid in the Waters▪ and Faith upon the human Institutions of men, which are variable and subject to Mutation, and come to know the Rock of Ages, and the unalterable Council of the Lord, and the Wisdom of the most high to rule in your Hearts; and wait in the immortal Light of God, which is within, that you may see overall these Mountains of Darkness, which are risen up in the Apostacy, and over all the Institutions, Decrees, Statutes, Ordinan∣ces and Inventions of men, to be before all these things were, and come  him who is the Beginning of the Creation of God, who is that quickning Spirit, by which all that believe are raised out of Death, to be Partaks of the Life which is immortal, which fades not away, and the Lord  be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; away with all Types and Figures▪ Shadows and Vails, human Institutions and Ordinances of men▪ Cm∣nies and vain superstitious Traditions, which God hath no Pleasure
which God hath no Pleasure in, which do not profit at all; and whatsoe∣ver leads the mind into visible things, from the invisible God, is to be thrown aside as a mestruous Cloath, and as the Breath of abominable things, which God will confound, because he hath no Pleasure in them; for the Life is risen, and the Vail of the Covering is rent, which hath been spread over all Nations; the Night is gone, the Day is come, and appeared in Brightness; the Shadows are past away, and the Morning of Righteous∣ness is appeared; the Son of God is come, who hath given his Flock an Understanding, in whom Life, and Blessedness, and Peace, and everlasting Consolation resideth and resteth upon his people for evermore. CHAP. XVI. Something concerning the Worship of God, whether that Kings and Rulers now in Gopel-times have any Power from God to compel or force about sprital things declared, and some Scriptures answered which have been perverted by them, who are in the Apostacy, to maintain the Bests Power and the false Church's Worship under the reign of Antichrist. WHen the Lord brought Israel out of the Land of Egypt by a strong Hand and an outstretched Arm, he made a Covenant with them, & gave forh a Law at Mount Sinai, by the Hand of Mose: the Judge of Israel, and Statutes and Ordinanes which Israel should walk in, who were as a Family, who came of one Stock, and the Laws and Statutes which were then given forth, were concerning civil things, as concerning man and man, and betwixt a man and his Neighbour, and for the Government of whole Families, and the Camp of Israel; and likewise Laws and Statutes which concern'd the Worship of the true God, which may be read at large in Exodus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, and they that worshipped not the true God, according to the command given in the first Covenant which was outward, were to have Judgment executed upon them according to the Law; and Moses, and the rest of the Judges over Irael, were to see the Laws and Statutes executed upon the Transgressors, and if any were an Idolater, and worshipped a false God, or a Blasphemer, were to be sto∣ned to death, or Sabbath-breaker was to be stoned to death, and this was according to the Law of God, and their Blood was upon their own heads; and when Israel-lusted after a King, he gave them a King, and they had many Kings, who were anointed of God, by his appointment, who were to rule in the same Manner as Moses, Joshua and the rest of the Judges had done, and whosoever was disobedient unto the aforesaid Command of God, whether in things civil, or things concerning the Worship of God, seve∣ral Punishments were to be inflicted by them for several Transgressors, as Blasphemers, Sabbath-breakers, false Prophets, and Wizzards, and Witches were not suffered to live, this was before Christ the Seed was ma∣nifested in the Flesh, this was the Old Way, the old paths that Israel were to walk in; but this Covenant was faulty as the Apostle saith, and the Ministers thereof could not continue by reason of death, the Law was chan∣ged, and the Priesthood was changed, and the Ordinances and Worship
was changed when Christ came to be manifest, the end of the Law for Righteousness; now, as Aaron and the rest of the high-Priests were but Types and Figures of the everlasting high Priest, so the Judges and Kings of Israel were Types and Figures of Christ, the King of Kings, and King of Saints, and Law-giver, and Judge; and their outward Power which con∣tinued but for a time, in compelling to the true Worship under that Cove∣nant, or restraining from Idolatry, did but continue until the time of Re∣formation was but a Type and a Figure of Christ, and his spiritual Pow∣er and Weapons, and spiritual execution upon his Enemies, who are not subject to his Government or Power, seeing the Father hath commit∣ted all Power unto him in Heaven and in Earth, and Moses the Mediator of the first Covenant which stood in outward Ordinances, both the Mediator, the Covenant & the Ordinances had an end (when the better Covenant was given, the Covenant of Light, and Christ the Mediator thereof was manifest) & this Covenant & Ordinances pertained unto the Jews, and the compelling unto the Worship and punishing for Idolatry pertained unto the Jews only, who were under that Covenant, and not to the Gentiles, as it was written, To Jacob he gave his Law, and to Israel his Statutes; to every Nation he did not so. So they which would bring People now under this Covenant, and the Power thereof, deny the second, the everlasting Covenant, and his Power; and they that would preach up compelling and forcing to worship, and bring those Scriptures of the first Covenant to be their Ground, are igno∣rant of the times unto which they were spoken; and upon this false Foun∣dation hath the false Church persecuted about Worship this many hun∣dred years, and this Doctrine is in too much credit with many in these dayes, who say they are under the Gospel; and this hath made People to hate and persecute one another. And the Ministers of Antichrist have pressed it upon Kings and Rulers, that God hath required it of them to enforce, and enjoyn all People unto a Worship, although they themselves are divided among themselves, one while for this thing, and another while for that; and because the Kings of Israel did so, and had Power to do, therefore they have concluded that Princes and Judges ought to do so, and so have made them put their Neck in a Yoak which is too heavy for them to bear, which the Lord hath not re∣quired at their Hands, and because of this compellings and forcings, many Hypocrites have been made, and many of God's Peoples Consciences wounded, and burdned, and many Kings and Rulers have lost their Domi∣nions, and they have been taken from them because of this, by the Lord. So all that have intruded upon Christ's Prerogative, and Soveraignity in this thing, are sure to be reckoned as no other but as Usurpers, and Intru∣ders into that Power which the Father alone hath given unto his Son, which Power, Dominion and Glory, he will not give unto any other, as to be Judge and Law-giver in the Hearts and Consciences of his People. Object. But some may say, Did not the Prophet exhort to enquire for the old Paths and the Good old Way? and did not the Prophet say, Kings should be nursing-Fathers, and Queens should be nursing-Mothers? And must not this be fulfilled in these Dayes? Answ. This is true that the Prophet did exhort the Princes and people of Israel, who were in the revolted Estate, who had transgressed the com∣mandments
of the Lord, and had lost their Guide of their youth, & the Rst of their Souls, and therefore he turned them back to consider of the dayes of old, and enquire after the good old Way, that they might walk therein, which they were gone from; but this doth not pertain at all unto this time; of Christ Jesus is the new and living Way, which all are to enquire after now▪ who is the end of the Law for Righteousness, and the first Covenant unto them that believe; and as for Kings being nursing-Fathers, the Queens nursing-Mothers, this was prophesied by the Prophet before they went in∣to captivity, and how the Heathen should have power over their Kings, prophets, and priests, and people, and Jerusalem should lye desolate; now this the prophet spoke of concerning the return of them unto the Lord, and they to inhabit their own Land, then their own Kings and Queens should rule over them, and be as Nurses to them, when they should return from their Captivity, then Jacob should rejoice, and Israel should be glad, and this was spoken to the Jews, and this had Reference to their State in that time. Further it may be objected, ought not Blasphemy, and Idolatry, and Adultery be punished, is this to be suffered now, seeing it was punished, under the Law? Answ. Yea, this is to be punished, and shall be punished, and that even with Death; for as I said, the Father hath committed all Power unto the Son, who will execute his Judgement upon all them who will not have him to reign in their Hearts, as it is written, Those mine Enemies that would not that I should rule over them, bring them before me, that I may slay them; with what Weapon? with carnal? nay, but with the sharp two-edged Sword which proceeds out of his Mouth, and with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; and the spiritual Weapon which runs through the Blasphe∣mer, and kills him, and slaves the false Prophet, and Southsayer, and In∣chanter, and Idolater, and yet saves the Creature alive, take one Example of Christ the new and living Way, when the Pharisees brought a Woman tempting Christ, which was taken in Adultery, saying, according to the Law of Moses she ought to be stoned to death; he that was the end of the Law said, He that  without Sin cast the first Stone, convicting them all that they were in the same Nature, and yet did not approve of the Adultery, but said, Go and Sin no more lest a worse thing come upon thee; likewise Paul said, I was a Persecutor and a Blasphemer, this Generation who profess Paul's words would say, Let him dye, he hath confessed he was a Blasphemer; but he was slain with other Weapons, Christ slew the Blasphemer, and the Persec∣tor in him, and left the man alive, and made him a chosen Vessel to declare against Blasphemy, and lead out of all Ungodliness. And herein is the second Covenant more excellent then the first, and the Ministration more excellent then the former, and the Dominion and Gove∣ment of Christ more excellent then the Dominion and Governmet of  Kings of Israel, and the Weapons more excellent then theirs, and the Powr greater then theirs, whch is able to destroy the Works of the Devil, i Bl∣phemy, Idolatry and Adultery, and save the Creature ali; this is the better Covenant, indeed the everlasting; and herein is the Mercy of God exalted, his Dominion and Power exalted, and Christ the King of Glory exalted, and these Sins before mentioned, punished with great Severi▪
and great Judgement; for in the first Covenant they slew with a temporal death but Christ when he appeareth in his Power and Glory in Flames of Fire, renders Vengeance within upon the Wicked, which burns, and scorch∣eth, & brings Anguish and tormenteth all them that are in that Nature, and banisheth all them from his Presence, and from the Glory of his Power, till that be dead and slain, which would not have him to reign, to wit, that which is born of the Flesh, which is within; and Blasphemy, Idolatry and Murder are the Fruits of the Flesh; where the Flesh is not lived in, these things cannot be brought forth; I speak not of the Creature, who is God's Workmanship, for that may be alive, when the Birth and Fruits which are after the Flesh are both dead; and herein is the mighty Power of God made known, and his Justice and his severe Judgement, which all must pass through before they come to witness eternal Life; he that despised Moses's Law, died by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, which was a natural Death, of how much sorer Punishment shall he be worthy which treadeth under foot the Son of God, and counteth the Blood of the Covenant  unholy thing? Heb. 10.28, 29. and blasphemeth. But further, it will be objected that the Apostle exhorteth for a Submis∣sion unto every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. whether it be unto Kings as Supream, or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent of him, and Rom. 13.1▪ 2. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Power, for there▪ no Power but of God, and the Powers that be are ordained of God. Answ. From these Scriptures many bad Constructions and Inferences have been gathered, as that Kings and Rulers were to be obeyed in all things, and that every Worship that is commanded by a King, or Superi∣or ought to be obeyed, and that Kings and Rulers had Power in spiritual things, to make a Law for such a Worship, or forbid such a Worship, and all these ought to be obeyed; and so in the Apostacy the Ministers of An∣tichrist have brought in many Inventions, and Traditions, and humane Institutions for divine Worship and Service, and thereby have pressed Ru∣lers to make Laws, and compel all People to receive them, although they have been repugnant to the true Worship of God; and then such Teachers have pressed such People to Obedience, as of Duty and Necessity, because the aforesaid Scripture doth command Subjection to all Rulers; and thus hath Babylon reared up her City, and gotten Merchants to put off her Mer∣chandize, and so hath cheated both Rulers and People, and hath led them to hate and destroy one another. Now these Scriptures, and divers others which speak of Obedience to Magistrates in all things, must needs be truly understood to be of things that are just and equal, which are only civil, and concerning things be∣tween Man and Man, and the Ordinances which are for the well-being of a Nation, or the good and wholsome Government of a State, and cannot be understood of things Spiritual, or relating to things appertaining to the Conscience, or respecting things about the Worship of God; my Reasons are weighty, for in that time the Apostles wrote, whether Peter, Paul or any other, the Magistrates were all Heathens, as Herod and Pontius Pilat▪ Augustus Caesar, Tiberius Caesar, and Nero, who were Heathen Emperors of , and Idolators, and at that time they had Power over Rome, and  Jerusalem and Judea; and Paul writing to the Romans, and Peter
Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, who were all under Heathen Rulers, and did not worship the true God; doubtless they enjoyned not submission unto the Heathen Rulers in spiritual things, for then they must have been joyned unto Idolatry; for if it be understood that they had Power in spiritual things, which pertained unto the Conscience, and that they ought to be obeyed in all spiritual things, then Peter and John were Transgressors them∣selves, when they taught boldly the things of the Kingdom of God, in e∣very City where-ever they came; and the Rulers in most Places opposed and put Peter and John out of the City, and commanded the Apostles to speak no more in the Name of Jesus; and yet they returned again and dis∣obeyed their Command, and their Power and Authority, and said, Whe∣ther it were better to obey God or man, judge ye; so that no King, Ruler nor Magistrate, as a Magistrate hath Power given of God to imprison, or force or prescribe any Law or Worship upon the Hearts and Consciences of men; for that belongs only to Christ the Law-giver, the Bishop of Souls. But then it would be objected, if not as a Magistrate, yet then as a Chri∣stian he may enjoyn and give Command concerning Worship, and compel and punish them that obey not. Answ. As a Christian they have no Priority, but as they stand in the Growth of Truth, not above others, for God is no Respecter of Persons, for the Apostles and Ministers of Christ who preached the Gospel, and had begotten many into the Faith through the Power of God which was with them, by which they spoke, and in things spiritual might have claimed Obedience to their command much more then any temporal Prince, and yet they said, We are not Lords over mens Faith, nor did they exercise Lordship over mens Consciences, but left every one to God's wit∣ness, and to the Word of his Grace, which was nigh in their Hears; and furthermore said, Let every one be perswaded in his own Mind, and said, If ny should be contrary minded, God would reveal it to them, and so waited in the Patience to see the Work of God prosper, and were content; and so forcing and compelling about spiritual matters, by temporal punishments, and temporal Laws, is all contrary to the Apostles Practice in the primitive times; though the Heathen persecuted the Christians by their temporal Laws for spiritual things, & about spiritual matters for the Worship of God; but we never read of any called Christians that did so, till Pelagius a Bishop of Rome or Pope, when the Emperor had given Boniface the third this Power to be called the chief Bishop, and Head universal over all Christian Churches, then he began to make temporal Laws to punish about spiritual things; and Pelagius made a Decree that Hereticks should be punished with temporal Death, about 555. years after Christ; so let all Princes, Magistrates and Rulers, who deny the Church of Rome in her Apostacy, follow not her Example, but leave every one free to the Lord in spiritual matters, as concerning his Worship; for to him must every on give an Account in his own Day when it shall be required, from which the Wic∣ked shall not be able to flee. Another Objection, But then it may be said, what Power will you allow to Magistrates that profess the Name of Christ? or how far have they Authority from God to punish evil-doers, and encourage them that do well?
Answ. It is said, By me Kings Rule, and Princes decree Justice; there is a ruling by him, and that is a ruling in the Power of God in him; he that rules in the Power of God, measures equal Justice unto all Men, and ruleth by the good and wholesom Laws which are made by the Will of God, which is according to God's Witness, which he hath placed in every man's Heart, and such a one is a temporal Head over the temporal Body, and ruleth in Righteousness in temporal things; but Christ he is the Head of the Body which is spiritual, which is his Church: Now the Law is a∣gainst the Lawless, is against Lyars, Stealers, Swearers, cursed-speakers, Murderers, Man-slayers, Man-stealers, Violence and Oppression, and Deceit, and that which tends to the hurt and destroying of the Creation; and he that is the Executor of the Law, ought to infflict temporal punish∣ments for temporal Facts, provided that every Punishment be sutable o the Transgression, and go not beyond it, and in so doing he rules for God; and the Sword is to be turned against that which doth evil, and to keep Peace amongst all men, and to keep down all Strife and Contention, Quar∣relling & Fighting and keeping the unrly from devouring, and destroying one another; and this is to rule for God in a Nation in the Creation, and to countenance the honest, upright and quiet, & meek; and this is a Praise  them that do well, and this is that which would keep the Nations at Peace; and here Governours and Rulers come to be blssed, when the Princes thereof rule in Righteousness, and when People live under them a holy godly and quiet Life; but when Godliness, and Holiness and Righteous∣ness is counted as a Crime, and Wickedness, and Violence, and Inquity set up, that Naion is near a Judgement, and for the Iniquity of Rulers, Kings and People, many fruitful Lands hath the Lord made barren, and that which is for the well-being, & Preservation, and for the universal good of all People therein, all People ought to render Obedience unto such Command for Conscience sake, and all People ought to obey Rulers and Governours in that which is Good and Lawful, and warrantable in the Sight of God, and unto all just Commands to yield Obedience, not for Wrath, but for Conscience sake; for so the Lord requires, which will be acceptable and pleasing in his Sight: And all Magistrates who are Christi∣ans, ought to be Paterns of Holiness and Righteousness to their people, and to admonish, exhort and reprove the prophane and ungodly, and to the Worship of the true God who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in the Spirit and in Truth; it is the Duty of every true Christian who is a King, and a Priest unto God.
CHAP. XVII. Concerning Oaths in the first Covenant, and the Lawfulness thereof, and the un∣lawfulness thereof discovered in the New Covenant, in Gospel Times; Though Apostates mingle the Ordinances of both together▪ denying all Oaths, proved to be no new Doctrine. IN the Beginning when God Created the Heaven and the Earth, and all things that are therein, by the Word of his Power, and set the Bounds and the Habitations thereof, and separated betwixt Light and Darkness; And when man was created in his own Image, in the Image of God crea∣ted he him, Male and Female created he them: Now the Image of God consists in Righteousness, Holiness, Equity, Long-suffering, Patience, Goodness, Mercy and Truth, the Glory thereof is unspeakable, man be∣ing in this Image there was no Transgression nor Sin, nor Sorrow, man was bound unto his Maker by the Power in which he was made, yea, he was in a capacity to Fear, Love, Honour, obey and Worship his Maker, from the virtue of that Power and Principle which God had placed in him, which some ignorantly call the Law of Nature; (but that is not the intention of my discourse to contend what it was) but to shew that man was at Union with God, and bound unto him by that which God had pla∣ced in him, in which his Wisdom, Power and dominion stood, to rule over all Creatures, Life was in him, there was no Death then, in this the Obligation stood, not in outward written commands or Ordinances, but it stood in that which was eternal and Invisible, this was before the Trans∣gression, here were no Oaths yet, nor outward Covenants made, nor out∣ward Ordinances. But after man had Transgressed, and eaten of the Tree of Knowledge of good and Evil, and gone from the Power, and broken the Covenant, he lost his Wisdom, and Folly entred; he lost his Dominion, and Weakness entred; he lost his Knowledge, and Ignorance entred, and an earthly part and a mutable came to have Dominion, not that this was Evil in it self, being subjected by the Power and Word in its place, and in the State wherein it was good; but Man being gone from the power, and from the Covenant, joyned to something out of it, and out of the mind, and listened to that which should have been ruled over, that became a Leader which God never appointed, and this led man's Heart from the invisible God of Life, and Light, who is immutable, to lust after Visible things, and mu∣table and earthly things, and into instability: And so his Heart and mind and affections became more and more to be alienated from the Lord, and his understanding more darkned, yet such was the love of God unto mankind that he did not wholly cast him off here, but followed him with his Mer∣cies, and Promised the Seed of the Women shall bruise the Serpent's Head, and so it did; yet the Adulterers Generation in the Transgressing Nature were great and fast, and there were but few before the Flood, in compari∣son to the Multitude who bore the Image of God, and few in a Generation, as Abel, Enoch, Seth, and the rest went after the Imaginations of their own
Hearts, and set up Images and Idols, and also after the Flood when the Earth began to be replenished, the cursed Seed grew faster, and many great Nations were ignorant of the True God, and made Idols and Images of Wood and Stone, of Gold and Silver, according to the minds of the craft∣man; and Worshipped them, and became in Love with them, and swore by them: Yet Abraham the Father of the faithful, feared the Living God of Heaven and Earth, and God was with him in all his Wayes, and he hearkned unto his Voice, and obeyed it, and followed the Lord where he led him, and God made a Covenant with him and his Seed forever, and gave him a Son in his old Age, and said unto him, In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee; and this was fulfilled, for Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the twelve Patriachs, and Jacob in the time of Famine went into Egypt, and sojourned in that Land, he and his Sons, and all that pertained to his Family increased and became a great People: But after many years the Egyptians afflicted them, and multiplyed their burdens insomuch that God considered them, and the Covenant he had made with Abraham, and his Seed, and sent Moses his Servant as a Leader, to be a Guide unto them out of that Land, and they were brought forth by an out∣stretched Arm, and great was their Deliverance; and he led them through the Wilderness, and fed them with Angels Food, and at Mount Sinai gave forth a Law, and made a Covenant with them sutable to the State wherein they were, for their minds were outward, and the covenant was outward; their minds were changeable and mutable, and the Covenant was so also; And all these Statutes & Ordinances pertained to a party which was aboe the Seed, yet they were shadows of good things to come, ad every Ordi∣nance in this covenant was but a Figure or shadow of a more Heavenly thing which was but to be in force, to wit, these Ordinances, until the Seed came to be made manifest, which ended them all. So all Priests, Offerings, Sabbaths, Fasts, Feasts, Oaths, though they were real in their time, and all Vows; yet the Law was changed which pertained to the changeable party, when the Seed of Christ was revealed, who is unchangeable; The first had an end, and continued to the time of Reformation, take notice of this, this covenant was made, to wit, the first after the Transgression, but when and wherein Christ is revealed and ma∣nifest, the great Reformer and the restorer, they end, and he leaves all to the Beginning again, out of deformity to be for Transgression, to that in which man was bound unto God at the first before Sin entred, and to be for shadows, was all for the new Moons, Offerings, Oathes and Sabbaths were given forth to man, when there was a Cloud, and a Vail, and a  over within, that the Glory of the invisible God could not be  this State, nor this Naked and clear Glory, but as that part comes to be done away, and crucified and subjected, and the cloud scattered, the Sha∣ow and clouds outward pass away, the Apostle calls the Ordinances out∣ward Shadows: And Paul to the Corinthians calls them a Cloud, they were  Baptized into Moses in the Cloud; And when the day appears, and Chr who is the Light is manifest, the clouds are scattered and ended, the shadows fly away, and clear Air appears, and Glory and clearness is beholden, een the Lord with open Face, and yet man lives and is not afraid of his Pre∣sence, but is glad because of the Light of his countenance: But this is  Mystery, and these things are hidden from the Wise and Prudent of this
World; But this is the sum of much, there was a time, when there were no Oaths outward before the Transgression, when man was the Image of God after the Transgression, the Oathes were given forth and the commands outward, but in the Restoration or Reformation they end again, and there shall be none; for Truth it self shall live, and it shall testifie in man, and there shall be no other Witnesses; blessed are they that believe and understand. But to come nearer the Understanding of all; it is granted that in the first Covenant under the Law, Oaths were ordained, and men did and might swear, but this was after Sin entered into the World many hundred Years; and the Nations who were Heathens swore, some by their Kings, and some by their Heathen-Gods; the Egyptians swore by the Life of Pha∣raoh, and the Romans by the Life or Fortune of Caesar, but Israel was to swear by the living God, Deut. 10.20. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by  Name, Lev. 19.11, 12. Ye shall not steal neither deal falsly, neither lye one unto another, ye shall not swear falsly by my Name, neither shalt thou prophane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord, Num. 30.2. And if ay vow a Vow unt the Lord, and swear an Oath to bind his Soul with a Bond he shall not break his Bond, but do all that proceeds out of his Mouth; and so Jshua kept Covena with the Gibeon∣ites, but when Israel revolted from the Lord in their Hearts, and yet sware a true Word and said, The Lord lived, yet the Prophet Jeremih said, chap. 5.2.23.10. Thou they say the Lrd liveth, yet they swear falsly; no truer thing could be said or sworn, then that the Lord lived, but he lied nor in them, that did lye, and steall, and kill, and commit Adultery, they held the former, but were gone from he Life and Power, and then it was a customary thing with them to swear, even as it is now among the Apostate Christians, and because of which the Land mourns, and in chap 4. vers. 15. Though Israel play this Harlot▪ yet let not Judea so offend, and come not yet to Gilgal, neither go you up to Bethaven, nor swear the Lord liveth. And Amos saith, They that swear by the Sin of Sama▪ and say, the God of Dan liveth, and the Manner of Bersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and rise up again. So when they kept the Covenant of God, they swre by the Name of the Lord in Truth and in Righteousness, but when they revolted they kept the Words, and swore without Fear, and prophaned the Name, and did swear then by the Heathen, by Milcom, and the Sin of Samaria, even as the Apostate Christians now swear by any thing, yea, even the most religi∣ous Swearing is by a Book, which is not the living God; and so this kind of Swearing hath no ground at all but custom, and tradition, but still this is granted that the Jews and many of the Faithfull Fathers swore, as Jacob and Abraham, and many others, and all died in the Faith, and yet were not made partakers of the [Promise] but saw through the Vail and the Shadows; and an Oath was a Type of Christ the Oath of God (and the Promise) but now the Promise is come, and the Restorer and the Reform∣er is come, and all are to hear him, or else be cut off from having any Share in him who is the Promise it self, yea all the Promises in him are Yea and Amen, in whom not only the Children of Abraham after the Flesh, but all the Children of the Promise are blessed, and he who fulfilled the Law, in whom God fulfilled his Oath, who is the everlasting high Priest after Mel∣chizedeck's
order, he hath put an End to all Oaths and swearing, and all the Types and Shadows. He saith, Mat. 5.33, 34. It hath been said of old time, thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform to the Lord thy Oaths; But I say unto you (my Disci∣ples and Followers, who have believed in me the true and living Way, who makes all things a new) swear not at all, neither by Heaven, &c. there being a Generation then (as now) who said to swear by the Greater is no∣thing, but he that swears by the lesser is guilty, he calls them Hypocrites and saith, Whosoever shall swear by the Eternity [the lesser] sweareth by him the [Greater] that dwelleth therein, and he that sweareth by Heaven [the lesser] sweareth by the Throne of God [and him] that sitteth thereon [the greater] and if Christ had only forbid vain swearing and Oaths, as most do ignorantly imagine, he had done no more then the Law had done before; but it is manifest, he forbids all Swearing, yea, even [by Lord] for if they that swear by Heaven, swear by God that sits upon the Throne, as he himself saith, then he prohibits this also, and saith, I say unto you, swear not at all; and James 5.12. who well knew Christ's mind, saith, Above all thing my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth; now we know Heaven and Earth comprehends all created things, and yet the Apostle goes further, and excludes all manner of Swearing, saying neither any other Oath, and this he commands above and before all things, and that upon the Penalty of Condemnation; but much by divers Hands hath been writ∣ten about this particular; so I desire not to be large, seeing we have a cloud of Witnesses which have good Assurance in themselves by God's Spirit, sealing unto them, rather then swear and bring condemnation upon them∣selves, have denied their Estates and Liberties, which lie at stake upon it; but happy will they be who have no hand in it to provoke the upright, and tempt them aside out of Christ's Way; for Wo will come undoubted∣ly upon such. And that others may see it is no new thing, take a few Examples of the faithful in Ages past, who suffered as Martyrs, and it were an easie thing to bring a cloud of Witnesses out of the Ecclesiastical Histories, of them that denied all Swearing in divers Ages, I shall instance only a few. Polycarpus, who was as it is said, John's Disciple, and had been a Chri∣stian eighty nine years, when he came to suffer Martyr∣dom,Acts and Monu∣ments, vol. 2. Fol. 55. the Procnsul requiring him to swear, by the Em∣peror's good Fortune, and by Caesar's Prosperity, which was the custom of the Romans at that time, and divers Heathen Emperors set up their own Images to be worshipped, and their Persons to be sworn by; but Polycarpus denied, and said he was a Christian, and would shew forth the Doctrine of Christianity, he desired the same, if the Proconsul would appoint a Day to hear it; so at that time it seems Christians did not swear, as afterwards they did in the Apostacy. And Basilides a Souldier, and afterwards a Martyr, being required to swear, affirmed plainly that it was not lawful for him to swear,Euseb. lib. 6. chap. pag. 98. for that he was a Christian; so it seems that it was the mark of a Christian not to swear. And the Waldenses or Leonists (whose Names are so famous amongst the reformed churches) and who are said immediately to succeed the Apo∣stles,
and were the most ancient and true Protestants, professed it to be n way lawful for a Christian to swear. In defence of whom in this very thing Bishop Usher, late Bishop of Argmagh, Primate of Ireland▪In his Book de succes. cap. 6. pleaded their cause against the Papists and Jesuits, who are the Swearers and Breakers of Oaths, and yet plead for Swearing. And the Plowman in his Prayer (which is so much esteemed of and com∣mended in the Book of Martyrs) saith, Lord th givest us a Commandment of Truth, in bidding us say, yea yea, and nay nay,Act and Mn. vol. 1. l. 527. and swear for nothing; thou givest us also a Commandment of Meekness, and another of Poorness; but Lord, he that calls hmself thy Vicar on Earth, hath broken both these Commandments; for he maketh a Law to compel men to swear, Fol. 585. And it is one of John Wickliff's Articles (whose Works were as much e∣steemed of by the Protestants in England and Bohema, as despised by the Papists and their Clergy) having his Bones taken up and burned, forty one years after his Decease, and his Books, and these Articles condemned by the Council of Constance, who also burned John Hus and Jerome of Prague for holding John Wickliff's Opinions, That Oaths which be made for any Contract or civil Bargain betwixt man and man be unlawful. And Walter Brute a Teacher among the People of God (in that Age by Scorners called the Devil's Servants) called Lollards, against whom the Pope and the King (Richard the second, and then the ungodly Bishops make so much ado to have the Name of Truth ex∣tinguished,Folio 653. and the Professors thereof cut off) This is Walter's Testimony As concerning Oaths, I believe and obey the Doctrine of Almighty God, and my Master Christ Jesus, which teacheth that Christian-men in affirmation of a truth should pass the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees of the old Testament, or else he excludeth them from the Kingdom of Heaven; for he saith, except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and as concerning Oaths he saith, It hath been said of old time, thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform those things unto the Lord thou knowest; but I say unto you, thou shalt not swear at all, nei∣thr by Heaven, nor by Earth &c. but let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay, for whatsoever is more then this cometh of Evil; therefore as the perfetion of Anci∣ent men of the old Testament was not to forswear themselves, so the perfecin of Christian-men is not to swear at all, because they are so commanded of Christ, who  Commandment in no Case must be broken, although the City of Rome, is cntrary to this Doctrine of Christ, &c. A good Testimony of a blessed Martyr. Here it appeareth that the Swearing which Christ forbids is not only prophane swearing in the communication,Ex. 20.7. for that was forbidden in the Law, where it is said, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, &c. but solemn Swearing which was to be per∣formed, and that was the Perfection of the Law; and Kings and Princes may take warning by this King Richard not to fulfill the cruel and bloody Desires of their Prelates. And Chrysostom (who was Bishop of Constaninople) in cmmendation of whom much is said in the ecclesiasti∣cal Histories,Ats and Monum. vol. 2. fl 701. he blameth them greatly that brng frth a
Book to swear upon, charging Clerks that in no wise they constrain any Body to swear, whether they think a man swear true or false; saying, that it is a Sin to swear well; now I mentioned before, that it was an Emperor commanded first, that men should swear by a Book, and this Chrysostome reproves; so hereby it may be seen by these Examples, it is no new Doctrine to deny all swearing, and there hath been a People very many years in the low Coun∣tries, that have denyed swearing in any matter, therefore their yea and nay stands in Courts of Judicature equal with an Oath, they being men generally of known Integrity, whose yea is yea, and nay nay, in all Places and Matters, If they that despised Moses's Law, died without Mercy, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall they be thought worthy of, who tread un∣der Foot the Son of God▪ &c. and disobey his Commands, and teach others so to do; they shall be shut out of the Kingdom of God, and have no part with the obedient, who keep Christ's commands, through Temptations and Sufferings, and are not offended at them, neither count them grievous they only are happy, and shall inherit everlasting Life. Likewise Jerome who was an ancient Father, and Teacher in the Church, which the Protestants own, upon that place, Mat. 5.37. and James 5.12. these are his Words, It was permitted under the Law to the Jews, as being tender, and as it were Infants, that as they were to offer Sacrifices to God, lest they should sacrifice to Idols, so they might swear by God; not that i was rightful so to do, but because it was better to swear by the Lord, then by false Gods and Devils; but th great Evangelical sincerity and Truth, admits not of an Oath▪ since every true Saying is equivalent thereunto. In like maner doth Theophilact an ancient Father of the Church, whom the Protestants own, and have often cited his Doctrine for proof upon the place in controversie, saith, Learn hence, that then un∣der the Law it was not evil for one to swear; but since the coming of Christ it is e∣vil, as is Circumcision; and in sum whatsoever is Judaical; for it may become▪ Child to suck, but not a Man: So that Oaths pertained to the Jews, who were under the changeable Covenant, and the mutable Covenant which continued but for a time, till the Seed Christ, the Oath of God was reveal∣ed, & here he is revealed and witnessed, all the Judaical Types and Figures; and changeable Ordinances have an End. Likewise Ambrose upon Psal. 118. he saith, None doth swear aright, but he that knows what he swears, and the Lord hath sworn and will not repent, Psalm 110. Ambrose saith, Let him then swear that cannot repent of his Oath, and a little after the said Ambrose saith, Do not imitate him in swearing, whom we cannot i∣mitate in fulfilling: And indeed the principal Solution given by him is, Swear not at all: And the aforesaid Waldenses, who condemned all manner of swearing as unlawful, they made it their care to avoid swearing and ly∣ing, and hereby they did give sufficient caution against all inconveniences which may come thereby, as to Government in general; for where a Te∣stification or Assertion is made without an Oath, is as sure as if it had been sworn to. And Bishop Usher doth esteem that place of Matthew the fifth, Swear not all,De Succes. cap. 6. to be a sufficient plea for the Wal∣denses against Swearing: and therefore they who have any Esteem of the aforesaid Authors and of their Doctrine, must not condemn the Quakers▪ as for Novelties, or for Broachers of new Doctrine; for Reynerius, one of
the popish Inquisition saith, amongst all the Sects which are or have been there is not any more pernicious to the Church, meaning the Church of Rome, then the Waldenses, and that for three Reasons; 1. Because of their Antiquity; 2. Because of their Universality; 3. In that they did profess i no Way lawful for a Christian to swear on any Occasion, which Do∣ctrine was contrary to the Church of Rome, which made Rinerius and Jn∣senius, two Papists, so much envy the Waldenses in this thing, about keep∣ing the Commands of Christ; and yet notwithstanding all this Cloud of Witnesses, both in primitive times and after Ages, divers who suffered as Martyrs did hold the same, and also the many Testimonies of them who have dyed in the Faith; yet many are so wilful, and so peevish, and so en∣vious against every thing which they cannot joyn unto, as that they will brand this Doctrine for Novelty and Heresie; let such consider how they will condemn this Doctrine, and yet justifie Christ's Words, and them that have been reckoned as Fathers and Martyrs, and as Orthodox, and found in the Faith by all, except the Church of Rome, who too much imi∣tate the Jews, and yet are no Jews, and they have been the chief Cryers up of Oathes and Swearing, and afterwards give Dispensations to them that break them: And therefore all who reckon your selves as Christians, keep to the Docrtine of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, who were Followers of him, and run not back to the Jews Ordinances, which conti∣nued but till the time of Reformation; and you that reckon your selves as Protestants, for Shame leave off that Doctrine which hath been brought in by the Apostates, who have mingled things together, without having Re∣spect either to Time, or Age, or People, and so have run back to the Jews, and bring those Commands and Injunctions which pertained to the Jews, and lay them as Yoaks upon the Necks of Christians; remember what the Apostle said to the Galatians concerning the Works of the Law, and concerning Types and Figures, Gal. 1.2. If you be circumcised, Christ profits yu nthig; and an Oath was a Type, as well as Circumcision to the Jews: and what if I say of all Swearers, who have no better Ground for so doing then the Jewish Oathes, which were Types, and testifie unto every one, that he that takes an Oath, and swears at all, is bound to keep the whole Law, Christ profits him nothing: And so let all People who fear the Lord, and do believe that they have received Christ in their Hearts, the End of the Law for Righteousness, not turn back to the changeable Cove∣nant again, lest he who is the everlasting Covenant say unto them, who hath required these things at your Hand? and also raise up his swift Wit∣ness to condemn them who transgress his pure and holy & righteous Com∣mands, and would compel others so to do.
CHAP. XVIII. Tythes in their first Institution, unto whom they were due, according to the Com∣mand of God declared; and that Tythes are no Way lawful to be received, ne∣ther sought for by any who are Ministers of the New-Covenant and the everla∣sting Gospel, proved out of the Scripture and Antiquity. TO omit Abraham's giving Tythes or the tenth Part to Melchizedeck after the Overthrow of his Enemies, and Jacob's vowing to give the tenth, when he should inherit the Land of Canaan, because a voluntary Promise only bindeth him that promiseth, and a free Gift from one to ano∣ther is no Command, neither binding to all Generations, because Abraham gave the tenth Part to Melchizedeck freely of the Spoil he had taken, and that but once, not of his Family's Labours or Industries, but of the Spoil; this was a voluntary and a free thing both in Jacob and Abraham; if Jacob had not vowed, he had not sinned; and if Abraham had not given the tenth Part of the Spoil, he had not sinned; so this is no Command or binding Example unto future Generations, especially of them that pretend they are Ministers of the second Covenant and the Gospel, but a very feeble and a poor thing for them to alledge. Tythes were never commanded to be paid by the Lord to any, but Israel, whose Law was given forth 400 Years after the Promise, as saith the Apo∣stle, neither were ever payable but by the Jews in the Land of Canaan, and to Levi's Tribe only, and to the Jewish Priests, that had no Inheritance al∣lotted them by the Lord of all the Land of Canaan, or beyond Jordan, but only Tythes or tenth Part among the Brethren, and that only according to the Command of the Lord, Deut. 18.4. Ezek. 25.13. for the Office of the Priesthood, and for the Service of the Tabernacle: At the giving forth of the Law, after Israel came out of Egypt, God chose Aaron and his Sons for the Office of the Priesthood, and the rest of the Tribe of Levi for the Service of the Tabernacle; God gave unto the Levites by Commandment all the Tenth in Israel for an Inheritance for their Service; and the Levites out of their Tythes were to offer up to the Lord a tenth Part of the Tythes, and give it unto Aaron the Priest for himself and his Sons; and no other portion had the Levitical Priests out of the Tythes, but the Tenth of the Tenth; as for the rest of the Tythes, they were for the Levites that did serve at the Tabernacles, and for Strangers, for Fatherless and Widdows. Moreover the tenth of the Tythes the Priest had▪ the first ripe Fruits of the Ground, of Wheat, of Barly, of Figs, Grapes and Olives, of Pomegranats and Dates, at what Quantity the Owner pleased, a Heave-offering also of Corn, Wine and Oyl, Fleece were given to the Priests at the 60th part, sometime the 50th at the Devotion of the Owner. But how comes it to pass that they that pretend another Priesthood then this, should receive the tenth of all, of unclean Beasts, as Pigs and Fols, ad of such things as we never read of tythable under the Law, of Eggs, Geese and Turnips, and the tenth of the Wood for Faggots for the Fire, and yet are not of this Priesthood, but pretend to be Bishops and Elders in
the Christian Church? so they cannot distinguish of the Time, neither of the Ministration, neither of Service and Worship that belongs to each Co∣venant, else they would be ashamed to claim Title to Aaron's Tythes and the Levites, that were given to them that had no Portion among their Bre∣thren in the Land; but these Bishops, Presbyters and Priests have a great Part of some Counties and Diocesses for their Revenue, and their inferior Officers Tythes of such things as were never tythable under the Law; so what damnable Deceit and Hypocrisie is this? is it any other but the Pope's Yoak, an absolute Apostate for Hundreds of Years? and must this be re∣ceived and enjoyned as Apostolical Doctrine? Oh for Shame! let it never be mentioned among them that call themselves Ministers of Christ, neither of any who profess themselves to be Christians. But to return to the Levitical Priesthood, no Tythes did the Priests re∣ceive under the Law of the People; for those belonged to the Levites, Exod. 13.2. that were appointed over the Tabernacle, to bear it, and to take it down, and to set it up, to serve Aaron and his Sons, and to keep the Instruments thereof; and for the better ordering of things, they were di∣vided into three parts, the Coathites, the Gershonites and the Mararites, and these received Tythes of the People, and delivered, the Priests did not all; so our Tythe-taking Priests are contrary to the Law and first Cove∣nant, and the Gospel also, and therefore to be looked upon as no other then Anti-christians; but to return to Aaron's Priesthood in the first Covenant, they grew and multiplied, and then the Priests were divided into twenty four Ranks or Courses, of which our Prebends, Deans and Chapters take their Example or Imitation, so to serve by their Turns at Cathedrals, as they are called, or else from the Church of Rome, which is worse; but the latter I am rather enclined to believe, because there was no such Name of any Ministers among the Jews, neither in the primitive Church, truly so called; but the Priests gave Attendance to execute their Office, and burn Incense, as his Turn came; and hereupon Zecharias, who is said to be of the course of Abiah, Luke 1. The Levites that were Singers were divided into twenty four Ranks also or Courses, of which I believe the present Quiristers or Surpless-men do imitate, and will bring the Levites for a Proof concerning their Office; but we cannot receive Judaism for Chri∣stianity, neither their Practice for Apostolical Ordinances in the Church of Christ. The Priests and the Levites being separated for the Work of the Lord in the Tabernacle and Temple, ministred according to the command and ordinances of the first Covenant, which were only Figures of things to come, and Shadows of things that were but to continue until the time of Reformation, and then they all had an End, both the Priesthood and the Levites, and their Service, and Office, and Maintenance, and Tythes ended, as the Apostle saith to the Hebrews, The Priesthood is changed, and the Law is changed, by which they received these Tythes for the Work afore∣said; but to descend, and to come unto the primitive time, we shall see whether Tythes were paid or no to Gospel-Ministers in the second Cove∣nant. In the Fulness of time God raised up another Priest, Christ Jesus, who was not of the Tribe of Levi, nor consecrated after the Order of Aaron;
so▪ he pertained to another Tribe, of which no man gave Attendance to the Altar; he obtained a more excellent Ministry, and of a greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not of the former Building, he being the Sum and Substance of all the Figures under the first Covenant, he put an End to the first Priesthood, with all its Shadows and carnal Ordinances, and changing the Priesthood which had a Command to take Tythes of their Brethren, there was made of Necessity also a Change of the Law, and a disannulling of the Commandment going before. Christ Jesus when he had finished his Office upon Earth by fulfilling all Righteousness, he offered up himself through the eternal Spirit a Sacri∣fice unto God, without Spot; the Apostles and Ministers who were made Partakers of the Divine Nature, and of the Word of Reconciliation, did not look back to the former Ordinances of the first Priesthood, but testifi∣ed an End was put to them, and witnessed against the Temple wherein the Priests ministred; Paul and likewise Stephen were stoned, and against Cir∣cumcision, saying, It was not that of the Flesh, and against all the outward Ordinances of that Covenant, and called them Carnal, and preached up Christ Jesus and his Doctrine, the new and living Way, which was not manifest while the first Tabernacle was standing; they preached freely the Everlasting Gospel, and did not desire or require setled Maintenance, but were ministred to only by them who had believed their Report, and were turned to Christ Jesus, and were made Partakers of spiritual things, though they often denyed that which was given unto them; here was no Tythes spoken on, either to the Jews or Gentiles who believed. At Jerusalem and thereabouts, such was the Love and Unity of Heart a∣mong the Saints in the Apostles Time, that all things were in common, and none wanted; so likewise the Church gathered by Mark at Alexandria in Egypt followed the same Practice, and the Church at Jerusalem, and Philo▪ Judeus saith, in many other Provinces the Christians lived together in So∣cieties. In the Church of Antioch, Galatia and Corinth, the Saints possessed every man his own Estate,Acts 11.29. where the Apostle ordain∣ed, that a weekly Offering should be made of the Saints, that every one might offer freely of that which God had blessed him with, which was put into the Hands of the Deacon of the Churches, whereby the poor was re∣lieed, and other necessary Services were supplyed. In the next Age monthly Offerings were made, not exacted, but freely given, as appears plainly by Tertullian Apologet▪ chap. 29. where he up∣braids the Gentiles with the Piety and Charity of the Christians; he saith, Whatsoever we have in the Treasury of our Churches, it is not raised by Taxati∣on, as though we put Men to ransom their Religion; but every Man once a Mo∣neth, or when he pleaseth himself, gives what he thinks good, for no Man is com∣pelled, but left free to his own Discretion; and it is not bestowed in Vanity, but relieving the poor, and for Maintenance of poor Children destitute of Parents, and aged People, and such as are cast into Prisons for professing the Christian Faith▪ and that this Way of Contribution continued till the great Persecution under Maximinian and Dioclesian about the Year 304. as Eusebius witnesseth▪ nd so dth Tertullian, Origen, Cyprian and others.
Also about this time some Land was given to the Church by them that believed,Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 22. & the revenue there∣of was distributed, as other free Gifts were, by the Deacons and Elders to the poor, for the fore-mentioned Uses, but the Bishops or Ministers med∣led not with them; Origen saith, It is not lawful for any Minister to possess Lands given to the Church to his own Use. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, about the Year 250. testifieth the same,Cyprian Epist. 27.34.36. and sheweth how the Church maintaineth many poor, and that her own Diet was sparing and plain, and her Expences full of Frugality; Prosper saith also, That a Minister able to live of himself, ought not to desire any Thing to be given unto him, and he that recei∣veth it, doth it not without great Sin: The Council at Antioch, Anno 340. finding that much Fault had been among the Deacons, to whom it proper∣ly belonged to distribute the Offerings or free Gifts where there was ned, which they detained for their own covetous Ends, the Council did ordain, that the Bishop might distribute the Goods, but required that they took no Part thereof to themselves, nor to the Use of the Priests▪ using the Apostles Words, having Food and Rayment, be therewith content▪ Chrysostome notes, who lived about the Year 400. hat Christian Con∣verts joyned in Societies, and lived in common after the Example of the former Saints at Jerusalem,Hom. 11. in acta. by whose Writings it doth appear that there was not the least mention made of Tythes in that Age; the Church at this time living altogether by fre Of∣ferings of Lands, Monies and Goods; the People were much pressed to bountiful Contributions for holy Uses, as may be seen in the Writings of Hierome and Chrysostome, who brought the Liberality of the Jews in their Payment of Tythes for an Example, beneath which they would not have Christians determine their Charity. Chrysostome saith, I speak not these Things, as commanding or forbidding they should give more, yet as thinking it fit they should not give less then the tenth Part. And Hierome also doth admonish them to Bounty and Charity to∣wards the poor, not binding at all to offer this or that Part, leaving them to their own Liberty, yet pressing them not to be shorter then the Jews in their Tenths. Ambrose who was Bishop of Millain about the Year 400. preached up Tenthes to be offered up for holy Uses, as the Phrase was then; but his Authority he produceth wholly from Moses's Writings; likewise Augusti Bishop of Hippo, joyns and agrees with Ambrose in this thing, but from the Law given to Israel take their whole Doctrine, & threatned them with great Penalties and heavy Judgments from God that did not give their Tenths; but yet take Notice to what End they requir'd them, that the poor might not want, and say, God hath reserved them for their Use; so by this time Love did grow cold in many, and the Power of God was much wanting, which would have kept the Hearts of People open in Love and Mercy to their Members; and therefore they were much prest and threatned by the Bishops, to give their Tenths, not that the Bishops had any better Ground, but the Jewish Law for their Foundation; and so in process of time this Doctrine came to be received, many following? he Opinion of the ancient Fathers, yet hitherto it was not laid down as a positive Doctrine, to pay
them, as the Jews did, but only brought the Jews for an Example, that Christians should not pay less. Leo (called the great) about the Year 440. who reigned twenty Years, he was very earnest in stirring up Mens Devotion to offer to the Church, but speaketh not a Word of any Quantity. Severin also 470. stirred up the Christians in Pannonia to give the Tenth to the poor: Likewise Gregory not only admonished the Payment of Tythes from Moses's Law, but also the observing of Lent,Hom 16. in Evan. and dist. 5. de conser. which he reckoned as the Tenth of time in the Year, and this he would have given unto God, saying, We are commanded in the Law to give the Tenth of all things unto God; and thus Ignorance began to en∣ter in, and Judaism among the Christians brought in by their Leaders; and from the Opinions of these and other ancient Fathers, who took their Ground from the Law, Tythes, Easter, Pentecost and other things came to be introduced and brought into the Church. Yet notwithstanding the Doctrine and hard Threats of some of the great Bishops of that time, It was not a General received Doctrine that Tythes ought to be paid, till about the Year 800. Neither was any thing by the then Church determined or ordained touching the quantity that should be given, though (no doubt) in many places the offerings of the devouter sort, tenths or a greater part of their increase were given according to Am∣brose's Doctrine and others; And then at ths time the Offerings or gifts to the Church were disposed of in this wise, being received into a common Treasury, one fourth part to the Priests, out of which every one had his Portion, another fourth part to the relief of the poor, and sick and strang∣ers; A third to the building and repairing places of publick Meeting; And the fourth to the Bishop, and generally the Bishop lived in some Monastry, and his Clergy with him, from whence he sent them to Preach in the Countries and Diocesses, and there they received such ofrings as were made and brought them to the Treasury; So that by the way the Read may take notice, that the Priest had no such peculiar Interest in that which was given, but now they claim all: Their Meetings places, since called Churches, were builded out of the gifts of People, and the Poor were recei∣ved, and the Widdow; But now Tythes taken by force three or four Fold, and People compelled to build and repair their Houses or Temples by force and the Poor and the Widdow have no share; nay, have not many Poor been cast into Prison, and Widdows goods Spoiled by the Priests of this Generation? and how unsutable these Practices are unto the Apostles, let all judge; nay, they are proud of the ancient Fathers and their Words, but they will not so much as come near them in Example in any thing tht is good; So for shame you Protestants leave forcing of Maintenance, and forcing of your Wages, and forcing to repair your Houses of Worship▪ and do not tell us of Church, and Antiquity when you are far enough  their practice, though they were in a declining State, in this Age I have been speaking of. And although divers of the Fathers and Bishops, and Popes in this Age did declare that Tythes were due and ought to be paid, (their Ground only taken from Moses) yet none of the first eight general Councils did  much as ever mention the Name of Tythes, or declare them a duty. The
ninth general Council held at Lateran under Pope Calixtus the second, 1119. mentions Tythes, but speaks only of such as had been given to the church by special consecration, for at that time people being led to believe that their Tythes ought to be given to the Poor, did dispose of them to the Heads and Rulers of religious Houses who kept open hospitality for the Poor and for strangers, they were esteemed Holy and good treasurers for the poor, who took care of distribution of them, as is testified by Cassian; But the Council held under Pope Alexander the third, Anno 1180. Seeing much given to the Poor, and little to the Priests, made a Decree to re∣strain peoples freedom, and indeed by this time much Wickedness was crept into these Houses, as Histories relate. There was no Law, Canon or Constitution of any General Council as yet found, that did command Tythes, or expresly supposed them a duty of common right before the Council of Lateran, held in the Year 1215 un∣der Pope Innocent the third, about which time the Pope's Power was grown great and powerful; But still the People had greater mind to give them to the Poor, then to the Priest, and made Innocent complain and cryed out against those that gave their Tythes and first fruits to the Poor, and not to the Priests, as hainous Offenders. At a Council held at Lyons under Pope Gregory the 10 in the year 1274. it was constituted, that it should not thence∣forth be lawful for men to give their Tythes at their own pleasure, as they had done before, but to pay all to the Mother-Church. But the great Decree which speaks most plain, and till then nothing was given forth which did constitute them, but rather supposed them as by former right, was made at the Council of Trent under Pope Pius the 4th, about the Year 1560. They commanded Tythes to be paid under the pe∣nalties of Excommunication about the Year 800, 900, 1000, and after Tythes were called the Lord's Goods, the Patrimony of the Poor, according to Ambrose, Jerom, and Chrysostom's Doctrine only, borrowed from the Jews. So thus in short I have shown, that Tythes were never reckoned as due to the Clergy for a thousand Years, but they did give them as they would▪ and how much they would, and that without compulsion, till the height of Popery and the power of Darkness spread over all, and since foring Constitutions have been made by Councils of Priests: And so you who look upon your selves to be Ministers of Christ, and to follow the Doctrine of the Primitive times, for shame cease from those things of take∣ing tythes and giving tythes, which was ordained and Constituted in the mid-Night of Popery, when the Power of God was lost, which should have opned peoples Hearts both to the poor and to the Ministry, and then this false Church began to force and compel, or else they could not have subsisted, for the Doctrine had little influence upon Peoples Hearts. About the year six hundred or soon after, Gregory the first, then the Pope of Rome sent over Augustin the Monk into England, by whom Ethelbert King of Kent was converted, as they call it, but it was but to Popery; he and his Clergy long time after followed the Example of former Ages, living in common upon the offerings of their Converts, and those that received them, joyned into Societies according to the primitive Practice by Gregories or∣der, and that they should in Tenderness to the Saxon-Church, still imitate the Primitive times, that that might not make their Religion burdensom;
but afterwards having brought a great part of the Nation to their Faith, they began to preach up the old Roman-Doctrine, that Tythes ought to be paid, and having taught People that Pardon of Sin was merited by good works and the Torments of Hell avoided by Charity, then it was no hard mrtter to perswade them to give their Tenths, and Lands, but also their outward Riches, and the Clergy had almost got a third Part of the Land into their Hand. As concerning Laws and Canons for Tythes among the Saxons in Eng∣land, it is reported, that in the Year seven hundred eighty six two Legates were sent from the Pope Adrian the first, to Offa King of Merceland, and Ethel∣wolf King of Northumberland, who made a Decreee, that the People of these two Kingdoms should pay Tythes; by this it may be seen that Tythes were not reckoned as due for many hundred Years, and indeed were never due in the second Covenant: So these things that are so pleaded for by these hireling Priests of this last Age, which have no better plea then An∣tiquity for their tythes and forced Hire, may be convinced, that Antiqui∣ty without Truth is nothing, and yet the Antiquity of the Churches in the primitive times condemns these practices; so that let all Protestants deny these introduced Institutions, and the Popes Wages, forced tythes and hire, which is Antichristian. A cloud of Witnesses might be brought out of the Ancient Fathers, who testified against them; and divers Martyrs, as Walter Brute and John Wickliff, who suffered Martyrs for testifying the Truth against the Idolatry and Superstitions of that Age. Selden in his History of Tythes, saith, that before the Year eight hundred, or there abouts, there is not any general Law that yet remains in publick, and is of credit, which ordained any payment of Tythes in the Western-Church, for the Eastern never any Law that hath been observed, menti∣ons them; So the first giving of tenths was by the perswasions of some of the Fathers fore-mentioned, for the poor and Service of the Church▪ and they were only the free Offering or free Gift of the people, as Alms, which were brought into the common treasury, first disposed of by Deacons for the Service of the Church; but they being sound faulty, it was ordered or decreed in a Council, that the Bishop or Overseer should dispose of them▪ to wit, the Offerings; but they were not compellable, who did not offer this or that part, but were left to do as they had▪ Freedom, only exhorted and threatned with the Judgements of God, if they suffered the poor to lack or be in want. The Predecessors of the Protestants, the Bohemians being descended from the Waldenses fore-mentioned, did profess that all Priests and Ministers ought to be poor, and to be content with the free Gift, or what the People freely offered them, so saith Eneas Silvius in his Bohemian History, and it is one of John Wickliff's Articles, for which he was censured, viz. That Tythes were a free Gift as among Christians, or only pure Alms, and that the Parishiner may for the offence of their Curates detain and keep them back, and bestow them upon others at their own will and pleasure. And this proposition aforesaid is maintain'd by Jhn Hs in the said Bk of Martyrs, page 461. That the Clergy are not Lords or Possessors of Tythes, or other Ecclesiastical Goods, but only Stewards; and after the Necessity of the Cle∣gy
is once satisfied, they ought to be tranported to the poor. At Geneva Tythes of all Sorts are taken up for the use of the State, and laid up in the publick Treasury. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, as zealous a Man for Church Privi∣ledges, as we hardly read of the like, Ambrose Epist. 23. saith, If the Em∣peror have a mind to Church Lands, he hath Power to take them, there is noe of as interposeth, the poor may sufficiently be maintained by popular Collections, let them not create us envy, by taking of those lands, let them take them away if they please. It may be observed at this time, that the Ministers were not maintained by settled Tythes, like the Priests of our time, but both they and the poor were relieved by Oblations of the People, and by such Lands as were given by the Emperors to the several Churches; so it was upon this account that Ambrose thus speaks; And William Thorp of whom I made mention, being examined in the Year 1407. being brought before Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor then of Egland, gives a clear Testimony against Tythes, how that they were no Gospel mainte∣nance. In his Answer he saith, In the new Law neither Christ nor his Apostles took Tythes of the People, nor commanded the People to pay Tythes, neither to Priests, nor Deacons, and Christ and his Apostles preached the Word of God to the People, and lived of pure Alms of the free gifts, but after Christ's Ascension when the Apostles had received the Holy Ghost they travailed with their Hands,Acts and Mon. pag. 536, 537. and afterwards he saith, Paul when he was full poor and needy, preached among the People: He was not chargious unto them, but travailed with his Hands, not only to get his own living, but also to relieve others that were poor and needy: And further he saith, Tythes were given in the old Law to Levites and Priests, but our Priests come not of Levi, but since, Christ lived and his Apostles by pure Alms, or else by the travail of their Hands; at the which the Bishop said, God's curse have you and yours for this teaching: And further William saith, Those Priests that challenge to take Tythes, deny Christ come in the Flesh, unto which the Bishop said, heard ye ever Lossel speak thus: And further William saith, That the covetousness and pride of the Priests, destroyes the Virtue of the Priesthod, and al∣so stirreth up God's Vengeance both upon Lords and Commons, who suffer these Priests charitably. And the Arch-Bishop said, Thou judgest every Priest proud that will not go arrayed as thou dost; By God, I deem him to be more meek▪ that goeth every ay in his Scarlet Gown, then thou in thy thred bare blew Gown; an Answer much like a tything Priest; but I refer the Reader to the whole testimony of William Thorp, which is large in the Book of Martyrs. David Pareus in his Commentary upon Gen. 28.21, 22. saith, Tythes or Tnths were freely arbitrary; a Man might give them, a Man might vow them, or he might not, as he pleased before the Law, but under the Law they were com∣mnded to be given to the Priests and Levites; hence saith he, our Clergy-men infr, if they were so of old, then they are so now; but this doth not follow, sith he, they had a divine ceremonial Right, but that is now ceased, they had Tythes as a Compensation of that lot they should otherwise have in Land, ours not so; ous have Towns, Villages, Mannours, yea Coutries and Provinces, nor is there any end of their insatiable Covetousness; and he concludes, when the Levitical Priest∣hod did cease, then did Right of that Priesthood cease, and the Right of Tythes did revert to God, as Governour and Soveraign of the World.
Great and large are the Testimonies that might be given, both out of Ancient and modern Writers, who were the clearest in their Judgements in their Age against Tythes, how that they were no Gospel-maintenance, neither of Divine Right to belong to any Ministry under the Gospel, who professeth Christ come in the Flesh: What I have said in this particular might be sufficient, seeing so large things by other Pens have been declared; but I am the more willing to instance divers Authors, who by our Prote∣stants are owned as orthodox, that they may be convinced that it is not a new Doctrine, for which we suffer the spoiling of our Goods, and our per∣sons imprisoned, but that Tythes have been testified against by many faith∣ful in Ages past, who died in the Faith, who though they be dead, yet their testimony liveth, and will stand through Ages, even forever; take this of the primitive Bishop. Antonius de Dominis the learned Bishop of Spalato de Repub. Eccles. Lib. 9. Christ himself though he were Lord of Heaven and Earth, and the Fulness there∣of, yet would he not be possessed of great Lands and Incomes, though he seeminly complained, the Fowls of the Air have Nests, and Foxes Holes, but the Son of Man not where to rest his Head, Luke 9.58. Yet did he not imbetter his Condition, although to the effecting thereof, there needed no more then that he should will it to be so; nor did he demand Tythes, though a Priest after the order of Melchizedeck indubitably; but while be went through the Cities and Countries preaching the Gospel, and instructing man, for the Kingdom of Heaven, and twelve with him, several Women, Mary Mag∣dalen, Joana, Susan and others did minister unto him of their Substance, Luke 8.1, 2. Nor did he otherwise instruct his Disciples, who were to be Embassadors on Earth towards Man-kind: In the Beginning when he sends them out, he did not bid them for to receive Tythes, or teach People to pay them, but bids them to live upon Alms, carry not with you Gold nor Silver, or any money in your Purses, not a Scrip, not two Coats, not a Staff supernumerary; for the Labourer is worthy of his Meat, Mat. 10.9. The Disciples of Christ being thus taught by their great Master, forsaking their livelihood and earthly Possession, presumed upon the Good∣ness of God, who would not so have sent them abroad, but that he would dispose the Hearts of men accordingly in order to their Subsistance; so they relied upon their Converts for their necessary Supplies, and received the Benevolence of several pious men and Women who ministred unto them; for so saith Paul, have not I Power to eat and to drink? have not I Power to lead about a Woman, or a Sister, as do the other Apostles, and the Brethren of our Lord, and Cephas? 1 Cor. 9.5. He at large and very clearly sheweth, how they who sow spiritul ought to reap temporal things. If one should ask the Ministry of thi Age, by what Right they claim Tythes, they cannot say by a bettter Right then the Apostles had, nor I hope will not; for they pretend to be but Successors of them; and if the Extent of their Commission be required, you shall have it in these Words forthwith, As my Father sent me, so send I you, or the like; but if one ask, if they will stand to this in all respects, I have little Hope they will comply in Point of maintenance, I have good ground so to judge▪ even many at this day who have in time past vaunted and boasted of their call and Ministry, and have thrown many in prison for these popish Tythes: Now when thy are like to be taken from them, would give over publication of their Gos∣pel, if they knew how to subsist for their Books and Bellies, which demon∣strates
that they had no mission from God, or else why should taking of Tythes away from them invalidate it? or do they judge all are converted▪ there is no more Work? Now such will be tryed who have boasted of calls and Commissions, and if all were gone, they would preach for nothing or freely without Gifts; I am afraid we shall hardly find one of five hundred but will rather then quite cease the gainful Trade, traffick in such Mer∣chandize as the time allows, though they must now be content with eight for a night-wake, and four for churching of a Woman, and sxpence for road∣ing over a Grave, or Tythe-egges at Ester, and rather then they dare stand Christ's allowance, will take this and such allowance as can be gotten un∣der Hand and Seal, as the time will afford them; but to return to that which was in my Heart to shew out of Antiquity, Tythes no Gospel min∣tenance Prosper saith, They do live upon the Gospel, who will be Propriators of nothing, who neither have, nor desire to have any thing, not possessing their own, but the Common Goods; what is it to live of the Gospel, but that he who lbours should receive necessary Supplies by them a∣monst whom he labours, without forcng,Prosper de vita con∣tempt. lib. 2. cap. 4. though Paul himelf would not make use of hs Permission, lest he should create an Offenc bt la∣boured with his Hands being a Tent-maker, and they that would receive it by vo∣luntary Contributions, were the Apostles and others who laboured in the Gospel. Cyril of Alexandria speaking upon that Passage of Abraham, Gen. 14 23. who after he had gained Victory over the King of Sodom's Enemies, and rescued Lot,Cyril de adorat. in spir. & ver. lib. 4. ad finem. when the King offered him part of the Spoils, he would receive nothing but a few Victuals, though saith he, the holy Teachers do war in the behalf of perishing mankind, and thouh they undergo much pains, yet do they not take anythng from the men of the World, nor do they heap up unto themselves riches, lest the World should say, I have made you rich, they only ought to receive their Sustenance from the Hands of those whom they have benefited; for it is Christ's Command saith he, that he who teacheth the Gospel should live thereby; So that it is evident that very many of Ancient Fathers, whom this Gene∣ration of Teachers have talked so much on, did deny Tythes and forced mintenance from the World; but in this Point it is like they may be judg∣ed for erroneous, or weak sighted (as they do the Quakers) or mn of weak Understanding; but I see many will trduce them in Words, but few in practice. Peer and John say, Silver and Gold have I none; Behold the riches of those who were Priests of Christ, but let us quickly aply these things saith he, unto ourselves,Orien, hom. 15. in Levit. who are prohibited by the Law of Christ, if we have any Regard thereunto, to have possessions in the Country, or Houses in the City, what do I say? Possessions Houses, no, not to multiply Coats or Money, if we have Food and Raiment let us be there with con∣tent; Hierom writing to Nepotianus a Clergy-man, doth much extol he Poverty of the Clergy, As a Levite and a Priest, saith he, I love and am sup∣plied with the Oblations of the Altar, having Food, having Cloath I will be content therewith, and naked follow the naked Cross; I beseech you, that you would not transform our spiritual Warfare into a carnal one, nor Imagine yourself in the Clergy, as if you were in an Army getting Spoils, nor seek after no more then whn
you came first into the Clergy, lest it be said to you, their Lot shall not profit them. The Aligenses Bedemontane Protestants have preserved their Religion incorrupt, longer then any Church with a Ministry endowed with Tythes and Hire in the World; and likewise the primitive times never wanted able Teachers as the best Histories say, although they lived either upon their Labour, or the free Offering of them that were converted, and were not so disquieted with political complying Opinions, and Curiosities, and Niceties, and Distinctions, and Contentions, until Constance began to en∣rich, and give Lands and great Revenues to the Church; and then they be∣gan to side and controvert in state matters, and grew into Pride, Idleness and Fulness, insomuch that Histories say, a Voice was heard from Heaven, This Day hath Poyson been shed in the Church. So you Protestants view over your Fathers, whom the Ministers have talked on; and so now if they will own their Practice so as to walk in it, and let them never be reckoned as Ministers of Christ more, who cannot be content with his allowance, and let forcing alone about maintenance, and the Tythes alone to the Priest of the first Covenant, and let bagaining alone for Wages, and seek not Hire of them you work not for; and if your Gospel will not maintain you, you have good cause to question it, whe∣ther it be the very same the Apostles preached, and the primitive Fathers, and never such a cry be heard more among People for maintenance and hire, for wages and Tythes; but he that hath the Gospel, let him preach the Gospel, and live of the Gospel, not upon Tythes, and forced mainte∣nance, and set stipends; for the Gospel condemns this, a Cloud of Wit∣nesses is against it, both in former and latter Ages, yea, it is inconsistent un∣to Reason to require Tythes in this Age by the Ministry. First, the Levites were one of the twelve Tribes, if they were not the twelfth Part of the People; but so are not the Priests now. Secondly, They had no Portion among the rest of the Tribes; but the Teachers and Priests now have equal to other men in Lands and Revenues. Thirdly, The Priests were but to have the Tenth of all clean things; but now clean and unclean Beasts, Birds and Fowls, Pigs, Eggs, Turnips, and every thing which were not tythable under the Law. Fourthly, Their Service was great at the Tabernacle and Temple, and in time of the War in sojourning; it is not so with Priests who stay over a few Families all their Life long. Fifthly, Seeing the Service is abrogated, for which the Levites had Tythes, and none of the Service performed now, no Reason that Tythes should be required now, when the Work is not done, unto which the Tythes belonged. Sixthly, The Levites were of Aaron's Priesthood, of which Tribe Christ came not (but of the Tribe of Judah) but these Priests are not after Aan nor Levi, neither their Successors, therefore have no Right to Tythes. Seventhly, That which was given by the Command of God only to Aaron and his Sons and Levites, and never to any other Priesthood or Ministry; now seeing the Law is changed, and the Priesthood changed Christ being cme, these Priests are unreasonable, who demanded them contrary to the Command of God, which belongs only to that Priesthood.
CHAP. XIX. Respecting of Persons, and Complemental Bowing, and worshipping one another, and flattering Titles no good Manners, but are in the Transgression, and have been anciently reproved and condemned. ALthough this Generation have so far run after every Invention and vain Custom and Tradition into Complements, and Flattery, and Deceit, and respecting of Persons, which is a thing in high Esteem, as a Piece of good Breeding and Education, and good Manners accounted, not only among the prophaner Sort, but even among Christians (so called) who have conformed unto every vain Custom of the Nations; yet they that know the Life of Christ cannot do so, and they that abide in his Do∣ctrine must not do so, though things be never so applauded by fallen Men, whose Glory is in that which is earthly; yet God beholds not, nor looks not as man, but his thoughts are contrary to mans in that State, and that which the Sons of men in the fallen Estate do highly esteem of, is disesteem∣ed by the Lord. The best manner of walking is, that which the Lord directs and leads into, which is pure and holy and incorrupt; and the Saints practice, who were taught of God, is the best Example to follow, and their Manners and Deportment among the Sons of men are chiefly to be followed, although that which is from below, doth and hath ever disesteemed their Way, and the Honour that comes from above; although the Heathen had many Lords and many Gods, yet it was said to Israel, Thy God is but one, and him shalt thou bow unto alone, and reverence his Name; Israel was not to follow the vain Customs of the Nations, neither follow their Example, who ser∣ved not the living God with their Hearts; and Multitudes are not to be followed in doing Evil; Custom without Truth is but a bad plea; Anti∣quity with Unrighteousness is but bad Proof; that which leads into De∣generation is not to be minded, but that which leads into Restauration and Innocency. The Redeemed of the Lord and the Israel of God now, who now work after the Directions and Leadings of God's holy Spirit, upon whom Peace resteth, are otherwise taught, then to follow vain Customs, which begt one another into Pride, and Deceit, and Unbelief; Christ reproved the Pharisees fr seeking Honour one of another and told them▪ They could not be∣lieve who sought it; was it reprovable then? is it commendable now? are there not many that seek it now? yes, that which is offended when it is not complemented and bowed unto, seeks it, and would have it, and is in the Unbelief; what capping and cringing, what bowing and scrping, in which many spend much of their time? what Complements and sign∣ed Speeches are daily invented▪ and Gestures and Ceremonies, of which there is hardly any End, which People run into now, who call themselves Christians? many Generations before cannot parallel it, and yet this must be counted good Manners, and be reckoned as such: Oh! the Lord is
grieved with these things, and they are abominable in his Sight, and will provoke the Lord to Anger, if they be persisted in, and the Honour which is from above they despised; and what invented Words and Names, which puff up the proud Minds, are People run into, and like Ephraim in the Transgression, feed upon Wind; that which will vanish as a ubble, and pass away as a Morning Dew; God will stain it all, and the Pride and Glo∣ry of all Flesh, and bring Contempt upon all the honourable of the Earth; for the Saints knew, who were come out of the Respect of Persons, that the Fashion of the World, and the Custom, Manners, Glory, Honour and Esteem thereof should pass away, and that all that come to the Beginning again, to Union with God, must dye to all these things, which are got and entered into the Hearts of Men since the Transgression; and while these things are loved, they alienate the Mind from the living God, and from the Honour due unto his Name. And oh what Strangers are men to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and to the primitive Saints! that it is even become a de∣scable thing in their Eyes, and their Practice and Manner of walking is now become an Offence, and reckoned unmannerly, and not only so, but it is counted such an Offence and a Crime, as deserves Punishment? Oh for Shame look back upon the Saints Practice for your Example, unto their Manners for your Imitation, and not unto the vain Custom of the Nations, not unto Mountebanks, Stage-players, Fidlers, Roysters and Ruffins, who make a Mock of Sin, and live by the Sins of the People. Will it be a good plea do you judge before the Lord [when the secrets of all Hearts shall be opened, and every Action brought unto Righteous Judgment] that you have followed the fashion of a Nation, the custom of a Court, City or Country, or the most in the World, doth not the Scrip∣ture say, that the Saints should not fashion themselves like unto the World, neither be conformable to it, but rather be transformed in your minds, and seek the things that are above? for, where the mind is transformed and changed from the earthly to the Heavenly, there the Actions will be new, and the Works new: did the Pharisees say truly of Christ in this, we know thou respects no man's Person? yes, they knew it, though they tempt∣ed him; And did not Peter say, of a truth, God is no respecter of Persons? and did not Solomon say, He that respects Persons will Transgress for a mersel of Bread And did not Elihu say, I know not to give flattering Titles to men, in so  my Maker would soon take me away? Is not this a flattering Generation and full of Hypocrisie and deceit, Flattering one another, when in a moment they are like to kill one another, Hating one another, and speaking Evil of one another, when as soon as one is parted from another, these things are an abhorrency in the Eyes of the Lord. Consider what James saith, the Apostle of Christ, Jam. 2. ver. 2, 3.4.5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. My Brethren, have not the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with respect of Persons; for if there come into your assembly a man with a Gold Ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a Poor man in , and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay Cloathng, and  to the Poor, stand thou there, or sit under my Foot-stool, are ye not the part in your selves, and are become Judges of evil Thoughts? Hearken my  Brethren, hath not God chosen the Poor of this World rich in Faith, and Heirs of
the Kingdom which he hath Promised to them that love him; Do not rich Men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment Seats; Do not they Blaspheme that worthy Name, by the which you are called; If you fulfil the Royal Law of God according to the Scriptures, thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, ye do well; but if ye have a respect to Persons, ye commit sin, and are Convinced of the Law as Transgressors. And the Apostle concludes, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law and offend in one point, is Guilty of all; and such is the re∣specting of persons, and giving flattering titles unto Men, and they that do it are Judges of Evil thoughts, and Transgressors of the Law, and are guilty of all. Marlorat out of Luther and Calvin saith upon this place, To respect Persons here, is to have regard unto the outward Habit, garb and attire, and according∣ly to esteem or undervalue him, love or dread him, and that such respect of Per∣sons is repugnant unto true Faith, and is inconsistent wih it, and concludes that none ought to be Honoured upon the account of Riches; But this Generation of Hypocrites are gone further into Transgression of the Law, into honour∣ing or disesteeming of Men because of their Cloaths or habit: a Gold Ring, a gay Cloak, a Fan or a Feather, are become the only cogniscance or badge of honourable Persons in this Age among Professors, but it was not so in the Dayes of old, but Modesty, Gravity, Sobriety, Temperance, Humi∣lity were the tokens of one truly Honourable. Jerom writing to a great Person in the World named Colentia, directing her how to live in the midst of her Riches and honour, saith thus, Heed not your Nobility, nor do ye thereupon take place of any; repute not them who are of a lower extraction to be your inferiors: Our Religion admits no respect of Per∣sons, nor did it lead us to value the outward condition of Men, but their inward frame of Spirit; it is hereby that we pronounce men Noble, and base with God; not to serve Sin is to be free, and to Excell in virtue is to be Noble; Bsides it is Folly for any to boast of Gentility, since all are equally esteemed by God, nr is it material in what Estate a man is born: the new Creature hath no distinctions; Or was this the Doctrine of one single Person alone? for Paulinius Bishop of Nola reproved Sulpitius Severus for writing himself in the Title of a Letter to Paulinius, (your Servant) he saith, In the Title of my Letter, I have not imitated your excellent Brother-hood, because I thought it more secure to write Truth; Take heed hereafter how you being from a Servant called out unto Liberty, do Subscribe your self Servant unto one, who is your Brother and fellow-Servant; for it is a sinful flattery, not a Testimony of Humility to pay thse Ho∣nours unto a man, which are due to the one Lord, one Master, one Gd: So this is no new Doctrine to deny respecting of Persons, and flattering Ti∣tles and Complements, although it seem strange to this Generation, in whom the corruptible part is exalted; and that which is below the Truth and the Power of God, elevated in their minds, which despised the Honour which is from above, and the Humility and lowliness of the Saints, and their plainness and Innocency; But all that come unto Christ, and do b∣lieve in him, and follow him for their Example, will come out all these vain complemental flattering titles and respecting of Persons, and will give all
Honour and Glory and Reverence unto him alone unto whom it is due, and respect him who is their Life, and have a respect unto all his Com∣mandments, and unto that which leads out of the Vanity of the World, and to the Beginning again, before deceit, Pride and flattery had a Being, in the pure Innocency and Uprightness, where Truth is spoken from the Heart, without flattery and dissimulation, in all plainness. CHAP. XX. Universities and Schools of Natural Learning were of no use, as to the making of Ministers of Christ in the Primitive times, but a thing introduced, and brought in in latter Ages by the Apostates, who had erred from the Spirit, who then ad∣mired and set up natural Languages and Philosophy, that thereby they might be furnished to make discourses, Speeches and Sermons, to get Money by; and as they are holden up at this day, are made an absolute Iol; and as to their Practice, it's generally known to be prophane, and no way meet to advance the Church of Christ. CHrist Jesus the everlasting High Priest and Minister of the Tabernacle, when he was manifest in the fulness of time, to fulfil the work which was given him to do of the Father, he chused unto him twelve Disciples which believed in him, Men who were not brought up at Universities, neither had studied Philosophy nor natural Tongues, but some Fisher-men, and such as were illiterate, to be Ministers of the glad-tidings of the Gos∣pel of Peace to the Nations; and their ability stood in the Spirit, where the ability of all the Ministers of Christ now standeth, viz. not in the Let∣ter, not in Philosophy, not in natural Languages, not in Grammar and Musick, but in the Spirit which qualified them, and from whence they re∣ceived abilities to declare the Word of Righteousness, and by it they had skill to divide it aright, and to give every one their Portion, and minister to every one suitable to their State in which they were, and they were skil∣led in the Word of Righteousness, and many did believe through their te∣stimony, though they had not the Wisdom that was from below, nor much read in natural Languages, and some not learned (at all) yet they wanted not Wisdom and utterance, and Words meet and suitable to de∣clare and Demonstrate the Heavenly mind of Christ, although it is true▪ many of the Jews & learned Rabbies opposed them, and set them at nought, the Philosophers, Stoicks and Epicures resisted; yet they desired not to be approved in that Wisdom which man teacheth, but in the Wisdom which is from above, which the natural Man with all his natural Parts doth not understand, and Natural men with their natural Parts despise the sim∣plicity of the Gospel, and they seek Qualifications which the Lord never sought, and such will not heed the Qualifications which are laid down by them that were Ministers of Christ; for they that had received the Spi∣rit, and were made Ministers by it, were qualified by it▪ and their holy
Conversation preacht unto others: they were vigilant, they were watch∣ful, they were Sobr, they were in Temptations and tryals, but their Lives were of good report: no covetous Persons, seekers, for their Gain from their Quarters, no Lords over mens Faith, no Masters over mens Consciences, but were Servants unto all for Christ's sake; not like the Ministers in these dayes who will assume the Office, but have not received the gift of God, neither are so qualified or fitted as they were, who had no Universities nor Schools of Learning, and these are they that cry up n∣tral Tongues and Languages, as the chief Abilities of a Minister of Christ ad that none are fit to dispence the Word of God, but such who are  up and educated in these things; and such in former Dayes despised the ross of Christ, and the Simplicity of the Gospel, and set up Tongues a∣bove it, and so do they now; But let us consider whether soon after the Primitive times they had any such Universities, or seven Years prentiships as they have now, or whether it was their Practice to be Studying these things which be but Natural, and whether they did esteem them as any way helpfull to the Ministry. But that I may not be mis-understood, I know each Language and each Tongue hath a proper Signification, and is not Evil in themselves; Schools, of Learning I am not against; natural Languages they may be Servicable for natural Uses, natural Transactions in civil Affairs betwixt Nation and Nation, man and man; but as they are extolled and cryed up to be nurse∣ries of Piety, and to fit Men for the Ministry, as to make it Effectual, i utterly false, and more mischief is learned and Impiety practised in these Universities, then in any other parts of the Nation, and indeed it is one of the main Props and Pillars of Anti-christ's Throne and Kingdom, and tht which upholds his Seat; And that they only, are the only fited and call∣ed men to Minister, who have Natural Tongues, and have read a little in a few Heathen Authors, and thereby are able to comment and make a dis∣course to the hearing of the Ear, (but God's Witness is not reached at all) and such dispise the Spirit, and set light by them that enjoy it, which clearly evidences they are out of the Power of God, which was among the first Christians, who received the Spirit and spoke from it, which is only sufficient and able to make a Minister of Christ; So let us see what Anti∣qity saith. Gaudentius de mor▪ sec. Justinian saith, We do not read that ever th Ati∣ents did openly in Schools teach Philosophy, since they did rather  and saith a good Author, I would fain see a man that could shew tht Chri∣ans either before or in the time of Justinian did openly teach Philosophy; And Hadrian Saraviah informs us the primitive Christians had no Accademical Schools like to those now adayes yet there was one at Alexandria, but in these Schools they read only Catechistical-Lectures; and we do not red of any University of the Waldenses, Albigenses and Bohemians; fr  it of their Teachers were Tradsmen and handy-crafts men, and did no spend their time in reading Tongues, or studying Authors.
Herald. animad. in ar. nob. The Christians in the primitive times, living excluded from all Honours and Magistracies, did neglect these Studies which were for the discharge of civil Imployments, because that Sophisters and Philosophers were the principal Enemies of Christianity, therefore upon this Account they condemned also all politick Learning; they con∣demned Tragedies and Comedies, and other Poetical writings, being the main Part of humane Learning, as judging they did not conduce to solid Knowledge. Tertullian lib. de Idolat. page 138, 139. judged that School-masters professing Learning were guilty of great Idolatry, because they on∣ly explained Names, and Genealogies, and Fabulous Acts of Heathen Gods: And generally Believers in those Dayes harboured a very bad E∣steem of natural Learning, and generally the Christians were provoked thereunto, because the Gentiles did upbraid them that their Teachers were illiterate Persons, as Combers of Wooll, Weavers, and the like; these things being objected against the Christians, the Christians on the o∣ther side rejected all Learning, as an useless thing, and no way advantagi∣ous to Salvation, though their Adversaries boasted of it. Origen lib. 3. saith, The Christians did declare, that men of any condition might be saved, Servants, Idiots and Rusticks, and such as the World valued as Fools, and that God did confound the wise in their own Wisdom; and Celsus, as Origen in his book, saith, that Christians did proclaim it in their Assemblies, Let none that is wise enter, none that is learned, none that is prudent; for thus it is appointed us in the Gospel: but if there be any unwise, unlearned, any Foolish, let him approach with confidence; for these are fit to be the Servants of God. Guzentius in his Animadversions▪ page 25. saith that the Gentiles did object against the Christians, their rude Stile, their harsh Language, and how they were destiture of all Addresses, calling them Rusticks and Clowns; So the Chri∣stians did again term the Gentiles, the Politick, the Eloquent and the Learn∣ed: Clemens Romanus saith in his Writings, lib. 2. chap. 6. Abstain from all the Books of the Gentiles; for what have you to do with strange Discourses or Laws, or false Prophets, which seduce weak men from the Truth? In the Council at Carthage there was a Canon made distinct, 37. cap. Epist. citante Jac. Laurentio de lib. gentil. page 41. Let not a Bishop read Heathen Authors. Gracian saith, we see the Priests of the Lord neglecting the Gospel, and the Prophets they read Comedies, and read Loves Verses out of Beuchlies, they peruse Virgil; and what is a Sin of enfor∣ced Necessity in Children, is become their Delight: Doth not he seem to walk in Darkness and Vanity of Mind, who vexeth himself Day and Night in the Study of Logick, who in the Persuit of Physical Speculations, one while elevates himef beyond the highest Heavens, and afterwards precipitates himself below the ne∣ther Parts of the Earth, and diveth into the Abyss, and chargeth his Memory with the distinct Knowledge of Verses. Petrus Belnius saith, in Greece amongst the Christians which were very many, there were very few learned men, because they esteemed not of it,
Necessity to Christianity, though they could speak Greek, and some Latine; ut few could write or read: In their Libraries were several Manuscripts of Di∣vinity, but no Historian, no Philosophers; for these were anathematized: And all Christians not to study Poetry and Philosophy; yet Reder thou mayest understand that the Greek Church is highly owned for a true Chri∣stian Church, and highly owned by the Protestants: yet neither they, nor the Pickards, nor Waldenses in Bohemia, did value Learning, so far were they from esteeming of it as the proper true Religion, Luther de Institu. puer. inter. aper. Wittenberg. to 7. fol. 444. Paul exhorteth to beware of Philosophy and vain Deceit, 2 Col. 2. He had been at Athens, and had acquainted himself with that vain glori∣ous humane Wisdom, and knew the multiplicity of contradictions which it had procured; what then had Athens to do with Jerusalem? What Fellowship have the Epicures and Stoicks with the Church of Christ? Jerom. lib. 1. contra Pelag. What hath Aristotle to do with Paul, or Plato to Peter? A multitude of Testimonies might be brought to this Effect, how the Christians did in former Ages reject Philosophy, and Heathen Authors, and all such frivolous Stories, as no way lawful for Christians to meddle in, nor any way good to propagate Christianity. Bishop Usher in Vindication of the Waldenses by way of Apology, he saith, God did chuse fisher men that so he might not give his Glory to another, forasmuch as the little ones had asked Bread came to receive it, and the learned being busied about vain contentions and Disputations were sent empty away; the Waldenses, saith Bishop Usher de succes. chap. 6.28. We are not ashamed of our Teachers, because they labour with their Hands, procuring thereby a livelyhood to themselves; because both the Doctrine and Example of the Apostles doth lead us to such Appre∣hensions. And as for the Ceremonies which are found in these Universities and Colledges, and popish superstitious Practices, I shall leave the Reader to read them elsewhere, which are so many and so superstitious, that they come little behind Rome in Idolatry; and as for their consecration of Priests, and the endless rabble of Ceremonies which do attend at such times as they take Degrees, is well known to many in this Nation: And yet these Universities and Schools are elevated in some mens minds as though they were the chief Propagators of Christianity, whenas in∣deed they are an in-let of Heathenism and Idolatry, and no way of Necessity useful for the true Church of God. And it is judged by some learned men, and that upon good Ground, that the present fashioned Universities, Orders and Habits was from the Dominicans; an Order instituted by the Pope to suppress the Waldenses, and their Doctoral Degrees by the learned are judged to be no othr then Noval, and accounted Antichristian, by the reformed Churches so called in Scotland, France, Holland, Switzerland, and the Calvinists in
high Germany; and so many Doctors there are in the Universities, who never knew how to divide the Word aright, nor what it is to con∣vert one Soul unto God; a Doctor that is no Teacher, he is a dmb Dog, and an insignificant Piece of Formality in the Universities, which carries a Shew of something, but is nothing in Substance, and the chief Practice is several ridiculous Solemnities, together with a constant wearing of a Coul, and some other Vestments fecht out of a Popish Wardrope; It was an Article of John Wickliff's condemned at Constance, who suffered as a Martyr, that Graduations and Doctorships in Universities and Colledges as they were in use then did conduce nothing to the Church of Christ, Acts and Monuments, page 449. Didoclavius in his Book Ad Damascenum pag. 891. Saith, that Hoods Tippets and Square Caps were introduced by Anti-christ to promote his splendor, and it is a Stage-play dress altogether ridiculous, being a di∣stinguishment of some Men from others by Signs, useless, and destitue of all Ornament; Upon their shoulders (saith he) there hangs down a hood such as Fools used to wear, being neither handsome nor convenient. Bu∣cer refused to wear a Square Cap, and being demanded the Reason, he answered that God had made his Head round. Philpt choosed rather to be secluded the Convocation of the Clergy, then to wear a Hood and a Tippet, who died a Martyr for the Faith of the Prostestant Church, as Fox tells us in his Acts and Monuments; and the Superstitious Hood is but a product of the old Monckish mettle, grounded upon the Su∣perstitious exposition of that place, Heb. 11. they wandered abroad in Sheep skins, &c. And whether such men are fit to be Ministers of Christ who gave such Expositions upon the Scriptures, or whether it is not al∣together detestable and Idolatrous, and savours altogether of Ignorance as to expound such a Scripture as this, stand fast having your  &c. And this must signifie the Episcopalian Girdles, with which they tye their Canonical Coats or long black Frocks; And whether this is a good Foundation for the Colledge Doctors to stand Booted and Spurd in the [Act] because there is mention made in Scripture of being  with the preparation of the Gospel: see Statute Acad. Oxen. Tit. 7. parag. 17. And whether this be not ridiculous and foolish, to give for their Arms the Book with seven Seals? is not that a gross abuse of what is laid down in the Revelations, as if the Liberal Arts [two whereof are Grammer and Fidling] are typified by these Seals, which none were worthy to open but the Lamb? And as for their habits and black Gowns and black Coats, these have been borrowed from Rome or else from the Chemerams, a sort of People of old among the Jews who were Idolaters, Hosea, 10.5. Some of the Kings of Israel who drew People into Idolatry, and countenanced Idolatrous Priests, 2 Kings 23. who were attired in Black: These were Prophesied against by Heea chap. 10.5. they were supprest by Josiah and Zehany ch. 14. saith, he stretcht forth his Hand upon Judah and upon all the Inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem, and cut off the Remnant of Baal, and the Name of the
Chemarims, or black-Coats with the Priests. Jerome bids Nepotian, being to enter upon the Clergy, to a void black Attire. In Tertullian's time every one that did turn Christian, or was made a Presbyter, did renounce his gown which was the Roman Vestment, and afterwards the Clergy relinquisht dark-Coloured Cloaks for Coats, and the Clergy and Laity in fine were both alike habited: And a Bishop was condemned of the Council of Gangrae, for introducing the fashion of long sad coloured Cloaks, that was condemned by the Assembly une∣seeming the Priest-hood; all this is clear out of Tertullian's writings de∣pallio, with the notes of Salmsius thereon: And all these things had but a bad Original, and were never commanded by God: And seeing they are made such Idols of, ought no longer to be imitated but to be quite a∣bolished. But some may object, though the Original were Popish and Anti-christian, yet since they are employed to better Uses, (viz.) for distinction, order and decency, they may lawfully enough be retained; To this is answered, Might not the Jews have given the same reason to their reformers, that the Golden Calves and their Groves might not be con∣sumed & turned into Ashes, because they might be better imployed to good uses afterwards! or might not the Brazen Serpent have continued as well as the Pots of Manna? Yet when it was become an Idol, away it must go: but the sum of all is, all these Habits and Attires have been used for Superstitious Ends, and Pride, and Pomp, and vain Glory: So they that retain them, they do no more then the Levite that stole away Michah's Gods from Mount Ephraim, and set them up at Dan, where Idolatry be∣came a more publick Worship: So all this innovated superstitious Trum∣pery is no way advantageous to the Church of Christ, neither conduceth to any true Order, neither hath any congruity with the Primitive times, and is to be denyed by all that come out of Babylon, and out of the Apo∣stcy, into the Primitive Order, and the true Churches practice, and the Saints Example. As for Parish Churches which I mentioned before, some say it was the Decree of the Lateran Council in the Year 1180. But Cambden saith, that Dyonysius did only distribute into Diocesses, and others judge into Parishes; and as concerning Church-Yards to bury the Dead, it's Original is Su∣perstitious, and all the Ringing and Singing and the Reading before and over the Dead is Idolatrous and Superstitious: Gaudentius saith, that of old Times [and so saith the Scripture] they did Bury their Dead in their own Ground, which custome was taken away by Pope Innocent the third, he prohibited that any should cause themselves to be buried in Unconse∣crated Ground, forsaking the Sepulchers of their Fathers. Hospinian saith, that at last it became so Superstitious in being buried in order near the Church, that they judged it material even to their Salvation. De Orig. Temple Lb. 3. chap. 1. The Waldenes said, the use of Church-Yards is Superstitious and invented only for Lucre sake, and it is no matter in what Ground any one is buried; see Usher de Succes. Eccles. Christ. chap. 6. And how much there is of this Superstition in England now, and what
excessive rates are paid for breaking up Ground, all is sensible of that; it is only one of the Popish Nets which is holden up to get Money by. And so I shall conclude these things and say with John, Come out of Babylon, and be not partakers of her Sins, lest you partake of her Plagues, for the Hour of her Judgment is come, and the time wherein her Filthiness and Loathsomness shall be made manifest to the Nations, and her Skirts shall be uncovered, and her a∣bominable Practices discovered, of which in part I have declared unto all in this discourse, that all may see the Abominations, and depart out of the Snares that led to Death, and these Practices which tend to De∣struction.
THE Rock of Ages EXALTED ABOVE ROME's Imagined Rock, ON WHICH HER CHURCH IS BUILDED. She proved not to be the only Church of Christ; her corrupt Doctrines proved not to be Apostolick, but contrary to the true Church of Christ in the Apostles Dayes. Also divers Arguments answered, which may convince the Papists, that they are not the true Church, wherein a Book is also answered, called, A Catechism against all Sectaries, newly published by C. M. in the Year 1661. By F. H. a Member of that Church which is coming out of the Wil∣derness.
A TABLE of the principal Things contained in this BOOK. COncerning the true Religion, what it is, and where it  demonstrated. The Church of Rome proved to be the false Church. The Pope proved not to be the Head of the true Church, ad Christ proved to be the Head of the Body, which is his Church, and the  which  Church is built. Purgatory proved to be an erroneous Doctrine, which is held forth by the Papists, and their praying for the Dead proved to be another false Doctrine, not com∣manded nor practised by Christ or his Apostles. The Papists Doctrine, which saith, Christ is really and personally in the Mass and in the Eucharist, proved to be Blasphemy and great Idolatry. The Papists Mass and their Ceremonies proved not to be Apostlical. The Papists honouring of Reliques and Images of Saints, and praying by Beads, proved to be but the Inventions and Traditions of Men, and contrary to the Doctrine which the Apostolick Church held forth. The Doctrine of forbidding certain Kind of Meats, and foridding the Scriptures to be read by all, answered. Cncerning Miracles. Answers to eight Propositions set forth by C. M. in his Catechism aforesaid.
THE Rock of Ages EXALTED ABOVE ROME's Imagined Rock, ON WHICH HER CHURCH IS BUILDED. GReat hath been the Havock and Spoil that the Beast, which John saw rise out of the Waters, made against them, in destroying them who received not his Mark in their Foreheads; and the Cry hath been long, Who is able to make War with the Beast? and great hath the Suffer∣ing been (these many Ages) of the Children of Light, and still is of the Members of the true Church of Christ, which is in God, which hath pro∣ceeded from her who sate as a Queen upon the Waters, which are Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, which have been the Seat of Mystery-Ba∣bylon, the Mother of Harlots, who hath held out her golden Cup of For∣nication, full of Abomination, false Doctrine and Error, which the Na∣tions have drunk of, and the Kings of the Earth have been made drunk with, and all have been in Instability, and have reeled and staggered up and down in the dark, in the Night of Ignorance, and have wildered in the Mists of Error, and lost the true Foundation, and are gone from the Rock upon which the true Church is builded, which is neither Peter, nor his Suc∣cessor, but Christ, the true Foundation, which abideth sure; and all that believe in him, and have their Minds staid upon him, know Settlement and Establishment in that which the Gates of Hell prevail not against. But blessed be the Lord, he is come, revealed and made manifest, who is able to make War with the Beast and his Followers, and a Discerning is given unto his Servants, that they can distinguish betwixt the Cup of For∣nication, and the Cup of Blessing; and betwixt the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils; betwixt the true Church, the Lamb's Wife, and Mstery-Babylon, the Mother of Harlots; betwixt the heavenly Treasur, which is communicable to the Saints in Light, who are Members of the  Church, and the Merchandize and the corrupt Treasure of the Harlot,
which the Nations, Kindreds and Tongues have been forced to buy,  Reason of the forcing and compelling Power of the Beast; and so the Na∣tions have been begotten into a strange Nature, into the cruel Nature, kil∣ling one another about the Forms of Worship and Shadows, and the Sub∣stance hath been known but to a few, neither the Lamb's Nature, which is meek and innocent; and the Leaves of the Tree of Life, which heal the Nations, have been known but to a few, which is the Cause of all the  Murders and Massacrees, Imprisonments and cruel Torments which the Nations have afflicted one another with, who have professed Christianity, but have been out of the Life, and out of the Nature of the true Church, which Christ is the Head of, which is Wife unto the Lamb; and herein is the true Church manifest from the false; the false Church hath propa∣gated and encreased her Number of Members by Force and Awe and Cain's Weapons, and many have been forced into a Belief, and a feigned kind of Profession, rather then by sound Doctrine or answering God's Witness in Peoples Hearts and Consciences; but the true Church, who is of the Hus∣band's Nature, her Weapons have been, are and will be spiritual, and yet are mighty through God to beat down strong Holds of Sin and Wicked∣ness in People, and hath by sound Doctrine and a good Example answered God's Witness in peoples Consciences, without forcing to any thing, but recommended themselves to every ones Conscience in the Sight of God, and would have every one perswaded in their own Hearts (by the Lord) of the Truth which they believed, and not to take things by Tradition and Hear-say, as the false Church and her Members have done, and so have had no Assurance of God's Spirit in their Hearts for what they did, and so Doubts have arisen in the Mind, because whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: But God is Opening the Eyes of many, and enclining the Hearts of ma∣ny to seek after the Assurance of God's blessed Spirit in their Hearts for what they do believe. And now Reader, I shall present thee with a great Fardel and Bundle of the Whore's Merchandize, and of the counterfeit Ware which she hath long deceived the Nations with, which hath long laid as mouldy and rusty in this Nation, but now new trim'd up, and presented again to this Nati∣on as for precious Treasure, and it is not to be concealed in a narrow Cor∣ner, nor put off under-hand, so that this Merchant of Babylon hath pre∣sented it to publick View with a great Confidence, that People that have been tossed up and down, and have found no Rest for their Souls, at lst may come to make a trial of this Merchandize, and see what it will do; but lest any should be cheated and deceived with such counterfeit traffick, I could not chuse (having the Knowldge thereof) but declare against the Deceit thereof, and to give Warning unto all, to beware how they touch, taste or handle it, lest they be defiled and corrupted by it, and their Un∣derstandings darkned, and their Consciences defiled; and the Merchan∣dize is thus tituled, A short Catechism against all Sectaries, by Way of Questi∣on and Answer, wherein all the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome are asserted for Infallible and Apostolical, wherein also is holden out, that the Church of Rome is the only true Church, out of which there is no Salvation, and some Arguments to prove the same; also in this said Book all that are not of the Church of Rome are condemned already as Hereticks and Sectries,
wholly to be without Salvation; newly published and translated by C. M. and London printed for P. S. 1662. And though we have given publick testimony, both in Word and Wri∣ting (in divers Nations) in Doctrine and Practice, yet such hath been the Envy of many Professors, who have denyed the Church of Rome, that they have accused us for holding Popish tenets, yet now on the other Hand by this Popish Author we are condemned as Hereticks and Sectaries, and to be with∣out Salvation: And thus they who have been under the Beast's Power in the Apostacy, have tost us upon their Horns from one to another▪ and have pushed us this Way and that Way; and every Party and Sect hath reck∣oned us and joyned us with them whom they judged to be Transgressors; but it is a small thing to us to be judged by Man's Judgment; for our Judg∣ment is with the Lord, and he judgeth in Righteousness, and unto him we appeal, who in his own Day, when Righteousness comes to be revealed in Peoples Hearts, they shall come to know us as we are, and the Truth which we believe and walk in, as it is in Jesus. But that such a Heap and Bundle of false Doctrine, and superstitious and idolatrous Practices may not go unreproved, God hath put it into my Heart to bear my Testimony against it, and all the confused Heap of Darkness, which is laid down for Catholick Doctrine, and to discover the Deceit thereof, lest any should be beguiled, and led into the dark Paths of Igno∣rance and Error, and should become an Inhabitant of that City which hath shed the Blood of the Prophets and Martyrs, where now Christ is crucified. First of all the Author saith, There is but one true Religion, wherein any can be saved. Answ. 'Tis true, there is but one true Religion in the which Salvation is witnessed, which is confessed by all who profess Religion, and every one will needs lay claim to it; and many have contended, even by Force and Arms, since the Apostacy entered in, and have killed and destroyed one a∣ther about the Name or Sound, without the Thing it self; and all Profes∣sors of Religion who are in that Nature, are not in the true Religion, in which Salvation is witnessed: The true Religion standeth in the Power of God, and to be exercised in those Things which the Power of God dire∣cteth every one in, who believe in it, and to be obedient unto the Commands of Christ, and to keep his Sayings, and to follow his Example in Righte∣ousness and Holiness, and in that which overcometh the World, and gi∣veth Victory over it, and keepeth out of the Pollutions of it; and this is the pure Religion, which purifies the Heart and Conscience from dead Works, and teacheth to love Enemies: Now the Church of Rome is ma∣nifest not to be in the one true Religion, but hath departed from this Faith and this Doctrine; let all Nations bear Witness, where your Religion hath been professed, how you have kept this Faith, and walked in this Religi∣on; if any have dissented from you these many hundred Years, and that upon good Grounds, as Luther and Calvin, which thou art so angry at, nd bring'st many Calumnies against, and slanderous Things, and Lyes, f which thy Vessel is full: Now they, with all others that dissent from you, you have reckoned (and do) as Sectaries and Hereticks; and in case it were
really so, if you were in the true Religion, and in the Faith of Chris yu would not destroy so many mens Lives as you have done within these thou∣sand Years; I appeal to all Nations, where your Authority hath been ex∣rised, how many have you killed, tortured, burnt to Ashes, and destroy∣ed the Workmanship of God? but it may be thou udgest such a Distincti∣on as this will cover a little, as, To hate their Heresie, and to love their Per∣son; but how you have loved their Persons, I hope Englnd hath not yet forgotten; instance John Wickliff, whose Bones you took up and burnt for∣ty one Years after his Decease; and how many Hundreds more have been burnt to Ashes in England in later Years, as Hereticks and Sectaries, whose Blood yet speaks and cryes for Vengeance upon that City, that Church or Religion, which hath drunk the Blood of the Prophets and Martyrs? So in what I have said, the Church of Rome (to all unbiased Spirits) will ap∣pear to be out of that one true Religion and that Faith and Doctrine which Christ delivered; and so Salvation is not to be looked for amongst Killers and Destroyers▪ And so what I have said may convince the Author of this Book, that they are not in the one true Religion, in which Salvation is wit∣nessed. And this Roman Church hath been alwayes visile and universal since the Apo∣stles Dayes, and Infidels have alwayes been obliged to joyn unto her; yet one can∣not be bound to seek that which is invisile; and the Marks and Signs of thi Roman Church are four, comprized in these Words, I believe in the True Church, which is One, Holy, Catholick and Apostolick. Answ. That there was a Church at Rome in the Apostles Dayes is not de∣nyed, so there was at Antioch, at Philippi, at Thessalonica, at Corinth, and divers other Places, that I might instance, which were as visible as Rome was, and as much a City set on a Hill as Rome was, and not inferir in Do∣ctrine, Gifts and good Works to Rome at all, but as to Predncy and Antiquity may claim Priority before Rome; and if he plead that Peter was at Rome, and (as he saith) was Christ's Vicar and Bishop, and if becaue of this Rome doth excell (which the Scripture is silent in) Jerusalem might claim Priority before Rome in this; for he (we read of) was more conver∣sant at Jerusalem, and a Minister of Circumcision; and Paul ministred to Gentiles, who preached two whole Years both to Jews and Romans, which were Gentiles; but it seems, the very imagining Peter to be Bishop of Rome hath made Paul's Work void, and hath turned his Work out of Doors▪ but however, he which hath usurped the Name of Christ's Vicar, hth turned both Peter and Paul their Life, Doctrine and Practice out of Doors, to set up Pride and Deceit: But what Blindness and Ignorance is this, to judge that God hath bound himself so by Promise to any Place, tht e will alwayes continue with them, whether they abide in his Dctrine  or : And though Christ said, The Gates of Hell should not  the Church▪ had this only a Limitation to one Place? if i  understood of a Place outward, because of these Words afore mentined▪ the why is it not extended as well to Antoch and the seven Chrches  Asi, and the rest afore-mentioned? have not the Gates of Hell and  of Drkness prevailed aginst them Places▪ and the Turks taken Pses∣sion thereof: And as for your Church at Rome, which thou say'st
err, and hath alwayes been visible and universal; what sayst thou to Mar∣cilianus, Christ's Vicar as you judge? whether did he not loose his Key; when he sacrified to Idols in the tenth Year of Dioclsian? But it may be then thy Church must not reside in Christ's Vicar, but in a general Coun∣cil; but hereafter we will consider, whether they have been alwayes one, and could not err. Secondly, That whereby the Roman Church gives us a Mark and Sign to be the true Church, to wit, Universality and Viibility, makes her clearly to be an Harlot; for John saw the true Church fly into the Wilderness for Time, Times and half of Time; now if yours hath been visible and univer∣sal all this Time, Times and a half, then you are not the true Church; for Universality comprehends all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; and if this be the Seat of your Church, then absolutely your Church is Mystery-Babylon (and not the Lamb's Wife) for she sate upon Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples and Languages, which were Waters. And here is your Catholick Visible Church measured with God's Measuring-rod▪ First, To be the Harlot, because she was never in the Wilderness: Secondly, Because her Seat hath been so universal and catholick, as Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples and Languages have been the Seat of your Church, which are the Waters which John saw, and so truly may be called the great City. And as for Infidels being oblieged to joyn to you, this hath been because you have forced and compelled by your Power and outward Force, where you had Dominion, and to escape your Tortures, rather then by sound Do∣ctrine, or an holy Example: Or, Secondly, Because your Religion hath stood in so many Formalities and Ceremonies, which have been very pleasing, and so near unto the Heathens Nature. And thou say'st, That one cannot be bound to seek that which is invisible; I say, through Faith God hath been seen, who is invisible; and Christ said, Seek, and ye shall find; and the Kingdom of God is spiritual and invi∣sible, and the natural and visible Eye never discerned it; for the Church is in God, and God is a Spirit, and Christ is the quickning Spirit, who is the Head of the Church, which is his Body; and the spiritual and invisi∣ble Eye is that which discerns the Head and the Body; and you that look gazing after Things that are visible, have never discerned the Members of the true Church of God as such, neither have known them, but have con∣demned them as Hereticks in all Ages, as your Generation hath done, who have been in Cain's Way. Secondly, If Unity, Holiness, Universal and Apostolick, be the marks and signs of a true Church, then yours is not the true Church, no more then they you count Sectaries and Hereticks, which thou saist, are no more one then Cats and Dogs: The comparison is odious, and like a Snrling, catching Spirit, who would tear every one that cometh nigh thee. And what if there be Protestants, Puritans, Anabaptists, Independents and Quakers, these Titles are but nominal, and there is not one amongst all there, but they acknowledge one God, and Jesus Christ, to be the Head of the Body which is his Church, and one Spirit by which the Saints are Sanctified; and they acknowledge Christ's Doctrine in Words, and his Worship,
tht it is in Spirit and in Truth, and walketh nearer to the Practice of the Apostles and the Church in their dayes, then you do: And if in some things they do vary, why may not variety be allowed by thee, where it is only nominal and Circumstantial, as well as thou canst allow Variety of Ave Maryes, Creeds & Pater Nosters, which thou saist delighteth? But why hast thou not judged at home? Thou must not think to lead us like Animals by the Head, as your Church doth poor ignorant People, to receive every thing for Apostolick Doctrine, because the Church of Rome calls it so, and cryes Unity: Might not the Sectaries, as thou callest them, return this up∣on your selves, that you are not at Unity, and not one? What meaneth the diversity of Orders in your Church, which may be called Sects, that is Jerom's Order, Austin's Order, Gregory's Order, Carmelites, Crouched Fryars, Franc, Anthony's, Bennet's, Dominick's, Trinity, Bsil, Brigan∣dine's Orders? All these kind of Orders, and many more, with every one their distinct Service, Formalities and ceremonies, what a heap of Secta∣ries are here, and yet Rome cryes Unity! Besides, what contradiction in your Councils, may hereafter be made manifest; and in your Vicars, one throwing down & condemning that which others have set up for Apostolick Doctrine. So if Unity be a mark for the true church, then you are without this mark and sign more then they which you call Sectaries. Thirdly, If Holiness be a sign of the true church, you are without this sign also more then the Sectaries, as you are pleased to call them: What cruel Murthers, Massacres, Tortures, Blood-sheds have been acted by your church, and that by Commission from his Holiness, (so called) Christ's Vicar, against them that have dissented from you upon good and warrantable Ground, only upon the account of Religion, because they could not acknowledge the Pope to be the Head, and Christ's Vicar, and receive all Decrees, though never so repugnant unto the Doctrine of Christ; yet because for Conscience sake many have denyed such things, nothing but Fire and Sword hath been threatned, and the force thereof hath been known in many Nations, as for instance, in Germany and the Low-Countries, France, Pyedmount, Holland, England and Ireland, of late years many Thousands Massacreed (not in War) but in Holes, hundreds of Houses burnt, Men, Women and Children; Children taken from their Mothers Breasts, and knockt against the Walls, toss'd upon Pikes Spears, wounded with Swords, thrown into Lakes and Rivers, stript Naked, starv'd in cold Seasons, through such like in human and Savage cruelty: Commissions given from your Nuntio's and Agents to Rob, to Steal, even Servants from their Masters, even upon this account only, to weaken and enfeeble the Sectaries and Hereticks, as you stile them, to advance your Holiness's Chair, and to propagate your holy, or rather Unholy Church and Religion, which things remain fresh in the memory of many Nations to this Day; besides, doth not your Church tolerate Stews and Adulte∣rous Houses in the Cities where you have Dominion? Besides▪ Pride abounds amongst you, more then the Nation beside. And so your Church hath neither this Mark nor Sign of Holiness. Fourthly▪ As for your Church being Cathlick and Universal, you want this Sign also; If it be One, Universal comprehends all Nations, like a all the World (in comparison) were your Church: What, is Germany,
France, England, Scotland and Ireland, nothing? What, is all the Turks Dominions of your Faith? And thou saist, In Asia, Affrica and America, all is coming to an End. There is that risen, and arising in America, which must spread over the Nations; the Breath of the Lord bloweth, which will daily dry up the Waters, which is the Seat of your Church, which you so much Boast of: And what, have you converted all the Indians? nay, have you not hardned their Hearts against the Name of Christ, be∣cause of your cruelty and unholy conversation among them? So that the Name of Christ and christian, is become as Odious unto them, as Mahomet is unto you; And so you are without this Sign, as that you are the true church. Lastly. That your church is Apostolick, if this be the Mark of the true church, then you are without this also; for you are neither Apostolick in Do∣ctrine nor Practice; your Weapons are carnal, theirs spiritual; their Head was Christ the Light of the World; your Head is visible and carnal, which darkens the World; they turned People from Darkness to Light, and to the Word of Faith in their Hearts, and to know Christ in them to justifie them: But one of your Rabbies told us lately, you had no such Doctrine in the church of Rome, as Christ in you: The Apostles turn'd them to the Anointing, and to the Spirit, to be taught by it, and to be led by it into to all Truth, and to worship in it; and you turn them to Images, Pi∣ctures, Crucifixes, Beads and Altars, and so keep People in outward things, which feed the Sensual and corrupt part. Lastly, they said, Bo∣dily exercise profiteth little; and most of your Worship stands in observing of Days, Meats, Drinks, Washings, Sprinklings, Altars, Tapers, light∣ing and bearing Candles, Bowing, creeping to the Cross, turning wheel∣ing this way and that way in all time and parts of your Worship; so that there is no time left for the Heart to be exercised towards God▪ And so you are not Apostolical, and so are without this true sign of being the true Church of God. But I shall descend to particular things, which are assert∣ed, and seem to be proved, but very weakly: But we can expect no Wine but such as is in the Bottle. It is asserted by this Author, That the Pope is the Head of the true Church, in which Salvation is only to be expected: And his proof he brings, is this; Christ hath so ordained it, in saying to Peter, Matth. 16.18.19. Upon this Rock will I build my Church; and Christ hath given Power to him and his Successors, to be a Head, to rule and govern the Church; and as there is an Empe∣rour to be the Head of the Empire, and a King of the Kingdom, so Peter and hs Successors are the Head of the Church, and have the Keys of the Kingdom of hea∣ven, to bind and to loose, and to remit and to retain Sins. The Apostolick Church hath this Doctrine, That Christ was given to be the Head of the Body, which is the Church, which is spiritual, though in the World, yet not of the World; and the Father hath committed all Power in Heaven and Earth to the Son, and hath ordained him to be a Leader, a Teacher and Feeder of his Flock, and to be his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, and his Glory he will not give unto another. But it seemes the Church of Rome hath soared so high in their Conceis and Ima∣ginations, that they judge all this Power to be given unto the Pope, Peter's Successor, as thy say: Now we do not read of two Heads to the one Bo∣dy,
which is the true Church, Ephes. 4.4.15. And so this is a contrary Doctrine then that of the Primitive Church; and Christ who is the Head of the Body, he said, Lo, I am with you to the End of the World: And so it is the meer Arrogancy and Pride of the Pope to be called the head of the Church, and an intrenching Christ's Power and Prerogative; and that e∣ver Peter was called the Head of the Church we do not read; and that of the 16th. of Matthew is but a poor Proof to prove Peter to be the Head of the Church; for Christ spoke unto his Disciples, ver. 15. and asked them Whom say ye that I am? Peter, as one amongst the rest said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and Christ said, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, viz. Up∣on him which was reveal'd unto Peter by the Father, the Son of God which was the Rock which the Fathers eat of, and drank of, Christ the Rock of Ages; and another Foundation can no man lay (said the Apostle) then that which is laid already, Christ the Rock and Corner-Stone, and not Peter; for Christ is unchangeable, and abideth for ever, and so was not Peter, though Peter and the rest of the Apostles received Power from Christ; yet in the 22d. and 23d. verses of the same chapter, he was gone out of the savour and discerning, and Christ said unto him, Get thee behind me Satan for thou sa∣vourest not the things of God; and what though it could be proved that Peter was at Rome a Pastor, an Elder, or a Bishop, who fed the Flock; and did feed the Flock, and so might be reckoned as an Elder, and worthy of Ho∣nour in respect of his Labour and Diligence in the Work of Christ; is the Promise so entailed to Rome or to any Place, that the next that succeeds in that Place must needs receive the same Honour, when he doth not the same Work, which is worthy of Honour, neither is in the same Power? but this I am sure of, though the Church of Rome lay claim unto Peter's Bishoprick, as they say, yet they have not done his Work. And secondly, If Peter was at Rome, and a Pastor yet he was not a Lord; for Christ reproved that when they strove which should be the greatest, and said unto them, The Gentiles exercise Lordship one over another, but it shall not be so amongst you; and though Peter and the rest of the Apostles who were in the Power of God, had that which did open into the King∣dom of God, and shut out that which did defile, yet this we are sure of, he sold no Pardons nor Indulgences for Gain and filthy Lucre, as many have done, whom you call Peter's Successors, and Christ's Vicar, and U∣niversal Bishop, and visible Head; but it is manifest how the Pope became visible Head, and Universal Bishop, not because of any Work or Labour in the Doctrine of Christ, or the Work of the Gospel, but by means of the Roman Emperor; for while the Christians were under Persecution and Suffering, there was no talk of visible Heads, or much of Universal Bishop, for then Rome had no more Priority then the rest; for the Churches at Con∣stantinople, at Jerusalem, at Caesaria, at Cyprus, and Alexandria for the first three hundred Years, they had as much Power in their several Churches, as Rome had, and often the Elders or Bishops of the afore-said Churches did reprove sharply the Bishop of Rome; but at last above five hundred Years or upwards, Phocas to aspire to the Empire of Rome, he murther∣ed his own Master Mauritius and his Children to attain unto the Em∣pire; so at that time Boniface the third was Bishop of Rome, and Phocas somewhat fearing, and willing to have Boniface his Favour, condesced∣eth
to all his Petitions, and grants him to be Universal head-Bishop over all Christian Churches, and there was the first rise of Romes visible Head, for this frivolous Reason of being Peter's Successor could never have raised him to that height, but then the Emperor's Power and Authority became to be the more forcible Plea; for before that time the Bishops of Rome were cho∣sen by the Emperor's consent, but after he had got Power, Emperors could not be chosen but by the Popes consent; and then came the Bishop of Rome to be a visible Head, and be called Universal Bishop, Christs Vicar, a Lord spiritual over all the Churches, and in process of time Lord tempo∣ral over all the Empire. And thus your Church of Rome became magnificent and great & to sit as a Queen upon the Waters, Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, as you acknow∣ledge your Church of Rome hath spread over; and here is a Head and a Bo∣dy which are joyned together in Union: Christ is the Head of the true Body, which is his Church and his Wife; and Antichrist he is the visible Head of his visible Church and Wife Mystery-Baylon. The next piece of Merchandize which the Authr brings forth to view, is Purgatory, and prayer to be made for the dead, and also pryer unto Saints and the Authors proof is 1 Cor. 3.15. whee he Apostle speaks. Every mans Work shall be tryed, and that Work whch will not abide the Fire, must be Burnt; and this the Author calls, The Fire of another World; and Prayer for the Dead he proves out of 12 of Maccabees, and prayer to the Saints: he sayes it's lawful to Pray in this Wrld unto good People; and Paul while he lived, did Pray for others, and also did beg their Prayers: And the Angel in the first of Za∣chary prayed for Irael; and there can be no harm in Praying to them that can Pray for us. Answ. They that dwell in the shadow of death are lik to speak out of thick darkness; & they that have made a Covenant with Death, are loath to have it broken, and they that have a mind to continue in Sin while they live, have a mind to put the Evil day afar off▪ & Judgment afar off; & Evil-doers will never have it time to give account for their Evil deeds, and so put it off till they are Dead, and to another World; and let he Devil have Prehemi∣ence in their Hearts while they live, and reckon their Sins venial, and Light faults; this is contrary to the Doctrine of the true church of Christ, and contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, The Wages of Sin is death; and there is no Sin goes Unpunished nor Unjudged; and Sion is redeemed through Judgment, and by the Spirit of burning; and Purgatory is a Fi∣action, falshood, and a Lye; and there is no cleansing from Sin in another World; Solomon saith, As the Tree falleth whether to the North, or to the South, so shall the Tree lye; and the Word of God, who have received it in their Hearts, which is as a Fire that purifies, and the Blood of Christ is that which cleanseth from all Sin, and there's not any cleansng from any Sin, but by it, and there is no cleansing in another World; but Purgatory hath been invented, and Prayer for the Dead, that thereby the Pope might be enriched, and sell the invented Prayers and Ae Maes, and so cheat People of their Money; and there's no Sacrifice to be offer'd for the Dead who dye in their Sins, nor no Remission after this Life. And as for praying to the Saints, the Scripture makes no mention of; and though Paul did Pray for others, and beg the Prayers of others, yet
he prayed not for them when they were dead, neither did beg the Prayer of the ded, but prayed for them who were Believers in the true Church, and desired the Prayers of them that were living Members, and were alive, and lived in the World, and were redeemed out of it; and the Angel prayed not for the People of Israel when they were dead; and that which thou calls Jeremy's prayer in the Maccabees, was never spoken by the Spi∣rit of the Lord, nor the Offering was not made in the Will of God, and the Prophet saith, Though Abraham know us not, and Israel be ignorant of us, yet thou O Lord, art our Father. And the Lord said unto David, Seek my Face, and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear and Answer: Not upon Mary, Peter and Paul, Dominick and Anthny. Again, it's contrary to the Practice of the Saints in the Primitive times, and contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, who said unto his Disciples, Whatsoever you ask in my Name, the Father shall give it to you: He doth not speak of any other Name; neither is any Prayer or Supplication accepted of the Father, but in the name of Christ alone. So these Doctrines are false, and Doctrines of Devils, never commanded nor Practised by any of the Saints in the Primitive time, but only have been invented and practised by the Apostates who have Erred from the Faith and Practice, which was one delivered unto the Saints, which the church of Rome hath made Ship-wrack of in many things, which I have made appear; and I shall proceed to more particulars to manifest it, lest any should be beguiled with such deceitful Babylo∣nish Merchandize, which the Nations are too much corrupted with already. The next false Doctrine which the Author layes down, is, That Christ is really and Personally in the Mass, and in the Eucharist: And his proof is Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.25.26. For saith he, God who is Almighty, is able to change Bread into his Body, and Wine into his Blood (in the Mass) as he did change the Water into Wine, and make the World of nothing; Hence also by the way you may learn, that we are no Idolaters, adoring the Eucharist, because it's no more Bread, but whole Christ, our God and Redeemer, who placeth himself there by Miracle after the Priest hath uttered the sacred Words of Consecration; yet the external accidnt of Bread and Wine remains, as our Eyes represent to us▪ but Faith tells us, the true Body of Christ is hidden under it, and the substance and Nature of the material Bread is there no more. Oh! horrible Blindness, and gross Ignorance, great Idolatry, and hor∣rible Blasphemy; your Priests by their Words it seems, can make God who made all things, and can make Chris the Redeemer, thn your Priests are greater then God and Chri; for he which createth and maketh, must needs be greater then that which is Created and made: And thou confesse that it is really Bread and Wine before the Priests sacred words are utter∣ed of Consecration, but afterwards it becomes the real and true Body of Christ; yea, whole Christ, our God and Redeemer: So it is clear that the Priest hath Power, in your Judgment, to make the Body of Christ, to make God and whole Christ a Redeemer; Oh! that ever such gross Dark∣ness should enter into the Hearts of the Sons of men: As for those two places in Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. it is but a pitiful Ground for you to plead, that the material Bread, and the material Cup is the very Body and Blood of
Christ; was not Christ present, when he broke the Bread, and gave the Cup, and after too, and alive? Did they eat his Body when he was with them, and drink his Blood? Was his Body broken for them then, before he was offered up? and was his Blood shed then, before he suffered upon the Cross? nay, it's manifest he was alive in the real Bdy, after they had eaten the Bread, and drunk the Cup, and this was a sign unto them of his Suffering for them, and of his Death; and as the Apostle saith, As oft as they eat the Bread, and drunk the Cup, they shewed forth the Lord's death till he came. (And reveal'd himself in his own Life and Power) and then they saw and felt that which was signified through the Figure before, that like as the Bread and Cup did nourish the natural man, likewise their Souls were fed and nourished with the Bread of Life; and the Cup of Blessing which they knew and felt little of, when Christ broke the Bread, and gave the Cup; and doth not Christ say, I am the Door, I am the Way, I am the Vine; and also, This is my Body, and This is my Blood? Why should one place be literally and naturally understood and interpreted, and not another so? 2dly, And we do not question what Christ can do, but what he did; that he turned Water into Wine we do believe, and that God made the World of nothing is for thee to prove yet; and that Christ made himself invisi∣ble, and passed through his Enemies sometimes without being seen, we believe; but that he made himself invisible when he broke the Bread, and gave the Cup to the Disciples, is clear contrary to the afore-mentioned Scriptures, and divers others; or that he conveyed himself so invisibly in∣to the Bread, and into the Wine, as you ignorantly suppose; or that he was so under it, as thy own Word is, so as that he was not seen visibly by the Disciples, even when they eat the Bread, and drank the Cup, and after he blessed it, is utterly false; for they saw him before he took the Bread, and when he took it, and blessed it, and brake it, and when they eat it, and ater they had eaten, he was visible in all these Moments of Time, is evi∣dent both by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John in their Narration of the Sup∣per; and so all your twining, and turning, and vain Arguments are made void. 3dly, We do not believe that ever any of your Priests turned Water in∣to Wine, or Bread into Flesh, or Wine into Blood of one Sort or other, much less into the Flesh or Blood of Christ; for thou say'st, the external Accidents remain, as our Eyes represent unto us after Consecration; but yet the Nature of the material Bread is no more, as your Faith teaches you so it seems you confess the visible Appearance, which may be seen and felt, as to the natural Aspect, doth remain; that the natural Elements of Bread and Wine still remain in Sight, but the Substance, Nature and Mar∣ is no more in being, I shall appeal to the Light of Christ in your Con∣sciences, whether this be true, yea or nay; nay, it is so ridiculous a thing, that I dare appeal to any Man or Woman, that have not lost their Senses, whether that which may be seen with the natural Eyes, and may be felt by the natural Hands, and tasted by the natural Taste, be not the very same in Nature and Matter after Consecration as before▪ if the external Accidents do remain, as you say they do, we will joyn Issue with you in this Thing for Tryal, if you dare venture it and put it to Proof, you and we with a
joynt Consent will chuse Bread and Wine, and you and we will both eat and drink of some Part of it before, and then your Priest shall consecrate it, and we will hear and see what he saith and doth, provided that he shall only speak to it, or pray over it, and then when he hath done, we will both eat again; and if it be not of the same Substance and the same Effect, as to your own Understanding, Sence and Feeling, as you are Men and Crea∣tures, which if there be no Alteration, but it remain the same in Substance, in Taste, in Matter, Nature and Quality with that before Consecration, then you shall confess your Error, and deny your Doctrine; but if it be altered, we will deny ours, and joyn unto your Faith. Or secondly, If you will stand Tryal, and appoint Time and Place for two or three of you, and two or three of us to meet together, where both Parties may be secure as to their Persons, you and we will take Bread and Wine, & one Part of it shall be unconsecrated, and another Part you shall be allowed to consecrate as well as you can for the Honour of your Church, and that which is consecrated and that which is unconsecrated shall be set together, and shall be watched by some of each Party; and if that which is consecrated do corrupt and decay, as well as that which is unconsecra∣ted, then you will renounce your Doctrine, and leave your killing about it; but if it do not corrupt and decay, as well as that which is uncon∣secrated, then we will deny our Faith, and confess that you are the true Church. Lastly, If you be not Idolaters, there were never any in the World, who say, that to adore or worship the Bread and Wine after Consecration is no more Bread, but whole Christ, your God and Redeemer, who placeth himself there upon the Altar by Miracle; it's a miraculous Thing indeed, that that which is given unto you by the Priest, which enters in at the na∣tural Mouth, and goes into the Belly, should be the Body of Christ, and whole Christ, and very God and Redeemer, as thou say'st, that one Per∣son should contain whole God, seeing the Scripture saith, that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, for he is the very Fulness that filleth all Things: Oh gross Darkness and palpable Ignorance which you have led People to believe! and call this Idol that Rats and Mice may eat, whole Christ, God and Redeemer; and you have destroyed and burnt to Ashes many for Hereticks, who could not believe this Doctrine: Therefore all People, it's Time to look about you, and see where you stand, and what you joyn unto; if you cannot receive this Doctrine for Holy and Aposto∣lick by the Church of Rome, not worthy to live, and without Doubt might not, if this Church had but that Authority which sometimes it hath had in England; but I hope the Eyes of many are open to see and detect this damnable Doctrine. The Author sayes, That Ceremonies were used by Christ at his last Supper, and they excite People to their Devotion during the Sacrifice; but for Proof you must expect none from this Au∣thor, and the Scripture is silent in the Thing; and Ceremonies and Formalities are so far from stirring up the Mind to God, that they ndeed draw the Mind to be busied in the Exercise of them, from waiting upon God, and from worshipping him in the Spirit, and such Worshippers are on∣ly accepted of him.
The Mass is said in Latine, and the rest of Divine Service; for if it were not, ignorant People might easily be mistaken, if these Mysteries were done in the vul∣gar Language; and because the Scripture hath been written in Latine, Greek and Hebrew, and these three Languages were written upon Christ's Cross, and therefore these three Nations ought to use them at their Mass and Divine Service; but the Priestly Garments and Ceremonies gve enough to understand, what is done at the Mass and Divine Service. Answ. This looks with a black Visage to be Apostolick Doctrine; but however I shall search into it, and examine it by the Apostle's Doctrine, before it be condemned; it's a good Shift indeed to keep People from Mi∣stakes, not to let them know what they say or do; but this is contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine, 1 Cor. 14.7.8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15. If a Trumphet give an uncertain Sound, who can prepare to Battel? and except Words uttered be un∣derstood, how shall it be known what is spoken? If the Meaning of the Voice be not known unto him to whom it is spoken, the Speaker and the Hearer are Barbarians one to the other: And when one understands not what is spoken, how can he be edified? And all Services ought to be done to Edfication. So your Church is erred from the Apostolick Doctrine; and your Mass and your Service doth not edifie at all, but you are as Barbarians one to another; for your Wor∣ship goes on in such a back Road, that the vulgar People would soon learn it and know it, and (it may be) slight it, if they should know the Worth∣lesness of it; and therefore the only Way (you udge) is to keep them in Ignorance: And what Mystery is there in the Mass and your Service, see∣ing that it stands in Crossings, Cringings, and Abundance of endless Ce∣remonies, and Reiteration of Words, which are patcht up by many Au∣thors, contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine: But it seems the Priests Garments and Ceremonies give Understanding enough to the Au∣ditors; a dumb shew is enough for them (like a Poppet-play) to make them understand the Mysteries of your Mass, an unbloody Sacrifice in∣deed, in which there is no Remission nor Acceptation: And here thou hast acquainted us with a Mystery indeed! Because Latine, Greek and He∣brew were written by Pilate upon the Cross of Christ, therefore they are called sacred Languages; sure the Church of Rome hath lost both Faith and Reason; will any that hath a Friend that should be crucified upon a Cross, and an Enemy who condemned him, should set over him Words in Latin, Greek and Hebrew in contempt, that therefore a man should count the Cross holy, and the Language sacred, as the Church of Rome doth, is great Ig∣norance and Idolatry, of which she is full, and therefore is not Apostolick, nor the one true Church, in which Salvation is to be looked for, as the Author would make People believe. The next false and superstitious Doctrine, which this Merchant of the Church of Rome holds for Apostolical, is, the Reliques and Images of Saints, and also Prayer by the Beads, by Number and Tale, as Brick-makers sell their Bricks; and this the Church of Rome would put off unto us as Apo∣stolical Doctrine.
The Reliques and Images of Saints are honourable in Regard of the Sants which they have Relation unto, and God himself makes Use of them for his Mra∣cles Moses was enforced to honour the holy Ground where the Angel appeared, Exodus 3. And David commanded the Ark to be adored, because it was God's Foot-stool, Psal. 99.5. And to honour the Reliques and Images of Saints is no Idolatry; for that is Idolatry to worship false Gods; and Chist doth not take it ill, that we honour his Saints and Friends: And to number our Prayers, if Hail Ma∣ry be said upon Beads threescore and three Times, it's because Mary lived so ma∣ny Years; and the Prophet prayed seven Times a Day▪ and Christ three Times in the Garden; and it's not evil to say our Prayers by Number; and if five Pater∣nosters be said, it's in Honour of the five Wounds, and what would there be a∣miss in this? And it's not Idiots that pray y Beads, but Catholick Kings, the Pope, Cardinals and Bishops make Use of them; an Variety delighteth the Mind, and there are no better Prayers then the Pater-noster, Ave and the Creed. Answ. The Reliques, or that which remains for all the Saints and Mem∣bers of the true Church of Christ to follow and to honour is, to live in the same Life that they lived in, and to honour him who was their Life, by whose Power they fulfilled the Will of God, and to walk in the same Foot-steps, is to honour him that was their Life, and them also, who walked as Examples of Righteousness, and that Power by which they became Ex∣amples of Holiness and Righteousness; but for the Church of Rome to wor∣ship Pieces of cloth, dead Bones, painted Images, which may as well be called the Images of Cain, Ishmael, Judas, and all the Seed of Evil-doers, as well as the Image of Christ, or Peter, Paul or Mary, for any thing that they know, which they have but received by Story, and is but as Old Wives Fables, which Paul to Timothy reproved. And hath the Church of Rome no better Thing to put them in Mind of the Saints Life, then a dead Picture or Image made by the Hand of the Crafts-man upon a Wall, or a Board, or Parchment, or Paper, this is Idolatry; for Christ promised to his Disciples and to the true Church, That he would send his Spirit to lead them into all Truth (which is an invisible Thing) and to bring to Remembrance whatever Christ had spoken, and whatsoever was necessary as to Salvation, whether the Saints Life and holy Practices which they lived in, or whatsoe∣ver else as conduced to their Peace and Justification with God, and what Images did God make Use of to shew his Miracles by? This is but an old Fa∣ble, formed by the Apostate Christians, whose Minds are turned after Sha∣dows and vain Shews, and are erred from the invisible Life, and worship the Works of mens Hands. 2. Though Moes did put off his Shoe's according to the command of the Lord, where God appeared in Power and Glory to him; What is this to your purpose? as to Create and form places, and Consecrate them as Holy, and then command Reverence and Honour unto them, this is but to Worship the work of your own Hands; and though David say in the 99 Psal. 5 vers. Exalt the Lord God, and worship at his foot-Stool, for he is Holy. What of all this, doth God call Reliques or Images his Foot-stool. And if the Author do judge that it was spoken of Zion and Jerusalem outward, where Aaron and the rest of the Priests Worshipped, doth not Christ
say, It s not at Jerusalem, &c. But they that orship God, Worship him in spi∣rit and Truth: What! doth not the Church of Rome profess Christianity and Apostolick Doctrine, and will now turn Jews or mitaters of them? What is Rome? Jerusalem or Zion? And must Pictures invented, and dead Pieces of Bones and Wood, be recommended unto the Nations as holy things? This is contrary to the Apostolick Church, and with the Life of God is judged, and the Life of the Saints, whom you honour in Words, and make Pictures of, and worship the Works of your own Hands, and Crucifie the Life where-ever it appears, that they lived in, and teach a contrary Doctrine. 3. Confession may be made in Words of the true God, and talk may be of his wonderous Works, and yet People Idolters; the church of the Jews who acknowledge the true God, and had seen and heard of his won∣derous works, they eat and drank, and rose up to Play; and these were Ido∣laters, and such is the church of Rome (who take Peoples minds up with Garments and Vestments, with Altars and Canales, with Crucifixes and A∣gnus Dei, with Images formed by Painters, with a piece of Bread called a Holy Host, and Eucharist, an Unbloody Sacrfice) who neglect the Life, and him that is the Head of the Body, and his witness in their Hearts and consciences, and lead them to worship and honour visible and carnal things, and to busie their minds in the exercise of outward things, which profit little or nothing at all, and so are Idolaters, Worshipping the works of your own Hands, which Christ and the Apostolick church bore Testi∣mony against; for that which the creature's mind goes out after, besides, or without that which may be known of God in the Heart, is made an Idol of, and the true God is not minded; and them that Honour God's Friends and Saints, walk in their Foot steps, live their Life, and honour their sayings; but your church is contrary, who would Kill, and have killed about these invented Fopperies, which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine. God accepts not Prayers by number or tale, nor for multitude of Words, which are without understanding, and without the Spirit; this Christ counted as Evil, and reprehended the Pharisees, and said, It was like the vain repetitions of the Heathen, who thought to be heard for their much babling; and the Salutation which the Angel gave to Mary, is no prayer: And that which is called the Apostles Creed, is no prayer; and them that are unconverted unto God, may prattle and prate over the Words, in the unbelief, and never have any acceptance of God: And though the Pro∣phet did pray seven times a day, it was according to the motion of God's Spirit in his own Heart, which shewed him his State and necessity; and what is this to imitators, when they pray not with the same Spirit, neither in the same words? And what if Mary lived threescore and three Years? who gave commandment that Hail Mary should be said threescore and three times over, The rest of the Saints are like to have but small shares of wor∣ship and honour, if she go with all this in a day. And what five wounds is that which the Church of Rome dreams of, that five Pater Nosters must be said for the honour of? With Deceit and Ignorance you wound him e∣very day, and your Pater-Nosters do not honor him at all, pattred  over with your polluted Lips, who are given to speak Lyes, and yor Tongues to speak Mischief, which Christ accepteth not: What, are you
all new creatures that say, Our Father which art in Heaven? Are you born again? Are your Natures changed? Sin you not? Do you hallow his Name, who do not love that which shews your Evil deeds? Would you see his Kingdom come, which stands in Righteousness? Where will you appear? Or how will you stand when he appears in his Power, and Glory to take Vengeance on all them that will not that he should rule in their Hearts, who is the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World? Would you see his will done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, when you walk contrary to his Doctrine which the Apostolick Church walked in, and set up a numberless number of Traditions and Inventions of Men instead thereof, which the Lord accepteth not, and you pray not with Understanding? 5. As for your Beads, which are neither Jewish nor Christian, but meer Heathenish, as to reckon the number or tale of that which you call your Prayers by; and though Kings, Popes, Cardinals and Bishops do the same, this is but a small proof as for Authority; Kings have drunk of the Whore's Cup, and Popes and Cardinals have usurped Power that Christ never gave, as to exercise Lord-ship, and be Law-givers unto others; for the Lord is the Saints Law-giver, and the Saints Life and Judge, and he will not give his Glory to another; for Kings have drunk of the Whore's Cup of Fornication, and Popes have usurped Authority, and Cardinals have exercised Lord-ship over mens Consciences, yea and over great Kingdoms and States too. And if they pray by Beads, as others do set Forms by number and Tale, they are as much Idiots as the rest are, who know not the Spirit to pray by. And so this is no Authority to prove your Practice Apostolical and holy; as for variety of Prayers and Worships, it delight∣eth the carnal mind indeed; but they that worship God in Spirit and Truth they Pray by the Spirit, and in it, as David and Christ prayed, whether seven times, five times or three times, and with understanding; and that which they prayed in, was not various, but one; and it's by that one Spi∣rit which is not various, by which the Sons of God cry Abba Father; and the variety of your formed charms, Bablings upon your Beads, God hath no regard unto, but is a Smoke in his Nostrills all day. And they that have exercised themselves in these things, have not the Witness of God in their own consciences that they are accepted of God; and so I shall proceed to another Doctrine called Apostolical, and Holy; and that is about Meats, whether they may be lawfully eaten at all time. The Author confesseth they forbid certain kinds of Meats, but it is but a cer∣tain times; and they are forbidden not as they are Evil, and the Creatures of God, but because they are forbidden by the Church; and his proof is, the Apple which Eve and Adam eat was not Evil in it self, but being prohibited; so to eat that which is good of it self is not ill, but to eat contrary to the Superiors mind and order, this is Evil. The Bible and Scriptures ought not to be read, but leave is to be asked of the Superior, because there are many hard Passages, which they which have little or no learning, as Peter testifies in hs second Epistle, chap. 3. some nderstands it one way, and some another; and therefore it is the fittest for Lear∣ned men to judge of them, and they must judge whether People be in a capacity to read them.
Answ. And why are Meats forbidden a certain imes▪ is this like Apo∣stolick Doctrine? are not all Times and Seasons in the Hand of the Lord? and are all good to them that believe, and to the pure all Things are pure, all Times and Seasons, all Meats and Drinks, being sanctified by the Word, which made them all holy unto all that do believe: And if you forbid them not as they are Creatures of God, but because they are forbidden, I say, who did forbid them? or when were they forbidden? by Christ▪ his Apostles, or the true Church of Christ in their Dy? but on the contrary Christ taught, That which goeth in at the Mouth, and n at the Belly doth not defile the Man, but that which proceedeth out of the Heart, which is corrupted: And Paul said, What is sold at the Shambles may be eaten and no Question made for Conscience sake; for to the clean, all Things are clean, and to the believing all Things are pure; and who hath limited such Meats for such Dayes and such Times, the true Church? No, but the Church of Rome, ho are go∣ing on in that Doctrine the Apostle spoke of, 1 Tim. 4. which he reckoned a Doctrine of Devils; but here is your Argument that must bring you off, because you forbid it not at all Times; I say, if it be a Doctrine of Devils to forbid at all Times, then it is some Part of the Doctrine of Devils to for∣bid at any Time, seeing Time and Things are all good in the Hnd of the Lord; but if this Doctrine should hold, what would become of your Dog-dayes and of your Lent, which has been patched up Week by Week by di∣vers Popes, and of your Wednesday, Friday and Saturday Fast; so by this Account of yours half of the Year is either unholy, or else some Meat is unholy for half of the Year; but there are few but see your Blindness, that in this much need not be said, but only thus, that which may lawful in it self, when it is prohibited by the Lord unto any particular, then it be∣comes evil; for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: But Christ alone, unto whom all Power is committed, hath the sole Power over the Heart and Conscience; and for any to make Injunctions and Prohibitions contrary to him, the same is Anti-christ; and so the Practice which your Church commands is not Apostolical, but you bring Yoaks upon the true Disciples Necks, which they that are made free by the Son cannot stoop unto, neither joyn with; for whosoever doth, goes into Bondage: And Christ is the supream Power, unto whom all Power is committed, and when he justi∣fies, what superior can condemn? And there is no need of asking leave of them that are Superiors, which reckon themselves as so, seeing every man stands clear in the Sight of God, when he transgresses not against the Su∣pream Law of Christ in his Conscience; and to offend any Superiors, who lay any Injunction contrary to the Command of God, is not to offend God, neither to break his Command. 2dly, It seems all Parts of Religion are monopolized by Mystery-Babylon, in which Rome is comprized, not only Patents and Pardons sold for eating of Meat, but Authority and License must be given to every one that reds Scripture, a Thing which the Apostolick Church (before the Pope had a Being) knew nothing of; but on the contrary, some were exhorted to read the Scriptures, and some were commended for reading of the Scriptures, and for searching whether the Things were so as Paul testified, and in this they were counted more Noble then they t Thessalonica; but now it is be∣come an ignoble Thing, and not at all to be  to read the Scriptures
without Patent or Licence in the Church of Rome's Account, who have laid down Ignorance to be the Mother of Devotion; but the Danger is, because there are hard Passages which are not understood when the People have little or no Learning, as the Author saith; was it for Want of natural Learning that Peter complained they wrested the Scriptures, and therefore is it for Want of Natural Learning that the Scriptures are not understood, and for Want of this they must not be read, as the Author saith? Ignorant Man! what, was Peter such a great learned Man? a poor Boat-man of Fisher-man, whom the Scripture saith was illiterate; in the Acts, When they beheld Pe∣ter and John, and that they were illiterate Men, and saw their Boldness, and took Notice they had been with Jesus: What! was it Want of Natural Lear∣ning that Peter spoke of? then he spoke against himself, for he was illite∣rate; but it was such a Learning that they wanted as this Author wants, who is untaught by the Spirit, and unlearned in the Doctrine of Christ, and such wrest the Scriptures, and do not understand hard Sayings, because the deep Things of God are revealed through the Spirit of God, and not by natural Learning, as this Author, who would sell Licences and Pardons for reading the Scriptures, as they have done for eating Flesh in Lent; but a Story of Robin Hood, a Comedy or a Play is more frequently read by the Members of the Church of Rome, which begets into Looseness and Pro∣phaneness, a Thing which this Generation is in Love with rather then the Scriptures; and though the Scriptures be applauded in Words, as for the Rule of Life, by many, and a Judge of Controversies, yet how should they be rul'd that may not read them without a Licence or a Toleration from the Superior? if it be lawful to read with Toleration, it's lawful to read with∣out Toleration; for the Toleration of Men neither addeth to nor diminish∣eth from any spiritual Exercise; and Timothy read the Scriptures of an Youth, and who gave him his Toleration? And Apollos was a migh∣ty Man, and a knowing Man in the Scriptures, from whence had he his Licence. 3. Because thou judgest according to the Judgment of this present evil World, that they are only fit to read the Scriptures, and give Interpreta∣tions upon it, who are naturally learned, and have the Wisdom of this World; I say, nay, the World by Wisdom knew not God, neither know him now; and them that had Natural Learning rejected the Foundation; them that had the Hebrew Language set Christ at nought; they that had the Greek Tongue withstood Paul, and called him a Babler; them that had the Latine Tongue (the Tongue of the Whore your Mother) persecuted the Christians in the first three hundred Years after Christ, as your own Histo∣ries do relate: So according to all these who had only the Knowledge in the Natural Languages, they did not understand the Things of God▪ and it was the wise Builders which builded by Art and Skill in the earthly Wis∣dom, that rejected the true Foundation and corner-stone; but on the con∣trary we say (according to the Apostolick Doctrine) That the Scriptures may be read, and ought to be read; for they are profitable for Insturction, and Correction, and Information, to make the Man of God perfect: and throughly furnished to every good Work, through Faith in Christ Jesus; and I would have the Author know, that we do not look upon Cardinals, Fryars, Monks and Bishops to be the alone Men of God, so that they alone
have the sole Power to tolerate the reading of Scriptures; for he is a Man of God who is born of the Spirit, which sanctifieth and leadeth into the clear Pathes of Equity and Righteousness, who walk not after the Flesh, neither fulfil the Lusts thereof; and such there are and have been, which have been unlearned in Natural Tongues; but this is the Way to keep your Church in Reputation, to believe as you believe, and every Man to put out his own Eyes, and live by anothers Sight, and hang his Faith upon ano∣thers Shoulders, this is not like Apostolick Doctrine; for the Apostle said, Let every one be perswaded in his own Mind (not by other Mens Minds) and he that believeth hath the Witness in himself, and hath it not to seek among the literal Rabbies, who darken Counsel through Words; and it is not for Want of Natural Learning that one understandeth the Scriptures this way, and another that way, but because they want the Understanding of that Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, which Spirit universally is given to all Men and Women (a Measure of it) to lead into Truth, and through which the deep Things of God are revealed: And its not your Traditions, Inventions, Natural Learning, Schools and Colledges, Fryeries and Co∣vents, in which the Spirit of God is only limited; but every one that seeks finds, whether learned or unlearned; for of a Truth God is no Respecter of Persons: and so the Mind of Christ is manifest unto them that believe, and the one Spirit, into which the Saints were baptized, is that which opens the Scriptures truly as they are, and discerneth the Times and Sea∣sons, and fulfilleth it in the Hearts of them hat believe, and manifests the State unto which they were spoken: And if the Scriptures be so hard to e understood, by Reason of the hard Sayings, or because of the Transla∣tions, what have you been doing these fourteen hundred Years, with all your Learning, with all your Councils, Popes, Bishops and Clergy, that you have not translated them aright, or so plain, that they may be under∣stood by all that read? But then your Doctrine, Worship and Practice would be soon manifest not to be Apostolical, nor consonant and agreeing to the Practice of the true Church of Christ. And now I come to the effectual Arguments and pregnant Wayes which the Author tells of, which will work upon the Sectaries, to make them return to the Catholick Church, which (he saith) they have groundlesly forsaken; and now I shall come to try his Arguments, and search the Force of them which he layeth down, as the most efficacious VVay to convince all Sectaries (as he is pleased to stile them) to come to the Church of Rome; but the Hope of this Man will be like a Spiders VVeb; for all whose Eyes God hath il∣luminated in any Measure, will come to see the VVeakness of this Philo∣sophy and vain Deceit, which he hath laid down as a chief Instrument to convince all, that the Roman Church is the true Church, and that Salvati∣on is only concluded in her. 1. The first Argument he takes from Mat. 18.17. Christ sends us to the Church (saith he) if any neglect to hear her, they must be counted as Heathens and Publicans; from hence this is the Argument, That that Church is to be heard, in which there is most Assurance to be had that one i in the Way to Salva∣tion;
but in the Roman Church there is most Assurance, therefore the Roman Church is to be heard. Answ. The Minor is false, and also the Conclusion; That church which hath the Foundation of its Assurance without, it is not the true church of Christ, neither is to be heard; but the Roman church hath only their as∣surance of Salvation without them, therefore are not to be heard; it is manifest their assurance stands only in outward things, as Antiquity and Visibility, which are not the alone Marks of the true church; Cain was Ancient enough, and there were them that were in Cain's way before Rome was so highly elevated; and that for Universality and Visibility, there is no assurance in that, for all the World hath wondered after the Beast, and the Whore hath sitten upon Nations, Kindreds and People; and so the first Argument is denyed, and proved to be false: I shall lay down another; 1. That church which hath alwayes been so Visible and Universal since the Apostles dayes, as hath had its seat over Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, is not the true church of Christ, but the Harlot; but the church of Rome hath been Universal over Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, therefore the church of Rome is the Harlot, and not the true church of Christ. But I shall not traduce thee in thy vain Deceit, but return thy Arguments upon thy self, which thou chargest upon others. 1. As first, That Church is not to be heard whose Authors and Doctors are Co∣zeners and Impostors. 2. But all are Cozeners and Impostors but the Church of Rome. Again, That the Church of Rome hath the Marks of the true Church, and no other, as Antiquity, Miracles, holiness of Life, Universality. Again, That the Church of Rome takes the narrow Way that leads to Life. Again, Because the Church of Rome keeps Sunady instead of Saturday, by Tradition; therefore she is the Church of Christ. To the first; If that church is not to be heard, neither her censures re∣garded, whose Authors and Teachers have been cozeners and Impostors, then the Church of Rome is not to be heard, nor her censures regarded, because the chief Authors have been Cozeners, Cheaters and Impostors, who have been out of the Power of God, and have taught for Doctrine the Traditions of men; as Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, only to cozen and cheat by, to fill the Bags and Coffers of the Popish Clergy; which Doctrine is contrary unto the Doctrine of Christ & the Apostolick church, therefore the church of Rome is not to be heard. 2. That the Church of Rome hath the Marks of the true Church, and no other as Antiquity, holiness of Life, Miracles, and Universality; This is false; there were Churches before Rome, that had these Marks; and there have been since, and are now, more then the church of Rome: Antiquity some of them called Sectaries will allow you a Thousand Years to be called a Church, and yet prove you apostates both in Doctrine and Practice. Your Miracles are but cheats, deceits, and lying Stories, if your own Authors be serched, you confess most of your Miracles are wrought by your Images, Works of your own Hands.
2. Antiquity without Truth, proveth nothing; and Holiness of Life, if your Church be holy, which is prophane? tolerating (as I said before) Whoredoms, Stage-plays, vain Sports and Pastimes, which draw Peo∣ple from the fear of God; and many foolish fopperies which I shall not now mention; so that there are them that have dissented from you, which are more ancient in the Faith, more holy in Life and Conversation, more a∣greable in Doctrine and Practice, to the true Primitive Church, then you are. And as for Miracles which are wrought by the true Power and Fin∣ger of God, there have been, and are more amongst them called Sectaries then in the Church of Rome: The blind have received their sight, the Le∣pers have been cleansed, the Lame have been made to walk, and the deaf have heard, and the Dumb have spoken, the dead have been raised, and many that have bound by Satan fourty Years, are loosed, and there are thousands that are Witnesses of it, and can testifie the Truth thereof, even in this time, and in this Year, in Scotland, England, Ireland, Germany and America, 1662. So there is a true Church which hath the Marks of the true Church of Christ, more then the Church of Rome; therefore the Roman church is not the alone true Church. 3. To the third Argument, That the Church of Rome keeps God's Com∣mandments, and walks in the narrow way of Christ's Counel, therefore she is to be head: How she keepeth the Commandments of God, is known, if he mean the ten Commandments; Thou shalt not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven or Earth, neither bow down to Worship them. Now you make Images of things in Heaven, as of God and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and of Mary; and as for things in Earth, you have Images of all sorts, witness your Mass-Houses, called Churches, your Cloisters, Fryaries and Covents; so that every place is filled full, and Worship unto them is taught by you for Doctrine, contra∣ry to God's Doctrine, and your distinction of Latria and Dulia will not serve; for it's meer Deceit; he that Honours an Image, and bows down before it in his Heart, whether you may judge it represents this or that, is an absolute Idolater, and knoweth not the Spirit which Christ said, he would send to the true Church, which should bring all things to their re∣membrance, both what he did and said, and the Saints Life and Example to remembrance, (without your Pictures.) And how you are in the nar∣row Way, is known to many thousands that you do not walk in it at all, neither take up the Cross of Christ, which is to crucifie the Lusts, affe∣ctions and desires of the Flesh, but taketh up outward Crosses, and bear them on your Necks, or Pin them on your sleeves, or hang them about your Necks, and all because Christ was crucified on the Cross: And here you are honourers of Pilate and the Jews, who crucified Christ upon the Cross as a Blasphemer, rather then honourers of Christ, and the strait and narrow Way you are ignorant of, and Christ's sufferings you are all strangers to: What! your Popes are as Emperors, your Cardinals as Law-givers, your Ecclesiastical Officers as Lords of great Possessions in the Earth, except some begging Fryars, which you have prest into a Voluntary humility, without necessity. And how do you love your Enemies? How many Indians have you destroyed and killed as Dogs? and how many that have professed the Name of Christ have you Burned & destroyed, as though
they had been Wood, and only Fewel for the Fire. And how can you say your Pater-Noster, about which you make so much ado, and say, For∣give our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; if the Heathen have trespassed against you, if them you call Sectaries have trespassed against your church, how do you forgive them? and how do you fulfil the Law of Christ, and keep his counsel, seeing that you are out of his Doctrine; a∣way with such Deceit and Hypocrisie, God hath found it out, and is judg∣ing it by his Saints, who rejoyce in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh, nor in fleshly Traditions and Imaginations, but live in the Power of God, and walk in the Spirit; and therefore because you walk con∣trary to the command of God and Christ's Counsel, and are out of the narrow Way that leads to Life, your church is neither to be heard, minded, nor heeded. The fourth Argument, That the Church of Rome is the true Church, be∣cause they keep their Sabbath of the Sunday by Tradition, and not upon the Satur∣day, as the Jews did; and therefore the Church of Rome is to be heard, because they have Tradition and solid Reason on their side. Thy Speech bewrayes thee, which bespeaks thee rather a Heathen then a Christian; for the Heathens had a day that they celebrated to an Idol made like the Sun, cal∣ed Sunday, and another day which they celebrated to an Idol called Satur∣nus, called Saturday; and in this your Church is not to be heard, who is out of the form of sound Words: but the Seventh day was the Jews. Sab∣bath, which none that profess Christianity ought to keep, seeing that Christ put an End to the shadows: and the Saints Sabbath is a stranger to the church of Rome; he that hath overcome the World and the Devil only knows God's rest, and the true Sabbath, of which the Jews was a Figure; and the Sunday thou callst, it is no more a Sabbath reckoned by the Lord of Life then that which thou callst Saturday; for every day is kept Holy to the Lord by him that witnesses the work of Redemtion, and this is accord∣ing to the Apostolick Doctrine; and if because of example the Christians whom you are pleased to Stile Sectaries, do observe the first day of the Week in the Power of God, for his Worship, then they are as much, if not more to be heard then you, and have as much Solid reason on their side as you; and thou must not think to carry the Matter on with such fri∣volous Arguments as this, to advance Mystery Babylon; for this is a know∣ing Age blessed be the Lord, wherein the Wisdom of God is revealed, and that which comprehendeth all shadows, Types, Dayes, Times, Years, Meats, Drinks, Washings, and other Figures, they are all seen over, and he is come & manifest which is Head of the true church, (and not the Pope) who was, is, and is to come, Life it self, Truth it self, Power, Strength, and everlasting satisfaction to thousands, and ten thousands, who have be∣lieved, (and to a numberless Number which are yet to be gathered into God's Sheep-fold, and into the narrow way of Christ) which will deny, and doth deny upon good Grounds, and infallible Testimony from the Eternal Spirit, that the Church of Rome is either in whole, or in part, any part of the true Church of Christ. And seeing this valiant Champion hath made so fair a Proffer, That  their Priests, Jesuites and Catholicks over all the World will turn to the Sectaries Way (as he calls them) if they can but get a clear and satisfatory Resltion to the following Doubts.
Answ. I am one which do acknowledge my self to be reckoned by him as a Sectarian; yet as a Sectarian is reckoned by the true Church of God in the Primitive Time, in the Apostles and Christ's Dayes, I do not reck∣on my self as such; and that I am a Minister of the everlasting Gospel, I dare not deny, seeing a Necessity is laid upon me to acknowledge the same; yet herein I do not glory, but in him who hath call'd me for the Work sake; and I know the Teaching of Christ Jesus and his Doctrine, and no other Thing these many Years have I published, but that which I received of the Lord, and from him by his Spirit, which is according to the true Faith and Godliness, which was in the primitive Church (before ever Rome did lay claim to be the only true catholick Church, excluding all others but her self to be in the Way that leads to Salvation) I which am as one amongst many Thousands which God hath manifested his Mind unto, shall answer in clearness, and according to Apostolick Doctrine and the Manifestation of his Spirit; but when I have so done, I am afraid this Champion, with the rest of the Priests and Jesuits, and the rest of the Catholicks over the World, will hardly own his Challenge, or confess that Doubts are answer∣ed; yet however, if it satisfie but one of a Thousand, I have my Reward, and shall put it to Tryal. The first thing the Author, who it seems knows the Mind of the Church of Rome in all things, both as to Doctrine and Practice, which they do al∣low of, and the contrary they will deny he knows to the full, or else he would never (sure) have made such a bold challenge. The first thing that they would be resolved in, is: Whether any can clearly shew that any Teachers, Doctors or Ministers are sent of Almighty God to preach and reform the Roman Catholick Church, and that they are not some who say, the Lord saith, when the Lord hath not spoken unto them; neither sent them Ezek. 13.2. Answ. What the Roman Church and their Members will take for a satis∣factory Resolution, as to themselves, I sometimes question, and do doubt the resolving of the most; but however, by the same Commandment that the Apostles did evidence their commission, that they were sent to reform the Church of the Jews, & also them that had made Defection from the Faith amongst the Gentiles; this may be shown. 1. The Apostles of Christ Jesus did declare their Commission, which they had received from Christ, and for other Proof, they sought none a∣mongst them that were Auditors or Hearers, but the Witness and Testi∣mony of God, unto which they desired to be approved in the Sight of God. 2. They shewed the Jews, that they held the Types and Figures, but did not receive or believe him who was the Substance, in whom they all ended; they were sent to bear Testimony to the true Light, that lightet every one that cometh into the World, and to preach down Dayes; Times, Moneths, Years, Fasts, Feasts, Sabbaths, Circumcision, Temples and Offerings, the Priesthood and the Sacrifice, which were but to continue until the time of Reformation, and the bringing in of a better Hope, by which they drew nigh unto God, and had an Access unto him; and they declared their commission against a voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, all which things the Church of Rome do stick in and vindicate for
Apostolick Doctrine, and many more things, which the Church of Rome is run into, contrary to the true Church of Christ, and therefore had need of Reformation: So that which is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, and Practice of the primitive Church in the first hundred years is in the Apostacy; but Rome is in many Practices and Doctrines contrary to the true Church, therefore needs reforming. And so God hath manifested himself in this his Day of Power, and hath discovered the Church of Rome to be contrary in Doctrine and Practice to the true Spouse of Christ, and hath stirred up and moved many by his Power and Spirit to preach the everlasting Gospel, and to declare also a∣gainst the Defection of the Church of Rome, and her apostatizing from the Faith, and they are not of those whom the Prophets spoke of, which ran, and the Lord sent them not; for them were the false Prophets in Israel, and they were manifest by their Fruits, of which there are great Store in Rome, who are manifest by their Fruits, and they are such as are in Cain's Way, who would kill, and such as are Seekers of Gain from their Quar∣ters, and such as take the Jews Tythes; and these the Lord nver sent to be Teachers or Ministers, to bring to the Knowledge of Christ; but we deny all these things, and your Church in the very Ground and Foundation, and know that it will be swept away, when the Beast is taken alive, upon which your Church now rides; then shall you see, that that which you long put off among People as Apostolick Doctrine, will not be received any more, neither Traditions nor Inventions of Men for the Worship of God. The second Doubt which the Author would be resolved in, is, whether we can make good what Luther and Calvin, with all Protestants, have boasted, that they would do, to reform convincingly one of the silliest Roman Catholicks that is, and to begin, do it in the Matter of the real Presence after Consecra∣tion. What Luther and Calvin have said unto you, as about your Worship, Doctrine and Practice, hath been made good by themselves while they were living, and in the Body; and what they said, did not only inform the Minds of many of the Roman Catholicks, but reform'd them too, which were not of the silliest amongst you, not only one, but thousands did see your Error and Deceit, though they in some Particulars did but differ from you: But now that is manifest which denyeth your Foundation in the ve∣ry Ground. And what I have said as about the real Presence of Christ's Body being in the Bread and Wine after Consecration, if thou dare put it, and endeavour the Trial thereof (according as I have in Reasonableness pro∣pounded unto thee) it will convince many of the Roman Catholicks of their Error, or else many of the Protestants of their Error; and so if thou darest adventure it, make no more Boasts, but let come to Tryal, as before is pro∣pounded unto the Church of me, if she, or any of her Agents dare admit of it▪ 3. The third Argument which he promiseth, If it can be proved from the Scripture (which he calls God's written Word) that the Sabbath-day is com∣manded by God to be kept on Sunday, and that little Children are to be bap∣tized. Answ. What others have said as to these two Particulars, who were but departed a little Way from you in divers things, as to their Judgments
I shall not stand to vindicate, because the Church was rather but a coming out of the Wilderness, rather then come already into her first Purity; but I am one of those, amongst many thousands in Europe, who deny the Chrch of Rome, as to be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife; and yet I shall not vindi∣cate either the one or the other, but deny both as amongst Christins, viz. as to keep the Jewish Sabbath upon Sunday, as the Author calls it, and sprinkling of little Children is like the other, an Invention in the Aposta∣cy, never that we read of commanded, commended or practised in the Apostles Dayes as such: The first Day of the VVeek the Apostles met together, and worshipped God, not by Virtue of the Jews Commandment, but in the Power of God, and you only have them both, and keep them both by tradition and custom, without commandment, and so are out of the Power of God, and out of the Saints Life. 4. The fourth Argument: Can the Sectaries with Reason and Ground suf∣ficient condemn all Catholicks that were so many Ages before Luther and Calvin, for being no better then Heathens? and convince me, that adhering to you I shall be more secure in my Salvation, then injoyning to them that have Time out of Mind been of the only saving Religion? Answ. The Sectaries have not gone about to condemn every individual man before Luther and Calvin for no better then Heathens; we believe some were; and we believe many were as bad (if not worse) they that walk in the Practice of the Heathen, and bring forth Fruit, but not unto God, are in the Heathens Nature; but the Generality of the Church of Rome have (for these many hundred Years) brought forth no better Fruit then the Heathen, and therefore are in the Nature of the Heathen; for like as the Heathen persecuted the Christians in former Dayes, even so hath the Church of Rome persecuted the true Christians in their Day, ad in this are no better then Heathens; instance the Blood-shed, Murder, cruel Deaths you have put many unto, since you have had the Name of a Church, and therefore are no better then Heathens in Nature; and for Antiquity, it proveth nothing without Verity: And there can be no As∣surance in your Church, seeing that it stands upon Tradition, and Hear-say, and outward Performances, and bodily Exercises, that profit little; but some, whom you call Sectaries, have more Assurance, for it's the Spirit of God that gives it; and as there is Obedience yielded unto the Lord (that Spirit) he giveth them Assurance; and them that are born of it do over∣come the World, and his Spirit beareth Witness to their Spirit, that they have overcome, by which they cry Abba Father; and this Spirit of Truth, that leadeth into all Truth, bringeth more Assurance unto them that are led by it, and worship in it, then can be had in all your outward Formalities, Ce∣remonies and Traditions. 5. Can you make evident at least, that in your Flock▪ and Luther and Calvin their Guides, there is more Holiness and Virtue then can be found among the Ca∣tholicks, and that you go the narrow way that leads to Life? I answer, yes; I am one among many thousands who are not of the Church of Rome, yet am of Christ's Flock, which he hath cleansed by his Blood, and revealed his Virtue in, and his holy Life; and it's made mani∣fest
that they are in the narrow Way more then the Church of Rome; they are in the Way that leads to Life, and abide in Christ's Doctrine; we love them that hate us, we bless them that curse us, we pray for them that per∣secute us; but so doth not the Church of Rome, but kills them and perse∣cutes them that oppose her; we say, without Righteousness and Holiness be revealed and wrought in our Hearts, we can bring forth no Fruit unto God, neither can be Members of the true Church; but if any conform un∣to the Practice of your Church in outward things, he is counted a good Member of your Church, though Righteousness and Holiness, Self-de∣nyal, Humility and Love be wanting: Therefore we are the Church in which there is more Holiness, Virtue and Life enjoyed, then in the Roman Church. 6. Can you shew us any Miracles that ever were wrought in Testimony of your Religion, or that the Catholicks Miracles are wrought by Beelzebub? and now thou hast askt us a resolution of the Doubts, and let all that are Illuminated, judge how we are deluded. Answ. It's an adulterous Generation that seeks a Sign; and what Christ wrought was reckoned as no Miracles by them that are in the Unbelief, yet these Signs have accompanied the Gospel, which is the Power of God, the blind have been restored to Sight, and the dead have been raised, and the deaf have heard, and the lame have been made whole, and this hath been witnessed by many, and we have a cloud of Witnesses, which your Church know not of; and by the effectual working of God's Power these things have been done, which do give Testimony and confirm our Religi∣on: And for your Miracles, the most that ever I heard of have been done by Pictures and Images, as you have testified, which are but fabulous Sto∣ries: and now let them who are lightned with the true Light of Christ, judge who are in the Delusion; and now let all judge whether these be not satisfactory Resolutions unto the aforesaid Doubts or Questions, which may convince them that have erred from Christ, the Power of God, and gone in their own Traditions and Inventions, and have forsaken the strai Way and the narrow Path that leadeth to Life; and all are exhorted to come unto him (who is the Light and Life of Men) that their Souls may live, and that they may witness Assurance of the Love of God unto them by his Spirit's Manifestation. And now let us see whether the Author will keep to his Word, whether the Church of Rome will all turn unto our Way, which is Christ, the Way, the Truth and the Life, or whether follow their Visible Head, the Pope, who is changeable, and doth not abide forever, who leadeth only to an Observance of outward things, but neg∣lect the weightier things to walk in. And now I shall come to some Propsitions, which (the Author saith) have been propounded, which are unanswerable; and the Propositions are against all Sectaries; and the Propositions are laid down by Francis Costerus (as the Author saith) of the Society of Jesus, which have been laid down fifty Years ago, and they are in Number eight; and with them eight Propositions (the Author sith) he hath put all the ablest Ministers of Germany and the Low Countries
unto their Wits End; now I hope some will be able to give an answer, and yet keep both their Faith, Wit and Reason. 1. The first Poposition is this, That never since the Apostles Time, till the Year 1517. (wherein Luther began his Doctrine) were any found in the World who did consent with either the Lutherans, Calvinists or Anabaptists, or other Sectaries Opinions; nor ever shall any of the Sectaries prove that any of the A∣postles or Evangelists were of their Faith; and so by Consequence the Sectaries are without Faith, and they are the Men whom the Scriptures in several Places affirm that should come, In the latter times false Prophets, &c. Answ. As I said before, any Opinion which Luther, Calvin or the bapti∣zed People do hold, I shall not stand to vindicate it, because they have so holden; yet in many things they are separated from you upon good Ground, and their Doctrine and Worship was far more consonant and agreeable un∣to the Apostles Dayes then yours are; but I am one that own my self a Protestant, who deny the Church of Rome; and I do say, this Propositi∣on is silly, poor and feeble; and I do not believe that any were so hard put to it, as to be brought to their Wits End by answering of it; for what need he talk of since the Apostles time till such a Year, we shall come to the Apostles time and age, and if any Society of People now are found the same in Faith, in Doctrine, in Worship, in Life, Practice and Conversa∣tion, then they are the true Church: and let Francis Costerus, with the rest of the Roman Merchants, take that Faith to themselves, and that Do∣ctrine to themselves, and those particular Points of Worship and Tradition to themselves, since all the World hath wondered after the Beast, and hath worshipped his Image, and this was since the Apostles Dayes: And if the Church of Rome pleads the whole World as for a Proof, John saw that An∣ti-christs, false Prophets, Deceivers were entered in then, fifteen hundred Years ago, and the World went after them; and he saw the whole World wonder after the Beast, and the Whore sit upon the Waters, Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; and this comprehends the World, the Whore's Seat; and we matter not for her Consent, neither to Doctrines and Principles, nor Opinions, nor for the Approbation of them that have drunk of her Cup: But if we can prove a People, which are gathered by the Word of God, and through the preaching of the Gospel, into the same Faith, Hope, Doctrine, Life and Practice which the Apostles walked in then; this is the Church which is coming out of the Wilderness again, where she hath been preserved, while the Mother of Harlots hath sit as a Queen, and hath been so visible, as over all the VVorld, and hath made the Nations drink her Cup of Fornication; and therefore your Unity in this thing and in this time is clear, that the Church of Rome is not the Church of Christ▪ but there are some whom Rome is pleased to call Sectaries, that own the same Practice, the same Doctrine, the same Faith which the Apostles walked in; and therefore this great Proposition is false, That all that have separated from the Church of Rome have no Faith, or a new fancied Faith; and now I come to his second Proposition. 2. Proposition. The Religion and Faith of the Roman Church hath not been any Way changed, in any Article that belongs to Religion, by any Pope, Councils,
or catholick Bishops; but it is the very same Faith hath remained intire and invio∣late, from the Apstles to this present Day. There were churches planted before there were any at Rome; and the Faith which they received, was that which did overcome the World, and gave them Victory over Sin and Death; and the Religion which the chur∣ches of Christ professed, as Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, and the rest of the churches which the Apostles planted, is no more like the Faith and Re∣ligion of the church of Rome now, then Black is to White; as for instance, Prove us out of the Scripture what Foundation you have for Purgatory, for selling Indulgences and Pardons for Sins; and what Scripture have you for Auricular confession, for an Unbloody Sacrifice, for Prayer to Saints, for worshipping of Images, (in the New-Testament) for observing of Lent, consisting of so many days? & what Scripture & example from the churches that were in the Apostles days (before Rome was called a church) concern∣ing Prayer for the Dead, for your crosses, your tapers and candles, for a∣nointing with Oyle and cream in Baptism, which was only invented by Pope lement, which another Pope (Pope Silvester) confirmed, 315. Plat Volat. Sabil. And what example from the true church of Baptizing of In∣fants, and for God-fathers and God-mothers, in Christ's day, when he planted the church? And that Infants should be Baptized, and only at Ea∣ster and Whitsuntide, was not this ordained by Pope Leo, in the Year 676. Lib. Council, Volat. Pol. Chron. and was not Transubstantiation, which you call the Body and Blood of Christ after the consecration, when the Priest hath Whispered over the Bread and Wine a few Latine Words, as, Hoc est Corpus meum, Hic est enim sanguis meus, &c. The Bread is turned into the Natural Body of Christ's Flesh, Blood and Bone; was not this ordained by Pope Innocent, held at LATERAN by Twelve Hundred Romish Priests, Monks and Fryars, in the Year 1215. decret. de summa Trini∣tate, Cap. Firmiter. And whether are not these Articles of the church of Rome, yea or nay? If I should traduce the church of Rome in their Bishops and Councils these 12. hundred Years and upward, I might bring a loud of Witnesses that the church of Rome is not the same in Articles of Faith in Religion, but divers Popes (I might prove) have made distinct Articles, and divers Councils and Bishops; so that I might clearly prove, and can, and shall, if God permit me with Life, if I hear any more of the church of Rome, or the Author of this Book, that I shall prove, that the church of Rome in the articles of her Faith, is not the same that the church of Christ was in before Rome was Planted a church. 2. I shall prove (if need require) her Universal Councils (as she calls them) to vary, and her Bishops to be different in their Decrees, and that her Faith, in points of Religion, is not the same from the Apostles day, to this time, as the author of this Book would make People believe; but what I have said to this unanswerable Proposition, (as he calls it) may be suffi∣cient to convince both the author and them that are doubtful in their mind about this particular. 3. Proposition is, That neither the Sacraments nor Ceremonies, or any Do∣ctrine of the Church of Rome, contain any thing that is contrary to the Scriptures but learned Doctors maintain the same: and that there is no alteration in any ar∣ticle of Faith▪ and then the Author makes a conclusion, though full too hastily, That they which dissent from the Church of Rome (which he is pleased )
Stile, Sectaries and Hereticks) have no reason to withdraw from the Catholick Church. Answ. As for that which you call the Catholick church of Rome, we find such diversity of Orders and constitutions one distinct from another, that to begin to enumerate them all, would take up much time before one end∣ed, and would prove tedious to the Reader, to view over the Variety of Constitutions and Decrees that have been made concerning the Ceremo∣nies, Sacraments, (as they call them) and other Doctrines of the church of Rome, which at this time is not my intention; but Pope Alexander com∣manded that unleavened Bread should be used in the Supper, in the Year 1119. Lib. Concil. grat. Sabil. Before that time the outward Bread was indiffe∣rent, whether it was leavened or unleavened; notwithstanding the Greeks do use leavened Bread unto this day, in that which is called a Supper, and they use Wine only in the Cup; but the church of Rome mingles Water with Wine, according to the Pope Alexander's Decree: And the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of turning the Bread into the Body of Christ, and Wine into Blood (as they say) was an unknown Doctrine in the Apostles dayes, and also among the Greeks, until Pope Innocent the third, 1215. Likewise Honorus the third, he made a new Ordinance, that the Sacra∣ment of the Altar (as the Church of Rome terms it) should be Worshipped, and kneeled unto of the People, and also it should be born unto the Sick, yea, and that with Candlelight, though it be at noon-day, in the Year 1214. D. 3. Tit. cap 10. Lib. Council, Pant. And Innocent the third ordained the Sa∣crament of the Altar should be kept under Lock and Key, that such as were like to dye, might not want Spiritual comfort at the time of their Death, Lib. Council, Cron. Pant. Pope Innocent the 8th permitted that the Priests of Norwegia might sing Mass with Water for lack of Wine, in the Year 1484. Math. Falm. Pant. And as about the Ceremonies about the Sacra∣ment or Mass, in a Council held at Rottomage, it was decreed that the Sa∣crament should not thenceforth be given to Lay-men nor Lay-women in their Hands any more, but the Priests should put it in their Mouths, con∣trary to the use and practice of the Primitive Church; yea & of the church of Rome it self many Years after, Lib. Council, &c. And so here the Church of Rome in contrary to the former Churches, and to their own Church of Rome in former times, though C. M. would elevate the Propositions of Francis Costerus (a Jesuit) unanswerable. 4. Proposition: The Author saith, It cannot be proved that any have been admitted Priests, but were duely consecrated by Bishops, Whence we infer, That Lutherans, Calvinists, and other Hereticks, are no true Ministers, nei∣ther are of Divine Priest-hood, because they give to People a meer piece of Bread and nothing else, and they have no Power to absolute People from their Sins, but send them away entangled with Sin, as when they came to them. Answ. As for the Consecration of the Priests of Rome, you have conse∣crated many who are out of the Doctrine of Christ, who are Traytors to Kings and Governments; and it's a Maxim, and a thing Meritorious in your Church, to slay a Heretick, that is, one dissenting, or not consent∣ing to your corrupt Principles, and as one Deceiver hath ordained and ad∣mitted another, so hath your Bishops and Popes ordained the rest to Exe∣cute
their Drudgery and corrupt Traffick; and as I have offered unto thee before, if it be not a piece of Bread, and Wine, except mingled with wa∣ter, (according to your changeable Ordinances before mentioned) put it to Trial upon the terms I before mentioned, that you may be made manifest to be Deceivers, or else we, to all People. And as for your Absolutions and Pardons, it hath been that which you have sold for Money, which made Luther and divers of your own Church to deny you, because it hath been contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine. And as for forgiveness of Sins, it properly belongs to Christ, and to them that are in the same Pow∣er; to them that confess, forsake and turn from Sin, to Pronounce forgive∣ness and Mercy; but the Members of your Church confess from day to day unto your Priests that are as much entangled in Sin as they who do con∣fess, and neither do Repent nor find Mercy at the Hand of the Lord; and your confessors, and they that do confess, they are defiled as much with Sin when they End their Work, as when they began. 5. Proposition. It cannot be found in the holy Scripture, that nothing is to be believed, but what is clearly and expresly contained in the same: Hence follows the overthrow of the Ground-work of the Sectaries, who say, that nothing is to be belie∣ved but what is expresly set down in the Scripture. Answ. What others have said as to this particular, I shall not now stand to Vindicate, because it is not my Work to Vindicate every particular Judg∣ment & Person who believe contrary to your Church; but I say many are of that mind (that are not of your Church) that things may be believed to be true, according to the manifestation of Gods Spirit, though the Scripture in express words doth not declare the same; yet you to bring in fabulous Stories, which you call unwritten Verity, that are to be believed, though never so Repugnant unto the Scripture, and to the Truth contained in it, this we cannot receive, neither believe; and this will never be attributed by the Lord unto any for Unbelief, although you say it. 6. Proposition. The Author saith, He would fain have Luther and Calvin, and the other Sectaries, to shew where Matthew's Writing is called holy Scrip∣ture, more then Nicodemus his Gospel; and seeing they cannot prove the one no more then the other, they must needs believe something that is not written in the holy Scripture. Answ. I shall let Luther and Calvin alone, they were Men that God did honour, and I do honour, and many more as in their Day; they are at rest in the Sepulchres of their Fathers, where your reviling cannot touch them, they prevailed in their Doctrine and Faith so much against you, as you have not recovered in an hundred and thirty Years, neither I believe ever will, so long as the Church of Rome will have any Cause to call her self Christ's only visible Church upon Earth. And I do not believe Matthew's Writing only because it is reckoned by you and us for holy Scripture, but beca we feel by the Spirit of God, that gave forth all Words, that it is a Decl∣ration of those things which were brought to pass in his Day, and likewise Mark, John and Luke, testifie unto the same Matter; but for Nicodemus his Gospel, as you are pleased to call it, the Spirit of God doth not testifie in us unto the same, but that it is repugnant unto the Mind of the Spirit,
and is a meer patcht up thing in the Corruption of time, wherein many things are contained that are in Opposition and contrary to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John their Declaration: And so thy fele Argument is answer∣ed, which thou concludest hath not been alerable these fifteen hundred Years; and let not him that puts on his Armour beast, but him that hath overcome, and puts it off. 7 Proposition is, That it cannot be shewn for these fifteen hundred  that there hath been any Catholick that held that the Pope of , or that did rail at the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass, or Inocation of Saints and Angels, and usual praying for the dead, and such like Wor of Pity▪ elongg to our Faith and Religion, which the whole World hath laudably practised and re∣verenced for fifteen hundred Years. It is a Wonder that this Author belonging to the Church of Rome▪ is not ashamed of his Arguments, and the silly Propositions that he hath propoun∣ded from another Hand; It seems, neither this Author, nor Francis este∣r, whose Propositions the Author hath vaunted in, and boasted of, know the Apostles Doctrine, who said, The whole World lay in Wickedness, and if any Man love the World, the Love of the Father dwells not in him; and Christ said to his true Church, Ye are not of the World, therefore the World hates you; and again, I have chosen you out of the World; and John in his Day saw through the Spirit▪ all the World wondering after the Beast, and wor∣shipping his Image (and not the Image of God) and saw all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People to be Waters, and the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Peo∣ple to drink the Whore's Cup; and these the two Athors bring in for a great Proof, and for an unanswerable Proposition, as that the whole World lyes in Wickedness, in whom the Love of God dwells not, and thy that have drunk of the Whore's Cup of Fornication, and they that have wondered after the Beast, (to wit) the whole World; these are his dark Cloud of Witnesses, to prove that the Pope was never called Anti-christ; will they that have received the Roman Faith, and accounted the Pope Christ's Vicar, and the visible Head, call him Anti-christ, which hath exalted himself and the Church of Rome's Faith over the whole World, as the Author boasts; That the whole World hath laudably practised and reverenced Invocation of Saints, and prayng for the dead, for the Piety, Faith and Religion of the Church of Rome for these 1500 Years, This proves the Church of Rome to lye in Wickednes ad to be contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostle; and this doth not clear the Pope at all, but rather mkes him to be an An∣ti-christ, and your Church to be the ill-favoured Harlot, and not the true Church of Christ: Hast thou forgotten how John Bishop of Constano∣ple, would needs be chief Bishop over all the rest of the Chuches, about the Year two hundred fifty and upwards, and how the other Bhops cryd out against him for to be Anti-christ; but your Bishop he got to be called chief Bishop over all Christian Churches, not by Consent of the Elders nor Churches, but by the Means of Phocas an Heathen Emperor as before I have said; and is not he much more an Anti-christ? And as for the Sa∣crifice in the Mass, Invocation of Saints, and praying for the Dd, which thou say'st is a laudable Practice; I say, none have or do reckon it worthy f Praise, but they that worship the Beast and his Image, and have drunk
of the VVhore's Cup, and are erred from the Faith and Religion that the Apostles and true Church of Christ were in, which all the World did that wondered after the Beast. Lastly, This I say, he that teaches a Faith, a Religion, a Doctrine con∣trary to the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, is an Anti christ; but the Pope these fifteen hundred Years hath taught a contrary Doctrine, therefore he is an Anti-christ. The 1st Proposition is evident from divers Te∣stimonies of Scripture, who teach only to pray unto the Lord in the Name of Christ, and for them that are alive in the Body, and not for them tht are dead. The second is proved by the Author's own Testimony, that the Pope and Church of Rome have prayed unto the Saints▪ and prayed for the dead these 1500 Years (to his Shame be it spoken) therefore the Con∣sequence must necessarily follow, The Pope  an Ant-chrst. 8. and last Proposiion is this, That the first Authors of the Christian Faith in Germany, Italy, Spain, France, England and Low Countries have ac∣knowledged no other Faith▪ nor brouht any other to them then the Catholick Ro∣man Faith, which the whole Universe hath acknowledged which we have lear∣ned of our Fore-fathers; therefore they that have brought in another are ac∣cursed. That which the whole Universe hath acknowledged (in the Apostacy) which lyeth in Wickedness, seeing all have wondered after the Beast, and drunk of the Whore's Cup since the Apostles Dayes, is but a lame and pi∣tiful Argument, as to prove the Church of Rome the true Church; and as for the Faith delivering (such as it was) to the Nations before-mentio∣ned, only excepting Spain, because it's probable that the Apostle Paul spread the Faith there, seeing that he said, he had a Purpose to come there into Spain, which if he did, thy Boast may cease as for the planting of Religi∣on there; and we know he was no Hypocrite, but the same Faith and Go∣spel which he had preached over the Regions, he would preach there; and his Gospel and Doctrine we find contrary to the Church of Rome; be con∣demned divers Doctrines which the Church of Rome holds, as forbidding Meats, Marriage, New Moons and Sabbaths, and voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, and praying unto them, and praying for the Dead; and if you brought the Christian Faith (so called) into the rest of the Nations first, and the aforesaid Doctrines mentioned, and preached them up for apostolick Institutions, then you brought in a Doctrine and a Gospel that is accursed, which you have received of your Fore-fathers, who wondered after the Beast, and received his Mark, and have been drunk∣en with the Whore's Cup, to wit the Universe which you lay claim to▪ and none but you called Christians: So that it is manifest your Visible Uni∣versal Church is the Harlot, and hath brought in another Gospel and other Doctrines then the Apostles, and so are anathmatized; for the Apostles preached the Power of God to be the Gospel, and you have preached Tra∣ditions, Inventions, old Wives Fables and outward Ceremonies for the Gospel, and so have deceived the Nations; and now when they begin to dislike your Traffick▪ you are angry; but the Day is made manifest, whih discovers all your Deceit.
And now I have answered the substance of the Book, and also the eight Propositions proposed by the Author and there, and I am not yet at the wits End, as thou sayst the Ministers in Germay and the Lo-Countries have been, neither at Wisdom's end, but am in it, and ready (if you will ly down your carnal Weapon) o begin with thee, and to Vindicate the Truth as it is in Jesus, against the Doctrines of the Church f Rome, whenever I shall hear of thee, or any that pertain to your Church mke such another bold attempt, as to condemn all since the Apostles days for Sectaries, Here∣ticks and Schismaticks, who have dissented from you; and shall endeavour in the strength of Christ to Vindicate and  (though not with Cain's Weapons) for the Faith and Doctrine whih was nce delivered to the Saints before the Apostacy, and now is manifest agin in us, and is with us, when the Apostacy is coming to an End, and the Everlasting Gospel is to be Preached again to them that dwell on the Earth, and to the Ntions, Kindreds, Tongues and People, that they may come to the true Founda∣tion again, and to the Rock of Ages again, that they may be established in Righteousness forever, the joyful Sound whereof is going into the Bord∣ers of Babylon, which will make the Inhabitants thereof to abhor their Ci∣ty in which they have inhabited, and they shall return to Zion with Songs of Deliverance, and everlasting joy upon their Heads, because the hur of God's Judgment is come, and coming upon the Harlot, and the Year of Redemption is proclaiming to the Captive, and the Dead shall be raised to Life, and shall hear the Word of Life, and their Graves shall be opened, and they shall have Victory over it; and they that hear the Voice of the Sn of God in themselves, shall live, and shall deny the Voice of many Waters, and the Voice of your church, Mystery-Babylon, whose Seat hath been upon them. And as for Doctor Bayly, which the Author efforts for his proof, and layes down his Reasons wherefore the church of Rome hath been, and  still the true church, by way of Demonstration. He saith, That the Churh of Rome was an excellent flourhing Mothr-Church▪ ths Church  to be such, but she must fall either by Apostacy Heresie or Schim: Now Apstacy (saith he) is a renouncing of the Faith of Christ, and no man will say, that the church of Rome had ever such a Fall. 2. (He saith) Heresie is an adhering to some private an singular Opnion,  Errour in Faith, contrary to the approved Doctrine of the church. Answ. Whatsoever the author is pleased to boast of the church of Rome, we do not find flourishing for Faith, wholome Doctrine and , more then other churches that were plnted before her,  both by Scripture, and the  the church of Rome her self will allow of; and  hath and a Fall (and prove it  by Apostacy. . As First, she is fallen from hr first Love, and  Doctrine of Christ, who taught to love Enemies, and to do god  that hate them, and to pray for them that Persecuted them:  the church of Rome hath not loved their Enemies, neither , but have Persecuted them to Death, and , who did not re∣ceive their Doctrine: and this is renouncing f that Faith which was  delivered to the Saints by Christ himself, who taught to love Enemies,
and if they beat them upon the one cheek, turn the other; but the Church of Rome is out of this Faith and Doctrine, and hath renounced this Faith of Christ, and hath denyed the Power of God, and placed it into a Man, to wit, the Pope, that Infallibility is in him; And this is in the Apostacy. 2. If Heresie be an adhering to some private Opinion or Errour in Faith, then the Church of Rome is in the Heresie; for the Faith that was held a∣mong the true Churches, was that which did overcome the World, and gave Victory over Sin, and Faith in Christ was that which only gave an Interest into the Kingdom of God; but Cardinal Bellarmine (a chief Pillar of your Church) hath asserted this for the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That a Man hath a two-Fold right to the Kingdom of God, first, by the merits of Christ: Secondly, by the merits of man's good Works, or Works of Supereroga∣tion: And this is an adhering to a singular Opinion, and is an Error in the Faith that was generally held in the true churches of Christ, as Witness, He worketh in us to will and to do, viz. Christ. So that there is nothing ap∣propriated unto the creature as a creature. 3. This is an Error in the Faith of the church of Rome, who teach and are taught, That there is a place called Purgatory, in which Men are cleansed from some light faults, or venial Sins; and this is contrary to the Faith of the true christian churches, and is no less then Heresie; for the true church, or churches of Christ, taught, That the Blood of Christ a∣lone cleanseth from all Sin, and that he is (to wit, Christ) the Propitiation for Sin, and the everlasting Sacrifice and Offering; but you have other Offe∣rings, as the Sacrifice of the Mass, which you call an unbloody Sacrifice, which is contrary to the Faith of the christian church in Christ's and the Apostles dayes, and therefore is Heresie. Again, praying for the Dead, and praying to Angels, and Worship∣ping of Images, is absolute Heresie, and contrary to the Faith and Doctrine of the true church of Christ. 4. And as for Schism, the church of Rome hath separated from many o∣ther churches in their Practice, and also have Excommunicated them as Schismaticks and Hereticks, witness the Eastern churches, the church of Caesaria, and divers others, as about your Lent, your Fasts, Feasts, and invented Holy-days, which the true church of Christ did not allow of; but you have brought those things in as Apostolical, and Excommuicated all the rest that would not bow unto you: As for example, about the Feast of Easter, the time when it should be celebrated, though Victor the Bishop of Rome Excommunicated all the Eastern churhes because they did not ac∣cord with Rome, Eueb. Lib 5. cap. 23. At which Iraeneus, Bishop of Lyon▪ in France, shrply reproved him, ibid. cap. 23. So in many more things which I shall not now stand neither to trouble my self nor the Reader, which the church of Rome hath departed in he Practice from the Primitive church, as you may see farther in a Book En∣tiuled, The Glory f the true Church discovered, Published by P. H. And whereas the Author desires to be satisfied by what General Council she was ever condemned; or which of the Fathers wrote against her; or by what Authority she was otherwise approved. Answ. Because the Author is so confident in his Assertions, as though
they were unanswerable, I return this short Answer, which if I hear any more from the Author may be amplified. For Instance, In the Year 287. there was a Council of Bishops called at Sinuessa, where the Pope was condemned (which your Church hath taught could not err) for sacrificing to Idols. A Council held at Cartage decreed, that Clergy-men should not med∣dle with temporal Affairs. At a Council held at Valentia in France, a Decree was made, that Priests should not marry; and these were called Christians, and some of Rome's Visible Universal Church. And this was against reproved and condemned in the first Council held at Tolledo in Spain, they decreed that Priests should marry: and now Rome look to thy Unity. Again, at a Council held at Caesar August, accursed all them that eat not the Sacrament in the Church; but the Church of Rme hath decreed, that it may be kept, and ready to carry abroad to sick People, and upon other Occasions, out of the Church. At a general Council at Constantinople decreed, that Mary shall be called the Mother of God, as though God were generated by natural Generation, which is Blasphemy. The Council of Armenium decreed for the Armenians, that Christ was not God. The Council of Calcedon (which was one of the four Councils that Pope Gregory compared to the four Gospels, and that their Decrees were sure and certain as the Scripture) yet, Pope Leo did not stick to condemn it, and of them as unadvised, viz. the whole Council. So Councils have erred, as is evident, and that which some have decreed for apostolick Doctrine since the Apostles Dayes, other Councils have condemned as Heresie, though called Christians, as well as the Church of Rome, and yet they have condemned that which some Councils did allow. So the Pope hath erred, the Councils have erred, as is manifest in what I have said, that I shall not trouble my Reader in large things, which I could and might do upon another Occasion, if I hear any more from the Church of Rome. 2. By what Authority she (viz. the Church of Rome) is reproved. In short, Leo the fourth, the Bishop of Rome, made void the Acts of Adrian, Bishop of Rome: Stephanus made void and abrogated the Decrees of Formosus and Sabian, Christ's Vicars so called, commanded that Pope Gregory (another Vicar, so called) his Writings and Decrees should be burned: And all these before-mentioned did say, and the Church of Rome holds it as such, that they were Peter's Successors: So here one Father or Head of the Church, as they reckon the Bishop of Rome, hath confounded a∣nother. The Nicene Council determined, that Images were not only to be placed in the Churches, but also worshipped; and the then Pope said, that Ima∣ges were Lay-mens Calendrs. The Lateran Council under Julius, did repeal the Decrees of the Pissan council: The Basil-council decreed, that a council was above the Pope; but
the Lateran-council decreed, that the Pope was above the council, that he that should think otherwise, should be counted an Heretick; yet the Basil-council aforesaid decreed, that they that judged that a council was not above the Pope, were Hereticks: and yet the Church of Rome layes claim to Visibility and Universality over all the World, and yet one as distinct from another, as black is to white, and is as unsuitable as Snow is in Summer, or Rain in Harvest. One Word more, and I have done. Boniface the eighth, a great Father of the Church of Rome, and a Pope, That no Man in the World can be saved, unless he be suject to the Roman Church, like this Author. And Pope Paschal thus said, That no Council could make Laws for the Church of Rome. And so much of General Councils, and of the confusion of the Church of Rome; a few Words more of Synods, and I have done. Bernardus saith, The Church of Rome was polluted with many Superstitions, that the Bishops were Biters of the Sheep, rather then true Shepherds; sometimes (saith he) I have admired that there should be a Traytor among the twelve Dis∣ciples; but now I much more wonder, that among so great a Company of Bishops, and Prelates, one upright Disciple cannot be found, Apop. Chr. Lib. 13. p. 260. Gregorius Theologus, who lived about three hundred Years after Christ, did determine never to come more at Councils or Synods, Because (saith he) there comes more Evil then Good out of them, for the Contention and Ambitious∣ness of the Bishops is above Measure, said he, anno 300. D. Paraeus said, Often hath the Truth suffered Wrong in Synods, because all that were assembled agreed in one Error, so that Truth came to be passed by with Silence, Iren. pag. 57. Again, Gregorius Nazianzenus used to say, That he had never seen any good End of any Council or Synod, Vide Inst. clav. 4. lib. 9. cap. 11. And some Synods have said, Tha Remedy was not to be expected from the Clergy, who were the Cause of Disease, anno 1616. So the Author saith, Whose Company did the Church of Rome leave? and from whom did she go forth? and where was the Church that she did forsake, that she should be counted Heretical and Schismatical? I say she left the Company and Society of the primitive Church in Christ's and the Apostles Dayes, and she went forth from the rest of the Churches that were planted, as I instanced; the Church of Rome in the Year 193 did excommunicate all the Eastern Churches; And where was the true Church that she did forsake? saith the Author; not only one, I say, but many, to wit▪ the Doctrine that the Apostles had laid down and preached at Antioch, at Philippi, at Corinth, at Ephesus, and the rest of the Churches of Asi. And so the Church of Rome is proved to be an Apostate, in the Apostacy, in Heresie, in Schism; so that there is an absolute Defection from the Life and Power of God, which was manifested in the Apostles dayes, and there∣fore the Church of Rome is not the true Church. What I have said, as to the Doctrines and Grounds which have been laid down by the Author, I shall refer it and the Answer unto God's Witness in every Man's Conscience; and if I hear any more of the Author, his great Boasts or ambitious Challenges, which may reach to all that do dissent from the Church of Rome, as to be Hereticks, I shall engage in the Strength
of the Lord to vindicate the Truth, however opposed, and shall further (if God permit) be ready to give a more large and full answer unto the Do∣ctrines, and Practices, and Worship of the Church of Rome, and prove them to be contrary to the Scriptures, and the Apostolick Doctrine, and the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. So in what I have said, I hope may convince the Author of his vain As∣sertions, and them that are enclined towards Babylon, it may put a Stop to that which would too readily close with every thing which goes under the Name of Antiquity. But in what I have said upon the whole Matter, I hope will be sufficient unto all who read with a single Eye, without Prejudice; and unto such I say, the Lord give them an Understanding, that they see and dis∣cern the Way which leadeth to Life and Felicity, from that which leadeth to the Chambers of Death, and the Pathes that take hold on De∣struction.
A GENERAL EPISTLE TO THE Seed of God, DEar Friends every where, who have believed in our Lord Jesus Christ, and called with an holy Calling to the great Salvation of God, which is manifest in this the Day of his Power; keep your first Love, and let not the Threats of Men, neither the Browns of the World af∣fright you from that which you have prized more then all the World; now the Sun is up, and a time of scorching is come, and that which hath not Root will wither; now every Ground will be tryed, and blessed is the Good, that brings forth the Seed which must inherit the Promise; Oh let not the Cares of this present Life choak that which God hath begotten; and seeing the Lord hath so marvelously wrought for us hitherto, in the midst of great Opposition, let not your Faith fail, nor your Confidence in God, who delivered Jacob of old out of his Adversity, and Israel out of all his Troubles, whose Care is over his People now; and having seen the Emptiness of the World and its Way and Worship, let nothing blind your Eye again, and let not the things present nor things to come separate you from the Love of God in Christ Jesus; and mind not them that draw back to Perdition, but let it teach you all more Diligence, to be as those that press after Glory, Immortality and Everlasting Life; the Way of God was ever hated by the World and the Powers thereof; never heed the rough Spirit nor the heavy, for their Bound is set, and their Limit known; but mind the Seed, which hath Dominion over all, and forsake not the assem∣bling of your selves together, in which you have found God and his Pro∣mise and Power amongst you and Blessing, your Understandings opened: Oh rather suffer all things, then let go that which you have believed; fr whoso doth, will loose the Evidence of God's Spirit in them, and their Peace and Joy will be lost; the Lord God preserve you all unto the End faithful. Your Dear Brother for the Testimony of Jesus, F. H. Aelby Goal, the 10th of the 3d Moneth, 1664.
A Visitation of Love, Peace and Good∣will from the Spirit of the Lord, sent un∣to the whole Flock of God, now in this their Day of Tryal, and Hour of Temptation. DEar Friends and Brethren, who have been called to believe by the holy calling of the Lord unto Sanctification and Holiness, that ye might inherit the Promises of God, and that your Souls might live in the Land of the living, and partake of his Goodness, that you might admire him, and praise his Name forever: And seeing the Lord out of his rich Love and Mercy hath visited you, who sometime sate in the Region of the Shadow of Death, and were cast out of his Presence in the time of Unbelief; seeing he hath caused his miraculous Light to shine upon you, in his gracious Visitation of you, and hath given you to believe in his Name; prize his Love unto you, and let not his gracious Benefits slip out of your Minds, lest your Hearts be filled with other things, that will corrupt your Hearts, and make you an unmeet Habitation for the Lord to dwell in and among. Dear Friends, hear my Brotherly Admonition and Exhortation; for the Lord moved in my Heart to write unto you; and in the Bowels of his kind and tender Love, and Motion of his heavenly Spirit, to stir up your pure Minds and Consciences unto Stedfastness in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; and so much the more that you all be watch∣ful, seeing the times be perilous; for now the Adversary goes about roar∣ing and ravening on the right Hand and on the left, to destroy and devour that which God hath brought forth in you, that so he might regain you too under his Power and Government, and that ye might revolt from the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, that stands in Power and Righteous∣ness, which is come, and hath been of a Truth manifest in great Glory▪ and this is an Hour the Power of Darkness is let loose, to try the Faith and them that dwell upon the Earth; and he is let loose for a Season, blessed are they that hide themselves under the Shadow of the Almighty, and un∣der the Wings of Christ Jesus, who is given for a Redeemer, a Saviour and a Preserver of Men, that the wicked One touch them not▪ and now the Devil rages, because he knows his Kingdom is but short, and but for a small time is like to stand in many, because a stronger then he that rules in the World is come, and hath began to dispossess the strong Man, and bind him, and cast him out, and now he rages and stirs up all the Temptati∣ons within and without▪ and all his Instruments to joyn with him, to make War for him, that he might not rule who is the Heir of all things, and
given for a Leader, and to be the Head of the Body, his Church, in which alone he hath Right to rule, because the Lord of the whole Earth, yea, of Heaven and Earth, hath put all Power into his Hands, to bind and to lose, to bring out of Captivity, and to lead Captivity Captive, that Life and Immortality might again inhabit in the Sons of Men, that Truth and Righteousness might sway, that Mercy and Love might sit on the Throne, that his Salvation might take hold on the Ends of the Earth, and his Pow∣er made known from Sea to Sea, that all that wait for him, and love his Appearance now when he is made manifest, might rejoyce in his Good∣ness and Life, and may be made glad as Zeulon and Nephtali beyond Jordan in the Dayes of old, upon whom sprung up a marvelous Light, that the whole Earth might be filled with his Praise and Glory, that hath been fil∣led with Darkness, Violence and Cruelty in the time of the Devil and An∣ti-christ's Reign, which hath been long and great in the Earth, so that the Hearts of the Sons of Men have been corrupted, and they are gone back∣ward from the Lord, and have been degenerated into a strange Nature, and have brought forth evil and corrupt Fruit, like that of Sodom; and they that do Evil are not at all ashamed, neither do they blush, but are be∣come impudent, through the long Custom of Evil, and hard and impe∣netrable, upon whom the Hammer of the Lord must come, and his In∣dignation be poured forth: But you whom God hath called out of this E∣state into a State of Redemption and Purity, by his Son, the Light of the World, who hath illuminated the Eyes of your Minds, Consciences and Understandings, that you might bear Witness unto him that is true, a Te∣stimony against the World that lyes in Wickedness, and pleads for it, and lives in it, as though it were the Way to Felicity; hold fast your Liberty, hold fast your Faith, hold fast your Hope, hold fast your Testimony, let none take your Crown; and so much the more as you are compassed with Temptations, and the times be perilous, so much the more you had all need to keep near the Lord; for now Father would betray the Son, and Sn the Father, the Mother her Daughter, and the Daughter her Mother and Brother, and Kinsfolk betray one another; and them that exercise Au∣thority would betray, who are not in the Power of God, and through Flattry, and Threats, and fair Promises, and Frowns, and Gifts, and Rewards, and Ease, and Liberty, and the Glory of the World, and wha not▪ to lead your Hearts away from the Lord, and then glory over you, and rejoyce that your Feet should slip, and you fall into the Mire, and Dirt, and gross Abominations, and Pollutions of the World, that lyes in Wick∣edness. Dearly beloved, nver heed none of those things, let not the Philistines put out your Eyes, nor damm up your Wells; for then would▪ they mke you grind like Sampson, and you might perish in the Drou  Look of Moisture, and then your Dayes would be miserable, and  Yers full of Sorrow; for the Lord will perfrm  Promise, and  with them that keep Covenant with him; but if you forsake him in your Harts, in what is made manifest, then he will forsake you, and then  are left to the Mercy of your Adversary, which will be cruel: Therefore  the Pride of Moab, nor the Reviling of the Children of Ammn.  th are uncircumcised in Heart, and the Moth shall et them up a a : Oh! if any draw back from following of the Lamb through Suffring they
will be smitten, and the Lord will have no Pleasure in them; and what will Amaleck say, when Israel turn their Backs in the day of Battel, but where is their God in whom they trusted? and he that brought them forth was not able to deliver them to the End: Oh that such things might never be spoken of now in Gath or Ashkelon, as in the dayes of old, lest the Sons of the Phili∣stines triumph, and the Daughters thereof rejoyce in their Wickedness, and this would make the Hearts of the Israel of God to mourn; this is the day of the Lamb's War indeed in our Age, and a Day of Battel, though his Weapons and his Followers be not carnal, but spiritual; and there is none that goeth to War doth entangle himself, that hath a Purpose to hold out, and is resolved to continue with him in his Sufferings, but will shake off these things that incumber, lest he should not obtain the Victory, and come short of the Promise, Victory & Crown, which all that endure Hardship to the End shall receive. Oh dear Friends, look above all visible things, and stand out of them all, and loose from them, that the Enemy do not en∣snare you; what, is not the Earth the Lord's and the Fulness thereof? and hath not he given the utmost Part of the Earth for a Possession to his Son? What, was not Abraham our Father blessed, when he was faithful, and o∣beyed the Voice of the Lord, and went out of his own Country, he knew not whether? was not the Lord with him whether ever he went, and his Blessing upon him where he sojourned in a strange Land? did not God intreat him kindly in Mesopotamia, and among the Hittites? and was not he loved and feared among his Enemies? Was not John the beloved and faithful Dis∣ciple of Christ banished into Patmos for the Testimony that he held? Was not Shadrach, Mesach and Abednego, Children of the Captivity, cast into the Furnace, and Daniel too among the Lyons, for the Testimony they held a∣gainst the common Worship of Nations, commanded by a Law? Did Christ endure the Death of the Cross, and the Contradiction of Sinners, and con∣demned by the most? Did not the believing Hebrews, who were banished, wander in Sheep-skins and Goat-skins, in Holes, Dens and Caves of the Earth, for the Hope they held, and the Country they looked for? Did not Moses through Faith forsake Pharaoh's Court, and became a Companion of poor Brick-makers in Captivity: A Cloud of Witnesses might be brought, even of them who dyed in the Faith, and yet were not made Partakers of the Promises, who many of them saw not what you have seen, nor heard those things that you have heard, nor enjoyed that which God hath made many Partakers of; and have we not a great Cloud of Witnesses in this our own Age, some who have not loved their Lives unto the Death for the Testimony they received, believed, and held fast unto the End unto Death? have not many dy'd in Prison with hard Usage? have not some been hang'd, and dyed a shameful Death, and finished their Course with Joy and Peace? have not many endured great, hard and long Imprisonment for Years? and are they yet weary? nay, have not many suffered great Spoil of their Goods? and have not they a Reward seven-fold into their Bosom: Oh let the Consideration of these things dwell upon your Hearts, and provoke you unto Suffering and Long-Suffering with Joyfulness, that in the midst of all Tribulations, as it abounds, you may feel (according to the Promise of God) your Joy much more abound, to carry you above it; indeed, now is the time come, and he that will manifest himself to be on the Lord's Side must
suffer, and he that will not, but turns back into the broad Way, and runs with the Herd of Swine into the Sea of common Pollution, must perish there; and indeed there is no Place for halting; If God be God, follow him; if Baal be he, go after him: And therefore let none draw you aside from that you are perswaded of in your Consciences by the Spirit of the Lord, neither to joyn with that you know he disallows, and in the Obedience you will have Peace and Joy; look not at them that draw back, for they go to Perdition, but rather after them that continue faithful, that shall receive Honour, Glory, Immortality and Everlasting Life: In the fresh Heavenly Power of God meet together, and worship him as at other Times, though the De∣cree be gone forth, and the more because you have been therein refreshed, comforted and edified; and let none prswade you from that innocent Du∣ty in worshipping God in his Spirit, and assembling your selves together for the strengthning of one another, for this is the Will of God, and accep∣table in his Sight, as many of you well know; watch and pray, lest you fall into Temptation, and into the Snare of the Wicked One: The God of Heaven and Earth establish all your Hearts, that you may glorifie God in your Generation, and be a sweet and an odorious Smell unto him in Bonds or Liberty, in Life or Death, is the Prayer of him who hath besought the Lord, and is determined so to do on all your Behalf, till the Lord by his Power tread Satan under your Feet, that you may triumph and rejoyce and sing over all in Heavenly Rejoycing and Praises unto God and the Lamb that lives forever and for evermore, Amen. Your Dear Brother in the Patience and Suffering of Christ, who abounds in perfect Love to all the faithful Flock of Christ every where. F. H. From Appleby Goal, the Place of my Rest, where my Dayes and Hours are pleasant unto me, the 4th of the 5th Moneth, 1664.
To Friends at the City of LONDON, and about it, and HARTFORD, and READING. DEar Friends and Brethren, who are called to be Partakers of the Heavenly and Everlasting Inheritance, where Thieves cannot break in and steal, neither take away your Portion, because nothing that defileth or maketh a Lye can enter therein, but is prepared through Christ Jesus for all that believe in him, and hear his Voice, who is given to reveal eternal Life and the Crown of the immortal Glory to all the Heirs of the Promise, who are born of the Word which liveth and endureth for∣ever, by which all things were made, and by which ll that receive it are renewed in their Hearts and Minds unto God, and are preserved in Purity and Holiness unto eternal Life, and upholden in the midst of all Tempta∣tions in Uprightness, that the Enemy prevail not: Grace, Mercy, Sal∣vation, Peace, Power, Love, Joy, Life and Immortality be revealed, multiplyed and encreased amongst you all, saith the God of Life in my Heart unto you all, who are Followers of the Lamb in the Day of Tribu∣lation, when the Lyon roareth out for his Prey, and the Powers of Dark∣ness combine together, to make Opposition and War, and to fill the Earth with Cruelty and Violence, who seek to destroy and make Havock of that which God hath brought forth, and hath determined shall live to bear Wit∣ness to him, and make War, and overcome, and reign with him in Glory everlasting, notwithstanding the Rage of Satan, and the Cruelty of his Followers, and the Madness of the People whom the God of this World hath blinded; yet he hath decreed to exalt his Son upon the holy Hill of Sion, and to make all that take Part with him in this Day of Tryal, Reproach and Blasphemy victorious and Conquerors, of him that hath the Power of Death, the Devil, and Hell, and the Grave, and their Triumph shall no more be; for Mortality shall be swallowed of Life, and he that hath decei∣ved the Nations, and sown Discord in the Earth, and hath set the Nati∣ons at Variance, shall be taken and cast into the Lake of Fire, and all his Subjects shall partake of the Wine of the Wrath of God, and be trodden in the Wine-press of the Wrath, without the holy City, when they that have been faithful unto the End shall stand upon Mount Sion, with their Harps in their Hands, and sing a Song of Triumph, Glory and Redempti∣on, greater then that of Moses in the Day of Israel's Deliverance at the red Sea, when God overthrew both Horse and Rider. Oh dearly beloved, re∣oyce & be glad, triumph and glory in that God, who out of his Everlasting love hath chosen us a peculiar People, to be a Cloud of Witnesses for him in this last Age of the VVorld, and that we are counted worthy to suffer with him, and to fall into many Snares and Sufferings for him; Oh sing, rejoyce and be glad, let not a faint Heart be amongst you, for the Lord is
on our Side, the God of Jacob takes our Part, and will plead our Cause, and uphold us, that our Enemies shall not glory, nor have Cause to boast; for greater is he that is with us and in us, then he that is in the World; and there∣fore we cannot bow nor stoop to Deceit, neither to any false Worship, hy∣pocritical Form, or false God; let us believe in him forever, and taste him forever, and give up our Lives and all we have into his Hands, who hath given us all, that he alone may be over all, and exalted over all, our ever∣lasting living God, God blessed forever. Oh most dearly beloved Friends, you live in my Heart, and to hear of your Valour and Obedience to the Truth makes glad my Soul, and comforts us all on every Side, wherein we rejoyce, and give Glory to God; and though they proceed severely and strictly with you, and make the Battel hot, it's but for a Moment; we have a Share with you, and many are in Bonds here, Men, Women and Chil∣dren, Babes, old Men and VVomen, blind and lame Men, and of all Con∣ditions, as to Age; but all well content and joyful in the Lord, blessed be his Name forever; and indeed your Faith and Obedience, Sufferings and Tryals are come abroad in the Nations, and many thereby are strengthned; we hear also of the Death of many, who are shut up in those nasty Holes, who are taken away from the Evil to come, whose Blood God will require at this Generations Hands, whose Sufferings and Death is precious in the Eyes of the Lord, and the Spirit of Life, which was in them, shall enter into others, and fill them, that God shall not want VVitnesses: The Pow∣er of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Your Dear Brother F. H. Appleby Gool, the 4th of this 8th Moneth▪ 1664.
To all the Beloved Prisoners and Fellow-Sufferers, who have lost your Liberty for Christ's sake in Newgate, and else-where in Bonds about the Ci∣ty of London, and to Friends of Bristol and Hart∣ford, whom the World is not worthy of. MOST greatly beloved in the Lord God everlasting, into whose Bosomes and Hearts my Soul, Life and Spirit is poured forth and joyned unto forever, in the perpetual Covenant of Life, which can never be broken, which will ou Death and Hell▪ and all the Lord's Adversaries, who would not acknowledge the most igh to rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and to have the Power and only Authority in the Hearts and Consciences of Men, which is his only Right and he never yet did give, nor will give this Honour and Glory to any other, though the Devil and Satan; who hath made blind the Nations, hath usurped and laid Claim to that which only belongs to the living God of Heaven and Earth; and he hath long reigned in the Earth, and now his Subjects plead for his usurped Power and Dominion, and are loath to let any Part of it go or fall; but we certainly know the Victory is the Lamb's and his Followers; and though you be in the War and in the Hardship and Suffering, and as killed all the Day long, yet your Bow abides in Strength, and the Lord will co∣ver your Heads, that your Enemies shall not touch your Life, as you keep near the Lord; and glorious will be the Triumph and great the Glory and Victory unto all that continue unto the End in the Hope and Faith which is manifest from our Lord Jesus Christ in your Hearts, by which you have been purified and sanctified▪ and made meet and worthy to be an Habitati∣on for the living God; the Crown of Glory, the Riches of the Kingdom which is without End shall be yours, and your Souls shall forever be bound up in the Bundle of Life, and ye shall shine as Stars of God in the Brightness of his immortal Power forever and ever; and have ye not received an Ear∣nest of the same already? and hath not God doubled and redoubled his Grace upon you and in you from Time to Time? have not you eaten of the Grapes of the Land already, which those which were brought from Escol by the good Spies, in the Land of Israel, were not to be compared unto? let your Hearts be comforted, and do rejoyce in Hope, for the In∣heritance which God hath promised you, who will perform his Promise, and make good that which he hath said▪ notwithstanding all the Oppositi∣on of all the Sons of Amaleck, and you shall see it, feel it▪ and be made Par∣takers of it, taste it, handle it, enjoy it, possess it, even that which shall satisfie your Hearts to the full; only be of a believing Heart▪ & look not out, neither think the Time long nor the Lord slack; for you hitherto have been
provided for in your Way, since you set your Faces towards Sion, and the Lord hath been your Leader, and in the Front, and his Righteousness hath been your Reward, and so will continue with you unto the End; forever true and most faithful we have found him in the Time of need. Most tenderly beloved, the Lord God, our Almighty Rock and Ever∣lasting Refuge, moved in my Heart to greet you with these Lines; for in his Name, Power and holy living Life, which is fresh and powerful in my Heart, do I say, Peace, Good-will, Mercy, Love, Life, Joy and the Encrease of all heavenly and spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus be multiply∣ed among you, to the confirming of you, and establishing of you in the most holy Faith, which is begun, and to the finishing of the blessed Race which you are begun in, and to the strengthning of you by his Almighty Power in all your inward Man, to make War and to overcome, to fight the good Fight of Faith, to the laying hold of eternal Life, and to the ob∣taining of the Crown of Glory, and Diadem of Righteousness, which shall be set upon the Heads of all the Lamb's Followers through Tribulation, which Rubies are not to be compared unto, neither the fine Gold of Ophir; but the hidden Treasure, the durable Riches, the everlasting Peace, the white Rayment, the glorious Clothing of the Lord, the Righteousness of the Saints you shall possess. Oh dearest Hearts, most dearly and entirely beloved of the Lord and me, what might I say, to make all your Hearts glad, even as mine is at this Time, though melted into Tears of Joy for your sake, because the Lord hath made you so freely and willingly to take his Yoak upon you, and to bear his Cross, and to despise the Shame, and to endure the Reproach so willingly: Oh blessed, blessed, blessed from the Lord God forever, I pronounce you in his Name and Power that ever lives, only Potentate, to whom belongs Glory and Honour forever and ever, Amen. Dearly beloved, true it is, as it hath been foretold by his Servants, that they that will live godly in Christ Jesus much suffer Persecution, because of the Enmity, that is in the World, in whom the Love and Peace of God dwells not, although they will make mention thereof in Words, but in Works deny him, as is very evident this Day by them who would not be count∣ed Heathens, but Christians, and yet hate his Life and Appearance; and they are grown so blind and impudent, through the Unbelief that is in them, that they cannot discern the Fruits of the Spirit, where they are brought forth, neither can believe, though it be declared unto them, and as is manifest, would not let God have any Honour or Worship, if it suit not their Blindness or their corrupt Laws, which they make not only to stand by God's Law, but even to cross it and gainsay i, and are so impu∣dent as to say, That to worship God is Crime enough, if they think meet to call it so, whether to Banishment, Death or Confiscation, and yet will say, Cursed is he that parts Man and Wife; and again, Whom God hath joyned together let no Man separate; and Cursed is he that spoils the Fatherless, and doth oppress the Widdow, and the like, and yet cannot see themselves in the very Act. Well, Dear Hearts, although it be your Share to partake of the Heat of the Dragon's Fury, yet you are not alone; and though you be counted unworthy by these corrupt Judges to live in your City, Fami∣ly and your native Land, because you will not deny that which God hath
wrought in you, and manifest to you by his Spirit, and conform to them in their Blood-thirstiness and Cruelty; therefore they by their unjust Se∣tence have pronounced you to be banished out of your native Country, and from your dear Relations, and yet say, it's just; and think that their Statute, which is like a Spiders Web, will be their Shelter which they have made, even as the Jews did against Christ & his Apostles, & the Romans against the primitive Christians, even the same they would do for Mahomet, Baal and Milcham, if there were a seeming Law to be their Shelter: Well, what shall we say, but that they are in Cain's Way, and themselves banished from the Presence of the Lord, and would have all wander as they after the Paths of the Heathen, and after the Customs of the Nations, and the corrupt Traditions of Men, and sport themselves over the Heritage of God; what doth he that sits in Heaven, and they that are in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus? and will not the Lord have them in Derision who mke a Mock of Sin, and rejoyce in Iniquity, as though it were the high Way to Felicity, Well, though the Archers have shot hard at you, and hve come in their Strength against you, yet the Lrd hath preserved you, that you do not break your Ranks; and I feel the Lrd hath put Courge in you, and Wisdom in your Mouthes, to withstand yur Adversaries; and the Lord is on your Side, the Cause is his, the Worship is his, the Glory is his you suffer for; and be assured he suffers with you, and so are his People afflicted with you; and in this be comforted that you are not alone▪ though you be counted Fools, it's for Christ's sake; though reckoned disobedi∣ent, it's because you keep his Commnds; and though you be represen∣ted as vile and evil, and as Transgressors, so was Christ, so have his Saints been in every Generation, since the Devil hath had Dominion in the Hear of the fallen Sons of Adam: What, should you be troubled at thi? ny, rather rejoyce that the Scripture is fulfilled of you in our ge, as Christ prophesied unto his Disciples, That they should speak all manner of Evil false∣ly for my Names sake, and be  out of their Assembly, and hailed before Rulers and Judgment-Seats for my Names sake, but rejoyce and be exceeding glad: And also it cannot but appear unto all People who are moderate, that it's on∣ly his Names sake you suffer for; yea, even the Lips of your Adversaries, and the Words of your Judges do demonstrate no less, that it's not for any Evil at such a Meeting, then it must needs be for your good doing there▪ and to worship God any where, but where they would have you, is reck∣oned Crime enough to banish you: Oh have not they bewrayed them∣selves? and will not this enter into other Hearts, not yet concerned, to con∣sider? O surely yea, and the Devil and his persecuting Enemies shall loose by it, and the Truth shall be a Gainer. Well, Dearly Beloved▪ you know, even as the Gospel was preached to others before, and as it came unto us, and as we did receive it, so it was declared unto you in all Simplicity; and you have not been beguiled by it, nor the Messengers of it, of whom some are at Rest, and fallen asleep, and their Life and Spirit is with you and a∣mong you: It hath been told you, that all must be given up, and all must be denyed, and the Cross must be born, and all must dye to the World, be∣fore they could receive Christ, or be made alive unto him, and before the Enmity could be slain, or the Peace witnessed, which you have found true; and happy are you that have believed, and keep in the Faith: And now
beloved, though our Adversaries think this is a loosing time, and this is the Way to bring us and Truth, in which we have believed, into Disesteem; I tell you the Truth in the Word of God unto you; this is the Time of gaining unto many, and shall be unto more; and this is the Way the Lord hath suffered to come pass (Persecution) that your Faith and Hope may be tryed from Hypocrites, and that it may be made known unto others, that you possess something that others possess not, that makes you willing∣ly and cheerfully deny that which otherwise might be precious unto you, if could be enjoyed in the Truth; and them that have lifted up themselves against us, may see and be convinced of their Weakness, and that they overprized that which now in this Day stands in no stead, and have under∣valued that which is able to carry them that truly believe through all Dif∣ficulties and Distresses, as it hath done you hitherto, blessed be the Lord, and will confirm you and establish you forever: When they had crucifi∣ed the Lord of Life, they thought they had brought all to an End; but then his Life, Power and Glory was more and more manifest, and Thou∣sands more did believe; and they thought to have stiffled all in Jerusalem, and then it came to be preached to all Nations: though they think to dam up the Way of Truth, and stiffle it here and us; I tell you, nay, the Fame thereof shall reach to the Ends of the Earth, and the Sound thereof unto the VVorld's End, and Salvation through it shall be known from Sea to Sea; we have a glorious Effect thereof in our own Day, as ever was in any Age, and in so short a Time, as I may truly say, as the Prophet said, The Lord hath wrought a Work upon the Wheels, and hath done it through weak poor Instruments, that his Arm and Power might only appear, and that he alone might have the Glory; and therefore be of believing Hearts, and look not at the Blackness and Darkness of the present Time, but before it; and let none trouble you, neither be ye troubled at the Words or VVri∣tings of any evil Spies or discontented Minds, for that would weaken; some Papers I have seen of that Nature abroad, which the Life of God judg∣eth: And moreover, if any come unto you with any new Doctrine, try it in the Light your selves, before you joyn to it; or if any come with a Shew of Humility, and tell you of another Appearance, or in another Way, then through the Light of the World, and gather not to you, but seek to make Dissension and Discord, and to beget a Dislike in you, either of the Truth or Persons of any who have believed, receive not that into your Hearts, Moreover, you know how many have doted about needless Disputes, and have busied Friends Minds about Trifles, and have begot a Heat in them, and have been hurried up and down in the Wind a while, and all hath er∣ed in nothing: Moreover, if any come and tell you, that they who have preached the Word of Truth among you, would reign over you, and u∣surp Authority over you, and seek Dominion, mark, for such are unsub∣jected Spirits; for I know the Lord bears Record, and be you also Record, that they which have laboured among you, have not preached themselves, But Christ, and have not sought yours, but you, and the Good of all your Souls; I have heard such Murmuring sometimes of the Sons of Corah a∣gainst some who were faithful Men, who are fallen asleep, and against some living; who so have done, their End hath not been good: But I can say unto you with a clear Conscience, and of them who are deceased, and them
that are living, as Gideon said to the Men of Ephraim, when they said he should reign over them, he answered and said, The Lord shall reign over you, even I speak of all the ancient Brethren, who have laboured and suffered in the Work of the Lord until now; I know they only sought that the Lord might reign in you and over you, even as he doth at this Day, for which I thank the Lord; and I am satisfied hitherto in what is done, and I have my Reward, and it's with me: O dear Friends, this I speak unto you, that you might abide in Love, and keep in Unity one among another, even as you did see us one to another at all Times: Oh dear Hearts, dwell in Love, in Meekness, speak all the same Thing, be kind to one another, and tender, and easie to be entreated one of another, and be pitiful and mer∣ciful one to another, and bear and forbear one another for Christ's sake, who hath born your Infrmities in Times past, be like minded; and truly I speak it, your Comfort, your Faith, Obedience, Suffering and Self-de∣nyal thus far is come abroad, and hath strengthned many, and hath made them willing to be Companions with you in Life or Death; their Prayers are for you, their Praises are of you, their Blessings are with you, and so is mine, who am the Lord's and yours in Life or Death; and if we shall not see one another any more in these Earthly Tabernacles, God's Heaven∣ly Will be done: And these Lines I send unto you, as the best Thing I have to greet you with my whole Heart, which is as tender as a sucking Child to you all; Farewel, Farewel, everlastingly in the Life of Christ Jesus, in which I write unto you, Farewel. Your Dear Brother and Companion in Tribulation. F. H. Send a Copy of this to Bristol and Hartford, and else-where where any are sentenced.
THE Great Case OF TYTHES AND Forced Maintenance ONCE MORE REVIVED: THE True state thereof enquired into before the Law, under the Law, among the Jews; likewise under the Gospel, the true Ministers of Christ their Allowance shown; likewise in the Corruption of time since Christ, how Tythes have been introduced, wherein Antiquity is searched, and the Judgment of the Fathers of the Church in several Ages produced, besides the Scripture it self examined; in all which is clearly proved Tythes and forced Maintenance are no Gospel-maintenance; the Scrip∣tures answered, divers Arguments confuted, and Objections answered, which are brought by the Ministry of this last Age. Also the Institution and Division of Parishes, and their Rise, which are published for the Benefit of all who desire that Gospel-Order might be established again in all the Churches of Christ. F. H.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Impartial Reader, THou hast here recommended once more unto thy View what from Time to Time, and from Age to Age hath been not only the grand Cause of invocating Councils, but also hitherto even the Ground of great Dispute and Controversie, if thou ths Treatise do with a single Eye perue, and ballance the same in just and equal Scales, thou wilt find it of so muh Validity, as will poise thy Judgment to give Censure, that this  a clear & true Demonstration of the Matter in Hand; if thou be serious in thy View, sincere in thy Heart, and single in thy Mind, as willing to know the Radix, Rise and Ground of the Matter here∣in handled, then wilt thou find th the very Key which will aright, and may with∣out Scruple open unto thee and demonstrate the very certain, infallible and sure Testimony, as well of ther Original Rise, Growing, Begetting, Constitutng, Setling, Confirming, Upholding and maintaining of them, viz. Tythes; all which that thou may'st be clearly informed, may'st thou find as by Step and Step herein traced, thou wilt find their Original; as first how Tenths were given before the Commandment was given forth to the Jews; thou wilt also find their grow∣ing, and their Institutions thou may'st clearly see, and wherefore they were so in∣stituted; thou wilt find them when confirmed, and when corrupted, and thou wilt find them when lawful, and when not lawful; thou wilt find them when they were to be payed, and thou wilt find a Time when they ought not to be payed: And because the Ministers of our Age, as we have daily from them, do vaunt and boast themselves of the Orthodox Fathers of their Church, therefore wilt thu find by a narrow Search and a single Eye in the reading hereof, unto which I do advise thee, and that in Patience and Sobriety, thou wilt, as one unbiassed ballance the same; here may'st thou have their Opinions and Judgments also, and their ancient Fa∣thers quoted thou wilt have at large their own Words; all which, as by this Trea∣tise is intended to inform thy Mind, and be as a President how they are now in this our Age apostatized from what they were, and now at length become as Usurpati∣on or abused; and for thy more full and perfect Understanding how they were con∣tinued and imposed, thou may'st also read the Orders and Decrees of many great Councils, their Opinions, Judgments and Impositions, from Time to Time in ma∣ny Ages past; thou wilt see the Testimony of the holy Martyrs and their Verdict; and last of all the Scriptures discussed, the Arguments confuted, the Questions an∣swered and the Objections razed, which the Ministers of our Dayes do produce, or in Times past have been produced, as the Basis or Ground from which they infer
and lay their seeming fair Foundation, these thou wilt all see sufficiently, clearly and evidently confuted, their Structure defaced, their painted Building demolish∣ed, their Foundation unbottomed, and they themselves, if their old Root of Co∣veousness were not so strongly centured in them, might be convinced; there is not one Stone left, but all is overturned, and the Bottom viewed, that thereby this Babel's Foundation may now be thrown down at the last, which hath had so many Batteries and Assaults against it, tha as it is the last, so it is indeed a weigh∣ty Piece, which if Truth might have Place (and Error and Deceit, which since the Apostacy is crept in, once rooted out) then needed there not another of this Na∣ture; for this indeed doth bolt the Door, and if sensibly felt, arightly understood, and the Truth of it assented unto, then would there be no Entrance; but though all this may not take hold with the worldly Priest, yet herein have I Hopes, that Truth therein being so sufficiently demonstrated, may take Place and Footing in every honest Reader, so far as that he may not only be informed, but convinced, and not only so, but being convinced by this which doth so candidly manifest the same, he may in the Zeal of his Heart own , and stand in the Defence thereof, vindicating the just Cause thereof▪ and witness with his Seal that this is true, which if unbiassed he peruse, it doth evidently appear unto me he cannot but own, as he is willing and aminded to own Truth: One Thing more is also in this Book inserted, to wit, the Sufficiency of Allowance to the Ministers of Christ in Gospel-dayes, according to the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles; and it were well if Magistrates and Superiors would weigh it, and that they would with the infallible Eye of pure Judgment labour to discern the same, lest they decree and uphold that which in this Case they ought not, to wit, Tythes, lest the Lord be an∣gry for their so doing, it being so repugnant to the Testimony of Truth. And so let every honest Reader weigh, and diligently and seriously consider, whe∣ther he ought to uphold Truth or Error, Light or Darkness; I assume he will say, that he ought to uphold and maintain the Truth, and to stand by it and for it, then let me ask him a Sober Question in the Sobriety and Calmness of Spirit, and I de∣sire that in the Coolness of the Day he may answer it, according to the Witness of his Conscience; my Question is this, whether he doth not believe after that he hath had a serious View of this Piece, that he meets with such valid Arguments, such Clearness of Demonstration as may or doth convince him, that the Imposition of Tythes now in Gospel-dayes, is absolutely out of the Doctrine of Truth, and ought not so to be? and if so convinced, whether he ought not to side and adjoyn with that of God in his Conscience, in a Testimony of this Nature, and so partake with Truth, which is a duty ought to be and is incumbent upon every Christian Man's Heart, which is the desire of him who is a Well-willer to Sion's Prosperity. E. G.
THE Great Case OF TYTHES AND Forced Maintenance ONCE MORE REVIVED SInce the Seat of Anti-christ hath been set, and his Throne Exalted so high as it now is, and he himself exalting himself above all that is cal∣led God; and not only so, but he hath laboured to make void the Laws and Commands of the Lord and his Christ concerning his Church, and like∣wise, to set up his own Institutions and Commandments, which are repug∣nant and eontrary to the commands of Christ, and the Practice and Ex∣ample of the Apostles, and Holy Martyrs of old, who laid down their Lives, for the Testimony of that Doctrine and Faith, which they had recei∣ved of the Lord Jesus Christ the Saviour of Man-kind, and knowing the Practice and the examples of Christ and his Apostles, and holy Witnesses they continued in their Doctrine to hold forth still the same in Purity, and to keep it unviolated even to their Death, that they might shew themselves forth to be followers of their Master Christ Jesus, and to abide in his Do∣ctrine, and walk according to the Primitive Example, notwithstand∣ing all the Opposition, and contradiction of Anti-christ and his Followers, which hath been great through many Ages, since the Nations have drank, and the Kings of the Earth of the Wine of the Whore's Fornication, and the way that Anti-christ and the false Church have had to exalt themselves, hath been by Policy, Craft, and Deceit, in perswading the Nations, that that which was once given, and offered freely unto the Lord for his Works sake, is now made of necessity, and claimed as Divine right to them and their Ministers, notwithstanding both the Doctrine, the Worship, and Practice be altogether inconsistent with the Primitive times, truly so called. But seeing the Ministry of the false Church, who abode not in the Do∣ctrine of Christ, (but hath violated it, and now hath turned against the Saints, the Ministers and Seed of the free Woman) hath not had Power by vertue of their Doctrine to work upon the Hearts and consciences of Peo∣ple, so as to open them and make them freely willing to minister earthly
things to their Ministers, because indeed most People in the Nations  not perswaded that they have ministred Spiritual things. And therefore the false Church hath perswaded the Powers of the Earth, who have drunken of her Cup, that is their duty to force and compel all to give  her and her Ministers, as of divine right, whether People be perswaded  no, that they are sent of God, and make the Scripture a Clk to cover their force or Injunctions, and produceth the Example of the  Christians for a cover, though they do nothing at all of the Work of the Apostles or Ministers of Christ in converting of Souls, but rather Mini∣string their own Inventions, and vain Traditions of men, instead of the true Ordinance of Christ, yet however Maintenance they must and will have though they do none of Christ's Work, and are so Imperious and Arro∣gant as to reckon Tythes the tenth part of the encrease of the Earth what∣soever, and of every man's labour, and Merchandize, yet this they would perswade all People is by divine right, and a Gospel-institution; And this hath been received by many in our last Generation, whose minds have been darkned with the cloud of Ignorance, for a Truth; and for any to with∣stand or deny it, hath been counted Error and Heresie, no less then a curse from Mystery-Babylon, did come upon all such as did Gain-say, also some with loss of lives, as Hereticks upon this account, and in this last Age many Imprisoned for divers years even until Death, and many have suffer∣ed great Spoiling of their Goods ten or twenty Fold more then that which they pretended due, and yet all this People must believe is Gospel institu∣tion and divine right. The consideration of which thing hath been an inducement unto my Heart of late, to make a true and a narrow search of the Lawfulness or unlawfulness of this particular thing, not only enquiring the true State of Tythes amongst the Jews, but also in the Primitive time, and amongst the ancient Fathers of the Church, whose Doctrine hath been approved among the most faithful Members of the Church of Christ downward until this last Age. First of all to speak of the tenths which were given before the Commandment was given forth to the Jews, Abraham in his return from redeeming his Nephew Lot, after the Pursuit of Chedlaoer the King of Elam, with the rest of the Kings oyned with him, having recovered his Nephew Lot with all his substance▪Gen. 14.9. & 11, 12, 13. and all the substance of Sodom & Gomorrah was met by Melchi∣zedeck King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, who blessed Abraham, and brought forth Bread and Wine, and gave unto  and to the rest who were with him▪ unto whom Abraham gave the Tythes of all the Spoil,Gen. 18.20. Hebrews 7.4. that he had taken from the aforesaid Chedorlaomer, and the rest of the Kings▪ Chry∣stome understands the Text only to e of the Spoils, whereof Abraham made Melchizedeck a partaker, by giving him the first fruts of his Martial performance. And Jerom often stiling it, Decimas spoliorum pra and Victoria, that is, the tenth of the Spoil of the prey, and of the Victor. And this is made one of the main basis or Ground for probation of Tythes due before the Law, which is but only a free gift of Abraham to Melchize∣deck of the Spoil he had taken; and that, but once that we read of; take notice of that: not of his Familys Labours or industries, but of the spoil
of what he had taken. And it is very clear, that it was a Volunry thing and freely given; and there is a good shew of reason in it, that it was by Way of gratitude unto Melchizedeck & to re∣quite his kindness,Gen. 14.18. who brought forth Bread and Wine unto his Souldiers after a great Pursuit; which refreshed both him and his Souldiers, which was a great sign and a courtesie; if Abraham had not given the tenth of the Spoil, he had not sinned; so an Example of this naure nnot be a binding Law to future Generations: for if the Ministry  is last Age will make this a binding rule, we may as well requie of them  Wine of every Priest for our selves and whole Families, and every Of∣ficer may require Bread and Wine of every Parish-Priest for himself and all his Souldiers, for the one example is as binding as the other, both of them being Voluntary. The next passage that seems to have any weight in it about Tythes, is Jacob's Vow, This Stone, saith he,Gen. 28.22. which I will set up as a Pillar shall be God's House, and of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. This was an extraordinary occasion, and more then an ordinary ap∣pearance from God unto Jacob before, when he went from his Father to Haran, to take a Wife of his own Kindred. And the Lord appeared unto him as he laid his Head upon a Stone,Gen. 28.13, 14, the Night being come, and said unto him, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the Land whereon thou liest to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed, and it shall be as the Dust of the Earth, and thou shalt spread a∣broad to the East, West, North and South, and in thee and thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed.Ver. 19. He called the name of the place Bethel, viz. the House of God, because of the Glori∣ous appearance of God, and of his great Promise made unto him, which he did believe, as may be seen more at large in the whle Chapter. So Ja∣cob's Heart being opened and filled fall of Joy and Faith, he pro∣mised again unto the Lord, and vowed a Vow saying,Ver. 2. If God will be with me, and keep me in this way that I go so that I cme again to my Father's House in Peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and of all that he giveth me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee: which he performed after twenty Years, as Josephus saith in these Words, by Oering unto the Lord the th of all his substance which he had got  rar, after that he returned unto that place where God did appear unto him, and made his Promise unto hi; then Ja∣cob performed his Promise unto the Lord. But unto whose Hand he gave this tenth, appears not, for  the Priest hood was solely annd to the first-brn f Families,  well with the Sanctifying of the first-born commanded in Egypt; hence it comes that Melchisedeck is commonly reputed to be Shem,Exod. 13.1. the eldest Son Noah, but that is Cntrovetl, and so I shall let it pass. But it is thought by some that Jacob payed his vow unto the Hands of Isaac his Father, and gave unto him the tenth of what he had got∣ten, as being the chief of the Family then living, and a Priest also, but as is said before, these two instances of Abraham and Jacob are only Volun∣tary and free Gifts, as a return of thankfulness unto the Lord, the
having got a great Victory over his Enemies, and he other having received a great assurance of the Lord of his Promise and Blessing with him, did bind them to it. But we do not read that they were at all oblieged by any special Commandment, as to give so much, though 'tis granted, that after Jacob had vowed he was oblieged, but these are no binding Examples unto future Generations, especially them that pretend they are Ministers of the second Covenant, the Gospel: there is no other mention made of Tythes before Moses his time, unless some will dream, as they will needs do, that the Levitical Law was written before the Creation. Yet some of the Ancients seem to have observed a respect, had to the quantity of what was as a part of the yearly encrease Consecrated in those times of the Lord: & that even in the first memory to Sacrifice, Cain's Offering was not regarded they say,Tertul Lib. ad∣vers. Judoeos alii tm Sepius Gen. 4.6. because he did not well or a∣right divide what he offered, as if some quota pars were at that time required. But this reason was from no other cause then the mis∣translation of the Text in the story of Cain, where the Jews read it, If thou offer well, but not divide aright, hast thou not Sinned? be quiet; unto which agrees the Text of the Septuagint, when as the true Translation out of the Original is thus, Why is thy Countenance cast down? if thou do well, art thou not accepted? if thou do Evil, Sin lyeth at the Door. But most agreeable to the Text, is that he gave with a grudging mind, and not of the best and first of his Fruit, for it is expresly said, that Abel brought of his first Fruits, but Cain only of his Fruit of the Ground. Abel giving then unto the Lord a portion of the best, the other not regarding of what worth his Offering were.Ambros Lib. de Cain and Ael Chap. .1.6. So here is not any cer∣tain quantity noted, but the mind of the Spirit of him that offered, and the quality of the Oblation or gift. So the chief thing to be noted from this is, That Cain was an Hypocrite, and offered with that mind and Spirit with which he slew his Brother, and so his Sacrifice was not accepted. But this is no Plea or Ground at all for the Payment of Tenths as due. Tythes were never commanded to be payed by the Lord to any,Galat. 3.17. but Israel, whose Law was given forth four hundred thirty Years after the Promise, as saith the Apostle. Nei∣ther were they ever payable but by the Jews, after they came to the Land of Canaan, and to Levi's Tribe only, and to the Jewish Priests,Levit. 18, 4. Ezek. 45.13. that had no Inheritance allotted them by the Lord of all the Land of Canaan, or beyond Jordan, but only the tenths, according to the command of the Lord, for the Of∣f of the Priesthood, and for the service of the Tabernacle. How among the Jews Tythes were payed, or judg'd to be due, the year∣ly encrease being either Fruit of Ground, or Cattel; in the Law of Fruits of the Ground,. 23.19. Lev. 23.10. Num. 5.20. first, the first of the first ripe were offered to the Priest in ears of Wheat, Figs, Barley Graps, Olives, Pomegranates and Dates, of these seven only the first Fruits were payed, in what quantity the owner would. Next the Theruma or heave-offering, or first Fruits of Corn▪ Wine, Oyl,
and Fleece, and the like, were given to the Priests, but it being not determined by Moses,Deut. 18.4. of what quaiy this Offering should be, the Jews anciently judg'd it to be e∣nough at the fiftieth part, but so, that no necessity was that every one should pay so much; he that payed a sixtieth part was discharged, but me of better devotion payed the fortieth. The Offerings spoken of in Ezekiel, This is the Theruma that ye shall offer,Ezek. ch. 45.11. the sixth part of an Ephah of an Homer of wheat, or of Barley; It is the same as if he had said ye shall offer the sixtieth part of an Homer, for an Ephh, being the same measure with a Bath, that is near our common Bushel; and after this offered to the Priests, every kind be∣ing given in Season; out of the rest were taken Tythes, which are best di∣vided into the first and second time. The first Tythes were payed to the Levites out of the re∣mainder at Jerusalem,Numb. 12.21. Num. 18.2, 8. and out of this tenth received by the Levites, the Levites payed another Tenh to the Priests, which is called the Tythes of the Tythes for this is to be taken notice of, that Priests receied Tythes of Husband-men but now them that are no Levites neither of Aarons Priesthood they take Tythes of Husband-men, and wre it is not offered reely, they take it Violently and by force; so now in these latter dayes, in the Apostacy, the late Priests from that Example, have payed Tythes to the Pope, being as they reckon him, chief-Vicar upon Earth. And also now since the Popes Supremacy hath ceas'd with us in England, a late Law hath been made,Stat. 26. Hen. 8. to pay the first-fruits to the Crown;Deut. 14.23. Levit. 27.30, 31. yet notwithstanding the Possessor was not to spend the rest, till he had taken out of these nine other Tythe, which he was the first two Years to carry to Jeru∣salem in kind, or to Convert it into Money, adding a fifth part of the value; after these tenths thus disposed of, the remainder was every way prepared fit for common use of the Husband man. Some make a third Tythe, but that was only the Tythe of the third year, after the first was payed of every year, which was laid up by the Husband-man within his own Gates, for the Leite that is within his Gate, the stranger, the Fatherless & the Widdow, & not carryed to Jerusalem & this Tythe bestowed every hrd Year was called he Poor man's Tythe & that third year the second years Tythe ceased to be payed at Jerusalem: so then every third year the Levites at the Temple received not their second Tythe at their Feasts, but according to the Law, it was spent at home in the Gates of the Husband-man; neither doth the second Tythe, and the poor mans Tythe differ in substance, but only in Circumstance,  place where the bestowing was makes only the differ∣ence, as the Septuagint Translates it.Deut. 16.12. When thou hast end∣ed the Tythe of all the Fruits of thy Ground, in the third Year, the second Tythe thou shalt give to the Levite, and to the stranger, &c. But after the second Temple was destroyed, and the dispersion of the Jews, then the Laws of first Fruits. Offerings, and Tythes with them cea∣sed; for their Doctors determin'd, that regularly, or according to the Law, no Inhabitants but of the Land of Israel were to pay any.
First, Because they then wanted their Priesthood and Temple.Rabbi Ben maje∣mon in jad chaz chahast de Theru∣mah ch. 1 and mis 5. Kotzi inp x. cept. 133. 2 Chro. 31. Mal. 3. &c. Neh. 13. Rambam de dec∣mis, ch. 9. Secondly, Because the Law did restrain the Paym thereof to Cannan, and herein they all agree. Also Eusebius agrees with the Jewish Rabbin herein That Tythes were only limited to the Land of Israel. How the Payment of these tenths was either observed or discontinued, partly appears in the Scrip, and partly in the institution of more trusty Overseers in their great Sanhedrim, or Court of 70 Elders, wherein they agreed, that the Overseers should be chosen of more ho∣nest men. By which hath been said, may be perceived the state of the Jews Ty∣thing, by the Commandment of God, and likewise the Judgment of their own Rabbins and Doctors of the Law, which gives a clear Judgment of the Practice, according as was in use, or exercised among them, and all do agree, that they, by a due right, did belong to the Aaronical Priesthood and to the Levites, and other officers in the Temple and Tabernacle, and for the Service there, according to God's appointment, for bearing the Tabernacle and setting it up, and for serving Aaron and his Sons; and for the better ordering of things, they were divided into three parts, to wi the Levites, as the Coathites, Gershonites, and the Marrarites, and these did receive the tenths of the People, and gave to the Priests their part, which belonged to them according to the Law of God in that Covenant; and after the Sons of Aaron grew and mutiplyed, then the Priests were di∣vided into 24 ranks or courses to serve at the Temple, of which our e∣hends Deans and Chapters take their example, or imitation, so to serve by their turns at Cathedrals, as they are called, or else from the Church of Rome; but the latter I am rather enclin'd to believe, because there was  such name of any Minister among the Jews, neither in the Primitive Church truly so called; but the Priests of Aaron gave attendance to Exe∣cute their Office, and to Burn incense as their turn and  came.Luke 1. And hereupon Zacharias is said to be of the course  Abba. The Levites that were singers were also divided into  anks or courses of which I believe the present Quiristers of Singers,  Surplies▪ men do have their imitation, and bring the Levtes for proof  Christ. But how these things do agree with the Primitive Practice of Christ his Apostles and Ministers, and the Churches planted by them , day, is easily seen in that which is written in sundry places of the New Te∣stament, so called; and how it comes to pass that they which  another Priest-hood, and to be Ministers of Christ, should receive the tenth of all clean and unclean Beasts, as Pigs, Geese, Eggs, Fowls, Tur∣neps, Wood, and Faggots for the Fire; all which things we do not find mentioned, but some of them forbidden to be offered unto the Law, and yet they pretend to be Bishops and Elders of the Christian Church; so that it seems they cannot distinguish of the time, nor yet of the ministra∣tion;
for if so, then they would be ashamed to lay claim to Aaron's tythes, and the Levites, and yet do none of their Work, which is contrary to all Reason, Truth, and Equity, for that was given to them that had no Portion among their Brethren in the Land, but these Bishops, Presbyters and Priests, have their Inheritances among their Brethren, and besides, have a great part of some Counties and Diocesses for their revenue, and their inferiour Officers tythes of all things, yea, of such things as was ne∣ver at all tythable in the Law, as is said before: so what damnable deceit and Hypocrisie is this! is it any other but the Popes Yoak; an absolute A∣postate for hundreds of years? and must this be received as Apostolick Do∣ctrine and Practice, and enjoyned? O! for shame, let it never be made mention amongst them that do call themselves Ministers of Christ, neither any who do profess themselves to be Christians, who dare not stand to Christ's Doctrine and allowance in respect of their Mainte∣nance. But in the fulness of time God raised up another Priest,Heb. 7.16. Heb. 7.13. Christ Jesus, who was not of the Tribe of Levi, neither made after a carnal Commandment, as the first Priest was, nei∣ther was he Consecrated after the order of Aaron, for he pertained to ano∣ther Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Altar, viz. to Judah, he obtained a more excellent Ministry, and of a greater and more perfect a tabernacle, not of the former building, he being the Sum and Substance of all shadows under the first Covenant, hath thereby put an End to the first Priest-hood, with all its shadows and carnal Ordinances and changing the Priest hood which had a command to take Tythes of their Brethren,Heb. 7.12. v. 18. there was a necessity also of the change of the Law, and a disannulling likwise of the Com∣mandment which went before. Now after Christ Jesus was manifest, the end of the Law for Righte∣ousness to them that do believe, the End of the Covenant, first Priesthood Tabernacle, Temple, Tythes, Offerings, Oblations, and in a Word, all the Worship of the Jews, and all their Shadows, Types, and Figures, and representations. All the Sabbaths, Fasts, Feasts, and their divers wash∣ings, and Purifyings, which all were but as Shadows of things to come; and he was the sum and Substance of them all, and ended them all; and whosoever will plead a necessity of all or anyone of the former things men∣tioned in the first Covenant that was faulty, Christ profits him nothing, and he denyes the Faith of Christ and his Apostles, and Ministers; for Circumcision was once commanded of God, and as real a Type as any o∣ther, and yet they that would needs hold it up, after the Sub∣stance was manifest, to wit, Christ Jesus,Gal. 5.2. Rom. 4.11. the Apostle Paul concludes that Christ profits them nothing, though he else∣where calls it the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith unto A∣braham, which he had before he was Circumcised. The like I also say of all the former Ordinances which pertained to the first Priest-hood and Co∣venant, and holds them up as of necessity, denyes the Faith of Christ, and Christ profits them nothing, and do make themselves thereby as debtors to the whole Law: and he that fails in the breach of one is guilty of all. Therefore of how much necessity is it, for them that do profess Christ and the Faith that was delivered to the Saints, to stand fast in that liberty where∣in
Christ hath made them free, and not to be entangled with the Yoak of Bondage, but to keep the Ordinances and Commands of Christ unviola∣ted; for that they lay claim to Tythes, and would cause us to pay Tythes,Gal. 6.13. they themselves do not keep the Law, but would constrain us, that they might glory in our Flesh, and would confound the Ordinances of the first and second Covenant together, with∣out putting any difference to the time and ministration unto which they did belong. The Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who were made par∣takers of the Divine Nature, and of the Word of Reconciliation, did not look back, nor draw People back to the former Ordinances of the Jews, and their Priest-hood, but testified against them, their Temples, Fasts, Feasts and New-Moons, and for these things, Paul, and Stephen, and divers others, suffered great Persecution; and Christ the everlasting high Priest, though he was the Son of God, the Heir of all things, and the first born of every Creature, and the Bishop of Souls, though he was the Lord of all, he made himself of no reputation, nor did not lay claim to the Posses∣sions of the World, but said, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of man hath not whereon to lay his Head. He laid no claim to Tenths, nor Offerings, nor Oblations, neither to Lands, where he travelled in the Work of the Father, though he laboured for the con∣version of Souls in divers places, as the true Bishop thereof. He laid no claim to any such Places as to be his Diocess, neither did look for any gifts and rewards from any place, but as he was sent of the Father, and was the free gift of Righteousness, he ministred freely: and like∣wise when he sent out his Disciples,Matth. 10.7. Matth. 10.8. ver. 11. and gave them Com∣mission to Teach all Nations and Disciple them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, he said unto them, As my Father sent me, so send I you. And again, Freely you have received,Matth. 10.10. Luke 10.7. freely give. And again, Take with you neither Staff, nor scrip, nor Money, nor Brass in your purses; but into what House or City ye enter, enquire who therein is worthy, and abide ye there till you go thence. And whatsoever is set before you, that do you eat and drink, for the Labourer is worthy of his meat. And though he sent them out, as is before said, when they returned again he said unto them, Lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nay. Though they were sent out as Sheep among Wolves, yet they preaching the Word of the Kingdom freely, and turned People to Christ, the new and living Way, whereby there Hearts were opened to Minister unto them, which serv'd for their necessity in the Work of the Gospel, they did not desire or require any Stipend, Sallary, Augmentation, or settled Maintenance, but were Ministred unto them only by them who had believed their report, and were made Partakers of Spiritual things; they never complained of want, nor never had any cause, nor did not give over Preaching of the Gospel be∣cause they had not settled Maintenance, like our latter Generation of Priests, who if their Maintenance do cease, their Gospel ceaseth, which demonstrates only they minister for Hire and filthy Lucre; and so are out of the Apostles Doctrine and Practice; for the Apostles they often denyed that which was freely proferred them, lest they should make the Gospel of Christ chargeable, and their Work of no Effect. Here was no Tythes
spoken of, that we read on, commanded or commended, either to the Jews or Gentiles who believed, in the Age of the Apostles, that we find mentioned either in Scripture, or any other Ancient Records. And after many Christians were converted unto the Faith, such was the liberality and bounty of believers in the Beginning of Christianity, that their bounty to the Evangelical Priesthood was so large, as that it far exceeded what the tenth could have been; or if you look to the first of the Apostles times, then the unity of Heart among them about Jerusalem was such, that all was in common, and none wanted;Acts 4.34. And as many as were possessors of Lands and Houses, sold them, and brought the price of that which was sold, and laid it at the Apostles Feet, and it was distributed to every man according as he had need. So the whole Church both Ministers and Believers liv'd in common of that which was freely brought in and ministred for the Service of the Saints; so likewise the Church gathered by Mark at Alexandria in Egypt, followed the same pra∣ctice as the Believers at Jerusalem. And Philo Judoeus saith, That in many other Province▪ the Believers lived together in societies. And in the Church at Antioch, Galatia and Corinth the Saints possessed every man his own Estate; where the Apostle Ordained, that a weekly Offering should be made for the Saints by every Man according to the ability of his Estate,Acts 11.29. Vide Ockam in Opera 90. du∣um, ch. 107. and this was put into the hands of the Deacons of the Churches whereby the Poor was relieved, and other necessary Ser∣vices supplied in the Church of God; and this continued for that Age. The next Age Monethly Offerings were made or given among the Saints by devout and able Christians, the Over-seers appointed by the Church were to receive it,Vide Synod. ianger. can. 66. and carefully and cha∣ritably dispose them, acccording to the necessity of the Saints, for Propagating of Christianity; as the Mainte∣nnce for the Brethren in their Travels for the Service of God, seeding, Cloathing, and burying their poor Brethren, relieving of Widdows and Orphans, and Persons condemned to labour in the Mettal-mines, or to Prison, or Banishment into Isles by the Heathen Emper∣ors; and these free Offerings were never exacted,Tertul. his A∣polog. ch. 39.2.42. or o∣therwise, witness Learned Tertullian, that lived about 200 Years after Christ, as it appears; his Words are That every mns gift is to be every Month, or as he can, or  the manner he will, and  he is able, so is he to give; for, says he, no Man is to be forced, but what as he confers of his own accord. And further, he upbraids the Gentiles with the Charity and Piety of the Christians; he saith, Whatsoever we have in the Treasury of our Churches, it  raised by Taxation, as though we put men to ransme their Religion, but eve∣ry man once a Moneth, or when he pleaseth himself, gives what he thinks good, & it is not bestowed in Vanity, but fr the Maintenance of the Poor, and the like ne∣cessary service aforesaid; and this way of Contribution continued until the great Persecution of Maximinian & Dioclesian▪ about the Year 340. as Eusebius, Tertullian,Offerings continu∣ed 340. Years. Cyprian, Origen, and others do witness.
Also about this time, some Lands were given to the Church by them that believed,Eusebius lib. 4. ch. 22. and the revenue thereof was di∣stributed as other free Gifts were by the Deacons and Elders, for the afore-mentioned uses, but the Bishops or Ministers med∣led not with them. Origen saith, It is not lawful for any Minister to possess Lands given to the Church for his own use. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage,Cyprian in his Epist. 37, 34, 36. about the year 250. also testifies the same, & shews how the Church maintains many Poor, & that her own diet was sparing and plain, and her Expences full of Frugalty. Prosper also saith, That a Minister able to live of himself ought not to desire any thing to be given unto him, and he that receiveth it, doth it not without great Sin. The Council of Antioch, Anno 340.The Council held at Antioch, Anno 340. finding that much fault had been among the Deacons and Elders, to whom it properly did belong to distribute the Offerings and free gifts where there was need, which they detain∣ing for their own covetous Ends, the Council did ordain, That the Over∣seer or Bishop might distribute the goods, but required that they should take no part thereof to themselves, nor the use of the Priest, using the Apostles words, having Food and Raiment, be ye therewith content. Chrysost. Hom. 11.Chrysostome Homil. 11. in Aa notes, and he lived a∣bout the year 400. that Christian converts joyned in So∣cieties, and lived in Common, after the manner of the former Christians at Jerusalem, by whose writings it doth appear that there was not the least mention made of Tythes in that Age; the Church at this time altogether living by the free Offerings of Lands, Moneys, and Goods, and the People were much pressed to bountiful Contribution for holy uses, as may be seen in the writings of Jerome and Chrysostome, who brought the liberality of the Jews in their payment of Tythes for an example, beneath which they would not have Christians determine the charity. But about this time there began to be a declination and a coldness in the devotion of them that offered, which made Jerome, Ambrose, and others press very hard upon the People for liberality in point of Offerings, because it was much less then in the Apostles time,Cypr. de unit. Eccles. ch. 23. in so∣much that Cyprian reproved sharply, and said, They gae not so much as was worth speaking of. And it doth no ap∣pear in any old Monuments of credit, till near the End of 400 Years after Christ, that any Payment to the Church of any tenth part, as a tenth, was at all in use. From the Year 400. till the Year 800. no Canon or other Law was gene∣rally received, to compel any payment of Tythes, although among the Offerings of devout Christians, gifts of that quantity was received as due by the Doctrine then in use in some places only, which Ambrose, Augu∣stine, Jerome, and Chrysostome taught by reason of coldness and want of charity among the Christians in divers parts; and for their Ground and Foundation, the first two taught that the Tenth was due by God's Law▪ which they took only from the Mosaical Law, and the other two perswaded only that a less part then a tenth might not be offered, but ought to be paid for holy uses, as the phrase was; and by the reason of the Doctrine o
Ambrose, they were offered under the name of tenths in part of Italy; he being the Bishop of Millain there in the year 390. Likewise Augustine Bishop of Hippo hath a vehement Sermon for the pay∣ment of them, whose Doctrine brought in the Word tenth in use among Christians; and as is said before his Ground only was taken from Moses's Law in point of offering, these two threatned them with great Penalties, and heavy Judgments, that did not pay their tenths; but yet take notice to what end they required them, viz. that the Poor might not want, and saith, that God had reserv'd them for that use and end; so in process of time, when this Doctrine came to be received, divers followed the Opi∣nion of the ancient Fathers before-mentioned, yet hitherto it was not laid down as a positive Doctrine to pay them as the Jews did, but only brought the Jews in for an Example that Christians should not pay less. Leo, call'd the great, about the Year 440. who Reigned 20 years, he very earnestly stirred up Mens devotion to offer to the Church, but speaks not a Word of any quantity; Severin also about the year 470 stir'd up the Christians in Panona to give the tenth to the Poor; Like∣wise Gregory not only admonished the Payment of tythes from the Mosaical Law, but also observing Lent,Greg. Hom. 16. in Evang. and dist. 5. de Cons. which he reckoned as the tenth part of the Year, and this he would have given unto God, saying, we are command∣ed in the Law to give the tenth of all things unto God, and thus Ignorance began to enter in, and Judaism among the Christians brought in by their Leaders, and from the Opinions of these and other Ancient Fathers Tythes, Easter and Pentecost came to be introduced and brought into the Church a∣mong the Christians. Also Jerome in these Words, I do not take a Part as the rest of the Tribes of Possessions of Lands,Jerom. in Epist. ad Nepotian de∣vita clericorum. but as a Levite I live of the Tenth, and as I serve at the Altar, I am sustained by the Oblation of the Altar, being con∣tent with Food and Rayment, I follow nakedly the na∣ked Cross: But there is no Necessity to understand his Words of Tythes; but as the Levites lived of Tythes, serving at the Altar, even so am I main∣tained by the free Offering of them that do believe. But it is to be observed, that there were divers Councils in and about the 600 Year only provincial, as Mascon and Arles; and some others do take it for granted, that a Tenth was due by Way of Offering, and put into the Hands of them that ministred to the Church, is spoken of as good Anti∣quity, grounded upon the Mosaical Laws, which they call their Divinas, all which did spring from the Doctrine of the four Fathers before menti∣oned, but especially Ambrose and Austin about the Year 400. but take his own Words, It is not fit for us (saith he) to prefer our selves as Christi∣ans, unless we do the Work of Christians, viz. to offer the tenth Part of Corn, and of Cattel, and all the first Fruits of the Earth; and took it for granted as due, only his Ground from Moses's Law; and if they should offer less then a Tenth, their Offering was not accepted: Also agreeing
with him is Augustine in a Sermon after this Manner, viz. Dear Brethren,In Serm. de 10th temp. in tem. 10. forasmuch as the Day of Christ draws near, we ought to assemble our selves together, and to give Thanks to God, who hath given unto us, by our offering unto God our Tenths, for God is worthy to have the whole; and this he grounds from that of Malachi, Honour the Lord with thy Substance, &c. Farther exhorting them to pay their Tribute to the poor, and their Sacri∣fice to the Priests; then urging more Texts out of the old Testament, he tells them, That the Neglect of Payment of Tythes was the Cause of Ste∣rility and Blasting of their Corn, and the like: These two great Bishops agree, and as was said before, from the Law of Moses infer their whole Do∣ctrine; yet notwithstanding the great Pressures and hard Threats of some of the Bishops at that Time; it was not a general received Doctrine, that Tythes ought to be payed until about the Year 800. neither was any Thing by the Church then determined or ordained touching the Quantity that should be given, though (no Doubt) in many Places the Offerings of the more devout Sort, Tenhs, or a greater Part of their Encrease were given according to the Doctrine then in Use: And then about this Time the Of∣ferings and Gifts to the Church were disposed of on this wise, being recei∣ved into a common Treasury, one fourth Part to the Priests, out of which every one that laboured had his Portion, another Part for the Relief of the Poor, sick and Strangers, and a third for the repairing Places of publick Worship, and the fourth to the Bishop; and generally then the Bishop li∣ved in some Monastery, and his Clergy with him, from whence he sent them to preach in the Diocesses and Countries, and there they received such Offerings as were made, and brought them to the Treasury; so that hereby the Reader may take Notice that the Priests had not such a peculiar Interest in that which was given, but others had a Share with them; but now they claim all; their Churches were builded out of the Gifts of the People, the Poor, Fatherless and Widdow were relieved out of them and the Prisoners, who suffered for the Faith they held, were relieved also, the Bishop and his whole Clergy were sustained; but now they claim it as due, and take Tythes by Force and Violence three or four fold, and some∣times ten fold, and People thrown into Prison, and Widdows Goods spoil∣ed; how unsuitable these Practices are from what they were in the Apo∣stles time, and the ancient Fathers for 500 Years; though they are very proud, and boast much of their ancient Fathers, yet they will not so much as come near them in Example, & yet they cry up the Church, the Church and Antiquity, when they are far enough off from their Practice, though they were in a declining Condition in this Age I have been speaking of before: Also Jerome upon the third of Malachy in his Commentary doth admonish Christians to give their Alms to the poor, and double Honour to him that labours in the Lord's Service, not binding at all to offer this o that Part, yet exhorts them not to be more backward then the Jews, wherein they payed their Tenths: Neither is Chrysostome at all different from him in his Doctrine, in perswading even Labourers and Artificers to give bountifully their Alms to the Church for Holy U∣ses,Chrysost. Hom. 43. upon the Epi∣stle 1 Cor. 1.16. according to the Apostolical Ordinances, relating to the weekly Offerings in the Churches of Corinth. Ga∣latia,
Antioch; and the Jews Liberality was brought as a President, below which he would not have Christians determine their Cha∣rity; and sayes withal, that he speaks these Things, not as commanding or forbidding that they should give more, yet as thinking it fit they should not give less then a tenth Part for holy Uses, as the Phrase was. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria speaking upon that Passage of Abraham, Gen. 14.23. who, after he had gained the Victory over the King of Sodom's Enemies, and rescued Lot, when the King of Sodom of∣fered him Part of the Spoils,Cyril de adorat. in spir. & ver. lib. 4. ad finem. he would receive nothing but a few Victuals; Though (saith he) the holy Teach∣ers do war in the Behalf of perishing Mankind, yet do they not take any thing from the Men of the World, nor do they heap up unto themselves Riches, lest the World should say, We have made you rich; they only ought to receive the Sustenance from the Hands of those whom they have converted to the Faith; for it's Christ's Command (saith he that those who preach the Gospel should live there∣by: So that it's evident that very many of the ancient Fathers, whom this Generation have talked so much of, did deny Tythes and a forced Main∣tenance from the World; but in this Point it's like they will be judged but weak-sighted, or erroneous in their Judgment by this Generation, as they do the Quakers, or Men of mean Understanding; but I see many will tra∣duce them in Words, but few in Practice. It was the Judgment also, not of private Persons, but of the most learned and sound Teachers of that Age in five or six hundred Years after Christ. Prosper saith, They that live of the Gospel, who will be Propriators of nothing, who neither have nor desire to have any thing, not possessing their own but the common Goods;Prosper de vitae contempt. lib. 2. chap. 14. and what is it (saith he) to live of the Gospel, but that he who labours should receive necessary Supplies by them among whom he labours, without forcing: And further saith, Though Paul himself had Power, yet he would not make Use of it▪ lest he should create an Offence, but laboured with his Hands, be∣ing a Tent-maker, that he might not be burthensome to the Churches of Christ. With him also agrees Origen, saith he, Peter and John saith, Silver and Gold have I none; behold the Riches of those who were Priests of Christ; but let us quickly apply these things unto our selves (saith he) who are prohibited by the Law of Christ,Origen Hom. 15. in Levit. if we have any Regard thereunto, to have Possessions in the Country and Houses in the City; what, do I say Possessions or Houses? no not to multiply Coats or Money; if we have Food and Rayment, let us be therewith content. Jerome also writing to Nepotianus a Clergy-man sayes, I beseech you that you would not transform our spiritual Warfare into a carnal one nor imagine your self in the Clergy as if you were in an Army getting Spoils, nor seek after no more then when you came first into the Clergy, lest it be said to you, their Lot shall not profit them. Neither in any General or Provincial Council were there any Constitu∣tions
made for the Right of Payment of Tythes, till the Year 586. in a Council held at Mascon in the Diocess of Lyons;Mascon 8. Can. 5. neither is this Council received into the Body of any of the Canons; the Council consisted of all the Bishops of King Canthrom's Kingdom; only some Provincial Councils and Secular Consti∣tutions betwixt the sixth and eight hundred Years, which supposed Tenths to be due, but they were disposed of diversly, now to the Priests, now to the Abbots, and now to the Poor, according to the Mind of the Giver; the Quantity was only arbitrary, but judged that some kind of Offering was necessary: Neither till near eight hundred Years was there any general Law that remains in publick, that is of Credit, ordained in the Western Church; and for the Eastern Church, never any Law that mentions Tythes: And further it is observable, that though there were divers Na∣tional and Provincial Councils held, which supposed them to be due, as di∣vine Right, and that less then a tenth Part ought not to be offered, yet was there no Commandment or Name of Tenth in the first eight General Councils. And though divers of the Fathers, Popes and Bishops did declare that Tythes were due, and ought to be paid, yet till the nineth General Coun∣cil held at Lateran under Pope Calixtus the second, about the Year 1119. mentions Tythes, but speaks only of such as had been given to the Church by special Consecration; for at that time People being led to believe that Tythes ought to be given for the Use of the poor, did dispose them to the Heads and Rulers of religious Houses (so called) who kept open Hospita∣lity then, for the Relief of the poor, Entertainment of Strangers and Sup∣ply of the Widdows, as is testified by Cassian the Hermite; but the Coun∣cil held under Pope Alexander the third, 1180. seeing much given to the Poor, and little to the Priests, made a Decree to restrain Peoples Freedom; and indeed much Wickedness, Self-Love and Covetousness was crept into those Houses or Monasteries by this time, as Histories do relate. About this time there was no Law, Canon or Constitution of any gene∣ral Council as yet found, that did command Tythes to be payed, or expresly supposed them a Duty of common Right, before the Council of Lateran, held in the Year 1215. under Pope Innocent the third, about which time the Pope's Power was grown very great and powerful;Cap. 53. in. ext. tot. de des. cap. 33. cum non sit vide a Baput. prox. sec. 7. Sel∣den. for about this time every man might have given his Tythes to what Church he would and People had more Mind to give them for the poor, rather then the Priests, as may be understood from the Complaint of Innocent the third, he preaching on Za∣cheus's Charity saith, dedit propium & redit alienum, &c. and cryed out heavily against those that gave their Tythes and first Fruits to the poor, and not to the Priests, as heinous Offenders; yet about this time no Regard was had to the Nature of the Encrease, but whatsoever did arise in Profit, whether by Trade, Merchandize or Husbandry, the Tenth was required to be paid, but when Pope Innocent had commanded, so then no scruple was made of it, but another took it with too much credu∣lity, neither till this time, were Epistles sent from Rome so frequent, to put in Execution that which had been established in two former Councils
against tat challeng'd right of the Laity, for the Laity had enjoyed their Liberty from the beginning of Christianity, to bestow or retain them to whom they would in most places till the year 1200. About this time, notwithstanding the Land occupiers in divers places, as the Bishop of Matera complained to Pope Innocent, that in his Diocess, they, viz. the Laity divided their Tythes at their pleasures, and arbitra∣rily gave part to the Church, part to the Poor, and part to their Kindred, like∣wise in divers places the thing was so much in Controversie, whether that Parishes had any due to Tythes or no, That we see particularly in the Diocess of Valentia, 1320. which was, that every man wheresoever he liv'd, he might declare himself to be of what Parish he would, and to that only give his tythes. The opinion of the Canonists in answer to a Question, viz. By what imme∣diate Law that Tythes were payable? they are divided among themselves, some say, de jure Ecclesiastico, others jus Naturale, others divinum morale; The Canonists with one consent do ground themselves upon the Letter of some of those passages of Provincial Councils, Fathers and Popes before-mentioned,Selden his hist. upon Tythes. c. 7. generally deliver that Predial and mix'd tythes are due to be paid jure divino, and they usually cite the Levitical precepts to justifie it, for they take this Ecclesiastical Revenue to be no otherwise due to the Clergy by common right (whom they to the utmost maintain, as they reason) may as a Supreame Steward of Clergies Maintenance dis∣pose of this or that particular part of it to where he will, and this was their common opinion. But for Personal Tythes,Ad Tt. de pa∣roch. & al pa∣roch. extra & significavit. they yet agree to be jure divi∣no, although Pope Innocent the fourth makes it a wonder to see any Man deny it, and divers of them followed him; the best Authority they bring for Personal tythes is that of Deut. 12. where tythes and the Offering of your Hands are spoken of, and this is a received Ground among them, that the tenth is due to the Church jure divino, and so would hold up the first Priest-hood, and Figures against the second, who is the Substance, only for covetousness sake. But some Canonists, and those of no small note, that agree the deter∣mination of the tenth to be only de jure Ecclesiastico, and that no more jus Naturale,So Cora, Aenvias, Varviar. resolute, l. 1. c. 17. or divinum Morale is in it▪ then what commands a competency of means to be given to the Priest-hood, but they are mingled and confoundd among themselves, and the best bottom they have is ei∣ther from the Popes Authority or from the Jews, and also many Divines and School-men were at great contest, and their Judgments are Various as the former. The Divines about this time have had several determinations and Do∣ctrines about this Point, some have held it, that the tenth considered quoad quotam Partem, or as it is determined, part devoted from that number is only due by Law Positive and Ecclesiastical, but as it is for the sustentation of the Clergy, it is due by the divine moral Law as they call it, and so they interpret it from the Levitical Commandment of Tythes, but others say it
is a Judicial or Ceremonial, as some will have it, and that it hath been brought into the Law of the Gospel, by Ecclesiastick Doctrine, and Constitutions; others say it is, by the imitation of the Jewish state, ordered by the Almighty, and not in that regard, per vim obligativam, viz. by a continued force of it under the Gospel, and that the Church was not only bound to this part, but might as well have ordain'd the payment of a ninth or eleventh, this is commonly taught by the old School-men, Hales and Aquinas, Henricus de gandavo, Cardinal Caietan, and divers others. The second Opinion among the Divines is of those that held tythes to be meer Alms, and not to be payed to the Ministers of the Gospel by any Parochial right, as a necessary duty to the Evangelical Priest-hood, but that they might be detained and disposed of at the owners will, especially if the Pastor did not well perform his Office; of this were both some of the Religious Orders in their Preaching, and also others opposite enough to them in Doctrine, The Dominicans and Franciscans, who began about the year 1210. and had in their Monasteries great store of School-mens Writings, made it a gainful Doctrine to themselves, though there was a Truth in it, they determined that it was not due by divine right, but only due as Alms, or due of Charity, not of Justice or Judicial Law but to be arbitrarily disposed of accordingly, to such as took any spiritual labour, and with them agree the Mendicants. Likewise about 800. 900. and a 1000. and after that tythes were called the Lords goods,Vide Sona in Con∣cil. Gang. 7. Nantz. Council. and the Patrimony of the Poor, whenas also the Council at Nantz declared the Clergy were not to use them as their own, but as commended to their trust, they were not then given to the Clergy, but to be disposed of to the use of the Poor. Furthermore, at a General Council held at Lyons, under Pope Gregory the tenth, in the Year 1274. when the Religion was only made a Clok for covetousness, and they sought their Gain, and not the good of Souls, it was then constituted that it should not be lawful thenceforth for men to give their tythes at their own Pleasure, where they would, as it had been before, but pay all their tythes to the Mother-Church; by which it may be seen, that though the People who then generally were Papists and in the mid-night of Popery, did believe they ought to pay tythes then, yet were rather willing to dispose of them where they pleased, till the Ppist Councils restrain'd their Liberty. But the great Decree that speaks most plain, and till which nothing was given forth which did directly constitute them, but ra∣ther still suppos'd them as a due by some former right,Council. Trent. Non sunt ferendi qui varjis artibus decimas Ecclesiis &c. was made at the Council of Trent in the year 156. and yet that great Council followed the Doctrines of their Fathers, and said, they were due to God, but had no nw Authority for their great decree, which they com∣manded to be obeyed under the Penaltie of Excommunication. Having thus briefly past over the Ecclesiastical state, first, of the Jews secondly, of Christ and his Apostles time; thirdly, of the State of the Church near to their time, and the Judgment of them which are reckoned the most learned and Orthodox Men, and Fathers of the Church in every
Age, till the very height of the papal Domination, and hath given some true understanding in every Age to the point in Hand; It will be requisite that something be said more particularly concerning this Nation, and the Practice thereof, and what hath been said with, or against this particular concerning Tythes. About the Year 600. or soon after, Gregory the first who was the first Pope of Rome, sent over Augustine the Monk into England, who was a Canon regular, by whom Ethelbert, King of Kent, was con∣verted, as they call it, but it was but to Popery,Bed. l. 1.26. he and his Clergy a long time after followed the Example of the for∣mer Ages, and imitated the Practice of the Apostolick Primitive Church living in common upon the offerings of their converts, and those that re∣ceived them joyn'd into Societies, and with the receipt of the offerings they maintain'd themselves, they repaired the Temples of the Gentiles, which by the advice of Pope Gregory, were not to be destroyed, but to be converted to Christian Service, and builded some Houses, which they called Churches, in which the Priests exercised their shrivings, for then the whole Diocess of Canterbury was indeed the only limitted Parish in re∣gard of profits; and whatsoever was received through the Devotion of good Christians, as they were called, made up a common treasury for the whole Diocess, so that it was no matter of what place the bounty was offer'd, so that it was within the Diocess, the Truth of this is confirm'd by that of Augustine in his question to Pope Gregory touching the Bishops, whereunto the Pope answers, The custome, sayes he, is generally to make four parts, viz. for the Bishop, for the Clergy, for the poor, and for the repairation of Churches, but he doth admonish him in tenderness to the English Saxon Church, that he and his Clergy should use the community of all things, as was in the Primitive times in the Apostles dayes, but after∣wards having brought a great part of the Nation to their Faith, they be∣gan to preach up the old Roman Doctrine, That Tythes ought to be payed to God and holy Church, as the phrase was, and having taught the People that Pardon of Sin, and the joyes of Heaven were merited by good Works, and the Torments of Hell evaded by charity, it was no hard matter to per∣swade them to give their tenths and Lands, but also their outward Riches to those called Religious Houses; then here and elsewhere may testifie in this Nation, they and the Clergy had almost gotten the third part of the whole Land, so wonderfully besotted were the poor ignorant People, that had not a Law been against such excessive gifts, a far greter part of the Nation had been in their Hands; But how long this community amongst the Clergy continued amongst them, and the free Offering, fully appears not, that it was not out of use till more then one hundred Years after Au∣gustin's coming, that is till past seven hundred Years after Christ,Extat. in Bed. exemplaris Saxoni lib. 3. Linwood in con∣stit. pro vincia Tit. dec. sanci∣no gtiom. as may be conjectured out of the Testimony of Bede, which extends so far in the City of London, till the time of Henry the third, no Tythes, as Tythes, were generally payed, but only a Decree made, that for every twenty Shillings rent a farthing a Sunday was to be paid, which came to fifty two farthings yearly, and this was given by way of Offering, but was supposed as due, and the tenth part of the yearly Rent of their Houses.
As concerning Laws and Canons for Tythes among the Saxons, it is reported, that in the year 786. in the time of Pope Adrian, when his Pow∣er began to grow great, he sent two Legates with Letters into England, for Reformation, as it was call'd; first to Offa King of Merceland, and Alfe∣wold King of Northumberland, who call'd a Council in the North, and Offa and Kenulph call'd a Council for the South. wherein they ordained, That a tenth of the Fruit of the Earth should be Payed, as it was written in the Law of Moses; and when this Council had thus concluded by Alfwold, the Legates and Embassadors took all the Decrees and Canons of the Council and carryed to Offa, and he and his Bishops and Abbots did subscribe it with a Cross to it: likewise Selden makes mention, That Ethelulfe, King of the West Saxons, in the year 855. he made a Law That the Tythe of all his own Lands should be given to God, and his Ser∣vants and should be freed from all Taxes: But there is great difference among Historians about his Grant, some restrain it to the Tythe of his own demesne Lands, others to the tenth part of his Land, and others to the Tythe of the whole Nation. About this time heavy pressures by Danish Invasions, and great Wars came on,Pro meo remedio ani∣mae, & regni po∣puli. so that he called a Council where were present Bernereddus, King of Mercia, and Edmond King of East Angles, and they to remove the heavy Judgment that was upon them, gives the Tythe of all the Land to God and his Servants, as the Phrase then was. King Athelstone about the year 930. and King Edmond about the year 940. and King Edgar about 970. King Ethelred about 1010. King Knute about 1020 Edward the Confessor, and others of the Saxon Kings, made se∣veral Laws for Tythes, as Histories do relate. Likewise the Normans, afterwards entring this Kingdom and subduing it▪ William the Conqueror confirmed the Liberties of the Church. Also Henr. 1. and Hen. 2. did the like, and King Stephen also. The Reader may understand the Principles upon which these men acted and the Doctrine then was believed by them, and maintained to be good by Prelates of that Age, that Heaven was merited by good Works, and Sins pardoned for Works of charity, which Works were chiefly reckoned to be good by the Prelates of that Age, when some Monastery was build∣ed, Church or Chappel so called, and dedication of Lands and Goods to such places, for the health and happiness of their Souls, they had perswa∣ded many men almost out of their Estates, leaving their Heirs and children very poor. Many instances thereof might be given; but one or two for manifesting the Truth of this, King Stephen in his dayes gave to the Priory of Eye in Suffolk, as may be seen in an Original charter of his, made to the said priory, wherein he gives the tenths of all his Mannors of Sted∣brook, Rading, Seldia, Bedima, with divers other places, for the pardon of his Sins, and obtaining the joyes of Heaven; and not only, he gave it for the health of his own Soul, but for the Soul of his Father and of his Mother, and of his Uncle, and interceding Kings to the use and End aforesaid. Likewise out of another old Charter, granted by Ralph then Bishop of Chichester, to the Abby of Battel, the tenths of Voulwaine, of Hennam, and of
Servin, and of Lezein, and Badhurst, and the tenths of many other places to the said Abbey, for the health of his own Soul, and the health of the Souls of his Ancestors. Also out of the charter of the Monastery of Ridding in Herefordshire, in the time of King John, Walter Clifford, for the health of his Fathers Soul, and of his Wifes and children, doth give the whole Tenth of Hamenesca unto the Church of Lempster. But notwithstanding the many Laws, Canons, and Decrees of Kings, Popes, Councils and Bishops (allding to the page before) that every man ought to pay the tenth part of his encrease, yet it was left to the owner to confer it where he pleased, which made so many rich Abies and Monaste∣ries, And till the year 1200. or thereabouts, every one gave their Tythe at their own Pleasure, which made Pope Innocent the third send his Decre∣tal Epistle to the Bishop of Canterury, commanding him to enioyn every man to pay his Temporal goods to those that Ministred Spiritual things to them, which was enforced by Ecclesiastical Censures; and this was the first beginning of general Parochial Payment of Tythes in England, this his Decretal was admitted, and enjoyned by the Law of the Nation, King and People being then Papists. The Decree of the Pope receiving all possible assistance from the Bishops and the Priests,John Wickliff's complaint out of Fox his Act. and Mon. in whose behalf it was made, did not only in a short time take away the Peoples then dered right to give their Tythes to those that best deserved them, but did also so much corrupt the Clergy that in the time of Richard the second, Wickliff, our famous Reformer, did make a heavy complaint to the Parliament in these Words following Ah Lord God, where this be reason, to constrain the poor People to find a Worldly Priest, sometime unable both of Life and cunning, in Pomp and Pride, Covetous and Envy, Gluttonness, Drunkeness, and Leche∣ry, in Simony and Heresie, with fat Horse and Jolly, and gay Saddles and Bridles ringing by the way and himself in costly Cloaths and pelure, and to suffer their Wives and Children, and their poor Neighbours pe∣rish for Hunger, thirst and Cold, and other mischiefs of the World: Ah Lord Jesus Christ, sith within few Years men paid their Tythes and Of∣ferings at their own will, free to good men, and able to great Worship of God, to profit and fairness of holy Church fighting in Earth: why it were lawful and needful that a worldly Priest should destroy this holy and approved Custome, constraining men to leave this freedom, turning Tythes and Offerings unto wicked uses. A cloud of Witnesses might be brought out of the Ancient Fathers, and also latter Testimonies who witnessed against them, and divers Martyrs, some whereof were put to Death, others grievously troubled, and suffer∣ed long and great Imprisonments, as John Hu, Jerme of Prague, the fa∣mous Reformer John Wickliff, who is spoken of before, and Walter Brute, William Thorpe, William Swindery, and it was generally the Judgment of all the Wickliffans and the predecessors of the Protestants,Aeneas Sylvius in his Bohemian History. the Bohemians being descended from the Waldenses, they did profess and held out, that all Priests or Ministers ought to be Poor, and to be content
with free gifts, or what the People freely offered them; so faith  Syl∣vius in his Bohemian History. And it is one of John Wickliff's Articles, whose Works are as much estee∣med of by the Protestants of England and Bohemia, as despised by the Papists and their Clergy, having his bones taken up and Burnt 41 years after his decease, and his Articles condemn'd by the Council of Constance;Fox his Acts and Mon. pag. 69. his own words are, That Tythes were and are a free gift as among the Christians, and only pure Alms; and the Parishoners may, for the offence of their Curates, detain and keep them back, and bestow them upon others at their own will and Pleasures. And his Proposition aforesaid is maintained by that godly Martyr John Hus, who was Burnt for his Testimony at Constance, but take his own words,Acts and Monu∣ments, p. 605. That the Clergy are not Lords and Possessors of Tythes, and other Ecclesiastical Goods which are freely given, but only Stewards, and after the necessity of the Clergy is once satisfied, they ought to be Transported to the poor. And a∣gain, if the Clergy do abuse the same, they are Theves and Robbers, and saocrili∣gious Persons, and except they do repent, by the just Judgment of God they are to be condemned. Likewise Ambrose Preaching upon the 16. Luke, Give an account of your Stewardship,Ambrose upon the 16th. of Luke. &c. From hence he in∣fers That the Clergy are not Lords but rather Stewards and Bailiffs of other men's Substance. furthermore Jerom writing to Nepotianus a Clergy-man saith, How can they be of the Clergy, which are commanded to contemn and despise their own substance, and yet to take away from a Friend, is Thieft, to deceive the Church it is Sacriledge, and to take away that which should be given to the Poor. Likewise Bernard in his Sermon upon these Words, Simon Peter said unto Jesus Luke 17. from thence infers these words,Bernard upon 17. Luke. viz. Truly the goods of the Church are the Patrimony of the Poor, and whatsoever thing the Ministers and Stewards of the same (not Lords Porossessors) do take unto themelves more then sufficient for a competent living, the same is taken away from the poor by Sacrilegious cruelty. Also Eusebius in his Treatise upon the Pilgrimage of Saint Jerome,Eusebius upon Jerom. writes thus, If thou oft possess a Gar∣ment or any other thing, more then extream necessity doth require, and dost not help the needy, thou art a Thief and a Robber. And Isidore in his Treatise de summo bono, Chap. 24. saith Let the Bishop know that he is the Servant of the People,Isidore de Summo Bono, chap. 42. and not Lord over them. These and divers more Authors that worthy man John Hus instanced at a Disputation in the University of Prague, in Vindica∣tion of John Wickliff's seventeenth Article which was, that Tythes was a free gift in the time of Christianity, and accounted as pure Alms. At the reformed Church in Geneva they live upon free gift, and Tythes of all sorts are taken up for the use of the State, and laid up for the publick treasury.
And that good man William Thorp, of whom I made mention before, who gave a large Testimony against divers abuses crept into the Church, it be∣ing the Mid-night of Popery, being complain'd of by the then Popish cler∣gy, and brought to examination in the Year 1407. being accused before Thomas Arundel Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and Chancellour of England: He gives a very clear Testimony about Tythes how that they were no Gospel-Maintenance, In his answer he saith, That in the new Law neither Christ and his Apostles took Tythe of the People, neither commanded they the People to pay Tythes, neither to Priests nor Deacons, and Christ and his A∣postles preached the Word of God to the People, and liv'd of pure Almes or free gifts, but after Christ's Ascension, when the Apostles had received the Holy Ghost, they travelled Labouring with their Hands; and also he saith, that Paul when he was full Poor and needy, Preaching among the People, he was not Chargeous unto them, but with his Hands he Laboured not only to get  own living, but also to relieve others that were Poor and needy. And further he saith, Tythes were given on the old Law to Levites and Priests,Heb. 7. but our priests time not of Levi, Ergo by the Law our Priests cannot challenge Tythes; for as the Priesthood is changed, so is the Law; but since Chrst in the time of his Ministry, and also his Apostles lived by pure Almes, or else by the Labour of their Hands, for the Servant is not greater then his Lord: At which Words the Bishop said unto him, God's Curse have you and mine for thus Teaching: And further the said William Thorp saith that those Priests that do take Tythes deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, unto when the Bishop said, Heard you ever Lozell speak thus: and further the said William saith, that the covetousness and Pride of the Priests destroyes the vertue of the Priesthood, and also stirs up God's Ven∣geance both upon Lord's and Commons, who suffer these Priests charitably: and the Arch-Bishop said, thou judgest every Bishop Proud that will not go arryed as thou dost, by God I deem him to be more meek that goes every day arryed in his Scar∣let Gown, then thou in thy Thread-bare blew Gown: This is an Answer much like a Lording Bishop, and a Tything Priest, but I refer the Reader to the whole Discourse, and Testimony of Williams Thorpe which is large in Fox his Acts and Monuments. Likewise William Swinderby in the Articles that are char∣ged against him is,Acts and Monu∣ments, pag. 607. That for an evil Curate to curse his Hearers, or Excommunicate them for with-holding of his Tythes, is nothing but wickedly and wrongfully, getting from them their Money, for if saith he, that the Priest or Curate be a wicked man, (as most of the Tything Priests are) If the Parishon∣ers do pay him Tythes, they are guilty before God of upholding him in his Sin and Evil deeds: and further saith he, that whereas Christ's Law doth command to Minister freely to the People, the Pope with his Law sells for Money, whereas Christ's Law teaches his Priests to be poor, the Pope justifies and maintains Priests to be Lords. Also with him doth agree Walter Brute,Acts and Monu∣ments, pag. 621. as is manifest by the Articles charg'd against him, viz. That no Man is bound to pay Tythes in Gospel times, 2. That if the Parishoners shall know their Curate to be bad they ought to hold from him their Tythes. 3. That if any Priest receive any thing by way of bargain or yearly Stipend, in so doing he is a Schismatick and accur∣ed.
4. That if we be bound to pay Tythes in Gospel times, then are we debtours to keep all the whole Law, for to say that men are bound to one part of the Law and not to another, is not true, for this were to prefer one part before another, and to set the Law against it self. 5. See∣ing that neither Christ nor any of his Apostles, commanded to pay Tythes, it's manifest and plain, that neither by the Law of Moses, nor by the Law of Christ, that Christian people are bound to pay Tythes, but by mens Traditions. And all these before-mentioned were op∣posite to the whole Nation o Fryars, of what order soever, who suffered grievous Persecution in their dayes, whose Testimony yet livs, and will be priz'd in Generations to come, though they be gone to the Sepulchres of their Fathers. Also to these may be added the Articles of the Bohemi∣ans, who were greatly Persecuted for their Faith and Belief published about the Year 250. wherein a Divine right as to Tythes since the Gospel were denyed, whereupon they long since took away all Temporalities from the Ministers, Gerardus Sagarillus also before Wickliff was Burnt for an Here∣tick, (as the Church of Rome reckoned him) upon this account, and the great Erasmus, gave the common exacting of Tythes, in his time no better Name then Tyranny. Paul Grisaldus a∣pud camell, borell in consiliorum parte.Moreover the Abbigeneses, Bedemontane Protestants have preserved their Religion without corruption lon∣ger then any Church with a Ministry endowed with Tythes and Hire, in the World. Likewise the Primitive times never wanted able Teachers, as the best Histories relate, although they lived either upon their Labour, or the free gift of them that were Converted, but did trust their Lord and Master, who sent them out in his Name and Power, for the Conversion of Souls: this was very much unlike to the Ministry of this Generation, who knows not how to live by Faith, nor of the Gospel, but rather by Jewish ythes, or rather Popish tythes, Stipends, Augmentation, Set-wages, Cove∣nants, and Sallaries, or else the old Proverb is truly verified, which sprang up in Popish times, No Penny, No Pater-noster, for evidence whereof  are hundreds in England within this twenty years, that when the aforesaid Maintenance was taken away by any temporal Power whatsoever, they have ceas'd their Ministry, and laid down their Commission, which they say they had from Christ, and made void their Call, and all necessity of Conversion of Souls laid aside, we might bring the whole Nation for a Tesi∣mony in this, who hath been observant as to the Practice of the Ministry a∣bout the changes of government which hath happened in the aforesaid ▪ And the former Christians were not so disquieted among themselves with plitical complying Opinions, and Curiosities, Niceties, Distinctions and contentions, although they had none of the aforesaid setled Maintenance until Constantine the Great his time, when they began to grow Rich, and give Lands and great Revenues to the Church, and then they began to Controvert and side in State matters, as is seen in the Councils of Basil and Constance, and divers other former Councils, and grew into Pride, and idle∣ness, and fulness, insomuch that Histories say, a Vice was heard from Heaven, this day Poyson hath been shed abroad in the Church. Great and large are the Testimonies that might be given in this particu∣lar
of the bestmen who were Sufferers for Christ, although the greedy covetous Hirelings of every Age thought it a strange thing that they should deny the Payment of Tythes, because some great Councils in the mid-Night of Popery had concluded them as due, some one way and some a∣nother; And the Clergy of our last Age very unwilling to loose any thing that may be Commodious to satisfie their Covetousness, though they have denyed the Pope and divers Councils in other particulars, yet in this point of tythes, they will allow of their Constitutions, as Jure divino, and if that will not serve, having solicited the Princes of divers Nations to make some Laws for provision for their Maintenance, because they were sensible their Gospel would not maintain them, and now their greatest plea is become Jure humano, or as one of the Pastors of the Church of England lately said, He cared not if the Devil was the Author of Tythes, if the Law of the Nation did give him them, he would have them whether the Parish would or no: and I be∣lieve many of them are of his Judgment, though they will not be so har∣dy as to deliver it in so open and shameful Words, but however, them that have only the Powers of the Earth to be their Prop and only Refuge, and fly to the Hills and Mountains that are but Earth, temporary and mu∣table for their help, for their Backs and their Bellies yet this doth not make void the Testimony of them who abide in the Faith, and dare stand unto Christ's allowance in point of Maintenance; for the Work of the Mini∣stry, as the Apostles and Ministers of Christ in the first Age of the Publi∣cation of the Gospel did, but take some further Testimonies that the truth of this may not seem a new thing, or as yesterday, nor only of the mean∣er sort, or of Illiterate men, but even of Learned Rabbies of our latter Ages. Antonius De Dominis the learned Bishop of Spaletto de repub. Eccles. lib. 9. saith, Christ himself,Antho. Bishop of Spaletto ac repub. Eccles. lib. 9. though he were Lord of Heaven and Earth, and the fulness thereof, yet would not be possessed of great Lands and Incomes, though he said,Luke 9.58. the Fowls of the Air have Nests, and the Foxes have Holes, but the Son of Man hath not where to rest his Head, yet did not he imbetter his condition, al∣though to the effecting thereof there need no more then that he should will it to be so, nor did he demand Tythes though he was a Priest, after the order of Melchizedeck indubitably; but whilst he went through the Ci∣ties, and Villages Preaching the Gospel, and instructing men for the Kingdom of Heaven, and twelve with him, several Wo∣men that believed, as Mary Magdalen, Joanna, Susanna,Luke 8.1, 2. and others, did minister unto him of their Substance; Nor did he otherwise instruct his Disciples, who were Embassadours on Earth towards Man-kind in the Beginning when he sent them out, he did not bid them for to receive Tythes, or teach People to pay them, but bids them to live upon Almes, carry not with you neither Gold nor Silver, nor any Money in your Purses,Mat. 10.9. not a Scrip, not two Coats, not a Staff, Supernumerari, for the Labourer is worthy of his meat: The Disciples of Christ being thus taught by their great Master forsaking their Lively-hood, and earth¦ly Possessions, lived by Faith in God, who would not have sent them abroad, but that he would dispose the Hearts of men accordingly in order
to their Substance, so they relyed upon their Converts for their necessary supplyes, and received their benevolence of several pious Women who Ministred unto them, for so saith Paul, have not I Power to eat and to drink, have not I power to lead about a Woman or a sister,1 Cor. 9.5. as the other Apostles, the Brethren of our Lord and Cephas, 1 Cor. 9.5. He at large and clearly sheweth how they who sow Spiritual things ought to reap temporal things. Likewise David Paraeus in his commentary upon Gen. 28. and 2. and 22. saith,Gen. 28. and 2.22. That Tythes or tenths were free∣ly arbitrarily, a man might give them, a man might vow them, or he might not, even as he pleased before the Lord, but under the Law they were commanded to be given to the Priests, and Levites, hence saith he, our Clergy men infer, that if it were so of old, then they are so now, but this doth not follow (saith he) they had a divine Ceremonial right, but that's not ceased; they had Tythes as a compensation of that lot they should otherwise have in Land, Ours not, Ours have Towns, Villages, Manners, yea Countries, and Provinces; nor is there any End of their insatiable Covetousness: And he concludes, that when the Levitical Priesthood did cease, then did the right of that Priesthood cease, and the right of tythes did revert to God, as Governour and Soveraign of the World. Great and large are the Testimonies that might be given, both out of Ancient and Modern writers, who were the clearest in their Judgments against tythes, how that they were no Gospel-maintenance, neither of Divine right doth belong to any Minister under the Gospel, who profes∣seth Christ come in the Flesh. But what I have already said in this parti∣cular might be sufficient, seeing so large things to this have been declared by others Hands; But I am the more willing to instance divers Authors, who by our Protestants are owned as Orthodox, that they may be thereby throughly convinced that this is no new Doctrine, for which we suffer the Spoiling of our Goods, and our persons Imprisoned; but that the Cove∣tousness of the Clergy and Tythes have been testified against by many faith∣ful and constant men in Ages past, who died in the Faith, who though they be dead, yet their Testimony still lives, and will stand for Ages. But you shall hear what State the Clergy and Ministry was in about the time of the Council of Basil in the Year 1431. by Lodovicus the Cardi∣nal ARLATENSIS, a Man very much praised for his Constancy and Wisdom in that Council of Basil, LODOVICUS seeing the Cowardliness of the Bishops and others of the Clergy, that they were more afraid to grieve temporal Princes, then afraid to offend God; and afraid to be Spoiled of their temporalities, rather then afraid that their Flock should be devoured; Albeit, saith he, If you were true Bishops, and true Pastors of Souls, you would not doubt to put your Lives in hazard for your Sheep; neither be afraid to shed your Blood for the Church in the cause of Christ; but at this pre∣sent, saith he, (the more is the Pity) it is too rare to find a Prelate in this world, and in this Age, which doth not prefer his Temporalities before his Spiritualities, with the love whereof they are so withdrawn, that they do study rather to please Princes then God, and confess God in Corners, but Princes they will confess open∣ly, of whom the Lord speaks in his Gospel, every one that confesseth me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven, &c. And contra∣riwise,
the Lord will not confess him before his Father, which is araid to confess the Lord before men, for fear of loss of their world¦ly Glories, and temporal Riches,Basils istores by eneas Syl∣vius. and displeasing of Prin¦ces, of which it may be more largely seen in the History of the Council of Basil, published by Aeneas Sylvius. So you that doth profess Reformation, and the Scrip∣ture to be your Rule, and your Ancient Fathers to be your Examples, whom the Ministry of this last Age hath talked of, and see now if you will own them in Practice; do not reckon your selves any more as Mini∣sters of Christ, who cannot be content with his allowances and let forcing for Maintenance by Tythes alone to the Priests of the first Covenant, and let bargaining alone for Wages, and seek not Hire of them you work not for; and if your Gospel will not maintain you, then have you great Reason to question it, whether it be the very same that Christ and his A∣postles Preached in the Primitive times: and it is manifest, as aforesaid, that they required no Tythes, Stipends, Augmentations▪ or Sllaries nei∣ther was ever any such Word heard amongst them, as, What will you give me, an I'll be your Minister? And yet there was no complint of any want; for Christ asked his Disciples when they had been travelling abroad prea∣ching the Gospel, though they had neither Staff nor Scrip, nor Money, If they wanted any thing? and they said Nay. But this Generation must know before-hand, what is to be had at such and such a place▪ and what is it worth per Annum, or else no Gopel is like to be Preached there. But if any should ask the Ministry of this Ae, by what Right they claim tythes? they cannot say by a better right then the Apstles had, nor I hope will not, for they pretend to be but Sucessrs of them. And if the extent of their Commission be enquired into they will give it you in these Words or the like presently, viz. As my Father sent me, so sen you: But if one ask if they will stand to this in all respects. I have little hope that they will comply in point of Maintenance; I have good Ground so to judge; even many at this day have boasted of their Cll nd Ministry, and have thrown many into Prison for those Popish tythes. For if a Law or Statute were made for the taking of them away, they would give over the Publication of their Gospel, which demonstrates their Commission is not of God, or else why should taking away of tythes invalidate them? I desire they were ryed who boasted of Calls and Commissions I am afraid we should scarce∣ly find one in 500, that would open his Mouth; for if the cause were ta∣ken away, the effect would also follow; i Maintenance were taken away their Preaching would cease. But I shall return to speak something further concerning our own Nation. It is needful to inform the Reader a little▪ that when the Popes Doctrine was received in any Nation▪ that Nation was dvided into so ny ishoprcs as was judged needful; and every Bishoprick into  many Parishes as were thought convenient, (for Parishes are but of a late Erection, as to which something may be hereafter said) for till then most Preahers were sent out of Monasteries and Religious Houses (so called) and the People at their own free will did give their Tythes and Offerings where they pleased, till about the Year 1200. for till that time every Owner of the nine parts did give the Tenth to the Priest, or to the Poor, as he would. But after that, Parishes being set up, and Priests appointed, and Tythes paid to them, after 40 Years
possession, what before was owned for free gift, is now claimed as a debt, & prescription was pleaded by the Priests as their Just title; but people seeing themselves run into a Snare, began to contend, but all too late, for the Pope be∣ing grown great, thunder'd out his Interdict against this Nation, Excom∣municated the King, affrighted the Subjects with his Bulls, stuffed with Commination or Curses; and that against the very point of Arbitrary di∣sposal of Tythes: and the Pope did highly insult over Kings and Princes a∣bout this time, witness Frederick Barabrossa, Hen. 6th and King John, and some others, as the Histories of them makes mention; so that by the Po∣wer of the Pope Parochial payment came just to be setled, yet notwithstand∣ing the English Parliaments not willing wholly to forget the Poor, for whose sakes tythes were chiefly given, did make divers Laws, that a con∣venient portion of the tythes should be set apart for the Poor of the Parish forever, as in the Statutes Rich. 2d. 15.6. and the 4th of Hen. 4. The Pope having by these means brought in Tythes, and the Priests made a pretended title, by prescription they set up Courts, called Eccle∣siastical Courts, which remain to this day (amongst them that say they are reformed) to recover their tythes by, and the Priests came to be the Jud∣ges of the Court, so people might easily understand what might be expe∣cted from them; yet them that did not pay, no greater punishment could they inflict upon them but Excommunication: Yet notwithstanding this general Decree, the Pope did dispense, and did give exemption to divers Orders of his Clergy (so called) to free them from payment, as the Hos∣pitallers, Templers, and generally to all Lands which belonged to the Reli∣gious Persons and Houses, which is the reason that divers at this day, who have any Land which sometimes belong'd to the Monasteries now dissolv'd, say, they are tythe-free. Now when the Pope, by colour of the Jewish Laws (by which tythes were given to the Levitical Priesthood) had gained an Universal payment of tythes to all his Clergy; he in further imitation of that earthly taberna∣cle, sets up a new building after the former Pattern; and therefore to him∣self he claims first-Fruits and tenths, as a Successour of the Jewish high-Priest, Sins also he under takes to Pardon, Cardinals are appointed as Leaders of the Families, Miters are ordained for the Head, as Aaron had, Synagogues they Built, now falsely call'd Churches, with Altars like the Jews, with Organs and Instruments of Musick, with Singers and Porters, &c. And in the form of the Levitical Priesthood they transform'd themselves and this was taught for Catholick Doctrine at that time, and yet is still upholden, and pleaded for by the Protestant Clergy, thereby wholly de∣nying Christ Jesus come in the Flesh, the end of all types and Figures. Likewise afterward Henr. 8. being a Papist, and believing the Popes Doctrine, as also did his Parliament, made a Law, that every one should se out and pay his tythes, as due to God and holy Church. Also a second Law in his time was made to the like purpose, for great need and reason he had, having dissolv'd the Monaste's who had many tythes, and eithe had them in his own Hand, or Sol them unto others, to be held as Lay possessions. And they having no Law whereby to recover them, he mad a new Law to enforce the payment of them, but still restrained the trya of Tythes, in the Ecclesiastical Court.
trble Damages, who also restrain'd the Tryal to the Ecclesiastical Court▪ these Laws supposed them due to God and Holy church, therefore they required every man to yield and set out their Tythes as had been accustom∣ed; likewise some Ordinances were made in that which was called the Long Parliament, in the time of the War, grounded upon the former Law for treble damages; all which Laws were grounded on the Pope's Decrees and Constitutions, and his Ground is upon the Jewish Priesthood, as before is made good by strong supposal, all which indeed is without any true Ground in Gospel-times. For a Gospel-Ministry I think it nor amis to add here by the way a complaint made to the Parliament not long after the dissolution of the Monasteries in England, when Lay-men began to possess appropriated Churches and Tythes into their Hands; but take the Words of Lodrics Mors,Ex libello dio, the complaint of Loderics Mors, o∣m impress, Gene▪ 2.3. sometime a Gray Friar, &c. Ye that be Lords and Burgesses of Parlia∣ment House, I require in the Name of all my Brethren that are English-men, that ye consider well (as you will Answer before the Face of Almighty God in the day of Judgment) this abuse, and see to amend it, when as Anti-christ of Rome durst openly without any Vizard, walk up and down throughout England, he had so great Favour, and his Children had such crafty wits, that they had not only almost gotten all the best Lands of England into their Hands, but also the most part of all the best Be∣nefices, both of Parsonages and Vicaridges, which were for the most part all impropred unto them (the Impropriations held by them were much more then one third of all the Parish Churches in England (divided into three parts.) And when they had the gifts of any not improperd, they gave them unto their Friends, of the which alwayes some were lear∣ned, for the Monks found of their Friends Children at School, and though they were not learned, yet they kept Hospitality, and helped their poor Friends; and if the Persons were improperd, the Monks were bound to deal Alms to the Poor, and to keep Hospitality, as the Writings of the gifts of such Parsonages and Lands do plainly declare. And as touching the Alms that they dealt, and the Hospitality that they kept, every man knoweth that many thousands were well received of them, and might have been better if they had not had so many great mens Horses to Feed, and had not been over charg'd with such Idle Gentlemen, as were never out of the Abbeys, and if they had any Vicaridge in their Hands, they set in some times some sufficient Vicar, though but seldom to Preach, and to teach, But now that all the Abbeys, with the Lands and Goods and impropered Parsonages be in temporal mens Hands; I do not hear that one halfe-pen∣ny worth of Alms or any other profit comes unto the people of thse Pa∣rishes; your pretence of putting down of Abbeys was to amend that which was amiss in them, it was far amiss that a great part of the Lands of the Abbeys, (which were given to bring up Learned men and to keep Hospi∣tality, and to give Alms to the Poor should be spent upon a few Supersti∣tious Monks, which gave not forty pound in Alms, when they should have given two hundred pound: It was amiss that the Monks should have Parsonages in their Hands, and deal but the twentieth part thereof to the poor, and Preached but once a year to them that payed the Tythes
of parsonages: It was amiss that they scarcely among twenty set oe suf∣ficient Vicar to preach for the Maintenance which they received? but see now, that which was amiss is amended as it is in the old Proverb, It is a∣mended even as the Devil amended his Dam's Leggs, when he should have set it right he broke it quite a pieces; the Monks gave too little Alms, and set unable Persons many times in their Benefices, but now where twenty pound was given yearly to the Poor in more then one hundred places in England, is scarce one Meals meat given: this is a faire amendment, where they had alwayes one or other Vicar that either preached or hired some, now there is none at all, but the Farmer is Vicar and Person and all; and only an old cast-away Monk or Friar which can scarcely say his Mattens, is Hired for 20. or 30. Shillings meat and drink, yea and in some places for meat & drink alone without any Wages: I know, & not I alone but 20000. more, know more then 500. Vicaridges and Parsonages, and thus well and Gospelly serv'd after the new Gospel of England. And so the Author goes on in his complaint, because that the Maintenance was ta∣ken away, and there was a great Famine for want of Pastours. By all which may be seen what Condition those religious Houses and Abbies, as they were called, were in at that time, and how they only ser∣ved to maintain idle and superstitious Monks and Fryars, which did deceive the Nations with fabulous Stories, under pretence of preaching the Go∣spel; and now these Benefices being taken away from the Papists, their Gospel ceased in England, and have been translated over and over unto di∣vers Sects, who separated from them; but it is to be observed, that as the Tythes and Hire was taken away, and converted to other Uses, their Sect did alwayes fall; and it is a Lamentation that these Tythes, and now for∣eed Maintenance▪ which was first decreed by the Popes Canon Laws should now be holden up by them that profess Reformation and Separation from them, and Scriptures to be their Rule. Having thus briefly run over the Doctrine, Decrees, Practices and O∣pinions concerning Tythes from the Apostles time downwards, we find them various, as may be understood by that which is before-written; and the Right of Tythes was never clear, but remained in Controversie, even amongst the ost great and learned Men in divers Ages since the time of Christ; yea, even amongst the greatest of Papists in the time of the Pope's Domination; and in all Ages there were that withstood the payment of them until this Day; and many of the Martyrs for that, amongst other things, suffered in the Flames, and at great Difference they ever were as about the End, the Property and the Use of them, as may hereby be col∣lected into several Heads: And First of all, the Tythes among the Jews were payed to the Levites and Priests: Secondly, that they were not for the Priests only, but for the Strangers, Fatherless and Widdows: Thirdly, when the Levitical Priesthood was taken away by the coming of Christ, the Law for tything was also changed: Fourthly, that neither Christ nor his Apostles in their Age ever received any, nor demanded any: Fifthly▪ that in the Beginning of the Church for the first 300 Years, whilest the Simpli∣city of the Gospel was retained, no Tythes were either claimed or payed amongst Christians: Sixthly, but as the Power of Godliness came to be lost, and the Mystery of Iniquity began to work, Mens Imaginations taught
instead of the Doctrine of Christ, began to preach up Tythe, fetching the Ground from Moses's Writings, that in the first practice of the payment of Tythes, after the Apostacy was entered in, they were not payed as Tythes, but as free Offerings, and as the Bounty of the Giver, and were not given for the Ministers Maintenance only, but chiefly for the poor; it was not received Doctrine generally that Tythes ought to be payed, till near a 1000 Years after Christ, that the Pope had set up his Authority and Do∣minion over the greatest part of Europe: Seventhly, that after they were confirmed by the Pope, and commanded to be payed, there was no compul∣sary Law made, but only Excommunication: Eighthly, after that they were accounted an Ecclesiastical Duty, and never called a civil Right, but were tryed in Ecclesiastical Courts: Ninethly, until about the Year 1200. the common practice was for every one to bestow his Tenths where he pleased: Tenthly, they were first brought in as Duty owing to God and to the Church, and so were required and enforced; and therefore there is no civil Property or Right in him that claims them, that first Fruits and Tenths are but a late invented thing, and claimed by the Pope, as Successor to the Jewish High Priest, as he sayes: Eleventhly, that Tythes were the same in the Ground and Foundation, whether claimed by a Priest Impropiator or by an Abey and differed nothing, but in the person of him that possessed them: Lastly, all may see the declining Estate, the Corruption and Error that crept in among Men, after the power of Truth was lost, so was the Fruit also, which cau∣sed such earnest pressing to needful Contributions; and then afterward was it necessary for Laws and Decrees to enforce them, but in the Begin∣ning it was not so, while that Purity and Simplicity of the Gspel rmain∣ed, for then their Charity abounded, even oftentimes beyond their Abi∣lity, to whatsoever need the Church required. But now to proceed to answer some other ples, which are come up in these latter Dayes; for now the Priests of this Age begin to be ashamed to make claim for Tythes Jure divino, they have been so bear out of that their Hole, and their pleas Jure ecclesiastico was but determined in the Mid-night of Popery; and they are ashamed to derive their Authority from the Pope or his Decrees; but now humane Right is pleading, sometime by Gift of Kings and Princes, others plead the temporal Laws of Kings and Parlia∣ments, others plead prescriptions by a legal Right of their possessions, o∣thers plead a legal Right by purchase: And Lastly, the Priests they plead the Equity of the Law of Moses still to be in Force, and alledge all the Scrip∣tures in the New Testament for their proof, unto which hereafter some∣what is said; these are the most pretences that of late have been made by the Priests of ou Dayes, or the main Reasons that have been alledged for Tythes: And first, whereas they pled the Gift of Kings, as one by King Ethelwolfe, as before in this Book; to that is answered, that i i could be proved that the whole Land had been in the  of any such King, they had sid something; but by what Rig cld he give the tenth part of all the Enrease and Fruits of the Labours of all the people of his Dominions who had no legal property therein? But if ind Ethelwl's Grant must be the Foundation of Tythes, then how many succeeding Kings and Bishops have violated his Deed, by appropriating them to Monast∣ries
and Abbies, and such like Houses, which shews the Vanity of this Ar∣gument. Another Argument, which seems more strong, is urged, That the tem∣poral Laws of Kings and Parliaments say, by the Law they have as good a Proprie∣ty to the tenth Part as any have to the nineth of their Lands. Answ. To such may be said, that the Law doth not give any Man a pro∣priety either in Land or Tythes, or any other things, but doth only conserve and preserve every man in his proper Right, whether by Gift, or by Purchase, or by Descent, and doth secure him from the Inuries or Violence of ano∣ther: But let us not be deceived with a new formed pretence, lately ta∣ken up to blind the simple Minds with a Name of  ropriety and Civil Right, for that is but a meer Shift; for I may give my hand which I have by Gift, Purchase or Inheritance, or I may sell  nd so cannot they that seem to lay Claim to Tythes; but it matters not much what any say, when they see their other Claims will not serve, they would evade and shift from one thing to another to blind People. But let us hear what the Makers of the Law say of them, though in the Height of Popery, passing by the Saxon time and King Stephen▪ who in their blind Superstition, being perswaded thereunto by the Doctrin hen taught of the Popish Clergy, that Remission of Sins was obtained by good Works, as aforesaid, they gave divers Gifts and Tenths for the Health of their Souls, and their Fathers Souls, as is aforesaid; but let us come to Henry the eighth, upon whose Law all others that are since made are builded, who in his time cast off the Pope's Yoak; in that Act concerning Tythes it is declared, that Tythes were due to God and Holy Church, & they blame Men for being so wicked as not to pay them, and therefore that Law is made; and here is the Ground of their Law, viz. not any Property or civil Right in Priests or others; for the Law requires them as due by divine Right, & therefore cannot be by any civil or temporal Right; for a Man to claim that by human Right from human Law, which commands them as due to God and holy Church, as that Statute of Henry the eighth doth, is but a meer Juggle and Deceit, and that Law of Henry the eighth and the rest since take them as granted due to God and ho∣ly Church; but if they be not, but only supposed as a Duty, then the Law cannot be binding, as they are in all the Statutes. That Tythes were never till of late pretended a civil Right is plain; for as they were imposed by the Pope, so they are tryable in his Courts; & those very Statutes which do plead, made by late Parliament, appoint them to be tryed in Ecclesiastical Courts: And the Act of 42. of Hen. 8. Tythes are there called Spiritual Gifts, and therefore no temporal or civil Right; for before the Dissolution of the Monasteries in Henry the eighths Dayes, thy were never called a temporal Right. But what is the Property that is now claimed? it cannot be in a Person, for the Priest hath them not until he enter into his Office. and when he parts with his Office, he looseth his Tythes, so that the property cannot be in the Priest; but it was supposed due to the Office, and what is that? it was a Popish Office; when Tythes were first payed to it, how should the Right continue now, the Office being laid aside, and the Pope also that set them up?
Others who plead a legal Right by Prescription, because they have so long possessed them, therefore they judge them their Right. This was the old Device of the Pope; first to preach that Tythes were due, and then to limit them to Monasteries and Parishes; when forty Years were past, to claim that a Debt, which before was payed as Charity, or at the most as the free Offering of the Owner: And thus the Pope got first Fruits, and Tenths, and Peter pence, and great Sums of Money out of this and o∣ther Nations, and he might as well have pleaded his Prescription, as any of his Branches can do now; is any so blind as not to see what poor Shifts are now made to uphold so great an Oppression, that hath no better Sup∣port then this, that it hath been so long payed? But shall the Continuance of an Oppression give Right to perpetuate the Grievance? How many great and heavy Pressures in this and other things lay upon the Nation, as may be seen in Henry the third, when the Pope got above one hundred and twenty thousand pound out of this Nation per an∣num, which was then more Worth then the King's Revenue: Now there is no such Office in being, is plain; for when Henry the eighth renounced the Pope, he was declared by Act of Parliament, assented unto by the Cler∣gy to be Head of the Church; and all the Ecclesiastical Orders were not to claim their Benefices from the Pope, but from the King, as by Act of Parliament; but this is more fully and largely set forth in a printed Paper by Grvs Benson, to which I refer the Reader. And as to the Impropriators, which lay claim by purchase, and have bought them of the State, and payed great Sums of Money for them, and may be many have no other Substance. Unto this it is answered, that in the Root and Ground all Tythes are a∣like, whether they be claimed by Priest or Impropriator, but seeing thse that sold them had no good Title, these that are derived from them cannot then be good; but being it was the King or State that sold them, and that the whole Nation had the Benefit of their Money, and the Nations were cased in other Taxes and Subsidies and Charge, which unavoidably would have come upon the Nation at that time, seeing the Nation had the general Profit, it is equitable and just, when they cannot have what is sold, that the Impropriators should have their Money repayed▪ which went to the bearing and paying of the publick Charge of the Nation; and it is Reason that it should be payed by the Nation in general, and so there would be no Detriment to any particular person, only it is equitable that the Rate be moderate▪ for it is believed upon good Ground▪ that the Value was but little, and the Rate small, which the Impropriators payed for them, be∣cause of the Charges and Hazards that was upon them; for the Purchaser could buy no more then what the Monasteries had, which were dissolved by Henry the eighth, and these Monasteries were to find a sufficient Priest or Curate, which had his Allowance out of them, and a convenient Por∣tion of Tythe, and likewise a Portion of the Tythe was set apart yearly for the Maintenance of the poor of the Parish forever▪ as is evident by divers Acts of Parliament, after the Dissolution of the Monasteries, the foresaid Charges were to continue upon them, as before, as may be seen at large in a Treatise called the poor Vicars Plea. Others say, The Laws were made by Parliaments, the Representatives of Peo∣ple,
and though Tythes were not due before, yet they might give Tythes, because as their own, they being the Body of the People. Answ. This supposeth a particular Donation of the People, not only in their Legislative Capacity, to bind themselves by a Law, but by a particular Act of Free Gift; but it's evident the Act never intended any such thing, for it gives nothing, but commands what was given before; and as to this or all other Laws that Princes, Parliaments, Popes, Councils, Bishops, and whatever else was by any Man made for the Payment of Tythes since Christ Jesus came in the Flesh, joyned all together, how do they all or any of them bind the Conscience? for if Tythes be not due by the Law of God, as hath been proved before, that they are not, who hath set them up? the Laws of men at the best; and what is man or the Sons of men, that make Laws in the Place, where God disannuls his own Commands, Heb. 7.12. as is manifest in this Point of Tythes by the precedent Scripture; verily, it is better to obey God then man; for Christ hath not put that Power into a∣ny mens Hands, to raise a compulsary maintenance for his Ministers, seeing he and his Apostles and Ministers, their Practice was otherwise, as is be∣fore-mentioned. Objection, But some may say, Have not the Magistrates Power, as Ma∣gistrates, to command the Payment of them to Ministers whom they approve of. Answer, If so as Magistrates, then the Turk, Tartarians and all In∣fidel Magistrates have the like; but it may be said, as Christian Ma∣gistrates. Answ. Then may not France and Spain, and Italy claim the same, for what Nation in Europe will not say they have a Christian Magistracy, though a far greater part of them be Papists, and may not the Papists by as good right claim and compel Maintenance for their Ministers as Henry the eighth, or any other could or can: but I would not be mistaken, as if I went about to lessen the magistrates Power in things Temporal and civil, as to raise Taxes, assessments, or subsidies, or other charges for the Service, defence, and well being of a Nation, but I distinguish betwixt things civil, and such as are called Spiritual, and so give unto Caesar the things that are his, and unto God the things that are his, for in civil things or temporal things they have Power from God to make Laws, and preserve a Nation in Peace, and to raise Taxes for the well being of a Nation, because in such things they are their own Masters; but in matters of Religion and Spiri∣tual THINGS no man ought to be imposed upon, for every one must give an account to Christ, who is the head of his Church, and must stand or fall to his own Master: But if the Law had been just in com∣manding Tythes, can it be judged equal to give treble Damages, where they are not payed? if a man be owing a just due debt, no more by the Law is recovered, but what the debt is, besides the charges of the Law, how Cruel therefore are those injunctions, which in a matter of so just scru∣ple, require and impose the treble value: and furthermore to be required by a Law to set out the tenth, makes a man a voluntary Agent in that thing against which his Conscience testifies, and he that cannot do so, they Sue and hale before Courts and Magistrates, to get judgments of treble Da∣mage; and by that Judgment frequently being put into the Hands of such
persons as will do it effectually to the Priests mind, they take away some∣times 6. or 7. yea oftentimes ten Fold dammage, what I say in this particular I can prove by many Witnesses in this Nation within this ten Years; and though in the Ecclesiastical Courts the ordinary might not examine a man up∣on his own Oath concerning his own Tythes; but now such as make Con∣science of Swearing, which Christ forbids, or that they cannot themselves tell what Tythe they had, are cast into Prison for contempt, and there may lye as long as they live, and many have dyed in Prison upon that ac∣count. O what Reformation is this? what! Compel a man himself to set out the Tythe of his own Goods to maintain a Hireling Priest, it may be a time-server, a prophane one, or a turn Coat, and so to make a man Sin against his own Conscience, or else take ten Fold as much, and not only so, but force him to Swear, or commit him to Prison, there to lye without Hope of any relief: O Priests! is not this the Wags of Unrighteousness that here is all this Work about tenths and first Fruits, and mortuaries and the like, which are no other then the Superstitious reliques of Popery? O did but the Rulers and Magistrates know and consider what Havock is made through the Nation, what driving of Goods, Oxen out of the Plow, Hor∣ses out of their Teames, the Cows from poor & indigent Children, & what carrying of Pots, and Pans, and Kettles, and fetching away the Cloathes off poor Peoples Beds, methinks it should make the Nation ashamed of such cruel Practices; or else of such Priests and Tythes as are the cause of all this: manifold instances I might give about all these things up and down this Nation, but that I would not trouble the Reader too much be∣cause they have been publickly made known before by other Hands and Pens. There are some other that have claimed Tythes and a propriety in them, as that they are right by a divine right, and for it plead the Law of Moses; but as to that I shall not say much more, neiher is there any necessity for it, because that most of the Ministry are ashamed to make this Plea. Others have pleaded the Decrees, Canons, and Constitutions of Popes and General Councils, Bishops and Convocations, and these have said, that Tythes are due by an Ecclesiastical Right, and by that right generally under the Papal power they claimed them, and others paid them: And this continued in England till the Popes Supremacy was cast off by Henr. the 8th and then he received first Fruits and Tenths. But of this plea many are ashamed, or few will own, as judging the Ground too weak to claim it by, an Ecclesiastical right. Lastly, The main and great plea of the Ministry of this last Age is, That Tythes are not due by the Law of God, because it was limited only to the Land of Israel, and to the Levites, only they say, the equity of the Law is still in force, which obligeth all to give a competent Maintenance for the Ministry; and to maintain this, they bring in all the Scriptures of the New Testament which seem to encline that way; and because they know of no other way for Maintenance, but by tythes, as they are supposed now to be established, many have ignorantly gone about to make inferences and Conclusions from them, as to prove their assertions. But to all which I return this answer. That these plead not for Tythes properly, but for a Maintenance by way
of Tythes, as they suppose most convenient, &c. And the first Scripture they bring in is, Luke 11.41. You pay Tythe of Mint and Rue, and all Man∣ner of Herbs: As also, Mat. 23.23. You pay Tythe of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin: Also Luke 28.12. I am not as this Publican, I pay Tythes of al that I possess, &c. It is answered, that Christ spake this to the Jews and Pharisees in the time when the Levitical Priesthood was not ended, and they were bound by the Law, whilest it was of Force, to observe this Ordinance amongst the rest which were in the first Covenant, which was faulty, which continued un∣til the time of Reformation, viz. till Christ was offered up, and said, It is finished, and was the End of the Law for Righteousness unto all that be∣lieve; but it is manifest that the Jews then, unto whom Christ spoke, were not Believers, but were such as withstood the Son of God, and did not re∣ceive him, who was the Sum and Substance of all the Types and Shadows of that Covenant; and so this is great Ignorance to conclude, that because these Scriptures are written in the New Testament, so called, that there∣fore Tything is a Gospel-Ordinance; for it is manifest that these Scriptures had Relation to the Jews, who were under the Law, and not under the Go∣spel; and so their Plea, as to this, is made void: But though Divine Right hath been long pleaded, and is yet by some, but few are now left that will only stand to it; for if Tythes be absolutely due▪ as by the Law of God, no Custom, Prescription, Priviledge, Exemption, Dispensation, Law or Constitutions of man or men can acquit any from the utmost Penny of the tenth Part; but scarce the tenth Person in England payes Tythes in kind, and many plead that they are Tythe-free, and pay none at all; but if any will stand to this, and plead Divine Right, then they are to be payed and received for the End and Use for the which they were commanded, for the Levites, Strangers, Poor, the Fatherless and Widdow, and then where is the Impropriator's Share? And some Lawyers of late, of very good Fme in England have given their Judgment, that Tythes are not due by the Law of God. Other Scriptures they seem to plead for the receiving of their Tythes, as Rom. 13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due: And Mat. 22.21. Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are God's. Answ. Herein is a clear Distinction betwixt the things which are Csar's; and the things which are God's; this speaks only of Tribute, and Custom, or Taxes, or Assesments, which the Civil Magistrate doth claim by Law and by Custom, for the Preservation of a Nation, or Conservation of eve∣ry man in his proper and particular Right; and herein every one ougt to render Subjection and Obedience, not only for Fear of Wrath, but for Con∣science sake; but these Scriptures have no Relation to Tythes at all, nor forced Maintenance for Priests. Object. But it may be objected, Hath not the Magistrate Power to com∣mand or make Laws for the Payment of Tenths, or what other Part he will to the Ministry? Answ. This was answered before; if God disanulled his own Command, Heb. 7. for the Payment of Tythes, who or what is Man, that he should make a Law, as well to contradict that his Command; as also on the contrary
to establish them? And seeing the Work of the Ministry is the Work of the Lord for Conversion of Souls, and that he is the Lord of the Harvest, he provideth for his Labourers and Harvest-men, whom he sends ; so that there need not any outward Law be made in this Particular; the Mi∣nisters of old needed not, though Believers were but few; and the Ministry of this Age reckons whole Nations to be Believers, and yet they dare not relye upon them for their Subsistance, but run to the temporal Powers, to make them a forcing Law to establish their Maintenance, which demon∣strates they are not true Believers, whom they reckon to be so, or else, that the Lord of the Harvest never sent them forth; or else, that they do distrust the Lord of the Harvest, who (they say) sent them out to preach. Other Scriptures are brought to plead for Tythes, or at least some Part of them, and forced Maintenance, as 1 Cor. 9.9. Thou shalt not muzzel the Mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the Corn, &c. Ver. 7. Who plants a Vine∣yard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? and who feedeth a Flock, and eateth not of the Milk of the Flock? Ver. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Answ. Unto all which I answer, that they which do believe, and have received spiritual things indeed, that they are enjoyned by the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles, and not only so, but even from natural things all that believe are largely taught their Duty therein, to distribute and communicate freely unto them who labour in Word and Doctrine, and are sent out in the Work of the Lord, that they be comfortably provided for by them that are Partakers of heavenly and spiritual things from the Lord, as to go in the Warfare of the Lord, and to plant in the Vineyard of the Lord; yea, and it is agreed that the Ministers of Christ did not do these things at their own Charge; but if they might not be muzled that tread out the Corn, yet they may be muzled that tread out no Corn, but run ram∣ping through the Lord's Fields, and spoil the Corn, these ought to be muzled. Again, they that watch over a Flock, though they may eat of the Milk of the Flock, yet they that kill them that are fed, and feed themselves with the Fat, and cloath themselves with the Wool, and worry the Lambs, they ought not to eat of the Milk of the Lord's Flock; and of such as they reck∣on Unbelievers and Hereticks, and they look upon belong to another Ma∣ster, and not to the Fold of Christ, they ought nt to cli and shear other mens Sheep: But in short, all the aforesaid Scriptures make nothing at all for Tythes, or any Part thereof, either from Believers or not Believers; and these Scriptures also grant that every man is the sole Owner of his own Labour and Possession, yet ought every one freely to glorifie God with his Substance, and to communicate to him that teacheth in all good things need∣ful, and such Sacrifice God doth well accept. Again, other Scriptures they bring, in which there is as little Ground or Footing as in the former, but that they are necessitated to get a Shelter and a seeming Cover for their Practice, to blind People withal, that they may get their Money; and so they bring 1 Cor. 9.10, 13, 14. For it's writ∣ten, or saith he, It's altogether for our sakes, no doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in Hope, and he that thresheth in Hope, should be made Partaker of his Hope. Ver. 13. And do you not know, that they who minister
holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar; even so hath the Lord ordained, that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: Upon these Scriptures, as upon the former, Inferences have been made, to prove their lawful receiving of Popish Tythes and forced Maintenance. The Apostle having travailed and laboured in the Gospel of Christ a∣mong the Corinthians, afterwards wrote unto them, exhorting them to Stedfastness in the Faith, and also reproving the Disorders that were a∣mongst them, which were crept in i hi Absence, whih were sown by them of the Circumcision, who boasted themselves against Paul, and led away the Hearts of the Corinthians from him, as much as in them lay, into the Liberty of the Flesh, and looked upon Paul as in Bondage, whereunto the Apostle useth Plainness of Speech, and tells them, that doubless he was as an Apostle to them, and magnifies his Office, and declares also his Power which he had received from Christ, as he told them, Ver. 4. have not we Power to eat and to drink? and I and Barnabas, have not we Power to forbear working? doubtless yes; it was the same that Christ gave unto his Disci∣ples, when he sent them forth, with them that are worthy to stay and to eat and drink what was set before them; and doubtless, they had Power to forbear labouring with their Hands, but they would not alwayes use it, lest they should seem burthensome, but laboured rather to make the Go∣spel of Christ without Charge; so this which is alledged, as out of the Law, for the Equality of it, as the Ox not to be muzled when he tred out the Corn, and a Husbandman ploughs in Hope to receive a Crop, and the Thresher thresheth in Hope to get out the Corn; even so, he that mini∣streth in Word and Doctrine in the Faith and Hope, is also made Partaker of his Hope, and goeth not to War of his own Charge, but Christ ma∣keth Provision for them, and opens the Hearts of People, to contribute free∣ly in the Work of the Lord, and for his Service: And seeing the Corinthi∣ans allowed this Power unto others, who sowed Dissension among them, the Apostle urgeth it, that he much more had Power, though he had not used it: And further, like as they that ministred at the Temple, who were Partakers of the Altar, as God had appointed them; likewise now they that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel, as God hath ordained it: But that Clause▪ Ver. 14. [Even so] hath been miserably strained by this last Generation of Teachers, as though they that preached the Gospel should live of Tythes, even as they, viz. the Levtes, that ministred at the Al∣tar, did live of the Offerings and Tythes that pertained to the Altar; but there is no Necessity to understand the Words [Even so] as thereby to in∣fer, that they who preach the Gospel should live of Tythes; but as the Le∣vites lived of Offerings and Tythes, that ministred at the Altar in their Day; even so, they that minister the Gospel, should live of the Gospel in their Day, and be content with Christ's Allowance, and as the Apostle saith else-where, having Food and Rayment, to be therewith content; for to live of the Gospel, is not to live of Jewish Tythes, nor Popish Tythes, nor forced Maintenance; for this is contrary to the Practice of the Ministers of the Gospel; for we never read of any Commandment given for Payment of Tythes under the Gospel, neither Exhortation to any, neither Reprehen∣sion of any for not paying in all the Writings of the Apostles; so that we
conclude there is none due, neither ought to be received by any Minister of the Gospel; but People being generally taught, that the Scripture is the Foundation of Faith and Practice of Christians: the Teachers of the last Age they know that People will expect to have some Ground or Scripture for Proof of their Arguments or Pleas, and they having not what they could desire, bring such as they can get, miserably turning and twining, perverting and straining these and the like Scriptures before-mentioned, to blind People withal; but the Day is manifest that discovers all the crook∣ed Pathes, Windings and Turnings of the old Serpent, and Ministers of Unrighteousness, and Wages of Unrighteousness. But another seeming Hold is, 2 Cor. 11.8. I robbed other Churches, taking Wages of them, to do you Service. Answ. Here the Apostle shews how he had behaved himself amongst them; though he had Power to eat and to drink, and to forbear Labour, and to receive of them (to wit, the Corinthians) those things needful, yet he had not done so for Reasons given, before-mentioned; and in divers o∣ther Places, though he saith, whilest he was present with them, that he wanted, as in ver. 9. and had preached the Gospel freely unto them, ver. 7. and did not use his Power, as aforesaid, but received something from the Brethren of Macedonia, which was freely given and ministred by them, amongst whom he had ministred before; and he made Use of this, even while he was in the Corinthians Work; and this he took, being offered freely by the Macedonians, that he might preach the Gospel freely among the Corinthians, and this he reckoned as Wages, and as taking from others, that he might serve the Corinthians, and that he might keep himself clear, and not be burthensome; but this was ingratefully done of the Corinthi∣ans, seeing it was that which they freely allowed unto them that had de∣ceived them, to wit, false Apostles; but what doth all this prove for Tythes and forced Maintenance, even nothing at all; but on the contrary, proves receiving freely that which was given freely by them, unto whom he had preached freely, and the Ingratitude also of the Corinthians. But being willing to answer all the Pleas and Arguments that ever I heard, and all the Scriptures in the New Testament (so called) which have been brought in for a Plea by the Ministry of this last Age, that their Cover may be rent, and their Vail done away, and the Feebleness of their Arguments shewed forth, that People may see they are without Foundation, or any grounded Bottom for thse challenged Tythes and forced Maintenance; and that all may see we do not suffer Imprisonment and spoiling of our Goods wilfully or ignorantly▪ but for our abiding in the Doctrine of Christ, and keeping stedfast to the Ordinances and Order of the Gospel in the pu∣rest times of the Publication thereof; but take one other Scripture which they alledge, and I have done, which is Heb. 7.8. And here men that dye do receive Tythes, but there he receiveth them, of whom it is witnessed that he li∣veth. Answ. Unto which I answer, because this is written in the New-Testa∣ment so called which they ignorantly call the Gospel; therefore because this Word (here) is mentioned in the Scripture; they have concluded that the Ministers of the Gospel do receive Tythes, which they as misera∣bly wrest as they do the Words (even so) for here the Apostle is exalting
the Priesthood of Christ above the Priesthood of Levi, and shews that Melchizedeck was greater then Abraham, after whose order Christ was made an High Priest, and that Levi payed Tythes in Abram unto Melchizedck: and these Words, Here men that dye receive Tythes, hath wholly relati∣on unto Abraham and to Levi in that Covenant, and not so much as any sha∣dow at all of paying or receiving Tythes in the second Priesthood; for if Perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood, what further need was there that another should arise after the order of Melchizedeck: And all the a∣fore-mentioned Scriptures, which are the greatest seeming Ground that the Ministry of this last Age pretend Tythes and forced Maintenance from, prove nothing at all, but rather to the contrary, as hath been said: and much more might be said; for it is manifest that all the Ministers of Christ never received any Tythes or forced maintenance from the World, who were in the Unbelief, neither of them who were not of their Church, nor of such as they reckoned as Hereticks; but this last Generation of A∣postates exceeds all that ever went before them, in Covetousness; if they be but remaining within such a Parish (which was first set up by the Pope and his Emissaeries, and ratified by the Princes of the Earth, that have drunk Whores Cup) whether they be Believers of Unbelievers, Prophane Schis∣maticks, or Hereticks; yea or such as they'l Curse and give up to Satan: Tythes and forced Wages, Mortuaries and Oblations, besides many other things that they claim as due, this they must and will have; and will tell you, he that preacheth the Gospel must live of the Gospel? O sad Ge∣neration, who fills the World with Darkness, and blinds the Minds of Peo∣ple! may it not truly be said and looked for; that which was Prophesied of Old, and came to pass coneerning the Levitical Priest-hood, when they had violated the Commandments of the Lord: For your sake shall Sion  Plowed as a Corn field, and Jerusalem become as Heaps: and truly I do rec∣kon it as one of the main Transgressions of the Ministry of this last Age, which should have been Leaders of the People, but have caused them to Err; that the Nation hath been Plowed up and turn'd over as a Husband∣man turns Ground, and therefore the Nation hath not enjoyed its rest, nor the Land its Sabbaths: neither I look will or can do, whilest these abomi∣nations are held up. Likewise, Let all the now call'd separated Churches be proved and try∣ed, who reckon that they are separated from the World, and yet many of them have received pay and Wages of those who are of the World, for their Teachers, who sent one out at their own cost, to Preach to the World; and this is likewise Hypocrisie and an abominable thing▪ and here also the Rulers of our present age might learn Wisdom (seeing that all he Ministers of Christ never received any Maintenance from the World, or from them that did look upon them as Ministers of Christ, nor own them as such) to with-hold their Hands from upholding any with their  Sword, or compel others to maintain them by their Penal Laws,  leave Christ's Kingdom to his own Rule, who is Lord of the  sends forth Labourers, and hath Spirit, and Life, and Power, and Wisdom to put upon them, and give unto them, who chuses whom he , and will not be limited, who set forth Fisher-men, Shepherds, , Plough-men, Tillers of Ground, and Keepers of Flocks, who spoke plain
and reached to the Consciences of men of the meanest capacity; and yet our litteral Rabbies cannot understand, who are yet wise in the World's Wisdom, gathered into Schools and there Study, and learn a Trade, and trade with their Words, thereby to get their Living, and what Do∣ctrine, suites the times, that they Study to uphold their Maintenance. In the time of Popery they studyed the Popish Doctrine, and preached into Nations, in the time of Prelacy they changed to a New form, and when that was laid aside, Presbytery stepped on the Stage, and that Doctrine and Worship was studied and Preached, and the Universities and Schools sent out such as would suit that time, then after that Independency that was propagated, and then the Universities and Schools sent out such as would suit that time, and now Episcopacy is strted up from the Grave, and all the frmer lid aside, & look what pleaseth them best which hath the great∣est livings to dispose, and that is sure by them to be cryed up, and study∣ed and Preached, and here's the spring of the Teachers, the Universities and Schools send forth, who Wheel about any way to preserve them in esteem and in their maintenance. But let the Rulers and all Wise men consider, that Christ's love to the World for whom he died is not lessened or abated, neither is his Spirit diminished▪ nor his Power shortened that he will not▪ or cannot send forth fit Ministers for his Service, or that he needs Universities or Schools, or Magistrates to provide maintenance for those that he sends forth, for let the Magistrates look to their own Kingdom which is of this World, and to restrain and punish the Evil-doers therein, and to encourage and pro∣tect the good, and then all would be agreed, and the Nations preserv'd and kept in peace and quietness, every one enjoying his true liberty and freedom in the things that are Spiritual, and which belong to the King∣dom of God, and herein would be no detrimnt at all to the Magistrates, or the Kingdoms of the World, nor any diminution from their Power; and oh that they might learn Wisdom, and as they would not have men to en∣trench upon their prerogative and Power, as it is not meet, so likewise that they would not intrench upon the Soveraignity and Power of Christ's Kingdom which is over all! and do we not say, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory? and know this, that his Glory he will not give to a∣nother; and let me speak freely the Reason wherefore the Nations have been broken into strie, and fractions, and war, is, because many men have made an inroad, and an intrusion upon the Soveraignity of Christ, and a∣gainst such his Power hth and will ever turn because they will not allow him that is the most high to Rule and Reign in Kingdoms and the Consciences of men, which he alone hath Right to do, and this Pow∣er, Honour and Glory the Lord hath not given to any other, nor yet will do, but to the Son of God▪ the Light of the World, the Life of men, and the Saviour of man kind; and what is man or the Sons of men, that they should strive with the Lord in this thing? Let all the Rulers of the Earth consider betimes: was not this it that destroyed the whole Nation of the Jews? was not this it, that confounded all the Roman Monarchs, and brought them all to a miserable End, because they would not suffer Christ to be Head among the Christians? and also how many Princes, though otherwise wise have lost their Crowns and Kingdoms, because they would not suffer Christ
to have dominion in his Peoples Hearts, but Persecuted them for keep∣ing his Statutes, and then his Power turn'd against them, as sad experi∣ence hath Witnessed in many Nations, and chiefly by the instigation of the Ministry of every Age since the Apostacy entred in, have stir'd up the temporal Kings, and temporal Princes to make Laws, and to compel all to obey them, and have pressed it upon the Magistrates, as their duty, when their Gospel would not maintain them to make Laws for them, to compel People to give them Tythes, and forced Maintenance, and Hire, or else most dreadfully complain upon the Magistrates, as that Christ was little beholden to them, if they would not compel and force according to the Priests mind, they have then judged them as luke-warm, and irreligi∣ous Persons, and such as had no care of the Church of God at all, and thus the Ppe and Prelates of every Age downward until this very time, have put on the Magistrates and Rulers to Work drugery for them, and inter∣meddle in those things which properly and solely belong to Christ Jesus, or else have stir'd up the Princes of the Earth to make War one against ano∣ther, only to Vindicate their Covetous and Ambitious quarrel, which was only a self seeking, and Pride, and not the Honour of God, nor the Pros∣perity of his saving Truth, & so greatly Wrong'd the Princes of the Earth, busying and troubling them with their own Covetous and self-seeking af∣fairs (falsely calling it the Church-affairs) and for the honour of Christ, when they have neglected their own necessary and urgent affairs in many Nations, and Kingdoms to the great harm of Princes, and detriment to the Nations, and trouble to the People, as is evident in the History of divers Christian Princes, from the time of Constance, until this very day 1664. Oh it is sad and Lamentable to behold how Emperors and Princes have been gull'd and cheated by these pestiferous, worldly, and carnal Priests, who have not minded the Law of Jesus Christ, nor the Conversion of Souls, but their own Bellies, and to be chiefly medling in State matters, and Prin∣ces affairs (which did not, neither do belong unto them) rather then the Flock of Christ, isomuch that they are grown to that height, and pride, and imperiousness, that no King, or Potentate could keep his Crown or prrogative and Kingdom in quiet, nor posses his own Dominion in peace, except he was subject unto them: Instances I might bring many of Emperors and Kings, whose Kingdoms have been introduced, and the King and his people Curst, and Excommunicated, because of some Factious Le∣gate, Bishop, or Prior, who have complain'd to the Pope, and upon every small complaint was ready to hear them, and to give Sentence and Judge∣ment against Princes, and all under pretence of Vindicating Church-prii∣ledges; and what a mischief and stir the former Bishops of Canterbury, Priors, Monks and others, what Stirs and Broiles they have made in this our Eng∣lish Nation, and what trouble they have put the Princes thereof unto, and ivolved them in, and the whole Nation, only for their own particular Interest? our own Chronicles and Histories of the Nation do sufficiently testifie▪ unto which I refer the Reader, rather then to trouble in this dis∣course: and since the Pope's Yoke hath been thrown off, how have the Na∣tions been involv'd in trouble, and Princes disturbed with the Covetous priests affairs, as about Tythes, Glebe-Lands, Augmentations, forced
Maintenance, Hire and Mortuaries, and about their Caps, and Tippets, and Hoods, and Altars, and Tables, and Crosses, and unholy R, and Bells, and Fonts, Surplices, and Girdles, and such other like trumpery, how hath the Nation been troubled, and Peoples Consciences been bur∣dened, and one dis-joynted from another, in which God hath not been Glorified at all, nor his People edified, and all this and much more the Magistrates have been pressed upon, and very much troubled. And for being afraid of offending their worldly Priests, they have become their Servants and Drudges, to Work their Slavery, and yet all is too little, and great commotion and strife hath been, and is in the Nation this day a∣bout these trivail yet troublesome things, by which the Hearts and Con∣sciences of good people are troubled, and the Nation vexed, and all under the Name of vindicating the Church-priviledges. O all ye Mngistrates and Potentates of the Earth arise, and stand upon your own Legs, and shake your selves and these things from off you, and trouble not your selves with that which is too Ponderous nd Weighty for you to bear, which you are never able to wade through keep Peace in your own Dominions, and Execute Justice and Judgment among all People without having respect to this or that particular Judgment, fr that's he way and the only way to preserve the Nation and Peple in Peace and qui∣etness, and let Christ's Kingdom alone, and his Chur  him th is the Head thereof, who gave his Lie for it, and hath a care of it, and let Christians alone as Christians, and as Christ's Subjects▪ to be gover∣ned by Christ, who is the King, Law-iver, and Judge of his People, who only hath right to Rule in the Hearts and Consciences of the Sons of men, who doth Teach, hath taught, and yet will teach his People, as is Wit∣nessed by the Prophet Isaiah. And this Glory and Power he hath not given to any man, as man, whatsoever; but he himself teacheth how he will be Worshipped, to wit, In Spirit, and in Truth, And whosoever would arrogate unto themselves that power, then doth the power of the Lord Je∣sus Christ turn against them. And therefore be warned, all ye Potentates of the Earth, and let your earthly Wisdom cease, and carnal policy cease▪ and earthly contrivance cease, and Worldly consultations cease; make room all, give place and give way to him who is risen and come in his se∣cond Appearance in his Saints, who must have way, and will have way, or else will force his way, though not by Bow, Spear, Bcker, or Shield, or carnal Weapons of War, for out of his Mouth goes the two-edged Sord, and hot Coals of Pire are kindled by the breath of his Mouth: And the reath of the Lord shall slay the Wicked, and burn up all Mountains and Hills before it. Con∣sider what God did to Amalec of old, whose King was Aga a mihty Prnce, and to Sion, and Ogge King of Bashan, who was of the Re of the Gaian, mighty for fortitude; and, moreover, Ammon and  very great Nati∣ons, all these rose up to stop the Lord in his way, and Israel, unto whom the promise of God was made. And what was the Issue thereof, when the Lord was glad to force his way, though to the detriment and ruin of all those mighty Nations? Christ the Light of the World, now in the End of the World, and in this last Age, hath chosen a People out of many Peoples, and a Family out of many Families, and a Nation out of many Nations, to serve him and Worship him, to Honour and obey him in Life▪
Spirit and Power, in their Generation, and unto them the promise of eter∣nal Life is made, and the Kingdom that is not of this World, and Inheri∣tance that fades not away. And Christ the King of eternal Glory is their Leader, and many are determined to follow him, and love not their Lives to the Death, and are willing to lay down all in this World for th which is Promised, and would fain walk on their way in quietness and Peace, with∣out any molestation to any man in Person or Estate in the world, eing their own Bread, and drinking their own Water, either by aour or by Price; but, alas! their way is stopt, and Divinations are sought against them, the Balaamites are called forth to Enchant, and divine,  Curse, and they give Counsel to the Princes to stand up in defiance, and seek by all means possible to stop, and have fram'd many engines, to see if that will do, to wit, forceable Laws, confiscations, premunires, Jayles, Prisons, Houses of Correction, Fines, Stockings, Whippings, execrations, com∣minations, and Excommunications, and what not, that can be invented by worldly policy? and now the Battel is set, though one party hath no carnal Weapon in their Heart or Hand, and all Nations mark the Issue, remem∣ber the Battel and the End thereof, and do no more, if the Lord do not manifestly say, and make it evident one way or other, (for I dare not limit him a way) saying as he did of old, Touch not mine Anointed, do my Pro∣phets n harm, to every Kingdom, Nation and people, who rieth up a∣gainst the Inheritance of the Lord, and if he bring not a Rebuke upon what∣soever Nation, people or Family, that arises up in Opposition against Christ and his people, whom he hath redeemed, then let all conclude that God is not among us, neither is with us, nor hath spoke unto us, but to be short in this matter, because a few Words to the wise is enough, and a lit∣tle Counsel to the prudent may suffice, but in this particular of which I have been treating most-what about Tythes, and Ministers Maintenance in this I shall conclude, and also assent unto, as being the Judgment of thou∣sands of the Lord's people, as that the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who are trly so, manifest in Doctrine and Works, who sow unto us o any peo∣ple Spiritual things, they should and ought to reap of our Temporal things But here lies the difference; First of all, that the Spirit of the Lord in our Consciences must be our judge, who these Ministers are, and no other man's direction▪ for to the Conscience were alwayes the Ministers of Christ made manifest, and not approved with the Reason and Wisdom of Man. Secondly, that our gifts may be free, and by no man's compulsion; are this is according to primitive Example, and the Church of Christ's order i the first -times, which all do conclude was the most purest time▪ And would not this ease the temporal Magistrate of much trouble that he puts himself unto, and also be more acceptable to God and man? for who hath made him a Judge of these things in Gospel-times? But seeing I have run over the many particular Judgments from the A∣postles time downward, and have given the best President that can be gi∣ven in every Age, as to this Particular; and seeing divers things are writ∣ten by other Hands, this may be enough to satisfie the Consciences of all who do scruple in this Matter: And so I shall conclude upon these many good Reasons and Grounds before-mentioned, which are agreeable, some of them, in every Age unto the Doctrine of Christ, and the Practice of
the Apostles, and this is a certain and positive Truth, believed among us, which also is agreeable unto the Scripture, that Tythes and forced Mainte∣nance, as to the Ministers of Christ, never was, is or shall be counted as Gospel-maintenance, neither are the Consciences of Believers at all oblie∣ged at all in this matter. Concerning Parochial Churches, and Division of Parishes, and Parish Profits. COncerning these Parish Churches, about which there is such heavy Stir at this Day, and for Parish Pay, and an Injunction for all to worship there, is a very Novelty, and compared with the Apostles time, though it's granted that there were places wherein the Saints did assemble themselves for the Worship of God, ye no limitting to any such Place, nor no limitting, nor no tying to pay, these were but set up at best in the time of Popery, and not altogether in the Beginning of it neither; for as i mentioned before, the Teachers were sent out of the Monasteries and reli∣gious Houses (so called) and the People did go to worship at any Place, and at their own free-will gave their Offerings where they pleased, till the Year 1200. as before is mentioned, as learned Slde hath well observed in his exact Treatise of Tythes. As for the Brittains, little or no Testimony is extant of any Credit, that dis∣covers their Order in their time, but some about the Year 500. after Christ was found amongst them; for when Dabritius was Bishop of South Wales, and his See appointed at Lanaff, divers Churches were erected, and Ob∣lations and other Profits were appropriated to him and his Successors, likewise mention is made of a Church built in the time of the Ro∣mans to the Honour of Saint Martin, in which Austin and his Followers, when they came first from Rome, made their holy Assemblies, as they were called; but Guildas saith, that about the Year 580. the Clergy having Lordship, had resort to them for filthy Lucre's sake. First, Parochia or Paraecia be diversly taken, as first it was taken by the Saxons for a Bishoprick or a Diocess, or otherwise for a limitted Place within that Diocess, called a less Parish▪ but it is manifest these Parishes had no Pro∣fits at all belonging unto them, but only were Places where Augustine sent his Monks unto in the time of the Saxons, and to preach and receive the Offerings, and they were carried into a general Treasury for the Clergy, for then they had all things in common; so at that time, when they began to grow rich, they began to build some Houses, cal∣led Churches, and to repair the old Temples of the Gentiles, as Pope Gre∣gory advised them out of the Offerings of the People but now Parish Priess take Tenths and Oblations also, and that by Force, and will neither build nor repair these Mass-houses, and so are worse then the Papsts in their time) for the Conveniency of the neighbouring Inhabitants were assigned to the ministring Priests, where they exercise their Shrivings; but not so limit∣ted, that every one was bound to keep his Divotion within the Limits of such a Place or any parish; for in the Respect of Offerings and profits, Can∣terbury
was indeed the only limitted parish, so it was not material at what place they met, or where they offered their Bounty, so they did it  where; and it's commonly received, that Honorus, who succeeded Augu∣stine at Canterbury, about the Year 630. divided his province into paiss, as some of the greatest and most learned Writers relate. But when the Pope's Doctrine was received, and Divotion grown great, such as it was, most Lay-men of great Estates desired the Country Resi∣dence of some Chaplains or Clarks, that might alwayes be ready for their Instruction, their Families and adjoyning Tenants; and then Parish Churches began to be builded by them also, and the Bishops hallowed them (as it was called) and they were endued by particular Maintenance from the Founders, the Territories, Demesnes and Tents▪ and Neigh∣bouring Possessions, and they assigned the Limits where the holy Function should be exercised & appointed the Persons  should  the Church, and offer there, and provided a special Sallery for the Performance, and made the Revenue perpetually annexed to the Church of that , who received it, and so the Offerings were restrained from the Common Trea∣sury of the Dioces. Out of these Lay Foundations, chiefly undoubtly came these kind of Pa∣rishes, which at this day are in every Diocess▪ their Difference in Quanti∣ty being originally because of the several Circuits, Demesnes or Territo∣ries possessed by the Founders, sometimes greater, and sometimes lssr: At what time these Lay Foundations began to be frequent, appears not; but some mention is made of them about the Year 700. as Bede aith, who mentions one Puch, a Saxon Noble man, and one Addi, who builded also, and endued them with Sallary; but about the Year 800. many were foun∣ded by Lay men, and recorded to be appropriated to the Abbey ; by this Time Lay Foundations grew very common, and Parochial imits also of the Parishioners Divotion: And in a Council hold under , Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, we find, that where Churches are builded, and that they are consecrated by the Bishop of the same Diocess, a Canon of the same Synod ordains, that though every Church, upon the Death of every Bishop, that all the Families of every Parish were to meet at the Church, and sing 30 Psalms, and 600 Psaleies, and 0 Missays, with Pasting and Prayer for the Soul of the Bishop deceased. Many more Instan∣ces might be given, and Presidents about these Parishes; but enough of this, only to inform the Reader of their Original; from these it doth flly appear, that the Limits of Parishes were understood; but the first express mention of Limitation of Profits to this or that Church, as in the Laws of King Edgar, made in the Year 970. in the very Midnight of Popery, where it was ordained, that every man should pay his Tythes to the most ancient Church or Monastery; where he heard God's Services; but some Parishes had other Beginnings, in Regard of the inconveniency, which made  Alexander write to the Bishop of York, that he heard of a certain Parish in his Province, so far distinct from the Parish Church, tht the  could not repair to it in Winter; whereupon he commands the Arch-Bi∣shop to build a Church in the Town, and to institute a Presntion of the Rector, that might have to his Use all profits encreasing in those Limits and acknowledge a Superiority to the Mother-Church: And so by the Autho∣rity
of the Power, either by the Pope, Bishop or Princes, who received their Doctrine; the Limits and Maintenance of Parishes have been more or less, as they ordained, and as they do continue to this Day. Likewise in other Kingdoms and Nations where the Pope had Authority, the like Rules as aforesaid were observed, as might be evidenced by sundry Authors; but not to trouble my self or the Reader any more with such un∣profitable Stuff; I have only given these Instances, to shew the Ground and Rise of them, and shew how that people then were not limitted to any par∣ticular place in Respect of Worship, neither in Respect of Pay or Duty (so called) but now them that pretend Reformation, and have denyed the Pope and his Doctrine, as they say, that claim both; and if all between such a Hedge and such a Dith, such a Water and such a Way, will not come and worship at that Place, called their Parish Church, and hear their Ser∣vice, and joyn with them i i, though it be never so repugnant to the Do∣ctrine of Christ and the true Worship of God; but more especially, if they come not with their Pay; they will give them up all unto Satan by whole Sale, and cast them into Prison, and denounce them Hereticks, and cy to the temporal Power for Help against these Non-conformists, for they are not fit to live in a Nation, because they are not commodious to us, and then get an Order, fetch away their Goods, break open the Gates, and carry away poor mens Corn, drive away Oxen and Cows, and trail away the Pots and Pans, hale away Clothes off poor peoples Beds, and then cry, they are not subject to the Orders and Canons of the holy Church, no, not con∣formable to our Laws; and this is the practice of our great Reformers of our latter Ages, which are far worse then in the very Height of Popery; by Reason o which practices the Land mourns, and because of which we cannot joyn with them in their Worship, neither give them pay for doing of Mischief, nor suffer the Lord's Goods to be given to such coveous lazy priests, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies. And for denying of these late Innovations and new upstart things, which are no Congruity with the primitive Church of Christ, we are great Suf∣ferers at this Day, but have rather chosen to keep our Consciences clear, and the Doctrine of Christ inviolable, whatsoever we suffer, till God make our Innocency and our Righteousness appear as the Noon-day, and plead our Cause in the midst of all our Enemies.
The poor Husband-man's CompIaint, his Hope and Confidence LET Pope and Priest do what thy may, God will take Tythes ere long away; For they're oppressive in the Land, Which makes good Men against them stand: For we oppressed are thereby, Which makes  to the Lord so cry, To ease us of this Burthen sore, That we may praise him evermore, That he would hearken our Addres, Which we to in Humbleness Present our Suit to ease our Grief, And thorow Pity send Relief; For by the merciless Merchants Crew Of Babel's City doth renew Our Sufferings most heavily; Housholds expos'd to Penury; Our Kine and Oxen they by Force Drive away without Remorse, Our Bedding, Pewter, and at last, Our selves are into Prison cast. Thus to Misery they their Doom, By Authority fetcht from Rome Do expose our sad Estate, And whole Housholds ruinate, By that which they usurpate, They whole Families extirpate: O great Oppression that again Makes us doubly complain; Our heavy Burthen fetcheth Groans, This cruel Tything forceh Mans: And wrongfully they have pretence Of Scripture made for their Defence; From Levi's Tribe they would possess Tythes to them are by Success: And thus the Gospel's Day in vain, To get their Prey they would disdain: But God's Worship that shall stand, When they have done what's in their Hand; For what is done against God's Power, Shall be thrown down as in an Hour;
The World shall destroyed be, Who lives not long may come to see, God will ry as there is need, And send Deliverance to his Seed; This is my Faith, I do believe That God will sore the Wicked grieve; Therefore let wicked Men repent, That unto Hell they be not sent; And if they subject be to God, They may escape his heavy Rod: The Time comes on and hastes apace, Wherein great Babylon God will raze Out of her Power and Might so great, That she'll be turn'd out of her Seat, That Christ may rein, whose Due it is, That all the Faithful him may bless: Babylon's Merchants with their Pay In God's Time he'll turn away; For he is come to be their Fe, Which is Caue to bring their Woe; For they shall cry Woe and Alass! When there is none to make Redress; As in one Hour shall Judgment come, With Violence perpetual Doom; Of Death and Famine shall she taste, Her stately Buildings all laid waste; The Day of howling shall betake, And she thrown down into the Lake; Ths dreadfully her doubled Cup Of Wrath and Sorrow she'll drink up; For why the Lord's Decree shall stand, His Purpose now is near at hand, And what is prophesy'd shall come, Babel's Merchants they shall mourn, They shall weep and howl right sore, Their Merchandize will sell no more▪ After that which they did lut Departed from them is as Just: Read your Sentence, Babel's Train, Judgment comes with Might and Main▪ The Wrath of God and Fury great Pered from his Judgment-Seat; From his Presence, yea, from him Will your Cup be ; Kings will mourn, and cry alas! When they thee Things see come to pas; For through Christ's Power and Renown, Down goes Babel, she goes down▪ J. R.
As one soreseeing the Day of Terror that is to come upon BABEL, makes this Invitation. COme out of her my People, O return, Make haste, her Day's at Hand to weep and mourn. Her Dayes of howling hasten on apace, She hath nigh liv'd her Time, and run her Race: Return, return, lest that her Plagues you taste. For desolate must she, her Buildings waste; Her fiery Burning Smoak  nigh at Hand For Fear of Torments Kings at Distance stand; The Voice of Mourning shortly comes to pass, Babylon's Merchants cry, alass, alass; This City great is now co'd ruinate, And all her stately Buildings desolate. Thu Babylon the great is thrown to'th Ground, And never any more is to be found: Then shall the glrious Day, and then the Voice, As if of mighty Thunderings, Saints rejoyce, And they their Song of Halelujah sing, Their Praises, Honour, Glory to their King. Their Joy and Splendor, now the Saints do say, The Lamb is come this is our Nuptial Day. O glorious Sun-shine, King of Saints we'll praise; And in thy Powerful Wonder we amaze With admirable Joy our Souls to thee The Song of Sion sing; O praised be Thou holy, holy, glorious, righteous God, Who Babylon hast shaken by thy Rod, And givest thy Saints the Songs of Joy to sing, Praise to their God, Praise to their gracious King; The Saints in Righteousness thou wilt aray With fine Adorning, thee to praise alway. And in thy glorious Habitation rest, For evermore with Joy their Souls be blest: Rejoyce, rejoyce, ye Saints of the most high, To Sion's King give Praise eternally; The wondrous Joyes unto you which are come Unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, In Admiration which to you belong, The doubled Halelujah is your Song;
When Babel's just Reward that Day shall be As a great Milstone cast into the Sea; Reward her as she hath rewarded you, Double her Cup, her Torments eke renew; For insomuch as she the Saints Blood shed, With righteous Judgment shall she be judged: Sit down ye Sufferers in the Patience-Seat, And willingly content, thugh it be great; Your Measure's hard in this your suffering Day, But your Reward shall come with double Pay; Resign your selves, and willingly sit down, In the Expectance of the glorious Crown; For why your Portion glorious shall be, A great Reward is sure, you shall it see: Fret not your selves because of Wicked Men, Your Day will joyous be; even so, Amen. E. G. The great COMPLAINT and OUT-CRY of one of the Sufferers of SION. O Rulers of England and Teachers and People, how long will it be ere you will awake out of the deep Slumber that hath seised upon you, and consider a little; you do all look upon in this Age that Popery is Ido∣latry, and to maintain their Worship and Practice is not consistant with the Worship which you own; but do you think that talking against Popery in the general, whilest that you are upholding it in many Particulars in Point of Laws and Worship, doth answer your Profession, or will preserve you in the Day of the Lord, when the Righteous Judgments of God shall be revealed, seeing that though you have broken off from them in some circumstantial and ceremonial things; for that very main Basis and Foun∣dation upon which it standeth is absolutely Covetousness and filthy Lucre; but to speak plain, Tythes, Offerings, Oblations, Mortuaries, Peter-pence and quid non is claimed and looked upon to be due as to the Pope, in Imita∣tion of the Jews High Priest, with all the Rabble of that Crew, even from the very Bishop to the Quirister-boy; and yet in Point of Wages and Pay all the aforesaid Ordinances, which constitute by Authority from Rme stand as Evangelical, or Jure divin unto this Day amongst the reformed Churches (so called) which are not only disconsonant to the first primi∣tive times, but also contrary to the very Law of the Jews, when Tythes, Oblations and Offerings were due to be payed; for then the Husband man, Poor, Fatherless, Widdows and Orphans might all eat together of that which was offered, or given according to the Command; but now they which pretend another Ministry, and lay little Claim to the Levitical Priest-hood, and have also Possessions of Lands amongst their Brethren, which the Levites had not; these go with Tythes, Offerings and divers other
things, never claimed by the Levites, but claimed by popish Constitutions in the Mid-night of Popery; and all these things the reformed Priests (so termed) lay claim unto, and must have, and will have, or else the whole Nation shall ring with their Noise, Common Pleas, Exchequer, Capiter Court, Assise and Sessions, Shrieffs, Goalers, Byliffs, and every common Catchpole shall be employed to do their Work, and all too little to satisfie their vul∣turous Eye: And if they can get a Scrowl under any Hand that hath Au∣thority, they will break open Doors, pull down Hedges, carry away the Corn at their Pleasure, drag away Pots and Kettles, and tugg away Bed∣ding and Cloaths of all Sorts, Childrens Night-beds, as a Priest of this Order did in Kent lately, yea Curtains and Vallans, drink Bear of the Cel∣lar, and if it be but half a Cheese; and this is their Plea, He that precheth the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel; and the aforesaid Husbandman, Father∣less and Widdows have not any Part or Share in the aforesaid falsly claim∣ed Tythes; but all is too little to satisfie the insatiable Covetousness of these Evangelical Priests, falsly so called: O how can ye know and behold these things, and not blush and be ashamed; and shall the Laws which have been made in the Night of Darkness and Popery, of Necessity be a Rule in this Age to Magistracy and Ministry, which pretend they are in a more pure Light: Oh that the Lord would open all your Eyes to consider; but how∣ever, them unto whom his marvelous Light is shed cannot but call unto you, and also bear their Testimony against the aforesaid Grievances and Disorder, which are executed beyond Measure upon the poor Pople in this Nation, which certainly, if not amended, will draw down God's hea∣vy Judgments upon the Nation; and so I cannot but as one among the rest give in my Testimony for God and his Truth against such cruel Act∣ings, and falsly pretended Maintenance of Black-Coats and Turn-Coats, and my Testimony is true, and to seal it I have given up my Life and Estate. By a Servant of the Lord, M. L. To all who say, you are gathered out of the World into Church-Fellowship, these Queries are for you to answer. I. WHat was the Woman that was cloathed with the Sun, and crown∣ed with twelve Stars, which travailed in Pain to bring forth? 2. What was the Sun she was cloathed withal, and twelve Stars she was crowned withal? and when was she so cloathed and crowned? 3. And what was the Man-child that was brought forth, seeing Chrst was born of the Virgin in Bethlehem long before John saw this in the Isle of Pathmos? 4. And when did the Woman fly into the Wilderness? and what is the Wilder∣ness into which she fled? and what is the Wings of the great Eagle, which she did fly withal? 5. And what is the Time, Times and the half Time which she is to be in the
Wilderness? and when did it begin? and when will it be expired? and whe∣ther is the Woman ever to come out again? and when shall be the Time of her Re∣turn? 6. When was the Time that the Man-child was caught up unto God, which the Woman brought forth, seeing Christ was ascended long before this Man-child was caught up to God, which was to rule the Nations? and how long it is since? 7. And whether is he ever to descend again, and be made manifest to rule the Nations? and when shall he begin to reign? 8. When was the Dragon in Heaven? and how came he there, seeing that it's written, No unclean thing can enter there, or nothing that doth defile? 9. And when was he cast out of Heaven into the Earth? and how long hath he to reign in the Earth? 10. When began he to persecute the Remnant of the Woman's Seed? and how long shall his Reign be? 11. When begin the one thousand Years that he shall be bound? or whether is it begun, or to come? 12. When shall he be taken hold of, and with the Beast and false Prophet thrown into the Lake of Fire? 13. What is Mystery-Babylon? and when had she her Rise? when was her City raised up, over which she rules as a Queen? 14. And what is the golden Cup of Fornication she hath made the Nations drunk withal? 15. And what is her Merchandize which her Merchants trade withal, and the Sea upon which they carry their Traffick, and upon which the Ship-Ma∣sters and Ships ride? and when shall it be dryed up? and what shall dry it up? 16. When shall the City over which she hath reigned be destroyed! and when shall her Flesh be burnt with Fire? and what is the Gospel that shall be preached again? 17. And how long hath it been since it hath been preached to the Nations, see∣ing it's to be preached again to the Nations? and whether is the Time begun or not? when was the Gospel lost, seeing all Europe is professing it? or whether is it yet to come, when shall it begin to be preached again to Kindreds, Tongues and Nations? 18. And what is the Light of the Lamb the Nations that are saved shall walk in after the seven Vials be poured upon the Seat of the Beast? Declare if thou hast Understanding. F. H.
A General Epistle to all who have belie∣ved in the Light of the Lord Jesus, and are called of God to follow the LAMB through the great Tribu∣lation. Dear Friends, WHom God called out of the World and the Vanities of it, to serve the living God in Newness of Life, and to be Wor∣shippers of him in Spirit and Truth, and to be Followers of Christ in the Regeneration, and to be baptized with him into his Suffering and Death, that so you may be partakers of his Resurrection and Life, and manifest unto all, that you are risen with him out of the Grave of Sin, Wickedness and Death, by having your Hearts renewed, and your Affe∣ctions and Minds set to seek those things which are above, which are not transitory and visible, but everlasting and immortal, by which the Souls of all the righteous and obedient Children are refreshed, and nourished up unto eternal Life, and through the eternal power of the Son of God, which hath been and is manifest among them that believe, in the Measure of his Spirit, and keep their first Love and Integrity unto the Lord, all his are pre∣served out of the Temptation of the Adversary within and without, who seeks to root out that which God hath planted, and to nip the Blossom and the Bud, which God hath caused to spring forth through his tender Love in your Hearts, so that you might dye to the Good, and be spoiled in that wherein all your Happiness lyeth now and forever. Oh therefore all watch and be circumspect so much the more against Temptations, lest you be en∣snared, and your Faith fail, and you fall short of the promise of God, in not continuing Faithful to the End: Friends, a Care, and a tender Love and a godly Jealousie is in my Heart to you and over you all that have be∣lieved, that none of you may be lost and scattered again in the Desarts and Mountains, and dry and parched places, where you have sometimes been in the time of Unbelief, where the Goats who are rough can feed, that must go to the left Hand, and have the Curse: The Zeal of the Lord and his Truth, who so gloriously hath been manifest among you, above all the people and Families of the Earth in our Generation, constrains me thus to write unto you, and to stir you unto Faithfulness in this Day of Trial; for now Satan desires to win now you within, and to sift you without; there∣fore all watch and pray, that your Faith fail not, which now will be tryed, and your Hope, and your Love, and your Zeal to the Lord and his Truth;
and whether you will confess him before Men, his Way, Worship, Laws and Statutes, which he hath revealed in your Hearts, which fallen men oppose and contradict, and Sayers gainsay, and would not have him to rule, nor his Servants to obey; so let it be manifest to all you fear God rather then men, and love him, and obey him above the Precepts of men, which are against him; and whether you love the things that are above, beyond the things that are earthly; and whether you will own him, his Cross, Re∣proach and Suffering, or deny it, and have the Liberty of the World, which is Bondage, and free from Righteousness; it's no time of Reserves, con∣cealing, hovering or halting, for there is an utter Discord betwixt Christ and Belial; and so much the more of Christ, his Power and Kingdom is brought forth, so much the more is the Hatred, Envy and Wrath of the Devil kindled, who hath deceived the Nations, and blinded their Eyes, and in his Subjects, who oppose the Lamb of God, and tread under Foot the Blood of the Covenant, so that to one or other each one belongs, and which is for each part will be seen, for there can be no Concord or Recon∣ciliation: Therefore all Children of the Day, put on the Armour of Light, and have your Feet shod now when we walk through thorny places; and be not fearful or doubtful, but of believing Hearts; stand not aloof off, and idle when others are engaged in this spiritual War; pull not your Necks out of the Yoak, when others draw; shelter not your selves, when you see others in Jeopardy; love not the World, when you see others have thrown it off; be not entangled in cumbersome Things, when you see o∣thers throw off all Weights; turn not your Backs in the Day of the Lord's Controversie, but follow the Lamb: This is the Day of Tribulation we have to follow him in our Age, like as all the Martyrs and Prophets had in their Age, whose Garments were made white in the Blood of the Lamb: So all that continue, and are not faint-hearted, shall receive the Crown, the Honour, the Reward, and shall reign with Christ, who now suffer with him: Therefore all dear Children of God, and Followers of Christ Jesus, let the Loins of your Minds be girded up, be now ready, when the Lord calls, who is on my Side? who will take Part with me? who will own my Reproach? who will engage with me? who will gather to my Standard of Salvation lifted up, and to my Ensign of Righteousness held forth in the World, to redeem it? an who is ready, and not abroad in the Field, neither hath to go to the House top? but that all may say in their Hearts, here am I ready to do thy Will, ready to obey thee, and follow thee, and to suffer for thee; for whoso draws back, the Lord hath no Plea∣sure in such; he that will save his Life▪ shall lose it; and he that will save his Liberty, shall lose it in the Spirit; and he that will save his earthly Pos∣sessions, and for the doing thereof will deny that which God hath perswa∣ded him of, that he ought to be faithful in, he will lose his Inheritance in the heavenly; in a Word, whoso fails in holding forth that Testimony that they know God requires, and is their Duty to render unto him, will lose the Testimony of his Spirit they have sometimes felt in themselves, and will decay, and their Love will wear out▪ therefore whosoever are resigned and given up unto the Lord, will be approved, and manifest to be on the Lord's part by Obedience to these things mentioned. Friends, do you not believe it a Duty that every Christian ought to be exercised in, to meet to∣gether,
to wait upon him, to worship him, and to admonish, exhort and strengthen one another, to pray together in the Holy Ghost, and one for another, and to edifie and comfort one another; and do you not believe God dwells not in Temples made with Hands, neither hath any Fellowship with Idols, but is worshipped any where and in every Place where the Saints meet in his Name: Again, have you not been comforted, edified and strengthned in meeting? and have you not found the Presence of the Lord and his Face? and have you not felt his great Power working in your Hearts, when you were assembled together in his Name, working in you to the opening of your Hearts, and quickning and enlivening your Souls unto God, and judging down the Evil? and have you not felt his living Mercies shed abroad in you, and the Springs of Life opened, and the ho∣ly Seed refreshed, and God's Witness reached in all, and many convinced and converted unto God in your Assemblies, so that all have gone away com∣forted and refreshed, and resolved to continue in the Grace of God, the Consideration of these Things dwelling in your Hearts, and the Sence of your own present Condition should stir you up, and provoak you unto Sted∣fastness in the Faith and Practice you have received and walked in from the Beginning of the Manifestation of God's Love unto you, so that there should methinks need little Exhortation; God's Enemies are resolved to do wickedly, be you also so to do your Duty; they seek by any means to make any fall from their Principles and Stedfastness, do you seek to escape their Snares, and to be kept clear in your Consciences before God; be va∣liant for the Truth, sell it not, but all for it, that it may be your all, and then you shall see your Lot is fallen in a good Place, and your Possession is pleasant; the Lord calls now to Suffering, put now your Necks in the Yoak, bear one anothers Burthen, and so fulfil the Law of Christ; and take heed you give not Ear to that Voice that speaks, Save thy Liberty, save thy Estate, possess thy own, and provide for thy self, and spare thy self, that is the Voice of the Enemy of your Souls: So keep over the World and its Spirit, let no Slackness appear, for that makes Sufferings long, and that gives Ground to your Adversaries, that they shall prevail, and that weakens the Hands of others, and strengthens not; this confirms our Enemies in their De∣ceit, that we are but as other men and people, that have professed God in Summer and fair Weather, but will make Ship-wrack of all in a Storm and in Suffering; and any turning aside from the holy Commandment of God, openeth the Mouth of God's Enemies; do not seek every one your own Profit, Ease, Life and Liberty only, but every one another's Good; and mind not only one Member, but the whole Body; heed not them that draw back, that is no President for you to follow, but them that press for∣ward, and are not offended in the time of Hardship; heed not them tht will tell you, they can keep their Hearts upright to God, and retain their Love to Truth and Friends, and yet will not afford their Presence in your Assemblies, but escape Suffering, and deny the Cross, and neglect their present Duty, for that is Deceit, and their own Hearts will deceive them; put not off till to morrow, defer not the time till you can see some more Ease and some greater Calm, beware of that, for then Coldness, Fear∣fulness and Slavishness will enter in, and you will lose your Strength: Moreover, if any have begun well, and be perswaded of the Truth of
that they have believed, and continue not unto the End, and do not finish, such will be reckoned foolish Builders, that could not finish, and all will mock them, and neither God nor Men can or will believe them, but our Adversaries will glory over you: Again, when any suffer, or are brought into Bonds for Christ and the Gospel sake, seek not to get out by any in∣direct Means, neither make any Covenant with thy Adversary, who would sell both thee and all Faith and Hope for Money, that encourages Deceit, and that Spirit would buy it self out of the Service of God, and grow wea∣ry; give no Place to that; be content every one with your present Con∣dition, till God arise and plead our Cause, and make our Innocency and Righteousness appear as Noon day, and make his Adversaries his Foot-stol, which undoubtedly he will do, and make all know the most high ought to rule, and will rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and not give his Glory to another, neither suffer another to take it; be conformable to none that go about under Pretence of Love to perswade or counsel you from your Duty to God; neither submit to them that would betray you of your Peace; heed not the Frowns of corrupt Men, nor the Counsel of them who mind their own Bellies, Pleasure, Ease, Profit and earthly things; let not natural Affections and Love either to Lands, Wife or Children blind your Eyes, but love them, and receive them in the Lord, and enjoy them as though not▪ stand loose from all things, and out of all Entanglements, and cast your Care upon the Lord, who careth for the Fatherless and the Widdow, and them that have no Helper in Earth; give no Occasion or Advantage to any that would turn your Hearts aside from following the Lord, left their Love betray you; give up all you have and enjoy to the Lord and his Service, and your Souls, Bodies and Spirits as a Sacrifice un∣to the Lord, that he may accept you, and pour forth and continue his Blessing amongst you; never heed the Threats of them that are as the Oaks of Bashan, nor of the great Men of the Earth, that mind their Pleasure and Lusts▪ who shut you up in Prison, and hale you before Judgment-Seats for the Worship of God, and falsly accuse you and condemn you▪ when God justifies you; the Moth shall et them up as a Garment, and stain the Glo∣ry of all Flesh that withstand the Lord, and they shall melt away as Snails, and as the Fat of Lambs, and as the Kidneys of Rams, and God will bring the Recompence of their own Deeds upon their own Pates, and wound the hoary Scalp of every one that doth wickedly, who toucheth God's a∣nointed, and doth Harm to his Prophets, and persecutes his Children; surely Judgment is not far from the Dwellings of them who have requited the Lord thus, as to render him Evil for Good; and God will be avenged on such a fathless, merciless, perfidious People as this; and of such a Spi∣rit, which rejoyceth in Iniquity, and makes a Mock of Sin, and hates all Reproof, and would clock over all Mischiefs with the Name of pure Laws and Authority, and Decrees of the holy Church, and yet persecutes and gainsayes the highest Power of God in things spiritual, that pertain to the Conscience: The Beast, and false Prophet, and Mother of Harlots have joyned together, and flatter one another, and joyn their Strength together against the true Church and Heir of all the World, and would, under Pre∣tence of doing Honour unto him, shut him out of the Earth, and kill his Subjects, and destroy the Children of the free Woman under Pretence of
suppressing Heresie, & turn Judgment into Gall, Hemlock and Wormwood, and instead of relieving the Oppressed; add to their Burthen. Friends, dwell above all these things, and the Devil and his Rage; the Earth is the Lord's and the Fulness of it; we cannot be banished from God's Presence, neither shall they fulfil their Determination, or ever be a∣ble to root out that Testimony which is among us; for Princes shall be gi∣ven for its Ransome, and Kingdoms and Nations for its Prosperity: The God of Power strengthen you all, that you may quit your selves like men of God, like Children of the most high, whose Inheritance is not here in the World, but in the Kingdom that fades not away: The Lord God of Power be with you, and make you consider what I say▪ and to receive this my true Love unto you all for the Lord's sake, who partakes with all the suffering Members of Christ in their Bonds, and shall and can rejoyce in all your Comfort and Joy: The Peace of God dwell in your Hearts, and his heavenly Light shine upon all your Tabernacles, that you may be as beautiful in the Eyes of the Lord as the Roses of Sharon, and blossom as the Lillies of the Valley, and yield your Fruit as the Fig-tree that casteth not his Fruit: The Lord takes our Part, let none doubt of that, and pleads our Cause, let all consider that; our Enemies shall see it, and be troubled at this, and time shall manifest it; therefore be of believing Hearts, and trust in the Lord, so shall you never be confounded, neither be ashamed, but be as Mount Sion, that cannot be moved, and as the Mountains are round about Jerusalem▪ so shall the Mercies of the Lord compass you about from this time forth and forevermore. Friends, Faith is sealed in my Heart, and Love in my Reins, and Gladness in my Soul, and Peace in my Consci∣ence, so that none doth or can hinder my rejoycing, praised be the Lord forever and ever, Amen. The Lord's Servant and yours in all true, unfeigned, pure Love, F. H.
THE TRUE Rule, Judge and Guide OF THE TRUE CHURCH OF GOD DISCOVERED AND Born Testimony unto, what it is, and wherein it consisteth. In Opposition to the pretended Catholick Church of ROME, her Rule, Foundation, Guide and Judge. Being returned in Answer to Captain Robert Everad his Book, tituled, An Epistle to all Non-conformists; wherein his main Reasons, Grounds and Allegations laid down in his Book are examined and discoursed with, wherein the Faith once delivered unto the Saints is vindicated, and the Doctrine of Christ and his Apo∣stles, against the pretended Faith and false Do∣ctrines which have been held forth by the Church of Rome among Christians as infallible. By a suffering Member of that Church which fled into the Wilderness, when My∣stery-Babylon sate as a Queen upon the Waters. F. H.
THE TRUE Rule, Judge and Guide OF THE TRUE CHURCH OF GOD DISCOVERED, &c. AFter Variou reports and upbraidings, and insultings of divers men in my heing, of a certain great Pillar and a leading man among the Non conformists, who it was said, had reliquished his Errors, and had conformed, and also written and published a Book for the convince∣ment of all others to Uniformity and Conformity: also the Weekly Intel∣ligencer willing to take advantage sometime when there is little or no occa∣sion, doth signifie to the whole Nation in his News book of the Conver∣sion of a great Non-conformist, for the strengthening and Supporting of those desires only in People who are willing to make Shipwrck of all Faih, Hope, Religion, and whatsoever also that is of the greatest moment, for a little ease and Liberty in the Flesh, and the imbracement of this present World, is willing to joyn with that which is the upper mst, and to Sail with Wind and Tide, not minding the Harbour, nor the way which they are passing, but only present enioyment; and such whose Faih is builded upon men and not upon God; and chuse rather to run with the Multitude to do Evil▪ then with a few despised and afflicted who keep Faith and a good Conscience) such flashes and airy ungrounded Rumours stag∣ger'd their mind, and make them afraid and troubled when there's no cause. At last this great and magniicent Piece of Conversion came pub∣lished in the News book, boasted on by the Clergy and divers other great Mountains of Earth, came to my hand providentially unlooked for, un∣sought for, or desired, which is Titled, An Epstle to the several Congrega∣tions of the Non-confrimists Subscribed by Captain Robert Everard, as he stiled himself▪ a Member of the Catholick Church; which Book hath been spread up and down the Counties t seems, as some rare, Weighty, and great matter to induce others to be of the same mind. But why the Mem∣bers of the Church of Egland should extoll this and reoyce in this great Convert I know not, except they have a mind to shake Hands with the Ro∣man Church, & to receive their Catholick Faith so called as unquestionable;
but Deceit loves to sport it self, and to make merry and triumph over any who do but relinquish the seeming Appearance of Truth to turn into the common Road of Darkness, they hug such a one for a while, and set him out as an Ensign to Glory in and over, against others. After the said Book came to my Hand amongst divers others, I was wil∣ing to take a Survey, and to make inspection into those things contained in it, and to see what demonstrative Grounds, and solid and Weighty mat∣ter was contained in it, which I have diligently weighed, and without a Prejudiced Spirit read, finding the matter in it chiefly to set up a Council of men to be absolute Judge of all matters of Faith and Doctrine, though ne∣ver so Repugnant unto the Doctrine and Practice once delivered and recei∣ved and walked in by the Saints, setting up this, both above the Holy Spirit of God, which is the only and Sole tryer of all Spirits; but also above the Scrip∣ture; wherein I have taken notice, his own Eye being blinded he would Captivate all others, and make them Blind also, and lay waste the Spirit of God and its office, the Scriptures, and their Translation, making them as uncertain, as much as in him lyes, as the Turkish Alcoran; and all solid and weighty Arguments and Reasons that have been produced these many Years by many Godly and moderate Dissenters in divers Ages, from the Church of Rome, this he strikes over all by whole Sail, labouring to set all a jarr, and to make every thing look with a Face contrary way, to represent them uncomely; and at last he hath concluded that the Catholick visible Church is the absolute Judge and Director, both in matters of Faith and Doctrine, without distinguishing of their abiding in the Faith, or falling from it, as though the Promise of God had been intailed to a certain place, as Rome, or to a certain sort of Men that may call themselves Peters Suc∣cessors, and Ministers of Christ, though they walk as far wide both in Doctrine and Practice, as Heaven is from Earth, from [Peter] and would assume the Title of Name and Office for honour and profit's sake, but do none of Peter's Work, feed not the Flock of Christ, but worry them and kill them that Christ Feeds, and shear off the Wool from off their Backs, and pull off the Skin too, and instead of saving have Destroyed hun∣dreds of mens Lives in Europe and America; some under the Name of He∣reticks, and some under the Name of Infidels have been most mercilessly and cruelly destroyed by the Power of this Holy visible Church, as . E. calls it, as the true Chronologies of Ages past do testifie, so that the Nations have been made like Akeldama by that Mystery Babylon, which hath drunk the Blood of the Saints, and slain the Prophets and Martyrs, under the Name of Hereticks, quite out of the Doctrine of Christ, and erred from his infallible Spirit, who came not to destroy mens Lives, but to save them, and to save People from their Sins: But this false visible Church hath destroyed their Lives under the Name of Heresie, and so hath destroyed them in their Sins if they count that Heresie be a Sin. But of this something more after∣wards may be said, if God permit. But it is a great piece of Confidence in R. E. that after fifteen hundred years, as he saith, this Church hath continued as a Judge & a Director, unto which all Christians are to submit, Page 20th. that he that is but a man of yesterday should be so stout a Champion as to make a flourish, and seem to over-ride all the weighty Things that have been spoken by the Blessed
Martyrs and Sufferers for Christ, and Righteous dissenters from this Romn Church at one clap; and again to exalt his own feeble things that he hath brought forth, and exhibit them so confidently to all Non-conformists as un∣answerable matter, or how he judged in himself that his Reasons or Argu∣ments should be of that weight to Convince or Convert any, seeing he hath rendered himself, & they that know him can testifie he hath alwayes been a changeable man, and unstable in all his wayes, tossed up and down, like the Waves of the Sea, and now at last fallen into the black Gulf of Darkness; but it seems by his own Writing in his Epistle, that it hath been his former Method, being filled with a scribling Humour in the days of his Ignorance, as he saith, when the Vail of Pride and folly hung between his Eyes, which appears to hang there yet, (for any thing I can see) ha∣ving condemned himself, and also repented, as he saith, for being in the head of a Troop of the Rebellious Army a Captain: and yet after Conver∣sion and Illumination and Repentance, as he saith, Subscribes himself, Captain Robert Everard, argues both Pride and Folly, and gives but a small shew of Repentance, but rather Argues feignedness and flattery, and him to be a time-server, and a man-pleaser. And whether he intend by his Epistle to all the Non-conformists to the Church of England, or all the Non-conformists to the Church of Rome is doubtful, for then the Church of England hath to conform in part, as wel as others, though I believe the Church of Rome will claim a good part of her Discipline to be theirs, only it wants the formality of Language: som∣thing might largely be spoken, as in return of Answer to the things con∣tained in the said Book, but that it may be supposed some of those People with whom he hath formerly conversed, which he now calumniates wih notorious Error, will not receive his Epistle as an infallible and Heaven∣ly Oracle, but rather will return him some publick Answer for the Vin∣dicating of their own Principles, and also shewing him his Weakness, how soon he was turned aside with, and for a thing of nought, and also that he should be so bold as to turn in a moment their Instructer & Teacher, when he hath but newly learned within a Year or two, the Principles of his own Religion, which he saith, he adores God in, and so is but a novis, and un∣skilfull in the word of Righteousness, though his Web be very long of Linsie Woolsie, and his Words be many, which will pass away as Wind, and have small effect, I hope of gaining many Proselytes, to be Members of that visible Church, which hath ruled over Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, which are the Waters, upon which the great Whore sits. I take my self little concerned, or that People with whom I am joyned in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who are Nonconformists to the World, and ever resolve to be, (according to the Apostles Doctrine) and to all Hypocrites and Time-servers, and them that serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, of which this Generation is full, who will Transgress for a morsel of Bread, and conform to any thing, and e∣very thing for the smiles of the World, ease and Liberty in the Flesh, but the Followers of Christ have not so learned Christ, for whoso will Reign with him, must suffer with him. Neither should I have said much, if the Quarrel had been Personal, or about some Circumstantial matters, which a man may be with and without,
and they neither add to, nor diminish from his Goodness and Vertue, but seeing it is a Quarrel not only against us that are alive, but against the Faith∣ful Sufferers, who laid down their Lives in Flames of Fire, and the very Foundation of God, which is the most sure thing is struck at, and the Spi∣rit of God turned out of doors, in regard of its Office, of certainty and in∣fallibility, and the Scriptures of Truth laid aside as an insufficient thing, except the Interpretations of Men be added to it for its Authority, and the Constitutions of fallible and Erring Men set up for Rules, and Men, as Men, set up as Law-givers and Judges over mens Consciences, and Lords over Faith, and to be the most certain thing for any Christian Man to rely up∣on, and to believe, as the old phrase is, as the Church believes, to pin ones Faith upon others Sleeves, and to hang ones Hope of anothers Shoul∣ders, to put ones Eye out that God hath given them to see with, and then see by anothers, may be led into any Hole or Ditch, and this to be publish∣ed with such confidence, as the only infalliable Guide, to which all Chri∣stians are to submit, would make a Man half Dumb to speak and stammer forth some thing as a Testimony against such palpable Error, and manifest Darkness, put off with such confidence, and Usher'd in among Christians in such an Age as this, when Light and Life is broken forth as a Morning without Cloudes in Goshen, where Israel the true Seed inhabits, I could not but say something in Vindication of that certain, sure, everlasting Truth which the Devil is out of, by which the Saints are made free indeed in their inward man from Sin, and Non-conformists to the World, its Error, ways and Worship, and also to shew the mistakes of the Author, and how easily he hath been drawn aside to lean upon a broken Reed, all his parti∣culars which are of any weight or moment shall be considered and weigh∣ed in the Righteous Ballance of equity, and answered in their due place: for the Confirmation of them that do believe, and for removing the stumbling Blocks out of the way of them that doubt to Stagger, lest they fall in such dark Pits as these, (viz.) as to deny the Spirit of God to be a sufficient Guide, and take away its infallibility, and place it in Men that have Erred, do err, and may Err; and call them the only sure infallible guide for all Christian men to follow. But to speak something to the seeming weighty matter which weighed down R. E. his Judgment, and cast the Scales so far, as that all his Hope, Faith, Foundation, and Religion was weighed down at one draught, and by such feeble things as put him to silence, which he heared from his Lay-catholick, as he calls him, argues a very weak and a poor Foundation and a sndy, which was so soon driven away; but one thing is to be minded, because he hath minded it himself of his Conversion, as to matter of time; this Conversion happened to fall out since the happy Restauration of our Gracious Soveraign to his Crown and Dignity, as he saith; this to some will render his Conversion somewhat suspicious, whether (he name) this time as only accidental, or the Restoration of the King; the cause some∣what of his Conversion, I shall not determine; but however he having been behind before in Conformity resolved to make a good step to, before the next time to avoid suffering loss and Reproach. But to speak a little as to the Discourse which R. E. hath published as the weighty matter whereby he was Convinced, their Judgments now it seems becoming one,
the Lay-GENTLEMAN he mentions and himself speaking to one speaks to both. First, Whether that any can be certain that the Christians in General are more true then the Turkes, Jews, or any other, and whether any can be in∣fallibly assured of this, that it is possible for one to mistake in this; and a∣gain the answer amounting to no more then this, you conceive you are in the right, you hope and believe you are not mistaken; but it is possi∣ble you may be mistaken in this, for every Man is a Lyar, and every Man and all Men and every Church is fallible and subject to Error; and with these and the like Words R.E. was extreamly troubled as he saith, and knew not how to answer without shuffing. Answ. The true Christian Religion stands not only in Name, nor in Words, nor in conforming, or Transforming to this or that outward Practice, which the Disciples of Christ were exercised in, which divers in the latter days in their old corrupt minds, not having their Hearts renewed, have taken on the outside, and have got the Form, and want the Life and the Power, and are not partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, and such a bare Profession as this has no certainty, nor infallibility in it, neither the assurance, but that they may be mistaken, and may be subject to Err as well as Turks or Jews, or any other, but the true Christians Religion in∣deed, whom Christ will own as true Worshippers of him, stands in Power in Life, and in being obedient unto his living commands and precepts, which he giveth forth unto his Disciples, and manifesteth by his Spirit, his Sheep hear his Voice, and know it from the Voice of a stranger: And he giveth the Knowledge of his will to all that believe in the measure of his eternal Spirit, which he hath given every one a Measure of to profit withal; and by it to be guided into all Truth, out of all Error, and this Spirit is infallible, and gives certain assurance to all that receive it, that they are in that way which is acceptable to God, and they feel Comfort unto their Souls com∣ing daily from the presence of Christ, who is the Rock of Ages, and the sure Foundation upon which his holy Church is founded, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; and they that are living Members are not Grounded upon a fallible certainty, or upon a conectural supposition▪ or a vain hope which is without bottom, but upon that which is sure and stedfast, last∣ing & everlasting; and all men in the unregenerate Estate are Lyars, but they that are Born from above are of the Truth, and Lye not, and are not sub∣ject to mistakes, because the Seed remains in them, and walk in the pure Religion which keeps unspoted of the World; and they that have no other Ground for their Religion but only without them, and from the report of o∣thers are short of the true Foundation, for that may be Truth in it self, in∣deed, which is not true to another, nor he truly partakes of it, and here is all the supposing conjectures and mistakes and fallible certainties, which it seems R. E. and his lay Gentlemen too, when the Axe is laid to the Root of the Tree indeed, and notwithstanding all the laying claim to infallibi∣lity and certainty its but grounded upon a report without, and the Tradi∣tions of men from Generation to Generation; For them that believe but only because of the true report without, and cometh not to Witness the thing assured in their own Hearts by the Spirit of the Lord, these will not be long of that Faith; 'tis true, many did believe because of the Apostles e∣claration
and report, but at last came to feel the Witness of God in their own Hearts testifying the same, in somuch that they could say, and truly too, though we have believed through your Words at the first, yet now we have heard him our selves, & that which giveth perfect assurance which admits of no doubts nor fallibleness, for such evidence all true Members of Christ's Church have in themselves, which carries divine Authority and satisfaction in it to every particular Believer, and so I say with P. E. in this, it seems unreasonable to perswade any to receive this or that for a Truth, when they that so perswade are uncertain in themselves, neither dare say their Judgment is infallible, which is that old Protestant Principle indeed, and also the Principle of many Sects who differ from the pretended Catho∣lick Church of Rome, who Persecuted one another about outward things even as the Heathen about their Idols, and yet will needs sit as Judge in Mens Consciences, with their fallible Spirit, though I speak not of every individual Person, neither can I justifie the Roman Catholick Church so called, who lays claim to infallibility; and whatsoever they Judge to be Heresie must be reckoned as such, though never so manfiest a Truth; and to place infallibility in men that may Err and have erred from the Spirit, I like not neither; for this is to give that to men that belongs to God, and to make the Judgment of fallible men above the Judgment of the infllible Spirit of God; and this I look to be great Ambition and Pride, in any to lay claim to the greatest things, as infallibility and certainty of assurance, and the most free of Error, and yet fall the shortest of it of any, as hath been made appear by many Learned and Grave Men of former Ages; and also if a necessity were, might be made appear, that the Church of Rome who saith, she cannot err, have been as uncertain both in their Doctrine and Worship as any, yea more; one Pope contradicting and throwing down that which another did establish; and one Council Decreeing, and another disanulling; as I could easily make appear, but that I would not be Te∣dious to the Reader in things that have been so manifest; neither do I de∣sire to wade out into diversity of matters, in so short a Discourse. But that which R. E. and his Catholick instructer calleth late, wild, and loos Opinions, that men of different Faiths may be saved; and this countenan∣ceth schism, and breeds Rebellion, as it is said; 'tis true, Faith is but one, which is saving, and there is no difference in that, for the difference is a∣mong Men where that is wanting, and only have words and Name of Faith, and want the Life and Power. Neither am I so narrow Spirited as R. E. and his Catholick, as to exclude all out of the Faith, who may differ in their perswasions in some Circumstantial things, if yet they hold Christ the Head: and what makes R. E. so virilent as to judge all in Errour, and to be out of the true Faith, seeing the Protestants and all sorts of separates profess Justification and Salvation, only through Faith in Christ Jesus, as well as the Church of Rome; and it were unreasonably judged in me if I should conclude a man to be no man, because he is not so tall as another; but I see R▪ E. and his Catholick would have all Shoes made by their Last, though they will not fit every mans Feet. Faith is the gift of God, there are divers Decrees and measures, accoding to the mind and good pleasure of the giver; so that he that hath received any measure or degree, must not be excluded as having no Faith, though he attain not to that
degree that some do enjoy; and the Apostle's Doctrine was, That  one should be perswaded in his own mind, and if any were otherwise minded, they were to be let alone, till God revealed it to them. And whatsoever People or Church (though they claim infallibility) that teach a contrary D∣ctrine unto this; we have good Reason to supe it, to be that hasty d∣ving and overdriving Spirit, that would force a Faith  God hth not given it (not to be the infallible Spirit of  the Church of Rome hath given a vehement  and Tortures they have exercised towards them, who  their Principles, and own their Judgment in all things: Bt . Gentleman blinded thy Eye,  he made thee  question  truth of Scripture, and hat it proceeed from the ifall, his Testimony of God's Sprt, and if thou hadst a certain feeling of the same in thy  Conscience, to let this go and mke this void, as an iuffcient Ground to receive Christianity upon, and to lean to a Prop without thee, and to e judged by men, who have been as fallible and changeable in their Judg∣ments as the Moon; which have assumed the Name of Catholick Church, whose Testimony, thy Instrucer I perceiv told thee, ought to be received, con∣cerning what was pretended to be revealed or not revealed by God, yet all must be obliged to stand to their Judgment though never so repugnant to the Doctrine of Christ, and Practice of the Church of Christ in the first Pri∣mitive times, truly so called; yet it is granted, that the Church of Christ are the dispersed Members through the World, though not of it, agreeing in one Faith, being in the Power of God, and being led and guided by the Holy Ghost, their Judgments ought to be received, which cannot (as lead by the Spirit) fail, in giving true Judgment in matters of Faith, which per∣tains to Salvation, but as men they may fail, and as erring from the Spirit they may fail; and infallibility is not intailed to the Persons of any men, but as they continue in the Grace of God, and walk in the Spirit, and bring forth the Fruits thereof, nor to any place or City, but as they continue in Cove∣nant with God, for the Promise of God was to Jerusalem, and Mount Zion, and to many other places and People in divers Cities, where the Glory of God once appeared, but now through their Apostacy and unbelief, and disob∣dience they are deslate, as to the presence and Power of God, and their Sun is set, and they are covered as with the Shadow of a Cloud; but this true Church whereof I have spoken, was seen to Fly into the Wilderness for time, times and half, and that since the Apostles dayes, and then was she not so Visible and Universal as she had been before▪ & the Man-child was caught up unto God; now if thou reckonst the Roman Church to be this true Church; shew the time, times, and half a time, wherein she fled into the Wilderness; and how long she hath been there, and when was the time of her return, and if ever she was there, how that will hang together with yur assertion, that she hath been visile and so Universal these fifteen hundred Years; and if this could be proved that Rome hath been so, whether doth it not rather demostrate her to be the Whore that sate upon the many Waters? which Waters are Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, and what Church? instance if thou can, doth lay claim to the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People to be your, and to Rule over so many Kings of the Earth, as you lay claim to be Universally of your Faith, and of your Church, which gives us a shrewd Character
to believe, that indeed you are Mystery Babylon; besides, the Blood of the Saints hath been shed under the Name of Hereticks, by th vsible Catholick Church among the Nations this twelve hundred Years doth give clear evidence that it can be reckoned or imputed unto none but you. But I would not Grate too hard upon thee, being but a new Convert; but when thy instru∣cter had made thee doubt of thy won state, and questioned the Foundation whereupon thou hadst received Christianity, the next thing he labours to make void, is, the Spirit of God its Testimony, which thou didst lay claim to, but I feel had little Portion in what thou saidst, at last he makes thee doubt of the infallibility of this Spirit which thou hadst spoken on, might for ought thou knew be the Spirit of Error, and thou not able to distinguish betwixt the Spi∣rit of God in thy self, which is infallible, and the Spirit of error, nor to distinguish betwixt their Operations; he perswaded thee that all was uncer∣tain, and therefore no confidence to be given to any Spirit of Faith in ones own particular, which is the most absurd and ridiculous thing in the World so to judge: For if there be no certainty or assurance given to any man, or means to every man, wherein he may be assured of the certainty of God's will, then whither should any go, or upon whom should any lean, seeing that no credit can be given to any thing that any man believes? and this were but tossing up and down Men from Mountain to Hill, that they might never have Rest for their Souls: And as for Jer. 17. and Eccles. 9. Rev. 3. The Heart of man is deceitful; &c. No man knows love or hatred, &. And because thou sayest I am Richand increased with Goods, and have need of no∣thing, &c. These Scriptures were brought unto thee, to make thee more Blind; the first is spoken of the Degenerate estate, where deceit bears Rule and not Truth; the second is spoken of visible enjoyments, which are common to all; and the third was spoken to one, who had erred from the Spirit, and was exalted in Pride, because of external performances, but having lost the Pow∣er was miserable, &c. But what of all this? doth this any whit at all de∣tract from the certainty & assurance of the Spirit of God in them that have it? what, shall we Reason thus, because some have been led aside, and are decei∣ved by their own Hearts, Lusts, that therefore all may be deceived, even them that have the Spirit of God? (God forbid) and we have some-what more to An∣swer an Arian, a Jew, or a Turk, if they should urge the like knowledge and feeling with the like confidence, to prove they were in the Truth and Christia∣nity, a delusion; and thy intructer said, what would you reply to them? We have more to reply in such Cases then time will permit now, or the state of the Case require; seeing it is but a supposition, and we take no thought what to answer the Gain-sayers of Truth withall, but rely upon the Promise of the Father, and of his Son Jesus Christ, who said to his Disciples, take no thought, for it shall be given you what to answer in that day, which Pro∣mise all that are true Disciples shall find true to the end of the World: but some-what more we have to say, it may be then thou said, when thou suffe∣red thy self to be made blind and carried Captive with another Man's Judgment, & neglected the measure of God's Spirit in thy self at home, through which alone the secret things of God are Revealed, & in which true certainty and in∣fallibility is Witnessed, and not in Men, who are fallible and changeable. If an Arian, Jew or Turk should urge their own interpertation of Scriptures (which is of no private interpretation) contrary to the mind of him that
gave it forth; I would say, he perverted the Words of the Scripture, which  in Harmony & Unity one with another, as to the states and conditions they were sp∣ken to, and are plain, and are only read by that Spirit that gave them forth: except it be in some Historical or Chronology or Genealogy of Names and Gener∣tions which might be, some gathered from anothers Hands, and different hands taking notice of them as to Record them, there might be some vari∣ation, yet the substance of the report is true, but what is Calculation of Years or Dayes or reckoning up of Genealogies, as to the matter of Salvation, and what if we had never had them, no more then we have other Histo∣ries and things that fell out among the Jews, but if there be any contradic∣tion for ought I know, we may blame the Church of Rome the most of any; who will needs affirm they received all or most of the things from the Apostles, and if the Translations differ, or be some-what uncertain, what have they been doing this fifteen hundred Years, with their infallible Spirit, that they could not have rectified them according to their first Original? and if any the foresaid Sects, should pretend the certainty of the Spirit, and yet not have it? I should answer, the Spirit is known by its Fruits, and the Fruits of the Spirit are manifest, and they that pretend to it, and bring forth contrary Fruits, are manifest to be Deceivers and deceived, but their States are different, and there∣fore require different Answers, which time will not now permit to insist upon: but over and beside all other Arguments perswade any man to, or from any thing, the witness of God in the party unto whom he speaketh, is to be reached, and that is beyond the understanding of Man, and greater then it, and more convincing then any Arguments that can be used with∣out; and he that cannot speak to this, is not skilful in the Word of Righteousness. That Christ was an infallible Guide, (who is the way, the Truth and the Life) is granted by all Christians, and that the Apostles received the Promise of the Father, and the infallible Spirit of God which led them into all Truth, and this infallible assurance the Christians had that lived in the Apostles time, thu i granted, and the Apostles were infallible Guides, not as Men meerly, but as Men full of the Holy Ghost, & as Men who were filled with the Spirit of God, and therefore the Apostle said, be Followers of us as we are Fllowers of Christ; and if any controversie did arise, as some there did, and doubts among the then Christians, the Apostles and Elders meeting together in the Power of the Holy Ghost, did write their minds and Letters to the Chri∣stians to pacifie all; and good Reason that they that had believed through their Word, should Sumi unto the Holy Ghost, and unto them by whom they were begotten unto God by the word of Life, for the ending of strife about Words and Shadows and outward things, and they whose minds were outward then, in Ages since, and now, ran into contention about outward things, and such for the most part do Err from the Spirit of God in themselves, But I would have thee to take notice of this, and all you Catholick Members so called, The Apostles of Christ only did exhort, and did not force their Decrees by Penal Statutes, and to be observed under the penalty of loosing Life and Limbs, as since their pretended Successors have done, who have Erred from the Spirit, and have go the Saints Words, and turned against the Life and Power: but the Decrees, as you call them, are not many nor burdensome, which the Apostles wrote at Jerusalem, as the many Counsels since have made, they are so endless and
numberless and burdensome, and so contradictory one to another in divers things, who will but look into the Decrees of the Counsels since the Apo∣stles dayes, that we can find little certainty in any of their Decrees, but rather as thy Instructer saith, the Sword of the Flesh, and not the Spirit hath been the Rule and Law to Christianity; but the Masters of great wit and Pow∣er and Interest, have framed and made parties unto themselves, and have Wars been raised among your selves about deciding your Controversies: hath not the Pope Warred against the Emperour, and the Emperour against the Pope? were no Wars raised about the Decrees, when Pope Eugenius was deposed as a Heretick by the Council of Bazell?—and one while the Pope must be infallible as Peter's Successor, and above all Councils and Churches, ano∣ther while the Council is above the Pope, Excommunicates him as a Heretick, and excludes his Infallibility: and now where is the certainty, and whether should one go or appeal for true Judgment? so, though the Church of Rome boast of Unity, yet how hath one Nation made War against another, and yet Professing the same Faith at divers times and in sundry Ages. And to tell thee plainly, and to speak the naked Truth, according to the Apostles Prophecy, after their Departure there was a great Apostacy, and a great Falling away from the Faith, and a giving heed to Lying Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, and many were suhverted from the Faith, by them that spake Lyes in Hypocrisie, and took up the Priests Office for filthy Lucre, and they went out into the World, and the World wondred after them, and they had the Form, and the Sheeps Cloathing, and the Saints Words, but were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and to the Pow∣er of Godliness; and the Kings of the Earth were bewitched with her Sorceries, and then forced all, and compelled all to receive and believe such Decrees and such Articles, as were then set forth by a Pack of those Hirelings, who minded their own Profit, and their own Bellies; who mingled their own Inventions and Traditions with the Doctrine of Christ, and brought the Scripture for a Cloak, and the Apostles Practice for a President, and could ay falsly, as the Apostles said in Truth; It seems good to us and the ho∣ly Ghost, that these our Decrees be observed; for God hath placed us as Judges and directors▪ as them that are appointed of God himself; to which all Christians are to submit, and none to question, and if any do question and will not obey, it is the Kings and Princes Duty in all Countries to cause all to sub∣mit to these our Decrees and Orders, or else to be punished as Hereticks with Death; for we are the Apostles Successors, and we are the Elders of the Church, and we have the infallible Spirit; and though we make Decrees contrary to what the Apostles made in their Day, yet none are to question that, the Church was but in its Infancy then, as unwasht, and un∣swadled, and in Persecution; but now she is grown up to a greater Statue and Power, and endowed with greater Priviledge, and that may be ne∣cessary now, that was not necessary then; and last of all called themselves the Clery▪ which signifies the Heritage of God, and so excluded all others but themselves: And these things are true and certain, and have been made good by many Sufferers for Christ; and this kind of Clergy or Heri∣tage made the Heritage of God indeed, to fly into the Wilderness, who had the infallible Spirit, and the Witnesses to prophesie in Sack-cloth, and then Mystery-Babylon began to sit as a Queen, and to gild her Cup, and to fill it full of A∣bomination,
and brought in Judaism, and the Practice of the Apostles and their own Inventions, and patched up an Endless kind of Worship and Service, consisting of out-side things in a great Part, in Postures and Ge∣stures, and Meats and Drinks, and Days and times, and Vestures and Bonnets, and Caps and Coules, and such other like Trumpery, which they made the Nations drunk with, and greedy after; and if any scru∣pled at any of those things or any other, the Holy Catholick Church hath decreed it, and she cannot err; for she is infallible, though the Errors thereof cannot be numbred: And this R. E. thou rests satisfied in as thy only Rule and Judge, and Director, and thou hangs all thy Faith here∣in and sayest, Thou shalt not scruple to believe, what Authority teacheth thee to be revealed by God, no more then if thou heardst God himself speaking: I say unto thee as the Apostle said, The Serpent hath beguiled thee, as it beguiled Eve; and further say, as the Prophet said, Thou must arise and get thee hence; for this is not the Rest; for thou wilt see thy self plunged into such a Labyrinth of Uncertainties as thou never wast before, if the Lord ever open thine Eye. And R. E. gives an Account, that after his reading of some controvertal Books, hath made some Collections as to himself, and also declares, That all dissenting Judgements grant there must be a Way and a Rule appointed to teach us, to deside all Doubts, to judge of all Matters, and to teach us the true Way to Heaven with Certainty; but who this Rule or Judge is, is not agreed upon by all, which he hath collected into four Heads. First, Some set up the Spirit to di∣rect them, and to be this Means. Secondly, Another will have every Man's own Natural Reason to be this Rule and Judge. Thirdly, Others will set up sole Scripture. And the fourth assigns the Holy Catholick Church to be that Judge and Director: Other then these (he saith) he never heard of any; for (he saith) he alwayes esteemed the Quakers Light to be either the Spirit or Natural Rea∣son (but which R. E. doth not know) and all the four before-mentioned (he saith) he hath examined, and treateth largely upon them all, wherein he goeth about, and giveth Grounds, and divers Reasons, and divers Interpretati∣ons of Scriptures; he layes waste all the former three, and establisheth (as he thinks) the fourth, as to be that Way, and Rule, and Judge, and gover∣ning Power, to decide all Doubts, as that whereby all are oblieged to submit unto, as to Christ himself; and this was that Question which he was to gain Satis∣faction in; and therefore he saith, He ceaed o enquire of their Doctrine, or this or that Article of Faith, and hang altogether upon this Point before-mentioned. Answ. 'Tis true, it is granted by all, that there must be a Way and a Rule, as the Means appointed of God, to answer all Doubts, and to give Satisfaction to every Man of the Certainty of that which he believes; and who this Way, and Judge, and Rule is, every one ought to be satisfied; and the four Heads into which thou hast collected the whole Controver∣sie of all dissenting Judgments in Christianity, take up the whole as to this Particular, which have ordinarily been holden forth among Christians: But I judge thou deal'st not wisely in thy Inquisition and Search for Satisfa∣ction, to hang all on this Pin, but rather to have examined further as con∣cerning Matters of Doctrine and Matters of Faith, held forth, most espe∣cially of this Party, to whom thou wast so much inclined, and see how thou could'st have swallowed down that Doctrine of Purgatory, and Sa∣crifice
for the Dead, and Justification by a Man's own Works, and of Bread and Wine after the Words of Consecration by the Priest, is transubstanti∣ated into the very Body and Blood of Christ, and becomes whole God, their Saviour and Redeemer; for these are principal things, either great∣ly necessary to Salvation, or greatly unnecessary; and when thou had'st tryed and found these to be so repugnant unto the Doctrine and Faith once delivered among the Saints, in the first Plantation of the Gospel; this might have put a Stop unto thee, that thou could'st not so easily close with their Judgment and pretended Infallibility, who pretend to be only Guides, and yet lead into the greatest Errors in Matters of greatest Moment: But as to the four Particulars mentioned, I shall not stand to trouble either my self or the Reader, as to speak much what of that which is no Part of my Faith or Judgment, but only to vindicate the Truth against the many false Concep∣tions of changeable Men: And first of all R. E. begins to treat of the Spi∣rit, and perverts the Scripture at his first Onset, and saith, As touching the Spirit earing Witness in secret with our Spirits, or (he saith) in plain Terms the priate Spirit; this (saith R. E.) I considered could not be the Means to convey Faith unto the World, nor the Rule, Judge or Guide which I enquired af∣ter, nor indeed the true Spirit of God, which he promised to be Apostles. Se∣condly, Those who pretend this Guidance, do not believe God but themselves only and their own Perswasions, which tell them, they have the Spirit of God; but they can give no other Account, but that they are verily perswaded so, or no other Answer, but I am sure it is the Spirit of God, and I am a good Man and an honest Man, and I believe my self; but ther Reasons or Evidence can they give none▪ Thirdly, This pretending of a private Spirit is against 2 Pet. 1.20. That no Prophecy of Scripture is of private Interpretation. Answ. This Man beats altogether beside the Anvil, whatever the Mat∣ter is, but that he is blinded and confounded in himself, he sets but up a Shadow, and then fights with it; for instead of proving the Spirit of God not to be a competent Rule, Judge and Guide, and Instructor in all Mat∣ters of Faith necessary to Salvation; he goes about to prove a private Spi∣rit, a pretended Spirit, a Spirit of Error is not a sufficient Guide and Judge; and in this he fights without an Adversary, and fills the World with Noise and Darkness, and the Air with Smoak, and would cloud Peo∣ples Understandings with Multitudes of Words, that tend not to Edifica∣tion, with a quarreling wrangling Spirit, which is not for Peace; but I see he hath delighted in Contention, and sported himself in Variance, and like the Son of the Bond-Woman, his Hand against every Man. Secondly,  wonder why R. E. quots so much Scripture for the Proof of his Mat∣ter in Hand, seeing that it is one of his great Pleas, that it is insufficient to be a Rule, or a Guide, or a Judge, as to answer any Doubts, or give any satisfactory Solution to him that is enquiring; and seeing he hath given in so many Reasons against it, as insufficient, and as much as in him lay, to invalidate and set it at nought, and hath laboured to set it at Odds, and to make Contradictions in it, as to render it insufficient for Matter of Proba∣tion in any thing which is in Controversie, or how he can judge that others should receive them, and his sometimes false rendering of them, or his own Interpretations upon them, seeing he denyes them as uncertain, as they
are translated, and insufficient, and not fit to be a Rule; and who this man hath conversed with, I know not, that should ever affirm a private Spi∣rit or their own Spirits to be a sufficient Rule or Guide to walk by, such I deny, and leave them and thee to quarrel together about your Imaginati∣ons, Thoughts and Conceptions, or else the Conceptions of other Men, who are as uncertain and fallible as the first, and shall assert the Sufficiency of the Spirit of God, teaching, ruling, guiding and judging all true Chri∣stian Men in that certain, everlasting, infallible Truth, which is necessary and satisfactory to the Souls of all them that do believe in it, and shall de∣ny all the Pretenders to it, who run into Heaps, and Heads, and quar∣rel and fight one with another about Shadows, and can give no other Ac∣count or Manifestation, then I am sure I have the Spirit of God, and I ought to be believed, and I am a good Man, and the like, which (thou say'st) thou could'st never receive any other Evidence or Testimony; and what though ma∣ny have pretended to the Spirit and the Guidance thereof, and in the mean while have brought forth the Fruits of the Flesh, and their own imaginary false Conceptions, and have put on Confidence enough to say so, as thou thy self it may be hast had a Share in times past; shall this make the Spi∣rit of God insufficient and uncertain in its Teachings to them that believe in it, and have received and bring forth the Fruits of it, and have the Deeds of the Flesh mortified by it? God forbid. Thirdly, Why hast thou perverted the Scripture, as I said, at the first Onset, Rom. 8.16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God; and this thou hast put in in a distinct Character, to be taken Notice of, as though it were Scripture, and render'st it thus, The Spirit being Witness in secret with our Spirits, or in plainer Terms, the private Spirit; thou must repent of this, and take Heed how thou callest the Spi∣rit of God a private Spirit; for it was that publick Spirit which manifest∣ed it self among all the Patriarchs and Prophets, and by which they spoke forth the Words and Mind of God unto the People, and prophesied of things to come; and through it alone is the deep and weighty things of God revealed, and was and is the only Way and Means by which Christ promised after his Ascension to lead, guide, instruct and comfort his Dis∣ciples in all Truth, and that it should bring to their Memory whatsoever he had spoken, and that they were to be without Care or Thought, for through it the Father should give them what to speak and what to answer before Rulers and Council for his Name's sake. And here the Sufficiency of it is proved to any resonable Man, who hath the least Savour or Dis∣cerning of the things f God; and this is that publick Spirit by which the Apostles published the Everlasting Gospel of Peace, and which Christ, the Head of the Body (his Church) had received without Measure; and this is a private, tining▪ creeping Spirit of thine, who hath been lost in thy own Imaginations, and following thy own forward rash Spirit, and hast found no Certainty in thy self of God's Spirit to stay thy Mind upon, nor no Patience to wait upon it, but reaching  at things in thy dark Mind, and last of all hast brought in thy  for the Devil against the Sufficiency of the holy Spirit of God,  Guidance amongst his People in the latter Dayes; and that is thy fond Conception to say, that the Spirit of God is expresly against 2 Pet. 1.20. which thou callest a private Spirit
all along; 'tis true, no Prophecy of Scripture is of private Interpretation, but the holy men of God spoke it forth, as they were moved by the holy Spirit, which was publick and conversant among them, with them and in them; and they that have it, can receive them as they are written, and can read them and understand them as they were spoken, and do see the In∣tent of the Holy Ghost in so speaking unto different States and Conditions, notwithstanding the many Copies thou tellest on, and Diversions, and different Translations, which thou would'st make a great Mountain on, and raise it up so high, to make the Scripture uncertain and low, as not fit to be taken Notice on, as to answer any Doubt, or to be any Rule and Guide, or any Example or President for any thing that I can perceive by the Coure of thy Spirit, which in the Truth is fathomed and comprehended, though it is as uncertain as the Way of a Serpent upon a Rock; yet they that have the Spirit of God see beyond all, and have Unity with the Words and Mind of the Spirit of God, notwithstanding the many Corruptions and Defects in Translations, and the many foul Hands it hath passed through. Fourthly, The Spirit of Christ is the Gift of God, which he giveth unto all that wait for his Appearance, and his Sheep have it & they that are Christ's have it; for they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his; & it is that which is every Way sufficient (& no Way insufficient) & it is every Way sufficient to lead into all Truth, according unto Christ's Promise, and to convince the VVorld of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment; again, it is that which Christ promised for a Director, which was with them when they healed the sick, and cast out Devils, and which was in them, to consolate them and comfort them in the midst of Affliction, as it did Peter and John, and made them bold, who were yet illiterate Men, and had not that Sufficiency which many look upon now they have, to wit, natural Tongues and Languages, yet it was sufficient in them, to give them Wisdom to declare the things of the Kingdom of God, to the Salvation of many that did believe through their Words; it was sufficient to comfort Paul and Silas, when they were shut in the inner Room, and their Feet fast in the Stocks, when there was no outward Cause of Joy, but rather of Sorrow, yet they were made to sing and rejoyce▪ because of the great Comfort and Joy that the Spirit of God filled their Hearts with; again, it was sufficient in the midst of great Conflicts and Tribulations which Paul and the rest suffered for the Go∣spel's sake and for Christ's sake; and yet as Suffering did abound, it was sufficient to make Consolation to super-abound, to ballance the Suffering, and to make it easie. Fifthly, It is that everlasting Covenant which the Lord promised by the Mouth of his Prophets in ormer Dayes, that he would fulfil in the latter Dayes or after times, That he would write his Law in their Hearts, and put his Spirit in their inward Parts. and that they should not teach every Man his Neighbour: saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; and again in another Place, I will pour upon them the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, and they shall see him whom they have pierced; and a∣gain, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and my Sons and my Daughters shall prophecy, &c. And this was fulfilled at Pentecost in Jerusalem, when the Disciples met together, and the Promise of the Father came to be fulfilled and the Unbelievers said, They were filled with new VVine; and the Lord
hath a Care of his People through Ages, and hath not left them comfort∣less, not without a Guide, and a certain and sure one too, which Spirit is manifest among some Non-conformists, whom thou takest Liberty to call Sects; and the Sufficiency of it is witnessed (praised be the Lord in our Assemblies, both as to convince, to convert, to save, to judge, to guide, to instruct, to comfort, and is that alone in which all true Christian Men can worship God, in the Silence of all Flesh & fleshly Motions & Thoughts; it's that that giveth Assurance also of Acceptation with God, and is that which makes the Prayers of the Saints as sweet Incense in the Nostrils of the Lord; it is that which makes the Words of him like Butter, as plea∣sant as Hony or sweet Oyl, who speaks by it, through it and from it, where∣by the Hearts of many have been pricked, and the Thoughts of many have been revealed, and many have been comforted with Joy unspeakable, and filled with pure Love from the sensible Feeling of the Sufficiency of its Power, operating in the inward Man, even as when the Harvest had been gathered in, and the Press been full of Grapes, and the Fats had overflown with Abundance, so that they could have rejoyced, and sung, and danced for Joy, as sometimes David did, when the Ark of God was brought from the House of Obed-Edom, and placed in Jerusalem, when David danced for Joy, and all Israel was filled with Gladness; what might I say for the Cer∣tainty, Sufficiency and All-sufficiency of this holy Spirit of God; I might fill my Mouth with Arguments, and time might fail me in Speech, to speak of the Excellency, Certainty and Infallibility thereof, against all Opposers and Quarellers: In a Word, it is that alone means through which God conveys Eternal Life to all Man-kind, and it is that Rule by which all the Sons of God were led, Rom. 8.14. It is that only sure Guide▪ Judge Way, Rule, in which there is Certainty and Assurance of the Love of God to Man-kind; it is that by which the Deeds of the Flesh are mortified, and men quickened and enlivened unto God in their Hearts, in which the Saints are accepted, by which they are regenerated, and through which they become Heirs of the Promise; what shall I say, but this, let all Flesh be confoun∣ded before it, and all Deceit stop its Mouth, and all the Sons of Men bow before it, all Councils and Churches, all Rulers and Elders, all Reason and Comprehension, all Words and Writings of Men, and holy Men, yea, of the Scriptures of Truth, it gave them all a Being, it was, and is, and is to come, and will remain when all visible things are past away; it is that by which God will plead with all Flesh, and bring a Consumption upon all the honourable of the Earth, and burn up the Mountains, and make the Hills to melt, and make all a Plain before him; therefore make room, make room, make way ye Potsherds, and cease all your contending and babling, and bow to it, and learn of it in your Hearts (which R. E. like an ignorant Man calls a private Spirit) that your Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord, and you may escape his Wrath, which is to come against all Resisters of it. Sixthly, Your Catholick Church, falsely so called, who hath Erred from the Spirit, the infallible Guide, (though you much boast of it) both in Doctrine and Practise abundantly; insomuch that your Faces seem alto∣gether to look another way, and your course to arrive at another Haven, then the Apostles and all the Primitive Christians attained unto; to wit, everla∣sting
Happiness and Rest of their Souls, and acceptation with God in their per∣formances and Sacrifices, which they offered unto him in the Spirit, of which they and all that believe in it, and have received it, received perfect assurance in their Hearts, by the immediate Spirit of God; and likewise the Prote∣stants in general, whether Lutherans or Calvinists, or other Sects known by denomination, are of so narrow and a pinching Spirit, as that you would Pinch and shut up the Universal love of God unto all Mankind, in a narrow Corner; and monopolize the free Grace of God that hath appeared unto all Men, that teaches all Men that receive it, to deny all Heresie, Falshood, Opinions and Humours, private Spirits, and Spirits of Error, which leadeth from all these, and is sufficient to lead out of all Ungodliness and world¦ly Lusts, and to do that which is acceptable in the sight of God, and this all Sects (since the Woman cloathed with the Sun fled into the Wilderness, viz. the true Church) and all parties have laid claim to, and excluded all other that were not of the Opinion, as from having any share in it, as though it were given only to such a company of Men that succeeded the Apostles, and by Arts and parts, and Natural Language in the Course and Term or Years, and at such & such places, as the Apostles were sometime conversant at; and other Sects besides you, who have kept more nearer in Conformi∣ty, in Doctrine and Worship, and unto the Apostles, then you have done, they have laid claim to the Spirit of God, and to the free Grace of God, only extending it self to them under such a Qualification, as though the Spirit of God, and free and saving Grace of God, had come by Generati∣on, or by Succession, or because of such and such a Qualification or Con∣formity in outward practice, as I said, as though the free Grace of God, and the infallible Spirit of God had been given to you, and had been bequeathed and in∣tailed to you, or any of you, under such and such a demination, and because in∣habiting at such a place; and thus you would limit the holy One of Israel, and to stop the Wind to blow where it lifteth, and Circumscribe the Infal∣lible means which God hath given unto all Mankind for a direction and a Guide, a Rule, and a Iudge, and pinch it up into a narrow Corner, and yet shut up all under Condemnation, who do not believe, and yet exclude all but your selves, from the sufficient means and Guide, and way; where∣by they may believe; away, away, with this narrow, partial, pinching Spi∣rit; for God will not be limited, neither can be, either to Men, time, or place; but as they keep in Covenant with him, and keep their first love and integrity, in the certain Truth revealed in the first publication of the Gospel; which the Roman Church above all others hath wonderfully Apo∣statized from, especially in this one thing, which she can never clear her self of, to wit, Persecution, in taking away the Lives of many, under the name of Hereticks, and suppose any had been so, as doubtless there are such; ye we never read, that it was Christ or the Apostles way to kill them and de∣stroy them, but on the contrary, denyed them, and warned others so  hem, and to have no Fellowship with them, and so left them to the World, nei∣ther that they Exhorted or stirred up, either Kings of Princes to take away the Lives of any, who did believe or not believe what they declared  be Truth; but on the contrary, when the Disciples in the dayes of their  would have commanded Fire to have come down from Heaven (as did Elias) Christ Rebuked them, & told them, they knew not what Spirit they were of,
and again, love you Enemies, and do good to them that hate you: How your Catholick Church hath kept this precept I leave all Nations to judge, where your Power hath been known; suppose real Schismaticks and Hereticks, as some such there have been in the World, how you have done good to them, and how you have loved them is manifest, except you judge that shutting them up in Prisons, Racking, Torturing, and cruel Torments, and at last of all Death, was in love to them, and in doing good to them, which methinks any reasonable Man should blush and be ashamed to think or say. But an old Plea comes to my mind, which some of the Members of the Church of Rome have alledged to me in the dayes of my Youth, when I was conversant with them, and among them, in a Friendly, Neighbourly, and sober discourse, of things of this Nature before mentioned; it was said unto me, The Roman Catholick Church is that Church whereby Christianity hath been conveyed to all Nations, and the great Oracles thereof delivered unto us, and the Scriptures also came from us, by which you know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and the Knowledge thereof came unto all, and all her Children ought to be subject unto her, as the true Mother that brought them all forth; and if any went astray either into Heresie, or Schism, which might not only hurt them∣selves, but also others, ought not the Mother in Natural love to her Children to correct them? and ought not they to bear her correction, and submit unto it? and hath not she Power to correct her Children when they go astray? unto which is Answered, Christianity, that which is truly such, and them whom God will own to be Christians were dispersed through the Nations by the Power of God; and we say, that the Church of Rome hath begotten Christen∣dom into that Mould and Frame into which they are now cast, more by force and awe then any sound Doctrine; and as for the Scriptures coming from her, that we deny; We know they came from the Apostles, and from the Primitive Christians, according to the will of God, and have been preserved to this day, though through many polluted hands they have come; and we know how much your Rage was kindled that ever it should be Translated into the English Tongue, and many felt the Effect of it to the loss of their Lives, as I hope many in England do well consider: But sup∣pose a true Mother hath many Children, and suppose some do Swarve and go astray from her precepts, and under pretence of correcting of them, she shut them up in Goals, and nasty Holes, and afflict them with sundry kind of Torments, and at last of all kill them and destroy them, what Judgment will be given by reasonable Men of such a Mother, but this, that she is become unnatural and Cruel, and Hard hearted, and degenera∣ted from the Nature of a loving and tender Mother, and deserves not to have or ever to have had any Children; and such a kind of Mother hath you Church been, to all that have dissented from her; that I may say of her, as the Prophet Jeremiah said, especially in these ltter Ages) the Sea Mon∣sters and Dragons of the Wilderness draw out their Breasts to feed their young Ones, but the Daughter of my People is become Cruel. Seventhly and lastly, We know that God will that all Men should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of Truth, and hath given that, and doth give that unto every man that is come into the World, whereby e∣very man that doth receive it is capable of fulfilling the will of God, and
this gift comes not by the will of Man, nor is received in the will of Man, but in its own will, even in the will of the giver, and this free gift of God  the free and saving Grace of God, which hath appeared unto all Men, to wit, e∣very Man that is come into the World, which teaches all the Saints, & would teach all Infidels to deny ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live Godly and Righteously, and soberly in this present Evil World. Howbeit all are not so taught, because they heed it not, and because they receive it not, and so they make the free gift of God of no effect, (as to Life to them) but it is their condemnation; yet however herein appears the equal▪  and Uni∣versal love of God, who is no respecter of Persons▪ but  distributed a measure of this unto all, to the intent that they might  Power o fulfil his will, and keep his Statutes, and so the  is not in God but in them, who slight and despise his gift, and so condmnation  of every one that doth not believe, and is of himself, and this reprehends that alse▪ Er∣ronious, narrow, pinching Spirit, which would  it up in a Corner, and tye it to one sort of Men or Sect, or Opinion, and the Msters thereof would assume it to themselves, as though the Spirit of God and Grace of God were only among them, and must be conveyed from them to other People before they have it, and the direction and Guide of every Man must be sought from their Mouths, as though God had not given a measure of his Spirit unto every man to profit withal; and to be led and taught and guided by it into all Truth, out of Error, according to Christ's promise, and ac∣cording to the Lord's Promise in the dayes of old; that though his People might eat the Bread of adversity, & drink the Water of affliction▪ yet their Teach∣er should not be removed into a Corner; and from this quickning, enlighten∣ing▪ enliveing Spirit of God, the Saints of God, and Ministers of Christ in the Primitive times received Power and Authority to propagate Righte∣ousness, and to judge deceit, and the Mystery of Iniquity, where-ever it appeared, and in this their ability stood; for they were made able and fit Ministers by it, not of the Letter, nor of Mens Traditions, nor of foolish fopperies, which have been introduced since, and shuffled in among Chri∣stians under the Name of Power and Authority of the Holy Church, and the Church of God that had received this Spirit walked in it, and brought forth the Fruits fit, whereby they were a good savour in the Nostrils of the Lord, and by which they adorned the Gospel of our Lord Jes Christ by a holy Conversation, which did manifest them to be of God, and Convince and stop the Mouths of gain-sayers: And thus we are bold to tell thee and all, that the Spirit of God, which is given a measure of it to every Man, and more fulness of it to them that believe, that it is the Rule, and the way and means, whereby all the Actions, Words, and Works of all Men are weighed, tryed, measured, and judged, and Objections Answered, and is the alone Judge of all matters, and answerer of all doubts and giveth on∣ly true and perfect satisfaction; and therefore R. E. may blush and be asha∣med to ever publish such a thing abroad in the World, as to say, That the Spirit of God is not a sufficient director, Teacher and Judge, but calls it, a pri∣vate Spirit, Opinion, humour and fancy; to make the Eyes of them blind who wait for its appearance, only to trust to Men who plead Antiquity and Power, without verity: And further he goes on and sayes in the 22th page of his said Epistle, There is neither Jew, Turk, Pagan, or Christian but he may put on confidence
enough, affirming that he is taught by the Spirit of God,  this, and yet teach contradictions; and further saith, that it hath no effect a∣mong them who pretend to it, and that they can no more satisfie another that they are guided by the Spirit of Truth then many who are cast into Bedlm. Answ. 'Tis true, many are confident and impudent enough▪ but confidence without Ground, and impudent proves but little; and he tht ith, he is a Jew and is not, but of the Synagogue of Satan, will soon be found out by his Doctrine and Fruits, and he that saith, he is a Christian, and led by the Spirit, and keeps not the commands of Christ, neither brings forth the Fruits of the Spirit, is soon discovered to be a Deceiver, and deceived▪ and such are like to teach contradictions, but all such are denyed, shut out with the Spirit of Truth, but them that have the Spirit of God▪ witness a bles∣sed effect among them, for they are turned from Satan's Power unto God, and do witness Remission of Sin and Reconciliation with God, and are not at dif∣ference, but at Unity one with another, and are brought out of the obsti∣nate and perverse Estate which all pretenders are in, and as for contradi∣ctions they are more to be seen in the Church of Rome then many wheres else; they who are but pleased and have leisure to view over the Decrees and Constitutions of several Popes and Councils, since he was elevated to be Universal Bishop over all Christian Churches, by that Hathen  Emperour Phocas, who slew his Master Maritius to obtain  did gratifie the Pope so far that he might be cryed up as Emperour, as th he should be Universal Bishop, and this proved a better ple for the Pope (because the Emperour had Power to defend him▪ and to compel all to re∣ceive his Decrees) then that he was Peter's Succeso▪ I say who will but look into the Constitutions and Decrees, shall find such setting of and throw∣ing down, and such decreeing, and such disannulling, as twenty  Cham∣pions as Robert Everard will never be able to free his Catholick Church from contradictions, although he is very forward to charge othe though he is but a new Convert; but let him not boast till he hah put off his Ar∣mour, and it is tht mad Bedlem Spirit of thine that saith, That among all the Nonconformists there is no one that can satisfie another, that he hath the Spi∣rit of God; I tell thee yes, there are thousands satisfied in one another that they have the Spirit of God, besides he that hath it can speak to the witness of God in another which shall testifie the same, and moreover their Works and Fruits shall and do manifest unto others, that they are born of the Spirit, because the Fruits of it are seen, as they are manifest to be born of God, and do the Works of God; and thou must first know the Spirit of God in thy self (if ever thou look for it there, and not hang altogether up∣on others belief as thou dst upon thy Catholick Church) before thou canst know it in another, and first be Convinced by it, and judged by it, for thy ill deeds and ill thoughts and Hypocrisie and time serving▪ and flattery, and Men-pleasing, before thou canst be Convinced of others Righteousness, and also be Convinced of the unbelief of thy own Heart before thou canst believe others; but thou hast been so busie abroad in quarrelling and contending about Words, Names, and empty shews without Substance and Life, that thy mind is all over grown with Thorns and Biers, scrawling and scratch∣ing, and entangling thy self and others; so that, that which should Sa∣vour the things of God is over-grown in these, and is buried, and to them
that are like Heaths in a desert, know not when Good comes, neither do know what they enjoy that dwell in the fat Valleis, and the Pharisees had such unbelieving Hearts, though Christ was the express Image of God, and did the Works that never Man did, yet being without Faith and without Reason, they said, he was a Blasphemer, and all his Works were done by Bell∣zebub, and would never be convinced that any thing he did was of God, and that Spirit is near thee which would represent the Fruits of the Spirit to be delusion, and them that bring them forth like them in Bedlam; and what though Turks, Jews, Pagans, Mahomet, and the false Christians do pretend to the Spirit and guidance by it, and yet bring forth the Fruits of the Flesh, doth this make the Spirit of God void, or the certainty of it to them that believe, or do make their Fruits of none effect? God forbid: thy Ignorance is manifest: but here thou ceasest not, thy Tongue being thy own, and thou being at liberty, and speakest thy own words, which in the end shall become thy Burden. Thou vapours and vants over them, to wit, all the Nonconformists, and saist, What can you say for your selves any of you, which these Enthusiasts who have gone before you to maintain their Errours, but the Rule and judge, and then thou concludes, That which God hath appointed to be rule and judge to all the World, and capable of being known and heard by all, and cannot contradict it self, nor must be contradicted by any, under pain of Damnation; if you cannot shew it to have been your Rule, you ought to lay aside your Folly, as destructive to human Society, and them that have pretended the Spirit, the strongest party, and Sword, upon the vote will prove it self the most convincing Spirit, and force the weaker Spirits to submit or cry, for thou concludes, the Nonconformists have no other Testimony to try your contradicting Spirits in matters of greatest mo∣ment, but force and success, if you have I pray you inform me what it is. Answ. If the Wind had not turned into another door, divers Non-confor∣mists believe we should have had another Song from thee, if time had but favoured thee so far as to have granted thee priviledge of thy Troop to be Captain, which Name thou holds up yet in the pride of thy Heart, though thou hast lost thy force, success, and Pay, which was the greatest plea when time was with thee, and not long since too, which makest thee mea∣sure every Man's Foot by thy Last, and thou might receive information before thou hadst made a Conclusion, had been the part of a Wise man, be∣fore thou hadst set thy self as Judge over all thy former Fellowships▪ which thou fianedly pretends so great love to; and before thou hadst discovered their nakedness (if it be nakedness) to all the World in such a publick in∣sulting bravado as this, like Goliah of Gath, and as for whatsome Non-confor∣mists both of the Church of Rome, and to the Church of England, to which thou creeping and sneakingly flatters, and saist, it's established, and there∣fore thou will not meddle, thou might have said, dare not, for thy Spirit is well enough seen by them, only to have the Spirit of a Slave, and not a free Member of the true Church of God. and it's no part of a Vertue, nor Honour, for thee to insult and glory over them, who are in suffering and Adversity, whenas thou darest not meddle with them, who are as contra∣ry to thee as the former, this is but the Spirit of a Coward, and is ignoble and base, and ever so to be accounted by all the Children of Light, who dare put all to venture which they do enjoy on this side of Immortality, and
to suffer the loss of all visible things for their Testimony, and the Truth which they believe, and for bearing witness against that, which is con∣trary unto their Faith, as did the valiant Primitive Christians of old, and that which some Non-conformists can say▪ is more then thou canst believe, al∣though demonstrated in the evidence of the Spirit of God, with sound rea∣son, and evident Example from the Scriptures of Truth, and though thou and thy former fellowships then, and thy new fellowships now, have made this vapour, which for ought I know might lay your Hands upon your Mouths, all considering what contradictory Doctrines and Fruits have been brought forth since the Night of Apostacy entred in, and all the World won∣dered after the Beast; some have this to say, He that pretends to the Spirit, and the thing cometh not to pass that they speak or Prophesie, let him be accounted a false Prophet; again, they that pretend guidance of the Spirit, as some formerly have done, and yet bring forth the Fruits of the Flesh, as variance, Hatred, E∣mulation, Strife, Contention, Heresie, false Doctrine, Persecution, force and violence, let them be counted (as truly they are) Deceivers and Del∣ders, which have gone out into the World, and deceived a great part of Mankind, of which Rome hath not had the least share, clear it when thou canst; Morever, he that pretends to have the Spirit of God, and layes down another Foundation to build upon, in matter of Faith, in matter of Rule, in matter of Judgment, in matter of Doctrine, then that which the Lord of Life and Glory hath laid down, he is a Deceiver, and an Anti-christ; but R. E. hath laid down another Rule, another way, another Judge, ano∣ther Foundation for Faith, and let himself make the Conclusion, if he once dare joyn to true Judgment, other Foundation can none lay then that which is lready laid, to wi, Christ Jesus, the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and of the Church of God, by which they were all builded up as a holy Habi∣tation for God to dwell in through the Spirit: Again the Apostle saith, All Judgment is committed to the Son both in Heaven and Earth; and again he saith himself, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and none can come to the Father but by me; and again, the Spirit of Truth shall lead and direct h Disciples into all Truth; and sealeth unto them their Justification, Redemption and Sal∣vation: And this R. E. would lay all waste and void; and why? because many have pretended to it, and have fallen short; therefore all the afore∣said things must be laid aside as uncertain, and not to be trusted unto; and a certain sort of Men, called the Apostles Successors, who have sought their gain and worldly Interest, and to enlarge their Dominions, and to make themselves Lords over mens Faith, and over mens Consciences, whatso∣ever they say, though never so contradictory to the Primitive Doctrine, de∣livered in Christ and the Apostles dayes, yet all must be received upon pain of Damnation, as R. E. saith; and this he calls the Visible Church, and the infallible Judge, and Rule and Director, and hath laid waste the Of∣fice of Christ, and turned the Spirit out of doors, and made it ineffectual, and would perswade all others to look to this from the Foundation, and so is a deceiver and an Anti-christ. Again, we have this to say, he that teach∣eth a contrary Doctrine then that which was once delivered unto the Saints is a Deceiver and deceived (and this was Christ's Doctrine once delivered unto the Saints) Swear not at all, and love your Enemies, pray for them that Persecute you, do good to them that hate you; And many more precepts which
this visible Guide, to wit, the Roman Church holds not, but hath made void; First, it teacheth its Members to Swear, and again gives Absolutions to remit them of their Oath if she think fit, and both must be reckoned infalli∣ble, and them that are your Enemies instead of praying for them, you Curse them; and instead of doing good to them, you Hate them, and stir up all your strength against them to Destroy them, instead of Con∣vincing of them in love and sound Judgment; Instance the dayes of King John, and divers other Princes, which felt your Fury and Wrath; and al∣so Frederick the Emperour after he was Interdicted, was made to go to Rome before the Popes Palace, and to stand bare Foot and bare Leg, with his Wife and Children two or three dayes in Winter, waiting for Peter's Suc∣cessor his Absolution: But it may be thou wilt say, this was in love to them, and in Charity to their Souls; but let all unbyassed Spirits judge: and whether have not you, when you have been the strongest party, made force, Violence and success your greatest engin and plea, to plead with all Nati∣ons, & whatsoever People that dissented from you either in matter or form; instance Germany, Bohemia, Moravia, and divers other Kingdoms and Provinces; besides the Indians in America, which you Destroyed, chiefly for their Gold and Treasure under this pretence, that they were Infidels, and forced a Faith upon some, and a belief by the violence of your Cruelty and Swords, which made the Noble Man of India say, he had rather go to Hell with the Infidels of America, as you call them, then to Heaven with the Spainards, so cruel a People, Members of your Catholick Church. What might I speak of the King of Castile against the poor Moors of Grandia, who were put to cruel Torments by force and violence; which is a Reproach upon this sort of Christianity unto this day: And what Persecution was raised against the Pyedmount Christians, by the force of this infallible Judge, falsly so called; and what Massacres in France, and also in Ireland in latter Years, propagated by the Popes Nuncio, a chief Embassadour from the Roman Sea, to carry on that design to root out the Hereticks, what destru∣ction of People, in a most Barbarous, Inhuman, preposterous and prodi∣gious Cruelty, some killed in their Beds▪ some knocked in the Head like Oxen, some stripped naked in cold Winter, and bereaved of all their En∣joyments, and driven as Sheep naked to the Shambles; and at last driven by scores into Lakes and Rivers, and drowned, some Burned alive in their Houses, some tender Woman strangled in Childbed, and their tender In∣fants taken from their Mothers Breasts and tossed upon Spears points; and to my knowledge license and Pardons given and sent from Rome to divers of their Emissaries there, that it should be lawful for any Servant or Catho∣lick bondman to Steal, waste and Purloyn their Masters Goods, if Hereticks▪ for the weakening and disenabling of them to resist the Roman Enterprise begun; these things and many more are legible in Bloody Characters, which I hope this Generation will not easily blot out of their Memories, so as to commit all Faith, all Hope, all Religion, and all infallibility and Judgment, to such a degenerated Generation, as R. E. would have us do, and with such Audaciousness is not ashamed to blow his Trumpets as in the head of an Host to animate and encourage all to come to this Black Stand∣ard for protection and direction, Judgment, certainty, and infallibility, un∣der no less then pain of Damnation; and why, but because Peter was some∣time
Bishop of Rome as they say, and had given unto him the Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever he bound on Earth was bound in Heaven, and whatsoever he loosed in Earth was loosed in Heaven▪ and because Christ said, (giving an Answer to Peters's Faith) upon this Rock I will build my Church; therefore all the Bishops and Popes as heirs apparent suc∣ceed him, in laying claim to headship, and do none of his Office, nor none of his Work, and this foolish foppery and private interpretation hath been put off at a very great rate, for Catholick Doctrine, which brings to my mind a pleasant Story, I have some time read of a certain poor Man meeting a certain Bishop at a certain time, in great Pomp and Glory, which the poor Man beholding, took up a Laughter, and being enquired of by the Bishop wherefore be laughed; said he, That Peter should be such a Fool as to live such a poor miserable Life as he did, and Persecuted in the World, and to leave his Successors so Rich, to inherit such Pomp and Glory: With that the Bishop replyed and said, Thou fool, I am not in this Glory as I am Bishop of such a place, but as I am Duke of such a place: at that the man smiled again, and said, When the Duke was in Hell for his Pride, where then would the Bishop be. But to let this pass, I am sure them that lay claim to be Peters Successors as to Patrimony and Riches (which he was never endowed with, for sometime he said, Silver or Gold have I none) but do little of his Work in Convert∣ing of Souls, or feeding of the Flock of Christ, and do lay claim unto his Priviledge and Power, but will not come near him in doctrine, labour and Suffering for his Members; and therefore I say to thee in thy own Words, lay aside thy Folly, with the consequences of it, as destructive to the Church of God, to hang all their Faith upon such uncertainties, but even to hu∣man societies, which I have mentioned, and might instance more, but that I would not be too tedious to the Reader. Lastly, Yes, some have some other Testimony, by which Spirits are try∣ed, and may be tryed to be of God, otherwise then by Force, carnal Sword, a strong Party or Success, that's thy own and not ours; we have the holy Unction which is poured forth, whereby the Saints knew all things, and tryed the Spirits, whether they were of God or no, and he that confesseth not that Christ is come in the Flesh is Anti-christ; and he that confesseth that Christ is come in the Flesh, only in Word, and because others have said so, and doth not witness Sin condemned in the Flesh, and turned from, and to have Pow∣er over it, the same is a false Witness, and is an Anti christ also; and also we have other Things to try Spirits by, we know a proud, angry, hasty, perverse Spirit is not the Spirit of God, a persecuting lording Spirit is not the Spirit of God; and again, they that teach a contrary Doctrine to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, they have the Spirit of Error; again▪ they whose Practice and Conversation is not suitable to the Practice and Conversations of Christ and the Apostles and primitive Christians, that they are in the Spirit of Error; again, they that would force a Faith by a∣ny human Constitution or Law, which is repugnant to the Law of God, or by Force of the Sword, or any carnal Weapons, they have the Spirit of Error; for the Weapons of the Lamb and his Followers are not carnal Wea∣pons, but spiritual, and yet mighty through God to the beating down of the strong Holds of Wickedness, and to prevail over the Powers of Darkness; again, the Testimony of God in every Man's Conscience, which is an unerring
Testimony, this savours the things of God, and by this things that be not of God are discerned, and this will put a perfect Difference between the Spi∣rit of Truth and the Spirit of Error; but what can be said to a man in Un∣belief, that hath closed his Eyes? The next thing which R. E. saith he considered, was, That the Natural Reason of every Man could not possibly be the Rule and Judge that I sought for; for (saith he) if Reason were to be Rule and Judge, then it would follow, contra∣ry to Scripture, that it's not impossible to please God without Faith, and it would likewise follow, that every Religion would be Truth, consequently, Contradictions would be true; consequently, there would be many Religions, and no Faith at all, for Reason excludes Faith, as in the 26th Page of his Book. Thy Tongue is thy own, and thou art at Liberty, and goest whether thou wilt, and speakest what seems Good in thy own Eyes, and hast never yet known another to gird thee, and lead thee whither thou would'st not; I stand not to vindicate every Man's Judgment, neither to prove other Mens Conceptions; but seeing thou hast taken in Hand to lay all Mountains waste before thee that stand in thy Wayes, thou hast raised up some in thy Dis∣course for others to stumble at, and hast spoken many false things, with∣out distinguishing and putting a Difference between Light and Darkness, between Natural Reason and Spiritual Reason, I could not chuse but say somewhat. Although it is no Part of my Belief, that the Natural Reason of any Man or every Man is able to be Rule, Judge and Guide to any Man in the things of God, yet Faith is not in Opposition unto pure Reason, neither is pure and spiritual Reason in Opposition to true Faith, but in Harmony with it, and one with another, as they are the Gifts of God; but the Natural Rea∣son of all the fallen Sons of Adam is corrupted, and is too short, and too nar∣row, too cross and too perverse to be Rule and Judge in the things of God; for the Natural Man by all his Endowments in the Transgression perceives not the things of God, for they are spiritually discerned; and the things of God that are spiritual and eternal, are above the Reach of Natural Rea∣son; and yet thy Consequence is false, for Faith doth not exclude pure Reason, and Faith doth not make blind the Understanding, but enlightens it; and though it is impossible to please God without Faith, yet it is im∣possible that that Faith should be without Reason; the Apostle desired to be delivered from unreasonable men, that had not Faith; so it is manifest, they that have Faith have Reason, and they that have no Faith are unrea∣sonable; and where thou hast borrowed this Rule I know not, That a man must believe that he doth not understand, seeing the Apostle saith to the Ro∣mans, even of the Gentiles, who had not the Law nor the Scripture, that that which may be known of God was manifest in them: for by that it is manifest they understood the Mind of God, and knew him; for Paul saith further, When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but were unthankful, &c. and again, He that believes must know that God is, for none can believe in that which is not; for to perswade any to believe in Uncertainties, which are not manifest in the Understanding, doth rather beget Unbelief and Doubt∣ing, then true Faith; but thy Paths are so full of Darkness I shall not tra∣duce them, and thy Consequences are false; for pure Reason teacheth not Contradictions, neither doth teach that there is no Faith at all, neither is
Faith excluded by pure Reason, as thou ignorantly say'st in the 26th Page; and is it not Reason that I should believe in him, whom I know is the Crea∣tor and Governour of all the World; and pure Religion is so far from exclu∣ding Faith, that they that have true Faith have Reason, and stand not in Opposition to Faith; but this I conclude, that the Reason of fallen men is corrupted, and is an uncertain thing to rely upon, and so not a com∣petent Judge in Matters of so high Concernment, as touching everlasting Salvation. The third thing which thou treatest upon, is against them who have pleaded, that the sole Scriptures are sufficient of themselves to teach true Faith from time to time, to direct, rule and govern us, and to be Rule and Judge, and to supply the Place of Christ and the Apostles. As I said, it is not my Intention to vindicate other mens Quarrels, which is no Part of my Faith; notwithstanding I should be sorry but that every thing had its true Weight and Measure, and shall not in the least detract from the Price, Value and true Worth of the Words of Truth, to wit, the Scriptures of Truth, which were spoken forth by the Spirit of Truth and by the holy Ghost, as it gave Utterance; but as men erring in their Judg∣ments, run sometimes to the right Hand, and sometimes to the left Hand, and walk not in a straightPath; some men are setting them up above that which they were intended for, and placing them in the Stead of God, Christ and the Spirit; and others are too much debasing them and dis-esteeming them, as that they would set up the Judgment of Variable and Chan∣geable Men, who hold and teach Things in Contradiction to the Scrip∣tures, and repugnant to the Mind of the Spirit in them that spoke them forth. But first of all, I say not against thee in this thing, that the sole or whole Scriptures are not sufficient of themselves to teach true Faith, and give the Knowledge of God without the Spirit; for many have got the Words, and yet have not received the Spirit, nor the Power which the Scriptures declare of, such wrangle and contend with the Words, and oppose the Life and the Power; the Jews had the Scriptures, and knew by them where Christ should be born, and knew by them what his Works should be when he was manifest, and yet rejected him, unto whom all the Prophets bore witness, from Moses to Samuel, and from him to John; and they were never intended by God, as to be set up as Judge & Guide, to wit, the Words with∣out the Power and Spirit of God; yet notwithstanding, though I cannot set them up in the Place of God, Christ and the holy Spirit, nor contend ignorantly, as some have done, that they are the Author of True Faith, and that they are the Eternal Word of God, which the World was made by, that they are the Light and the VVay, the Truth and the Life, and that they are the Decider of all Controversies, and sole, and absolute, and only Judge of all Matters of Faith, and of all Matters that ver have been, or e∣ver shall be in Controversie to the End of the VVorld, without the Spirit of God; neither am I of that ignorant Mind, as some are, that the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, as that whosoever hath the Scripture, must needs have the Spirit, or whosoever hath the Scripture, must needs be in∣fallible without the Spirit; all that are of the aforesaid Judgment are but
VVranglers for the most Part about VVords, and Contenders against the Power of God and Godliness, and bring the VVords to oppose the Life, and them that have the Spirit, and walk in it; for a natural man may read the Scriptures, and yet not perceive the things of God, neither perceive the Mind of the Spirit, but wrest to their own Destruction, as Peter saith, because they are unlearned and untaught (by the Spirit's Teach∣ing) though otherwise learned enough in Languages, Tongues and Speeches. Secondly, Yet I cannot detract from them, neither undervalue them, or dis-esteem them as uncertain, or of no Use, or of little Use; but what∣ever themselves declare themselves to be, that I own them to be, to wit, the Words of God, the Words of Christ, the Words of the holy Prophets, and Pa∣triarchs, and Apostles, who were endued with the holy Ghost, and spake forth the Scripture as they were moved thereby, in several Ages, of seve∣ral things, and unto several States and Conditions, as they were led there∣to by the holy Spirit; and they are a certain Declaration of things that were done, and believed, and practised by the Jews under the first Covenant, and by the Apostles and primitive Christians in the New Covenant, and con∣tain many precious and holy Precepts and Commands, Doctrines, Examples, Ex∣hortations, Admonitions, Reproofs and Instructions, and are as lively Exam∣ples and holy Patterns for all the Saints in Light to follow, by which we are given to understand what Faith, what Hope, what Patience, what Love, what Mercy, what Long-Sufferings, what Consolation, what Virtue and what Inheritance the Saints in Light were made Partakers of, through Faith in Christ Jesus; likewise, what Doctrines were held forth, and what Practice they used in the primitive times, when they walked in the Order of the Gospel, and had Fellowship with God the Father and the Son, and one with another in the Light of the Gospel, which is the Power of God, through which they witnessed Salvation & Remission of Sins, and published it unto others that they might believe. Thirdly, The Scriptures testifie of Christ, and were written, that they might be believed, and received, and read, that thereby every one that belie∣ved might be made wise to Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 3. and instructed in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished with all good Works; and whosoever doth teach any Doctrines con∣trary unto the holy Men of God, who spake as they were moved by the Spirit of God, which dwelt in them; the Scriptures are Witnesses against such, that they have not the Spirit of God, but are led by another Spirit, which brings forth contrary Doctrine, and another Faith then was once delivered among the Saints; and whosoever brings in, sets up other Pre∣cepts, Constitutions, Orders and Practices in Point of Worship, in Op∣position and contrary unto those Practices which were held forth in the primitive times, and would set up other Traditions then the Apostles de∣livered either by Word or VVriting, such are manifest to have the Spirit of Error, and are Innovators and Bringers in of other things, as necessary in Point of VVorship among Christians, which the Apostles and Ministers of Christ did not see necessary then, and yet they wanted no Part of the Counsel of God; for Paul said, He had declared the whole Counsel of God; and
furthermore they said, We have the Mind of Christ, and Christ's Mind is not variable. Fourthly, Though divers of the VVritings of the Prophets and Apostles be lost, doubtless, as is evident by divers Places of Scripture, yet blessed be God that there are those preserved which do bear VVitness of the one thing absolutely necessary unto Salvation, & of the Ministrations that were appointed of the Lord for the Church of God to observe, both in the first and second Covenants; so that Christians of this last Age are not lest with∣out Example and President, which all ought to have an Eye unto, and a diligent Regard; and though there be divers Copies of that which is cal∣led the Original Tongue, and divers Translations, yet he unto whom the Spirit of God is given, and waiteth in the Measure of Christ's Light, shall receive it, doth ee and shall see the Mind and VVill of God in every Age, and the Mind and Intent of the Spirit in them that spoke forth the Scrip∣ture, and can receive the Matter therein contained, as though they had heard them speak that spoke it at the first; and though the Translators were Men, yet I have such an honourable Esteem of their Labour, that I believe they have not varied wittingly and willingly from the best Copies that were extant in their Age, neither that they were altogether void of the Spirit of God in such a good VVork, which conduced to the Benefit of Man∣kind, but were assisted by it for so good VVork; and there be many Fi∣gures and Tropas, Improprieties of Speech, Mysteries and Diiculties, yet all these come to be made easie and plain to them that are Witnesses of the same Spirit that gave them forth; and though there be Diversity of Judgments & Professions of Religion, one clashing against another, thwarting and contradicting another, & all will seem to bring the Scripture for their Proof, which yet cannot maintain and prove every thing good, especially when their Doctrines contradict one another; this is granted, it is only their private Interpretation, and not the Scripture; and for Wnt  ht Spirit that gave it forth, for that alone gives the true Understanding of i; and they that are without this are like to kill one another about Words, and Names, Sounds, Tittles, and Jottas, but still want the Key that opens, and gives an Entrance into the Knowledge of the things of God, which alone is the Spirit of God, that gave forth the Scriptures. Last of all, R. E. after he saith, The three former Props, which are the Basis of the whole Foundation, and glided over as slightly as he possible could, al∣though he hath never stated the Matter right, indeed as to remove all things out of his Way, which might hinder him in his Cause which he drives so hard on in, to wit, to set up a certain Company or Multitude of men Visible and Universal (as he saith) to be the only infallible Judge to convey Faith to the World, and to be the certain and infallible Judge in all Matters, that either pertain to the Worship of God, and to be believed under Pain of Damnation, as his Term is all along, without questioning at all either their Doctrine or Prin∣ciples, or comparing them with the Doctrine of Christ or Primitive Christians, whether they be true or false, whether they be with or against; but all is to be received by an implicite Faith, Hand over Head, and by whole sale, for it will admit of no Examination or Doubt, but all must be received of Ne∣cessity as infallible, and upon so great a Necessity too, as R. E. saith, if you
will believe him, would make it so, that all forfeit eternal Salvation for not receiving all the Doctrines of this Church, and consequently, procure eternal Damnation unto themselves who refuse it; so that if I should say no more, but even lay down his Assertions, which are scattered up and down his Book, called, An Epistle to all Non-conformists, it were Answer enough, I hope, to many, whose Mouths, I hope, would be filled with Arguments, and sound and grounded Ones too, or at least with Faith in their Hearts, to oppugn and not receive all these bold Assertions without Examination or Tryal, on∣ly upon the Account of Infallibility from the universal Church of Rome, falsly so called; but R. E. having removed away all the stumbling Blocks which are in his Way, as he judges; the private Spirit he hath concluded not to be this Rule and Judge, which I judge he hath no Opposers in, though he hath spent much Paper and Time in his scribling Humor, which hath been his manner in former Dayes; as he confesseth in the first Page; nei∣ther Reason nor the Scriptures are this Rule and Judge, but he hath concluded the Catholick Church is; but all along he hath waved that which indeed is the only and alone Rule and Judge infallible, viz. the Spirit of God, but either calls it the private Spirit, or concludes it is intail'd upon the Church, so that she cannot err, Page 54. which I shall say something further unto. That there hath been a Church of God, and a peculiar People whom God hath singled out, as to be Objects of his Love, which feared him in their Hearts, and bore a Testimony of him, and worshipped him accor∣ding to the Manifestation of his Spirit unto them, whether by Word or Revelation, which was certain and infallible unto them that received it, is granted, and this was alwayes but little in Comparison of the Multitude of the fallen Sons of Adam, and the rest of the Nations, and People that served and worshipped strange Gods, and never made such a Boast of Uni∣versality and Visibility, as this supposed Catholick Church hath done, sinc the Apostacy entered in, which the Apostles fore-saw and prophesied of before their Departure out of this Tabernacle, and since many have belie∣ved in Christ, and the Worship of the Jews extinguished, and a fatal Over∣throw of their Civil Government and Kingdom, are two main Reasons of extinguishing their Worship, and hath been no Invitation to any to turn Jews, or hold in their Worship, seeing they have lost their Government and Dominion, and are as scattered People without Priviledge, and is no Inducement for the World to joyn to them; therefore seeing the Face of that Government was demolished, and their Worship ended, but only as to themselves, who remained in their Unbelief; and seeing that the Do∣ctrine of Christ did so far prevail, as to extinguish it, and put out the Glo∣ry thereof in the Apostles Dayes, and sometime afterwards, and also the Gentiles Worship, and their false Gods and dumb Idols which they were led after, the Power of God prevailing through the Apostles, the Ministers of Righteousness, by whom many were converted unto the Faith of Christ, the Sum and Substance of all Shadows, many being converted to the Faith did hold forth a publick Testimony, and it became in some Reputation, and many preached him of Envy, Contention and Strife, and for filthy Lucre, Covetousness and Self-Ends, and many followed their pernicious Wayes,
and yet held the Name of Christ and Christianity; and thus began the Mystery of Iniquity to work, and the Devil to turn so far Christian in Name (only) because it was in vain among many to hold forth the Jews Worship or the Gentiles Worship, because they had an Inclination another Way after Christianity, that came into more Repute with the World▪ and therefore suffered the Name, or many to profess it, and under this Name and under this Cover to bring forth his Work of Darkness and the Fruits of the Flesh, and the Nature of Christ wanting; and here was the Begin∣ning and Rise of your universal visible Church. Secondly, For the first two Thousand Years before the Scriptures were written (R. E. saith) the Church of God was this Rule and Judge and infallile Director▪ which might to some indifferent men have been granted, but that I see which Way his Course bends, viz. to the setting up of men as Judge, and Rule, and Guide, and detracts from the Spirit and Power of God, in which the Ability and Power of the Church of God stood, and from which alone they received this proper Power and Right, because their Understandings were enlightened, and their Judgments informed, to declare the Mind of God freely, according as it was revealed, and to give true Judgment; why is not this attributed rather to the Spirit and Power of God that was manifest in them, rather then to Persons, seeing their Ability stood, and their Power only as they kept in Covenant with God; & as any erred from that in any Age, or fell from that, they came to be blind Guides, and to give false Judgment, as some such there were in all Ages. Thirdly, R. E. saith, That after the Scripture was written, the Church of the Jews was Rule and Judge unto the Jews; and cites Deut. 17.8. Thou shalt come unto the Priests, Levites and unto the Judge, and enquire, and they shall shew thee the Sentence of Judgment, and according to that which they shall tell thee thou shalt do: And likewise he quotes Mat. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, &c. And from thence he infers, would God direct them unto, and punish with Death for not obeying an Authority which might deceive them, and was this Authority committed to them that were capable of mistaking? Answ. It seems R. E. would narrow and pinch up the Church of God among the Jews in a straight Compass, when he would confine it only to the Priests and Levites, and to the Judges in those Dayes, whenas all the Tribes were called the Church as well as Levi; again it is said, Jacob is my Portion, and Israel is the Lot of my Inheritance, comprising the whole Tribes and Families of the Jews; but it seems these must be no Part of the Church with R. E. he pinches narrower now then he will do when he tells us of the Vastness of the Universal Church; but let that pass as by the Way, and to come to the Matter in Hand; the Priests and Levites were ap∣pointed by the express Commandments of God, as to be Ministers unto him, and to minister unto the People, according unto the Covenant that he made in those Dayes; and the Priests and the Levites were endowed with the Spirit from God▪ suitable to the Ministry & Charge committed to them, and they were Figures of Christ, the Everlasting High Priest; and the Law and Judgment which was given by the Lord to Moses, was deli∣vered to the Priests, and their Lips were to preserve Knowledge, and good
Reason, because they were committed unto them; and the Tables of Stone and the Commandments were not given to the Families and the rest of the Tribes, and as R. E. hath answered himself, neither could sufficient Copies have been written in any reasonable time to every particular Tribe, Family or Person; and therefore R. E. concludes full too hastily, but that his Spirit indeed is by assed all along in his Discourse to aim toward the Mark he would be at, to set up Men above the Spirit, Scripture and Reason; but I enquire of R. E. whether that the Priests and Levites and Judge did tell them any other thing, or direct them in any other Way, or gave Judgment after any other manner then as was written in the Tables of Stone, or the Book of the Law, which was written, wherein the Mind of God was contain'd, both in Point of Worship, and also in Point of Government; and why might not R. E. as well and reasonably have concluded, that that which was given from the Mouth of the Lord concerning all Israel, was the Direction, Rule and Guide, and Judge, as well as the Priests and Levites; and the Rea∣son that the People or the Church having the Recourse to their Ministers appointed of God, was, because they had the Statutes and Ordinances of God committed unto them, which was put in the Ark of the Covenant, and in the Tabernacle: And by the Way, I would ask R. E. or any of his Roman Catholicks a Question, seeing he saith, That this Promise is granted and intailed unto the Church (without all Limitation or Condition) as to be the only infallible Rule, and that they cannot err; whether that these Priests and Levites ever did err, yea or nay? and when was the Entail cut off from them? seeing the Scripture saith, They had violated his Law, and bro∣ken his Covenant; and again, The Prophets prophesied for Hire, and the Priests bore Rule by their Means, and the Judges judged for Rewards; and as David and Paul said concerning Israel, They are all gone out of the Way, and there is not one that doth Good, no not one, and whether were they the Rule, and true Guides, and Judges in this revolted State, yea or nay? although I do not question but they retained still their Places by Way of Office, and would claim the same Power which they had before from God, as they stood in the Commands of God, as R.E. and his Catholicks do, and will lay claim to the Office and Power the Apostles had, though they do err from the Spirit the Apostles were in; and whether their Power of being Directors, Guiders and true Judges and infallible Rule stood not upon this Condition, as they did continue in the Covenant of God, and kept the Precepts of God in Purity without Violation, which when they did not (as sometimes they did not) whether were they subject to err, or whether did they err, ye or nay? viz. the Priests and Levites, Judges and Heads of the People, which R. E. reckons for the Church; and though Christ did exhort his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses's Chair, and to observe and do those things which they from the Law before-given read, taught and instructed the People in, because as I said before, the Law and the Statutes were committed to the Priests and Levites, and they to read it, and minister unto the People by the Appointment of God; and these Statutes and Ordinances were the Rule that the then Church ought to have observed, yet Christ exhorted the Disciples to beware of their Leaven and of their Hypocrisie, and said, they said and did not, notwithstanding all the
Authority which R. E. saith they had; and further saith, Would God direct them unto, and punish with Death for not obeying an Authority which might de∣ceive them? or would Christ command the doing of whatsoever should be done by an Authority that was capable of mistaking? all which maks nothing for R.E. but rather would run him upon a harder Rock, if this should be true or granted; for then he is bound both to believe and justifie the Scribes and Pharisees in whatsoever they did or said, of which methinks R. E. should be ashamed; 'tis true, they that sate in Moses's Chair could not err, nor be capable of mistaking, as they continued to keep unviolate the Ordinan∣ces, Statutes and Rule, which were given unto them by the Command of God; but when they disobeyed, and set up the Traditions of Men, and min∣gled them with the Ordinances of God, and neglected the weighty Matters of the Law, as Justice and true Judgment; both they that taught, and they that were taught, came justly under Reproof: And seeing R. E. reckons that the Authority of the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees could not be deceived, or capable of mistaking, only because they bear the name of such an Autho∣rity and Office; I query of R. E. again, whether the Scribes and Pharisees were not mistaken, yea or nay? and whether they were not deceived, yea or nay? and wherefore Christ should exhort his Disciples to take heed of them, and to beware of them, and to take heed of their Doctrine? and why did Christ pronounce so many Woes against them, notwithstanding their sitting in Moses's chair? But in what hath been said, I hope will be suf∣ficient to convince any, that what R. E. hath laid down for a seeming Foun∣dation makes altogether against himself, the Premises before well consi∣dered: And as for all thy collections out of the Promise of God to his Church, Isa. 54. & 56. and of its Endowments and Glory and Excellency, and of his putting his Spirit in them, and of his Word in their Mouthes, and that it should not depart from the Seed, or the Seed's Seed forever; this is granted, and the Promise is not to Men, as Men, but to the Seed, which is not ma∣ny but one; but Israel was this true Church then in the time of this Prophe∣cy, though it hath Relation to future Ages also; and if R. E. looks that this Promise should be to Israel after the Flesh, the Church then visible and in Being, he mistakes himself, and he egregiously errs, and contradicts the Scripture in sundry Places, which saith, Your House is left unto you desolate, their Sacrifices ceased, the Glory of God departed from them, their Prophets pro∣phesied a Divination of their own Brain, and their Visions were as Visions of the Night; and the Lord spake not to the most of them, yet they said falsly, Thus saith the Lord, in their revolted Estate; for they were erred from the Spirit, and gone from the Seed, and joyned to another Seed, and their ho∣ly Flesh was departed from them, though as Men they had the same Flesh still, go learn what that means; and yet notwithstanding all this, the Pro∣mise of God was not violated, neither unfulfilled on God's Part; for the Promise was not then, neither now is to Natural Generations, or that which is born after the Flesh, or to men as men and Creatures, but as they are the Seed, and as they are Men of God, and as they are born again and new Creatures; and if thou wilt have an intailing, here it is intailed, which cannot be cut off; for the Covenant stands not to Men in such a Place, that carries the Name of Office or Authority, but as they are led by the Spirit, the infallible Judge, Rule or Guide, as they walk by this and in this, they
cannot err; and they erring from this, they are subject to be deceived, and to be mistaken in all things and every thing, of which there are evident Ex∣amples in the Scriptures of Truth in divers Ages, of them that professed themselves Members of the Church of God, and so visible as R. E. speaks of, yea, and the greater Part too, that have erred, and their Pathes have been reckoned by the Lord as crooked and perverse, and their Habitations full of Cruelty; and this is given for an Instance, the visible Church of the Jews did err and go aside, notwithstanding all the Promises of God to them; and as they looked that it still belonged to them, because they were in visible Profession, though they had turned their Backs upon the Lord, and their Hearts too, and violated his Covenant; yet still (as I said) the Promise of God and the Covenant of God is not made of none Effect, nor broken on God's Part, but stands with the Seed forever, who are circum∣cised in Heart, and who worship God in Spirit and Truth, and in Upright∣ness of Heart, and hath no Confidence in the Flesh, nor fleshly Priviled∣ges, nor external Performances, but only trusts unto the Gift of Righteous∣ness manifest in them, by which Justification comes upon all that believe, and the Fulness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ, and the Fulness of the Promise of God; but these things I know, though they be Ho∣ly, Faithful and True, are a sealed Book, and hid from all Eyes living in the Flesh, who have not been baptized into the Death and Suffering of Christ. Fourthly, That Christ by his own Mouth and the mouths of the Apo∣stles, did Promise that there should be a Church which the Gates of Hell should not prevail against, and this Church was established upon the ever∣lasting Foundation, and the Rock of Ages, and was endued with Power from on High, and with a great measure of the Spirit of God according un∣to Christ's Promise, which more plentifully was poured forth after Christs departure, and after his Ascension, and great Gifts were given unto them, the Word of Knowledge, the Word of Wisdom, the Interpretation of Tongues, and the gift of Tongues, the Gift of Prophesie, the gift of discerning Spirits, healing the Sick, working of Miracles, &c. and all these foresaid gifts were given for the Work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come into the Unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, and unto a perfect Man, and to the measure and Stature of the fulness of Christ, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. And all these were instrumental (though the Spirit of God which was with them and in them, the only means) to bear witness unto those things that they had learned and belie∣ved, and to publish the word of Faith abroad unto the World: and for these aforesaid ends above-mentioned, which though R. E. and his Catho∣licks will needs lay claim to the Succession by way of Office, yet by their Doctrine deny in part the very end wherefore such gifts were given, to wit, the Doctrine of Purgatory, for if they did perfect the Saints, or were brought up to the knowledge of the Son of God, and to perfect Men in Christ Jesus, and to be without Sin, what need had there been of raising up this damnable Doctrine out of the Pit, to purge from Sin after they be dead, seeing they were to be perfect Men while they were alive, and the Ministry was given for this End? but yours it seems cannot have these ef∣fects on this side of the Grave, and therefore they perfect them in the grave
and so be ministers in another World: And this Church thus gathered and endued before-mentioned, with the infallible Spirit of God, if any that did sometime believe and were joyned unto it, did walk disorderly, as not becoming the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, they were to be admoni∣shed and Exhorted, and if they persisted in their disorder, it was to be told to the Church, or the whole Body, and if such a one would not hear the Church, he was to be reckoned as a Publican, or a Heathen, and to be denyed as to have any Fellowship with him, till manifest Repentance was shewn; but we never read that this Church did shed any man's Blood, or Burn any, or give consent to Destroy any, istance if thou canst, though obstinate and Heretic too; and in this amongst many other things the Spirit of your Church is seen to be contrary to the Primitive Church, and you out of Christ's Doctrine; but R. E. Argues further and saith, but if Christ by his Spirit doth not preserve this Church from all possibility of teaching Error instead of Truth, I may receive such Errors as may damn me; unto which I say, Christ by his Spirit doth preserve this Church from all possibility of teaching er∣ror, if they continue in the Guidance thereof, and Err not from the Spirit of Christ, as some Churches did, which were as truly Christian, and might lay claim unto Christ's promise of preservation out of error, as ever Rome could do, and yet six of the Seven Churches of Asia were reproved by the Spirit of Christ, some of them for holding gross Error, and some for suf∣fering it; but where was the fault? did not Christ perform his promise to his Church, or to these and other particular Churches, as Corinth and Galatia? (yes) but there was an erring from the Spirit; but all that R. E. goes about▪ is to prove (which he will never be able to do) that Christ is bound by Promise to make it good to them that he hath once Promised un∣to, though they perform nothing of their part in taking heed to his dire∣ction, and thus would limit the Lord, and let Men go free with obedience to his commands; and he cites Mat. 28.20. how the promise of Christ was, and lo I am alwayes with you even to the end of the World; but he hath done as the Devil did, when he brought it is written, to Christ, and left out half the words, so R. E. hath left out the Conditions on the Disciples part, and that which was their duty, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I command you, and then lo I am with you, &c. But R. E. likes not obedience it seems unto Christ's commands, and yet he will needs be a sharer in the Promise, and of the Power that was given, and bind God unto that, and he and his Church to be loose, to do and to teach what they will; but as to all the Scriptures he hath brought and minced them, and cut them in piece-meal; and all the inferences he makes, this we acknowledge with∣out multiplicity of words, that whatsoever was promised to the Church of Christ▪ and the Disciples of Christ; as the Church of Christ, and Disci∣ples of Christ, the same Promise of Christ, doth belong to the Church of Christ and Disciples of Christ in every Age, and stands upon the same con∣dition; viz. Obedience unto hs will, and that they still do teach, and no other thing but what he commands them, then he is with them according to his Promise; but let not R. E. nor his Roman Catholicks look if they teach things repug∣nant to his mind and contrary to his will, and press upon others to believe that which Christ hath never taught, that then the Promise of God will be so intailed to them as that they cannot Err, and here the deceit of thine and
your Hearts hath led you aside, and this is one of the cunning sleights of Men, and craftiness whereby you lay in wait to deceive; and by this you have deceived many; because God hath made such large Promises unto his Church, how that they should be led into all Truth, and preserved out of Error, and you are their Successors, and must needs Inherit this Promise by way of intail, and you cannot Err, you cannot be deceived, because the Apostles were infallible, therefore you must needs be infallible; though you Err and go aside never so much from the infallible Spirit, the true Guide and Judge of and in the Church of God; as though you had been born to infallibility, and the Spirit of Truth had come by succession; but the inward Light, which thou scoffs at, and the Spirit of Truth, which thou calls a private Spirit often, hath discovered you and your Spirit, though thou boastest of fifteen Ages that your Doctrine hath been held by the Past∣ours and Teachers in your Visible Church as in the fifty seventh Page of thy EPISTLE; suppose I should grant the fifteen hundred Years, which I neither can nor will, but I will lead thee to the sixteen hundred years and try thee & your Doctrine that you have held this fifteen hundred Years, if it be so, as thou saist; but this thou likes not, but seeing thou plead'st Antiquity, let us come on and joyn issue, prove us Transubstantiation in the first hundred Years, nay, I will give thee five hundred more, and if I give thee five more thou would'st hardly prove it, before the Council of Trent; prove us the Doctrine of Purgatory in the first hundred Years▪ and if thou take two, it shall not offend me; prove us the forbidding of Ministers to mar∣ry in the first hundred years, and abstinence from Meats, as though they were unclean which are created by God for the use of Believers; prove us that Man hath a two-fold right to the Kingdom of Heaven, as your great Bel∣larmine saith, the one by Christ, the other by a Mans own Works; prove us Invocation of Angels, and Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead the first hundred years after Christ; prove us their selling of Pardons in Christ's and the Apostles dayes for Money; prove us setting up of Images, as to put Men in mind of the Saints deceased, and of their Works; prove us Baptism of Infants with Cream and Spittle, and singing with the Cross, and God-fathers and God-mothers; and let us have some example beyond bare re∣port, for we dare not relie upon your infallible Spirit in these things, there∣fore convince us, for we are Gain-sayers, and upon good Ground, and we do look upon all these Doctrines and many more not to be of such a great Age as thou tells on, neither to have any affinity or congruity, with the Church of Christ in his or the Apostles time, nor sundry Years after, but rather look upon them as Doctrines of Devils, and a very novelty; a further Scripture R. E. urges, 1. Tim. 3.15. the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth; and may we not relie of that Pillar that God hath e∣rected for us? (saith he) and he that hears you hears me, and go teach all Nations, and I am with you alwayes, and yet if after all these Promises if the Church may not be believed except she teacheth according to the Scriptures, and be only infal∣lible but when she doth her duty, then the Church hath no more priviledge then the Devil hath, for so long as he teaches conformable to the Scripture he may be belie∣ved▪ and so long as he teaches Truth he may be believed, saith R.E. in page, 58, 59. Answ. The Church is in God, 1 Thes. 1. and is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; she is in the World though not of the World; and though the
Members thereof be visible in the World, yet the world that lies in Wick∣edness, never owned them as such, either saw the Glory of this Church, but alwayes Persecuted it, and was so far owning it as Rule and Judge, as it altogether gain-sayed its direction; but they that did believe in the word of Life, and were separated from the World, and hated by it, were will∣ing to hear the Counsel & to receive the instruction of the Church of God; and the Church only medled with their own Members, as in matter of Judgment, and not of the World, further then by preaching Repentance in it; for the Apostle saith, What have we to do to judge them that are without? and this Church as in God was secure to relie upon, for she had the Oracles of God committed unto her, & every one may relie upon this Pillar, if they dare trust it, which I see R. E. dares not, because he likes not to be tyed to their Doctrine declared of in the Scriptures, but would have all to take what they say for granted without the Scripture, or the Apostles example or Spirit, and is not this unreasonable in thee, that would'st have the Church to be believed, or that which calls it self so by Name, when she teacheth not conformable to Scriptures, and to the Faith which was once delivered among the Saints? and wouldst thou have a Church reckoned infallible and to be believed when she doth not her duty? the Churches priviledges are in speaking Truth, and judging Righteously, and the Devil was a Lyer from the beginning and is out of the Truth; and where hast thou read that he teaches conformable to Scripture, and so may be believed? is not the Pro∣mise of God to his Disciples, as they continued to the End, and as they kept his Commandments? and were they not known to be the Church of God and Disciples of Christ by this? and was not the Promise to them that hungred and thirsted after Righteousness, and to them that did overcome? and was not the Exhortation to the Church of Philadelphia, hold fast that which thou hast that none take thy Crown, Rev. 3.11, 12. Was there not a possibility of letting go that which they had▪ and of loosing the Crown? or else, why is the Exhor∣tation? But I see R. E. would lay claim to Promises and Priviledges with∣out all condition, and will not be tyed to keep the commands of Christ, nor would not have the Church tyed to follow the Doctrine of the Primi∣tive Church, no will not admit of any possibility or probability of failing or Erring, nay, not so much as a mistake; but as to infallibility and certain∣ty I have said enough before, and the confidence or rather the impudence of R. E. is easily seen, and to make up all, he concludes the Apostles, as Men, were subject to error in their private affairs, yet were they by the assistance of God's Spirit infallible in delivering matters of Faith, I say, as they were assist∣ed by the holy Spirit of God, they neither erred in private affairs nor matters of Faith, but as they were not assisted by this they were subject to Err, for in this stood their only Ability to Teach, Instruct, Exhort, and judge, and as they were guided by this Spirit, they were infallible▪ and so R. E. saith, That the Prelates f the holy Catholick Church, as Men, they are fallible in their own private actions and affairs; yet when they are assembled in a general Council with their supream Pastor, they are still made infallible in determining matters of Faith: It is well that R. E. will grant, that there is any possibili∣ty for their Prelates to fail, either publick or private▪ but I say, he that is not faithful in his own actions & affairs, can never be faithful in the Lord's; but it seems  General Council cannot fal when the supream Pastor, the
Pope is there, but if he be not, it seems by R. E's discourse, it is more doubt∣ful: the like he also judges, if the eleven Disciples and the seventy too, with the Brethren and Elders, if they had all been to define matters of Faith if Peter had been wanting, which this Catholick Church calls the Prince of the Apostles, there had been some doubt of their infallibility in point of Faith; as though the Promise of God and the Spirit of God had not been with the rest of the Apostles as well as Peter: but a word or two and more hereafter of the infallibility of General Councils, the Nicean Council de∣creed flat Idolatry about Worshipping of Images, the Council at Constanti∣nople condemned their Proceedings, and made void their Decrees, yet both these in R. E's account must needs be infallible; the Council at Basil as Albertus Phigious saith, Decreed against all Reason and against Scriptures; (the Council of Calcedon) which was one of the four that Gregory the great compares to the four Gospels, that their Decrees were as certain and infallible, yet Pope Leo did not stick to condemn it, and all them as unadvised; Ste∣phanus Bishop of Rome made void the Decrees of Formosus; and Sabi∣nian the Pope commanded that Pope Gregory's Mass and all his Writings should be Burned; Leo the fourth abrogated and made void the Acts of Adrian; the Basil Council determined that the Council of Bishops was above the Pope, but the Latteran Council under Leo determined that the Pope was above the Coun∣cil; and they decreed also that he that should think otherwise should be held for a Heretick; but the Council of Basil aforesaid decreed that they that judged that the Council was not above the Pope they were Hereticks: Innumerable more instances I might give, but that I will not trouble my Reader with such unprofitable Stories; and all these Popes said, They were Peter's Successors, and had the Keys of binding and loosing, and all these Coun∣cils and many more which were of the Roman Faith, which in R. E's account could not err, but must needs be infallible, and yet are as contradictory one to another, as Light is to Darkness, and black to white, and look with their Faces several ways, like Sampson's Foxes; and therefore let not R.E. nor none of his Catholicks think that the Church of Christ now coming out of the Wilderess again, can receive all their contradictory Decrees, and in∣vented Fopperies & Constitutions of Men for infallible: the Day is broken, the Light hath taken hold of the Ends of the Earth, the Sun is risen which shall make all Foggy mists of Darkness & Clouds of Ignorance to fly away. But R. E. ceases not here, but heaps up one Peice of Darkness upon a∣nother, till Blackness of Darkness appears; and he tells of a Visible Church, Mat. 16. which is builded upon Peter, that Visible Rock; for that Rock there spo∣ken of is not Christ (saith he) but Peter, for immediately after he names Pe∣ter, whereas (saith he) if he had meaned himself or Peter's Confession, for that (saith he) is too remote, or mediate and antecedent; for if Christ had meaned himself, or Peter's Confession, he should have spoken according to the Grammar Rule and Construction, Upon that Rock, or upon this Rock I have built, I do build, and not I will build: In the 63d Page and in the 64th Page he tells of a Church Visible, having two Heads, of an Independent Head, and a Dependent Head; and in the 66th Page he saith, He hopes that it will appear clear to all, as it did to him, that the Visible Church is that Rule and Judge appointed by God, and all up∣on Pain of Damnation are to submit unto it.
Where R. E. hath read of a visible Church with two Heads, I know not, and to take it for infallible I intend not; and where is Peter called a visible Rock, and the chief Pastor among the Apostles? doth not this contradict Scripture? doth not Christ say, The Gentiles exercise Dominion one over a∣nother, but it shall not be so amongst you, he that will be greatest among you, let him be your Servant, and he that will be chief, let him be your Minister; and as for thy visible and militant Church, we read no such Words in the Scriptures of Truth; we read of a Church of God, & of the first-born, whereof Christ was the Rock and the Foundation, and another Foundation can no Man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. And Paul saith in ver. 10. As a wise Master-Builder I have laid the Foundation. I hope R.E. will not be so im∣pudent as to say, he had laid Peter, or that he had preached up Peter to be∣lieve in for Remission of Sins, nor for the Foundation of Faith; for that had been contrary to the Apostles Commission and their Doctrine; for saith the Apostle, We have not preached our selves, but Christ, the Lord, and our selves your Servants for his sake: And I may say to thee R. E. as Paul said to the Corinthians, when they were striving about Men, Cor. 3.21. Therefore let no Man glory in Men, for all Things are yours, or as he saith in Chap. 1. Ver. 13. was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in the Name of Paul? were they not carnal that so glorified? was Peter crucified for us? or were we baptized in the Name of Peter? is not your visible Church car∣nal, who thus judgeth, that Christ intended Peter to be the Foundation of his Chruch; for what was he or the rest of the Apostles, but Ministers by which many believed; ; and if thou hadst been present, it is very like would have instructed Christ what to have said, and bidden him have spo∣ken after the Grammer Rule and Construction, upon that Rock I will build my Church; for Peter's Faith in Christ is too mediate (it seems) and his Confession too remote and antecedent to be the Rock meant in Mat. 16.18. and therefore Peter must be immediate, and the Rock upon which Christ hath, doth and will build his Church; but as immediate as he was, and as sure a Rock as he was, when he began to rebuke Christ, he turned him about, and said unto Peter, Ver. 23. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an Offence unto me, for thou savours not the Things of God; and so say I to R. E. and his Catholicks, they savour not the things of God▪ but it is thy private Spirit, and your own Interpreta∣tions, and not the Mind of Christ; and how far antecedent is Peter's Con∣fession of Christ the Son of the living God? is it not in Vers. 16. and where∣in was Peter blessed, but in this, that it was revealed to him, that Christ was the Son of the living God, the Rock of Ages, and the Foundation of his Church; and as for thy visible Church with its two Heads, indepen∣dent Head and dependent Head, which sure must have two Bodies where they can be found; but that I shall leave to R. E. and I hope, from the Grounds that thou hast here laid, which did appear so clear to thee, that none will be afraid, nor judge that such a visible Church with two Heads is to be Rule and Guide to all, to whom all are to submit under Pain of Dam∣nation, which is to have Peter for its Rock, which if he had been living, he would have denyed you all, as Setters up of Men, and Slighters of Je∣sus Christ, the Rock of Ages, the Foundation of the Church, the Head of the Body, the Rule of Life, the Judge of Quick and the Dead, the Law-giver, Director, Instructer and Preserver of his Church forever;
but R. E. goes on and saith, It only remains that we consider which among all these Congregations now on Earth, which pretend themselves to be this Church of Christ; for having once found her, and knowing that she is so assisted with the ho∣ly Ghost, that she cannot teach us an Error, we shall no more dispute the Verity of her Doctrine, then we would have questioned the Articles of Faith taught by the holy Apostles, or the Words of Christ himself; wherefore if this Church, this in∣fallible Guide shall teach us that Infants ought to be baptized, and that it is as law∣ful to desire the Saints departed to pray for us, as to desire the Prayers of them that are alive, and that the Body of Christ our Saviour is really and truly present in the Sacrament of the Altar, or any other Article of Faith, we shall no more doubt it, then the first Christians did the Verity of what the Apostles taught them. Among all those Congregations on Earth, that look upon themselves to be the Church and Spouse of Christ, there is one, if thy Eye could behold, or if thou could'st discern it; but before thou canst, there is an Eye in thee must be put out, and there is a Wisdom in thee that must be confounded, and turned into Foolishness, before thou canst discern it in its Glory as it is; but however that is it undoubtedly, which is begotten into the Faith through the Publication of the immortal Word of Life, and who are tran∣slated from Death unto Life, and who have received the Power and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, and meet in his Name and Power, and do wit∣ness his Presence among them, and have received a Measure of that infal∣lible Spirit of Truth which leadeth into all Truth, and out of the Polluti∣ons of the World, and are dead unto the World, and baptized into the Sufferings of Christ, and are crucified with him, who keep unviolated his Statutes and Commands, without adding to or diminishing from, who walk in the Order of the Gospel, and are not conformable to the World, nor to that which fallen Men set up, but to the Power of God, that work∣eth in the Hearts of all that believe, to the framing of them a meet Habitation for God to dwell in, and abide in the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and are Sayers and Doers, speak the Truth and do the Truth, and hold the Truth in Righteousness, and the Faith once delivered to the Saints in a pure Heart and a pure Conscience, who pray in the Spirit, and with Under∣standing, who publish the Truth, and declare it in the Spirit, reaching to the Consciences, and to the Witness of God in all that hear, who rejoyce only in Christ Jesus, the great Power of God and the Wisdom of God, and have no Confidence in the Flesh nor fleshly Performances, whose Faith stands not in Words, but in the mighty Power of God, which she hath received ac∣cording unto the Promise of God; this Congregation or Congregations, which is one, and doth hold the one Head, by which all the Members of Christ are knit together in the one Faith, by which they overcame the World; this undoubtedly is the Church of Christ and the Spouse of Christ: But whether R. E. will not dispute against the Verity of her Doctrine, I question, notwithstanding all his Submission in Words; and if this Church should teach, that Infants are to be baptized with Cream and Spittle, and signed with the Cross, as absolutely necessary to Salvation, or that it is the Duty of the Saints alive to pray to the Saints departed this World, or to teach that Christ's Body which was broken for us, and hanged upon the Tree at Mount Calvary, that this should now be in a Morsel of Bread and a Sup
of Wine, and conveyed thither by the Priest, and this to be really the Body of Christ, if this Church should teach any such Doctrine there were good and weighty Reason to Question, seeing that R. E. before hath said, that they cannot be infallible who contradict one another, and teach two contrary Doctrines, and yet say, they are both infallibly directed so to teach, I hope R. E. will grant that the Church in Christ's time and the Apostles, was infallible, & it taught no such Doctrine, but to the contrary, therefore that Church which pre∣tends infallibility, and yet teacheth such Doctrines as before mentioned, contrary unto Christ and the Apostles cannot be infallible, neither led by the infallible Spirit, & all have good reason to Question the Verity of these things, more then what the Apostles taught, seeing they are contradicto∣ry to Christ and the Apostles teaching, and contrary to Scripture, and con∣trary to the witness of God in all Consciences, and as I said before, this Church of God whereof I have spoken now, though not denominated by any other name then the Church of God, is and hath been assisted so by the Holy Ghost as she hath not erred, when she only hearkened to its instruction and direction; but when the Wisdom of the Flesh and the Worldly part and States, and Governments, and Policies, and Princes have been mind∣ed more then the Spirit of God, then Error hath been taught, and the grea∣ter Part in a Council have overswayed the rest, & established Error by De∣cree, and have enjoyned it under Penalties to be received as Sacred, and Holy, and Infallible, of which we find the Church of Rome exceedingly guil∣ty, and therefore do conclude notwithstanding the promise of God to his Church that kept in Covenant with him, that this Church of Rome hath er∣red and doth err, both in Faith, Doctrine and Practice, of the infallible Church in the Apostles dayes; and therefore their Doctrine is more to be questioned then the Apostles; and they not fit to be this Rule, and Guide, and director; unto which R. E. saith, All are to submit under pain of Dam∣nation. Scar-Crows will hardly affright Men of understanding, but unrea∣sonable Creatures they may. And last of all, R.E. saith▪ He will conclude his whole Proof with an Argu∣ment from Heaven, & of the highest Nature, & make it evident That the Roman Church must be this Guide and Judge which God hath appointed, because of the Gift of Miracles; & cites John 15.24. If I had not done among them the work that no other Man did, they had not had Sin. And now I say, that the Roman Church hath done Works and Miracles, such as no other Church hath done, therefore if we refuse to believe her we shall have Sin, and shew our selves haters of God: And he instances. St. Ber. St. Mal. St. Dom. St. Fra. which wrought Miracles, and of Austin the Monk which taught Christian Faith first in England, and his fellow Monks, which was then confirmed by won∣derful Miracles from Heaven, not in confirmation of those Points and Ar∣ticles of Faith which you had with us, but of those which you call Popish and Superstitious, as the Sacrifice of the Mass, and about Respect and Ve∣neration which is given to Saints, Reliques, and Images, and about the Doctrine of Purgatory, and Payment of Tythes: and R. E. concludes if we will not believe what you have not seen, you destroy Faith which is an evidence of things not seen. Although R. E. makes a great boast of the Miracles of the Church of Rome, which no other Church hath wrought the like, & therefore concludes
that she is this Rule and Guide, which all are to give Ear unto, under pain of Damnation; and these Miracles he saith, are an Argument from Hea∣ven, and proof of the highest Nature; believe him who can. If time would but permit, and the Reader have patience to read most or many, if not all the Miracles he so much cries up, might be declared to his and their shame, the very report and relation thereof cannot but be reckoned as fabulous and fained Stories, and proceed from that lying Spirit which was in the fase Prophet, which wrought Miracles before the Beast, and deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them which Worshipped his Image, which must be taken alive and cast into the lake of Fire, Rev. 19.20. It is an adulteros Generation that seeks a sign, and yet did not believe when they had Mira∣cles wrought by the Finger of God amongst them, yet they said, it was by Beelzebub. The Scribes and Pharisees said, If he be the King of Israel, let him come down from the Cross and we will believe; but the Power of Christ was not to be shewed at the Blind will of the Phariees, neither would they have believed if he had come down. Though Miracles have been wrought by the Power of God, and are according to his Heavenly will, and are not limited either to Men, time or place, yet it is not so sufficient an Argument from Heaven as R. E. saith to prove the Church of Rome this true Church, seeing that the Devil, and Satan and Anti-christ shall come with Signs and ly∣ing Wonders, and if it were possible, deceive the Elect; And Jannes and Jam∣bres withstood Moses in working Lying Miracles before Pharaoh, to the hard∣ning of his Heart. And Chrysostome in his Hom. upon Mat. 19. saith, In the end of time Power shall be given to the Devil to work Signs and Miracles; So that the Ministers of Christ cannot be known by working of Miracles, but by working none at all. And Augustine saith, (though some said Prayers at the Tombs of the dead, and obtained their desires, as they said) Away with these things, they be either juglings and mockeries of deceitful Men, or else delusions of lying Spirits. Chrysost. in his Hom. upon Mat. 49. In old time it was known by Miracles who were the true Christians, and who the false; but now Miracles are rather among them that are false Christians. And as for your great Miracles which thou sayest the Chronologies and Histories speak of J. L. as Bed. and Holingshed, Stow, and others, we look upon them not at all as material in this thing, seeing they have had the Reports from other Hands and Pens of certain Mnkih Stories which they have found scattered here and there, published themselves, and left their Fables upon Record to deceive poor People withal for their own advan∣tage; and most of the Miracles that we hear of, are either wrought about your Tombs and Sepulchers, and your holy Mass, and your Reliques and Images. I have heard indeed▪ how that from the skirt of an Image of yours which one in a Bloody Flux did but touch, and immediatly vertue came from it, and Water and Blood issued forth, whereby the party was made whole by washing therein. Also I have heard of the Image of the Virgin Mary▪ first honoured by Christians in Nazareth, afterwards Translated in∣to Sclavonia, and when Images began to be vilified there and dis-esteemed▪ it removed it self from place to place, as discontent did arise in it, it seems at the place and People where it was situated sometimes, and at lst it re∣moved a whole Island with it nearer Rome, now call'd Loretta, and common∣ly known by the Name of Our Lady of Loretta, to which all the Pilgrims and
Monks commonly and frequently go to confess their Sins, and to receive Absolutions before they come to Rome, and so continues to this day. I cannot forget indeed the notable Miracle wrought by Austin the Monk, of which R. E. glories so in, wrought at Cometon in Oxfordshire, touching the Doctrine of due Payment of Tythes, a profitable Doctrine to Austin and his Monks, the first Bishop of Canterbury, confirmed by a Miracle, and such as it is you shall have it. About the Year 600. as it is said, Austin comes to Preach at Cometon in Oxfordshire, the Priest of the place complains to him, how that the Lord of the Manour would not pay his Tythes; Austin Questioning the Lord aout the fault in his Devotion, he stoutly Answered, That the Tenth sheaf doubtless was his, that had the Interest in the Nine, and therefore would pay none: presently Austin denounceth him Excommunicate, and turning to the Altar to say Mass publickly, forbad that any Excommunicated Person should be present there; suddenly a Dead Corps that had een buried at the Church Door, a∣rose and went out of the Church, and stood while the Mass continued; which end∣ed, Austin comes to ths living or dead (whether you will) and charges him in the Name of God to declare who he was? he tells him, That in the time of the British State, hujus Villi Patronus, and although he was often urged by the Doctrine of the Priest to pay his Tythes, yet he never could be brought to it, for the which he saith, after he was dead, he was carried to Hell: Austin desired to know where the Priest that Excommunicated him was buried? th dead shewed him the place, where he makes an Invocation of the dead Priest, and bids him arise, because they wanted his help; the Priest arises; Austin asks him if he knew that other that was rien? he tells him yes, but wishes he had never known him; for saith he, he was in all things ever averse to the Church, and a detainer of h Tythes, a great Sinner to his Death, and therefore I Excommunicated him. But Austin declares that it was fit Mercy should e used towards him, and that he had suffered long in Hell for his Offence; You must suppose the Author meant Purgatory: wherefore he gives him Absolution, and sends him to his Grave, whre he fell a∣gain to Dust and Ashes; he gone, the Priest new risen tells that his Corps had lien there about 170 Years, and Austin would gladly have hd him to have onti∣nued on Earth, for instruction of Souls, but could not thereto intreat him; so he returned to his frmer Ldging. The Lord of the Town standing by all this while, and Trembling, was now demanded, If he would pay his Tythes, but he presently fell down at Austin's Feet, weeping and confessing his Offence, and submits to pay Tythes, and receives Pardon, and became all his Life time a follower of Austin. Besides the common Legend of our Saints, it is in some Volumes put a∣lone for a most observable Miracle, and it is found to be bound up at the end of the Ms. Lie of Th. Becket Arch Bishop of Canterbury, written by John De∣gradeono, and it remains in the publick Library at Oxford; there also it is relted in Jhnnes Anglic his History Aurea. Bsides Selen in his Hi∣stry of Tythe makes mention of it, and in the 274. page of this Book. And as concerning the Miracles which are reported by certain Jesuites to be done in the West Idies by them of that Society, after they had converted them to the Christian Faith as they call it▪ in confirmation of their Doctrine they write of great Miracles that were wrought by them, how that with Holy Water, They had Calmed the Sea in great Tempests; and with Holy Water they had driven Mice out of the Country; and how that by Holy Water, they
had made Barren Women to bear Children. See Cope's Dialogue the first, page the 18th. And many devised and fained Miracles are Storied among you, and kept up to deceive and blind the People withal; Dead Images have been forced to Sweat, to Weep, to Laugh, and to Shift themselves from place to place; and as among the Panim and Infidels, the Image of Jupiter was able by art to cry aloud, Let all the Christians be Banished the Country, Euseb. l. 8. even so among the false Christians, Images have been able to speak whatsoever his Keeper or Sexton listeth; and the Image of our Lady hath been able to attend her own Candle, and other Images have been able to Heal all Diseases; believe it who can. Nicholaus saith, in the Church of God the Priests often times deceive the Peo∣ple with fained Miracles for Lucre's sake; and thus the World hath been born in Hand, that Images were not only bare Images, but had some secret di∣vine Power hidden within them; but I shall conclude and say, as Hierome saith, The Truth of Christ shall devour and consume the falshood of Anti-christ, and all his fained Miracles, and lying Wonders, and Inchantments, and Sorce∣ries, with which he hath deceived the Nations. Alexander Hales saith, p. 4. qu. 53. men. 4. In the Sacrament it self there appears Flesh, sometimes by the conveyance of Men, and sometimes by the work∣ing of the Devil. And hath not R. E. heard and read of a certain Catholick of theirs, and no Lay-man neither, not many Ages ago, that did pennance at Pauls Cross, and made a publick Confession of his Dissimulation, when he pricked his Finger and made it Bleed when he gave that which you call, your Eucharist (or Sacrament of the Altar, as you call it) unto the People to delude them, making them believe, that, as the phrase is, Christ by Mi∣racle had conveyed the Blood into the Bread after the words of Consecra∣tion? but enough of this hath been said by others, and written largly of by other Hands and Pens, so that I need not say much. But Miracles be not ever more undoubted proofs of a true Doctrine, nor such absolute Signs of a true Church, nor such infallible Arguments as from Heaven, as R. E. saith his are. And so I conclude with that which Austin said unto Faustus the Manichee, Ye Work no Miracles, and yet if ye wrought any, at your Hands we would take heed of them. And Jer. 23. saith, The false Prophets have decei∣ved my People by their Lyes and by their Lightness, and by their Dreams and Mi∣racles. And so hath this false fained pretended Catholick Church done, deceived the Nations, and bewitched them with such Lying fabulous Sto∣ries, and false and ridiculous Miracles, and Sorceries and Inchantments, as is above-mentioned; and many more of the like Nature might be men¦tioned, but that I would not be tedious to the Reader, which if they were all sum'd up, would hardly make up a Heavenly Argument and Proof, as R. E. saith it doth, That their Church is the only true Church, and fit to be the Rule and Judge of all matters of Faith. And now Reader view over their Mi∣racles before-mentioned, and see if thou canst receive them, because the Church of Rome saith, they are true, and must not be questioned, for if thou do, thou art like to come under a hard censure by the verdict of R. E. and his Catholick Church, first, to be reckoned as an Unbeliever, second∣ly, to be a Hater of God, and thirdly, in not believing these Miracles, or whatsoever else shall be declared unto thee by the said Church, or else thou
comest under no less Penalty then Eternal Damnation, as R. E. saith in the 80th page of his Epistle: but it is a small thing to be judged by man, and especially such a man who hath gadded abroad, and changed his way so oft, so that he hath forgotten the true Path of Righteousness to walk in, or else never knew it, and hath turned and wheeled about; and now at last doth as the poor Indian doth with his Deer-skin, hangs it upon one Shoulder, and so upon the other shoulder to shelter him from the Wind and Tempest that comes of that side: But the day is dawned, and mens Spirits are disco∣vered beyond their Words, and all the turnings and wheelings of things up∣side down, is but as the Potter's Clay; for God measures every man, not by his Words, but by his Heart and Spirit, and Works, and will judge e∣very one in Righteousness according to their deeds. And R. E. goes on as confident that his Arguments and Reasons laid down have prevailed, and almost takes its for granted that it must needs be evident to all, that the Roman Church is the true Church; and saith, He knows but one single Point between the Catholicks and them that stand divided from them, and that is, saith he, That we follow a several Rule, to Guide and Judge in the great affairs of Faith, for all sides are bound to believe all Truth sufficiently propounded to them, to be revealed of God; and therefore if the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Purgatory, Worshipping of Im∣ages, Invocation of Saints, and Prayer to the Dead, and for the Dead: If these or any other Point of Faith be sufficiently propounded; by denying them, God's Veracity is denyed, and God thereby made a Lyar. The dif∣ference stands betwixt you, and them that are divided from you, in more particulars then thou art aware of, or ever wilt be able sufficiently to pro∣pound them to be revealed of God; though it is true, some are divided from you in Circumstantials and Ceremonies, and some others in some points of Faith and Worship, yet some deny you in the very ground, though 'tis true, the different Rule by which each party are directed, is a great and a main thing. Thou sayest, This Cathlick Church is the Rule; but I say, and am not alone, that Christ is the Way to the Father, and the Way to the Kingdom, and the Rule and Means by which his Church is Governed, and he is the Law giver and the Judge, and all Judgment is committed to the Son, and it is he alone that propounds Truth sufficiently; and they that are in him▪ are new Creatures; and that which is the New-Creature Rule, Guide and Judge, is the Rule, Guide and Judge of the Church of God, and Christ is the Author of Faith, and it is nothing that avails any thing with God, but the New-Creature; and as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace is to them, Gal. 3.16. And Christ hath not left his People with∣out a Guide, for he said, Lo I am with you to the End of the World, so as to commit the guidance thereof to fallible men, who may assume Authori∣ty without his Power, and to fasten those things upon God as to be reveal∣ed from him, when the Lord hath spoken nothing; and we are so far from looking that the main grounds that thou lyest down to prove your Church to be this Rule & Guide, & the many Doctrines propounded by you are not sufficiently propounded to be revealed of God, but rather they are the Imagi∣nations of your own Brain, and things packt up since the Apostles dayes, by different Popes, and different Mutations and Alterations in your Church or filthy Lucres sake; and so to deny them is not to deny God's Veracity, nei∣ther
to make God a Lyar, as thou falsely sayest; but thou, and you are the Ly∣ars, as to propound those things to be revealed from God, and to be received by all under pain of Damnation, when God hath revealed no such thing, but the contrary, and so thy own Words at last shall turn to be thy burden, be∣cause thou sayest, the Lord saith, and hath revealed, and sufficiently proposed the real presence of Christ in your Sacrament of the Altar as a divine Revelation, Worshipping of Images, Prayer to the dead, and for the dead, and all hese fool∣ish Imaginations which you have brought in, and introduced and thrust upon People by force; and these are sufficiently propounded, as thou sayest, as divine Revelations, and the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or the incarnation of Christ: Silence deceit, and for shame blush so to say; the Prophets who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost and Prophesied of things to come, they declared of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost all, and prophe∣sied long before, that a Virgin should bring forth a Son, whose Name should be called Emanuel, God with us; and the Government should be upon his Shoulders: This the Pope hath usurped, and you put it upon his Shoulders, but your invented Doctrines aforesaid, are meerly the Imaginations of your own Brain, which neither the Prophets nor Apostles bore Witness unto, but against. And therefore it is thy, and your great Presumption, to make God, Christ and Apostles the Foundation of all this Rubbish, Straw, and Stubble, which thou would'st put off as divine Revelation, and as sufficiently proposed, as the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles was; nay, blush for shame; they brought in the Prophets for the Peoples sake, to prove that they had testified of the same before, and had decla∣red the coming of the Just One; besides they commended themselves to the Wit∣ness of God in every man's Conscience; and upon waiting upon the Lord and in the measure of his Spirit, they found the things even so, and by searching the Scrip∣tures as the Bereans did, & found the things even so, as had been declared of: but upon due consideration we find not these foresaid doctrines so propounded as to have the Testimony of the Prophets and Apostles, neither doth your Doctrine and Wor∣ship answer the Witness of God in every mans Conscience; and so to deny you is not to make God a Lyar, but God true, the Prophets and Apostles, and the Wit∣ness of God true, and you Lyrs, who contradict them and their Testimony and the Power of God, and would assume it to your selves, though you be erred from the Spirit, and would put all under the Name of Infallibility, and by such Heavenly Arguments as R. E. calls them, to wit, the Miracles aforesaid, by which you have deceived the Nations, and blinded the Eyes of the People; but the time is come, and Light and Life is broken forth, that the Skirts of the Whore must be discove∣red, and her nakedness must appear, and her Fornications and Adulteries shall be manifest unto all, so that you shall not proceed much further: And I hope by this time in R. E's Words, it will appear evident to all, whose Eyes God in any measure hath opened, That this Catholick Church (so called) is manifest in what hath been said to R. E. not to be the Church of Christ, neither their Doctrine and Practice divinely propounded, neither she taken from henceforth as the only infal∣lible Judge, Rule and Director in all matters of Faith, which all are to receive upon pain of Damnation, as R. E. saith; though she sit as Queen, and hath known no Sorrow; but on the contrary, she to be a blind Guide that hath bewitched the Kings of the Earth, and the Nations (which are Waters, which is the Universal∣ty R. E. boasts of) with her Inchantments & Sorceries, which from hence forth shall
not be taken as infallible but fallible; and as that Church that hath not convey¦ed the true Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, but rather hath spread a∣broad Error and false Doctrine, and the Traditions and inventions of Men, in∣stead of the Doctrine of Christ, and would put off all ths under the Name of Au∣thority and Power from God, and sufficiently propounded, and infallibility, and under the Penalty of the highest curse upon not receiving it; but the Sun is risen which hath disovered all your deceit; lay down your carnal Weapons, Cain's wea∣pons, and your human Power by which you have prevailed, more by force and cruelty upon the Nations, then by sound Doctrine, or that plea of being Peter's Successors: I say, come forth with your spiritual Weapons, which the Church of God had in the Primitive times, and prevail as far as you can; but Oh! you want these, and therefore you are necessitated to take up force and Violence, the Dra∣gons Power to compell all to come to your Church. Further, R. E. in his Postscript hath been confident of what he hath de∣clared, That it is of such force what he hath said for the Roman Catholick Church, so called, that he believes what he hath said cannot be answered; and he saith, his confidence doth not mis-become him, and that it is improbable to be Answered, and that he hath not yet done his All; neither in his first nor second Edition, but hath some-what more yet of great moment to speak as to prove the Church of Rome this only and infallible Guide. Unto whom I say, it had been good not to have boasted when he put on his Armour, but when he puts it off; and methinks having been so unsta∣ble and unsetled as he hath been formerly, he should not have been so con∣fident in opposition to Wisdom, as to give such a challenge and make such a vapour of, as that it is improbable to be answered, and it is more then any of you or all of you can answer, as his own Words are, (page the 9th) these words are not becoming a Man indeed, who saith, He hath learned meeknes and humility of Heart, and hath such great bwels of Charity, as he pro∣fesseth he hath; page the 86th. The substance of what he hath said or writ∣ten, which he reckons so profound and unanswerable, and to be more then any or all the Non-conformists can answer, they have been Answered over and over again, before R. E. was born, by many Learned, sufficient, and good Men; whose Reasons and weighty Arguments about the Premisses have not been made void unto this day, but have prevailed with many, not only to the Convincing, but also to the turning of many from that usurped Authority of the Roman Church, and hath discovered the Errors, false Doctrine, and evil Practices, notwithstanding their pretended infallibili∣ty, which R E. will not be able to answer, if particulars should be descend∣ed unto; and though R. E. may reckon the reasons tht he hath  down, when he hah the most what taken at the gainest, and reckon them as im∣pregnable, yet I hope they will not appear so to an understanding Eye which is enlightened by the Spirit of the Lord, nor to them who are of a sound Judgment; what others have done to answer his bold Challenge I know not, because I am shut up in a Corner for the Testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God: but methinks them that are concerned should not let such Boasts go unreproved, neither such false Doctrine nor false suggestions as R. E. hath made, to viifie and debase and set at nought all things, and every thing, that seems contrary unto the Judgment of this pretended Catholick Church; and seeing that he shuts out all Non-confor∣mists
as to be Members of the Church or God, and to be without all Rule, all Order, all Government, and to come under the great penalty of dam∣nation, by not submitting unto whatsoever this pretended Catholick Church doth impose, how Repugnant soever it be unto the Doctrine of Christ, and how contrary soever it be unto the Spirit of God, yet all must be received without question, though it be that which the Spirit of God sometimes called the Doctrine of Devils, but how it must become holy, and of divine Authority, and sufficiently propounded and so received; be∣cause as R. E. saith, Ths Church cannot Err; I say unto him and unto all men, and to the Witness of God in every man, either the Church in the Apo∣stles dayes did Err and teach false Doctrine, or this pretended Catholick Church, because they teach contrary one to the other, and do walk by a contrary Rule; and as R. E. saith, Infallibility cannot contradict it self; and he hath granted that the Apostles and Primitive Christians had an infalli∣ble Spirit, and did not Err; then let R. E. and all, take a view of the Ro∣man Doctrine, and compare it with theirs, and they shall find it as far wide one from the other as the Heavens are from the Earth, or Light from Dark∣ness, so that for the Truth's sake, and for the Doctrine and Faith sake that was once delivered among the Saints, and for the Non-conformists sake, who cannot bow their Knee to Baal, neither submit to the Injunctions of change∣able Men, instead of the Doctrines of Christ. I could not do less then give Answer unto the substance of R. E. his Epistle which he boasted of, To be more then any could answer, and to reprove his false Doctrine and Error, which he would perswade all unto, and not to question, because the Church of Rome hath propounded it as infallible; most of all those Doctrines are denyed, and I cannot but give my Testimony against them as to be false, and that which leads People into Error; and let R. E. when he brings forth his All, prove to us, that Infallibility as intailed to the Pope by succession, and Prayer for the Dead, Worshipping of Angels, Worshipping Relicks, worshipping Images, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, sprinkling of Infants; prove to us from the Scripture in thy next, that these were Apostolical and Infallible Doctrines, delivered and taught by the Church of Christ in the Apostles time, or in the first hundred Years after Christ, and thou will not only gain me, but many more, to receive and imbrace the Catholick Church of Rome for an absolute Rule and Guide, unto which all on Earth ought to be sub∣ject unto, which if thou dost not, we will take it for granted, thou darest not, lest thou ingage thy self in such a Controversie as thou never ingaged in yet, by which thy and your Folly will more and more appear unto all. I shall not trouble neither my self nor the Reader any further in traducing R. E. in his multiplicity of Words, although the main and weighty Argu∣ments and Reasons as R. E. looks upon them are answered, which I com∣mend unto thee, and to the Witness of God in every Man's Conscience, to try and search out, where the difference and weight lies, and the Truth, and as the measure of God's Spirit in every Man's Conscience doth close with or against, if it can what I have said about R. E. his Epistle▪ for unto that I dare stand to the Judgment of and in it, as every one believes and walks, I bid my Reader, Farewell. Westmoreland this 18th of the 5th Moneth 1665. F. H.
A General Epistle To the Dispersed and PERSECUTED FLOCK OF Christ Jesus IN THE DOMINION OF ENGLAND, AND All Parts and Regions where this shall come, who have believed in Christ, the Light of the VVorld, and now suffer for his Names sake. DEarly Beloved, whom God hath called and redeemed out of the World, and the Vanities thereof, to follow the Lamb in the Re∣generation through the Cross and Suffering in this Age, wherein the Whore, Beast and false Prophet, and all that have drunk of her Cup, and have received the Mark of the Beast, and are led aside to believe Lys, that proceed out of the Mouth of the time serving, flattering. deceitful Workers of this Generation, who are all joyned together i thei rength and Power, to act every Way against the Lamb and his meck Appearance, (who takes away the Sins of the World and against all them that are made clean through his Blood, and are come out of the Pllutions of the Wrld, and to make War against the Rmnnt of the Seed of God, who are beget∣ten again to the lively Hope of Christ Jesus, and to the Inheritance that fdes not away, and to root out, and destroy, and weary out through cruel Suf∣fering the Saints of the most high, that so the Prince of Darkness might rule in his full Power and Authoriy in his Instruments and Servants, with∣out Opposition or any Gain-saing: And as God out of his everlasting Love hath redeemed and translated many from great Darkness, wherein they have bin hld in the time of Unbelief into his marvellous Light, to walk in it, and to bring forth the Fruits of the Day, of Light, Faith and Righte∣ousness,
to the Praise and Glory of his Grace, who hath called them, and translated them for that very End, to shew forth his Power and Glory in the Earth, who have been quickned and raised by it out of the Grave, that they might bear Witness thereunto, and testifie of it both in Word and Work against the World and the God thereof, who now rules in the Chil∣dren of Disobedience; therefore is his Wrath the more kindled, and his Fury great against them that are departed out of his Kingdom, and will not yield their Hearts and Necks to be subject any more unto his Yoak, by whom they have been enslaved and held Captive under many and divers Lusts, which the Wrath of God is revealed against, and to be revealed a∣gainst; and because they are made free by the Frightness of the glorious rising of the Sun of Righteousness in his Power and quickning Life in their Hearts, which hath broken his Yoak of Bondage, and destroyed the Law of Sin and Death, which sometimes had Power over them; but now being made Conquerors of them through the Power of Christ, the old Dragon, the Deceiver of the Nations, who is out of the Truth, labours by all means to bring them back again under his Yoak; and his Devices are not a few, which are set on Foot at this Day, to make all bow unto him, which the Children of Light are not ignorant of, who are and have been watchful against the mysteri∣ous working of his Power within, and also without in his Instruments, who have received great Power from him to propagate his Kingdom, that stands in Wrath, Evil▪ doing and Cruelty: And therefore all had need to watch and be circumspect, that they that are escaped be not ensnared and entangled again, lest their Bondage be greater, and the Yoak heavier then before: Therefore the Lord moveth often in my Heart, to exhort all unto Watchfulness and Diligence, and so much the more, because the Dayes are perilous, and the Times dangerous, and the Temptations many on every Hand; so they that look out are in Danger to be ensnared, and let in the Enemy, and Fears, and Doubts, and Unbelief enter, and questioning in the Haste, Can God deliver? or will he deliver? or hath he any Regard unto our Afflicion? And because the time seems long, and they cannot see to the End thereof, their Hearts fail, and their Faith is in Danger to be shaken, and they lose their States; therefore it concerns every one to watch and pray, that they enter not into Temptations, neither be overcome with the wicked One, neither of the fading Pleasure▪ Profit and Ease that the Children of this World do enjoy, which is but for a Time, and then is the Beginning of endless Misery. Therefore all dearly beloved, look over all the Sufferings, and Trou∣bles, and Temptations, and Necessities, and over the Devil and all his Works; to the Beginning, and to that have an Eye which was before they had a Being; to the Lord God everlasting who made Heaven and Earth have an Eye, and let your Eye be fixed on him which destroyes the Devil and all his Works, and will reward the Workers of Iniquity according to their Deeds with everlasting Torments. Dearly Beloved▪ who have been under great Sufferings & Losers for Christ's sake and the Gospel's in this Age, like as many faithful Witnesses have been in former Ages; I am a Sufferer with you, and am sensible of your Griefs, Affliions, Necessities and Tribulations, which are many, and do bear and suf∣fer with you all in my Heart, and in the true Sence and Feeling of you all disper∣sed every where, where God hath placed you in the Earth, my Heart, Soul, Life
and Spirit breatheth forth unto you all, and your Burden is mine, your Afflictions are mine, your Sufferings are mine; I do weep with them that weep, I am sor∣rowful with them that are sorrowful; and what which is a Grief and Vexation un∣to the Spirit of God in any, in the Spirit of Christ, which is but one in all, I am burdened with them, and do bear a Part of their Grief; I speak without Ostenta∣tion or Glorying, for what have I to glory in any, but the Lord, or to rejoyce in, but that which all the World hates, because it testifies against it; and therefore we are become the Objects of Scorn and Hatred in this World, by them that are of it, who glory in Sin, who rejoyce in Iniquity, whose End is Destruction and perpetual Misery, and their Rejoycing shall be turned into endless Sorrow and Grief. Elected of God, our Portion in this World is to be Sufferers in it and by it, because God hath chosen us out of it and its Nature; therefore we are hated, despised and persecuted in our Generation, like as all the People of God were in former Generations; we cannot be exempted from drinking of the same Cup which Christ the Heir of all things drank, neither be ex∣empted from being baptized into his Suffering; and therefore Christ told his Disciples, In the World ye shall have Trouble; and the Apostles, and Ministers, and Believers in Christ did drink of the same, and were bapti∣zed into the same Baptism, and therefore testified, That them that will live godly in Christ must uffer Persecution; for the World loves only the Chil∣dren of it, but alwayes hated the Children of God, and them that were redeemed out of it, and they bore Witness against it and the Works there∣of; it's no new thing or strange thing; for it's that Portion which all the Prophets and holy Men of God were Partakers of, Christ and the Apostles, and all true Believers in every Age; and the nearer any came to be unto God in their Life and Practice, the more they were hated, and the more vilified, slandered and evil spoken of, sometime by the Jews, sometime by the Heathen, and now by the Apostatized Christians; for the Nature is one through all Ages, and Diversity of Names in Profession do not at all alter Man or Men at the Heart; the Jews, who professed God in Words, and cryed up the Temple, and Moses, and the Law in Words, slew the Prophets, and laid false things to their Charge; Jeremiah when he pro∣phesied against Jerusalem, and spake to the Princes and Rulers, when they were revolted from God in the Dayes of Zedekiah, and denounced Evil a∣gainst the City and People because of Transgression; they put him in the Dungeon, and where his Feet sticked in the Mire, and said, He was fallen away to the Caldeans, and did alienate the Hearts of the Jews from them and their Law, and despised their Government; Christ was accounted a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, and had a Devil, a Transgressor of Moses's Law, though he came to fulfil it, and an Enemy to Caesar, and a Blasphemer, and what not? who said so? the Elders, the Doctors, the Rabbies and Rulers of the People▪ and they crucified him as an Evil-doer, though none could convince him in; the Apostles of Christ as seditious Men, Ring∣leaders of Sects, Authors of Uproars▪ Turners of the World upsie down, as dis∣obedient, Enemies to Peace, as discontented Men with the present Laws and Cu∣stoms then established, and judged as not fit to live: And therefore many suf∣fered long for holding out their Testimony faithfully they had received, and last of all suffered Death, not as Saints and Prophets, but as Evil-doers
at last, some by the Jews, some by the Heathens: The primitive Christians, of whom the World was not worthy, were falsly accused by the Romans, Heathens and Pagans in the great Persecutions that arose, were evil spoken of, and falsly represented, and rendered odious, and as Objects of Hatred, through the Envy of the Devil, because they opposed his Kingdom of Darkness: Tertullian saith, The Heathen commonly reputed the then primi∣tive Christians incestuous men, Killers of Children, Enemies of all Mankind, Enemies against the Gods, against the Emperours, against the Laws; they made an Out-cry upon them, it's not lawful they should live: And when any Judgment did befall them, Augustine saith, it was become a Proverb, Our Rain fails us because of these Christians; and Eusebius saith, The Religion of Christ was called, the Heresie of godless Christians. Likewise after the Name of Christ and Christians became in Repute and Esteem, many Hypocrites and Formalists took on the Name, when it was countenanced by the Kings and Princes of the Earth, and then turned against them that were more in the Life and Power then they were, as the Bohemians, and the Waldenses, and first Protestants in Germany; how were they branded with Heresie and Schism, as seditious, factious, Enemies to the Laws, Church and State, and to the Princes? and how was the Hatred of the Pope and Emperour kindled against them, and War raised upon them, and many suffered Death in their Account as Evil-doers who persecuted them: Likewise, come nearer our own Age, in the Dayes of Queen Mary, how were the best of Men, and the best of Christians in that Age censured as Enemies to the Queen's Law and Government, Enemies to the Church, seditious Hereticks, and such as were not fit to live; and therefore many suffered in the cruel Flames of Fire, and did undergo many great Torments and Sufferings, and last of cruel Deaths many suffered, and by them called Christians, and yet slew him, and persecuted him in his Members. Last of all, God hath brought us forth in our Age, to bear witness unto him, and unto that Life, Power and Light, by which we are quickned, and raised out of the Grave of Sin and Death, to live unto him, and serve him in Newness of Life, and to con∣fess unto his holy Name and Power, by which we are saved, illuminated and directed, and to worship him in Spirit and Truth, according to the Manifestation of his Spirit to us and in us, and according to the Scriptures of Truth; for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth judge, and all his holy Angels, and all just Men, that are anointed with the holy Unction, that know Truth from Error, whether we hold any thing either in Doctrine or Practice, but that which the primitive Christians bear Witness of, and also the Scriptures bare witness unto, and that which we are perswa∣ded in our Consciences by the unerring Spirit of the Lord, which doth give us Assurance of his Acceptation and Peace in our Hearts. And how often have we declared our selves both by Word and Writing, which is sufficiently manifest unto all, who have not wilfully closed their Eyes, and stopped their Ears against us, that we are of no other Faith Hope or Religion, but that which Christ and his Apostles and primitive Christi∣ans were of, which they did hold forth, both in Doctrine and Practice, as in Respect of Worship; and how peaceably and humbly we have walk∣ed towards all Men, without seeking the hurt or detriment of any; thou righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth knowest, and according to the In∣nocency
of our Hearts do thou judge us, and plead our Cause: And fur∣ther, we have laboured that Sin might be beat down, and that all every where might have been turned from it unto the living God, and that Righ∣teousness might have been advanced, and Truth have taken Place in all Mens Hearts, both in word and deed, that Christ▪ who is professed in Words, might have ruled in the Hearts of all Men that make mention of him, that so God's Blessing might have been felt and known by all, and the Souls of all saved from the Snares of Satan, and out of that which the Wrth of God and his Judgments come upon: And Lord God of Heaven and Earth, thou knowest how our Adversaries have sought Occasion against us, for no other Cause but for the Matter of the Worship of the living God, and unto God's righteous Judgment Seat we dare appeal, & do thou judge us, and reward us according to our deserts, if ever we have contrived the Hurt of any Man or Men, or have sought to violate any righteous Law of Man, which stands to the well-governing of a Nation or Country, in the things that pertain to the World; yet how have we been falsly represented, slander'd belyed, mis-reported, hated, back-bited, persecuted and killed, as all the Day long; and reputed we are as not fit to live in our native Land, neither to enjoy our own Wives and Children, a thing common to all men, Christian and Heathen, neither to breath in the common Air: And how many grievous things have been heaped, and are daily upon our Backs, that we are factious, seditious, Enemies to Magistrates, to the Ministers of Christ, Plotters▪ Conspirators against humane Government, Enemies to the King, disobedient to the Laws, Broachers of Heresie, Authors of Sedition, Ene∣mies to the Church and State! And this the Devil who was a Lyar, and a Murderer, and a Slanderer from the Beginning, he hath put a lying Spi∣rit in the Mouthes of some, and it's entered into the Hearts of others; and thus by them are the Powers of the Earth stirred up and the Rulers, to persecute us without any just Cause; but this must not be counted Per∣secution, for all the aforesaid things and many more he hath perswaded them we are guilty of; and therefore all that comes upon us, it must be reckoned as just, and is an equal Reward for our Offences, and as just pu∣nishment for our Transgression and Disobedience, and so is no Persecution at all▪ and he hath Witnesses enough to testifie against us, as he had against Christ, all the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Leaders and Rulers of the People, with the high Priests, Judas and all to testifie against him, That he was not fit to live, but all cry, Away with him; even so now, he hath all the Rabbies and Elders, and all the Time-serving Hirelings, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, and all formal Professors, who profess him in Words, but deny him in Works, and depise his Cross, with all Drunkards▪ Lyars and Swearers, all proud and covetous, all wanton and riotous, and all that love the Pleasure of Sin for a Season, all these will give their Verdict against us. There was and is a Generation that called Darkness Light, and Light Darkness, and Good Evil, and Evil Good; the Judgment of all such is false, and must be Judged; and God who hath Immortality, and dwells in the Light, with whom is no Darkness at all, judgeth not as these men; and therefore let us never heed the Censures and Judgments of fallen men,
who err in their Judgment, who cannot judge for God or his People, but against them; let us count it a light thing to be judged or condemned by man, seeing the Lord justifies us in his VVork and Service, whereunto we are called; and all the aforesaid Crimes falsly laid to our Charge he clears us of, and we can with a good Conscience and pure Heart bid defiance to all the Powers of darkness, and all the Enemies of God; and the Lord will clear us more and more, as his Power, Glory and Light appears in the Earth, and brings forth our Righteousness as the Noon-day before our E∣nemies, notwithstanding all the false Aspersions and Reproaches cast upon us in the mean time; if we be crowned with Reproaches, as Christ was with Thorns, and evilly entreated for his Names sake, let us bear all things, and endure all things with Patience and Hope to the End: And though they cover us with Bear Skins and Draff, as the Heathens did the primitive Christians, and so let all the wild Beasts upon us; let us give up our Bodies as a Sacrifice unto the Lord, and for a Witness unto his Name and Truth, that so we all may witness eternal Rest unto our Souls, and everlasting Joy in his heavenly Habitation, where all Persecutors and Evil-doers are shut out. Dearly beloved of the Lord, I write not these things unto you because you many of you do not know them, but because you know them, to put you all in Mind, and to stir up your Hearts to the holy Consideration of these things in these perilous and trying times; and in very Truth, what∣soever doth lye within my View, that might conduce to any or all your Good, I cannot withhold it from you, because I know it is not only my Duty, but I can truly say, the Love of Christ constrains me; for my Soul, Heart and Life is knit unto you in the everlasting Covenant of Life, above all the Families of the Earth, and the more you are hated, the more I love you, and the more you are despised and set at nought, the more I prize you, and the more you are compassed about on every Side with Tryals and Afflictions▪ the more my Soul is poured forth unto the Lord for you, that you may be kept stedfast in the Faith and Hope in the Lord unto the End, that you may receive his Reward, the Crown of Glory, which is laid up for all them that love the Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Faith do overcome. And blessed and happy are all they that keep their Garments clean in this polluted time, wherein Wickedness walks with open Face, and Ungodli∣ness with an out-stretched Neck, and is exalted in great Height, and doth corrupt many, and the Earth is growing ripe with Wickedness for De∣struction; for the proud are counted happy, and they that work Wickedness are admired and gloryed in, as the only brave Men of these times, which they make evil, through yielding themselves Servants unto Sin, and their Lusts. Ease, and worldly Enjoyments, and immediately drop down into eternal Perdi∣tion; and it's time for the Lord to arise and plead with all Flesh, for men make void his Law, and go about to establish their own in Opposition there∣unto: for Violence, Cruelty and Hardness of Heart and Persecution are the Fore∣runners of Desolation and Destruction; these things do generally abound, all is secure and at Ease, Hardness of Heart is generally over People, and clearly to me it doth presage Judgment; Tenderness of Heart and Spirit
is generaly lost among people, and the most have made Shipwrack of all their Hope, Faith and Profession, to please the time and men of this Ge∣neration, who are perverse and froward, they have been treacherous to God and to their own Souls, and cannot do Good to his People; keep as much as in you lyes out of their Spirit & Manners, for they are corrupt; and though God's Judgments be abroad in the Land, and his Anger kindled and broken forth, yet few enquire the Cause, or say, What have I done? but if any do enquire, it is generally in that dark Spirit that leads them to Evil, which God hides his Counsel from, and will not be found of, and yet they make Conclusions, and give Judgment, as the Heathen of old▪ if any Pestlece▪ Famine, or Drought, or Judgment came upon them, thy said, The Christians were the Cause, and so stirred up Persecution against them; the like and Dreamers of this Age in their Mock fasts and Humiliti∣ons, they say, Heresie: the Cause, and because all d nt conform and are not willing to submit to the changeable Institutions of men, though ne∣ver so repugnant to the Law of God, they tell the Magistrates, The I ha∣naticks and Quakers are the Cause; and so they fast for Strife and to kindle Debate, and to stir up Persecution; and they seem to cleave so close to the Magistrates that will force and exct Gain for them▪ and give them large Pay, they will cry them up as the higher Power, that all are to submit un∣to in all things under the Pain of Condemnation; and they will cry them up, and dance, and clap their Hands, and rejoyce, as Israel did about the Calf, when they had forgotten God; so the Lord is provoaked more and more, and they think by rooting out his People, if possible, will stay his Judgments; it's lamentable to see what Blindness is over the Hearts of the Seers of this Generation, who cry, Peace, Peace, and how Peple are given up to believe their Lyes, and to Hardness of Heart, and never consider their own Estate, neither the Afflictions of Joseph is remembred. Another thing also hath been in my Heart many Weeks, and a Query hath been in my self, and I know hath been on many Spirits▪ why in this common Calamity, and in God's Visitaion of the City of London, and many other Places of this Nation, that they that have suffered so greatly, so long and so faithfully, and have born such a Testimony for the Lord, why also they should be taken away among the rest, seeing the Lord was a∣ble to deliver, and also command his destroying Angel to pass over, as it pleased him, and spare and take away as he pleased? and why it should not be wholly upon his Enemies, and upon them that called not upon his Name in Truth and Righteousness? I had many sad Thoughts of Heart, and have waited upon the Lord concerning these things, with Supplications and Tears concerning his afflicted Peple, and concerning his Name and Truth; and this Satisfaction I have received in my self, and do communicate unto you. First of all it is said, That Paul stayed and preached the Gospel at Ephesus two Years, so that not only them of Ephes, but all Asia heard the Word of God, both Jews and Greeks, and many were gathered unto God, and believed, and the rest were hardened: When I considered this▪ that not only two Years but twelve Years that City of London hath heard the Word of the living
God declared and published plentifully in it, and the everlasting Gospel of Christ in the Demonstration of the Spirit and with Power, insomuch that the Sound went through and through, and many believed, and the rest were hardened, having lost the Day of their Visitation; but alas! it was but a few, considering the Labour and Travail, and considering so many Thousands who counted the things of God a slight Matter; and for them that were worthy, and did believe, they were hated, and despised, and evilly entreated with the most, and shut up in Holes, and miserable Bonds and Prisons, and lingring Torments, which oftentimes were the Cause of their Death, whose Lives God is requiring at the Hands of that Place; and the Messengers of God were mocked, abused and evilly entreated, and shut up in Bonds till Death, and Wickedness did abound, and Peoples Hearts grew hard in Ease, Riches, Pride and vain Glory, till the Wrath of God broke forth, and cut down Thousands in his Displeasure; and this was seen and foreseen full three whole Years and upwards by some of the faith∣ful Servants of God, who laid down their Lives in Bonds in that City, and are gathered unto the Lord, and also some who remain in the Body unto this Day; and it was prophesied of, and the City was warned thereof, Ru∣lers and People, but the most made a Mock of it, till the just Judgment of God seized upon it. Secondly, The Lord took away these faithful Men of God, Edward Bur∣roughs, Richard Hubberthorn and George Fox junior, who had been much con∣versant there, who were faithful Watchmen, and prevailed often with the Lord, till they were shut up in Bonds for all their sore Travail and Labour amongst the Inhabitants thereof; and that Place being unworthy of them any more, he delivered them, and took them away to himself from the E∣vil to come, that they had seen and prophesied of, that they might see none of that Misery that is now come. Thirdly, They were gathered unto the Lord, as a Token and Sign unto them that believed, of many following after and of their Dissolution. Fourthly, The Lord did fore-know and fore-see, and also had determi∣ned Evil against that City, and that which is now come to pass, and that this Generation, notwithstanding all the Entreaties, Woings, Warnings and Exhortations which they had and slighted, and they would proceed on to more Mischief and Persecution, in presumption against God and his peo∣ple, and are yet determined, and have said in their Hearts, Though the Bricks be fallen down, we will build with hewn Stone, to fortifie themselves, that their End might not fail, which the Lord God will blast and confound; and though Friends have born their Iniquity, they shall at last bear it them∣selves, and know the Reward thereof▪ and have none to help; so the Lord hath taken away many in his Love and Mercy from the Evil to come, and hth freed them from further Misery, and hath translated them out of the Reach of all their Enemies. Fifthly, Seeing they have suffered long and faithfully in that plae and and elsewhere▪ and have born a living Testimony, many to the Loss of their Lives, and to their ruinating in this World, against the Abominations that did abound, and their righteous Souls were vexed, as Lot's was with the
Sodomites; the Lord hath considered, and hath said, It is enough, your Af∣flictions I will end, and take you into my Rest and Peace, out of the Reach of the Oppressor. Sixthly, For the frustrating of the Purpose of them who decreed that un∣righteous Decree for Banishment, that it may not profit them, neither answer their End and Unrighteousness; & the Lord, the Lord hath cut them short of their Purpose, and will cut them short of their Hope, and in the End bring their Council to nought, for that which is formed against the Lord shall not prosper. Seventhly, For the hardening the Hearts of this Generation, who have devised Mischief from the Womb, and have gone astray as soon as they were born, after so many Warnings and evident Tokens of his Hand against them, and of his Displeasure, which have been set at nought, and yet are resolved to go on to root out the Heritage of God; I say, that their Hearts might be hardened, and their Eyes closed, that they may not discern be∣twixt the End of the Righteous and the Wicked, nor see a Difference in their States, but as one dyes, so dyes the other as to the outward Appea∣rance; though you beloved know a Difference both in Life and Death; and I do believe many who have laid down the Body, and put off this earth∣y Tabernacle, have given great Testimony of God's Love unto them, of his Favour, Peace and Acceptation in the latter End; in this which I have said I am satisfied, and therefore could not but signifie the same unto you, that we might not sorrow concerning them that dye in the Faith, and sleep in Christ, as them who are without Hope; for these rest from their La∣bours, and their Faith, Works and Life shall live, and we have and enjoy their Spirit and Life; so it is only personal Absence of this earthly Taber∣nacle that we want, so in that be comforted. Last of all, The Wayes of the Lord are unsearchable, but as he reveals them to them that fear him; and whatever may be manifest to any other, this I am certainly perswaded of, that God will have Honour and Glory through all these things, as it shall be in the End for the Prosperity of the Gospel of Truth; and I am perswaded of this, though the Lord should per∣mit many to be destroyed outwardly of all they enjoy, yet they are resol∣ved to trust in him forever. And though the Day be dark and gloomy, and the Devil be let loose to try the Faith of them that dwell upon the Earth, and the Wrath of the Wicked be great, yet the Bond is set that they cannot pass; and though we that yet remain alive to this Day were all dissolved and rowled toge∣ther in the Dust, which is the End of all Flesh, yet that Life and Power which we have believed in, and that everlasting Truth which we have te∣stified of and suffered for shall never be extinguished or rooted out, but shall take up other Persons and Bodies from Generation to Generation, while Sun and Moon endureth; in this be all assured and comforted in the Lord, and chearful in your Sufferings, and comfort and strengthen one another; in the royal Seed of God all live and dwell (which cannot bow to the Seed
of the Bond-woman) which hath the Promise of Life, and Immortality, and everlasting Blessedness; and all look unto the Lord over all and above all the Rage and Wrath of the Enemy, and the Afflictions of this present Life, and feel that which is without End. The God of Power be with you, & comfort your in the midst of all your Tryals, and preserve you that your Faith fail not, is the earnest Desire of him whose Heart is knit unto the Lord and all his suffering People in the e∣verlasting Covenant of Life and Peace; pray all unto the Lord without ceasing, that you may be able, though through the Valley of the Shadow of Death; the Peace of God fill all your Hearts, that you may rejoyce in the Lord, and trust in him forever. The 16th of the 8th Moneth, 1665. Yours in Life or Death, F. H.
OATHS NO Gospel-Ordinance, But prohibited by CHRIST BEING IN ANSWER TO A. SMALLWOOD. D. D. To his Book lately published, being a Sermon preach∣ed at Carlile, 1664, wherein he hath laboured to prove Swearing lawful among Christians; his Reasons and Arguments are weighed and answered, and the Doctrine of Christ vindicated against the Conceptions and Interpretati∣ons of Men, who would make it void. By a Sufferer for Christ and his Doctrine, F. H. Because of Oaths the Land mourneth, Jer. 23.10, 11, 12, &c. By Swearing, and lying, and kling, and stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood toucheth Blood, therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, Hosea 4.2, 3.
TO THE READER. TRuth never had that Advantage nor Countenance from the Men of this World (though Wise in their Generation) since Sin entered into it, to have the Approbation of the World, neither of the Powers and Potentates thereof; for it alwayes ha∣ted the Truth, because it bore Witness against the World, and the Deeds and Works thereof, which ere evil; for Wisdom is only justi∣fied of her Children, and Truth is justified of her Children, nei∣ther indeed doth it need any other Patron to shelter it self under, but the God of all Truth, from whence it proceeds; neither shall I seek a Shelter, neither run to any Mountain or Hill for Safety or Protection, nor to the mighty of the Earth, as ma∣ny of latter Dayes have done, to patronize their Labours, and to make them the more acceptable, and to be the sooner and more readily received: But seeing the Apostle saith, Not many Wise, not many Rich, not many Noble are chosen, but he hath chosen the Weak, and Poor, and despised of the World, who are Rich in Faith and good Works, who are Heirs of the Promise and of the the World to come; I chuse only to be approved to the Witness of Christ's Light in every Man's Conscience, and to the Measure of his holy Spirit which he hath placed in every Man, to that only I desire to be either approved, or else by it reproved; for wholly unto the Judgment of that in every Conscience I appeal, and do commend this ensuing Discourse, in the Sight of God, and the Answer un∣to A. Smalwood's Book, who hath sought to make void Christ's Command, for to obey the Command of Men, as is manifest in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Gentlemen of Cumberland; for it seems by his Epistle they put him on Work, to preach and print this Sermon, whether upon this Subject or not, I shall not deter∣mine; but however, he saith, He hath obeyed their Commands, though he hath laboured, as much as in him lyes, to make the
Command of Christ void and the Apostles Doctrine, by his Arguments which he hath raised, to prove Christ's Doctrine one thing, and his Intention another; and so would blind the Minds of People, only to establish the Doctrines of Men, and the Tra∣ditions of Men in the Apostacy, and hath put divers Constructi∣ons upon the plain Words of the Scripture, and Interpretation, to prove his false Assertion that he laid down at the first, that Christ did not forbid all Swearing; I say, I could willingly have been si∣lent, rather then to be found over and over again contending with every new Opposer of those old Truths, that have been believed and received long before the Apostacy entered in, which hath been answered (by that People I own in Judgment and Conversation) long ago; to let pass those Disadvantages we have adventured upon, our low, persecuted, imprisoned, and in a Manner condemned Condition, so that we may expect our Words, how true soever, yet they are not like to gain much Credit a∣gainst such an eminent Man as Doctour Smalwood. Again, con∣sidering how we expose our selves to the Lash and Severity of a sharp Law, which some Men in their blind Zeal are far more rigid and severe in their Prosecution of it, then I am apt to be∣lieve the Supream Enactors of it were in their Intentions when they did enact it; all which notwithstanding are no Discouragement unto me, forasmuch as the internal and eternal Truth of our God, which we have known received and believed, is very pre∣cious in our Eyes, yea, far more then either Life, or Liberty and Estate (which some have forfeited and lost upon Truth's Account) or any external Treasure or outward Enjoyment whatsoever, so that considering how the Truth lyes at Stake, we cannot be si∣lent, lest thereby we should appear to some Mens Apprehensions, as to be satisfied with what the Doctour hath said, and own his Arguments and Reasons that he hath laid down for positive Truth, I could do no less then to show our Dislike of his Doctrine, and to manifest the Weakness of his Arguments about this Particular of Swearing at all, under the Gospel, though he hath strained ve∣ry hard to prove his Assertion, That Oaths may lawfully be taken by Christians in some Cases, notwithstanding Christ's rohibition and Command to the contrary; but of how little Effect or Force hi Reasons are thou wilt see in the ensuing Discourse, although his Book be looked upon by some to be sufficient Force to con∣vince
all Gain-sayers; and although he say, he hath had divers Papers and Books of Dissenters, who are of a contrary Judgment, where he found any Reason offered against what he has laid down for Doctrine, he hath answered, though indeed he hath over-riden the most weighty Matters in them▪ and hath said little but that hath been said before by other Opposers of Christ's Doctrine; though it's very like the Doctour will count this but a loose Discourse, as he hath done others of very great Weight (yea indeed, of more Weight and Reason in them then any thing he hath exhibited to the contrary) and so count it not worth taking Notice of; but though he do not, it's not of much Moment; for that End only have I writ, to bear my Testimony for Christ's Doctrine, against all the false and feigned Interpretations of Men, being that which I have stedfastly believed, and is of that Force and VVeight upon many Consciences, & so evident by the Spirit of Christ, that they can receive nothing of Mans fallen Reasons and Concepti∣ons, which are variable and changeable, to answer or weigh down the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and primitive Christians, who walked in the Order of the Gospel, and obeyed the Commands of Christ before the Apostacy entered in, and the Power was lost, and the Life and Spirit of Christ erred from, and mingled the Ordinances of the first and second Covenant to∣gether, & the Injunctions of Men among them for Doctrine, and then compelled all to receive it, all this long Time of Ant∣christ's Reign and the false Church's Visibility, wherein she hath sitten as a Queen upon the Waters, which are the Nations, Kin∣dreds, Tongues and People, which A. S. brings as a great Argu∣ment to prove Swearing in Use among Christians since Christ gave out that Command, Swear not at all; the Reasons the very strength of them I have laid down, as A.S. hath published them, without varying from his own Words; the Answer thou may'st peruse and read without Prejudice, and weigh with the Measure of God's Spirit in thy self, for unto that I appeal, which is a more certain Thing then Councils, or Nations, or Consent of Multitudes, who have the Name of Christian, and walk not in his Doctrine, neither live his Life, nor do the Things he saith: I am shut up in a Corner, and have not that Advantage that some Opposers have of others Labours, as to bring Authors of divers Ages that denyed to swear, though not only some there were, but many; but alas! they are condemned by A. S. and
others for Phanaticks and Heterodox, and so their sayings will seem of less Force; but however, I have not much striven, nei∣ther shall, to fetch Things from far in the Apostacy, but rest in that which makes all Things evident, even the Spirit of God in thy own Heart, and the Scriptures of Truth, which were spoken by the Spirit, which are so clear unto many, that there needs not Multitude of Words to demonstrate this Truth of the Prohi∣bition of all Oaths among true Christians; but I shall not detain thee from the Matter it self, and the Lord give thee an Under∣standing.
OATHS NO Gospel-Ordinance, But prohibited by CHRIST: THere being a Book lately published by A. Smalwood. D. D. as I un∣derstand Doctor of Divinity; first preached in a Sermon at Carlile, I suppose before the Judges at the Assizes then holden the 17th day of August, 1664. since which I perceive many Additions, by Reasons and Paraphrases are added thereunto, and Printed at York: In which Dis∣course he hath Vindicated the lawfulness of Swearing under the Gospel, and hath gone about to prove it by many Reasons, and Authors; how that Christ upon that subject, Mat. 5.34. Swear not at all, did not intend an absolute Universal prohibition of all manner of Swearing under the Gospel; which Book of his I have perused with an upright Heart, and an imparti∣al Eye, seriously, to the End I might own that which is good in it, not as one being glued to an Opinion or Judgment; but what as carries demon∣stration of Truth with it upon my Conscience and in my Heart; it being a Principle well known and believed amongst us, to have our Consciences void of offence towards God, and towards Man: and seeing my self and many more are great Sufferers at this day upon this very account, which I look upon, being truly and Conscientiously grounded upon the Doctrine of Christ, and consonant to the Primitive Christians, and seeing so large things have been written by other Hands in asserting the Truth of what we have believed, which yet stands as a Witness unto the Doctrine of Christ; notwithstanding all opposition and gain-saying, that it hath had by many Hands; I could have been wholly silent, and have referred all that hath been said to the Judgment of the Lord, and to that of God in every Mans Conscience; but that I perceive A. Smalwood hath rendred that People which I own in Judgment and Practice, to be in Error, and hath greatly gain sayed & Villified all such as ever did or do deny Swearing upon never so Conscientious account; As erroneous, and as only sprung from the Pelagian Heresie and Manicheus, and I know not who, and have rendred all with Reproach and disdain, as Phanaticks who discent from him, with dis∣dainful, and reproachful Names, to represent us as Odious as may be to the Magistrate, and at such a time as this, when tender and Conscientious
People, who fear the Lord in their Hearts, (and desire to live and be at Peace, and seek it with all Men) are sufferers, and great Sufferers too, upon this very account, whereby many are stirred up to more Persecution & Wrath against us: and besides, this Discourse it seems is cryed up, as the most exquisite that ever was, or can be; and as unanswerable, and that we who deny to Swear, would abolish all judicable proceedings, and make them nothing; this Discourse is printed, as A. S. in his 12. page saith, To induce us to forsake so irrational an Opinion, and to Convince us of our Error; and it seems he himself, besides many other, exspects it must effect some great matter. Reply. I say all these things being considered, were a strong inducement to me, to write something in reply thereunto, through in very deed I love not Contention, neither strife about Words, but seeing it is the Doctrine of Christ, and that which hath been, and is stedfastly believed by divers faithful Professors and Sufferers, both formerly and now, however by A. Smalwood accounted and reproached by that disdainful Name of Phanaticks; a Word lately invented in the Pit of Darkness, where many of those and the like reproaches come from; I was engaged in my Heart, to bear my Testimony against this said Book, and for the Truth of Christ's Doctrine; not out of obstinacy and wilfulness, but in duty as by Conscience to God & his Truth; which is dearer to me then my outward Liberty or all I have to loose for it, which I and many more at this day choose rather to suffer, then to be found violating the commands of Christ, or deny that which I have stedfastly believed; being perswaded thereunto by the Spirit of the Lord, and evidence of the Scripture of Truth. The subject A. Smalwood hath taken to treat upon, and in the End to gain∣say, and pervert; are no less then Christ's own Doctrine, Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all: who would have believed or thought that one who accounts himself a Doctor, a Divine, and a Minister of Christ, should choose Christ's own Words to plead against Christ, and them that do abide in his Doctrine? or that ever any should go about to prove Swear∣ing lawful from these words in Gospel-times, or that Swearing is not for∣bidden? but what would this Man encounter with, or what would not he oppose, if he hath but the Power of this World on his side? it is a small thing to gain-say what we say, and pervert our Words, and make them seem Erroneous, and to make our intentions one thing, and our words another, when he is so bold as to make Christ's Doctrine, his ex∣press words, Swear not at all, and his intentions contrary to his words; what do we judge of a Man that speaks one thing, and intends another? it's fear∣ful to think what conclusions some will make to carry on their intended de∣signs; but methinks A. S. might have been more considerate then to have taken Christ's own Doctrine and Words, to oppose Christ's intention, or to be so bold as to assert the intention of Christ was otherwise then his words import; but rather have chosen some other Subject; but what matter makes many of subjects, for with a Consequence or two, and a little Lo∣gick, they will seem to turn things any way, and go about to prove dark∣ness is Light, and Light is darkness, and what as in them lyes make it so to appear if they take a matter in Hand; and therefore the Apostle Exhorted to beware of Philosophy and vain deceit, for by this Men have been cunning
and crafty, and lie in wait to deceive the Innocent and Harmless, and to lead them out of the way. In the fourth page he saith, He will clear his intention, and that there are two sorts of Men that do Violence to this Text; the one winds it up to too high a note, as though Christ had forbidden all Swearing whatsoever. And in the tenth page he saith, This error is masked under a fair Colour of a more then ordinary Piety, but tends to overthrow all Judicatures, and takes away the decision of all emergent Suites and Controversies; and were it granted, saith A. Smalwood, we should be necessitated if not to disown the Magistrates Authority, yet to disobey their loyal command, as having a counterand from Christ, Swear not at all, and the other sort of Men are such who in despight of this Text to commonly, rash∣ly, prophanely and falsely Swear. Answ. Who doth the greater violence to this Scripture, whether A. S. who in his Doctrine he hath raised from these Words to be the Foundati∣on of his Discourse, who makes Christ's plain and express words one thing and his intentions another, I leave to all unbyassed Spirits to judge off; or they that say, Christ intended what he spoke, and spake what he intended: I say let all see and consider where the violence lies, and in whom, and whe∣ther he doth not wind it up by that note, or contrary to it, to use his own Words, otherwise then Christ intends it, as after will be made more evient∣ly to appear, & we say it's not error but Truth to believe Christ's Words, whoare Truth, more then A. S. his conjectural supposition, neither do we be∣lieve it, to be error masked, but Truth revealed, and Christ spoke and declared it, that we might believe it, and obey it: And we believe that A. S. and many more have put a mask and a vail upon Christ's Words, and would hood-wink all, and lead them blind-fold after their Imaginations, and crooked Pathes, winding and turning this way and that way, that lead into Darkness and trouble, and Confusion, from the Path of Life: And what doth Christ's command, viz. Swear not at all? doth it overthrow all Justice and Judicatories? Is it not the Seat of Judgment established in Righ∣teousness and Truth? and they that sit in Judgment ought they not to give Sentence and Judgment in Righteousness and Truth, and as the causes are represented unto them, and brought before them? and may not every Truth be confirmed out of the Mouth of two or three Without an Oath as un∣der the Law in divers causes where no Oath is mentioned but Witnesses, Deut. 19.15. Witnesses, and all emergent suits & Controversies ended according to the best evidence after diligent Inquisition and Judg∣ment given accordingly, and that without the needless and cumbersome formality of an oath Deut. 19.6. In case of Life and Death, no Oath was used we read of. which is sometime this, and sometime that, and changeable, whenas every true confession and Testimony is equivalent thereunto, in the presence of the God of all Truth? and who ever denyed this? And there is no necessity so to Judge that he that fears to Swear, and take an Oath, yet refuseth not to give Testimony about any matter, whether it doth concern the Lord or his Neighbour, that therefore he denyes the Magistrates Au∣thority, or yet disobeys their legal commands? so that though all Swear∣ing should be denyed, yet that which answers the cause in hand is not deny∣ed, true Testimony; and therefore the Magistrates Authority and their
lawful commands may well stand and be obeyed, and right done unto eve∣ry Man, and Christ's command stand also, these are but the Secret smit∣ings and suggestions of A. Smalwood to render them Odious to the Magi∣strates and all People, who dissent from him in Judgment: And indeed such like Discourses and Instigations from such like Mouths and Pens as his is, who is accounted Learned and Eminent, hath not a little added afflicti∣ons unto our Bonds, and they have made wide the Wound, and have made the Breach seem greater then it is, and the matter more grievous then there hath been any Cause for, I desire they may consider of it, and Re∣pent. And in page 13. from this Text, Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, swear not at all, he layes down this Proposition or Doctrine, viz. Our Saviour did not intend by these Words, Swear not at all, an absolute, universal and li∣mited Prohibition of all manner of Swearing; and goes on to prove it by divers Reasons. The first he gives is, That the Father and the Son are one in Nature, Power, Wisdom, Immutability and Eternity, and one in Will and Wisdom, therefore they cannot give forth contrary Commands; but God the Father hath command∣ed Swearing in these Words, Thou shalt fear the Lord, and swear by his Name, and serve him, Deut. 6.13. And therefore it is not possible that God the Son should forbid it. Answ. Though the Father and the Son be one in Nature, Power, and Wisdom, and Immutability, and Will, as in themselves, and alter not, but keep Covenant from Age to Age, and from Generation to Ge∣neration, there is no Contrariety in them, yet there are Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, and there are Differences of Administrations, but the same Lord: It is granted, that after Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and Diffidence and Unbelief, Variance and Strife, and many Trans∣gressions, for which the Law was added, and because of which the Law was added, and the Command given forth unto the Jews, to swear by the Name of God, as Jerome saith upon Mat. 5.3, 37. It was permitted the Jews under the Law, is being tender and Infants (and to keep them from Idolatry, which the rest of the Nations did run into) they might swear by the Name of God, not that it was rightful so to do, but that it was better to swear by the Lord then by false Gods or Devils; but the great Evangelical Sincerity and Truth admits not of an Oath. Secondly, For the ending of Strife and Variance, being in the Unbelief, which was the Occasion of the adding of the Law, and the Cause of the Command given forth, Deut. 6.13. with divers more Words, specified by Moses and the Prophets: And though Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil it, and to destroy that which the Law was against (and which it took hold upon) and to finish Sin and Transgression, and bring in ever∣lasting Righteousness, and to restore to the Beginning; and we say, ac∣cording as we have believed and received of the Lord, and have a Cloud of Witnesses, both them that are gone before, and of them that yet re∣main alive: As Christ said of Divorcement, It was not so from the Beginning, so we say, Oathes were not from the Beginning, but were added after Hardness of Heart, and Sin, and Unbelief entered into the World; but Christ who was made under the Law, and fulfilled the Law, put an End
to the Transgression, Sin, Unbelief, Variance and Strife, in whom all the Promises of God are fulfilled, he is the Righteousness of God; and who are true Christians indeed are come out of Unbelief, Variance and Trans∣gression, and do see and know Christ to be the End of the Law for Righte∣ousness unto them that believe, who exhorted to do the Truth, confess the Truth and speak the Truth, who said, Swear not at all by Heaven, and which after more shall be said, God willing, to the Text it self: And so A. Smalwood his Reason is made void, and his Impossibility made possible, that God gave forth a Command, and permitted the Jews to swear in that Covenant and Ministration, and yet Christ in the New Covenant counter∣mands it, as in the Text, being the Minister of a better Covenant, which stood upon better Promises, who leads to the Beginning, and is the Restorer of all Mankind that do believe; and yet the Father and the Son are one in Will, Wisdom & Power: And though A. S. and others cannot un∣derstand, or else have no Mind in that Latitude, as generally prohibitive of all Swearing, because he sayes, God did require it no less then he did his own Worship and Service in the moral Law; these nice Distinctions of Moral, Ju∣dicial and Ceremonial have confounded Peoples Understandings, though it is still acknowledged they did vow and did swear in the first Covenant under the Law; but whether he or any other making Swearing moral, ju∣dicial or ceremonial is not much matter, seeing that Christ the Righteous∣ness is the Sum and Substance of all, and the End of the Law for Righte∣ousness to them that do believe, and in him is Life and Righteousness en∣joyed; for the Law was given by Moses, but the Grace and the Truth cometh by Jesus Christ, who in the Sum of all Types and Shadows; and therefore the Apostle said, We are circumcised in him, and baptized in him; and we do look upon an Oath under the Law to have some Type and Figure in it, notwithstanding A.S. sayes, It was none, and that Christ is improperly called the Oath of God, no more improper then he is a Vine, a Door, a Way, a Shepherd; For he is called God's Covenant, Isaiah 53.5. and God's Covenant is his Oath which he sware, Luke 1.72, 73. for all the Promises are fulfil∣led in him, and are yea and amen: And as for the Morality of it, so far as it is moral and perpetual to all under the Gospel, is in Confession of Truth, and bearing Witness thereunto, as before the Lord, or in his Pre∣sence, and speaking the Truth when there is Necessity, as when any man's Person or Estate, or any Part thereof is in Danger; and this we have ever owned, and do own, and have and are ready to testifie the Truth before the Lord, or in his Presence, as concer∣ning any Matter which concerns the Glory of God, or the Good of our Neighbour, without being pinched or bound up to a certain Form of Words imposed upon us, but according as Necessity requires, so amply and largely as our Words may give Knowledge, and Understanding, and Light in any Matter which is to be desired▪ but this hath been denyed, and hath not been received by this unbelieving Generation, who seek rather to establish the Traditions and Customs of men, rather then the evangelical Doctrine of the Gospel. And though Dr. Smalwood will needs have it, viz. Swearing, neither to be ceremonial or judicial; but for any Proof he brings, for ought I see,
it may be either as well as that he calls moral; for sure I am that Oath, were used Deut. 19.16. Exod. 20.10. in judicial Proceedings, and Ceremonies were used in the Worship of God and his Service then, and by Commandment; and the Service of God and his Worship, I hope he will say is moral, yet so as under the Law it was not without Ceremony; and it is concluded by the most learned, that there was some Ceremony, or Figure, or Sign in that Covenant in all the Worship, and some Shadows of good things to come (then if Swearing was any Part of the VVorship of God) as the most do grant and assert, and I think A. S. will hardly deny, then I argue, it had some Ceremony or Shadow in it; but Oh this A. S. cannot away with in this Point of Swearing, but it must needs be all moral, for Fear he should weaken his Matter that he hath taken in Hand, to war against Christ's Command; but it is evident that Swearing was used in judicial Proceed∣ings, as is manifest, Deut. 19.5. about killing of a Man accidentally, and Ver. 11. about Murder, and Ver. 14. about Land-marks, and Ver. 21. Life for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, and Foot for Foot, a∣bout all these things and many more, and in Ver. 16. about a false Witness (were to be decided and tryed by VVitnesses before the Judges) and Judge∣ment was to be given according to the several Commands about the afore∣said different Transgressions, all which Statutes belonged to their Judicial-Proceedings, as this about Swearing, and as is manifest in this Chapter; and all of these Commands seem to have as much Morality in them, as Swearing hath in the Judgment of many, unto whose Judgment I leave what I say, to be weighed by the Spirit of God in them. Thirdly, The Law said many things by Way of Precept and Commission (at least Permission) from God, which would be Irregularities grosly re∣provable in Mens Manners, in moral Matters, Conversations, civil Trans∣actions and Communications, should they be used among them who profess the Gospel; the Law said, An Eye for an Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Foot for Foot; the Gospel saith, Avenge not your selves, resist not Evil, suffer Wrong, put up, forgive, forbear; the Law said, Thou shalt love thy Neigh∣bour, and hate thy Enemy; but A. S. will look upon this as an Addition or false Interpretation to the Law, it may be; but however, certain it is, that under the Law they made War, the Jews with Amaleck, with Moab, with Ammon, and the Canaanites and the Egyptians might be spoiled, but the Go∣spel said only, Love your Enemies, if he be hungry feed him, if he be thirsty give him to drink; and for any thing I can see, the aforesaid Commands were as moral, and had as much Morality in them as Swearing, whatever A. S. say or can say: In the 7th Section A. S. sayes, If any argue, that Christ abolished the ceremonial and judicial Laws once commanded by God (he sayes) he denyes that Assertion; for we were never under the judicial Law, it being solely given to the Jews for the regulating their Common wealth in the Land of Canaan, Deut. 4.14. and they were never obligatory to us that are no Jews, nor never dwelt in Canaan; and as for the ceremonial, it was meerly temporary, and ceased at our Saviour's Death, and was not abrogated, but observed by him in his Life, neither can it properly be said to be re∣pealed. Reply, Though I do not argue that Christ abolished the ceremonial and
judicial Laws once commanded, not abrogated them, yet Bishop Gauden doth, who attained, if not to a Degree of Knowledge and Learning, yet to a Degree of Promotion above A. Smallwood in his Book which he wrote for the Information of the Quakers about Swearing, he saith in his own Words, Christ came to fulfil the moral Law, however he came in a Way of fulfilling to abrogate the ceremonial, yea, and the politick Laws too, belonging to the Jews Policy in Church and State; and herein is the Bishop and the Doctor at odds, the Bishop said, He abrogated the ceremonial Law and judicial too, belonging to the Jews Policy and State; but Doctor Smallwood sayes, He denyes his Assertion; for (sayes he) we were never under the judicial Law, and what was never imposed need not be abolished; so then what remains forme to say but this, if Swearing was any Part of the judicial Law, or did belong to their political Estate, as it is the Judgment of many, but it is evident that Swearing was used by the Witness before Judges in Israel in those Dayes, to try out their Matters, according to Commandment gi∣ven of God, as is evident from Deut. 19. in the whole Chapter, and di∣vers other Places; then by this Argument A. S. hath made, he hath o∣verthrown himself, for he saith, We are no Jews, nor in Canaan, and so never imposed, and what was never imposed needs no abolishing; and it is, as I have said, manifest, that Oaths had Relation to judicial Proceedings, and to the Service of God too in that Covenant, which was shadowy, and con∣sisted much in outward Signs and Figures, but the Substance is Christ: So then instead of proving Swearing under the Gospel lawful, he hath by his Argument proved it never injoyned unto the Gentiles, neither indeed was it either ever commanded or commended unto the Gentiles who believed, or they reproved for not observing it, that we ever read of, by Christ or his Apostles or Ministers in the first and purest times of Christianity; for to Jacob he gave his Law, and to Israel his Statutes; to every Nation he did not so, no not to Moab, Ammon, nor the Canaanites, neither the Gentiles; and though he seems to plead hard for Swearing under the Gospel, yet he talls short in his Proof, except he took his own Reasons and Arguments, which divers of them are but imaginary; and in the Foundation of his Discourse he hath taken such great Compass, as there is not an universal, unlimited Prohibition of all Manner of Swearing; but what this Manner of Swear∣ing is, it is very uncertain; sometimes he makes it this, and sometimes that; sometimes he saith, It is no Oath, though in the Form thereof there be not, I swear, or God be not named, or by God doth not alwayes signifie an Oath, and other where he seems to affirm it to be an Oath; but when an imparti∣al Eye hath sounded and tryed the Bottom, what this Swearing is, that brings so much Glory to God, and so much Good to our Neighbour, that he so vehemently contends for, that ought to be observed as well as God's Fear & Service; it's but their own Traditions & Inventions, for that under the Law will not serve (As the Lord lives) or that he calls Swearing under the Gospel will not serve (The Lord is Witness) or I speak the Truth in Christ, or ths is Truth in the Presence of God, or the like, none of these will serve; but though he & the Rulers do say they are Oaths, yet when at any time we have proffered willingly to declare the Truth in this or that particular Causes, or to make as ample Confession in Demonstration for clearing any Cause in Debate, that hath either conduced to the Glory of God, or the Good and Profit of any particular Man in the Nation, among whom we converse,
and not without some Attestation of God, or of his Wisdom, Power and Presence, yet it would never yet be received, but reckoned as Insufficient, though both the Rulers of this Age and A. S. have said it, It might be that in private it might, but in Judicature never as received, though I do believe the most do believe we dare not lye in ordinary Communication, much less in Judicature, yet we have been set aside as Objects of Wrath, as deluded, erronious, factious, seditious, Contemners of Law, Obstructors of legal Procedings, except we would lay our Hand upon a Bible, and kiss it, and say, I swear, and by the Contents of the Book, and so help me God, or else fined imprisoned for Term of Life, our Lands and Goods confiscated, and we sentenced to be banished, our Wives and Children ruinated, Husband and Wife parted, Children and Parents separated, and such Monsters of Chri∣stians have we to deal withal in this Age, and how many brought into this sad Condition in England, as little A. S. knows as cares: But for ought I know that he and such as he, in such publick Discourses as this of his have blown the Sparks, and have kindled a Flame in the Rulers, and incensed them, and stirred them up to Severity and Harshness against them who fear the Lord, and do maintain Peace with all men, as much as in them lyeth, and keep their Consciences void of Offence towards God, which makes us to chuse rather all this Hardship, then to offend the Lord, who serve and fear his Name, and reverence it more then they who seem to honor it, and pretend God's Honour through their Swearing. But to make a∣mends for this A. S. saith, The Magistrates must act by the Law, and that en∣joyns such a Form of Swearing, and they cannot allow it. Unto that I answer, it had been a more necessary Discourse for A. S. to have exhorted the Magistrates, if the Law had been answered in the Sub∣stance, not to be so severe in the Form, and also to have told them where any Law was made contrary to the Law of God, either in Matter or Form; the Consciences of Believers could not yeild Obedience thereunto, when it was repugnant unto the Law of God, and not according to the Form thereof, and in such Cases to be wary; and he and the rest of the Clergy to have advised with the Rulers and Law-makers, and to have informed them from whom they receive such great In-comes and Revenues (for the Preservation and Peace of all Men) tnat they need not stand so much upon the Form, seeing that so many conscientious People questioned it, so that there needed not such tying up to Form, under such great and heavy Pe∣nalties, as Banishment, Confiscation and perpetual Imprisonment, but have informed them so that the Truth might have been found out, and no judicial Proceedings hindered, which I am sure may be without any Swearing, true Testimony never being denyed, when required by any Magistrate, and let but a Penalty be upon him that gives false Evidence, or speaks an Untruth about any Proceedings in Judicature, or otherwise cal∣led to bear Evidence in any Controversie, if found, let them suffer as them that swear falsly, and as perjured, and the Case is one; and here all Scruples and Contentions about Swearing would end, and there would not be the least Obstruction in legal Proceedings, or in Administra∣tion of Justice; and let me tell Doctor Smallwood and the rest of his Bro∣thren, that if they would move such a thing in Parliament, peradventure it would be readily received from them, and in so doing they would do as
acceptable a Piece of Service, and as well-pleasing to God, and would con∣duce as much to the Peace and Tranquillity of the Nation, as any thing that ever they will do in their Age, or hath been effected many Ages; and so all these Heart-burnings, Contentions, and evil Surmisings, and evil re∣presenting one another would cease and end, and which if not effected, no∣thing can be looked for but sad Suffering, and great Oppression and Per∣secution, which will provoke the Lord to Anger, and ever did against all them that were the Cause of it in Ages past: But I come to his second Argument. Second Argument, Some without any Colour, Reason or Possibility of Proof, will needs have Swearing a ceremonial Rite, but God ranks it with his Fear and Service, therefore it must needs be moral; and therefore what at all Times, as well under the Gospel as under the Law, as well among the Gentiles as the Jews, tends to the Glory of God, that is not a ceremonial Ordinance, nor forbidden by Christ; but such is Swearing, and therefore it cannot be thought to be pro∣hibited. Reply, It hath been said and often asserted, that all the ten Words and ten Commandments were moral and perpetual, as well under the Gospel as under the Law; then I wonder what A. S. and divers others intend to do with the fourth Commandment if it be moral and perpetual, and to be observed in the same Manner and with the same Service, as then com∣manded, and the same day and time, then he and most of them who con∣tend most for the Morality of these ten Commandments are great Trans∣gressors; and if he grant there was something ceremonial in it, and typical or figurative, which then was the seventh Day, which was given for a Sign of the World's Rest from its Labour, and of keeping after it an ever∣lasting Sabbath to the Lord, by Man's Cessation from his own Works, as God did from his, Isa. 58. and the last of Hebrews, ver. 4. which Jewish Ob∣servation of the seventh Day as a Sabbath now, though never so solemnly, as then commanded, will have no Acceptation at all, no more then he, and he as much (that is, none at all) that never so solemnly swears by the Name of God, in such ceremonious Way as the Jews did of old, (or goes beyond the bare Asseveration or Testimony of Truth, with some Attestation of God's Power and Veracity, which hath never been denyed) which to do, we do not only think, but know it to be a superfluous Ceremony to Juda∣ism, not to say, Brat of Jewish Extraction, as A. S. doth) now circumci∣sed and cut off from Christians by Christ? And what though God did, Deut. 10.20. rank it with his Fear and Service? was there any Service or Worship in that Covenant that had not some Sign and Shadow in it, and was ceremonial, and was to end in the Substance? was there not Prayer and Praising? and were not these Service and Worship? and had these not the Ceremony of Incense and Sacrifice, which then attended these Services? but the Substance was lifting up of the Heart unto the Lord, and making a Me∣lody in the Heart; and Circumcision is now that of the Heart, Rom. 2. which was outward before; the killing of a Lamb at the Passeover was an Ordi∣nance in that Covenant; the Substance thereof is Christ, the Passeover; the other now under the Gospel would be no more then cutting off a Dog's Neck; these were all Ordinances of God to be observed, and in their day
and time; & they that did according to the Command of God tended to the Glory of God in that first Covenant; but in the second under the Gospel, whosoever should observe them in the Figure, Ceremony and Shadow, should much dishonour God and his Christ, the Substance, and Christ would profit him nothing; see that Ceremony of Swearing, the Morali∣ty that only abides under the Gospel, is testifying the known Truth from the Heart, with some Attestation of God to witness, who is Witness of all we do or say, and that no more then Confession or Denial by Yea or Nay, which is no Oath, is that standing Substance and the moral (if A. S. will have it called so) that remains under the Gospel, which answers that ce∣remonious Way of Swearing under the Law, which is most evidence by the Apostle Paul's rendering of that Term Swearing, as it was spoken by Way of Prophesie concerning its Continuance, Isa. 45.23. To me every Tongue shall swear, under that Term Confessing only under the Gospel, Rom. 14.11. Every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall confess to God; Confession under the Gospel is made equivalent with an Oath under the Law; but this rendering of it A. S. doth not like, but would pervert Paul's Words, to have it Con∣fession (but put to his own Addition) by Oath, so that his Argument is void; Swearing was binding in that ceremonious Way which it was commanded under the Law, but not under the Gospel, nor among the Christians, who are come to the Substance, and to confess and speak the Truth in Christ, to the Glory of God, acknowledging his Power and Omnisciency, and his Justice, in discerning whether Truth be spoken, and in punishing them that speak falsly & his Wisdom in discerning the Secrets of all Hearts; and A. S. might as well have said, That Offerings and Oblations, & Sacrifice tend much to the Glory of God under the Gospel, as under the Law, as Swearing; but saith he, Swearing is a Part of God's peculiar Service, that is incommunicable to any Crea∣ture; the like I say of the former, Offering, and Sacrifice, and Incense were incommunicable to any Creature, but was due unto God alone; yet it doth not follow as well under the Gospel as under the Law, for that were to set up the Figure, and deny the Substance; so this second Argument is insufficient, and the third is somewhat related to it, which I now come unto. Thirdly, The third Argument is, That if Christ's Purpose be utterly to abo∣lish all Swearing, as an illegitimate Brat of Jewish Extraction, not to be admit∣ted into the Christian Church, then it must be either as it is repugnant to our Du∣ty to God, or else to our Neighbour; for into that summary he hath contracted the whole Law. Reply. We must still distinguish that which was once a duty to be per∣formed under the Law, because commanded, is not required as a duty un∣der the Gospel, and the strength of most of A. S. his Arguments, and the rest who contend for Swearing under the Gospel, are grounded upon the Mosaical Law, though this of Oaths he will needs have to be moral; it may be he would contend as much for the Morality of Tythes and Oblations, if it had been the subject of his Discourse, as for Oaths, and them to be jure divino, under the Gospel, for many such we have met with, and he might bring the same Arguments for Tythes and Oblations, they are not repug∣nant unto God, but bring Glory to his Name; because hereby his Mini∣sters under the Gospel are maintained, and are enabled thereby to Preach
the Gospel for the Conversion of Souls, which addes much to the Glory of God, and therefore cannot or are not to be prohibited, but these only belonged to the Levitical Priesthood, and continued only to the time of re∣formation, viz. to the bringing in of a better Hope and a better Covenant, which stood upon better Promises; for the Priesthood being changed, there is also of neces∣sity a change of the Law, Hebr. 6.12. by which Tythes was a duty, and they robbed God that detained them, Mal. 3.8. But this being ended and ful∣filled in Christ, the everlasting high Priest, who by one Offering perfected forever them that are Sanctified, he bid not his Disciples require Tythes as a due, or duty belonging to God, under the Gospel, But freely you have received, freely give, and what House soever ye enter into that is worthy there abide, and eat such things as are set before you, for the Workman is worthy of his Meat, and this was far more Evangelical, & conduced more to the Honour of God, then Tythes; and the Apostles lived more by Faith upon God, who provided for them, who were employed in his Service, so that I argue, what was once a duty under the Law, that was to be performed unto God, is not alwayes a duty among Christians, for though Oaths were command∣ed unto the Jews in that time of Infancy, and as being weak, and it was per∣mitted them, as Jerome saith, upon the 5th Mat. vers. 37. to Swear by the Name of God to keep them from Idolatry, seeing all other Nations were given to Idolatry, and Swear by false God's, as Chemosh, Ashtereth, and Baal, he knew their aptness to be led aside with the Customs of other Nations, and there∣fore they were to acknowledge him alone, who was the living God, and no other, and to testifie Truth by his Name, as a thing certain and sure▪ and therefore one of their Oathes was, as the Lord lives, and this among the rest was one of the Precepts of the Law, which was added because of Trans∣gression, to Swear by his Name, which needed not have been added, if Sin, and Transgression, and unbelief had not entered in, (mark this) and this Law of Oathes pertained to that part which was in the Transgression, and Variance, and Strife, and that led to Worship Idols, and this continued while that Nature was standing, but Christ was revealed and given to fi∣nish Sin and Transgression, and unbelief, and to do away that part that lust∣ed after Idols, and that led into variance, and he leads out of the occasion of Evil, and from that which was the cause of the Addition of the Law un∣to everlasting Righteousness again, which was in the beginning before Sin entred, and they that come to believe in him are not under the Law, but under Grace, moreover the Apostle saith, Rom. 7.14. The Law hath Power over a Man so long as he liveth, even as a Wife is bound by the Law of her Husband so long as he liveth, (and no longer) so as long as Man liveth in Sin, Unelief, Transgression, Discord, Variance, and Strife, and Idolatry, the Law hath Power over him to correct and reprove him, and judge him, and was to be a limit unto that Nature; but Christ leads out of the occasion of all these, for which the Law was added to do the Truth and speak the Truth, and ceaseth Strife, for which the Law was added. Again, the Law was added as a cure and a remedy to decide Contro∣versies, and ill distempers, that were entred into the Hearts of Men in the unbelief, and that is one reason which Doctor Gauden gives, why solemn Swearing should and ought to be in judical proceedings among Christians, to take away Jealousies, Distrusts, Dissimulations, frauds, unsatisfacti∣ons
and insecurities; and Quotes Grotius, That Swearing is necessary, not absolutely and morally, or preceptively, but by way of Consequence and remedy, as to the state of the Jews we shall not, nor have not denyed it; but as to the State of Christians who are truly such, we say that the cause is taken away, and the effect follows, all Jealousies, distrusts, Dissimulations and strifes, and Insecurities, and so the remedies, to wit, Oathes cease, and the ne∣cessity of them, and that was one main thing why Oathes were permitted to end Strife, and Strife is a Work of the Flesh, and variance and discord, and it is inconsistent with true love to our Neighbour to hold that which An∣swers the Strife, and that part, for love fulfills the Law, works no ill to the Neighbour, ends Strife, and so puts Swearing, the means to end strife, and the remedy out of place and date. But A. S. goes on and tells us, That Oaths advisedly and reverently taken upon necessary occasions are so far from displeasing God, or hurting our Neighbour, that on the contrary they are acceptable to the one, and advantagious to the other, for by them Princes are secured of their Sub∣jects Allegiance, and Generals of their Souldiers fidelity, Leagues confirmed be∣twixt Nations, every Man's just right maintained, Offenders discovered, and duly punished, and Controversies and Suits decided: and these are such great and good Ends that Men cannot be in any Degree of security or happiness without them. Reply. To this I answer, that notwithstanding all the great and good ends, and the necessity of Oathes which A. S. conceives that Men cannot subsist in any degree of security without, yet we see by experience not∣withstanding all the reverent taking, and all the solemn taking, and the necessity that is put upon Oaths, yet they have never answered the end purposed, for where perfidiousness and unbelief, and distrust, and jealou∣sies, and strifes are, which is no where so much, as among those that plead for Swearing, yet Oaths do not, nor have not bound them, when they had a mind to be loos'd, and see that to stand to such Obligations will not be for their profit, or present safety, many instances might be given; what security had the Pope when all the Nobility and Clergy in England were bound to maintain his Supremacy by Oaths? and no doubt but they Swore reverently, and it was judged both by the then Church and State to be binding, and yet notwithstanding all the Obligation, all was broken, and the Pope's Supremacy denyed; in the time of Hen. 8th. and Edward 6th. in their time all Swore against the Pope's Supremacy, either in Church or State; and how much security was the Nation in when Queen Mary came to the Crown, though the Nobles and the Bishopes, and Prelates did all Swear a∣gainst the Supremacy! yet behold it was brought in again; and confirmed by Oath again; and yet in the dayes of Elizabeth renounced again, and of ltter days what Oaths have been exacted, first by one, and then by ano∣ther, and one party contrary to another, though every prty fancyed a se∣curity for the time, but it proved of no more effect, neither were they in degree more secure then if there had been none at all; for indeed, that fre∣quent Swearing hath made Men, being got into a Custom of it, that it is become a light thing unto them, though otherwise they look upon them∣selves as bound; Generals how have they turn'd one way, and another way, and Soudiers the like! so that one may conclude indeed that Oaths are made no more of but even to stand in force, while (that bears up head
and is exalted) that to please the present time and Power they seem to be devoutly obliged to it, but if it come under any Ecclipse or diminution, then they reckon themselves no longer obliged; so that indeed their Oaths are become of little or no force at all; and for Controversies, we see they begin many, and are the cause of much disiention and discord, but end few; for why may not all these foresaid states and conditions be secured, and as well, and the good and great ends accomplished, that A. S. pleads for by true evidence of every one concerned in any of the foresaid relations, by declaring and confessing the Truth, and speaking it unto Men as necessity requires without Oath?, yea and all the foresaid States have as much securi∣ty, and subsist as well, if not better, then by all this Swearing, which more properly belonged to the Judaism then to Christians, and there is no such necessity of them among Christians if any at all, who dare not Swear for fear of offending Christ, or denying his Doctrine, and yet will not Lye, but speak the Truth, and indeed it is the custom of Swearing, that hath been used in the Nations since the Apostacy entred in, that is more looked upon then any thing else, more then any legality, necessity, or security, under the Gospel, seeing in the Primitive times, truly so cal∣led, it was enough to say, Christian sum, and that sort of Swearing that is imposed now hath no other Ground but Custom, which Jer. 10.3 is accounted to be vain, neither hath it so much as an inch of Ground from the Scripture, and therefore doth not bring so much lory to God as A. S. tells on, because whatsoever is added or super-added to whatever God com∣manded as to matter or Form is but Will-worship at the best, and a making whatsoever was said or commanded, or practised before, imperfect, and no way sufficient, but more of this shall be said after, if the Lord permit. Fourth Argument, Had Christ intended Universally to forbid all kind of Oaths in the words, Swear not at all, then those amplifications, neither by Hea∣ven, nor by Earth▪ neither by Jerusalem, neither by the Head, had been use∣less, as being generally included in the general prohibition; but had he meant that no Oath should be used upon any occasion, the subsequent Words are so far from gi∣ving Light to the preceding that they much obscure them, but had he said no more thn Swear not at all, it might have been said, he disallowed all Oaths, but he descending to th or that Creature may rationally imply that this purpose was only to forbid such Swearing, and not that which was formerly enjoyned, and his con∣clusion is only Creature Swearing, or Swearing by Creatures is that he would have forbidden. Answ. Christ knew better what he intended then A. S. who would make his words one thing and his intention another; it is evident by the pre∣ceding Doctrine and by that which follows after the Text, that Christ prohibits all Swearing, which shall be further spoken on, when the second part of the Discourse is spoken of; some stumble ignorantly, and some wilfully would pervert, and turn aside from that which they have no mind to receive, and would hold up that which they assert, true or false, and that makes all this disputing and reasoning about the plain Words of Scripture, Christ's words; But I say unto you, Swear not at all by Heaven or Earth, is a general Negative of all Oaths, even of those which before were used in the time of Moses, and by Heaven and Earth, and Jerusalem, are
more ample expressions of Christ to make the Scribes and Pharisees under∣stand his mind of his dislike of these Oaths by Creatures that they frequent∣ly used, & though these and much more were included in the general Nega∣tive, Swear not at all; yet they are not to be excluded as superfluous, neither do they obscure the former, Swear not at all, but give more Light to the for∣mer, to any but them that sees with A. S. his Eyes, for by Heaven, by Earth, by Jerusalem, are more ample expressions of his mind, and a fur∣ther explication of the former, Swear not at all; and though they seem to A. S. to obscure and darken Christ's words, if he did intend all Oaths, yet they that see with another Eye then he doth, is that they are only more large expressions, thereby to make the Pharisees understand, who were in the unbelief, and dull of hearing, that did not only forbid what the Law had forbid before, but even those Oaths that they frequently used, under those terms and forms which the Law had spoken of in those Words, as Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, Head and Foot, and therefore he enumerates them as an amplification of his former prohibition, and so they are to be joyned, and we shall not stop as A. S. sayes, some do at the words, Swear not at all, but shall joyn that which Christ hath joyned, viz. Heaven, Earth and Jerusalem, and to be enumerated only and joyned to the former Negative, and spoken as to their Capacities in those full and large Terms that they might understand his mind, that he prohibited not only by Heaven and Earth and Jerusalem, but even any other Oath which the Law had com∣manded, or the Jews permitted to Swear before; and though A. S. would have it limited, only to Swearing by Creatures, which indeed was for∣biden under the Law; but Christ who taught a more Evangelical and ex∣act obedience then the Law, he said, It hath been said of old time, thou shalt not forswear thy self: But I say unto you, (who saith more then the Law hath said) Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more cometh of Evil. And of this mind was Bp. Usher, late of Ardmagh, who pleaded the Cause of the Waldenses, or Leonists, whose Names are famous amongst the Reformed Churches, and were the most Ancient and true Pro∣testants, if any Reformation be looked at beyond Luther; they professed it no way lawful for a Christian to Swear▪ and the said Bishop Usher de Succes. Chap. 6. doth esteem that place of the 5th. of Mat. Swear not at all; and that of 5th. James to be a sufficient plea for them against the Papists, and he pleads their cause; and this made Renerius and Jansenius so much Envy the Waldenses, two Romanists, who said, Amongst all the Sects which are or have been, there is not any more pernicio to the Church (meaning the Church of Rome) then the Waldenses; and that for three Reasons, first, their Antiquity; secondly, because of their Universality; thirdly, in that they did maintain and hold it no way lawful for a Christian to Swear on any occasion. But it may be that A. S. will tell us that these and other were condemned in some general or Provincial Council for Heresie, and if he do, it is no great matter, since most of these have erred, especially since all Nations have drunk of the Whores Cup of Fornication, and have Erred from the Fith, and have lost the Power, and then contend for a form, and bind all to receive it upon some commination or malediction, or other, or else they were He∣reticks; And why? who said so? the Church hath so decreed; and if these Canons and such like must be binding, A. S. will hardly escape their
Censure, if he continue in the profession of the Faith he is  and they seem to agree in this particular, about Swearing. But I come to his fifth Argument. Fifth Argument, Christ never forbad any thing but that was intrinsecally evil, as may be proved by induction, he forbids anger, abusive Language, he for∣bids Lust, and divorce, and Swearing by Creatures; and therefore what ever he forbad was Evil, and that in it self, and not meerly as forbidden; but Swearing in general is not for that hath not only been the practice of Holy Men, but of Angels, Dan. 12.7. Revel. 10.6. Reply. Was it Evil in it self under the Law if a Man smote out ano∣thers Eye, or tooth, or cut off his Hand, or his Foot, or give one a wound in any part of the Body, Deut. 21.24. Levit. 1.24.20. Deut 19.11. was it Evil in it self for the Judges in those days to give Sentence, that he that had struck out his Neighbour's Eye, or struck out his Tooth, or cut off his Hand, to pronounce & give the same judgment unto the offender, that he should be so done withal? was this eternally evil or intrinsecally evil for the party so wronged to seek remedy? or was it not an act of Justice equal and good, not only because enjoyned and commanded but in it ll just? and was it or is it an act in it self (intrinsecally evil) if a Man sued a Man wrongfully at the Law, and takes a Man's Coat or Garment away, to seek to defend himself, and preserve his Coat or cloak? if not A. S. his Argument is of no moment; for even in the same Chapter, where Envy and Murther, and divorce, saving for Fornication, and abusive Language, and all Swearing is forbidden, so is that forbidden which is not intrinse∣cally evil by Christ, Mat. 5.39, 40. But I say unto you that you resist not evil; and whosoever shall smite the one Cheek turn hm the other also; and if a Man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; and whosoever shall compell thee to go a mile, go with him twain. And it is in the new Testament (I hope) written, Avenge not your selves. And was i e∣vil in it self, or morally Evil to keep the seventh day of the Week as a Sab∣bath, or only good because commanded, or was it lawful to fight with A∣malicks, Edomites, Egyptians, & Canaanites, because Israel was only command∣ed, or because they were real Enemies to God in their Hearts; or as Samu∣el Fisher well said in Answer to Doctor Gauden, which A. S. quarels with, that Circumcision, Sacrifices, and Offerings, Passover, and New-Moons▪ Fasts and Swearing, was not Evil in themselves but because forbidden; and though A. S. give such a great Challenge to S. F. to produce one Instance that any thing was prohibited by Christ, but what was intrinsecally evil, or else his Argument is in vain, I say the afore-mentioned thing prove it, that something was forbidden that was not Evil eternally & intrinslly, but because prohibited, and again in the same Chapter, ver. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies▪ bless them tha Curse you; though under the Law they did fight, and might fight with the aforesaid Enemies, the Canaanites▪ and Gentiles; but now I say, put up, forgive, love your Enemies, Peter put up thy Sword, he that takes hold on it shall perish by it; Avenge not, go not  Law one with another, 1 Cor. 6.7. suffer, forbear, forgive if thy Brother si a∣gainst thee, seventy times 7. times. And though A. S. says, That nothing was forbidden by Christ, or in all the New-Testament but what was in it self Evil, or in some respect conducing thereunto; methinks he hath given  bld a
Challenge; what will he say to all the former things mentioned? and what evil had Circumcision in it, or the Passover, or Sacrificing, or New-Moons, and the Sabbath days, or what tendency had they to Evil, but rather were good for the end they were ordained, to be Signs and Types, and Figures of holy things to come, like a Swearing was among the rest, what-ever A. S. say or Argue; and yet when the substance of the good things was to come to them that had believed, and received him who was sum of all; the Apostle said, Gal. 5.2, 3. If you be Circumcised Christ profits you no∣thing; after he was offered up: And Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. You observe new-Moons, and Holy days and Sabbaths: And these things that were once as really good as ever Swearing was, considering the End wherefore they were enjoyn∣ed, and these things were never Evil in themselves, yet the Apostle reck∣oned them beggarly Rudiments, and told them, they had begun in the Spi∣rit, and now sought to be made perfect through the Flesh; and so stood in doubt of them that his labour had been in vain, and thereof if A. S. or any other will needs uphold Swearing, because commanded to the Jews, (before the Seed Christ was revealed) I say he is, Gal. 5.34.) a debter to the whole Law; and is as much bound to keep it in all other points as this, or else he is a Transgressour, and is one of those that would be laying Yoaks upon the Disciples Necks, unto whom they were never intended, for if the Cere∣monies, and Rights and outward observations, which properly did belong to the Jewish Church and State, to observe till the fulness of time, when the partition Wall should be broken down, and the Jews and Gentiles should be one, and one Shepherd and one Fold for them both, (and no longer) and they were never given to the Gentiles to observe; and therefore, for ought I can perceive many would have the gentile-Christians, who never were under the Law, neither the Ordinances of the first Covenant, neither ever given to them, yet they would compell the Christians to live as do the Jews, and to observe their Ordinances; and therefore are greatly to be blamed, Gal. 2.13, 14. Therefore we do not look upon any Swearing to be now a duty under the Gospel among true Christians, truly such, as some Swearing was once under the Law▪ but affirm all Swearing to be now a Sin, because forbid∣den by the positive Law of Christ under the Gospel, who by his Death ended the right of that, and many more legal Rites and Rudiments, which whoso doth observe now as Christians doth it not without Sin, and Guilt, and Superstition; and therefore S. Fisher that faithful Servant of God, (who suffered in Bonds till Death for his Testimony even in this particular) saith well, That that sort of Swearing▪ which was not Sin simpliciter in its Na∣ture under the Law, is now a sin upon the account of Christ's Universal prohibition of all Swearing; who was of Authority to put to an End as he did by his Death unto the Law: And therefore that sort of Service and Worship which stood in outward Observations, which was duty because commanded un∣der the Law, and no Sin▪ in their own Nature, neither were Evil in them∣selves, nor in any respect conducing thereto, as they were observed, but had some single good in them once, and yet who observes them now, as Service of God maketh Christ of so little effect to himself, as that he profits him nothing at all; I hope A. S. will not deny but these things as forbidden in the new Testament, which sometime were not Evil in their own nature, but now are evil when the Substance is come, in whom they all End▪ and
therefore S. F. his Argument is not vain but of force: And yet let A. Smallwood know that there were many things observed and done not only by the Jews, but by them that believed in Christ, and thought well of him, while he was present with them, and yet did not see to the end of those things which were Shadows and Signes, and good, as once commanded, and had no Evilin them, but were Good, as commanded, and for the end for which they were ordain'd, which afterwards in the more full growth and Knowledge in the Mystery of Christianity they came more to be seen through, and that was felt in which they all ended▪ and though Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, and to observe the Ordinan∣ces commanded in that Covenant to fulfill that which was written of him Psal. 40.6. In the Volume of the Book it is written, I am come to do thy will O God: And further he said himself, It behoveth us to fulfill all Righteousness, and that which was commanded: but this was before he was offered up, and was as a middle dispensation betwixt the ending of the Law and publishing of the Gospel; yet howbeit Christ knew it, and did spek of it at some time, that those things that had been sometime commanded, Deut. 12, 5. and were good as they stood related to the end wherefore they were command∣ed, instance the Worship at Jerusalem▪ and the Service there, and the place where God had promis'd to place his Name, yet Christ said, as foreknow∣ing the End of all, the aforesaid Worship which appertained to that Covenant, and therefore he said to the Woman, Joh. 4.23. but the Hour cometh and now is, when the true Worshipers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, for the Father seeks such to Worship him, and 24. vers. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him must Worship him in Spirit and Truth, 2. Cor. 3.17. From hence it is clearly evident (for this was before he was offered up, that then was the time) that neither at Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain of Samaria, it shall be only said, they worship the Father, though at Jerusalem was the place, Deut. 1.1, 2, 5. of Worship formerly, and the Jews held it then, and the Worship was that which was commanded, to wit, Sacrifices, and Offer∣ings, and many other legal Services, which belonged to them to perform according to the command of God, and if Swearing or Oaths was any part of the Service of God, as in that Covenant, as we with A. S. do grant, Deut. 10.20. You shall fear the Lord and serve him, and Swear by his Name, then I say, that Swearing amongst the rest of the Worship is included, but saith Christ, neither at Jerusalem, nor this Mountain, but they that worship shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth▪ so that the time was (then) but came on more afterwards to be fulfilled, that both the place, and the wor∣ship, and Service that belonged to the place, they should no more Worship the Father (with and in)▪ but in the Spirit and in the Truth, and this may be in Answer to that which A. S. makes a great adoe with in his Book, how that Christ said, Swear not at all, it was before his Death▪ and therefore they that Argue, saith he▪ That swearing was prohibited only and ended in Christ's death, cannot plead that all Oaths were prohibited, but that command of Christ, Mat. 5. because he spake this in his Life time, I say o did he this, Jo. 20.21, 22, 23. And he may as well Argue that Christ destroyed the place of Worship at Jerusalem, and the Worship also, and came not to fulfill it as he saith he did, and why? but because he spoke this before he was Cruci∣fied, and so did he, Swear not at all, and why may not A.S. conclude with us that this is a commodious place to interpret and explain Christ's mean∣ing
in those words? in the 5th. Mat. 23, and 24. and so the Words may truly be understood thus, ye have heard that it hath been said of old time, thou shalt not forswear thy slf, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, Exod▪ 20.7. and Deut. 5.11. but the Hour cometh and now is, (when I say unto you) that say more then the Law hath said, Swear not at all, neither y Heaven nor by the Earth but let your Yea be yea, and your Nay nay, for whatsoever is more then these cometh of Evil; and yet whatever may or can be said A. S. will needs conclude, That all Swearing is not forbidden, and why? because it hath been the praice of holy Men, and also an Angel, this Argument is of lit∣tle force, so was it the practice of holy Men to offer Sacrifice, and burn Incense, and as for the Swearing of the Angel, Dan. 12. and Revel. 10.6. to prove the lawfulness of some Swearing, these have been answered, over and over, and over again, though A. S. will take no notice of it, though I perceive he hath read the Arguments that have been used as Answers to these things, though he will not seem to take notice, nor to reply to con∣fute the Arguments, but rather minds his own, and to assert what may seem to mke for his purpose, as to the matter he hath taken in Hand, but as for good Men's Swearing, and the Angel's Swearing, if their Example would utifie the lawfulness of Swearing, yet they could not be any presi∣dent to us, who are under the Gospel of the Son, that is greater then the An∣gels, (by the dispensation of whom) the Law for Oaths, Tythes, offerings, oblations, and other legal Rights, and Rudiments were given, which Son also all the Angels of God are bid to Worship; for the Apostle saith, Hebr. 2.5. For unto the Angels hath he not put into subjection the World to come, but that is committed unto the Son, under whose Ministration and subjection we are, who said, Let your Yea be yea, and you nay nay, and speak the Truth, and do the Truth, and bear witness to the Truth, who said, Learn of me, and these things we have learned of him unto whom all Power is committed, for he is counted Hebr. 3.3. more worthy of Glory then Moses, though Mo∣ses was faithful in his House as a Servant, but Christ as a Son▪ which is that great Prophet that Moses Prophesied of▪ which all are to hearken unto, with whom the Father is well pleased, being made so much better then the Angels, Hebr. 1.4. as he hath y Inheritance obtained a more Excellent Name then they, vers. 5. for unto which of the Angels said he at any time thou art my Son, this day I have begotten thee? vers 6. Again when he bringeth the first egotten into the World, he saith let all the Angels of God Worship him; of the Angels he saith, he makes them minstrng Spirits, and a Flame of Fire, but unto the Son he saith, thy Throne oh God is forever and ever, the Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, for if the Words spoken by Angels wer stedfast, and every Trans∣gression received a just recompence of reward, how shall they escape (Hebr. 2.3.) who do not only neglect the command of Christ, but labour to pervert, through their Strengh of their own reason the ministration of the Son, who is the sum and substance of all Shadowy and Typical Ministrations; and therefore A. S. and all concerned look o it who would introduce Judaism and the Mosaical Observations upon the Neck of Christs Disciples, and as Laws in his Kingdom, and whether would not this prefer the Servant be∣fore the Son, yea or nay, and his Ministration before the Ministration of the Son, though the one is not against the other, but the one pointing at the other, and in the latter the first is fulfilled, the Truth declared, the Truth
spoken, the Truth lived in, and the Truth confessed in every matter where∣in any Christian is concerned, which is the sum and the matter, which all Oaths in their highest and greatest Ordination could or can effect. In the 40th. page of his Book he saith, our Saviour saith Amen, Amen, 24. times in John's Gospel, which he saith, St. Ambrose will needs have to amount unto an Oath; and he cites Apoc. 3. These things saith the Amen, compares it with Isa. 65.16. where he concludes, that Amen seems either to be a Name or an Epithete of God, and this he sayes, Is the Opinion of our Church in the Homi∣ly against Swearing, that our Saviour did swear divers times; and further sayes, it cannot be denyed that God himself swore, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent; and so concludes, that Christ forbad not all Swearing: Unto this Bp. Gauden though he straines and scrues very hard as A. S. doth to make all things to bend to their inclination will needs have Amen, or verily▪ verily, to be an Oath: Doctor Gauden in his citation of Capellus out of Rabby Johnas, sayes, In veritate, forma jurandi apud Judeos; but he con∣cludes doubtfully, and sayes, It is only the next degree unto an Oath; but A.S. thinks, He hath put it out of dubt with his reason and his Authors, that verily, verily, is an Oath, which if it were true this would only prove Swearing lawful in Sermons, and not in Controversies, which is the great good end he so much pleads for, and if this were true would serve his turn. The Magistrates exacting Oaths he seems to prove out of the Mosaical Law, and the Priest's Swearing lawfully out of Paul's Epistles and Christ's Sermons, but this his covering is too short, and is but trifling in the weighty things of God, not distinguishing betwixt the first Covenant and the second, and the Ordinances thereof; for the first he hath no Adversary, viz. that they did Swear though never exacted under Penalties, the second we conclude to be no Oath, viz. Amen, Amen, or verily, verily, which is no more then truly, truly, I say unto you; and if this be an Oath, why hath it not, and why is it not accepted as such? for we have said more then this, and can do in Truth, which we look upon to be far from amounting to an Oath, and yet it would never be received as such, which Argues plainly that what S. F. and R. H. hath said, though A. S. quarrel with it, that surely the Ma∣gistrates in England do not believe the Priests Doctrine, for if they did, why are so many sentensed to perpetual Imprisonment, with confiscation of all Lands and Goods, to the ruinating of many poor Wives and Children, which A. S. knows little of? and for ought I know such a discourse as this may add affliction to their Bonds, and misery to their Sufferings, and yet these have never been received; as if we say, verily, verily, or truly, truly, or God is our Witness, or we speak the Truth in God's presence; yet notwith∣standing this would never give satisfaction to any Magistrate in any Judi∣cature that ever we knew or heard of in England; and though he tells us of I. Penington, how that he gave satisfaction, and that it found ac∣ceptance with the Court▪ and also to the King: We are not ignorant of what I. P. hath written, which is wholsome, just, and good, and sound, and condescendingly as a Christian Man could do as about the premisses to pa∣cifie & satisfie all whom it concerned▪ that they might not proceed in such a rigorous manner against the truly Conscientious, and so in letting them know what we could do, and what we could not do, yet notwithstanding what ever any might seem to own as sufficient in private, we never found
it in publick, or in any case of concernment, but rather they knew before∣hand what would ensnare us, have set the snare, and run us into it; but notwithstanding all this that A. S. will have to be Oaths, as God is Wit∣ness, and I speak the Truth in Christ; and verily, verily, it will not serve, for he says, The Law will not allow of it, for inferiour Magistrates are sworn, he says, to act according to Law, and the Law prescribes in what manner, and with what formality Oaths shall be taken; and therefore the Magistrates are not at li∣berty to accept thereof, because they are tyed up to the Rules of the Law: as I said before, seeing that Oaths are a matter of great concernment unto many, it had been a more necessary Discourse for A. S. to have told the Magistrates, that these things in Testimony which were ready to be given had been suf∣ficient, and that they should not so much have stood upon the formality, seeing that which answered the substance of the Law was not denyed, though we except against the formality which is now used, and hath no ex∣ample or president in the Scripures of Truth as they are used; and there∣fore let A. S. tell the Rulers, that the Rules of the Law in this case are too strict, and the Penalty exceeds the Transgression far; as for a Man for not holding up his Hand, or laying it upon a Bible, and Kissing it, and saying after a Clark or a Cryer, I swear, and the like needless Ceremonies, which are not without (at least) a shew of Evil in them, yet for not doing and observing these Formalities, though those things which A. S, and others calls Swearing, we have condescended unto; yet it's reckoned as insuffici∣ent, though themselves say, it is an Oath, yet it is not called so, nor account∣ed so, except the aforesaid needless trifles be observed, and is not this a hard thing, and far from Equity, Justice, and Reason, that a Man should be exposed to so great a Penalty as Confiscation of Lands and Goods, and perpetual Imprisonment, for want of observing of these trifling, groundless, needless Ceremonies and Formalities, wich is not at all beseeming Christians; and whether the Law had not need to be rectified in this Case, which exposeth so many to so great suffering, which we in Conscience do except against as well as Oaths, and see that the Penalty far exceeds the Crime, if it were any; but we look upon it to be none at all, but rather a duty incumbent upon Christians to keep to yea and nay; or that which amounts to it in all their Communication both publick and private, and not to Swear at all, but to abide in Christ's Doctrine, and walk after the Primitive Christians ex∣ample, to testifie the Truth and not to Swear: And as for Amen, Amen, ve∣rily, verily, is no more then truly, truly, and is no more then an ardent, and a fervent speech from the Heart of him that speaketh, wherein he would be believed, or it is Truth from which and in which he speaks; and as for comparing Amen with the 65. of Isa. and 16. where he is called the God of Truth; this proves nothing at all, he is called the God of Truth in op∣position to false Gods, which were Lyes; and in opposition to the Heathen∣ish Gods▪ which were not true Gods, which had Eyes and saw not▪ &c. and could not save; he might as well say, when Wisdom, Holiness, Righte∣ousness, or Immortality is named or mentioned, that therefore it is an Oath, as when Truth is spoken, for these are as much epithetes of God as truly  Truth; and though your Church in a Homily against Swearing, do say, That Christ did often Swear, because he said, Verily, we judge you have con∣cluded upon too slender a Ground: And as for Psal. 110. The Lord hath
Sworn and will not Repent: It is not denyed though the Lord Swore once, yea more then once by himself; this was in condescension to the State of Man in weakness and unbelief; and as to the State of the Jews, Gal. 3.19. before the Seed was revealed, which was the Substance of all Figures, and Gods Example of Swearing is no example for us now to imitate, and was in no wise a confirming of that old legal Ceremony of Oaths, as a practice legi∣mate to his Saints forever, as A. S. would make us believe it was, for his Oath, viz. (God's) ended in Christ, in whom all the Promises confirmed by Oath, were yea, and in him Amen, was also to end all Strife between him and Men, and to put an end to all Strife and Oaths also that are among Men to end Strife; Ambrose saith upon that 110. Psal. Let him then swear who cannot Repent of his Oaths; a little aftter the same Ambrose saith, Do not imitate him in swearing whom you cannot imitate in performing; and indeed the principal solution he gives is not to Swear at all: And Theophilus upon the place in Controversie whom A. S. says, was not cautelous enough, and it seems among the rest of the Fathers that A. S. sets as judge of, he saith, Learn hence that under the Law it was not Evil for one to swear, but since the coming of Christ it is Evil, as is Circumcision, and in sum, what ever is Judaical, for it becomes a Child to suck but not a man: So that it appears he amongst the rest of the Fathers did not only declare against Oaths in general or private Communication, but also distinguishes betwixt the first Covenant and the second, and the Ordinances thereof; and though the holy Ghost bear witness that both An∣gels and Men, yea, and good Men, and the Creator himself in that first Covenant did Swear, so that A. S. concludes That is not morally Evil of its own Nature; In the first we shall not much quarrel nor dispute as under the Law, but that which was obliging then, as by command, it is not always obliging, but Christ the end of the Law for Righteousness said, Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more under the Gospel (then amounts to this) comes of Evil; therefore there is no necessity to put any o∣ther sence of Christ's Words then this Universal prohibition of all. Swear∣ing as under the Gospel, (seeing that speaking the Truth, confessing the Truth, declaring the Truth) and nothing but the Truth in any matter wherein any Christian is concerned either in respect of God, or a man's Neighbour, this Answers the very Substance of the Law, and the very end & purpose thereof, as ever an Oath did among the Jews in the first Instituti∣on; forasmuch as speaking the Truth acknowledgeth God's Omnisciency and presence, and Power, and Wisdom; secondly, it doth any Office to any Neighbour, as in bearing witness to any Truth, and again to find out any Transgressour, or Transgression; and this is done, may be done, and ought to be done by all true Christians; and therefore no necessity of that formal Ceremonious way of Swearing as under the Law, neither is there any necessity for seeking any other sence of Christ's Words and the Apo∣stles Words, Swear not at all by Heaven or Earth, or any other, seeing all the main ends and good ends, & good purposes are Answered in the full, which the Law in the full Latitude and morality thereof did require, or for which it was given. His sixth Argument is, That either these Words, Swear not at all, must be interpreted as not to forbid any Oath though taken upon just accasion, or else
Paul never knew the meaning of this Text, or else contrary to his knowledge, and that upon good deliberation he acted against it, and that in thee very writings wherein we all believe that he was infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost; for his Oaths, saith A. S. are upon record, 1. Thes. 2.5. God is Witness; see Rom. 1.9. Now to call God to Witness is the very substance of an Oath saith A. S. and as Au∣stin tells him, and he sayes, He hath not read of any of a contrary opinion except some Phanaticks, which if they would yield to  much as Paul saith, God is Wit∣ness of the Truth of their assertions, it might be wished out of condescension to their weakness, that they might be dispensed withal, if the Law would give leave as to the external formality of an Oath. Answ. What A. S. will call a just occasion I know not, it appears to me he would have a large compass, and a larger then the most contenders a∣gainst Christ's Doctrine that we have met with, or what he will account a just occasion I know not, though otherwise he seems to condemn sometime needless and vain Oaths in ordinary Communication, though I know some without reflection upon A. S. who use them too to frequently, and are not only Members but Pastours so called of the Church of England, and though he seems in his Discourse here & there to be against customary and vain Oaths, yet for all that what he calls a ust occasion upon some Ground, some calls it a needful occasion when they are called before a Magistrate and some when any business is in Controversie betwixt man and Man clls it a just occasion, where sometimes I have seen a Curate administer that which he called an Oath upon a Book, what Ground h had I suspect ei∣ther from Commandment, or example of Primitive Ministers, (is certain he had none) but it may be A. S. will conclude it was upon just occasion, but what COMPASS he will have for his jst Occasion is doubtful, seeing he hath put no Termination or end to it; but for ought I can perceive would leave liberty for every Man to exact an Oath upon a∣nother when he would, and call it a just occasion, and account it a point of duty in the other to obey, even in ordinary Communication. And as for St. Paul we deny thy Argument, as that he never knew the meaning of this Text of Christ's prohibition; secondly, that in his Writings he acted con∣trary to his knowledge▪ and upon set deliberation; for though God was his Witness whom he served with his Spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my Prayers. Also, that which A. S. calls an Oath▪ 1 Thes. 2.5. For neither at any time used we flatter∣ing Words as ye know for a Cloak of Coetouness, God is witness. Though we know and infallibly believe with A. S. that he was infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, when he published the Gospel of Christ among the Gentiles, and wrote both unto the Jews, and to the Gentiles, who believed, that his calling God to witness, was not any Oath, neither was there any necessiy or just occasion, whatever A. S. my call just occasion we cannot, for he hath left such a great compass for himself to turn in though here and thre he seem to disallow of customary Oaths and frequent Oaths▪ yet notwith∣standing his Discourse rather tends to an allowance of Swearing frequently and unnecessarily; for we reckon it to be a piece of ordinary Communi∣cation for a Christian Minister to write a Letter of admonition▪ or Exhortati∣on▪ or an Epistle unto the believing Hearers▪ and that there is no necessity of Oaths in such a Discourse; for what-ever A. S. sayes this would make the Apostle guilty of frequent, and unnecessary, and common Swearing, which
we are far from believing; forasmuch as they did believe through the word of Life declared by the Spirit of God in him, neither through his Epistles written, being assisted by the Holy Ghost, they were not like to believe him for Swearing if he had Sworn; but saith A. S. If his words had really been believed which he spoke and wrote, what occasion would there have been for him to have written so to the Roman's, Rom. 9.1. I say the Truth in Christ, I Lye not. The Apostle knew what occasion he had to speak these Words, and the occasion was this, that the Jews sought to be justified by the Righteousness of the Law and by the Works thereof, and would needs look upon themselves as the Children of God, because they were of the stock of Abraham according to the Flesh, but the Apostle knew and also gave them to understand that the Children of the Promise were counted for the Seed; and again, for they are not all Israel which are of Israel, Rom. 9.6, 7, 8. And thus he spake Truth unto them, as it was revealed by Christ, whom the Father had revealed in him, and why might he not say, I speak the Truth in Christ, seeing that Christ was in him, and he in him? I Lye not, my Conscience also bears me Witness in the Holy Ghost, he might also as well say▪ that Paul Swore by his Conscience, seeing that he took it for a witness; away, away, with such perverting and straining of the Scripture beyond and beside the mind of the Holy Ghost, for God is witness and I speak the Truth in Christ, they are no more then arden and Zelous, or fervent expressions, as the Spirit of God at several times did stir up in his Heart both to speak and write, for the end that they unto whom he spoke or wrote might believe; and there∣fore we conclude not as A. S. would needs have it, that the Apostle spoke these fervent words unnecessarily, for we know and see his end and pur∣pose was good, and therefore he spoke with fervency, and with boldness the Spirit of the Lord bering witness in his Conscience that he spoke the Truth, which we are fr from believing; is either juration or abjuration, and for ought can be perceived by A. S's disdainful Spirit all that do dissent from him in his Opinion he calls Phanaticks, and Paul shall hardly go free, nor divers of the ancient Fathers, as, Origen, Chrysostome, Jerome, Theophi∣la, and others, who denyed not only Swearing in private Conversation, but to Swear at all; but now these must be called Phanaticks, who dissent from all men but themselves, by A. S. and such as he, who Sail with Wind and ide, and exalt and applaud that which hath praise among men, and hath not the praise of God; and so the last of all he makes this Conclusion, that so help me God, is the most certain expression of an Oath; which form of Words that though he count them certain, we find not either under the Law or under the Gospel, and I look upon▪ it mre as a piece of flattery in A.S. because this is the Form and the Cstom which  clled Swearing, which is in use in this Nation, and it's stranger to us that they will reckon this so great a piece of peculi Service, which is incommunicable to any Creature but only to God, whenas indeed we never find it written or com∣manded, either among the Jews, or commended or used amongst all the writings of Christ and the Apostles that hath relation to Christianity; In∣deed I remember that I have read that in the days when the Pope's Authori∣ty was in full Power here in England, how that the Chancellour then of England said to one of John Wickliff's followers being brought before him, in
Examination he said unto him, Lay thy Hand upon the Book thou Heretick and Swear, so help me God and holy doom: An old Superstitious Popish Form I look upon it to be, and hath no consistance with an Oath in its true matter and Form under the Law, when i was commanded; and for ought I see A. S. will rather take part with the Church of Rome and her Members, who Persecuted, rather then Wickliff that famous Reformer, who had his Bones taken up and burned 41. Years after his Decease, and his Books, and these Articles condemned by the Council of Costance, who also burned John Hus, and Jerome of Prague for holding John Wickliff's Opinions, which was, That all Oaths under the Gospel be unlawful. I say A. S. might have been more modest then with the Council of Constance condemn them for Error, see∣ing they were the only People in their Age and time that opposed, and suf∣fered for opposing the Church of Rome in the Apostacy, seeing that they are fain to own them if they look for any Reformation before Luther to be their Witnesses against the Church of Rome, which I have heard many Protestants say, that they were on their part against the Church of Rome; and though A. S. tells us of a Generation of People, quos non persuadebis, e∣tiam si persuaseris, who as they will not be perswaded, so they will not be counselled, who will have nothing else to be the formality of an Oath but by God; but this he sayes only of his own Head, except he knew some People that we know not of; for we say▪ to Swear the Lord liveth as an Oath, and again, as the Lord lives is an Oath, or by the Lord that lives forever and ever is an Oath; and yet we must needs deny that Paul Swore in the 1 Cor. 15.1. when he said, by your rejoycing I die daily: And we ne∣ver said A. S. mistook himself in saying that, by, as the only mark and Character of an Oath; and if Austin said upon these words of Paul as A. S. tells us, per vestram gloriam juratio est, upon Paul's words, I suspect his judgment, and therefore shall not so much regard it: But A. S. seems not to be at Unity in his Book with himself notwithstanding all his raveling out where he seems in his 41. page to dislike of Nicholas Fuller's Judgment, viz. that there is no Oath where God is not interposed; and yet in the 56. page he saith, That the Substance of an Oath consists in the attestation of God, and in the 89. page he saith, that Christ answering to the high Priest, I am, and thou hast said, is an Oath. And in the 91. page it was enough that Christ denyed not to Swear, and from this he imagines that he did Swear; and when we enquire what the Oath was▪ it amounts but to this, thou hast said I am; and where was the attestation of God here named, or mentioned, or spoken on by Christ? were his Words any more then his own Doctrine which he taught before, Let your yea be Yea, and your nay▪ Nay? when the high Priest said, Art thu the King of the Jews? he answered I am; and is this any more then yea, though not in the same Syllables; and Mat. 26.63. I adjure thee to tell  whether thou art the Son of God or not? and he answered, thou hast said: And is this any more then yea, or I am▪ or it is Truth. But indeed if one should traduce A. S. in his Discourse and of his definition of an Oath, it is so uncertain one shall hardly know what to pitch upon to be his Judgment, sometime it is this, and sometime it is that, and som time it is neither this nor that, sometime he says, It is an Oath where God is interposed, one while an Oath consists in the ATTESTATION of God▪ another while it consists in saying truly, truly, and sometimes, I call God to witness is an Oath; and sometimes thou hast said is an Oath, sometime because God
is named in a Sentence, therefore he concludes it must be an Oath, other∣whiles when he is not named it must be an Oath; and thus he twines up and down, leaving People in the dark, and leading them after his Imagi∣nations. And I shall conclude the Answer to this reason, and neither im∣pute ignorance nor wickedness to the great Apostle, nor conclude, that Christ's words as he saith, doubtless the Apostle did, must be understood in a limited Sense, and limited only to Creatures, and not to all Swearing; and why so? but because the Apostle said, God is witness; and I speak the Truth in Christ, which is no contradiction of Christ's prohibition, Swear not at all. His seventh Argument is this, If some Swearing be enjoyned in the third Commandment, then all Swearing is not forbidden by Christ in these words▪ Swear not at all, because he came not to destroy the Law, but some Swearing is there en∣joyned, or else the Law written by the Finger of God in Tables of Stone cannot be vindicated from imperfection; and therefore in this Negative precept the affir∣mative must needs be included, thou shalt Reverence the Name of the Lord and Swear by it, whensoever it is not vain but necessary, which is required by a law∣ful Magistrate for the Glory of God▪ and for maintaining of Peace, punishing Offenders, and ending of Controversies, and all these are necessary Ends but not attainable, at least not so well by any expedient, yet put in Practice as by inter∣position of Oaths, so it cannot reasonably be believed, that Christ would forbid them being of such important ue. Reply. The substance of this is answered before, but however A. S. how he can make this third Commandment, Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, to prove the continuation of Swearing under the Gospel among Christians we do not see, If Bishop Gaudens Words be true (as they are) who sayes, A true Christian's Oath is needless, his word be∣ing as firm as it, page 41. and an evil Man's Oath is worthy of no more credit then a Lyar, pag. 17. Since upon that account whosoever Swears by the Name of God Swears in vain and to no purpose, whether he be a true Man, or one deceitful, his word amounting to as much as his Oath: And why A. S. mentions the third Commandment to prove Swearing lawful under the Gospel except for the morality of it, which he looks upon Christ came not to destroy, and doth he look that every Letter & Syllable of all the ten Com∣mandments is so moral in all respects unchangeable & uncapable of any an∣nihilation by Christ's coming? he much forgets himself; for all these things contained in the first Table are not so moral or perpetual without some ce∣remoniality and subjection to alteration by Christ's coming▪ as he imagins if he had but remembred the fourth Commandment the next unto it, Re∣member that thou keep the holy Sabbath day, which then was the very 7th day of the Week which God had Sanctified, was but a Type and Sign, and Shadow, and Figure, and a Ceremony of the 7th. day of the World's rest from its Labour, and of the everlasting Sabbath as I said before, Heb. 4. and I might as well Argue if the 7th. day of the Week was commanded in the fourth Commandment, then the seventh Day is not prohibited, nei∣ther by Commandment, example, or practice of Christ, the Apostles or Primitive Christians; and I might add this as a reason, because Christ came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it; and further I might add the 7th. day was enjoyned in the 4th. Commandment, (and they used to call
it as moral as the third) and therefore it ought to be so under the Gospel, or else the Law written in Tables of Stone cannot be vindicated from im∣perfection, and what would all my arguing prove, even as much as A. S. his arguing, the continuation and necessity of Oaths from the third Com∣mandment, and that is nothing at all; and the Law of God needs not A. S. nor any Vindication, it is Perfect, and endures forever, Psal. 19.7. and the Ceremonies, and Types, and Shadows that were joyned with, and unto the Substance of the Law, do neither add nor detract from its perfection, but it is the same in it self forever; and though we cannot own Swearing in that▪ Ceremonious way as the Jews did use it till the Sed came, unto whom the Law and the Prophets bore witness; yet we do not make void the third Commandment, we take not his Name in vain, but Reverence it, and speak well of it, and Sanctifie it in our Hearts; and as the Apostle said, Do we make void the Law through the Preaching of Faith? God forbid. So do we make void the Law, or the Perfection of it, by speaking the Truth, and bearing witness to the Truth; though as I said, we cannot own those Typical Ceremonious ways of Swearing as it was in the first Covenant; nay, it is established, and the third Commandment is established, for he that speaks the Truth and bears witness in and from the Truth, honours God's Name, and Reverences it, forasmuch as he is called the God of Truth, and as we have said, being lawfully called before a Magistrate to bear Testimo∣ny in any thing wherein the Glory of God, or our Neighbour is concern∣ed, or the decision of Controversie, seeing that true Testimony is a medi∣um that concerns as much to that purpose now as Swearing did under the Law, therefore we have still been and are ready to answer all these neces∣sary ends, and as well; and this is as good and expedient to be put in pra∣ctice among Christians as interposition of Oaths, enjoyned by God in the first Covenant, and far more Evangelical, and therefore shall conclude with that of Jerome, The Gospel Truth admits not of an Oath. His eighth Argument is, That Christ did never any things without some Ground of reason, but no reason can be shewed, why all manner of Swearing should be forbidden in a due manner, and upon a just and necessary occasion, and there∣fore we may well believe that such Swearing was neither here or any where else forbidden. Reply. We shall not much dissent or disagree about terms with A. S. that Christ did never any thing without some Ground or Reason, but yet we must deny his Conclusion, that no Reason can be given why all manner of Swearing should be forbidden; first of all, there was a time since Man had a being in this Creation when he was in the Image of God, and stood in the Covenant of God, when there was no Oath, neither any necessity thereof, Man being endued with Power from God, which was placed in him, so that he was in a capacity to fulfill, obey and serve, and believe his Maker without an Oath; for unbelief or Sin had not entred, and this was before the Fall, Gen. 1.26, 27. Secondly, Christ the unspeakable gift of God, who is the Mediator of the everlasting Covenant, yea, the Covenant is self, who is given for a Leader to the People, and who is made a Propitiation for Sin and Transgression, to end both Sin, Transgression, and Unbelief, which was the cause of the Addition of the Law, who leads to the beginning
again, all that truly do believe, and are worthy to be called true Christi∣ans, or by the Name of Christ to have Union with God again, in that Life, Power, Truth, Righteousness and Wisdom, in which the Image of God truly consists which was before Sin and Transgression, and before the Law which was added because of it, which was commanded four hundred and thir∣ty Years after the Promise was made, Gal. 3.17. Thirdly, After Sin was en∣tred, and Death by Sin, an unbelieving part got up in all the Sons of Adam, so that they could not believe God nor his Promises, and yet such was his love unto Mankind, considering the State into which they were plunged for confirmation of his Word unto Man, he Swore by himself, this was the Lord's condescension unto their low and unbelieving Estate all that time, and no way exemplary for Christians (truly such) who are come into the Faith, and to the Truth in it self, who do believe that all the Promises are fulfilled in Christ, yea, and Amen, who is the Author of Faith and of eternal Salvation to them that believe, Heb. 9.12. who prohibited that by his com∣mand, Mat. 5.23. which sometimes was permitted, yea, and command∣ed, yea, and added because of Transgression, and for which the Law and the command for Oaths was only added (which he did not destroy) be∣cause he leads from under the Power of that which the Law came against (which is just and good, and Holy) and the Seed fulfills it, and hath Uni∣ty with it, and with him who is the Judge and Law-giver, and Saviour of all that do believe in him from Sin and Transgression. Fourthly, At that time when the Law was given forth at Mount Sina, Exod. 19.20. general∣ly all the Nations were given to Idolatry, and to serve and Worship strange Gods, as Baal, Ashtaroth, Chemosh, Rimphan, and many others, as the Gods of Samaria, which were said to be according to the number of their Cities, and their Idols were called the Sin of Samaria; Amos saith, They Swear by the Sin of Samaria, that did say, thy God O Dan lives; and the manner of Bar∣sheba lives, even they shall fall and never rise again, Amos 7.14. Which was no other then the Calves which Jeroboam set up at Dan and Bethel, which they feared, Worshipped and Swore by; therefore God having chosen a peculiar People to himself to Worship and serve him, and honour him, who should not walk after the manner of the rest of the Nations who knew not God; he commanded them to serve him, and Worship him, and Swear by his Name, as Jerome saith well, to keep them from Idolatry, and that they should not Swear by the Gods of the Heathen▪ as the rest of the Nations did round about; yet still this must be considered that this State of the mi∣nority of the Jewish Church, wherein God gave them Ordinances suitable to their State, but it doth not follow, neither can it be reasonably conclu∣ded that these Ordinances were to be perpetually binding unto all future Ge∣nerations▪ especially when Christ the Seed uno whom all the Promises are, in whom the Law is fulfilled, and in whom the former Ministrations end, that his Disciples and true Christians should always be bound to these things once commanded, especially seeing Christ their Master, in whom the Father is well pleased hath prohibited this about Swearing, and also did Prophesie of the time to come after his Resurrection and his Ascension, that those Visible things which were as a Ministration for a time, should end as to the outward exercise and Typical and Figurative appearance of them, and that all these things should be revealed within by the Spirit and felt in
the Power of God in all that did believe, when the Holy Ghost should be poured forth, and the Promise of the Father be made manifest. Fifthly, Now considering that the Name of God is believed in, and he is confessed unto, and his Christ, and that there is not that Idolatry (especially out∣ward) as there was in the Nations before and after the Flood, especially in that which is called Christendom, though we dare not conclude that all are Israel that are of Israel, or that all are Christians that have the Name, yet generally I say, the Name of God and his Christ is acknowledged and wor∣shipped, and not Idols and false God's; therefore there is no necessity of Swearing by the Name of God, as there was at the time of the giving forth of the Law, but especially among them that the Father will reckon as tru∣ly his subjects and Disciples of Christ, who are partakers of his divine Nature, here is not that necessity among them, for they through the Law being dead to it, it hath no more Power over them; and therefore no rea∣son that they should be kept as under Tutors and Governours, seeing that the Age and Ages is come, which the Apostle spoke of, Eph. 2.7. wherein Christ is revealed the hope of Glory, and whom he makes free are free indeed, Joh. 8.32, 36. Sixthly and lastly, The command of Oaths was given for the ending of Strife and Controversies among Men, Heb. 6. which hath relation to the Law, and to the State of the Jews, and their Political proceedings, the Apo∣stle brings but that in as an instance or an example, and it is but A. S. his Groundless supposition that it seems it was used in the Apostles time, the Apostle speaking of an Oath only as among Men, and not of Saints, who as concerning Strife the occasion of Swearing, and consequently concern∣ing Swearing should not walk as Men, 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 3. but A. S. should consider this as every one ought, that when men that have been once in Strife and Contention, and Variance, come once into Christ, and to be in him New Creatures, (Christians) to walk no more as Carnal, not as Men, but as men of God, and as spiritual, and as true Saints and Christi∣ans, they come both out of Strife and Swearing, which was added to end Strife; and whatever A. S. may conclude, we say these and divers more are great and weighty Reasons wherefore Christ did prohibit all Swear∣ing, and puts it out of use and date, and no necessity of it as among true Christians, seeing that every true saying or Testimony is equivalent with an Oath. His ninth Argument is, That either these Words Swear not at all must not be extended to a total prohibition of Swearing, or else Christ thereby gave a new moral command; but Christ gave no new moral command, for that had been con∣trary to God's express will, thou shalt not add unto the word which I command; and besides he ordained no new Law in the matter of the 6th. and 7th. Command∣ments; and shall we think that he who vindicated the other Commandments from the leud depravations of Men, hath abrogated this only, as though it had not been framed by the same Wisdom▪ and acted by the same God? and further, Christ's op∣position is only against the Pharisaical Mis-interpretations of the Law, and if only so, then Christ did not forbid such Oaths as were lawfully before enjoyned. Reply. What ever A. S. calls a new moral command, sure I am, he com∣manded that which was more exact then the Law, so that Doctor Gauden
himself sayes, That Christ gave many singular precepts of more eminent dili∣gence, Patience, Charity, Mortification, Self-denyal, Sincerity, and the per∣fection of obedience required now under the Gospel is above whatever the Letter of the Mosaical Law seemed to exact, or by the Pharisaical interpretation were taught by the Jews, &c. in which he speaks the Truth: it was said in the 21. of Exod. and 42 of Levit. an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but in Mat. 5.39. Christ commanded that which the Law had not spoken of and not only a further thing, but another thing, But I say unto you that ye resist not ill, but whoever shall smite thee on the right Cheek turn to him the other also, ver. 40, 41. And if a Man sue thee at Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; where said the Law this, And whosoever shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with him twain; where did ever the Law of Moses command this? and though the Law said, Levit. 19. Thou shalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine Enemy; which he saith, was but a Pharisaical innovation, which if it be, I query of A. S. where in the Law it is written, Love thine Enemy? and as was said before, whether did not Israel fight with their Enemies, and kill them, and destroy them, and whether they had not a command so to do, yea or nay? as in Deut. 2.24. chap. 3.3. Numb. 21.23, 24.25. Josh. 10.19, 23. And whether this be not another thing that Christ saith, ver. 44. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you, &c. But it is manifest that in the second Covenant un∣der the Gospel that a more Evangelical and exact obedience then was ex∣prest in the Letter of the Law, which so far as it was Typical, was only a Temporary dispensation; for as I said before the Letter of the Law of Mo∣ses permitted to be avenged on Enemies, Egyptians, Amalekites, &c. And I hope that A. S. will not conclude that they killed them in love to them, and they might be avenged and take an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, whose Gospel in other points which the Law had not said forbids and condemns rash, anger, Lust after Women, Polygamie, divorce, ex∣cept for Fornication, and yet it was indulged and connived at as under the Law, yet the Lord saith, by the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2.16. He hateth putting away; while the Letter condemned no more but actual murder, and Adultery, indulging and conniving Polygamie and divorce: And though under the Law, Stripe for Stripe, Wound for Wound was permitted; but under the Gospel resist not Evil, avenge not, forbear, forgive, for the whole Law of Moses was given by the dispensation of Angels in the Hand of that Mediator for a time; and so some Swearing and such Swearing as even by God, was used in order to end Strife, where it was yet standing, yet Christ the Mediator of a better Covenant, in whose Hand the Law is now unto all Christians, he forbad not only that which the Law allowed, and indulged, connived at and commanded in divers things, as is manifest in this fifth of Matthew, where he prohibits all Swearing; so that it is evi∣dent that Christ doth not only reprove the false gloses, and the abusive loose interpretations of the Law which they allowed, but even divine in∣dulgence dispensed with and connived at in the things before-mentioned, because of the hardness of their Hearts: And let A. S. or any Man living shew us wherein Christ requires a Righteousness or Perfection that ex∣ceeds that of the Law, for the Law said, Swear not by any Creature but only by God, and for swear not, and if Christ said no more but Swear not by any
Creature, as Heaven, and Earth, and Jerusalem, where is that high State of Perfection, and that Righteousness which exceeds that of the Law, and of the Scribes and Pharisees. And though A. S. will not grant that he ordained a new Law in matter of the 6.th & 7.th Commandments, no more will he grant of the fourth, which I suppose A.S. doth not keep as it was commanded under the Law where e∣ver he will have his dispensation I know not; so to conclude in answer to this, he did more then reprove the erroneous tenets and vicious manners of the Jews, and their false interpretations and glosses which they had gi∣ven upon the Law, but he doth disallow also something which the Law had allowed before, as is proved before, and that he disallowed something yea divers things which the Law had allowed and connived, and indulged, as divers Polygamie, killing Enemies, or in seeking revenge upon them that had done Ill unto us, which the Law allowed as an act of Justice, Deut. 19.21. Eye for eye, Tooth for tooth; but this Christ exhorted unto, Over∣come Evil with good, avenge not, resist not, do good to them that hate you, and Pray for them that despightfully use you, and Persecute you: Likewise the Law, Deut. 42.1, 2. When a Man takes a Wife, and it comes to pass she finds no favour in his Eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her, then let him write her a Bill of Divorcement, and send her out of his House, and when she is departed out of his House, she may go and be another Man's Wife: But Christ saith, Mat. 5.32. who shall Marry her that is divorced, commits Adultery: Which is a clear prohibition of that which the Law allowed, and what A. S. will call this, whether a new moral command, or promulgation of a new Law I know not, but it is evident enough that some things were prohibited by Christ, which the Law commanded, or at least allowed, and therefore we conclude from the 23. and 24. Verses of the 5th. of Matthew, that Christ did prohibit all vain Swearing and unlawful Swearing, which was disal∣lowed before under the Law, but even all Swearing which was command∣ed, or at least permitted under the Law, for the reasons and ends given before, and this will stand as Truth, notwithstanding A. S. his Ar∣gument. His tenth Argument is, That if the hih Priest charged Christ to Swear, and he without exception answered upon Oath, and that some Years after he had said, Swear not at all, from hence follows that when the Magistrate imposeth an Oath, the Person charged to Swear may lawfully answer upon Oath as Christ did, not∣withstanding his prohiition of Swear not at all. Reply. First that was a time when the administration of the first Covenant was not fully ended, for Christ was not yet offered up, and so the high Priest as being a Jew might from the Commandment or permission of the Law as being one that sate in Moses Chair might require Christ to speak upon Oath, as presuming he had Authority so to do, being he looked upon it as a Work of God; and what though it was some Years after Christ had said, Swear not at all; what doth A. S. infer from this, Christ knew that the high Priest and Pharisees were about the work of their Father the De∣vil; and though the high Priest did say, I Adjure, which A. Smallwood
Adjure doth often sig∣nifie to charge or Oblige, by bare Promie, as well as Oath▪ for if the phrase, I adjure thee by God, be a command to Swear by God, then ths would make Acts 19.12, 13. absurd; when the Exorcists did adjure the evil Spirit in the Name of Jesus, (not to Swear) but to come out, or depart ot of the Man. tells us is, I command thee to Swear to us; Christ answered in his own Authority, and in the Pow∣er and Wisdom of the Father; and if he had ans∣wered as taking notice of the high Priests adjuring who was about to Crucifie the Just, which was not the Work of God, neither was jurations or Oaths, ever intended to be instrumental in the Devil's work, then I Argue, that if Christ had answered to his adjuring, knowing the end was to ensnare him the Son of God, then Christ had consented unto his Evil work, which were blas∣phemy to think or speak, and therefore as it was Prophesied of him, he was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, sometimes he opened not his Mouth, the other sometimes he did in the Authority and Power of the Father which was with him, and in him, and though the high Priest charged Christ, By the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of the Living God, Mat. 26.63, 64. Jesus answered, thou hast said, and what is this the Oath that Christ Swear, A. S. tells us before that an Oath was an attestation of God to the Truth of what was said, but now the Words (thou hast said) barely of themselves without any attestation of God is an Oath; if the high Priest had said, art thou Peter, or art thou John that was with Jesus of Gallile, and Peter and John had answered, I am Peter and I am John that was with him; what will A. S. conclude now that Peter and John hath Sworn? away with such perverting and straining, & screwing of the Scriptures from their genuine sense only to uphold that which was ad∣ded because of Transgression; now when Sin & Trangression is finished, the end of Christ's coming is Witnessed to uphold that which Christ came to end, to wit Sin, and also an Oath which was added because of Sin and Un∣belief, and the hardness of their Hearts only to remain till that part was done away, and until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. to wit, the bring∣ing in of everlasting Righteousness, and it cannot be reasonably concluded, that because Christ answered the high Priest, thou hast said, that therefore he took notice of commanding to Swear, or at least approving of his adju∣ration, knowing that he was about an Evil work, and doing the Work of the Devil, which must needs be judged that Christ did neither approve of, nor consent unto, what ever A. S. may say or think, but only in his own Authority spoke the Truth▪ & made a good confession as he did before Pon∣tius Pilate▪ to the Glory of the Father, who had sent him, whose will he came to do: And Luke 22.70. Art thu then the Son of God? and he said unto them, ye say that I am; and Pilate was as much a Magistrate as the high Priest, and he asked▪ Art thou the King of the Jews? and he answered him, and said, thou sayest it: And Herod was as much a Magistrate as either Pilate or the high Priest, and he questioned with him in many Words, but Christ answered nothing▪ so that he did not so much take notice of their Questions or examining or charging, or adjuring as A. S. would make seem of it, but according to the Wisdom and Power of God which was in him spoke, and answered in his own Authority, without taking so much notice of them as he would infer, he knowing what they were going about, though they
had the Name, and bore the title of Magistrates, yet were out of the Power of God (in the Persecuting Nature) which is the Ground and Foundation of all Authority which is of God, but A. S. sayes, Mark 14.62. relates plainly that Christ answered, I am; but yet neither Mark, Luke, nor John take so much notice of the high Priests adjuring, or make so much for A. S. his Argument as he would have them; Mak saith only, Mark 14.61. The high Priest asked him and said unto him, art thou Christ the Son of the bles∣sed, he doth not say, I adjure thee, or I charge thee to Swear unto us, as A. S. would have it; but though Mat. 26.63. say, (I adjure thee to tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of God?) is not much material; for A. S. hath made more matter about it then is to any great or good purpose, but I say he was as much bound to answer Pilate or Herod as the high Priest, and as much directly to one as to another, we see his Answers were not all alike, but I would not have A. S. nor my self neither sit as Judges over Christ's Answers, and squeeze and serue them beyond or contrary to Christs in∣tention; for the sum of the matter is this, thou hast said, I am, and thou say∣est I am a King; and is Christ's answers to the high Priest and Pilate, and no∣thing to Herod; and A. S. might as reasonably have concluded, that the high Priest rent his Cloaths and cryed Blasphemy, not so much at, thou hast said, or I am; as of this the next words, nevertheless I say unto you, ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of the Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; for then the next words are, then the high Priest rent his Cloaths and cryed, Blasphemy; and then A. S. goes on, It was enough that Christ de∣nyed not to Swear, and the sum of all or the most that he can make when he hath twined about with many Circumstances to prove that he did Swear or consented to Caiaph is adjuring, and answered his adjuring, this is all, I am, and thou hast said; and therefore what either may or can be said A. S. hath concluded Christ did Swear; & yet Sect. 27. he tell us, that the essence of Swearing is in calling God to Witness, and how or where did Christ call God to wit∣ness? then this overturns his own Argument, seeing we do not read that Christ saied any more in his answer, then as is aforesaid, I am, and thou hast said; and he sayes, To alledge that Christ Swear not, because he laid not his Hand upon a Book or kissed, or lifted up his Hand is but to trifle, yet he says, that Ceremony is Ancient, as Chrysostome tells him, that it's above 1250. years since; if it be but to trifle, why are so many Conscientious People in bonds this day in England, under a Premunire for these trifles? a very shame to Christianity; for where any or all of these have been denyed, though they have answered the Truth, and the whole Truth, and as much as A. S. calls an Oath, yet this hath been counted insufficient, and we know Ju∣stinian the Emperour, ordain'd the Ceremony, that Men should Swearly the Gospel or Book, and lay their hands thereon and kiss, or the like; and though it be so many Years since it was ordained, as A. S. sayes, this adds nothing to the warrantableness thereof, but Custome is proof enough to such a Cere∣monious Age as this, when Formalities, Ceremonies, Gestures and Po∣stures are more regarded then the power of God and Godliness; and we say such a Ceremony about Swearing is not without the Appearance of evil; for the Bible is a Creature, made up of many Creatures, and laying the Hand, and kissing, and ordering it in such manner is I know looked upon by many to be Swearing by it, and so the most takes it, and this were un∣lawful,
and therefore better to be wholely avoided then so many suffer because thy cannot do it, besides as I said, the evil appearance of it; for it is not any Gospel Institution, but an innovation since the Apostacy entred in; and if God had ever judged any necessity thereof, or that it had ren∣dred an Oath more solemn, the Law would have said something of it, and it was never a practice among the Primitive Christians, and therefore a vain Humane tradition crept in since, which ought to be avoided; and and though A.S. says, to reply that Christ Swore not, (though Caiaphas ad∣jured him is vain) for an examinate is to answer both in matter and Form, according to what is proposed; I say it's A. S. his vain supposition and pre∣sumption without Ground so to judge that Christ Swore, I say sometime he held his Peace, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Pro∣phet of him before, that he should be as a Lamb dumb before the Shearer, as sometime he was, both to the chief Priests and Elders, to Pilate, and to Herod, which were all in some Authority, and sometime he answered them in the Wisdom of God, and sometime he spoke and bore witness to that, and Prophesied unto them, which was not at all either as to the matter or form of the high Priests adjuring, for the very next Words. (but thou hast said) nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven) Mat. 26.64. and therefore these show A. S. his Argument to be frivolous and vain; and Mark saith, the chief Priests accused him of many things, Mark 15.3. but he answered nothing either to their accusations, or took notice of the high Priests adjuring to answer him in matter and form, as A. S. would have it, neither did he look upon himself so oblig'd, but answered sometime, and spoke the Truth alwayes when he spoke, and that which alwayes displea∣sed and dissatisfied the Jews when he answered, and for ought can be per∣ceived by his arguing that every Examinate is to answer directly to every matter and form to any that pretends Power to administer an Oath, or to adjure, he goes about to establish the Popes Inquisition, and create matter, as sometime they did here in England, in the height of the Popes domina∣tion forged matter out of their own wicked Hearts to ensnare the Lambs of Christ, and then to require them to Swear that they might destroy them and accuse them out of their own Mouths, even as the high Priest sought to destroy Christ and to ensnare him, which methinks A. S. hath said too much in Vindication of his adjuring, and will needs have Christ to be of his mind, and at last concludes that Christ Swore, but its but upon his own presumption and supposition, and is more then ever he is able to make e∣vident from what is written. And A. S. tells us over and over again, Swear∣ing was a part of God's Worship, wherein God's wisdom, Power, and justice is ac∣knowledged, and then incommunicable to any Creature or false God, as is answered before, so was Circumcision then, and the Oblations, and Burnt Sacrifice, and Offerings, and new Moons to be performed only to the Lord, and were peculiarly to be performed unto God, and not communicable to any Creature; and we say and prove, Deut. 6.13.10.20. that these were a part of the service and Worship of God, and which as we shall grant that an Oath under the Law was commanded as well as these Services, or in his own terms an Oath was equally commanded with his Service as is proved above; In this he hath no Adversary; but what doth this prove in respect
of his Argument which makes it more (then equally commanded) for he will yield that these services were but temporary, but Swearing is perpe∣tual, and so he hath given it a priority above the rest, his Argument all a∣long hath been chiefly drawn from the Mosaick Law, that it was joyned e∣qually with Fear and Service under the Law, and so hath striven without an Adversary, but now it must needs be above the service of God then, and yet from the same command he would only prove it, for he hath no better strength nor Ground; and we may as well alledge as he doth, and say con∣sequently to this sort of Service that was commanded by the Lord as well as Swearing, for God hath joyned them together in the Text above said, and obligeth equality at all times, as well under the Gospel as under the Law; yet then A. S. would call this absurd if it be so as it is indeed, then we may as well conclude the other absurd, because one is standing as well as the other, and binding as well as the other by the vertue of this com∣mand, although he tells us that an Oath in its Substance hath not any Type at all, so we say; for the substance is Christ, the Oath of God, in whom all the Promises and Oaths are fulfilled, and this is its substance; but as under the Law it was a Type of the Substance, and not the substance it self, and that Circumcision, the Passover, and the legal Offerings un∣der the Law had as much goodness in them as Oaths had, what-ever A. S. sayes: and served to as good ends and purposes in that Ministration as they were ordained, and conduced as much to the Glory of God, and were sub∣servient to, but not against the morality of the Gospel; for the shadows were not against the substance, nor the Ceremonials against the Morals, though the Apostle says, the Law is not of Faith, yet not against it, for as ministerial as the Ordinances of the Law were to the Gospel then, yet the Gospel may be and now is without it. But to conclude this Argument, A. S. Were it so indeed that Oaths were Ceremonial, then it follows that Christ in this Text did not forbid them; for he did not forbid the Ceremonial Law, but observed it all his Life, eating the Passe∣over with his Disciples the Night before his Death, unless some would Interpret his Words, (I command you that you do not Swear) yet I am content for a Year or two you may Swear by Heaven or Earth as you have been accu∣stomed, but after my Crucifixion and Resurrection Swear no more, and there let these that disallow Swearing as a part of the Ceremonial Law, Argue no more the unlawfulness of Swearing from these Words (Swear not at all.) Reply. Though Christ did observe the Ordinances of the Law, as being that Ministration appointed by God until the time of Reformation and the bringing in of a better Hope, Heb. 9. It became him to fulfill all Righteous∣ness, so was he Circumcised, and eat the Passover, and was Baptized, washed the Disciples Feet, which were not enjoyned by the Law, (though not against it) and that Ministration not fully ended, though he see it must end, and spoke of a further thing, and of the time then, and also it should be ministred more afterward after his Resurrection, Joh. 4.20, 21, 22, 23. The time cometh and now is, neither at Jerusalem, nor this Mountain, but they that Worship the Father shall worship him in Spirit and Truth; so that he Pro∣phesied of the end of all those things, and of the cessation of them, which were sometime commanded, respecting both the place and the Worship,
and to them that did believe the Disciples, unto whom it'was given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, (then was the time) to them it was come, even (then) before Christ suffered; and therefore A. S. his Consequence is not true (that Christ did not forbid all Swearing from this Text) and though he had both Prophesied of a clearer Ministration, and laid down in Doctrine a more Evangelical precept then the Law, yea, and more strict obedience, yet notwithstanding many did still hold up these things, which the Law commanded, though they believed well of Christ, yea, after his Suffering and Resurrection, and that a long time, though that the Apostles told them the Substance was come, and that there was no more Offering for Sin, nor Oblations, neither legal Observations to be minded any more, yet still many observed them, and doubtless as to that formal Swearing that was among the Jews, and that vain Swearing too many did continue in it afterward notwithstanding Christ's command, but then not submitting, made not his command void in it self, and there is no necessity to make such an absurd Interpretation as that he permitted them to Swear for a Year or two, by Heaven and Earth, and then at his passion to Swear no more, for after he gave forth the command there was no Permission, and yet afterward, as I said, the Apostles declared against the Shadows, and preached up the Substance, and as A. S. confesseth the types ceased of themselves, but let him know there was a time of Dying to them, and they ceased not all at once to them that had observed the Law, neither were the Mysteries revealed all at once, but as they grew in Faith and Knowledge, for the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, and though the legal Observations were observed in Christ's time, so were they after, by many, but by right ended in the substance, and when he was come, though many did not see it till afterward: But I come to his 11th. Argument. Eleventh Argument, No exposition of the Text o any other is to be admit∣ted, that puts inconsistency betwixt the Old Testament and the New, seeing both are Inspired by the same God, who is incapable of falshood or alteration; where∣upon if we be not so atheistical as to deny, the veracity or immutability of the most high, Tit. 1.2. it must be granted that his word is of eternal Truth, Jam. 1.17. his Promises yea and Amen, his precepts more unalterable then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, nor did our Saviour come to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, thereupon he enjoyns obedience to the commands of the Pharisees, as sitting in Moses's Chair, Mat. 23.2, 3. from all which it is apparent that the Old Testament is so far from being contradicted, that it is fully confirmed in the New; there∣fore I may well draw this conclusion, that these words (Swear not at all) ought not to be interpreted as to render all Swearing unlawful, Deut. 6.13. Psal. 63.11. not without Promise of reward, Jer. 12.16. and it was Prophesied before by Isaiah that Christians under the Gospel should Swear, Isaiah 19.18. and 4. and 23. and I look upon it as a piece of Manichisme, and extremely derogatory both to the Scripture and God himself, therefore what moral duty one Man was commanded in the Law, another should be condemned in the new. Reply, 'Tis true, no exposition of this Text or any other is to be admitted, that puts such a difference betwixt the old and new Testaments in matter of Substance, but shall agree with Austin: The Law is the Gospel vailed, and
the Gospel is the Law revealed; and what was Prophesied and typified in the first is fulfilled in the latter; but what shall be thought of them, that hold up the Types and Figures of the first, as though they were not fulfil∣led, or as though the Promise was not come, and he made manifest in whom all Shadows end? and though God be unchangeable in himself, and incapable of falshood or alteration, and I know none who denyes the ve∣racity of his word, or the immutability of the most high: yet notwith∣standing I cannot set up the changeable Priesthood, and Covenant, and the Ordinances belonging thereunto, against the unchangeable and everlasting Priesthood and Covenant, and as hath been said before, as though that all the precepts therein were so unalterable, as that of necessity they must needs continue, as obligatory to Generations, I might truss up together many Scriptures, and thwack them one on the Back of another, which be∣long to the Jews and the first Covenant most properly (till the Seed Christ was revealed, and offered up) and I might bring in Scripture to prove, that many things were commanded by the immutable God, and by him who is uncapable of alteration, and multiply many words, as A. S. doth to little purpose, and say what was written in the old Testament was by the Inspiration of God, and that his precepts are no more alterable then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, and therefore they must needs still be ob∣served by all Christians to the World's end, or else conclude they that do not are atheistical, and deny God's veracity, and make the Law of God void; and what would all this in arguing prove, nothing at all; the Jews will confess as much, and plead as hard as A. S. can, who yet have not be∣lieved in him of whom the Prophets prophesied, neither have received him who is the Substance of what Moses and the Prophets bore witness, and in whom the Law is fulfilled, and the Promises made good, and con∣firmed with, and in whom all the Shadows end, and the vail done away, and all the Worship & precepts belonging thereunto, who hath manifested and revealed the Father in all that believe, who is the new and living way, whose Worship is not now in the Letter, nor in the Shadows, nor Types, nor in any outward Observations, but in Spirit & truth is he worshipped, for he seeketh such to Worship him; for the great Promise of reward was to, as ever was to Swearing; yet when they resisted him whom the Father had sent, all their observances though never so strict did not avail; but their Circumcision became Uncircumcision, and their Worship and service be∣came Prophaneness, when they despised the substance by whom Grace and Truth came to all the Children of promise: and we grant with A. S. that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil it, and to end both Sin and Transgression, and the Law which was added because of it, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and it to rule in the Hearts of all that believe; and against such there is no Law; and though Christ enjoyned the Disciples, Mat 23. to observe what the Scribes and Pharisees bad them, who sate in Moses's Chair and read the Law, and performed those services in part commanded; that was the time before he was offered up, and the Mini∣stration of that Covenant was not fully ended; yet I hope A. S. with us will grant that they were not to heed them or to obey them in their vain traditions and false glosses, and Interpretations and Evil manners, which he cryed wo against, Mat. 23.13, 14. neither after his Resurrection did
he enjoyn them to hear the Pharisees, neither to observe the Legal Ordi∣nances of the first Priesthood, but they declared against them and their practice, which continued in the Observation of those things, which did not make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 8.9. Heb. 9.9. and for all these Texts he alledges out of the Old Testament, Mat. 6.13. Psal. 63.11. Jer. 12.16. unto these it hath been answered that this proves nothing that Christians under the second Covenant should Swear as they did in the first; for these Precepts were only to keep them from Idolatry: for Jer. 12.16. If you will diligently learn the wayes of my People to Swear by my Name (the Lord liveth) as they taught my People to Swear by (Baal) then shall they be Builded in the midst of the People: And the 6th. of Deut. 13.14. is to the same Effect, You shall fear the Lord and serve him, and Swear by my Name: And Verse the 14. Ye shall not go after other Gods. All these only prove that the Nations went after other Gods, and Sware by them, and served them, and Israel too prone to follow their manners did so also, and therefore he gave them these Precepts to serve him, and fear him, and acknowledge him, to keep them from Idolatry, as hath been said, in the state of their Mino∣rity and weakness, and that before the Seed was revealed; and that which A. S. calls a Prophecy by Isa. 19.18. of Christians Swearing under the Go∣spel, it's no such thing, but a Prophesie of Egypt, his joyning to the Jews, and owning their Worship, and their God, and acknowledge him; and do Sacrifice and Oblation, yea and vow a vow unto the Lord and perform it, ver. 21. Which clearly hath relation to the Law and the Worship of the Jews, and not to the Gospel; so that A. S. might have as well said it was a promise how Christians under the Gospel should offer Sacrifice and Ob∣lations as under the Law, as well as Swear. But the Doctor hath traver∣sed many Paths which are crooked, winding, and turning, to gather something together, and hath fetched it far, to prove Swearing under the Gospel, but all his proof falls short of his matter by much: And that of Isaiah 5.23. is a Prophecy of Israel's return out of the Captivity of Ba∣bylon, in the days of Cyrus, whom the Lord called his Anointed, and shep∣herd, Isa. 44.28.45. who made a Decree for all Israel to go out of Assyria to Jerusalem, and build their City, and their Temple, and Worship their God according as he had commanded; as may be seen at large in the Book of Ezra and Nehemiah, and this was fulfilled (then) when they builded the City and the Temple in those days, (long before Christ was manifest in the Flesh) and then did Israel return, and every Knee did bow, and eve∣ry Tongue did Swear by the Lord, which before the Captivity had not bowed, nor served, nor acknowledged his Name, but Idols which pro∣voked the Lord, and therefore gave he them into the hand of the Babyloni∣ans for seventy Years till they were humbled, and then brought them back according to Jeremiah, Isaiah, Haggai, and Zachariah's Prophesies, for this was fulfilled; then is spoken by Isaiah in this Prophesie, Isaiah 5. ver. 23, 24, 25. (without contradiction to Christ's command) and his command entrencheth not upon this prophesie, neither doth this make the Gospel thwart the Law, beyond all terms of Reconciliation, as A. S. vainly sug∣gests in his margent, for this Prophesie was fulfilled long before Christ gave forth this command, Swear not at all: Moreover, if this prophesie have any relation to the state of the Christian Church (as A. S. supposes,
upon what Ground I know not, saving his own affirmation) then we shall consider and see how it is fulfilled under the Gospel, and what the Gospel allows of in this particular; the Apostle Paul a Minister of the Gospel, not of the Letter, as he saith himself, which some interpret to be the Law, citeth this Prophesie of Isa. 45.23. compare it with Rom. the 14 ver. 11. for it is written (where? in Isaiah before cited) As I live, saith the Lord, eve∣ry Knee shall bow unto me, and every Tongue shall confess to God; and in Phi∣lippians the 2.10, 11. That at the Name of Jesus, whom the Father hath sent, whom all is to obey, unto whom all Power is given in Heaven and Earth; the Apostle citing again the very words of the Prophet says unto him (viz. Jesus, every Knee shall bow; and ver. the 11. and that every Tongue shall con∣fess to the Glory of God the Father; so that it cannot be reasonably thought or judged, that if God had required Swearing by his Name among Christi∣ans as among the Jews, that the Apostle thus should alter the words, as to put confessing instead of Swearing, seeing he sayes, he used always plain∣ness of Speech, for this had not been plainness, and we have better rea∣son to believe the Apostle, unto whom the Gospel was committed, whom the Son was revealed in, who declared the whole Counsel of God, and yet never either commanded or exhorted any to Swear, or reproved them for not Swearing by the Name of God (as the Jews did) in all his wri∣tings that are extant, I say we have better Ground to believe him and his rendering of the words of the Prophet to be according to the mind of Christ, where he puts in confession to the Christians (which before was Swearing to the Jews) as being acquainted with the command of Christ, Mat. 5.23. Swear not at all:) and what-ever A. S. look upon it as to be Heresie, and derogatory both to the Sriptures and God himself, it is not much matter of Man's Judgment, he might as well accuse Christ and the Apostle, the one forbidding to Swear, and the other for deminishing from the Scripture, and altering the Prophets words; and though it seems strange to A. S. yet it is not to us, that some Men were commanded in the Old Te∣stament for observing some things, yea, many things, which are condemn∣ed in the New, and yet God is not dishonoured, neither the Scripture bro∣ken; if we see the end of every command, and the time for which it ser∣ved, and the Service for which it served, as this about Oaths, hath been sufficiently declared before, to keep the Jews from Idolatry, to end Strife among them where it was; (but among true Christians, indeed) Strife is ended, and Peace is come, and they seek it with all Men; and that is done away (for which the Law was added) to wit, Sin and Transgression, dif∣fidence, and Unbelief, and Strife, and no necessity of them among them; and all the morality that doth remain is confession, or saying, or Testimo∣ny in true words in any matter is that which is equivalent with an Oath, and is that which is the most conform to Christ and the Apostles Do∣ctrine, under the Gospel: but I come to his last Argument. Twelfth and last Argument, The consent of the Christian World, the pra∣ctice of Emperours, Kings, Princes, Councils, Bishops, and People of all sorts, confirm this Truth that Christ notwithstanding these Words, (Swear not at all) had never forbidden Swearing as altogether unlawful; 'Tis true, some of the Fathers in their Homilies, and to the People inveighed much against Swear∣ing,
as though it had been altogether unlawful, but it was only against Customa∣ry Oaths; Chrysostome in his Homily to the People of Antioch preached so much against Swearing that the People were offended; he told them, he would ne∣ver leave that Sermon till they would leave that prophane Custome of Swearing; but the Fathers were less cautelous, but with great Vehemency enveigh'd against common Swearing in ordinary Discourse; but not at all intending to take away necessary Oaths; but Origen in his first Book against Celsus, God is witness of my Conscience; and Athanasius yet vehemently declaimed against prophane Swearing, yet in his Apology to the Emperour Constantius, he Sware again and again, the Lord is witness, and his Christ is witness: All whith clearly shews they did not disallow the voluntary taking an Oath, much less in Judical pro∣ceedings; and the Reformed Churches, and the Church of England, and the whole Catholick Church in all times and places approved this Doctrine, that all Swearing is not unlawful; so that it follows that the Church in all Ages was so ig∣norant as not to understand Christ's meaning, or so wicked as to Teach and Practise quite contrary, or else Christ never meant to forbid all kind of Swearing, (to as∣sert the former) were to profess all that went before either Dunces or Devils. Reply. Whatever A. S. concludes & thinks, he hath not such a consent a∣mong Christians, as he makes a great flourish of; it's manifest by what hath been said, Christ prohibited it amongst his Disciples, Swear not at all; and likewise James the Apostle agrees in the same Doctrine, and the rest of the Apostles, also all the Primitive Christians were esteemed so strict, ex∣act, and cautious of their asserting, or promising, that there was no need of an Oath among them, they kept up the sactity, credit of their Poses∣sion, yea, among Unbelievers, that it was security enough in all cases to say, Christianus sum, I am a Christian, as Justin Martyr asserts; and if they were urged any further to any Oath, for matter or manner, they repeated this as the only satisfaction they could give, there needed no more then the Veracity of their bare record; and thus much Bishop Gauden confesseth, and also in the 36. page of his Book he says, The Ground or Foundation for Swearing now is the Wickedness and unbelief of Men; but Christians (truly such) are brought out of Evil and Wickedness, Unbelief and Distrust, and there is no necessity among them either publick or private to Swear at all: Polibus observes, in the better and simpler Ages of the World, Oaths were seldom used in Judicatures, but after Unbelief and Lying increased, Oaths in∣creased, as a only remedy to cure and restrain those Evils: (but let it not be said that those are Christians that name Christ's Name and depart not from Iniquity) and since the perilous times came on that the Apostle spoke, that Men would not abide sound Doctrine but be lovers of them∣selves, that should have a Form of godliness and deny the Power thereof; such went out of the Truth, and went into the World, and the world went after them, and the false Church began to rise to dignity, and have the Name of Christian, though she consented not to the wholsome Doctrine of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Swear not at all, but perverted this, as she hath done many other Doctrines, and beguiled thc Kings of the Earth, and held out her Golden Cup of Fornication, and made Emperours, Kings, and Princes drunk with her Fornication, Rev. 17.18. Councils, Bishops and People Err in their Judgments, & by Tradition one Age after another have holden that lawful which Christ did not prohibit; but what doth all
this prove, for it's manifest that most of the Ancient Fathers of the Church as Origen, Chrysostome, Theophilact, Hillary, Athanasius, Jerome, Theodo∣ret, Laurentius, and others in their Sermons and Homilies to the People, vehemontly and frequently enveighed against all Swearing without any Limitation, without any reserve amongst Christians Swearing as to private Conversation, yet they did not disallow the voluntary taking an Oath, much less in Judicature he says; but those are but therms of his own shuffling in, and what he speaks only of his own Head, by mingling his own words with theirs, for his own ends, for there is no such distinction made by them, as he makes, as lawful Swearing and prophane Swearing, and vo∣luntary Swearing, and Swearing in Judicature; and it's to be desired that A. S. had but produced their Testimonies, and have cited only their own Words without adding to them, that they would have made much against him, for it's plain their Judgment and Witness was against all Swearing what-ever. But A. S. tells us, Chrysostome in his Homily to the People of Antioch preached so much against that prophane custome of Swearing, that the People were offended, and he told them that he would never leave that Sermon till they did leave Swearing; It were to be desired that more in this Age who pretend to be Christian Ministers would follow his ex∣ample, for the like I believe hath not been in any Age; Oh! what custo∣mary, vain, rash, prophane, ungodly Oaths (in their Acceptation) take God's holy Name upon every trivial Occasion in vain in their Mouthes, and daily inventing new Oaths and Execrations, even daring God to con∣found them and damn them; yea, it grieves my Heart to think, and the Spirit of the Lord in me to consider what sounded in my Ears not long since, which I mention with Detestation and Abhorrency, that some when they had sworn even all the customary Oaths, and all the new invented Oaths, did proffer ten Shillings to any that could invent ten new Oaths, even glo∣rying in Sin, and making a Mock at it; and indeed it is fearful to hear, how without any Reverence unto God, or Dread of his Majesty, Oaths, these late Years, are broke out like a Land-flood over all the Banks; and no where so much to be found, nor no where so common as among them that reck∣on themselves conformable Men (Loyal) and Members of the Church of England, which is one crying Sin, that draws down the Judgment of God upon this Land; and what Credit can we give to such Men in Judicature? shall we not say as St. Austin sayes, It disposes Men to false Swearing and gross Perjury, nor can indeed much Credit be given any more then to a Lyar to any Man that swears never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a common Swear∣er; but instead of beating down that for which the Land mourns, Jer. 23. 10. many are even Propagators of it, and Pladers for it, and glory in it, and it's become almost the only Mark of a conformable Man: Oh what a sad Time are we fallen into, and what a sad State, that they that depart from this great Iniquity are become a Prey; I say, it had been more time for A. S. to have used his utmost Endeavours this Way, rather then to have opposed Christ's Doctrine, and added Affliction to the Bonds of con∣scientious Sufferers, who dare neither swear nor lye. But not to disgress, A. S. he would make the Fathers, as he doth with Christ and the Apostles, he would make all dance after his Pipe, and make them all of his Mind, and construe and interpret all their Words unto his
End, though never intended, and therefore he sayes, they were not cau∣telous enough, and so doth with them as he doth with Christ, he makes their Words one Thing and their Intentions another; though (saith he) Origen in his 25th Tract upon Mat. sayes, that Christ did forbid all Swearing; yet he himself swears in his Book against Celsus, for he said, God is Witness of my Conscience; and Athanasius though he declaimed against Swearing, yet in his Apology to Constantius he swears again and again; and why? he wrote as the Apostle did, the Lord is Witness, and Christ to Witness, and these must needs be Oaths, and voluntary Oaths; it's not probable that they should use voluntary Oaths, when they declaimed against all Oaths; and there∣fore Origen saith, It behoves not a Man who lives according to the Gospel to swear at all; and Jerome, the Gospel Truth admits not of an Oath; likewise Chry∣sostome who was Bishop of Constantinople (in Commendations of whom much is said in the Ecclesiastical Histories, Acts and Monument vol. 21. fol. 72.) blames them greatly who bring forth a Book to swear upon, charging the Clerks, that in no wise they constrain any Body to swear, whether they think a Man swear true or false, saying, it's a Sin to swear well; so that not only Swearing upon a Book was reprehended, but even all Swearing, such as A. S. calls lawful: Theophilact upon the Place in Controversie, Learn hence that under the Law it was no Evil for Men to swear, but sice the coming of Christ it is evil, as Circumcision, and in sum whatever is Judaical; to omit Wickliff, John Hus and Jerome of Prague, who were faithful Men and righteous in their Generation, which the reformed Churches are be∣holding to for their Testimony in other weighty things against the Church of Rome, though A. S. will not own them in this, but rather takes Part with them who burned his Bones 41 Years after his Decease, and burnt his Books, and these Articles condemned by the Council of Constance, who al∣so burned John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, who maintained his Articles, that all Oaths that be made for any Contract or civil Bargain betwixt Man and Man be unlawful under the Gospel; and Walter Brute, whose Testimony with many others was, that as the Perfection of the old Testament was not to for∣swear themselves, so the Perfections of Christ was not to swear at all, because they are so commanded of Christ, whose Commandment in no Case must be broken; the Testimony of many worthy Men and godly Sufferers at this time are suitable to many of the Fathers before-mentioned; but this A. S. calls Er∣ror; who said so? the Church of Rome, and the Council of Constance, with whom A. S. joyns, rather then the Sufferers of Christ, and they who hold it an Error not to swear at all, and yet no Error to break when they have a Mind, and dispense with it, as the Papists do to this very Day; and these Fathers of the Church (doubtless) were the best of Men in that declining Age, and were neither Dunces nor Devils, but understood by the Signi∣fication of God's Spirit in them the Doctrine of Christ) and that which was consentaneous thereunto) was witnessed by divers in after Ages before-men∣tioned, which A. S. would condemn as Hereticks, and why? the Church of Rome hath called them so, and them that sate at the Stern, who alwayes called themselves Orthodox, and others Heterodox, that did not sing to the same Tune in Swearing, and every Thing else, when once they had got up into pompious lordly Dominion over Mens Faith; but what doth this prove? nothing at all; and what doth this prove that A. S inserts in his
marginal Notes, that the Ministers who are inferiour in Hungary and Tran∣silvania swear Canonical Obedience to their Bishops, or the Church of En∣gland, or the Confessions of Helvetia, Basil, or others whom he calls re∣formed? what of all this? what doth this prove from the Scripture of Truth; or as to the Convincement of them who hold it unlawful to swear under the Gospel, because Christ hath prohibited it by his Doctrine? what is all that A.S. hath said in his Arguments to Dissenters Satisfaction? who know Hundreds of Things wherein as much as they fall out and fight even to Blood with each other about their fancied Formalities, they all agree in against the Light and Power of Godliness, and against the very Appearance of the Image of him in his Holiness, who is the substantial Truth it self, we say, what is all this to some, that dissent from A. S. his Judgment, and others he calls reformed, whose Faith stands higher then the Wisdom and Thoughts of Men, who cannot consent so as to lead their Faith and Rea∣son captive after them, to try this or any other Truth, seeing it is the Gift of God, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding; and though the Church of Rome and you agree in this, though you damn one another in other Matters, what is this to us? It shews only they erred from the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, & you in this and many other Things are not separated from them; and thy Conclusion which thou ac∣cordest with is false, that though God in the old Testament commanded it, yet it doth not follow that Christ in the new did not forbid it (neither that Christ and his Apostles practised it) who were under another Cove∣nant, and for ought can be perceived by A. S. by that he calls voluntary Swearing, which he hath no Ground for, though in other Places he seems to condemn vain Swearing and customary Oaths, yet in this he looks not like himself, but seems to tolerate a kind of Oaths we find no mention made of in the new Testament, and yet we shall not conclude, as A. S. sayes, that all were so ignorant as not to understand Christ's Mind, nor so wicked as to teach the quite contrary to his Mind; for it is manifest many have been of the Mind of Christ in former Ages and latter, though we shall never strive to bring in all the World, or the Heathen, or Nations that became as Wa∣ters after the Publication of the Gospel, nor that Rabble which he calls the Christian World, which hath wondred after the Beast, Rev. 13.4. and yet there hath been still some Testimony born through Ages unto the Do∣ctrine of Christ; and Christ's Doctrine stands in Force; and in that Lati∣tude that he intended it, notwithstanding A.S. his Reasons and Arguments and many more, as to forbid all Oaths in the second Covenant to his Disci∣ples (truly such) in these Words, Swear not at all: Many Instances might be brought of particular Bishops, as Otha Bishop of Bamberg in Germa∣ny and Basilius of Chalcedon, who refused to swear; and though A. S. can∣not trace it beyond Pelagius or Manicheus, yet we know that both Christ and the Apostles confirm it; and also the Esseans among the Jews did refuse to swear at all, even in Judicature; for Josephus a Jew saith of them, What∣soever they say is as firm as an Oath, and so swear among them was counted a Thing superfluous; likewise St Basil commends Chinas a famous Greek, that he suffered a Fine of three Talents, rather then he would save it by Swear∣ing, to the Loss of his Honour; and shall Christians (truly such) with whom Truth abideth, and in whom it dwelleth, come short of that Ex∣actness
that was among some of the Jews, and the best and most virtuous of them called Heathen; shall not this kind of Christianity which is professed in this Day, who are in Unbelief, Frauds, Infirmities, Contentions be condemned by these? shall not this Circumcision become Uncircumci∣sion? and shall not they that fear to swear, and deny all Oaths be set above this, whose Yea is Yea and Nay Nay in all their Communication, accor∣ding unto Christ's Doctrine? shall not this inherit the Promise? and is not this more Gospel-like, to say, speak, testifie & do the Truth, rather then to go back to Judaism, or into Contention, Strife, Emulation and Distrusts that the Swearers are in (falsly reputed Christians) and yet abide not in his Doctrine? But having done with A.S. his negative Part, I come to his af∣firmative Part, which is no other then hath been answered over and over again, yet he thinks he hath said more in clearing of it then others have said, that Christ only forbad Swearing by Creatures, and that indeed is the Sum of his affirmative Discourse, and the Pharisees Interpretation; and he brings the Judgment of divers Expositors upon this Text; First, promisary Oaths are here chiefly forbidden; 2dly, Others think that Christ here forbad such Oaths as then were used in common Discourse; 3dly, others say that prophane, false, rash and vain Oaths are generally here prohibited; 4thly, Many understand that by these Words of Christ all Swearing by Creatures is forbidden, but not that by God himself, and last of all A.S. gives his Thoughts, which are as follow. That Christ did not forbid what the Law had commanded, but only the Phari∣saical corrupt Glosses thereon, and the irreligious Practices of the mis-informed Jews (and cites Origen and Chrysostome who say upon this Place, they were accustomed to swear by Heaven and by Creatures) and A. S. further sayes, The Pharisees taught them to affirm whatever they had promised, swearing by God; they under a specious Pretention, that they would not take God's Name in vain up∣on a slight Occasion, fell to swear by Creatures, which Grotius shows out of Phi∣lo Judeus, which the Pharisees did not disallow, the easier thereby to delude such credulous People as believed those Oaths which themselves neither thought obliga∣tory, nor meant to keep; and it's certain the Scribes and Pharisees taught the People, that to swear by several Creatures, as by the Temple and Altar was not binding, Christ reproves them as blind Guides upon that Account, Mat. 23.16. and further they taught, it was Perjury indeed to break an Oath if a Man had sworn by God, but not if he had only sworn by Creatures; in Exposition of which Christ forbids all Swearing by Creatures, and teacheth cntrary to the Jews Rab∣bies, that such Oaths ought not to be taken, yet being taken are binding in Re∣spect of Creatures Relation to the Creator, and Christ reckons them among sinful Oaths, and teacheth them to use only bare Affirmations or Denyals in their Com∣munication: And this is the very Sum of his Judgment; and the Words of Christ are only to be limitted to this Sense and no further, that is, not to swear at all by Creatures in their mutual Converse or Communications; and this he hath repeated over and over in his Book, and this is the furthest lati∣tude that he will allow unto Christ's Prohibition, Swear not at all; and this Interpretation before-mentioned he looks upon to be the genuine meaning thereof, and is the Judgment of Doctor Gauden also, who hath contended as hard for some Swearing as A. S. hath; and I perceive that A. S. hath read the Answer to Bishop Gauden, published by that precious
Servant of the Lord Samuel Fisher, who finished his Life in Bonds for the Gospel-Truth against all Swearing, whose Answer stands firm, and his de∣monstrative Arguments of Force, and are yet unanswered, though A. S. hath a little here and there carped at, and hath bitten at the Heel, but hath not made void at all his Answer, which will live as a living Testimony in Generations to come, as consonant unto Christ's Doctrine, wherein he prohibits all Oaths under the Gospel. Reply, Though there be some Truth in the different Authors that are al∣ledged, and also in A.S. his Words, that swearing by Creatures, as Hea∣ven, and Earth, Jerusalem, and vain Oaths, is forbidden, and customary Oaths, and the corrupt Glosses of the Pharisees, and the false Interpretati∣ons, yet all this comes short of Christ's mind, and of the true genuine sense of the words & the scope of Christ's Sermon as is manifest in the Chapter, and in his Testament, and all he hath said will not help him to carry on that Work he hath undertaken, (viz.) the Justification of any, or the law∣fulness of any Swearing, or the defence of that limited sense, he would put upon the Universal terms in the 2. Texts, wherein Christ and the Apostle forbids all Swearing: And though A. S. often tells us, Christ did not for∣bid what the Law had commanded, neither gave any new positive Law before his Death; he sure hath forgot himself much; what will become of the two great Ordinances still upheld, as Baptism, and breaking of Bread? and whether was this a new Institution of Christ, or was it an In∣stitution in the Law? and if it was an Institution of Christ (as the Church of England doth hold) and not of the Law, nor of Moses, (as indeed it was not) then A. S. his Argument is fallen to the Ground, that he gave no new Commandment, neither instituted any new Ordinance? and then what is become of these two great Mysteries as they have been called? but he hath ravelled out and spun out his Threed so long, that he often runs off his Legs; and though A. S. does often urge, that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; and therefore hath said falsly, that Christ Sware be∣fore the High Priest after he had given forth this Commandment, Swear not at all, which if it had been true it had been no more president for Chri∣stians then eating the Passeover; and though he sometimes urge that such Oaths as were commanded under the Law are not forbidden by that Text Mat. 5.38. because it was spoken sometime before his Death, and the Mini∣stration of the first Covenant was not ended till his death; and therefore he concludes, That all Oaths would not be forbidden by Christ in this Text, for saith he, Christ did not forbid what the Law commanded; but though this pro∣hibition was given out before his Death, yet with reference to the Gospel∣times after his Death: It is evident by the Texts before it and behind it, (viz.) of divorce and of deportment towards injurious Ones and Enemies so in this of Oaths Christ prohibites and condemns not only those gross Abuses of those things that they had a Dispensation for under the Law, and that by Divine indulgency, which abuses crept in by the Pharisaical false Glosses, too much loosing the meaning of God's Law by Moses by their de∣praved examples or popular Customes; but Christ condemned and prohibi∣ted those very things, which in regard of the hardness of their Hearts, di∣strust and wicked Cruelties, God himself in that very Letter of the Law indul∣ged them in, and gave them both a dispensation, and a precept for, in the
Law; for the Law said of old time, before the false gloss of Scribes and Pha∣risees came in some things; so as it was not said from the beginning, when Man was in Innocency, and was merciful as his Heavenly Father was mer∣ciful, and the Law said, Deut. 24.12. whosoever shall put away his wise let him give her a Bill of divorcement, & then she may go & be another man's Wife; but I say whose putteth away his Wife, causeth her to commit Abultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth Adultery, Mat. 5.32. So that not only the corrupt Glosses and irregular Practices of the mis-informed Jews are forbidden; but even that which the Law not only permitted and al∣lowed, and dispensed with, but commanded, is for bidden; (and another thing injoyned) and in cause of injury as he hath done, so shall it be done unto him: ye have heard it hath been said, an Eye for an eye, and a Tooth for a tooth, this was the Law, Exod. 21.44. Levit. 24.20. Deut. 19.20. and this was commanded: But Christ saith, I say unto you that ye resist not Evil, whosoever shall smite thee on the one Cheek turn the other also, and if a Man sue thee at Law and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, and whosoever shall compell thee to go a mile go with him twain, Mat. 5.39, 40, 41. So here is not only a further thing, but even another thing commanded by Christ. Further, the Law said, Exod. 20.14. thou shalt not commit Adultery; but Christ the wis∣dom of God saith, Mat. 5.28. whosoever looketh upon a Woman and lusteth af∣ter her, hath committed Adultery with her in his Heart, again, ye have heard that it hath been said that thou love thy Neighbour and hate thy Enemy, though A. S. sayes, That is not found in the Law, but a corrupt Gloss of the Pharisees; I say that is found which amounts to as much, as hath been shewed: for the Jews that were of the Law, might and did spoyle their Enemies, the Gentiles and Canaanites, and Egyptians and Amalekites, and had a command so to do, and kill them, and Root them out, and yet to help his Enemies Oxe or Asse under a burthen, if he were belonging to a Jew that personally hated him, and not an Amalekite one of that cursed race; but this is a ridle to ma∣ny; But I say unto you love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you and Persecute you, Mat. 5.44. and the Apostle exhorted, give no offence to Jew or Greek, so that his Doctrine went beyond the Law, put up, pass by, forgive, forbear; a∣gain, you have heard it hath been said of old time (where?) Exod. 20.7. Deut. 5.11. Numb. 30.2. Mat. 5.33. Thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oathes, but I say unto you, Swear not at all, nei∣ther by Heaven for it is God's Throne, nor by the Earth for it is his Foot stoole, neither by Jerusalem for it is the City of the great King, neither shalt thou Sweare by thy Head, because thou cannot make one hair white or black, but let your Com∣munication by Yea, yea, and Nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these cometh of Evil: It's most evident that Christ prohibits somewhat more here then was forbidden under the Law, yea, what ever Oaths were lawful under the Law, therefore it must be all Swearing at all, or else none at all, either all such Swearing as was used lawfully, and allowed as a Type for a time, in the Law, Oaths made lawfully and acceptably to God, or else nothing more at all then what was forbidden in the Law: for all false Swearing and forswear∣ing, and all Swearing by Creatures, or breaking of solemn Oaths, made as unto God, were forbidden in and by the Law; therefore Swearing it self is for∣bidden or nothing: but saith A. S. The grand objection falls of it self, which
is either all kind of Swearing is forbidden, or else Christ forbids nothing which was not forbidden before, which is utterly improbable, saith he; and he grants that God had formerly prohibited all false and vain Oaths, and all Swearing by Creatures, saith he, which I grant to be true, then how is the grand Objection fallen, for is not Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, the Head, Creatures; and this is the most that A. S. and divers others affirm, that it is only Oaths by Creatures, such as before mentioned that Christ on∣ly prohibits: and vain Oaths, and Swearing by Creatures, A. S. sayes, Christ reckons among sinful Oaths; then if so, as they are indeed, had not the Law forbidden this before, in general terms, wherein all Creatures are in∣cluded? therefore the reason stands still in force, and the Objection, that either Christ forbad all Swearing, or else he forbids nothing but what the Law had forbidden before: It's manifest it stands still in force, for Christ forbad even those Oathes the Law required, and all vain Swearing, and Swearing by Creatures, and all Swearing whatsoever, Mat. 5. Ye have heard it hath been said by them of old time, not of late by the Scribes and Pharisees, only putting their false Glosses on the Law, as A. S. intimates Pareus and others, in his Annotations, and hence conjectures, that by them of old time is on∣ly meant, the Scribes and Pharisees, and not Moses and the Law, and of old time must be meant (a good while ago) or not very long, as Com∣mentators understand it, less then (twenty Years) and thus he twists and twines to make the true sense of Christ's words void: it's evident of them of old time, is Moses time, the place before cited, Numb. 30.2. is the place Christ alludes to, you have heard it said thou shalt not forswear thy self; so saith the Law in forty places, but perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, But I say unto you, Swear not all; no not by any Oath at all, note the opposition in the particle [but] which is between the old, lawful legal, Swear∣ing, and no Swearing at all, not between no Swearing, and such prophane Swearing as was unlawful under the Law: the whole sum is this, the Law said, break no Oaths, but I say, take none; for if Christ intended no more in these phrases (Swear not at all) not by any Oath, then thus, Swear not vain∣ly, prophanely, ordinary, or by Creatures in your Communication, forswear not your selves, what forbids he more then the Law forbad? for Heaven, and Earth, Jerusalem, A. S. says, Christ reckons among sinful Oaths; and these are Creatures, and Swearing by Creatures was forbidden by the Law, I grant quoth A. S. Then this reason stands still good, he either forbad all Oaths, or he forbad no more then the Law forbad; and though it be granted that the Jews Swore by the Creatures, as the Temple, Altar, Jerusalem, and there∣fore Christ prohibits them, and reproves them for these things, and like∣wise all Swearing whatsover; what doth A. S. gain by this? for it's evi∣dent in divers passages of his Sermon in the 5th. Chap. of Mat. that he teach∣es a Righteousness which exceeds that of the Law, as I have shewed before, which he came to fulfill and not to destroy, by taking away the Ceremo∣ny of Swearing, and establishing the substance in its stead, which is speaking the Truth, as in the sight of God in uprightness of Heart; yea, we say a∣again, what saith he more to his Disciples else, then the Scribes and Pha∣risees to theirs? they said, Swear not falsly, prophanely, but by God only, Swear not falsly: For Bishop Gauden cites for his Author Drusius, among the Jews all thing sin Judicials were confirmed by the Religion of an Oath, wherein
the name of God was interposed, therefore Christ says more unto his Disci∣ples in express terms, Swear no Oath at all, otherwise how would their Righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, which except it did, they could in no case enter into the Kingdom of God; the Perfection and Righteousness of the Law therefore in this point of Swearing was not for∣swearing: the Perfection and Righteousness of the Gospel, in the same is not Swearing at all, so though the Gospel be not against the Law, yet the Gos∣pel exceeds the Law in every point; the Law said, kill not, the Gospel be not angry; the Law, commit not Adultery, the Gospel, look not on a Woman, lust not; so in all the prohibitions of Christ; the Commandments of Christ went beyond the Law, also in this of Swearing, yet it did not if now there be any Swearing at all among Christians and Disciples of Christ, yet we shall also with A. S. agree that Christ not only forbad all Swearing (even that commanded by the Law, sometime lawful) but he also forbids and reproves, and condemns Swearing by Creatures, and vain Swearing in all Communication, and their perverting of the Law, and too much loosing it by Traditions, and making it void by their false Glosses, and counts them blind Guides, which said, To swear by the Temple, by the Altar, by Heaven, was nothing, he pronounced a Wo against them, and concluded, they were bound to keep those Oaths, though they ought not to have Sworn them, for as much as he that swears by the lesser swears also by the greater; as he that Swears by Heaven swears by the Throne of God, and him that sits thereon, Mat. 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. We confess with A. S. this was but a sinful prophane Creature Swearing, an irregular form of Swearing; by the Name of God the Jews indulged themselves in, but what doth A. S. gain by this? it's evident enough that solemn Oaths by God him∣self, as those familiar Oaths by Creatures, in which they tacitely Sware by God are forbidden by Christ, but I say unto you, Swear not at all. But A. S. tells us as Grotius tells him out of Philo Judeus, That the Phari∣sees taught them to perform what-ever they had promised Swearing by God, they under a specious pretence that they would not take God's Name in vain upon slight occasions fell to Swear by Creatures, which the Pharisees did no disallow to cheat People withal, which they themselves neither thought obligatory, nor meant to keep. The name Elohim and Jehovah they might possibly scruple at, but that name Adonai they oft, as superstitiously, repeat in their much babling as they superstitiously decline mentioning of the other, but that in serious cases of concerns of Justice and Equity, and in Judicature in matter of de∣bate, or ending of Controversies, that they should wave and forbear swear∣ing by the Name of God, when their Scriptures was so express for it, and they should chuse that way of Swearing, that is no reason at all to believe it, seeing Drusius sayes, among the Jews all things in Judicature were confirm∣ed by Oath, wherein the Name of God was interposed, as above mentioned. 2dly. That they should wave Swearing by the Name of God in matters of con∣cernment, which they all believed were binding, and should Swear by Creatures in order to the giving satisfaction to one another, and security of each other, and by such Oaths as they judged not to be obligatory, and ne∣ver meant to keep them, seeing A. S. says, It was in pretence of Reverence to God, they Swear not by God but by Creatures, to cheat and never meant to keep,
they knowing this that he that so Swears by Creatures meant not to keep but to cheat and not perform; such Oaths were not very probably used in Ju∣dicature among them, neither in serious cases, for such Oaths instead of giving satisfaction and putting an end unto Jealousies and Distrusts would have sure created them more then before; forasmuch as he that so Swears believes himself not to be bound thereby, then if he had not Sworn at all, and he unto whom he Swears also knows the same, that such Oaths (as A. S. tells on that they did Swear) is not binding, neither can any more credit be given to them then to a Lyar, because in this sort of Swearing there was no security; it is not probable I say, that they should chuse this in Judicature or any serious case of Controversie: And if it be that Swear∣ing that Christ only prohibits by Heaven, Earth, and Creatures, which the Pharisees indulged them in, wherein (as to the point of Swearing) does he prescribe a Righteousness and Perfection above or beyond Moses his Servant whom he was to exceed; for God by Moses in the Law it self had Univer∣sally forbidden all other Oaths, either in general terms, or sometime more particularly; but still all false oaths, vain oaths, and Oaths by Creatures are included, save only solemn Swearing by his own Name that there was no more Swearing left for Christ to forbid his Disciples, but Swearing by God himself, which the Law allowed of. Besides moreover, the Opposition then which lies intimated in that Par∣ticle [But] being not between false Swearing and prophane Swearing, and Swearing by Creatures, as A. S. would have it, but between Forswearing then and No Swearing now, shews Christ's Intent to be to prohibit all Swearing; for it is indeed as if he had thus said, God under the Law com∣manded you to swear by his Name, and when you had sworn in Truth by him, to perform the Oaths you made by him, whether to him or any o∣ther; but I say, now God allows you not to swear at all, not by Heaven, Earth, or any other, no not those Oaths which ye did and might make of old unto the Lord your God in things lawful, but no Oath by a Creature did God account as an Oath made to him, provided ye performed it when ye had done, any more then he counted their solemn Fastings to be to him, Zachariah 7.5. Again, Christ's own Expressions in the affirmative Part shew his mean∣ing in the negative to be a Prohibition of all Swearing as well as any; but let your Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; so the Negative of his Words, Swear not at all, must be understood in such an universal exclusive Latitude as admits of no Oaths whatsoever among his Disciples; and as hath been said, that Particle [But] which stands between these two Pro∣hibitions, of Moses, saying, Forswear not, but perform to God thine Oaths, and of Christ, saying [But] I say unto you, Swear not at all, doth manifest that Christ forbids all Swearing as much as any, even such Swearing as was not indulged to them by the Pharisees only, but by Moses and God him∣self, who by his Servant dispensed with them in, and instituted even their Swearing by God's own Name, who never indulged or dispensed with a∣ny of that Creature-swearing, as A.S. speaks of, but threatned Woes to it under the Law; and by the Law again, if it be said, Christ only prohibi∣ted all such voluntary Oaths, which they sware to perform to the Lord by any Crea∣ture,
as Heaven, Earth, in their Communication and mutual Converse (as A.S. sayes) but not solemn Oaths by God in Courts, or before Magistrates, and not between Man and Man, and Matter of Deliberation, as some others say, and have interpreted the Words, Let not your whole Conversation be interwoven with Oaths. Reply, Christ doth indeed forbid all such voluntary Oaths as were used by the Jews and Pharisees, and all Swearing by any Thing besides God or below God, also all Swearing in common Communication and ordinary Conversation, where Yea and Nay should serve, yea, and that which is called solemn, and by some sacred and lawful, even by God even all Swear∣ing by God commonly, frequently or generally, which is now in Courts, and imposed by Justices and Magistrates, then which nothing almost is more ordinary, frequent and common; if our Communication and Con∣versation should be without Swearing, and our mutual Converse one with another among men should be without Oaths of any kind whatsoever; is not this exclusive of Swearing in Courts, and before Magistrates as well as other men, whether in Courts and Consistories as well as other Places, where men have their Conversation and mutual Converse with each other as ordinarily and commonly as else-where, which being considered I have with other often mused why some men have been so inconsiderate as to in∣terpret Christ's Words and Prohibition, as exclusive of mens Swearing in their ordinary Converse in Courts, where Oaths are as ordinary, fre∣quent and common as in any Places whatsoever, especially that some men plead so much for Oaths in Courts, and before Magistrates only (as though they were sacred and solemn there, and no where else, and holy and law∣ful only there) and yet can bring no better Proof under the Gospel for them nor of their Right to impose them upon Christians more then others? a∣mong the many false Instances they bring of Paul Swearing frequently to the Churches in his Letters; and such pitiful Proof as A.S. offers of Christ being charged by the high Priest (as he sayes) to Swear; though he Swore, for I deny that (I adjure thee) proves not that Christ Swore, it being not his, but another's Charge upon him; and it's silly to think, that Christ who said, Swear not at all, no not by Heaven, for it's God's Throne, which who∣so Swears by, Mat. 18. Swears by God that sits thereon, that he should Swear by the living God, he was the Christ, at the Command or Charge of the High Priest, who was his Inferiour (though he had been a better Priest then he was) as being but the Type of himself; but indeed there was no such matter as A.S. and others have affirmed; for when the High Priest barely asked him only whether he were the Christ or not? he answered, I am; besides the Law was not in the Shadow of it fully ended, although Christ had instituted divers Things among his Disciples, which were not in the Law, and yet not against it; but all these Instances which A. S. with many Opposers, hath brought of the Apostles and Christ's Swear∣ing, are but Shrouds and Shelters they make for themselves, because they have a Mind to obey the Commands of men rather then Christ's Doctrine, for avoiding of Persecution and Suffering, and therefore would make all Things they take in Hand look like their own Image; but having discour∣sed
of this before, I come to A. S. his last Part of his Discourse, and his Interpretation upon Mat. 5. and Jam. 5. In his 41 Section he sayes, If any still urge the Universality of the Expres∣sion (Swear not at all) and that of Jam. 5.12. (Above all Things my Brethren Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, neither any other Oath) To the first he sayes, It's plain that they that thus argue break off our Saviour's Sen∣tence in the middle, and suffer him not to come to his Period; for he saith not, Swear not at all, there fixing a Point, but Swear not at all, neither by Hea∣ven, nor by Earth, &c. and for that of James must of Necessity by understood with Restriction, quotes Austin upon the Text, it cannot be that Swearing is worse then Forswearing, Theft, Adultery, Murder, these are hainous Crimes, nulla autem culpa est verum jurare; but if no Sin to Swear the Truth, why then Above all Things Swear not, not that Swearing is so great an Offence as many o∣thers but lest we contract a Habit thereof, then probably by rash Oaths we shall offend God by false Swearing, which is no more then in an especial Manner, forbear for∣swearing, and any other Oath must be restrained in a limited Sense, for there is not meant any Oaths whatever, but such as the Apostle speaks of, neither by Hea∣ven, by Earth, nor any other Oath, that is, any Oath taken by other Creatures, for so must they be understood, unless we interpret his Words to make them contra∣dict God's, and se the Servant in a manifest Opposition to his Master. Reply, We who are of a contrary Judgment to A.S. do still urge the U∣niversality of the Text, Mat. 5.33, 34, &c. and we shall not break off Christ's Sentence in the middle, Swear not at all, &c. but shall render it as it is, neither was it ever intended otherwise, but for Brevity sake, because the Enumeration of Heaven and Earth, &c. are only inclusive in the Pro∣hibition; and we shall speak on, and what Christ hath joyned we shall not separate, but read the Words as they are, Ye have heard it hath been said of old Time, thou shalt not forswear they self, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, neither by the Earth, it's his Footstool, neither by Jerusalem, for it's the City of the great King, neither shalt thou Swear by thy Head, because thou cannot make one Hair white or black; but let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, whatsoever is more then these cometh of Evil. James 5.12. But a∣bove all Things my Brethren Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay, lest you fall into Condemnation: In which two Texts we say (in the Affirmative) all Manner of Swearing is forbidden, for the Truth of which many Rea∣sons have been and may be given. First, Because all Manner of Swearing is here expresly instanced in these two disjunctive Clauses, which are expresly conclusive, and consequently (because spoken by Way of Prohibition) exclusive, exceptive of all Swear∣ing that can be thought on, Swear not, Swear not at all, sayes the Text, yea, that none may imagine, as A. S. would make men do, that this general Rule admits of any Exception; but all know the Prohibition is so strict as to allow of no Permission in the Point to swear by any Thing but God, he adds, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by Jerusalem, neither
by thy Head; and these are only more ample Expressions of that Prohibiti∣on, and are not exclusive or disjunctive from the Prohibition, but conclu∣sive of the Prohibition of all Swearing whatever. But lest any should think he forbids only and no more then extravagant Oaths of such as swear by Creatures, as Earth, Jerusalem, the Head, and such like, whenas whosoever swore lawfully under the Law was to swear by none but God himself; but that there be no Root at all for any reaso∣ning for Swearing against the flat Prohibition of it, James 5. he concludes and shuts up all in these universal Terms, and excludes all Oaths, and all possible Pretence of Plea at all for any Swearing, adding neither by any other Oath; what Words more plain Words can be uttered, or can be more ex∣presly exclusive both of all Kinds or Sorts of Swearing, and of all sorts of particular Oaths of every Kind; and by Heaven, and by Earth, and by Jeru∣salem, are so far from signifying that those Oaths by Creatures are only the Oaths that Christ prohibits, that they are but only Enumerations and Am∣plifications of the former Part of the Prohibition, Swear not at all, which we grant were spoken to reprove the Pharisees and the Jews Practice about their vain Swearing. And why must those Words of James 5. needs be understood with Re∣striction? Above all Things Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, &c. why, St. Austin scruples at the first Words, Quare ante omnia jurare est quam furari, &c. quam adulterare, &c. quam hominem occidere, it cannot be that Swearing is worse then forswearing, then Adultery, Theft, Mur∣der; we do not say it is, but if it be not, or that be not the Reason why he sayes, Above all Things Swear not, because Swearing is a Sin above all Sins, can no other Reason but that be rendered? yes, yet we shall agree with Au∣stin and A. S. too, if their Judgment be one, thus far, that it was not Sin to Swear the Truth, when called unto it, under the Law; why then Above all Things Swear not? not that Swearing is so great an Offence as Murder or Adultery, but lest we contract a Habit thereof, and then possibly by rash Oaths, we should offend God, which is no more (saith he) then in especial Manner, for∣bear Forswearing; and any other Oath (saith A. S.) must be restrained in a limited Sense; for there is not meant any Oath whatever, but such as the Apostle speaks of, by Heaven, by Earth, &c. Though there be some Truth in what is said, yet it's too short to answer the Apostle's End and Scope, and the Reason falls short that is rendered; but the main Reason is, they were Jews unto whom he wrought, the twelve Tribes scattered, whom we deny not but were run into that Custom of vain Swearing by Creatures, as Heaven Earth, Jerusalem, Head and Temple, &c. but that is not all, though we grant it is some Reason; but they being Jews, who might under the Law Swear erious or solemn Oaths, and were not so fully informed of the End of the Law in Christ, under which among them some Oaths were lawful, they were apt to think, they did as well in swearing so now as they did before; so though Adultery and Murther may be as bad & worse then Swearing, yet the Law being so expresly against them, which yet in its time allow'd some kind of Swearing in some Cases (it was more hard to bring them of from some Ceremonious services of the Law that were once lawful, as is evident long after Christ's Ascension, the Apostles had much to do with them about
the Rites of the Law, as Circumcision, and Times, and Dayes, and new Moons, &c. then from such Sins as were known and hated by them, and held accursed, by the very Letter of the Law; and therefore he says) Above all things my Brethren Swear not; that they might not only take hold of all vain Swearing, and Swearing by Creatures, that was ever unlawful; but if that they might know that now to be unlawful which in former times was accounted lawful for them: and so it's ordinary to say to Men, above all things take heed of that to which they have been long accustomed, and with which (through heedlesness of the unlawfulness of the thing) they are apt most easily to be overtaken. Again, It is by Solomon, who spoke by the eternal Wisdom of God, and in it to fear an Oath is made the Character of a righteous Man that Sacri∣ficeth acceptably to God (to Swear (at all) is more the Character of a wick∣ed and unclean Sinner, Eccles. 9.1, 2. for howbeit Men shall once return, and discern the happiness of him that serves God, from his woe who serves him not, yet he is one event to the Righteous and the Wicked, to the good and clean, and to the unclean, to him that Sacrificeth, and him that Sacrificeth not, as is the good so is the Sinner, as he that Sweareth so he that fears an Oath, and so as above all things Swear not, is to be taken not only of those Oaths which were ever unlawful by Heaven and Earth, but even of those that sometime, were lawful under the Law, in the Type which now when the Substance the Oath of God is come, and the Covenant of Light given to all Nations▪ Isa. 5.5. Luk. 1.72, 73. who ends all, not only vain Oaths, but all Oaths, and is the Substance of all, even to the subsequent, neither by any other Oath is not only to be taken of such Oaths neither by Heaven, nei∣ther by Earth, which were ever unlawful; but even of those sometime lawful, even all Swearing and all Oaths; and the Servant is not in oppositi∣on to his Master, but knew the mind of his Master Christ, and therefore taught like Doctrine and the same: but whatever Christ or James had said, A. S. would make them, if he could to mean as he means, to set their plain express words against their mind: But so much hath been said by many others who fear the Lord and an Oath too, and so many Demon∣strative and weighty things have been offered to the Consciences and pub∣lick view of all, which A. S. I perceive hath seen some of them, though he come not so much as near as to answer them, but only asserts his own, being a work it seems he was put upon by others to plead for Swearing; so that something he must say on that behalf, and draw that way, and to make all things look towards that end, and to concur together (to justifie them, and the lawfulness of Oaths under the Gospel, and their Work who Persecute the Servants of Christ for abiding in his Doctrine, who speak the Truth and dare not Lye nor Swear at all; I say I shall be the more brief because I know many things are extant by others, & of weight, which have not yet been answered, nor are by A. S. though here and there a little in his Annotations he craps sometime upon smll Ground, although he hath asserted nothing but that which hath been answered over and o∣ver again: But I draw on to his last Refuge and plea, his answer to both the Texts Conjunction.
That these Propositions, says A. S. (How Universally soever exprest) ought not in equity to be extended beyond the intention of the Apostles, but be limited according to the subject matter, Swear not at all (says Christ) neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, &c. That is, I Universally forbid you all those Oaths which you were wont to use frequently to wicked purposes; and further he sayes, all vain and false Oaths by God, even by the acknowledge∣ment of the Pharisees were sufficiently forbidden before, so there was no need either for Christ or James to speak of them again, others places of Scripture most of necessity be thus interpreted, 1 Cor. 10.23. Mat. 15. Luk. 2.1. Mat. 12. Luk. 8.47. how Universally soever exposed must be restrained according to the mind of the Speaker, and so must these words Swear not at all. Reply. It's freely granted that these two Texts ought not to be extend∣ed beyond the intention of the Speakers, but be limited according to the subject matter, as for General terms and Universal prohibitions, admitting of exception they do so, we grant now and then they do, and of restricti∣ons, but when they do these exceptions and restrictions are usually in one place or other of the same Testament, where they are made, or at least manifestly amplified by him that gave out these general prohibitions, and so are most of these generals and restrictions that A. S. hath instanced, 1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful for me to eat, that which was sold at the Sham∣bles was lawful, but that which was Sacrificed to Idols, ver. 12. there he mentions the restriction himself, and so Luk. 1.3. It seemed good to me also, having perfect understanding of all things from the very first, the subject mat∣ter whereof he writes and the things are exprest, and the exceptions, in the 2 Chapter, and in Mat. 12.31. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be for∣given unto Men, but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be for given, there in the same Verse Christ makes the exception and restriction, and Exod. 20.10. Thou shalt do no manner of Work, it's abundantly expressed else∣where in the Law; where the Priests service on every Sabbath are appoin∣ted them, and the exception of dressing what every one was to eat, and was expressed, and the exception of doing good, and of works of Mercy, in saving the Life of Man or Beast was to take place ever against the Typical Sabbath (I will have mercy and not Sacrifice) and that of Luk. 8.47. and the Woman that was healed by touching the border of Christ's Garment, she declared unto him before all the People; what saith A. S. before all the People of the World, or before all the People of the Land? no there is none so ignorant as to understand it, for Mark. 5.21. manifest the excep∣tion before all the People, only that were with him nigh unto the Sea; when he returned from the County of the Gdarens, or before all the People of his own City that came out to meet him, Mat. 9.3. Mat. 8.34. many more I might add to what A. S. hath instanced, that Christ uttered many Truths in general terms which must admit of exception, Luk. 13.10. all the Sinners Christ spoke to about him, in the general terms, ye shall Perish, but this was not without exception of such as should Repent; but that ex∣ception was not without expression, viz. except ye repent, again he said unto his hearers, Ye cannot enter the Kingdom of God; that was not without exceptions, nor these exceptions without expressions, viz. except ye be con∣verted;
yea, in the verses immediately before, this Universal prohibition, Swear not at all, Mat. 5.30, 31. Christ sayes, 'twas said of old, if any put away his Wife, let him give her a Bill of divorce; but I say, whosoever shall put a∣way his Wife, causeth her to commit Adultery: But this admits of an exception and that exception is thus exprest, viz. saving for the cause of Fornication; but though all this be granted, even these and many more Universal terms admit of exceptions and restriction, yet we cannot grant that these two Texts admit of any such exceptions or restrictions as A. S. would inter∣pret them. My reason is this, because in this general term and Universal prohibition, Swear not at all, it cannot in Equity be taken and limitted in that sense which A. S. puts upon it, nor with that restriction, for that sense would make it short of the subject matter where all Swearing is forbidden as well as any, because Swear not at all by Heaven, Earth, &c. Because there is not only no Expression made any where after of any such Exception or Restriction, but a fuller Amplification of it by such Particu∣lars as are enumerated, and are more particularly exclusive of all kinds of Oaths, and of all Oaths of any kind, not only of those that they used to wicked Purposes, but even those they solemnly used sometime to good Pur∣poses before the Seed Christ was revealed; and the Apostle, James 5.12. neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, which is a Re-inforcement and redoubling of the said universal Prohibition; where∣as if Christ had intended any Exception here, he might as easily have ex∣prest, and would as assuredly as he did immediately above in the Cause of Divorce, by (except in the Cause of Fornication) and have so said, Swear not at all, except it be solemn and sacred Oaths, and by the Lord, to good Purpo∣ses in Courts, where ye are call'd to swear before a Magistrate; so James if he had intended, as A.S. will needs inforce, yet without any Ground, a Limita∣tion and Restriction, Above all Things my Brethren Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, except ye swear solemnly by God to good Purposes in Courts or before Magistrates; but as I said, instead of excepting any Exception, he adds that which more strengthens and clears beyond all Exception the Universality of his Prohibition; and if all vain Oaths by God were forbidden before, and all Swearing by Creatures, so that there was no need either for Christ or James to speak of them again, as A.S. sayes, then this is still matter for the Argument on our Part, that some Oaths were prohibited by Christ and James which were not prohibi∣ted before, and of which there was Necessity for them to speak, as there was indeed, not only about those Oaths and other Things which the Law before had prohibited, but even of those Things that it had allowed and indulged, because of the Hardness of their Hearts; so we say, there was a Necessity of Christ and James, not only to mention those Things again which the Law had spoken of before, and disallowed, which we have in∣stanced before, and is manifest in that Chap. 5. which the Pharisees had per∣verted and loosened by their false Glosses and Traditions, but even those Things which were permitted, indulged and commanded under the Law, and suffered to be, because of the Hardness of their Hearts, and Strifes, Unbeliefs, Insecurities; and therefore Christ teacheth and informeth his Disciples as it was in the Beginning before those Things entered, and in
this Cause about Oaths among the rest prohibits all Swearing without Li∣mitation, not only that which was once forbidden, but even that which was once permitted, and commanded, and indulged; and therefore it hath been said of old Time, thou shalt not forswear thy self (under the Law) where? in Numb. 30.2. Deut. 23.21. but I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor Earth, nor Jerusalem, nor thy Head, which is mani∣festly an exclusive Prohibition of all Oaths, without Exception or Restri∣ction or Limitation, and still will stand good (notwithstanding all A. S. and others opposing) among his Disciples and true Christians, in whose Hearts he hath put it to speak the Truth; and confess in any Cause where∣in they are concerned, to the Glory of God the Father, and to keep the Commands of his Christ, and to glorifie him by abiding in his Doctrine, Swear not at all. And then A. S. concludes, Here the grand Objection falls of it self, which is, Either all kinds of Swearing is forbidden, or else Christ notwithstand∣ing his Words (But I say unto you) forbad nothing which was forbidden be∣fore, which is utterly improbable, and the Reason is (saith he) because God formerly had forbidden all false and vain Oaths, and all Swearing by Creatures, all which I grant to be true (saith he) but the Pharisees had taught the People o∣therwise by their wicked Glosses, that made the Commandment of small Effect by their Tradition, and the Practice of that Nation was widely distant from the Com∣mandment, both which were necessarily to be reformed, which our Saviour did in these Words, But I say unto you, Swear not at all. Reply, Who ever denyed but that the Pharisees were blind Guides, and that they laboured to make void the Law, and made the Commandments of God of small Effect by their Traditions, or that the Practice of that Nation was not widely distant from the Commandment, and that they sware by false Gods sometime, and vainly by the true God, and took his Name in vain, and sware also by Heaven, and Earth, and Jerusalem, like as ma∣ny do now; all this we grant, that they were out of the Way both in Oaths and other Things, also that Christ reproved in the fifth of Matthew and else-where, which Christ reformed and reproved their Doctrine and Manners; I say again, how is the grand Objection fallen by this, That ei∣ther all kind of Swearing is forbidden here by Christ, or else Christ forbad nothing which was not forbidden before, which is utterly improbable, saith A. S. but it is more probable then any thing that A. S. hath yet offered; for if on∣ly by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, Head, Temple and Altar be that which Christ forbad, that the Pharisees taught the People they might swear by, these were forbidden before, inclusive in false Swearing or Swearing by Creatures, though not expressed or enumerated nominally, yet included among the sinful and vain Oaths under the Law, and so were forbidden before; and saith A. S. I grant that all vain Oaths and Perjury, and all Swear∣ing by Creatures were formerly forbidden; and if so, as indeed they were, what more did he forbid then was forbidden, if the Words must only be understood of those sinful and vain Oaths by Creatures above-mentioned, that the Pharisees indulged the People in, and taught as A. S. would limit his Prohibition and Exception, I shall leave to the Conscience of every en∣lightned
man to judge, and say that in these Words, It hat been said of old Time thou shalt not forswear, but pay thy Vows unto the Lord, but I say (who am come to restore Man again into that Estate he fell from by Transgres∣sion, and to redeem him that believes out of Strife and Contention, and Idolatry, to have fellowship with the Father) Swear not at all, neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath, that as hath been said before here is a prohibition of all vain Oaths and false Oaths, and Perjury, and all Oaths by Creatures, and all the vain Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees about Oaths, and somewhat more, even a prohibition of those Oaths to his Disciples, which the Law allowed after Sin had entred, for which cause the Law was added, and Oaths added, but Christ ends it, (not by destroying it) but by fulfilling it, and hath set up that which is more E∣vangelical, Truth it self, in which there is no shadow of change, and it is binding upon the Souls of all true Christians, and that by which they are bound one to another, and every Word, Promise, or Testimony that goes out of their Hearts and Mouths, they by it are bound to keep, least they fall into Condemnation, but their Yea is yea, and Nay is nay; and whatsoe∣ver is more then this cometh of Evil; and therefore they do not, cannot, nor dare not go beyond this or that which doth but amount to as much, and there needs no more among true Christians. Now as to them, who are in the Contention and Strife and Unbelief and Oaths, works of the Flesh, as Variance, Discord, whom the Law hath Power over and is against, as long as they live in such estate, it's granted that the Law was added because of these Transgressions, and is against such; and how far Swearing can be binding among evil, contentious, unconsci∣onable Men, that make no Conscience of any thing, who cannot believe one another, nor give credit to one another without Swearing, Experience hath manifested whether they judge one another to be believed better by Swearing then without Swearing, that's little to us, neither shall we meddle in contentious matters, nor have to do with striving Men, as little as possible, but rather suffer wrong, then wrong our Consciences by Swear∣ing, which we are perswaded by Christ we ought not to right our selves, as hitherto we have done and have Peace, blessed be God in our Hearts, however, we could rejoyce and be glad to see all Men be at Peace, and a∣gree, and it's our desire to live in that love, and we shall seek it with Men and to be at Peace as much as in us lyes, even in that love that works no Evil, nor thinks no Evil, but believeth all things, and beareth all things, and so carries beyond Strife and Oaths; but if they will not be without Oaths in Courts and Judicatures, we are clear in the matter, if they exact upon us, and do as they have done, to the undoing, and Ruining of many in this World, we must be content, knowing it is better to suffer wrong, then to do it, and shall acquiesce and rest in the will of God, till he plead our cause, and open the Hearts of Men to see through the Clouds of Error and Igno∣rance that is over their Consciences. Yet however this I must needs say, this frequent, common, prophane Swearing, that hath exalted its Horn, more of late Years, is one of the crying Sins of England, that God's Anger is against, and will draw down his Judgment, and kindle the Indignation which hangs over this Nation,
not only because of those that command Men to Swear, contrary to Christs command, (and that for to establish Cruelty and injustice) but also that Swore falsly and vainly, and that against their Knowledge, for their own profit, and the disadvantage of others: to accomplish their wicked, Ma∣licious and Revengeful designs, against the Innocent, who dare not Swear at all, and thereby are made a prey to the Teeth of Wolves, and to the Wills of corrupt Men, who take occasion (as it were) To plow long Fur∣rowes upon the Backs of the poor and needy, for which things sake the Wrath of God will be poured out upon the head of the Wicked, and the Nation shall be on Heaps, and the wise Men shall be turned backwards, and their Table shall be a Snare, and the Curse shall be upon the Rebellious, and they shall fall and be bro∣ken and rise no more; and this may justly befall this Nation, because of Oaths, and because of Oppression. And oh much pittied Nation! it may be said of thee truly as the Pro∣phet Hosea 4.2, 3. (Because of Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and Whoring, they break out, and Blood toucheth Blood, therefore shall the Land Mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off) Oh! what sad times do we behold, nothing but extreames of Evil are presented to our Eyes and Ears, some do little but Swear, ordinarily, commonly and vainly, in all kind of Communication and Conversation, not only in their usual outer Courses in Courts, with Judges and Magistrates, but in their hourly discourses also with other Men, in Cities, Townes, Princes and great Mens Courts, and Places, Universities, Colledges, almost all Houses, at least all Taverns and Ale-houses, and in the open Streets and Assemblies, almost every where, are full of dreadful Oaths, and Mens discourses interwoven with execrable and direful Oaths, even as it were daring God to confound them and damn them, and such like, and though there be divers Laws against swearing vainly and forswearing, yet these are not looked at, but how should we exspect that they should look at the Execution of the Laws of Men which are good, who heed not the Law of God; and are so buzzed now a dayes, with over-executing those intangling Laws that are extant for Oaths, and forswearing, to intrap and insnare poor Innocent Men, who dare not Swear at all, but keep the Commands of Christ; so that there is no leisure lost to look after those most wholsome and profitable Laws of both God and the King, which are against vain Oaths, and forswearing, which the Land abounds with, the like hath not been in any Age, which is a sad presage of the Judgment of God to be at hand. And last of all, A. S. says, He hath done, and he fears it's more and time to have done with the Exposition of those words, and so comes to Application, and so he speaks to all in general; who at that time or any other may be legally called to take their Oaths, which you have heard Vindicated to be lawful, notwithstand∣ing the seeming opposition of these words, Swear not at all; but those must be understood of necessary Oaths, and your Righteousness is to exceed the Scribes and Pharisees, but they condemned Perjury in the verse immediately before my Text; and your Warrant for swearing is in Jer. 4.2. which thence appears not only lawful but in some cases necessary. Reply. It's more then time indeed to have done, to pervert Christ's plain Doctrine with his imaginary Exposition, and what he counts (legally cal∣ed
seeing Christ prohibited it, is not of much force, neither will A. S.'s Vindication stand against the real opposition of Christ's words, Swear not at all; but his seeming Vindication (in the day of the Lord, when the secrets of all Hearts shall be manifest by Jesus Christ, when the Book of Conscience shall be opened) will be found to be in real opposition unto Christ, and his reward will be according to his works, who hath by his work strengthn'd the hand of Evil-doers and Persecutors, to the adding af∣fliction to affliction upon the Righteous; and if the words must be under∣stood of necessary Oaths, then there is none necessary among Christ's true Disciples, who commanded, Let your Yea be yea, or your Nay, nay, for what∣soever is more comes of Evil; and whether the Scribes and Pharisees condem∣ned a Perjury or not, we are sure the Law did, which Christ's words hath reference to, It hath been said of old time thou shalt not forswear thy self; and if the Righteousness of Christ's Disciples be to exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and they condemned Perjury, and all false Swear∣ing by God, and the Law condemned all false Oaths and vain Oaths, and Oaths by Creatures, as A. S. hath granted; then the Righteousness of the Disciples is to be another, then the Righteousness of the Law, which condemned all Perjury and vain Oaths; then what is it, but not to Swear at all any Oath, but speak the Truth, and confess it to the Glory of God in yea and nay? and this is that which exceeds the Scribes and Pharisees, and is only lawful and necessary under the Gospel; and as for Jer. 4.2. this is pit∣tiful proof and warrant for Christians to Swear under the Gospel, for that was only spoken to Israel or Juda, who were under the first Covenant, and yet were revolted from the Ordinances thereof, and were back-sliders, as is to be seen, Jer. 3.22. and hath not Reverence to the second Covenant: But I shall come towards an end as well as A. S. and conclude and refer all (what both he and I have said) to the judgment of the Lord, and the measure of God's holy Spirit in all Mens Consciences, to be received or denyed by that as he and his Witness bears evidence, so shall the matter stand eternally. Yet I cannot but mind the Reader, though A. S. hath had, as appears, certain Books of the Dissenters, in which are weighty things, about this particular of Swearing, which he hath not answered at all, as to their Arguments, only carped here and there at a word, which is not of great moment; but though he may plead some reason, that it was not possible to answer all things in so short a Discourse, as a Sermon, wherein he was limited as to time, yet since he had, I perceive, by his Annotations, time enough to have answered them, having their Books extant by him, but hath not, in the most weighty Considerations; therefore I refer the Reader to them, for his further satisfaction, viz. to the Answer of Bishop Gauden, by that faithful Servant of God, Sam, Fisher, where this point is largely discussed, likewise his Antidote against Swearing, in Answer to Heary Den, and Jeremiah Ives, likewise a Book published by Isaac Penington, titled, The great Question concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Swearing under the Gospel stated, and considered of; wherein are weighty things declared in short; 1st. what an Oath is; 2dly. the Ground and occasion of an Oath; 3dly. the causes wherein an Oath was to be used; 4thly. the end of an Oath; 5thly. the suitableness of its NATURE to the end aimed at by it; 6thly. the Persons to whom the use of an Oath was proper and lawful.
Wherein also is clearly shown the state of man-kind from the Creation, comprised in four Heads or particulars: First, (The State of Innocency) when there was no Oath) Secondly, An estate of Captivity, wherein an Oath was proper and lawful: Thirdly, The estate of shadowy Redemption, wherein it was lawful also: Fourthly, An estate of true and perfect Redemption, where∣in it's neither needful nor lawful, seeing it's prohibited by Christ, all which A. S. hath passed over, and hath not answered. Likewise a Book published by John Crook, Titled, The Case of Swearing (at all) discussed with; and several Objections answered: These things A. S. hath not answered, I only instance them for the Readers further sa∣tisfaction, if unsatisfied in what hath been said already; all which great and weighty things, are worthy of the Serious consideration of all. Likewise a Book, Titled, (Swearing denyed in the new Covenant) by Morgan Watkins. When all that hath been said, is duly considered and weighed in the Righteous Ballance of God's holy Spirit, they will not think it strange that some deny to Swear at all, but rather wonder that such a Vail of Darkness should be so long over the minds and Hearts of them that believe not, notwithstanding so clear evidence from Christ and his Apostles, or the Example of the Primitive Christians or holy Martyrs, who spoke the Truth, but denyed to Swear at all; but that Custome and Tradition is often more minded then the very Truth it self. Oh! that the Rulers of this Nation would once consider & weigh what they are doing, and how many and great the suffering of a Conscientious People that fear the Lord in theirs Hearts are, who dare not disobey the commands of Christ, lest they fall into Condemnation, and come under the rebuke of the Lord in their Hearts, who hath Power alone to kill and to make alive, but rather chuse to suffer the loss of all, and undergo the manifold Sufferings that some malicious Spirits cause to be inflicted upon them; when indeed there is no cause at all; while prophane Persons Swear, and forswear, and take God's holy Name in vain, and make little Conscience of any thing, but sometime for, and sometime against, what∣soever seems countenanced and discountenanced by the Magistrates; so that neither the King nor Kingdom is in any more security, notwithstanding all such Swearing, how solemn soever they seem in Swearing, neither any more credit be given in Judicature, then there is to be given to him that is a common Swearer in his private occasions, or common Communication; and Oh! how doth the Land abound in this, insomuch that he that is not a Curser or Swearer is looked upon as a Phanatick, or some disobedient Person, or unconformable Man, which ought especially to be eyed for a dan∣gerous Person: Oh! that the Heads and Rulers of the People would but consider how near the Judgment of God is, and how ready to break forth upon the Nation; and not without cause, even great Evils are begun, Pe∣stilence and Sword already threatned, and God's Arrows flying abroad to wound and to destroy them that continue in hardness of Heart, & rebellion against God, and will not suffer him to rule and reign in the Consciences and Kingdoms of Men, but vain Men would set up their Thresh-hold with his, and not only so, but against his; and great is the wickedness and the Sins
of this Nation upon many accounts, which the Lord will bring a Scourge upon, especially that grievous Sin of Persecution, that Cain-like way, which the Generations have chosen to add as they ignorantly suppose unto their Church, and so build up their Zion with Cruelty, and their Church by Iniquity: Oh! this is loathsome in the sight of God; had Zimri peace who slew his Master? had Israel Peace when she slew the Prophets? had the Jews Peace when they had Crucified Christ? had the Romans Peace when they Persecuted the first Christians? had Cain Peace when he had slain his Brother? If nay, let not England expect Peace, when they are Perse∣cuting them that are Members of Christ's Church, so that this grievous Sin (if England had no more) were enough to bring the dreadful Judg∣ment of God upon the whole Land, and undoubtfully will, if not repent∣ed of; but now it must not be counted so; and why? because there are some Statuets and Laws which they obey not, and so it's for disobedience; consider, did not all the former pretend one Law or other, did not all that ever suffer'd, even the best of Men & Christians suffer as disobedient, & as Of∣fenders against some Law or other, & as Evil-doers in the Account of them, that inflicted Punishments upon them; if so (as it is certain they did) may not England be deceived, while that they are thinking they do God and the King Service, to root out and destroy some under the Notion of Heresie, and some under the Notion of Disobedience and Factious, may they not be persecuting Christ in his Members, or destroying the peaceable Members of their Native Country; the Lord open all their Eyes, and do away the Darkness and the Vail of Ignorance that is over many Hearts, that they may turn to the Lord, and submit unto his eternal and unchangeable Pow∣er, that so they may escape the Day of the Lord, which is at Hand, and the Judgment of God that is ready to break forth as an an over-flowing Scourge, to cut off and sweep away in his Displeasure even all them that would not have Christ to rule in their Hearts, neither have his Laws ful∣filled nor obeyed, which he writeth in the Hearts of all true Believers, un∣to whom all must bow and be subject, because the Father hath committed all Power into his Hand, and his Glory he will not give to another, no, to none but him whom he hath given for a Covenant of Light and Life, to be King, Law-giver, Saviour and Judge of his People, and to be the Head of the Body, his Church, whom he redeems out of the World to himself to glorifie him, who is the only Potentate and King of Immortal Glory, God blessed forever and ever, Amen.
To all the Well-beloved Flock of Christ, whom he hath gathered into his Fold (to feed in his Heavenly pasture) in and about London, Hartford and Kingston. PEace from God the Father be multiplyed in all your Hearts through Jesus Christ, the Prince thereof, whom the Father hath sent, as his Free Gift, and given for the Covenant thereof unto all that be∣lieve and receive him, to reconcile all, even all that believe, even them that have been and yet are afar off, and are in Enmity in their Hearts yet by wicked Works, and have no Title or Right unto Peace, yet they that have received have, and them that shall receive him shall have, and shall be brought nigh unto God, and out of the Wrath and Enmity, and so come to be capable thereof, through receiving and believing in his Name and Power, by whom alone Remission of Sins is obtain'd, and Peace and Reconciliation with God witnessed, to whom be Glory and Honour for∣ever and ever, Amen. Dearly Beloved, with Thoughts of pure and unspotted Love I often re∣member you all, who have been and are Followers of Christ, and Suffer∣ers for him in this present World, and also have been and may expect to be while in the World Companions with them that suffer for that bles∣sed Hope and Testimony, which you have received from God in your Hearts, by which the Saints in Light were purified and sanctified, and did overcome the World and the Prince thereof, who now ruleth in the Chil∣dren of Disobedience, who are subject to his Power and Government, which stands in Wrath, Envy, Oppression, Persecution, and in that which leads unto every evil Deed and Work, and because the Lord hath chosen you out of the World, and from under the Power of the Prince of Dark∣ness, therefore he and all his Subjects hate you; and as it was from the Beginning of his Kingdom since Sin entered into the World, so it is now (though it was not so from the Beginning of God's Creation) when all was blessed and at Peace, and in Unity and Harmony one with another, when Man was the Image of God; and you through the rich Mercy and Love of God being called to believe in the Hope and Promise of God, and having waited and obtained Life through Jesus Christ, whom the Father hath given for Life and the Covenant thereof, and of Peace unto all that believe; I say, it being given unto you of the Father to believe and re∣ceive him whom the Father hath sent to restore again all, even all; receive the free Gift, and close therewith, according as the Father
tenders him unto all, believing and obeying his Voice, they come to wit∣ness Restoration, and to be delivered from Darkness and Death, and eve∣ry evil Way and Work into perfect Freedom in due time, and to serve the living God in Righteousness and Holiness, and to be made Partakers of his precious Promise, and of the Kingdom, Power and Glory of God, that fades not away, and of Life eternal, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost now and forever, and makes all his chosen Ones, who believe in his Name, Partakers of his piteous and long Suffering, and of his heavenly and spi∣ritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, to whom be Glory forever and ever, Amen. I say, because the Lord hath chosen you, and hath wrought Change in you, and brought you out of their Pathes, whose Habitations are full of Cruelty; all that are in Bondage hate you and your Freedom and your Life and Way, and there can be no Reconciliation no Concord in the Ground; for as it was of old time, even so now, since Cain slew his Bro∣ther; so all the Children of the Flesh, of the Bond-woman and of the World hated them that were born of the Spirit, and were redeemed up unto God, to live unto him, and glorifie him forever, by shewing forth by a holy Conversation, that they were so called and chosen of God; I hope the Consideration of these things, and the Knowledge of them dwells with you, and in your Hearts; and you see you are joyned to a blessed Compa∣ny and an holy Assembly, who are gone before, and are entred into Rest, and have precious Fellowship with them who now remain alive unto this Day, who have Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and in all our Trials and Afflictions are afflicted with us; although you have had Exercises above many, and have walked through the Region and Shadow of Death inward and outward, yet the Lord hath upholden you unto this Day, that you may bear in Mind his great and dreadful and wonderful Works, and fear before him, land honour him, and speak Good of his Name, and worship him in the Beauty of Holiness, which he hath led you into, and glorifie him in his Temple; comfort and strengthen one ano∣ther in the Truth, and let not the World, neither the fading Glory of it overcome your Hearts; but in the Dominion of God stand over the World and its Temptations, lest you be entangled, that you cannot run with Pa∣tience, and follow the Lord in the Cross; the Dayes of our Pilgrimage go on apace, the time is short, all outward Suffering will have an End, and Wrath shall cease to be any more; happy are they that continue in the Pa∣tience for this Moment of time we have to follow the Lamb here through the War and Tribulation, Victory is at the End thereof, in the mean time God by his holy Spirit gives daily Hints of his Love in the inward Man un∣to all stay'd Minds, and Assurance of the Victory, which makes me often overlook present Suffering, and forget the Afflictions that are past, and little to heed present things, though they seem to frown, because the Light of God's Countenance is lifted up, and his Favour, and Love, and strength∣ning Power felt in the inward Man, which ballances all, and weighs down the Scale of present Trouble and Affliction, so that hard things are become easie, and ponderous things light; look not out at Trouble and Hardship, but rather admire the great Goodness of God, that hath so much restrain∣ed the Wrath of Men, which was great, and hath made some of it to turn
to his Glory, he hath made void the Intention of the prudent, and hath turned Counsel backward, and hath frustrated the Expectation of the proud and lofty, who took Counsel together, even as of old, against the Lord and his anointed, yet for all this God hath established his Son on the holy Hill of Sion, and his Saints reign with him; sure you cannot but have taken notice of these things, and of the Out-goings of the Lord, and have considered his handy-Works, and say with me, the Lord hath created Deliverance upon Mount Sion, and hath appeared to the Joy of the Righ∣teous, and his Enemies he is making as the Dust under his Feet, and is scat∣tering the Devices of the Sons of fallen Adam, and making them as the Chaff of the Summer Floor, which the Wind scattereth. Friends, what shall I'say unto you? that I love you ye know, that it's no less, neither di∣minuished to the faithful I now give you to know; I often remember you upon my Bed, and not only so, but before the Lord▪ whom I know hath a Regard unto the Supplications of the upright, and their Prayers are as In∣cense, and from whom he smells a sweet Savour, and gives them to feel and know it in their Hearts, so that they come unto him with Confidence, having Access through Jesus our Life and Joy, unto whom be Glory and Honour forever and ever, Amen. Dearly beloved, what shall I say to com∣fort your Hearts, and stir up your Minds to the Exercise of his Grace in you; but the plenteous Harvest of the Lord is come, wherein they that have sown to the Spirit, and have walked in Obedience thereunto, do reap the plenteous Fruits of Righteousness, Peace, Joy, Assurance and pure and perfect Consolation, so that all Cause of Complaint is taken a∣way, Glory to the Lord forevermore; the Vintage is ripe, the Press is full, and many Fatts overflow because of Plenty, and many are filled with the Fatness of God's House; the new Wine is drunk, that comes from the pure and living Vine, Christ Jesus; Clusters of heavenly Grapes are pos∣sessed, better by far then them the Spies brought from Eshcoll, which may animate all your Hearts, and encrease your Faith and Hope; and further, this I say unto you, God is ready to give bountifully unto all, if you be ready to receive, and meet to digest his heavenly Food; and I am sure you cannot want any good thing, neither will his Consolation be withhlden from you, but that which the Prophet Hosea prophesied concerning Israel, and the Bles∣sings that should come upon them, The Lord shall hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and Wine, and Oyl, and they shall hear Israel; the same you shall feel inwardly, to the Satisfaction of all your Souls; the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ open all your Hearts▪ and keep them open, that he according to his Promise may come in, and sup with you, and make his Abode with you and us all▪ Amen, Amen. Brethren, I might and could write largely unto you, but that I know that Word of Truth hath been and is plentifully from time to time published among you, which I would have you all prize as a Mercy and Blessing from the Lord; it was said in the Dayes of Eli the high Priest, That the Word of the Lord was scarce in those Dayes; and Amos prophesied against Israel, when they slighted the Commandment of the Lord, and said to the Sers, see not, and were out of Love with the Word of the Lord, That there should come a Famine of it, and they should wander from Sea to Sea, and should not hear, which was a great Judgment; for that End I speak, that
you may prize that Plenty God hath scattered and sown among you, and not loathe like Israel, what nothing but Manna, nothing but Manna? or lust after new or unknown things, as some prophane Minds say, What, one and the selfsame thing still we hear if we go from Year to year; yest indeed, the Truth is one, the Way to Life one, the everlasting Covenant of Life is one, by which Salvation, Peace and Reconciliation comes to all that believe, and Union with God known, and perfect Satisfaction to the faithful, so that they say and believe in their Hearts he is come, and the Way is declared that leads to everlasting Felicity, and we look not for any, nor after any other; I say, I might write largely unto you, but you are written in my Heart even all that keep their Integrity; feel my Love unto you all in the Life that hath quickned you, that it runs as fresh and freely as Euphrates, that wa∣tered the Garden of Eden, and is no other then the bubling and springing of the VVater of Life, of Love, which the Lord caused to flow forth, and in it to salute you all; the Peace of God rest in all your Habitations, Amen. Appleby, the 22d of this 6th Moneth, 1668. Your Dear Brother in Suffering for Christ, F. H. Cause this to be read in the Assembly of the Church of God in and about London, Hartford and Kingston.
THE TABLE OF THE Principal Things contained in this BOOK. A Warning to the Priests and People of Kendal, page 1. The Word of the Lord to Oliver Cromwel, p. 5. An Answer to Tho. Ellison's Petition to O. Cromwel, p. 7. The fiery Darts of the Devil quenched: In Answer to a Book called, The second Beacon fired, presented to Oliver Cromwel, then Protector, p. 17. A Warning to all the Rulers in these English Nations, p. 24. A Warning to all the World, p. 26. A General Epistle to the Camp of the Lord in England, p. 28. The Inheritance of Jacob discovered after his Return out of Egypt, p. 37. A Lamentation for the scattered Tribes, p. 65. I. The Difference shewn betwixt them that learn of Christ, and are taught of him, and them that follow the Principle of Darkness, that leads into Error, p. 72▪ II. The Difference betwixt the Faith which is feigned, which is the World's, and the Saints Faith, p. 77. III. Concerning Hope, and the Difference betwixt true and false Hope, p. 79. IV. True Faith how it is wrought, and what it is in its Effects and Operations, p. 80. V. A Word to all the Ministers of the World in all Opinions and Sects, and to all your People in every Sect, p. 81. VI. To all you who put out the Eye through long accustoming to Sin, who are near utter Darkness, p. 84. VII. To all them that are tossed, and find no Rest for the Sole of their Feet, but are still lead aside into Pollutions and Sin, and know not how to come forth, nor where the Power is, p. 86. The measuring-Rod of the Lord stretched forth over all Nations, p. 89
Some of the Mysteries of God's Kingdom declared, p. 109. I. What the Day of the Lord is, and to whom it hath appeared, and how it is seen and discovered, p. 114. II. What the Day of the Lord is, and what it will be to the Wicked, declared, p. 115. III. What the Day of the Lord is to the Righteous, and how he appears to them, and whether any are to look for it whilest in the Body, resolved, p. 116. IV. Where the Day of the Lord doth appear, and how it comes, and how it is to be looked for, declared p. 118. V. What the Spirit of the Lord is, and how it comes to be received, which discovers the Things of God, p. 119. VI. How the Spirit of Truth worketh and appeareth in them who are convinced, and yet have not obeyed showed, p. 121. VII. How the Spirit of the Father worketh in them who are turned to it, and have ta∣ken Heed unto its Manifestation, and are in some Measure Partakers of its Power, p. 125. VIII. Vnto whom the Spirit of the Father bears Witness, and seals Assurance of the Father's Love, and of Justification with God, declared, p. 125. IX. What the free Grace of God is, and unto whom it hath appeared, and where all are to wait to receive it, declared, as it hath been revealed by the Spirit, p. 127. X. Whether all have received the Grace of God or no, declared; and whether it be a suf∣ficient Teacher in it self, to wit, that Grace that hath appeared to all, if it be recei∣ved, demonstrated, p 129. XI. A Word to the Wise Men of this World, who are glorying in the Sound of Words, and worshipping outward Appearances; to all Wise and Litteral Professors, who think you are worshiping God aright, who think to search into the deep Things of God by your Natural Wisdom, Learning, Parts and Study, p. 134. XII. The Kingdom of God and of his Christ declared in some Measure, as it is reveal∣ed, what it is, and how it comes to be revealed to them and in them that believe, that all that are waiting for it may know wherein it consists, and so receive the End of their Hope, and the End of their Expectation, and know the Dominion which hath no End, p. 137. An Epistle to Friends in London, p. 141. Mystery Babylon the Mother of Harlots discovered, p. 145. The Invisible Things of God brought to Light by the Revelation of the Eternal Spirit, p. 173. I. The Work of the Lord declared, which was in the Beginning, when the Word was with God, and was the Father's Delight, and Man made in the Image of God, &c. p. 179. II. The Vndrstanding may read the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, and also may see thi sottish Doctrine of the Apostates, p. 182. III. An Objection answered▪ p. 183. IV. How Peace, Joy and Delight possssed every Thing that God had made, how every Thing which he had formed glorified him with one Consent in the Beginning, p. 184. V. How Man lost his Estate and Dominion and Vnity with God and all the Creatures, and how the Lamb came to be sain, and the World that lay in Wickedness came to be framed in Man after the Tempter entred, how endless Misery came in upon all after the Transgression, p. 185. VI. How Sin entred into the World, and Death by Sin, and how Man is dead while he lives, and all are dead Works that he acteth, and the States of all the Sons of Men and their Works may be seen in the Fall, p. 177. VII. Three Objections answered about this Particular, p. 189. VIII. Self▪ Righteousness, Deeds of Darkness also and dead Works are to be condemned also, and Man who acteth them in the Fall▪ p. 191.
IX. An Objection answered as to the present State of the Ministry of the Nations, their Practice and their Worship, p. 192. X. How all Men in the Degeneration and in the Fall have corrupted themselves, and been Idolaters in every Administration, being gone from the Life and Power of God in them∣selves, and having lost the Power of God, Man can neither Worship, Honour nor O∣bey God aright, p. 196. XI. How the Woman that travailed in Birth, who was clathed with the Sun, and brought forth the Man-Child, fled into the Wilderness, when the Dragon had Power, and the Man-Child was caught up to God, p. 211. Darkness and Ignorance expelled by the Light shining forth and the Appearance of the Day, p. 217. The Popish Inquisition newly erected in New England, wherein their Church is manifested to be a Daughter of Mystery-Babylon, p. 237. The Works of Darkness brought to Light, and reproved: In Answer to John Wells, concerning the Word, the Gospel and the Way to Christ, p. 262. The Mouth of the Pit stopped, In Answer to a lying Story called, Hell broke loose, p. 275. The Heart of New-England hardened through Wickedness: In Answer to a Book en∣tituled, The Heart of New-England rent, p. 299. An Information and Advice to the Army and Committee of Safety, p. 324. One Warning more unto England before she give up the Ghost, and be buried in the Pit of Darkness, p. 333. One of Anti-christ's Volunteers defeated, and the true Light vindicated: In Answer to a Book called, Ignis satuus, p. 344. To all Friends and Brethren, who have been called of the Lord into that Place of New-England▪ to bear their Testimony for the Lord, to the answering of his Witness in e∣very ones Conscience, p. 369. The Deceiver of the Nations discovered, and his Cruelty made manifest, p. 372. Some Openings of the Womb of the Morning, to all the Princes of Germany and People, who profess the Name of Jesus Christ in those Dominions, p. 383. The Glory of the true Church discovered, as it was in its Purity in the primitive Times, also a Manifestation how and when the Apostacy came in, p. 401. I. The State of the true Church from the Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, to the End of the Apostles Dayes, p. 407. II. The entring in of the Apostacy, and the Declination from the Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Practice, and when it began, p. 411. III. The Reformed and Separated Congregations called Parochial, proved to be in the Apostacy, compared with the Primitive Times in Worship and Practice, p. 417. IV A few Words, shewing unto all how they may come out of the Apostacy to the true Church, which is in God, the Lamb's Wife, p. 422. V. Concerning baptizing or sprinckling Infants, p. 424. VI. Concerning the Sign of the Cross, and ordaining of Parish-Churches, p. 426.
VII. Concerning Swearing by the Gospel (as it is called) and kissing the Book, and Bishopping of Children, p. 427. VIII. Concerning Fasts, Feasts and Holy Dayes, their Institutors and Founders in the Apostacy, p. 430. IX. Concerning Priests Vestures and Bells, which are practised amongst Christians, as Apostolick Institutions, p. 431. X. Concerning the Mattens, and singing of Psalms by Course in Musical Tunes, and Supplications and short Prayers called Letanies, hir Authors shewn, p. 433. XI. Concerning the Passeover and Lord's Supper, and the Ceremonies about it, p. 436. XII. Concerning Ministers and their Office under the Law and under the Gospel, p. 438. XIII. Concerning the Ten Persecutions under the Heathen Emperors, how divers vain Traditions and Institutions got up among the Christians in those Times, and Constitutions among the Eastern and Western Churches after the Apo∣stacy was entered, in the first Three and Four Hundred Years after Christ, p. 443. XIV. Of the Decrees and Ordinances of the Church of Rome, which are holden out for Apostolical Ordinances and Institutions, p. 457. XV. Concerning the General Councils since the Apostles Dayes, which belonged to the Church of Rome, their Decrees not infallible, but contradicting one another, p. 460. XVI. Concerning the Worship of God, and whether Kings and Rulers ought to compel in spiritual Things, declared, and some Scriptures cleared, and several Objections an∣swered about this Thing, p. 463. XVII. Concerning Oaths in the first Covenant, and the Lawfulness thereof, and the Vnlawfulness thereof discovered in the New Covenant in the Gospel-Times, though the Apostates mingle Ordinances of both together, p. 469. XVIII. Tythes in their first Institution, unto whom they were due according to the Command of God, declared, and that Tythes are no Way Lawful to be received, neither sought for, by any who are Ministers of the New-Covenant and the Everlasting Gospel, proved out of Scriptures and Antiquity, p. 476. XIX. Respecting of Persons, and complemental Bowings, and worshipping one another, and flattering Titles are no good Manners, but are in the Transgression, and have been anciently reproved and condemned, p. 487. XX. Vniversities and Schools of Natural Learning were of no Vse, as to the ma∣king of Ministers of Christ in the Primitive Times, but a Thing introduced and brought in in latter Ages by the Apostates, who had erred from the Spirit, and then admired and set up Natural Languages and Philosophy, that thereby they might be furnished to make Discourses, Speeches and Sermons to get Mo∣ney by, and as they are holden up at this Day, are made an absolute IDOL, p. 490. The Rock of Ages exalted above Rome's Imagined Rock, on which her Church is buil∣ded, p. 497. I. What the true Religion is, and where it is, demonstrated, p. 501. II. The Church of Rome proved to be the false Church, p. 502. III. The Pope proved not to be the Head of the true Church, and Christ proved to be the Head of the Body, which is his Church, and the Rock upon which his Church is built, p. 505. IV. Purgatory proved to be an erroneous, Doctrine which is held forth by the Papists; and their Praying for the Dead proved to be another false Doctrine, not commended nor practised by Christ or his Apostles, p. 507. V. The Papists Doctrine which saith, Christ is really and personally in the Mass and in the Eucharist, to be Blasphemous, and great Idolatry, p. 508. VI. The Papists Mass and their Ceremonies proved not to be Apostolical, p. 511.
VII. The Papists honouring of Reliques and Images of Saints, and praying by Beads, proved to be but the Inventions and Traditions of Men, and contrary to the Doctrine which the Apostolick Church held forth, p. 512. VIII. The Doctrine of forbidding certain kinds of Meats, and forbidding the Scrip∣tures to be read by all, answered, p. 515. IX. Concerning Miracles, p. 519. X. Answers to eight Propositions set forth by one C. M. in a Book of his called, A Ca∣techism against all Sectaries, p. 521. A General Epistle to the Seed of God, p. 536. A Visitation of Love, Peace and Good-Will from the Spirit of the Lord, sent unto the whole Flock of God now in their Day of Tryal and Hour of Temptation, p. 537. An Epistle to all the beloved Prisoners and Fellow-Sufferers in Newgate, and else-where in Bonds about the City of London, and to Friends of Bristol and Hartford, who have lost their Liberty for Christ's sake, whom the World is not worthy of, p. 543. The great Case of Tythes and forced Maintenance once more revived, p. 548. The State thereof enquired into before the Law, under the Law, and among the Jews, likewise under the Gospel. The true Ministers of Christ their Allowance shewn, Likewise the Corruption of Time since Christ, how Tythes have been introduced, wherein Antiquity is searched, and the Judgment of the Fathers of the Church in several A∣ges produced, A general Epistle to all who have believed in the Light of the Lord Jesus, and are called of God to follow the Lamb through the great Tribulation, p. 604. The True Rule, Judge and Guide of the true Church of God discovered and born Testimony unto, what it is, and wherein it it consisteth, in Opposition to the pre tended Catholick Church of Rome, her Rule, Foundation, Guide and Judge; being in Answer to a Book writ by Captain Everard, entituled, An Epistle to all Non-confor∣mists. p. 611. A General Epistle to the dispersed and persecuted Flock of Christ Jesus in England and else-where, who have believed in Christ, the Light of the World, and now suffer for his Name's sake, p. 657. Oaths no Gospel-Ordinance, but prohibited by Christ; being in Answer to A. Smallwood's Sermon published, which he preached at Carlile, wherein he laboured to prove Swearing lawful among Christians, p. 668. To all the well-beloved Flock of Christ, whom he hath gathered into his Fold (to seed in his heavenly pasture, in and about London, Hartford and Kingston. p. 732. THE END.
