H708 09681747 43980
THE Apostolical Liturgy REVIVED. A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes held at Chelmsford in the County of Essex, March 18. 1660. By Nath. Hardy, D. D. D. R. and Vicar of St. Martins in the fields. PSAL. 72. 15. And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba; prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised. Theoph. ad Luc. 20. . London, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford, at the sign of the Castle and Lion in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1661.
To the Right Worshipfull Sir ROBERT ABDY, Knight and Baronet, and High Sheriff of the County of Essex. IT hath been the Lot of this following Dis∣course (as well as its Author) to passe through good and ill Report. Your Self with many other worthy Gentlemen of the County, so candidly accepted it, as to desire its pub∣lication, and yet some ignorant or malevolent Audi∣tors have fastened upon it, the heavy charge of Super∣stition, whether justly, or caulesly, let the impartial Reader Judge. The truth is, when I reflect upon the persons offended, I have reason to believe, that not the Popery, but the Loyaltie of the Sermon; not so much that part of the Discourse about praying for the dead, as that which perswadeth prayer for, and subjection to the King and his Government, both Civil and Ecclesi∣astical was the Crime; and if so, what they account my fault, I shall ever esteem my duty and my glory. In the mean time, I cannot but congratulate you, worthy Sir, those honours which our gracious Soveraign
hath confer'd upon you, particularly, in that having so plentifull a choice of Able Gentry, he cul'd you out (as it were) to lead the Van in that high Office where∣with you are invested, which how you have hitherto ma∣naged, I need not tell the world. The fame of your Noble Entertainments, numerous Attendants, and especially your impartial deportment, hath already fil∣led City and Country: and I may justly affirm, your place hath not so much honoured you, as you the place. Go on (Good Sir) to do worthily, and be famous in Essex, and by serving faithfully your God, your King, your Country, to gain to your Self greater honour, not only in this, but the world to come, which shall be the constant prayer of, Your affectionate Friend, Nath. Hardy.
THE APOSTOLICAL LITURGY REVIVED. 1 Tim. Chap. 2. Vers. 1, 2.1. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men.2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. IT is not long (Beloved) since this with other parcels of Canonicall Scri∣pture, was by our insolent Usurpers adjudged Apocryphall, and the open performance of the duty of this Text, would have been condemned by their obsequious Judges as Treasonable. We have seen, we have seen unquiet and troublous times, wicked and evil
dayes, wherein the pretence of godliness banished all honesty; and in truth neither godliness, nor honesty were to be found, wherein there was no King in Is∣rael, nor any lawfull Authority over us, nor was it lawfull publickely to pray that there might: but what was denied in publick, was, I doubt not, perform∣ed in private by all, loyall Subjects and good Christi∣ans; and I trust the cold of their prohibition from without by a kind of Antiperistasis, made our inward devotion so much the hotter. And loe, that God who hath heard our secret prayers, hath returned an open answer, giving us great cause of thanksgiving for re∣storing our King as of old, our Judges as at the first, and our Counsellors as at the beginning; and there∣fore what Scripture can I present you with more suta∣ble than this, I exhort therefore that first of all, &c. The first word of the Text  I exhort, may well give a denomination to the whole; it is an Ex∣hortation, in which are four parts considerable. The manner of propounding it, which is with gen∣tleness, and yet fervency in those words, I exhort therefore that first of all. The matter or duty perswaded, which is set down with fulness and variety in those, That supplications, prayers, and intercessions, with giving of thanks be made. The objects for whom we are to perform this du∣ty, represented both universally and eminently in those, For all men, for Kings, and all that are in Au∣thority. The ends wherefore this duty is in particular to be performed for Kings and all in Authority, specified
both concisely and distinctly in those, That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and ho∣nesty. 1. The manner of propounding is that which first oc∣curreth, and shall briefly be discussed, I exhort there∣fore that first of all. The Conjunction  Therefore is most usually a Par∣ticle of Illation, inferring one thing from; but here it is only a transition passing from one thing to ano∣ther: and therefore I shall not need to enquire after any dependance of these words, upon what precedeth in the former Chapter. The word which we render, Exhort, properly sig∣nifieth to call upon another,Polyb. and is often used in Poly∣bius, to express a Commanders encouraging his Soul∣diers to the Battell. Thus St Paul the Apostle being a Leader in the Church militant, animateth Christians to fight, but with no other weapons than those of their prayers.Suid. Suidas observeth that the word sig∣nifieth not only Hortor, but Oro, to exhort, but to entreat. And accordingly it is often elsewhere tran∣slated I beseech, and here in the vulgar Latin by Ob∣secro. So desirous is this Apostle that this duty of prayer should be observed, that he prayeth for the per∣formance of it. Indeed elsewhere in the first Verse of the fifth Chapter, his word is I charge; and in the eighth Verse of this Chapter, I will;1 Tim. 5. 21. 2. 8. and those phra∣ses seem most sutable to an Apostle. But the truth is, both wayes of expression are very congruous, and have their peculiar Emphasis. I charge, and I will, are words that justifie his Authority; I exhort or be∣seech
testifie his humility, those serve to set home upon the conscience, and these to win upon the affections, finally both arise from the zeal of his spirit, and argue a great deal of vehemency. Upon this account it is that  first of all is annexed, which standing between I exhort on the one side, and that supplications, &c. be made, on the other, may be refer'd to either; nor is it much ma∣terial to which, since it will amount to one and the same sense. This is that to which I first of all exhort, or this is that which I exhort first of all to be done. The Adverb  denoteth order, and that ei∣ther of time or dignity, and both may be admitted here. In the former notion our Apostle intimateth à Jo∣ve principium, that prayer should be the beginning of every day, in the morning as soon as we open our eyes, we should lift them up to Heaven; of every weighty action, before our hands are stretched forth to businesse, we should elevate them to God. Indeed it should be both the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the ending of every day of our life, and of every important businesse of the day. In the later notion this , first of all, is much like that  else where above all, taking the shield of faith, and St. Peters ,Ephes. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 8. before all things have fervent charity, and presseth this duty as rem maximè necessariam, a thing most needfull and usefull; though other duties must not be left un∣done, yet this ought chiefly to be done; and there∣fore most earnestly to be urged. Gods Ministers
must not only propound, but enforce divine truths upon their hearers, not onely strike in the nail, but drive it to the head, declare what is to be done, but exhort to the doing of it. And as they must not shun to acquaint the people with whatsoever is their duty, so they must insist most earnestly upon that which is of greatest concernment; for so doth our Apostle here, Exhort first of all. That supplications, prayers, and intercession, with giving of thanks be made,Gen. 2. which is the second part of the Text, the matter and duty it self, which I shall handle both in a general latitude, and in a particular reference. 1. That word  is by some Expositors divided from the , and conjoyned with this which fol∣loweth, as if the sense were, I exhort first, by all men supplications, &c. be made. There are some services which all men may not do: It is not for every man to bear the sword, or dispense the Word, but on∣ly for the Magistrate and Minister. There are some duties which every man cannot do, every man cannot build Hospitals and Churches, confute errours and he∣resies, onely the rich and the wise; but this is that duty which all can, may and ought to practice. What this duty is we find expressed in four words, which yet may be reduced to two heads, namely, Pe∣titio & Gratiarum Actio; Petition, which is enlarged in three words, Supplications, prayers and intercessi∣on, and (which is comprized in one word) giving of thanks. 1. Petition is the first branch of this duty, which consists in supplications, prayers and intercessions, and
these three words may very well be construed either as various or synonymous. 1. Look upon them as various in their sense, and they set forth those three parts, whereof our petitions to God must consist. 1. Supplication is that whereby we deprecate evil, whether of iniquity or calamity, the remission of the one, the prevention and remotion of the other, in this respect after St. Paul had reckoned up several pieces of the Christians armour, he closeth with this as be∣ing of singular use to defend us against all sort of evils which we either feel or fear. 2. Prayer is that by which we implore those good things whereof we stand in need, and more especially those which concern our eternal welfare; upon this account prayer is not only our armour to preserve, but onr store-house to provide for us, or rather the key which openeth the store-house of Heaven whence eve∣ry good and perfect gift cometh. 3. Intercession is that whereby we perform both these acts of petition in the behalf of others; faith is appropriative, but prayer is communicative, that as an hand clasped, this as an hand open, and therefore whereas it is I believe it is our father. True it is, Nulli sapit, qui non sibi sapit, he that seldom pray∣eth for himself will hardly pray for others; and as our charity, so our piety must begin at home, but it must not end there, we must love others, and pray for others as well as our selves, our own need engageth us to be petitioners for our selves, and brotherly love obligeth us to be advocates for others. Indeed meri∣torious mediation is Christs peculiar, but charitative
intercession is our duty, it is his bloud which must plead for us all, but yet in his name we must pray one for another. 2. Look upon these three words as synonymous, and then we may with Calvin conceive,Calv. in loc. that these multiplied expressions to the same purpose, as also the putting them in the plural number are designed to minde us of the frequent performance of this duty, that it must not be done once, but often, daily; and as St. Paul exhorteth the Thessalonians,1 Thess. 5. 19. continually. But rather with the learned Cameron, it will be expe∣dient to take notice, that one and the same thing may be signified by several words without any vain taute∣logie, whenas either the one is proper, and the other figurative, or the one obscure, and the other clear, or when there is a diversity, though not in the thing it self, yet in the manner of signification, and so it is here, every one of these words representing the same duty under a different notion according to the se∣veral derivations, and proper significations of the words. 1. , saith Suidas,Suid. and being de∣rived from  indigeo, sets forth prayer, as it is an acknowledgement of our necessities, whereby as the sick man acquaints the Physician with his distemper, and the beggar layeth open his sores, we spread our wants and complaints before God. 2.  being derived from  votum signi∣fieth prayer, as it is the pouring out of the heart, pant∣ing of the soul, and breathing forth of our wishes. By prayer we make known, as our defects, so our requests, nor is it onely a manifestation of our
wants, but a testification of our desires. 3.  being derived from , adsum; re∣presents prayer, as it is that whereby we ascend Gods presence and entertain communion with him. Medi∣tation is a soliloquy with our selvs, prayer is a colloquy with God; by this we climb to Heaven, whilest we are yet on earth,Psal. 138. 8. in respect of this David saith, When I awake I am still with thee;Damasc. Pa∣ral. and it is defined by Da∣mascene to be the lifting up of the mind to God,Ephes. 3. 12. and by St. Paul to be an access with boldnesse to the throne of grace. So that in these three words are expressed three pro∣perties of a right prayer, to wit, Humility, Zeal and Faith; Humility in the confession of our wants, Zeal in the fervency of our desires, and Faith in the confidence of our approaches to God. Prayer is not an ostentation of our vertues with the Pharisee, but a discovery of our need with the Prodigal, not the in∣vention of a witty brain, or the elocution of a fluent tongue, but the ebulliton of a devout soul; Finally, though in prayer we must stand afar off with the Pub∣lican in the apprehension of our own unworthinesse, yet we must also draw near to, and follow hard af∣ter God with David by a believing application of his mercy. 2. You have seen the first part of the duty, namely Petition, but we must not stay here; to our supplica∣tions, prayers and intercessions we must adde giving of thanks. They are joyned together by our Apo∣stle in precept, not only here, but elsewhere, and we must not sever them in our practise. Davids Psalms consists of Hallelujahs as well as Hosannas; we must
not only have the tongue of men in begging, but of Angels in praising: we are never so full here, but there is something wanting, and therefore we have need to pray; nor are we ever so necessitous, but there is something we enjoy, and therefore have rea∣son of thanks; and then is our devotion compleat, when these two meet together; according to that of St Chrysostome,Chrysost. in loc. , Let every prayer be attended with thanksgiving. It is observed of those Lepers in the Gospel, Ut acciperent importuni, donec acceperint inquieti, cum acceperint ingrati; They were importunate that they might, unquiet till they did, but unthankfull when they had received health and cure from Christ. Oh far be this temper from us; let us be as forward in acknowledging what we receive, as in imploring what we desire. Indeed thanksgiving is Efficacissimum orandi genus, a most effectuall kind of prayer, but ingratitude stops the cur∣rent of divine mercy: since Indignus de dandis qui in∣gratus de datis, he is unworthy of what he craveth, who is unthankfull for what he hath: whereas Gods benefits (like that River whereof SolinusSolon. speaketh, which so long as men are singing, continueth flowing) are so much the more plentifully encreased, by how much they are gratefully acknowledged. Nor would that gloss of Theophylact be passed by,Theoph. in loc. who observing what followeth, would have us take notice that we ought to give thanks for benefits conferred upon others, by which means we are firmly knit together in brother∣ly love; for he that is thanfull for his neighbours pro∣sperity, , cannot but have a love towards his person; and if thanksgiving ought to be
rendered in respect of others, much more in regard of our selves. 2. Besides this generall notion, there is a particu∣lar reference of this duty to the publick service of God, which appeareth so much the more rationall, when we consider that this Epistle is directed to Ti∣mothy, who was invested with Episcopall Authority by St. Paul, and therefore ought to take care that com∣mon supplications, prayers, & intercessions, with giving of thanks be made in the publick Assemblies. To this purpose is that gloss of Beza upon those words which follow,Vers. 8. Beza in loc. I will that men pray every where; Omnem lo∣cum intellige sacris caetibus destinatum; understand every where, to be all such places as are appointed for holy Assemblies.Aret. ibid. And more fully that of Are∣tius, who saith that as St Panl had given Timothy or∣der in the former Chapter, to take care that sound doctrine were preached to the people, so here that the publick prayers be done decently and religiously; to which end he prescribeth severall rules in the prece∣ding part of this Chapter, and in these two Verses more particularly insinuateth for whom they should put up their joynt prayers, and (to give you his own words) Ut certam habeant formulam; that they should have a certain form of prayer, consisting of these se∣verall parts which are here enumerated. Nor is it without great reason, since where men are left to their extemporary effusions, these severall sorts of de∣votion are either some of them omitted, or else confu∣sedly mentioned. In pursuance of this Apostolicall Exhortation, it is that the Christian Church hath still had her Liturgy,
and that replenished with this variety. St Austin hath observed and distinguished these four kinds of devoti∣on in the Eucharisticall administration, where speak∣ing of these words he saith,Aug. Ep. 59. ad Paul. Eligo in his verbis hoc in∣telligere, quod omnis vel paenè omnis frequentat Eccle∣sia, &c. I choose to understand in these words, that which all or almost all the Church frequenteth, that we conceive those to be called supplications, which we make at celebrating the mysteries before that which is on the Lords Table begins to be blessed: prayer, when it is blessed, and sanctified, and broken to be distributed: in∣tercession, or request, when the people are blessed; which done, all concludeth with thanksgiving. If we take a view of our own Liturgy, we shall find these se∣verall forms, in that comprehensive Letany, in that excellent Office of the Communion, yea almost in eve∣ry part of the service, of which (having this occasion to mention it) I shall be bold to say, though it is not so exact, as not to need any alteration or addition; yet there is nothing in it, which may not admit of a candid construction; nor is there any publick form in any other Church whatsoever which excels it, (I had almost said) which is equall to it. And though I dislike not a review for the satisfaction of the scrupu∣lous, (if any thing in reason might, or themselves knew what would satisfie them) yet I hope and pray, that our Timothies may in due time have the exercise of their power so far restored to them, that in all Churches with one lip and language, this Apostolicall precept may be observed, Supplications, prayers, in∣tercessions, with giving of thankes may be made. And that
For all men,Part. 3. for Kings, and all that are in Authority, which is the third part of the Text; the objects for whom we are to make intercession, which is pro∣posed, 1. Universally, in those words, For all men. For men: we are not to pray on the one hand for Angels; the good Angels are in gratiâ confirma i, so confirmed in innocency, that they need not our prayers: and the bad are in malitia obstinati, so setled in their wicked∣ness, that our prayers cannot benefit them. Nor yet on the other for the irrationall and inanimate crea∣tures, but only in reference to men, so far as they are serviceable for, and beneficiall to mankind; upon which account we both give thanks and pray for seaso∣nable weather, the fruits of the earth, and the like. For men it is, and that for all men, which we must make intercessions. To give you the just and full la∣titude of this All. 1. I shall first consider the distinction of all men in∣to the quick and the dead. 1. Those who are dead are to be ranked only into two sorts, the wicked, and the righteous, whose bo∣dies lie mingled in the grave, but their souls go, those to Hell torments, and these to Abrahams bosome. 1. As for those who die in their sins, their state af∣ter death is such as can admit of no alteration, and therefore it is in vain to make any supplication. San∣guis Christi non descendit adinferos,Bern. in Cant. Serm. 75. saith St Bernard: not Christs bloud, much less can our prayers prevail for the damned. As for those who die in the Lord, and sleep in Jesus.
1. That they being themselves at rest, desire the same bliss for us who are here militant, hath been al∣wayes received as a truth.Cypr. Serm. 7. de Mort. That of St Cyprian is very apposite to this purpose, Magnus illic nos charorum numerus expectat, copiosa turba desiderat jam de suá immortalitate secura, & adhuc de nostrâ salute solicita; The great number and multitude of our dear friends in Heaven expect us, being already secure of their own immortality, and solicitous for our salvation; and sure∣ly what they are so desirous of, they pray for. In∣deed they do not pray for us in particular, because they cannot come to a knowledge of our severall wants; if they could no doubt they would; and if we had any way of imparting our condition to them, we might as well desire their prayers, as we do here the prayers of each other. But that they do know that there are still Saints upon the earth, (since otherwise the world would be at an end, and their bodies raised;) and that whilest there are such on earth, their condition will be militant, encountring with temptations and persecutions; and that knowing they cannot but have a sympathy with, and charity towards the militant Saints; and that charity puts them upon prayers to God for them, are such strong probabilities, that can∣not be weighed down by any thing that can be said to the contrary: yea it seemeth strange to me, why any (except those Hereticks who affirm the soul to sleep with the body) should not imagine, that the souls of good men are imployed as in praising God for them∣selves, and the rest of the triumphant, so in praying for that part of the Church which is militant: and if so, why may not we desire of God, that by the imi∣tation
of the Saints departed, we may be worthy to re∣ceive the benefit of those prayers, which they as a part of the Catholick Church offer to God in our behalf; ac∣cording to that passage in the late form, for the thir∣tieth of January, so much, and yet so causlesly decried as Popish by the enemies of our Church. 2. That there ought to be giving of thanks for them who depart hence in the Lord, in that they are delivered from the miseries of this sinfull life, enjoy so glorious a victory over sin and Satan, and have left such vertuous examples to us that survive, is a do∣ctrine which cannot justly be gainsayed. We are bound to bless God for the temporall, much more for the eternall welfare of others. We ought to be fol∣lowers of, and therefore to be thankfull for the good patterns which the dead have (as well as the living do) set before us. We profess to believe a Commu∣nion of Saints; that communion is not only of the Saints in Heaven with each other, and so of the Saints on earth; but between the Saints in Heaven and earth, the operation whereof is on their part prayers and supplications for us, and on our part a reverentiall re∣spect to, pious imitation of, and thanksgiving for them. 3. Lastly, As to prayers for the dead, I assert, 1. This doctrine, That there is a third sort of per∣sons, who are neither in heavenly bliss, nor hell tor∣ments, but in the pains of Purgatory, out of which they are delivered by our prayers, is a novel figment of the Church of Rome, and hath no footsteps either in Scripture or antiquity. 2. That it is a very ancient practice of the Church,
to pray for the souls of the blessed, is not to be denied, nor yet do I see how it can be in all respects justi∣fied. 3. That inasmuch as the Saints departed are not yet compleatly happy, nor shall be till the end of the world, we may do that for them, which I doubt not but they do for themselves, pray to God to send them a joyfull resurrection, and an happy consummation of their bliss both in body and soul. And this is a truth so evident, that I see not how any can with colour of reason oppose it. 2. But though this all men according to the fore∣mentioned conclusion may be thus far enlarged, yet I conceive that here St Paul intends only the living, for all whom we ought without all controversie to make intercession. The just extent whereof will best appear by the distinction of all men into friends and foes; good and bad. For all men; that is, for enemies as well as friends: , is St.Chrysost. in loc. Chrysostomes counsell upon this Text, Let us learn to pray as Christians; and how is that, but as he afterwards teacheth to pray for our enemies? Hear how St.Act. 7. 60. Stephen prayed not only not against,Luk. 23. 34. but for his persecutors, Lord lay not this sin to their charge.Matth. 5. 44. Nay hear how Christ himself prayed for his crucifiers, Father forgive them; and as it was his practice,Id. ibid. so it is his precept, Bless them that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you. The truth is, as that same Father excellently, He that blesseth his enemy, blesseth himself; he that curseth him, curseth himself; and he that prayeth for
him, prayeth more for himself, than him. 2. For all men; that is, for unbelievers as well as believers. So much is intimated, in that he bids them pray for Kings, which at that time were Infidels. Supplicat ubique Ecclesia non solum pro sanctis & in Christojam regenitis, sed pro omnibus infidelibus, & inimicis crucis Christi, idolorum cultoribus, &c. The Church (saith Prosper) every where prayeth not only for the faithfull and regenerate,Prosper de vo∣cat. Gent. but for Infidels and I∣dolaters, for the enemies of the cross of Christ, and the worst of sinners; De quocunque pessimè in hac vita con∣stituto non utique desperatur, saith St Austin, Nec pro illo imprudenter or atur, de quo non desperatur. We are not altogether to despair of any, though never so vile; and for him we may pray, of whom we are not to despair.Eph. 6. 16. Indeed St Paul elsewhere seemeth to li∣mit the ,Joh. 17. 9. by , praying with all manner of prayer for all Saints. Our blessed Saviour saith, I pray not for the world; there are some sort of petiti∣ons peculiar to the Saints, which Christ maketh not for the world; and there are petitions which we may and ought to make not only for all Saints, but all men: Constit. 2. 51. so runs the Ecclesiasticall Constitution. Let the Dea∣con pray for the whole Church, and for the whole world. As we must do good especially to, so we must pray chiefly for the houshold of faith; but we must do good to, and pray for all; even they who are without the pale of the Church, must be within the reach of our prayers. Publica est nobis & communis oratio (saith St Cyprian) & quando oramus, non pro uno sed pro toto populo oramus.Cypr. de Orat. dom. We have publick common prayers, and
when we pray, we pray not for one, but the whole peo∣ple, because all the people are one. Thus as our pray∣ers must be for their depth, cordiall, from the bot∣tome of our hearts; for their height, celestiall, chiefly for the things of a better life; and for their length, continuall, to the end of our dayes; so they must be for their breadth, universall, for all men. But withall 2. Eminently, for Kings, and for all that are in authority; where besides the explicite Doctrine, there are severall truths implicitely couched, which would not be passed by: and for the better handling of these words, I shall proceed by these steps. 1. All that are in authority supposeth a distinction of Superiors and Inferiors.Aug. de civit. dei, cap. 1. That there should be some Regnis praediti, invested with dominion; and others Regnantibus subditi, obliged to subjection, is not saith St. Austin, without divine providence: nay saith St. Chrysostome,Chrysost. in ep. ad Rom. c. 13. it is , a work of divine wisdome so to order it. Look as the earth is made up of hills and valleys, mountains and dales; so among the Inhabitants of the earth, God hath appointed, that there should be some above and some below. In the naturall body there are se∣verall members, and some of them in the upper, some in the lower part; so it is and ought to be both in the Civill and Ecclesiasticall body. A Consideration which not only serveth to justifie Superiority against the Levelling Party in Church and State; but also minds those who are , placed on high, to re∣member that being set upon an hill, they are more obvious, and ought to be the more exemplary to
others; and therefore that as they exceed them in greatness, they would excell them in goodness; and as they are above, so they would go before them in the paths of vertue and piety. 2. Kings and all that are in authority implyeth that not only authority in general, but Monarchy in parti∣cular is agreeable to the will of God; it is the voice of wisdom,Prov. 8. 18. not only non sine me, not without my per∣mission, but per me, by me, that is, my ordination Kings raign; and had not Monarchy been approved by God, St. Paul would not have exhorted Christians to make prayers  but , for but against Kings. Yea when I consider. 1. What Pliny observeth, that in omni rerum conditarum genere unum quiddam eminere cernimus,Plin. Nat hist. in all sorts of Creatures one hath the prehe∣minence; among the Planets the Sun, Trees the Oak, Beasts the Lion, Birds the Eagle, and the like. 2. What St. Ambrose saith of Kings,Ambrose in Rom. 13. that they are dei imagi∣nem babentes, such as in a peculiar manner represent God himself, for which reason his name is imparted to them, and 3. that one of the offices which Christ himself under∣taketh is Regal: yet further, 4. when I take notice what a special providence there must be in it; that such multitudes of persons as are in every Kingdom should willingly subject themselves to, and stand in awe of one person. And 5. add to this, when I observe a kind of Monarchy among Bees and Cranes, unreasonable Crea∣tures; and that among Heathens, no Government so usual as Regal, as if the light of nature directed them to it: Yea lastly, when I read that promise to A∣braham, that Kings should come out of his loyns,Gen. 35. 11. to the Christian Church,Isaiah 49. 23. that Kings should be her nursing Fa∣thers,
and that it is set down as a signal favour confer'd by God upon Israel,Ezekiel 16. 13 that it did prosper into a Kingdom: I shall not fear to assert, that of all Authority, Regal, is that which is most consonant to the Divine Will. 3. It is not, all in Authority, and Kings; but Kings, and all in Authority, whereby is implyed the subordination of others in authority under Kings; which will more plainly appear, if you compare this of St. Paul with that of St. Peter: To the King as supream, or to Go∣vernours, as them which are sent by him:1 Pet. 2. 16, 17. The King in his Kingdom is sole deo minor, only inferior to him, whose stile is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and as he deriveth his power immediately from God, so all other Authority is derived from him. It was Moses who chose able men out of all the people,Exod. 18. 16. and made them heads over the people, Rulers of thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens:2 Chron. 19. 5. It was Jehoshaphat who set Judges in the Land through the fenced Cities, City by City. The Statues of Kings were of old pla∣ced by fountains, to intimate, that they are the foun∣tains of honour: the Greek word  imports, that Kings are the basis and foundation of the people, and all other Magistrates are pillars reared and support∣ed by that foundation. In our own Land, those who serve in Parliament are elected and called by the Kings Writ: Judges sit by the Kings Commission; even Constables act in the Kings name, all owning that au∣thority, which they have, to be originally from the King, in whom the Supream power doth undoubted∣ly reside. 4. Lastly, That which is expresly required is, that intercessions be made for Kings, and all that are in au∣thority,
Mos hic egregius (ut & multa alia laudabila) venit à Judaeis:Grot. in loc. This as many other laudable practises cometh from the Jews (saith the Learned Grotius) whose custom was, as you read in Ezra,Ezra 8. 18. to pray for the life of the King.Tertul. Apol. It is here enjoyned by the Apostle to Christians, and was accordingly practised. Tertulli∣an saith of those in his time, Sine monitore quia de pectore oramus pro imperatoribus, We need no Moni∣tor, our loyal hearts prompt us to pray for our Empe∣rours. There are two sorts of persons, who of all men stand most in need of our prayers, namely Magi∣strates and Ministers; the King and the Bishop, the Prince and the Priests, no wonder, if else-where, St. Paul requireth praying for all Saints, and for me, and here for all men,Eph. 6. 19. for Kings and all that are in au∣thority. Indeed on the one hand it is a great weight and bur∣den which lyeth upon the shoulders of Kings and all that are in authority; though earthly glory be but an empty shadow, yet in this sense we may make use of St. Pauls phrase, concerning that which is heavenly; it is a weight of glory,2 Cor. 4. 16. and quò sublimior gloria cò major cura, the higher the glory, the greater the weight which lyeth upon them: great reason there is, that the people should help them to bear it with their pray∣ers; it is but gratitude, since they watch for us, that we should pray for them; and since they take upon them the care of our welfare, we should put up our re∣quests to God for theirs. Besides, on the other hand, Kings and all in authority are exposed to manifold dangers in respect of them∣selves as well as cares in regard of us; in perils they
are by false friends, fawning flatterers, and in perils they are by secret enemies, rebellious conspirators; in danger by them who say in the language of the people to Herod,Acts 12. 22. The voice of God, and not of man, and in danger by those who say, We have no King, because we feared not the Lord, what should a King do to us?Hos. 10. 4. and being in so great hazards, they need the prayers of their people to guard them. Upon these Considerations, there is good cause why Kings and all in authority should be much in prayer for themselves, like that good King Charls the fifth, of whom it is said, Soepius cum Deo quam cum hominibus loquebatur, He did more frequently converse with God by prayer, than with men by discourse; and why their subjects also should be earnest with God in their behalf, by which means even Kings are in some sort engaged to their meanest, as well as their greatest sub∣jects, who by their zealous prayers for, bring down blessings upon them. These prayers must be made for Kings and all in authority, as well bad as good. The truth is as Saint Austin observeth, Qui Mario Imperium dederit, ipse etiam Caio, qui Augusto, ipse & Neroni, qui Vespasiano & Domitiano. He that gave authority to Marius, Au∣gustus, and Vespasian, who were mercifull, gave it al∣so to Caius, Nero, and Domitian, who were cruel Em∣perors; and therefore we must testifie our subjection to,Aug. de civit. Dei. by our devotion for the one, as well as the other. If Kings be good, they deserve our prayers so much the more because of their singular care over us; and if they be bad, then so much the more need there is we should pray for them, by how much they are back∣ward
to pray for themselves. I end this with this short Item, we are obliged in many duties to Kings and all in Authority, we are bound to pay to them those tributes and customs which by the Laws belong to them; we are bound to fight for them when requi∣red: If my kingdom were of this world,Iohn 8 36. then would my servants fight for me; but surely, it is very little we will do if not so much as to pray for them; and there∣fore pray, and again I say, Pray for Kings, and all in Authority, and so much the rather, because it is our own concerne as well as theirs; for so it fol∣loweth. 4. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: which is the last part to be dis∣coursed. For the more Methodical handling whereof I shall consider these words in themselves, and in their connexion. 1. Consider the words in themselves, they present us with the parts of a Christian conversation, where∣in it consists in godliness and honesty, and with a singu∣lar help to the performance of them peace and qui∣etness. 1. If you would know, what it is to lead a Chri∣stian life, and wherein it consists, the Text answers, in godliness and honesty. 1. The principal requisite to a good conversation is godliness, which what it is, will appear by the Ety∣mologie of the Greek word , which is derived from  colo &  benè; so that to be godly is to worship God aright. 1. The material part of godliness is the worship of
God; for though it taketh in imitation, yet it prima∣rily consists in adoration; by imitation we acknowledge his excellency, but it is by adoration we proclaim his Deity; and therefore, though every godly man endea∣vours to follow Gods pattern, yet the proper act of godliness is to worship his name. 2. The formal part of godliness is to worship him aright, which is: 1. When it is performed according to the right Rule, to wit, the word of God, wherein the substantials of Worship are particularly and expresly prescri∣bed, whilest the circumstantials are included in those general precepts of Order, Decency and Re∣verence. 2. When it is directed to a right end, namely the glory and honour of God, which as it is finis operis, the end of the worship; so it ought to be finis operantis, the ultimate end of every worshipper. 2. The next ornament of a Christian conversation is honesty. If we consult the derivation of the Greek word, , we shall finde it to be from the same verb with the former, and is fitly rendered veneration or reverence; and as that refers to God, so this may be refer'd to Kings and all in Authority. I cannot but sometimes wonder at the folly of the Quakers, as in many others, so in this particular of denying external expressions of Reverence toward their Superiors, be∣cause it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve;Matth. 4. 10. not considering, that it is also written, Fear God and the King; fear God, ho∣nour the King; render to all men their due, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour,Prov. 24. 21. 1 which cannot bePet. 2. 17.Rom. 13. 7.
render'd but by an outward testification in our speeches both to, and of, and our behaviour towards them; Nor yet distinguishing between Religious and a Civil Worship; the former whereof, is Gods peculiar, but the latter due to Kings, and all in Authority. Besides this strict notion of the word it is often used, and may very well be enlarged to signifie, gravitatem & honestatem morum, a grave and honest behaviour towards all men, with whom we converse, and so in∣cludeth omne officii genus, all kinde of duty which belongeth to mutual society. Both these godliness and honesty, as elswhere righ∣teousness and holiness are fitly joyned together, since the one containeth the Duties of the first Table, and the other of the second, and so both render the con∣versation compleat. But alas where or in whom almost do these two meet? Some there are (I trust not many) who, like that unjust Judge in the Parable who neither feared God nor regarded man,Luke 18. 4. abandon both godliness and honesty, letting loose the reins to all manner both of impiety and iniquity. But more, far more there are whose Conversations are deficient in one, or the o∣ther of these. How many Christians are there who are no more then meer civil honest men, to whom it may be truly said in the language of our Saviour, what do you more then Heathens?Matth. 5, 41. I can tell you of a grave Cato, just Aristides, chaste Lucretia, many honest Pa∣gans: think you that the conversation of a Christian must not exceed theirs, and what is it but godliness which maketh the difference? Again how many Christians are there, who seem (for it is no more) to be godly, and so call themselves, and would have
others account them, yet their practises have been ma∣nifestly unjust, unmercifull, and their works dishonest; Oh that it might not be told in Gath, and published in the streets of Ashkelon, that in this Christian King∣dom there hath been a Generation of holy oppressors, zealous Church robbers, pious Traitors, Religious Re∣bels, and godly Regicides: but where, oh where is the Generation of them who lift up both their hands to Gods Commandments in the exercise of godliness and honesty? Brethren, let no man deceive you, honesty without godliness is but Philosophical, and godliness without honesty Pharisaical; let it therefore be our care to approve our selves to God by Piety, and to men by honesty; nor must we leave out the extensive par∣ticle All, which is here annexed, but make conscience of doing every part of our duty both in reference to God and Man; that godliness is no godliness which ab∣horreth Idols, and yet committeth Sacriledge; that honesty is no honesty which detests intemperance, and dispenseth with deceit; there must be no baulks in our spiritual husbandry; the work of Christianity must not be done by halfs: Then shall I not be ashamed (saith David) when I have respect to all thy Commandments, which we cannot do, unless we have a care to lead our life in all godliness and honesty. 2. The singular help to both these is peace and quietness; and by the mention of this the Apostle inti∣mateth. 1. That the desire and endeavour of all Christians ought to be, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life. By which two words, may very well be under∣stood that twofold peace, namely, foreign and dome∣stick;
when there is no invasion from abroad, then a Kingdom is like a calm Sea, no blustring winds from without to enrage it: when there is no insurrection at home,Psal. 147. 14. 122. 7. then it is like a still earth, no winds got into the bowels to shake it; the former is peace in our borders, and the latter is peace within our walls; both great bles∣sings where God confers them, and both all good Christians seek after. It was St. Pauls precept to the Romans,Rom. 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lyeth in you, live peaceably with all men: and our Saviour to his disci∣ples, Have peace one with another;Mark 8. 50. we must not be wanting in our endeavours to live a quiet life with all the world, however to live a peaceable life among our selves. 2. The end why we should desire to lead a quiet and peaceable life, ought to be in reference to godliness and honesty, not so much that we may get wealth and riches, much less that we may live in mirth and jollity, idleness and luxury,Theoph▪ in loc. but that we may exercise godliness and honesty; with which agreeth that of the Song of Zachary, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we may serve him without fear, in righteous∣ness and holiness,Luke 1. 74, 75. all the days of our lives. 3. That peaceable and quiet living is an especial means to advance godliness and honesty. It is a known saying, Inter arma silent leges, in times of War the Laws are silent, no honesty; ey and Religion is negle∣cted, no godliness neither; our own sad experience can tell us what sacriledge and prophaness, what oaths and blasphemies, what plunders and violences, unjust sequestrations and imprisonments, War hath produced. It was not without cause that St. James said,
The fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace:James. 3. 18. and the Author to the Hebrews ex∣horts to follow peace with all men,Hebr. 12. 14. and holiness; where peace is placed before holiness, not as if peace were the principal, but because it is a preparative; for though holiness be more excellent than peace, yet it is peace which maketh way for holiness. 4. Lastly, we must desire such a peaceable and quiet life as may consist with godliness and honesty, quae fidei non adversatur & cum vitae probitate conjunctae,Murlorat. in loc. which is consistent with a sound faith and a pure conver∣sation; it is a very ill bargain to purchase peace with the loss of piety; and if peace cannot be had but upon such terms, that God, Caesar and the Church must lose their due, it is not to be embraced but rejected. 2. Having viewed the words in themselves, I shall consider them in a double relation to what pre∣cedeth. 1. To that which immediately precedeth, Kings and all in authority, whereby is intimated, the great in∣fluence which they have upon the peoples happiness by procuring and promoting godliness and honesty with peace and quietness among them. There is a threefold power annexed to Magistracy, of making Laws, which belongs to the King as Supream;  of passing Judgement, and of inflicting punishments which are executed by all in authority from and under the King; and all of these are, at least ought to be designed for this threefold end peace, piety and honesty. The Magistrate is called by St. Peter an humane creature,1 Pet. 2. 16. or creation not in respect of the
efficient cause (that word Creation contradicts it which is Gods proper act) but in regard of the final which is the benefit of man, Qua∣si  non mihi, sed populo, was Tra∣jans; pro lege & grege, was Alphonsus his Motto; and good Kings, though they receive not their Diadem from, yet have still looked upon themselves as intrust∣ed with it for the people. More particularly: 1. By Kings and those in Authority, godliness ought to be propagated among the people.Deut. 17. 18. It was Gods com∣mand concerning the King, when he sitteth upon the Throne, that he should have a Copy of the Law to be with him, and read it:2 King. 11. 12. and at the Coronation of King Joash, the High Priest delivered him the Testimony; and why this? not only that they might know and do it themselves, but take care (as much as lyeth in them) that it might be known and observed by the people; ac∣cordingly we finde the good Kings of Israel and Ju∣dah purging the Temple, pulling down Idols, cau∣sing the people to enter into a Covenant to seek the Lord; nor were those Christian Emperors Constan∣tine and Theodosius, less famous for their zeal in the things of Religion. 2. By Kings, and all in Authority, honesty is to be maintained, this being one special end wherefore Ru∣lers are set up, that they may suppress Robbery and violence, with all manner of injustice and dishonesty. When there was no King in Israel (saith the Scripture) every man did what was right in his own eyes,Judg. 17. 6. and that right was wrong: It is Government which is the hedge to keep in those men, who like wilde beasts would trample upon their neighbours.
3. By Kings and all in authority, peace and quiet∣ness is preserved. The Poet saith of Augustus, Custode rerum Caesare non furorHorat. Civilis, aut vis eximit otium. By Caesars care the publick peace is kept inviolable; and one of Seneca's characters of a great Prince is,Senec. de bono pac. that he is one, Sub quo justitia, pax, securitas dignitas flo∣rent; under whom righteousness, peace, safety and ho∣nour flourish: Hence in the Coyns of Emperours was engraven, Securitas Publica; and that of Nero, Pax orbis terrarum; and that phrase among us, The peace of our Soveraign Lord the King. Where there is Magistracy, there is Order, and where there is order there is peace. It was a custom among the Persians, that when their King died there was an Anarchy for the space of five days, that by the many quarrels and Contentions in those few days the people might be convinced how advantagious Monar∣chy was to their peace and safety; this is the happiness which a people have by good kings and Magistrates, that (as it is said of Solomon) in their days shall the mountains bring peace to the people, and the little hills righteousness.Psal. 14. 2▪ 3. 2. To that which mediately precedeth, where we are exhorted to make Prayers for kings and all in au∣thority; upon this account, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Accord∣ing to this reference, these words admit of a double notion as intimating either the matter or the motive of our prayers for them.
1. If you ask, what it is we should pray to God for in reference to Kings and those in Authority? the an∣swer is, that we under their Government may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty: and truly considering (what hath been already men∣tioned) the great influence which Magistrates have upon godliness, honesty, and peace among the people, and that not only on the one hand to further and en∣courage, but on the other to discourage and hinder them; this had need be one part of our prayer to God for them, that he would so encline their wills, as that they may improve their power for those happy ad∣vantages. 2. If you ask, why we should pray to God for kings, and all in authority? The answer is, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and ho∣nesty. Indeed as Theophilact well glosseth,Theoph. in loc. their safety is our tranquility, so that our intercessions, though they be for them ob∣jectively, yet they are for our selves terminatively; and those vapours of good desires which ascend from us to Heaven in behalf of them, descend in golden showers of blessing upon our own heads. Indeed there might many arguments have been made use of to perswade this duty; but surely none more prevailing than this, which is drawn ab utili from the benefit which hereby redounds to our selves. We ought to pray for kings and all in Authority, in respect of our Christian Religion, that it may be acquitted from that odious brand of disloyalty, in respect of themselves, it being one part of that duty which we owe to them. But if neither of these can sway with us, yet surely our
own interest will oblige us. No wonder if our A∣postle singleth this from the rest, and urgeth his ex∣hortation, with this consideration, I exhort therefore first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions and gi∣ving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And now that your patience may not be too much tired, nor your weighty affairs too long retarded, I shall close up my Discourse in a few words of Ex∣hortation. To you Right Honourable, and Right Worshipfull, let me commend the care of these two lovely Virgin Sisters, Godlinesse and Honesty, with their comely hand maiden, peace and quietness. Godliness is in Suidas his language, , the head of vertues, good reason the head should be safe, she is the Queen of graces, fit it is the Queen should be guarded. There are many good Laws made for the reverend using of Gods name, decent Celebra∣tion of his Worship; frequent repairing to his house, due sanctifying of his Day, comfortable maintenance of his Ministers; I trust you will, I desire you may im∣prove the Authority with which God and the King hath invested you, that they may be put in execution. Honesty is societatis vinculum, the bond of all hu∣mane society and civil commerce; great need it should be kept inviolable; In all causes which come before you let right take place, and if men will not be honest imploy your power to make them so. Finally, pax optima rerum, Peace is the best of out∣ward blessings, oh let the peace of the Country and
Kingdom be pretious in your eyes; consider you are Justices of the Peace, to whose custody this Jewel is committed, take heed it be not spoiled, and remem∣ber I beseech you that Stocks, and Whips, Pillories, and Ropes, the Prison, and the Gallows, are those en∣gines upon which hangs the Garland of Peace. To you Gentlemen of the Grand Inquest, my earnest advice is, that you would show your selves friends to Godlinesse, favourites of honesty, and lovers of peace, by making strict and diligent inquiry after the offen∣ders against any, or all these: not only common swea∣rers, but Heretical blasphemers; prophaners of the Lords day, but those who detain the Lords portion, Tithes from the Minister; careless neglecters of the publique Assemblies, but Schismatical frequenters of private Conventicles (what ever they pretend) are enemies to godliness; let both the one and the other be taken notice of. I shall not I suppose need to bid you find the Bills against Cheats, Thieves, Vagabonds and Marderers, the enemies of honesty; and I hope you will be carefull to finde out all riotous quarrellers, with their neighbours, and seditious raylers (whither in pulpits or elsewhere) against Civil and Ecclesiastical authority; oh remember, it is impossible for the Judges to punish and reform, if the Grand Inquest do not pre∣sent and complain. To be brief, Let honesty sit upon the tongues of the Learned in the Law, and then I am sure they will not dawb over a rotten wall, nor justifie any cause which is unjust; let peace and quietness be their study, and then though it may be a greater profit to plead Causes at the Bar, they will esteem it a greater honour to take up (e∣specially
petty) differences among parties. To all who are Plaintiffs in any causes now depending, I wish a quiet and peaceable spirit, that they would hearken to terms of accomodation with their adversary, and not prosecute their neighbour for a trifle; I would to God all witnesses, who are to give evidence in any Cause were so overawed with godliness, that they might not dare to take Gods name in vain, and by false testimo∣ny bring upon themselves the guilt, not only of ly∣ing, but perjury. And for you of the Petty Jury, in whose hands are both the estates and lives of men, I beseech you take heed what you do, and let godliness and honesty sway in all your verdicts. I should now end, but that I foresee there will ere long be another publique meeting of this County for the choice of such as shall have share in the Parliamen∣tary Authority, and let it be a seasonable item, that those whom you choose have these Characters imprint∣ed on them. Look that they be godly men, the word indeed hath been much abused, but the thing must not therefore be disregarded; no, choose godly men, not of the new Cut, but of the old stamp, godly men of the former, not of the latter edition; not such Godly men as pull down, but set up Churches, as decry, but countenance the Mi∣nistry, as run into corners, but attend the publique Or∣dinances. Look that they be honest men, not godly men only, but godly honest men, such as reverence their King, and live justly among their neighbours, such as are of un∣tainted reputation for loyaltie and equity. Look that they be men not of turbulent factious, and
seditious spirits, but such as are for peace in Church and State, such as make it their business to allay the flames, and heal the breaches which have been among us. And since I well know how much the Clergy may and ought to advance this threefold Interest of peace, piety and honesty; Let me in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech my Reverend Brethren, those especially who dissent from the Church of England, that laying aside needless debates about Ceremonies, they would study peace by submitting to the dictates of Authority, and in particular complying with his Majesties moderate desires of conforming in what they can, who hath gra∣ciously condescended to theirs, by indulging to them in what they cannot, that instead of inveighing against imaginary superstition, they and we may joyn together in decrying real prophaness; yea, that we would all of us, both by our preaching and living, endeavour to advance the power of godliness and practise of honesty in the hearts and lives of the people. I have nothing more to add, but that which con∣cerneth all of all sorts, Magistrates, Ministers, People, to exhort you: That In the first place there be humble and hearty thanks∣giving rendred by us all to Almighty God: And that First of all for our King. That instead of a beggerly Oligarchy, Slavish Stra∣tocracy, and bastardly Protectorship, we have restored to us our ancient fundamental Government of a renown∣ed Monarchy. That we have not only a King, but such a King, our own, and our Lawful King, and that such a King, who is a declared Enemy of all prophaness and dishone∣sty,
and who by all the ways of Forgiveness, Meek∣nesse, Moderation and Condescension, professeth nothing to be more desirable to him then the peace and quiet∣ness of his Subjects. That we have our King in such a peaceable and quiet way without any effusion of blood, or noise of Guns (except upon the account of a joyfull reception) and this notwithstanding they who had the power in their hands, were so full of resolved malice in their hearts against Kingly Government. Next for those who are in Authority under him, let there be thanksgiving first to God, and next to the King that he hath set in the Courts of Judicature, persons eminent as well for godliness and honesty, as for learn∣ing and ability; that he hath intrusted the Sword of War, the Lieutenancy, and posse Comitatus, with per∣sons of known worth and honour; and the Sword of Justice with Gentlemen of best repute in the County. Together with our Thanksgiving, let us joyn our supplications, prayers and intercessions. For our King, according to St. Chrysostoms LiturgieChrysost. Litur. that God would give him strength, victory, health, safe∣ty, length and tranquillity of days; or if you will in Ter∣tullians form, Long life,Tertul. Apol. a secure Government, safe Court, valiant Army, faithfull Senate, good people, quiet world, and whatever he can desire as a King, or as a Man: Or once more in Lactantius his words, that God will keep him,Lactant. who is the Keeper of all things in his Dominions, and inspire into him a Will which may al∣ways persevere in the love of God, to his felicity and our tranquillity: For all in Authority under him, in the words of our Church, that they may truly and indiffe∣rently
administer Justice and Iudgement, to the punish∣ment of vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true Religion and vertue. For Kings and all in Authority in the words of our Apostle, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And oh thou that hearest prayers, bow thine ear and graciously hear from Heaven thy dwelling place, the supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings which are made, either in publique or private, by good Christians, for all men, by loyal Subjects, for Kings and all in Authoritie under them, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and honesty, to the glory of thy Name, the honour of the King, and the welfare of the people, through Iesus Christ our Lord; to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be praise, honour, and glorie, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
