P2929 I198a 13621544 39843
The Pope's CURSE: Being an Excommunication OF THE Church of Rome, Against the HERETICKS IN ENGLAND. BY the Authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the Holy Canons of the Undefiled Virgin Mary, the Mother and Patroness of our Saviour; and of all the Coelestial Vertues, Angels, Arch-Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and of the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and of all the Apostles and Evangelists, and of the Holy Inno∣cents,
who in the sight of the Holy Lamb are found wor∣thy to sing the new Song, and of the Holy Martyrs, and Holy Confessors, and of the Holy Virgins, and of all the Saints, together with all the Holy and Elect of God. We Excommunicate and Anathematize him or them, Male∣factor or Malefactors; and from the Threshold of the Holy Church of God We Sequester them; that he, or they, be Tormented, Disposed and delivered over with Dathan and Abiram; and with those that say to the Lord God, Depart from us, we know not thy ways: And as Fire is quenched with Water, so let the Lights of him or them be put out for evermore, unless it shall Repent him or them, and make Satisfaction. (Look to your Bums Beloved, for adad you'll be all Duck'd.) May the Father who Created Man, Curse him or them. May the Son who suffered for us, Curse him or them. May the Holy Ghost who was given to us in Baptism, Curse him or them. May the Holy Cross whom Christ for our Salva∣tion Triumphing over his Enemy, Ascended, Curse him or them. [I never knew the Cross was Alive before] May St. Michael the Advocate of Holy Souls, Curse him or them. May all the Angels, Arch-Angels, Principalities and Pow∣ers, and all the Heavenly Host, Curse him or them. May the Laudable number of the Patriarchs and Prophets, Curse him or them. May St. John the chief Forerunner and Bap∣tist of Christ, Curse him or them. May St. Peter and St. Paul, and St. Andrew, and all other Christs Apostles, toge∣ther with the rest of the Disciples, and the four Evangelists, who by their Preaching Converted the universal World, Curse him or them. May the Holy and wonderful com∣pany of Martyrs and Confessors, who by their Holy Wor∣ship are found pleasing to God Almighty, Curse him or them. May the holy Quire of holy Virgins, who for the
Honour of Christ have despised the things of the World, Curse him or them. May all the Saints, who from the beginning of the World to everlasting Ages are found to be the Beloved of God, Curse him or them. [Coleman, Sibley, and the Jesuits which was Hang'd at Tyburn for Treason, it is Thirteen pence half-penny to a Crucifix, that they are Canonized for Saints before now.] May the Hea∣vens and the Earth, and all the Holy things remaining therein, Curse him or them. May he or they be Cursed, where ever he or they be, whether in their House, or in their Fields, or in the High-way, or in the Path, or in the Wood, or in the Water, or in the Church, [Or at Mass] May him or them be Cursed, in Living, in Dying, in Eating, in Drinking, in being Hungry, in being Thirsty, in Fasting, in Sleeping, in Slumbering, in Waking, in Walking, in Standing, in Siting, in Ly∣ing, in Resting, in Pissing, in Shitting; [O brave Pope!] in Blood-letting; may he or they be Cursed in all the Faculties of their Body; may he or they be Cursed In∣wardly, and outwardly; in the Hair of his or their Heads; in his or their Brain: May he or they be Cursed in in the top of his or their Head; in the Temples; in the Fore∣head; in their Ears; in their Eye-brows; in their Cheeks; in their Jaw-bones; in their Nostrils; in their Fore-teeth, or Grinders; in their Lips; in their Throats; in their Shoulders; in their Wrists; in their Arms; in their Hands; in their Fingers; in their Breasts; in their Hearts, and in all the Interiour Parts, to the very Stom∣ach? in their Reins; in their Groins; in the Thighs; in their Genitals; in their Hips; in their Knees; in their Legs; in their Feet; in their Joynts, and in the Navel: May he or they be Cursed in all their Joynts, from the top of the Head, to the sole of the Foot, may
there not be found any Soundness in him or them. May the Son of the Living God, with all the Glory of his Majesty, Curse him or them; and may Heaven, with all the Powers which More therein, rise against him or them, to Damn him or them, unless it shall repent him or them; or, that he or they shall make Satisfaction, Amen, Amen; so be it. (Your Humble Servant Pope Innocent.) Printed at Amsterdam in the Year 1688. For Jeremiah Lovechurch, at the Sign of the three Bibles in Protestant-Lane.
