I240A 99827994 32420
INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES To be observed by the Muster-master General and his Deputies, and the Officers of the Guards of Horse, Foot and Halberdeers, and other the Officers of Troops and Com∣panies of His MAjESTIES Army in this Kingdom of Ireland. As also all Officers, Ministers and Artificers of the Train of Artillery and Wards here. BY THE Lord Lieutenant General and General Governour of Ireland. DƲBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet, 1667.
INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES. BY THE Lord Lieutenant General and General Governour of Ireland. ORMONDE. I. THat the Muster-Master General by himself and his Deputies, are to muster all the Guards of Horse, Foot and Halberdeers, and all the Troops and Companies of his Majesties Army, Officers, Ministers and Artificers of the Train of Artillery, ad all Wards within the said Kingdom of Ireland, every three moneths at least, or as often as we shall think fit.
II. That the Deputy Muster-masters, who are appointed to muster the Guards, Troops and Companies, and Train of Ar∣tillery aforesaid, in their several Garison or Quarters, are not to give notice of their purpose so to do, until late in the evening. And then they are to give notice to the Governour or Officer, commanding in chief the said Garison or Quarter, who is thereupon to have in a readiness the Troops or Companies early next morning, every Officer and Souldier in his proper Armes and Furniture, at the usual and accustom∣ed place, or such other place as the Deputy Muster-master shall appoint. Where the Captain of each Troop and Company is to have in a readiness two Muster-Rolls, containing the names of the Officers and Souldiers, fairly written alphabetically ac∣cording to the Sirnames, as is now usu∣al. And that the Deputy Muster-master
before he proceeds to muster the Troop or Company, do take an account of the Ranks and Files of each Troop and Com∣pany; and after he hath so numbred them, to call the Officers and Souldiers particu∣larly placing a cypher before their names, signifying their being present; and if any be absent, sick, dead, discharged or run away, they are to be written so on their names. And after the Roll is so called, the Deputy Muster-master is to count the Ranks and Files again, that so he may be assured there is not any wrong done by the Officers in causesing Souldiers to be mustered twice, or mistake on his own part by mark∣ing more or less than he ought. And that such men as are to be entertained that muster in the rooms of any dead, dischar∣ged or run away, be entered for that Muster at the latter end of the Roll, and after brought into the Alphabet. After the Muster, the Deputy Muster-master is to close the Roll with the Officers, accor∣ding
to the usual manner, one Roll to be signed by the Captain and all Commissi∣oned Officers present, which is to be delive∣red to the Deputy Muster master to be by him sent to the Muster-master General; according to which Muster-Roll, War∣rants are to be drawn for their pay: And the other Roll is to be signed by the Depu∣ty Muster-master, which is to be delivered to the Captain, to be produced by him at the next Muster for an Examining Roll, to the end if any Souldiers be wanting, it may be known what is become of them, whether dead, discharged or run away: and that thereby the Muster-master General may be able to render an account to Us from time to time of such Souldiers as are recei∣ved into any Troup or Company in the Army, and those likewise that go forth. III. The Muster-master General and his Deputies are not to permit any Officer or Souldier in the Army to pass muster, un∣less
they shall produce a Certificate under the hand of the Bishop of the Diocess, up∣pon a Certificate made to him under the hand and seal of the lawful Minister of the Parish wherein they are quartered or Ga∣risoned, that they had received the blessed Sacrament of the holy Communion, ac∣cording to the Discipline of the Church of Ireland, the Easter or the Christmass next preceding the said muster: and this to be done once every year. IV. That no Captain shall present at the muster, any Officer or Souldier to be ab∣sent by Licence, except the same be under Our hand, which Licence is to be entred in the Muster-master Generals Office, and the time limited set down on the muster Roll: and that the entertainment of all Non-Commissioned Officers & Souldiers, licen∣ced to go out of the Kingdom, be stayed in the Treasurers hands; and if they shall re∣turn within the time limited, Warrant
shall be granted forthwith to the Treasurer for the payment of their whole entertain∣ment during their said Licence: But if they return not within the time limited, then their whole entertainment to be chequed, except they produce a Certificat or Testi∣monial from the Mayor, or other chief Officer of the Port from whence they shall ship themselves, that they were ready to come, but were stayed by casualty of con∣trary winds and weather, or for want of passage, or by sickness, And in case any Officer or Souldier, who is licenced to be absent from his duty within the Kingdom, out-stay the time limited, then his pay is to be chequed for such time, and the Cheque not to be taken off but by special Order in writing from Us. V. That if any Officer or Souldier be ab∣sent from his muster, then he be returned absent, and lose the benefit of such muster, unless it be in case of sickness. which is to
appear by view of the Deputy Muster-master, or by authentick Certificate, if the person sick be far distant, or that they have special Licence from Us as aforesaid. VI. That no Captain give Licence to any private Souldier under his Command to be absent above fourteen dayes, and no such Licence to be of force, if any Souldier be absent at muster. VII. That no Commission Officer shall pass muster till he first produce his Commission to the Deputy Muster-master, and the same entred in the Muster-master Generals Office, to the end he may receive his pay accordingly, and that the Muster-master General may the better render an account to Us of all the Commissioned Officers of the Army from time to time, as the same shall be required. VIII. That if any Officer or Souldier be at
any time taken prisoner, then, upon attesta∣tion of the Captain, or other Officer com∣manding the Troop or Company, the said prisoner is to be allowed on the musters during his imprisonment. IX. That no Officer shall entertain any per∣son in the room of any Souldier, dead, discharged or run away out of any Troop or Company, till the next muster day, and his pay to commence from that day for∣ward, and not sooner. X. Taking into Our consideration the evil consequence of Officers discharging their Souldiers irregularly: No Officer shall from henceforth discharge any Souldier mustered in his Troop or Company, until such Souldier be discharged by a Court Marshal, or by order in writing from Us, or by the Souldiers consent at muster, up∣on pain of being cashiered.
XI. That no Captain, or other Officer of the Army shall in the tender or present∣ment of his Musters, use any fraud, practice or deceit, whereby the Muster-master Ge∣neral or his Deputies may be misled, mista∣ken or prevented of the due understanding of the true state of that Company or Troop: upon pain of loss of his place, and such other ignominious punishment as by a Marshal Court shall be thought fit. XII. That every Officer and Souldier of the Army, and Officers, Ministers and Artifi∣cers of the Train of Artillery, take the Oathes of Allegiance and Supremacy, or else not to be allowed on the Musters. XIII. That the Officers make no contract or agreement with any of the Souldiers of the Army for less pay than is allowed them by His Majesties Establishment, to which end the Muster-master General and his Depu∣ties
are hereby strictly required to use all means possible to inquire what Officers do make any such contract, who being satisfi∣ed therein, are forthwith to inform Us of the same. And such Officers and Souldi∣ers so offending, shall forthwith be dischar∣ged the Army, and suffer such other punish∣ment as we shall think fit. And this Our pleasure we require the Deputy Muster-masters to publish every Muster at the head of each Troop and Company, to the end no Officer or Souldier may plead ignorance herein. XIV. That no Souldier be suffered to pass muster upon a borrowed Horse, or with borrowed Arms or Furniture, and that his Horse be serviceable, and not under Four∣teen Handfuls high. XV. That the Officers being supplied with convenient and necessary Arms and Furni∣ture belonging to their several Troups and
Companies, the Muster-master General and his Deputies are required to take speci∣al care at the musters taken by them, that the Souldiers armes be well fixed, and that all the Fire-armes of the Foot be of one bore. And if they shall find any Souldi∣ers armes unfixt on the muster-day, they shall mark the same on such Souldiers name in the muster Roll, and the said Souldier shall be chequed for every such defective armes the Cheques following, viz. For a Sword every moneth two dayes pay; The like for Pikes, Musquets, Bandaleers, Pistols, Carbines and Holsters. XVI. That no Souldier that is an Inhabitant of any Town or Garrison, and a Trades∣man being well able to live of himself, shall be suffered to pass muster, unless he will re∣side constantly in his Garrison, and be fit and ready upon all occasions for service, to
be drawn into the field, and be well trained in the exercise of his armes. XVII. That no Souldier in muster answer for another, or muster by a false name, upon pain of death, and the Officer that esents such Souldier to be cashiered. XVIII. That the Deputy Muster master have a sufficient Convoy from Garison to Gari∣son when they are mustering. XIX. That no Officer or Souldier presume to taunt, revile, or pick a quarrel with any of the Deputy Muster-masters, but shall qui∣etly suffer him or them to examine, demand or inquire any Souldiers name, the Country from whence he came, and time of his being in this Kingdom, and to take any note or mark of the Soldiers at his or their pleasure: And if any Officer or Souldier shall offend herein, severe punishment shal be inflicted on him or them, as oppugners of His Majesties
Authority, and breakers of our Orders and Instructions, as We shall think fit. XX. That the Muster-master General do from time to time alter and change his De∣puties to muster in such Circuits and Pre∣cincts as he in his discretion shall think fit; and not to permit them to muster in one and the same precinct constantly. XXI. That if any of the Deputy Muster-masters shall at any time abuse the trust committed to his care, by conniving with the Officers to make a false Muster, or taking from any Officer or Souldier any bribe or present whatsoever upon account of muster∣ing, he shall forfeit his Imployment, and suffer such further punishment as We shall think fit. XXII. For the better putting in execution the aforesaid Orders and Instructions, The Muster-master General and his several De∣puties
within this Kingdom, in discharge of the great trust reposed in them, are re∣quired with all care and diligence strictly to observe the same. And if any of the said Deputy Muster-masters in any measure omit, or neglect to put in execution the Rules and Directions before exprest, he shall be dismist from his said Imployment, and suffer such other punishment as We shall think fit. And we require all the Of∣ficers of the Guards, and other the Officers of the Army and Train of Artillery in this His Majesties Kingdom to take due notice hereof, and to yield due obedience hereunto, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. Given at his Majesties Castle of Dublin the first day of August, 1667. G. Lane FINIS.
