I860 16156277 104905
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL▪ ORMONDE. WHereas Redmond O Hanlon of Tonderegee in the County of Armagh, Yeoman; Laughlin Mac Redmond O Hanlon of Kelleany, Yeoman, and several other persons named in a Proclamation Issued from this Board, dated the 14th. of December 1674 were for the reasons in the said Proclamation expressed, Proclaimed Rebels and Tray∣tors, And whereas the said Redmond and Laughlin O Hanlon, and their Complices, have (since the publishing of the said Proclamation) in several Counties of this Kingdom, appeared in Armes against His Majesties authority, and several of them Committed Murthers, Burglaries, Robberies and Stealths, besides divers other outrages, to the Terror and annoyance of his Majesties Loyal and good Subjects, and the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; upon which misde∣meanors and Crimes, being pursued by some of His Majesties Good subjects assist∣ed by some of his Majesties Army, they the said persons and their Complices are fled to the Woodes and Mountains, and stand upon their Keeping, so as they are not answereable or ameasneable to Law, but willfull contemners of the same, and cannot as yet be apprehended, whereby they may be punished according to the or∣dinary course of Law. We therefore do hereby declare, that the said Redmond O Hanlon, and Laughlin O Hanlon shall henceforth be called, reputed and taken for Noto∣rious
Rebels and Traytors against his Majestie, and accordingly to be prosecuted by all his Majesties Loveing and good Subjects, in all Hostile manner. And we further declare, that whatsoever person or persons shall comfort, relieve or a bet them or either of them, they are & shall be reputed, deemed & adjudged Traytors in like de∣gree with the forenamed Traytors & Rebels themselves, & to be proceeded against according to Law; And we do in his Majesties name straightly Charge and Com∣mand all his Majesties Loyal Subjects, upon their duty of allegiance to His Ma∣jesty, not onely to forbear to receive or relieve the persons aforesaid or any of them, but also to make diligent search and enquiry in what place or places the said persons shall from time to time Lurk or be relieved; and by all means possible to prosecute, apprehend and take the bodies of them, and them to bring or cause to be brought under safe custodie unto the high Sheriff of the respective Counties where any of them shall be apprehended, to be by such Sheriffs kept in strict & safe custodie, untill we upon notice thereof shall give further direction concerning them, or resi∣sting or refusing, to be taken to kill them or either of them, And for the better en∣couragment of such person or persons who shall prosecute and bring in the said Redmond and Laughlin O Hanlon, We do hereby publickly declare, that whosoever shall bring unto any Sheriff the bodies of them or either of them alive, or kill any of them, and bring his head to the Sheriff of the County where he shall be killed, to be by such Sheriff set up in some publique place in that County. shall have for his reward for each of them so brought in, or his head, viz for Redmond O Hanlon, one hundred pounds, and for Laughlin O Hanlon Fifty pounds, for payment of which summs respectively, We will give sufficient warrant as occasion shall require, and will take care that the same shall be immediately paid accordingly; And towards the speedie effecting of this service, all Commanders of Horse and Foot, and all o∣ther His Majesties Officers and Loveing Subjects are to be aiding and assisting, as they and every of them will answer the Contrary at their peril. Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin the 21th. day of January 1679. Mich: Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran. Ranelagh. Longford. Lanesborough, Ed: Brabazon. Char: Meredith. Ro: Booth. John Keatinge. Jo: Davys. VVm Flower. Tho: Newcomen. God save the King. DƲBLIN▪ Printed By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's most Excellent Majestie, and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesties Printing-house in Skinner-Row. 1679.
