I87A 99833185 37660
AN Impartial Relation OF JOHN KELLY's Services IN THE VICTUALLING-OFFICE. WITH AN ACCOUNT of the great ABUSES he has met with from his OPPOSERS. Likewise his Necessary VINDICATION Occasioned by their REPORT TO THE LORDS of the ADMIRALTY. LONDON; Printed for the Author, who is an Advocate for the Sailors, MDCXCIX.
THE PREFACE. HONOURED GENTLEMEN, HAving done considerable Services relating to the Victualling, Mr. Agar being dead (for whose Memory I shall always have a Veneration); and it being confidently spread abroad that Mr. Papillion was laying down, and Capt. Ayles to be removed, which would have made way for new Comissioners; being sensible of my Loss in the former, who had constantly given me Encou∣ragement in what I offered for the Publick; and that Mr. Main who was to succeed Him as First Commissioner would be my violent Opposer. Upon this I resolved and accordingly applyed my self to the Admiralty (Recommended by His Grace the Duke of Ormond) for a Settlement and Compensation, for Performances laid before Them; which the following Prints present the Reader with. Their Lordships sent my Allegations down to the Commissioners for Victualling, with a Command of a Report concerning me, which They made, and I have publish'd from a Copy granted me after it was sent up. This was soon replyed to by me, and only given in to Them. I now likewise print it. Paragraph to Paragraph to Their Report, that in one single view the Reader may see and judg of both. From that time Mr. Papillion has made me hope the Gentlemen might be brought over to do me Right, yea even after the Lords of the Admiralty had writ to Them in Words of a harsh Sound about me, occasioned by the Severity of their Report. Several Months being spent in fruitless Attendance, Capt. Ayles since dead, and Mr. Burlington were prevail'd with, by Mr. Papillion, upon Proposals here to be seen of eminent Advantage to the Government, to Contract with me. Mr. Bur∣lington recedes and leaves me all in Ruines, Mr. Main is what he ever was, and nothing less than a Miracle can change him. The Letters I likewise set forth, to shew I have used my utmost Endeavours to soften them to a Compli∣ance with me: All being successless, I became desperate, as may appear by my Farewel-Letter, of such a strain nothing could justify it but such a Treatment; especially when at that very Instant the King was abus'd in His Subjects, the Commissioners in their Honour, and I with a Numerous Family expos'd to a Jail and Starving. Who could have done more to have prevented this Publication? Or who would silently perish in complaisance to such unrelenting Tempers?
An Account of the Transactions between John Kelly and the Commissioners for Victualling, since their coming in and his first being employ'd by them. BEing heartily affected to the present Government, I very early devo∣ted my thoughts to the Service of it. I well knew that there might be Baked in the Kings Ovens larger quantities of durable Bisket than custom, that common plea for all that's Ill, would ever admit of; and that the Town Bakers in Contract required an Overseer as much as formerly. I was recommended to the Commissioners for the Victualling by Persons of so extraordinary a Character, that they soon received me to regulate their own Bakehouse, and to see the Bakers abroad perform'd their part. In this Trust I was for six Months, I challenge my Enemies to prove upon me the least failure in my duty. All that space I Baked in my own House, and sold to the Commissioners, being under the daily view of such who (if they had found any thing to my disparagement) would loudly have proclaim'd it. At the foresaid Expiration, Mr. Mne at the Board demanded my Warrant, telling me, They had no farther Occasion for me; and when they had, they would send for me: Which some intended they never should, as by the sequel will easily be discern'd. This was the deep Contrivance of Capt. Bolt, whose private Interest justling with the Publick and Mine, is the Source of all my Misfortunes. Not long after D was taken into my Place on Labourers pay, one of no judgment, and whose mean allowance might be foreseen a temptation to  I detected: He does his utmost to blast my Reputation, thereby to prevent my re entry whence I was dispossess'd. The Commissioners having occasion for great quantities of Bisket bought 3000 Bags of me. I had just taken a new built House, which I had a prospect would prejudice my Bread if it continued with me; I acquainted the Gentlemen with it, they promis'd to take it as fast as baked: This not being done, I renewed my application; they told me the Ships were not ready; with these Delays I had 1500 Bags of Bisket so damnified (though very good in it self) that it was left on my hands, which I was forced to cull, and sold to those of the Trade who sold part of it to the Commissioners, as I proved before them. Dampness of Ships spoil'd some Mens Bread while in the River, yet they sustain'd no loss by it. Note, The sending for Bisket was Capt. Bolt's business. At the same time two others baked Horse-Beans in their Bread, and was accepted, by the fa∣vour of Mr. Mayne who sold a Horse, Capt. Bolt who had the Present of a Silver-heated Cain, and Dodson who had 10 l. lent him on a Note, which was to be deliver'd up when the Bisket went to Sea. This I made out against Dodson, for which he was discharg'd. Thence forward such Grain was made use of in Bisket for the Navy, as ne're had been known. Mr. G. bought 130 Quarter of dammag'd Pease out of the Victualling-Office, baked it into Bisket, and sold it to the Commissio∣ners. I ask'd him how he thought to get clear of it? He told me I might go with him and see: he buys a Horse of Mr. Mayne, who challenges him for 10 s. remaining for the former in my hearing.
I baked 500 Bags of Bisket with some Pease in it, to see how they would pass from me: They were refus'd, and after six Months keeping, sold by another to the Office, for more than I would have parted with them for at first. The Town-Bakers were in Confederacy to fix an extravagant Price on the Bisket, they knew the Commissioners were in urgency for; after all these Discouragements I resolv'd to appear, and as I happily baffled their Designs, I made then Three Proposals to the Commissioners. 1st. To prevent mixtures. 2dly. To carry on Baking in their own Office, as afore done by me. 3ly. By baking in my own House the Kings Stuff. The latter they soon complied with me in, and contracted with me for, the Two former was to be co∣loured over as I shall presently relate. The Proposal they closed with me in, was to be defeated as far as possible. Mr. Mayne set himself against my pay∣ment according to Contract, which Mr. Papillon was for, yet it was carried against me. Nor did I bake what I could have baked, though I might have Goods sent into me on the Office credit: This was to my great Injury, and the Publick too, and Gain to none I know of, but the Purveyor. The Com∣missioners order'd the clearing of my House of the Bisket I had in it, before I baked for them; which I did, and after sold it to them. Dodson was again brought in, he survey'd it, and reports it, as handling cold; when I came to take out my Warrants, Mr. Mayne crys out we'll amerce him, Mr. Papillon askt how much? Mr. Mayne said 3 l. per C. which came to 45 l. Dodson seem'd concern'd at it, and told me, he thought 1 s. per C. would have been as much as they would have laid on it. This was the first Amercement ever was made, as I knew of; and by Mr. Mayne's good will it should be the only one, as will appear by an Article in the Report about Amercement, which was what he openly express'd at the Board against me to have brought them off; which taking Air the Bakers Petition'd for Remission, but Mr. Papillon resolv'd it should not go unpunish'd, and carried it. The Commissioners Ship'd great quantities of Bisket for the Streights There was sent to Sea as I proved upon Dodson by Three Witnesses such Bisket it was ashame it should pass; upon this he was again thrown out, Mr. Papillon declaring he must never expect to be imployed more in the Office. For all this the Commissioners accepted not of my two former Propo∣sals till some time after, as the succeeding Papers will manifest. I'll put an end to this account, acquainting only after all the Services my Reply to the Report will make out, with the brightest Evidence, at the mo∣ment it was rumour'd Mr. Papillon had resign'd, there having been a Drip in my House that had damaged some Cakes; the whole Lost of Bisket, was given out for such to Capt. Ayles, which he so resented, he resolv'd I should turn out before himself, so forbid me any more Meal. This Inspiration from the Father of Lies was to render me odious to the New Commissioners, Mr. Maine to be Chairman. While my Enemies were flusht with this Ima∣ginary Victory they flatter'd themselves they had obtain'd, and looking on themselves as rid on me forever. The Almighty Patron of the Oppress'd infuses new Courage into me; and bold as Innocence I attended the Duke of Ormond with my Case, who was nobly pleas'd to send me in his Great Name to the Admiralty; to whom I presented what follows. I must only detain the Reader while I do justice to their Lordships, for their most obliging Reception of me. I should be guilty of the blackest Ingratitude, did I not make an honourable mention of what was so deser∣ving it. I return likewise the Gentlemen of the Navy my acknowledg∣ment for their dispatch in my Affair. How pleas'd should I be to celebrate the Praises of those, whose goodness has been flowing to me, while I'm all in torture now, I am forc'd to appear a rude ill-natur'd Satyrist, in making the iustest Reflexions on those who have been otherwise.
The Case of John Kelly of St. Pauls Shadwell, His Majesty's Bisket-Baker, and Supervisor of the Victualling-Office on Tower-Hill. I. THat the said John Kelly for many Years hath followed his Calling of a Bisket-Baker, but in November 95, the Commissioners for victualling the Navy contracted with him wholly to serve the King, and to quit all Merchants and other Services, and to bake all he could in his own House on Wapping-Wall, and make it of the King's Stuff, which he did per∣form with all Faithfulness according to his Contract. II. That being zealous to serve His Majesty and his Seamen, and he did in several Letters inform the said Commissioners, that other Bakers who were in Contract to deliver Bread made all of sound and sweet Wheat at a certain Price, did defraud the King, and abuse the Seamen by mixing Meal made of Rye, Barly and Pease, which would not keep any considerable time Water-born, nor was wholsome for the Seamen. III. That such Practices was the occasion that so much Bread was so fre∣quently return'd, and particularly betwixt November 96, and May 97, vast Quantities were return'd at one time, for which the King paid 20 s. per C. and was sold for 4 s. per C. and there went away as good Bread with it for want of being cull'd, as the King gave 20 s. per C. for at that time; and I did propose a Method to the Commissioners to prevent such Evils (as had long rain'd) for the future; provided they would empower me so to do, and that I was inform'd by R. S. that some part was sold to the Transport-Office for 12 s. per C. and some to Newfound-Land for 45 s. per C. by R. B. IV. That the 10th of May 97, he receiv'd a Warrant under the Seal of the Office requiring and impowering him to supervise all the Bakers in Contract with the Office, and to inspect what Stuff they made their Biskket of, and if not according to Contract to report the same in order to their Abatement and Punishment. V. That in the beginning of July 97, the Commissioners being in a great Strait for want of Bread, the Bakers understanding it, they would have impo∣sed upon them as to Price and Payment. I acquainted Mr. Mitchell how they might raise more Bread in the Office, and my House, by setting the Ovens to work Night-work, which he acquainted the Commissioners with; upon which I was sent for to the Board, and was order'd to do as I proposed (be∣ing introduced by Mr. Green into the Bake-house) which I so well perform'd, that they baked there, and at my House, a sufficient Quantity of Bread from the King's Stuff. VI. That Kelly Pursuant to the Warrant to him directed, did inspect the Bakers in Contract, and through many Difficulties did discover such notorious Abuses in their mixing undue Grains with Wheat, that the Commissioners amerced 10 of them in proportion to their Offences. VII. That Kelly acquainted the Commissioners, that he had consider'd of such Methods that would save the King Thousands, and to have always good and wholsom Bread; and in order thereto did propose that His Majesty should purchase Mills and grind all their own Wheat that they made into Bisket; by which all Frauds and Abuses to His Majesty's Subjects, and Losses by bad Bread, which had for many Years been practiced would utterly cease; and accordingly Kelly did further propose the purchasing Mr. Mayhew's Mills at Rotherhith, which upon survey of Kelly, he found it accommodated with four pair of Stones, and all other Conveniences ready fixed with large Grainerys, and a Killn for drying of Wheat, in order to dress their Flower, which will make it keep three times longer at Sea than without drying.
VIII. That the King with those Mills might grind 180 Quarters of Wheat, a Week, which is as much as would supply the Victualling-Office and the said Kelly's House, and be a sufficient Supply, and likewise prevent all the Mis∣chiefs that have hitherto attended the buying of Bisket, and that none is used in the Bisket they buy for the Navy. Here follows a Copy of the Letter sent to the Commissioners, upon which they granted me their Warrant. Henoured Gentlemen, May the 3d 97. ONce more I must give you to understand, that I see daily Abuses put upon you by one and another, in a meer Combination to distress you as much as they can, without any restraint. I am the Butt into which the Arrows of their Malice are Shot. I have laboured to open your Eyes, but you seem as tho you had no Eyes; I assure you, you have not the same Goods you buy, so that the Government pays for that it has not, and the Subjects abused by it, who will reflect on you. Nothing is more common than to sell you by Sample that which you have not in Parcel. I am sure there is 10 s. per Quarter difference in some sort of Goods that come to me; and you buy Bread to be made of good Wheat, whereas 'tis made of Barly, Rye and Pease, and coarse Midlings, which makes Bread four Shillings in the Hun∣dred worse than you buy it for. This I can make appear, and will when I am impowerd from you, but not before. I can save the Government much more than 500 l. per Ann. as I have said I could. Pray Gentlemen take me right, and don't do by me as you have formerly. I have done my duty as a faithful Servant, and I'm sorry my He been bound behind the back of my Indeavours. I'll assure you  will not credit this, it shall be the last I shall trouble you with. , Gentlemen, Your Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. By the Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy. WHEREAS Information hath been given to us, that several of the Bakers, that contracted to deliver Bread for His Majesty's Service, all made of good sound sweet Wheat, have notwithstanding contrary to their said Agreements, put in Meal of Rye, Barly and Pease, which may be very prejudicial to His Majesty's Service, and the health of the Men. These are therefore to require, and impower you to visit the several Bakers that bake Bread for this Office, and to examin what Stuff they bake their Bisket of, and to give Information to us when you find any Abuse, that upon examination thereof, such Abatement may be made, or such other Courses taken, for the Punishment of the said Abuses, as shall be directed according to Justice and Equity. Dated at the Victualling-Office, London the 10th of May, 1697. To Mr. John Kelly, These. Tho. Papillon. Simon Mayne. J. Barrington.
This Letter was sent to the Commissioners after the Reception of their Warrant. Honoured Gentlemen, June the 14th 1697. IN pursuance of your Warrant to me directed, wherein you impower'd me to visit the several Bakers in contract with you, which accordingly I have, and do find your Honours very much abused by the Generality of them, as will appear by the Stuff and Bread they bake, which I can produce, and will when you order me. I do not know how to proceed any further, till you have seen what has been made thus far. I doubt not but your Honours will see a necessity for an Alteration, or else you cannot be safe in what you buy to send abroad, if it be Water-born any considerable time it will not hold, and that's the reason you have so much return'd Bread, because the nature of the Stuff will not hold, it being made of Rye, Barley, Pease, coarse Midlings and some Wheat, more or less, in the most of the Bread I have seen you have. I remain Your Honours Humble Servant JOHN KELLY. Their Answer was, THat they had so much occasion for Bread at that time, that they order'd me to refuse none but what was mouldy; and that they would take another Opportunity to treat with them that offended. Honoured Gentlemen, May the 18th 1698. I Have obeyed your Commands, in comparing the Produce of your Meal in the Office with that in my House, and they both yield but poorly; how far they agree, wherein they differ, and why they do so, Mr. Green (who has the Account) will acquaint you. I am sorry to see you so far abused as you have been and are; do hope you'll strengthen my Hands, who can by Power from you not only prevent these for the future, but may do that which was never perform'd, nor I believe can be exceeded hereafter, in that which I profess to undertake. As I have left all business to serve the Government (under you) so I would fain do it, not by keeping you in the dark, but by bringing hidden things to light, carrying on the working, grinding and ba∣king your Wheats, that you shall clearly discern wherein they differ, whether in kind or grinding; that ye may know a true estimate of the Produce of any parcel of Meal, or Meal and Midlings, whenever you require it; whereby you may know the prime cost of the Bread to the King. If your Honours would amerce the present Wheats, which ye are sensible vary so much from what you bought them for, with submission it seems equally just to amerce Wheat as Bisket, and perhaps may be the best way to deter from such prac∣tises hereafter. Your accepting or refusing this Motion, as well as Reward for what's past, I willingly leave to your Wisdoms; and do remain, Your Honours most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. This Letter was sent in obedience to the Commissioners Commands, after I had lent the 400 Bags of Bread, for which I took Receipts, as follows.
I Promise to deliver unto Mr. John Kelly, or his Order, two hundred Bags of Bisket, for the use of His Majesty's Navy, containing one hundred and twelve Pound each Bag. Witness my Hand, this Fifteenth Day of December, 1697 Richard Salter. I Promise to deliver unto Mr. John Kelly, or his Order, two hundred Bags of Bread, for the use of His Majesty's Navy, containing one hundred and twelve Pounds each Bag. Witness my Hand, this Fifteenth day of December, 1697. Edward Lodge. These two Letters were sent to the Commissioners, in relation to the taking Mills, and the Advantages that would accrue thereby. Honoured Gentlemen, May the 20th 1698. I Have made several Essays in my way to serve the Government, and for the most part I have been unhappily understood and bauk'd; however, seeing there is one way more very providentially falls out, and perhaps 'tis the greatest from me of any. I know a Person that has Mills, with large Grainaries, four pair of Stones, with all moveable Conveniencies, which he'll let the King have for two hundred and fifty Pounds, the standing Rent is 135 l. per Ann. and there is as much to be let as will yield 50 l. per Ann. so that the standing Rent will be 85 l. per Ann. These Mills  180 Quarter per Week, if fully employed, which is as much as the Office and my House can bake in that time. The Toles thereof is 115 Bushel, which at 5 s. per Bushel, is 28 l. 15 s. per Week, and at 8 s. per Bushel, as it is now currant is 46 l. per Week. These Mills at the utmost cannot stand the King in more than 500 l. per Ann. 'tis certain this will be of great advantage to the King, if you do but compute it according to what Wheat has been, and must be spent in the Office and my House, besides the innumerable Evils and chargeable Practices; this very thing will prevent too many here to be enu∣merated. The Sense you have of the whole I wait for, and am Your Honours humble Servant. Honoured Gentlemen, May the 24th 1698. THE other Day I hinted the great Profit in taking Mills for the King's Use, if it needs urging, I can do it from the many Abuses it will pre∣vent, and the bare naming them, I am perswaded will be enough to satisfy you. I. By those that sold you Wheat, who have not deliver'd the the same ac∣cording to Sample into the Mills, nor have sent in the full Quantity which they have sold at that time, and yet the Millers have given a Receipt for the full Proportion of what has been order'd them to receive, and has taken a Note from under the Factors Hand to make good the full Complement. II. Another great Evil was your sending your Wheat to so many Mills at such distances, and has been proved upon some of the Millers to have gone there good, but have come home bad, besides the power of Sacks you have lost every Year; these have been reigning Evils along time: when they be∣gan I doe not know, but hope you will put an end to them now, by set∣ting up a better way for the Publick Good, and your Honours. What I have said is true, and not to be slighted.
If it be demanded, that seeing these things are so momentous, why  not let you know them sooner; to that I will return these two Answers. 1st. That I have met with so much Opposition in lesser Matters, which yet were as true, that I have been afraid to meddle with so great a one. 2dly. For me to discover those evils that were in such high Practice, and which could not be removed by a bare discovery. I thought therein I should have done more hurt than good; but now when such a singular opportunity is put into my Hands to cut off all these, and without which you can never do it. I was encouraged to present it to you, being Your humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. The Commissioners Report to the Lords of the Admiralty, in Relation to his Petition and Case, together with his Reply to them, and what is since added. Honoured Gentlemen, WE received your Honours Letter of the first of August last, accom∣panying the Petition and Case of John Kelly, calling himself His Majesty's Bisket-Baker, and Supervisor in the Victualling-Office, trans∣mitted to you from the Right Honourable the Lords of the Admiralty, which you send us, and desire us to inform you what we know of his Allegations, and whether we think it fit for His Majesty's Service to continue him as he desires, with such other Matters as we should think proper for their Lord∣ship's knowledg. We have for some time deferr'd the answering your Honours said Letter, in regard of the Absence of some of our Board, desiring that the said Mat∣ter might be examined in a full Board, which having now been done, we crave leave to acquaint your Honours with the state of that Matter. Report. We cannot allow of the Title he gives himself of his Majesty's Master Bisket-Baker, and Supervisor in the Victualling-Office, nor that ever we contracted with him wholly to serve the King, and quit all other Services. Honoured Gentlemen, I Beg leave to reply to your Honours Report, whereby I intend to set things in a clearer Light before you. The Title of Master-Baker I'll drop, but desire to be your humble Remembrancer, that Mr. Green by your verbal Or∣der, introduced me into the Office of inspecting your own Bakers, who ever since have constantly observed my Directions, and in particular my comman∣ding them Night-work, whereby more Bisket than ordinary being raised, it occasioned the Town-Bakers who were then caballing to advance their Price, to lower it (as Capt. Bolt then own'd to me.) I sometime after put things into such a method, you might always be ascertained of the actual Produce of Bisket from Meal, whereby you might discover the Quality of the Stuff (which before had a Cloud cast over it.) I discovered likewise the excessive charge you were at in repair of your Ovens, and would have demonstrated, by what might have been done for the future, the shameful Management for the past. I add, I would have ordered the dressing your Bran to a considerabler Ad∣vantage than at present: I offered it, but it was neglected, as was likewise the dressing your own Flower. I do not see how a Master-Baker becomes so unallowed a Title, when a Master-Cooper is so granted a one; in baking there seems to be more of Mistery, and so one to guide and govern it seems to
be as necessary: and Names are only for Distinction. I once oppposed Capt. Bolt's Judgment, recommending such Stuff to be baked into Bisket, to be sent with Capt. Warren to the Indies, as I am certain would have fail'd, and preferr'd other which lasted the Voyage out and Home, as I received ac∣count from Mr. Edward Wilks Clerk to Capt. Warren. As to your signifying your not contracting with me wholly to serve the King, I with due submission rejoin, the very nature of the thing implies it; otherwise I might have been under continual Suspicion (blow up by those whose Interest it interfer'd with) of changing the King's Goods for worse of my own, having no Eye of yours over me, I suppose because you knew me only employ'd for the King, therefore there was none. I add, my former Pa∣pers puts this out of doubt, relating such Circumstances about it I shall neve forget. Report. It's true that the 10th of May 97, having Information of the Abuses of some Bakers then in contract, we did give him a Warrant to visit and examin with what Stuff the several Bakers we were in contract with did bake their Bread, and wherein he found abuse to give us an account thereof, and at the same time we did imploy him to bake Bread for His Majesty's Service, and furnished him with Stuff for the same rate of 2 s. per C. weight, for his Care of inspecting the other Bakers, he demanded no Allowance in regard he was imployed by us to bake Bread himself. The said Kelly in answer to the said Warrant, did give Information against several Bakers; and upon hearing and examining the Matter, there hath been between 2 and 300 l. stop'd and allow'd for the Abuses they had been guilty of. The said Kelly's Informations being not given unto our Board, until the Bread was deliver'd and gone. We knew of no expence of Time and Money that the said Kelly hath been at, otherwise then before exprest, nor ever understood of any contrivance he made for the Retrenchment of the Charge in the Office, or that he expected any Compensation or Salary for his Service, otherways than the due Payment of him for the Bread he baked. Reply. I was above a Year in baking for you, before I prov'd upon Dodson his Connivance at the Bakers, for which he was a second time discharg'd; soon after you gave me a Warrant to the purpose you express it. Mr. Agur gave it as his Sense at the Board, and none of you contradicted it, that half of the Amercement should be my Encouragement. I am ready to give Oath I made Complaint against them with all imaginable Candor, to avoid the Clamour I expected upon it. The receiving of the Bisket mulcted by them was by the Appointment of the Board, notwithstanding Mr. Maine's asserting differently. Mr. Agur had the several Samples at delivery handed to him, by Mr. Warren who is ready to attest it. I could never have ima∣gined your Honours could have thought all the fore-mentioned Services to be done, only for the good done by them, or that it could be expensless, or that I would create Legions of Enemies only for the pleasure of engaging them. I add, I had a Salary for executing my former Warrant, though I baked my own Stuff, and might have gain'd sufficiently, as all did except my self, for the Reasons before-given. Report. That whereas he suggests in the third Article in his Case, That Quan∣tities of return'd Bread from the Ships of War, were sold at 4 S. per Cent. and afterwards by the Person that bought it, sold to the Commissioners of the Transport for 12 s. per C. &c. all the Contents of the said Article (except only that the said defective Bread was sold at 4 s. per C.) is altogether false and scandalous, and upon the Examination in his own Presence, all the said Par∣ticulars hath been own'd by him to be utterly false, and all his Pretences of excuse, asserting such untruth, was that some body or other told him so.
Reply. As to the return'd Bisket sold to Capt. Clerk, he frankly own'd the culling it; but said it came to a bad Market. William Railton one of the Furners, justified some of it as good as what you bought, which was no great Credit to the Purveyor. I add, what I said about selling to the Transport-Office, which is so aggra∣vated, I had it from R. S. I invented it not, nor ever design'd to scandalize you by it, but to expose the buying of no better Bread than sold for damaged. They Report. We own it to be true, that the said Kelly did Inform them of the Mills at Rotherith were to be sold; and that it would be for the King's Service to buy the same, to prevent the Abuses that had been for∣merly committed by the Millers; which we upon consideration, hoping it might prove to His Majesty's Advantage, did apply to the Right Honour∣able the Lords of the Admirality, for their Lordships Direction in the Case; and upon their Lordships Approval, did buy the Lease of the said Mills: We think Mr. Kelly therein did a good Service, but we never heard that he expected any Bounty for the same. Reply. For the Mills which Providence proposed I laid hold on, and your Honours Embraced, as the great Remedy for so many Evils the Office la∣boured under; to your Fame be it spoke, with a Generosity worthy of you: You despised all the Artifices made use of to hinder your taking of them. And my possessing my self of Mahew's Papers somewhat contributed to. I pay you, Gentlemen, my sincerest Acknowledment for owning me as an Instrument about them. Report. As to the Prayer of his Petition, That he might be continued Master-Baker in the Victualling-Office, and Impowered Supervisor of all dry Provisions, &c. We crave leave to certifie your Honours, That we cannot think him a fit Person for such a Trust, not only because before he was Im∣ploy'd to Bake the King's Meal, when he was in Contract for delivering of Bread, we found him as Culpable as any of the other Bakers; but that also since he was Imploy'd to Bake for the King, he did dispose of 400 Bags of Bread for his own use, for the Payment of his Private Debts, with∣out the Knowledge or Allowance of the Board, and in a time when there was great Scarcity of Bread for their Service; and though the same hath since been supplied by other Bread, which was not so good as that of the King's; yet we humbly conceive, a Person that hath been Guilty of such a Breach of Trust, and in a time when the King's Affairs might have suffer'd exceedingly for want of the Bread, is not fit for such an Employ and Trust as is in his Petition desired. We are, Gentlemen, your Honours most Humble, &c. Reply. I come now to the concluding Paragraph about my Contrivan∣ces, &c. I pray with more fervency than ever, that since I have acted so (as the Paper demonstrates) for the Common Good, you would not suffer me, as you are Gentlemen, and more as you are Christians, to fall into Ruin, to the Triumph of those that hate me, and the disheartning all who shall serve the Publick against the Selfishness of them that oppose it. As to your representing me as unqualify'd, from undue Baking whilst in Contract, it should seem more an Objection against using me formerly, than at present; and what gave satisfaction then, will, I trust, con∣tinue it now. Though I must needs say, that Eye was sharp as an Eagles, that could disern Pease in Bisket while it was mine, and therefore rejected it; and as soon as it came to be Mr.  became blind as a Mole (or the Pease vanished) and accepted it.
The 400 Bags of Bisket disposed of by me, was such a fault, nothing less than Necessity can Apologize for: But your Honours have been misinform∣ed about paying my Debts with the Sale of them. I have their Note to shew it otherwise: As it is not out of your Power, or unreasonable to for∣give it, seeing it has been made good; so let it not be against your Inclina∣tions, but let my Services, with the State of a poor Family in the depth of Misery, move your Compassion; and may I upon a Second Commission of that kind, fall under the severest Justice, as now I hope to become an Object of your Mercy. And so remain, Your Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. I add, I assume the Boldness to assert, I have abundantly Refuted your charging me, when in Contract, with delivering as bad Bread as others; I wish both that and what I have returned to it, had never seen the Sun. The Services about the Mills alone in the full extent of their usefulness, are of that consequence, the consideration of them might have prevail'd with you to have buried the 400 Lent Bags in Everlasting Oblivion: I must be free with you, Gentlemen, you had no other way of intercepting the Lords of the Admiralty's Bounty to me, and preventing their Settling me (upon Pe∣titioning them) according as I requested them, but with blackening me with that unhappy Fact. I am sorry for you, that your Prejudices should not rest here, and tho' I have declined the Matter of my Petition, and only Crave to live by Serving the Government, and that only because I can live no otherwise, having disoblig'd almost all others, by my Serving the Government in oppo∣sition to them. I must be deny'd this, though I give in Security; and no∣thing will satisfie, but to abandon me to all that is Miserable, as if I had been one of the Vilest of Criminals. The Touch about Bisket supply'd, being not so good, I can only say to it, Captain Ayles might have refused it, I could have compelled them to send in better, as I might sooner, had I known your Scarcity, the Notes running to answer it on Demand. I cannot take my leave of the last Article, (that gives such a wound to my Reputation, I and all mine are threatened to bleed to Death by it) with∣out making two Observations upon it. First, As to what you term the Prayer of my Petition, my Answer to the first Article, and the Amercement; I think, clears it up to a Demonstration, that my Conduct has been unexceptionable in both Parts; and that is more than I shall grant that of my Adversaries to have been. Secondly, Neither can that far fetch'd Argument against me, nor your nearer ones (all so weakened (as I humbly conceive) by my Reply to them) I verily think, conclude against me even in that, unless my Faults, different from all Mankind, admit of no Extenuations; and what would be a Vertue in others, is demerit in me. Much less for ever to shut me out of Employ under the King, when I have given in Security. The Account of the first Years Work, wherein I was concerned in buying part of the Goods. 1695.   Nov. 11. TO Meal, for 100 Qr. bought of Mr. Holloway 56 s. per Qr. Decem. 5. To ditto for 50 quart. of the said Holloway. at 50 s. 5. To Midling, for 9 quart. bought of Geo. Hubert, at 48 s. Decemb. 9. Produce, by Bisket Bread 528 Bags Jan. 22. Delivered, by Providence-Hoy, James Pearse Master, 320 Bags. Ditto 25. Deliv. by a Hoy called the William, W. Phillpot Master, 208 Bags.
1695 & 96.   Decem. 16. To Meal for 150 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at 54 s.   To Midling for 13 quart. of Geor. Hubart. at 48 s.   To Midling, for 8 quart. 4 bush. of Geo. Staples, at 35 s. Januar. 27. Produce, by Bisket Bread 582 Bags. Januar. 25. Delivered, By William Hoy, Phillpot Master, 104 Bags. 28. Deliv. by the William and Thomas, John Long Master, 358 Bags.   Deliv. by the Friendship, 120 Bags. Januar. 9. To Meal, for 150 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway, at 54 s. 28. Produce, by Bisket-bread 493 Bags. 30. Deliv. by the William and Thomas, John Long Master, 453 Bags.   Deliv. by The. Hermond, 40 Bags. Januar. 28. To Meal, for 150 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway, at 54 s. Febr. 10. Produce, by Bisket Bread 489 Bags. Febr. 3. Deliv. by Wherry for the William and Thomas, 20 Bags. 11. Deliv. by the Success, J. Sauly Master, 196 Bags.   Deliv. by Wherries in 100 Punchins, 200 Bags. March 2. Deliv. by the James Hoy, John Litchfield Master, 73 Bags. I would have given you the whole of the Deliveries, but it would have been too large for this Book, as well as too chargable for me. This I think is suffi∣cient to shew my Method, and the constant Attendance of me and my Servants. Febru. 15. To Meal for 250 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway, at 54 s.   To Midling, for 10 quart. 5 bush. of Mr. Broxwel, at 47 s.   To Midling, for 21 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Holloway, at 36 s.   To Midling for 12 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Meagor, at 48 s.   To Medling, for 2 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Tho. Clark, at 48 s.   To Midling, for 16 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Hubbart, at 48 s.   Produce, by Bisket Bread, 1042 Bags. March 24. To Meal for 220 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at 48 s.   To Midling, for 19 quart. 4 bush. of Geor. Hubbart, at 48 s.   To Midling, for 40 quart. of Mr. Holloway at 36 s.   To Midling for 12. quart. 4 bush. of Meagor, at 48 s.   To Midling, for 3 quart. 1 bush. of Tho. Clark, at 48 s.   To Midling, for 12 quart. 4 bush. Rich. Rountree at 44 s.   Produce, by Biket, 978 Bags. May 4. For Meal, 210 quart. of Mr. Holloway at sundry Prices.   To Meal, for 30 quart. of Mr. Moore, at 42 s.   To Midling, for 36 quart. 5 bush. R. Rountree. at 44 s.   To Midling, for 15 quart. 5 bush. ditto Rountree, at 40 s.   To Midling, for 5 quart. 3 bush. Edw. Davis at 40 s.   To Midling, for 5 quart. 7 bush. ditto Davis at 36 s.   To Midling, for 4 quart. 3 bush. James Kenfield at 33 s. 6d.   To Midling, for 14 quart. Mr. Geor. Hubbart, at 32 s.   Produce, by Bisket Bread, 1034 Bags. June 15 To Meal, for 100 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at 40 s.   To Midling, for 6 quart. 2 bush. of Ja. Norwood at 32 s.   To Midling, for 28 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Holloway at 29 s.   Produce, by Bisket Bread, 445 Bags.
1696.   July 2. To Meal, for 145 quart, bought of Mr. Holloway at 40 s.   To Midling, for 6 quart. 4 bush. bought ditto Holloway at 30 s.   To Midling, for 22 quart. of Holloway or Rich Rountrees 29 s.   To Midling, for 5 quart. 5 bush. of Edw. Davis 28 s.   To Midling, for 11 quart. 7 bush. Mary Tillard 32 s.   Produce, by Bisket Bread, 649. July 30. To Meal, for 137 quart. 4 bush. at 40 s.   To Midling, for 9 quart. bought of Mr. Gallaway at 28 s.   To Midling, for 11 quart. of Mr. Bedwel, at 28 s.   To Midling, for 12 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Davis at 30 s.   To Midling, for 8 quart. of Mr. Holloway at 29 s. Septemb. 21. Produce, by Bisket Bread, 600 Bags. Septemb. 21. To Meal, for 100 quart. at 38 s.   To Midling, for 4 quart. 2 bush. of Mr. Holloway, at 26 s.   To Midling, for 16 quart. 6 bush. of Ja. Norvood, at 28 s. 6 d. October 9. To Midling, for 6 quart. 3 bush. of Jos. Shepard, at 26 s. October 9. Produce, by Bisket Bread, 449 Bags. Honoured Sirs, October the 13th 1696. I Have delivered the Account of the two last Parcels which have been in hand since the 2d. of July, the neat produce of the former, was 600 Bags of Bisket at 13 s. per Bag, and the other 449 Bags at 12 s. per Bag, I could have baked twice as much in the time or more; and considering how cheap I work, and the great Charge I am at, it's hard with me, for want of Money for what I have done, as well as for want of what I could have done; so that set my Working time and my Playing time together, I have got nothing by Serving you this Year, for I have Three Ovens which draw 200 and a half per Shute, which comes but to 5 s. and the Wood and Wages of that is 4 s. 7 d. whence it appears my Profit is very small, to pay House-Rent and Taxes, and maintain my great Family, for whom I have no other way to get Bread; having, as you know, thrown off all my other Con∣cerns (as you oblig'd me) to serve the Government, which has Created me many Enemies, who labour industriously to overthrow all my Endea∣vours, which is to me a great Trouble, and especially from those who should have been one with me: They are the great Tools made use of by my Ene∣mies (within) though, I thank God, they cannot charge me with the least unfaithfulness to my Trust, and all the former I could much better bear, had I but the Countenance and Encouragement from your Honours, as my Rea∣diness and Fidelity might obtain, were not your Honours possess'd with con∣trary Sentiments, all which, I hope, Time will change into favonrable ones concerning Your Honours most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. Note, The Commissioners contradicted not my asserting throwing off all my other Concerns, as they obliged me, &c. The first of that kind I met with in the Report.
Honoured Sirs, February the 5th 1696. I Am constrained to give you the trouble of these, because your Delays to pay me my Wages for my last Years Work, lays me under such Necessities, that I can no longer stand under the same, unless you pay me. What I have done, is cheaper than any other Man could do it, or than it is done in the Office by 5 per Cent. from November 1695, to November 1696; and if you please to compute it, you will find it so, or pretty near it. One thing more I can prove, that if you would have let me Bake what I would have Baked from June to November last, I had saved the King 35 per Cent. of what you give now; which is 926 l. 9 s. on the 2647 Bags of Bread which I could have Baked more than I had. The Meal, &c. to have made it of, I could have had of such as would have Credited the Office at that time, which are as followeth; Mr. Francis Hollaway, Mr. George Hubart, Mr. Megar, Mr. Edward Davis, Mr. James Norwood, Mrs. Mary Tillard, &c. For the Truth of what I say in this particular, please to review your own Agreement with Mr. Hollaway, September last, for 100 Quarters, as it stands in your Minute Book, and 'twill appear true; all which, when entertain'd in your Honours serious Consideration, undoubtedly will prevail with you to take some effectual Course for my Payment, and further oblige Your Honours most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY. Honoured Gentlemen, February the 10th 1697. I Conclude by your Carriage to me, and your not paying of me according to Contract, that you think I get greatly by Baking for you; If I had been fully Employ'd all the Year, I could have cleared about 100 l. per Annum. I have acted with that plainness and clearness in my Accounts, which proves me to be otherwise than was thought by some of you when I first proposed this Undertaking, and others which was then offered; which would have been as advantageous to the Government as this, and altogether for the Say∣lors Good: I know the Suspicions which some of you have of me, were suggested to your Honours by some in your Office, as well as without, whose Interest these Proposals of mine interfere with, and some of them have been heard to say, That they had better given me a Thousand Pounds, than I should have done what I did, for it was, and it would be, much out of their way. Gentlemen, I hope you will not take my Addressing you amiss, for is there not a Cause? I find you slight me, and all I do for you, as if I were not faithful to you, when no Man could have done more to Serve you than I have; I have obeyed your Orders punctually, have given you an Account justly, have been diligent in finding out all Irregular Practices that were prejudicial to the Subject, or reflect dishonour on you: I have spent both my Time and Money to serve you, and had I had the Incouragement I de∣served from you, things might have been so managed, that none of your Suc∣cessors should be able to find fault in these Species: I humbly remain, Gentlemen, your Faithful Servant, JOHN KELLY.
IT was not my first Intention to print the Transcript out of the Books, and the Three Letters that accompany it, which I am sensible in the order of Things should be in another more proper place: But this being an After-Thought, I must acquaint you they have a double Face, looking backward and forward, and are so serviceable to my main Design, I cannot without Injury to my self omit them. First, The Transcript proves what I assert in my foregoing Reply to the the Commissioners, that I was employ'd by them in baking, long before they gave me the Warrant they specify the Date of, viz. May 97. I leave it to all who are impartial, whether love of Trouble and fierce Opposition only, could be a reasonable Motive to pay further Services to the Government, without respect to the Rewards of it; I am sure I cannot pretend to so elevated a Vertue, and never thought any would have fastened it upon me. Secondly, They show from the ample Produce the goodness of the Stuff then used; which failing afterwards, the then Accomptant Mr. Lillburne, since deceased that examined it, finding the same Deficiency in the King's own Bake-house. It a wakened to the Consideration of the Abuses at the Mills, as the true Causes of it, which made way for the purchasing of them, and like a Torrent bore down all Arguments against them, and will be a standing Demonstration the Victualling-Office can never be without them. Lastly, They with a Glance of the Eye discover the frequent compleatings of Parcels, and the natural Consequences to me seems my Payment ought to have kept pace with them; and that they did not, I feelingly express in my Letters, where I likewise manifest I might and ought to have had constanter Work, for the Publick Advantage and my own, which evinces what the last Page will present you with about my Losses: All Men will easily be satisfied the Prepossession against me was long before the 400 Bags, and guess at the Quiver whence so many Arrows have been shot at me; though I am certain the Government has been wounded through my Sides. A LETTER to the BOARD. Gentlemen, I With profound Respects to your Honours, and equal Sincerity, ex∣press'd my self in words you ordered Minuting, and ever since with a Patience only Heaven could inspire me with, have been Echoing to them. Were your generous Natures sensible of half my Sufferings, they long e're this had period put unto them. I'm pleas'd with nothing more, than the Pro∣posal now before you; wherein no Man's Interest is interfer'd with; the King's secur'd, and I not nam'd. This carries such Demonstration with it, I presume to believe, were proper for their Lordships of the Admiralty's Cognizance, that they would approve it, as I humbly suppose your Great Judgments do. And yet at the same time, out of the Abyss of Misery I court your Affection, to a speedy embracing it. My Case look'd on as Des∣perate, and reported such as to your Office, reach'd the Ears of some who about a Week since, engaged me on Saturday next to meet them, in order to the transmitting it to the Parliament. I wish and heartily entreat your
Honours to prevent that Assignation. By such Benificence you will di∣sperse the Clouds have so long hung ore a distressed Family, give Light and Life unto them, and your selves taste surely the Satisfaction the Divnity it self is bless'd in, viz. that of being and doing good. ILLUSTRATIONS. First, The Words minuted were, That my Design was to serve the Govern∣ment, in doing what might be to their Honour. Secondly, By no Mans Interest interfered with; I had an Eye to the Small-Coal and Bran, that they should be disposed of by the usual Hands, I design∣ing only their frequent payment of that Money to me for my present supply: and my Modesty was such (the Lords having writ concerning not employing me as Master-Baker and Supervisor) I proposed the Contract might run in another Name. Thirdly, My Invitotion to Parliament was Fact; supposing it such, could it have been expressed softer? Upon this Letter Mr. Barrington and Capt. Ayles told one, who immediately imparted it to me, they thought they should comply with me, Mr. Papillon being for it: without this Intimation I had gone up according to the appointment. The PROPOSALS of JOHN KELLY. THE third of April last, I laid before the Commissioners the advantage 'twould be to the King, in employing my House in baking the over∣plus of what their Mills could grind, over and above what they could bake at their Office. I. That 'tis more consistent with the Interest of the Government, to em∣ploy my House with your Office, because your Office cannot bake all the Bread you have occasion for, as appears by your buying Bread. II. Your Office cannot bake all the Wheat your Mills can grind; therefore the Mills do not answer the Ends for which they were taken for. III. The Mills will grind as much Wheat as your Office and my House can bake in a Week, and therein they fully answer the End for which they were taken for. IV. The Tolls of the overplus of what the Mills can grind over and above what the Office can bake, will come to Ten Pounds a Week, which will pay the Rents of the Mills, and the Servants Wages belonging thereto. V. That I will make Bread of all Wheat, as cheap to the King (all things considered, and far better for the Subject that eats it) than that which you buy of the Bakers and Mealmen, made of Barley, Rye, and Midlings of Bran ground over again, which is improper for the Navy's use, and con∣trary to your Instructions. VI. The Employing of my House has been of great Advantage to the Government, it being a Check to them that sold Bread to the Office, who would have made greater Advantage to themselves, had it not been for me; and likewise that I gave them to understand the true Produce of the Stuff I received, made out; and what the Bread laid the King in, clear of all Charge. Upon these Articles I founded these Proposals. First, To give Security to Satisfaction. Secondly, to bake the Stuff for Eight Shillings the Quarter. And,
Thirdly, To be paid Quarterly, and that the Money that ariseth from the Bran and Small-Coal Weekly, be paid to me, from the Hands of them that receive it, and to be discounted out of the Eight Shillings per Quarter. April the 4th the Commissioners sent for me, in pursuance to my Propo∣sals, upon which we entred into Contract: The Commissioners present at the Contract, was, Mr. Thomas Papillon, Mr. Humph. Ayles, Mr. John Barrington. The Contract is as follows, (viz.) April the 4th 1699. THE Commissioners are content to Employ Mr. John Kelly, for Baking of Bisket at the Price of Eight Shillings per Quarter, and that the Money that shall be Weekly received for Bran and Small-Coal, be paid to him on Account, to be cleared and made up; and that he give Security to Satisfaction for the Faithful Performance, and that he will not Sell or Dispose of any of the King's Goods, and will make good the Money he shall receive for the Small-Coal and Bran upon Account. This is a true Copy of the Contract taken by Mr. Charles Mitchel, Secre∣tary to the Commissioners of the Victualling. And I have fully Comply'd on my Part, which was to give Security to Satisfaction. A LETTER to Mr. BARRINGTON. SIR, I Had but one Plank left to escape Shipwrack by, and that was the Com∣missioners Contract with me. — Transported that I had any thing to offer my Creditors, I immediately founded an Instrument on it: The fairness of which prevail'd with them to a compliance with me. Without it I had been remanded to a Goal, and 7 Children, and a Wife big with another, had all perish'd. I am stab'd to the Heart to find fresh Differences to arise among your Honours about me. By all that is gentle in human Nature, and merci∣ful in the most charitable Religion in the World, be won over to Mr. Papillon's Sense of that Expression of the Lords of the Admiralty concerning me, should it be a mistaken one, all that shall hear of my deplorable Cir∣cumstance, would applaud and justify you in it. And give me leave, Sir, to hope your Goodness may carry you so far, as to influence even Mr. Mayne to the same Nobleness of Spirit with your self: This would be Heroick. May he that has the Hearts even of Kings in his hands, affect both yours with a Case, one of the most compassionable the heart of man was ever address'd to withal. May you both resemble the best of Beings, in giving and forgiv∣ing, is the Prayer of your humble Supplicant and Servant, JOHN KELLY.
NOverint Vniversi per presentes nos, Johannem Ke lly, de Parcch St. Pauls Shadwel, in Com' Mid' Pistor; Georgium Hubbard, de Paroch' Hillington in Com' Mid' Millar, & Thomum Goldsmith, Civem & Mason de London, teneri & firmiter obligar' Dom' nost' Gui∣lielmo Tertio, Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex; Fidei Defensor, &c. in Mille Libris, bonae & legalis monetae Anglia, Solvend' eidem Dom' nost' Guilielmo Tertio Dei Gratia, aut sic certo Attornet' Successor' vel Assignat' suis, ad quamquidem solutionem bene & fideliter faciend' Obligamus, nos & quemlibet nostrum per se pro toto in solido, Hered' Executores & Administratores, nostres & Cujuslibet nostrum firmiter, per presentes, sigillis nost' sigilat' dat' secundo Maii, Anno Regni Dom' nost' Guilielmo Tertii Dei Gratia, nunc Angliae, &c. Fidei Defensoris, Vndecimo Anno Dom' 1699. WHEREAS the Honourable Commissioners of His Majesty's Victua∣ling-Office, are content to Employ the above-bounden John Kelly, for the Baking of Bisket, at the Price of Eight Shilling per Quarter; and that the Money that shall be Weekly received for Bran and Small-Coal, be paid to him on Account, and every Month the Account to be cleared and made up. NOW THE CONDITION of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John Kelly, shall, and do from time to time, Faith∣fully perform the said Agreement and Trust Reposed in him, and no ways Imbezel or Dispose of the King's Goods to his own Use; but from time to time, Monthly as aforesaid, out of the said Eight Shillings per Quarter, De∣duct, and make good unto the said Commissioners, or their Order, all such Moneys he shall receive for the Small-Coal and Bran upon Account as afore∣said, without Fraud or further Delay; then this present Obligation to be void, and of no effect; or else to remain in full Force and Virtue. Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of us, it being first Stampt with the double Six Penny Stamp, according to Act of Par∣liament, John Kelly. George Hubbard. Tho. Goldsmith. By the above-bounden John Kelly, and Thomas Goldsmith, Charles Michel. Robert Stepens. Sprig Manistie. John Woodward. Hugh Haworth. To the Honourable Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy. The Humble Petition of John Kelly Sheweth, THat your Petitioner having contracted with the Board on the 4th of April last; being thereby obliged to give Security to Satisfaction for his faith∣ful Performance, which he hath accordingly done; did thereupon propose to his Creditors to pay them a part of his Earnings in the Service, which they accepted, and accordingly a part of them have sign'd an Instrument, which obliges them to forbear giving your Petitioner trouble, so long as employ'd in your Service, till the whole be paid. Therefore humbly prays (in Consideration of the great Detriment, it will be to your Petitioner, the making void the aforesaid Instrument and the loss of what he expended in preparing for the Work,) your Honours would take the Matter into your serious Considerations, and not suffer his sole Depen∣dance to be frustrated, to the prejudice of his Creditors, and the utter ruin of him and his Family. And he shall ever pray.
A Letter to his Grace the Duke of Ormond. May it please your Grace, May the 29th, 1699. WIth the most profound Acknowledgment ever paid to mortal Great∣ness, I address your Grace, with a Nobleness peculiarly your own, recommended me to the Admiralty, they in course to the Navy, who trans∣mitted it to the Victuallers; their Report made upon it, which consisted partly of Criminations, partly of owning Services I have done the Govern∣ment. I had a Copy of it granted me from Mr. Papillon unhappily after it was sent up, I rejoined to it, and have by the incouragement of that good Man, from the Reasonableness of what I then offer'd, both which I lay be∣fore your own Judicious Eye; I attended nine Months in hopes of Success given me by him; he has brought it even to a contract with me upon Propo∣sals of demonstrable Advantages to the King and the Subjects good, which one of them present at it flies from; upon the Truth of this Amazement of opposition, I cast my self at your Grace's Feet, imploring your acquainting His Majesty therewith, that he in his princely Wisdom alone, or in Council, as his Royal Pleasure shall be, give speedy Justice to me; I perish without it, as I shall deserve to perish, if Mr. Papillon appear not in my Righteous Cause with the same Freedom as he did at the Board, where he precides: this will prevent my ruin, with seven Children, and a Wife big with ano∣ther, and inable me to pay some hundreds of Pounds of just Debts con∣tracted by Losses I have sustained by the Publick Service, And your Supplicant, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray. JOHN KELLY. A Letter to the Commissioners. Honoured Gentlemen, June the 5th 1699. MAY the 29th I waited on his Grace the Duke of Ormond, with my Case, Proposals, and Contract, I put all into his Grace's Hands pro∣videntially, when he was in the Coach with His Majesty, in whose Presence I am certain he read them: on my Attendance to receive his Answer, at Kin∣sington, he with a Generosity truly Illustrious, asked me what I would de∣sire from him that he could serve me in? I said only that his Grace would Espouse the Justice of my Cause. Having moved him in my Address, to use his Powerful Interest, to Influence His Majesty, either alone, or in Council, as his Princely Wisdom should order it, to the hearing me. His Grace told me I had deserr'd it too long, the King being just upon going; his Grace's Advice to me was, to tender my Bond to you Gentlemen, as I now do, in expectation of your Signing the Contract, in failure thereof to Petition the Privy-Council, where I shall have Justice done me. I do beseech you to be no longer divided, but unite in serving the Publick, as the Papers now before you carry their Demonstrations with them; and to prevent the Ruin of him and his Family, who hath laid aside all other Business to Serve the Publick Interest; and your Compliance therewith, will inable me to pay my Just Debts, which I have Contracted by my Losses in the Publick Service under you. Who am Your Honours Humble Servant to Command, JOHN KELLY. Note, Mr. Papillon's answer to me was, That he was for it, and if I could prevail with Mr. Barrington, and Mr. Maine, it should be comply'd with. Their not complying occasion'd the writing this Farewel Letter following.
HOUOURED GENTLEMEN, From Wapping-wall; June 8. 1699. I AM Ruin'd by your Service, and have the Demonstration of it in several Articles, 'tis fit the World should know it. A truly Virtuous Man were he to make his choice would rather be as I, one of the most distressed Men living, than one of my Oppressors in all his Flourish. The Justice of the Nation shall hear my Cry; and I cannot entertain so reflecting a Thought on it, as to question its relieving me. I am at an end of all my Humble Melting Addresses to you; I will be trampled on no more for casting my self at your Feet, by some of you, nor once again pierce the tenderer Heart of one of you, by the sight of it. I now take my Farewel of you, by giving you to understand your Old Conjurers have rais'd a New Mist to continue you in Darkness. I'm sorry I must say your constant encouraging them (and to use a Silken Expression for what deserves a rougher one) your different treating me emboldens them. Your Warrant to me, and my last Proposals to you, agreeable to your own Instructions from Above, are to prevent the Sailors being abus'd by mixt Grains: To evade this, Artists are started up (be∣yond me, for I have try'd in vain) who have succeeded in an Experiment of grinding over Bran, mixing it with other Stuff and Baking it: You may fancy this Biscake hearty as you please, blow up your Mills, beat down your Ovens, and lay me aside altogether in Complement to the Cheapness of it. This is the happy Project some Mens Wits have hit upon, to gratify their Interest and Malice in my Destruction. I have had my Brains near dash'd out for once writing you had no Eyes, but all Men will say they are strange Ones, that shall hear of their magni∣fying Mole-hills into Mountains in me, and dwindling Mountains into Nothing in my Enemies. They of you who are against employing me, from the Admiralty's Command about me, I must say I think are egregiously mistaken. I request only their Review of my modest Reply, to that Report which occasioned it; and then I dare leave it to the Judgment they will be of about it in their Dying Hours, when they may be perplext with the Re∣membrance of my Usage, on their going to a Place where all that is past will appear in a better Light to Angels and Men than ever it has yet done: Then I should not have been, as I am, one of the greatest Objects of Compassion that ever was by them unpittied, JOHN KELLY. When I sent this in Writing with a Postscript, I mentioned my design of printing it, with many other Papers; this I did hoping they would excuse me so ungrateful a Trouble.
I shall according to my last farewel Letter to the Commissioners, give my demonstrations of my ruin by these several Articles. By Abatement upon 300 Bags of Bisket which I sold into the Office, sometime after I contracted to bake the King's Stuff. l. s. 45   Lost upon the discount of the Warrant. 55   Lost upon discount of a Warrant of 150 l. and Interest. 45   Lost upon a Warrant of 45 l. 06 10 Lost upon a Warrant of 208 l. 31 04 Lost by a Warrant of 100 l. 15   Lost by a Warrant of 44 l. 06 02 Lost by a Warrant of 78 l. 11 14 Lost by a Warrant of 68 l. 10 04 This besides my Loss upon Chequer-Bills, amounts to 225 14 By lost time whilst in contract to bake the King's Stuff, 44 Weeks, at 3 l. per Week, comes to 132 By the Repairs of my Ovens whilst in contract, and a part of a Loft broken down by the over-wait of Bread 36 By rebuilding of my Ovens, and the fitting up of my House for to comply with the last Contract, comes to 105 By being out of Imployment 12 Months, with a House of 50 l a Year, and a great Family to maintain. 152 The great Oppression I met with from many of my Creditors, because I could not pay them, for want of having my Money paid me from the Office in due time, I was forc'd to pay double, which I am sure amounts (since I have been concern'd to bake the King's Stuff in my House on Wapping-Wall) to 152 The occasion of all these Losses has been from their not imploying me as I might have been, and their not paying me as they ought, and the Loss the Government has sustained hereby is very great also. I'll wind up all with this one Offer more. I am ready to make out before proper Judges, to save the Government in baking in their own Office, and my House, and in their dry Provisions, in proportion to 1000 l. per Ann. for the future. By the truth of this I desire to stand, or fall into all the Con∣tempt Malice it self can procure upon me. FINIS. ERRATA IN the Preface, line 15 for to read of. Page 1 line 35 for heated read headed. Page 9 line 40 for Contrivances read Continuance. Page 18 line 2 after Grace, read who. Line 4 read trans∣mitted my Case to the Victuallers; they made Report upon it. Line 17 for precides read presides.
