J1098 11724726 48358
A JOURNAL OF THE King's March from Hilsburgh. TO His MAJESTIES Happy Entring DUBLIN, On Saturday, July the 5th, 1690. Honoured SIR, MY former gave you an Accompt of what passed that was remark∣able from the King's Landing to the 21th of June. The 22th being Sabbath-day, the King decampt from Hilsburgh, and made his Advance to Lough-Brick lane, where he continued his Camp that daye, Munday, Tuesday, and Wednesday follow∣ing, and on Thursday advanced to the Newry, where the Camp continued only one Night. At Two the next Morning made an advance towards Dndalk, and encamped the Army on the same Ground where the Enemy Encampt when they made that great Appearance against us last Winter. The King on his Arrival here divided his Army, having one pa under the Command of Lieutenant Gene∣ral Douglass, to collect the Dnish and We∣stern Forces, with some Addition of the other English Forces, and to March by the way of mag, and on Friday they met his Majesty at the Camp of the , and being joyned, makes the greatest and most formidable Body of Horse, Foot, and train of Artillery that was ever seen in this Kingdom. His Majesty was pleased to order the Major General Kirk, with three Regi∣ments of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse and Dragoons, to make their advance be∣fore the Army, on whose approach the E∣nemy not only quitted a very advantagious Pass, which they had fortified through the Mountains, in their passage betwixt New∣ry and Dundalk, though the Sabbath-day before they made some advantage of that very Pass; and on the Major-Generals further advance, they as tamely quitted the Town of Dundalk, after they had spent their whole Winter in making a strong and regular Circumvallation about that Town, and had made that destruction of the Buildings, that what was left, was in∣deed but a strong Cadel; yet this, as well as the aforesaid Pass, they left with∣out the least opposition, and drew the whole body of their Army, consisting (as was reported) of 35000, to their Garrison of Atherdee. And finding his Majesty, and his Army Encamping in this place, with∣in six Miles of their Army, and they hearing Lieutenant-General Dowglas to be
they new  Army towards Drogbedah, and by two in the Afternoon left Atherdee, as they had before Dundalk, without mang any, or the least defence. Their ng being, as is reported) told by one esteemed among them a Cunning-Woman, That if he stay∣ed the next Morning, his Army would be heaten by King William's Army: And one of their Generals telling them, Their King's  er to stren∣gthen himself, to secure the Boyne; a Ri∣ver that environs almost Forty Miles round. The 28th, an obscure Irish Man and Woman making Enquiry for the King's Quarters, were apprehended, and being searcht by the private Souldiers, and find∣ing both to have Poyson about them, with∣out further Enquiry, the Souldiers having half hang'd the Woman, she confessed a French Captain gave them both the Poison, and advised them to poison the Springs near the King, or where those about him use to Drink: This Confession and the Poyson found upon them, caused the Rabble, without further proof, to hang both out∣right. The same Morning the King went to view Atherdee, which as Dundalk, is left standing, but the Buildings all wasted, and left without an Inhabitant. The 29th of June, at Two in the Morning, the King decamped, and marcht towards Drohedagh unto Atherdee. The 30th the King by break of day decampt, and encamped that day on the North-side of the Boyne, right against the Enemy, and within reach of their Can∣non, which had like to have been of fa∣tal Consequence, his Majesty being strook with one of the Balls upon his right Shoul∣der, which carried away Coat, Wastcoat, Shirt, and raz'd the Skin; notwithstand∣ing which, the King continued on Hors∣back until Dinner, and after some Appli∣cation made, mounted again until night. Tuesday, July the first, the Army being drawn up at their several Posts, Count  Pass, when Eight Squardrons of Horse defended it, but he soon beat them off, passed the For, and draw up his men on the other side. After which, with a little loss all the Passes were gained, and our Army got on the other side, engaged with the Enemy, whose Foot made no great Defence: the Horse did well, and made a good Retreat, being carried of by Count Cazun. In Conclusion, the King Routed them from Hill to Hill for seven Miles round, and having obtained an intire Victory, slept that night in the Princes Coach. I shall not trouble you with Particulars of this great Action, for that you have it by Ex∣press; only must tell you, we have lost the never to be forgotten General, his Grace the Duke of Schonbergh, and Mr. Walker late Governour of London-Derry, both shot in gaining a Pass by Noon. Wednesday July the 2d, the King and all the Army blessed God for their Victory; and his Majesty sent Summons  Dre∣dagh, which on Thursday the 3d. surren∣dred upon Discretion. In were two Regiments, and vast Stores. The same day the Duke of  en∣tred the City of Dublin with six hundred Horse, and a Body of Foot, where he was joyfully received, and is made Go∣vernour. On Friday the 4th the King marched for Dublin, and Encampt in the Park, two miles short thereof, where his Majesties Tent is set up, &c. On Saturday his Majesty entred the City, and was received with all possible Demonstrations of Joy from a delivered People. His Majesty caused all Persons to be set at Liberty, and other Matters, and returned to the Camp that Night. And as a Person of Quality saith, who was in Dublin on Saturday at Three a Clock, the King did intend on Sunday to heat a Ser∣mon preach'd in Dublin, and to Dine in the City, of which our next Letters will give a particular Accompt. ADVERTISEMENT. A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the English Prisoners of War. Being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in Britany, to Thoulon in Province: And back again. With a Description of the Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the Number of the Men that died under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the places of their Deaths and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and Sufferings of the poor Prote∣stants of France: And other Material Things that baped on the Way. Faithfully and Im∣partially performed by Richard Strutton, being an Eye-Witness, and a Fellow Sufferer. Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Baily. London: Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey. 1690.
