M468 R10681 13568010 100337
The manner of the ELECTION Of the Honourable and Approved Patriots, Sir HARBOTTLE GRIMSTON, Master of the ROLLS, AND Capt. REYNOLDS, To Serve in PARLIAMENT, FOR BURGESSES for the Town of COLCHESTER IN ESSEX; Upon Tuesday the 15th of February, 1680. THe Competitors were, the Master of the Rolls, and Sir Walter Clarges (Son of Sir Thomas Clarges) who were former Burgesses; and Samuel Reynolds Esquire, (a Gentleman lately put out of the Commission of the Peace, and of the Place of Captain of Horse in the Militia.) Be∣fore the Election there was great Confidence that Sir Walter would carry it against Mr. Reynolds: but it being discovered, that Sir Walter had Voted for the D. of Y. they generally decli∣ned him; notwithstanding, he being Kinsman to the Duke of Albemarle, was accompanied by His Grace, who is our Lord Lieutenant and Recorder; and had also the Assistance of almost all our Magistrates. The Numbers, upon casting up the Books, were thus: For the Master of the Rolls, 418. For Mr. Reynolds, 308. and for Sir Walter, 218. And it is the more observeable that the Election was thus carried, when Mr. Reynolds, though he was a Justice of the Peace at the Election of the last Parliament, did then, in a Contest with Sir Walter, poll but about 130, when Sir Walter polled about 290. Our Mayor manifested himself in the whole Proceeding inclinable to Sir Walter, by encouraging those that were for him, and calling for the Officers of the Town that he knew were against Mr. Reynolds to come to Poll, and did fre∣quently
treat those that offered themselves for Mr. Reynolds with reproachful Language, and put Queries upon several of the Ele∣ctors; and however after it appeared that Mr. Reynolds had car∣ried it by 56 undoubted Voices, upon whom e had put no Que∣ries, he refused to proclaim the Election of the Master of the Rolls and Mr. Reynolds, and said he would consider of it till Monday next; when we doubt not but he will remember his Duty, and seal the Indentures of the Election, in hopes to prevent Serjeant Topham's conducting him to Oxford. In the time of the Poll there was this pleasant Passage: A Per∣son coming to Vote, declared himself for Mr. Reynolds, and ac∣knowledged that he had been engaged three Weeks before for Sir Walter, but said that he was better informed; and though he was but a Cobler, he would not trust Sir Walter to give away his All. After the Election made, the Free Burgesses agreed upon the following Address. To the Honourable Sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet, and Samuel Reynolds Esquire, now chosen Burgesses for our Corporation of Colchester, in the Country of Essex. WE, the Free Burgesses of the said Corporation, being deeply sensible of the unspeakable danger threatning His Majesty's Life, and the Protestant Religion, and the well established Govern∣ment of this Kingdom, from the Hellish Designs of the Papists, and their wicked Adherents: And that our Religion and Liberties can only, under God, be secured to us, and our Posterity, by wholsome Ad∣vice in Parliament; have now chosen you to represent us there, in con∣fidence of your Integrity and Courage to discharge so great a Trust in this time of Imminent Danger. And we do desire you to allow us to speak our stedfast Resolution (with utmost hazard of our Lives and Fortunes) to shew our Approbation of what shall be resolved in Par∣liament, for the maintaining the Protestant Religion, and our Liber∣ties, against Popery and Arbitrary Government. And we hope you will endeavour, to the utmost of your Power, to disable James Duke of York, and all other Popish Pretenders, from inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And we shall pray for your good Success. And so the Day was ended, to the general Satisfaction of the Town. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Janeway. 1681.
