N577 13536016 100052
A New BALLAD, To the Tune of, I'll tell thee, Dick, &c. CHil tell thee, Tom, the strangest story, Because thou art an honest Tory; 'Tis News beyond expressions: Zich zights are no where to be zeen In any Lond, (God zave the Queen) But at our Quarter-Zessions. Vor Rogues I zaw in zich a place, As wou'd the Gibbet quite disgrace, 'Tis pity it shou'd want 'em: But how the Devil they came there, List, Tom, and chil in brief declare▪ And How they did recant 'em. When I was late at London-Town, To zee zome zights e'r I went down, To White-hall I did venture; And having on my best Array, As vine as on a Holy-day, Zoors I made bold to enter. Up stairs I went, which were as brooad, And Dirty too as any Rooad, Or as the streets o'th' Zity. Hadst thou been there, thou wouldst have zaid There had been no Servant Maid, Gods zooks, and that's a pity. When I was up, I did discern A Chamber bigger than a Barn, Where I did zee Voke stand, That I was well near vrighted quite, It was so strange and grim a zight, With long things in their hand. Their Cloathing cannot well be told, On which were things of beaten Gold Upon their Back and Breast; I doft my Hat when I came in, Quoth I▪ Pray which of you's the King? Which made a woundy Jest. At last came by a Gentlemon, Who made me zoon to understand I need not be avear'd; Quoth he, Come on, and vollow me, Chil shew thee strait His Majesty, Vor theas are but his Guard. But, Tom, not any Wake or Vair Can shew zich numbers as are there, Still cringeing low, and bowing, That I may zwear, and tell no lie, They wearier are, than Thou or I With Thrashing or with Plowing. No Ants do vaster lead or drive, Or Bees buz to or fro' the Hive▪ I marl they were not dizzy; And zure the Nations great Avairs Lay heavily upon their Cares, They look'd zo wise and busie. At last came in His Majesty, No taller tho' than Thou or I; Yet, whatzoe'r I ail'd, With only gazing on His Vace, I trembl'd like a Love-zick-Lass Just on the point to yield. He look'd, methought, above the rest, Tho' not by half zo vinely drest, Which made me vall a zwearing, A Pox upon the Parliament, That will not let us pay him Rent, Gold's only for his wearing. A Ribbon vine came cross avore, Zich as our Landlords Bridemen wore, At end of which was hung A curious thing, that shone as bright As Maudlin's eyes, or morning light, When guilded by the Zun, But now the News, chil tell thee Truth, Hard by his zide there stood a Youth, That look'd as trim and gay, As if he had not guilty bin Of wishing e'r to be a King, Unless a King of May. It was the zame our Vicar zed Vor Treason shou'd have lost his Head, Vor which vive hundred Pound By Proclamation offer'd was To any that should take his Grace In any Kerson ground. Won Zunday morn, thou maist remember▪ I think the twontieth of Zeptember, Our Parson read a thing, How this zame Spark, (a vengeance on him▪) With vorty moor, did take upon him To kill our Gracious King. But scant the vrighted harmless Zwain, That meets a Wolf upon the Plain, Was zo agast with vear: Wounds! if His Majesty (quoth I) Does keep no better Company, Chil stay no longer here. With that, the Mon that brought me in By th' Jacket pull'd me back again; Quoth he, Pray hear ye reason; He was a What-d'ye-calt▪ 'tis true, But's Pardon makes him vree as you Vrom Knavery or Treason. Whaw whaw! quoth I, a pretty Nick, To make Rogues honest by a trick Zo often try'd in vain; As if my Bull shou'd gore me once, I'd trust the zenseless Beast with Horns To gore me o'r agen. Chil e'en to Devonshire agen, Where honest men are honest men, And Rogues are hang'd vor Rogues. Ods wounds! were I His Majesty, E'r zich a Zon shou'd count'nanc'd be, Chi'd prize him as my Dogs.
