n460 99830411 34862
A Philosophical and Divine DISCOURSE Blazoning upon this Blazing STAR: Divided into Three Parts; The I. Treating on the Product, Form, Colour, Motion, Scituation, and Signi∣fication of COMETS. II. Contains the Prognosticks of Comets in Gene∣ral, and of this in particular; together with a CHRONOLOGY of all the Comets for the last 400 years. III. Consists of (1.) the Explication of the grand Concerns of this COMET by Astrological Precepts and Presidents. (2.) The Ap∣plication of its probable Prognosticks As∣trologically and Theologically. By Christopher Nesse, Minister of the Gospel, in London, 1681.
A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Late BLAZING-STAR: With some probable Prognosticks upon what may be its Effects. ABlazing Star is called a Comet from the Latin word Coma, the Hair, because it seemeth to send forth Streamers of flaming Hair to those that behold it a far off. There be various Opinions of Authors concerning those Comets: some whereof are so improbable, that only to report them, is enough to refute them. As, 1. Democritus dreamed that Comets were the Souls of famous Men triumphing in Heaven. 2. Thaddeus thinketh that they are the Secrets of Nature, and (like the occult Quality of Philosophers) ought not to be enquired after. 3. Para∣celsus supposeth that they are Fires carried about by Spirits which are conscious of their own Fates. 4. Anaxagoras imagines them to be a Conjunct Apparition of Planets; because when Planets come near together they seem to touch one another, and that Conjunction of 2 or 3 Lights into one, causeth the Phoenomenon, or Appearance of a longer Star; which by varying its Place, varieth its Form also. 5, Appianus and Proetorius (both) acknowledge that Comets are Meteors, or Vapours exhaled, yet deny that they are inflamed, or fer on fire in their own Bodily Matter, but only enlightned by the Refract Rays of the Sun and other Stars, both upon its Body and Tail. 6. But this last Opinion of Aristotle is most probable; that a Comet is a Fiery Meteor made up of Copi∣ous, Viscous and Fat Vapours, drawn up into the highest Region of the Air by the influence of the Sun and Stars; and then when it is ripened, taketh Fire, and shineth in the Figure of a Star, to
the Astonishment of all its Beholders. Besides those (properly cal∣led) Comets engendred in the Elementary Region, it is supposed there be some other new Stars sometimes seen above the Moon in the Aetherial Region, such as that which appeared in Cassiopoea, in the Year 1574. every way like a Star in Form and Light, save only its Splendor and Magnitude exceeded the greatest of Planets. This could not properly be called a Comet: 1. Because it removed not from that Point of Heaven wherein it first appeared, but kept constant in the Constellation till it disappeared. 2. Because it con∣tinued in view for a whole Year, and more than a Quarter. 3. Be∣cause it had neither Hair nor Tail or Train, as Comets have; which likewise remove from one part of Heaven to another, and never continue so long as that did. 'Tis not improbable that such new Stars God (for a time) withdraws from Men's sight, that the Sign of his Anger or Favour might be the more admired: For these do not waste away, as (properly called) Comets do; but only lie hid from the Eye, seeing Heaven cannot admit of new Bodies. That Star which appeared to the Wife Men, Matth. 2. was not a Natural, but a Miraculous Star. 1. Because it shone not in the Celestial, but in the Elementary Region; yea, in the lowest part of it, so as to guide the three Men to a certain House over which it stood. 2. Because it had not the Motion of a Natural Star, but such as was Accommodated every way to the Travel of the Wise Men. 3. Its Progress was unequal, sometimes Appearing, and sometimes Disappearing. 4. It did not only shine forth by Night, but also by Day. Yea, 5. With such a Splendour, as far exceeded, not on∣ly that of the Stars, but also the Sun it self; as Ignatius, Chrisostom, &c. do testifie. Some say, that Star in Matth. 2. was the Holy Ghost which appeared (at Christ's Baptism) in the Form of a Dove, as at his Birth in the Form of a Star, being most Consentaneous to those Eastern Sages: For as a mighty Draught of Fish was the apt∣est Sign to make Peter (a Fisher-man) to follow Christ, so this Sign of a Star was best accommodated to these Men of the East, it being most familiar to them in their frequent Study of the Stars. But more probably Chrisostom judgeth it was an Angel [] a certain invisible Power to be the Guide of their Journey, as the Pillar of Glory was Israel's in the Wilderness, Exod. 13.21,
22. Yea, some do affirm that it was the same Angel who appeared also to the Shephards, Luke 2.9. But the Elementary Comets can∣not in any proper Sense) be called Stars (though their common Name be Blazing Stars.) Because, 1. They have a different Form, no way congruous to that of Stars. 2. They grow Greater and Lesser. 3. They have an Uncertain and Vagabond Motion. 4. Their Matter is an Hot and Dry Exhalation, which is Slimy and Sul∣phurous; and which being spent, they vanish away: Those things hold no Congruity with proper Stars. Philosophy saith, that those Comets are composed of a Matter full of Mettalline or Mine∣ral Vapours, which is both thrust out of the Bowels of the Earth by an Internal Heat from the Subterraneous Spirits, and extracted thence also by an External Heat from the Celestial Bodies; whereby likewise it is drawn up into the Upper Region. One part of this Fuliginous Smoak, thrusting up, and cleaving close to another, till it become as big as a Mountain, then it hangs pendulously, and mellows kindly into a Combustible Substance. Then takes it fire; and the Colour of that Star by whose force it is Generated and Governed: And when all this is done, though it be of a vast Magnitude, yet through the great Distance of Place▪ it seems to us as a very little Spangle or Spur-Rowel, if severed from its Train or Streamer. Touching these Comets, These four things are prin∣cipally considerable after their Product or Generation. 1. Their Form. 2. Their Colour. 3. Their Motion. 4. Their Signification. 1. Of their Form, which is various: one Comet hath a Beard, ano∣ther a Tail, and a third is Hairy round about. This flows from the Flame of the fired Vapour diversly dispersed. 1. If it spread its Flame upon its former part, then it is called , Barbatus, a Bearded Comet, as having the Flame (as a Man's Beard, or a Horses Main) hanging downward. 2. If from the latter part the Flame sputter out behind, following after the Body, then it is called Can∣datus, a Tailed Comet. But 3. If it spit Fire from all parts round about, then is it called Crinitus, an Hairy Comet, when it is sur∣rounded with Rays of Fire, as the Bushy Head is with Hair. Thus the diversity of Flames produceth diversity of Forms in them, yet mostly such as have Trains or Tails; for the hinder part (being not so compact as the former) soonest taketh Fire, and sputters
out a Flame (as we see in Squibs or Fuzzees) like a long Besom∣or the Tail of a Peacock. 2. Of their Colour, which Distinction they derive from the Dominion of the Planet in their Generation, which may easily be discerned by their various Colours. Comets have their Dusky and Leaden Colour from Saturn, Splendid from Jupiter, Fiery from Mars, Golden from the Sun, Silver from the Moon, Yellow from Venus, and of changeable Colours from Mer∣cury: And all these various Colours are supposed to be various In∣dications of differing Natures, as the Planets (from whence they derive them) do differ in their Natures and Influences one from another. 3. Of their Motion. Comets are of an Erratick Motion, as the new Stars immitate the fixed Stars, so do Comets immitate the Planets in their Motions: Some are moved according to the Motion of the Primum Mobile (to speak ex Hypothesi) to wit, from East to West; but some slowlier fulfilling that Motion, and others more swiftly exceeding it. Their Motion is therefore called Erra∣tick, because it is not Regular and Certain, as that of the fixed Stars is, whose Rising and Setting are certainly known; but the Motion of Comets is sometimes nearer, and sometimes further off from the Zodiack, as the Motion of the Planets is: Yet not altogether as the Planets, which never remove far from the Zodi∣ack, but have always certain and well known Bounds of their Mo∣tions: whereas Comets have an Irregular Motion, and (as to the Zodiack) plainly Eccentrick, wandring far from it in their remote Appearances; and though Motion from East to West be Regular, yet this happens by Accident, only because the Upper Region of the Air (wherein Comets are both Engendred and Fired) is whirl'd about with the Heavens; hence the Comet therein wheels about with it. 4. Of their Signification. The principal thing intended, to wit, the Prognosticks of them. 'Tis true, there be some who deny altogether their Significancy; as Erastus, Gryneus, and others: but 'tis too too manifest that Comets are not mute things, but that they are Signs which God placeth in Heaven, to preach something to Men on Earth. No Man in his right Mind can say, that the most wise God doth make any thing in vain, or that the Father of Lights should hang out such a strange and stupendious Light
up aloft (to be seen far and wide) and this not to portend some extraordinary thing. Consult Antiquity, there is found. 1. That Greek Proverb, [,] There is no Comet which brings not some Evil. 2. That Verse of Manilius, [Nunquam Futilibus Resplenduit Ignibus Aether.] God never Fires his Beacon (set upon so high a Hill) but those below had need look to themselves. 3. That other Trite Verse (which is a Synonymon & Synbolizeth with the two former Et Nunquam Coelo Spectati Impune Cometae That is, never doth the Earth 'scape Scot-free, when Heaven holds forth a Blazing Star to her View. This is confirmed by all Histories, especially those of later Times, whereof I could give many Instances. The Chronology of Comets (to go no higher than the 13th Century after Christ to this present) doth afford us most Direful Effects of many Comets frequently appearing within that compass of time, a particular Account whereof a single sheet cannot compleatly comprehend, especially to Discourse upon them all, Phisitally, Politically and Theologically,. The Rules of this Astrological Art (whereby to make Right Prognostications) must be acknowledged to be Obscure and Doubtful to Instance in that one Astrological Axiom [That the Prognosticks of Comets do depend all upon Mars and Mercury.] Ts is hard to be Demonstrated, for none can prove what is the Influence of this or that Star in Hea∣ven, as they may the Operation of Rhubarb or other Druggs on Earth; Yet Ptolomy (with others) make this Maxime (aforesaid) thus far probable, saying, The Effects of Comets (which are rarely Good, but mostly Evil) are of two sorts, 1. Such things as are Savage, Bloody, Mortiferous, &c. (portended by them) be ascri∣bed to Mars, and other things that are Inconstant, Moveable and Uncertain, be ascribed to Mercury. The Assertion here may be true, though the Application be false; for Astrologorum Decreta non sunt praetoria; their Rules are not Infallible, yet Examples have more perspicuity and certainty in them, I shall only give the two last and latest Exemplifications of Comets, the one in 1664, and the other in 1677. That in 64 was a forerunner of most Dreadful Dispensations, as the Sweeping pestilence in 65 and the Swallowing fire in 66. The former falls fowl upon Persons, the latter up∣on
Habitations. The last in 1677. was a forerunner of the most Damnable Plot (yea a Complication of Plots) that ever Hell in∣vented: Now God hath lighted up another Torch to give us a new Warning, that being forewarned we might be forearmed also, es∣pecially with those Arms of the Church, to wit, prayers and Tears (our Desperate Malady hath not yet met with an Effectual Remedy) lest those Matchless Mischiefs which are Imminent over us may not also be Incumbent on us. There is certainly something more than ordinary God hath upon the Wheel, to lighten up such a Blaze as this in the very depth of Winter, which is a time Diame∣trically contrary to the very Nature of Comets, for Cold and Moist Weather is altogether unapt to produce those Hot and Dry Vapours whereof a Comit consisteth. A Winter Comet is therefore like Win∣ter Thunder, which is commonly call'd the Worlds Wonder: The proper time of engendring those Meteors is Antumn, for in Spring∣time there is supposed to be too much Moisture and too little Heat to congregate those Vapours, and in Summer-time there is so much Heat as plainly Segregate and Disperses those Exhalations, but Winter-time is wholly opposite to their existency, and quite con∣trary to the constituting of them: Therefore this Extraordinary and preternatural sign must needs signifie some Extraordinary and supernatural thing, even some Sweeping, Swinging or Scourging, yea some Cutting or Killing Dispensation, for the  or Ap∣parition Extraordinary (which I saw with my own Eyes) had a threefold Resemblance, 1. Of a Broom, 2. Of a Rod, 3. Of a Sword, 1. Of a large Broom, or Besom, yet Dreadfull to behold by its sparkling Aspect, as if God were coming to Sweep Babylon with his dreadful Besom of Destruction, as he hath promised, Isa. 14, 22, 23. 'Tis true, God hath his [Scopas purgatorias, as well as perdi∣toias;] his Brushing, as well as Crushing, Besoms. The former is for Sion, which God Brushes only for its Ornament, the latter is for Babylon, which God Crushes also for its Overthrow. God grant this Ʋnclean Spirit of Babylon may be Swept out of our Land, Zach. 13.2. Even by a Parliamentary Besom. 2. Of a long and fiery Rod, wherewith God may Swinge or Scourge the Inhabitants of the Earth a God may indeed Chastize Sion with Rods (gently and fa∣vourably as a Father his Children, not to break their Bones, but
their Stomachs,) but God will Scourge Babylon with Scorpions, as 1 King. 12.11. He will break her with his Rod of Iron, Psal. 2.9. like a Potters Vessel, that can never be patcht together again: She shall feel the weight of God's mighty hand upon her, to Crush her to pieces, and to Grind her to Powder. 3. Of a prodigious flaming Sword, possibly not unlike that which God placed at the Garden of Eden, turning every way to keep the Gate thereof, Gen. 3.24. There the [Cheru] or Angel had [Lahat Chereb] a Flaming Sword, a great Elegancy in the Hebrew, and a Material Sword made of Steel; if brandisht. will Dart out bright and dazling flames, according to that of Vorgils Aemad. 8. [Ipsem Terribilem flammasque Vomentem] God bless us from this Material and Bran∣disht flame Vomiting or Glittering Sword, Ezek. 21, 9, 10, 14, 28. God may call for such a Sword. Ezek. 38, 21. Levit. 26.25. If we give no better Audience and Obedience (than we have done) to the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Eph. 6.17. as we have smarted under the Sword of the Angel, which is the Pe∣stilence, 1 Chron 21.16.27. So God may bring upon us the Sword of the Enemy, whose Mercies are Cruelties. Oh God forbid that he should Hiss for the Flies of Egypt to bite us, or the See of Baby∣lan (which is worse) to sting us, Isa. 7.18. The Star (it self) that shouteth forth this flaming Sword, I have not beheld, it be∣ing as yet hid in the Sun beams, going down a little after the Sun, a little before the New Moon, and a little before Fiery Mars, be∣ing not far from all these three in the Horizon, nigh to Aquila and to the Milken Allyc; All which would afford over curious and too critical Speculations, according to the Rules of Astrological Art, which I therefore omit. Though Comets (in themselves simply considerate, or in their Houses wherein they are seen) do not make future Events uncontroulably legible, yet when they are placed in Conjunction with the Sacred Scripture, they are not without their proper Instruction, but foretell singular things, pro∣vided the word of God (who is the Creator of Comets) be the Rule of that Interpetation. Though we Christians should not be afraid of the sign of Heaven, as the Blind Heathen were, Jer. 10.2. Yet may we not altogether despise those Divine Monitors and footsteps of Providence (though obscure) seeing 'tis God's Method (fre∣quently
Recorded in History) that when he is about to punish a City or Nation, he is wont to give them warning thereof first by some previous Prodigies, and to hang out some Conspicuous signs of Divine Displeasure in the Air, to be beheld of all Men: And though Comets (for the most part) are loud Preachers from Heaven (which Popish Prelates cannot silence) of Gods wrath for Mens sins, yet may they publish Joy to some, as well as sorrow to others, for the Setting of one may be the Rising of another; the Falling of Old Favourites may be the Rise of New ones; as Haman's fall was Mordecai's rise. Thus the Tiburtine Sybel Interpreed that Comet (of a vast bigness) that appeared at Christ's Birth, saying [Hic puer major te est, &c.] This Child that is now born is greater than thee. O Roman Emperour, and he comes to set up a Kingdom that shall destroy the Roman Kingdom. Might we have the same li∣berty to suppose this strange Star to be an Angel, as some do that in Mat. 2.2, 9, 10. Then hath He a drawn flaming Sword in his hand Ready to destroy our Jerusalem, as that Angel had, 1 Chron. 21.16. Oh pray, pray, pray that God may repent him of that Evil, and say to the Angel, 'Tis enough, stay thy hand and put up thy Sword into its sheath, v. 97. and 2 Sam. 24.16. but suppose it such an Angel as stood in Balaam's perverse way with a drawn Sword in his hand, Numb. 22.23. or rather that Angel of the Co∣venant, out of whose mouth cometh a sharp Sword, Rev. 19.15, 21. Oh pray, pray, that this Sword may slay not only the grand Balaam of Rome, but even Babylon too, and all her proud Helpers▪ as he hath there both Prophecyed and Promised: This is the Hear∣ty Prayer of C. N. London, Printed for J. Wilkins, and J. Sampson, 1680.
A Second SHEET, further Blazoning upon the Blazing-star. With a Chronology of COMETS for the last 400 years. HAving spoken to the Products, Form, Colour, Motion and Signification of Blazing-stars, in the first Sheet: A further Account of the Prognosticks of Comets in General, and of this present COMET in particular (which the first Sheet could not contain) I insert and send forth in this: The General Prognosticks of COMETS (according to the best Rules of Astrology) are deduced from an Ancient and Receiv'd Tri∣stich or 3 Latin Verses. Octo Comet a Mala haec fulgendo per Aethera Signat Ventus, Sterilitas, Aqa, Pestis praedominantur Rixa, Trmor, Moritur Dux, Ft Mutatio Regni. This plain, yet pithy Poetry doth (in our native Language) signify, That Comets Blazing in the Air doth portend 8 several Mischiefs, as the Predominancy, 1. Of Storms and Tempests. 2. Of Drought and Dearth. 3. Of great Floods and Inundations. 4. Of Plague and Pestilence. 5. Of Troublesome Fears and Jea∣lousies. 6. Of Quarrels and Contentions 7. Of the Death of great Captains, 8. Of Alterations in States and Kingdoms. Those Prognostications in general are not altogether improba∣ble, if considered either, 1. Physically, 2. , or 3 helo∣gically, by a Judicious mind: 1. Physically considered, so omets (probably) are not only natural Si, but also natural Causes mostly of much Evil, through sometimes they may be also of much Go.. 'Tis a Maxim in Phiosophy, That natural Causes
must produce the like natural Effects: now it may be rational∣ly argued, That Comets are Natural Cause (as well as Signs) 1. Of Drought, Dearth, Plague, &c. 1. Because without a great Heat, a Comet cannot be incorporated, and much moisture must of necessity be consumed by its flames when once it is sired: This, as the Cause, produceth Drought as its effect, and Drought brings forth Dearth, 2. Because the I athess (and so by conse∣quence the Fertility or Fruitfulness) of the Earth is exhaled, not only to the compounding of the Comet (whereof it is most∣ly constituted, as in the first Sheet) but also exhausted by the continued, Hames of the long burning Comet so near to it, as the Region of the Air is; the follows the Pagu as another Effect of Drought and Dard) all those Three having a mutual conne∣ction each with the other and producing one another. 3. Be∣cause so many l and dry Vapours and Exhalations (as must make up the montanous mass of a Comet) come to be sired and so dispersed hither and tther in the Upper Region▪ they cannot bat corrupt the Air whereby the Bodies of men and beasts are infected: this brings pestilential Diseases. Secondly, Come's in like manner do not only naturally , but also pro∣duce horible Tempes. dread Earth es, . because in such a Massy multitude of Exhalations there must be much that cannot take ire and be wholy consum'd (as we se in ingneuli∣m, in out Kitching hire) some fewel will shuffle out, and es∣cape burning, and so it may happen mn ay fire) this part therefore that remains unconsum'd, is the engendring Matter of most boisterous Winds, and of most terrible Earthquakes, &c. for there is the same matter for causing the Blustering Wind a∣bove the Earth. that there is for a dreadful Earthquake with∣in it: because when those remaining Vapours of the C do flutter abroad in the Air, they do engender Storms, but when those umes do fall into the Caverns of the Earth, and come to be pent up therein▪ by an Anperistasi both increased and inra∣ged they do naturally endeavour an Inlargement, which, they do with that mighty Violence, as shaketh the Earth: ow seeing those Physical presages seem so probable, I cannot d Reason enough to render the Plcal and belg presa∣ges
(which are the 2d and 3d) less probable than the first: e∣specially considering how the Manners of mens minds do fol∣low mostly the Temperament of their Bodies▪ As that Adage in Greek (post ) after Dearth comes the Plague▪ is Rational, for ood corrupted must fill mens bodies with many malignant Humours, So ▪tis no less rational to affirm, That when those Vicious fumes of Comets are conveyed into the Blood and Spirits of Mens Bodies, and so infect the with much Choler and Melancholy, thence must necessarily arise much Envy, Hatred, sharp Contests, and Land desroying Wars. 'Tis not at all dissonant from Truth, That those hot and dry Vapour disper∣sed by the Comets combustion should stir up Anger in Chole∣rick Constitutions. And out of Ag ariseth Quarrels, out of Quarrels, Conquests, and out of Conquests strange Changes both in Church and State▪ And I see not, but that Comets may portend the Death of Great nn, for their Intemperance, Delicious fare, (of all sorts) and Exorbitancies in Pleasures, Night-watchings, &c. (wherewith they do commonly indulge themselves above all men) must needs expose them most to contrat the worst of Distempers. The more Luxuriously any men live, the sooner they must be infected with the Contagion of Comets▪ Yea artho∣lme boldly Asserteth, That Comets are Signs sent on purpose to premonish Princes of their Ruin without Repentance and Refor∣mation. The Probability of those Prognostications by Comets may be best Demonstrated by an Induction of Instances and Examples drawn out of Chronological History of Comets: And to go no higher therein than those last foregoing Centuries near to our own Times; I find most marvelous Testimonies there recor∣ded, As, (I.) in the year 1347▪ a Comet appeared not far from the Bull Ey; After which follow'd such a dreadful sickness, that ra∣ged all the World over, and continued forty years together: Insomuch, that (as Authors say) it destroy'd the Third part of men in Europe. (II.) In the year 1363. a Blazing star broke forth, and brandi∣shed its bright Beam's all-abroad for 3 Months together: Im∣mediately
after which, Ariseth that burning and shining Light Dr. John Wicklis, who was as an Angel sent from Heaven for a marvelous Reformation on earth. So that Comets, as is afore∣said) portend good as well as evil: for the Consumption of such a multitude of hurtful Vapours as passeth away in the Expira∣tion of a Comet, why may it not (if only it be considered physi∣cally and naturally) have good Effects as well as evils? especially, if it be considered politically and theologically; thus, no Comet can be so obnoxious, but as it portends Sorrow to some, so it doth Joy to others, as this did, which was a Cordolium to the Romanists, but a Cordial to those of the Reformed Religion. (III.) In the Year 1375. There appeared another frightful Comet, which had such infinite. Swarms of Locusts following it, as almost destroy'd the Kingdom of France, in all the Fruites thereof, as if God had sent one of the Ten Plagues of Aegypt upon it, Exod. 10.14. his formidable Army, Jel 2.4.10.11. Locust hath its name in Hebrew from Multitude, wherewith the very Sun is darken'd as with a mighty Cloud, and the Green things of the Earth so devoured, that the Aegyptians make the Docust their Hieroglyphick for Famine, because of both their numerosity and Voracity. And as the Locusts of Aegypt were all drowned in the Rod Sea, as well as Restrain'd from Gshen; So those Locusts aforesaid. had the British Sea, not only (through Divine Grace) for their Boundary beyond which they could not pass) but also for their Sepulchre, wherein they were (with a most Hideous storm) all driven, and wherein also they were (with a most horrible noise) all drowned. (IV.) In the year 1390▪ Another Comet Blazeth out, after which did follow a most furious Pestilence in this our Nothern▪ Region, so exceedingly outragious it was▪ that in a very little space of time a Thousand and some Hundreds dyed of the Plague in that one City of York. (V.) In the year 1400. (VI.) In the year 1401. (VII.) In the year 1402. (VIII.) And in the year 1403. All those several years, (Im∣mediatly Succeeding one another) produced several Comet Suc∣cessively,
and portending great things, for at that time, Tam∣berlan destroy'd the Turkish Empire, and John Hus, (with Je∣rom of Prage) began their famous Reformation in Bobemia, from whence many Tumults arose, and afterwards brave Zisca waged War successfully against those who call themselves CATHO∣LICKS, whereas CACOLICKS is their more proper Title: Then (IX.) In the year [1458.] Another Comet broke forth in the sign of the Bull. After which that Fat Bull of Bashan (the Pope) dyed, and A'phonsus King of Arragon, and in the follow∣ing year James King of Scotland. (X.) In the year [1472] Another Blazing Star appeared in the sign call'd Libra, which was first of a slow motion until it came to Arcturus, and then it Ran swiftly through the whole Hemisphere between the Poles of the Zodiack and the Aequi∣coctial. And lastly when it Blaz'd about from the thirteenth of Jnuary▪ to the last of February, it Blaz'd out its last in Aries, as if that Battering Ram had batterd it into nothing; After which many Princes and great men (too long to Relate) dyed, and so to be weighed in Heavens Libra and Ballance, wherein this Comet Appeared. Again, (XI.) in the year [1477.] A Saturnine Comet (of a dusky leaden Complexion) appeared; which was attended with so great a Drought, that not only the corn in the Fields, but the Trees in the Woods were plainly Burnt and Withred, yea many deep and broad Rivers, were wholly Dryed up, as if the Flames of that Comet, had been another Behemoth to Drink whole Rivers dry. Likewise a most noisom Plague followed this, and the Death of many Princes. Also, (XII.) In the year 1491. And XIII.) in the year 1492. Two Comets appeared, both which were forerunners of an horrible Murrain of Cattle, and of a fatal Mortality of many Princes. (XIV.) In the year 1500. A comet having a Northern La∣titude, blazed forth in April, under the sign of Caprcorn for 15 days, then followed the Famine and Pestilence in Germany, then Pope Paul was push'd down (as with the Horns of Capricorn,
where the Comet appeared) from his Infllible Chair, to his more Infallible Grave, then dyed also the King of Swedeland, and the Queen of Bohemia, with many other Princes. XV. In the year 1522. Another Comet of a Saturnine co∣lour (as before) broke forth, which ushered in a most dreadful Plague, and that Sweating Sickness which was most peculiar to English Bodies, dogging them (as it were) into all Lands. Again, XVI. In the year 1533. A mighty Comet appeared in July and August, on the outside of the Zodiak, nigh to the Constellation called Prs, and Streaming it Tail towards the VVest; After which follow'd the Plague, Earth-Qake, and that Monstrous Mutny at Munster in Grmany, yea and then did our Henry the VIII. Unhorse the Pope here, by throwing out the Popes Supremacy in England. (XVII.) In the year 1556. A pale Comet appeared for two Months, of a most swift Motion, directing its Course from Spi∣ca Virgiis to Bootes. from thence again to pes and to Saturn, (which Planet was then in Aris) and then disappeared: After which came the Plague, Famine, Muain, &c. but especially those Bloody Marian days wherein so many Holy Martyrs were com∣mitted to the Mercy of the merciless Fire (XVIII.) In the year 1558. Another pale Comet arose, which foreran the Fall of some Kings and ueens, and some Princes of all Ranks. (XIX) In the year 1560. Appeared another Comet in De∣cember which foreran a most fatal Plague here in Ldon, the great (and unheard o) Frost, and many Monstrous Births in several Counties of England, (with sundry other rodigies) followed after. XX. In the year 1572. A new Star then appeared (menti∣on'd in the first sheet.) After which were those Bloody Butche∣ries at that Treacherous Royal Marringe at Paris, whereat more Blood than Wine was powred out and Drnk. To Omit (as I have done sundry for Brevities sae) those three new Stars which were seen in the years 1602. 160. and 1607. after all which marvelous Mutations and strange Revolutions happened in the World, as Chronological Histories do abundantly de∣clare.
I pass on to the year 1618. VVherein the (XXI.) Comet bla∣zed forth (even in the VVinter Season) with a very long Tail or Train: After which our Queen nn, and the Emperour of Germany departed the VVorld. Then in the year 1652. The (XXII.) Comt (of a Saturnine and Lnar colour) appeared in Gem near to Oros Shield, mo∣ving (besides its Diurnal Revolution,) with an oblique motion towards the Plads, and passing by the Head of Mds (that fatal Star,) It came lastly to Prss where it was almost Verti∣cal to England,) and there it Vanished: Its Tail tended towards the North-East, and it Appeared not above ten or twelve Days in Dcember, and then Disappeared. Now the Products of this Blazing Star, are yet fresh in mot mens Memories, in what Mo∣tions and Commotions, yea strange Mutations of Monarchy in∣to Aristocracy and of that into Democracy and then into Mo∣narchy again, so that the Land seemed to Ring Changes and all were turned psi e dw both in Church and State. In the year 166. the (XXIII.) Coet of a Saturnine dusky Complexion) was seen in the beginning of Decmber, &c. And the sad effects thereof (in the Plague and Fire of London) are still fresher in the Memories of most men. Then in the year 1677. Another Comet appeared about A∣pril, the effects whereof were not only VVar at Sea and Land, unheard of Hail-stones, &c. but also the Damnable opish Plot from which we cannot yet be sae, no not by a Parliamentary Power. Now in this year 1680. Another (the XXV.) Comet appears in December also (and I see not why this should not have such se∣vere Significancies (which ought justly to be seared) as well as all those afore aid in this Compendious Chronology of Comets, seeing this is one of those Methods and VVays, whereby God talketh with M, not only by the Tongues of his Prophets and Apostles, but also by the very Elements disposed into Divers forms, e must hear God in h Prk as well  n his Word. The best Prospect several Dusky Evenings would allow me to take to this COMET, not a tittle obscued with the Splen∣dour of the M, was this, according to my Astrolabe, this Star
made its fist appearance to me in the sign Psces, ascending our Horizon from the Southern Line betwixt Pegsus, and the Sou∣thern Triangle to ndromeda, then it advanced with its exceed∣ing long Train until it got beyond Mduss Head, which is re∣ckoned (by all Authors) an unluckly Constellation. The streamer of this Star (I have observed) hath stretched out it self from the lowest Line of the Hemisphere at the very bottom of the Aequinoctial Colure (below Pisce) through the Tropick of ancer, through part of Persn between Auiga and Cpella even to the Solstitial Colure (which is one ful quarter of the Coelestial Globe) until it had a Direct Parallel Line with the North-Pole and the upper end of its Tayl or Train: This therefore, having a greater both Latitude and Longitude (in its Rays) then any I ever saw or lately read off, must needs be the greater Prodigy, and so may produce more prodigious Effects, which may (possibly) be distinctly and particularly spoke to in a third sheet, as wanting Room in this second. In the mean time, How ought this Out-Cry from Heaven [of Fire, Fir,] in this astonishing lame, Rowze us up out of our slumber of security, that we be not such sottish sensua ists as to take no notice of Gods great Works, but grunt at them (like Swine) and go our Ways: 'Tis the Brush Man that knoweth them No. Psal. 92.6. Such Brutish Spirits as Regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Operations of his Hands, the Lord will pluck them down and not build them up, sal. 28.5. Like rotten Ruinous Houses ne¦ver more to be Rebuilt or Repaired because they Regard not the Works of Gods Hands, God will Reward thm accrding to the Works of their Hnds v. 4. Ducunt Volemm Fta Noentm ra∣hunt saith, Seea. The Vast Regions of the Air is as fowly In∣fected with a stinking malignant Contagion at the extinguish∣ing of a great Comet, as a large Room is with the stinking Snuff of a great Candle, when 'tis rudely Blown out. As Dnel said of his dreadful Dream, Dan. .9. God Almighty bess u (in this Nation Prince and People) from the Dreful consequences of this Come, and let thm be to those that Hae the ord and are Ene∣mies to Jesus Chrst. S pray, C. N. FINIS. Publishd by L. Curtiss, on Ludgate-hill. 1681.
A third Sheet, shewing a further and fuller Blazoning upon this particular BLAZING-STAR. MY Method in this third Essay, shall be (first,) the explication of the grand concerns of this Comet, to wit, its Colour, Sci∣tuation, Motion, &c. (secondly,) the Application of its Portents and Significancys: First, the Explication, this is done two ways, 1. By Astrological Precepts or Maxims, 2: By Astrolo¦gical Presidents or Examples. (1.) The Apothegms or Rules (which they call Maxims) in Astrology, are 1, that there are Prognosticks I di∣omatick (which predict the natures and manners of Nations and Metra∣politan Cities) and Symptomatick (which presage the more than ordi∣nary Accidents that befal Countreys and Cities, whether good or evil; the former of these two I omit, as not concerning our Comet so much as the latter doth: The 2d. Rule is, That Comets and other fiery Me∣teors are always , Significant, and never , or Insignifi∣cant. The 3d. Rule is, That Comets have the strongest Influence upon those Countries and Cities upon which they are most Vertical or over their heads in a direct Perpendicular line, and in whose Signs they are most conspicuous. The 4th. Rule is, The Significancies of Comets are derived from their Colours, which is taken from the Dominion of the Planet in the generating of them, this [] or proper Tem∣perament of the praedominant Planet is easily discerned by the com∣plexion or colour of the Comet: If it be red, it borrows that colour from Mars, which is predominant in its Generation: if dull and dusky, then 'tis Saturnine as before, and so of the rest, and as they have the like Colour with this or that Planet, so they have the like Influence. The 5th Rule is, Comets have their Significations from the Signs of the Zodiack wherein they are scituated, as if they appear in the Watery Signs, they portend Famine and Plague, if in the Airy Signs, the follow furious Storms and Fractions or Factions; If in the Fiery Sign, then Fire and Sword sticceed, &c. The 6th. Rule is, the significancy of Comets is drawn from their differing Positions to the Sun, for a Morning or Even∣ing Comet portendeth the Death of some Prince, but the Eastern Comet presageth a quicker accomplishment and dispatch of such a Royal Death than doth a Western one. The 7th. Rule is, Prognosticks of Comets are further taken from their Motion: If the Comet be without motion, and be fixed in one point of the Heavens (as that over Jerusalem was, a lit∣tle before its Destruction) it denotes some long and lasting evil; if it be moveable from one Sign to another, 'tis an Indication of Commotions,
Wars, and (perhaps) of Civil Wars. If it move fast and soon decay, 'tis a Sign Gods Wrath will come shortly and be short though it be sharp. The 8th. Rule is drawn from the magnitude and form of the Comet, as well as from its Duration, for the greater that a Comet is, and the longer that it continueth, the more horrible are its effects and indications; if also its form or figure be with a Tail or Train, then it (as with a finger) pointeth out thereby that Evil is denounced against those Countries, es∣pecially towards which its Brush or Tail is extended, and the longer that the Train is, the longer will that evil be upon them: The 9th. Rule is borrowed from the Celestial Houses wherein the Comet appeareth, for Comets are most obnoxious to those Countries over which they are ei∣ther Vertical, or in whose Signs they are most seen: And to mention no more of those Celestial Signs or Houses (wherein this Comet is said to appear in its Retrograde motion,) Astrological Rules place. 1. Norway, Bavaria, Fez, &c. under Scorpio, in which Sign this Blazing-Star is said to have its first rise. 2. Spain, Hungary, &c. under Sagittary. 3. Grece, Lithuania, Saxony, &c. under Capricorn. 4. Tartary, Russia, Swede∣land, &c. under Aquarius. 5. Portugal, Galitia, Normandy under Pis∣ces. 6. England, France, Germany under Aries: I mention no more but these 6 Houses of Heaven (omitting the other 6,) because Mathe∣matick Professors have observed this present Comet hath had some short residence in all these 6 Celestial Signs or Houses, first in Scorpio, and last in Aries, so that according to Astrological Rules) all those Countries and Cities which are placed under those 6 Signs aforenamed shall be af∣fected and infected with the force and influence of this Blazing-Star, not only this and that Land, but even all those Lands over which it appeared, having extender it self over the greatest part of Europe, as well as other parts of the World, and perhaps its effects may begin in those Coun∣tries over which its appearance (or rather existence) began: while this Comet was in Scorpio, though it then did exist, yet could it not appear, being then hid in the Beams of the Sun, yet going down before the Sun, and shooting its Rays and Stream of Fire (as it were) against the Sun, which posture of a Comet (stay Astrologers) doth always portend the Fall of great men, but this Comet having its Retrograde motion into, and some short stay and scituation in those 6 several distinct Signs (the Sun oven-running it, and leaving it every Night farther and farther be∣hind it) must have likewise some several and distinct Effects and Progno∣sticks, for (according to the Rules of this Art) a Comet 1. in Scorpio Prognosticateth Wars and Worldly Changes, Drought and Dearth, Rob∣bery by Land, Piracy by Sea, Miscarriage of Women with Child, &c. 2. a Comet in Sagittary signifies Losses, Crosses to Great men, great con∣tentions about Civil and Sacred things, malignant Feavers, and much Mortality. 3. In Capricorn, it portends Murders, Massacres, Thefts, Plague and Famine, Death of Princes by Poyson, all Despite against Religion and
the Religious. 4. In Aquarius, a Comet presages long Wars, great Cru∣elties, Terrible Thunders and Lightnings, Famine, Pestilence, Rot and Murrain. 5. In Pisces, it foreshews contention about Civil Rights, as Men, Division about Sacred Truths as Christians; unnatural Relations a∣mong Superiors, Inferiours and Equals, uncivil and (it may be) civil Re∣bellions, scarcity of Fish, and great losses both at Sea and Land, &c. 6. A Comet in Aries foretelleth Diseases in the Head natural, and discom∣posures in the head political (as this Sign is the Head of all the twelve Signs) as likewise the Death of those that are Heads of Families of Cor∣porations, of Cities, of Countries and of Kingdoms. Now this present Comet having had its Stage and Theatre in all those 6 aforesaid Signs, may possibly Prognosticate all those evils aforesaid to befal some of those Regions seated under all those Signs which it hath run through betwixt its rise in Scorpio, and its failure in Aries. According to my best Intelli∣gence, this Comet took its fist Flame by the hot Beams of the Sun (be∣fore it was gone out of the Sign Scorpio) wherewith it hard its Conjuncti∣on, and wherein it had its absconding (for some time from the Sight of men, and likewise it lost its last Flame(according to my strict Obser∣vation) by the cold Beams of the Moon, even the Half Moon, wherewith it met about the middle of this Month January: Foreign Letters do fully testify that this Comet waded out of the Sun-beams (wherein it first lay hid) much sooner in other Countreys beyond Sea, than it did in our Land, so that it must have its Existence (if not its Appearance in the Month of November, continuing all December until the 16 of January, the Time of its Disappearance. This Comet (besides its Diurnal moti∣on, wherein the Sun (that race-running Champion) did daily over-run it) had its Retrograde motion, wherein it marcheth backward farther and farther on the East side from the Sun, and neerer to our Zenith, or point of the Heavens directly over our heads, before the attaining of which point it vanished out of sight; so that is this backward motion it fulfil∣led a marvellous course, from nigh to Cor Scorpij (where it had its first being and beginning in this Northern Hemisphere. From Scorpio this Comet advanceth almost all along the Aequinoctial Circle through the Solstitial colure by the Milky way into Sagittary, and by Antiuous and the Dolphin into Capricorn, so by Cygnus, Aequulens and Pegasus (stri∣king through the Tropick of Cancer, it came into Aquarius, and so (crossing the colure Aequinoctial) it passed into Pisces neer to the South∣ern line, and from thence into Aries, in which 6th. Sign I last saw it, where this Aries, or (as the word signifies) the Battering Ram, did (as it were) batter down both the Star and its Blaze quite out of Sight. In∣deed the long Blaze or Tail of this Comet extended it self to many other Constellations (besides these aforenamed,) as Aquila, Lyra, Cepheus, Andromeda, the Triangle, Cassiopeia, Medusa's head, even to Auriga and Capella, as if it had been a Messenger sent to visit all the most fa∣mous
Constellations in the full half part of the Northern Hemisphere: The last appearance I had of it, was this, its Train (then weaning away) darted it self forth betwixt Cassiopeia and the Pleiades (or 7 Stars) fa∣cing (as it were) the Bulls Eye and bright Jupiter himself (who was then in that Sign of the Bull) yea and that most Glorious Constellation (of all others) to wit, Orion, with both the Greater and the Lesser Dog: Star. A more particular Description both of the Star it self, and of its Train seemeth necessary to the fuller Explication, before we can come to the Application of All, and 1, concerning the Star it self, I do find it was a Phaenomenon found in various Complexions, which perhaps its se∣veral Paralaxis or differing scituations might occasion. The first Ac∣count we had of it, was from the Mathematick Professor at Hamburgh who saith he took his prospect of it in his Tube, and there in saw the Comet (it self) to be fiery and glowing like the flames of a Bakers Oven 2. Other Artists (that have viewed it by their Telescopes) say they saw it of a bright, splendid colour; as the former Aspect was from Mars, and so it was a Martial Star (which it might well be, while it had the Tin∣cture of the first Sign, wherein it first existed, for Cor Scorpij hath the same complexion with the Planet Mars, of a red and fiery colour) so this latter was from Jupiter, which made the Comet a Jovial Star, por∣tending Jovial or Joyful things, as the former doth War and Blood-shed, The 3d. Accompt we have from Foreign Mathematicians is, that at its first appearance it had a mixture of divers colours, which it borrow'd from Mercury, so became a Mercurial Star, and betokening a mixture of differing Dispensations, of good as well as of evil; but the 4th. and most universal Prospect of it was, that it hath been of a dusky and lead∣en complexion from its first appearance to its last disappearance, this colour it borrows from Saturn (as is said before) and makes it a Satur∣nine Star, of the most sullen influence of all the three other Planets a∣forenamed; so that no less than 4 Planets are (as it were) called in to the composition of this Comet, and though some doubt may be made concerning the 3 former, to wit, Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, yet none can question this last the 4th. of them, inasmuch as many Millions of eye-witnesses do unanimously concur that for a long time to its last ex∣tinguishing, it had no other complexion but that of Saturn, the signifi∣cation whereof cannot be good, as the Satyrical Poet represents him in this Hexastich. Pale and of Ashy colour, Male-content, A Cataline to Mortal Temperament, That would blow up the Capitol of Man, With Envious Influence, Melancholy, Wan, And if Ill hate be in an Heavenly Breast, This Planet with that Fury is possest.
The 2d. Description is of its Tail or Train, which some Foreign Ar∣tists discovered by their Tubes and Telescopes to be red and fiery all a∣long from the body of the Star (which then to them appeared red as before,) but it was pale towards the end of the Stream, having the re∣semblance of those long Streamers, which Men of War (Ships of the first Rate) do carry with them; so that 1, As to its Colour which was Red at the beginning, and pale at the end of it, and 2. as to its Resemblance of a War-Streamer, it plainly portends as if the Red Horse [War] should Usher in the pale Horse [Death] which 2 colours the Seal-Prophecy mentioneth, Revel. 6.4.8. War is commonly accompanied with Fire and Blood, 2 King. 3.22. Isa. 9.5. and 63.1.3. and Death is commonly called pallida Mors, as it causeth a paleness of face. And if there were no Deception of Sight in those who call this Saturnine Comet a black Star (such as Chronology speaketh of) then may it also denote the Black Horse in that Seal Prophecy. Rev. 6.7. to wit, Famine, which disco∣loureth and denigrateth the Countenance, as Lam. 4.8. but whatsoever was the Colour of the Train, all conclude (even from ocular Demon∣stration) that it was pale, and the portent thereof is bad enough; yet 3. as to the Length of this Streamer, it was conspicuous to every com∣mon eye to have a most prodigious extent, so that whether we take it, 1. as Gods Sweeping Broom, or 2. as Gods Swinging Rod, or 3. As Gods fla∣ming Sword (as in the first Sheet) it evidently declares that the great God hath great punishing Instruments, either to sweep away, or to swinge, or to slash and slay his Adversaries, Those that took the Longitude of this Train by Jacobs Staff, &c. give us this Account, that the true dimensi∣on of its Blaze or Tail, was about 70 Degrees in Longitude, now sup∣pose (as is generally supposed) that every particular Degree is 60 miles, then the Train of this Comet by this very computation, must be no less than about 427 miles long, yet considering the height of its scitua∣tion, as the magnitude of a Planet, so the longitude of this Comet (in its Streamer) is much more than can be taken by the best sight or pro∣spect. The latitude or breadth of this Tail is computed by Artists also to be no less than 2 Degrees, which amounts unto an 120 miles, oh then what a Predigious Streamer must this be, that is 4270 miles long, and an 120 miles broad. In longitude it excelleth all Europe (which from St. Vincent in Portugal to Constantinople, bears but 3800 miles) and in latitude it exceedeth the Northern part of England, and every part of Scotland or Ireland. This introduceth the 2d. part, to wit, the Appli∣cation. It is therefore very incongruous and unchristian, yea rather brui∣tish and barbarous for any Mortal man to despise or deride such a pro∣digious piece of work from the Immortal God (as is longer than the 4th part of the World, and broader than many Countries and Kingdoms) As some Princes of the World have lately done at this Comet, as it is re∣Ported
of them: 'Tis writ, the French King frothily despised and deri∣ded this present Comet, saying, It had spoiled his sport at a grand Ballet (or Dance (composed with much curiosity, for his Sons (the Dauphins) Diversion, when it was privately proved before him it pleased him well, but when it came to be publickly performed in his presence before his No∣bles and Ladies of Honour, there happened a Baffle in the Actors, which did frustrate his expectation, hereupon he jeeringly soffed that the Influ∣ence of the Comet was fallen upon his Dance to spoil it, pssibly before its portents pass away, it may (in good earnest) soil and spoil more of the French Dances. 'Tis storied of Vespasian, that he scorn'd an Hairy Comet shining in his Sight, saying it concerned the King of Parthia who wore long Hair, and not himself who would not were any long Wiggs, (which this very blaze may possibly scorch) so it denounced no woe to him; notwithstanding he soon after smarted, for his jesting with Gods edge-tools. Any despight done to a mans work is a despight done to the Work-man himself, 'tis God that Works Signs and Wonders in Heaven and Earth, Dan. 6.27: Such as are De∣spisers of Gods Signs and Wonders, God will make them for Signs and Wonders in the World, Act, 13.41. Deut. 28.46. Thus God hanged up Pharaoh (as it were) in Gibbets, as a Sign and Wonder to the World, because he despised Gods Signs and Wonders in the World. Something of this Divine Wrath Philip the 1. King of Spain did feel, when he took no warning at a Blazing-Star, sent (it seems) to foreshew his Death, which followed soon after, and when he lay in his dying Agonies, he continued crying out [Ha Cometa, Ha Cometa, &c.] I took no warning by thee; but Charles the Great, (or Ludovicus Pius his Son, as some say) did bet∣ter who did Fear at the Sight of a great Comet, blazing out before him, and when Egmundus his Astrologer (unwilling to see his Prince sad, ur∣ged to him Jer. 10.2. That he should not be dismayed at those Signs, &c. he prudently and piously answered, It was not the Sign (the Comet) but the maker of that Sign (God himself) that he feared, yet would he praise God for his tender clemency (withal) in Rebuking their slugish∣ness with those his Signs. They were not Fools but wise men that said we have seen his Star in the East, Math. 2.2. 'twas a Star of Christs making, aswel as leading to him, Where a Blazing Star led them to the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4 2. Mortals in Vain did never Gaze, When Comets did in Heaven Blaze. Besides what I have said in the Chronology of Comets aforementiond (all fore-warnings of following Evils) a little may be aded, to wit. 1. Soon after that Comet in the year 137. with its very long Train, the French burnt Southampton, and did much more mischief upon the Coasts of England. 2. Soon after that in the year 1440. followed
here, the Barons Wars twixt York and Lancaster; God bless us from the like 'twixt York and Monmouth. And 3. Soon after that Star which appeared in the year 1580. The Rebellion broke out in Ireland, through the Popes Instigation, who sent Italians and Spaniards to assist the Irish (against Queen Elisabeth in the 22 year of her Reign, October the 8. God bless us from the like Eruption now. Here withal take a little enlargement upon that Star in Cassiopaea 1572. (aforesaid) which gave Caution and Counsel to Charles the 9th of France (the Author of the Massacre at Paris) as likewise did Beza in his Poem concluding thus, Tu verô, Herodes, Sanguinolene, Te. Yet this bloody Prince (another Herods) took no warning, but first wallowed in the Blood of Protestants, and at last God plagu'd him with such an eruption of Blood in his own Body (then full of Blood, being in the flower of his Age) that he wallowed in his own Blood and was also Choaked with it. And upon that Comet in the year 1618. which foreran the Desolations of Germany, God bless us from the like Deso∣lations: the Bishop of Spalata (that Turn-Coat, as bad as he was) said of that very Comet, that it was no Phantastick Phoenomenon, but Real and Significant, a true Exhalation, Inflamed, and no Deception of sight about it: I would to God we did not exercise wild Fancies more than solid Judgment about these Prodigies, as this Comet, the fiery falling Bullet, and other Apparitions most Dreadful (of a Northern and Southern Army fighting in the Air: ) according to credible Infor∣mation: Alas we know not the Signs of the Times. Math. 16.3. Luke. 21▪ 11. and Act. 2.9. Such as Dubartus describeth in his Dodekastick, or 12. Verses shewing how all Prodigies prognosticate manifold Evils unto persons and places of all Ranks and Qualities. Here in the Night appears a flaming Spire, There a fierce Dragon folded all in Fire; Here a bright Comet, there a fiery steam, Here flying Lances, there a burning Beam; Here sems an Honned Goat environd Round With Fiery Flakes about the  bound, There with long Bloody Hair, a Blazing Star, Threatning the World with Famine, Plague and War▪ To Princes Death, to Kingdoms many Crosses. To all Estates inevitable Losses, To Herdsmon Rots, to Plowmen hapss Sedsons, To Sailors storms, to Cities civil Treasons. If we consult. 2ly, Paradigms; or Examples, as we have hitherto A∣pothegms or Astrological-Rules (which are the Placits of Astrologers and (possibly) are onely ad placitum to be received) with the other in the Chronology, it may portend either one of, or some of, yea all of those Evils which they portended, not onely to other Lands but also to
our Land, over which it was almost Vertical in Persus and Medusa's Head when it Vanished: Sed manum de Tabulà, ne Caldaizare videar, I withdraw my hand, least I should seem to speak like a Caldean, whom it better becomes to speak like a Christian and like a Gospel Minister wherewith I shall Conclude. The Men of Issachar were in great ac∣count with David. (literal) who had Ʋnderstanding of the Times, and did know what Israel ought to do. 1 Chron. 12.32. A prudent man fore∣seeth an evil and hideth himself, Prov. 22.3. He foreseeth it not by any unlawful Divination, or by Gazing as common Star-Gazers in their Unwarantable Judiciary Astrology do) but by a Judicious observation of those extraordinary Beacons which the wonder-working God fireth in the Firmament (which he never doth but to give warning that some mischief is ready to make an Invasion.) As also by a solid Collection and Connection of causes and consequents: as, If God be the same that ever, as Holy, Just, Powerful, &c. and, If Sin be the same that ever, as foul, loathsome, and God-provoking, &c. Then such effects and e∣vents will follow such causes and courses: As there be natural signs (sometimes) of an ensuing Judgment which prudent thinking Men can readily discover. If Elias see but a Cloud (though no bigger than a mans hand) come from the Top of Carmel, he can tell that it will cover the whole Heavens as with a black Curtain, and that a great Rain will follow after, 1 Kin. 18.44.45. The most tender Tempers are most sensible of the change of Weather. A Moses (who converseth with God (as a man with his Friend) is quick-sighted, and espies Gods wrath at its first setting forth. Numb. 16.46. The more faith∣ful and familiar that men are with God, the sooner do they see his wrath arising and running forth: were we such, and had we our Eyes in our Heads, as wise men. Eccles. 2.14. and Ʋnderstood we the Times, as those of Isachar did, knowing, by a singular Sagacity, both what is to be done, and when to do it, we shall be of great Account with our David Spiritual and may yet Retrieve, Retrench and Redeem some part (at least) of those evils that are Imminent over us, before they be Incum∣bent on us: It remaineth that we ply our Spiritual Oars and Row hard as did the Disciples. Joh. 6.19. our Jesus will certainly come to us, though sent we be both in the Deep, (so as we cannot feel bottom) and in the Dark so as we cannot see Shore; though the Child be come to the Birth and there is not strength to bring forth, 2 Kings 19.3. yet Christ will come and Midwife it into the World, and after this Day of Rebuke, will bring his Spouse into his Wine-Cellar under his Banner of Love and will draw out his best Wine (which he reserved last) for her even the promises of the latter day: which shall be as Life from the Dead, Rom. 11.15. even so come Lord Jesus come quickly Cito, Citius, Citissime, lmera, beamenu. Soon and in our Days. So prays C. N. FINIS. Published by L. Curtiss on Ludgate-hill.
