O168 12498447 62598
BRITANNIA, Volume the First: OR, AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND AND Dominion of Wales: By a Geographical and Historical DESCRIPTION OF THE Principal Roads thereof. Actually Admeasured and Delineated in a Century of Whole-Sheet Copper-Sculps. ACCOMODATED With the Ichnography of the several Cities and Capital Towns; AND COMPLEATED By an Accurate Account of the more Remarkable Passages of Antiquity, Together with a Novel Discourse of the Present State. By JOHN OGILBY Esq His MAJESTY's Cosmographer, and Master of His MAJESTY's Revels in the KINGDOM of IRELAND. LONDON, Printed by the Author at his House in White-Fryers. M.DC.LXXV.
MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715 GEORGIVS D.G. MAG BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F.D.
TO HIS GRACE The most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT By Divine Providence Lord Arch-Bishop OF CANTERBURY, PRIMATE of all England and METROPOLITAN; AND One of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL; His Munificent Patron: THIS ROYAL VOLUME, BEING The First Part OF HIS BRITANNIA, IS Most Humbly Presented and Dedicated BY His most Obedient and Humble Servant, HIS MAJESTYS Cosmographer, JOHN OGILBY.
TO HIS Most Serene and Sacred MAJESTY, THE High and Mighty Prince, CHARLES' II. OF England, Scotland, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, &c. SIR, THE Engagements We lay under at the Com∣mencement of those Differences wherein the Greater Part of EUROPE stands at pre∣sent Concern'd, being by Divine Providence, and your Sacred Majesty's Great Prudence hap∣pily Withdrawn; You have Laid Open to Ʋs all those Maritin Itineraries, Whereby We Trade and Traffique to the several Parts and Ports of the World, through the Two and Thirty Points or Bearings of the Universe. Conformable to Which, Influenc'd by Your Majesty's Approbation and Munificence, I have Attempted to Improve Our Commerce and Correspondency at Home, by Registring and Illustrating Your
Majesty's High-Ways, Directly and Transversly, as from Shore to Shore, so to the Prescrib'd Limits of the Circumambient Ocean, from this Great Emporium and Prime Center of the Kingdom, Your Royal Metropolis. Precedents of this Nature Divine Authority is not wanting to afford; Had not the Constant Practice of the Greatest Princes, even in the Achma of the Three Last Empires of the World, and We may Presume the Assyrian also, Highly Recommended It a Work truly Great and Political. For, The Persian Princes had the Stationary Distances through Their Vast Extended Territories exactly Registred and Enume∣rated; The Macedonian Conqueror had His Mensores Itinerum Alexandri; And the Illustrious Founder of the Roman Greatnes, JULIUS CAESAR, not only Compos'd an Universal Itinerary, but Order'd That Great Survey of the World, that became the Work of Two and Thirty Years: Lastly, the August Emperor, Antoninus Pius, in that Celebrated Collection of His, of the Consular Ways and Stations, Mansions and Mutations throughout the Whole Roman Empire, Has Oblig'd Ʋs more especially with an Iter Britanniarum, a Distinct Itinerary of that Part of Britain which Added so Great a Lustre to the Roman Diadem. The Excellency of such Tables, equally Corresponding the Compliances of Peace and Rufflings of War, has through all Ages found an Ac∣knowledgment; And yet the most Accurate Ones of this Kind, even those Peutingerian Military Charts so Worthily Admir'd, appear too faint a Resemblance, whereby an Idaea might be Fram'd, of what We have Wrought This Our Essay to, by Actual Dimensuration. Here then I Present Your Sacred Majesty with an Important Novelty, the Scale of Peace and War, whereby (not to Prescribe Your Majesty) a True Prospect of This Your Florishing Kingdom may be Taken, Pregnant Hints of Security and Interest Gather'd, and the Considerable Augmentation of It's Extent, beyond Vulgar Esti∣mation, more Certainly Collected, than from any the Notional Accounts, Impos'd heretofore, by the Erroneous Computations of Latitude, Longitude, or Proportion. I might here be Bold to Tell Your Majesty, That We, who have hitherto seem'd to Truckle under the Fame of France and Belgium, for Performances of this Nature, may Presume, by the Propinquity of This Our Design to Perfection, That perchance no Attempt at first came nearer, to have Given such Measures to The Virtuosi of the World, as Forein Princes and States shall be Glad to Imitate. But I, Dread Soveraign, Choose rather to Consecrate It, as An Earnest to The Succeeding Volumes of My BRITANNIA; That Your Majesty and The World may See, how Effectually Ope∣rative Your Royal Countenance is, in Adapting such Mean Abilities to so Great Performances, That perchance no Library in The World affords a Parallel.
May the same Influences Tend to the Culminating all other Arts and Sciences, and the King of Kings Crown Your Sacred Head with Peace and Plenty, Raising up the Splendor of Great Britains Mo∣narchy, and Rendring It The Grand Exemplar of Industry and In∣genuity, even to the more Polite and Civiliz'd Nations of the World. Such are the Fervent Desires of Your Majesty's Most Humble, Obedient, and Loyal Subject, and Servant, JOHN OGILBY.
PREFACE. GEOGRAPHY or the Description of the Supersicies of the Ter∣restrial Globe, of so high Concernment in the Interest and Affairs of Mankind, though it has through all Ages been an equal Sharer in the happy Improvements of Humane Learning, is yet capable of being brought to a far more transcendant Pitch, by that most absolute Method which the Volumes in Hand present you with, ACTUAL DI∣MENSURATION. That the Ancients, though there was a constant Emula∣tion of Out-doing one another, were infinitely short in their Performances of this kind; the Perusers of Eratosthenes, Strabo, Mela, Pliny, Solinus and Ptolomy, will readily acknowledg, nay, even those later Geographers, Ortelius and Mercator, not to mention Our Modern ones, Bleau, Sanson, and the Rest, so Eminent for the Curious Performances of the Graver; their most Ac∣curate Maps being but so many Guess-Plots and their Perambulated Projections, as those of Our own Country Compil'd by Mr. Saxton, and more and more vitiated since by Transcribers and Copiers, much inferior to what might have been done by a strict Dimensuration. Now, the Methods made use of by Geographers in the Description and Illustration of Kingdoms and Countries are various, Some following the Natural Traduction of Rivers and Mountains, Others the Distinction of People and Inhabitants, others again more frequently, the Politique Division of Princes; but Antiquity and the Practical Succession of Geography has more especially commended to Us the Itinerary Way as the most Regular and Absolute; and the greatest Height the Prosecution of this Method hath arriv'd to beyond the common Itinerary Tables, are those Choro∣graphical Charts or Tabulae Peutingerianae, Collected out of Ptolomy and Antonine, being the Delineation of the Stations in the Later upon the Maps of the Former at 40 or 50 Miles per Inch only, which being Cut in Brass and Illustrated by Mark Velser, are to be seen in Bertius's Edition of Ptolomy and elsewhere; from which Precedent have been Deduc'd all the latter Performances of this Kind; whereby 'tis no Mar∣vel if the Tracing of Notionary Roads upon imperfect Charts at Minute Scales be the highest Perfection the best of Our Geographers, Dutch or French, can as yet pretend to. These Considerations may sufficiently Authorize the present Undertaking, were We not under more particular Obligations of Compleating Our English Atlas, where∣in having Design'd to each Quarter of the World one fair Volume, and a fifth to BRITANNIA; Practical Experience taught Us, that in such a Compendium an Actual Survey of all England, in order to the Regulating our Maps and Reforming our Histories, would to Vulgar Appearance be little more than Actum Agere, though the Dimensuration of Roads and other Perambulations in Order thereunto, would Measure more than thrice the Circumference of the Earth; Hence therefore, and from His Majesty's Approbation and Signal Encouragement of the Design in Embrio, succeeded by divers of the Nobility, We advisedly Enlarg'd it into 3 Volumes; whereof this being the First, to contain An Ichnographical and Historical Description of all the Principal Road-Ways in England and Wales; The Second, A Description of the 25 Cities with Peculiar Charts to each of them, but more particularly those of LONDON
and WESTMINSTER; and the Third, A Topographical Description of the whole Kingdom, under the Title of BRITANNIA. That such a Triple Illustration of the Kingdom cannot but be of Excellent, nay Absolute Use, the Benefit the Nation acknowledges from the fainter indigested Representations hereof already extant is sufficient to persuade: For not to Press the infallible Notions deducible in order to the Security against Civil Dissention and Fo∣rein Invasion, of what infinite Advantage may we presume it in Reviving and Pro∣pagating the great Soul of the World, Commerce and Correspondency, in maintaining Privileges, encouraging Industry, and inciting the whole Kingdom to a Noble Emu∣lation of recovering a Pristine Splendor, establishing a Present Greatness, or laying Foundations of a Future Glory; These and a thousand Others might be urg'd, did not the Novelty as well as the real Utility (whereof Posterity will be more and more sensible) sufficiently perswade Us of the general Acceptation of a Work from which Ignorance and Malice alone is able to Detract. Hitherto of the Undertaking in General as Praefatory to the more material Business of this Place, an Explanation of the WORK, which before We proceed to, We shall in a few Lines consider the Roads of England Antique and Modern: The As∣serters of the Brittish King Malmud or Malmutius Dunwallo, Anno Mundi 3522. make Him, among other Eminencies, the Raiser of those 4 Great Ways of the Kingdom, known at this Day by the Names of Watlingstreet, the Foss, Ermingstreet, and Ikneld∣street; but the more Sober conclude them a Work of the Romans, who by such Consular, Praetorian and Military Ways facilitated the March of their Armies, and the Communication between Station and Station, and believe, that even at their De∣parture from Brittain, that which We call the Foss-Way remain'd then imperfect and unfinish'd; for even besides these, there are divers others of the like Erection though of less Extent, leading likewise from now antiquated Stations to other like Stations, Garisons, or Colonies, whose Names speak them sufficiently the Viae publicae of the Roman Empire in Brittain: Many of these following the Fate of the Stations them∣selves are grown infrequented and obsolete, and with New Towns, New Ways have gra∣dually succeeded; and the Principal Modern Roads (even those the Present Volume takes Notice of) are either such as lead Directly from the City of LONDON towards the Kingdoms of Scotland or Ireland, or the Countries of France and Belgium, or some Eminent Inland City or Maritin Port; or Cross, from Great Town to Great Town, a∣mong which the Post Roads for conveying Letters missive to and from this Great Center, taking up a considerable Part, We have at the End of this Preface added a particular Account thereof; and come now to the Explanatory Part of the Work it self, as relating to, It's Division and Prosecution. I. As to the First of which, Having Illustrated the Principal Roads of England and Wales by 85 several Itineraries, We have distinguisht the same into Direct Roads and Cross Roads, calling such Direct as proceed Directly from this Our Prime Center and Grand Metropolis, LONDON, to the less Central Cities, Capital Towns, or other Eminent Places of the Kingdom; and calling such Cross as lead from some of the said Lesser Centers to another like Capital Town or Place of Eminency; The First of which We have divided into Independants, or such as Commencing actually at LONDON, receive the beginning of Computation from the Standard in Cornhil, as from another Milliarium Aureum: And Dependants, or such as being Com∣puted from LONDON, Commence not Actually there, but Branch out of the foresaid Independants; and the Second into Principal Cross Roads leading directly from Town to Town as aforesaid; and Accidental Ones consisting of several shorter Branch∣es, some Independant some Dependant: These We have caus'd to be Engraven in 100 Whole-Sheet Copper-Sculps, whereof some Roads Extend to 2, 3 and 4. Plates, and the Barwick Road to 5. Others are contain'd in single Plates, and in some few Plates again We have Inserted two, and more rarely, 3 distinct Roads.
As to the Prosecution, We may consider the Dimensuration, Delineation and Illustration. II. In Dimensuration, We might here Treat of the several Measures us'd by the Antients; as among the Persians and Egyptians, the Schoenos containing two Para∣sangs or 60 Stadia; the Leuca or League among the Gauls, containing 1500 Paces, and the Rasta of the Germans 3000. but suffice it, that We say somewhat to the Ro∣man Measure by which our Stations in Antonine are Computed; applying That and the Modern European Ones to the English Standard. The Romans accounted by Miles and Stadia, the Mile contain'd precisely 1000 Paces of 5 Foot, and the Stadium or Furlong 125 Paces, yet others Reckon the Stadium but 120 Paces or 600 Foot, and some Account the Mile but 7 Stadia and an half; now the Roman Foot exceeded Ours by 33 Parts of 1000; but the Itinerary Miles seem rather a Computation than any strict Measure, since by Our Dimensurated Intervals of the more certain∣ly-known Stations, the Mile which should answer the English one as 1033 to 1056 seems rather larger than Our own, if the continual Inequality thereof admit a Cen∣sure: To which We may add, That the antient Greek Foot is said to contain deci∣mally 1’076 Parts; the Babylonian 1’211; the Alexandrian 1’240, and the Arabian 1’102 of the English Foot, and as to Forein Measures in use, the Rhynland Foot being the same as the Roman 1’033; the Foot of Amsterdam ’934; Antwerp ’939; Hafnia (in Denmark) ’965; Paris (the Royal Foot) 1’070; Venice 1’157; Toledo ’896, and Nuremburgh 1’006 Parts of the said English Foot. And as to the En∣glish Mile it is deduc'd from a Barley-Corn, whereof 3 in length make an Inch, 12 Inches a Foot, 3 Feet a Yard, 3 Feet 9 Inches an Ell, 5 Feet a Pace, 6 Feet a Fathom, 5 Yards and an half or 16 Feet and an half a Pole, Perch or Rod, 40 such Poles a Furlong, and 8 Furlongs a Mile; so that a Mile English contains 8 Furlongs, 320 Poles, 1’056 Paces, 1760 Yards, 5’280 Feet, and 63’360 Inches. To this of Measures We may adjoyn a Word or two of Dimensurators or Measur∣ing Instruments, whereof the most usual has been the Chain, and the common length for English Measures 4 Poles, as answering indifferently to the English Mile and Acre, 10 such Chains in length making a Furlong, and 10 single square Chains an Acre, so that a square Mile contains 640 square Acres; This, as it obliges the Surveyor to chargeable Assistances, so it exposes the Account to the Dangers of Mistakes, which, perhaps is not the least Reason of the slow Progress of Actual Dimensuration, even in these last Centuries; That We have been much facilitated therefore in this Great Work by the Wheel Dimensurator, which, for Ease and Accuratenes infinitely surpasses the Chain, as being manageable by a single Person, Measuring, even the smallest Deviations of the Way, and finishing a Revolution but once in 10 Miles; We readily acknowledge, and even in Wheels themselves, commend rather the Foot-Wheel here mention'd, of half a Pole Circumference, with the Way-Wizars as they are now Regulated, than any such like Coach or Chariot-Mensurator whatsoever. In the Delineation or Decyphering these Roads upon Copper-Sculptures: 1. We have Projected them upon imaginary Scrolls, the Initial City or Town being always at the Bottom of the outmost Scroll on the Left Hand; whence your Road ascends to the Top of the said Scroll; then from the Bottom of the next Scroll ascends again, thus constantly ascending till it terminate at the Top of the outmost Scroll on the Right Hand, as by the Succession of Figures representing the Miles, most plainly appears. 2. The Road it self is express'd by double Black Lines if included by Hedges, or Prick'd Lines if open; but if the Road be describ'd altogether by Black Lines or Prick'd Lines throughout the whole Plate, then the Distinction aforesaid of En∣clos'd and Open is omitted. 3. The Scale by which the said Road is Protracted, is according to one Inch to a Mile, or the 63’360th. Part of a Mile; the said Miles being exprest by double Points, and numbred by the Figures 1, 2, 3, &c. Each subdivided into 8 Furlongs, represented by the single Points included between the said double Ones. 4. The several Deviations or Turnings out of the Road to adjacent Places on ei∣ther
Hand, are exprest by a short double Line, and are generally inscrib'd, to such a Place, and sometimes the reputed Distance of the said Place in Miles is likewise signify'd by Figures affixt. 5. Capital Towns are describ'd Ichnographically, according to their Form and Ex∣tent; but the Lesser Towns and Villages, with the Mansion Houses, Castles, Churches, Mills, Beacons, Woods, &c. Scenographically, or in Prospect. 6. Bridges are usually noted with a Circular Line like an Arch, but are general∣ly imply'd where the Rivers or Brooks crost are not drawn through the Road. 7. Rivers are Decypher'd by a treble wav'd Line or more, and the lesser Rills or Brooks by a single or double Line, according to their Eminency. 8. Ascents are noted as the Hills in ordinary Maps, Descents e contra, with their Bases upwards. 9. Whatever is posited upon or within the Scroll, is presum'd to bear the same Scale as the Road it self. 10. The several Inclinations of the Road to the one or th' other Hand, are na∣turally express'd accordingly, and the Points of Bearing are Collected from the pe∣culiar Compass of each Scroll, the Flower-de-luce shewing the North; and when a Compass is repeated in the self same Scroll, a straight transverse Line expresses to what Part of the Scroll either of the said Compasses belong. In the Illustration or Historical Part, respecting the General and Particular History, the first thing occuring is the Point of Bearing from the Initial to the Terminating Town of the Road; wherein We have advisedly vary'd from the Positions of former Maps; The Original of which Compil'd by Mr. Saxton about an Hundred years a-go, were Projected according to the Meridian of the Magnetick Needle (in England) which then vary'd 12 Degrees from North to East; since which, it has gradually inclin'd to the true Meridian, which in England it respected Anno 1658. but in France Anno 1666. and now varies with Us about 3 Degrees 15 Minutes to the West. Secondly, the Direct Horizontal Distance, by which We understand the nearest Interval between the two Places, which We have cursorily Collected from the Horizontal Protraction of the said Roads, with convenient Deductions for the several Hills and smaller Deflexures of the Way: And upon these two Points, with the included Difference in the Heavens, depends that necessary Investigation of the Quantity of a Degree upon the Superficies of the Earth, which Ptolomy reckons 500 Stadia; Snellius in his Eratosthenes Batavus, almost 67 Miles; Fernelius by the Revolutions of a Wheel, 68 Italian Miles and 96 Paces; Our Mr. Norwood in his Experiment from YORK, more than 69 Miles and an half; the Learned Mr. Oughtred about 66 Miles and a quarter; the Accurate Mr. Picart above 69 Miles, viz. 57064 Toises of Paris of 6 Foot, equal to 365’184 English Feet, and the Vul∣gar Computation only 60 Miles: This, if accurately adjusted, (and We hope much, even from Our own Dimensurations) would conduce infinitely to the Regulation of Latitudes and Longitudes: In the first of Which, some have deviated more than a whole Degree in the Position of Barwick, and others 3 or 4 Degrees in the later, in Asserting the Distance between the Lands-End and North-Foreland. Thirdly, The Vulgar Computation, which (though variously accounted) We have thought fit should also accompany the Dimensuration, by the Inequality of which, the Peruser may easily observe the Erroneous and Irregular Consequences necessarily following a Dependance thereon, which, in some Parts near equals, in others, an∣swers only 3 quarters, and sometimes but Two Thirds of the Dimensuration; About LONDON the very Roman Miles seeming to be retain'd, but even after 20 Miles distance, resolving into the former Proportions, and not gradually as they are more remote from the City according to Vulgar Belief: Now whence these Computations arose is altogether uncertain, the nearest Conjecture is, that they seem to exclude the whole Length of the Towns, and to be the Distance from the End of one Town to the Beginning of the Next, not regarding the Fractional Parts of a Mile, but taking the lesser Integer, which in a well inhabited Road will come near the Matter. Lastly, The Tables of Computation and Dimensuration, having Explain'd them in the Printed Relation, pag. 1. We shall onely Illustrate by this Example out of the Aber∣istwith Road: From LONDON to Acton in the Colums under Computation is 6 Miles, under Dimensuration 8 M. 3 F. From Acton to Uxbridg in the 2d. Line of the first
Colume, under Computation 9 Miles; in the same Line and Colume, under Dimen∣suration 10’1. but from LONDON to Uxbridg, in the same Line and 2d. Colume, under Computation 15 Miles, under Dimensuraeion 18’4. caeteris paribus. In the Particular History We have precisely Trac'd the Delineation, onely We have Collected at the Beginning of each Plate, the Acute and forward Ways issuing out of the Road, as they follow successively from the Town Commenc'd at, and at the end of the Plate, the Obtuse or Backward Ways falling in with the said Road from the Initial Town, but being likewise Acute or Forward from the Terminating Town, whence We have successively recounted them. In the Historical Account of Places, We have faithfully Collected the most Materi∣al Antiquities from the best Authorities, and in the Modern Account the Reader will meet with much of Novelty and much of Utility; neither have We confin'd Our selves to the Road immediatly, but have briefly Touch'd upon the more Remarkable Adjacents also, inso∣much, that there is scarce one Market Town of Ten in the Kingdom that has mist an Illustra∣tion. The principal Variations of Bearing We have added in the Margent by the com∣mon Letters, expressing the 32 Points of the Compass, as N. for North, N. b. E. for North by East, N. N. E. for North North-East, N. E. by N. for North-East by North, and N. E. for North-East, & sic de caeteris; the Numbers annext shewing the Miles and Furlongs, whereat the Bearing Commences; and the several Towns and Villages pass'd through, are in like manner Inserted in the Margent, with the Miles and Furlongs representing the Midle of the said Town or Village. To conclude, Having already given the State of Maps and Itineraries, the Reasons, Account and Uses of the Undertaking, with it's Explanation in respect of Dimensuration, Delineation and Illustration; We conceive We may modestly declare, That as to the Volume in Hand, considering the ACTUAL DIMENSURATION of so ma∣ny Thousand Miles of Roads, through the several Counties of the Kingdom, the Protraction, Delineation and Engravement thereof in 100 Royal Whole-Sheet Copper-Plates, the accomodating them with the Ichnographies of Capital Towns, and an His∣torical Discourse, wherein the more Remarkable Passages of Antiquity meet with an Ac∣curate and Novel Illustration of the present State; nothing of this Nature requiring so vast a Charge and such infinite Labor and Disquisition was ever yet Attempted, or perchance so much as Thought of, either at Home or Abroad. But as to the Whole Work, the Tri∣ple Account of this florishing Kingdom, adding to the former, the Ichnographical and Historical Description of Cities, accurately and elaborately Perform'd, the Chorographical and Topographical Description of Counties, Examin'd and Adjusted by the strictest Rules of Dimensuration, Historical Truths asserted, and Scenographical Ornaments added; We may be bold to Challenge the Universe for a Paralel, and Commend it an Undertaking worthy the Patronage of the Greatest Princes or Potentates whatsoever.
OF THE POST-ROADS OF ENGLAND. IN the following Discourses having Occasion among other Computations to take No∣tice of the Establish'd Post-miles, which in some Roads answer the Vulgar Estimation onely, in others the Dimensuration nearly, and in others again, a midle Number 'twixt both; We shall here give a brief and general Account of the Distribution of England for the Benefit of Correspondency, under the Excellent Regimen of that Important Office. Know then, That the several Roads of England (such, We mean, as issuing from this Prime Center, We have distinguisht by the Title of Direct) are by the Re∣gulation of that Office Branch'd out from, and Reduc'd to; these 6 (or rather 8) Independing Itineraries: First, the Northern Road extending to Barwick, and thence to Edenbrough in Scot∣land; 2dly. the North-East Road, to Yarmouth in Norfolk; 3dly. the Kentish, or Eastern Road to Dover, and therewith the South-East Road to Rye in Sussex; 4thly. the South-West Road to CHICHESTER in Sussex, an Adjunct to the Great Western Road to Plymouth in Devonshire, and thence to Market-Jew near the Lands-End in Cornwal; 5thly. the Due West or BRISTOL Road, leading to that City; and 6thly. the North-West or CHESTER Road, extended to Holyhead in Anglesey; Each of which in Order. I. The Northern Road to Edenbrough numbers 28 Stages and 300 Post-Miles, where∣of, to Berwick 25 Stages and 260 Miles, equal to the Vulgar Computation, but ex∣ceeded in the Dimensuration 79’2. the Particulars thus: From LONDON to Waltham 12 Miles; Ware 8. Roystone 13. Caxton 8. Hunting∣ton 9. Stilton 9. Stamford 12. Post-Witham 8. Grantham 8. Newark 10. Tuxford 10. Baw∣try 12. Doncaster 6. Ferrybrigs 10. Tadcaster 9. YORK 8. Borowbrigs 12. Northaller∣ton 12. Darlingtom 10. DURHAM 14. New-Castle 12. Morpeth 12. Alnwick 12. Bel∣ford 12. Berwick 12. Cockburnspeth in Scotland 14. Haddington 14. and Edenbrough 12. The Principal Depending Branches being these that follow: 1. From Royston to NORWICH, by Cambridg, New-Market, Bury, Thetford, Larlingford, Attlebrough and Windham: And therein, First, from Thetford to Wisbich, by Stokeferry and Downham, and to Lyn from Stokeferry: Secondly, From Larlingford to Wells, by Hilbrough, Swaffham, Fakenam and Walsingham: And Thirdly, From NORWICH to Walsham by Alesham. 2. From Stilton to PETERBOROUGH. 3. From Grantham to Wainflete by Boston, and to Alford, Lowth and Grimsby, by LINCOLN. 4. From Newark to Nottingham. 5. From Doncaster to Burlington by Howden and Hull. 6. From Ferrybrigs to Wakefield, and to Bradford by Leeds, and to Skipton by We∣therby. 7. From YORK to Whitby and Scarborough. 8. From Northallerton to CARLISLE, by Richmond, Gretabrig, Brough and Penrith. II. The Yarmouth Road accouts 11 Stages and 104 Miles, 12 Miles more than Vulgar Estimation, and 18’5. less than Dimensuration, thus: From LONDON to Rumford and so to Burntwood 16 Miles; to Ingerstone, thence to Chelmsford and so to Witham 18. to Keldon and thence to Colchester 12. to Ipswich 16. Saxmundham 16. Beckles 16. and Yarmouth 10.
Branching Out, 1. From Chelmsford to Walden, by Dunmow and Thaxted. 2. From Witham to Braintry on the Left, and to Malden on the Right. 3. From Colchester to Lavenham, by Nayland, Buers, Sudbury, and Milford on the Left, and to Harwich by Maningtre on the Right. 4. From Ipswich to Scole, by Codnam, Stoneham, Bradish and Yaxley on the Left, and to Glemham by Martlesham, Woodbridg and Wickham on the Right. 5. From Saxmundham to Aldbrough and Sowold. 6. From Beckles to Hartleston by Bungay. III. The Kentish Road to Dover makes 6 Stages and 70 Miles, exceeding Common Com∣putation 15 Miles, and equalling the Dimensuration within a Mile and half; the Particu∣lars follow: From LONDON to Dartford 14 Miles, to Gravesend and so to Rochester 14. to Sitting∣born 12. to CANTERBURY 15. and to Dover 15. Branching Out, 1. From Rochester to Maidstone. 2. From Sittingborn to Shereness, by Quinbrough, and to Feversham. 3. From CANTERBURY to Deal by Sandwich, and to Thanet from Sandwich. The Rye Road has only 3 Stages of 20 Miles each, as from LONDON to Chepstead 20 Miles; to Stone-Crouch 20. and to Rye 20. in all 60 Miles, which by Vulgar Account is only 46 Miles, by Measure 64 Miles. IV. Before We come to the Western Road, that from LONDON to CHICHE∣STER offers it self, passing through Kingston, Guilford, Godliman and Haselmere, giving a Branch from Haselmere to Arundel by Midherst and Petworth. We Pro∣ceed then to the Great Western Road leading to Market-Jew in Cornwal, by 18 Stages containing 269 Miles, (by Vulgar Computation 228 Miles, by Measure 287 Miles,) thus: From LONDON to Stanes 16 Miles. Hartford-bridg 16. Basingstoke 9. Andover 18. SALISBURY 16. Shaftsbury 19. Sherborn 16. Crookhorn 13. Chard and so to Honiton 19. EXETER 15. Ashburton 20. Plymouth 24. Looe 14. Foy 10. Truro 16. Falmouth and Penryn 8. and Market-Jew 20. The Depending Branches leading, 1. From Hartford-bridg to Portsmouth, by Alton and Petersfield, and from Alton to the Isle of Weight, by WINCHESTER and Southampton. 2. From Shaftsbury to Weymouth, by Blandford and Dorchester, and to Pool and Ware∣ham from Blandford. 3. From Sherborn to Bridgwater by Evil, Ilchester, Somerton and Street, and from Street to WELLS. 4. From Crookhorn to Lime by Axminster on the Left, and to Mynhead by Taunton and Dunster, and to Watchet from Taunton on the Right. 5. From Honiton to Tiverton. 6. From EXETER to Bediford by Barnstable, and to Hounsworthy and Launston. 7. From Ashburton to Dartmouth by Totnes. 8. From Plymouth to Padstow. V. The BRISTOL Road reckons 7 Stages and 104 Miles, more by 10 Miles, than Common Supputation; and so much less than the Dimensuration, viz. From LONDON to Hounslow 10 Miles, to Maidenhead 16. to Reading 12. to Newbury 16. Marlborough 15. Chipenham 15. and BRISTOL 20. And it Branches out, 1. On the Right, from Maidenhead to Nettlebed 12 Miles; thence to Abington 16. to Farington and so to Lechlade 20. to Ciceter 10. and to GLOCESTER 18. and so to Swan∣zey by Monmouth, Usk and Cardiff; and this again Branches from Abington to OX∣FORD and Burford; from GLOCESTER to HEREFORD; from Monmouth to Carmarthen by Brecknock and Llanimdofry, and from Carmarthen to Penbrook on the Left, and Cardigan on the Right.
2. On the Left, From Marlborough to Froom by the Devizes and Westbury, and from Westbury to Warminster on the Left, and Bradford by Troubridg on the Right. VI. And lastly, The CHESTER Road Extending to Holyhead, Numbers 17. Sta∣ges and 208 Miles, As follows: From LONDON to Barnet 10 Miles, to St. Albans 10. Dunstable 10. Brickhil 7. Toceter 13. Daventry 10. COVENTRY 14. Colshil 8. LICHFIELD 12. Stone 16. Namptwich 16. CHESTER 14. Northop 8. Denbigh 12. Conway 14. Beaumaris 10. and Holyhead 24. Answering throughout the Common Estimation, but exceeded by the Di∣mensuration 61’ 2. Issuing out, 1. From Brickhil to Alesbury and Buckingham on the Left, and to Bedford on the Right. 2. From Toceter to Banbury on the Left, and on the Right to Northampton 6 Miles; thence to Harborough 12. to Leicester 12. to Loughborough 8. and to Darby 12. and thence to Sheffield by Chesterfield, as also from Darby to Uttoxeter, Ashborn and Hiworth. 3. From COVENTRY to Broadway by Warwick, Stratford upon Avon, and Evesholm, and from Stratford to Morton Henmarsh. 4. From Colshil to Birmingham, and thence 1st. to WORCESTER by Bromsgrove, and Droitwich, 2d. to Ludlow by Stourbridg, Kederminster, Beaudly and Tenbury, and 3d. to Aberdowy by Wolverhampton, Shefnal, Shrewsbury, Welshpool, Teandomine and Mahunleth. 5. From LICHFIELD to Stafford and Draiton. 6. From Stone to Bruerton Green, and thence 1st. to Manchester by Congleton, Macclesfield and Stopford, 2d. to Kendal by Knotsford, Warrington, Preston and Lancaster, and from Warrington to Leverpole. 7. From Namptwich to Whitchurch. 8. From CHESTER to Wrexham on the Left, and Nesson on the Right. Advertisement. HAving in our General Survey of all England Design'd the Actual Admeasurement of above 40,000 Miles of Roads, and in Order thereunto, already run over near Two Thirds of that quantity; We have in the subsequent WORK Selected only the most Considerable of Them, or such, as an Orderly Distribution of the Kingdom has Oblig'd Ʋs to Exhibit; wherein, wheresoever the Sincerity of Our Intentions, by Mi∣stake, Omission, or Mis-information, shall appear manifestly Viola∣ted, We Crave, and shall gratefully Accept, the Candid Informations of Knowing and Judicious Men, and Regulate Our selves and the WORK accordingly, which is still Capable of Emendation, either by Insertion or Alteration.
OF THE CITY OF LONDON. The Introduction. PURSUANT to Our Method prosecuted in the Subsequent Volume, where∣in We have Affixt the Historical Account of Places, either in Transitu, as We pass through them, or in Termino, as they conclude a Road; no such Opportunity offering this Our Prime Center, LONDON, We have con∣cluded it necessary to praefix a peculiar Illustration hereof, an Epitome of a larger Design, by which, however, the Reader may not only see with how great Reason the Eminency of this Great Emporium, becomes the Subject of the better half of our Exhibited Itineraries; but the Traveller may inform himself likewise of the several Passages Outward and Homeward, and gratifie his Curiosity with an Ac∣count of the more obvious and considerable Remarques of a City so Celebrated by Antiquity, and Unrivall'd by the present Age. The Prosecution. In the Prosecution hereof, We shall in general, Discourse It's Name and Etimology, It's Antiquity, Situation and Extent; with It's Division, Government, Privileges and Com∣merce; and in particular, the several Exits from the Center of this Center, the Stan∣dard in Cornhil, to the farthest extended Buildings in the Periphery; remarquing the several deviating Streets, &c. pass'd by on either Hand, and the more Eminent Observables therein, as well as those upon the Grand Thorough-fares. Name.LONDON, by which, in a larger Sense We understand the two United Cities of LONDON and WESTMINSTER, with the Borough of Southwark, and the whole Mass of contiguous Buildings; but in a stricter Acceptation, the City of LONDON only has successively admitted various Appellations; for, besides that of Troy-Novant, i. e. Troja Nova, and Caer-Belin, i. e. Urbs Belini, mention'd by Geffry of Monmouth, and of Caer-Lud by Gildas; in Tacitus, Ptolome and Antonine, We find it Lon∣dinium and Longidinium; in Ammianus, Lundinium and Augusta; and in Stephanus, Lindo∣nion; by the Cambro-Britains or Welsh, call'd Lundayn; by the English Saxons, Lunden∣ceaster, Lundenbyric and Lundenwyc; by the Modern French, Londres; by other Nati∣ons, Londra and Lunden; and now in Latine, Londinum. Etymology. As for the Deduction of the Word, the more probable Conjectures are either from the British, Llwyn, Nemus, a Wood, q. d. Urbs Nemorosa, or Llong, Naves, Ships and Dinas, Civitas, or Llawn, Plenus, Populosus, Full or Populous; which two last Characters She at present Eminently Maintains; those of Llwyn Dianae, Diana's Wood or Grove, and Llan Dian, Diana's Fane or Temple, seeming to be less proper or probable Etymons. Antiquity. The Assertors of the Story of the Trojan, Brutus, and of his Founding this City, Anno 2855. and 1108 Years before Christ, Denominating the Island from his own Name, and the City Troy-Novant as aforesaid, speak fair for it's Antiquity; but the Authority equal with that of It's being augmented by King Belin 400 Years before Christ, the Builder of Belinsgate; and Re-edify'd by King Lud about 60 Years ant. Christ. the Founder of Ludgate, is equally suspected, and these two Gates find more plausible Etimologies; however, for the space of above 1700 Years; 'tis Re∣corded in Caesar by prope firmissima earum Regionum Civitas, Caesar de Bel. Gal. Com. 5. the most settled City of all those Countries; and Corn. Tacitus more than 1600 Years since accounts for it's Emi∣nency, when it was copia Negotiatorum & Commeatu maxime celebrie, very famous for Commerce and frequency of Merchants; and add to which, that Amm. Marcel. speaking
of Theodosius's coming hither, Egressus (saith he) tendens{que} ad Londinium vetus Oppi∣dum quod Augustam Posteritas appellavit, &c. Coming for London, a Town of good Anti∣quity, which Posterity call'd Augusta; shews us what it was esteem'd 1300 Years ago; to omit the Civitas Trinobantum mention'd in Caesar; the British Termination Dinum for a City; and the Inscription of a Roman Coyn in Honor of Britannicus Son of Claudius, where you have METROPOLIS ETIMINIJ BASILICOS LON∣DINUM, not above half a Century after Christ to prove it both a City and a Metropolis in those Days. The Situation. As this City seems with Lipsius, vitali Genio Condita, to have been Founded under fortunate Aspects, so it's Situation argues much the Wisdom of our Ancestors; for as to the Whole, It is Seated in relation to the Neighboring Country, at about 4 Miles distance either to North or South, in a pleasant green Valley; but as to the City it self, respecting the River Thames, which washes the South Part of it, upon a gentle rising Bank, in an excellent Air and Gravelly Soyl; but the Eastern Suburbs towards Essex lye low and in a flat, as does the City of WESTMINSTER on the West, and the Borough of Southwark on the South, and even level with the Ri∣ver at High-Water: This Famous and Navigable River being indifferently 12’00 Foot over, does here cast it self into a Crescent or Right-Angle, the next Angular Point being at Ivy Bridg, about the midle of the Strand, whence 'tis near East to the Tower, and near South to Lambeth, distant about 60 Miles from the Eastern and Southern Seas, whereby 'tis equally accomodateded for Importing Merchandize from Abroad, and receiving necessary Supplies of Provisions from Home: It may be said to be situate on the South Limits of the County of Midlesex, or at the Conjun∣ction of that County with Surry; though it is really a City and County of it self; where the Pole is Elevated 51’32. and the distance from the Prime Meridian account∣ed from the Pico Tenariff about 24’20. more Westerly than Paris by 10 Minutes of Time, and 2 Degrees 30 Minutes of Longitude, making the Suns greatest Meridian Altitude 62 Deg. 20 Min. and the longest Day 16 Hours 38 M. Touching the Modern Extent of this mighty City, whose Suburbs in Nero's Time are suppos'd to have abutted upon Spittle Fields, as His and the other Emperors Coyns often digg'd up there Testifie: It Measures from Limehouse in the East, to Tuttle Street, or rather James Street beyond Petty France, in the West, inclusive, 49 Furl. 17 Paces; but from Blackwall, inclusive, almost 61 Furl. viz. 2436 Poles, or 8038 Paces; and from the End of St. Leonard Shoreditch to the End of Blackman Street in Southwark, a∣bove 13’000 Foot, more than 2600 Paces, and almost 800 Poles; containing with∣in the Walls 380 Acres; but within the Liberties of the City of LONDON, ex∣cluding the Borough of Southwark, about 680 Acres, and in the whole about 3500 Acres, which is between 5 and 6 single square Miles of Building, equal to a Cir∣cle of 2 Miles 3 quarters Diameter, is 8 Miles Circumference; the Perimeter of this (representing a Treperia rather than a Laurel Leaf) being about 13 Miles. The num∣ber of Houses within the Walls are above 15’000. which being accounted but a 5th Part of the Whole, encreases the Total to near 80’000. 50’000 more than in Paris; and the Number of Souls therein, being Anno 1636. computed within the Barrs or Liberties of the City, to above 700’000. and thereby the Whole at about 1500’000. may be presum'd by the vast Addition of Buildings these last 40 Years, to be encreas'd a Third Part more, viz. to about 2000’000. but the Computati∣on by the Bills of Mortality, reckoning from the Year 1661 to 1673 inclusive, 304’000 Burials and upwards, though (including a Plague of above 70’000) mul∣tiply'd by an indifferent common Ratio, will fall much short of the foresaid Account, and yet those Bills are treble to those of Amsterdam, and but 1/20 less than those of Paris; in which last City the Computation of Souls is under a Million; and allow∣ing 12 Souls indifferently to an House for 80’000 Houses, Our Number will much about equal that of Paris. The Division of this great Metropolis is into 4 Parts, First the City it self within the Walls; Secondly the Liberties of the City; Thirdly, the City and Liberties of Westminster; and Fourthly, certain Out-Parishes in Midlesex and Surrey; and therein 132 Parishes, viz. in the First 97. in the Second 16. in the Third 5. and in the Fourth 14. But as to the Government, the City of LONDON and Liberties be∣ing the two first Parts before mention'd, is devided into these 26 Wards: Aldersgate, Aldgate, Basinghall, Billinsgate, Bishopsgate, Breadstreet, Bridgward within, Bridgward
without, Broadstreet, Candlewick, Castle-Bainard, Cheap, Colemanstreet, Cordwainer, Corn∣hill, Cripplegate, Dowgate, Faringdon within, Faringdon without, Langhorn, Limestreet, Portsoken, Queenhith, Towerstreet, Vintry and Walbrook. The Ecclesiastical Government of the City of LONDON is by a Bishop, (but in the Time of the Brittains an Arch-Bishop) numbring in a continual succession of 10 Centuries and an half 91 Bishops: The Cathedral one of the most Antient and Stately Structures of the World, Eminently Situate on the Highest Part of the City, is Dedicated to St. Paul, and has besides a Dean, a Chapter, a Treasurer, and 30 Prebendaries; the Diocess contains Midlesex, Essex, and Part of Hartford∣shire, and has five Arch-Deacons, viz. of London, Midlesex, Essex, Colchester and St. Albans, and the Bishop has Precedency next to the Arch-Bishop. The City of WESTMINSTER, antiently Thorney, whose Cathedral Dedi∣cated to St. Peter; was in the Britains Time the See of the Arch-Bishop of London, numbers but one Bishop Created by H. 8. after the Dissolution of the Abbots, since which time it has continued a Deanry only, the Deans enjoying most of the Privileges of the former Abbots, as keeping the Regalia, and having a chief Ser∣vice in Coronations, &c. The present Structure Dedicated to St. Peter, was Founded by King H. 3. (in the Place where Edward the Confessor Re-built King Sebert's first Erection) the Ab∣bots much enlarg'd it Westward, and H. 7. added that Magnificent Chapel at the East; the Diocess contain'd Midlesex only, which being restor'd to London, it re∣mains now a Collegiat Church consisting of a Dean and 12 Prependaries. The Civil Government of the City of LONDON, in the Romans Time was by a Praefect, the Title continuing 300 Years; in the Saxons Time by a Portreeve, which after the Conquest was chang'd into sometimes a Bailiff, sometimes a Provost: Rich. 1. Granted them two Bailiffs, and King John chang'd them into a Mayor and two Sheriffs, as they are at this Day: Assistant to which are the Court of Alder∣men, one to each Ward, over which he Presides; every Alderman having his De∣puty. and the Court of Common-Councel Men. whereof there is about 230 in all, some Wards having more, some less; add to which, a Recorder, Chamberlain, Town-Clark, Common-Sergeant, Remembrancer, Vice-Chamberlain, &c. And as to the Civil Government of WESTMINSTER, being settled by Act of Parliament, Ann. 27 Eliz. The principal Magistrate is the Dean, who, with the High-Steward, was wont to Elect 12 Burgesses and as many Assistants, viz. one Burgess and one Assistant for each Ward; and out of these 12 Burgesses are yearly Elected 2 Chief-Burgesses, who have the Prime Regulation of the said City and Liberties. The Military Government of the City and Liberties only, consisted at His Ma∣jesties Restauration in 6 Regiments of Train'd Bands, 6 of Auxiliaries, and one Regiment of Horse; the 12 Regiments of Foot being 18’000 compleat, and Com∣pos'd of 80 Companies; the Regiment of Horse 6 Hundred, Compos'd of 6 Troops. The 6 Regiments of Train'd Bands, upon a Commission of Lieutenancy some Months after His Majesty's Arrival were new settled, and Commanded by 6 Citi∣zens, Knights; their Leiutenant-Colonels being Knights also: These, with the 6 Regiments of Auxiliaries, made up 20’000 Men; with which were Listed 2 Regi∣ments of Horse of 5 Troops each, and 80 in a Troop, 800 Horse: Besides South∣wark one Regiment of Train'd Bands 15’00 Men; the Hamlets of the Tower 2 Regiments 3’000 Men; Holborn Regiment and Westminster Regiment 4’000. but in Case of Necessity, the City within the Liberties may in few Days Raise above 40’000 Men, and Westminster with the Suburbs, &c. 30’000 more. Add to these, the Artilery Company of 600 a kind of Military Nursery, Commanded by his Royal Highness, under whom is a Leader, 2 Lieutenants, 2 Ensigns, &c. The Privileges and Immunities of the City of LONDON are Great and Nu∣merous: The Mayor, though always a Citizen and Tradesman, is usually a Knight before, and during his Mayoralty has the Title of Lord praefixt; four of his Dome∣stick Attendance are reputed Esquires, the Sword-Bearer, the Common Hunt, the Common Cryer, and the Water-Bailiff; besides which, there are sundry other great Officers, most of which have their Servants allow'd them: He is usually Chosen on Michaelmas Day, and on the 29th of October is with great State convey'd to West∣minster, where taking his Oath, and returning to the Guild Hall of the City, a most
sumptuous Dinner is there prepar'd for Him and his Brethren, and frequently Ho∣nor'd with the Presence of the King, Queen, Prince, Nobility and Judges, &c. His Authority along the River of Thames reaches to the Mouth of the River Med∣way, Eastward; and to Colny Ditch, above Stanes Bridg, Westward: The two She∣riffs of the City are Sheriffs of Midlesex also, and the Lord Mayor and Aldermen appear abroad usually on Horseback, in Scarlet and Gold Chains, and the Lord Mayor has his Mace and Sword born before him. To the Lord Mayor and City belong divers Courts of Judicature, as first, the High and Antient Hustings Court for Preservation of the Laws, Rights and Customs of the City: 2dly a Court of Conscience or Requests: 3dly. The Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen: 4thly. Two Courts of the Sheriffs for the two Counters: 5thly. The Court of the City Orphans, Presided by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen: 6th. The Court of Common-Councel, consisting of two Houses, one for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the other for the Commoners; wherein, are made all by-Laws for the Regimen of the City: 7th. The Chamberlains Court for the Revenues of the City, and Regulating Apprentices: 8th. The Courts of the Coroner and Eschea∣tor, and for Conservation of the River Thames: Lastly, the Court of Goal Delivery, Held at the Sessions House in the Old Baily, for the Tryal of Criminals Apprehend∣ed within the City and Midlesex, whereof the Lord Mayor is President: Besides these, there are Ward-Motes for the peculiar Wards, and Hall-Motes for the Regulat∣ing particular Guilds or Fraternities. The Lord Mayor upon the Death of the King is said to be the Prime Person of England, and at Coronations, claims the Office of Chief Butler. All the Aldermen having been Lord Mayors, and the three Eldest Aldermen not having arriv'd to that Dignity, are Justices of the Peace; they have Charter of Free Warren, are exempt from Toll throughout England, have a Common Seal, and are free from being Prest to the Wars; they are represented by 4 Burgesses in Par∣liament, and are Impowered to Make Acts and Ordinances for the Regulation of the City, not Repugnant to the Law of the Nation, or prejudicial to the Interest of the King. The Trade. The Traders of this City are divided into several Companies, Corporations, or Bodies Politique; the 12 Principal, out of which the Lord Mayor is annually Cho∣sen, are the Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Fish-Mongers, Gold-Smiths, Skinners, Merchant-Taylors, Haberdashers, Salters, Iron-Mongers, Vintners, and Cloath-Workers; whose Halls or Guilds generally resemble so many Stately Pallaces, and their Government, not much unlike that of the City, is by a Master, Wardens and Assistants: The rest of the Incorporated Companies being the Dyers, Brewers, &c. to the Number of about 70 besides the first 12. and these likewise have their Halls, their Governors and their Officers, their Armorial Ensigns, &c. and are accounted one of the Glories of this Super-Eminent City. To these We may add the several Companies of Merchants Trading to Foreign Parts: As 1. The Russia or Muscovia Company of Merchant Adventurers, for discovery of New Trades, adventuring Northwards, North-Eastwards, and North-Westwards; Directed by a Governor, 4 Consuls and 24 Assistants. 2. The Levant or Turkey-Company of Merchants, Trading to their several Factories at Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo, Cyprus, &c. Manag'd by a Governor, Deputy-Go∣vernor, a Treasurer, a Husband and 18 Assistants. 3. The East-India Company, Trading to India, Persia, Arabia and China; Regulated by a Governor, Deputy-Governor, and Committee of 24 Assistants, grown within these few years to a considerable Pitch, their Actions at this time being Valued at 220. Pounds. 4. The Eastland Company Trading to Norway, Sweadland and Poland, Eastward of the River Oder, and the Isles within the Sound; by a Governor, Deputy-Governor, and 24 for a Court of Assistants. 5. The Royal or African, call'd also the Guinee Company, Trading into Africa, be∣tween Sally in South-Barbary, inclusive; to Cape bone 'Sperance; by a Governor, Sub-Governor, Deputy-Governor, and Court of Assistants of 24. Former times have known several other Companies now Extinct, as the Mer∣chants of the Staple, of Elbing, &c.
To this We may add, that for the furnishing this Great Emporium with Provisi∣ons and such like Necessaries; there are besides 12 or 13 Butcher's Shambles, divers Markets, as Leaden-Hall Market, one of the most Eminent; Woolchurch, or the Stocks Market; Cheapside, alias Hony Lane or Milk-street Market; Newgate Market; and a late small one at Ratcliff; then King-street Market in Westminster; St. James's Market; South∣hampton vulgo Bloomsbury Market; and Clare Market vulgo New Market; Lastly, three Markets Weekly in Smith-Field for Live Cattel, Mondays and Wednsdays for Fat Oxen and Sheep, &c. and Fridays for Horses also. And for Water, besides that of the River Thames forc'd up, and from certain Water-Houses convey'd to several Parts of the City; and the many fair Springs even in the City it self, and about 20 Con∣duits or Receptacles of adjacent Fountains; It expends a whole River, brought to It at a vast Charge by Sr. Hugh Midleton, Ann. 1613. from about Ware in Hartford∣shire, by an irregular Course of above 60 Miles: Neither is It less Accomodated for Fuel, which is convey'd to it by the River Thames from New-Castle, Scotland, Kent and Essex. THUS We have given you a Cursory Account of this Celebrated Emporium, which for Situation, Extent, Government, Magnificence, Trade, Plenty, Riches and Strength, may Challenge any the European Cities whatsoever: We proceed now to the Particular Survey of the Prime Thorough-fare Streets, directing to the several Parts of the Kingdom; from the Standard in Cornhil, rather than from that suppos'd Milliarium in Cannon-Street, at this Day retaining the Name of London-Stone; whence issue only an Eastern and Western Passage; but This, like another Cairfax, is the Conjunction of 4 Prime Streets, Bishops-gate Street to the N. b. E. Leaden-Hall Street to the E. N. E. Grace-Church vulgo Gracious Street to the S. S. E. and Cornhil to the W. That to the South Branching into Two, and that to the West into three distinct Exits, according to the 14 Independant Roads, and consequently the Dependant Ones Issue from these 8 Out-lets, In this Manner   Independants. Dependants. From the Standard in Cornhil 1 Along Bishopsgate-street within, through Bishopsgate, Bishopsgate-street without, Norton-Folgate, Holloway-street and Shoreditch, (the End of the Buildings at 9 Furlongs 7 Poles) to 1 Barwick. 1 Boston. 2 Flamborough. 3 Kings-Lyn. 4 NORWICH. 5 Wells & Bury 2 Through Leaden-hall-street, Aldgate and White Chapel, (the Buildings extending 9 Furl. 22 Poles) to 2 Harwich. Yarmouth. 3 Down Grace-church str. Fish-street Hill, over the Bridg, and through long Southwark, to St. Georg's Church, 7 Fur. 25 Poles thence 1 Down (part of) Long-Lane, and through Kent-Street, in all 11 F. 23 P. to 3 Dover.   4 Hith. 5 Rye. 2 Along Blackman-street, in all 10 Furl. 31 Poles to 6 Arundel.   7 Newhaven 8 Portsmouth. Chichester. 4 Along Cornhil, the Poul∣try and Cheapside, to St. Michaels Quern Conduit, 4’19. thence through 1 St. Pauls Church-yard, Lud∣gate-street, Ludgate, down Ludgate-hill, through Fleet street, Temple-Bar, ye Strand up the Hay-market, and a∣long Pickadilly, in all 23 Furl. 25 Poles, to 9 ye Lands-End 1 Barnstaple. 2 Southampton. 3 Weymouth. 10 Bristol. Bath & Wells. 11 St. Davids   2 Blowbladder-str. Newgate-str. & Newgate 6’18. thence 1 down Snowhil up Holbornhill, along Holborn & St. Giles's, 20 F. 5 P. to 12 Aberistwith. Montgomery. 13 Buckingham.   2 Through gilt∣spur str. Py Cor∣ner, Smithfield, & St. Johns str. 11’39. to 14 Holyhead. 1 Carlisle. 2 Derby. 3 St. Neots. 4 Oakham. 5 Salop.
The Remarkables upon each of these Thorough-fares, and the adjacent Streets and Places, We shall discourse successively, As follows: First, In the Road from LONDON to Barwick: From the Standard in Cornhil, (en∣tring Bishopsgate-street) at 20 Poles you pass by St. Martins Outwich Church on the Left, pos∣sessing the Corner of This & Thread-needle-street, & 5 Poles farther, Thread-needle-street falls in on the same Hand, wherein stands Merchant-Taylors Hall, a stately new Erected Build∣ing; as also, the French Church, and St. Benet Fink Church, &c. at 34 Poles you come to Crosby House on the Right, now made use of for the general Post (or Letter) Office; at 37 Poles you are opposite to Gresham College on the Left, extending backward to Broad-street, Founded (together with the Royal Exchange) by that Worthy Citizen Sr. Thomas Gresham, who Planted therein 7 Lectures, of Divinity, Astronomy, Musick, and Geometry, Civil Law, Physick and Rhetorick; and is now the Place of Congress for the Virtuosi of the Royal Society of London, for improving Practical and Experimental Philosophy: At 1 Furlong or 40 Poles, you have Great St. Helens on the Right, leading to St. Helens Church and St. Mary-Ax street; at 1 Furlong 18 Poles you pass by St. Ethelburgh Church on the Right, and 15 Poles farther Wormwood-street on the Left, and Camomile-street on the Right, conveying you along the In-side of London-Wall; the First, by Alhallows on the Wall and the two Moor-gates, to Criplegate on the North-side, and Broad-street, Winchester-street, Coleman-street, Bashishaw-street, Aldermanbury-street and Sion College, to Wood-street, successively on the South: The Second, by St. Mary-Ax and Berry-street to Dukes-Place. At 1’35. you come to Bishopsgate, so call'd from a Bishop, a Benefactor; 'tis one of the 8 Principal Gates of the City; where entring Bishopsgate-street without, you come at 2’5. to Hounsditch on the Right, (a Street leading to Aldgate Church in White-Chapel) and St. Bo∣tolphs Bishopsgate Church on the Left; 7 Poles beyond you come to Bethelem vulgo Bedlam Gate on the Left; that Eminent and Antient Hospital of St. Mary of Bethelem, for Luna∣tick and Distracted People; the Passage leading into Morefields, where adjoyning the City Wall, between Great Moorgate and Little Moorgate, the Foundation of a New Bethe∣lem, a stately Edifice already appears, in the Place where pro interim after the Fire, a slight Septennial Street call'd New Cheapside, was Erected for that Emergency. At 2’15. you pass by Devonshire House on the Right, Built by one Jasper Fisher, and Nick-Nam'd Fisher's Folly; 13 Poles farther you have Hand-Alley on the Right, falling in∣to Gravel-Lane and Pettycoat-Lane, and at 3’8. come to the Cage or Round-house in the midle of the Street; 2 Poles more, you leave Artillery Lane on the Right, leading to the Artillery Yard or Garden, (formerly Farel Close) and the many Streets and Lanes on that Hand; as, also into Pettycoat Lane, and to the Barrs in White-Chapel: At 4’18 you have the Spittle Gate on the same Hand, directing into Spittle Fields, so call'd from the dissolv'd Priory & Hospital of St. Mary Spittle; of late Adorn'd with many new Streets and fair Buildings. At 4’23. you come to the Barrs, which terminate Bishopsgate-street and the Liberties; where entring Norton Folgate at 4’33. you pass by White Lyon Yard on the Right, & 5 Poles beyond come to the Watch-House in the midle of the Street: At 5’2. leaving Norton Folgate, and entring Holloway Street, you have Hog Lane on the Left, leading to the upper Part of Moorfields opposite to the New Artillery Garden, and at 6’11. come to another Watch-House in the Midle of the Street; 4 Poles beyond you have Holloway Lane on the Left, leading to the upper Corner of the foresaid Artillery Ground by Bunhil Fields; at 6’35 you pass by Cock Lane on the Right, and at 7’21. leave Holloway-street and enter Shoreditch, coming at 8’6. or a Mile and 6 Poles, to St. Leonard Shoredich Church on the Left, where the forward Way on the Right leads to Hackney, a well-frequented Village about a Mile distant, 6 Poles farther the acute Way on the Left, leads to Hogsdon contiguous to Shore∣ditch, and the Rectangular Way by Anna St. Clares Well over the Fields to Old-street; at 9’7. the Houses on both sides terminate; beyond which, you have only 3 or 4 more on the Left, between that and Kingsland: Thus having brought you out of Town, We refer the Prosecution of it to the Road it self, pag. 9. Observing, that the Extent of the Fire seem'd in a manner Limited by the former Part of this Way, nothing on the Right Hand having submitted to that Impetuous Conflagration; whereas little within the Walls escaped It's Fury on the Left. Secondly, The Harwich Road: From the Standard aforesaid, entring Leaden-Hall-street, at 6 Poles you are opposite to the Gate or midle of Leaden-Hall on the Right, a large and antient Building, belonging successively to the Nevils, Cogshals and Bohuns, (E. of Hereford) afterwards to the Rikedens, who past it away to certain Citizens, and they to the City, Ann. 1411. where they us'd to Weigh Wool, Meal, &c. and Store up several Wares, Corn, &c.
It was Anno 1534 design'd an Exchange, (then kept in Lombard-street) and since us'd as a Market, giving a Through-fare into Lime-street; at 25 Poles you have the East-India House on the Right, for Negotiating the Affairs of that Honorable Company, and 10 Poles far∣ther come to Lime-street on the same Hand, extending to Fenchurch-street; at 38 Poles St. Mary-Ax-street presents it self on the Left, leading to the foresaid Camomile-street by London Wall, and at 1’13. Billiter Lane on the Right, extending to Fenchurch-street, almost oppo∣site to Mark-lane; at 1’29. Creed-lane appears on the Left, and 2 Poles farther St. Katharine Creed Church; at 2’8. Fenchurch-street falls in on the Right, of above 100 Poles long, in the midst whereof, before the Fire, stood St. Gabrael Fenchurch: At 2’25. you have Crutched Fryers on the Right, a Street so call'd from the Crowched or Crossed Friery adjoyning, Found∣ed Ann. 1298. it divides it self below, and leads to Tower-Hill and Mark-Lane; a Pole far∣ther you come to Aldgate or Elbegate, suppos'd to be so call'd from It's Oldness; here you enter White-Chapel, & at 2’33. come to Hounsditch on the Left, a Street paralel to the Wall and leading to Bishopsgate-street aforesaid; 2 Poles farther you are opposite to St. Botolphs Aldgate Church on the same Hand, and a Pole beyond that, have the Minories on the Right, a fair Street so call'd from an adjacent Monastery of Friers Minors, Dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and near which was a Nunnery call'd the Minories, where now stands the Trinity Minories Church; this Street leading to Little Tower Hill, and that important Fortress the Tower, situate on the Bank of the Thames, gives us occasion to acquaint you, that this Fort or Cittadel is a Royal Palace as well as a Royal Arsenal, a Treasury, a Mint, a great Ar∣chive, the chief Prison, and indeed rather a City than Cittadel; in no County or Parish, but a peculiar Liberty, exempt from Taxes, as It's Church is from Ecclesiastical Jurisdicti∣on; there are belonging to it 13 Hamlets, and are kept within It several great Offices and Officers, as the Master General of the Ordnance, the Lieutenant General, Surveyor, and Clerk of the Ordnance, the Keeper of the Stores, Clerk of the Deliveries, and the Trea∣surer, and Pay-Master, all particular Officers, with divers others; the Governor hereof is Stil'd Lieutenant of the Tower, Who is, Virtute Officij, in Commission of the Peace for the Counties of Kent, Surrey and Midlesex; enjoys divers Privileges, and is usually a Person of great Worth and Fidelity. At 3’30. you have Petticoat Lane aforemention'd on the Left, of near 100 Poles length, and a Pole farther you come to the Barrs of White-Chapel, where ends the the Liberties of the City this way. At 5’14. you have a narrow acute Pas∣sage on the Right, on which Hand, behind the Street, lye Goodmans-Fields, extending South∣ward almost to Rosemary Lane, 5 Poles farther you come to Brick-Lane on the Left, and 2 Poles beyond that, Bell Yard on the same Hand, and a Pole farther, Church Lane, leading in∣to the Fields by White-Chapel Church-yard on the R. at 5’32. you are against the Church on the same Hand, and at 6’21. have another Way into the Fields on the Right: At 7’31. you leave the Houses on the Right, and at 8’21. the Buildings on the Left grow discon∣tinued, and at 9’22. may be said to terminate. Thus have We brought you to Mile-End Green, and within little more than 2 Furl. of Mile-End, and here leave you to the Road it self for the Continuation, pag. 37. Thirdly, In the Roads to Dover, Hith and Rye, Newhaven, Arundel and Portsmouth: From the Standard as before, you proceed down Grace-Church vulgo Gracious-Street; at 35 Poles pass by Lombard-street on the Right, well frequented by Gold-Smiths, Adorn'd with the Churches of Alhallows, St. Edmond, and St. Mary Wolnoth, and several stately Private Houses; the other End of which extends to the Stocks or Woolchurch Market Westward; 2 Poles farther you have Fenchurch-street on the Left, (the farther Corner being possest by St. Benet Grace-Church) falling into Leaden-Hall-street near Aldgate, as before; at 1’34. you come to Great East-Cheap (or rather Cannon-street) on the Right, well-inhabited by Butchers and Little East-cheap on the Left; the former proceeding Westward, and passing by St. Swi∣thins Church, and London-Stone, falls into Budg-Row and Watling-street: and the Later East∣ward, by St. Margaret Pattons Church falls into Tower-street; here entring Fish-street Hill, 4 Poles beyond you come to the Pillar or Collumb on the Left, of 175 Foot in Height, be∣sides a Pedistal of 40 Foot, Erected as a Memorial of the late dismal Conflagration, which Began a little Eastward of this Place, in a Bakers House in Pudding Lane, and spreading round about, but principally Westward, even from the Tower to the Temple, in length 11 Furl. precisely, devour'd 12’000 of the 15’000 Houses within the Walls, & above 2’000 more without, therewith 87 Parochial Churches, 6 Chapels, St. Pauls Cathedral, the Guild-Hall, the Royal Exchange, Custom-House, &c. most Halls of Companies, and other Publick Edifices; the concurrent Causes hereof were many, but the Loss infinite; for with the Buildings, the Wares, Houshold-stuff, Moneys and other Moveables, with the
Charges of Removing, &c. has been modestly computed to near 10 Millions sterling. At 2’o. you leave Crooked Lane on the Right, and at 2’13. cross Thames-street, from It's situation along the Bank of the Thames, It extends Westward to Puddle-dock by Black Fry∣ers 225 Poles, and Eastward to Tower-Dock, above 100 Poles, somewhat more than a Mile in all; in which, on the Left Hand is Belinsgate, now a well-frequented Key, sup∣pos'd formerly to have been a City Gate; and a little farther the Custom-House, Re-built by His Majesty since the Fire at 10’000l. Cost; and here are Manag'd all things belong∣ing to the Port of London, which generally amount to 330’000 l. per Annum, equalling the 2 Thirds of the Customs of all England; and on the Right Hand, first Little and Great Alhallows Churches; next, Dowgate q. d. Dowre-Gate, i. e. Water-Gate, suppos'd another of the City Gates; then the Churches of St. James Garlick-Hith, and St. Michael Queen-Hith, from the adjacent Dock or Key call'd Queen-Hith; and Lastly, St. Peter's and St. Benet's Pauls-Wharf Churches, &c. near the last of which stood Bainards Castle, formerly the Kings Palace, of late the Earl of Pembroke's, now Built into Tenements: But to return, The farther Left-Hand Corner of these Streets are possess'd by St. Magnus Church, to the mid West End of which, you are opposite at 2’16. 3 Furlongs beyond you enter upon the Bridg, and at 2’29. come to the Buildings thereupon, situate without the Verge of the late Devouring Flames; at 3’20. you pass the Draw-Bridg over the largest of those 19 mighty Arches that constitute this stupendious Structure one of the Remarqu∣ables of Europe; hence you have a Vacancy of Buildings of 13 Poles to the Bridg-Gate, which is one of the 8 aforemention'd, and as great or greater a Thorough-fare, being the sole South passage to the City, and through which a numerous Concurrence does con∣tinually pass and re-pass, and on this Gate are commonly erected the Heads of the more Eminent Capital Offenders: At 4’3. you come to the End of the Bridg, making It's whole Length 64 Poles or 1056 Foot, being precisely the 10th Part of an English Mile; but the River, even above the Bridg, measures indifferently 12’00 Foot transverse: Here you have St. Olave's Street on the Left parallel to the River, and a Church of the same Name but vulgarly call'd St. Tooly's; this Street extends to Battle Bridg, and to Horsley∣down and Rother-hith vulgo Redriff; thus are you actually in Southwark, annext to the City of LONDON, Ann. 4. E. 6. and by Him made the 26th. Ward of the City, by the Name of Bridg-Ward without, and here you enter a fair broad Street call'd Long Southwark: At 4’37. you come to St. Thomas Hospital on the same Hand, a College or Hospital for the Poor, with a Parish-Church therein of the same Name; 4 Poles farther you have the Meal-Market in the Midst of the Street, and a Pole beyond St. Thomas-street on the Left, and Foul Lane on the Right; at 5’29. you come to St. Margarets Hill, where you have a Sreet falling in on the Right from the Thames, &c. whence, by the Marshalsey and Kings-Bench Prisons at 6’25 and 7’5. and the White Lyon at 7’13. till of late a Prison also; you come at 7’23. to the Midle of the West End of St. George's Church on the Left, and two Poles farther, come to the Division of the Roads, the 3 first turning short on the Left by St. George's Church aforesaid, the Midle of whose South-Side Measures 7’32. from the Standard; 11 Poles farther you leave the directer Way call'd Long-Lane, and bear to the Right, entring Kent-Street, so call'd as leading towards that County; at 11’17. you leave the Houses on the Left, and 2 Poles farther come to the Chapel on the Right, on which Hand the Buildings continue only; 4 Poles more bring you to Lock Bridg at 11’23. whence the 3 Roads aforesaid proceed together to 4 Miles 2 Furl. where entring Kent, the Left-Hand Way leads to Dover, and the Right-Hand Way to Lewsham; where, at al∣most 6 Miles the Hith Road bears away to the Left, and the Rye Road proceeds up the Town, [as in pag. 35.39. and 61.] To the 3 later, prosecuting the forward Way from St. George's Church aforesaid, you enter Blackman Street, and opposite to the said Long Lane, have the Mint Gate on the Right: At 9’8. you come to the End of the Pavement, and 11 Poles farther to the End of the Buildings on the Right, and the Commencement of St. George's Fields: At 10’3. you have Newington Wind-Mill on the Right, and at 10’31. the Houses End on the Left: At 11’30 you come to the May-Pole, and 7 Poles farther to the Division of the Ways, the Left to Camerwel, the Right to Lambeth; and at 12 Furlongs pass to the End of St. George's Fields and the Entrance of Newington, at the End of which, at 1 Mile 6 Furl. the Right-Hand Way leads to Portsmouth, and the other dividing it self at 2 Miles 2 Furl. the Left-Hand Way directs to Newhaven, the Right to Arundel, [as in pag. 57. and 59.] Fourthly, In the Roads to the Lands-End, Bristol and St. Davids, Aberistwith Buck∣ingham, and Holyhead: From the foremention'd Standard, proceeding down Cornhil, at
3 Poles you are opposite to St. Peters Church on the Left, possessing in a manner the Cor∣ner of this and Gracechurch-street, and at 26 Poles Finch Lane on the Right, leading into Thread-Needle-street, opposite to the foremention'd French Church; 2 Poles farther you have Birchin-Lane on the Left, frequented by Sales-Men, &c. leading into Lombard-street; and at 1’2. you are against the Midle of the Old or Royal Exchange, a quadrangular Stucture of 203 Feet in Front, and 171 Feet deep, somewhat more than 3 quarters of an Acre; first Built by Sr. Thomas Gresham, Ann. 1566. and since the Fire more splendidly Re-built at the Charge of 60’000 l. by the City and Company of Mercers, equally; within whose Court or open Area the Merchants assemble, & the several Shops above Stairs with those below, and the huge vaulted Cellars, are valued yearly at 6’000 l. At 1’25. you have 2 back∣ward Streets falling in with your Road, Lombard-street on the Left, and Thread-Needle-street on the Right; where leaving Cornhil and entring the Poultrey, you have St. Mary Wool-Church Market-Place (formerly the Stocks) on the Left; and at 1’30. a Conduit and thereon a Marble Effigies of His Present Majesty on Horse-back, Erected Anno 1671. by Sr. Robert Vyner Baronet, now Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON; 4 Poles beyond, and at the farther side of the said Market-place, turns down Walbrook on the Left, well Inhabit∣ed by Skinners, and leading to Dow-Gate aforemention'd; at 2’2. you leave St. Mildreds Poultry Church, lately Re-built on the Right; and 3 Poles beyond, the Poultry Counter on the same Hand, a Prison under the Jurisdiction of one of the Sheriffs, as that in Wood-street is of the other; at 2’12. is the Passage to Grocers Hall, a little backward on the Right, and 5 Poles beyond is the Old Jury on the same Hand, from the Jews formerly Cohabiting there, a fair Street, Adorn'd with the Church of St. Mary Cole, leading up to Lothbury, almost op∣posite to Coleman-street aforesaid: At 2’22. an obtuse or backward Street falls in on the Left, call'd Bucklers-Bury, principally inhabited by Seeds-men and Drugsters, and leading to Walbrook aforesaid; 5 Poles farther you have Mercers Chapel and Hall on the Right, with a Narrow, but Neat Front; at 2’31. you have Ironmongers-Lane on the same Hand, lead∣ing towards Bashishaw vulgo Basinghal-street, and 4 Poles farther, Queen-street formerly So∣per-Lane on the Left, and King-street a fair new made Street on the Right; the first leading to the Thames; the second to the Guild-Hall of the City, a large and Eminent Structure, wherein are Held 9 several Courts belonging to the City; 'twas Built Anno 1411. by the Mayor and Aldermen, &c. which being in the late Fire in a manner consum'd, is since beautifully Repair'd, and Adorn'd with the Pictures of His present Majesty and the Duke of York, Lord Keeper, and Judges, &c. This New Street was design'd (however it mis∣carry'd) to have given a Prospect from the Guil'd-Hall Southwards, in a direct Line clear over the Thames to Southwark and the adjacent Country, but is diverted by an Angle of a∣bout 5 Degrees, at the Intersection of the said Queen-street with Watling-street: Next at 3 Furl. you come to St. Laurence-Lane on the Right, leading to Cat-eaton-street opposite to St. Laurence Jewry Church; and 7 Poles farther Bow-Lane by the East End of Bow Church on the Left, 4 Poles beyond which you are opposite to the Steeple of the said Church, and 4 Poles farther have a Passage on the Right to Milk-street Market remov'd from Cheapside; at 3’22. you have Milk-street on the Right, leading towards Aldermanbury, and 2 Poles farther Bread-street on the Left, leading to Thames-street near Queen-Hith; at 3’29. you come to Wood-street or Great Wood-street on the Right, leading directly through Little Woodstreet to Criple-Gate; and hereabouts stood the stately Cheapside Cross, Demolish'd by a Fanatick Zeal, Anno 1644. 5 Poles farther you have Friday-street on the Left, crossing Watlingstreet, and falling into Old Fish-street; at 4 Furl. precisely you come to Gutter-Lane on the Right, leading to Maiden-Lane by the Back of Goldsmiths Hall, and 13 Poles beyond, Foster-Lane on the same Hand, inhabited by Goldsmiths and Ironmongers, so call'd from the Church of St. Vedast vulgo Foster, at the hither End of it, towards the other End whereof is Gold∣smiths Hall aforesaid, a fair Structure: At 4’17. you pass by the Old Change on the Left, leading also into Old Fish-street; and 2 Poles farther come to the Conduit, contiguous to which, before the Fire, was the East End of the Parish-Church of St. Michael Quern, and here you have, not only a Division of the 5th. from the 6th. and 7th. Exits, but a fair Mi∣dle Street call'd Pater-Noster Row leading to Creed Lane and Amen-Corner, chiefly inha∣bited by Mercers and Silk-Men; but prosecuting the 9th. 10th. and 11th. Itineraries, you bear to the Left, and at 4’22. enter St. Pauls Church-yard, where at 4’35. you have St. Pauls School on the Left, in a very splendid manner Re-built; and at 5’9. come to the South-East Corner of the Church-yard, where falls in on the Left, through St. Austins Gate, a fair Street call'd Watling-street, along which it is suppos'd the old Roman Watling∣street proceeded, since this Street, after having crost Queen-street and Walbrook, and chang'd
It's Name into Budg-Row and Cannon-street, passes by London-stone, presum'd to be another kind of Milliarium Aureum set up for the Beginning of Computation of Distances, like those in Rome and Constantinople: about 5’22. you are opposite to the great South Door of St. Pauls, and at 5’32. come to Pauls Chain a fair Street leading to the Thames side, about the Midle of which are two Colleges, the One to the Right for the Doctors and Students of the Civil Law, call'd Doctors Commons; and on the Left the College of Heralds, for Re∣gulation of Armorial Ensigns, &c. Thus proceeding along the South Side of St. Pauls Church-yard, a Place inhabited by the Woollen-Drapers; at 6’15. you come to the West End of it, but before you leave it, take in a Line or two a View of another of the Wonders of Europe, This sometime stately Cathedral of St. Paul, was Founded by Sebert a Saxon King, circa Ann. 610. enlarg'd by Bishop Erkenwald, and suffering much by Fire; was again began to be Re-built, Anno 1083. by Mauritius another Bishop thereof, but not finish'd till Anno 1221. 'Tis Eminently Seated, and for Antiquity, Length and Height, surpasses all o∣ther Churces, measuring from East to West 690 Foot, in Height 102 Foot, and in bredth 130 Foot, covering 3 Acres and an half of Ground, and with It's Church-yard possessing at present above 5 Acres; Built in Form of a Cross, and Adorn'd with a Tower of 260 Foot height, and a Spire 260 Foot more, exalting it self from the Midst of the Cross; this stately Timber Spire cover'd with Lead, with a great Part of the Church was Ruin'd by Fire, Anno 1561. It was again Repair'd by the Bounty of Queen Elizabeth, the City of Lon∣don, and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury; and lastly, a great Part of the decaying Structure, by the Kings Favor and vigorous Endeavors of the truly zealous and pious Dr. Laud Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, curiously Re-built, a Magnificent Portico at the West End added, and the whole Fabrick in a fair Way of being Finish'd; when Anno 1640. the Flames of Civil Dissention breaking forth, 170’000 l. reposited in the Chamber of Lon∣don for this pious Work, was soon employ'd by a prevailing Disloyal Faction against the best of Kings, and this Temple of God made a Stable for Horses; and soon after His Ma∣jesty's Restauration, the design'd Reparation hereof was again prevented by that dreadful Conflagration, yet still His Sacred Majesty prosecutes his Pious Intentions, and resolves upon a New Erection shall infinitly surpass the Old, according to that well-accepted Mo∣del of Sr. Christopher Wren's, His Majesty's Surveyor: Leaving the Church-yard, and entring Ludgate-street, at 6’21. you have Creed-Lane on the Left (leading towards the Black Fryers and Puddle-Dock) and Avemary-Lane on the Right, which through Warwick-Lane leads into Newgate-street; at 6’34. you have St. Martin's Ludgate Church adjoyning the City Wall on the Right, and behind it Stationers Hall lately Re-built; at 6’38. you come to Ludgate, q. d. Fludgate, us'd principally as a Prison for Debt; whence the old City Wall pro∣ceeds on the Right directly to Newgate, and on the Left (by a return) down to the Fleet Ditch; 5 Poles from Ludgate you have the Old Baily a fair Street on the Right, towards the upper End whereof, adjoyning the out-side of the said City Wall, is the Sessions House before mention'd, a handsome Re-built Edifice: Thus down Lud-Gate Hill you come at 7’29. to Fleet-Bridg over a small River, heretofore Turn-Mill Brook, of later times call'd the Fleet-Ditch, now the Canal; being fairly Wall'd with Brick, and made passable for Loi∣ters, &c. from the Thames to Holborn-Bridg, on the Banks of which to the Right Hand, is the Prison of the Fleet: At 7’37. you have Bride-Lane, and a little backward St. Bridget vulgo Bride Church on the Left, and more backward but Fronting the Ditch aforesaid, Bridewel, formerly a House of the Kings, now a Work-House and House of Correction for the Poor and Idle of the City; at 8’13. you come to Shoo-Lane on the Right, a Thorough∣fare into Holborn by St. Andrews Church of near 75 Poles length, and a Pole farther Salis∣bury Court on the Left, leading to the Thames, at the lower End of which, Fronting the River, stands the Dukes New Theater: At 8’29. you have Water-Lane on the same Hand, leading to the Thames likewise, between which and the Temple stood formerly the White-Friers, now Built into divers fair Passages: At 9’8. you have Serjeants Inn, belonging to the Sergeants at Law; and at 9’15. you come to Fetter-Lane on the Right, another Tho∣rough-fare into Holborn of near 80 P. Extent or a quarter of a M. 2 Thirds of which, from Fleet-street, submitted to the general Conflagration; and here the Fire Ended on this side, even among dry rotten Houses, such as We call Paper-Built; at 9’27. you have the West End of St. Dunstans Church on the Right, and behind it Cliffords Inn, one of the 12 Inns of Court and Chancery, and 3 Poles beyond this, the Fire terminated on the Left. At 9’37. you have Chancery-Lane a fair Street of 100 Poles compleat, leading into Holborn, wherein is the other Serjeants Inn, next the Chancery and Six Clerks Office, then the Office of the Rolls, Presided by a Master of the Rolls, a Place of great Importance and Profit; and therein the
Chapel of the Rolls, wherein are kept the Records issuing from divers Offices; high∣er up, is Simonds-Inn now insignificant, Lincolns-Inn one of the Four Inns of Court, and the Cursitors Office: opposite to Chancery Lane is the Gate of the Inner Temple, and 7 Poles farther the Midle Temple, two more of the Inns of Court; thus by Bell Yard and Shire Lane on the Right, Passages leading into Lincolns-Inn-Fields, at 10’10. you come to Temple-Barr, the Western Limits of the City Liberties, a fair and late Erected Portico, where entring the Strand, and therewith the Liberties of the City of WEST∣MINSTER; at 10’19. you have an acute Way on the Right up the Butcher-Row, leading into Clements-Inn and Clare-Market or New-Market; and at 10’34. in the narrow Part of the Street Essex House, in agitation of being Built into Tenements; at 11’3. you are opposite to the West End of St. Clements Church on the Right, and 8 Poles beyond Arundel House on the Left, belonging to those Earls, but in Project of Re-build∣ing; at 12’2. you have Strand-Bridg a Passage to the Thames, and 7 Poles more, the May-Pole and Little Drury Lane, which leading into Great Drury Lane, yields a direct Way of near half a Miles extent into St. Giles's Holborn: At 12’21. you come to the Gate of Somerset House on the Left, Built by the Duke of Somerset, Protector and Unkle to E. 6. now the Queen Consorts, pleasantly Seated on the Banks of the Thames: At 12’35. you come to a fair new-made Passage towards Covent Gar∣den, call'd Katherine-Street, and by Wimbleton House on the same Hand, come at 13’11. to the projecting Corner of Exeter House, whose Garden is lately converted into a fair Street bearing It's Name; and opposite to this is the Savoy, Built by Peter Earl of Savoy, Anno 1245. afterwards the Palace of the Dukes of Lancaster, and still a Member of the Dutchy, with a Liberty thereto annext, reaching from Ivy Bridg al∣most to Temple-Barr, under the Regulation of the Officers of the Dutchy: Worcester House on the Left, belonging to those Marquesses; and at 14 Furlongs you are a∣gainst Bedford-House Gate on the Right, the House lying backward with a fair Gar∣den, extending to one Side of the Area of Covent-Garden; is the Residence of the present Earl of Bedford: At 14’10. you pass by the Midle-Exchange on the Left, part of Salisbury House, and lately Erected by that Earl; another part of the said House being lately Built into Tenements; between which and Durham Yard is Ivy Bridg, a narrow Passage to the Thames, at the very Angle thereof oppos'd to the projecting Point at the Saw-Mill, where the River is near 14’00 Foot over: At 14’34. you have the Half-Moon Passage on the Right, leading into Bedford-street and Covent Garden; and on the Left, Brittains Burse or the New Exchange; a large and stately Oblong, Built in the Place of Durham-House Stables, Anno 1608. and the said House, &c. converted into Streets and Tenements, by the Name of Durham-Yard aforesaid; ad∣joyning this, was York House of late the Duke of Buckingham's, now Built and Build∣ing into fair Streets, as Buckingham Street at 15’15. leading to the stately Wa∣ter-Gate, and Villers Street at 15’24. to the Thames likewise: At 16 Furlongs, or 2 Miles precisely, you have Brewers-Yard a passage to the Thames; and at 16’19. St. Martins-Lane extending Northwards by Newport House Garden, and So-Ho Fields, to the Pound in St. Giles's: At 16’22. you have the Midle of the stately Quadrangular Northumberland House on the Left; and at 16’30. Charing-Cross, the Name now only remaining: Here the directer Way on the Left proceeds South, by the Duke of Al∣bemarls, Lord Moulgroves and Wallingford Houses on the Right, and Scotland-Yard on the Left, to White-Hall the Kings Palace on the same Hand at 18’11. and thence into the City of WESTMINSTER, measuring 20’20. to the Gate of the New Pa∣lace-Yard; and at 21’30. to Tuttle-street Gate; but the Road from Charing-Cross a∣foresaid, bears to the North-West, and at 17’1. passes by the Mews on the Right, where are kept the Kings Horses, to which belong many Officers of great Quality, under the Government of the Duke of Monmouth, Master of the Horse, one of the most considerable Offices of the Court: At 17’17. by the Side of the said Mews, runs up Hedg-Lane directly into Wind-Mill Street, and the Uxbridg Road; and at 17’25 Warwick-street acute on the Left, and Great Suffolk-street on the Right: At 17’39. or in a round Number, 2 Miles and a quarter, the Left Hand and equally direct, presents you a very fair straight Street of above 100 Poles in length, call'd the Pall-Mall, parallel to the North-side St. James's Park; but your Road bears to the Right up the Hay-Market, passing by Little Suffolk Street, New James Street, and Pan∣ton Street, successively on the Right, and opposite to the Last, Morris Street leading to St. James's Market-Place; at 19’21. being come to the upper End of the Hay-Market,
the forward Street leads into Wind-Mill Street, and the Right-Hand Way by Mr. Secretary Coventry's towards So-Ho-Fields and St. Giles's; but the Road bears to the Left South-Westerly along the Pickadilly parallel to the Pall-Mall aforesaid, giv∣ing you at 19’24. an acute Way on the Right up Shugg-Lane into the Fields, and at 20’17. a Cross-way by Air-street on the Right, into the Fields, and Eagle-street on the Left, into the New-built St. James's Fields: At 20’32. you have Portugal∣street on the Left, leading into the Area or Square of the said New Buildings of the Earl of St. Albans; whence by Swallow-street and Chip-street successively on the Right, and Duke-street on the Left, you pass by Sr. Thomas Clerges's and Burlington House on the Right also; and at 22’13. James's Street on the Left leading to the End of the Pall-Mall and the Pallace of St. James's, the Residence of Their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Dutchess of York; on the Right you have the Stately and Splendid Clarendon House Huilt by the late Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor; hence you have the New Park, or Addition to St. James's Park on the Left, the Buildings terminating with the Pickadilly on that Hand; and at 23’5. Barkley House, a stately and late Erected Structure on the Right, 20 Poles beyond which, the Buildings actually terminate on the Right also. To this Extent from the Standard Westward, adding the Distance thence to Mile-End Eastward, gives the Length of the City this Way 33’7. or in a modest round Number 32 Furlongs or 4 English Miles: But proceeding, at 24’26. you come to the Stone-Bridg over that Rill which supplies the Canal in the Park; and at 25’30. to the West Corner of the Park, where on the Left falls in the Way from Westminster by Tuttle-street, Petty-France, and the West Side of the Park, which continued from Charing-Cross, and accounted from the Stan∣dard, measures to this Corner 29’28. almost 4 Furlongs more than the prosecuted Road; 4 Poles from this Corner you have 3 Houses and a Way on the Right by the Side of Hide-Park, falling into the other Road at Tiburn, the forward Way lead∣ing to Knights-Bridg, &c. We refer you to in the Particular Roads to the Lands-End, Bristol and St. Davids, aforesaid, pag. 19. 27. and 49. which proceeding conjunct∣ly to to the End of Hounslow at 12 Miles 5 Furlongs; the Bristol Road bears to the Right, carrying with it the Glocester or St. Davids Road, till 3 Furlongs beyond Mai∣denhead, viz. at 28’3. when the said St. Davids Road bears to the Right also. We return now to the Conduit of St. Michaels Quern at the End of Cheapside; whence prosecuting the 6th. and 7th. Exits conjunctly; at 4’23. from the Standard you enter Blow-Bladder-street, and at 4’31. pass by St. Martins Lane on the Right, frequented by the Shoo-Makers, and leading directly to Aldersgate one of the City Gates; and in this Lane stood formerly a fair College call'd St. Martins le Grand, Founded Anno 1056. and claiming Privilege of Sanctuary: Hence by Pincock-Lane and Butcher-Hall-Lane on the Right, you enter New-Gate-street at 5’12. and 3 Fur∣longs farther pass by Ivy-Lane on the Left, leading to Pater-Noster Row and St. Pauls Church-Yard; at 5’22. you come against Christ-Church on the Right, an Eminent Hos∣pital and Thorough-fare to Smith-Field by St. Bartholomew's Hospital; at 5’26. you have New-Gate-Market formerly in the Street, now remov'd into a fair Square, back∣wards, as all the Markets are since the Fire; at 5’38. you leave Warwick-Lane afore∣mention'd, on the Left, wherein is the Phisicians College a fair new Structure; and a Pole farther the Gray-Fryers on the Right, whose Church was at the Dissolution converted into the stately Parish-Church now call'd Christ-Church: At 6’13. you are under New-Gate another of the City Gates, us'd as a Prison for Debtors, but more especially Felons of the City and Liberties, as well as the County of Midlesex; 5 Furl. beyond you come to a Cross-way, the Great Old-Baily on the Left, and Giltspur∣street on the Right, along which proceeds your 7th Exit; but proceeding the 6th and the directer Way; at 6’25. you come to the Little Old-Baily uniting the Great some∣what lower; and at 6’32. are opposite to the West End of St. Sepulcher Church, whose Tower, like that of St. Michael in Cornhil, yields a fair Prospect to the Neighboring Coun∣try; thus along Snow-hill, frequented by Salesmen, &c. at 7’5. Seacole-Lane falls in on the Left, and the forward narrow Street, call'd Turnback-Lane, proceeds only to the Ditch or Canal; here then bearing to the Right, you come at 7’14. to Cock-Lane extending to Py-Corner on the Right, and 2 Poles farther to Holborn Conduit, where the forward Circulating Way on the Right, call'd Cow-Lane, leading into Smith-Field, you bear to the Left; and at 7’36. come to Holborn-Bridg, to which extends the New Canal aforemention'd, and thus far extended the Fire this Way; but farther in Fleet-street, a 4th Part of Shoo-Lane and a 3d.
of Fetter-Lane, only escaping the Flames: Thus entring Holborn, at 8’14. you have Shoo-Lane and St. Andrews Church and Church-yard on he Left, and 7 Poles farther the West End of the said Church and Yard: At 8’26. you have Ely-House belonging to those Bi∣shops on the Right; and at 8’34. Hatton-Garden a far Street of 80 Poles, or a quarter of a Mile on the Right, opposite to Thavy's Inn on the Left; at 9’12. you have Fetter-Lane on the Left also; and at 9’16. Leather-Lane on the Right, between which and Hatton-street, lay the Garden belonging to Hatton-House, now Built into Tenements; at 9’22. you have Ber∣nards-Inn on the L. and 4 Poles farther Furnivals-Inn on the Right; at 9’31. you have Castle-Yard on the Left, and at 9’37. you come opposite to Bro House on the R. & 5 Poles be∣yond Staple-Inn on the Left; at 10’6. you come to Holborn-Brrs, the Western Limits of the City this way; a Pole farther begins the Midle-Row of Buildings on the Left; and another Pole beyond, Gray's-Inn Lane turns down on the Right, along which the Buildings on the Right Hand extend 120 Poles, giving you a well-frequented Road to High-Gate by Pancras Church and Kentish-Town: At 108. the Midle-Row ends, and at 10’25. you have Gray's-Inn Gate on the Right, leading into Gray's-Inn, A∣dorn'd with fair Walks and Gardens; 'Tis one of the Four Ins of Court, as the 4 Inns last mention'd are of Chancery: At 10’29. you come to Old Southampton-Build∣ings on the Left, and at 11’1. Chancery-Lane on the same Hand; at 11’6. you have Warwick-House on the Right, the Gardens extending backwards to the Fields and Gray's-Inn Walks, and 8 Poles farther a new Street leading to the Fields likewise: At 11’29. you come to Great Turn-stile Alley on the Left, inhabited by Shooe-makers, and leading into Great Lincolns-Inn Fields a pleasant and large Square; and at 12’34. Little Turn-stile leading to the West Corner of Lincolns-Inn Fields aforesaid: At 13’10. you come to Kings-Gate on the Right, leading into Red-Lyon Fields, so call'd from the Red Lyon Inn; and 6 Poles farther you have a Cross Way, Little Queen-street leading to Great Queen-street on the Left, and King-street, Bloomsbury, on the Right; at 13’26 you come to Southampton-street on the Right, a fair, broad Street leading into the Square before Southampton-House, belonging to the late Earl of Southampton; and at 14’11. you have Lyon-street on the same Hand, leading into Bloomsbury-Market; at 14’39. Bow-street on the Right also, and a Pole farther Drury-Lane on the Left; where leaving Holborn and entring St. Giles's, at 15’34. you pass by Vine-street on the Right, leading to Great Russel-street and the Fields; and at 16’32. the forward Left-Hand Way turns down King-street, St. Giles's, to Long-Acre and Covent-Garden; 3 Poles more brings you to the beginning of the Parish Alms-Houses in the Midle of the Street, which you leave just at 17 Furlongs; at 17’15. you have St. Giles's Church and Church-Yard on the Left; and at 18’5. the Pound and the forward Way to Hampsted, &c. where bearing to the Left; 5 Poles farther you have Hog-Lane on the Left, meeting with St. Martins-Lane, and at 19 Furlongs the Houses grow scattering on each side: At 19’29. you leave the Buildings on the Right; and at 20’5. where So-Ho turns down on the Left in a direct Lire to Hedg-Lane, the Buildings terminate on that side; thus the Extent of Housing this Way may in a round Number be accounted two Miles and a Half, beyond which, for the far∣ther Prosecution of this Way, see the Roads themselves, Pag. 1. and 23. Which proceeding together till a Mile and Half beyond Uxbridg, at 10 Miles 4 Furl. That to Buckingham, &c. Branches out on the Right. For the 7th. Exit and 14th. Itinerary; Having in the Last brought you at 6’18. to the Turning up Giltspur-street Northwards; We proceed, and 10 Poles farther en∣ter Py-Corner; at 7’2. you have Cock-Lane leading to Holborn Conduit on the Left, and Rosemary-Lane on the Right; thus being come to the Verge of the Fire this Way; 6 Poles beyond you enter Smith-field, and at 7’13. Hosier-Lane extending to Cow-Lane, turns down on the Left: Thus are you actually in Smith-field where An∣nually is kept the only Fair of the City, call'd Bartholomew Fair, continuing Four∣teen Days from St. Bartholomew's Day, a Privilege first Granted to the Priory of St. Bartholomew, Founded circa Ann. 1102. At 7’36. you are opposite to Cow-Lane aforementiond on the Left, and Long-Lane, inhabited by Brokers, &c. on the Right, extending to Aldersgate-street, and leading into Barbican inhabited by the like Tradesmen, and yielding thence a rea∣dy Way into Moor-fields through Beech-Lane and Chiswel-street; at 8’5. you leave the Open Part of Smith-field on the Left, and 2 Poles farther on the Right also; and at 8’15. come to the Barrs or Liberties of the City; where entring St. John's Street,
at 8’21. you have Chater-House Lane on the Right; leading into Chater-House Yard and to the Chater-House or Sutton's Hospital, a most Eminent Foundation, Purchas'd by Mr. Thomas Sutton of the Earl of Suffolk for 13’000 Pounds; who thereupon Raising a goodly Fabrick, Planted therein a Master, a Governor, a Preacher, a Free-School, with a Master and Usher; 80 decay'd Gentlemen and 40 Scho∣lars, who entred therein, Anno 1614. The Left-Hand gives you an acute Way call'd Cow-Cross, leading into Tu-mill-street; at 9’2. you are opposite to Hicks's-Hall, the Sessions-House for the Justices of the Peace of Midlesex, Seated in the Street; behind which turns up an ute Way into St. John's, so call'd from the dissolv'd Priory of St. John of Jerusale: At 10’5. begins the Earl of Alesbury's Garden on the Left, the House being stuate in St. John's vulgo St. Jones's aforesaid; at 10’13. you have Swan-Alley alias Sitton-street on the Right, a Thorough-fare to the upper End of Goswel-street, almost opposite to Old-street, and at 10’37. by the End of the said Garden a Passage into Clerkenwel-Green and Clerkenwel-Close, just opposite to the Pound; at 11’2. the Houses terminate on the Right; and at 11’39. on the Left also at a Place call'd Corporation-Lane; whence for the Prosecution of the Road, vid. Pag. 41.
A Catalogue of the several ROADS, As they Follow Successively in the Ensuing Volume. Direct Independants.   Commencing at Extending to Plate. Passing through. 1. Aberistwith. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Islip 3. Bromyard Islip OXFORD 1. Acton, Ʋxbridg, Beaconsfield, High-Wick∣ham, Tetsworth, Wheatley-Bridg. Bromyard 2. Enston, Morton-Inmarsh, Broadway, Per∣shore, WORCESTER. Aberistwith 3. Leominster, Prestain, Riadergowy. 2. Arundel. LONDON Arundel 4. Towting, Ewell, Darking, Billinghurst, Wickford-Bridg, continued to CHICHE∣STER. 3. Barwick. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Stilton 3. Tuxford 4. YORK 5. Chester in the Street Stilton 5. Waltham, Ware, Royston, Huntingdon. Tuxford 6. Stamford, Grantham, Newark. YORK 7. Bawtre, Doncaster, Went-Bridg, Tadcaster. Chester in the Street 8. Burrowbriggs, Topcliff, Northallerton, Darlington, DƲRHAM. Barwick 9. Newcastle, Morpeth, Alnwick, Belford. 4. BRISTOL. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Marlborough Marlborough 10. Brantford, Hounslow, Colebrock, Maid∣enhead, Twyford, Reading, Theal, Wool∣hampton, Thatcham, Newbury, Chilton, Ramsbury, or Hungerford. BRISTOL 11. Little Kennet, Caln, Chippenham, Marshfield, continued to Humspil, by Langford and Axbridg. 5. Buckingham. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Banbury Buckingham 12. Acton, Ʋxbridg, Amersham, Wendover, East-Clayton, continued to Banbury, by Shroughton. Bridgnorth 13. Nether Pillerton, Stratford, Coughton, Bromsgrove, Kederminster, with a branch to Campden by Shipston. 6. St. David's. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Abington 3. Monmouth 4. Burton-Ferry Abington 14. Brantford, Hounslow, Colebrock, Maid∣enhead, Henley, Dorchstr Monmouth 15. Faringdon, Lechlade, Fairford, Barnesley, GLOCESTER, Michel-Dan, Coverd. Burton-Ferry 16. New-Church, Catts-Ash, Newport, Car∣diff, St. Nicholas, Cowbridg, Corntown, Aberavon. St. David's 17. Swansey, Llanelthy, Kidwelly, Llan∣stuffan, Haverford-West. 7. Dover. LONDON Dover 18. Deptford, Crayford, Dartford, North∣fleet, Chaulk-Street, ROCHESTER, Sittingborn, Bocton-Street, CANTER∣BƲRY. 8. Harwich. LONDON Harwich 19. Rumford, Burntwood, Chelmsford, Wi∣tham, Keldon, Colchester, Maning∣tre. 9. Hith. LONDON Hith 20. Eliham, Farmingham, Croseley, Aylisford, Barsted, Ashford, Wrotham, Maidstone. 10. Holyhead. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Toceter 3. LICHFIELD 4. CHESTER Toceter 21. Barnet, St. Albans, Dunstable, Brickhil, Stonystratford, LICHFIELD 22. Daventre, Dunchurch, COVENTRY, Colshil. CHESTER 23. Rugeley, Heywood-Magna, Stone, Sta∣bleford-Bridg, Wore, Namptwich, Tor∣perley. Holyhead 24. Harding, Northop, Denbigh, Abercon∣way, Beaumaris, Boddedar
11. ye Lands-End. Plate 1. LONDON 2. Andover 3. Crookhorn 4. Plymouth Andover 25. Brantford, Stanes, Bagshot, Hartley-Row, Basngsioke. Crookhorn 26. SALISBƲRY, Shaftsbury, Sherborn. Plymouth 27. Axmister, Honiton, Rockbere, EXETER, Chidleigh, Ashburton, Brent. Sennan 28. Low, Foy, Trewardreth, Tregoncy, Philey, Market-Jew, Pensance, St. Burion. 12. Newhaven LONDON Newhaven 29. Stretham, Croydon, East-Grimsted, Lewes; continued to New-Shoreham by Brighthel∣meston. 13. Portsmouth LONDON Portsmouth 30. Wansworth, Kingston, Cobham, Guilford, Godalmin, Lippock, Petersfield, Harnden, Portsey-Bridg. 14. Rye LONDON Rye 31. Lewsham, Bromley, Farnborough, Sevenoke, Tunbridg, Lamberherst, Newenden. DIRECT DEPENDANTS.   Commencing at Extending to Plate. Passing through 15. Barstable Plate 1. Andover 2. Bridgwater Plate 3. Hetherley Bridgwater 32. Amesbury, Shruton, Warmister, Maiden-Bradley, Bruton, Weston-Regis, Ascot. Hetherley 33. Hartrow-House, Dulverton, South-Moul∣ton, Barstable, Torrington. Truro 34. Ivy, Newport, Hall-Drunkard, Camble∣ford, St. Indullion, Padstow, St. Columb, St. Michael. 16. BATH and 17. WELLS Chipnam Marlborough BATH WELLS 35. Chipnam, BATH, Paulton. Devizes, Troubridg, Phillips-Norton, Chil∣compton. 18. Boston Stilton Boston 36. PETERBOROƲGH, Wellington, Crow∣land, Spalding, Sutterton. continued to LINCOLN by Heckington & Sleaford. 19. CARLISLE Plate 1. Darlaston-Bridg 2. Garstang Garstang. 37. New-castle, Bruerton-Green, Grulam, War∣rington, Newton, Wigan, Whittle, Preston. CARLISLE 38. Lancaster, Boulton, Kendal, Thrumby, Penrith, Hescot. 20. CHICHESTER Guilford. CHICHESTER. 39. Godalmin, Chidingfold, Midhurst, continued from Midhurst, to WINCHE∣STER by Petersfield. 21. Derby Stony-Stratford Derby 40. Kings-Grafton, Northampton, Bricksworth Harborough, Great Glen, Leicester, Mont∣sorrel, Loughborough, Kegworth. 22. Flamborough Plate 1. Stilton 2. LINCOLN LINCOLN 41. PETERBOROƲGH, Market-Deeping, Born, Morton, Sleaford: or thus. Temsford, Eaton, Bugdon, & so to Stilton. Flamborough-Head. 42. Redbourn, Glamford-bridges, Barton, Hull, Beverley, Beseck, Kilham, Burlington. 23. Kings-Lyn Puckeridg Kings-Lyn 43. Barkway, Fowlmere, Cambridg, Stretham, ELY, Littleport, Southerey, Downham See∣chy. 24. Montgomery The 4 Shire-stone Montgomery 44. Campden, Evesholm, WORCESTER, Hundred-house, Tenbury, Ludlow, Bishops-Castle. 25. St. Neots Barnet St. Neots 45. Hatfield, Stevenage, Baldock, Biggleswade, Temsford: continued to Oakham by Cat∣worth, Lyford, Haringsworth. 26. NORWICH Puckeridg NORWICH 46. Barkway, Wittlesford-bridg, New-Market, Berton-Mills, Thetford, Larlingford, At∣tleborough, Windham. 27. Oakham Plate 1. St. Albans 2. Oakham 3. Barnsley Oakham 47. Luton, Selso, Bedford, Shellington, Welling∣borough, Ketering, Rokingham, Ʋppingham Barnsley 48. Milton-Mowbray, Plumtree, Nottingham, Papplewick, Ashton, Rotheram, Womble. Richmond 49. Almondbury, Hallifax, Kighley, Skipton, Cuniston, Carlton, and Midlam. 28. Salop Meriden Salop 50. Birmingham, Dudley, Bridgnorth, Wenlock; continued to Welsh-pool by Aberbury. 29. Southampton Bagshot Southampton 51. Farnham, Alton, Alresford, Twiford; con∣tinued to SALISBƲRY by Rumsey & White-Parish. 30. Wells and Bury New-Market Bury 52. Berton-mills, Burton-ferry, Hilboro, Swaff∣ham, Tittleshal, Fakenham, Walsingham, Kenford. 31. Weymouth Basingstoke Weymouth 53. Sutton, Stockbridg, Broughton, Dunckton, Cranborn, Blandford, Dorchester. 32. Yarmouth Colchester Yarmouth 54. Stratford, Ipswich, Woodbridg, Saxmund∣ham, Bliborough, Beccles, Hadsco.
34. BRISTOL to Banbury BRISTOL Banbury 55. Chipping-Sodbury, Tedbury, Cirencester, Burford, Bloxham. 35. CHESTER Plate 1. BRISTOL Plate 2. Ludlow Ludlow 56. Aust-Ferry, Chepstow, Monmouth, HE∣REFORD, Leominster. CHESTER 57. Church-Stretton, Shrewsbury, Whitchurch. 36. EXETER BRISTOL EXETER 58. Bishops-Chue, WELLS, Glastonbury, Greinton, Lyng, Taunton, Wellington, Welland, Bradinch 37. Weymouth BRISTOL Weymouth 59. Bishops-Chue, WELLS, Glastonbury, Somerton, Martock, Crookhorn, South-Parret, Frampton. 38. WORCESTER BRISTOL WORCESTER 60. Acton, Dursley, Whitmister, GLOCES∣TER, Tewksbury, Severn-Stoke. 39. Cambridg to COVENTRY Cambridg. COVENTRY 61. Elsley, St. Nots, Great Stonghton, Higham-Ferries, Northampton, Watford, Rugby. 40. CARLISLE to Barwick CARLISLE Barwick 62. Brakenhil, Castleton, Jedborough, Kelso, Cornil, Wessel. 41. CHESTER to Cardiff Plate 1. CHESTER Plate 2. Llanbeder-Vunneth Llanbeder-Vunneth 63. Wrexham, Sellatty, Llansylen, Llanvelling, Llantair, Tregunon, New-Town. Cardiff 64. Llanbadarn-Vawr, Bealt, Brecknock, Pont-Stucketh. 42. Dartmouth to Minhead Dartmouth Minhead 65. Newton-Bushel, Kenford, EXETER, Silverton, Tiverton, Bampton, Berry, Em∣bercum, Minhead. 43. St. Davids to Holywel Plate 1. St. Davids 2. Tallabont Tallabont 66. Fiscard, Newport, Cardigan, Llanarch, Llanrusted, Llanbader-Vawr. Holywell 67. Machenlet, Aberangel, Llanum-mouthy, Bala, Bettus, Ruthyn. 44. EXETER to Barstable EXETER Barstable 68. Crediton, Chimleigh, Barstable: continued from Ilfracomb to Bediford & Torrington. 45. Truro EXETER Truro 69. Dunsford, Chegford, Tavestoke, Liscard, Listithiel, Grampond. 46. GLOCESTER to COVENTRY GLOCESTER COVENTRY 70. Cheltenham, Winchcomb, Stratford, Camp∣den, Warwick. 47. GLOCESTER to Montgomery GLOCESTER Montgomery 71. Huntley, Ross, Much-Birch, HERE∣FORD, Pembridg, Prestain, Knighton, Clun. 48. HEREFORD to Leicester HEREFORD Leicester 72. Froomshil, WORCESTER, Droitwich, Bromsgrove, Allchurch, Solihul, Meriden, COVENTRY, Woolvey, Shauford. 49. Huntingdon to Ipswich Huntingdon Ipswich 73. St. Ives, Erith, Sutton, ELY, Soham, Bu∣ry, Wulpit, Stow-Market. 50. Ipswich to NORWICH Ipswich NORWICH 74. Claydon, Thwait, Osmondston, Long-Strat∣ton: continued to Cromer by Alsham. 51. Lyn to Harwich Lyn Harwich 75. Swaffham, Stanford, Thetford, Icksworth, Stow-Market, Ipswich. 52. NORWICH Lyn NORWICH 76. Gayton, Mileham, Billingford: continued to Yarmouth by Hadsko. 53. Monmouth to Lanbeder Monmouth Lanbeder 77. Llandilo-Cruseney, Abergaveney, Creco∣wel, Brecknock, Redbrue, Llanimdofry. 54. Nottingham to Grimsby Nottingham Grimsby 78. Newark, LINCOLN, Wilton, Market-Raising, Stanton in the Hole, Briggesley. 55. OXFORD to BRISTOL OXFORD BRISTOL 79. Fifield, Faringdon, Hiworth, Purton, Malmesbury, Luckinton, Puckle-Church. 56. Cambridg OXFORD Cambridg 80. Bisciter, Buckingham, Newport-Painel, Bedford, Gamlignhay.
57. CHICHESTER. OXFORD CHICHESTER 81. Abington, East-Ilsley, Newbury, Kings∣clear, Basingstoke, Alton and Petersfield. 58. COVENTRY. OXFORD COVENTRY 82. Kidlington, Dedington, Banbury, South∣am, Princes-Thorp, continued to Derby by Nuneaton, Atherston, Ashby, Swarkston. 59. SALISBURY. OXFORD SALISBURY 83. Abington, Great Shelford, Hungerford, North-Tudworth, continued to Pool, by Cranborn and Winborn. 60. Prestain to Carmarthen. Prestain Carmarthen 84. New Radnor, Bealt, Ludlow-Vaugh, Llanimdofry, Abermarlas, Rue-Raddor. 61. SALISBURY to Campden. SALISBURY Campden 85. Everley, Burbich, Marlborough, Hi∣worth, Lechlade, Burford, Stow. 62. Tinmouth to CARLISLE. Tinmouth CARLISLE 86. Newcastle, Ovingham, Hexham, Halt∣wesel, Chapelbourn, Corby. 63. Welshpool to Carnarvan. Welshpool Carnarvan 87. Llnavair, Dinas-Mouthy, Dolgelhe, Llandura, Harlech, Dolbenmer. 64. YORK to CHESTER. Plate 1. YORK 2. Warrington Warrington 88. Tadeaster, Thorner, Leeds, Burstal, Ealand, Rochdale, Manchester & Eccles. CHESTER 89. Froddesham, with the branch from Man∣chester to Drby by Stopford, Buckston and Brassinton. 65. YORK to Lancaster. YORK Lancaster 90. Allerton, Knaresburgh, Ripley, Boulton, Skipton, Conyston, Settle, Greenby, Horn∣by, Lancaster. ACCIDENTALS. From Commencing at Extending to   Passing through. 66. Carmarthen to Aberistwith Carmarthen Aberistwith 91. Kilvah-Kilreaden, Cardigan, Tredrair, Red-Owen, Llanbeder, Tallasern, Llan∣risset. 67. Chelmsford to Bury & 68. Walden. Chelmsford Bury 92. Braintry, Halsted, Sudbury and Laven∣ham, Dunmow and Thaxted. Walden 69. Maldon Chelmsford Maldon Raleigh Gravesend 93.   70. Raleigh 71. Gravesend Billericay, Horndon. 72. and CAN∣TERBURY to Dover. Sandwich and Deal. 73. EXETER to Dorchester EXETER Dartmouth 94. Bishops-Clyst, Newton-Poplar, Cullyford, Lime, Chidiok, Bridport, Modbury, Hol∣wel. 74. and Plymouth to Dartmouth 75. Ferrybridg to Boroughbridg, Barnard Castle Ferrybridg Wakefield 95. Abyforth, Wetherby, Boroughbridg, Rip∣pon, Lemyng, Richmond, Barnard Castle. 76. and Ferrybridg to Wakefield. 77. Kendal to Cockermouth Kendal CARLISLE 96. Stanley, Ambleside, Keswick, Cocker∣mouth, Egrimond, Winnick, Cockermouth, Boland, Thuresby. 78. & Egrimond to CARLISLE. 79. LONDON to Pool, Pool to Lemington Alresford WINCHESTER 97. WINCHESTER, Rumsey, Castle-Malvord, Ringwood, Knaston, Pool, Lem∣ington, Southampton. 80. and Southampton to WINCHESTER. 81. Shrewsbury to Holly∣wel Shrewsbury Holywel 98. Ellesmere, Wrexham, Mould, CHE∣STER, Flint. 82. and CHESTER to Holywel. 83. Whitby to Tinmouth Whitby Tinmouth 99. Skelingdam, Gisbrough, Morton, Norton, Sigfield, DƲRHAM, Sunderland, 84. YORK to Whitby YORK Scarborough 100 Whitwel, New-Malton, Pickering, Whit∣by, Rollington, Sherborn, Scamor. 85. and Scarbrough.
map of England A New Map of the Kingdom of ENGLAND & Dominion of WALES. Whereon are Projected all ye Principal Roads Actually Measurd & Delineated By JOHN OGJLBY Esqr his Ma.ties Cosmogrpher
The Road From LONDON to ABERISTWITH on the Sea Coast com. Cardigan Wherin are Included the Roads to OXFORD and WORCESTER Actually Surveyd and Delineared By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 199 Miles 2 Furl: viz.t From the Standard in Cornhill. LONDON to Acton S.m.  to xbridge to, to Bacomfeild  to High-Wickha Teworth  to OXFORD  Islip 12’5, Ending Plate the  Thence to Bromyard  Hereford 67’1. Plate the 2d Thence to Aberistwith 74’6. in Plate the 3.d and last
HAVING Dispos'd all the Principal Roads of ENGLAND and WALES into a Hundred Whole-sheet Copper Sculps, The Division of the Whole. Divided the same into Direct from LONDON to the several Cities and Great Towns, and Cross from Capital Town to Capital Town; and Subdivided the First into Independant and Dependant, and the Second into Principal and Acci∣dental; We begin with the Direct Independants, and ac∣cording to Alphabetical Order Exhibit in the first place The Road from London to Aberistwith on the Sea-Coast in Cardiganshire, South-Wales. For Illustration whereof, We shall first give you the General History as follows. 1. THE Point of Bearing W.N.W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 177 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 145 M The General History. 4. The Dimensuration 199’2. The Particulars of which two last Accounts the following Table will more ac∣curately manifest; the two First Colums giving the Reputed Miles, One seperately between Town and Town, the other conjunctly in a continued Number from LONDON, and the two Last shewing the Dimensurated Miles and Furlongs answerably. Table of Computati∣on and Dimensuration. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Acton 06 06 08’3 08’3 Uxbridg 09 15 10’1 18’4 Beconsfield 07 22 08’5 27’1 High-Wickham 05 27 05’5 32’6 Tetsworth 10 37 12’0 44’6 Wheatly-bridg 04 41 04’5 49’3 Islip 06 47 08’0 57’3 Enston 10 57 12’5 70’0 Morton In marsh 10 67 13’2 83’2 to Broadway 05 072 07’5 090’7 Pershore 07 079 11’6 102’5 WORCESTER 06 085 09’5 112’2 Bromyard 10 095 12’2 124’4 Lemster 08 103 11’3 135’7 Prestain 08 111 12’7 148’6 Ithon fluv. 08 119 12’7 161’5 Riadergowy 06 125 09’0 170’5 Aberistwith 20 145 28’5 199’2 With the Branch to the City of OXFORD, thus, From LONDON Comput. Measure. to Tetsworth, as before 37 37 44’6 44’6. Wheatly 05 42 05’4 50’2. OXFORD 05 47 05’4 55’6. You pass through the several Counties of Midlesex, Buckingham, Oxford, Glocester, Counties past through. Worcester, Hereford, Radnor; and Cardigan; and over the Rivers Coln, Tame, Rivers crostover. Char∣wel, Avon, Severn, Teme, Lug, Ithon, Wye, Istwith and Rydal; Quality of the Way. having a good Road to Wickham, but less pleasant to Prestain, no ill Way to Riadergowy, but thence to Aber∣istwith generally boggy, yet almost every where replenisht with good Towns, con∣venient Entertainment, and delightful Prospects.
THUS much for the General History of the whole Road, which being contain'd in 3 Plates, the First ending at Islip in Oxfordshire, and Including the Branch to the City of OXFORD; the Second at Bromyard in Herefordshire, and the Third at Aberistwith; We begin with Plate the First, containing 57 Miles 3 Furlongs, wherein these acute or forward Turnings are to be avoided. At 2’1. At the Pound in St. Giles's the for∣ward Way to Hampstead. 3’2. At Tyburn, the Right to Padington. 20’4. The Right to Alesbury. 34’5. A little short of West-wickham the Right forward. At 35’0. at the End of West-wickham, the Coach-way to Stoken-church on the R. 49’4. Beyond Wheatly-bridg, the forward way to OXFORD. 52’0. The Left to OXFORD. 53’6. The Right to Odington. [* The obtuse ways are observed at the End of the Plate.] We proceed then, LONDON. as in all Direct Roads, from the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, through Cornhil, Cheapside, Newgate-street, Newgate, Snow-hill and Holborn, (as in the De∣scription of LONDON prefixt) leaving the Lord Mayors Banqueting-house on the Right; [2’1. N.W.] passing Tyburn, and by the North-side of Hide-park and Campden-park, come to Kensington Gravel-pits at 5 Miles, Kensington Gravel-Pits, 5. M. Acton, 8’3. a long but discontinued Village; at 6’7. through Shep∣herd's Bush, a small Village; at 8’2. you enter Acton, a well accomodated Thorough∣fare; at 11’3. pass through Hanwel, a small Village seated on the Brent, and at 12’7. Norcoat another small Village, Norcoat, 12’7. whence at 15 Miles by Hays-Church on the Left, and at 15’7. through part of the Town, and over Hellingdon Heath, you enter Hellingdon at 17’1. and Uxbridg at 18’1. Hellingdon, 17’2. Ʋxbridg, 18’4. a large and well-frequented Town of a mile Extent, numbring a∣bove 200 Houses, hath a well-furnish'd Market on Thursdays, two Fairs annually, and divers good Inns for Reception of Travellers, as the Crown, Three Swans, &c. At the End of the Town you cross the Coln and enter Buckinghamshire, [24’3. W. by N.] and by several sprinkled Houses on the Road, and Hedgley-park on the Left, you descend for 4 Fur∣longs, Beconsfield, 27’1. whence through the Woods at 27 Miles, you enter Beconsfield or Becon-field, si∣tuate on a dry Hill though no considerable Ascent, numbring about 100 well-built Houses, affording several good Inns, as the Swan, &c. and hath a reasonable Market on Wednsdays, and two Fairs yearly, on Candlemas Day and Holy Thursday. At 28’5. You come to a Descent sprinkled with Woods, whence by Loudwater, a small Village, High-Wickham, 32’6. (a Brook accompanying your Road on the Left) at 32’3. you enter High-Wickham, seated in a pleasant Vale, a large and Well-built Town, numbring near 200 Houses, with several good Inns, as the Cathern Wheel, &c. Is Govern'd by a May∣or, Recorder, &c. Sends Burgesses to Parliament, hath a well-frequented Market on Fridays, and two Fairs annually; whence by several scattering Houses on the Road, and through West-wickham at 34’7. West-wickham, 34’7. a Village with some good Inns; at 36’4. you ascend for half a Mile, pass through a Wood of 12 Furlongs, and at 38’2. enter Oxfordshire: Thus through Stokenchurch at 39 Miles a well-known Village; Stoken-Church, 39. M. [41’1. N.W. by W.] Tetsworth, 44’6. [45 Miles, W. by N.] At 40’1. you descend for 6 Furlongs with Woods on your Left, whence you proceed directly to Tetsworth at 44’6. a Village of good Accomodation and 2 Furlongs Extent, from which a di∣rect Way leads you to Wheatly-bridg, over the Tame, a Furlong beyond which you come to the Division of the Roads; That to Islip turning short on the Right, and the OX∣FORD Road proceeding directly, Wheatly, 50’2. OXFORD, 55’6. and conveying you at 50’1. to Wheatly, a good Town of 3 Furlongs, and at 52’3. descending for 10 Furlongs, cross the Charwel at 55’1. and enter the City and University of OXFORD, seated on the North of the Thames, where it receives the foresaid Charwel; A City of great Antiquity, [whereof see more in OXFORD to BRISTOL pag. 157 and succeeding Plates.] But prosecuting the Road towards Islip, [49’4. N.W. by N.] you pass by Forest-hill a Village adjoyning, and Stanton St. John a Furlong to the Right at 53 Miles; Forrest-hill, 51.7. Islip, 57’4. whence a direct Way brings you to Islip at 57’3. first crossing the Reie or Bure, as in the next Plate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 5 Furl. from OXFORD the Left to Heddington. 2. 1’3. Short of Wheatly, the Left. 3. 1’5. Beyond Tetsworth, the Right to Henley, and the Left acute. 4. 7 Furl. beyond Stoken-Church, the Left to Wickham, the Coach-way. 5. At the End of Uxbridg, the Left to Swak∣ley. 6. 2 Furl. short of Hellingdon, the Right to Colebrook. 7. In Hanwel the Right to Brentford. 8. At Forest-hill, the forward to Haulton.
The Continuation of ye Road From LONDON to ABERISTWITH Plate ye Second Com̄encing at Islip Com̄ Oxford & Extending to Bramyard com̄ Hereford By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 67 Miles furlong vizt. From Islip to Enston 12’5. Morton-Inmarsh 13’2. to Broadway 7’5. to Pershore 11’6. to the City of WORCESTER 9’5 to Bramyard 12’ miles 2. furlongs
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to ABERISTWITH. Com. Cardigan, South-Wales. PLATE. II. Commencing at Islip in Oxfordshire, and Extending to Bramyard in Herefordsh. Containing 67 Miles 1 Furlong. Wherein the following Turnings are to be avoided. At 65’2. the Right to Barton. At 73’1. The Left forward to Chipping-Norton. At 77’1. the forward to Long Compton. At 81’3. the Right to Campden at the 4 Shire stone. At 91’3. the Left to Somerfield. At 95’5. the Left to Hinton. At 102’0. the Left to Cheltenham. At 103’1. the Right to Aulcester. At 103’3. the Left to Upton. At 107’0. the Right to Easton White-Lady, and the Left to Upton. At 123’0. the Right to Edwin. At 124’2. the Left to HEREFORD. IN Plate the First We conducted you to Islip, seated on the North-west of the Bure, Islip, 57’3. N. by W. over which it has a Stone-bridg of 6. Arches, a small Town but well accomodated, and here the two Days Stage-coach to WORCESTER takes up the first Night; whence an indifferent straight Way brings you at 60’2. to Blechindon, Blechingdon, 60’3. a Village of 2 Furlongs; and at 62’2. you cross the Charwel, [62’2. W. by N.] mention'd at the Entrance into OX∣FORD, and enter open Arable, where at 62’4. the Right-hand Way unites again at 64’5. [64 M. N. W. by N.] the Left-hand Ways hereabouts leading to that pleasantly scituate Corporation and Market-town, Woodstock, about 2 Miles distant. At 65 Miles you pass by Wotton Church on the Left, and at 66’3. Glimpton, 66’3. W. b. N. come to Glimp∣ton, a small Village, whence by the Checquer-Inn, through open Arable; at 70 Miles you come to Enston an inconsiderable Village, yet of good Entertainment; Enston. 70 M. beyond which you have a straight open Road to 73’1. where, [73’1. N. N. W.] the forward Way leading to Chip∣ping-Norton, you bear to the Right, and at 74 M. by a House call'd Chapel on the Heath, 6 Furlongs further leave Chipping-Norton half a Mile to the Left, a large but not com∣pact Town, except about the Market-place, yet a Corporation Govern'd by Bay∣liffs, &c. Keeps a Court for Actions under 4 l. and has a good Market on Wedns∣days. At 75’2. you descend a Hill of 7 Furlongs, leaving Great Rolright Church on the Right, and ascending for 5 Furlongs leave Little Rolright on the Left, in which Parish, but a Mile to the Left, stands that circular Monument of great Stones, said to be Erected in Memory of a Battel there fought by Rollo the Dane: Then by Long Compton on the Right, and Little Compton on the Left, you pass between the Coun∣ties of Oxford and Warwick; at 79’2. descend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, and at 81’3. come to the 4 Shire Stone, the well-known Limits of Oxfordshire to the South and S. E. Warwick to the North and N. E. a part of Worcestershire included within Gloce∣stersh. to the S. W. and Glocestersh. to the West and S. W. Here you bear to the Left, and a morass Way brings you at 83’2. to Morton in the Marsh, vulgo, Morton Henmarsh, Morton Henmarsh, 83’3 of 2 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Foss-way, a good Thorough-fare, had formerly a Mar∣ket on Tuesdays, at present onely 2 Fairs, Lady-day and Alhallontide. At 84’6. You ascend Broadway-hill of 5 Furlongs, Burton on the Hill, 85’1 whereon is Seated Burton on the Hill, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, well inhabited; when being entred on the Downs, [86’2. N. W. by W.] call'd Broadway-hills, 3 Furlongs beyond you leave Burton's Ash on the Left, where you have a very Eminent Prospect; and at 88’4. by a Cross Hand for Direction; 7 Fur∣longs farther descend Broadway-Hill, even to the Town of Broadway, Broadway. 90’7. which you en∣ter at 90’4. a well-built Town of 5 Furlongs Length, affording several good Inns for Accomodation, and though no Market-town of it self, yet plentifully supply'd from the adjacent Ones of Campden and Evesholm. Hence an indifferent straight-way, for the most part open Arable, leaving Child's-Wickham
on the Left, brings you at 96’3. to Wickenford, a Brook so call'd, where you enter Worcestershire, and a little after, the Vale of Evesholm, so eminent through the King∣dom for it's Fertility, [102. M. N. W. b. W.] being here within 2 Miles of the Town of Evesholm: At 100’6. you enter a Lane conducting you at 102’1. to the fair River Avon, passable by a large Stone-bridg of 6 great and several small Arches, Pershore, 102’5. leading you into Pershore, a Town of 7 Furl. Length, seated in a Plain, said to be Built by Egelward Duke of Dorset, in the Reign of King Edgar, a large Town containing near 300 Houses and 2 Parish-Churches, has 2 Markets Weekly on Tuesdays and Saturdays, and one Fair annually on the 15th. of June; somewhat decay'd since the Dissolution of it's ancient Abby, but now in a fair way of retriving it's pristine Lustre. At 103’4. you pass by Alesborough, a House on the Left, giving Title to the Right Honorable the Lord Coventry; Stouton, 107. M. whence little occurs, onely passing through Stouton at 107 Miles, a small Village; your Road direct, and mostly enclos'd, brings you at 111’4. to the Suburbs, and by the Way of Sudbury-Gate, to the City of WORCE∣STER, whereof take this short Account. WORCESTER, WORCESTER, 112’2. a City and County of it self, pleasantly and commodiously seat∣ed on the Eastern Banks of the Severn, over which it hath a fair Stone-bridg with a Tower thereon; a City of great Antiquity, by Antonine and Ptolomy call'd Branonium; by the Britans, Caer-wrangon; and by the Latines, Vigornia; Enjoying great Privileges and Immunities Granted them by several Kings, even before the Conquest; and though a plentiful Sharer in Calamities, yet at this day remains a City of extraordina∣ry Beauty and Splendor; sending Burgesses to Parliament, Honored with the Title of Marquisate in the Right Noble Henry Marquess and Earl of WORCESTER; Dignified with an Episcopal See, accounting 88 Bishops; is Govern'd by a Mayor, 6 Al∣dermen, a Sheriff and two Chamberlains Elected out of 24 principal Citizens or Ca∣pital Counsellors, 48 Capital Citizens, or Common-Councellors, to whom belong also a Recorder, Town-Clark and two Coroners, besides 13 Constables, a Sword∣bearer and 4 Sergeants at Mace: Is divided into 7 Wards, containing besides the Cathedral, 9 Parish-Churches, not accounting St. Michael's and St. John's adjoyning, and 3 others Demolisht; Numbers 3 Grammar-Schools and 7 Hospitals liberally en∣dow'd; has a fair Water-house and a well-contriv'd Key; enjoys a great Trade espe∣cially for Clothing, and it's Markets on Wednsdays, Fridays and Saturdays very consi∣derable, especially the Last, for Cattel, Flesh, Fish and all Provisions; [more of which vid. in LONDON to Montgomery, p. 87.] From WORCESTER over the Bridg, through St. John's, and over the small River Laughern, an enclos'd Way leads by Earl's-Court on the Right, through a Wood, and after by Cotheridg-Church on the Left, Broadwaies, 117’4. and at 117’4. through Broadways, a scattering Village; then by Todnam-Chapel on the Right, at 119’4. you cross the Teme, Lulsey, 119’7. alias Temde, over a Wood-bridg, and by Lulsey Church on the Left, at 120’3. you enter Herefordshire, Bramyard, 124’4. whence by scattering Houses, and over Bramyard-Heath, at 124’2. you cross the Froom over a Stone-Bridg of two Arches, and presently enter Bramiard, alias Bromyard, a Market-Town of 4 Furlongs Extent, as in the next Plate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. Against Cotheridg, the Left to Hallow. 2. 6 Furl. beyond WORCESTER, the Left to Evesholm. 3. At the End of Stouton, the forward to Upton. 4. At 1’6. short of Pershore, the Left to Aulcester. 5. 3 Furl. beyond Pershore-bridg, the Left to Evesholm. 6. 2 Miles short of Wickenford-bridg, the Right to Winchcomb. 7. 7 Furl. short of Burton's Ash, the Right to Stow. 8. 10 Furlongs beyond the 4 Shire-stone, the Right to Chippingnorton. 9. At the End of Enston, the Right to Kil∣lington. 10 2 Furlongs beyond the Checquer-Inn, the Right to Woodstock. 11. In Glimpton, the Left to Banbury. 12. 4 Furlongs beyond Wotton-Church, the Left, uniting 2 Miles beyond.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to ABERISTWITH By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmographer Plate 3d. & last Comencing at Bramyard com̄: Heref: &c Extending to Aberist with Containing 74 miles 6 furl: vizt. From Bramyard to Leominster 11’2. to Prestaine 13’to Ilion flu: 12’7. to Riadergowy 8’7. to ye Entring of Cardigan-shire 3’4 to Aberistwith 20’2.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to ABERISTWITH, in Cardigansh. PLATE. III. & Last. Commencing at Bromyard, in Com. Hereford. and Extending to Aberistwith, aforesaid. Containing 74 M. 6. Furl. Wherein thes following Turnings are to be avoided. At 125’7. The Left to Webley. At 136’2. the Left to Webley. At 138’2. the Left to Keinton. At 140’3. the Right to Knighton. At 142’4. the Left to Hoobden. At 149’5. the Right to Knighton. At 160’2. the Right. At 162’5. the Left to Garthuagh. At 169’3. the Right to St. Harmon. At 171’0. the Left to Llannimdiffry. At 175’6. the Left to Rose-fair. At 188’3. the Left to Cardigan. At 190’3. the Left to Llanrusted. At 197’4. the Left to Llanrusted. IN Plate the Second We brought you at 124’5. to Bromiard, alias Bramyard, Bramyard, S. W. b. W, [125’6. W. by N.] a Town extending most on the Road, containing near 200 Houses, with a good Market on Mundays, for Cattle, Corn, &c. and 5 Fairs annually, on Lady-day, Holy-Rood, Whit∣son-munday, Thursday before St. James, and Thursday before St. Luke; and is not unpro∣vided of good Inns for Entertainment of Travellers: whence an Indirect Way brings you at 127’3. to Birdenbury, a small discontinued Village, Birdenbury, 127’3, Hockley, 130’6. Eaton, 134’6. beyond which a straight Road conveys you at 130’6. through Hockley, a long scattering Village like the for∣mer, and leaving Humber 6 Furlongs on the Left, brings you at 134’6. to Eaton a small Village on the Left, 2 Furlongs farther crossing the Lug over a Stone-bridg of 3 Ar∣ches, and at 135’5. entring Leominster, vulgo Lemster, Leominster, 136 M. of onely 4 Furlongs Extent this Way, but a Mile transverse; in British, Lhan Lieni, i.e Templum Monialium, a more pro∣bable Etymology than that of Leonis Monasterium, from a Lyon appearing to a Monk in a Vision; a large and well-built Town, seated in a rich Soil, and upon the River Lug, which in form of a Semi-Circle waters the North and East Side of it; contains (though but one Parish-Church) about 400 Houses, numbring 6 Wards, viz. Eaton∣street, South-street, High-street, Cross and Pinsley, Midle-marsh and Lower-marsh; is Go∣ver'nd by a Bayliff, Recorder, 5 Justices, and 24 Capital Burgesses, besides 12 Con∣stables; Elects Parliament Men, hath a very great Market on Fridays for Cattle, Corn, &c. and 4 Fairs annually, viz. St. Simon and Jude, St. Peter, St. Bartholomew, and Tues∣day after Mid-lent Sunday; is Eminent for it's fine Wool call'd Lemster Ore, as likewise for its pure Wheatand fine Flowr, and hath several good Inns, as the Crown, Uni∣corn, Three Horse-shoes, &c. The main Body of the Town lies upon the Right, which We shall carry you through, in BRISTOL to CHESTER pag. 111. But proceeding at 136’2. you omit the forward Way on the Left to Webley, and an enclos'd Road by two Houses on the Right, would convey you directly to Keinton, but bearing to the Right at 138’2. you pass by Kingsland Church, and at 140’1. through Kingsland, Kingsland, 141 M. a scattering Village of 4 or 5 Furlongs; and at 142’4. through Easterton, Easterton, 142’4. [143’1. W.] a small Village; whence at 144’4. descending 2 Furlongs, and after by stragling Houses, and a great Hill on the Left, at 146’6. you cross the small River Wadels, and pass through Comb, a discontinued Village, Entring Radnorshire at 148’3. Comb, 146’6. and a Furlong farther Prestain seated on the River Lug, in a Pleasant and Rich Vale, in Welsh, Prestain, 148’4. Lhan Andre, formerly a small Village, now a large and well-built Town of 4 Fur∣longs Extent, is the Place where the Assizes are kept for the County of Radnor, has a well-frequented Market on Saturdays, especially for Barley, which is here Mault∣ed in good quantity, and two Fairs annually, on St. Andrew and Midsomer Day, with several good Inns for Entertainment, as the Antelop, Swan, &c. Hence at 151’3. through a scattering Village call'd Discoyd, and at 153’3. Discoyd, 151’3. Cascob, 153’4. [157’1. N. W. by W.] through Cascob an inconsiderable Village, you ascend a Hill of 6 Furlongs, and by Blethu∣agh Forest, and Blethuagh Church on the Right, at 154’7. you descend for 7 Fur∣longs; whence over a Heath of 6 Furlongs your Road ascends again for 5 Furlongs, [158. N. by W.] and somewhat a less Descent brings you into a direct enclos'd Way passing by a few
scattered Houses, and crossing the small River Comaron at 160 Miles, beyond which passing over another Hill about 4 Furlongs high, at 161’5. you come to the River Ithon, falling into the Wye above Bealt; and at 163’2. cross Clowedock fluv. which falls into the foresaid Ithon; [169 Miles, W. S, W,] whence repeated Ascents and Descents, leaving Nantmel on the Left, brings you at 168’5. to the River Dulas, beyond which a direct Road con∣veys you to Riadergowy, Riadergowy, 170’3. W.N.W. vulgo Raihader, which you enter at 170’3. a Town of 3 Fur∣longs Extent, seated in a Mountainous Part of the County, and upon the River Wye; is Govern'd by a Bayliff, has a Market on Wednsdays and 4 Fairs annually, St. James Day, 10th. of August, 14 Days before Michaelmas, and three Weeks after Alballontide, with two Inns, the Swan and the Lion; at the End of the Town over a Wood-bridg you cross the Wye, and 5 Furlongs farther come to the Foot of an Eminent Ascent of 10 Furlongs, which at 174’4. descends for 6 Furlongs; and having left the enclos'd Way a Mile on this side Riadergowy, your Road continues altogether open as well as Mountainous and Boggy, even to Aberistwith. But proceeding from the last mention'd Descent, the River Eland accompanying you on the Left; at 179’1. you cross Ecomistwith Brook and enter Cardiganshire, pre∣sently ascending a Hill of 6 Furlongs equally descending, and over Moorish-ground, by some Lead-mines, and a House on the Right at 183’5. call'd Mowen Glowth, a woody Descent leads you into Brunant, Bruant, 184.3. a small Village seated in a Valley, whence by some scattering Houses seated on the following Ascent, and sprinkled along the suc∣ceeding part of the Road, which still lies through a kind of morass; at 192’5. you touch upon the River Ridal on the Right, and at 194’2. descend for 12 Furlongs crossing the River Ridal, [193’4. N. W. Llanbadern vawr, 197’ at 196’7. and 2 Furlongs farther entering Llanbadern-Vaur of 6 Furlongs Extent on the Road; a well built Town with a fair Church, former∣ly an Episcopal See, and now the Parish Church to Aberistwith which you enter at 198’7. of 4 Furlongs Extent, whereof in brief thus: Aberistwith, Aberistwith, 199’2. or Aberisthwy, seated on the Ridal, near its Confluence with the Istwith where it falls into the Sea, imply'd by the praefixt Aber, i.e. Ostium Fluminis, former∣ly a Wall'd-town, fortify'd with a now ruinous Castle; and containing many more Houses than now it does, yet it is a Corporation Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, &c. sending one Burgess to Parliament, enjoying a good Market on Mondays, for Corn, Wool, &c. and 2 Fairs yearly, viz. Monday before Easter, and the 18th. of December; and though it scarce numbers 100 Houses, yet it is well-frequented for its Fishing Trade for Herings, Cod, &c. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. A Furl. from Aberistwith, the Left to Welshpool. 2. At the End of Llanbadern-vawr, the Left to Welshpool. 3. 3’2. Beyond Llanbadern-vawr, the Right to Rose-fair. 4. 4 Furlongs farther the Right. 5. 2’6. short of Brunant, the Left to New-Town. 6. 1’3. Beyond Riadergowy, the Left to Montgomery. 7. 10 Furlongs short of Clowedock fluv. the Left to Ludlow. 8. 1 Furlong short of Ithon fluv. the Left to Knighton. 9. 2’4. short of Cascob, the Right to Rad∣nor. 10. At Cascob the Left to Knighton. 11. In Discoyd the Right to Keinton. 12. 5 Furlongs beyond Prestain, the Right to Keinton. 13. At the End of Comb, the Right to Keinton. 14. 3 Furlongs beyond Easterton, the Right to Arland. 15. The Left in Kingsland. 16. 2 Furl. beyond Kingsland, the Right to Lawton. 17. A Mile short of Lemster, the Right to Evington. 18. The Right in Lemster to HERE∣FORD. 19. 4 Furlongs beyond Lug-Bridg, the Right to Hampton, and a Furlong farther the Left to Pidleston.
The Road from LONDON to ARVNDEL. com: Sussex. By JOHN OGILBY Esqr His Ma.ties Cofmographer Containing 55 miles 4 Furlongs vizt. From ye Standard in Cornhill to Ewel  to Letherhead 5m5 fur to Mickleham 2: to Darking 2:5 to Billinghurst 27 to Amberley. 9.7. to Houghton 1:4 to ARVNDEL 2: 6: With the continitation From ARVNDEL to CHICHESTER.
The Road from London to Arundel In SƲSSEX. 1. THE Point of Bearing S.W. by S. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 49 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 46 M. 4. The Dimensuration 55’4. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Towting 05 05 06’7 06’7 Ewell 06 11 07’1 14’0 Letherhead 05 16 05’5 19’5 Darking 04 20 04’6 24’3 to Stonestreet 05 25 05’5 30’0 Billinghurst 10 35 11’3 41’3 Amberley 08 43 09’7 51’2 Arundel 03 46 04’2 55’4 With the Continuation from Arundel to CHICHESTER, thus From Arundel Comp. Measure. to CHICHESTER 08 M. 10’4. Midlesex, Surrey and Sussex include the whole Road, and the Thames, Mole, Oke, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Arun and Lavant are the principal Rivers past over, affording an indifferent Way, but good Entertainment. The Road We exhibit is by Darking, The quality of the way. yet some will pass by Horsham 3 or 4 Miles to the Left, and others travel the more frequented Way on the Left to Darking by Stretham, Micham and Sutton. Thus much in general, the Turnings to be avoided being these that follow: At 1’7. The Right to Kingston. At 2’3. the Left to Croydon. At 8’4. the Right forward to Kingston. At 13’2. the Left to Nonsuch. At 14’1. the Right to the Common. At 15’5. The Right. At 15’7. The Left. At 19’4. In Leatherhead, the right to Guilford. At 24’3. In Darking the Right to Guilford. At 32’7. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The Left along Honey-lane uniting again. At 33’3. The Right to Guilford. At 34’7. The Left to Horsham. At 35’2. The Left by Screw-bridg uniting a∣gain. At 45’4. The Right to Pulborow. At 51’4. The Left. At 53’5. The Right to CHICHESTER. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, along Grace-church-street, LONDON, S.W. b S. Fish-street-hill, over LONDON-bridg and through Southwark, as in the Description of LON∣DON, a small Interval brings you at 1’4. to Newington of 2 Furlongs Extent, Newington, 1’5. at the End of which the acute Way on the Right to Kingston, Guilford and Portsmouth branches out, and another at the Gallows to Stretham and thence to Lewes and Newhaven by Croydon, or to Arundel by Horsham or Darking. Hence over Clapham-heath you come at 6’4. to Towting-beck a small Village, Towtingbeck, 6’4. at 7 Miles pass through Towting-graveny a Village of 2 Furlongs, Towting graveny, 7 M. Moredon, 10’3. whence an indirect Way brings you at 10’2. to Moredon another little Village, and leaving Non-such on your Left, a stately House of the King's Built by H. 8th. you pass through Ewel at 14 Miles, Ewel, 14 M. a small Market-Town of about 2 Furlongs long; and at 15’4 through part of Ebesham, Ebesham, 15’4. vulgo Epsum, a Town much frequented for its Medicinal Waters, the Well lying 3 Furlongs on the Right at 16’6. But proceeding, at 19’3. Leatherhead, 19’5. S. you enter Leatherhead of 3 Furlongs in length, affording good Entertainment; whence bearing to the Left, and at 21’5. passing through Mickleham a Village of 2 Furlongs, Mickleham, 21’5. a Mile farther you cross the River Mole, near the Place where it has a subterranean Passage for a Mile or two, Darking, 24’3. and enter Darking, alias Darkin, at 24’1. situate on a Branch of the Mole, a large Town of good Reception, with a Noted Market on Thursdays, especially for Fowl. From Darkin over a Hill of 3 Furlongs height, succeeded by another Ascent, and woody on each side, you come to Cold-harbor Hill ascending for 3 Furlongs, but des∣cending a Mile, and conveying you at 30 Miles to Stone-street a scattering Village; Stone-street, 30 M.
whence a Cause-way of 2 Miles, part of the old Roman Port-way call'd Stany-street; (near which is Okeley or Aclea, where King Ethelwald Son of King Egbert obtain'd an eminent Victory over the Danes) conveys you by a small Descent at 30’7. to Oke∣wood Bridg, Okewood Bridg, 30’7. and ascending Oke-wood Hill, enter Sussex at 32’7. the forward Way lead∣ing through Honey-lane, to avoid the Dirtyness of which, you bear to the Right, and at 34’7. the forward Way on the Left leads to Horsham about 3 Miles di∣stant, a good Borough and Market-Town, so call'd from Horsa Brother of Hen∣gist; Govern'd by 2 Bayliffs, Electing Parliament Men, and is the place where the County Goal is kept; Rohook, 35 Miles. [37’5. S. by W.] omitting which you come next to Rohook a small Village, where you have again a different Way on the Left. Hence through a small Wood, at 36’4. you cross the River Arun, leaving Detsum-Place on the Left, and uniting the last mention'd Way at 37’5. whence a direct Road through Buckman-Corn a small Village leads you at 41’1. Bucknam-Corn, 39’4. Billingherst, 41’3. into Billingherst of 3 Furlongs, and good Accomodation; thence through a small Village call'd Mulsey, and over New-Bridg and Pulborow Common, you descend for three Furlongs, pass over Wickford Bridg, Wickenholt, 47’6. and at 47’6. through Wickenholt a small Village, and af∣ter by Parham Park Sr. Cecil Bishop's, and the Place on the Left you come to Parham a little Village; Amberley, 51’2. whence 3 successive Descents convey you at 51 Miles into Amberley, a reasonable Thorough-fare of 3 Furlongs. At 52’2. Houghton, 52’6, over Houghton Bridg you cross the River Arun, and 4 Furlongs farther pass through Houghton 2 Furlongs long, whence after an Ascent of 3 Furlongs you come to Arundel at 55’2. Arundel, 55’4, by the Way of Mary-gate, whence to the Bridg it extends 6 Furlongs; an antient Borough-Town, Seated on the N. W. of the River Arun, over which it has a fair Wooden-bridg where Ships of 100 Tun may ride; Is Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, 12 Burgesses, a Steward, &c. has a great Market on Thursdays, and a small one for Provison on Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually, the 3d. of May, the 10th. of August, the 14th. of September, and the 6th. of December; It enjoys a good Trade, several Ships being here built, as of late the Society and the Mary, &c. The Castle famous in the Saxon Times, and yet, as having the Honor of an Earl∣dom entail'd upon the Posessors thereof, now in the Noble Family of the Howards Earl of Arundel and Duke of Norfolk, is seated on the East of the Tame, and reput∣ed a Mile in Circumference. From Arundel through the old Fish Market and Watergate, Arundel, W. by S. by Hookswood on the Left, and Arundel great Park on the Right, (the little one lying between Marygate and the Castle) at 2’7. [3’2. W.] Crockerhil, 6’5. you descend Amsford Hill of 4 Furlongs, and at 4 Miles over Mac∣krels Bridg, and after by Half-way Tree passing through Crockerhil at 6’5. a small Vil∣lage; Thence by Boxley Church at 7 Miles, and Sr. William Morley's House on the Right, and Tangmere on the Left, at 8’2. you pass through Maudline a scattering Vil∣lage, and by Hampnet Church on the Right, and the Place on the Left, you cross the Lavant, CHICHESTER, 10’4. and at 9’6. enter the Suburbs of CHICHESTER, seated in a Plain and on the River Lavant near its confluence with the Sea, a City indifferent large, numbring 4 Parish-Churches within the Walls, besides the Cathedral, and One with∣out East Gate, and another without West Gate, both Demolisht in the late Wars, hath 4 Gates respecting the 4 Cardinal Points, to which the 4 principal Streets lead, and are call'd East-street, West-street, North-street, and South-street; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, hath two well furnish'd Markets Weekly on Wednsdays and Saturdays, which are Noted to be the greatest for Fish in the County, and 5 Fairs annually, viz. 23d. of April, Whit∣sun Munday, 25th. of July, Michaelmas Day, and 9 Days after, call'd Slow Fair: a far∣ther Account of which (vid. in LONDON to CHICHESTER, pag. 77. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Maudline the Left to Petworth. 2. In Amberley the Left. 3. A Furl. beyond Darking, the Right to LONDON by Stretham. 4. In Leatherhead the Left to Kingston. 5. At the Entring Ewel the Left to King∣ston. 6. At the Mid-way between Mordon and Towting, the Left to Wimbleton.
The Road from LONDON to BARWICK Actually Surveyd & delineated By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Total 339 Miles o. Furlongs. vizt. From LONDON, to Waltham 12. mile to Ware 21½. to Royston 38 to Huntingdon 57¼. to Stilton 69¼. to Stamford 83 to Grantham, 104½ to Newark 228½ to Tuxford 232¼ to Doncaster 255¼ to Wentbridg 165½ to Tadcaster 182½ to York 292 to Topcliffe 215¾ to Northallerton 229½ to Darlington 243½ to Durham 262½ to Newcastle 276½ to Morpeth 291  to Alnwick 310 to Belford to BARWICK 339 miles Gr. King Surveyor
The Road from London to Barwick In NORTHƲMBERLAND. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. b. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 28 o. M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 260. M. 4. The Dimensuration. 339’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Waltham 12 12’ 12’0 12’0 Ware 08 20 09’4 21’4 Royston 13 33 16’4 38’0 Huntingdon 15 48 19’2 57’2 Stilton 09 57 12’0 69’0 Stamford 12 69 13’6 83’0 Grantham 16 85 21’4 104’4 Newark 10 95 14’0 118’4 Tuxford 10 105 12’6 131’2 Doncaster 18 123 24’0 155’2 Wentbridg 07 130 10’2 165’4 to Tadcaster 12 142 17’0 182’4 YORK Micklegate 08 150 09’4 192’0 Topcliff 17 167 23’6 215’6 Northallerton 09 176 13’6 229’4 Darlington 10 186 14’0 243’4 DURHAM 14 200 19’0 262’4 Newcastle 12 212 14’0 276’4 Morpeth 12 224 14’4 291’0 Alnwick 12 236 19’0 310’0 Belford 12 248 13’4 323’4 Barwick 12 260 15’6 339’2 Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Cambridgshire, Huntingdonshire, Rutlandshire, Lincolnshire, Counties past through. Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, the Bishoprick of Durham and Northumberland are the Coun∣ties past through; And Lea, Granta, Owse, Nine, Welland, Witham, Trent, Meden, Idle, Rivers crost over. Whit∣water, Dun, Went, Are, Wharf, Nid, Your or Owse, Swale, Wisk, Tees, Skern, Were, Tyne, Blith, Wanspeck, Ale, Warne and Tweed, are the Rivers crost over: Being one of the most frequent∣ed Roads of the Kingdom, though none of the best Way, The quality of the way. for after the first 20 or 30 Mile 'tis so generally bad, that there was a certain late Imposition upon Travellers, during 3 years, at Stilton and a place or two on this side of about a Penny for a Horse &c. to∣wards the Repair of that part of it, yet is it well accommodated for Entertainment and at moderate rates. The Computation of Post Miles are precisely the same as the vulgar Estimation; only from Royston to Huntingdon they account 17. miles, and from YORK to Northallerton but 24 miles. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting in 5 Plates, the First ending at Stilton in Huntingdonshire, the 2d. at Tuxford in Nottinghamshire; the 3d. at the City of YORK; the 4th. at Chester in the street in the Bishoprick of Durham; and the 5th. at Barwick aforesaid; we begin with Plate the First Containing 69’2, wherein you are to avoid these following turnings. At 5 Miles the Left to Woodgreen. At 17’7. The Left to Brocktonbury Hall. At 21’3. The Right. At 27’3. The Right to Standon. At 27’6. The Right to Cambridg. At 31’3. The Right to Withiall. At 47’5. The Left to Packston. At 58’0. The Right. From the Standard in Cornhil, along Bishopsgate-street within, LONDON. [N.] through Bishopsgate and Bishopsgate-Street without, you come at 4. furl. to the Barrs, where you enter Shorditch, [2’1. N. b. E.] as in the Description of LONDON more at large, leaving LONDON at 1 mile 2 furl. and Hogsdon adjoyning on the Left, at 2’2. you enter Kingsland a Village of 2 furl. Kingsland. 2’3. Newington. 3’2. and a mile farther Newington such another, but giving you a long Street on the left to∣wards Islington, whence an easy Ascent though of 4 furl. called Stanford Hill, often fre∣quented by High-way-men, and equally descending, Tottenham. 5’1. brings you at 5 Miles to Tottenham High-Cross, a place well frequented by the Citizens; Hence reiterated Buildings lead you at 6’5. to Tottenham Street, Edmonton. 7’2. and at about 7 miles to Edmonton a long discontinued Vil∣lage. At 8’5. you come to Ponders-End, and presently after Lackmore-End, small Villages, Lackmore End. 9’2. and at 10 miles Enfield Wash a long disunited Village, whence leaving Tuttle Street
on the left at 11’6. Waltham Cross. 12. M. you enter Hartfordshire, and a little farther Waltham-Cross, a Post Town, and a very good thorough-fare, with 2 or 3 Convenient Inns for entertainment, It extends about 3 furlongs and a little beyond, where you have the Gibbet on the Right, Theobalds a House of the Kings and Pleasantly seated appears 2 furl. on the Left. At 13. Crossbrook-Street. 13. [13’7. N. E.] Cheston Street. 14’2. [15’1. N. b. E.] Miles you pass Cross-Brook, and a quarter of a mile farther Turners hill a small Village, at 14’1. entring Cheston-Street 3 furl. long, whence scattering Houses bring you to Wormley End at 16’1. half a mile beyond Crossing the New-River, and 2 furlongs after entering Brockton a discontinued Village. At 17’6. Hodsdon. 18.2. you come to Hodsdon of 6 furl. Extent seated near the River Lea, a good thorough-fare Town, with a well frequented Market on Thursdays; and one Fair on St. Peters day; hitherto your Road has continued like an entire Street by the frequency of Repeated Houses: Proceeding, you leave Hayley on the Left, and over a small Hill descend into Amwell at 20’5. Amwel. 20.5. from which and Chadwel the New River is conveyed to LONDON as in the Description of the City prefixt; The several Ways on the left here∣abouts lead to Hartford, but 2 miles distant, the Shire Town, Governed by a May∣or, 9 Burgesses, &c. Electing Parliament Men, and having a Market on Saturdays; had once 5 Churches, reduced to 3. and is much decay'd since the diverting the great Road from it. At 21’4 you enter Ware a mile in length. Ware. 21.4. N.N.E. crossing therein first the New River aforesaid, and next the Lea, which at about half a miles distance has accompanied you this last 14 Mile; a Large Town full of Inns; with a good Market on Tuesdays; and talkt on for its great Bed; whence by Wades Mill where you Cross the Mimer, you pass through High Cross end, Colliers end. 25’5. [27’3. N. b. W.] Puckridg. 27’4. and Colliers end, and at 27’2. enter Puckeridg alias Puckrich, a good thorough-fare of 3 furl. at the entrance into which the Road on the Right leads to Standon a small Mar∣ket Town a mile distant, and just beyond the Town the great Road to Cambridge, &c. lies before you on the Right. At 29. Buntingford. 31’6. [32. M. N. b. E.] Miles you repass the said Mimer and at 31’5. come to Buntingford, a good thorough-fare Town of 4 furlongs with a Market on Mundays, 6 furlongs beyond which you enter New Chipping, and at 34 miles Buckland, 2 small Villages, whence an ea∣sie descent leads you at 38 miles to Royston, Royston. 38’2. a large Town 4 furl. long, seated on the Er∣ming Street in a fertile Vale, and part in Cambridgeshire, full of good Inns, with a great Corn-Market on Wednsdays. At 39’7. Kneesworth. 40’6. Arrington. 44.5. you enter Cambridgshire, and at 40’6 pass through Kneesworth a small Village; at 43’2. Cross the River Grant alias Cam and at 44’5. come to Arrington another Village, whence a direct Road by Wimple and Cungrave on the Right, and through a little Wood at 48. Caxton. 50. M. miles brings you at 49’3 to Holm, and at 49’6. to Caxton, of 3 furl. Extent, seated in the Clay, a Post Town, and reasonable thorough-fare, with a Market on Tuesdays. At 51’7. Papworth Everard. 51’7. [53’6. N. b. W.] you pass through Papworth Everard a Village of 2 furlongs, and leaving Nether Papworth or Papworth Agnes half a mile on the Left, enter Huntingdonshire at 53’5. leaving Hilton 4 furl. to the Right, and afterwards Beggers Bush, a Bush so called Emi∣nently situate a little on the left, Godmanchester. 56’2. a small descent leading you into Godmanchester at 56’2 Extending 4 furlongs, a Place of great Antiquity, and a large Corporation, seated in a fertile Soil, and on the River Owse much addicted to Husbandry; being crost the River you enter Huntingdon, Huntingdon. 57’5. [58. M. N. W.] heretofore Numbring 15 Parish Churches, now only four; Go∣vern'd by a Mayor and 12 Aldermen, Electing Parliament men, is the Shire Town, has a good Market on Saturdays, and gives Title to the Right Honorable Theophilus Earl of Huntingdon (as more at large in Huntingdon to Ipswich pag. 145.) At 58 miles you leave the Town; [62’1. N.] Stilton 69’3. at 59’7. pass through Great Stukely a Village of 2 furl. and half a mile farther Little Stukely; at 62 miles bearing to the Right, a direct Road indifferently enclosed and open, by Stonegate Hole, and Stonegate on the Left, and St. Andrews Chapel and Cannington on the Right, brings you at 69’1. to Stilton as in Plate 2d. Backward turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Stilton the Right and Left to Oundle and PETERBOROUGH 2. Against Stonegate the Lef to St Ives. 3. In Holm the Left to Bourn. 4. 7 Furl. beyond Holm, the Right to Pack∣stone. 5. 6 Furl. beyond Buntingford, the Right to Upstaine. 6. At the end of Ware the Right to Hart∣ford. 7. At the end of Kingsland, the Right to Islington.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to BARWICK Beginning at Stilton and extending to Tudord Plate the 2d Containing 62 miles From Stilton to Stamford 13 ¾ to Grantham 22½ to Newark 14 to Tuxford 12 ¾
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to BARWICK, Com. Northumbr. PLATE. II. Commencing at Stilton Com. Huntingdon and Extending to Tuxford Com. Nottingham. Containing 62 Miles. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. 1 At 73’2. (From LONDON) an Oblique Cross Way the Right to Allerton. 2 At 81’4. the forward way which leaves Stamford on the Right. 3 At 97’7. the Left to Stoke, the Right to Easton. 4 At 104’7. the Left to Barobey. 5 At 112’5. the Right to Dodington. 6 At the Entrance into Newark the Right to Coddington. 7 At 110’4. the Left to Kellum. 8 At 130’ Miles, the Right to Normanton. IN Plate the first we brought you to Stilton at 69’2. a reasonable through-fare, Stilton N. with good Reception, and a Principal Post Town, of about 3. furlongs Extent, [70’3. N.W.b.N.] whence an open direct way passing 6 furl. from Haddon on the left, at 73’1. [73’7. W.N.W.] conveys you between Chesterton and Allerton, each a quarter of a Mile from the Road; 5 furl. farther a way falls in from Peterborough, at a place called Washington-Corner, Water Newton. 75. a Mile beyond which you enter Water-Newton a Village of 2 furl. Sibson. 76, M. seated on the South-west Banks of the Ri∣ver Nine, and another mile farther, viz. at 76 miles pass through Sibson a small Village lea∣ving Stibbington between you and the River 2 furl. to the Right; At 77’2. crossing the foresaid River Nine, and entring Wantsworth of 3 furl and therewith Northamptonshire, [77’3. N.b.E.] Wantsworth. 77’6. [78’2. N,W.] leav∣ing Thornhow and Wittering equally 2 furlongs on the Left, at 81’4. you omit the directer way aforesaid, and between Wothrop and Burleigh, at 82’5. enter Stanford vulgo Stamford from Stan and ford, q. d. Vadum Saxeum, Stanford. 82’7. seated upon the Navigable Welland and at the conjunction of the Counties of Northampton, Rutland and Lincoln, in which last 'tis reputed situate, being the Principal Town of that division of the County call'd Kesteven; it extends about 5 furlongs on the Road, a Town of good Antiquity. whence the Roman High-Street, or High-Dike, leadeth to the North, and where temp. E. 3. part of the OXFORD Schollars upon a contention between the Southern and North∣ern men of that University, seated themselves, and held their Publique Schools for all sorts of Learning; not returning till by Order of the Kings Proclamation; Whereupon the Graduates were afterwards obliged by Oath not to Read publickly at Stamford to the prejudice of OXFORD: At present a fair, large and florishing Town, consisting of divers well ordered Streets: Governed by a Mayor, Aldermen, a Recorder, &c. contains 6 Parish-Churches, is Walld about, adornd with several fair Structures, and has weekly 2 well frequented Markets on Mundays and Frydays, for Cattle, Corn, and Provisions; Trading principally in Mault, Sea-Cole, and Freestone which they have from Ketton Quarry; Elects Parliament Men, and gives Title to the Right Ho∣nourable Henry Grey E. of Stamford Leaving the Town you enter Rutland; and at 84’2. [83’2. W.N.W.] your forementioned di∣rect way falling in on your left, Casterton. 85’2. [89. N.b.W.] you are conveyed thence to Casterton alias Brig-Casterton a Village of 3 furlongs supposed to be the Causennis in Antonine, at the En∣trance into which just at 85. miles, you cross a branch of the Welland, whence a straight Road generally open, leaving Tickingcote at 86’7. and Greetham, at 89’6. each 2 furl. [95. N.W.b.W. to the left, carries you through a small Wood at 90. miles, and within 2 furlongs of Strat∣ton on the Right at 91’1 and having just past through another small Wood, you enter Lincolnshire at 92’6. and leaving South Witham Church about a mile, [95’4. N.b.W.] and North Witham half a mile on the Left, (where the River Witham takes it's rise,) through another small Wood and Post-Witham you come to Coltsworth at 96’2. a small Village, Coultsworth. 96’2. Whence an open direct Road crossing the said River Witham, at 97’2. conveys you between Kirk-Stoke and Easton, and by great Panton contiguous on the Left at 101’1. where Roman Pavements have been oft dig'd up, and by its Propinquity to the River Witham presum'd
to be the ad Pontem in the Itinerary, and Little Panton 2 furl. distant on the same; at 102. you ascend for 3 furl. and a mile farther descending, pass by the Spittle on the Left, and some houses on the Right, Grantham. 104’4. just at 104 miles, and 3 furl. farther Enter Grantham, seated in a bottom, and on the Western Banks of the River Witham, a well frequented Town, with a good Free-School built by Richard Fox Bishop of WINCHESTER, and a fair Church Noted for its high Spire and seeming crookedness, which yet is over-lookt by the adjacent Hills: a Corporation governed by a Mayor and 12 Justices of the Peace Electing Burgesses to Parliament, Enjoying a well-furnisht Market for Sheep, Corn, Malt, &c. on Saturdays and 2 Fairs yearly, the 6th. of December and the 5th. Munday in Lent; at the entrance into the Town a Road turns off to Harlaxton vulgo Harlston 2 miles to the left, where temp. H. 8. was turned up by Ploughing a Golden Helmet of an antique make, 108’3. N.W. b W.] supposed to belong to some Eminent Roman commander, and at the other end of the Town a Road on the left likewise to Barobey and Belvoir Castle, seated on the edge of Leicestershire in the pleasant Vale of Belvoir, about which are found the Star-like Stones called Astroyts, [109’4. N. b. E.] formerly of great esteem, Victory being attributed to the effects of their Wearing. At 104’7. you leave Grantham, whence a gentle ascent of about a mile brings you to Gunnerby, a small Village, a furlong beyond which leaving Mathorp half a mile on the Right you descend Hoocliff Hill, and leaving Sedbrook and Allington on the Left, enter Foston at 109’7. Foston. 110. M. [110’7. N. b. W. Benington. 112. M. a small through-fare of 3 furlongs, beyond which Westborow appears half a mile on the Right, and at 111’4. you come to Benyngton, principally on the Right Hand, a stragling Village of a mile long; beyond which the several Right-hand-ways lead to Dodington a mile distant, and at 114’5. you enter Nottingham-Shire, an open way bringing you at 116’2. Balderton. 116’2. Newark. 118’3. to Balderton, vulgo Bauderton a small Village, and thence a direct way leads you at 118. M. into Newark, and for distinction sake, Newark upon Trent, as being seated on the South East of that River, which beyond the Town formeth an Island; it is a large, fair and well frequented Town Governed by a Mayor and 12 Justices of the Peace, claims the Election of Parliament men; enjoys a good Trade, and a con∣siderable Market on Wednsdays for Corn, Cattle, &c. with 2 Fairs yearly, Wednsday in Whitsun-week, and 22 July: Had once a stately Castle built by Alexander Bishop of LIN∣COLN now ruinous It extends 6 furlongs, and at the end of it, over a fair Bridge, you cross the River Trent and leaving Kellum half a mile to the Right repass it at 120. Miles, or rather that seperated Branch only which unites within a Mile below, and here forms an Island as before. At 121. [121’5. N.E.] [122’4. N.] M. you pass hrough South Muskum, and at 122’2. North Muskum, both small Villages, Crumwel. 123’6. Carlton. 125’5. the Trent accompanying you at half a Miles distance on the Right: Thus proceeding, at 123’6. you come to Crumwel a thorough-fare of 2 Furlongs, and by Wil∣loughby and Norwell on the Left, at 125’4, Enter Carlton upon Trent another like thorough∣fare; Sutton. 127. M. [128’6. N.W.b.N.] thus arriving at Sutton just at 127. Miles you take leave of the Trent, and Incli∣ning to the Left pass through Weston at 128 M. a small Village; from which nothing pre∣sents it self Memorable till at 131’1. Tuxford. 131’2. you Enter Tuxford alias Tuxford in the Clay, from its Claiey situation; about 3 Furlongs extent, not large, but a Post Town and good thoroughfare, affording sutable Reception and having a small Market on Mundays. Backward Turnings to be Avoided. 1. 3 Furlongs beyond Tuxford, the Left to Normanton. 2. At the end of Carlton upon Trent the Right to Norwel. 3. 12 Furlongs short of Newark the Right to Kellum. 4. A Furlong beyond Newark, the Right hand way. 5. At the entring Lincolnshire, the Left to Claypool. 6. 10 Furlongs short of Benington, the Left to Doddington. 7. At the end of Benington, the Left to Westborow. 8. 2 Furlongs beyond Foston, the forward way. 9. 4 Furlongs beyond Grantham, the Left to Boston. 10. Opposite to Kirkstoke, the Right and Left. 11. At the end of Coltsworth, the Right and Left. 12. Opposite to Stratton, the Right and Left hand ways. 13. A Mile short of Stamford, forward is the Street way. 14. At the entring Stamford, the Left to Uffington. 15. At the end of Wantsworth, forward to Stilton a different way. 16. A Mile beyond Water Newton, the forward way to Peterborough.
The Contation of the Ro from LONDON BARWICK. Beginning at Tux & Extending to York.  3d. Containing ales & ¾. viz.t From Tuxford. to Ire. to Doncaster. to Wentbridg. 10¼ dcaster. 27. to York. 9. ½.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to BARWICK, Com. Northumbr. PLATE. III. Commencing at Tuxford in Com. Nottingham, and Extending to the City of YORK, Containing 60. Miles 6 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 134’7. The Left to Elsey. At 141’1. The Right to Sutton and the Left acute. At 151’1. The Right to Cantley. At 156’7. The Left to Scausby. At 167’1. The Right to Womersley. At 17’1. The Left to Brotherton. At 172’4. The Right to Hillum. TUxford we brought you to in Plate the 2d. which leaving at 131’3. Tuxford 131’2. N.W you pass by Little Markham, 2 F. on the Left, a descent bringing you to the River Idle, which you cross, and at 134 M. pass through Little Drayton, a small Village, [132’1. N. N. E.] whence Entring the Forest of Sherwood you pass between Elsey and Gameston, and come at 137 miles to the 4 Oaks, leaving Babworth and Norton a little distance on the Right, and at 141’3. Little Drayton 134 m. Barnby 141’4. Tarworth 142’7. entring Barnby on the Moor, a Village of 2 furlongs, you come next at 142’6. to Tarworth a Village like the former, a mile to the Left of which appears Blith a small Market Town. Next at 143’5. you pass through Ravenskel a small Village, and by Sorlby, on the Left come at 145’3. to Scrooby a Village of 2 furlongs, Ravenskel 143’5. Scrooby 145’4. from which an open way brings you to a Rill at 146’6. where together you enter Yorkshire and Bautry; a Town of 3 furl. Extent, with a Market on Saturdays, chiefly noted for its Trade in Milstones &c. Bautre 147 m. [149’4. N. W. b N.] and here falls in a great Road on the Left from Mansfield, Rotheram &c. Hence through a small Wood at 148 miles a direct and good way brings you at 151 M. to Rossington a small Vil∣lage, the Church 3 Furlongs to the Left; Rossington 151 m. 2 Miles farther leaving High Eaders 2 Furlongs on the same hand, you Enter Doncaster at 155 Miles of near 5 Furlongs length, of good Antiquity, Doncaster 155’2. antiently Danum and Doneceaster from its Castle now ruin'd and its situation on the River Don; Large and well built, Govern'd by a Mayor and 6 Aldermen &c. Enjoys a good Trade for Stockings and Knit Wascotes &c. Has a good Market on Saturdays for Cattel, Corn, &c. with a Fair the 10 of August, and gives Title to his Grace James Duke of Monmouth, Earl of Doncaster &c. At the end of the Town you cross the River Don aforesaid, leaving about a quarter of a mile to the West, Kusworth, Scausby and Pigborn successively; at 160 miles the Street way falling in on your Left conveys you by Robin-Hood's Well at 161’7 close on the Right, and Upton at 163’2 half a mile on the Left; Entring Wentbridg at 165’4, Wentbridg 165’5. [166’1. N. b E.] 2 furl. long seated on the River Went, and affording good Reception; a mile and half beyond which you pass through Darrington; Darrington 167’2. your Road inclining to the Right and leav∣ing the Street way, which thence passes through Pontefract Park, brings you at 170’2. to Ferrybridg vulgo Ferribriggs, (2 miles to the N. E. Ferribridg 170’3. of Pontefract) a Post Town and well Accommodated for Travellers, seated on the South side of the broad River Are, over which it has a fair Stone Bridg, whence 4 furl. brings you cross the Marsh, and within a quarter of a mile of Brotherton on the left, the Birth place of Thomas of Brotherton Son to Edward the First. Then between Burton and Pool each a quarter of a mile from the Road you come to Betteress Hill at 173’2. a descent of 2 F. passing between Lumney and Monk-Friston equally half a mile from the Road, entring Milford at 174’7 a Village of 2 furl. Milford 175 m. Sherborn 176’1. and at 175’7 Sherborn, near half a mile long, a well frequented Town with a Market on Saturdays, and an Eminent Free-School, and noted for its Production of Cherries, &c. At 177’5 you leave Barkston and at 178M. Scarthingwel Hall each 2 furl. on the Right, and at 179’5 come to Tolton vulgo Towton a small Village of near 2 furl. Towton 179’6. where on Palm Sunday Anno. 1461 the House of York after a dubious Conflict obtained a Signal Victo∣ry over the Lancastrian party, [182’1. E. N. E.] both Armies consisting in 100’000 Men whereof 35000 are Reported to be slain on the place. At 182’3 Over a fair Stone Bridge you cross the great River Warf or Wherf and enter
Tadcaster, the Calcaria in Antonine, whereto answers an adjacent Hill called Kelebar; a Town of 3 furl. extent, well provided for Reception, Enjoys a Market on Thursdays, and is noted for the abundance of Limestone here digd up; Whence by Streton Hall 3 furl to the Right, a Mile farther the Street way from Tadcaster falls in on the Left, and 3 furl beyond viz. Street-Houses 185’7. [189’6. N. N. E] at 185’7 you pass through Street-Houses a small Village, 6 furl. to the West of which is Bilbrough; then passing between Askeham and Knapton on the Left, Ring Houses 190’5. and Coppen-Thorp and Bishops-Thorp on the Right, at 190’4 you come to Ring-Houses a Village of 2 furl. so called, and by the Gallows and 3 Windmills Enter the Suburbs of YORK at 191’5, YORK 192 m. 3 furl. more bringing you to Mickle Gate, whence you have a quarter of a Mile to Ouse Bridg, and as far beyond to the Pavement or midle of the City; The Eminence and Grandeur whereof will easily admit the following Discourse, Wherein we shall briefly Consider its Name, Antiquity, Situation, Extent, Govern∣ment, Privileges and Commerce. YORK, the 2d. City of the Kingdom anciently Eboracum or Eburacum, by the Saxons, Everwic and Eoferwic, the Cambro Brittans, Caer Effroc, by Nennius, Caer Ebranc, and Ptolome, Brigantium, as being the Chief City of the Brigantes: So call'd from the River Your or Urus which passes through it q. d. juxta Urum; of great Antiquity, said to be built by Ebrank a Brittish King 980 years before Christs time, whence some would also deduce the Word Eboracum; of great Esteem in the Time of the Romans, being a Colony and station of their sixth Legion called Victrix; famous for the Death and Funeral Exequies of Severus and Constantius, and the Birth and Inauguration of Constantine the Great the First Christian Emperor; Preserving and Encreasing it's Lustre even to a Mi∣racle, under the various changes of the Saxons, Danes and Normans, accounting temp. Edw. Conf. 6 Divisions or Wards, and therein 1628 Mansion Houses; yet a plentiful sha∣rer in Calamities, both by Sword, Fire and Pestilence. 'Tis pleasantly seated in a large Vale in the midst of the Shire, at the Confluence of the Rivers Owse and Foss, in a fertile Soil and Healthful Air; is the Decus & Tutamen of the Northern Pars; being well Built, though principally of Wood, Adorn'd with many fair Structures Publique and Private, and Fortified with a Castle and strong Walls; it Extends S. W. and N. E. 12 Furlongs, and as much transversly; is divided into 4 Wards, within which are Contain'd, besides the Cathedral, 32 Churches, whereof 28 in present Use: It is Govern'd by a Lord Mayor as the City of LONDON is, 12 Aldermen Justices of the Peace, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Prime Councel-Men, 8 Chamberlains, 72 Common-Council Men, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, Sword-Bearer, and Common Serjeant; Enjoys large Immunities, Confirm'd by the Successive Kings of England from H. 2d. Made a County Incorporate by R. 2d. Including 36 Villages and Hamlets, call'd the Ainsty, all seated on the West of the Owse: Elects Burgesses to Parliament, and is Honor'd by giving Title to several Princes of the Blood, Particularly the most Illustrious Duke of York Sole Brother to his Present Majesty. Well frequented by Merchants, as seated on the Navigable Owse, severing it into 2 parts, conjoyn'd by a stately Bridg of 5 Arches, whereof the midlemost is perchance the fairest in England: Has 4 Markets Weekly, Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, well Provided of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, &c. Is the Seat of of an Arch-Bishop; the Cathedral, begun by Edwin King of the Northumbers Anno 627. Finisht by his Successor Oswald, and Dedicated to St. Peter, being Burnt, the Foundation of the Present was laid by John Roman, and Finisht by his Son John, William Melton and John Thoresby Arch-Bishops hereof, Assisted by the Nobility and Gentry of the Country, especially the Percies, and Vavasors, and is a large Magnificent and Stately Piece, with a Curious Chapter House on the North-side of Exquisite Workman∣ship, Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs from YORK, the Right. 2. 2 Furlongs from Bilbrough, the Right to Tadcaster the Street way. 3. 3 Furlongs from Tadcaster, the Right to Wingate. 4. 2 m. short of Ferribriggs, the Left to Pool, the Right to Burton. 5. 7 Furlongs short of Robin-Hood's Well, the Right to Skelburrow. 6. 2 Mile beyond Robin-Hood's Well, the Left to Adam-street the Right acute. 7. 1’3 beyond Doncaster the Left. 8. 5. Furlongs short of, (and opposite to) Rossington, the Right. 9. 3 Furlongs short of Scrooby, the Right. 10. 4 Furlongs short of Little Draiton, the Right. 11. 6 Furlongs from Little Draiton, the Left.
The continuation of the Road from LONDON to BARWICK beginning at York and ectending to Chester in ye Street Plate ye 4th conining 76½ viztt: to Burrowbriggs 17½ to Topeliff 6 to Northallerton 14 to Darlington 14 to Drham 19 to Chester in ye Street: 6
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to BARWICK, Com. Northumbr. PLATE. IV. Commencing at the City of YORK and Extending to Chester in the Street Com. Dunelm. Containing 76 Miles 4 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 192’3. without Micklegate, YORK, the Left forward to LONDON. At 194’2. the Right to Popleton. At 209’3. Entring Burrowbrigs, the left to We∣therby, the Right (forward) to Aldborough. At 213’5. In Disford, the Left to Rip∣pon. At 254’4. the Left to the Cole-Pits. At 259’1. the Left to Great Merington. At 267’1. the Right to Lumley. VVE brought you in Plate the 3d. to the City of YORK, whereof we there gave a short Account; reckoning from the Standard in Cornhil LONDON, to Micklegate on the South West of that City 192 Miles, and to the midle of the City about 192’4; By the direct superficial Protraction of the said Road about 176 Miles; but the direct Horizontal distance not above 162 Mile; This we mention, for that about 40 years ago Mr. Norwood making the said Horizontal Distance 177 Miles, stated thence a degree of Latitude at 69’5 English Miles, which Mr. Oughtred by an Angle to the Center of the Earth reduces to 66’25. and we incline to believe will not prove above 63 Miles; but hope shortly to adjust more accurately this Important Thesis. Our Dimensuration we continue from Micklegate aforesaid doubling 3 furlongs of the Road from London, passing between Popleton on the Right, YORK Micklegate 192 m. W. S. W. [193’2. W. N. W. and Rufford and Heslow on the left; Crossing the River Nid at 199’7 over Skip Bridg half a mile below Wilsthorp Hall, leaving Kerk-Hamerton 2 furl. to the left, Green Hamerton 201’5 N. N. W. and Passing through Green Hamerton a small Village at 201’5. having hitherto had a direct Road, indifferently Enclosed and open. Hence bearing to the Right you leave Whixley 2 furl. on the Left, and little Osborn as much on the Right, between which and great Osborn about half a Mile on the same hand springs the River Owse, which a little below meets the Your, rising near the Confines of this County with Westmoreland, and passing through YORK, after its Confluence with the Trent, bears the Name of Humber, importing to Leland as much as Aber i. e. Ostium flu∣minis; But proceeding, you pass by Branton-Green 2 furl. to the Right, and between Grafton and Over-Dunsford, are conveyed by a direct way at 209’2 to Boroughbridg, Burrowbridg 209’4. N. vulgo Burrowbriggs, of 3 furl. Extent, seated on the South side of the Your, over which it has a fair Stone Bridg; The Town not large, yet well accommodated, Electing Parlia∣ment men and enjoying a small Market on Saturdays; the Straight Road from Ferribriggs by Wetherby falling in here on the Left, saves the Traveller 9 Miles of what the Dimensu∣ration by YORK enlarges his journey: Half a Mile to the East of this Town appears in the Valley Aldburgh or Aldborough a small Village, in Antonine Isurium, an eminent City in the time of the Romans, and near it certain Piramidal Stones supposed to be Erect∣ed by the Romans as a signal of Victory, by the Countrey People call'd the Devils Bolts. At the end of the Town Crossing the River aforesaid, a direct open way brings you at 213’5 to Disford a small Village whence the Road inclines to the Right, Disford 213’5. N.E. b N Topeliff 215’6. and having received a different way from YORK at 214’6, brings you to Topcliff at 215’2 a pret∣ty through-fare of 5 or 6 F. extent, [216 m. S. W. b S.] seated principally on the North East of the fair River Swale, upon a Considerable Ascent, through which your Road passing irregularly, at 217 Miles carries you by Newby Hall 2 furl. on the Left, [218 m. N. b E.] Catton on the Moor 218’4 and at 218’2 brings you to Catton on the Moor a Village of 3 furl. the foresaid Swale accompanying you at about half a miles distance on the Left; thus passing over the Moor, and within a mile and half of Thresk, a small Market and Borough Town on the Right, at 221 Miles you pass through Sand-Huton a small Village; and now the Wisk (which near this place falls into the Swale) accom∣panying you at about a like distance on the Left also for several Miles, an Enclosed way
passing by Newsome 2 Furlongs distance on this side, and Kirkby at alike distance on the other side the said River, you leave the Kilvintons on the Right, and Great and Little Ottrington between you and the River on the Left, Northallerton 229’3. and at 229’1. Enter Northallerton, (A.S. Ealfertun) seated on a small Rill, which a Mile below falls into the Wisk a Town of 4 Furlongs in Length, large and well Built; Elects Parliament Men, has a great Market on Wednsdays for Horses and other Cattel, Corn and Provisions: Is a Post-Town of good Reception, and well Traded unto. And thus far Anno 4. Steph. R. David King of Scots Invading Northumberland, proceeded and Spoild the Country (the King be∣ing otherwise Engaged by Maud the Empress) but was Repell'd by Thurstan Arch-Bishop of YORK: William Earl of Albemarl, &c. 10’000. of his Men Slain, and him∣self with his Son Henry forc'd to Retreat. Your Road continuing Enclos'd, passes between Danby super Wisk, and Brunton each a Mile distant, Lowsey Hill 233’1. Little Smeton 235’1. and by Lowsey Hill a small Village contiguous on the Left, on the pitch of a Descent of 3 Furlongs; at 235 M. you Enter Little Smeton, a Village of 2 Furlongs, and at the end of it cross the forementioned Wisk, and half a Mile beyond you come to Great Smeton, Great Smeton 235’7. a Village little better than the former; whence a direct Road brings you at 239 M. to Break-horse-bank, a Descent of 2 Furlongs, and by Ereyholm 2 Furlongs on the Left, at 240 M. to the Ferry over the River Tees, where at the same time you Enter Ny∣som, Nysom 240’2. [N. W. b E.] a Village of 2 Furlongs, and the Bishoprick of Durham: this River alone be∣ing the Southern Limits of that County Palatine; and leaving Hurworth on the Left, at 243’1 you cross the River Skern, 243’3. N. b E. which rising about 10 Miles to the Northward, falls into the Tees near Croft-bridg 2 Miles below this Place: Having past the Bridg you Enter Darlington vulgo Darnton, Darlington 243’5. of 5 Eurlongs Extent upon the Road; large and well frequen∣ted, being a Post-Town, well Accommodated for Entertainment; and having a very considerable Market on Mundays for Cattel, Corn, &c. At Oxenhall near this place are 3 Pits call'd Hell-kettles, whereof the vulgar tell you many fabulous Stories. At the end of the Town over Northgate-bridg you cross a small Rill, falling into the Ad∣jacent Skern, which fetching a compass on the Right appears near the Road again at Co∣teham or Cotonmundil which you pass through at 247’6. and leaving Brasford alias Brafor∣ton, half a Mile on the Right, you come at 249’3. to Acle alias Ackham, a Village of 2 Fur∣longs, and at 252 M. to Woodham another small Village, whence by Rushey-Ford, and be∣tween West-close and Little Chilton, Ferry Hill 256’0. [N. N. W.] you come to Ferry-Hill, alias Ferye super montem, at 255’7. a Village of 2 Furlongs, seated on the pitch or brow of an Hill, descending 3 Furlongs: whence by Hett and Croxdale 3 Furlongs on the Right, Sunderland 259’1. at 259 M. you come to Sunderland a small Village, and 2 Furlongs farther Sunderland-bridg, over the River Were; whence by Farwel a House on the Right, Farwel 260’5. N. E. [262 m. N. b W.] DƲRHAM 262’6. at 262’3. you Enter the Western Suburbs of DURHAM, lying 5 Furlongs on the Road, leaving the City it self almost Encircl'd by the River on your Right; well Compacted, Numbring 6 Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral Dedicated to St. Cuthbert: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Aldermen, &c. And its Principal Market is on Saturdays: The City it self is seated on an Eminence in a Pleasant Vale, but its Suburbs Extends into the bottom; 'Tis Wall'd about, and being Defended by a Castle, renders it of good Strength. [Whereof see more in Whitby to DURHAM and Tinmouth pag. 179.] At 263 M. leaving the forementioned Suburbs, a small Ascent passing between the Gallows and Crokehal alias Crokshal, Darham Moor 263’7. Succeeded by another small Hill, leads you into Dur∣ham Moor, at 263’7. a small Village, whence between Newton on the Right, and Nettle∣worth on the Left, Plausworth 266’2. Chester in the Street 268’2. you pass by Plausworth contiguous on the Right at 266’2. and leaving Waldridge on the Left, Enter Chester in the Street at 268 Miles, of 4 Furlongs Extent as in Plate 5th. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 Furlongs from DURHAM, the Left. 2. 3 Furl. from Ackham, the Left to Brasford. 3. 12 Furl. short of Darlington, the Left to Barmetton. 4. 6 Furlongs from Darlington, the Left to Yarum. 5. A Mile short of Great Smeton, the Right to Richmond and the Left acute. 6. 11 Furlongs short of Northallerton, the Right to Danbey. 7. A Furlong from Northallerton, the Left to Thrusk. 8. 4 Furlongs from Topcliff, the Left to YORK. 9. At the end of Burrow-bridg, the Right to Wetherby. 10. 4 Furl. from Burrow-bridg, the Right. 11. 4 Furlongs from Green Hamerton, the Right to Kirk Hamerton. 12. At Skip-bridg, the Right to Woolstrop-hall.
The continuation of the Road from LONDON to BARWICK Beginning at Chester in ye: Street in Epalu Dunelm & extending to BARWICK Plate the 5 and last containing 70 ½m: vizt: to Newcase: 8: to Morpeth: 15: to Alnwick 18½: to Belford: 13½: &: to BARWICK 15½.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to BARWICK, Com. Northumbr. PLATE. V. & Last. Commencing at Chester in the Street, in Epatu. Dunelm. and Extending to Barwick aforesaid. Including 71. Miles. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 292’7. The Left acute. At 312’7. The Left acute. At 319’4. The Left acute. At 321’0. The Right acute. At 330’4. The Right acute. At 334’5. The Left acute. IN Plate the 4th. we brought you to Chester in the Street, (computed, Chester in the Street, [286’2. N. by E.] but errone∣ously, the Mid-way between DURHAM and Newcastle, to which last it is farther by 2 Miles) so call'd from it's Situation on the Via publica; by the Saxons, Concester; whence Cambden supposes it the Condercum in the Notitiae; seated on the West of the Were, pleasantly over-looking Lumley-Castle, the ancient Seat of the Lord Lumley's, about 6 Furlongs distant on the other side the River: It is a good Through-fare of about 4 Furlongs, with handsom Reception: Leaving which at 268’4. about 6 Furlongs farther pass by Peloo-Hall, a little distance on the Right, and prosecuting the Street-way which is a straight way indeed; at 271 M. leave Birtley, vulgo Buckley, on the same Hand; whence at 272’7. inclining to the Left, [273. N. N. W.] two small Descents bring you at 274 M. to a Beacon, and 5 Furl. farther a Windmil on the Right, whence an easie Descent conveys you at 275’6. to Gateshead, alias Gate-side, Gateshead, 276. M. as it were the Sub∣urbs of Newcastle: a Town of great Antiquity, consisting at present of a fair Street of 4 Furl., seated on the Banks of the Tine, by the Saxons call'd Gates-heved, i.e. Caprae Caput, or Goat's-head, perchance from an Inn with such a Sign. Whence a stately Stone∣bridg over the Navigable Tine, separating the Counties of Durham and Northumberland, leads you into Newcastle, whereof take this brief Account. Newcastle, 276’4. New-castle, seated on the South-side of an eminent Ascent; before the Con∣quest call'd Monkchester, as appertaining to the Monks; but from the Castle built here by Robert eldest Son of William the Conqueror, New-Castle. It is a Town and County govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, &c. sends Burgesses to Parlia∣ment, is the Shire-town for Northumberland, and gives Title to his Grace, William Duke, Marquess and Earl of New-castle; numbers 4 Parish-Churches, besides one in Gateshead; has a fair Exchange and handsome Custom-House; is encompast with a strong Wall and 7 Gates, but the Castle on the East of the Town is now ruin'd: Has weekly two great Markets on Teusdays and Saturdays. 'Tis a most eminent Em∣porium, rich and populous, highly frequented by Merchants, &c. driving a mighty Trade both by Sea and Land, but principally noted for it's wonderful Coal-trade, whereof it transmits some thousands of Sail yearly to the City of LONDON and other Parts, Domestick and Foreign. Leaving New-castle at 276’6. you pass by Old Heton, and at 278’5. [277 M. N.] Great Ben∣tham on the Right: At 280’2. Entring North-Gosford, a Village of 2 Futlongs, North-Gosford, 280’3. ha∣ving before left South-Gosford on the Left, a direct and open way conveys you at near 285 Miles between Blakedon on the Left, and Shotton on the Right, and at 285’6. to Blith-Bridg over the River Blith or Pont, which rising about the Picts Wall, falls into the Sea at Blith's Neuk 5 Miles below this Place. At 286’3. You pass through Stannington, a Village of 2 Furlongs, Stannington, 286’3. and leaving Netherton on the Right, a reasonable Direct Way brings you, by  Castle on the Left, to Wanspeck at 290’7. the Church and Castle adjoyning on the Left: Wanspeck, 291. M. here you cross the River Wanspeck, rising about the midle of the County, and ha∣ving a little above receiv'd the Font, about 5 Miles below falls into the Sea. Having past the River you enter Morpeth, a Corporation, Govern'd by two Bayliffs, send∣ing Burgesses to Parliament; has a great Market on Wednsdays for Cattle, Corn, &c. Morpeth, 291’4. is a Post-town, and a very good Through-fare, extending about 4 Furl. on the Road. You leave the Town at 291’6. whence a Road generally open, and somewhat
more indirect, [292’1. N.W.] [292’7 N. b. E.] passing by Heborn and Espley on the Left, and Tritlington on the Right; crosses the small River Line, and leaving Causey on the Left, passes a Rill or two, and some Houses at 299’7. [295’4. N.W.b.N.] [299’1. N.N.E.] whence you come to a little Village at 301’2. of two Furlongs Extent, and there cross the River Cocket, rising on the Confines of this County and SCOTLAND, and proceeding Eastward, receives the Uswey, Rid∣ley and Ridland, and by Warkworth-Castle, over against Cocket-Island, discharges it self into the Sea. A quarter of a Mile beyond the River you enter Felton, Felton. 302. M. a Village of two Furlongs, whence by Acton on the Right, [308’6. N. N. W.] and Newton on the Moor contiguous on the Left; you pass between Snipehouse and Whittel, through a small Wood and over a Rivulet or two, Alnwick, 309’7. and at 309’6. enter Alnwick, vulgo Anwick, seated near the River Alne, Ale or Alon, not above two Furlongs on the Road, yet a good Through-fare, had once a large Castle now ruin'd, and near it a decay'd Abby; It has a reasonable Market on Satur∣days, and here Anno 1092. MALCOLM King of Scots having Invaded Northumber∣land was slain, with EDWARD his Son, and his Army defeated by Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland. And Anno 1174. WILLIAM King of Scots Invading ENGLAND with 80’000 Men, was 7. July. here Encountred, his Army Routed, Himself made Prisoner, sent to LONDON, and by King HENRY carry'd to Roan in Normandy, paying 4’000 l. Ransom. At 310’2. You cross the foresaid Alne, which rising 10 Miles to the West, dis∣charges it self into the Sea about 4 Miles Eastward. Hence sprinkled Woods and easy Descents bring you to an open Way, Carleton, 315’6. leading you through Carleton at 315’6. whence leaving Tunston-Castle, Warnford, 319’7. Ellingham and Newsted on the Right; At 319’6. you enter Warnford, a Village of 2 Furl. a Mile farther leave Edderston, als. Atherston a Furlong on the Right, and a Mile and half further Mowsewel 2 Furl. on the Left. Whence by New∣lands a quarter of a Mile on the Right, Belford, 323’5. at 323’4. you enter Belford, a small Through∣fare, yet being a Post-town, is accordingly provided for Reception of Travellers; whence by the Chapel at 324 Miles close on the Left, and Middleton and Detcham on the same Hand; At 328 Miles you pass by Buckton contiguous on the Right a Mile and half distant from the Sea, and at 329’4. Fenwick, a Village two furlongs on the Left. At 331’2. Haggerston, 331’3. You come to Haggerston a Village of 2. Furlongs, whence by Broome House, and Brigg Mill on the Left, and Cheswick and Skrimerston on the Right; the last within a Mile of the Sea, Tweedmouth, 338’2. (338’4. E. by N.) at 338’2. you pass through Tweedmouth, whence crossing the Famous River Tweed, over a long Bridg of several fair Arches, at 339 Miles you Enter Bar∣wick, 2 Furlongs more bringing you to the Cross, where ending our Computation, we shall present you with a short View of this Important Town: Barwick, Barwick, 339’2. alias Berwick, anciently Tuesis, Importing, according to Leland, as much as Aberwic i.e. Urbs ad ostium Fluminis; but Somner rather deduc'd it from Bere-wic, in Saxon signifying Corn-town, whereof see Mr. Cambden at large. A Place not so Emi∣nent for Antiquity, as for being a Town and County of it self; and included in Nor∣thumberland, though situate on the North-side of the River Tweed; a Place of great Strength, having the Sea on the East and South East, and the River Tweed on the South-west, encompass'd with a Wall, and fortify'd with a strong Castle. Is large Populous and well-built, Govern'd by a Mayor, Bayliffs and Burgesses, Elects Par∣liament Men, and has a very great Market on Saturdays for Corn and Salmon, and other Provisions. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 4 Furlongs from Barwick, the Right to Cailsho, and so to Carlisle. Opposite to Skrimerston the Left to the Water-side. Opposite to Cheswick, the Left acute. 6 Furlongs beyond Hagerston the Right. The Right against Mowsewel. 2 Furlongs beyond Warnford, the Right. 3 Furlongs beyond Carleton, the Left. 10 Furlongs short of Alnwick, the Right. 4 Furlongs beyond Alnwick, the Left. A Mile beyond Cocket fluv. the Right. At the End of Morpeth, the Left to Sheelds. At the End of Gateside, the Right to Redhough.
The Road from LONDON to the City of BRISTOL By IOHN OGILBY Esqr His Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 115. miles 2 furl: vizt. From the Standard in Cornhil LONDON to Brantford 10 m 2. to Hounslow 2’2. to Colbrook 6’4. to Maidenhead 8’7 to Twiford 7’4 to Reading 5’ to Theal 4’3. to Woolhampton 5’6. to Thateham 3’2. to Newbury 3’1. to Hungerford 7’7 thence to Marlborough 9’2 to Newbury 3’1. to Chilton 9’5 to Ramesbury 2’7 to Marlborough 6’2. Thence to BRISTOL. in part of Plate 2.d 39. Miles 7 furlongs. Thence Extended to Huntspil. Com̄. Somerset. Ending Plate 2d. 29 m 2.
The Road from London to Bristol. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. by N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 107 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 94 M. 4. The Dimensuration 115’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Brentford 08 08 10’1 10’1 Hounslow 02 10 02’2 12’3 Colebrook 05 15 06’4 18’7 Maidenhead 07 22 08’7 27’6 Twiford 06 28 07’4 35’2 Reading 04 32 05’0 40’2 Theal 04 36 04’3 44’5 Woolhampton 06 42 05’6 50’3 Thatcham 03 45 03’2 53’5 to Newbury 02 47 03’1 056’6 Chilton 09 56 09’5 066’3 Ramesbury 02 58 02’7 069’2 Marlborough 04 62 06’1 075’3 Caln 10 72 12’5 088’0 Chippenham 06 77 05’6 093’6 Marshfield 07 84 09’2 103’0 BRISTOL 10 94 12’2 115’2   94   115’2   Otherwise by Hungerford, thus To Newbury, as before 47 47 56’6 56’6 Hungerford 07 54 08’1 64’5 Marlborough 08 62 09’6 73’7 Continued to Huntspil, Com. Somerset. thus, From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Langford 09 09 12’0 12’0 Axbridg 05 14 06’2 18’2 Huntspil 08 22 11’0 29’2 With the several Accounts above mention'd, take also the Post-miles from LON∣DON to BRISTOL, thus: From LONDON to Hounslow 10 Miles, to Maidenhead 16. to Reading 12. to Newbury 16, to Marlborough 15, to Chippenham 15, and to BRISTOL 20. In all 104 Miles. Midlesex, Buckinghamshire, Barkshire, Wiltshire, Counties past through. Glocestershire and Somersetshire con∣tain the whole Road, which crosses the Rivers Brent, Coln, Thames, Kennet and Avon, Rivers crost over. affording in general a very good Way, and reiterated good Towns and Through∣fares. The Post-Office making this one of their six Principal Roads of England, and branching it to the Devizes, &c. on the Left, and to South-wales, HEREFORD and OXFORD on the Right. THUS much in general for the whole Road which consisting of two Plates, the first ending at Marlborough in Wiltshire, the Second at BRISTOL, continued to Huntspil in Somersetshire; We begin with Plate the First, containing 75’3. wherein the following Turnings are to be avoided, viz. At 12’5. The Left forward to Stanes. At 24’3. The Right to Wickham. At 28’3. The Right to GLOCESTER. At 33’6. The Right to Wargrave. At 36’2. The Right to Sunning. At 43’3. The Right acute. At 62’2. The forward Way to Hungerford. At 65’5. The Right forward to Lamborn. At 71’ The Left a different way to Marlbo∣rough. In the Way by Hungerford. At 64’4. The Right to OXFORD. At 67’0. The Right. From the Standard in Cornhil, through Cornhil, Cheapside, St. Pauls Church-yard, LONDON. Ludgate-street, Ludgate, Ludgate-hil, Fleet-street, Temple-bar, the Strand, the Hay-mar∣ket and Pickadilly, as in the Description of LONDON. You come to Knightsbridg, [2’3. S.W. by W.] Kensington and Hamersmith, well-frequented by the Gentry and Neighboring Citizens. Entering Brentford at 9’1. distinguish'd into the Old and New, Brentford, 10’1. seated on the River Brent, at its Confluence with the Thames; [as in London to St. Davids, pag. 27.]
Whence by the stately Sion House, on the Left, belonging to the late Earl of Nor∣thumberland, Hounslow, 12’3. over Small-beer Green you enter Hounslow at 12’1. a good Thorough-fare of 4 Furlongs length, [12’5. N.W. by W.] at the end of which, the direct Way leading to Stanes, carryes you to Southampton, or EXETER, or any the included Places: Your Way proceeding over Hounslow-Heath, [14’6. W. by S.] distinguish'd into 1, 2 and 3 Mile Heaths, at 14’5. passing by Baron Windham's House on the Right, at 16’6. Enter Longford, a Village of 4 Fur∣longs; Longford, 17 M. [18’0. W.N.W.] where passing 4 separated Branches of the Coln, at 18’5. cross the Coln it self. Here at once you enter Buckinghamsh. Colebrook, 18’7. and Colebrook (the Pontes in Antonine) a very good Thorough-fare, with a Market on Wednsdays, about 4 Furlongs long, at the end of which, branches out the direct Way to Windsor; which at Slow 3’4. beyond this place, appears pleasantly at Right Angles on the Left, at 2 Miles distance. From Slow a level Road brings you to Maidenhead, Maidenhead, 27’6. first crossing the Thames at 27 Miles, and en∣tring Barkshire, and 3 Furlongs farther the Town, extending half a Mile on the Road, of great Reception for Travellers, has a well-frequented Market on Wedns∣days, and a Key to which Barges come from London. A quarter of a Mile beyond the Town the great Road to GLOCESTER branches out on the Right, [31’3. S.W.] Twiford, 35’3. whence through the Commons and Woods call'd Maidenhead Thicket, you pass Harehatch, and at 35’1. enter Twiford, a Village of 4 Furlongs, and good Entertainment, Reading, 40’2. whence a pleasant way brings you at 39’7. to Reading, so call'd from the Confluence of the Rivers as seated on the Navigable Kennet, near its Influx into the Thames, and here cross'd by 7 Bridges; the fairest and largest Town of the County, with 3 Parish Churches; is a Corporation electing Parliament Men, Govern'd by a Maior 12 Aldermen, &c. Eminent for Cloathing and Malting, and once beautified with a rich Monastery and strong Castle. You pass the main Town on the Right, which leaving at 40’4. a pleasant Lane conveys you to Theal, Theal, 44’5. vulgo Dheal, q. d. the Vale, a discontinued Village with two or three good Inns, Extending to 44’7. thence passing Inglesfield, the pleasant Seat of the Marquess of Winchester's near a Mile on the Right, [49’3. W by N.] Woolhampton, 50’3. a good way through broad Lanes and open Arable, brings you at 50’2. to Woolhampton, vulgo Woolington, small but of good Reception; whence a pleasant way and Prospect conveys you at 53’4. Thacham, 53’5. to Thatsham, vulgo Thacham, 3 Furlongs long and a reasonable Through-fare; whence having touch'd upon the Kennet, Newbury, 56’6. at 56’5. enter that part of Newbury, call'd Spinhamland, the Relicts of the ancient Spinae, whose Ruins gave Rise to the pre∣sent New Town, [for which see the Road from Oxford to Chichester, pag. 161.] At 57’4. you pass by Spein on the Left, and Donnington Castle on the Right; whence between Craven Park and Wickham Heath, [59’ W. by S.] [62’2. N. by W.] [62’6. W. by N.] at 62’2. you come to the parting of the Roads, the Left being the Post-way by Hungerford, but the Right the more usual, being both the Coach and Plow-way by Ramesbury; which prosecuting, at 65’3. you enter Wiltshire, Chilton, 66’ 3. and at 66’1. come to Chilton, a small Through-fare thought of 4 Fur∣longs extent; [69. S.W. by W.] Ramesbury, 69’2. leaving the Place on the Right, and somewhat farther, Littlecot on the Left; and at 69’1. enter Ramesbury, a discontinued Village of 4 Furl.; and a Mile farther by Ramesbury-place, the Earl of Pembrook's; a less pleasant Way, passing at 73’6. Middenhal, 73’6. Marlborough, 75’2. through Middenhal, a small Village, brings you at 75’1. to Marlborough; as in Plate the 2d. If by Hungerford; Hungerford, 64’5. Then prosecuting the directer way at 62’2. aforesaid, you cross the Kennet, and enter that part of Hungerford call'd Charnham-street at 64’4. [as in Oxford to Salisbury, [66’1. S.W. by S.] [72.11. by N.] p. 165.] Leaving which, you enter Wiltsh. and by Froxfield on the Right, through Savernake Forest, and over a considerable Ascent; at 73’4. enter Marlborough aforesaid, Marlborough, 73’7. and repassing the Kennet, fall in with your other Road at 73’7. shortning your Journey this way 11 Furlongs. Retrograde Turnings to be avoided. 4 Furlongs from Marlborough, the Left to Oxford. The Left at the end of Theal. 5 Furlongs from Reading, the Right to Okingham. 3 Miles short of Maidenhead, the Left to Merloe.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to BRISTOL. By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma:ties Cosmographer Plate 2d & last. Com̄encing at Marlborough co: Wilts and Extending to the High Cross in BRISTOL. Containing 39 miles 7 furl. vizt. From Marlborough. to Caln. 125 to Chippenham 5’6. to Marshfield 9’2. & to BRISTOL 12’.2. Continued to Huntspil com̄ Somercet 29’.2. vizt. From the High Cross in BRISTOL aforesd to Langford 12 to Axbridg 6’2 to Huntspil 11. m.
The Road from LONDON to BRISTOL. PLATE II. Commencing at Marlborough in Wiltsh. and Extending to the High-Cross in BRISTOL: Containing 39. Miles 7. Furlongs; with the Continuation to Huntspil Com. Somerset, Con∣taining 29, Miles 2. Furlongs. Wherein you are to Avoid these forward Turnings. 1. At 81’1. The Left to the Devizes. 2. At 82’2. The Left to BATH. 3. At 88’1. The Right in Caln to Malmsbury. 4. At 94. The Left in Chippenham to BATH. 5. At 107’1. The Left to BATH. In the Continuation to Huntspil. 1. At 13’5. The Right-forward to Church∣hill. 2. At 18’7. The Right to BRISTOL 3. At 19’3. The Right to Uphil. 4. At 21’0. The Left to Baddesworth. 5. At 29’5. The Right to Castle-Brent. 6. At 29. The Left forward. IN Plate 1. we brought you to Marlborough, (by Hungerford at 73’7. Marlborough. [75’2. W.S.W.] and by Rames∣bury, at 75’2.) alias Marlberge so call'd from its Chalky Soil, Antiently Cunetium, from whose Ruins it took Rise, and was once Fortified with a Castle belonging to John Sur∣nam'd Sans Terre: Here was once held a Parliament, where a Law being made for Suppression of Tumults, retains the Title of the Statute of Marlborough: 'Tis at present a good Town Govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Aldermen. 24 Burgesses. &c. Elects Parliament Men, gives Title to William Earl of Marlborough: Has a Market on Saturdays, and 3. Fairs Annually; Contains 2. Parishes, Trades chiefly in Cheese: And since its last Conflagration (for it has often suffer'd by Fire,) is handsomely Rebuilt. Leaving the Town at 75’5. and the Lord Seymours House, with its curious adjacent Mount, together with the Kennet on the Left: You pass on the same hand Preshuter, Manton, Clatford, Fifield, and Overton: Viewing, on the right, Multitudes of great Stones disperst, vulgarly call'd the Grey Weathers. Little Kennet. 80’4. Thus a descent leading you into little Ken∣net at 80’3. giving Denomination to the River (which rising near Abury, crosses your Road 2. Furlongs, hence) you come to a neat peice of Artifice Silbury-Hill, which makes it to be Noted amongst those other Eminent Hills of the County, Badbury, St. Anns, and Martensal: Here the Road to the Devizes and WELLS branching out on the Left, [82 2. W.N.W.] you Enter Marlborough Down; at 81’5. pass through Beckinton alias Beckhampton a small Village, [84’4. W.S.W.] 5. Furlongs farther the Road to BATH, by Sandy-Lane, issuing out on the Left, whence over the Downs, repeated Ascents and Descents by Cheril on the Right, [87’1. N.W.] Cal. 87’7. bring you at 87’1. to Cumberford Bridge over the River Coln, and 4. Furlongs beyond to the Town of Caln, Seated on the foresaid River, dirty and discontinued: [88’7. S.W by W.] But Electing Burgesses to Parliament having a Market on Teusdays. Repassing the River in the Town, which you leave at 88’2. a Mile farther you come to Studley Bridge, where you again cross the Coln, and ascend a Hill of 3. Furl. 0’7. W. by N.] whose top gives you a different way on the Right to Chipnam; but proceeding through Studley a small Village at 90’7. you descend, and a Stone Causey brings you at 93’3. to Chippenham, Chipnam. 93’6. vulgo Chipnam of 7 Furlongs Extent, Seated on the Avon, over which it has a fair Bridge of 16 Arches: a good through-fare, Electing Parliament Men, with a noted Market on Saturdays. Hence an easie ascent brings you at 96’2. to a well beaten Road on the Right leading to Sodbury, (and thence by Aust-Ferry into Wales,) whence at 98’7. crossing a Val∣ley and a small Rill; at 100’3. Marshfield. 102’7. leave Wraxhal Church on the Right entering Glocestershire at 101’3. and Marshfield at 102’5. in Extent 4. Furlongs, bleakly situate in a great Corn Country, and on the Woulds, with a Market on Teusdays, whence a direct Road brings you by Cold-Easton on your Left, at 106. to Tughil a descent yielding a fair Prospect over
the Seavern into South-Wales; [111’2. W.S.W.] then at 110’4. ascending Barton-Hill, you pass through Kings-wood, affording store of Pit-coal, and by Dungeon Cross enter BRISTOL at 114’2. by the way of Lawfords-Gate; a City whereof having occasion to Discourse more in succeeding Plates, we shall thus briefly give a General account of: BRISTOL a City & County Seated on the River Avon (where it receives the Frome,) BRISTOL 115’2. over which it has a stately Bridg; a Corporation sending Burgesses to Parliament: Govern'd by a Mayor, Aldermen, 2. Sheriffs, &c. In Scarlet: Computed Equal to a 10th. part of all LONDON, but enjoying a whole 7th. part of its Trade; Contains 18 Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral Founded by Robert Fitz-Harding, Son to a King of Denmark, Dedicated to St. Austin, and Planted with Regular Chanons, made an Episcopal See by H. 8. containing 6. Prebendaries, and Numbring 14. Bishops to this present: Had a Castle in the North-East part of it, Demolish'd in the late Wars, and since Built into fair Streets; is Encompast with a Wall, and Six Gates; its Principal Key is upon the Froom, whether Vessels of about 150 Tun may Arrive, Extending from Froom-Bridg to the Marsh; the other call'd the Back, upon the West side of the Avon, commences at the great Bridge alias BRISTOL Bridge and extends likewise to the Marsh, the Greater Vessels riding in Hungrode about 3. Miles below. They reckon about 200. Sail belonging to the Port, and are chiefly Traded to from Wales, and the Midland Countries, withal keeping a Weekly Correspondance to Southamp∣ton; dealing most in Tobacco and Sherry-Sacks: the Streets are well Order'd, Houses well Built, Inhabitants Numerous, and may well be reckon'd the 2d. City of the King∣dom; its Markets on Wednsdays and Saturdays; Plentisully provided, and its Fairs on St. Jame's and St. Paul's Day Wonderfully frequented even by the Londoners themselves. The Continuation to Huntspil. As we ended, BRISTOL High-Cross. S. W. so we begin our Computation from the High-Cross in BRISTOL, which like another Standard in Cornhil is the Conjunction of 4. Eminent Streets, whence down High-Street over the Bridg you Enter Somersetshire, and through Redcliff-street at 7. Fur∣longs leave the Town, Bedminster, 1’2 and 2. Furlongs farther enter Bedminster a Village of 2. Fur∣longs; at 2’7. Descending for 5. Furlongs, and at 4. Miles leave Dundrey Eminently situ∣ate near a Mile on the Right. Langford, 12. M. At 5’5. [15’ S. b. W.] you Ascend for 6. Furlongs, whence an uneven Road brings you at 9’1. to a considerable Descent of 1. Mile 5. Furlongs Crossing Perry-Bridg, and at 12. Miles passing through Langford, [17’7. W.] a scattering Village, whence a kind of Continued Ridg of Hills on the Left accompanies you to Axbridg, Axbridge 18’2. which you Enter at 18. Miles: It Extends about 4. Furlongs, consisting Principally of one Street; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. has a good Market on Thursdays, Crose 19’1. and is situate under the Mendip Hills near the Chedder Rocks. At 19. Miles you come to Crose a Village of 3. Furlongs, at the Towns end Crossing the River Ax, Lower Were 20. M. [19’3. S.W. b. S.] and half a Mile beyond, Passing through Lower Were a Village of 2. Furlongs, at 23’6. pass by East-Brent adjacent on the Right, and at 26’2. through Burnham a strag∣ling Village situate in the Brent-Marsh, [23’6. W.S.W.] at 27’4. leave Burnham Church on the Sea-side about a Mile on the Right, [29. W.N.W.] Crossing High-bridg, and by several scattering Houses at 29. Miles Enter Huntspil, vulgo Hinspil, Seated near the Navigable Parret, about 4. Miles below Bridgwater, Huntspil, 29’2. and near its Influx into the Seavern, a good Country Town, though not dignified with any Considerable Remarque. Backward turnings to be avoided. 1. Furlong from Huntspil the Right forward to Marke. 5. Furlongs short of Burnham the Left. At the end of Axbridg the Left to Were. 2. Miles 1. Furlong beyond Perry-bridg the Right to Winford. At the end of BRISTOL the Left to GLOCESTER. 4. Miles 4. Furlongs short of Cold Aston the Left to Deynton. 2. Mile 3. Furlongs short of Cold Aston the Left forward The Right in Chipnam a different way to Marlborough. 4. Furlongs short of Studley the Right to the Devizes.
The Road from LONDON to BUCKINGHAM. Continued to Banbury in Com̄ Oxon̄. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Majesties Cosmographer. Containing 77 miles 5 furlongs vizt. From the Standard in Corn-hill LONDON to Acton 8.’3. to Vxbridg 10’.1. to Amersham 11’.0. to Wendover 9’.5. to Alesbury 5’.0. to East Claydon 9’.7. to Buckingham 6’.4. to Shroughton 9’.2. & to Banbury 7’.7. Thence continued to Bridgnorth Com̄ Salop. in Plate the 2.d 64 m 3 f. With a Branch from Banbury to Campden 21 m.
The Road from London to Buckingham, Continued to Banbury in Oxfordshire, and thence to Bridgnorth in Shropshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 120. M. 3. The Computation 105. M. 4. The Dimensuration. 142. M. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Acton 06 06 08’3 08’3 Uxbridg 09 15 10’1 18’4 Amersham 09 24 11’0 29’4 Wendover 06 30 09’5 39’1 Alesbury 04 34 05’0 44’1 East Claydon 06 40 09’7 54’0 Buckingham 04 44 06’4 60’4 Shroughton 07 51 09’2 69’6 to Banbury 06 057 07’7 077’5 Nether Pillerton 09 066 12’1 089’6 Stratford 06 072 08’0 097’6 Coughton 06 078 09’0 106’6 Bromsgrove 09 087 11’4 118’2 Kederminster 08 095 09’6 128’0 Quot 07 102 09’3 137’3 Bridgnorth 03 105 04’5 142’0 With the Branch from Banbury aforesaid, to Campden com. Gloc. From Banbury Comp. Measure. to Shipston 10 10 14’0 140 Campden 05 15 07’0 210 Midlesex, Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Counties past through. Rivers crostover. Staffordshire and Shropshire are the Counties including the Road: And the Brent, Coln, Tame, Owse, Charwell, Avon, Arrow, Salwarp, Stowr & Seavern the Principal Rivers pass'd over: Afford∣ing a very good Road to Alesbury, The quality of the way. but not so pleasant to Banbury and Bromsgrove yet sufficiently recompenc'd by it's goodness thence to Bridgnorth, being a well frequented and well accommodated Road throughout. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting in 2 Plates, the First ending at Banbury com. Oxon. the 2d. at Bridgnorth aforesaid; we begin with Plate the First, containing 77’5. wherein the following turnings are to be avoided At 2’1. At the Pound in St. Giles's, the forward way to Hampstead. At 3’2. At Tyburn, the Right to Padington. At 9’0. The Right to Wilsdon. At 15’2. The Right to Watford. At 20’4. The forward way to Beaconsfield. At 34’6. The Left to Tame. At 39’1. The Right forward in Wendo∣ver to Dunstable. At 46’2. The Left to Shipston. At 66’7. The Right to Brackley. At 76’2. The Left to Bodycot. From the Standard in Cornhil LONDON, along Cheapside and Holborn, [N. W.] your way lies through Kensington-Gravel-pits, Shepherds bush, Acton, Hanwel, Norcoat, Hayes, Hellingdon and Uxbridge (as in London to Aberistwith pag. 1.) Whence at 20’4. omitting the forward way to Beaconsfield, 20’4. N. [22’2. N. N. W.] St. Peters Chafforn 24’2. [27’6. N. W. you leave the fore∣said Road and an inclosed way, sprinkled with some stragling Houses, brings you at 24’1. To St. Peters Chalfunt vulgo Chafforn a Village of 2 furl. Extent, and at 25’2. pass through a Rill dilating it self near 2 furl. and 5. furl. beyond through part of St. Giles-Chal∣funt; whence over a Branch of the Coln, certain discontinued Houses lead you at 29’3. in∣to Agmondesham, vulgo Amersham, 4. furl. long, Amersham. 29.5. so called either from its being shel∣tred by Oaks, or built by one Agmund; 'Tis seated in the Chiltern (that part of the Country so called that extends it self towards Dunstable,) A good Borough Town sending Burgesses to Parliament containing near 200 Houses, hath a free-School and 4 several Almshouses, a small Market on Tuesdaies, and 2 Faires Whitsonmunday, and the 8th, of September.
At 32’1. Little Missenden, 32’1. Great Missenden, 34’4. Wendover, 39’1. (42. Miles N. W. b. N.) you pass through Little Missenden a small Village, whence by several stragling Houses, and over 2 or 3 small Rills you enter Great Missenden at 34’2. half a mile long, and a good throughfare, from which Little occurs, till at 38’7. you en∣ter Wendover of 4 furl. extent, a Borough Town, of about 150 Houses sending Bur∣gesses to Parliament, with a small Market on Thursdays and 2 Fairs Annually, May day, and a week before Michaehnas. From Wendover, an Inclosed way for the most part brings you at 43’5. Alesbury, 44’1 N.W.b.W. to Walton adjoyning to which is Alesbury, (pleasantly seated near the confluence of an Anonimous Rill with the Tame) in Saxon Aglesburgh, a large and well built Borough Town, containing about 400 Houses; Electing Members to Par∣liament; is the place where the Assizes are kept for the County, hath a well provi∣ded Market on Saturdays and 3 Fairs yearly, Saturday before Palmsunday, 13th. of June, and 4th. of September, and is at present the Honorary Title of Robert Earl of Alesbury and Elgin. At 44’4. you leave the Town, and half a Mile farther the Gallows on the Right; at 46 Miles Crossing the Tame, which rises about 4 Miles to the East, near whose Banks Querendon a Furlong to the Right appears, (50. Miles. N.N.W.) East-Claydon, 54’1. whence an indirect way for the most part open, being indifferently Arable, and Pasture, brings you at 54 Miles to East Claydon, a Village of 2 Furlongs extent, prosecuting a Road much like the former, till at 60’2. you cross the Owse over a Stone Bridge of 6 Arches and enter Buckingham, Buckingham, 60’6. (61. Miles W b. N.) a Corpo∣ration Governed by a Baliff, 12 Capital Burgesses &c. contains about 300 Houses, sends Burgesses to Parliament, hath a well furnisht Market on Saturdayes, and 6. Fairs viz. on St. Mathias. St. Mark. Thursday in Whitsonweek. St. Peters. St. Bartholomew and St. Simon and Jude. (whereof see more in the Road from Oxford to Cambridge Page, 159.) Repassing the Owse you leave the Town and by the Lady Smiths House and Park, and Ratley Church on the Right; Tinewick. 63’1. Fenmore. 64’1. at 63 Miles you come to Tinewick a discontinued Village, and at 64 entring Oxfordshire, you pass through Fenmore another scattering Village, whence your way for the most part open Pasture, entring Northamptonshire at 66’7. leads you to Shroughton, Shroughton 69’6. Ayno. 71’7. (72’3. N.W.) at 69’5. a Village of 2 Furlongs extent, and a pretty thorough-fare. At 71’7. you pass through Ayno, Extending 2 Furlongs, on the Road aflording good Reception for Travellers, and crossing the Charwell at 73’2. over Nell-Bridge of 6 Arches Stone-built, [76’2. N.] Banbury 77.5. you Reenter Oxfordshire keeping the Charwel on your Right, and omit∣ting the forward way on the Left to Bodicot; at 77’3. enter Banbury, situate on the west side of the Charwell, a Large and well-Built Town containing several good Inns for Accommodation, Governed by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen (whereof one is Chamberlaine, and 3. Justices of Peace) and 6 Burgesses; it's Market on Thurs∣day is well stored with Provisions: And hath 7 Fairs yearly, viz. on Holy Thursday, Corpus Christi, Lamas day, Thursday after Twelft day, and First Thursday in Lent; with two others at present disus'd. It subscribes to none in the County, OXFORD excepted, for Wealth and Beauty. But having occasion to revisit it in BRISTOL to Banbury p. 109. and OXFORD to COVENTRY, P. 163. for its futher Illustration we refer you thither. Backward turnings to be avoided. 1. 9. Furlongs from Banbury, the Right to Adderbury. 2. A Furlong beyond Ayno the Right to LONDON. 3. 5. Furlongs short of Fenmore the Right to Tame. 4. At the end of Buckingham the Left to Little Harwood. 5. 2. Furlongs beyond East Claydon the Left to Leighton. 6. 4. Mile beyond East Claydon the Right to Henley. 7. At the end of Uxbridg the Left to Swakeley. 8. 4. Furlongs short of Hellingdon the Right to Colebrook. 9. In Hanwel the Right to Brentford. 10. In Acton the Left to Wilsdon. 11. In Kensington Gravel-pits the Right to Kensington.
The Continuation of the Extended Road from BUCKINGHAM to Bridgorth in Com Salop By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosingrapher Comencing at Banbury in Com Oxon & Extended to Bridgnorth aforesaid Plate ye 2d & last Containing 64 Miles 3 furlongs vizt. From Banbury to Nether Pillerton 12. to Stratford 8.’0, to Coughton 9.’0. to Broms grove 11.’4. to Keclerminster 9’6, to Quat 9.’3. to Bridgnorth 4.’.5. With a Branch from Banbury to Campden in Com̄. Glocester. Containing 21 Miles o furlongs viz.t From Banbury to Shipston 14 to Campden 7 m.
The Continuation of the Extended Road From BƲCKINGHAM to BRIDGNORTH In SHROPSHIRE. Commencing at Banbury in Com. Oxon, and Extending to Bridgnorth aforesaid. PLATE. II & last. Containing 64. Miles 3 Furlongs. With a branch from Banbury to Campden Com. Gloc. containing 21 Miles. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 78’3. The Right to Southam. At 85’2. The Left to Osserton. At 101’7. The Right to Aston. At 104’1. The Right to Auneton. At 115’0. The Right to Sturbridg. At 118’3. The Left to WORCESTER. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 118’6. The Left to WORCESTER. At 128’2. The Left to Bewdley. At 135’7. The Right to Claverly. At 136’1. The Left to Ludlow. In the Branch to Campden. At 2’5. The Right to Stratford. At 4’4. The Left to Sibberts. At 8’1. The Left to Sibberts. At 20’4. The Right to Stratford. VVe brought you to Banbury in Plate the 1st. Banbury N.W. Drayton 79’5. [79’6: W. b N.] whence an open way brings you at 79’5. to Drayton a Village of 2 Furlongs extent, then crossing 2 small Waters, an indifferent straight way for the most part open, being part Arable and Pasture, by Wroxton Church on the Left 1 Furlong, Hornton on the Right 2 Furlongs, and Osserton on the Left 6 Furl. entring Warwickshire at 84’1. brings you to Edg-Hill a descent of 3 Furlongs, where K. Charles I. 23. Octob. 1642. After driven from his Imperial Chamber, and oblig'd to Erect his Standard at Nottingbam, with the Forces there rais'd, was Encounter'd by the Parliament Army Commanded by the Earl of Essex, to whom he left the Field with equal Loss. Leaving Kineton a Market Town about 2 Miles to the Right, and prosecuting a Road like the former by Tisoes and Oxhul Churches 4 Furl. to the Left; at 89’5. you come to Nether Pillerton of 2 Furlongs length, crossing the Foss-way at 90’6. Nether Pillerton 89’6. and entring Over or Upper Eatington at 91’3. a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent. Ʋpper Eatington 92’4. [97’2. W.] Stratford 97’6. Hence a straight way convey's you at 97’3. to a fair Stone-Bridg of 13 great and 6 small Arches over the River Avon, where you enter Stretford alias Stratford upon Avon, a large and well-built Town Containing near 500 Houses, has a fair large Church and a Chapel of Ease built by Sr. Hugh Clapton late Lord Mayor of LONDON, and an Alms-House with 12 dwellings Founded by Edward the 6th: Drives a great Trade in Malt; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, High Steward, 12 Aldermen, whereof 2 are Justices of the Peace, 12 Capital Burgesses, &c. hath a great Market on Thursdays, 5 Fairs annually, and several good Inns for Accomodation. From Stratford an open way generally Heathy convey's you between Haseler and Aston, [99’1. N. b W.] and crossing the Alne at 104’1. leave Great Auneton Church on the Right, [104’1. W. b N.] and a little after Aulcester vulgo Auster a Mile distant on the Left, a Town Corporate, Enjoying a Market on Tuesdays; then at 106’2. by some scattering Houses you cross the Arrow which uniting the Alne at Aulcester aforesaid, falls into the Avon at the Edg of the County: next through Coughton a Village of near 3 Furlongs Extent, Coughton 106’5. N. b W. [108 m. N. W.] Samborn 108’4. Crabs-Cross 110’5. where you have the House and Park of Sr. Francis Throgmorton on the Right, at 108’5. you pass by Samborn a scattering Village on the Left, and at 110’5. through Crabs-Cross a small Village at the end of which you enter Worcestershire, leaving Ipsley Church 9 Furlongs on the Right. At 111’7. you pass through Hedley's-Cross a Village, Hedley's Cross 111’7. whence over Wib Heath and Fackenham Forest, leaving Fackenham Church 4 Furlongs on the Left, at 113’3. you pass
through Fox-Liddet a little Village, Fox Liddet 113’3. Tontuel 116 m. [118 m. W. b N.] Bromsgrove 118’2. and by Tardbick Church a Furlong to the Left at 115 Miles, and through Toutnel at 116 Miles, you come at 118 Miles to Bromsgrove, seated on the small River Salwarp extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, a large Town Numbring about 400 Houses, driving a Considerable Trade in Clothing; Is Govern'd by a Bailiff, &c. hath a well-frequented Market on Tuesdays, for Corn, &c. and 2 Fairs annually, viz. Midsumer-day, and John Beheaded, a Town affording good Entertainment to Tra∣vallers. From Bromsgrove an indirect Road by several scattering Houses brings you at 123’4. Cheddesley 123’4. Winterfould 124’3. Stone 125’4. to Cheddesley a small Village, and 7 Furlongs farther to Winterfould, and 9 Furlongs beyond that to Stone both small Villages; whence discontinued Buildings convey you at 127’5. to Kidderminster alias Kederminster of near a Mile Extent, Kederminster 128’2. N. W. seated on the Stour, (which rising near the Confines of the County, receives the Smestal, passes by Sturbridg, and 3 Miles be∣low this place falls into the Severn) a large well built and well Inhabited Town Num∣bering about 500 Houses, driving a great Trade in Clothing and Stuffes, hath a very good Free-School, with 2 Masters well Endow'd, an Alms-House given by Sr. Edward Blunt of 6 dwellings, and another by Sr. Edward Clare: Is Govern'd by a Bailiff, 12 Ca∣pital Burgesses, 25 Common-Council, &c. hath a well furnisht Market on Thursdays, and 3 Fairs yearly, Holy-Thursday, 9 days after Whitsontide, and St. Bartholomew-day. At 131’1. you ascend Red-Hill of 3 Furl. at the foot of which you enter Staffordshire, and 1 M. Quat 137’3. Quatford 139’4. Bridgnorth 141’4. 7 Furl. farther Shropshire; at 135’3. you come to Allam-bridg, and by some scat∣tering Houses, at 137’3. pass through Quat a small Village, and at 139’4. Quatford ano∣ther little Village, and passing over part of Morf Forest enter Bruges alias Bridgnorth at 141 Miles, seated on the Navigable Severn, over which it hath a large Stone-bridg of 7 Arches, that divides it into the Upper and Lower Town; a Corporation Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 24 Aldermen, 48 Common-Council, 2 Chamberlains, and 2 Bridg-Men; Contains 2 Parishes, hath a very good Market on Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually: [Whereof see more in LONDON to Shrewsbury pag. 99.] The Branch to Campden From Banbury through the West-Gate, Banbury. S. W. [2 m. W. b N.] North Newton 2’4. at 2’3. you come to North Newton a small Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs, and at 4’7. Shutford another Village with an Inn in it, whence an open way brings you at 6’4. Shutford 5 m. W. b S. to an ascent of 6 Furlongs; so over Sibberts Heath, at 8’1. entering Warwickshire, you descend a large Hill of 11 Furlongs, at the foot of which lies Brailes a dis-united Village extending 10 Furlongs on the Road, Brailes 10’4. W. b N. having an Inn or two in it for Accomodation; thence a direct way brings you at 13’6. to a Stone-bridg of 6 Arches over the River Stour, where at once you enter an Included part of Worcestershire and Shipton alias Shipston upon Stour, Shipston 14 m. W. b S. a small Town, yet Enjoying a good Market on Saturdays, and one Fair yearly on St. Barnaby's Day, From Shipston your way for the most part is open, Re-entring Warwickshire at 15’1. and at 18’1. Campden 21 m. descending 3 Furlongs you come to Campden at 20’4. of 6 Furlongs Extent, [for which vid. LONDON to Montgomery pag. 87. and other succeeding Plates.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs beyond Brailes, the Right acute. 2. At the entring Oxfordshire, the Left to Stratford. 3. 4 Furlongs beyond North Newton, the Right to Deddington. 4. At the end of Bridgnorth, the Left to Birmingham. 5. 2 Furlongs beyond Allam-bridg, the Right to Bewdley. 6. 6 Furl. beyond, the Right to Bewdley. 7. At the end of Kedermister, the forward to WORCESTER. 8. A Mile short of Cheddesley, the Right to Rushok. 9. A Furlong farther, the Left to Bell-Broughton. 10. At the entring Cheddesley, the Left acute. 11. 4 Furl. beyond Cheddesley, the Right to Droitwich. 12. At the end of Bromsgrove, the forward to COVENTRY. 13. In Toutnel, the Left to Warwick. 14. In Coughton, the forward to Aulcester. 15. In Pillerton, the Left to Kineton.
The Road from LONDON to St. DAVIDS in com̄ Pembroke By JOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 269. miles. 4 fur. vizt. From ye: Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Bramford: to m vsun ihence to Hounstow 2: 2: to Colbrook 6 4. to Maiden head 8.7 to Henly sup Thames 8.1 to Dorchester 13: 6: to Abington: 6: to Monmouth by Glocester 71. 6: to Burton Ferry by Cardiff: 70:  to St Davids by Hanerford were  72.2
The Road from London to St. Davids On the Sea-Coast in Pembrokeshire South-Wales. 1. THe Point of Bearing W. b N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 215 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 207 M. 4. The Dimensuration 269’5. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Brentford 08 08 10’1 10’1 Hounslow 02 10 02’2 12’3 Colebrook 05 15 06’4 18’7 Maidenhead 07 22 08’7 27’6 Henley 07 29 08’1 35’7 Dorchester 12 41 13’4 49’3 Abington 05 46 06’0 55’3 Faringdon 10 56 13’2 68’5 Lechlade 04 60 06’0 74’5 Fairford 02 62 03’4 78’1 Barnesley 04 66 05’6 83’7 GLOCESTER 15 81 18’3 102’2 Michel-Dean 08 89 11’5 113’7 Coverd 06 95 05’0 121’7 Monmouth 04 99 05’1 127’0 to New-Church 09 108 12’2 139’2 Catts-Ash 05 113 07’3 146’5 Newport 03 116 04’5 151’2 Cardiff 10 126 11’6 163’0 St. Nicholas 05 131 06’1 169’1 Cowbridg 05 136 06’0 175’1 Corntown 04 140 05’4 180’5 Aberavon 10 150 13’2 193’7 Burton-Ferry 02 152 03’3 197’2 Swanzey 04 156 05’2 202’4 Llanelthy 09 165 11’5 214’1 Kidwelly 06 171 08’2 222’4 Llanstuffan 04 275 05’1 227’5 Haverford West 20 195 26’6 254’3 St. Davids 12 207 15’2 269’5 Midlesex, Buckinghamshire, Barkshire, Oxfordshire, Glocestershire, Monmouthshire, Counties past through. Glamorgan∣shire, Carmarthenshire and Pembrokeshire are the Counties through which you pass, and the Brent, Coln, Thames, Coln, Seavern, Wye, Monow, Trothy, Usk, Ebway, Rompney, Tave, Elay, Rivers crost over Ewenny, Ogmore, Neath, Tawye, Thlu, Loughor, Dulas, Gwendrath-Vaur, Towy, Tave, Clethy and Dungledey are the chief Rivers crost over, affording generally good way through the three first Counties; reasonable through Oxford and Glocestersh. The quality of the way but through Wales more uneasie and Mountainous, the latter part of it especially, which is often inter∣rupted by Ferries, &c. and affords not that convenient Reception as the former part does. This is the Road, yet some will take the Bristol Road to Chippenham, and thence by Sodbury, Aust-Ferry and Chepstow, others more rarely by Cirencester, and Framlode or Newen∣ham Passage, and some again by Brecknock and Carmarthen. The Computation of Post Miles answers nearly the Dimensuration, but the Road varies through Cirencester and Usk, Extending only to Swansey, the remainder being sup∣plied by a branch from Monmouth to Brecknock, Carmarthen and Pembroke. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which Consisting in 4 Plates, the 1st. ending at Abington in Barkshire, the 2d. at Monmouth, the 3d. at Burton-Ferry, and the 4th. at St. Davids: We begin with Plate the 1st. Containing 55 Mile 3 Fur∣longs, wherein the following Turnings are to be avoided, viz. At 12’5. The Left-forward to Stanes. At 20’0. The Right to Iver. At 20’4. The Left to Windsor. At 28’1. The Left to Reding, and so to BRISTOL. At 29’1. The Left to Reding. At 35’6. In Henly the Left to Grays. At 36’0. At the end of Henly, Acute turnings to be a∣voided. the Right to Marlow. At 40’2. Entering Nettlebed, the Right to Tame. At 42’4. The Left to Wallingford. At 49’5. At the end of Dorchester, the Right to OXFORD. From the Standard in Cornhil, through Cornhil, Cheapside, St. Pauls Church-Yard, LONDON. Lud∣gate-Street, Ludgate-Hill, Fleet-Street, Temple-Bar, the Strand, the Hay-Market and Pickadilly, [2’3. S. W. b W.] (as in the Description of LONDON) at 3’1. the way from WESTMINSTER by St. James Park corner falls in on your Left; whence passing by Hide-Park on the Right, frequen∣ted
by the Nobility and Gentry, who here make their Tour on May-day and the Summer Evenings; Knightsbridg 3’6. Kensington 4’5. at 3’6. you come to Knights-bridg, and at 4’5. to Kensington, at the Entrance whereof on the Right stands the House of the Right Honorable Sr. Heneage Finch Baron of Daintre and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. Beyond the Town Campden House, and at 5’2. a Seat of the Earl of Holland's appear on the Right; Hamersmith 6’4. at 6’1. you come to Hamersmith, whereas also at Chelsey, Knights-bridg, Kensing∣ton, &c. are the Summer Residences of divers of the Nobility, Gentry, and Wealthy Citizens; whence through Turnam-Green, Turnam Green 7’4. leaving the Marquess of Worcesters, the Lord Crofts and Sutton Court on the Left, and at 8’5. Sr. John Meinels on the Right, you enter Old Bran∣ford or Brentford at 9’1. Brentford 10’1. and at 9’6. New Brentford, having a well-frequented Market on Tuesdays, They extend together a Mile on the Road, and are Eminent for an Assault here given the Danes by Edmond Ironside, and an Engagement between the King and Parlia∣ment Forces November 12th. 1642. Hence by Sion House and Istleworth vulgo Thistleworth on the Left, through Hounslow, and over Hounslow-Heath you come to Longford and Colebrook, Hounslow 12’3. [12’5. N.W. b W.] [14’6. W. b S.] Longford 17 m. Colebrook 18’7. where at 18’5. you en∣ter the Town and cross the Coln, which rising near Market-Street at the conjunction of Hartford and Bedfordshire, passes by St. Albans, Watford, Uxbridg and this place, and near Stanes falls into the Thames. At 22’3. Slow 22’3. you are in Slow, 2 Miles South-ward of which appears Windsor, which though out of the Road craves this Digression: Windsor, from its winding Shore, large and pleasantly seated on the Thames, Dignifi'd with a stately Castle and Royal Palace, wherein is a Cha∣pel, a College, and Houses for the 18 Poor Knights; with a Park and Forest adjoyning, and here is kept St. George's Feast at the Ceremony of Enstalling the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter: 'Tis a Corporation Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. sending Burgesses to Parliament, and has a Market on Saturdays. From Slow, leaving Stoke, Farnam, Burnham, Hicham and Topler on the Right, you come to Maidenhead, Maidenhead 27’6. [as in LONDON to BRISTOL pag. 19.] a quarter of a Mile beyond which the Great Road to BRISTOL branches out on the Left; whence an indirect unlevel and Woody way, [31’1. W.] Henley 35’7. leaving Hurley Place on the Right brings you at 35’4. to Henley, at the Entrance into which you cross the Thames, and are convey'd into Oxfordshire, a large Town Corporate; Govern'd by a Warden, &c. its chief Trade is in Malt, having a great Market on Thursdays, where oftentimes above 300 Cart Loads of Corn are Sold in a day. You leave the Town at 36 Miles and half a Mile beyond come to a Wood which convey's you within 3 Furl. Nettlebed 40’3. of Nettlebed, ascending only 4 Furlongs at 37’4., and entring the Town at 40’2. [43’2. W. N. W.] a well Accomodated Post-Town of 2 Furlongs extent; whence descending 2 Furlongs you presently alike ascend, leaving at 42 M. Nuffield Church 2 Furlongs on the Left, and having past Hunterton Common, and descended Falk Hill succeeded by 4 other descents, Benfington 46’3. Shillingford 47’7. Dorchester 49’3. come at 46’2. to Bensington of 2 Furlongs length, seated on the Banks of the Thames, and at 47’7. to Shillingford a small Village, crossing the Tame at 49 Miles and entring Dorchester of 5 Furlongs Extent, an ancient Town formerly an Episcopal See, at present not so much as a Market Town, yet Accomodated with several good Inns for Entertainment: The aforesaid Tame rises about the Confines of Buckinghamsh. and Hartfordsh., passes by Alesbury and Tame and continuing a Course of a∣bout 30 Miles only, meets the Isis a little below this place, after which Conjunction they are call'd Tamesis, contractly Thames, and vulgarly Tems; becoming the Argument of that Eminent Piece of Historick Poetry Draiton's Poly-Olbion or the Mariage of Tame and Isis, [50’5. W] a Work thought Worthy the Illustration of that great Antiquary Mr. Selden. Hence by Burcot a scattering Village on the Left, Clifton 52 m. at 52 Mile you pass through Clifton of near 3 Furlongs in length, and after by Cullum Church on your Left, at 54’2. you cross a Branch of the Thames, and at 55 Mile the Thames it self or perchance more properly the Isis, Abington 55’3. at the same time Re-entering Barkshire, and ascending Abington seated on the Plain of a Hill, a large Town Corporate, consisting in 2 Parishes, hath 2 Markets Weekly Mundays and Fridays, and 6 Fairs yearly: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Burgesses, &c. and Elects Members to Parliament, [as in OXFORD to SALISBURY pag. 165.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 9 Furl. short of Nettlebed, the Left to Hunterton end. 2. 11 Furl. short of Henley, the Left to Marlow. 3. At the end of Henley, the Right to Ockingham. 4. 2 M. 5 Furl. short of Slow, the Right to Windsor.
The continuation of the Road from LONDON to St DAVIDS. commencing at ABINGTON Com: Berks. and extending to MONMOVTH. BY IOHN OGILBY Esq. His M.ties Cosmographer Plate ye 2.d containing 73 nules 6 Furl viz.t From ABINGTON to Faring don 23:3 to Lechlade 6: to Fairford 3.4 to Barnsley 5:6 to LOCE. STER 28.3 Micheldeanus to Coverd 8 & to MONMOVTH 5.2
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to St. DAVIDS, in Pembrokeshire. PLATE. II. Commencing at Abington in Berkshire, and Extending to Monmouth. Containing 71 Miles 6 Furlongs. Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 58’1. The Left to Wantage. At 60’6. The right acute in Kingston Baptist. At 64’1. The Right acute. At 68’6. The Left to Highworth at the End of Faringdon. At 74’3. In Lechlade the Left acute. At 78’3. The Left to Cirencester at the End of Fairford. At 81’7. The Left to Cirencester. At 85’4. The Right to Stow. At 87’4. Just beyond Perrots Bridg the Right acute. At 88’2. The Left to Daglinsworth. At 89’4. The Left to Bisley. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 95’2. The Right to Cheltenham. At 104’1. The forward to Newent. At 104’3. The Left to Newnham. At 108’0. The Left forward a different Way, uniting again at 110’5. At 110’0. The Right to the Forest. At 112’1. The Right to Ross. At 116’6. The Right acute. At 117’4. The Right acute. At 121’7. In Coverd, the Left acute. At 125 Miles, The Right to Hadnock. IN Plate the First We brought you to Abington, which leaving at 55’6, Abington, W. by S. [57’3. W. N. W.] Shipton, 57’6. Kingston Baptist, 60’6. W. by S. a straight Way brings you at 57’4. to Shipton of 2 Furlongs Extent; and at 60’6. to Kingston Baptist a small Village, where a different Way from Abington by Fifield falls in on the Right; whence by Longworth and Buckland on the Right and Pusay on the Left, a small Descent leads you into Faringdon at 68’2. Faringdon, 68’4. W. b. N extending 3 Furlongs on the Road; Govern'd by a Bayliff, &c. has a well-frequented Market on Tuesdays, and Four Fairs annually, Candlemas Day, Whitson Tuesday, St. Bartho∣lomew and St. Luke. At the End of the Town, the Left-hand Way leading to Highworth, you de∣scend for 4 Furlongs, and at 70’2. ascend as much; whence by the 2 Mile Stone, at 73’6. crossing St. John's Bridg of Stone over the Thames, and entring Glocester∣shire; 4 Furlongs farther you come to Lechlade, Lechlade, 74’4. seated near the Confluence of the River Lech with the Thames, extending about 3 Furlongs, with a Market on Tues∣days, and 2 Fairs annually, on St. Lawrence, and the 29th. of August: This and Creeklade are suppos'd to have been anciently Eminent Nurseries of Learning, the One for Latine, the Other for Greek, to which the Names seem to allude; but are with more Probability deduc'd by Mr. Somner from their Situations upon the River, This from Leccian, Rigare the Other from Crecca, Torrens and Laidian purgare. At 77’7. Fairford, 78 Miles. you enter Fairford of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accommodation for Travellers, at the End of which you cross the River Coln near its Influx into the Thames, and omitting the acute Way on the Left to Cirencester, an indifferent straight Road brings you at 83’5. Barnsley, 83’6. to Barnsley 2 Furlongs long and a Place of good Recep∣tion. At 87 Miles you descend for 3 Furlongs, [89 Miles N. by W.] and over Perrot's Bridg cross the River Churn, which rising some Miles higher, waters Cirencester; and at Creeklade aforesaid falls into the Thames: At 88 Miles you ascend 2 Furlongs, and at 91’1. 4 Fur∣longs; whence by the Greyhound Inn on the Right, [94’3. N. W.] and between Elston Church on the same Hand, and Brimsfield on the Left, passing through a small Village at 95’5. you leave Wytcomb Church on the Left, descend Burlip Hill of 10 Furlongs on the Road, and at 98’6. through Brockworth a small Village, at 101’6. Brockworth, 98’6. [101’4. W. by N.] enter the City of GLOCESTER. A City of good Antiquity, A. S. Gleauceaster i. e. Pulchra Civitas, and in Latine, GLOCESTER, 102’2. Colonia Glevum, not from Claudius Caesar as some would have it: It is situate on the
East-side of the Seavern, where dividing it self into 2 Streams it constitutes the Isle of Alney; a large, well inhabited and well-frequented City; reckoning 12 Churches, whereof 6 in present Use, besides its Cathedral Dedicated to St. Peter, a fair Structure, Eminent for its large Cloyster and excellent Whispering-place; and the Interments of Lucius the first Christian King, and the unfortunate King Edward the Second. It florished greatly in the Times of the Heptarchy, and even within this last Century seem'd not to have diminish'd any thing of its pristine Glory, and though at present it appears not fully recover'd of its late Calamities, yet it is still a City and County of it self, Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, a Chamberlain and 40 Common-Councel Men; sends Burgesses to Parli∣ament; enjoys a good Trade, having 12 incorporated Companies: Numbers 5 Hos∣pitals and 2 Free-Schools; has 2 Markets weekly, Wednsdays and Saturdays, and 5 Fairs annually: Was fortify'd with a Wall, till after His Present Majesty's happy Restau∣ration, when with COVENTRY, Northampton, &c. Security against Civil Dis∣sentions for the future advis'd its Dismantling. From GLOCESTER, after the first Bridg over Seavern, you pass through Al∣ney-Isle 4 Furlongs over, wherein Edmund Ironside and Canutus the Dane after several bloody Battels, engag'd one another in single Combat, in the End agreeing to di∣vide the Kingdom: and crossing over a second Stone-bridg of 7 Arches over the Severn, Over, 103’5. you enter Over a Village extending near 2 Furlongs on the Road; and at 104’6. leave Esq Cook's House and Hinam Church on the Right; whence an en∣clos'd Way by several scattering Houses brings you at 108 Miles to Birdwood, at the Entrance into which, omitting the directer Way on the Left uniting again at 110’5. you bear to the Right through the Wood, pass over Huntley Heath, and en∣ter Huntley at 109’4. Huntley, 109’4. extending about 4 Furlongs on the Road, and affords good Accommodation for Travellers, being a Place the Hereford Carriers, &c. often make their Stage. At 111’4. you descend 3 Furlongs, and pass through Long-Hope a small Vil∣lage; [112’1. W. by S.] Micheldean, 114 M. 7 Furlongs farther you ascend again and enter Michel-Dean, i. e. Dean magna at 113’5. extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, seated in the Forest of Dean from which it takes its Name; has a good Market on Mondays, and 3 Fairs annually, Easter Monday, the 9th. of July and Michaelmas Day: Whence leaving Aben-hall Church on the Left, and Captain Colchester's House on the Right, you pass through the Fo∣rest; descending at 115’2. for 6 Furlongs, and at 117 Miles for 5 Furlongs more, and ascending at 118’2. for the space of 4 Furlongs. Being thus actually in the Forest of Dean, We shall give you a brief Account thereof: [119 Miles S. W] It generally posesses all that Part of Glocestershire which lies between the Severn and Monmouthshire, extending S.W. and N. E. about 20 Miles, and half as much transverse, constituting 3 Hundreds of the County, wherein are contain'd 23 Parishes, 4 Market-Towns, Michel-Dean, Newent, Newnham and Coverd, and 32’000 Acres of Common; it is well stor'd with Mines of Iron and Coal, excel∣lent Stone-quarries, is well Wooded and Water'd, and well replenish'd with Fish and Fowl. At 121 Miles by some Cole-pits on the Left, a Descent of 5 Furlongs leads you into Covert or Coverd, Coverd, 121’7. N.W. a small Market-Town of 2 or 3 Furlongs only: At 124 M. you pass through Stanton a small Village, Stanton, 124 Miles. and descend a Hill of 4 Furl. at the Bottom of which you enter Monmouthsh. Monmouth, 127 M. and at 125’2. another of 10 Furl. at whose Foot crossing the Wye you enter Monmouth, the Account of which We shall give you in the succeeding Plate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Stanton, the Left acute. 2. In Coverd, the forward. 3. 6 Furl. short of Huntley, the Right to GLOCESTER a different Way. 4. 9 Furl. beyond Brockworth, the Left to OXFORD. 5. 2 Miles short of Perrot's Bridg, the Right to Cirencester. 6. At Perrot's Bridg, the Left to Stow. 7. At the End of Fairford, the Left. 8. 6 Furlongs beyond St. John's Bridg, the Right to Hiworth.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to S.t DAVIDS Com̄encing at Monmouth & Extending to Burton Ferry By Ino. Ogilby Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Plate 3d. Containing 70 miles 2 furl: vizt. from Monmouth to Newchurch 12 m. 2 furl: to Caslash 73. to Newport by Christchurch 4’5. to Cardiff 12’6. to St. Nicholas 6’1. to Cowbridg 6. to Corn-town 5.4. to Aberaven 13’3. to Burton Ferry 3’3.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to St. DAVIDS in Pembrokeshire. PLATE III. Commencing at Monmouth, and Extending to Burton-Ferry near Neath in Glamorgansh. Containing 70 Miles 2 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 128’0. At the End of Monmouth, the Left to Troy House. At 132’4. The Right acute in Trelagh. At 132’7. and 133’2. The 2 forward ways on the Left to Chepstow. At 134’1. The Left to Chepstow, and a Furl. farther, the forward on the Right to Llannissent. At 136’7. and 137’6. The Left to Chepstow. At 139’5. The Right to Carleon. At 140’0. The Left to Shire-Newton. At 143’2. The Right acute. At 147’4. The Right to Carleon. At 152’1. The Right to Risca. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 153’6. The Left to Tradegan. At 154’2. and 156’6. The Right to Ru∣perry. At 159’2. The Right to Tredelogh. At 161’6. The Right through Rothe, unit∣ing after 6 Furlongs. At 166’2. The Left to Aberthaw. At 175’5. The Right to Castle Pendeen. At 181’5. The Right to Bridg-End. At 184’0. The Left acute. At 188’1. The Right to Trislyeon. At 191’6. The Left to the Sea side. IN Plate the Second We brought you to Monmouth, Monmouth, S a large and well-built Town seated on the Banks of the Wye, where it receives the Monow; enjoying seve∣ral Privileges, as sending one Burgess to Parliament, &c. had formerly a Wall and Castle now ruinous; at present contains two Parishes, the Monk's Church and St. Thomas; is the Shire-Town, Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 15 Common-Councel Men, hath a well-furnish'd Market on Saturdays and 3 Fairs annually, Whit∣sun Tuesday, St. Bartholomew and St. Martin. At the Entrance into the Town you cross the Wye, and on the West Part of it the Monow aforesaid, over a Stone-bridg of 2 Arches; whence a kind of Suburbs of a∣bout 4 Furlongs extends to 127’7. a quarter of a Mile beyond which, over ano∣ther Stone-bridg you cross the Trothy, leaving Troy-House on your Left; whence 3 successive Ascents composing together a very considerable Hill; Lidiard, 129’6. your Road proceed∣ing partly on a Pav'd Causeway, conveys you at 129’6. to Lediard House on your Left within 2 Furlongs of the Top of the foresaid Eminence, Gogheker, 130’6. and 5 Furlongs far∣ther by Red-waer another House on the Left, and a quarter of a Mile beyond that, to Gogheker on the Right, two or three Houses so call'd. Trelagh, 132’4. [133’2. S. W. by W.] At 132’4. you pass through Trelagh a small Village, and 7 Furlongs farther (o∣mitting first the two acute Ways on the Left to Chepstow) descend a Hill of above a Mile, and at the Bottom cross the River Olwye falling into the Usk at Usk; and 4 Furlongs beyond descending gently and crossing a small Rill, Devordan, 136’4. New-Church, 139’2. you ascend a Hill of 1’4. near the Top of which you pass through Devordan a small Village. At 139’2. you pass by New Church close on the Left, descending at 140 Miles for 6 Furlongs crossing the small River Throggy at 141 Miles, [142’1. S. W.] about 3 M. above its Influx into the Severn; ascending at 142 Miles a Rise of 7 Furlongs, and at the Top leaving the Ruins of Strogle Castle on the Right, having Went Wood 4 Miles together on your Left; at 144’6. Cats Ash, 146’5. W.S.W Christ Church, 148’5. Newport. 151’2. you descend for 2 Miles passing through Cats Ash a small Village in the Bottom; whence ascending 4 Furlongs at 148’5. you pass by Christ Church on the Right, beyond which 3 repeated Descents by Fair Oak on the Left leads you into Newport of 6 Furlongs Extent, seated on the South West side of the Fair River Usk, which rising about the Confines of Brecknock and Car∣marthenshire, passes by Brecknock, Abergaveny, Usk and Carleon, and having receiv'd 13 other Rivers besides 2 below this Place, discharges it self into the Severn Sea; the Town is said to be rais'd out of the Ruins of the foresaid Carleon, had formerly a strong Castle now Demolisht, is at present an indifferent large and well frequent ed Place, having a good Market on Saturdays for Cattel, &c.
At 152’2. you descend 7 Furl. and leave Esq Morgan's Park on the Left, opposite to a scattering Village on the Right, crossing the Ebwith which falls into the foresaid Usk just at its influx into the Severn, and passing by Bassalego Church on the Right at 153’7. then at 154’5. you ascend 4 Furlongs, and through a scattering Village descend at 156 Miles for 2 Furlongs, leaving Llannihangle-veddo Church and Kirmably House both on the Right about 3 Furlongs distance. At 159’1. St. Melens, 159’1. Rompney, 160’3. you pass through St. Melens, and a Mile beyond, Rompney 2 small Villages, crossing the River Rompney at 160’7. where you enter Glamorganshire; whence by Rothe a small Village on the Right at 162 Miles; 7 Furlongs farther you come to Cardiff, Cardiff, 163’1. by the Britains, Caer Didd, i. e. Urbs Didij; seated on the Tave, in a Rich and fertile Soil; a large, compact and well-built Town, having a Castle, Wall and 4 Gates, contains 2 Parishes; is Govern'd by the Constable of the Castle, 12 Aldermen, 12 Burgesses, &c. Has the keeping of Courts, the sending of a Burgess to Parliament, and the Holding of Assizes and Sessions; enjoys a great Trade especially with BRISTOL, and has 2 Markets weekly Wednsdays and Sa∣turdays. At 164’4. you leave Llandaff 6 Furlongs on the Right, situate on the foresaid Taff or Tave, an Episcopal See, with a fair Cathedral Dedicated to St. Telean, the Di∣ocess whereof contains the Counties of Glamorgan, Monmouth, Brecknock and Part of Rad∣nor; the Town or City at present very small, and not enjoying so much as the Be∣nefit of a Market. At 165’3. over a Stone-bridg you cross the Elay at a small Village of the same Name on the Right; at 167’5. (by St. Fagons and Llanihangle a Mile on the Right) you descend for 4 Furlongs and enter St. Nicholas at 169 Miles extending 2 Fur∣longs on the Road, St. Nicholas, 169’1. and leaving Cotril House on the Right 3 Furlongs; you come at 172 Miles to Tresimon a scattering Village of a Mile in Length; Tresimon, 172 Miles. whence by Sr. John Aubry's Park on the Left, an unlevel Way by St. Kayry on the Left also, brings you at 173’6 to an eminent Descent of 7 Furlongs, [173’6. W. N. W.] Cowbridg, 175. M. leading you into Cow∣bridg q. d. Vaccarum Pons, near half a Mile long, seated on the small River Thaw, by the Britains Pont-van, from its Stone-bridg; a good Town, Govern'd by a Bai∣liff, has the keeping of the Easter Sessions of the Peace, and a well-frequented Mar∣ket on Tuesdays for Cattel, Corn, &c. Hence between Penllyn Church and Castle, your Way Mountainous, brings you to the Golden Mile at 178 Miles; when descending you pass by some Houses in the Bottom on the Left, and Coy Church half a Mile on the Right, and over another Hill descend into Corn Town at 180’2. Corn Town, 180’4. a discontinued Village of 5 Furlongs. At 181’4. leaving Wenny half a Mile on the Right, you come to Ewenny fluv. and at 182’4. (over New-bridg) Ogmore fluv. which rising in the North of the Coun∣ty, passes through Bridg-End a considerable Market-Town about a Mile above this Place, and about two Miles below falls into the Sea: Next by Trelales i.e. Laleston, 4 Furlongs to the Right, [185’6. N.W.] a Descent of 6 Furlongs leads you at 187’2. to the Pile a small Village; whence over a Rill or two and by Margum House and Park on the Right, a level Road by the Foot of a kind of Ridg of Hills on the Right, con∣veys you at 193’6. Aberavon. 193’7. to Aberavon, seated on the River Avon just at its Confluence with the Sea; a Borough-Town of two Furlongs Length, Govern'd by a Port∣reeve, but its Market discontinued. At 195’3. you pass by Baylan a Furlong to the Right, and at 197’3. come to Briton or Burton Ferry 2 Furl. over, Burton Ferry, 197’4. cross the Neath, which Rising in Brecknockshire, re∣ceives two or three other Rivers, and passes by Neath a Borough and Market-town, well Traded to for Coals, &c. about 2 Miles above this Place, and a little below discharges it self into the Sea. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. Against Margum Park the Right to Newton. 2. 2’1. Short of New-bridg, the Right to Llandidock. 3. 4 Furlongs farther the Left acute. 4. 3 Furl. beyond Ewenny fluv. the Right to St. Donnets. 5. At Elay fluv. the Left to Llandaff. 6. 6 Furl. beyond St. Melens, the Left to Kirmably. 7. Against Llannihangle-veddo, the Left to Ruperry. 8. At Cats Ash, the Right acute.
The Continuation of ye Road From LONDON to St DAVIDS cō: Pembroke. Com̄encing et Burton-Ferry & Extending to St DAVIDS By John Ogilby Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Plate 4th & last, Containing 7 miles 2 furlongs vizt. From Burton-ferry to wansey 5 miles  furlongs to Llanethy 11’4. to Kidwelly 8’4. to Llanstuffan. 5’2. to Haverford West 26’4. & to St Davids 15’2.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to St. DAVIDS in Pembrokeshire. PLATE. IV & last. Commencing at Burton Ferry near Swansey in Glamorganshire and Extending to St. David's aforesaid. Containing 72 Miles 2 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 203’3. The Left to Coggilth. 214’1. The Left into Llanelthy. 214’7. The Right acute. 219’2. The Right acute. 228’0. The Right to St. Cleer. 234’7. The Right to Tenby. 236’2. The Left to Haverford a different way. At 243’6. The Left to Haverford a different way. 246’2. The Left into the Wood. 248’6. The Left to Picton Castle. 254’5. The Left to Knolton. 259’1. The Left to Fair Castle. 265’1. The Right to Whitchurch. 266’3. The Right to Whitchurch. IN Plate the 3d. we brought you to Burton alias Briton Ferry, Burton Ferry W.S.W. of near 2 Furlongs over the River Neath, which rising in Brecknockshire, receives 5 or 6 smaller Rivers, passes by Neath a Market Town about 2 Miles above, and a little below this Place falls into the Sea, accompaning you on the Left, till at 201’3. you pass by the Salt Pits, and at 202’1. by means of a Ferry of 2 Furlongs cross the River Tauy or Tawye, rising likewise in Brecknockshire, and immediatly Enter Swansey, Swansey 202’4. [N. W. b W.] Comodiously seated on the Navigable Tawye aforesaid, near its Influx into the Sea; by the Welch Aber-Taw a large and well built Town Extending 5 Furlongs on the Road: Driving the greatest Trade of any in the County, especially for Coal, having a great Correspondence with BRISTOL; The Marquess of WORCESTER is Lord of the Town, it hath 2 great Markets Weekly on Wednsdays and Saturdays. At 203’4. you pass through Trahere a small Village, Trahere 203’4. and presently ascend 2 consider∣able Hills, and descending about a Mile, over Pont Llew you cross the River Thlu a branch of the Lloghor; whence ascending again for 5 Furlongs, and a little farther descending the like quantity you come to Ponta Bremin, passing through Lloghor at 208’7. Lloghor 208’7. of 2 Furlongs Extent, formerly Fortifi'd with a Castle, now Ruinous; a Borough-Town Govern'd by a Port-Reeve, 6 Furlongs beyond which you pass by the Castle, where crossing the River Lloghor, (that rises about 10 Miles higher) over a Ferry which is fordable at Low∣water you Enter Carmarthenshire, and after a small ascent at 211’5. Llanelthy 214’2. pass by Capel Gwelwee or Gunilo on the Left, and at 213’3. Capel Dowhee on the Left also, and Enter Llanelly alias Llanelthy at 214 Miles, extending on your Left towards Penbray above 4 Furlongs; sea∣ted between a Creek of the Sea and the River Dulas, by which means it drives a consi∣derable Trade in Coal, &c. and it's Markets on Thursdays, are well furnisht with Cattel, Corn and Provisions. Whence over several ascents and descents, and after by a small Wood on the Right at 220’4. you arrive at Spuddore over the River Gwendrath-Vawr, and by another small Wood on the Right Entering Kidwelly or Kidwylye at 222’2. Kidwelly 222’4. of near 4 Furlongs Ex∣tent seated near the Sea, and on a Creek of it driving a considerable Trade in Clothing; and Maritine Affairs: Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. [223’7. N. W. b N.] and hath 2 well-frequented Markets on Wednsdays and Saturdays. A considerable ascent succeeds the Town, [226’4. W. Llanstephan 227’5. whence prosecuting a Road like the for∣mer over several Hills at 226’4. you cross the fair River Towy by a Ferry of 2 Furlongs over, which rising on the Confines of Cardigan and Brecknock Shires, passes by Llanimdiffry, Llangadok, Llandilo-Vawr, Dinevor Castle, the Golden Grove and Carmarthen; and having re∣ceiv'd 12 other Rivers, a little below this place falls into the Sea. A Mile farther you enter Llanstuffan or Llanstephen Extending 2 Furlongs on the Road, where was once a strong Castle, now Ruinous, from whence over an Hill of 4 Furlongs; at 229’6. a descent of 6 Furlongs brings you to a Ferry of 3 Furlongs over the River Towa, and at 230’6. you Enter
Llacharn or Laughern seated on the foresaid Towa, Llacharn 230’7. near it's confluence with the Sea, and was formerly strengthned by a Castle that is now ruin'd; it extends about 2 Furlongs, drives at present an indifferent Trade by Sea, and has a well-furnisht Market on Fridays for Corn, &c. at Killmain-loyd upon the Tave, (one of the five Rivers that fall into the said Towa) about 6 Miles above the place, an Earthen Vessel was found full of Roman Coyn of Embas'd Silver, of the Times Succeeding Commodus the Emperor. Leaving the Town you ascend a Hill of 5 Furlongs, and pass by Llansadurnen vulgo Llissaderna Church on the Left 4 Furlongs, descending at 232’7. for near a Mile; then passing through a Valley you leave Egloys-Kemen Church on the Right a Furlong, and omitting the acute way on the Left, being a worse Road to Haverford, at 239 M. you cross a small Brook about a Mile above Crunwaier and enter Pembrokeshire, imme∣diately ascending for 3 Furlongs. At 241’1. Llanguido 241’1. you pass through Llanguido a small Village, and then an indirect way both Woody and Hilly, by Narbarth a Market-Town about a Mile to the Right, brings you at 246’6. Canaston 246’6. to Canaston a small Village where you cross the River Clethy, which about 3 Miles below receiving the Dungledy from Haverford, passes to Sea-ward, and at Penner-mouth, meets that Creek of Milford Haven which runs up to Penbroke, in Brittish Pen-bro, i. e. Caput Marinum; the Shire-Town, strong, large, and well built and well-fre∣quented, Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a great Market on Saturdays. But proceeding, 3 repeated ascents by Mid-County House on the Right, leads you through a Vale at 253 M. descending 3 Furlongs: At 253’6. you pass through Prangherst or Prenderherst a small Village, and crossing the Dungledy aforesaid, at 254’1. enter Ha∣verford (vulgo Herford) West q. d. Aber-ford by the Britans Hulphord, [252’5. W. S. W.] a Town and County of it self, seated on the side of an Hill near Milford Haven; was formerly strengthned with a Wall and Castle, Haverford West 254’3. Demolisht in the Late Wars, is at present a large and well built Town-Corporate, Numbring 3 Parish Churches, is well Inhabited, driving a consider∣able Trade at Sea, having divers Vessels belonging to the Town; Enjoy's several Imu∣nities, as sending a Burgess to Parliament, &c. is the place where the Assizes are held and County Goal kept; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Sheriff, Common-Council, Justices of the Peace, &c. and hath 2 well-furnisht Markets Weekly, on Tuesdays and Saturdays. The greatest part of the Town lies upon the Left hand, which leaving at 254’5. your Road continues generally Hilly even to St. [254’6. N.W.] Davids crossing Pelkham Bridg at 255’7. and Keason Bridg at 257’7. whence by Roch Castle at 260’3 on your Right, at 262 M. you pass through Creekhowel a small Village upon the Sea-side, Creekhowel 22 m. [263’2. W. b N. St. Davids 269’4. and by the Nine Wells at 267’3. Enter St. Davids at 269’2. of 4 Furlongs in length, anciently Menew, in Latin Menevia, in Brittish Tuy Devi, i. e. Domus Davidis, from St. David, who Translated the Archiepiscopal See hither from Carleon upon Usk; which in Austin's Time had 7 Suf∣fragans: Numbring 26 Arch-Bishops to the year 910. vel circa, whereby it appears to have been a City of good Account, now a small Village only, bleakly situate with∣in a Mile of the Sea, whence off of the Head you have a Prospect to Ireland. The Cathedral and Free-School are the only Remarques in it, the Bishops Palace and Prebends Houses being much ruin'd; it's Walls are decay'd, it's Inhabitants few, and though it still continues an Episcopal See, yet has it not the benefit of a Market. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1’2. short of Creekhowel, the Left to Riccasson. 2. 2’7. beyond Creekhowel, the Right acute to Simpson. 3. 6 Furlongs short of Pelkam Bridg, the Left to Pelkam. 4. At the end of Haverford, the Left to Prangherst Church. 5. 1 M. 2 Furlongs beyond Prangherst, the Left to Wiston. 6. 2 Furlongs beyond Canaston, the Left to Narbarth. 7. 4 Furlongs beyond Canaston, the Right to Grove. 8. 1 M. 4 Furlongs beyond Canaston, the Right to Templeton. 9. 1 M. 6 Furl. short of Egloys-Kemen, the Right to New Inn. 10. 1 M. 3 Furl. beyond Llanelthy, the Left acute.
The Road From LONDON to DOUER in cō: Canty: Actually Survey'd & Delineated by John gilby Esqr. his Maties C mographer Containing 72 miles 4 f longs viz. to Deptford 5. Crayford 8’6. Dartford 2. Norfleet 5’2. Chaulk street 3’2. RCHESTER bridg 5.4 Sittingborn :2, Bactonstreet 9’4. CANTER∣BVRY Prisongate 5-6. Dover 15’2.
The Road from London to Dover In KENT. 1. THE Point of Bearing S.E. b. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 62. M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 55. M. 4. The Dimensuration. 71’4. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Deptford 04 04 05’0 05’0 Crayford 06 10 08’6 13’6 Dartford 02 12 02’0 15’6 Northfleet 04 16 05’2 21’0 Chaulkstreet 03 19 03’2 24’2 to ROCHESTER 04 23 05’4 29’6 Sittingborn 08 31 11’2 41’0 Bocton Street 08 39 09’4 50’4 CANTERBURY 04 43 05’6 56’2 Dover 12 55 15’2 71’4 But the Post Miles comes near the Dimensuration, accounting it to Dartford 14. to ROCHESTER 14. to Sittingborn 12. to CANTERBURY 15. and to Dover 15. in all 70. Midlesex, Surrey and Kent include the whole Road; which crosses the River Thames, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Cray, Darent, Medway and Stour: Affording in general a very good and well-beaten Road as any in the Kingdom; chiefly Chalky and Gravelly, The quality of the way. and none better provided for conveniency of Entertainment, being certainly the most frequented Road in England; as conveying you unto the readiest passage for France, and to the Downs upon all occasions: Wherein these Turnings are to be avoided. At 1 Mile the forward way to Newington. At 4’4. The Right to Lewsham. At 21’0. The Left to Gravesend. At 35’5. The Left to Upchurch. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 45’7. Acute on the Left to Feversham. At 67’0. The Left to Colred. From the Standard in Cornhil LONDON, you take your way down Gracious-street, LONDON. S.S.W. Fish-street Hill, over the Bridg, and along Southwark; being come to St. George's Church, you turn short on the Left half a Furlong, [1’1. S.S.E.] and through Kent-street as in the Description of LONDON; come to Lock Bridg, there at 1’4. leaving the Town, you first cross a Rill call'd St. Thomas Watering; then by Half-way House on the Left come at 4’3. [4’0. E.] to a discon∣tinued Village call'd New-Cross, where you Enter Kent; New-Cross. 4’4. having from the Bridg hither been in Surrey: Presently after the Road branches out on the Right to Lewsham, and thence to Tunbridg and Rie, &c. At 5 Miles you are in Upper Deptford, Deptford 5 m. which with Lower Deptford makes a large Town of chief account for it's Docks and Store-Houses, &c. At 5’3. the Ascent brings you to Black-Heath, where at 6 M. a Corner of the Brick Wall Enclosing Greenwich Park, comes up to the Road on the Left, and at 6 Furlongs distance Lies Greenwich, a large Pleasant Town on the Banks of the Thames Ennobled with a House of the Kings, now in a Stately manner Re-edify'd: This Heath is noted for a Common Rendezvouz; for here Wat the Tyler or Helier, Muster'd near 100’000. Anno 4. R. 2d.: Jack Cade who call'd him∣self Mortimer Encampt here Anno 28. H. 6th. and Anno 1497. 2000 of the Cornish Rebels were here kill'd, and the rest Defeated. At 8 M. Shooter's Hill ascends for about 7 Furlongs, whose top affords a very Emi∣nent Prospect into the 3 adjacent Counties; whence descending you pass through a Wood of a Mile in length, heretofore not so safe for Travellers; Wellen 11’0. Crayford 13’5. and at 11 Mile Enter Wellen a small Village, and at 13’5. Crayford upon the River Cray, a good Country Town of 3 Furlongs, well Accommodated; whence a direct Road brings you at 15’2. to a descent leading you into Dartford 6 Furlongs long, Dartford 15’2. seated on the Darent near its Influx into the Thames, a large Town with good Inns, and a well frequented Market on Satur∣days for Corn, &c. and 2 Fairs annually; whence by Stone Church on the Left, your Road by several ascents and descents brings you to Stonebridg within a Furlong of the Thames, just at the beginning of Cravesend Reach, from which a small ascent leads you to
Northfleet a disunited Village of 3 Furlongs, North-Fleet 21 m. with an intermittent Market on Tuesdays, from Easter till Whitsuntide only. At 22’2. you pass within 4 Furlongs of Cravesend, leaving it and the 2 Wind-Mills and Beacon all on the Left; Chalk-street 24’1. [25 m. E. b S.] at 24’1. you Enter Chalk-street about 2 Furl. long, and at 25 M. leave the Church on the Left, ascending Gad's Hill at 26’1. whose rise continues 4 Furl. whence through a Wood you are convey'd to the bottom of the Descent at 28 Miles; [28’ . E. b N.] Strond 29. m. a Mile farther Entering Stroud 5 Furlongs upon the Road, but may well pass for the Suburbs of ROCHESTER by its Contiguity to it; to whose Stately Bridg over the fair and Navigable Medway having convey'd you, [29’2. S. S. E.] [29’7. E. S. E] ROCHESTER; 0 m. a short turn on the Left leads you up the Principal Street of this ancient, though now small City, yet well Inhabited and Frequen∣ted: Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, 12 Common-Council, &c. Elects Burgesses to Parliament, gives Title to the Right Honorable John Wilmot Earl of RO∣CHESTER; Has 2 Markets weekly Wednsdays and Fridays, and 2 Fairs yearly: From the East Gate continued Buildings bring you to the brink of the Medway on the Left, and so into Chetham vulgo Chatham, Chetham 31’3. well known, as by its Vicinity to ROCHESTER, so for its Eminent Dock, and as it were the Repository of the Navy Royal: Thus this City which we call small, may be accounted 2’5. long; since we leave Chatham but at 31’5. where a small descent succeeded by a larger Rise, and a direct Road, but some∣what Woody, Raynham 35’1. brings you at 35 Miles to Raynham a Village of 2 Furlongs, followed by discontinued Houses for about a Mile together. At 37’7. Newington-street 38 m. you Enter Newington Street, about 2 Furlongs, and pass through Key Street another Village; whence discontinued Buildings bring you at 41 Miles to the midle of the long Town of Sittingborn, Sittingborn 41 m. Noted only as a well Accommodated through-fare, with 2 annual Fairs; the several Roads past on the Left, leading to Milton a Market Town on the S.W. of the Isle of Shepway, about a Mile distant; whence through several Villages, as Bapchild at 42’1. Bapchild 42’1. Radfield Street 43 m. Green Street 43’6. Radfield Street at 43 Miles, and Green Street at 43’6. you come to the top of an Eminent Ascent at 45’5. whereon stands Ospring Beacon, at the foot of the Hill the acute on the Left leads to Feversham, 12 Furlongs distant a large and well fre∣quented Market and Post-Town; whence little presents, till passing Bocton Church on the Right, Bauton-street 46’2. a descent of 3 Furlongs leads into Bocton or Bauton-Street, alias Bauton under Blean from the adjacent Hill so call'd, its a good through-fare of 4 Furlongs length. Being come to the top of the Blean at 51’5. [55’3. E.] [55’5. S. E. b S.] [56’4. S. W.] CANTERBƲRY 56’2. [56’6. S. E. b S. a Woody open way carries you over the Hill to the bottom of the descent at 55’1. whence passing by scattered Houses, and through Harpledown, at 55’6. you Enter CANTERBURY, a City every way Emi∣nent, being equally Antient and Honorable; said to be Built 900 years before Christs Time; and with the first Plantation of Religion among the English by Austin the Monk made an Archi-Episcopal See, the Arch-Bishop whereof is at this day accounted Pri∣mate and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND, and is the first Peer of the Realm: Ac∣counting 76 Bishops to his Present Grace Gilbert by Divine Providence Lord Arch-Bishop of CANTERBURY: This City Pleasantly seated on the Stour, shews one of the Stateliest Cathedrals in England; Numbers 14 Parish Churches, is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, and 24 Common-Council, &c. Has Election of Bur∣gesses to Paliament, and 2 Markets Weekly, Wednsdays and Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually. Leaving CANTERBURY at 57’2. you pass Bishops-Court Bridg at 59’4. and from 60. 5. S. b E.] to 61. Sr. Anthony Auchers Park on the Right; so over Barham Down and an ascent at 63 Miles, an Enclos'd way brings you to Lydden a small Village, whence passing through a Vale at 68’6. Ewel 68’6. Buckland 70 m. Dover 71’4. you come to Ewel, and so to Buckland at 70 Miles, Entering Dover at 71’1. a place Eminently Fortify'd both by Art and Nature, and Defended by a large and strong Castle; Enjoys large Immunities, is one of the Cinq-Ports; and gives Title to the Right Honorable John Carew Earl of Dover: Yields a Prospect to Calais in France, to which it is the readiest Passage; the Chanel here being but 7 Leagues over: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Jurats, 37 Common-Council, &c. Had once 7, now but 2 Parish Churches; 2 Markets Weekly, and 1 Fair annually. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At St. Dunstans by CANTERBURY the Right. 2. The Right in Stroud to Frinsbury. 3. The Left at the End of Stroud to Cobham.
The Road From LONDON to HARWICH in Essex By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 7 miles o furl vizt From the Standard in Cornhi LONDON to Rumford 11 m 6. to Burntwood 6 m: to Chelsford 10’5. to Witham 8’.2. to Keldon 3’.5. to COLCHESTER 9’6. to Maning tree 9’.1. and to HARWICH 11’.7.
The Road from London to Harwich In ESSEX. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. N. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 62 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 61 M. 4. The Dimensuration 71 M. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Rumford 10 10 11’6 11’6 Burntwood 05 15 06’0 17’6 Chelmsford 10 25 10’5 28’3 Witham 07 32 08’2 36’5 to Keldon 03 35 03’5 40’2 Colchester 08 43 09’6 50’0 Maningtre 08 51 09’1 59’1 Harwich 10 61 11’7 71’0 Midlesex and Essex include the whole Road, conveying you over the Rivers Lea, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Rodon, Chelmer, Blackwater and Coln; yielding generally a good Way and handsom Entertainment. These following Turnings to be avoided. At 4’2. In Stratford, the Left to Epping. At 27’0. The Left to Writtle. At 28’3. In Chelmsford, the direct Way up the Town to Braintre. At 40’1. The Left in Keldon to Phoenix-hall, At 49’7. In Colchester the direct to Sudbury. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 55’1. The Right to Brumley. At 58 Miles the Right to Wicks. At 67’3. The direct Way in Street. At 67’5. The Right to Okeley. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, along Leadenhal-street, LONDON, E. through Ald∣gate and White-Chapel Street, as in the Description of LONDON; [1’5. E.N.E.] Mile-End, 1’7. at one Mile leaving the Town, you enter Mile-End Green, and at 1’5. Mile-End a Village of 4 Furlongs, whence a well-beaten Road brings you to Bow, which you enter at 2’7. Bow, 3’0. well replenish'd with Inns and some Gentlemens Houses; descending easily for 2 Furlongs you come to the Bridg, which being of Arched Stone-work gave Deno∣mination to the Town. Here you cross the River Lea, antiently Ligea fluv. i. e. Leasluv. 3’1. N.E. Lyg-ea, or Lyg-water, which rising on the West side of Hartfordshire, passes by Hatfield, receives the Bean at Hartford, the Mimer at Ware, and the Sturt or Stour near Hods∣don; where dividing Essex from Hartfordshire (as it does here from Midlesex) passes by Waltham Cross, and the old Durolitum now Layton, and at Black-wall falls into the Thames. At 3’7. Having past some seperated Branches of the Lea, Stratford, 4’1. E.N.E. you enter Stratford Lang∣thorn, alias Stratford at Bow of 3 Furlongs, consisting chiefly of Inns for Entertain∣ment. At 6’7. you cross the small River Rodon, Great Ilford, 7’1. and enter Great Ilford a good Tho∣rough-fare, the Right-hand Ways hereabouts leading to Barking a small adjacent Market Town; passing at 8’5. a Rill here call'd Seven Kings watering: Chadwel, 9’0. [11’5. N. E. by N.] Rumford, 11’6. At 9 Miles enter Chadwel a Village of 2 Furlongs, and by the Whales Bone, at 11’2. Enter Rumford 6 Furlongs long, a large and well frequented Town, Noted for a Swine-Market on Tnesdays, and another for Corn and Provisions on Wednsdays. At 12’6. you pass through Hare-street, leaving Guidy Hall on the Left; and at 13’4. Harestrect, 12’6. E.N.E part of Epping Forest, with a Gallows to the Left. At 16’3. You enter Brook-street, Brookstreet, 16’4. a Hamlet to South Weald, and 3 Furl. after ascend a small Hill seconded by another which leads you to Burntwood alias Brentwood, 3 Furl. in length, Burntwood, 17’6. [18’2. N. E.] a Place of good Anti∣quity, fair and well Inhabited, with a good Market on Thursdays. At 18’5. you pass through Shenfield a small Village; and at 20’4. Shenfield, 18’5. over Chain-Bridg cross a Branch of the Chelmer, whence little occurs till at 22’6. fere, you enter Ingatstone vidgo Ingerstone 3 Furlongs long, and of good Reception; Ingerstone, 22’7. N.E whence a direct Road (passing by the Bull-Inn on the Right) brings you at 26’6. [27 M. N.E.b.E.] Chelmsford, 28 Miles. [28’3. E. by N.] to Widford Bridg and the Village of the same Name: At 28 Miles fere, passing by Moulsham Hall, the Lord Fitz-Walter's on the Right, you enter Moulsham, that Part of Chelmsford so call'd which lies on this side the Bridg, where having crost the Chelmer, the most Emi∣nent River of the County, you enter the Town, antiently Canonium, a large and
well frequented Place, where the Assizes for the County are generally Held, en∣joying a good Market for Corn, &c. on Fridays. Turning short on the Right out of Town, you cross the other Branch of the Chelmer: Springfield, 29’2. At 29’2. come to Springfield, and at 30’4. New-Hall Park, inclosing a state∣ly House belonging to His Grace Christopher Duke of Albemarle; This and Audley-End Being the two most Eminent Structures of the County: Leaving the Park at 31’3. Boreham, 31’7. [35’6. N. E. by N.] Witham, 36’5. and 4 Furlongs farther passing through part of Boreham, you come at 34’3. to Hatfield Peverel a small Village; and at 36’3. Enter Witham, alias Post-Witham, a Market-Town of 4 Furlongs Extent, of good Antiquity and a handsom Thorough-fare, situate on a Branch of the Blackwater; [38’1. E.N.E.] the several Roads hereabouts leading to Maldon. At 40 Miles you enter Kelvedon-Easterford, Keldon, 40’2. E. S. E. vulgo Keldon, consisting chiefly of Inns, somewhat scattering, [40’7. E. N. E.] [41’4 N. E.] [44’7. E. by N.] except about the West End; but conveying you at 40’7. to Blackwater fluv. joyning the Chelmer near Maldon. At 44’7. you come to Cross a Hand, a Direction-post so call'd; and at 46’4. through part of Stanway, Lexden, 48’2. [48’4. E. by S.] and by the Beacon over Part of the Heath. At 48’2. Enter Lexden, a Village giving Denomination to one of the Hundreds of the County; and at 49’3. Enter the Suburbs of Colchester, 2 Furlongs farther turning short on the Left into the Town, and one Furlong beyond short on the Right to the Cross: [49’6. N.] A Town of great Antiquity, pleasantly seated on the Navigable Coln, Colehester, 50’0. E. (by Antonine, Colonia) Eminent for giving Birth to Lucius the first Christian King, Helena and Constantine the first Christian Empress and Emperor in the World; It is encompast with a Wall having 6 Gates, 3 Posterns, and 9 Watch-Towers; had heretofore 15 Churches reduc'd to about 6 for present use; It suffer'd greatly under the late Pressures of prevailing Disloyalty, yet it is a Place of good Trade for Bays, Says, &c. therein employing abundance of Dutch, who have here their Church for Divine Worship, and amongst other things of Note, that of its excellent Oysters is not the least: It is Governed by a Mayor, 12 Aldermen in Scarlet, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, &c. Elects Burgesses to Parlia∣ment, and has a well-frequented Market on Saturdays. At 50’5. [50’7. N. E. by N.] [54’3. E. by S. Ardley, 54’6. [55’1. N.N.E.] Lawford-street, 57 M. [58’0. N. by E.] [59 Miles, E. by S.] Maningtre, 59’1. [60’4. N. E. by N.] [67’0. S. S. E.] [67’3. E. N. E.] you cross the Coln aforesaid, and presently after the Road to Ipswich and Yarmouth turns short off on the Left, a Furlong beyond which you leave the Town, whence an enclos'd and generally woody Way brings you at 54’4. to Ardley a small Village, and at 57 M. you pass through Lawford-street; entring Maningtre, vulgo Maintre, at 59’1. seated on the South-side the River Stower, which here divides it self into two Branches, the Town not large yet enjoying a Market on Tuesdays. Hence an Indirect Road brings you again to the Bank of the Stour at 61’5. which prosecuting 12 Furlongs, you come at 64 Miles to Wrabness, and leaving Stour Wood on the Left, at 67’2. pass by Street and over Ramsey-Bridg, which Water makes the Ray a Peninsula; thence leaving Ramsey and Dover-Court Churches on the Left, an included Way brings you to Harwich, [70’4. N.N.W.] Harwich, 71’0. which you enter at 70’6. The Town small but compact, and well Inhabited; is a strong fortify'd Garison and Seaport, with a safe commodious Harbor, and upon Occasion the Station of the Navy Royal; is the readiest Passage for Holland, whence to the Brill the Pacquet-Boats transport Letters and Passengers: Is a Corporation Electing Burgesses to Parliament, and has a small Market on Tuesdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. Against Stour Wood, the Left to Wicks. 2. 11 Furl. short of Maningtre, the di∣rect South to Mistley. 3. At the end of Maningtre, the direct to Catwade Bridg. 4. At the End of Lexden, the Right to Halsted. 5. At Cross a Hand, the Right to Cogshal. 6. At the End of Keldon, the Left to Maldon. 7. 5 Furl. beyond Chain-Bridg, the acute on the Right. 8. In Rumford, the Left to Dagen∣ham. 9. At Seven Kings Watering, the Left to Dagenham.
The Road from LONDON to Hith in Com̄ Kent Including the Road by Maidstone. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 69 Miles 4 furlongs viz.t From the standard in Corn-hill LONDON to Eltham 8’.5. to Farmingham 10’.1. to Croseley 8’.4 to Aylisford 7’.1. to Barsted 5’.5. to Ashford 17’.2. to Hith 12 miles 2 fur.
The Road from London to Hith In KENT. Including the Way by Maidston. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. E. b. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 54 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 49 M. 4. The Dimensuration 69’4. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Eltham 06 06 08’5 08’5 Farmingham 08 14 10’1 18’6 Troseley 06 20 08’4 27’2 Ailsford 05 25 07’1 34’3 to Bersted 04 29 05’5 40’0 Ashford 12 41 17’2 57’2 Hith 08 49 12’2 69’4   49   69’4   Otherwise by Maidston thus, From LONDON Comput. Measure. to Farmingham, as before 14 14 18’6 18’6 Wrotham 05 19 06’5 25’3 Maidston 08 27 10’7 36’2 Bersted, as in the Table, 02 29 03’6 40’0 Midlesex, Surrey and Kent include the whole Road; and the Thames, Ravensburn, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Cray, Derent, Medway, and Stour are the principal Rivers crost over, affording a rea∣sonable Road to Farmingham, but less commendable to Hith, being generally a rough, hard, narrow Way, and not much frequented; The quality of the way. Travellers choosing rather to pass by ROCHESTER to Maidston than by either of the Ways here exhibited, yet is it not unprovided of fitting Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 1 Mile the forward Way to Newington. At 2’7. The Right to Peckham. At 4’1. The forward to Deptford. At 5’5. The Right in Lewsham to Bromley. At 9’1. The Left acute. At 12’1. The Left acute. At 13’6. The Left acute. At 15’0. The Left acute. At 19’0. The Right to Ainsford. At 22’6. The Left acute. At 23’1. The forward Way to Wrotham and Maidston. At 33’6. The Right to Maidston. At 41’0. The Left to Hollingborn. At 48’5. The Left to Feversham and CAN∣TERBURY. At 61’7. The Right to Smede. At 62’1. The Left acute. At 66’5. The Right acute. At 68’2. The Right acute. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, over the Bridg and along Southwark, LONDON, S. S. W. you come to St. George's Church, where turning short on the Left, and through Kent-Street, as in the Description of LONDON, you pass by Half-way House, and at 4 Mile come to New-Cross; a Furlong farther entring Kent, [4’1. S. E.] and omitting the forward Way to Deptford and so to ROCHESTER, &c. you bear to the Right, and at 5’5. Lewsham, 5’5. [6 Miles, E. by S.] Ley, 6’4. Eltham, 8’5. [9’1. S. W.] pass through part of Lewsham, leaving the Town before you on the Right; whence through Ley at 6’4. a small Village, you come to Eltham at 8’3. extending 3 Fur∣longs on the Road, a well-frequented Town, especially by the Gentry in Summer, and had formerly on the South-side an House of the King's; South-End, 9’5. at 9’5. you pass through South-End a scattering Village; thence by several stragling Houses on the Road, at 12’6. enter Foot's Cray, to distinguish it from North Cray, Foot's Cray, 12’7. Paul's Cray and St. Mary Cray adjoyning; It extends 2 Furlongs, and in it you cross the River Cray: thence through Birchen-Wood of above a Miles Extent, at 18 Miles descending for 4 Furlongs, enter Farmingham 3 Furl. long, of good Reception and seated on the River Derent. Farmingham, 18’6. At 22 Miles you pass through King's-down a small discontinued Village; and at 23’1. Kings-down, 22 M.
leaving the forward Way to Maidston, [23’1. E.] Stansted, 24 Miles. [26’5. S. S. E.] Troseley, 27’2. [28 Miles, E. by S.] Addington, 28’5. you bear to the Left; at 24 Miles pass through Stanstead a disunited Village, whence ascending 3 Furlongs and descending as much, at 26’3. you enter Troseley alias Trottescliff at 27 Miles, a scattering Village of 3 Furl. so through Addington at 28’5. and between Ryherst and Town-Malling alias West-Malling, a Market-Town of Note formerly for its Abby; Larkin, 32’1. [33’6. N. N. E.] Aylesford, 34’3. E.S.E. you come to Larkin at 32 Miles, a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs, and after by Ditton Church on the Right, a sudden Turn to the North brings you to Aylesford at 34’2. of 2 Furl. Extent, affording good Accomoda∣tion; in which over a Stone-bridg of 7 Arches you cross the fair River Medway, and is of Remark for a Battle here fought between the Brittains and Saxons, wherein Catigern Brother to Vortimer King of the Britains, and Horsa Brother to Hengist King of the Saxons, slew each other in single Combat. At 36 Miles (having by the Way touch'd again upon the River) you pass by Al∣lington on the Right; whence over Pickendon Heath, where the Road from Maidston falls in on the Right; Bersted, 40 Miles. you come to Thurnham-street contiguous to Bersted, extending together 6 Furlongs but somewhat disjunct; whence between Leeds Church on the Right and Hol∣lingborn on the Left, Parrs-Gate, 42’2. at 42’2. you pass through Parr's-Gate a small Village; then by Leeds Castle the Lord Culpeper's on the Right, at 44 Miles you come to Harietsham vulgo Har∣resham 3 Furl. long; Harresham, 44’2. Sandway, 45’6. and at 45’6. to Sandway a small Village, leaving Clifton House the Seat of Captain Hales on the Right. At 47’4. you pass through Lenham-haugh, Lenham-haugh, 47’4. certain dispers'd Houses so call'd, and 5 Furl. farther Bradens-haugh, Bradens-haugh, 48’2. leaving Egerton Church 4 Furl. on the Right; whence an indirect Road by several scattering Houses brings you at 53 M. to Hothfield-haugh (or Common) passing through Hothfield at 53’4. Hothfield, 53’4. Ashford, 57’2. thence at 55’3. by the Lord Topham's Park on the Left, you enter Ashford at 57’1. of 4 Furl. Extent, wherein is kept a Court of Record every Tuesday 3 Weeks, for all Actions under 20 Mark; with a Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, the 6th. of May and 29th of August. At the End of the Town you cross the Stour; Willesborough, 59’2. at 59’2. pass through Willesborough a stragling Village, and at 61 M. by Sr. Norton Knatchbull's Park on the Left, and a Mile far∣ther, Sr. Thomas Scot's Park on the Right; descend at 63 M. for 2 Furl. and pass through Sellinge a small Village; Sellinge, 63’5. whence by Esq Gimbleton's Park on the Right, at 66’1. you come to Ostenhanger Park, including a fair Seat of the Finch's, and accompanying your Road a Mile and half on the Left; Pedlin-street, 67’7. then through Pedlin-street, 3 or 4 Houses so call'd; at 68’2. you descend 4 Furl. Hith, 69 Miles. and at 69 M. enter Hith alias Hide or East-Hith, formerly containing 4 Parishes, but by the choking up it's Haven and other Accidents reduc'd to one; is one of the Cinque-ports: Govern'd by a Mayor, 5 Jurats and 12 Common-Councel Men; hath 2 well endow'd Hospitals; a well furnish'd Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annu∣ally, on St. Peter's Day, and the 20th. of November. The included Way by Maidston. At the foresaid parting of the Roads at 23’1. you take the Right-hand or forward way, and at 24’6. Wrotham, 25’3. E, b. S. Ofham, 28’2. descending 4 Furl. enter Rotham or Wrotham 2 Furl. long, with a Market on Tuesdays. At 26 M. you pass by Nebucan House on the Right, and enter Offam alias Ofham at 28’1. of 2 Furl. Extent; whence an indifferent straight Way but very Woody, (leaving Malling at 30 M. between this and the other Road) brings you at 35’6. to a large Stone-bridg of 5 Arches over the Medway, Maidston, 36’2. [36’4. N, E.] leading into Maidston of 6 Furl. length, but transversly much more, large and well-built, its Streets well order'd, having several graceful Houses; is the Shire-Town, sends Burgesses to Parliament, &c. Is Govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Jurats, &c. has a good Free-School, a well-provided Market on Thurs∣days, and 5 Fairs annually, with several good Inns. Hence bearing to the Left at 37’6, you unite with the foresaid Road by Aylesford. Backward turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs short of Pedlin-street, the Left acute. 2. In Willesborough, the Right to Hinksel. 3. At the End of Caril or Calchil-haugh, the Left acute. 4. 2. Furl. short of Bradens-haugh, the Left to Egerton. 5. At the entring Lenham-haugh, the Right to Lenham. 6. 4 Furlongs beyond Aylesford, the Left to Maidston. 7. 5 Furlongs beyond Addington, the Left to Wrotham.
The Road from LONDON to Holy-head co'Anglesey North Wales, actually Survey'd and Delineated, By IOHN OGILBY Esq His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 269. miles 2 surlongs. vizt. From the Standard in Corndull LONDON. to Barnet. 11’7. to St. Albans. 9’6. to Dumlable. 12’5. to Brickhill. 9’5. to Stony Stratford 9’2. & to Toweester 7 m 4. Thence to the City of LICHFIELD in Plate 2d. 58 m Thence to the City of CHESTER in Plate 3d. 63’4 Thnce to Holy: head in plate 4th and last. 87 m. .
The Road from London to Holyhead, Com. ANGLESEY, North-Wales. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 224 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 208. M. 4. The Dimensuration 269’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Barnet 10 10 11’7 11’7 St. Albans 10 20 09’6 21’5 Dunstable 10 30 12’5 34’2 Brickhil 07 37 09’5 43’7 Stony Stretford 07 44 09’2 53’1 Tocester 06 50 07’4 60’5 Daventre 10 60 12’2 72’7 Dunchurch 06 66 08’0 80’7 COVENTRY 08 74 11’2 92’1 Coleshil 08 82 11’4 103’5 LICHFIELD 12 94 15’0 118’5 Rugely 05 99 07’5 126’2 Haywood 03 102 04’4 130’6 to Stone 08 110 10’1 140’7 Stableford-bridg 05 115 06’5 147’4 Wore 05 120 06’4 154’0 Namptwich 06 126 08’4 162’4 Torperley 07 133 10’1 172’5 CHESTER 07 140 09’4 182’1 Harding 05 145 07’1 189’2 Northop 03 148 05’2 194’4 Denbigh 12 160 14’6 209’2 Aberconwey 14 174 20’3 229’5 Beaumaris 10 184 12’0 241’5 Boddedar 17 201 19’1 260’6 Holyhead 07 208 08’4 269’2 Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordsh. Buckinghamsh. Northamptonsh. Warwicksh. Staffordsh. Counties past through. Shropsh. Cheshire, Flintsh. Denbighsh. Carnarvansh. and Anglesey are the Counties through which the Road lies; and the Coln, Lowsel, Owse, Leam, Avon, Sherborn, Cole, Tame, Rivers crost over. Trent, Wever, Dee, Wheeler, Elway and Conway are the principal Rivers crost over. The first 30 Miles very good Way, whence 'tis indifferent through Buckinghamshire and Nor∣thamptonshire; Dunchurch Lane gives you 2 Miles of bad Way, The quality of the way. but Staffordshire and Cheshire no ill Road; WALES though Mountainous, yet the Tide being out gives a plea∣sant Way over the Sands for several Miles. This as being another of the six prime Post-ways, and readiest Passage for Ireland, is one of the most frequented Roads of the Kingdom, accordingly affording good Entertainment for Travellers; yet we may advise, that as the Stage-Coaches to CHES∣TER miss LICHFIELD, and pass through Newport and Whitchurch in Shropshire; so on the other Hand, Horsmen will sometimes ride by Northampton, and Carts keep the Watlingstreet. THUS much in general for the whole Road which consisting of 4 Plates; the First ending at Tocester in Northamptonsh. the Second at the City of LICH∣FIELD; the Third at the City of CHESTER, and the Fourth at Holyhead: We begin with Plate the First, containing 60’5. wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided, viz. At 10’5. The Right. At 12’3. The Right to Hatfield. At 21’1. In St. Albans, the Right to Luton. At 22’2. In St. Albans, the Right to Redbourn. Turnings to be avoided. At 47’7. the Right to Hanslop. At 59’5. The Right to Easton. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, through Cornhil, Cheapside, LONDON. Blow-blad∣der-street, Newgate-street, Newgate, Giltspur-street, Pye-corner and Smithfield, you come to St. John-street, as in the Description of LONDON; and at 1’5. cross the New River and enter Islington extending above a Mile upon the Road, Islington, 2’2. full of Inns and publick as well as private Houses, for Divertisement to the Neighboring Citizens; [2’0. N. N. E.] [2’7. N. W. by N.] Lower Holloway, 4’1. whence at 3’2 you pass by Ring-Cross, and at 4 Miles enter Lower Holloway, a Village of above 2 Furlongs, and a quarter of a Mile further Upper Holloway, from whence you ascend Highgate-hill, entring the Town at 5’1. Highgate. 5’4. consisting in several fair Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, and good Inns of Accomodation, and before you come to the Gate, the Way from Gray's-Inn-Lane by Pancras and Kentish-Town falls in on the Left: Leaving Highgate at 5’6. you descend, and at 7 Miles enter Finchley Common, [6’4. N.] Whstone. 10 M. and by Brown's Well on the Right, pass through Cole Harbor at 9’4. and come to Whetstone
at 9 Miles 6 Furlongs, extending near 4 Furlongs with several good Inns for Enter∣tainment. At 10’4. [10’5 N. W.] Barnet, 11’7. Enter Hartfordshire, and by an easy Ascent Barnet, alias High Barnet at 11’6. a well-frequented Town extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, Noted for it's Medicinal Waters, good Inns, and a Swine-market on Mundays; and here EDWARD the 4th. obtain'd a Victory over the House of Lancaster. Having past the Town you re-enter Midlesex, [12’1. W. by N.] [12’5. N. W. by N.] and through Kicks End, and part of South Mims; At 15’3. Enter North Mims of 3 Furlongs Extent; Mims, 15’5. [16’6. N. W.] and at 16 Miles re-enter Hartfordshire, a Mile beyond which a steep Descent conveys you down Ridg-hill and shews you St. Albans, which (first passing Coney at 18’6.) Coney, 18’6. a direct Roadbrings you to at 21’2. a Town affording a plentiful History, but briefly thus, St. Albans, St. Albans, 21’5 W. a large and well-frequented Thorough-fare, Corporation and Market∣town, Govern'd by a Mayor, 10 Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, gives Title to the Right Honorable Henry Jermin, Earl of St. Albans; is divided into 4 Wards, and numbers 3 Parish-Churches, and sends Stage-Coaches daily to LONDON; a Place of good Antiquity, Rais'd out of the Ruins of that Ancient and Eminent Roman City Verulam (whereof the Name now onely remains) and denominated from one Alban a Citizen thereof. [22’2. W. S. W.] [22’4. N. W.] Leaving the Town at 22’4. a direct enclos'd Way brings you at 25’7. Redburn, 25’7. to Redburn, a good Thorough-fare Town, (the Left-hand Ways leading to Hempsted and Berkhampsted, two adjacent Market-towns) and at 30 Miles to Mar∣ket-street, Market-street, 30’2. 4 Furlongs long, full of good Inns for Accomodation, where entring Bed∣fordshire, Dunstable, 34’2. an enclos'd Way leads you at 34 Miles into Dunstable, from one Dun a noto∣rious Robber so call'd, anciently Magioninium and Magintum; 'tis seated on a Hill in a chalky dry Ground, well-frequented, full of Inns for Accomodation, and has a good Market on Wednsdays for Corn and Cattle, and is Noted for good Larks; having a cross Road in it, the Left to Leighton and OXFORD, and the Right to Cambridg. At 34’3. Leaving the Town your Road gently ascends to 35’4. where a steep De∣scent carries you down Chalk-hill, thence (if in Winter) a dirty Way leads you to Hock∣ley, Hockley, 38’5. alias Hockley in the hole, (from Hoc i. e. Lutum) long and scattering, consisting chiefly of Inns and publick Houses; and here the Road to Woburn branches out on the Right. Hence the Watlingstreet way brings you to the entrance into Buckinghamsh. at 42’4. 9 Furlongs farther entering Little Brickhil 3 Furlongs long, Brickhil, 43’7. a Post-town and of good Re∣ception. Then gently descending at 45’5. You pass the Lowsel a Branch of the Owse, and Enter Fenny-stretford 2 Furlongs in Length, Fenny-stretford, 45’6. and mostly Inns for Reception of Tra∣vellers. Thence by Rickley-wood on the Left, over Bunch-hill and Harford-bridg, a straight Road leads you at 52’6. Stony-stretford. 53’1. Owse flv. 53’2. into Stony Stretford, Seated on the Owse, anciently Lactoradum, a large Town containing two Parish-Churches, well accomodated with Inns, has Five Fairs yearly, and a great Market on Fridays, their chief Imployment being Bone-lace weaving; At the End of the Town, having past the River, you enter Old Stratford in Northamptonshire, affording some good Inns, both together making a Mile in Extent; and here the great Road to Northampton, and so to Nottingham and Derby, Potters Perry, 55’5. branches out on the Right; whence at 55’5. by Potters Perry End your Road keeps streight, but somewhat Woody, shewing some visible Remains of the old Roman way; so by Cuttle-mill on the Left and Havencote Houses on the Right you come at 60’2. Tocester, 60’5. to Towcester, vulgo Tosseter and Toster, anciently Tripontium from its Bridges, a handsom Town, well provided for Reception of Travellers, and has a good Market on Tuesdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. A Furlong from Cuttle-mill, the Right. 2. Against Paulers Perry Church, the Left to Stoke-Park. 3. At the Endof Fenny Stratford, the Left. 4. 2 Furl. beyond Little Brickhil, the Left. 5. Just beyond the Gate at Highgate, the Right to Graies-Inn-Lane, LONDON. 6. At the Entrance of Islington, the for∣ward to Kingsland.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON. to Holy head. By IOHN OGIL BY esq.r His Ma:ties Cosuwgrapl Plate 2d Comencing at Towcester in Com' Northlon & Extending to the City of LICHFILLD. Containing 58 miles. o. furlongs. vizt: From Toweester to Daintre 12’2. to Dunchurch 8. to the City of COVENTREY 12’2 to Coleshall 11’4 & to the City of LICHFIELD 15.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to HOLYHEAD, Com. Anglesey. PLATE II. Commencing at Tocester Com. Northampton. and Extending to the City of LICHFIELD. Including 58 Miles. Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 61 M. The Left to Warwick. At 68’3. Watlingstreet way, forward to Watford-gap. At 87’4. The Right in Ryton. At 98’5. The Left to Birmingham. and Salop. At 103 M. The Left to Birmingham. At 107’5. The Right to Draiton-Bassets. At 108’5. The Right to Tamworth. At 109’4. The Left acute. At 111. The Left acute entring Bassets-Heath. At 113’2. The Right acute by the Bishops ruck of Stones. At 116’0. The Right to Frayford. FROM Tocester You continue a straight open Way, being part of the Watlingstreet, Tocester. [60’5. N. N. W.] to Forster's Booth, an Inn or two and 3 or 4 small Houses so call'd, at 63’3. Whence your Road by intermittent Ascents and an easie Descent brings you to Wedon, anciently Bonnaventa and Isannovantia, seated in a Bottom, [68’3. W. N. W.] whereby it is subject to sudden Inundations; has one or two publick Inns, but the Road leaves it on the Left, and 4 Furlongs farther, viz. At 68’3. leaves the direct Watling-street at the Cross o'th' Hand, and bearing to the Left, over Rye-hill, and by Hook-wood, brings you at 72’6. 72’3. N. W. by N.] to Daventre, vulgo Daintre, 3 Furlongs on the Road, Daventre, 73. M. Eminently Seated on the Side of Borow-hill, a good Through-fare with divers handsome Inns, as the Wheat-sheaf, &c. A Corporation Govern'd by a Bayliff, Aldermen, Steward, &c. Has a good Market on Wednsdays for Horses, Cattle, Corn, &c. and gives Title to the Right Honorable Heneage Finch, Baron of Daintry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND. From 74 Miles an open Way carries you to Berry-bridg near Branston at 76’2. Enter Warwickshire. 77. [79’1. W. N. W] Dunchurch, 80’7. 6 Fur∣longs farther Entring Warwickshire, and 2 Furlongs more crossing the River Leam a few Miles from its Head, repassing it at 78 Miles; and entring Dunchurch-lane, usually very bad Way of about 12 Furlongs Extent; 6 Furlongs beyond which you come to Dun∣church, 2 Furl. long, with 2 or 3 reasonable Inns, as the Dun Cow, &c. Leaving the Town at 81 Miles, you enter Dunsmore-heath of about 4 Miles Extent. At 85’3. Pass the Foss-way, which at High-cross in Leicestershire meets the Watling∣street; and by Knightley-Cross at 87’3. Ryton, 87’3. enter Ryton (super Dunsmore) a scattering Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs; a Mile beyond which over Ryton-bridg, Wymal, 89’5. (crossing the Avon from Rugby) you pass through Wymal, and by the Seven Stars a well-known Carryers-Inn, and Whitley-mill, come upon the Pavement, which a Mile farther leads you at 91’6. [90’2. N. N. W.] COVENTRY, 92’1. into the City of COVENTRY, extending with the Western Suburbs 10 Fur∣longs on the Road; Pleasantly Seated near the Midle of ENGLAND, on the lit∣tle River Sherborn, whose Water is peculiar for the Blue Dye: A Corporation of great Antiquity, as appears by a Charter of Leofricks Earl of Mercia; [92’0. W.] had divers Privileges Granted and Confirm'd to them by Ranulph Earl of CHESTER, aug∣mented by H. 2d. and the successive Kings and Queens of ENGLAND. Is at this Day a City and County including 19 Villages and Hamlets: Govern'd by a Mayor, 2 Bayliffs and Sheriffs, a Recorder, 10 Aldermen, a Coroner, Steward, two Chamberlains, two Wardens, &c. Holds Pleas for all Actions; has a Goal for Fe∣lons as well as Debtors: Sends Burgesses to Parliament, &c. Numbers 10 Wards and 3 Parish-Churches; was Enclos'd with a strong Wall demolish'd Anno 1662. near 3 Miles in compass, with 12 Gates and 26 Turrets; Has a large Grammer-School well Endow'd with three Masters and Exhibitions in both Universities, with a free Musick-School, and another Free-School for Poor Boys; divers Hospitals, One for 10 old Men, another for 20 Blue-coat Boys, a Third for 8 marry'd Couple, and a Fourth in West-Orchard Street. In the Market-place stands the stateliest Cross of the Kingdom it being 66 Foot high, Adorn'd with the Statues of several Kings, &c. Repaired and Beautify'd, Anno 1667. Their principal Trade is Cloathing, They reckon 18 Companies;
have three Markets weekly, Fridays for Cattel, Corn, &c. and Wednsdays and Satur∣days for Provisions, with four Fairs annually; [whereof see more in succeeding Plates.] At 94’6. [94’6. W. N. W.] Ausley. 97’0. W. by S. Meriden 98’3. N.W. you pass through Alesly, vulgo Ausley, a little Village, whence little observable onely an Ascent of clayey way succeeded by a Rocky Descent leading you at 98’2. into Meriden, extending 2 Furlongs, consisting chiefly of Inns, being otherwise a scattering Village, but remarkable for that having just enter'd the Heath, the great Road to Shrewsbury by Birmingham, Dudley and Bridgnorth, and from COVENTRY to WORCESTER, &c. branches out on the Left. Thence by Packington Sr. Clement Fisher's, you pass between the two Parks, cross the little River Blith; Coleshill, 103. N. b. W. and at 103 Miles enter Coleshill a Mile in length, Seated on a Hill by the River Cole, chiefly Eminent as a Thorough-fare, and among other good Inns, the Swan, Angel and King's Arms are good Receptacles, the Town not small, nor its Market on Wednsdays inconsiderable; on the Left of the Town is the Hall, the Seat of the Lord Digby of Geashil in IRELAND. Passing Grimscot-hill, the Descent brings you at 105’5. to Curdworth-bridg over Tame fluv. a fair River giving Denomination to Tamworth, an adjacent Market-town; a little below which 'tis receiv'd by the Trent: [107’5. N.W. b. W.] [108’3. N. N. E.] [108’5. N. N. W.] [109’1. W.] [109’4. N. N. W.] [111’4. W. N. W.] [112’2. N. N. W.] Thence by Dunton, and Moxhull the Seat of Sr. Andrew Hacket on the Right, by Whisshaw-green and the Red Cap, a well-known Carryers Inn; at 110’7. leave Middleton New Park on the Right, and enter Bassets Heath, the Pole at 111’4. dividing the Counties of Warwick and Stafford; The Right Hand Ways hereabouts leading to Sutton-Colefield, an adjacent Market-town; whence by Canall Wood on the Right, and the Bishops Ruck of Stones, a Heap so call'd, a gra∣velly Valley brings you to Black Brook and the Cross o'th' Hand. At 115’1. The Watlingstreet Way you left at Wedon, passing by High-cross and Atherston, [116 M. N. E.] [116’2. N. N. W.] here thwarts your Road and proceeds to Shrewsbury, &c. At 115’7. You pass through Swinfen, a small Village, where entring the County of the City of LICHFIELD: At 117’6. cross another Roman Way call'd Ickneld-street, and by Boroughcop-hill on the Right, LICHFIELD, 118’2. enter the Suburbs of the City at 118’2. a Mile in Extent on the Road, and as much transverse, yet not numbring above 600 Houses: Of great Antiquity, anciently Licidfield, i. e. Campus Cadaverum, from the many Martyr'd Bodies in the Dioclesian Persecution; to which possibly alludes the Arms of the City, viz. Three slain Kings; The Cathedral was first Built by Oswy King of the Mercians, circa Ann. 556. making Duyna the first Bishop; in the Time of Offa King of the Mercians was made an Archiepiscopal See, the Bishops of WINTON and HEREFORD, and those of Sidnacester, Dorchester, Elmhalm and Dunwich appointed for his Suffra∣gans, but determin'd with the Death of the King: Anno 1075. It was Translated to CHESTER, afterwards to COVENTRY, and back to LICHFIELD by Roger Clinton, who Erected the present Structure, Dedicated to the Virgin Mary and St. Chad; a curious and splendid Piece, especially its West-end, where, by the Late Bishop Hacket, (a second Langton) is plac'd a Statue of His present Majesty, and the whole Fabrick, miserably harass'd by a sacrilegious Rebellion, now beautifully Repair'd. The County of the City is about 10 or 12 Miles Circumference, surrounded by the Shiriff annually 8. Septemb. who then feasts the Corporation and Neighbor Gentry: Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, and a Shiriff Elected out of 24 Burgesses, a Recorder, who is Judg upon Occasion, a Town-Clark, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, has a Goal for Felons and Debtors apprehended within the Liberties (but not within the Close,) has weekly 2 Markets, on Tuesdays and Fridays, and annually 4 Fairs, Friday after 12th. Day, May 1. Ashwednsday, and Friday before Simon and Jude: Has a Free Grammar-School with two Masters, an Hospital call'd St. John's, and another in Bacon-street; Is well-frequented by Gentry, contains 3 Parish-Churches, the greatest part of the Town lying on the Right-hand of the Road: In the Thorough-fare Street, among other good Inns, the George and Swan afford very good Entertainment, and 2 Cawsey-bridges joyn the main Town to the Close and Bacon-street, accounted the chief Street in the Town till burnt in the late Troubles, in which this City appear'd so Eminently Loyal. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the Cross o'th' Hand the Left to Weeford. 2. At Wisshaw-green, the Right to Wisshaw. 3. A Furlong beyond Coleshil, the Right to Warwick. 4. The forward Way in COVENTRY. 5. 2. Furl. beyond Ryton-bridg, the Right to Southam. 6. Against Upper Wedon, the Right to Wedon.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to Holy head. By IOHN OGILBY esq His Maties Cosmographer Plate 3d. Comencing at the City of LICHFIELD & Extending to the City of CHESTER. Containing 63 Miles 4 furlongs vizt. From the City of LICHTIELD to Rugeley 7’5 to Great Haywood 4’4. to Stone 20’2. to Stableford: bridg 6’5. to Wore 6’4. to Nampt wich 8’4. to Torperley 10’1. & to the City of CHESTER 4’4
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to HOLYHEAD, Com. Anglesey. PLATE III. Commencing at the City of LICHFIELD, and Extending to the City of CHESTER. Containing 63 Miles 4 Furlongs. Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 119’7. The Left (direct) at Cross o'th' Hand to Farwel. At 128’4. The Left (direct) to Stafford. At 131’6. The Right to Uttoxeter. At 141’2. The Right (forward) in Stone to Olton. At 142’6. The Right to New-castle and Lancaster. At 147’3. The Right forward to New-castle. At 148’7. The Right to Madeley. At 158’1. The Right to Wibunbury. At 172’2. The entring Torperley, the Right acute. At 173’0. At the End of Torperley, the Right to Utkinton. At 175’0. The Left to CHESTER the Cart-way. At 179’5. The Right to Christleton. FROM LICHFIELD you come to Cross o'th' Hand, LICHFIELD, N. W. by W. 118’5. a few Houses so call'd from a Direction-post there plac'd, reckon'd a Mile from the City; so pass∣ing by Longway-house on the Right, and cross Bilson-Brook, a little Descent brings you to Long-green, and thence an easie Ascent to (Longdon, [119’7. N. N. W.] Longdon, 122’7. [123’7. W.S.W.] [124’2. N.W.b.W.] vulgo) Long Church on the Right at 122’6; whence a steeper Descent carries you through part of the Town, and a Mile farther you come to Brereton Hill, descending 3 Furlongs, leading you at 124’4. into Brereton, vulgo Brewerton, 2 Furlongs long with a good Inn, Brereton, 124’5. whence a direct Road carrieth you to Rugeley, vulgo Ridgeley of 5 Furlongs Extent, Rugely, 126’2. a good Through-fare-town, with a Market on Tuesdays. [126’4. W.N.W.] Leaving the Town at 126’5. a sandy Way brings you by Sr. Charles Wolseley's on the Right, to Wolseley, vulgo Ousley, with one good Inn, where at 128’5. Wolseley, 128’4. N.N.W. you cross the Trent, which afterwards accompanies you on the Left to Darlaston-bridg; at 129’2. you pass through Colledg; at 129’5. Little Haywood, and at 130’4. enter Great Haywood, Colledg, 129’2. [129’6. W. by N.] Great Haywood, 130’6. N. by W. [131’6. N.W.] a Village extending above 4 Furlongs on the Road, with 2 or 3 good Inns; whence leaving Tixall the Lord Aston's, a Mile, and Ingestre the Seat of the Chetwin's half a Mile on the Left, you pass by a Salt-work, vulgo the Brine-pits, and close to Weston on the Left at 134’1. whence a gravelly Way brings you at 136’2. to Sand-cross, from the Direction Post at the Cross-way, leading from Stafford 3 Miles on the Left, to Ut∣toxeter 6 Miles on the Right: In the Church of Sandon, vulgo Sand, Sand, 136’6. 2 Furlongs on the Right, is a stately Monument of Sampson Erdswick, and the Hall adjacent the Seat of George Digby, Esq whose Daughter and sole Heir Marry'd Charles late Lord Gerard, of Gerard's Bromley. Passing through the Village, and a little further, part of Burston, at 138’6. you leave Carr-house on the Left, a well-known Carriers Inn; Stoke, 139’6. Stone, 140’7. thence through Stoke a small Vil∣lage, and by Stone-hall and Park on the Right, at 140’5. enter Stone of 4 Furlongs Ex∣tent, a handsome Thorough-fare with 5 or 6 good Inns, a Market on Tuesdays, [141’2. W. by S.] [141’4. N.W.] Darlaston, 142’3. and a Fair on St. James Day; memorable for that King Wolpher (suppos'd to reside at Berry∣bank, a Hill adjoyning near Darlaston) here murther'd his two Sons Wulfald and Rufin, for embracing the Christian Faith. You turn short out of Town on the Left, and at 142 Miles over Darlaston Bridg cross the Trent, and pass through Darlaston, where at 142’6. [142’5. W.] the great Road leading to Newcastle, Warrington, Lancaster and Carlisle branches out on the Right: At 145’2. [145’5. N.W. by N.] [147’3. W.] Stableford bridg, 147’4. [152’6. N. N. W.] you ascend Warren-Hill, whence by some scatering Houses you come at 147’4. to Stableford-Bridg, affording one Inn for Carryers, &c. Thence by Side-way Hall on the Left, at 152’6. come to Pipe-Yate, 2 or 3 Houses so call'd, where you cross a Corner of Shropshire, carrying you at 154 Miles through Wore, vulgo Owre, Wore, 154 Miles. a Village with an Inn or two; 6 Furlongs beyond at an Ash-tree entring Cheshire. At 155’7. you pass through Bridgmore 2 Furlongs on the Road, Bridgmore, 155’7. [157’1. W.N.W.] and a Mile farther by a Pool or Mere, and Doddington Hall the Seat of Sr. Thomas Delves on the Left,
you come to Stapeley at 159’6. [159 M. N.W. b. N. [162’3. W. by S.] Namptwich, 162’4. and by some sprinkled Houses at 162’2. enter Nampt∣wich extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, seated on the River Wever passing through the midst of it; large and well-built with a fair Church, well inhabited and frequented by reason of the great quantity of white Salt here made; whose Springs, as those at Midlewich and Northwich, lie on the Banks of a fresh-water Stream: It has a good Mar∣ket on Saturdays for Corn and Cattel. Hence by Sr. Acton, 163’6. N. W. Thomas Wilbraham's on the Left you come at 163’7. to Acton, thence to Burford-green, Hurlstone, and at 166 Miles through Stoke, leaving the Hall on the Right, and at 166’4. come to Bar-bridg, and enter upon Watfield Pavement continu∣ing to 168’4. [170’5. N. by W.] whence by some Houses on your Right call'd Highway side, and Sau∣try a little distant on the Left, you leave Beeston-Castle about 2 Mile on the Left, and at 172’2. Torperley, 172’5. [172’2. N. W. b. W.] enter Torperley a good Thorough-fare Town of above 4 Furlongs Extent, yielding good Accomodation for Travellers. At 174’1. Cotton, 174’1. through Cotton, 6 Furlongs farther you leave Dutton-Hall on the Right, the acute Way on the Left falling in again at 179’3. is sometimes travell'd by Carts, as is another acute Way on the Right 3 Furlongs thence, just beyond Clotton a small Village; whence at 176’6. through Hocknel another small Village, you pass over 3 Stone-bridges so many Rivulets, and enter Cotton-Heath. At 178’5. [177’4. W.] you pass by some Houses call'd Brown-Heath, and 4 Furlongs farther a Gibbet on your Right; and having touch'd on the Banks of the Dee on the Left, come to CHESTER at 181’3. passing through Fore-East-Street extending 4 Furl. and through East-gate enter the City, whereof our Histories speak very largely, which thus in brief: CHESTER, CHESTER, 182’1. alias West-CHESTER, from it's western Situation, anciently Deva from the River Dee, by the Britains, Caer-Legion, &c. a Place of great Anti∣quity, in form quadrangular; the Walls excluding it's large Suburbs about 2 Miles in Circumference, with 4 Gates respecting the 4 Cardinal Quarters; defended by a strong Castle, wherein is the Shire-Hall, large and stately, in which are Heard and Determin'd all Concerns in Law of the County Palatine, having to that End proper peculiar Officers: It numbers 10 Parishes besides the Cathedral; had for its first Earl Hugh Lupus Half-Brother to the Conqueror, which Title is now in the Crown. The Diocess contains the Counties of Chester and Lancaster, part of Flintshire, Cum∣berland and Yorkshire: Has a fair Water-house by the Bridg, and the principal Streets are Piazzo-wise: Has a great Intercourse with IRELAND, This and Holyhead be∣ing the principal Places of taking Shipping for DUBLIN the Capital City of that Kingdom: Is a City and County Govern'd by a Mayor, 2 Sheriffs, 24 Aldermen, a Recorder, Town-Clark, &c. the onely Place of the County, sending Burgesses to Par∣liament, has weekly Markets on Wednsdays and Saturdays: At Midsummer Fair is per∣form'd the Ceremony of the Minstrels, a Privilege belonging to the Heirs of Dutton; at which time also there is a stately Procession by the Mayor, Aldermen, Compa∣nies, &c. resembling the Lord Mayors Shew of LONDON; They have also an∣other great Fair at Michaelmas, both which are plentifully furnish'd and frequented by the Tradesmen of LONDON and DUBLIN. Backward turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furlongs from CHESTER the Right to the Holt. 2. 1’3. from CHESTER, the Right to Whitchurch, the Left to Christleton. 3. 2 Miles from CHESTER the right to Namptwich, the Cart-way. 4. 7 Furlongs short of Highway-side hou∣ses, the Right to Tilston. 5. 4 Furl. beyond Namptwich, the Left to Besley and Sandbach. 6. 3 Furlongs short of Stapley, the Right to Aulm. 7. At Pipe-yate, the Right to Drayton. 8. 3 Furl. short of Sandon, the Right acute. 9. 9 Furlongs short of the Brine-pits, the Right acute. 10. The Right in Great Haywood. 11. The Right in Rugeley to Cank∣wood. 12. A Furlong beyond Brereton, to Cankwood. 13. 5 Furlongs beyond Brereton, the Left.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to Holy-head, By IOHN OGILBY. Esqr: His Ma:ties Cosmographer Plate 4th. & last. Comencing at the City of CHESTER. &. Extending to Holy: head. abovesaid. Containing 87. Miles 1. furlong. viz.t From the City of CHESTER, to Harding 7’1. to Northop 5’2 to Denhigh 14’6. to Aberconway 20’3. to Beaumaris 12: to Boddedar 19’1. to Holy-head, 8’4.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to HOLYHEAD, Com. Anglesey. PLATE. IV. & Last. Commencing at the City of CHESTER, and Extending to Holyhead, aforesaid. Containing 87 Miles 1 Furlong. Wherein the following Turnings are to be avoided. At 186’6. The Left at the End of Bretton. At 203’6. The Left to Ruthin. At 209’7. The Left direct. At 212’6. The Right acute. At 225 Miles, The Right being the Foot∣way to the Ferry. At 229’5. The Left through Aberconwey to Bangor. At 236’2. The Left to Bangor. At 264’5. The Right to Holyhead when the Tide is out. At 265 M. The left to Holyhead by the bridg. FROM CHESTER over the Bridg, CHESTER, S. [182’4. S. W.] [186’1. S. W. by S. Bretton, 186’5. [186’6. W.] Harding, 189’2. omitting the Left-hand Way to Eaton and Wrexham, you leave the Suburbs; and at 184’3. enter Flintshire, an open Way carrying you to Bretton at 186’5. a small Village, whence an enclos'd Way by Har∣ding Park on the Left, brings you at 189 Miles to Harding, alias Hawarden, extend∣ing 3 Furlongs on the Road, and a reasonable Thorough-fare, with the Castle ad∣joyning on the Left; thence between Yowley and Yowley Castle, each 2 Furl. distant, Northop, 194’4. over Pantrey Bridg by several Ascents and Descents at 194’4. you come to Northop a small Post∣town, where the Road to Holywell branches out on the Right: Cravat-Clough, 196. M. [196’5. N W.] [199’6. W.] At 196 M. pass by Cravat Clough, a House or two so call'd, and at 197’4. descend Skybough-haggin Hill, and 4 Furl. beyond ascend part of Lagin-haggin Hill, the Top of the Eminence lying to the Left. At 200’6. leaving Skiviog Church on the Left, you pass by the Smell Mills, and at 202’5. leave Pulgum Hall on the Left, and Caierwis a small Market-Town near a Mile on the Right; thence by Masmunnam Hall on the Right, and Abervilla Hill, you pass Potuary, and at 206’3. come to Pontriffith Bridg, where crossing Cluyd fluv. (which a little below passes by St. Asaph, an Episcopal See and Market-Town, just at its Confluence with Elwy fluv.) you enter Denbighshire; and by Leweny Hall and the Five Oaks on the Left, at 209 Miles come to Denbigh, Denbigh, 209’2. seated on a Branch of the Cluyd, once of great Strength with Walls and a Castle lately Demolish'd; The Town indifferent large, esteem'd the best in North-Wales; gives Title to the Right Honorable Bazil Fielding Earl of Denbigh; Govern'd by two Aldermen, 2 Bayliffs and 25 Capital Burgesses, &c. Elects a Parliament Man, and has a good Market for Cattel, &c. on Wednsdays. Leaving the Town at 209’7. you pass by Foxall Hall, [211’3. W. S. W. [212’4. W. N. W.] [216’0. W. by N.] and Hen-Llan a little Vil∣lage seated on an Eminence; whence over several Rills and Ascents, at 215’3. through Llanusydd, alias Llanwith, you come at 217’3. to Pontgwithy Bridg, over the foremention'd Elwy, where are 3 or 4 Houses; 3 Furlongs beyond which you ascend a considerable Hill for 6 Furlongs, descending about 4 Furlongs; Bettus, 220 M. and at 220 Miles arrive at Bettus, alias Bethouse a small Village, and 5 Furlongs farther by Bettus Hall on the Right. At 221’4. pass over Dolven Bridg, whence little occurs but Up-hill and Down-hill and some Woods, till at 227’1. [226 Miles, N.N.W.] Crosworth, 227’2. [228’1. W. by N.] you come to Crosworth a small Vil∣lage, and enter Carnarvanshire at 228 Miles, whereof onely a small Corner lies on this side the Conway, which at 229 Miles you arrive at, and over which by a Ferry of 3 Furlongs you come to Conway Town, alias Aber-Conway; Aberconwey, 229’5. by Edw. 3d. Rais'd out of the Ruines of the old Brittish City Caer-baen, alias Canovium, seated on the Mouth of the Conway, imply'd by the prefixt Aber, i. e. Ostium Fluminis, a Large, Well∣built and fortified Town, Govern'd by an Alderman and 2 Bayliffs, with a Market on Frydays. But leaving the Town on the Left (unless the Tide being in, [229’5. W. S. W.] you are oblig'd to pass by Bangor) you keep the Right-hand Way, and over a Skirt of Pen-maen-bychan, or the Lesser Stony-head, come upon the Sands at 231’5. whereon you continue to
234’2. unless the Tide being out you can keep along the Sands, else at 235 Miles ascending for 6 Furlongs a Skirt of the well-known Pen-maen-maur, Pen-maen-maur Hill, 235’6. i. e. The great Sto∣ny Head, a Path not onely difficult but dangerous, the Ascent being rough and steep, giving you a perpendicular Precipice or Declivity on the Right to the Sea, and a kind of over-hanging Rock of as great a height on the Left to the Land-ward; a small Descent of about 2 Furlongs carries you from the Top to 236 Miles, where again at a House or two on the Left, [236’2. W. by N.] branches out the Way to Bangor, through which, as before we advertis'd, you must yet take your Way if the Tide be in, o∣therwise you re-enter the Sands, directing your self half a Mile wide to the Left of Beaumaris for greater safety; Beaumaris, 241’5. at 240’6. arriving at the Menay Streight, seperating (by a Fretum of generally a Mile over) Mona Insula or the Isle of Anglesey from Car∣narvanshire, on the East side of which Fretum is seated Carnarvan, (which we shall discourse in Wesh-pool to Carnarvan, pag. 173.) and Bangor before mention'd, antient∣ly for its largeness call'd Bangor or Banchor-vaur, i. e. Bangor the Great, and defended by a strong Castle long since Ruin'd; now onely a small Episcopal See, containing the Counties of Carnarvan and Anglesey, with Part of Denbigh Merioneth and Montgo∣merysh.: The Town or City is Govern'd by the Bishop's Steward; its principal Build∣ings are the Cathedral Built circa Ann. 516. the Bishop's Pallace and Free-school-House, House, and it's Market on Wednsdays is indifferent good: But to return, The Ferry over the Menay is about 5 Furlongs leading you into Beaumaris, anciently Bon-over, q. d. Pulchra Palus, fortify'd with a good Castle by Edw. 1st. a well-built Town, Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Bayliffs and 21 Common Councel; Elects one Parliament Man, is the Shire-town where the County Goal is kept, and the Ge∣neral and Quarter Sessions Held; furnished with good Entertainment for Passen∣gers in their Way to and from Holyhead, and has Weekly two Markets, on Wedns∣days and Saturdays, with a good Harbor for Ships. You leave the Town at 242 Miles, a Mile farther pass by an Alms-house on the Right, Tincohet, 246’6. whence over Kin-cough Brook a direct Road brings you at 246’6. to Tincohet a small Village, after which crossing several Rills, at 249’3. you pass by Pen-menis Hall, and at 250’4. Hildravaght Mill both on the Left, and ascend a small Hill with a Gibbet on the Right: At 251’7. you come to two or three Houses part of Llan∣gaveney; Llangaveny, 251’7. Massalan, 256’4. Boddedar, 260’6. [262’2. W. S. W.] [266’2. N. W. b. N.] thence at 256’4. Massalan a few Houses on the Left, and by a long upright Stone, at 258’4. cross Rudband Bridg; entring Boddedar at 260’6. a small Thorough∣fare; a Mile and a half farther leave Llanengh-hennel on the Right, and bearing to the Left, at 264’5. observe the Right-hand Way to Cleveock Sands, leading to Ho∣lyhead when the Tide is out, otherwise you proceed by Way of the Bridg, unless 4 Furlongs farther you pass over the Sands and Rocks, all uniting before you come to Holyhead, Holyhead, 269’2. which you enter at 269 Miles, a scattering Town consisting chiefly of Houses for Entertainment of such Persons as either are bound for IRELAND, or lately arriv'd thence; 'Tis seated directly opposite to DUBLIN, to which it is the shortest as well as safest Passage over the most dangerous of all the British Seas, St. George's Channel. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furlongs from Holyhead, the Left o∣ver the Sands when the Tide is out. 2. Against Haneglous Church, the Left to Dubatmare. 3. 4 Furlongs short of Aberconwey, the Right into the Town. 4. 1 Furlong beyond Crosick, the Left acute. 5. 1’3. short of Dalwen Bridg, the Left acute. 6. At Elway fluv. the Right to the Moun∣tains. 7. 5 Furlongs beyond Hen Llan, the Left acute. 8. At Aberwilla Hill, the Left acute. 9. 2 Furl. beyond the Smell Mills, the Right acute. 10. Against Skiviog Church, the Left 11. A Furl. beyond Northop, the Right acute. 12. 9 Furlongs short of Harding, the Left acute. 13. At the End of Harding, the Left to Sawtry. 14. In Bretton, the Right acute.
The Road From LONDON to the LANDS END Comencing at the Standard in Cornhill and Extending to Sian in Cornwall. By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r his Maties Cosmographer. Containing 303 miles 3 furlongs vizt. to Brantfort 10’4 Stanes 8’7 Bagsh 10’0. Hartley Row 9’0 Basingstoke 10 And over 18  SALISBURY  4. Shaftesbury 19’2 Sherborn 15’4. Crookhorn 14’6 Axminster 10’2 Hiton 12’4 EXETER 16’4. Chidley 94. Ashburton 9’0. Brent 7’6. Plymouth 17’0. Lowe 16’2. Trewardreth 12’0. Tre∣goney 12’6. Mark  Jew 30’2. ensance 3’0. Senan 10’3. Rie Shortgrave Surveyor.
The Road from London to the Lands-End In Cornwal. 1. THe Point of Bearing W. by S. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 259 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 238 M. 4. The Dimensuration 300’3. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Brantford 08 08 10’1 10’1 Stanes 07 15 08’7 19’0 Bagshot 08 23 10’0 29’0 Hartley-Row 08 31 09’0 38’0 Basingstoke 08 39 10’1 48’1 Andover 16 55 18’1 66’2 SALISBURY 15 70 17’4 83’6 Shaftsbury 18 88 19’2 103’0 Sherborn 12 100 15’4 118’4 Crookhorn 10 110 14’6 133’2 Axminster 09 119 13’2 146’4 Honiton 07 126 09’4 156’0 Rockbere 07 133 10’0 166’0 EXETER 05 138 06’4 172’4 to Chedleigh 08 146 09’4 182’0 Ashburton 07 153 09’0 191’0 Brent 06 159 07’6 198’6 Plimouth 14 173 17’0 215’6 Lowe 12 185 16’2 232’0 Foy 07 192 08’4 240’4 Trewardreth 03 195 03’4 244’0 Tregoney 10 205 12’6 256’6 Phily 05 210 06’0 262’6 Market Jew 18 228 24’2 287’0 Pensance 02 230 03’0 290’0 St. Burion 05 235 06’0 296’0 Senan 03 238 04’3 300’3   238   300’3   The Post-Office making this one of their 6 Principal Roads of England, account it to EXETER 157 Miles to Plymouth 201. and to Market Jew the farthest Extent of the Maile 269 Miles, branching it out to the Isle of Wight, &c. on the Left; and to Wells, Bridgwater and Barnstable, &c. on the Right. Midlesex, Surry, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Devonshire and Corn∣wal are the Counties through which you pass, and the Brent, Thames, Loddon, Ditford, Test, Burn, Avon, Stour, Parret, Ax, Yare, Clyst, Ex, Tygn, Dart, Hareborne, Aune, Avme, Yalme, Tamer, Lemard, Low, Foy, Vale, Cohor and Hale are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording in general a very good Road as any in the Kingdom, The quality of the Way. and as good Entertainment. THUS much in general for the whole Road which consisting in 4 Plates, the 1st. ending at Andover in Hampshire, the 2d. at Crookhorn in Somersetshire, the 3d. at Plymouth in Devonshire, and the 4th. at Senan at the Lands-End in Cornwal: We be∣gin with Plate the 1st. wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 12’5. the Right to Colebrook. 19’1. the Left to Chersey. 22’0. the Right to Bagshot a different way. At 23’3. the Right to Windsor. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 43’7. the Left acute. 52’7. the Left to Overton. 60’0. the Right to St. Maryborne. SEtting forward from the Standard in Cornhil LONDON, LONDON S.W. you take your Way down Cornhil, Cheapside, St. Pauls Church-Yard, Ludgate-Hill, Fleet-Street, Strand, Hay-Market and Pickadilly, as in the Description of LONDON Preceeding, and leave the Suburbs of the City at 2’6. thence through Knightsbridg, Kensington, Hamersmith, Turnam-Green, Brantford and Hounslow as in LONDON to BRISTOL pag. 19. Brantford 10’1. and Succeeding Plates: Hounslow 12’2. Where at the end of Hounslow you keep the forward way over Hounslow-Heath, omitting the acute way on the Right to Colebrook, and at 14’1. cross Baber Bridg over a Brook where you have the Powder-Mills on your Right, and Sword Mills on your Left; then you cross the New River or Cut that runs through the Park belonging to Hampton Court at 15’1. Bedfont 16 m. and pass through Bedfont at 16 Miles a Village of some Accomodation. At 18’6. you enter Stanes A. S. Stana i. e. lapides of 3 Furlongs Extent, Stanes 19 m. W. a well-built
Town seated on the Thames, Enjoying a Market on Fridays, and a Fair on the 8th. of September, hath several good Inns as the George, Lyon, &c. This Town took its Name as some suppose from the Stakes call'd Conway Stakes, which were fixed in the Thames by the Britains for the preventing Julius Caesar's Army to cross the River, near this Town is Running Mead where the Barons Assembled Anno 1215. to require of King John their Liberties; at the end of the Town you cross the Thames aforesaid over a Wooden-bridg which is maintain'd by a certain Toll on Waggons, Cattel, &c. that pass over it, Egham 20’4 [21’3. S. W.] and Barges, &c. that pass under it, and at 20’2. come to Egham a large discontinued Village of good Accomodation, at 22’6. an easie descent by the New-England Inn on the Left and Windsor Park on the Right conveys you over Bagshot Heath or Windsor Forest, Bagshot 29 m. whence by Winsham Church on the Left, and a House of the Kings on the Right, you come to Bough-wough and Bagshot at 29 Miles, a place with seve∣ral good Inns of Accomodation. Leaving Bagshot you pass over 2 small ascents, [30’1. W. by S.] where you omit the acute way on the Left to Frimley and Southampton, your way from hence being generally open and Heathy, whence 2 repeated descents brings you at 33 Miles to Blackwater a small place with an Inn or two in it, Blackwater 33 m. where you cross the River Loddon; thence little occurs but ascen∣ding a small Hill at 34 Miles, and descending at 37’5. till at 38 Miles you pass through Hartley-Row a place of some Entertainment; Hartley Row 38 m. S. W. by W. and cross Hartford Bridg over a Brook, then by several disperst Houses and Hartley Church on the Left, and through Merrard-Green a small Village, Merrard Green 40’4. come at 41’1. to Holsum Bridg over the small Ri∣ver Ditsford, Hook 42 m. Newnham 43’3. [46’4. W.] Basingstoke 48’1. proceeding through Hook at 42 Miles, and Newnham at 43’3. both small Villages, descending 6 Furlongs at 46’4. come to Basingstoke at 47’7. Extending 6 Furl. on the Road, a place affording good Accomodation, seated on a Brook in which are good store of Trouts: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen, 7 Bur∣gesses, &c. has a great Market on Wednsdays for Corn, &c. and a Fair yearly on Mi∣chealmas Day. Near Basingstoke on the other side the Brook was formerly seated an Antient and fair Chapel (now Ruinous) Dedicated to the Holy Ghost, in the Roof of which was lively Portraid the Prophets, Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ; at some distance likewise is Basing House a stately Structure belonging to the Lord St. John which suffer'd much in the Late Wars. Leaving Basingstoke you pass through Worting a small Village at 50’.4. Worting 50’4. [51 m. W. S. W.] and by Church Oakly on the Left at 53’1. and some discontinued Houses come at 56’4. to Setherton a small Village; Setherton 56’4. whence ascending and descending by Ash Church on the Right, and Laverstoke House on the same hand at 58’1. seated on a small ascent, you are convey'd at 59’4. Whitchurch 59’5. to Whitchurch of near 4 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment, seated on the small River Test, an Antient Market and Borough-Town, Govern'd by a Mayor, and hath the Privilege of choosing Burgesses for Parliament; the Town is at present much decay'd, yet hath 2 Fairs annually, October the 23th. and Whit-Monday. Hence by Charlecot Church on the Left and a Park on your Right which accompanies your Road for a Mile together, Hursboorn 61’5. you cross a Vale at 61’5. and in it pass through Hursboorn a little Village, then over another Vale something Woody, you are convey'd at 66 Miles to Andover an indifferent large Borough-Town Extending 3 Furlongs on the Road and about as much transverse; Andover 66’2. is seated on a Branch of the Test, a Town affording good Acco∣modation to Travellers, hath the Privilege of Electing Parliament Men; Enjoys a very great Market on Saturdays which is well stor'd with all sorts of Provision, &c. and hath 2 Fairs yearly, viz. May the 1st. and November the 6th. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 F. beyond Setherton the Left to Reding. 2. 1’4. beyond Setherton the Right and Left acute. 3. Against Church Oakley the Left acute. 4. 1’7. Short of Worting the Right to Skip∣pords Inn. 5. A Furlong beyond Worting the Left to Basing. 6. 2 Furl. beyond Basingstoke the Left to Basing. 7. 2’4. Short of Newnham the Right to Odiam. 8. 1’3. Short of Newnham the Left acute. 9. At the end of Newnham the Left to Re∣ding, and the Right acute. 10. 1’5. Short of Blackwater the Right to Frimley. 11. 4 Furl. beyond Bagshot the Right to Chersey, the Left to Windsor. 12. At the end of Egham the Left acute.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to the LANDS END Plate 2d. Comēncing at Anover com̄: Hants & Extending to Croohorn com̄: Somerset. Containing 67 miles 6 furlongs, vizt. to SASISBƲRY 18. miles, to Shastesbury 19 miles 4 furl: to Sherborn 15 miles 4 fur, & to Crookhorn 24 mi: 6 furl
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to the LANDS-END in Cornwal. PLATE II. Commencing at Andover in Hampshire, and Extending to Crookhorn in Somersetshire. Containing 67 Miles 0 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 66’4. the Right to Amesbury, &c. At 68’3. the Right acute. At 84’4. the Right to Odstoke. At 84’7. the Left to Homington and Coom. At 103’1. the Right to Hendon. At 104’6. the Left to Stoner Protost. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 118’7. the Left to Bradford. At 125’6. the Right acute. At 131’0. the Left in Hasilbere to North Parret. TO Andover We brought you in Plate the 1st. Andover W. S. W. where omiting the Right-hand Way to Amesbury, &c. you bear to the Left, and at 68’1. crossing a Brook you leave Up-Catford Church on the Left, and Abbots Ann on the Right; at 70 M. you ascend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, which is presently seconded with another of the like quantity, at the Top whereof you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 72’7. pass through Middle Wallop a small Village seated on a Branch of the Test; Middle Wallop 72’7. then passing some Hills you come at 75’6. to the entrance of Wiltshire, where you descend 5 Furlongs, and at the bottom have a Noted place call'd Lobcocks Corner. Hence several repeated ascents and descents brings you at 81’4. [82 m. S. W. by S.] SALISBƲRY 83’6. to Hurrut Bridg where you cross the Bourn, and at 83’2. to the Entrance of the City of SALIS∣BURY, which this Way Extends a Mile on the Road, and near as much transverse: A City every way Eminent and of great Antiquity, Antiently call'd Sorbeodunum and Searisbirig, from the dry situation of Old Sarum whence this took rise; it is pleasantly seated on the Avon, whose streams water most of the Principal Streets; the chief Buildings are the Cathedral a stately and Eminent Structure, with a large and cu∣rious Cloyster; and the Bishops Palace with the Town-Hall seated in a spacious Market-Place, Contains besides the Cathedral 3 Parish Churches: This City is Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, &c. Elects Burgesses to Parliament (as does Old Sa∣rum) is well frequented and Inhabited, and its Market on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sa∣turdays, and 4 Fairs, viz. Tuesday after Twelfth-Day, Munday after Lady-Day, Michealmas-Day and one in the Close on Whitsun-Munday; are well Furnisht and Provided with all sorts of Comodities, besides it is Dignifi'd with the Title of Earl in the Person of the Right Honorable James Cecil Earl of SALISBURY, &c. hath a good School and Alms-House. Leaving SALISBURY you cross the aforesaid Avon and enter on SALIS∣BURY Plain, then ascending you leave Langford House on the Right, [84’7. W.] [92’1. W. by S.] and crossing 2 Vales come to several Race Posts as the One, Two, Three Mile Posts, where you have Ugford and Burcomb Churches on the Right; whence little occurs but pas∣sing by Esbourn, Alveston and South-Barwick Churches succesively on the Left and Ansty on the Right, till at 97’5. you come to Whitesheat Hill whose descent is 5 Fur∣longs; hence you cross a small Vale and leave Donet Church on the Right, [100 m W.] and at 100’1. pass through a small Village where you ascend a Hill of 2 Furlongs. At 101’3. you enter Dorsetshire, and at 102’6. Shaftsbury 103 m. Shaftsbury or Shafton Extending near 4 Furlongs on the Road and as much transverse, A. S. Sceaftsbyrig from its Spire Steeple; it is seated on a high Hill quite destitute of Water, which is brought to them on Horses from the foot of the Hill, which at a certain time of the year the Inhabitants Pay Homage for to the Lord of the next Mannor; the want of which is in part recompens'd by its Healthful situation: It is an Antient Town said to be built by King Alfred, who had here his Palace which was after Converted into a Monastery, and here King Edward the 2d. (that was Murther'd, at Cors Castle was Interr'd) who being accounted a Martyr was Canoniz'd a Saint, his Shrine after∣ward
was so visited by Devotists that the Town for a time bore his Name, and here also Canutus the Dane the first that Sway'd the English Scepter was Intomb'd: this Town when in its greatest glory Contain'd 10 Parish Churches, which are now reduc'd to 3. which with the Town are large and well built; It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, gives Title to the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, &c. and it's Market which is on Sa∣turdays is very considerable for Corn, Cattel, &c. At the end of the Town you descend 6 Furlongs, [106 m. S. W. by W.] whence over several smaller ascents and descents by Gillingham Church above a Mile on the Right, come at 107 Miles to Stour Eastover a scattering Village; then descending 3 Furlongs you cross the River Stour and leave Stour Provost Church on the Left, and at 108’4. pass through Stour Westover a small Village, Stour Westover 108’4. [114 m. W. by S] thence again over several Waters or Rills are convey'd by Henkestridge Church and Dunmeer House on the Left, (where you cross part of Somersetshire) to Milborn Port at 115’5. Milborn Port 115’6. of 3 Furlongs Extent, and good Accomodati∣on; seated on a Branch of the Parret, a Borough-Town Electing Parliament Men. From Milborn Port passing over an ascent and descent you leave Oborne Church on the Right, [116’6. S. W. b W.] Sherborn 118’4. and after Sherborn Castle on the Left, entring Sherborn it self at 118’3. of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, A. S. Scireburn i. e. Fons Limpidus; a large well built, Inhabited and frequented Market-Town, seated on a Branch of the Parret, and divided into two parts, the one call'd Castle Town, it was formerly a Bishops See, and contained 3 Churches, now reduc'd to One, which is reckon'd the best in the County; it hath a good Free-School Founded by King Edward the 6th. and an Alms-House by Richard Beauchawp Bishop of SALISBURY, injoys 2 Markets weekly on Thursdays and Saturdays which are well Furnisht with all sorts of Provisi∣ons, &c. Leaving Sherborn a straight way brings you at 120’5. to the ascent of an Hill where you have Compton, Midle Compton, Trent and Mutford all on the Right; at 121’7. you descend Babilon Hill and at the bottom enter Somersetshire, where you cross a Branch of the aforesaid Parret; Evil 123’7. and at 123’5. enter Evil or Yeovel an indifferent large Market and Borough-Town of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, seated on the Evil a Branch of the Parret; hath a very well Provided Market on Fridays for Corn, Cheese, Hemp, &c. Nigh unto Evil is Camalet Hill of a steep and difficult access, on whose Top is the Ruins of an Antient Castle with triple Rampiers and deep Ditches, call'd by the People King Arthurs Palace. Hence at 124’3. you ascend a Hill of 3 Furlongs and leave Preston Church on the Right, West Caudor 126’7. East Chenock 128’5. Hasilbere 131 m. at 126’7. you pass through West Caudor, and at 128’5. East Chinock both small Villages; then at 130’6. you come to Hasilbere a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment, thence 2 repeated ascents and descents convey you at 133’0. to Crookhorn or Crookhern of above 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation: Crookhorn 133’2. By the Saxons Cruccerne perchance from the Saxon Word Cruce, Crux and Hern Casa; it is seated on the aforesaid Parret and near the Confines of Dorsetshire, enjoys a very con∣siderable Market for Corn, Sheep, &c. on Saturdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Crookhorn the Right acute. 2. 5 Furlongs short of Hasilbere the Left to Merrite. 3. In Hasilbere the Right to Burport. 4. 1 & 2 Furlongs beyond East Chinock the Right acute, the Left to Otrom. 5. In Evil the Left to Ilchester. 6. 3 Furlongs beyond Shaftsbury the Right to Blandford. 7. At the bottom of Whitesheat Hill the Left to SALISBURY a different Way. 8. 2 M. short of the Race Posts the Right to Broad-Chalk. 9. 1’3. beyond SALISBURY the Left to OXFORD. 10. At Lobcocks Corner the Right to Stock∣bridg and WINCHESTER. 11. 1’4. Beyond Midle Wallop the Left to Way-Hill.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to th LANDS-END Plate 3d. Com̄encing at Crookhorn com̄. Somerset & Extending to Plimouth com̄. Devonshire Containing 82. es 4 Furlongs. vizt. From Crookhorn to Axminster  Miles 2 Furlongs. to Honiton 9. m. 4 f. to Rockbere 10 m. to the City of TER 6 m. 4 furl. to Chidley 9. m. 4 f. to Ashburton 9. m. to Brent 7  6 furl. and to Plimouth 27. miles.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to the Lands-End in Cornwal. PLATE. III. Commencing at Crookhorn in Somersetshire, and Extending to Plymouth in Devonshire. Containing 82 Miles 4 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 135’7. The Right to George Henton. 138’2. The Right acute. 139’7. The Right to Chard. 159’7. The Right to Lark-peer. 162’6. The Right acute. At 173’2. The left at the end of EXETER Acute Turnings to be avoided. 176’7. The Right to Dunchidock. 178’4. The Right to Dunsford. 191’1. & 3. The Right to the Moor. 194’0. In Buckfasleigh the R. to the town. VVE brought you to Crookhorn in Plate the Second, Crookhorn, W. b. S. at the End whereof you ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, [136’4. S.W.] which is seconded with 2 other Ascents; whence crossing a Vale you come at 138’2. to a Descent of 9 Furlongs, at the Bottom whereof you pass through a discontinued Village call'd Streat, Street, 139’5. and leave Chard a Market and Post-Town about a Mile distant on the Right; then at 140’5. you descend 4 Furlongs and enter an included Part of Devonshire, where you cross the small River Ax, and pass by several disperst Houses and over a small Ascent, leaving Esq Titherly's House on the Right, Ford, 143’6. pass through Ford a discontinued Village, entring a Part of Dorsetshire at 144’2. where you have Hauke Church on the Left and a Beacon on the Right. Hence by Coakson House on the Left, you descend a small Hill at 145’1. and passing over Weecraft Bridg enter Devonshire, leaving Weecraft House on the Left, and Sisterhood on the Right, come to Axmister or Axminster at 146’2. Axmister, 146’4. W. by N. a Town in∣different large, extending 3 Furlongs on the Road; is seated on the Ax aforesaid, and near the Edg of the County towards Somersetshire; it was a Town of good Account in the Time of the Saxons, whose Princes slain at the Battel of Bruna∣burgh were here Interr'd. It at present enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Leaving the Town you cross the Yare, several Hills and small Waters or Rills, and by Dalwood Church on the Right and Widworthy on the Left, come to Part of Offwell at 152’4. a Village of some Accomodation. At 154’6. Honiton, 156’9. W. b. S. you descend 7 Furlongs and enter Honiton a Borough-Town of 4 Fur∣longs Extent and good Entertainment: It enjoys several Privileges, as sending Bur∣gesses to Parliament, and has a very considerable Market for Corn, Cattle, &c. on Saturdays. From Honiton you pass by several disperst Houses on the Road, and by Buckrel Church on the Right; then at 159’3. you over Honiton Bridg cross the River Otter or Autre; whence an irregular Road, descending an Hill, Rockbere, 166 Miles. conveys you to Rockbere a small Village, where you cross a Vale and Brook, and at 168’1. pass through Honiton-Cliss a little Village, at which Place you cross the River Clys; Honiton-Cliss, 168’1 [170’6. W. by N.] then ascend¦ing some small Hills, and by some disperst Houses, come at 172’1. to the City of EXETER, of which take this general Account: EXETER, 172’4. S. by W. EXETER, or Excester, a large, well-built, compact and well-inhabited Ci∣ty; call'd by Ptolomy, Isca; by Antonine, Isca Damnoniorum; by the Saxons, Exance∣after and Monketon, a Monachis; by the Britains, Caer Isk and Pen-Caer: It is seated on a small Ascent, and on the Banks of the River Ex; is about a Mile and half in Circumference, (excluding it's Suburbs which are large) containing fifteen Parish-Churches besides its Cathedral, which is a curious Structure, to which Diocess belong the Counties of Devon and Cornwal, and hath four Arch-Deacons, viz. of Cornwal EXETER, Barnstable and Tiverton: The Walls of this City were first Built by King Athelstone, which gives Entrance by five Gates; near the East-Gate of which stands the Ruines of Rugemont Castle, formerly the Palace of the
West-Saxon Kings, and after of the Earl of Cornwal: This City hath been much ha∣rass'd and spoyl'd, viz. by the Danes, the Earl of Devonshire, Perkin Warbeck, the Cornish Rebels, and the Parliament Forces, and it's River Choak'd up by the said Earl of Devonshire, that at present they are forc'd to Lade and Unlade their Goods at Topsham, a Place about three Miles distant; yet for all this it is in a florishing Condition, drives a good Trade, is well frequented by Merchants, &c. Is Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 24 Aldermen, &c. sendeth Burgesses to Parliament; is Dignify'd with giving Title to the Right Honorable John Earl of Exeter, &c. and hath 2 Grand Markets Weekly on Wednsdays and Fridays, which are well fur∣nish'd with all sorts of Provisions, &c. Leaving EXETER, Affinton, 174’3. you over a fair Stone-Bridg cross the foresaid Ex, and at 174’3. pass through Affinton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodati∣on; Shillingford, 175’1. then ascending and descending you pass through Shillingford a small Village, and at 177’1. ascend an Hill of 9 Furlongs height, and crossing a Vale, descend ano∣ther of the like quantity; Chidleigh, 182 Miles, S. W. whence again you cross a Vale, and enter Chidleigh or Chidlay, of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; seated on the Teign, and en∣joys a good Market on Saturdays. At the End of the Town you cross the Teigne aforesaid, descend a small Hill, leave Bovy Tracy Church on the Right, and Knighton on the Left, pass by several disperst Houses, and New-Inn on the Left, and as∣cending a small Hill come to Beckington a little Village at 187’6. Beckinton, 187’6. where you cross the Leman and ascend a small Hill. At 190’7. Ashburton, 191 M. you come to Ashburton an indifferent large Borough-Town, seated on a Branch of the Dert; It is beautify'd with a fair Church, Elects Parliament-Men, and hath a well furnish'd Market with Corn, Cattle, &c. on Saturdays. Leaving the Town, [193’2. W. by N.] you at 193 Miles in a Vale cross the Dert, and a Mile be∣yond pass through Buckfastleigh a small Village: Buck fastleigh, 194 M. Dean Prior, 195’1. Harburton, 196’7. Hence at 195’1. you come to Dean-Prior another small Village, and at 196’7. in a Vale, cross the small River Harbone, and pass through Harburton a little Village. At 198’6. Brent, 198’6. you proceed through Brent a small Market and Post-Town; and 5 Furlongs farther over Brent Bridg you cross the small River Aune: whence crossing several Hills and Waters, Wrangatin, 201 Miles you are brought at 201 Miles to Wrangatin a little Village, and at 203’3. [205 Miles W.S.W.] Woodland, 205’7. [208’2. W. N. W.] Ridgway, 210’5. by a Cross in the Road, come a Mile farther to Ivy Bridg over the River Aume; then through Woodlad a little Village at 205’7. cross a Vale at 207 Miles, and at 208’2. over Lynam Bridg cross the River Yalme; little else offering it self, till at 210’5. you pass through Ridgway a small Village, and leave St. Mary's Church on the Left, where you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 212’3. pass over New-Bridg, [213’4. W.S.W.] then ascending and descending, come to Plimouth at 215’3. a Port-Town, of which take this general Account: Plymouth or Plinmouth so call'd from the River Pline, Plymouth, 215’6. on which and the Tamer it is situate at their Influx into the Sea; a Place of great Strength both by Art and Na∣ture, which by the occasion of a commodious Port and Haven, from a poor Vil∣lage is become a fair, large, well-inhabited and well-frequented Borough and Town-Corporate, seeming rather a City than a Town; 'ts a Place (though containing but 2 Parishes) of great Importance to the King and Kingdom, where Men-of-War and Merchants Ships may Ride free from the Danger of the Sea or Enemies; the Haven is fortify'd on both sides and defended with a powerful Fort, hath on the South-side a Peer, and in the Midst St. Nicholas Isle, with a Chain to Lock over if occasion be, and to the further strengthning of it, His present Majesty hath built a fair Cittadel which is well Man'd, and hath many Pieces of Ordnance mounted there∣on: This Town drives a very great Trade, is Govern'd by a Mayor, Aldermen, Common-Councel, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, hath 2 Markets weekly, on Mondays and Thursdays, which are well furnish'd with all Sorts of Provisions, live Cattel, &c. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1’6. Beyond Plimouth the Left to Efford. 2. 1 M. short of Woodland the R. to Everton. 3. In Woodland the Right to Arminton. 4. 4 Furl. short of Brent, the R. to Totnes. 5. 4 Furl. beyond Ashburton the Left to Alston 6. 5 Furlongs short of Chidley the Right to Newton, the Left to Linton. 7. 6 furl. short of Affinton, the R. to Weybrook. 8. At the End of EXETER, the Left to Tiverton, &c.
The Continuation of the Road from LONDON to the LANDS — END Plate 4th. and last Com̄encing at Plimouth com̄. Devon: & Extending to Senan com̄. Cornub. Containing 84 Miles 5. Furlongs, vizt. From Plimouth to Lowe 16 m. 2 fur to Foye 8’4. to Trewardreth 3’4. to Tregoney 12’6. to Phily 6 m. to Market-Jew 24’2. to Pensance 3 m. to St. Burion 6 m. & to Senan 4’3.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to the Lands-End in Cornwal. PLATE. IV. & Last. Commencing at Plymouth in Devonshire, and Extending to Senan at the Lands-End in Cornwal. Containing 84 Miles 5 Furlongs. Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 225’7. The Right to Shevioke. At 232’7. The Left to Purloe. At 241’5. The Right to Listwithiel. At 245’6. The Left to the Sands. At 247’6. The Left to Menegessy. At 252’3. The Right to Grampond. At 254’3. The Right to Penance. At 259’6. The Left to Gerans. At 265’0. The Left to Perin. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 265’6. The Right to Truro. At 269’4. The Left to St. Sethians. At 274’2. The Right to Redruth. At 290’4. The Right to Alverton. At 292’4. The Right to Kirthier. At 293’1. The Left to Lamorle. At 296’6. The Left to Barnavel. TO Plymouth We brought you in Plate the Third; Plymouth, W. Stonchouse, 217’1. W. S. W. whence you pass by Stoke-Dameron on the Right, and at 217’1. come to Stone-house a Village of 2 Furl. Ex∣tent, and 5 Furl. farther to Crimble-Passage over the Tamer, which is here crost by a Ferry of 4 Furlongs; at your Landing you leave Mount Edgcomb on the Left, and ascending and descending leave Andorn Place on the same Hand; then crossing a Sand you enter Cornwal at 220’2. where you ascend a small Hill, and presently descend∣ing again enter Millbrook a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation. Milbrook, 220’7. W. N. W. In Millbrook you ascend an Hill of 6 Furlongs; and at 223 Miles pass through Tregantha a little Village, where you ascend an Hill of 3 Furlongs, Tregantha, 223 M. which is second∣ed with a like Descent; then at 224’4. you come to Crosthole a small Village, Crosthole, 224’4. [226 Miles, W. b. S.] and at 226 Miles ascend an Hill of 2 Furl. on which is a Beacon on your Left; then a Descent of 9 Furlongs brings you to Recliff a small Village; which leaving, Recliff, 227’6. you cross 3 repeated Vales, and in a 4th Vale cross the Low over a large Stone-Bridg of many Arches, on both sides of which is Lowe alias Looe, Lowe, 232 Miles. divided into East and West Looe; they are commodiously seated by reason of their nearness to the Ocean, their chief Trade consisting in Fishing, they are both Towns-Corporate and send Bur∣gesses to Parliament; towards the Sea they are Fenc'd with a Garreted Wall; [238’5. S. W. b. S.] the Town of East Looe enjoys the Benefit of a good Market on Saturdays; near the Mouth of the River is a small Island call'd St. George, on which great store of Sea-Pyes breed. Leaving Looe you pass 2 Ascents, and by Plinle Church on the Right, cross 2 Vales, and leave Woodvil House on the Left; then by several disperst Houses you come at 140 Miles to descend an Hill, where you pass through Tredennick, and crossing the River Foy enter the Town of Foy alias Foye, which is seated on an Ascent: Foy, 240’4. It is strongly fortify'd, and its Haven secur'd with Block-Houses; the Town had former∣ly 60 Sayl of Ships belonging to it, and was Renown'd for Sea-Fights; it at present is a good Trading Place, and enjoys a well-provided Market for Corn, &c. on Sa∣turdays. Whence ascending and descending several Hills, you come at 244 Miles to Trewardreth a small Village seated near the Sea, and a Bay of the same Name; Trewordreth, 244 M. [245’5. S.W.b.W.] thence crossing a Ferry you leave St. Blais Church on the Left, whence you ascend and presently descend again. At 246’2. you come to Trenawry a little Village, Trenawry, 246’2. Tregorrick, 248’3. Polchooth, 250 Miles. and crossing a Vale you pass through Tregorrick a small Village, and leave St. Austle Church on the Right: then crossing a Brook you ascend an Hill and pass through Polebooth a scattering Village, where you presently ascend and descend, and leave Mowan Church on the Right; thence bearing to the Left you ascend a small Hill and cross a Vale; whence little occurs till at 256’2. you descend an Hill, and on it enter Tregny alias Tregony, Tregony, 256’6. seat∣ed near the Sea and on the River Vale, of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Accomoda∣tion; was formerly strengthned with a Castle, which with the Town is much gone
to decay, yet as a Town-Corporrte sends Burgesses to Parliament, and enjoys a Market on Saturdays. Hence your Road is Hilly and Sandy, Trevan, 259’3. Trenustray, 261’2. [261’5. W. by N.] Philly, 262’6. passing through Trevan at 259’3. and Tre∣nustray at 261’2. both small Villages; then an irregular Way brings you at 262’6. to Philly a small Village, and descending an Hill you cross Kings High Passage, and 3 Furlongs farther pass through a little Village; thence ascending you pass over a Vale, and at 267’3. descend again and cross over another Valley, pass through Blow the Cold Wind a little Village so call'd, Blow the Cold Wind, 268’2. and leave Peryn Church on the Left; whence little occurs but passing 5 repeated Ascents, and by the Blue Stone on the Right, till 2 repeated Descents brings you by Crowan Church on the Left. Then passing by some disperst Houses on the Road and by a Wood on the Right, [278’2. W. by S.] crossing a large Vale at 284 Miles, where you pass through a small Village, a Mile beyond you descend an Hill, and at the Bottom pass through a small Village, leaving St. Henbor, 285’7. Market-Jew, 287 M. Hillary Church on the Right: At 285’7. you pass through Henbor a small Vil∣lage, and 3 Furlongs farther another little Village, entring Market-Jew at 286’6. of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, seated on an Arm of the Sea call'd Monts Bay, and on a Descent; a mean Town yet enjoying a Market on Thursdays. Leaving the Town you cross a small River, and have St. Michael's Mount near you on the Left, which is call'd the Hoar Rock, and severed from the Main-Land by a Sandy Plain, which at Ebb Water is pass'd over on Foot: This Mount is of a great Eminence, the Entrance whereof is an open Plain, that brings you to a winding and craggy Path, which ascending you approach the Top, on which is a Fort or Castle, with Lodgings for the Captain and Soldiers, and a Chapel for De∣votion; a little distant from the Castle is a craggy Place call'd St. Michael's Chair, and under the Mount is a good Road for Ships to Ride in call'd Monts Bay, near unto which is Main Amber Rock, mounted on others of a smaller Size, so equally counterpoiz'd that it may be stirr'd, but not mov'd out of it's Place. Hence the Bay accompanies your Road on the Left to Pensance or Penzans, Pensance, 290 Miles, W. S. W. which you enter at 298’6. (first passing by Gulfary Church on the Right) the Name signifying an Head of Sands, it extends about 7 Furlongs on the Road; was almost destroy'd by the Spaniards, Anno 1595. which is since Re-built, driving a considerable Trade, and hath a good Market on Thvrsdays well serv'd with Provi∣sions, and Fish very plenty. Leaving the Town, you pass by Laregon House on the Right, and bearing to the Left, Newlin, 291’6. [293’3. W.] St. Burien, 296 M. pass through Newlin a Village seated on an Hill, of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation: Whence by St. Paul's Church on the Left, you bear to the Right, ascend an Hill and cross 2 Vales, come to St. Burien a small Village at 296 Miles; leave Lea House on the Right, Boskena, Trevodran, and Pondre Houses on the Left, cross a Vale and pass through Renberth a little Village, and by Trua House on the Left, Senan, 300’3. are conducted at 300’3. to Senan a Village on the utmost Promontary or Head-Land call'd the Lands-End in Cornwal, which is wash'd with the West Sea. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1 Furl. beyond St. Burien the Left to Talarivean. 2. At the End of Golsenna the Right to Tresnerna. 3. 4 Miles beyond Golsenna the Left to Redruth. 4. 1’5. Short of the Blue Stone the Right to Helston. 5. At the Blue Stone the Left to Truro. 6. 2’5. Beyond Blow the Cold Wind the Left to Truro. 7. 6 Furlongs beyond Tregony the Left to Grampond. 8. 2’2. Beyond Tregony the Right to St. Tue. 9. 2’1. Short of Polboth the Left to Mewan. 10. 1’3. Short of Polbooth the L. to St Austle. 11. 1 Furl. short of Tregorrick the Left to St. Austle. 12. 5 Furl. beyond Tregorrick the Right to Polmeer. 13. In Truredreth the Left to Listithiel. 14. A Mile beyond Truredreth the Right to Menebille. 15. 1’4. Beyond Tredenick the Left to Laun∣ceston. 16. 9 Furl. short of Woodvil the Left acute. 17. 7 Furl. short of Woodvil the Right to Lansolis. 18. 5 Furl. beyond Crostholethe the Left to Saltash. 19. 2 Furlongs short of Milbrook the Left acute.
The Road From LONDON to NEWHAVEN com̄: Sussex By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmographer Containing 56. les 2 furlongs, vizt. From the St andar in Corn hill London to Stretham 6’2. to Croydon 4.’3. to East-Grimsted 19’1. to Lewes 20’2.  to Newhaven 6’2 Conued From Newhaven to New-horeham com̄: Sussex 16. miles. viz. to Brighthelmeston 't & to New-Shoreham 6’7. Ric: Shortgraie Surveyor
The Road from London to Newhaven, On the Sea-Coast in Sussex. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 49 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 45 M. 4. The Dimensuration 56’4. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Stretham 06 06 06’2 06’2 Croydon 04 10 04’3 10’5 East-Grimsted 15 25 19’1 29’6 to Lewes 15 40 20’2 50’0 Newhaven 05 45 06’6 56’6   45   56’6   Continued to Newshoram thus, From Newhaven Comp. Measure. to Brighthelmeston 07 07 09’1 09’1 New Shoram 05 12 06’7 16’0 Midlesex, Surrey and Sussex include the whole Road, and the Thames, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. a Branch of the Medway, and the antiquated Owse that runs by Lewes to Newhaven, are the Rivers crost over; no considerably frequented Road, nor commendable for its goodness, The quality of the Way. either as to the quality of the Way or otherwise, except for Entertainment. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 1’6. The Right to Wansworth. At 2’3. The Right to Towting. At 6’3. The Right to Micham. At 11’1. At the End of Croydon, the Left to Westram. At 12’6. The Right to Rygate. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 14 Miles the Left to Farley. At 31’2. In Ashdown Forest, the Left acute. At 44’5. The Right to Dichling. At 54’7. The Right down the Hill. In the Continuation to New Shoram. At 14’0. The Right to Staning. At 15’1. The Right forward to Old Shoram. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, LONDON, S. S. W. you take your Way down Gracechurch-street, Fishstreet-hill, over the Bridg and along Southwark, as in the Description of LONDON; leaving the Town at 1’2. and entring Newington at 1’4. Newington, 1’4. a Village of 2 Furlongs on the Road, affording several Houses for Divertisement of the Neigh∣boring Citizens; a Furlong beyond which, the acute Way on the Right leads to Wans∣worth, Kingston, Guilford, and so to Portsmouth. At 2’3. leaving the acute Way on the Right to Towting, Ewel, &c. [2’3. S. E. b. S.] just at the Gal∣lows, or Place of Execution of Malefactors apprehended in the County of Surrey, and Convicted at Southwark; you bear to the Left, [3’5. S. by W.] and a Furlong farther cross the New River or Cut, entring on Bristol Causeway at 4’5. which at 6 Miles brings you to Stretham of about 3 Furlongs Extent, Stretham, 6’2. S. S. E. where the acute Way on the Right at the End of the Town leads to Micham, Sutton and Darking, and so to Arundel, &c. [10 Miles, S.] Croydon, 10’5. At 8’5. you pass by a Gallows on the Left, and at 10’2. enter Croydon of 7 Fur∣longs Extent, a large and well built Town, hath a fair Seat of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury's, an Hospital and Free-School with a well-furnish'd Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annually, the 24th. of June, and the 21th. of September. Hence a direct Road brings you at 12’6. to an acute Way on the Right to Ri∣gate; whence at 13’1. you come to a small Ascent, from the Top of which, a straight Way but woody on the Left brings you to a Descent of 4 Furlongs, having little remarkable except some small Woods on your Right, till at 18 Miles descend∣ing an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and presently another of the like quantity; at 20 Miles you pass through a small Village, opposite to which Godstone Church appears 6 Fur∣to the Left.
At 20’3. [21’5. S. S. W.] New Chapel Green, 24’5 [20’6. S. S. E.] you ascend 4 Furlongs, descending about 3 Furlongs, and at 24’4. en∣ter New-Chappel Green a Village of 3 Furlongs; whence passing by a small Wood on the Left, crossing a Rill at 26’7. you ascend for 3 Furlongs, and enter Sussex just at 28 Miles, a small Rill with a Bridg over it call'd Felbridg seperating it from Surrey; whence by the Gallows you are convey'd to East Grimsted or Greenstead, East Grimsted, 29’6. at 29’4. half a Mile in Length, eminently seated; Elects Parliament Men, is the Place where the Assizes for the County are generally held; is Govern'd by a Bayliff, &c. and has a good Market on Thursdays. At the End of the Town you descend for 4 Furlongs, and enter the Forest of Ash∣down at 31’6. [32’3. S.] Forest Row, 32’4. descending again a Hill of 4 Furlongs, in the bottom you pass through a small Village call'd Forest-Row, and being come to the Top of an Ascent at 34 Miles, [36’5. S. E. by S.] Sheffield Green, 37’4. you pass by a Stone-quarry on the Left, and descending at 35’5. for half a Mile, at 37’4. you pass through a small Village call'd Sheffield Green, and at 38 Miles come to Dane Hill a Descent of 4 Furlongs. At 39’6. [39’6. S. W.] [42’2 S.] you pass by some Houses on the Left, and at 40’3. cross a small Rill; whence by a small Wood on the Left, an irregular Road, crossing another Rill at 43’3. leaves Chayly on your Right and conveys you over another Brook at 45’5. through a small Wood, and at 47 Miles over another, all Branches of the Owse. At 48 Miles you pass through Offam-street a Village of 2 Furlongs, Of ham-street, 48 M. a quarter of a Mile beyond which you ascend a Hill of 5 Furlongs, and descending again at 49’6. enter Lewes seated on the River Owse, Lewes, 50 Miles. a Place of good Antiquity, large, well-built and well inhabited, containing 6 Parish Churches, and esteem'd the best Town of the County, consisting of divers handsom Streets, and having each way very fair Suburbs; a Borough-Town Electing Parliament Men, enjoying a good Trade, and a well frequented Market on Saturdays: Eminent as the Place of Mintage in King Athelstan's Time, and for a bloody Battel fought against H. 3d. by the disloyal Ba∣rons, who in an Hostile manner assembled together in the Castle here. Leaving the Main Town on the Left, a straight Road brings you (by Iver on the Left) at 52 Miles to a House or two on your Right call'd North-Hes, North-Hes, 52 Miles. and a∣bout 5 Furlongs farther to an Ascent of 5 Furlongs, at the Foot of which lies Rad∣mel, and at the Top St. Lees, each about 2 Furlongs to the Left; whence by the edg of a Descent to the Right; Pidenhoo, 55’6. you pass through Pidenhoo at 55’6. a Village of 2 Furlongs, Newhaven, 56’6. seated upon the River, and about a Mile farther enter Newhaven situ∣ate at the Mouth of the foremention'd Owse, but the Name of the River is now obsolete as Poly-Olbion observ'd heretofore; the Town is small, inhabited chiefly by maritin People, having a Key on the East-side of it where Ships may Ride, the Harbor being accounted reasonable good for Security of Vessels in foul Wea∣ther, which these Seas are frequently expos'd to. The Continuation to New Shoreham. FRom Newhaven you have a very straight Road to New Shoreham, Newhaven, W. by N. for after 3 Miles you continue on the Sea-coast, passing under Morsteage and Saltden Hills, and Rattenden Church and Beacon all on the Right; whence you are convey'd at 9’2. Brighthelmeston, 9’1. to Brighthelmeston, indifferent large and Populous, chiefly inhabited by Fishermen, with a small Market on Thursdays, and a reasonable good Harbor; the Town lies most upon the Right, being onely 2 Furlongs on the Road; whence by Hoove on the Right at 10’5. a Mile farther you pass by Alderton Beacon, leaving Alderton, [15’1. S. by W] Angleton and Portstade successively on the Right; to which Hand inclining, you leave Week and Kingston between you and the Sea; and at 15’1. turn short on the Left, New Shorcham, 16’1. entring New Shoreham at 15’6. (to distinguish it from Old Shorcham near adjoyning) a Town Corporate, sending Burgesses to Parliament, but not en∣joying the Benefit of a Market; It extends about 4 Furlongs, and is seated on the East-side of a Creek of the Sea, or the River Adur, if Mr. Drayton has hit right on the Name, and would be well frequented were its Harbor better. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 6 Furl. from New Shoreham, the Left to Staining. 2. Against Chayly, the Right to Nowich. 3. 2’5. short of Dane-hill, the right to Fletching 4. 5. Furl. short of Sheffield Green, just at the Foot of Dane-hill, the R. to Sheffield Place.
The Road from LONDON to PRTSMOUTH in com: Suthamp: Actually Sureyd & Delineated By IOHN OGILBY Esq: His Maties Cosmographer Containing: 73: nules:  Furlongs vizt: From ye Standard in rnhill, LONDON to Wansworth: 6: miles: 4: Fur: to Kingone: 6: to: Cobham: 7:4 to Guildford to to Godalmin 24:4: to: Lippock: 12: 2: to Petersfield: 8:4: to Hurnden :2 to Portsey bridg: 6:4: to PORTSMOUTH: 4:2:  Ro: Shortgrane Saurveyor.
The Road from London to Portsmouth, Com. Southampton. 1. THE Point of Bearing S.W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 65 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 60 M. 4. The Dimensuration 73’5. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Wansworth 05 05 06’4 06’4 Kingston 05 10 06’0 12’4 Cobham 07 17 07’4 20’0 Guilford 08 25 10’0 30’0 Godalmin 03 28 04’4 34’4 to Lippock 10 38 12’2 46’6 Petersfield 07 45 08’4 55’2 Harnden 06 51 07’2 62’4 Portseybridg 06 57 06’4 69’0 Portsmouth 03 60 04’4 73’4 Midlesex, Surrey, Sussex and Hampshire include the whole Road; and the Thames, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Wandle, Mole, Wey and Arun are the principal Rivers crost over; The quality of the way. affording generally a good sandy Way, well frequented and accommodated. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1’7. The Left to Croydon. At 14’6. The Right being the Way by E∣sher Church. At 20’5. The Right to Ham-Hall. At 25’4. The Left. At 30’5. The Right to Farnham. At 34’3. The Left to Chidingfold. At 34’5. The Right. At 42’0. The Left to Midherst. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 54’1. The Right to Steep. At 56’3. The Left to Havant. At 56’5. The Right to East-Mean. At 59’3. The Left. At 62’4. The Left to Havant. At 65’0. The Left to Blendworth. At 71 Miles, The Left to Portsey Church. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, down Gracechurch-street, Fish-street-Hill, LONDON, S. S. W. over LONDON-bridg and through Southwark, at 1’2. you leave the Town, Newington, 1’5. S.W. as in the Description of LONDON, at 1’5. you come to Newington of 2 Fur∣longs Extent, well frequented by the Neighboring Citizens; [3’0. S.] [4’0. S. W.] and at the End of the Town omitting the acute Way on the Left to Croydon, &c. you bear to the Right, and leaving Fox-Hall just upon the Bank of the Thames on the Right, and Caroon House on the Left; at 4’4. you pass by Clapham, and Sr. Denis Gauden's House 2 Furlongs on the Left, whence over Battersey Heath, a small Descent leads you at 6 Miles into Wandlesworth vulgo Wansworth, Wansworth, 6’4. seated upon the small River Wandle near its Influx into the Thames, a good Thorough-fare Town of 6 Furlongs. Hence two succeeding Ascents bring you to Putney Heath of about a Mile over, leaving the Bouling-Green on the Right, and Wimbleton about a Mile on the Left; then descending for three Furlongs, at 9 Miles you come to New-Park enclos'd with a Stone-wall, and accompanying your Road near 2 Miles on the Right, [10’4. S.] [11’6. W. S. W.] opposite to which is Comb a Mile distant on the Left; whence passing over the Hill, not rarely infested by Robbers, a Descent of 3 Furlongs leads you at 12 Miles into Kingston super Thames, by Leland, Regiodunum, as being the Seat of the Saxon Kings, Kingston, 12’4. whereof 3 were here Crown'd, before which time it was call'd Moreford; a large and well built Town, had formerly a Castle belonging to the Earls of Glocester; is the Place where sometimes the Assizes are kept for the County of Surrey, and enjoys a very good Market on Saturdays. From Kingston the Thames accompanies you on the Right, till at 14’3. Thames Ditton, 14’3. you pass through part of Thames Ditton, opposite to which on the other side of the River, is the stately Palace of Hampton Court; and omitting the Right-hand Way at 14’6. which leads by Esher Church and is often travell'd, you proceed through Hare Lane, leaving Esher vulgo Sandy Chapel 4 Furlongs on the Right; and passing over a Heath of 3 Miles, at 20 Miles enter Cobham of 3 Furlongs Extent, Cobham, 20 Miles. a Town well fur∣nish'd
with Inns; at the End of which you cross the Mole, which Rising on the Edg of Sussex, passes by Darkin, and at Moulsey falls into the Thames. At 21’4. you descend for 3 Furlongs entring a Heath, and passing between two Ponds and by some Iron-mills on the Right, Ripley, 24’4. you come to Ripley a scattering Vil∣lage on the Left at 24’4. whence over a Rill call'd St. Thomas Watering at 26’4. you leave Send Church and Sutton Place on the Right, Guilford, 30 Miles. entring Guilford at 29’7. seated on the River Wey, rising about Aulton in Hampshire, and made Navigable from this Place by the Help of Sluces; a large Town Corporate, containing 3 Parish Churches; Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament; is a Place where sometimes the Assizes are kept for the County, hath a very good Market on Satur∣days, and several good Inns and Places of Reception, as the Red Lyon, White Hart, &c. From Guilford, passing the foresaid Wey at the End of the Town, you omit the a∣cute Way on the Right to Farnham, &c. and ascend Katherine vulgo Kattern Hill, leav∣ing the Chapel on the Left close adjoyning, and Shalford or Shawford farther off on the same Hand, and Loathsley Place about half a Mile on the Right: Then an o∣pen Road on the Right brings you by the Hospital on the Left, and repassing the Wey at 34’1. Godalmin, 34’4. presently enter Godalmin vulgo Godliman, a Market Town extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, well inhabited and frequented. At the End of the Town crossing a Branch of the foresaid Wey, you proceed, and at 36’1. Milford, 36’1. pass through Milford of 2 Furlongs Extent, a small Thorough-fare; whence over a large Heath and an Hill of 4 Furlongs height, [39’3. S.] you leave Thursley on the Right, and through Rood-lane come at 40’5. to the Foot of Hind Head, an Hill of great Eminence, yielding a remarkable Bottom or Hollow on the Right, which a Foot-man prosecuting may save near a Miles Travel, the Road it self fetching a ve∣ry great Compass on the Left; [42’0. W.] [42’6. S. S. W.] the Top of the Ascent is at 41’7. whence an easie Descent, omitting the Left-hand Way to Midherst. &c. brings you (by an open Road) at 44’3. to the Pitch of another Descent where you enter Hampshire, and by Bram∣shot on the Right, come at 46’6. to Lippock, 2 Village of 2 Furlongs upon the Fo∣rest of Wulmere. From Lippock, Lippock, 46’6. leaving the Forest on the Right you come to Rake at 50’2. a small Village on the Right, where you enter Sussex, and ascend for 5 Furlongs, and at 52’4. descending 3 Furlongs, come to Sheet-Bridg at 53’7. where crossing the River Arun you re-enter Hampshire, Petersfield, 55’2. and a Mile farther arrive at Petersfield extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, an indifferent large Town with a Market on Saturdays. Hence reiterated Ascents and Descents by Buriton and Chalton on the Left, and Clanfield and Katerington on the Right bring you at 62’4. Harnden, 62.4. to Harnden a small Village, where bearing to the Right you pass through the Forest of Bere, and over Purbeck Heath and Portsey Down, yielding a very fair Prospect; you are convey'd at 68’3. to Co∣sham a Village of 3 Furlongs, Coshant, 68’4. and 2 Furlongs thence to Portsey Bridg over a small Arm of the Sea, Hilsey, 69’6. Kingston, 71 M. guarded by a small Fort; where entring Portsea Isle, you pass o∣ver Hilsey Green and so through Hilsey a small Village, come at 70’6. to Kingston of 3 Furlongs Extent, where bearing to the Right, you leave Portsey Church on the Left and enter Portsmouth at 73 Miles, Portsmouth, 73’4. over 4 Draw-bridges; a well fortify'd Ga∣rison and Sea-port, and the usual Station of the Navy Royal; a large, well-built and well frequented Town, defended by 2 strong Castles and other Fortifications to se∣cure the Haven; is a Corporation Electing Parliament Men; has 2 Markets Week∣ly on Thursdays and Saturdays, and even of late is much increas'd in Beauty. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furl. short of Kingston, the Left. 2. Entring Ports-Down, the Left to South∣week. 3. Entring the Forest of Bere, take the midle broad Way. 4. At the End of Harnden, the Right to Blendworth and East Mean. 5. At the Bottom of Muster's-cross Hill, the Right to Buriton. 6. 2 Furl. beyond Sheet Bridg, the Right to Rogate. 7. A Mile beyond Rake, the Left into the Forest. 8. At the End of Lippock, the Left into the Forest. 9. 1’2. short of Milford, the Right to Witley. 10. At Guilford Town end, the Right to New Waren. 11. 2 Furl. beyond Kingston, the Right. 12. Beyond New Park Wall, the Left to Putney.
The Road from LONDON to RYE. in Com. Sussex. By JOHN OGJLBY. Esq.r His Ma.ties Comographer. Containing 64 miles viz.t From the Standard in Coil to Lewsham. 6 m. 4. furl. to Bromley 3.2. to Faruber 4. 0. to Sevenoke. 9. 1. f. to Tunbridg 6. 5. furl. to Lamberherst 10. 1. to Newenden. 14. m. to Rye. 10. m. 2. f
The Road from London to Rye, In Com. Sussex. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. E. by S. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 51 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 46 M. 4. The Dimensuration 64 M. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Lewsham 04 04 06’4 06’4 Bromley 02 06 03’2 09’6 Farnborow 03 09 04’0 13’6 Sevenoke 06 15 09’2 29’0 to Tunbridg 05 20 06’5 29’5 Lamberherst 08 28 10’1 39’6 Newenden 10 38 14’0 53’6 Rye 08 46 10’0 64’0 Surrey, Kent and Sussex are the Counties that include the Road; and the Thames, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Ravensburn, Derent, Medway and Rother the principal Rivers crost over; affording a well frequented Road, The quality of the way. as conveying you to the readiest passage to Diep and Haur du Grace in Normandy in France, whence you have the shortest Land-passage thence to Paris: but for quality of the Way not altogether so commendable, especially beyond Tunbridg. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At St. George's Church in Southwark, the for∣ward to Newington and so to Stretham, or Kingston. At 4’2. The Left to Deptford and so to ROCHESTER, &c. At 5’7. The Left to Eltham and so to Maid∣ston, &c. At 7’4. The Right to Croydon. At 14’2. The Left to St. Mary Cray. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 29’7. The Right to the Wells at the End of Tunbridg. At 37’3. The Right acute. At 40’2. The Right (forward) to Lewes. At 44’5. The Right to Robert's Bridg. At 54’4. The Left through White Bread Lane, uniting at 58’3. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, down Gracechurch-street, LONDON, S. S. W. Fish-street-Hill, over LONDON-bridg, and through Southwark, omitting the forward Way on the Right to Newington, &c. you turn short by St. George's Church and along Kent-street, as in the Description of LONDON: New-cross, 4’3. At 4 Miles pass through New-Cross a scattering Village, a Furlong beyond which you omit the forward Way to Deptford, ROCHESTER, CANTERBURY, &c. and bearing to the Right, cross first County Bridg, and next Lewsham Bridg over the small River Ravensburn, [5’7. S. E. by E.] Lewsham, 6’4. and 2 Furlongs farther enter Lewsham a stragling Town of 7 Furlongs Extent, yet well furnish'd with Inns for Entertainment of Travellers. At 9’4. Bromley, 9’6. (first passing by the Alms-houses on the Left) you enter Bromley of 2 Furlongs Extent, a well frequented Town having a Market on Thursdays. Whence over Tenner's Bridg and Bromley Common, and through a Wood of 4 Furlongs; at 13’6. you pass through Farnburgh alias Farnborow, in length 3 Furlongs, Farnborow, 13’6. [18 Miles N. E. b. E.] and a well accommodated Place; from which (avoiding only the Left-hand Way to St. Mary Cray by Fisher's Oak) a direct Road brings you at 16’6. to the Foot of Rushmore Hill, ascending 4 Furlongs, with the Porcupine Inn near the Top on the Right, and Halsted Park on the Left at 19 Miles; whence continuing over the Top of the E∣minence, you descend Madam's Court Hill for near a Mile, being a steep and dif∣ficult passage, leaving Madam's Court at the Foot of it one the Right. Then over Darnton Green at 21 Miles you cross Longford Bridg over the River Derent, and enter River-Head in Extent 2 Furlongs, a small Thorough-fare; [20’2. E. by N.] River-head, 21.1. whence passing by the Lady Boswell's Park on the Left, and ascending for 2 Furlongs, at 22’6. you come to Sevenoke vulgo Sennoke, denominated from 7 Oaks, Sennoke, 23 Miles. a good Town 4 Furlongs long, with a well provided Market on Saturdays, and an Alms-house and Free-School given by William Sevenoke formerly Lord Mayor of LONDON. Hence equally descending and ascending 3 Furlongs, leaving Knoll Place on the
Left, you come at 24’1. to River-head Hill an eminent Descent of 4 Furlongs, whence little occurs till at 29’2. [29’2. S. E. by E.] Tunbridg, 29’5. [30 Miles, E. by N.] [31’4. S. E.] having first past over Hilden Green, you enter Tunbridg, so call'd from its Bridges, situate on the Medway where it divides it self into several Streams; a large and well built Town, has a well frequented Market on Fridays, and is famous for the Medicinal Waters that are near it, whereby it is much resorted unto by the Gentry in Summer. At the End of the Town crossing the Medway aforesaid, you omit the forward Way on the Right to the Wells, and an indirect Road through South Frith Wood eminently seated, Woodgate, 34’2. E. [35’2. S. E.] Kipping Cross, 36’1. Lyndridg, 38 Miles. Lamberherst, 39’6. [40’5. E.] [42’1. S. E. by S.] Stone-Crouch, 42’7. [44’5. E.] Flimwel, 44’7. [46’6. S. E.] brings you by Woodgate to Copember Green a small Village; and at 36 Miles to Kipping Cross another small Village; whence at 38 Miles through Lyn∣dridg a small Village; at 39’5. you at once enter Sussex and Lamberherst a Town of 2 Furlongs Extent affording good Accomodation. At 41’4. (first passing by a Stone-quarry on the Right) you come to Beauls Bridg where you re-enter Kent; at 42’7. pass through Stone Crouch a small Village; and at 44’7. through Flimwel another small Village, an Ascent leading you into the Town, in which at a well known Stone you re-enter Sussex, and at 45’5. just beyond the Frith on the Left, and the Royal Oak Inn on the Right Kent again; thence over Sea-cock Heath and through High-street, High-street, 47’4. by Highgate and Hawkherst Church on the Right and Mr. Kilburn's House on the Left, a woody Way by the Watch-house, Field Green, 50 M. and through Field Green and Cobeech Green, leaving Sandherst Church on the Right 4 Furlongs, Newenden, 53’6. [54’4. S. W.] brings you at 53 4. to Newenden a good Thorough-fare of 3 Furlongs, at the End of which crossing the River Rother, you once more enter Sussex. At 54’4. leaving the forward Way through White Bread Lane on the Left you bear to the Right, [55’3. S. E.] Nordiam, 56 Miles. [57’6. E. S. E.] and 6 Furlongs farther turn short on the Left; and at 56 Miles pass through Nordiam of 2 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Rise of an Hill, leaving Brickwal House on your Right, and at 57 Miles ascend a small Hill whereon stands Beckley Church close to the Left; whence by Brownsmith's Oak, where the Way through White Bread Lane falls in again; leaving Peasmarsh on the Right, and Sal∣cote alias Playden between you and the River on the Left, you come at 63’4. to Rye alias Rhie, Rye, 64 Miles. from the French Rive, Ripa, 2 Furlongs farther entring the Gate ex∣tending in all 6 Furlongs: One of the Cinque-ports, fortify'd and Wall'd temp. Edw. 3d. a fair, well built, well inhabited and well frequented Town; Govern'd by a Mayor and Jurats, enjoying a commodious Haven, and 2 Markets weekly, Wednsdays and Saturdays; is the readiest passage to Diep in Normandy, from which it is distant about 18 Leagues, which makes these two Ports the more Eminent. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. A Mile from Rye the Right (forward) to Iden. 2. 10 Furlongs short of Beckley, the Right through White Bread Lane. 3. 4 Furl. beyond Nordiam, the Left a Field way. 4. 3 Furl. beyond the Watch-house, the Left to Hawkherst. 5. 3 Furl. farther, the Right to Cranbrook. 6. A Furlong beyond Flimwel, the Left to Tiseherst. 7. 5 Furl. short of Lamberherst, the Left to the Down. 8. 6 Furl. beyond Kipping Cross, the Right (forward) to Pembury. 9. 6 Furl. short of Tunbridg, the Right to Tudeley. 10. At the End of Tunbridg, the Right to Sheyborn. 11. At the End of Senoke, the Right. 12. 6 Furl. beyond Senoke the Right. 13. 2 Furl. short of River Head, the Left to Sundridg. 14. At the Foot of Madam's Court Hill, the Right to Halsted. 15. 2 Miles farther the Left to Nockwel. 16. A Furl. short of Farnborow, the Left to Down. 17. 2 Furl. beyond Farnborow, the Right to Bradstreet Green. 18. At the End of Bromley, the Right to Dartford. 19. At the End of Lewsham, the Right to Deptford.
The Road from LONDON to BARS TABLE. in Devonshire. By IOHN OGJLBY Esq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographr. Containing 193 Miles  furlongs, viz.t From ye Standard in Cornhill LONDON. to Andover. in the Lands end Road 66’2. ence to Amesbury 14’3. to Shruton 3’7 to Warmisler 23’ to Maiden Bradltry. 6’7. to Bruton 9’3. to Weston. Regis 10’5 to Asol. 7. 5. and to Briwater 9. 4 Thence to Barstable aforesaid, part of Plate ye 2.d 5 4. Extended from Barstable to Truro in Cornwal 94’5 viz.t to Hetherley termmating Plate ye Second 22 m. 4 furl. Thence to Truro in Mate ye 3.d 73’2.
IN the preceding Part We have Illustrated so many of the Direct Roads as being Compris'd in Fourteen Itineraries and One and Thirty Plates fell under the Title of Inde∣pendants; We come now to the remaining Part of the Direct Roads which We call Dependants, being such as branch at several Distances out of the former Independants, of which there are Seventeen Itineraries contain'd in Three and Twenty Plates, wherein prosecuting likewise Alpha∣betical Order to the several Terminating Towns, We present you in the first Place with The Road from London to Barnstable In Devonshire. Commencing at Andover in the Lands-End Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 168 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 154 M. 4. The Dimensuration 194 M. Table of Computation and Dimensuration. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Andover 55 055 66’2 066’2 Amesbury 10 065 14’3 080’5 Shrawton 05 070 05’7 086’4 Warminster 10 080 13’0 099’4 Maiden Bradley 05 085 06’7 106’3 Bruton 08 093 09’2 115’5 Weston Regis 09 102 10’5 126’2 to Ascot 06 108 07’5 133’7 Bridgwater 08 116 09’4 143’3 Hartrowhouse 10 126 13’3 155’7 Dulverton 10 136 13’7 169’6 Southmoulton 10 146 13’4 183’2 Barnstable 08 154 10’6 194’0   154   194’0   Extended from Barnstable aforesaid, to Truro in Cornwal 94 Miles 6 Furl. thus, From Barnstable Comp. Measure. to Torrington 8 08 11’2 11’2 Hatherley 7 15 10’2 21’4 Ivy 9 24 10’3 33’7 Newport 6 30 08’2 42’1 Hall-Drunkard 8 38 09’4 51’5 Cambleford 4 42 05’4 57’1 to St. Indullion 7 49 08’5 65’6 Padstow 5 54 06’5 72’3 St. Colomb 6 60 08’1 80’4 St. Michael 5 65 07’0 87’4 Truro 5 70 07’2 94’6   70   94’6   Midlesex, Surrey, Hampshire, Wiltshire, Somersetsh. Devonsh. and Cornwal, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. are the Counties through which the Road lies; and the Brent, Thames, Loddon, Ditford, Test, Bourn, Avon, Froom, Parret, Ex, Dunsbrook, Moule, Bray, Tau, Touridge, Tamer, The quality of the Way. Kensy, Enyam and Camel the principal Rivers it crosses; affording in general a good Way, especially to Bridgwater, wherein you have near 20 Miles of excellent Way over Salisbury-Plain even from Amesbury to Warminster; but beyond Bridgwater through the remaining Part of Somersetshire, Devonsh. and Cornwal, less commendable, yet the whole Road full of reiterated good Towns, affords every where convenient Entertainment and suitable Reception.
THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting of 3 Plates; the First ending at Bridgwater in Somersetshire, the Second at Hetherley in De∣vonshire, and the Third at Truro aforesaid: We begin with Plate the First contain∣ing 142’2. wherein the following Turnings are to be avoided, viz. At 66’6. Acute Turnings to be avoided. a little beyond Andover, the Left to SALISBURY and EXETER. At 67’6. The Right to Fruxon. At 97’4. The Left to Hatchberry. At 99’6. The Right to BRISTOL. At 116’2. The Left to Sherborn. At 133’0. The Left to Taunton. At 140’4. The Right to BRISTOL. From LONDON to Andover in Hampshire We discours'd in the Lands-End Road; Andover, 66’2. W. [67’7. W.S.W.] whence proceeding, you leave the Town at 66’4. and 2 Furlongs farther the great Road to SALISBURY, EXETER, &c. branching out on the Left, you bear to the Right, Morkson, 69’6. [73’2. W.] and at 69’6. pass through Monkson a Village of 2 Furlongs. At 72’5. you pass by Greatley Church 2 Furlongs to the Left, when entring o∣pen Way indifferently Arable and Pasture, you proceed by the Foot of an Ascent on the Right, and at 75’2. descending 4 Furlongs you enter Wiltshire, and by Challer∣ton a small Village in the Bottom close on the Right, Challerton, 75’6. come at 78’1. to an Emi∣nent Descent of 12 Furlongs call'd Beacon or Harrodon Hill, [77’2. W. S. W.] [80’2. S. W.] Amesbury, 80’5. [81 Miles W. N. W.] whereon you cross the Roads leading from OXFORD and Marlborough to SALISBURY; and entring Amesbury or Ambresbury at 80’4. so call'd from Ambrose a Brittish King there slain, an indifferent large Town extending 3 Furl. pleasantly seated on the East-side the Avon, hath several very good Inns, a small Market on Fridays, and 4 Fairs yearly. Leaving the Town, you enter Salisbury-Plain, passing over an Hill of 2 Furlongs and ascending a Second, [85’4. W.S.W.] whence between the 7 Burrows or small Hills at 82 M. and by Stonehenge that Wonder of the Isle about 3 Furl. distance on the Left at 83’2. a direct open Way but inclining to the Left brings you at 86’4. Shrawton, 86’4. N.W. to Shrawton or Mai∣den-shrawton vulgo Shruton, a Village of two Furlongs, seated in a Valley upon a Branch of the Wiliebourn, [90’6. W. by N.] [95’2. W. S. W.] [97’4. W. N. W.] having a good Inn of Accommodation. Hence between Madenton and Orcheston you pass through a Valley for 2 Miles, and by Norton Bovant half a Mile to the Left; at 98’3. (leaving the Plain) you pass through Boreham and enter Warminster alias Werminster, Boreham, 98’3. Warminster, 99’4. [99’6. W. by S.] antiently Verlucio, at 99’2. of 4 Furlongs length, indifferent large, having one Church and a Chapel, a great Mar∣ket on Saturdays for Corn, &c. 2 Fairs yearly, and several good Inns. At 100’2. Samborn, 100’2. [103’5. W. by N.] you pass through Samborn a small Village, and descending 4 Furlongs, at 102’2. cross Sherewater, the Head of which is about a Furlong on the Right; and leaving some Hills on the Left, Maiden Bradley, 106’3. [107’6. S. W. by W.] an enclos'd Way brings you to Maiden Bradley 2 Furl. long; a Town of good Reception, formerly enjoying a Market: 2 Furl. be∣yond which entring Somersetshire, Yarrfield, 107’4. Kilmington, 109’2. W. at 107’4. you pass through Yarnfield and at 109’2. Kilmanton, 2 small Villages; whence an indirect Way over Kingshuttle Hill a De∣scent of near a Mile, through part of Selwood Forest; and Bruham at 112’6. a small Village; [115’1. N. W.] Bruton, 115’6. W.S.W over 2 Ascents succeeded by a Descent of 5 Furl. leads you at 115’3. in∣to Bruton seated on the River Brew, of 6 Furlongs Extent, well-built with a good Market on Saturdays and 3 Fairs annually; hath a fair Church, and a Free-school Founded by King Edward the 6th. and a stately Alms-house; it driveth a great Trade in making Searges and Stockings. At 117 M. Cole, 117 Miles. (by an Ascent on the Left) you pass through Cole a small Vill. where the Left∣hand Way branching out near the entrance into Bruton falls in again; and at 118’6. come to Ainsford a scattering Village of 3 Furl. Ainsford, 119 Miles Clanvil, 120 Miles. Alford, 121’3. [126 Miles N.W.] Weston Regis, 126’3. [128’5. W.N.W.] Ascot, 133’2. [139’6. S. W. by W.] Knoll, 140’2. Bridgwater, 143’3. whence through Clanvil at 120 M. Alford at 121’3. and Lovington at 122’2. all small Villages: at 123’4. you pass by East Lidford, and at 126’2. Weston Regis, both contiguous on the Right; whence by Ivythorn and Walton Wind∣mills, you come at 133’6. to Ascot of 2. Furl. in length and good Accommodation. At 134’6. you come upon Polton Hill, a kind of eminent Causeway descending princi∣pally on the Left, it continues even to Knoll, which you enter at 140’1. a small Village of 2 Furlongs; whence by Horsey Green and Sidney House on the Right, at 142’5. you enter Bridgwater, extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, as in Plate the Second. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 Furl. beyond Ascot, the Left forward to Walton and Glastenbury. 2. 5 Furl. short of Weston Regis, the Right. 3. A Mile beyond Amsford, the Right. 4. 11 Furl. short of Sherewater, the Right to Deverel Longbridg. 5. 7 Furlongs beyond Shrawton, the Left to Netherhaven.
The Continuation of  Road from LONDON to BARSTABLE in Com̄ Devon. By JOHN, OGJSBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer. Plate the 2.d Comencing at Bridgwater in Com' Serset Extending to Barstable. in Com̄ Devonshire and Continuing thence to Hatherley. Containing 72. miles. . Furlongs vizt. From Bridgwater to Hartrow House 13.3. to Dulverton. 13.7. to Southmoulton 23.2. to Barstable 10. to Torrington. . 2. to Hatherley. 10.2.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to BARNSTABLE in Devonshire. PLATE II. Commencing at Bridgwater in Com. Somerset, and Extending to Barnstable aforesaid. Containing 54 Miles 4 Furlongs. Extended thence to Hatherley in Devonshire, 21 Miles 4 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 144’0. The Right to Spaxton. 147’0. The Left to Taunton. 150’3. The Left forward to Bishops Le∣diard. 150’6. The Right to Minhead. 151’5. The Left to Lediard. 153’1. The Right to Crokham. 159’3. The Right and Left to Lux∣borough and Tiverton. 160’4. The Left to Bampton. At 167’0. The Right acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 168’2. The Left to EXETER. 173’0. The Left to Newstone. 178’6. The Left to Bisherton. 181’7. The Right to Johnson. 182’6. The Left to Kings Nemet. 184’2. The Left to Bediford. 190’3. The Right acute. 191’2. The Right to Newland. 191’5. The Left to Venn. In the Continuation to Hatherley. At 3’4. The Right to Brumsey. 4’6. The Right to Bediford. 11’3. The Right to the Common. At 12’4. The Left to Esq Copstones. 15’0. The Right to Densbeer House. 21’2. The Left to Monk Oakington. IN Plate the First We brought you to Bridgwater, Bridgwater, S.W. b. S. a large and well-frequented Town, situate on the Navigable River Parret, at whose Bridg Ships of 100 Tun do often Ride, 40 Sail belonging to the Town besides Foreiners; it is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs and 24 Common-Councel Men; sends Burgesses to Parliament, and gives Title to the Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgwater, &c. has 2 Markets weekly on Thursdays and Saturdays well provided, and 3 Fairs annually, viz. Thursday sevenight in Lent, Midsummer Day and St. Ma∣thew; with a fair Church Dedicated to St. Mary, and several great Inns, the Angel, Swan, King's-Head, &c. Durlay, 144’3. W.S.W From Bridgwater at 144’3. you pass through Durlay a small Village, and 10 Fur∣longs farther through Faulty a scattering Village ascending a Hill of 4 Furlongs; Enmore, 146’5. [149’5. W. b. N.] thence at 146’5. through Enmore, leaving the Lord Rochester's House and Park on the Right, 3 Furlongs beyond you ascend again, and at 148’1. descend a Hill of 8 Furlongs, then over Worledg Common leaving Sr. John Howel's Park on the Left at 150’7. you descend another of 6 Furlongs, and pass through West Bagboro a small Village, West-Bagboro, 151’6. [153’1. W. S. W.] and after passing by several scattering Houses on the Road, an open Way leads you to Willet at 115’3. there ascending an Hill of 4 Furlongs, Willet, 155’3. W. b. S. on the which you pass by Hartrow House the Seat of Esq Lacy on the Right. At 156’5. an easie Descent brings you to the Foot of Brunnam Hill a large As∣cent of 8 Furlongs, your Way being generally Hilly and open, little occurring else but passing at 159’4. by a small Parcel of Stones call'd Rawlin's Cross, and through Holwel-slade a Bottom where several Roads meet; then at 162’3. leaving the open Way, you descend 10 Furlongs, ascending and descending several Hills and at 164’2. pass through Wilcot a small Village; then at 165’2. Wilcot, 164’2. you pass by Hewis Mill on the Right, crossing a small Water, and leaving Brumpton Regis Church 5 Furlongs on the Right. [166’3. S] [168’7. W. S. W.] Dalverton, 169’6. At 168’3. you cross Heal Bridg of Wood over the River Ex; and at 169’4. enter Dulverton seated on the Dunsbrook a Branch of the River Ex, over which is a Stone∣bridg
of 5 Arches; hath a small Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annually, Simon and Jude and St. Peters, the chiefest Commodities then sold are Oxen and Sheep; it contains about 150 Houses, and hath several Inns of Accomodation. At the End of Dulverton you cross the Dunsbrook aforesaid, whence an indirect Way up and down Hills and over Alshare Down and Whitmore Common, and pas∣sing severall small Waters or Rills, [173 Miles W.] brings you at 173’2. to enter Devonshire, then over Smallacon Common, Durliford Water, Bormer Common, Broadgate Water, &c. by Bush Mill on the Right, and over Bush Bridg you are convey'd at 182’6. to a Stone-Bridg of 3 Arches over Moul fluv. (which rising in Exmore, and 4 Miles below this Place receiving the Bray falls into the Taw near Buriton) and enter South-Moul∣ton, a Town Corporate; Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 3 Capital Bur∣gesses; Southmoulton, 183’2. the Mayor is a Justice of the Peace for one year after his Mayoralty, and the eldest Burgess likewise; they have a well-frequented Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, viz. Saturday before St. Barnaby, and Saturday before St. Bartholomew, at which time all sorts of Cattel and other Commodities are there sold; their chief Trade is in making White Serges and Felts, having several good Inns. At the End of South-Moulton you descend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, and crossing Ad∣der-brook you leave the acute Way on the Left that leads to Bediford, and 5 Fur∣longs farther pass through Southalla a small Village; then at 185’6. you cross Brench Brook, and 3 Furlongs farther the Bray over a Wooden Bridg, and at 186’4. by Philley Church and Colonel Fortescu's House on the Right; Southalla, 185 M. whence an indirect Way something Hilly brings you at 192 Miles to Lankey a small Village; then at 193 M. you enter Newport of 2 Furlongs Extent, Philley, 186’4. [190’1. N. W.] Lankey, 192 Miles. Newport, 193’1. Barnstable, 194 M. a good Thorough-fare, and hath a well∣pav'd Causeway; 2 Furlongs farther entring Barstable alias Barnstaple, seated on the Taw; a large Town-Corporate; sends Burgesses to Parliament; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen and 12 Burgesses; hath 3 petty Markets weekly, viz. Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and one grand Market on Fridays, where are sold all sorts of live Cattel and other Commodities, and one Fair annually. The Continuation to Hatherley aforesaid. FROM Barnstable you cross a fair Stone bridg of 17 Arches over the River Taw, Barnstable, S.S.W. Roundshil, 3 Miles. St. John's Chapel, 4’2. Newton Tracy, 6 M. Alverdiscot, 6’5. [7’4. S. by E.] [8’5. S.S.W.] Torrington, 11’1. [11’6. S.] and at 3 Miles pass through Roundshil a scatterring Village; and at 4’2. in a Valley through St. John's Chapel a small Village; and at 6 Miles in another Valley through Newton Tracy, and 5 Furlongs farther by Alverdiscot Church on the Left; from whence a very stony Way and over several Hills, conveys you at 11 Miles to Tor∣rington or Torrington magna, seated on the Towridg; a large but poor Town; is Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, 8 Aldermen and 16 Burgesses; its chief Trade is making of Stuffs; hath a good Market on Saturdays for Flesh, Corn, &c. and 3 Fairs annu∣ally, viz. St. George's Day, Midsomer Day, and Michaelmas Day; gives Title of Earl to His Grace Christopher Duke of Albemarle, &c. Leaving Torrington you cross the Towridg over a Stone-bridg of 4 Arches, and ascending pass through Little Torrington, Little Torrington, 12’4 [13’3. S. S. E] and at 12’4. by another Part of Little Tor∣rington on the Left; whence at 14’6. you pass by Potheridg a Noble Structure of the Duke of Albemarle's on the Left; Marton, 16’5. and at 16’5. through Marton a small Village, descending a Hill you cross over Kingsford Brook, leaving Hewish Church and Lieu∣tenant Colonel Yew's House 4 Furlongs on the Left; then at 18’3. pass by Stokeley House on the Right, Mesh, 19’2. and 5 Furlongs farther through Mesh another small Village; thence at 20’3. in a Valley you over a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches cross the Towridg, and 7 Furlongs farther enter Hatherly alias Hetherley, Hatherley, 21’4. seated on a Branch of the foresaid Towridg, a small Town containing about 100 Houses, hath a Market on Fridays, and one good Inn of Accommodation, the George. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs beyond Hatherley the Left to Shipwash. 2. 7 Furlongs short of Mesh the Left to Pe∣therickstow. 3. 6 Furl. short of St. John's Chapel the for∣ward to Smiverton Green. 4. At the End of Lankey the Left. 5. 9 Furl. short of Hewis Mill the Left to Brumpton Regis. 6. At Rawlins Cross the Left to Monksilver. 7. 12 Furl. short of West Bagboro the Left to Bridgwater a different Way.
The Continuation of ye Eended Road From. BARSTABL to TRURO. By JOHN OGJSBY. Es his Ma.ties Cosmographer. Plate ye  ast Comenceing at Hather in Com̄ Deronshire. or Extending to Truro  Commitatis Cornuh. Containing 73 miles furlongs vizt. From Hatherley to I 22.3. to Newport 8.2. to Hall Drunkard 3.4.  Cambleford 5.4. fur. to St. Indullion. 8.5. to Hstow 6.5. to St. Colomb. 8.2 to St. Michaell. 7.. Truro. 7. m. a. fur.
The Continuation of the extended Road From BARNSTABLE in Devonsh. to TRƲRO in Cornwal. PLATE. III. & Last. Commencing at Hatherley in Devonshire, and Extending to Truro aforesaid. Containing 73 Miles 2 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At the End of Hatherley the Left to Plimouth At 29 Miles the Right acute. At 35 Miles the Right to Virginstow. At 41’5. The Left to Launceston. At 43’3. The Right to Tregentle. At 51’3. The Left to Bodman. At 57’0. The Right to Lanicolas. At 57’7. The Left to Bodman. At 60’4. The Right to Tregargut. Acute Tumings to be avoided. At 62’4. The Right to Tissick. At 68’2. The Left acute. At 69’0. The right to Saers and Tarvanger. At 72’4. The Left to Warbridg. At 78’1. The Left to Rose-Carmon. At 79’3. The Right to Skeythey. At 87’2. The Left to Tregney. IN Plate the Second We brought you to Hatherley, Hatherley, S. S. W. [23’4. W.] whence over a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches you cross a Branch of the Towridg, and omitting the acute Way on the Left to Plymouth, ascend a small Hill and pass by a Wood on the Left; [29’4. S. W.] whence you have an indirect Way for the most part open, over Northliew Moor, Stovert Moor, &c. crossing the small River Care at 25’3. then at 28 Miles by Be∣worthy Church 3 Furlongs on the Left you come to Ivy at 33’6. Ivy, 33’6. [38’3. S.] [39’3. S. W.] a small Village on the Right, and at 37 Miles cross Dericary a small Brook; then at 39’5. you descend 4 Furlongs, at the Bottom of which over a Stone-bridg of 4 Arches you cross the River Tamer and enter the County of Cornwal, leaving Werington vulgo Worriton Church and Sr. William Morice's House on the Right 4 Furlongs. At 40’5. you ascend a Hill of 6 Furlongs, and at 42’0. Newport, 42 Miles. [42’3. N. W.] pass through Newport alias St. Stephens, an antient Borough-town, Electing Parliament Men, and hath 2 Fairs yearly, May Day and St. Margaret's; near adjoyning unto which on the Left is Launston alias Launceston, a large Town formerly strengthned by a Castle now ruinous; It enjoys several Immunities, as sending Burgesses to Parliament, and being the Place where the County Goal and Assizes are kept, &c. is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder and 8 Aldermen; has a good Market on Saturdays, and 3 Fairs annually, Whitsun Monday, Midsomer Day and St. Leonard's. [43’3. W.] Egleskerry, 45’3. From Newport an indirect Way by several scattering Houses on the Road brings you at 45’3. to Egleskerry a small Village, then by Tresmere Church on the Left, and Treneglos on the Right, and over Kettes Moor; at 51’4. you come to Hall-Drunkard alias Halworthy, a Noted Inn affording as good Entertainment as any on the Road; then at 52’4. you pass by Tresoak on the Left, and at 53’2. Tresoak. 52’4. Davidstow, 53’2. [54’1. S. W. by S.] Cambleford, 57 M. by David∣stow on the Right, both small Villages; from whence little occurs till at 56’6. you enter Cambleford, seated on the Camel, a small Town scarce numbring 50 Houses, is in the Parish of Lanicolas a Mile distant, yet sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 8 Magistrates; has a small Market on Fridays, and 3 Fairs yearly, the 15th of May, the 7th of July and St. John's in August, having some Inns affording good Accommodation. At 58’1. you pass by Tremagny on the Right, Tremagney, 58’1. Helson in Trig. W. St. Teath, 60’4. [62’4. S. W.] and at 59 Miles through Helson in Trig a small Village, and at 60’4. through St. Teath another small Village, and 6 Furlongs farther by several scattering Houses on the Road; thence at 63’1. you pass by Tregear on the Left, and at 63’7. through Peadogget both little Villages; Tregear, 63’1. Peaddogget, 63’7. [65’1. W. by S.] St. Endellion, 65’5. then leaving Tresongor House on the Right 4 Furlongs, you at 65’5. pass through St. In∣dulion alias Endellion a scattering Village, and at 68’3. leave St. Minver Church on the Left a Furlong. At 69’5. you pass by some Houses on the Right call'd Tredessick, Tredessick, 69’5. and at 70 Miles enter on a great Sand which is drove (as the People here report) up from
the Sea by a North West Wind, and hath already bury'd above 300 Acres of Land, several Houses, Part of a Church yet appearing visible above the Sand; near the River you have Predilly Church or Chapel on the Left, and three or four Sheds built on the Sands for Entertainment of People that come to the Hurlings, and for Direction of Passengers: At 71’2. you come to the River Camel, which Rising near Davidstow a small Village, passes by Camelford, and a Mile and half be∣low this Place falls into the Ocean, and is here 6 Furlongs over, and cross'd by a Ferry to Padstow; a Mile and half below which, in the Mouth of the River is New Island, of Note for its good Camphire and Sea Fowl taken there. Padstow, Padstow, 72’1. S. b. E. a Port-Town Trading chiefly to Ireland, enjoying several Immunities, as sending Burgesses to Parliament; hath a good Market on Saturdays, no Fair, but affording good Accommodation. From Padstow you have St. Merryon Church on the Right, and St. Tissey on the Left, [78’1. S. S. W] each distant 4 Furlongs; at 75’2. you pass by Trevilada House on the Left, and 4 Furlongs farther by Treviblin on the Right; from whence you go over a large Down generally Boggy, entring a Lane at 78’6. then ascending and descending, and by some stragling Houses on the Road, you at 80 Miles over a Stone-Bridg of 2 Arches cross a Brook or small River, St. Colomb, 80’3. and ascending a Furlong farther enter St. Colomb major of 3 Furlongs Extent, containing about 100 Houses, which affords very good Entertainment, being the usual Place where the Justices of the South-Division Sit; they have Privilege of keeping a Court once in 3 Weeks for all Actions under 40 Shillings; Sr. John Arundel is Lord of the Town; it hath a good Mar∣ket on Thursdays, and one Fair yearly, the Thursday after Alhallontide. At 81 Miles you pass by a House on the Left call'd Sr. John St. David; whence over several Hills at 87’2. Michel, 87’3. S. W. you enter Michel alias St. Michael, a mean Town con∣taining about 30 Houses, yet sends Burgesses to Parliament; has a Court Leet twice a year, the One half of which is in Newland, and the other in St. Tinedar Parish; is Govern'd by a Portreeve, and hath 2 Fairs yearly, on St. Francis Day, and 5 Days after Michaelmas. From St. St. Ern, 90’5. Michael little occurs but passing by Trutham on the Right, and St. Ern a scattering Village on the Left, till at 93’4. descending 6 Furlongs you enter Truro seated on the River Foy, Truro, 94’4. the chief Town of the County, and the Place where the Justices of the West Division Sit; is large and well-built, being a Sea-port, is well inhabited and frequented, and here likewise the Tynn is Coyn'd; it sends Burgesses to Parliament; and is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 24 Capital Bur∣gesses, out of which are 4 Aldermen chose, and out of them the Mayor; it hath two well-furnish'd Markets, on Wednsdays and Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually, Wednsday in Whitsun Week, the 19th of November, St. Thomas Day and Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 Furlongs beyond Truro the Right to St. Clements. 2. 10 Furl. short of Michel, the left acute. 3. At the End of Michel the Right to Renhal. 4. 6 Furl. short of St. Colomb the Right to Tregny. 5. 2 Mile beyond St. Colomb the Right to St. Tissey. 6. A Furlong beyond Treviblin, the Right to St. Tissey. 7. A Mile beyond St. Minver the Left to Pontea. 8. At the End of St. Teath the Right to Michael Stow. 9. 7 Furlongs short of Davidstow the Left to Stratten. 10. A Mile beyond Tresoak the Left to Houlsworthy. 11. A Mile beyond Hall Drunkard the Right to EXETER. 12. 6 Furlongs beyond Newbridg the Right acute. 13. 5 Furlongs short of Dericary fluv. the Left to Ashwater. 14. 10 Furlongs short of Ivy the Left acute. 15. On Stovert Moor the Left to Houls∣worthy. 16. At the End of Stovert Moor the Left to Shipwash. 17. 6 Furlongs short of Keylake the Left to Shipwash.
The Roads from LONDON to BATH & WELLS in com̄: Somert. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Maties Cosmographer the first Containing 12. mile . furlong vizt: From the standard in Cornhill LONDON to penham in the BRISTOL Road 94:5 to the city of BTH:14:1. thence continued to WELLS:19:3. vizt: from BATH to Paulton:9:1: to the City of WELLS to  The second containing. 120.2. vizt: from e Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Marlbourough in the BRITOL Road:75:2. to the DEVIZES .13.. to Troubridge. 9.6. to. Phillips Vton. 5.2. to Chilcompton. 8.4 to the City 4 of Wells. 7.6.
The Roads from London to Bath & Wells.   Bath. Wells. 1. THE Points of Bearing W. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 98 M. 110 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 87 M. 96 M. 4. The Dimensurations 108’1. 120’2. Commencing at Chipenham and Marlborough in Wiltshire, In the BRISTOL Road. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Chipenham 77 77 94’0 94’0 BATH 10 87 14’1 108’1 to Paulton 08 94 09’1 117’2 WELLS 08 102 10’3 127’5 From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Marlborough 62 62 75’2 75’2 Devizes 10 72 13’6 89’0 Troubridg 08 80 09’6 98’6 to Phillips Norton 04 84 05’2 104’0 Chilcompton 07 91 08’4 112’4 WELLS 05 96 07’6 120’2 Midlesex, Buckinghamshire, Barksh. Wiltsh. and Somersetsh. Counties past through Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. are the Counties through which you pass; and the Brent, Thames, Kennet, Avon, Biss and Frome, are the principal Rivers crost over; affording an indifferent good Road to Chipenham, thence to BATH is something rough and stony, and after to WELLS over Mendip Down a bad Winter Road, it is likewise a good Road from Marlborough till you come to the Downs as afore. Forward Turnings to be avoided in the Road to BATH. At 97’6. The Right acute. At 99’7. The Right to Box. At 117’1. the Left acute in Paulton. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 119’0. The Left to Stone Ashton. In the Road to WELLS. At 82 Miles the Right to Sandy Lane. At 84’6. The Right to Sandy Lane. At 89’1. The Right to Chipenham. At 93’4. The Right acute to Troubridg a different Way. At 94’4. The Left to Kevil. At 101’0. The Right to Bradford. At 104’3. The Left acute. At 109’2. The Right to Lipyard. At 115 Miles the Right to Chewton. FROM LONDON to Chipenham you have the Account in LONDON to BRISTOL pag. 21. Chipenham, S.W.b.W. where proceeding, you omit the Road on the Right to BRISTOL, and bearing to the Left, take your Way by Cosham Church and Hall, and at 98’3. enter Pickwith a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Pickwith, 98’4. then ascending an Hill of 3 Furlongs, by Haslebury House on the Right, and Chapel of Plaister on the Left, cross a Vale and leave Box Church on the Right, descend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and enter Somersetshire at 104’0. Bathford, 104’3. thence you pass through Bathford a small Village and cross the Avon over a Stone-Bridg, Baneston, 105’4. and come to Boneaston alias Baneston at 105’4. a small Village, where you leave Bathampton Church on the Left. Hence at 107’4. through Wallcot a small Village, Wallcot, 107’4. BATH, 108 Miles. you 3 Furlongs farther come to the City of BATH, which is seated on the River Avon, and in a Vale begirt with high Hills; a City of great Antiquity, call'd by Ptolomy, Udata Therma; by Antonine, Aqua Solis; by the Britains, Caer-Badon; and by the Saxons, Bathanceaster: This City is not large, containing but one Parish-Church besides the Cathedral or Abby, yet it is well built and well inhabited, which is occasion'd by it's Medicinal Baths; It gives Title to the Right Honorable John Earl of Bath; is Govern'd by a
Mayor, Recorder, Common-Councel, &c. and hath 2 Markets weekly, on Wedns∣days and Saturdays. At the End of BATH, [115’6. S.W.b.S.] over a Stone-Bridg you cross the aforesaid Avon, and leave Witcomb Church on the Left; then 2 repeated Ascents lead you at 110’5. by Inglescomb and Priston Churches on the Right, and Oddown House, Dunderton and Camerton Churches all on the Left, little else occurs but passing some Hills, and through a small Village call'd Tunley, Paulton, 117’1. S.W. till at 117 Miles you come to Paulton a scat∣tering Village, and by Faringdon on the Right, and Stone-Aston Church and Hall on the Left; Chuton, 121’3. at 113’3. to Chuton under Mendip another Village; whence over Mendip Down, by the Lead-Mines and Green-Oar House, come at 127’2. to the City of WELLS, WELLS, 127’5. which is but small yet well inhabited and of good Account, sends Bur∣gesses to Parliament; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen and 16 Gown-Men; has 2 Markets weekly, on Wednsdays and Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually, vid. more in BRISTOL to Weymouth, pag. 117. In the Road to WELLS. FRom LONDON to Marlborough, Marlborough, W. b. S. [83’4. S.W.b.W.] and so to Silbury Hill, the same as in the BRIS∣TOL Road, and being on Marlborough Down you cross Wansdike or the Devil's Ditch at 84’6. which runs cross the Country, and fabled by some to be cast up by the Devil on a Wednsday, but by Campden said to be the Bounds betwixt the West Saxons and the Mercians; a Furlong farther you ascend 4 Furlongs, which is seconded with a Descent of 6 Furlongs, and a Mile beyond leave the Down; and at 88’2. enter the Devizes, Devizes, 89 M.W.b.S an indifferent large Town containing 2 Parish-Churches, besides a Cha∣pel on the Green: The Town was formerly of considerable Strength, and is Go∣vern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 11 Masters, sends Burgesses to Parliament, has a good Market on Thursdays, and 7 Fairs yearly. Proceeding from the Devizes, Sean, 92’3. you pass by Polshed and Brunan Churches on the Right, and at 91’4. [94 Miles W.] [94’6. W.S.W.] [95’2. S.W. by W.] Troubridg, 98’6. W.b.S cross Someron Brook, and 5 Furl. farther enter Sean a long discontinu∣ed Village; then by Bond Church on the Right, and Simenton and Helperton 2 small Villages on the same Hand; come at 98’3. to Troubridg of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; has a Market on Saturdays and a Fair on St. James's Day. At the End of the Town over a Stone-Bridg of 3 Arches you cross the Biss, and leave Studley a small Village and North Bradley on the Left, and crossing a Brook and Horse-Bridg call'd London-bridg, and by Trowl and Winfield both small Villages, come at 101’4. Farley, 102’1. to the entring Somersetshire; where crossing the Frome you have Farley Ca∣stle and Park on the Right, and the Village on the Left. At 103’5. Phillips Norton, 104 M. [106 Miles S.W.] you enter Phillips Norton of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, has a Market on Fridays and 3 Fairs annually, on one of which they sell their Commo∣dities by Whole-sale, and is reckon'd as great a Fair as any is in England for one Day. Leaving the Town you cross a Brook and pass through Falkland at 106’1. Faulkland, 106’1. Kilmersden, 109’2. Charlton, 110’1. Chilcompton, 112’4. Kilmes∣den at 109’2. and Charlton at 110’1. all small Villages, leaving Babinton Church on the Left; at 111’2. you cross the Foss-way, and a Mile farther pass through Chilcompton a small Village; whence by several scattering Houses, and over Old-down Heath, pass through Enboro at 114’4. Enboro, 114’4. a discontinued Village, where you have a large Pond on the Left, and Biniger Church some distance on the same Hand; then over Mendip Down, and by Penhil on the Right, descend a very large Hill and enter the City of WELLS, WELLS, 120’2. which We have discourst in LONDON to BATH, and succeeding Plates. Backward turnings to be avoided between WELLS and Marlborough. 1. At the End of WELLS the Left acute. 2. 1’5. Beyond WELLS the Right to Warmister. 3. At the End of Falkland the left to BATH. 4. 3 Furlongs beyond the Devizes, the left to Runaway. 5. At Wansworth Dike the left to Marlborough a different Way. Between WELLS and Chipenham. 1. A M. short of Paulton the left to Farinton. 2. At the End of BATH the Right acute. 3. 4 Furl. beyond Baneston, the Left to Box. 4. At the entring Pickwith the Right acute. 5. 10 Furlongs short of Chipenham the Right to Laycock.
The Road from LONDON to BOSTON in Lincolnsh: By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties COSMOGRAPHER Containing  Miles  Furlongs vizt. From the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, to ilton in the Barwick Road 69. M. . Furl: to PETERBOROUGH 7’7. to Wellington 3’6. to Crwland 7’6. to Spalding 10’0. to Setherton 10’2 and to Boston  Furl: Continued to the City of LINCOLN 37 M. 4 F. vizt. From Boston to Heckington. 13’3. to Sleford 6’1 and to LINCOLN 18’0.
The Road from London to Boston In Lincolnshire. Commencing at Stilton in the Barwick Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. by W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 95 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 90 M. 4. The Dimensuration 114’3. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Stilton 57 57 69’1 69’1 PETERBOROUGH 05 62 07’3 76’4 Widrington 03 65 03’6 80’2 Crowland 06 71 07’6 88’0 to Spalding 07 78 10’0 098’0 Setherton 07 85 10’2 108’2 Boston 05 90 06’1 114’3   90   114’3   Compleated with a Branch from Boston to LINCOLN, thus; From Boston Comp. Measure. to Heckington 10 10 13’3 13’3 Sleaford 05 15 06’1 19’4 LINCOLN 14 29 18’0 37’4 Midlesex, Hartfordsh. Cambridgsh. Huntingdonsh. and Lincolnsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. contain the whole Road; and the Lea, Granta, Owse, Nine, Welland and Witham, are the principal Rivers crost over; the Road is generally good, the Fenny Part being rais'd with Causeways, and in most Places good Towns and publick Inns of Accomodation. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At the End of Stilton the Right to Stamford. 83 Miles in Pea-Kirk the Left to Market Deeping. At 94’4. In Cowbit, the Left to Wisbich. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. 111’2. The Right to Frampton. In the Branch to LINCOLN. At 30 Miles the Right acute. At 30’6. The Left to Harmiston. FROM LONDON to Stilton We have Illustrated in LONDON to Bar∣wick, pag. 9. Whence a straight open Way conveys you to Yaxley at 74’5. Stilton, N. by E. Yaxley, 74’5. a small Market Town contiguous on the Right; and crossing a Brook you ascend a Hill, and leaving Fasset, Fleton and Stanground all on the Right, and Woodston on the Left, come at 76 Miles to cross the Nine over a Wooden-Bridg, where you at once enter Northamptonshire and the City of PETERBOROUGH, PETERBOROƲGH 76’4. N. by W. a City of great Antiquity, call'd by the Saxons Medeshampsted; it is of no great Extent, containing but one Church besides the Cathedral, yet its Houses are well-built, and Streets well order'd, and has a curious Market-Place, over which the Assizes and Sessions for the Hundred of Nassaburgh are kept; it hath Privilege of sending Bur∣gesses to Parliament, is Honor'd with the Title of Earl in the Person of the Right Honorable Henry Mordaunt Earl of Peterborough, &c. It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, &c. and has a well-frequented Market on Saturdays, and 3 Fairs annu∣ally, viz. June the 29th. August the 6th. and September the 25th. vid. more in LON∣DON to Flamborough, pag. 81. Leaving PETERBOROUGH, you pass by the Gallows on the Left, Paston, 79’2. Wedrington, 80’2. and at 79’2. come to Paston a small Village, and 5 Furlongs farther enter Wedrington a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation: then leaving Glinton on the Left, arrive at Pea-Kirk at 82’7. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Peakirk, 83 M. E. b. N where omit∣ing
the acute Way on the Left to Market-Deeping, you bear to the Right, the Ri∣ver Welland accompanying your Road close on the Left; thence you pass by Dun∣beer House on the Right, Crowland, 88 M. N. and come to Crowland at 87’5. (where you enter Lincoln∣shire) a Market-Town of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, enjoying a Fair each St. Bartholomew's Day; it was of Note formerly for its Abby Founded by Ethelbald King of the Mercians, Anno 716. It is seated very low and amongst deep Fenns, almost after the manner of Venice, its 3 Streets being separated from each other by Water-Courses, the Banks whereof are preserv'd by Piles; the lowness of its Situation admits of no Carriages to come at it, yet it is well inhabited, oc∣casion'd by the great quantities of Fish and Fowl that are taken in the Pools and watry Places hereabouts. Leaving Crowland, you have the Welland still accompanying you on the Left, and passing by Clout-house, Brother-house and Pikale, all on the Right, come at 94 Miles to Cowbet a Village on the Right also, Cowbet, 94’4. which extends a Mile on the Road; whence an irregular Road conveys you at 97 Miles to Spalding, Spalding, 98 Miles. a Town Extending above a Mile on the Road, and most on the Right, in which you cross the aforesaid Wel∣land and Longtost Drain, the Town is antient and well built, the River Welland on which it is situate is here Navigable, and hath several Vessels and Barges on it be∣longing to the Town, which enjoys a good Market for Corn, Cattel, &c. on Tuesdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, September the first, and December the sixth. Proceeding from Spalding, you first cross the little Drain, then the Phanetus or Boston Drain, Pinchbeck, 100’4. and at 100’4. pass through Pinchbeck a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence by several disperst Houses on the Road, you are brought at 102 Miles, to cross Boston Dike and to enter Surfleet a Village of near 2 Furlongs Extent; Surfleet, 102’1. then by Gosberton a Village contiguous on the Left, Gosberton, 104 Miles N. by E. Setherton, 108’2. Strugshil, 109’4. and Dunnington a Mile distant on the same Hand, come at 108 Miles to Setherton a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent, but most on the Right; thence by Alderwood on the Right, through Strugshil at 109’1. Part of Kirton at 109’6. Kirton, 110’4. and Kirton it self at 110’4. all small Villages; you leave Frampton, Wilberton, and Skerbeck, all on the Right, and by a Gibbet on the Left, over a Stone-Bridg cross a small River and enter Boston, Boston, 114’3. of which take this gene∣ral Account: Boston, i. e. Fanum Botolphi, commodiously seated on both Sides the River Witham, near its Influx into the Sea, which occasions it to drive a considerable Trade: It is a large, well-built, well-inhabited and frequented Borough and Town-Corpo∣rate, hath a fair and stately Market-Place and Church, whose Tower is of a great Height and serves as a Land-Mark to Sailors: It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Record∣er, 12 Aldermen, Burgesses, &c. hath 2 Markets weekly, on Wednsdays and Sa∣turdays, well provided with Flesh, Fish, Fowl, &c. and 2 Fairs yearly, July the 25th. and November the 30th. In the Branch from Boston to LINCOLN. SEtting forward from Boston you cross 5 several Drains, Boston, N. W. Swineshead, 7 M. W. and passing by Kirton-Holm a Village on the Left, you enter Swineshead at 6’5. a large Village, ex∣tending most on the Left, and about 4 Furlongs on the Road, of good Accomo∣dation; Garick, 11’3. Heckington, 13’3. then again you cross 3 other Drains, and at 11’3. pass through Garick a small Village, and at 13’2. through Hekinton a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; then you pass by Asgerby and Kirby Churches, and Old Hall, all on the Right, Sleaford, 19’4. N.b.W. and enter Sleaford a Market-Town at 19’1. where you fall in with the Road from LONDON, and proceed for LINCOLN, [as in LONDON to Flamborough, LINCOLN, 37’4. pag. 81.] Backward Turnings to be avoided between LINCOLN and Sleaford. 1. A Mile from LINCOLN the Right to Ancaster. 2. At the End of Sleaford the Right to Bourn. 3. In Swinshead the Right acute. Between Boston and Stilton. At Gosberton the Right to Sleaford. In Wedrington the Left acute.
The Road from LONDON to CARLISLE in com̄: Cumberland By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 301 mile  Furlongs vizt: From the Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Darlestons bridge in com Stafford in ye: Holyhead road 42:2: thence to Newcastle 7:1 to Brewerton green 13:4 to Grulam  Warington to:1:to Newton 5:2 to Wigan 8:2 to Whittle 6:2: to Presto 10: and to Garstang 11:1: thence to CARLISLE  Plate ye: 2d. 78::
The Road from London to Carlisle In CƲMBERLAND. Commencing at Darlaston-Bridg near Stone in Staffordshire in the Holyhead Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. N. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 243. M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 235. M. 4. The Dimensuration. 301’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Darlaston 111 111 142’2 142’2 Newcastle 005 116 007’1 149’3 Brewerton 008 124 013’4 162’7 Grulam 006 130 009’0 171’7 Warington 006 136 010’1 182’0 Newton 005 146 005’2 187’2 Wigan 007 153 008’2 195’4 Whittle 005 158 006’2 201’6 Preston 009 167 010’0 211’6 to Garstang 10 177 11’1 222’7 Lancaster 10 187 10’0 232’7 Boulton 03 190 04’1 237’0 Burton 05 195 07’4 244’4 Kendal 08 203 12’1 256’5 Thrumby 13 216 19’0 275’5 Penrith 05 221 07’0 282’5 Hesket 07 228 09’3 292’0 CARLISLE 07 235 09’2 301’2 Midlesex, Hertfordsh. Bedfordsh. Buckinghamsh. Northamptonsh. Warwicksh. Staffordsh. Counties past through. Lan∣cash. Westmorland and Cumberland Include the whole Road; and the Lowsel, Owse, Leame, Avon, Sherborn, Cole, Tame, Trent, Dane, Mersey, Yarrow, Darwen, Ribble, Wire, Lune, Kent, Rivers crost over. Low∣der, Eden, and Petterel, are the Principal Rivers crost over: The quality of the way. Affording through Cheshire no ill way, but mostly Sandy or otherwise firm, through Lancashire somewhat more deep hard and Hilly; but rough, harder and more Mountainous through Westmorland and Cum∣berland, in which last Counties you meet not with that frequent Accomodation as in the former. As to the Post Road it varies in this, that it takes Knotsford in the way from Brewerton-Green to Warington, proceeding thence to Kendal only, but supplying Penrith and CAR∣LISLE by a branch from Northallerton through Richmond out of the Northern Road. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consists in 2 Plates, the 1st. ending at Garstang Com. Lanc. the 2d. at the City of CARLISLE aforesaid, We begin with Plate the first, containing 81’3. wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided, viz. At 142’5. At the end of Darlaston, the Left to CHESTER and Holyhead. At 151’5. The Left to Audley and North∣wich. At 157’0. The Left to Sandbach. At 165’6. The Right to Manchester. At 169’6. The Left-forward to Daneham. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 190’3. At the end of Ashton, the Right to Lauton. At 195’2. In Wigan, the Right. At 196’0. At the Butts, the Right acute. At 205’0. The Left to Laland. Having crost the Trent at Darlaston Bridg past Darlaston, Darlaston Bridg N. N. W. and omitted the great Road to CHESTER and Holyhead on the left; by the Banks of the Trent, you come at 144 M. to Tittensor a Village of 2 Furlongs, and at 145’3. to Trentham, Tittensor 144 m. Trentham 145’3. a discontinued Village of 4 Furlongs, adorn'd with the Seat of the late Sr. Richard Leveson: At 147 Miles you cross Hanford Bridg, Newcastle 149’3. and 2 Miles farther enter Newcastle (Under Lime) either from the Rivulet so call'd, or the quantity of Lime here got; a large Town Govern'd by a Mayor, 2 Justices, 2 Bailiffs, 24 Common-Council, &c. Holds Pleas for Actions under 40 l. Elects Parliament Men, has a Market on Mundays, and every Munday Fortnight a great Beast Market, and annually 4 Fairs, with 2 other great Markets or Fairs Shrove-Munday, and Munday after Cross Week, had formerly 4 Churches, now reduc'd to One; It Suffer'd much in the Barons Wars, and the New Castle, whence it was Denomina∣ted, is now Levelled. The adjacent parts yield good quantity of Pit-Coal.
At 152 Miles passing through Chesterton a Village of 2 Furlongs, Chesterton. 152 Mils. Talk. 154 Miles. [154’6. N.W.] [157 Miles, N. b. E.] a straight way conducts you at 154 Miles to Talk on the Hill, (yielding a most Eminent Prospecteven as far as Cumberland,) a Village of 2 Furlongs with one or two Inns; whence a pretty steep descent of 3 Furlongs brings you into a Sandy Lane, where entring Cheshire at 155 Miles, Odrode, 157’7. N.W. Knoles, 162 Miles. and through Odrode a small Village at 147’7. giving a way on the Right to Congleton a small adjacent Corporation, a direct Road brings you at 160’2. to Knoles another small Village, whence, leaving Sandbach a Mile on the Left, Eminent for its good Ale, Brewerton, 162’7. Holms, 144 Miles. at 162’6. come to Bruerton Green a little Village so call'd, and a Mile farther Holmes Chapel a small through-fare with one Inn only; whence over Cranage Bridg crossing Dane Fluv. Cranage, 165’2. you come to Cranage at 165’1. 3 Furlongs beyond which the Road to Manchester branches out on the Right, where entring a Heath, and passing through Stublage, Stublage, 167’6. [169 Miles W.] Lach-Green, 169’6. N. W. Lastock, 170’6. Grulam, 171’7. Whitley, 175’1. Stocks, 176 Miles. [178 N. by W.] Stocken, 180’2. Warington, 182 M. Holm, 184’3. Winnick, 185’1. N.N. W Newton, 187’2. Ashton, 190 Miles. Wigan, 195’3. Lach-Green and Lastock 3 small Villages, you come to Grulam at 171’6. a small through-fare, leaving Northwich a Market Town a Mile on the Left. Hence between Duiton and Budworth, and through Whitley and Franley Stocks 2 small Villages, you leave Streton Chapel on the Right, pass through Stocken, and at 181’6. cross the Mersey enter Lancashire, and a Furlong farther Warington a hansom Market Town, [As in YORK to CHESTER pag. 177.] Whence over Langford Bridg, through Holme and Winwick 2 small Villages, at 187 Miles enter Newton 6 Furlongs long, having the Election of Parliament Men, and 2 Fairs annually. At 189’7 you come to Ashton a Village of 4 Furlongs, whence over several Ri∣vulets, at 194’6. you cross Dowle Fluv. and presently enter Wigan of 6 Furlongs extent, well built; Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. Elects Parliament Men, hath 2 Markets weekly Mundays and Fridays, but the former discontinued; and 3 Fairs annually: Noted for its Pit-Coal and Iron-Works, and several Industrious Manufa∣ctures. At 198’3. Standish, 198’4. [199’2. N.] Coppen-Moor, 200’4. Whittle, 201’5. you pass through Standish 2 Furlongs long, having 2 Fairs annually; at 200’4. Coppen-Moor, at 201’5. Whittle, small Villages; next at 202’1. Charnock-Moor, and at 203 Miles Charnock Richard, 3 Furlongs farther crossing the Yarrow over Pincock Bridg, so over Pincock-Brow, by Exton Chapel and Renshmore on the Right, and Laland on the Left; Harden, 207’5. [208’3. N. W.] Preston, 211’4. at 207’5. you pass through Harden-Green a small Village, at 209’6. crossing the Darwen, and 7 Furlongs farther the fair River Ribble, and enter Preston at 211’2. 6 Fur∣longs in length, large fair and well frequented; Govern'd by a Mayor, 8 Aldermen, 4 Under Aldermen, [212 Miles N.] and 12 Common-Council: Has the Election of Parliament Men, keeping the Chancery Courts, &c. for the County Palatine of Lancaster, and acknow∣ledging Statute Merchants, &c. has several Alms-Houses, and 3 Markets weekly, Wednsdays and Fridays for Provisions, &c. and Saturdays for Corn, Cattel, &c. Hence to Lancaster the Road is somewhat Hilly, especially a kind of continued Ridg of Hills accompanies it on the Right at 3 or 4 Miles distance; but proceeding, at 214 Miles you pass through Cadley-Moor a small Village, Cadley-Moor 214 m. Barton, 217’2. and over Broughton Bridg leaving the Church on the Right, at 217 Miles enter Barton a scattering Village of at least 6 Furlongs; Baugrave 221’7. whence over Maskay-Brook and Brock Fluv. at 221’7. you come to Baugrave a small Village, 4 Furlongs farther cross the Wyre which waters that large Tract of Barren and Mossy Ground call'd Wyersdale, Garstang 222’5. and at 222’4. enter Garstang a good through-fare, as in the next Plate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Preston, the Left to Ribble. 2. At Darwen Fluv. the Right to Laland. 3. A Mile beyond Harden-Green, the Right to Pennerton. 4. 5 Furlongs short of Renshmore, the Left acute. 5. 4 Furlongs beyond Wigan, the Right to Leverpool. 6. In Holme, the Left acute. 7. 5 Furlongs beyond Stocken, the Right to Dallamore and Acton Bridg. 8. Against Budworth Church, the Right to Dutton. 9. At the end of Odrode, the Left to Con∣gleton. 10. 12 Furlongs beyond Odrode, the Left acute. 11. 2 Furlongs short of Newcastle, the Right to Knutton. 12. 1 Furlong short of Trensham, the Lest to Hanford.
The continuation of the Road from LONDON to CARLISLE com̄: Cumbr: By IOHN OGILBY Esq His Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 78 mile Frlong vizt From Garstang to LANCASTE to Boulton 4 to Burton 74 to KENDAL 12:1 to Thrumby 19: to Prurth 7:6 to Heslot 9:3 to CARLISLE . Plate the 2d. & last Commencing at Garstan in com LANCASTER and extending to CARLISLE foresaid
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to CARLISLE in Cumberland. PLATE. II. Commencing at Garstang in Lancashire, and Extending to CARLISLE aforesaid. Containing 78 Miles 3 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 233’4. a little beyond Lancaster, the Left At 267’2. The Right to Applebey. At 273’0. The Right to Strickland. At 283’6. The Right to Salkelde, and 4 furl. Acute Turnings to be avoided. farther the Right to the Moss. At 298’6. The Left at the End of Carlton. VVE led you into Garstang in Plate the First at 222’4. Garstang, N. W. b. N. [225’6. N.] extending about 2 Furlongs, a reasonable good Thorough-fare, with a Market for Corn, Cattel, &c. on Thursdays: Leaving the Town at 223 Miles, and Green-haugh Castle about half a Mile to the Right now Ruinous, and Wyresdale at 226’2. a Mile to the Right also, seated in a Part of the Country so call'd, and to which the se∣veral Right-hand Ways hereabouts lead you; at 227’6. Elhil, 227 6. you pass through Elhill a small Village, whence a direct Way over Gaugut Bridg brings you at 230’1. to Burrow, and at 231’5. to Scotford two small Villages, entring Lancaster at 232’4. Burrow, 230’1. Scotford, 231’5. Lancaster, 232’6. situate on the South side the River Lune, a Place of good Antiquity, suppos'd to be the Longovicum in the Notitia's, containing several handsom Streets, with a large Church, which together with the Castle, wherein are kept the general Assizes and County Goal, is eminently seated on the North-West of the Town: 'Tis a Corporation Govern'd by a Mayor, 2 Bailiffs, 6 Mayors-Peres or Brethren, 24 Burgesses, &c. Statutes-Merchant are here acknowledg'd, and Parliament Men Elected; it has a great Market on Saturdays for Corn, Cattel, Fish, (especially Salmon) and other Provisions; and has given Title of Earl and Duke to several Princes of the Blood for some Centuries of years: The Parish is very large as are most of those of this County which in all numbers but 61. Leaving the Town you pass the River over a fair Stone-bridg, and at 235’7. Slyne, 235’7. Boulton, 237 Miles. [238’6. N. E.] Carnford, 239’4. come to Slyne a small Village; 7 Furlongs farther entring Boulton of near 3 Furlongs Extent, a reasonable Thorough-fare: At 239’4. you pass through Carnford a small Village; whence over Care-bridg and by Lighton Hall on the Right, at 243’5. you enter Westmerland, and 6 Furlongs beyond come to Burton 2 Furlongs long, [241’6. N.] Burton, 244’4. situate on the South-side of Farleton Knot, an indifferent Thorough-fare with a Market on Tuesdays. This is reckon'd the Mid-way between Lancaster and Kendal, the Remainder whereof is very Mountainous, else litle occurs only passing between Holm Church and Park, and a Mile beyond Frandon seated upon Holton Crag about 2 Furlongs to the Right; a direct Road crossing 2 or 3 Rills carries you over Sallat Brow and by Grove Chapel on the Right, Sidwick. 253 Miles. Notcliff, 254 Miles. brings you at 253 Miles to Sidwick alias Siggeswick a small Village, and at 254 Miles to Notcliff a Village of 2 Furlongs, entring Kendal at 256’1. extending a Mile upon the Road, and affording a large History which in this Place only thus: Kendal, a fair, large and well-frequented Town, Kendal, 256’5. [256’6. N.N.E.] esteem'd the Beauty of the County, pleasantly seated on the River Can or Kent, of no great Antiquity, but remarkable Industry, exercising great Manufacture of Cottons, Druggets, Hats, Stockings, &c. has a large Church to which belongs 12 Chapels of Ease, and on the East-side of the River stood formerly a Castle, whereof the Ruinous Walls now only remain: It is Govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Mayors-Peres or Aldermen, 12 Common-Councel Men, a Recorder, &c. near the Church stands a fair Freeschool well endow'd, with Exhibitions to Queen's College in OXFORD: It has a great Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annually on the 25th of April and 28th of October, and between those Terms a great Beast-market every Fortnight.
Repassing the River, [258 m. N. b W.] [261’6. N. N. E.] [269’3. N.] you have hence to Penrith a very Mountainous Road, carrying you over Betome Hill a skirt of Skeesmore Fell, Banesdale Horse, and several other anoni∣mous Eminencies with much open way, [Shop 272’2.] and by the Horse House on the Left at 265’2. and some Stone heaps on the Right at 270’3. you come at 272’1. to Shop a small Village most on the Right hand; Torumby 275’5. [275’6. N. N. W.] [278 m. N. whence open way again brings you at 275’4. to Thurnby alias Thrumby of 3 Furlongs extent, a small through-fare. Hence more open way carrying you by Clifton Chapel on the Left, convey's you at 281’1. to the River Lowder, and leaving Brougham vulgo Broom Castle, the Countess Dowager of Pembroke's on the Right, at 281’5. over Emon Bridg you cross the Eden and enter Cumberland, Penrith 282’4. and 5 Furlongs farther Penrith vulgo Perith of 6 Furlongs Extent; Signi∣fying in Brittish the Red-head, a large and well built Town; Esteem'd the 2d. of the County, with a fair Church, and in the Church-Yard an Old Pyramidal Monument antiquely Graven: [283 m. N. N. W] It has a good Market for Corn, &c. on Tuesdays and a more Emi∣nent one for Cattel every Tuesday Fortnight, from Whitsunday to August 1st. Hence an indifferent level Road and not much indirect, but generally open way, car∣ries you to CARLISLE; Saucold-yate 287 m. first passing over an open place call'd 13 Town's Rents, and at 387 Miles Salkelds vulgo Saucold-yate contiguous on the Left a small Village, Salkelds it self lying about a Mile on the Right upon the River Eden, and is Eminent for a great Monument of Victory Erected near it, consisting of 77 great Stones, each about 10 Foot high, and one 15 Foot, call'd by the vulgar Long Meg and her Daughters. whence a straight way conducts you through Englewood Forest and part of Hesket, and a Mile farther War-Hesket no large Villages, War-Hesket 293’5. leaving Kirk-Oswald, a late made Market Town about a Mile on the Right likewise, but on the farther side the River. At 298’3. Carlton 298’4. Burraby 299’7. you enter Carlton a Village of 3 Furlongs, and at 299’6. Boteherby vulgo Burraby 2 Furlongs long, at the end of which crossing the small River Petterel at 300’7. you enter at the English Gate the City of CARLISLE. A City of great Antiquity, CARLISLE 301’2 Eminent in the Time of the Romans, call'd in the Iti∣nerary Tables Luguvallum, Interpreted the Tower by the Vallum, i. e. the Picts Wall, near which it stands; whence contractly Caer-luel and so Carleil and Carlisle: Encompast with a Wall about the year 680. by Egfred K. of the Northumbers, and Fortifi'd with a Castle by W. Rufus: Made an Episcopal See by Henr. 1st. Anno 1133. Numbring 42 Bishops to this Present; and giving the Title of Earl to the Right Honorable Charles-Howard Earl of CARLISLE, &c. It is seated on the South-side of the River Eden, and between the Petterel and the Caud on the East and West; It lies Triangular, the Castle standing in the North-West Corner, strong and large; The Cathedral a Curious Structure, and the Houses well built: It is Govern'd by a Mayor, 12 Alder∣men, 2 Bailiffs, &c. Sends Burgesses to Parliament; Is Traded unto for its Fustians, and has a very considerable Market on Saturdays: Giving Entrance by 3 Gates, the Caldo or Irish Gate, Bother or English Gate, and Rickard or Scotch Gate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 10 Furl. short of Saucold-yate, the Right to Hutton-Hall. 2. In Saucold-yate, the Right to Hutton-Hall. 3. 10 Furl. beyond Saucold-yate, the Right to Hutton-Hall. 4. 2 Furlongs beyond Penrith, the Left to Appleby. 5. A little beyond Shop, the Left to Apple∣by. 6. In Kendal, the forward-way on the Right. 7. At the entring Sidwick, the Right a∣cute. 8. Opposite to Holmes Park, the Right to Holme. 9. 6 Furl. short of Care-Bridg, the Right to Walton. 10. 3 Furl. beyond Care-Bridg, the Right acute. 11. 2 Furlongs beyond Boulton, the Right acute. 12. A Furlong beyond Burrow, the Left acute. 13. 3 Furlongs short of Elhil, the Right acute. 14. 2 Furlongs beyond Elhil, the Left to Wyresdale.
The Road from LONDON to CHICHESTER in com̄: Suslex By IOHN OGILBY Esq:r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 63 mile 2 furlongs viz:t From ye Standard in Cornhi LONDON to Guilford in com Surry in ye: Portsmouth ad 30 thence to Godalmin 4:6 to Chidingfold 6:4 to Midhust to 6 to CHICHESTER 11:2 with ye. Road from Midhurst  Petersfield continued to WINCHESTER 29 m z:t from Midhurst to Petersfield 10 6 to WINCHESTER: 18:2
The Road from London to Chichester, Commencing at Guilford in the Portsmouth Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 55 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 50 M. 4. The Dimensuration 63’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Guilford 25 25 30’0 30’0 Godalmin 03 28 04’6 34’6 Chidingfold 05 33 06’4 41’2 to Midhurst 10 43 10’6 52’0 CHICHESTER 07 50 11’2 63’2   50   63’2   The Branch to WINCHESTER. From Midhurst Comp. Measure. to Petersfield 08 08 10’6 10’6 WINCHESTER 12 20 18’2 29’0 Midlesex, Surrey, Sussex and Hampsh. are the Counties through which you pass; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Thames, Wandle, Mole, Wey, Arun and Lavant, are the Chief Rivers Crost over; the first Part of the Road is very good, but the later Part is more unplea∣sant, yet in all Places is provided with good Towns, &c. for Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 30’6. The Right to Farnham. 32’3. The Right acute. At 34’6. The Right to Portsmouth. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 44’0. The Left to Petword. In the Branch to WINCHESTER. At 9’6. The Right to WINCHESTER a different Way. 12’3. The Left to Kamsdean. At 13’4. The Left to East Mean. 20’4. The Right to Alresford. FROM LONDON to Guilford you have the Account in LONDON to Portsmouth, pag. 59 Whence crossing the Wey, Guilford, S. W. b. W. [6 Furl. S. S. W.] you omit the Road on the Right to Farnham and bear to the Left, and pass by several scattering Houses on the Road, ascend Katherin Hill at 31’5. and leave Shawford on the Left, and re∣crossing the Wey, enter Godalmin vulgo Godliman, a Market-Town, Godalmin, 34’6.] [as in LON∣DON to Portsmouth, pag. 59.] Leaving the Town, your Way is generally open; passing by Busbridg House and Godliman Park on the Right, and Hascomb Church on the Left: Whence a straight Way conveys you at 39 Miles through Hambleton a little Village, Hambleton, 39 Miles. where you descend a small Hill, and leave some Brick-Kilns on the Right; Chidingfold, 41’2. whence another Descent brings you to Chidingfold a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent. Hence, you enter Sussex at 43’4. and pass by Longdown Beacon on the Right, and North Chapel and Lurgishal on the Left; descend a small Hill, cross 2 Waters, 50 Miles, S. pass through a Wood, and at 48’5. ascend Bexley Hill, and descending, leave Cowdray Park on the Left, and at 51 Miles pass through Easeborn a small Village; Easborn, 51 Miles. and 6 Furlongs farther, leaving Cowdray Place on the Left, cross the Arun and en∣ter Midhurst of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment: Midhurst, 52 Miles. It is a Borough-Town Electing Parliament Men, hath a Market on Thursdays, and a Fair on Whitson-Tues∣day. Leaving Midhurst, your Way is generally Heathy, ascending Cokin Hill, and pass∣ing by Westdean on the Right, and Singleton on the Left, brings you at 58’6. to St. Rook's Hill, where you have a Beacon on the Left, and near the Bottom of the Hill, a Marl-Pit on the Right.
Hence you pass by East Lavant Church and Ramer House on the Right; and at 63 Miles enter CHICHESTER, CHICHESTER, 63’2. a City Seated on the Lavant; first Built by Cissa Second King of the South-Saxons, and by him call'd Cissanc-Caster, where he had His Royal Palace, yet before the Conquest it was of little Note, containing only a Monastery of St. Peter's, and a little Nunnery: It is at present Dignify'd with an Episcopal See and Residence of a Bishop; It's Cathedral began first to be Built by Bishop Radulph, but before the Finishing of it was totally consum'd by Fire, yet the said Bishop began to Re-build it, which, by the Assistance of King Henry the First, was quite Finish'd; yet again it was consum'd by Fire in the Time of King Richard the Third, with the Bishop's Palace and Prebends Houses; which were all again Re-built by Bishop Seffrid the Second of that Name. In the Branch to WINCHESTER. FROM Midhurst you pass by Woolbeding, Midhurst, W. Stedham and Trotton Churches, all on the Right, [5’7. W. S. W.] [7’5. W. by N.] [9’6. W. S. W.] and cross Woolbeding Bridg of Stone over a Brook, and the Ri∣ver Arun at 3’4. over Trotton Bridg of Stone, and after pass by Turwick Church, and Vining House and Rogate Church on the Left, and by Maiden Oak on the Right, and enter Hampshire at 9 Miles; then by Durford House on the Left, crossing Sheet-Bridg and Brook, Petersfield, 10’6. enter Petersfield a Market-Town at 10’5. the Account of which you have in the Road from LONDON to Portsmouth pag. 59. Whence, you cross 2 small Waters or Rills, [12’3. W. by N.] and pass by some scattering Houses on the Road. At 13’2. Langridg, 13’2. you pass through Langridg a small Village, and at 14’2. by some Hou∣ses on the Left call'd Bordean, Bordean, 14’2. and after by Prevet Church on the Right, come at 20’0. Bramdean, 20 Miles. to Bramdean another small Village; then by Henton Amner House, Cheriton and Chilcomb Churches on the Left, and Magdalen House on the Right, and some dis∣perst Houses on the Road, WINCHESTER, 29 M. are convey'd at 28’2. to the City of WINCHESTER; by the Britains, Caer-Gwent; and by the Romans, Venta Bulgarum; Seated on the Itchin; an antient City Built about 900 Years before Christ; hath been Consum'd twice by Fire; at present hath five Churches besides the Cathedral; It's Walls are a Mile and half in Circumference; is the Place where the Assizes are kept for the County, sends Burgesses to Parliament; is Dignify'd with the Title of Marquess, in the Person of the Right Honorable John Paulet Marquess of Winchester, &c. Hath two plentiful Markets weekly on Wednsdays and Saturdays, and a Fair on the First Monday in Lent. Backward Turnings to be avoided Between WINCHESTER and Midhurst. 1. 1’5. Short of Cheriton, the R. to Waltham. 2. 2 Furlongs beyond Cheriton the Right to Waltham. 3. 2 Furl. Beyond Bordean, the Left to Froxfield. 4. 2 Furlongs from Rogate the Left to Farnham. 5. Against Maiden Oak the Right acute. 6. At Trotton Bridg the Right acute. Between CHICHESTER and Guilford. 1. 5 Furlongs from CHICHESTER the Left to Petersfield. 2. 8 Furlongs from CHICHESTER the Left acute. 3. At the Entring Easborn the Right to Petworth. 4. A Furlong beyond Easborn the Left to Lippock. 5. 7 Furl. beyond Easborn the Left acute. 6. 9 Furlongs short of Leckford Bridg the Left acute. 7. At Leckford Bridg the Left acute. 8. Against Blackdown Beacon the Left acute 9. The Right and Left at the End of Chidingfold. 10. At the Foot of Katherine Hill the Left acute.
The Road from LONDON to DARBY. By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 122 Miles  furlongs viz.t From the Standard in Cornhil LONDON to Stonystratford in the Holy Head Road 33’ to Kings Grafton 4’.7. to Northampton 8’.7. to Brksworth 7’.0. to Haver: borough 10’.6. to Great Gle 8’.4. to Leicester 5’.5. to Mountsorrell 5’.4. to Loughborough 3’.1. to Kegworth 5’.1. to DARBY 10’.0.
The Road from London to Derby. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. by N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 110 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 98 M 4. The Dimensuration 122’4 From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Stony-Stretford 44 44 53’1 53’1 Kings-Grafton 04 48 04’7 58’0 Northampton 06 54 08’7 66’7 Bricksworth 05 59 07’0 73’7 Haverborough 07 66 10’6 84’5 Great Glenn 07 73 08’4 93’1 to Leicester 05 78 05’5 098’6 Montsorel 05 83 05’4 104’2 Loughborough 03 86 03’1 107’3 Kegworth 04 90 05’1 112’4 Derby. 08 98 10’0 122’4   98   122’4   Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordsh. Buckinghamsh. Northamptonsh. Leicestersh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and Derbysh. are the Counties past through; and the Coln, Lowsel, Owse, Nine, Welland, Sour and Trent, are the Principal Rivers Crost over; which in general is a bad deep Way, but very much recompenc'd by the reiterated good Towns and Places of Ac∣comodation you pass through. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 57’7. The forward in Old Stretford to COVENTRY. At 56’5. The Left at the End of Yadley Guben to Toceter. At 76’2. At the entring Lamport the Right to Oakham. At 78 Miles at the Entring Meadwel the R. to Haverborough a different Way. At 78’1. In Meadwel the Left to Haselbich. At 93’4. The Left acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 99’7. The Right to Newark. At 110’1. The Left acute. At 112’6. At the End of Kegworth the Left to Belten. At 112’7. The Right to Nottingham. At 113’5. The Left to Lockenton. At 118’3. The Left to Swarkston. FROM the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON, to Stony-Stretford, Stony-Stretford, N.W [as in LON∣DON to Holyhead, pag. 41.] Whence crossing 2 Stone-Bridges, the one of 5, the other of 8 Arches, over the River Owse; you at once enter Northamptonshire and Old Stretford, where omitting the forward Way to COVENTRY, &c. Old Stretford, 53’6. N. by W. you bear to the Right, leaving Goosegrave Church on the same Hand; and at 56’5. pass through Yadely Guben a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Yadley Guben, 56’5. Kings Grafton, 58 M. thence crossing a Brook and Rill you ascend an Hill, and at 58 Miles pass through Kings Grafton a small Village, and crossing a Vale seconded with a Descent, you have Stoke Park Lodg and Church on the Left, and passing over 2 Ascents, you have Road and Cottenhal Churches, and 2 Ponds on the Right; then crossing a Stone-Bridg of 2 Arches and Brook, you leave Colentrough on the Left, and Wotton, Hardenston and Queens Cross, all on the Right, and descend an Hill of 5 Furlongs. At 66’3. you cross St. Leonard's Bridg of Stone, of 2 Arches, Northampton, 66’7. and a Furlong farther another of 6 Arches over the Nine, and enter Northampton: A Place of great Antiquity, formerly larger than now it is; yet it at present contains 4 Parish-Churches within it's Demolisht Walls: It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Bailiffs, 4 Aldermen, 48 Common-Councel, &c. Sends Burgesses to Parliament; gives Title to the Right Honorable James Earl of Northampton; hath a good Free-School, and 2 Alms-Houses well Endow'd; is the Place where the County-Goal and Assizes are kept, and the Justices Sit, and hath 3 Markets Weekly, viz. Wedns∣days, Fridays and Saturdays, and 7 Fairs annually. Leaving Northampton, your Way is generally open, [70 Miles N. by E.] crossing a Brook and Vale at 68’2. pass over Kings Thorp Heath, and leave the Church on the Left, and by the Lady Banbrough's Park or Wilderness; cross 2 Brooks and Vales, and at 73’6. enter Bricksworth a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; Bricksworth, 73’7. then you
cross another Vale: Lamport, 76’3. N. b. W. At 76’3. pass through Lamport a small Village, and at 77 Miles cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook, and ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and pass by Sr. William Haslewood's House and Boulton Church on the Right; Meadwel, 78’1. Kelmarsh, 79’5. through Meadwel at 78’1. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and Kelmarsh at 79’5. Thence crossing 3 Rills, Oxendon, 82 Miles. [83’6. N.W. b. N.] Haverborough, 84’5. you leave Hardenworth Church on the Right, and come to Oxendon at 82 Miles, and leave the Church on the Left, and Brabrouch and Little Bowden on the Right; and at 84’4. over a Stone-bridg of 6 Arches cross the Welland, and at once enter Leicestershire and the Town of Haverborough: an Antient Town and hath a good Free-School; It enjoys a Market on Tuesdays, and a Fair on the 8th of October yearly. Leaving Haverborough, you pass by Foxen Church on the Left, and at 90’4. en∣ter Kibworth a long discontinued Village; Kibworth, 90’6. Great Glenn, 93’1. and crossing 2 Brooks by Burton Overy on the Right, come to Great Glenn at 93 Miles, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; Oadby, 95’5. then by Wixen 2 Spires on the Left, and Stouton on the Right, are brought at 95’3. to Oadbey a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent and some Accomo∣dation: Whence you pass by Evington and Humberstal on the Right, and Knighton on the Left, Leicester, 98’6. N. b. E. and arrive at Leicester at 98’5. which extends this Way 4 Furlongs on the Road, and more transverse: It is a Borough and Town-Corporate, and hath 5 Churches standing and one destroy'd; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, and 24 Aldermen, 48 Common-Councel, &c. It enjoys several Privileges, sends Burgesses to Parliament, &c. Is Dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester, &c. hath one Alms-House, 2 Hospitals, and a Free-School, with 3 Markets weekly, Wednsdays, Fridays and Saturdays, and 5 Fairs year∣ly, [vid. more in HEREFORD to Leicester, pag. 143.] From Leicester you pass by the Abby on the Left, and cross a Brook and Rill, and at 100’2. Belgrace, 100’2. pass through Belgrace a disperst Village; where at the End, over a Stone-Bridg of 7 Arches you cross the Sour; then ascending, you pass by Bustal, Trumerson, Wonleps, Syston, and Cosenton, all on the Right, and Rothly on the Left, and crossing a Stone-Bridg and Brook, ascend a small Hill, and at 104 Miles enter Montsorrel alias Monstrel or Mount-Soar-Hill, Montsorrel, 104’2. N. by W. of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomo∣dation, seated on the Sour, of Note formerly for it's Castle; It at present enjoys a Market on Mondays, and a Fair on St. Peter's Day. Hence at 105’3. you pass through Quon a Village, Quon, 105’3. in which, over a Stone-Bridg of 5 Arches you cross a Brook, and leave Burton upon Sour on the Right. At 107’1. Loughborough, 107’3. you enter Loughborough, Seated likewise on the Sour, a Town of 4 Furlongs Extent and very good Accomodation; is grac'd with fair Buildings and a large Church; hath a well Endow'd Free-School, a very good Market on Thurs∣days, and 2 Fairs yearly, the First of August and Second of November: Thence cross∣ing 3 small Brooks, by Stanford, Normenton, Ditchley, Hathern and Sutton, all on the Right, and Whatton on the Left, the River Owse accompanying you part of the Way on the Right, Kegworth, 112’4. W. by N. are convey'd at 112’2. to Kegworth a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; and after pass by Roteliff, Soley and Willen, on the Right, and Lokenton and Donenton, on the Left, and crossing a Stone-Bridg and Brook, come at 115’5. to Willen-Ferry over the Trent. Hence your Road is generally over Marsh-Ground, passing through Shadloe a small Village at 116’5. and by Asen on the Left, and Elverston on the Right, come at 119’5. to Alverston a small Village; and crossing a Wood-bridg and Brook, are brought at 121’7. Derby, 122’4. to Derby vulgo Darby, a large and well-built Borough-Town, containing 5 Parish-Churches; call'd by the Saxons, Deorby, and sometimes North∣forthig, from the River Derwent, on which it is Seated, q. d. Derwent-by: The Town drives a considerable Trade; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 9 Aldermen, 14 Brethren, and 14 Common-Councel, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is the Place where the Assizes for the County are kept; gives Title to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Derby, &c. hath 2 Hospitals well Endow'd, 3 Markets Weekly on Wednsdays, Fridays and Saturdays, and 7 Fairs yearly. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Derby the Right to Coventry. 2. 9 Furl. beyond Alverston the L. to Elverston 3. 4 Furlongs beyond the Trent, the Left to Soley. 4. 10 Furl. short of Kegworth the Left acute. 5. 2 Furlongs beyond Haverborough the Left to Little Bowden. 6. A Furlong beyond Queens Cross the Left to Hardenstone.
The Road from LONDON to FLAMBOVOVGH HEAD in Com̄ Ebor By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties. Cosmographer Containing 212 mile 6 Turlongs vizt. From the Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Stilton in the BARWICK Road. 69. 1. to PETERBOROW 7.1 to Market Deepin 10.6 to Born .6.4. to Morton. 2.3. to Sleeford .14.5. to LINCOLN 18 thence to Flambourough i plate the 2d. .84.2. otherwise 218 mile 4 Fngs thus From the Standard in Cornhill LONN to Temsford in ye. St. Neols road 52 to Eaton. 3.6 to Bugdon 5 7 to Stilton aforesaid. 13.3. thence to LINCOLN vt supra.
The Road from London to Flamborough In Yorkshire. Commencing at Stilton in the Barwick Road. And directing you the Way to Stilton by Tamesford. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 168 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 168 M. 4. The Dimensuration 212’6. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Stilton 58 058 69’1 069’1 PETERBOROUGH 05 063 07’1 076’2 Market-Deeping 08 071 10’6 087’0 Born 05 076 06’4 093’4 Morton 02 078 02’3 095’7 Sleaford 11 089 14’5 110’4 LINCOLN 14 103 18’0 128’4 Redbourn 15 118 19’0 147’4 Glamford-Bridges. 05 123 05’5 153’1 to Barton 8 131 10’1 163’2 Hull 5 136 06’4 169’6 Beverley 6 142 09’2 179’0 Beseck 5 147 07’0 186’0 Kilham 9 156 12’0 198’0 Burlington 6 162 07’4 205’4 Flamborough 4 166 05’0 210’4 Flamborough-Head 2 168 02’2 212’6 Midlesex, Hartfordsh. Cambridgsh. Huntingdonsh. Northamptonsh. Lincolnsh. and Yorksh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. are the Counties through which you pass; and the Lee, Granta, Owse, Nine, Welland, Witham, Ankam, Humber and Hull, are the principal Rivers crost over; which in ge∣neral is no very ill Road, and in every Place accomodated with good Towns for Entertainment. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting in two Plates, the First ending at LINCOLN, the Second at Flamborough; We begin with Plate the First: Wherein these forward Turnings are to be avoided. Between Tamesford and Stilton. At 52’2. The Right to St. Neots. 56’4. The Right to St. Neots. At 59’3. The Left to Southam. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 75’1. The Left to Stamford. Between Stilton and LINCOLN. At 69’2. The Left to Stamford. 82’7. The Right to Crowland. At 96’4. The Left acute. At 121’1. The Right acute. IN the First Part of the Road, viz. Tamesford, 52 Miles N. b. E. Eaton, 55’6. From LONDON to Tamesford and so to Eaton, you have the Account in the Road from LONDON to St. Neots, pag. 89. Whence at 57’4. over a Wooden-Bridg you cross a Branch of the Owse, [59’3. N. E.] and enter Bedfordshire, and after pass by Little Peckham and Doddington on the Right, and Southam on the Left, and crossing a Wood-bridg and Brook, come at 61’3. to Bugden a Town of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; Bugden, 61’5. where is a Seat of the Bishop of Lincoln: Which leaving, an indifferent straight Road, crossing 5 several Rills or Brooks, brings you at 67’7. to Aukingbury cum Weston, Aukingbury, 67’7. a small Vil∣lage, first leaving the Church on the Right. From Aukingbury, [69 Miles N] you ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and leaving Upton on the Left, come at 69 M. to a Descent of 3 Furlongs, and a Mile farther have a Place call'd Stone-Gate Hole on the Left, and a little beyond, Stone-Gate it self on the same Hand. Hence, you pass by St. Andrew's Chapel and Cunington on the Right, Saltry, Glat∣ton and Denton on the Left, and crossing a Stone-Bridg and Brook, come at 74’7. to Stilton, a good Thorough-fare Town, [as in LONDON to Barwick, pag. 9]
In the Road from Stilton to Flamborough. VVE have given you the Account to Stilton [in LONDON to Barwick, Stilton, N. E. b. N. pag. 9.] Where omitting the forward Way to Stamford, you bear to the Right, PETERBOROƲGH, 76’2. and come to the City of PETERBOROUGH, [as in LONDON to Boston, pag. 71.] Adding this, That it took it's Name from a stately Monastery Dedicated to St. Peter, Built by King Wolpher, circa Anno 633. which Monastery was to∣tally Destroy'd by the Danes, and Re-built by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, about the Year 960. with the Assistance of King Edgar, and Adulph the Kings Chancel∣lor: It was by K. H. 8. made a Bishoprick where he Founded a Chapter, consisting of a Dean, 6 Prebends, and an Arch-Deacon of Northampton; the Diocess contains the Counties of Northampton and Rutland. [77’4. N. N. W.] Leaving the City, you pass through Wal∣ton, Willington and Peakirk, [as in LONDON to Boston, pag. 71.] In Peakirk, Peakirk, 82’6. Narboro, 84’6. Market-Deeping, 87 m [89’2. N.] you omit the Road on the Right to Crowland, and bear to the Left, pass through Narboro a Village at 84’6. and come to Market-Deeping at 86’7. Seat∣ed on the Welland where it parts Northamptonshire from Lincolnshire: It's an indiffe∣rent good Town, and enjoys a Market on Thursdays. From Market-Deeping, you pass by Redum House, Langtost and Baston Churches on the Right, Stow and Wilthrop two small Villages on the Left, and at 90’1. over Ket Bridg of Stone cross Baston Drain, and 6 Furlongs farther, pass through Thurl∣bey a small Village, Bourn, 93’4. a straight Way bringing you at 93’2. to Born or Bourn, a large Town, of Note for being the Place where King Edmond was Crown'd, It enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Leaving Born, a straight Way brings you by Dike a Village on the Right, and Cathorp a Village on the Left, Morton, 95’7. at 95’6. to Morton, a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment: At the End whereof, you have Hauthorp a Village on the Left, and Hackinbey Church on the Right; then ascending and descending, you have Sr. John Rowley's House and Hasilby Church both on the Right; whence you cross 4 several Vales, leaving a Beacon on the Left, and in the last Vale, have Butter∣wick a small Village on the Right; hence you pass by Bellingbore and Horbling Churches, and Simpring a Village on the Right, Fokingham, Osburnbey, Aserbey and Willoughbey Churches all on the Left, crossing 2 or 3 Rills, and descending an Hill, are con∣vey'd at 110’1. Sleaford, 110’4. to Sleaford of 6 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; It is seat∣ed on a small River of the same Name, is a large, well-built, and well-inhabited Town, formerly strengthned with a Castle now Ruinous; It at present enjoys a very con∣siderable Market on Mondays, for Corn, Cattel, &c. From Sleaford, [116’4. N. N. W.] you pass by Hadingham a Village, Lisingham Church, Dunsby Hall, Branswele and Ashby Churches, all successively on the Right; your Way being ge∣nerally straight and Heathy, [126’3. N. b. E.] LINCOLN, 128’4 descending a small Hill, arrive at the Barr-Gate of the City of LINCOLN at 127’4. a Bishops-See, call'd by Ptolomy and Antonine, Lindum; by the Britains, Lindcoit; by Beda, Linde-Collina; by the Saxons, Lynd-Cyllan-Ceaster; and by the Normans, Nichol: It is seated on the Rivers Witham and Foss, which plea∣santly water it; formerly a Place of very great Account, for here King E. 3. Or∣dain'd his Staple for the Mart of Wool, Leather and Lead; this City hath suffered much, both by Fire, War and Earthquake, yet for all it's Misfortunes, is at pre∣sent a large, well-built, and well-inhabited City, the Diocess being the biggest in all England, both for Jurisdiction and Shires, numbring within it's Extent 1255 Parishes, whereof 577 are Impropriations; It hath 6 Arch-Deacons, viz. of Lincoln, Bedford, Buckingham, Huntingdon, Leicester and Stow: It's Cathedral or Minster is a fair and state∣ly Structure, so loftily elevated, that it may be seen Northward about 50 M. and South∣ward about 30 M. the City is Dignify'd with the Title of an Earldom in the Person of the Right Honorable Edward Fines Earl of Lincoln, &c. Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Record∣er, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen in Scarlet, 4 Chamberlains, &c. Is a City and County of it self, sends Burgesses to Parliament, and it's Market on Fridays is well furnisht with all sorts of Provisions. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. A Mile beyond LINCOLN the Right to Ancaster. 2. At the End of PETERBOROUGH the Right acute. Between Stilton and Temsford. 1. 6 Furlongs short of Aukingbury the Left acute. 2. 2 Furl. short of Eaton the Right to Bedford.
The Continuaton of the Road from LONDON to FIAMBRUGH, Com. By JOHN OGISBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 84. miles 2. furlongs vizt. From Lincoln to Redbourn 200. to Glamford-Bridges. 5.5. to Barton 20.2. to Hull .4. to Beverley 9.2 to Beseck 7.0. to Kilham 22 0 to Burlington  4 to Flamborough 5 0 or to Flambourough head. 2.2.
The Continuation of the Road From LONDON to Flamborough-Head in Yorkshire. PLATE. II & Last. Commencing at LINCOLN and Extending to Flamborough aforesaid. Containing 84 Miles 2 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 153’0. In Glamford the Right acute. At 180’2. In Musgrove the Left to Marl∣ton. At 192’6. The Left to Selingham. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 205’4. In Burlington the Left to Flambo∣rough a different Way. VVE brought you to LINCOLN in Plate the First; whence, LINCOLN, N. passing out at Newport Gate, a direct open Road leads you over a Heath, upon which, by a Beacon on the Left, you pass by certain Alms-Houses at 142 Miles; and leave Warton a small Village, a Wind-Mill, and Smitherby Church, Redbourn, 147’3. all on the Right, and crossing 2 Rills, enter Redbourn at 147’3. of about 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment. Thence, by a Wind-Mill on the Left, and crossing a Rill, you pass through Hibeistow, a Village at 149’1. and leave Newstrop Hall near 6 Furlongs on the Right, Hibiestow, 149’1. and a Wind-Mill 2 Furlongs on the Left, [151’6. N. E. b. E.] and Scaubit Church equidistant on the same Hand; and crossing 2 Rills, leave a Wind-Mill near the Road on the Left, and bearing to the Right, over a Wooden-Bridg cross the River Ankham, and 3 Furl. farther crossing a Brook, enter Glamford-Bridges, a Town of 5 Furl. Glamford-Bridges, 153 M. N. E. b. N. Extent and good Accomodation; enjoying a Market well furnish'd with Provisions on Thursdays. Thence, passing by Wrangby Church a Furlong on the Right, and so over a Com∣mon, where you leave a Wind-Mill near 6 Furlongs on the same Hand, at 155 Miles you enter a Lane, and leave another Wind-Mill, and about a Mile farther Elsom House, both about 2 Furlongs distance on the Right, and ascend near 3 Fur∣longs, on which is a Wind-Mill about 4 Furlongs on the Left, and Elsom Church 2 Furlongs on the Right; on the Top of the Hill you leave another Hill near 3 Furlongs on the same Hand, on which stands a Beacon, and so passing through a Moor or Common, you cross 2 small Vales, the Way being Moorish-Ground; then at 161’6. by a Beacon on the Right, where you descend near 6 Furlongs, and presently enter Barton, which lies most on the Right; Barton, 163’2. E. b. S. Its an indifferent good Town, Seated on the Humber, and hath the Benefit of a well-furnish'd Market on Saturdays. Leaving Barton, you pass over the Humber to Hull, by a Ferry, which River is here above six Miles over, and is Compos'd of the Rivers, Trent, which We have given you the Account of before, and the Owse or Your, which arising on Hu∣seat-Morvel Hill, near the Edg of the County, respecting Westmerland, passes by Mid∣lam, Masham, Rippon, Burrough-Brigs, YORK and Selbey, and then unites with the aforesaid Trent, receiving into it, 1st. the Semere, 2d. the Comer, 3d. the Swail, and therein the Barney, Ark, Holgat, Marsk, Risdale, Wisk, Codbeck, Willowbeck, 4th. the Nyd, and therewith the Kebeck; 5th. the Wharf, and therein the Wasbrook; 6th. the Derwent, and therewith the Harford, Rye, Dow, Rical, Hodgbeck, Seven and Costow; lastly, the Are, and therein the Calder, Dun, Rother and Went. Having crost the Humber, Hull, 169’6. N.N.W. you at once enter Yorkshire and the Town of Hull alias Kingston upon Hull, a very large, well-built and well-inhabited Borough and Town-Corporate, Built by King Edward the First, who Granted it large Immunities; It's Trade is hardly inferior to any in England, being furnisht with Shipping and all sorts of Commodities in great Plenty; It is exceeding well Fortify'd, in which is a continual Garison; It is a Town and County Incorporate of it self; sends Burgesses to Parliament; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. Gives Title to the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston
upon Hll, &c. And it's Market which is on Saturdays is well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions. From Hull, a direct Road conveys you by Newland, where you have several Wood-Bridges over Dikes, and at 175’5. you leave Thorn Church near 3 Furlongs on the Right, Beverley 179 M. and at 178’3. you enter Beverley of 9 Furlongs Extent, Seated on the River Hull; a large and well-built Town-Corporate, containing 2 Parish-Churches besides it's Minister; the Town is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, and hath 2 Markets weekly, on Thursdays and Saturdays. Leaving the Town at 179’4. you 4 Furlongs farther ascend 5 Furlongs, where you pass through Musgrove a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; Musgrove, 180’2. N. b. E. and presently descend near 8 Furlongs, at the Foot of which, crossing a Wood-Bridg (call'd Pump-Bridg) and Brook, Beckingfield, 182’2. 3 Furlongs farther you pass through Beckingfield another little Village; at the End whereof you cross a Rill, and at 183’6. leave Sr. John Hotham's Hall 2 Furlongs on the Right, and after cross two small Brooks, where you have a Mill on the Left; Beaseck, 186 M. at 185’6. you enter Beaseck of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Ac∣comodation. Thence you are accompany'd with a Brook near the Road on the Right, which you cross at 187’1. Wotton, 187’4. and pass through Wotton a Village; at 188 Miles you ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, call'd Swicker's Hill, and passing by Crancick and Heveden Churches on the Right, and Sunderlandwick a Village, and another scattering Village, both on the Left, and crossing two Brooks, leave Little Drifield Church near 3 Furlongs on the same Hand, and pass through another Village; thence by Northaton near 6 Fur∣longs on the Right, at 194’2. you ascend 5 Furlongs, and cross a large Vale, se∣conded by a Descent of 7 Furlongs, Kilham, 198 M. which brings you to the Entrance of Kilham at 197’7. of near 4 Furlongs Extent, seated in the Woulds, and enjoys a market on Thursdays. Hence, [200’2. E.N.E.] you presently ascend near 9 Furlongs, where you leave a Beacon and Church near 4 Furlongs on the Left, and cross a Vale, where you leave Burton Church 4 Furlongs on the Right; at 202 Miles you descend 3 Furlongs, and pass by Boyington Church about 4 Furlongs on the Left, and at 203’5. crossing a Brook, the Road inclines to the Left, and a Mile farther again to the Right, which brings you at 205 Miles to Burlington or Bridlington, of about 5 Furlongs Extent, Seated on a Creek of the Sea, where it hath a safe Harbor for Ships; It gives Title to the Right Honorable Richard Boyl Earl of Burlington and Cork, &c. is a Place of good Trade, and enjoys a well-furnish'd Market on Saturdays. Leaving the Town at 205’6. Bridlington-key, 207 M. you pass by a Wind-Mill 2 Furlongs on the Right, and a Water-Mill close on the same Hand, and enter Bridlington Key at 206’5. of about 5 Furlongs Extent, the Place where they Lade and Unlade their Goods, which is chiefly inhabited by Maritine People. Suerby, 209 M. Whence you have the Sea accompanying you on the Right till you enter Suerby, a Village of near 3 Furlongs Extent: Thence crossing a small Vale, Flamborough, 210’4. you pass through Flamborough at 210’4. a Village of 2 Fur∣longs Extent and some Entertainment; which leaving, you pass by a Pond near the Road on the Left; then ascending 2 Furlongs, a direct Road conveys you by the Light-House on Flamborough-Head at 212’5. Flamborough-Head, 212’5. a well known Place to Sea-Men. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At Bridlington Key the Left acute. 2. 2’4. Beyond Burlington the forward to Boyington. 3. 5 Furlongs beyond Glamford-Bridges the Right to Casetrop. 4. 2 Miles beyond Redbourn the Right to Braughton.
The Road from LONDON to KINGSLYN com. Norf. By JOHN OGILBY Esq. is Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 98. Miles 4. furl vizt. From the Standard in Cornh LONDON. — to Buckeridg in ye Barnick Rad 27. m. 4 furl thence to Barkway 8. to orlmere 7. m. 1. furl. to Cambridg 9.3 to Stretha 12.9. to EL.Y. 4.2. to Littleport .2 to Souther 6.3 to Downham 6.4. to Seechy 7.2. and to KINGS-LNN. 4.2.
The Road from London to Kings-Lyn In Norfolk. Commencing at Puckeridg in Hartfordsh. in the Barwick Road. 1. THe Point of Bearing N. b E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 81 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 80 M. 4. The Dimensuration 98’4. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Puckeridg 25 25 27’4 27’4 Barkway 07 32 08’0 35’4 Fowlmere 06 38 07’1 42’5 Cambridg 06 44 09’3 52’0 Stretham 10 54 12’5 64’5 ELY 03 57 04’2 68’7 to Littleport 04 61 05’2 74’1 Southery 05 66 06’3 80’4 Downham 05 71 06’4 87’0 Seeching 06 77 07’2 94’2 Kings-Lyn 03 80 04’2 98’4   80   98’4   Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Essex, Cambridgshire, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. and Norfolk are the Counties that In∣clude the Road, and the Lea, Mimer, Cam, Owse, and Helgay are the Principal Rivers crost over: Affording a very good way to Barkway, Quality of the Way. and thence to Cambridg and Lyn Indifferent, yet is every where well Accomodated with good Inns, &c. for Entertain∣ing Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 27’5. the left in Puckeridg to YORK. 37’4. in Barley, the Right acute. 54’0. the Right acute. 56’1. the Left acute. 59’7. the Left acute. At 71’3. the Right to the Meadows. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 74’1. the Left in Littleport. 79’3. the Left to Downham. 84’2. the Right to Stoke. 88’3. the Left acute. From the Standard in Cornhil LONDON to Puckeridg, Puckeridg N.E. We have Discourst in LON∣DON to Barwick pag. 9. From whence omitting the great Road on the Left, Leading to YORK and Barwick, at 28’2. you pass over Forebridg, and a Mile farther through a small Village, and 5 Furlongs beyond through another Village, then leaving Little Hor∣mead 4 Furlongs on the Right, at 31’3. Hare-street 31’4. N.N.E. come to Harestreet a Village extending most on the Left, and passing by Great Hormead on the Right 4 Furlongs; at 32’3. you leave Bingham House on the Left 3 Furlongs, then by Anstye on the Right, Withial and an old Chapel on the Left each distant about 4 Furlongs, at 35’4. Barkway 35’4. you pass through Barkway of 2 Furlongs Extent, formerly Enjoying a Market which was kept on Fridays. From Barkway descending and ascending you at 37’4. Barley 37’4. pass through Barley extending 2 Furlongs on the Left, having an Inn or two in it, descending at 38’2. for 2 Furlongs, thence an indifferent straight way for the most part Arable, leaving Haydon Church 4 Fur∣longs on the Right convey's you at 42’3. Fowlmere 42’5. to Fowlmere a scattering Village with an Inn or two, extending 4 Furlongs on the Road; whence prosecuting a way like the for∣mer, and at 47’6. passing by Hassem Mill on the Right, at 49’5. Trumpington 49’5. Cambridg 52 m. you go through Trum∣pington a small Village,, and at 51’4. enter Cambridg: By the Saxons Grantceaster and Grant-Brycge from its Fenny situation, by Antonine Camboritum, from the River Cam, Signify∣ing Crooked or Winding, in Latine Cantabrigia, suppos'd to have its Name from one Cantaber a Spaniard, who here setl'd the Seat of the Muses 375 years before the Birth of Christ, the Gospel being Preacht here about the Time of Hadrian the Emperor; it hath twice been Ruin'd, 1st. by the Saxons, (and after by one of their Kings Re-built again) then by the Danes it was quite laid Wast, not recovering Her self till the Normans became Masters of the Kingdom, when soon it came to be a Famous University; it is at present large well Built and well Inhabited: Containing 14 Parishes besides 16 Stately Colleges and Halls which are well Furnisht with Professors of all Arts and
Sciences, this and OXFORD being the only Universities in the Kingdom, it had formerly a strong and large Castle, now Ruinous; Its accounted a Town within a University, the Colleges and Halls being plac'd on the out-side, it Enjoys several Pri∣vileges, Sends 4 Burgesses to Parliament, 2 for the University and 2 for the Town: Is a Corporation Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. and has a well Furnisht Market on Sa∣turdays. From Cambridg you again pass through open way, at 54 Miles leaving Chesterton on the Right 3 Furlongs, Milton 56’1. [60 m. N. E.] and entring Milton at 56 M. of 3 Furlongs Extent; thence at 58 Miles you pass by 2 Wind-Mills on the Right, and on the same hand are Alms-Houses and Waterbeach Church distant about 3 Furlongs, [62’2. N.N.E.] at 60’2. you pass by Denny-Abbey on the Left, and at 60’7. by a small Village on the Right, there entring the Fenns; whence at 62’7. you cross the Ferry and enter the Isle of Ely; at 64’5. passing through Stretham a Market Town something scattering, Stretham 64’5. in Extent 4 Furlongs, you at 66’3. pass by a small Village on the Left, and at 68’5. enter the City of ELY: [68 m. E.] ELY 68’7. N. E. b N. By Leland Anguilaria, by the Saxons Elig, by the Britans Helig, as seated in a Fenny part of the County on the River Owse; of great Antiquity being built in the Time of Egbert King of the Northumbrians, at which time it Contain'd 600 Fami∣lies, is at present much Decay'd, yet still Enjoy's great Immunities: And is Govern'd by a Mayor, &c, and hath a well Furnisht Market on Saturdays, [vid. more Huntingdon to Ipswich pag. 145.] From ELY you pass by Newberry on the Right, Chetsham 70’6. Woodhouse 71’6. Littleport 74’1. and at 70’6. through Chetsham a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and a Mile farther by Woodhouse a small Village on the Left, whence after an ascent at 74 M. you enter Littleport, Enjoying formerly a Market now disus'd, yet affording good Accomodation to Travellers: Hence you pass on a high Bank and Causeway (the River Owse accompanying you on the Right, and some stragling Houses on the Left) till at 79’5. you Ferry over the foresaid Owse and en∣ter the County of Norfolk, Southery 80’4. Helgaye 83’3. and 5 Furlongs farther Southery in Extent 3 Furlongs. At 83’3. you pass through Helgaye a small Village, and 3 Furlongs farther over Helgaye Fluv. then by Snowes-Hall on the Right and Hardham Chapel on the Left, and through some Woods, [84’3. N. b W.] pass at 85’5. by Russen-Hall 2 Furlongs on the Right, and at 86 Miles by part of Denber on the Left, [86 m. N. b E.] Downham 87 m. leaving the Church on the Right, and 4 Furlongs farther by Crows-Hall on the Right, then at 87 M. you enter Downham seated on the Owse, Extending 2 Furlongs on the Road, and enjoying a good Market on Sa∣turdays being well provided for Reception of Travellers. Hence at 88 Miles you leave Wimbotsham on the Left 2 Furlongs, and at 89 Miles Stow on the Right one Furlong, and a quarter of a Mile farther the Hall, then by Wat∣lington Park on the Left, at 90’7. you pass by Houghton Chapel on the Right, and after by Watlington on the Left and Totnal on the Right, Seeching 94’2. enter Seechy or Seeching at 94 Miles of 3 Furlongs Extent, seated on a small River but Navigable; has a Market on Tuesdays, on which day once a Fortnight is vended many Fat Bullocks, for which it is much resorted unto. At 95’6. West-Winch 95’6. Hardwick 97 m. Lyn 98’4. you pass through West-Winch, and at 97 Miles through Hardwick, 7 Fur∣longs farther entring Lyn alias Lyn Regis, formerly Bishops-Lyn, by the Britans Llyn Sig∣nifying a Lake; Seated near the Mouth of the Owse, an ancient Borough-Town large well built and well Inhabited, Containing 3 Parish Churches, is Encompast with a Wall and deep Trench; enjoys several Imunities as sending Burgesses to Parliament: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. and hath 2 good Markets Weekly on Tuesdays and Saturdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. The Left in Hardwick to Swaffham. 2. The Right in Littleport. 3. 4 Furl. beyond ELY the Right, a different way to Cambridg. 4. In Milton the Right. 5. At the end of Trumpington the Right.
The Road from LONDON to MONTGOMERY NORTH WALES By IOHN OGILBY Esqr his Maties Cosmographer Containing 158 miles 5 furlongs (viz) From the Standard in Cornhill London to the 4 Shire Stone in the Aberistwith road. 81.3. to Campd  6.1. to Evesholme 7.7. to the Citty of WORCESTER. 14.2. to the Hundred house. 9.0. to Tenbury, 10.0. to Ludlow. 7.5. to Bishops Castle 14. & to Montgomery. 8.3.
The Road from London to Montgomery, In North-Wales. Commencing at the 4 Shire-Stone in Glocestershire, in the Aberistwith Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. by W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 144 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 122 M. 4. The Dimensuration 158’5 From LONDON Comp. Measure. to the 4 Shire-Stone 66 66 66 81’3 081’3 Campden 05 71 06’1 087’4 Evesholm 06 77 07’7 095’3 WORCESTER 10 87 14’2 109’5 ye Hundred-house 07 94 09’0 118’5 to Tenbury 08 102 10’0 128’5 Ludlow 05 107 07’5 136’2 Bishops-Castle 10 117 14’0 150’2 Montgomery 05 122 08’3 158’5   122   158’5   Midlesex, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordsh. Warwicksh. Glocestersh. Worcestersh. Shropsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. and Montgomerysh. include the whole Road; and the Brent, Coln, Bure, Charwel, Even∣lode, Avon, Piddle, Stonebow, Rea, Corve and Oney, are the principal Rivers crost over; affording a good Road to Wickham, not so pleasant to the 4 Shire-stone, Quality of the Way. and from thence very bad to WORCESTER, then to Ludlow indifferent, and better to Bishops-Castle, after to Montgomery bad again, yet it is every where provided with fitting Entertainment for Travellers. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 81’3. The left forward to Morton Inmarsh At 88’0. The Right to Stratford. At 95’6. The forward to Aulcester. At 100’6. The forward in Piddle to Pershore At 138’0. The Right to Gunsloe. At 141’0. In Onibery, the R. to Shrewsbury. At 143’3. The Left acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 146’0. The Right to Shrewsbury. At 147’4. The Left acute. At 150’2. The Left to Clun at the End of Bishops Castle. At 152’2. The Left to Newton. FROM LONDON to the 4 Shire-stone We have discours'd in LONDON. 4 Shire-Stone. N. W. b N. to Aberistwith, pag. 3. from whence omitting the forward Way on the Left through a Gate leading to Morton Inmarsh, Pershore, &c. you keep the Hedg on the Left, and at 82’6. cross the Foss-way, and 2 Furlongs farther pass through Darnton a small Village; and at 84 Miles descend 3 Furlongs, Darnton 83 m. Broad Campden 86’4. crossing the Evenlode at 84’7. and entring open Arable; then at 86’4. you pass through Broad Campden a small Village, and 6 Furlongs farther enter Campden vulgo Camden, Campden 87’4. W.bN. a large though poor Town, numbring above 200 Houses, is Dignify'd with giving Title to the Right Honorable Baptist Noel Viscount Campden, and is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 12 upper and 12 inferior Burgesses; hath a Market on Wednsdays, and 2 Fairs an∣nually, [vid. more SALISBURY to Campden pag. 169.] From Campden ascending 3 Furlongs, your Way open call'd Broadway Hills, con∣veys you at 89’1. to a Descent of 9 Furlongs, leaving St. Berry on the Right, Willerstey 90’4. [93 m. W. N. W.] and entring Willersley at 90’3. of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence you pass through open Way for the most part, entring Worcestershire at 93’2. and Bengworth at 94’7. of 2 Furlongs Extent, where over a Stone-bridg of 7 Arches you cross the Avon and enter Evesholm vulgo Esam, a Town Corporate esteem'd the Second of the County, Evesholme 95’4. of Note formerly for a strong Castle (built by Egwin with the Assistance of King Kenred Son to Wolpher King of the Mercians) which is now converted to a Church call'd Bengworth; a large and well-built Town numbring 3 Parish-Churches; sends Bur∣gesles to Parliament; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 4 Justices and 15 Common-Councel; has a very good Market on Mundays, and 3 Fairs yearly. From Evesholm you pass by Colknave Hill on the Right, and at 99’1. leave Fladbury
Church on the Left 3 Furlongs, Piddle 100’6. [104’1. N. N. W.] [105’4. W. N. W.] entring Piddle at 100’5. of 2 Furlong Extent, and good Accomodation; and at the end cross the Piddle, then at 102’6. over a Stone∣bridg of 2 Arches, you cross the River Stone-Bow, and at 105 Miles leave Oversloe Wind-Mill on the Left, Spechley 106’2. W. then at 106’2. you pass through Spechley a Village affording good Entertainment, wherein is the Lord Berkley's House on the Left; thence at 107’1. you leave Spechley-Green on the Right, Spechley-Green 107’1. [108 m. W. N. W.] WORCESTER 109’5 at 108 Miles uniting with the LONDON Road from Pershore, and 7 Furl. farther you enter the Suburbs of WORCESTER, a City every way Eminent, whereof having Discourst already, We shall only add that it was built by the Romans for their security against the Britans, Enjoying great Privileges, and Immunities by the several Charters granted them by the Kings of England, even before the Conquest both Danes and Saxons as high as Hengist and Horsa; it has been a Plentiful sharer in Calamities and Shocks of ill Fortune, Fir'd and most of its Inhabitants slain by Hardi-Canute the Dane Anno 1041. Being Re-built and Peopled again Anno 1113. it suffer'd extreamly by sudden Conflagration, together with the Castle and Cathedral Church, and twice again burnt in the Civil Wars by King Stephen, whereby it lay almost waste, scarce hoping a Recovery, notwithstanding it arose Gradually to a far greater Lustre; Her Buildings rais'd more stately, especi∣ally the Cathedral Dedicated to Christ and the Blessed Virgin, in whose Quire are several stately Monuments, as that of King John, Arthur Prince of Wales, &c. From WORCESTER over the Bridg you leave the forward way through St. [110’7. N. N. W.] Johns and bear to the Right, and passing by several scattering Houses on the Road, at 112 Miles you leave Hallow Park on the Right, Hallow 112’3. and a little farther pass through a Village of the same Name, leaving at 115 Miles Grunley Church on your Right 3 Furlongs, whence by Reiterated Houses on the Road and a Pond on the Left; at 117’7. you pass by Witley Church and Mr. Cooley's House on the Left, and at 118’5. by the Hundred House on the Right a Noted Inn of good Accomodation. Hundred-house 118’5 [118’7. W. b N.] Stockton 121’2. At 121’2. you pass through Stockton a small Village, and 122’6. through another scattering Village, a Mile farther by Lyndridg Church on the Right and after by Estham on the Left, then at 125’4. passing by 2 or 3 good Inns of Accomodation; over Newnham's Bridg of Wood you cross the River Rea, Newnham's-Bridg 125’4. which rising in Shropshire here falls into the Temd, which River accompany's you on the Left to Ludlow, then at 127’2. you enter Shropshire; Tenbury 128’5. [128’6. W. S. W.] at 128’5. pass by Tenbury 2 Furlongs on the Left, which is sea∣ted on the Temd, and has a good Market on Tuesdays; then leaving Burford on the Left you cross the Ledwich, [131’2. N.W.] Ludlow 136’2. at 130’2. a small Brook, whence little occurs, but passing by several scattering Houses on the Road, till at 136’1. you enter Ludlow. [for which vid. BRISTOL to CHESTER pag. 113.] From Ludlow crossing the Corve, an indifferent straight way, by Stanton-Lacye Church on the Right 6 Furlongs, [138 m. N.W. b W.] and Bromfeild on the Left 4 Furlongs, brings you at 141 Miles to Onibury a small Village; Ombury 141 m. Newton 143’2. [144’7. W. b N.] Barford's Yate 146’2 at 142’6. you leave Stoake Church, Castle and Park on the Left, and 4 Furlongs farther pass through Newton a little Village; whence your way is much Up-Hill and Down-Hill, passing through Barfords-Gate a small Village in a Valley, at 146’2. whence by Edgton Church on the Right, at 150’1. you come to Bishops-Castle most on the Right, Bishops-Castle 150’2. [152’2. N. W. b N.] which though not large, Enjoy's several Privileges; sends Burgesses to Parliament, &c. Is Govern'd by a Bailiff, and has a good Market on Fridays well frequented by the Welch; at 152’2. a large ascent brings you to the Bishops-Mott a very Noted place, being a small round Hill or Knoll on the Right where you en∣ter Montgomerysh. hence by several stragling Houses on the Road, and 2 repeated descents by Red-house an Inn on the Right, and at 158 Miles the Lord Herbert's Park on the same hand, 2 Furlongs farther you enter Montgomery. [for the account of which vid. GLOCE∣STER to Montgomery pag. 141.] Montgomery 158’5. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Montgomery, the Left to Bridgnorth. 2. At the Bishops-Mott, the Right to Clun. 3. 2 Furl. beyond Ludlow, the Left to Bridg∣north. 4. Against Tenbury, the Left to Bewdley. 5. A Furlong beyond Newnham's Bridg, the Right to the Ferry. 6. 5 Furlongs short of Stoak, the Right for∣ward. 7. 1 M. 6 F. beyond Witley, the Right to Co∣theridg. 8. A Mile beyond WORCESTER, the Left to Pershore. 9. 5 Furlongs beyond Spechley, the Left to Naunton.
The Road from LONDON to S.t Neotts in Com̄ Hunt̄. Continued to Oakeham in Com̄. Rutland. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosinographer. Containing 96 miles 2 for long viz.t From the standard in Cornhill LONDON to Barnet in the Holy head Road 11.’7. to Hatfeild 8.’4. to Stevenage 11.’4. to Baldock 6.’1. to Biggles wad 7’7. to Temsford 6.’2. to St. Neotts 5.’2. to Catworth 9.’5. to Lyford 7. m 6. to Harrings worth 12.’6. to Cakeham 8 m 6.
The Road from London to St. Neots In Huntingdonshire. Continued to Oakham in Rutland. Commencing at Barnet in Hartfordshire in the Holyhead Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. N. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 80 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 67 M. 4. The Dimensuration 96’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Barnet 10 10 11’7 11’7 Hatfield 07 17 08’4 20’3 Stevenage 08 25 11’4 31’7 Baldock 04 29 06’1 38’0 Biggleswade 05 34 07’7 45’7 Temsford 04 38 06’2 52’1 Eaton by St. Neots 03 41 03’7 56’0 Catworth 07 48 11’0 67’0 Lyford 05 53 07’6 74’6 Harringsworth 08 61 12’6 87’4 Oakham 06 67 08’6 96’2   67   96’2   Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordsh. Huntingdonsh. Northamptonsh. and Rutlandsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. are the Counties through which you pass; and the Lea, Owse, Nine and Welland the princi∣pal Rivers crost over; the first part of the Road being reasonable good Way, but Baldock Lane is notorious for its badness, neither is the succeeding part of it at all commendable; yet is it to St. Neots a well-frequented Road by Carriers, &c. who from Lincolnshire often travel This, and omit the great Northern Road. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 12’4. The Left forward to St. Albans. At 15’5. The Left forward to St. Albans. At 22’2. The Left to Dunstable. At 25’5. The Left to Hitching. At 38’0. The Right in Baldock. At 46’2. The Left forward at the End of Biggleswade. At 52’3. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The Right forward the great Road to St. Neots. At 57’1. The Right to Stilton in the Barwick Road. At 60’4. The Left in Great Stoughton to Bed∣ford, &c. At 77’4. The Right forward to Oundle. FROM LONDON to Barnet We discourst in the Road to Holyhead, pag. 41. Barnet, N. E. by N. [16’1. N. N. W.] whence crossing a Corner of Midlesex and leaving the foresaid Road to Holy∣head on the Left, you pass over the Common, re-enter Hartfordshire, and at 17’5. by Bell-bar, at 18 Miles by Michel-bar, and at 18’7. by Hatfield Wood-gate all on the Left, you pass by Hatfield Park the Earl of Salisbury's on the same Hand, Hatfield, 20’3. [20’4. N. N. E.] and at 20 Miles enter Hatfield extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, with a Market on Thursdays, and a Fair on the 23d. of July. From Hatfield you descend a small Hill at the Foot of which you cross the Lea, Wellen, 25’6. [27’6. N.] whence your Way is Hilly and something Woody, entring Wellen at 25’5. of 2 Fur∣longs Extent: From 26’2. Woodhal Park accompanies you on the Left a Mile, where ascending and descending you pass through Woolmer Green a Village of 2 Furlongs, Woolmer Green, 27’7. Broadwater, 30 Miles N. N. W. Stevenage, 31’7. and your Road still Hilly brings you at 30 Miles to Broad-water a small Village, and at 31’5. to Stevenage of 3 Furlongs Extent, consisting in several good Inns, &c. for Accommodation, enjoying formerly a Market on Fridays; and still a Fair on the 17th. of July. Hence a Woody Way conveys you to Gravely at 33’5. in Extent 2 Furlongs, Graveley, 33’6. N. b. E. Baldock, 38 Miles. N. W. by N. be∣yond which repeated Ascents and Descents lead you at 37’4. to Baldock extending 5 Furlongs on the Road, driving a great Trade in Mault, having a Market on Thursdays and 3 Fairs annually, the 24th. of February, the 23d. of July, and the 31th. of November.
Presently beyond the Town you come into Baldock Lane a deep and ill Way con∣tinuing even to Biggleswade, at the entrance into which passing by Norton and Rad∣wel on the Left, in the Bottom beyond the first Hill you enter Bedfordshire at 39’4. then over 2 other Hills leaving Stotfold, Astwick and Langford Churches on the Left and Edworth on the Right, Biggleswade, 45’7. [46’2. N. by W.] you enter Biggleswade at 45’4. in length 5 Furlongs, seated near the Ivel a Branch of the Owse, has a well-furnish'd Market on Wedns∣days, and 4 Fairs yearly, Whitsun-Monday, the Monday after Low-Sunday, the 23d. of October, and the 1st. of November. At 47’1. you pass through Nether Calcot a small Village, and at 48’5. by Bech∣ing-Cross 3 or 4 Houses on the Left, and Sandy on the Right; at 49’1. over a woo∣den Bridg cross a small Brook, Terford, 49’5. and enter Yerford of 5 Furlongs Extent with several Inns of Accomodation. At 51’6. Temsford, 52’1. an open Way brings you to Tamesford or Temsford of 3 Furlongs Ex∣tent, seated near the Confluence of the Ivel and Owse, full of good Inns for Enter∣tainment, and of Note formerly for having a Castle, and being a Station of the Danes; 2 Furlongs beyond which (the direct Way to St. Neots proceeding forward) you ford over the Owse, and leave Rokesdon Church on the Left; and at 54’3. through a small Village come at 55’4. to a Stone-Bridg over a Brook where you enter Eaton of 6 Furlongs Extent, Eaton, 56 Miles. a good Thorough-fare, and seated on the Banks of the Owse, which hence passes to St. Neots near a Mile distant, so call'd from Neotus a Monk of Glastonbury, a large and well-built Town with a good Market on Thursdays, and 4 Fairs annually. At 57’1. [57’1. N.W. by N.] [58’5. W.N.W.] the Road to Bugden and so into the great Road to YORK, &c. proceed∣ing forward you fall in with a well-beaten Road from St. Neots, and bearing to the Left at 58’3. Great Stoughton, 60’4. N.N.W. enter Huntingdonshire, and Great Stoughton at 60’3. of 2 Furlongs Ex∣tent, where the Road to Bedford, &c. branching out on the Left, you bear to the Right, and at 65’5. leave Kimbolton on the Left, a small Market-town, the Castle being the Seat of the Earl of Manchester; whence an open Way for the most Part Arable, Catworth, 67 Miles. Brynton, 68’6. brings you at 66’6. to Great Catworth of 2 Furlongs Extent, and at 68’5. to Brynton a Village of 2 Furlongs, entring Northamptonshire at 70’2. At 51’6. Clapton, 71’6. Lyford, 74’6. you pass through Clapton a scattering Village, into which a small Wood introduces you; whence an open Way brings you to Lyford a small Village at 74’5. at the End of which over a Stone-bridg you cross the Nine, Benyfiold, 79 M. W. N. W passing between Ay and Pilkington, and by 2 repeated Descents at 79 Miles pass through Benyfield of 2 Furlongs Extent, Dean Thorp, 82’1. [83 Miles W.] Dean, 83’4. [83’7. N.N.W.] and through Dean Thorp at 82’1. entring Dean at 83 Miles ex∣tending 2 Furlongs on the Road, and Adorn'd with a fair Seat and usual Resi∣dence of the Earl of Cardigan's. At 84’2. you descend 2 Furlongs, and through Part of Rokingham Forest, lying principally on the Left, by some Stone-quarries on the Right, and Laxton on the same Hand; Harringsworth, 87’4. [87’7. W.] you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 87’3. enter Harringsworth of 2 Furlongs Extent, affording good Accommodation; a Furlong beyond which over a Stone∣bridg of 3 Arches you cross the Welland and enter Rutlandshire. Hence ascending and descending by Seyton Church on the Left, Glayston, 90 Miles. [91’1. N.N.W.] at 90 Miles you pass through Glayston a small Village, whence your Road continuing Hilly and ge∣nerally open, by Preston on the Left, and Wing, Manton and Egleton successively at some distance on the Right; Oakham, 96’2. at 96 Miles you enter Oakham, the Shire-town, in∣different large, having a good Market on Saturdays and 3 Fairs yearly, March the 4th. April the 25th. and August the 29th. [as in LONDON to Oakham, pag. 93.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furlongs beyond Dean, the Left to Oundle. 2. At the entring Dean Thorp, the Right to Bedford. 3. In Benyfield the Right to Brigstock. 4. 1’5. Beyond Benyfield the Right. 5. At the end of Brynton the Right acute. 6. 1’3. Beyond Tamesford the Left to Sandy. 7. At the End of Baldock the Left to Weston. 8. In Broadwater the Left to Hartford.
The Road from LONDON to NORWICH in NORFOLK By JOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographr Containing 108 mile 7 Furlongs vizt. From the Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Puckeridge in the BARWICK Road. 27. mile 4. furl. to Barkway. 8. m. to Wittlesford-bridge. to. 4. to New market. 14.5. to Berton mills. 8.3. to Thetford. 10.5. to Larlingford. 8. to Attle borough. 6.m. to Windham. 6.1. and to the City of NORWICH. 9.1.
The Road from London to Norwich, Commencing at Puckeridg in the Barwick Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. E. by N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 88 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 90 M. 4. The Dimensuration 108’7. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Puckeridg 25 25 27’4 27’4 Barkway 07 32 08’0 35’4 Wittlesford Bridg 10 42 10’4 46’0 New-Market 12 54 14’5 60’5 Berton Mills 07 61 08’3 69’0 to Thetford 09 70 10’5 079’5 Larlingford 06 76 08’0 087’5 Attleborough 04 80 06’0 093’5 Windham 05 85 06’1 099’6 NORWICH 05 90 09’1 108’7 Midlesex, Hartfordsh. Essex, Cambridgsh. Suffolk and Norfolk contain the Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. and the Lea, Mimer, Cam or Granta, The quality of the Way. Owse parva and Yare are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general a good Way, especially in Norfolk, with a succes∣sion of good Towns affording suitable Entertainment. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 27’5. At the End of Puckeridg the Left to YORK, Barwick, &c. At 35’6. At the End of Barkway the Left to Royston, &c. At 38’6. At the Entrance into Essex the Left to Cambridg. At 62’4. The Right to Bury. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 69’1. At Berton Mills the left to Brandon. At 79’5. In Thetford the Left forward. At 87’0. The Left acute. At 99’5. In Windham the Left. At 104’1. The Right forward. FROM LONDON to Puckeridg We measure 27’4. Puckeridg, N.E. Harestreet, 31’4. Barkway, 35’4. Barlee, 38 Miles. which We have Illustra∣ted in the Road from LONDON to Barwick, pag. 9. whence through Hare∣street at 31’4. Barkway at 35’4. and Barlee at 38 Miles, as in LONDON to Kings-Lyn, pag. 85. omitting the acute or forward Way on the Left at 38’6. to Cambridg, ELY, &c. you enter Essex, and after a small Ascent at 40’4. pass between Ha∣donbury Farm and Hadonbury House, and enter Cambridgshire at 41’5. Hence a small Ascent of 2 Furlongs by a Watch-house on the Left, your Way direct, open and Heathy, Wittlesford Bridg, 46 M. passing between Wittlesford and Duxworth each 4 Furlongs distant, brings you at 46 Miles to Wittlesford Bridg where are 3 or 4 Houses, and where crossing the Cam or Grant, and leaving Sawsten, Pampworth and Badburnham Churches on the Left, Hinkston and Abbington on the Right, over a small Hill and an easie Ascent at 49’4. of 2 Furlongs; you enter New-Market Heath at 50’2. New-Market 60’5. con∣tinuing to New-Market, a Place much frequented for the Conveniency of the Ground for Horse-Races, especially during His Majesty's Residence at New-Market. At 55’3. you pass by a white Post on the Left, and about 57’ miles through fur∣zie Ground call'd Hare-Park; at 57’6 you ascend easily for 3 Furlongs, and at 58’6. cross a great Ditch vulgarly call'd the Devil's Ditch, the ancient Limits of the East Angle and Mercian Kingdoms: then at 60 Miles by the Race-House on the Left; 2 Furlongs farther you enter New-Market, a Town not large but well-built, extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, but more transverse; Honor'd with a House of His Ma∣jesty's; contains 2 Parish-Churches, One in Cambridgshire, the Other in Suffolk, af∣fords very good Entertainment, and is much resorted to by the Gentry. At 61’7. you come to a long green Bank crossing your Road where you are actually in Suffolk, extending Westward towards Ixning a Mile distant, retaining in Sound somewhat of the ancient Iceni: At 62’5. you descend a small Hill, and leav∣ing Kennet at 65’2. almost contiguous on the Right, but situate in Cambridgshire, [64’2. N. N. E.] a very small Corner whereof you here cross; at the succeeding Brook 3 Furlongs be∣yond re-enter Suffolk, whence by Red-House on the Left, and a Lodg on the Right
you pass over a Warren, and leaving Badlingham on the Left 6 Furlongs, and Herings∣wel on the Right 2 Furlongs, [68’1. N. E. by E.] Berton Mills 69. M. over a small Hill and through open Arable, at 69 Miles come to Berton-Mills a Village so call'd, seated on a Rivulet which Rising near Bury passes by Mildnal or Mildenhal, a good Market-Town a Mile below this Place. Here the Road to Brandon Issues out on the Left, whence over a Heath prose∣cuting a straight Way by several small Ascents and Descents at 76’1. leaving Elden Church 2 Furlongs on the Right: At 79’3. you cross Owse parva, and at once en∣ter the County of Norfolk and Town of Thetford, Thetford, 79’5. E.b.N. extending 4 Furlongs on the Road; by the Saxons Theotford, from its Situation on the River Thet; by the La∣tines Sitomagus; an antient Town being in times past an Episcopal See, is at pre∣sent a large Borough-Town, Electing Parliament Men, of Note for its Company of Musicioners, and hath a good Market on Saturdays. At 81’1. [81’1. N. E.] you leave Lilverston Church on the Right 3 Furlongs, and at 84’5. pass by a Stone-Cross, and a Mile farther by Roudham Church and Hall on the Right 4 Furlongs; [87 Miles, E. N. E.] open Arable conveying you at 87’3. to Larlingford of 2 Furlongs Ex∣tent, Larlingford, 87’5. a quarter of a Mile farther coming to Larlingford Bridg over a Branch of the little Owse; whence through open Arable at 89’3. passing by a Beacon on the Right 2 Furlongs, and at 90’4. Harpham a little distance on the Right; a Mile farther you come to Frettle-Bridg over a small Brook, a straight Way conveying you thence at 93’3. Attleborough, 93’5. N. E. to Attleborough of 4 Furlongs Extent, having a good Market on Thursdays for fat Bullocks and Sheep, &c. At 94’3. you leave Attleborough Hall on the Left, and at 94’7. Bunwel Church on the Right 4 Furlongs, crossing Attleborough Mere at 95’1. whence leaving Sutton-Morley Church on the Left 6 Furlongs, and passing over Sutton Common you enter on Windham Causeway; 3 Furlongs farther passing by Windham Hall on the Left 2 Furlongs; Windham, 99’6. E. b. N. at 99’3. arriving at Wimundham alias Windham extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, seated in a Bottom, of Note for the Interment of the Albines Earls of A∣rundel, and a great Rebellion Ann. 3. Edw. 6. Headed by Robert Ket a Tanner of this Place; the Trade of the Town is in making Stockings and some Wooden Ware, enjoying a good Market on Fridays for Corn, &c. At 100’6. you cross Mile-bridg being so much distant from Windham, and pass over Hetherset Common extending even from Windham to Hetherset, Hetherset, 103’4. and at 103’2. leaving Woodhal on the Left, enter Hetherset of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence at 104’2. a Wood accompanying you on the Right, Cringleford, 106’1. Eaton, 106’5. conveys you at 106 Miles to Cringleford a small Village; and at 106’5. to Eaton another small Village, between which and Cringleford at the Stone-bridg over the Rill there, you enter the County of the City of NORWICH; whence a straight Way carries you at 108’3. to St. Stephen's Gate where you enter the City of NORWICH. A City of great Eminency and Antiquity, NORWICH, 1087. A. S. Nordhwich, i. e. Septentrionalis Sinus, from its Northern Situation; in the Time of the Heptarchy it was the Seat of the East-Angles; and though it has been no common Sharer in publick Calamities, either of Fire, Sword, Famine or Pestilence, by which last 57’104 Persons are reported to have perish'd Anno 1348 between July and January, yet is it even at present a large, Populous and well-frequented City, commodiously seated on the River Hierus or Yare, dividing and yet almost encompassing it; it extends above a Mile in Length, and near as much in bredth, containing within it many fair Orchards and Gardens, rendring it very beautiful; is encompast with a Wall, giving Entrance by 12 Gates, accounts 32 Parish-Churches, whereof a far smaller Number serves the present Use; its chief Buildings are the Cathedral, the Bishop's and D. of Norfolks Palace, &c. Is a City and County Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. Elects Parliament Men, is an Episcopal See whose Diocess contains the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and therein 1121 Pa∣rishes; Honor'd with the Title of an Earldom in the Person of the Right Honorable Henry Howard Earl Marshal of England; has 3 Markets weekly Wednsdays, Fridays and Sa∣turdays, and enjoys a great Trade for Stuffs and other Manufactures. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of NORWICH the right acute to Ipswich. 2. 4 Furl. beyond Windham the Left acute. 3. At the End of Attleborough the Left to Bucknam. 4. 12 Furl. beyond Frettle-bridg the Left to Bury. 5. At the end of Thetford the Left to Burly. 6. At Burnbridg the Left to Bishops Stratford
The Road from LONDON to OAKEHAM in Com. Rutland Continued to Richmond in Yorkshire By IOHN OGILBY Esq:r His Ma:ties Cosmographr Containing. 26 2. mile. 2. furl: viz.t From ye. Standard in Cornhill LONDON to S.t Allbans in the Holyhead Road. 21.5. to Luton S.m. to Selsoe 9. m. to BEDFORD. 8.7. to Chellington 9. to Wellingborough 9.1 to Kettering 7.1 to Rokingham 10.2 to Vppingham 4.6. and to Oakeham. 6.2. thence to Barnsley in Plate the 2d. 81. and to Richmond in Plate the 3.d 87.
The Road from London to Oakham In Rutland. Extended to Richmond in Yorkshire. Commencing at St. Albans in the Holyhead Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. by W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 193 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 200 M. 4. The Dimensuration 262’2. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to St. Albans. 20 020 21’5 021’5 Luton 08 028 08’0 029’5 Selsoe 06 034 09’0 038’5 Bedford 06 040 08’7 047’4 Chellington 06 046 09’0 056’4 Wellinborough 06 052 09’1 065’5 Kettering 05 057 07’1 072’6 Rokingham 08 065 10’2 083’0 Uppingham 04 069 04’6 087’6 Oakham 05 074 06’2 094’0 Milton-Mowbray 08 082 10’4 104’4 Plum-tree 10 092 12’6 117’2 Nottingham 04 096 05’2 122’4 Papplewick 06 102 07’5 130’1 to Mansfield 04 106 06’1 136’2 Clown 09 115 11’3 147’5 Aughton 08 123 09’3 157’0 Rotheram 03 126 04’4 161’4 Wombwel 06 132 08’6 170’2 Barnesly 04 136 04’7 175’1 Almondbury 11 147 14’7 190’0 Hallifax 07 154 09’2 199’2 Kighley 09 163 12’6 212’0 Skipton 07 170 09’6 221’6 Cuniston 09 179 12’1 233’7 Carlton 09 188 13’1 247’0 Midlam 04 192 05’0 252’0 Richmond 08 200 10’2 262’2 Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordsh. Northamptonsh. Rutlandsh. Leicestersh. Nottinghamsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Derbysh. and Yorksh. are the Counties past through; and the Owse, Nine, Welland, Ey, Wadeland, Wreak, Trent, Lyne, Meden, Gunno, Rother, Calder, Are, Wharf, Cover, Your, and Swail, are the Principal Rivers crost over; which in general is no good Road, yet is much recompenc'd by the good Towns and Places of Accomodation you meet with. THUS much in general for the whole Road which consisting in 3 Plates, the 1st. ending at Oakham in Rutland; the 2d. at Barnsley, and the 3d. at Richmond in Yorkshire: We begin with Plate the First: Wherein these Forward Turnings are to be avoided. At the End of St. Albans the Right to Hitch∣ing. At 25’2. The Left to Redbourn. At 37’2. The Left acute. At 41’5. The Left to Horton. At 42’0. The Right to Haimes. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 53’3. The Left to Steventon. At 65’5. The Left to Northampton. At 66’0. The Right acute. At 82’5. The Left acute. FRom the Standard in Cornhil, LONDON to St. Albans, [as in the Holyhead Road, pag. St. Albans, N. W. 41.] Whence, leaving the Town at 22’1. [29 Miles, N.] and passing by Harding alias Harpenden at 25’2. a Village almost contiguous on the Left, come at 28’2. to a little Ascent, which 3 Furlongs farther is seconded with a like Descent, at the Bottom whereof you enter Bed∣fordshire, and 5 Furlongs farther Luton of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, Luton, 29’5. en∣joying a Market on Mondays for Corn, &c. and one Fair yearly on the 15th of August, which is well frequented. At the End of Luton you cross a Brook, and pass by a Gallows, and Stretly Church on the Left; thence a direct Road conveys you over Luton Down (where you cross the Foss-Way) to a Descent of 4 Furlongs, at the Bottom whereof leaving the Down, [37 M. N.E. by N.] Barton Clay, 37’5. Selsoe, 38’5. you pass through Barton Clay a Village of some Accomodation; then at 38’4. by Selsoe, a Village on the Right, and over a small Ascent and Descent, are brought at 39’7. to a Stone-Bridg
of 4 Arches over a Brook, [40 Miles N. b. W.] and a Mile farther, over another Ascent and Descent, your Road being something Woody, and at 41’5. omitting the forward Way to Horton, you bear to the Right, and 3 Furlongs farther to the Left again, and descending 2 Furlongs pass by Wilsumsted Church on the Left, Willsumsted, 44 M. and come at 44 M. to a Village of the same Name, which extends 2 Furlongs on the Road, at the End whereof you cross a Brook. Hence a straight Road leads you through Elstow alias Elvistow at 46 Miles, a Village of near 3 Furlongs Extent, Elstow, 46 Miles. Bedford, 47’4. W. and arrive at Bedford at 47 M. of 7 Furlongs Extent: Is the Shire-Town, Seated on the Owse, which divides it in the midle; It is well inhabited and fre∣quented, numbers 5 Parish-Churches; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, 2 Bailiffs, 2 Chamberlains, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, is Dignify'd by giving Ti∣tle to the Right Honorable William Earl of Bedford, &c. It enjoys 2 considerable Markets weekly, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, and 6 Fairs annually. You leave Bedford at 47’7. Clapum, 49’6. Ockley, 51’4. N.W. and pass through Clapum at 49’6. and enter Ockley or Ocle at 51’2. a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation: At the End of the Town you pass Stafford-Bridg over the Owse, and leave Mylton and Petonham Churches both on the Right, Petonham, 53’3. [54 M. W. b. N.] Chellington, 56’4. N. W. b. N. and at 53’3. pass through Part of Petonham, where you bear to the Right, and leave Steventon Church on the Left, and at 54 Miles bear again to the Left, and as∣cending 3 Furlongs enter Chellington at 56’2. of 5 Furlongs Extent. Leaving the Town, you pass by Woodhil 5 Furlongs on the Right, and at 57’1. over a Stone-Bridg cross the Owse, [60’2. N. b. W.] and have Harald Church on the Left, and Sr. Thomas Alston's House on the Right: Hence a direct Road conducts you through a Wood 9 Furlongs long, and by Peddington near a Mile on the Right, and Farndish a little distant on the same Hand, and come to the Entrance of Northamptonshire at 62’4. then by Woolaston alias Woo∣lerton and Dodington Churches both on the Left, and by Hillutton on the Right; at 64’4. over a Wooden-Bridg you cross the Nine, Wellingborough, 65’5. and at 65’3. enter Wellinborough of 6 Furlongs Extent, a large and well Inhabited Town, Seated on the Banks of the aforesaid Nine; is of Note for it's Medicinal Waters; hath a fair Church and good Free-School, enjoys a Market on Wednsdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, on Easter Tuesday, and the 18th of October. At the End of the Town you cross a Brook, [66’1. N. W. b. W.] and omitting the forward Road on the Right, bear to the Left, and 6 Furlongs farther cross a Valley and Brook, and at 67’4. pass through Great Haridon a Village of 3 Furlongs Length; Great Haridon, 67’4. [68’3. N. b. W.] Highsham, 69’5. Kettering, 72’6. at the End of which, you leave Little Haridon on the Left, and then through Highsham at 69’5. and cross a Brook at 70 Miles, and at 71’1. another, and ascending 4 Furlongs you enter Kettering at 75’3. of 8 Furlongs Extent, an indifferent good Town, is the Place where the Justices of the Peace of the County sometimes assemble; It enjoys a good Market on Fridays, well provided with Corn, Cattel, &c. and a Fair on Thursday in Easter Week. You leave the Town at 73’3. [77 M. N. N. E.] where you likewise leave Thorp Church on the Left; whence little occurs till at 75’5. over a Stone-bridg you cross a Brook, and enter Roking∣ham Forest at 79 Miles, Rokingham, 83 M. and at 82 M. leave it, and pass through Rokingham at 82’7. a Vill. of 2 Furlongs Extent; at the End of which, crossing the Welland, you enter a Part of Lei∣cestershire, and a Mile beyond cross the Eye, and enter Rutlandshire, and pass through Caldi∣cote a small Village; Caldicot, 84’1. N. b. W Luddington, 86’3. whence prosecuting a straight Road, you enter Luddington at 86’1. of 4 Furlongs Extent, at the end whereof you ascend 5 Furl. and after cross a little Vale, and enter Uppingham at 87’5. Ʋppingham, 87’6. of 3 Furl. extent on the Road, but more transverse: A well-built Town of good Accomodation, hath the Benefit of a Free-School and Hospital, and a Market on Wednsdays, which is well provided with Cattel, Corn, &c. and 2 Fairs yearly. Leaving Uppingham, a direct Road conveys you by Aiston on the Left, where you descend a small Hill, and at 90’1. cross a Brook and pass between 2 Hills, then at 92 M. you cross the Wadeland, Oakham, 94 Miles. and ascending 4 Furl. enter Oakham at 93’5. the Shire-Town, indifferently well Built, Seated in the Vale of Catmus, hath a good Church, Free-School, and Hospital, is the Place where the Assizes are kept, and hath a certain Privilege of acquiring a Shooe off of any Noble-Mans Horse that passeth through the Town, which is generally re∣deem'd with Money: vid. more LONDON to St. Neots, pag. 89. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Uppingham the Right to Stowcray. 2. At the Entring Wellinborough the Left to PETERBOROUGH. 3. A Mile short of Chellington the Left acute 4. At 1’7. beyond Wilsumsted the Left to Haims. 5. 3 Furlongs farther, the forward to Har∣ton. 6. 9 Furlongs beyond Barton Clay the Right acute. 7. 5 Furl. short of Harding the Left acute. 8. In St. Albans the forward on the Right to Dunstable.
The Extended Road from Oakham to Richmond in Yorkshire By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Comencing at Oakham aforesaid & Extending to Barnsley in Yorksh: Containing 81 Miles  furlong vizt. From Oakham to Milton Mowbray 10.’4. to Plumtree 12.’6. to Not∣tingham 5.’2. to Papple wiek 7.’5. to Mansfeild 6.’1. to Clown 11.’3. to Aughton 9.’3. to Rotherum 4.’4. to Wombwell 8.’6. & to Barnsley 4.’4
The Continuation of the extended Road From OAKHAM to RICHMOND. PLATE II. Commencing at Oakham in Rutland, and Extending to Barnsley in Yorkshire. Containing 81 Miles 1 Furlong. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 96’6. The Right to Whitsonden. At 126’7. The Left to Hurilwel. At 130’2. The Right to Bledworth. At 131’4. The Right to Bledworth. At 135’0. The Right to Winckborn. At 136’2. In Mansfield the Left acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 147’7. The Right to Ellington. At 149’2. The Left through Barlbrough. At 152’6. The Left to Eckington. PRoceeding from Oakham, you pass through Berlythorp at 95’3. a small Village, Oakham, W. b. N. Berlythorp, 95’3. Langham, 96’4. [99’4. N. W. b. W.] and at 96’3. through Langham another Village, and leave Burow a high Hill on the Left, on the Top of which is to be seen the Ruines of a double Trench and Wall, and some Remains of a Town which took up about 18 Acres of Ground; and ascending at 97’6. you leave Whitsonden Church on the Right; then crossing two Vales you descend an Hill, and at the Bottom pass over a Brook and enter Leice∣stershire, where you leave Estrap a small Village on the Left, and at 100’6. des∣cend a Mile together, and at the Bottom cross a Wooden-Bridg and Brook, Burton Lazers, 102’5. and 6 Furlongs farther pass through Burton or Burton Lazers a small Village, which took it's Name from an Hospital or Spittle there Rais'd about the Beginning of the Nor∣man Conquest, by a willing Contribution over all England for the Cure of the Lepro∣sie, which then infected the Kingdom: Whence over a Stone-Bridg crossing the Wreak, you enter Milton-Mowbray of 6 Furlongs Extent, Milton-Mowbray, 104’4. and near as much trans∣verse; It's a large Town of good Account, esteem'd the best in the County next to Leicester. At 106’2. you have Esq Bennet's House on the Left, and at 107’1. in a Vale enter Abketleby a Village of 6 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation: Abketleby, 107’4. Then des∣cending you enter the Vale of Beaver, Nether-Broughton, 109’7. Over-Broughton, 110’6. N.N.W. and crossing a Wooden-Bridg and Brook come to Nether Broughton at 109’6. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; and crossing a Stone-Bridg and Rill enter Nottinghamshire, and ascending, pass through Over Broughton, and leave the Vale of Beaver: Whence a straight open Way conveys you by Wydmerpole Church on the Left, cross the Foss-Way to ascend an Hill, cross a Vale, Normanton, 116’5. Plumtree, 117’2. and so des∣cend again, and pass through Normanton at 116’5. and Plumtree at 117’2. both small Villages. At 118 Miles you leave Peter in Ashes on the Left, [118 Miles N.] and after Bridgford on the Right; and at 120’6. over a Stone-bridg cross the Trent, and 4 Furlongs farther, cross another Part of it, and at 121’7. over a Stone-Bridg cross the Lyne and en∣ter Nottingham, Seated on an Ascent, a Town and County of it self; Nottingham, 122’4. call'd by the Saxons, Snottengaham; by the Britains, Turogo-bauc, i. e. Speluncarum Domus: It is a large and well-built Town, containing 3 Parish-Churches, and was formerly strengthned with a Wall and Castle now Ruinous; It sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is Dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Nottingham, &c. and as being the Shire-Town is the Place where the Assizes are held, and the County Goal kept; It drives a considerable Trade, and is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Aldermen, 2 Sheriffs, 2 Chamberlains, &c. and hath 3 Markets week∣ly, on Wednsdays, Fridays and Saturdays. Leaving Nottingham, you ascend an Hill and pass by a Gallows on the Right, cross 3 repeated Vales, and leave Basford Church on the Left, and at 126 Miles descending an Hill, you have Beskwood Park accompanying your Road on the Right for 3 Miles together, and being on the Forest of Sherwood you have the aforesaid River Line accompanying your Road on the Left, and leave Bulwel a Village,
Hucknal and Lynby Churches all on the Left; Papplewick, 130’1. cross Papplewick Moor, and enter Pap∣plewick at 129’7. a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment: Whence your Road being Woody and Hilly, passing by the Lord Byron's House and Robin∣hood's Stone on the Left, are convey'd over a Wood-Bridg and Brook at 135’6. to Mansfield, Mansfield, 136’2. N. E. b N. a Town extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, affording very good Ac∣comodation; is large, well Built and well Inhabited, drives an indifferent good Trade, and has a well-provided Market on Thursdays for Corn, Cattle, &c. Leaving Mansfield you bear to the Right, and crossing a Vale enter Derbyshire, and leave Plesly at 139’7. Plesly, 139’7. Houghton, 141’1. [141’4. E. b. N.] Clown, 147’5. Barlbrough, 149’2. Houghton at 141’1. both Villages contiguous on the Right, and crossing 2 Vales, leave Scardiff on the Right, and Boulsover on the Left, and at 147’5. pass through Clown a Village most on the Right; then leaving Barlbrough Church and Hall on the Left, descend an Hill, and pass by a Lake on the Right, and passing over a Moor leave Kilmarsh Church on the Left, and at 153’2. in a Vale cross the Gunno and enter Yorkshire, leaving Wales a Village at some distance on the Right, and in a second Vale have the Lord Darcy's Park on the Left, accompa∣nying your Road for above a Mile together, and leave Beghton Church on the same Hand. At 156 Miles you leave the Park, and ascend an Hill of 3 Furlongs, and 157 Miles pass through Aughton a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Accomoda∣tion: Aughton, 157 M. At the End whereof you descend an Hill of 6 Furl. and ascending another Hill, Celbey, 158’7. pass through Celby a small Village, and at 159’4. in a Vale, pass through Whiston another Village, Whiston, 159’4. and leave the Church on the Right; then passing through Nether Moor and Upper Moor Gate, Rotheram, 161’4. come to Rotheram at 161’3. a Town of 3 Fur∣longs Extent and good Entertainment, Seated on the River Dun; of Note for giv∣ing Birth to Thomas Rotheram Arch-Bishop of York, where He Founded a College, &c. the Town enjoys a good Market on Mondays, for Corn, Cattel, &c. Nigh unto Rotheram is Conisbrough, where was Fought a Battel between the Saxons and Bri∣tains, in which Battel Hengist the Saxon Captain lost his Life. At the End of Rotheram over a Stone-Bridg you cross the aforesaid Don or Dun, and ascending and descending, Gransborough, 163’2. N. E. b. E. Nether Haw, 164’6. Brafield, 167’4. pass through Gransborough a small Village, and cross∣ing a Brook, through Nether Haw at 164’6. another small Village; thence an Ir∣regular Road again ascending and descending, brings you to Brafield at 167’4. a little Village; at the End whereof you descend an Hill of 10 Furlongs, and at 170’2. Wombwel, 170’2. Adsly, 172’6. pass through Wombwel a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent and some Accomo∣dation: Whence a straight Road brings you at 172’6. to Adsley a small Village, where you ascend and descend, and leave Burton Grange on the Right, and Burket on the Left, both small Villages, then crossing a Rill you arrive at Barusley or Black Barnsley at 174’6. Barnsley, 175’1. a Town of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; It's Seated on the Side of an Hill, drives a considerable Trade in Wyre, and hath a good Market on Wednsdays, for Provisions and all sorts of Grain. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the Entring Adsly the Left to Doncaster. 2. 3 Furlongs from Wombwel the Left to Wath. 3. 7 Furlongs beyond Aughton the Right to Derby. 4. In Houghton the Left acute. 5. 7 Furlongs from Mansfield the Left to Bledworth. 6. At the End of Neather Broughton the Left to Clauston. 7. In Abkettleby the Left to Holwel. 8. 2 Furlongs short of Burton Lazers, the Left to Stapleford.
The continuation of the extended Road from OAKEHAM in Rutland to RICHMOND Com̄ Fbor. By IOHN OGILBY Esq His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Plate ye 3d. and last. Commencing at Barnesley in Com Ebor and Extending to RICHMON aforesaid Containing 87 Miles 1 Furlongs) videlizet. From Barnesley to Almondbvry 4.7 to Hallifax 9.2. to Kighley 12.6 to Skipton. 9.6 to Cumston 12 1 to arlton 13 1 to Midlam 5.0 and to RICHMOND 20.2.
The Continuation of the extended Road From OAKHAM to RICHMOND. PLATE III. & Last. Commencing at Barnsley in Yorkshire, and Extending to Richmond aforesaid. Containing 87 Miles 1 Furlong. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 177 Miles the Left acute. 177’3. The Right acute. 177’7. The Right acute. 181’2. The Right acute. 182’0. The Left to Denby Hall. 186’7. The Left to Shakerley. 188’6. The Right acute. 190’3. The Right to Colen Bridg. 193’1. The Right to Rastrick. 195’4. The Right to Rastrick. 196’4. The Left to Stanmore. 197’6. The Left to Lancaster. At 198’6. The Left to Lancaster. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 200’7. The Right acute. 211’6. The Right to Morton. 212’0. The Left acute. 214’5. The Right acute. 222’4. The Left to Settle. 234’0. The Right acute. 236’7. The L. to Midlam a different way. 252’0. The Right acute. 253’7. The Right acute. 254’5. The Right acute. 259’5. The Right to Hipswel. VVE brought you to Barnsley in Plate the Second, which leaving, Barnsley, W. b. S. Caisborough, 178’7. you come at 176’1. to a Descent of 5 Furlongs, and at 178’7. to Cais∣borough a small Village, and passing through a Wood are brought at 180’4. Huland, 180’4. to Huland another small Village; whence 2 Ascents and Descents convey you cross a Vale to Camlenthorp at 184 Miles, a little Village; where crossing a Rill, Camlenthorp,  Shelley, 185’4.  Kirk Burton, 8  and ascen∣ding, you pass over another Vale, and leave Shelley a Village on the Right, and descending 7 Furlongs, pass through Kirk Burton a Village of 2 Furlongs Length; then through Smithipland at 187’5. and East Dudleygate at 187’7. Smithipland, 18  East Dudleygate, 187. both small Vil∣lages. Hence crossing a Wooden-Bridg and Rill, you leave Woodsam Hall on the Left, and ascending an Hill, cross a Vale, and enter Almondbury at 189’7. Almondbury 190 M. a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation: It was formerly call'd Cambdunum, and strengthned with a Fort and Castle now ruin'd; was the Regal Seat of the English Saxons, and had a Cathedral Dedicated to St. Alban, Built by Paulinus the Apostle of these Parts. At the End wherof you descend 9 Furlongs, and crossing a Wooden-Bridg and Brook, leave Hutherfield Church on the Left, and ascend again the like quantity, at the Top whereof you pass through Poreton a small Village; Poreton, 192’7. whence 2 repeated Ascents convey you by Fixby Hall on the Left, and a Wood at some distance on the Right, at 194’3. to a Descent of 3 Furlongs, and at 195’7. Elland, 196 Miles N. b. W. to Elland a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment. Leaving Elland you cross a Vale, and in it the Calder over a Stone-Bridg, then leaving Elland House on the Left, and Ashley a Village on the Right; in a second Vale cross a Stone-bridg and Brook; and at 198’2. descend an Hill, Hallifax, 199’2. N.W. b. W. and crossing a Rill, come at 199 Miles to Hallifax, formerly Horton, q. d. Halig-feax, i. e. Holy Hair, from the Hair of a Holy Virgin of this Place, whom a certain Clerk being deny'd the use of her Body, was by him beheaded, and afterward Worshipp'd as a Martyr: The Town is Seated on a Branch of the Calder, of Note for being the Birth-place of Johannes de sacro Bosco, the Inventor of the Sphere, and their strict Law in Beheading those that are taken in Theft; It is a large and well-built Town, the Parish containing 11 Chapels of Ease, and 12000 Inhabitants, who drive a great Trade in Cloth, &c. and enjoy a good Market on Thursdays. From Hallifax you first cross Lea Bridg, and leave North Owrum, Boyes Town, Shaley and Haldworth, all at some distance on the Right; and Ovendon, Mr. Farmer's
House and Ellinworth Chapel all contiguous on the Left, Ellinworth, 202 Miles N. b. E. and at 203’3. descend Cock Hill, and 6 Furlongs farther Swill Hill; whence an Irregular Road by Deben∣ham Yate on the Right, Cullinworth, 208’2. and over some Hills, brings you at 208’1. to Cullinworth a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; [211 Miles N. W.] then by Rycroft and Ha∣ner on the Right and Cow-Houses on the Left, descending some Hills, are brought at 211’7. Kighley, 212 Miles. [215’5. N.] to Kighley a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation. Leaving Kighley, you pass by Utlay and Steton on the Right, Utlay Green Head and the Red Lyon Inn on the Left, cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook, and leave Glusborn on the Left; Kildwick, 216’4. at 216’4. you cross the Are, and pass through Kildwick a small Vil∣lage, Farnhil, 217’1. and at 217’1. Farnhil another Village, leaving the Hall on the Left, and a little after, Humblethorp Park on the same Hand, and passing by an Hill on the Right, enter Bradley at 218’3. Bradley, 218’4. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; whence you are convey'd by Upper Bradley on the Right, Skipton, 221’6. and Carlton on the Left, to Skipton in Craven, which you enter at 221’1. a Town of 7 Furlongs Extent and good Ac∣comodation; It's an indifferent large and well-built Town, gives Title to the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, &c. and enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Setting forward from Skipton you ascend an Hill, and leave Sturton a Village on the left, cross 3 Rills, and at 224’3. come to the Lord Burlington's Park on the Right, which accompanies you on the Road for above a Mile together; whence crossing 3 several Rills, Rilston, 226’4. N. E. b. N. you ascend an Hill, and on it pass through Rilston a Vil∣lage of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; which leaving, you pass by Crackston on the Right, and ascend an Hill, which is seconded with 2 Descents; then crossing a Rill, you pass by a Lake on the Right call'd the Tern, and at 230 Miles through Linton a small Village, Lynton, 230 Miles, N. W. b. N. Rashby, 231 Miles, Cuniston, 233’7. and crossing a Vale come to Rashby a little Village, where you cross Linton Bridg of Stone over the River Wharf, and proceed by Girsington a Village on the Right, through a large Wood, and having an Hill on your Left, come to Cuniston at 233’6. a Village of near 2 Furlongs Extent. Hence, crossing 3 Rills, and passing by an Inn on the Right, are brought at 236’5. Kettlewel, 236’6. N. N. E. to Kettlewel a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, where you ascend, and cross∣ing a Vale, pass through a Park and ascend again, then at 239’6. you descend and enter a Moor, and leave Coverhead a small Village on the Left, descending and as∣cending, Woodhal, 242’3. Bradley, 243’1. Horshouse, 244’2. Gamersgil, 245’3. Carlton, 247 Miles. pass through a large Vale wherein is Seated Woodal, Bradley, Hors-house Chapel, and Gamersgil all small Villages, at 246’6. leaving the Vale, you enter Carlton, a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; whence you have the River Coverd accompanying your Road on the Right for several Miles. At 247’7. Melmerby, 247’7. Ocklethorp, 248’7. you pass through Melmerby, and a Mile farther, Ocklethorp, both small Villages, leaving a Seat of the Lord St. John's on the Left; whence a straight Road over a Moor brings you to Midlam or Midleham at 251’4. Midlam, 252 Miles. extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, of good Accomodation, Seated on the Your, and enjoys a Market on Mondays: Leaving Midlam you cross the Your aforesaid, and ascending an Hill, on it pass through Harnby a small Village, Harnby, 253’4. and passing over a Moor, cross several small Waters or Rills, and at 255’7. ascend an Hill of 7 Furlongs, and crossing a Vale, come at 258 M. to a Descent of 10 Furl. at the Bottom whereof you cross a Rill, and leave a Lead-House on the Left; thence crossing a Vale you descend, and over a Stone-bridg cross the Swale, Richmond, 262’2. and enter Richmond a large and well-built Town, con∣taining 2 Churches, Fortify'd with a Wall and Castle, is well inhabited by Gen∣try, and Honor'd with the Title of a Dukedom, which lately was in the Person of His Grace Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. Keeps Courts for all Acti∣ons without Limitation, and hath a very good Market on Saturdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furl. from Richmond the Left to Hipswel 2. At the End of Kildwick the R. to Glusborn 3. 7 Furl. beyond Kighley the L. to London. 4. At the entring Hallifax the L. to Pontfract 5. At the End of Eland the Right acute. 6. 7 Furl. beyond Eland the L. to Coln Bridg. 7. 4 Furl. beyond Porteton the L. to Dighton. 8. 6 Furl. short of Almondbury the R. acute. 9. 5 Furlongs short of Almondbury the Left to Horsefell Bridg. 10. At the End of Almondbury the Left to Woodsom Hall. 11. 4 Furl. short of Dudleygate the Left to Wakefield. 12. 5 Furl. beyond Camlenthorp the L. acute. 13. At the entring Huland the L. to Wakefield
The Road from LONDON to SHREWSBURY Continued to Welshpool court: Montgom: in North Wales By JOHN OGJSBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographr. Containing 6. Miles vizt. From the Standard in Cornail LONDON to Meriden in Warwicksh: in the Holy-head Road 98 miles 4 furl: Thence to Birmingham in to Dudley 10’1 to Bridgnorth  to Wenlock 8 m to Shrewsbary 13’2 to Abberbury 7’4 and to Welshpool  ii Miles 4 furl:
The Road from London to Shrewsbury, Continued to Welshpool in North-Wales. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 144 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 138 M. 4. The Dimensuration 176 M. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Meriden 78 078 98’4 098’4 Bermingham 10 088 11’1 109’5 Dudley 08 096 10’1 119’6 Bridgnorth 12 108 16’0 135’6 to Wenlock 06 114 08’0 143’6 Shrewsbury 10 124 13’2 157’0 Abberbury 06 130 07’4 164’0 Welshpool 08 138 11’4 176’0 Midlesex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordsh. Buckinghamsh. Northamptonsh. Warwicksh. Worcestersh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Staffordsh. Shropsh. and Montgomerysh. are the Counties past through; and the Coln, Lowsel, Leam, Avon, Sherborn, Smestal, Rea and Severn, are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in most Places an indifferent good Road and convenient Enter∣tainment to Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At the End of Meriden the Right to CHES∣TER, the Left to Hampton. At 105’4. The Right to Yardley. At 109’6. In Bermingham the Right to LICHFIELD. At 121’5. The Left forward. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 127’6. & 128’2. The Right to New-Inn and Newport. At 130’6. The Right acute. FRom LONDON to Meriden, [as in the Holyhead Road, pag. 43.] Meriden, W. Whence leaving Meriden at 98’5. you keep the Midle-way, and pass by Gumer's Oak on the Left, and at 99’6. you cross Stan-Bridg over a Brook, and leaving Hampton on the Hill and Bicknal Churches both on the Left, Little Bicknal, 100’4. and pass by Little Bicknal a small Village close on the Right; then through a Wood of 3 Furlongs Extent, the suc∣ceeding Part of the Road being sprinkled with Houses, [102’3. W. N. W.] you cross 2 Bridges and little Brooks, and at 103’6. a Green, and another Bridg and Brook 7 Furlongs af∣rer, and leavings Seldon 4 Furlongs on the Right, you enter Worcestershire at 105’4. and a Mile and half beyond re-enter Warwickshire, and at 109’1. Bermingham, 109’5. come to Berming∣ham vulgo Bromicham of a Mile Extent and good Accomodation, Seated on the Rea: Is a large and well-built Town, drives a great Trade in most sorts of Iron-work, and enjoys a very considerable Market on Thursdays. Leaving Bermingham at 110 Miles, a direct Road brings you to the Entrance of Staffordshire at 112’3. Smethwick, 113’4. Oldbury Chapel, 116’1. Whence through a little Wood and a discontinued Village call'd Smethwick, you are convey'd at 115 Miles by Blakely Hall a Furlong on the Right, and 7 Furlongs farther to Oldbury Chapel a Village of about 3 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation: Hence by Brade Hall on the Right; through a few scat∣tering Houses call'd Twedale Houses at 118 Miles, Twedale, Houses 118. where you leave Pullens Hall a Furlong on the Left, and at 119’4. by the Castle on the Right, and in an includ∣ed Part of Worcestershire, come to Dudley of 4 Furlongs Extent, Dudley, 119’6. a Place of good resort, enjoying the Benefit of a Market. Leaving the Town at 119’7. and re-entring Staffordshire 4 Furlongs after, you pass between Hills, scattering Houses and Coal-pits; then a little Ascent seconded with a Descent, by Garnel Hall 3 Furlongs on the Right, brings you at 122’1. to a Wood which is most on the Left, and at 123’3. Himley, 123’5. [127 Miles, W. to Himley a discontinued Village, at the Entrance whereof you have the Lord Ward's Hall on the Right: Hence an open and direct Way conducts you by Womborn Church on the Right over the River Smestal, where you have Tressel Church on the Right: At 127’3. a little Ascent brings you to a round Oak, an eminent Tree on the Left, and through
an inclos'd and indirect Way by Heathton Place on the same Hand, come at 129’5. to enter Shropshire, where you cross a Brook, and leave Claverley Church 3 Furlongs on the Right, and at 131’3. you enter the Forest of Morse; whence a direct Way brings you by two or three Race-Posts on the Left, over a little Ascent and Des∣cent to Bridgnorth at 135 Miles of 7 Furlongs Extent; Bridgnorth, 135’6. a large and well-built Cor∣poration and Market-Town, [as in LONDON to Buckingham, pag. 23.] Adding, That it was Built by Athelfleda the Mercian Lady, and that it was Fortify'd with a strong Wall and Castle now Ruinous, and hath Privilege of Electing Parliament-Men. Leaving the Town, you pass by Fasly Church on the Right, and Walton Hall on on the Left, Morvil, 138’2. N.W. and through Morvil a small Village at 138’2. where you leave Craft House on the Right, and then pass by Audnam Park on the same Hand, and Muckley Hall on the Left, and through a small Wood at 141 Miles; whence a little Ascent and Descent brings you at 143’4. Wenlock, 143’6. N. b. W. to Wenlock or Wenlock Magna, an indifferent good Town, of Note formerly for it's Nunnery, where Milburga the Holy Virgin liv'd a Devout Life: It is at present a Town-Corporate, Govern'd by a Bailiff and Bur∣gesses; hath Privilege of sending Burgesses to Parliament; is of Note for the great quantity of Lime and Tobacco-Pipes here made, and enjoys a good Market on Mondays. From Wenlock you descend an Hill of 3 Furlongs call'd Wenlock Pitch, and pass through Harley at 145’5. Harley, 145’5. Cresedg, 147’6. N.W. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; then crossing a Vale, and leaving Belsadine Hall 4 Furlongs on the Right, come to Cresedg at 147’5. of 3 Furlongs Extent: Whence an indifferent straight Way by the Lady Newport's Hall on the Right, Cund, 150’4. Cross-Houses 152 M. and through Upper Cund, Cund and Cross-Houses, all small Villages, and by Euston and St. Giles's on the Right, and Betton on the Left, brings you at 155’1. Shrewsbury, 157 M. W to Shrewsbury, a large Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, call'd by the Saxons, Scrobbesbirig; by the Brittains, Pengwern and Ymwithig: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder; 24 Aldermen, and 48 Common-Councel Men, &c. hath Privilege of send∣ing Burgesses to Parliament, and hath the Convenience of a good Free-School, and 2 Markets weekly, on Wednsdays and Thursdays, and is Honor'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Charles Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, &c. [vid. more in BRISTOL to CHESTER, pag. 111.] Leaving Shrewsbury, a direct Road with scattering Houses most on the Right, and a small Wood on the Left, brings you at 162’2. to cross a Bridg and Brook, where you leave Ford Church about 3 Furlongs on the Right, [164’2. W. S. W.] and after Carston Church and Hall on the Left about the same distance; whence in an indirect Road you pass by Ronton Castle and Watleburgh Hall on the Right, and several disperst Houses on the Road, come at 166’2. to the Nag's-Head Inn on the Right, and passing over Watleburgh Heath, you leave Westbury Church on the Left, and Wilson and Tri∣venant Halls on the same Hand; Trivenant, 169’6. then by Trivenant a small Village on the Left, and a great Oak on the Right, enter Montgomershire at 170’2. and pass by Mallagolm Hill on the Right, and over a small Ascent, leave long Mountains on the Left; and at 172’4. Buttington, 173’1. you pass by Buttington Hall a Furlong on the Left, and through But∣tington a Village at 173’1. cross a Bridg and the River Severn, and 2 Furlongs far∣ther cross it again, and leaving the Turge Hill on the Right, a direct Road leads you to the Entrance of Welshpool at 175’6. Welshpool, 176 Miles. of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Acco∣modation; call'd by the Welsh, Trellin; Is a Town-Corporate, and the largest and best Built in the County; is Govern'd by Bailiffs; enjoys a very good Market on Mondays, and hath a very stately and well-built Castle call'd Powis Castle. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. In Welshpool the Right to Montgomery, the Left to Oswestry. 2’ 1’6. Short of Trivenant the forward to Criggin. 3. 4’4. Beyond Ronton Castle the Right forward. 4. In Wenlock Magna the Forward to Brose∣ly. 5. 3 Furlongs beyond Wenlock, the Right to Callaton. 6. A Furl. beyond Bermingham the Right acute.
The Road from. LONDON to SOUTHAMPTON. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 78 Miles  furlongs vizt. From the Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Bagshot in the Lands: end Road 29. miles 6. furlongs thence to Farnham 11’6 to Alton 9’13 to Aleresford 9’.6. to to SOUTHAMPTON 9’.5. Continued. to Salisbury Com̄. Wilts 25 m 5 furlongs vizt. From SOUTHAMPTON to Rumsey 8 m 3 furl: to White Parish 9. m. And to the City of SALISBURY 8 miles 2 furlongs.
The Road from London to Southampton, Continued to SALISBƲRY. 1. THE Point of Bearing W.S.W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 69 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 62 M. 4. The Dimensuration 78 M. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Bagshot 23 23 29’0 29’0 Farnham 09 32 11’6 40’6 Alton 07 39 09’3 50’1 to Alresford 08 47 09’6 59’7 Twiford 07 54 08’6 68’5 Southampton 08 62 09’6 78’3 The Continuation to SALISBURY. From Southampton Comp. Measure. to Rumsey 06 06 08’3 08’3 White-Parish 06 12 09’0 17’3 SALISBURY 06 18 08’2 25’5 Midlesex, Surrey, Hampshire and Wiltshire, are the Counties including the Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. and the Thames, Wey, Itchin, Test and Bourn, are the principal Rivers crost over; yielding a very good Road to Southampton, and thence to SALISBURY indiffe∣rent, and is every where accomodated with fitting Entertainment to Travellers. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 30’3. The R. to Andover and EXETER. At 33’3. The Right to Haley. At 33’7. The Left to Farnborough. At 38’0. The Roads on the Left to Alderscot. At 38’2. The Right to Crundle. At 50’7. The Left to Portsmouth. At 60’7. The Right to Ovington. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 64’0. The Right to WINCHESTER. At 67’7. The Left to Morwel. At 68’5. The Right to SALISBURY. At 69’7. The Left to Bishops Stoke. At 74’7. The Right to Rumsey. In the Continuation to SALISBURY. At 1’1. The Left forward to Ringwood. At 2’7. The Left to Milborough. At 5’0. & 7’6. The Left to Nurslin. At 8’2. The Right to Andover. At 9’2. The Left to Fordenbridg. At 10’0. The Left to Ridg, the Direct to Pool. At 12’6. The Right and Direct Ways. At 18’4. The Right to SALISBURY. At 23’7. The Right to Laystock and Mivord. FROM LONDON to Bagshot, We have discours'd in the Lands-End Road, Bagshot. [29 M. S. W b. W.] [30’3. S. W. by S.] [33 Miles, S.] [34’6. S. S. E.] pag. 49. which leaving at 29’3. you pass over Bagshot Heath; at 33 Miles enter Frimley, and at the following Water, Hampshire; then at 34’6. (having first crost Farnborough Common) by the Lord Ansley's House and Chapel on the Left, you presently enter Farnham Common of 4 Miles Extent, re-entring Surrey at 39’3. Farnham, 40’5. S.W. and arriving at Farnham at 40’5. a Town 4 Furlongs long, seated on the North-West side of the River Wey, denominated from the quantity of Fern hereabouts: Is Go∣vern'd by 12 Masters, whereof 2 are Bailiffs; has a great Market on Thursdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, on Midsummer Day and All-Saints Day. At 43’2. you re-enter Hampshire, and at 45’0. pass by some Houses on the R. call'd Bentley Green, 12 Furlongs farther descending, you pass by Frail Church, and Sr. Denis Gauden's House on the Left; whence ascending again, you are, Alton, 50 Miles. by a direct Road with some sprinkled Houses, convey'd to Alton at 50 Miles, of 4 Furlongs Extent, seated on the foresaid Wey, well Wooded, and has a great Market on Saturdays for Cattle and Provisions.
From 52 Miles through Woods, [53’3. W. by S.] [57’7. S.W.] [59’7. S.S.W.] and up Hill at 53’2. little occurs on your Road from 54’7. it lying direct, gives only scattering Houses at 58 Miles, then at 59’6. you cross a Part of Itchin fluv. here call'd Alre, through which your Road went a Mile before, Alresford, 59’6. and which feeds the great Pond on the Left; entring Alresford vul∣go Ailsford, a large Town above 3 Furlongs long on the Road; Govern'd by a Bailiff and 8 Burgesses; has a great Market on Thursdays, especially for Sheep and Provisions, and 2 Fairs, on Holy Thursday and Midsummer Day. At 60’7. [60’7. W.S.W.] you go through Sewers Water, another Branch of the Itchin so call'd; and at 64 Miles the great Road on the Right leads to WINCHESTER, as do most of those betwixt this and Twiford; here entring Long-Wood Down, it brings you at 66’5. [67’3. S.S.W.] Twiford, 68’5. S.b.W. [69’7. S.W. by S.] to Morsted Church on your Left, and at 68’5. to Twiford, a Village ex∣tending 2 Furlongs on the Road, with good Accomodation for Travellers; seated near the Itchin; which (leaving Brambridg House on the Right) crossing at 70’6. over High-Bridg; Swaland, 74’7. 10 Furlongs farther, pass by a few Houses, and Albrook House on the Right; at 74’7. through a scattering Village call'd Swaland, a direct Road in intersperst Houses, Southampton, 78’0. and the River accompanying you on the Left, brings you at 78 Miles to Southampton; whence a direct Street of 6 Furlongs leads you to the Key, to which Ships of a considerable Burthen may arrive. It is a Town and County Govern'd by a Mayor, 9 Justices, a Sheriff, 2 Bailiffs, 24 Common Councel, 24 Burgesses, &c. Has the Election of Parliament Men; is large and well Built, containing 6 Churches, Fenc'd with a double Ditch and strong Walls, has 7 Gates and several Watch-Towers; a Place of good Trade, design'd for a Mart temp. Edw. 6. it's Markets are on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and Fairs on St. Mark's Day, and Trinity Monday: gives the Title of Earl to the Illustri∣ous Charles Fitz-Roy, Earl of Southampton, &c. and is the Place where the Assizes for the County are often Held. From Southampton to SALISBURY. FROM the Market-Place in Southampton, Southampton, N. [0’2. W.] [1’1. N.W. by N. Ʋpton, 5’0. N.N.W. after 2 Furlongs you turn short on your Left Hand, and over Rumsey Common and a Rill at 2’6. leave Half Way Oak on the the Right at 3’7. at 5 Miles you pass through Upton a small Village, and at 5’3. enter Austrey Wood above a Mile in length; whence through a Coppice, and by a few scattering Houses, you leave Broadlands House on the Left; and at 8’1. Rumsey, 8’3. W. b. S. enter Rumsey, a large and antient Town extending 5 Furlongs on the Road, Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Aldermen, 12 Burgesses, &c. much inhabited by Clothiers; has a good Market on Saturdays, and 3 Fairs annually, viz. Easter Monday, the 15th. of August, and St. Simon and Jude. At the End of the Town you cross the River Test, which rising about Basing∣stoke, passes by Stokebridg, and 4 Miles below this Place falls into the Sea; then at 8’7. the Right-hand Way after 16 Furlongs unites again; here ascending for 3 Furl. and keeping to the Right, [10’0. N.N.W.] [12’6. W. by S.] [14’2. N. W.] [16 Miles W.] White Parish. 17’3. [19 Miles N. W.] Whaddon, 20’7. Alderbury, 22’1. [22’7. N. by W.] at 10 Miles enter Bluck on the Heath, a Common of 2 Miles so call'd, conveying you by an indirect Road and some sprinkled Houses, at 14’6. you enter Wiltshire, where an open Way carries you to Cowsfield Green, some Houses so call'd. At 17’2. entring White Parish a Village of 2 Furlongs length, with some Houses of En∣tertainment; at 19 Miles leaving Councellor Ayres House on the Right, open Way con∣veys you to Whaddon, a Vil. at 20’7. thence over Alderbury Common to Alderbury another Vill. at 22’1. Clarendon Park on the Right, and the Lord Colraines House on the Left, at 24 M. [24 Miles W. by N.] you pass over a Brook, and afterwards 3 other Rills, all Branches of the Bourn, which you cross at 24’6. and a little lower falls into the Avon: At 25’1. entring the City of SA∣LISBURY or New-Sarum, SALISBƲRY, 25’1. as in LONDON to the Lands-End, pag. 51. Backward Turnings to be avoided between SALISBURY and Southampton 1. At the End of SALISBURY the Left to Milvord. 2. A Mile beyond SALISBURY the left to Milvord and Laystock. 3. 5 Furlongs short of Alderbury the Right to Wethrington. 4. In Rumsey the Left to Andover and WIN∣CHESTER. Between Southampton and Bagshot. 1. The Left in and at the End of Twiford to Southampton. 2. 2’7. Beyond Bighton the Left to Maysted. 3. In Farnbam the Right to Petersfield.
The Roads From LONDON, to Wells in Norfolk and St. Edmons-Bury in Suffolk By JOHN OGILBY Esqr.  aties. Cosmographer Thest 1. Containing 121. Miles 1 Furlong vizt. From ye Standard in Cornhill London,  New market in ye Norwich Road, 60.3. to Berton-Mills 8.5 to Brandon-rrey 9.2. to Hilborro 9.1. to Swafham 6.3. to Tittleshall 20.4 to akenham 6.2. to Walsmgham 5.6. to Wells 4.. The 2d. Contag 75 Miles  Furlongs vizt From ye Standard in Cornhill London to Newmarket aforsd. 60.5. to Kenford 4.5. to St. Edmons Bury 9.6
The Roads from London to Wells, In Norfolk: and St. Edmunds-Bury in Suffolk. Commencing at New-Market in the NORWICH Road.   Wells. Bury. 1. THE Points of Bearing N. N. E. N.E.b.N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 98 M. 55 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 95 M. 64 M. 4. The Dimensurations 121’1. 75’0. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to New-Market 54 54 60’5 60’5 Berton-Mills 06 60 08’5 69’2 Brandon-Ferry 07 67 09’2 78’4 Hilborro 06 73 09’1 87’5 Swaffham 04 77 06’3 94’0 to Tittleshal 07 84 10’4 104’4 Fakenham 04 88 06’1 110’5 Walsingham 04 92 05’6 116’3 Wells 03 95 04’6 121’1   95   121’1   In the Road to Bury. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to New-Market 54 54 60’5 60’5 Kenford 03 57 04’5 65’2 St. Edmunds Bury 07 64 09’6 75’0 Suffolk and Norfolk include both the Roads; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Owse and Winsder are the principal Rivers crost over; affording generally a very good Way throughout each of them, and no mean Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided in the Road to Wells. At the End of New-Market the Right to Bury, the Left to ELY. At 59’4. & 70’2. The Right to Thetford. At 88’0. The forward to Kirsingham. At 97’1. The Left to Castle-aker. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 110’7. The Right acute. At 116’7. The Right to Old Walsingham. At 118’0. The Left acute. FROM LONDON to New-Market (We have discourst in LONDON to NORWICH and preceeding Plates,) at the End whereof you enter Suffolk; New-Market, N. E. whence a straight Way conveys you over a Heath and Furzy Ground, by Kennet Church and Grange on the Right, at 66 Miles to enter Cambridgshire; then by Red∣house on the Left, you re-enter Suffolk at 67’1. where you ascend a Hill of 2 Fur∣longs, seconded by a like Descent, and leave Fackenham, Berton, 69’2. N. b. E Mildnal and Berton Churches all on the Left, and pass through Berton-Mills at 69’2. a Village of 2 Furl. Extent and good Accomodation; at the End whereof you cross a Brook, and omitting the Road on the Right to Thetford, you bear to the Left. Hence you cross a Warren, and at 71’2. ascend 2 Furl. pass by Del-hole and Hobs Cross, and leave Eswel, Wangford and Brandon Churches all on the Left, Brandon, 78’4. N. W. by N. come to Brandon-Ferry or a Part of Brandon at 78’1. of 3 Furl. Extent, a Place of some Account by it's convenient situation on the little River Owse; where they lade and unlade several Comodities to and from the Isle of Ely; the Town enjoy'd formerly a Market which is now dis-us'd, yet is at present dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Charles Gerard Baron Gerard of Brandon, &c. and hath 3 Fairs an∣nually, viz. the 14th. of February, the 11th. of June, and the 11th. of November. At the End of the Town you cross the little Owse aforesaid, [80’6. N. by W.] and entring the County of Norfolk, leave Weeting Church on your Left; whence an open Way
over Sheep Downs, Munford, 83’2. conveys you at 83 Miles to Munford a Village of near 3 Furl. Extent, where you cross a small River and leave Igboro Church on the Right: hence 2 repeated Ascents by Bedney Church and Hall on the Right, leads you at 87’4. to Hilboro a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, Hilboro, 87’5. where you bear to the Right; and at 88 Miles, omitting the forward Way to Kirsingham, bear to the Left; then at 90’3. you cross a Valley, and 4 Furl. beyond descend 2 Furl. and at 92’3. ascend the like quantity. At 93’6. Swaffham, 94’0. you enter Swaffham of about 5 Furlongs Extent and as much transverse, a Town of good Accomodation, accounted one of the best Towns in the County; and it's Market which is on Saturdays is well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions, whence at 96 Miles you descend a small Hill, [97’1. N. E.] and 9 Furl. farther, omitting the for∣ward Way on the Left, you bear to the Right, and leave Castle-aker Church and the Ruins of an old Castle on the Left, Newton, 98’5. entring Newton at 98’4. a Village of 2 Furl. Extent; then at 100 Miles you cross a Brook, leave West Lexham Church on the R. and pass through a Vale, where a straight, open, and heathy Way, by Ruffham Church and Lodg on the Left, and a small Wood on the Right, conveys you at 104’4. Tittleshal, 104’4. through Tittleshal a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, leaving the Church some distance on the Left. Hence you pass by some sprinkled Woods on the Right, and by Patchly House, Raynham Hall and Tofts Church and Beacon all on the Left, and Oxley and Cockham Churches on the Right, descend 3 Furl. at 108’3. and at 110’3. crossing the Winsder, enter Fakenham of 3 Furl. Extent, Fakenham, 110’5. N. by W. [112’6. N. N. E.] and good Accomodation; with a Market on Thursdays. Leaving the Town you bear to the Left, and at 112’6. to the Right again; thence by Great Snoring on the Right, at 114’1. you have East Basham Church on the Right, and the Hall on the Left; then through Houghton a small Village at 115 Miles, Walsingham, 116’3. where leaving the Church some distance on the Left, come to Walsingham or Great Walsingham at 116’1. of above 3 Furlongs Extent, perchance from the Saxon Word Welise, Abrotonum; a Place much frequented in former times by Pilgrims in their Devotion to the Virgin Mary; and Noted likewise for it's College of Canons: It at present enjoys a great Market on Fridays, [116’7. N. W.] plentifully stor'd with all Necessaries. Leaving Walsingham you bear to the Left, and pass by Old Walsingham and Wighton Churches both on the Right; at 118’6. you descend 3 Furl. and at 119’4. you as∣cend the like quantity, Wells, 121’1. and descend again 4 Furl. and enter Wells at 120’7. an in∣different large Town, seated on the Banks of the Sea, of 4 Furl. Extent and some Accomodation. In the Road to Bury. FROM LONDON to New-Market as before; New-Market, E. whence your Road is generally open, descending at 62’4. 2 Furl. and at 63 Miles ascend the like quantity, which at 64 M. is seconded with another Ascent; then at 64’6. you descend 2 Furl. cross Kenford Bridg and Brook, Kenford, 65’2. [70’5. E. S. E.] and pass through Kenford a small Vill. then by Heringwel Church and a noted Tree seated on a small Eminence on the Left, Garsbly and Bareow on the Right, are convey'd at 69 M. to a Descent of 2 Furl. seconded by a like Ascent, where in the Bottom over a Bridg you cross a small Water; thence by Little Saxham Church and Hall, and Westly Church on the Right; Risby and Farnham on the Left, and several Woods accompanying you on the Right and Left; you come at 74’2. to Bury, a large Town affording good Accomodation, of which take this general Account: Bury or St. Edmunds Bury, Bury, 75 Miles. so call'd from King Edmund the Martyr, A. S. Bedericsgueord, i. e. Villa Bederici, a large, well-built, well Inhabited and frequented Corporation and Market-Town, famous formerly for it's Abby which exceeded all others in England, having 3 less Churches in her Church-yard as her Waiting Maids, of which 2 remains fair and spacious, which are too few for its numerous Inhabitants; it is situate in a most delicate Air, which is the occasion of much Gentry resorting to it; It hath a convenient Grammar-School for Youth; is the Place where ordinarily the Assizes for the County, and the Quarter-Sessions for the Liberty of St. Edmond are kept; It hath a fair and spaci∣ous Market-hill, Fair-sted and Corn-Cross; Is Govern'd by an Alderman, Recorder, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament; hath a very great Market on Wednsdays for Corn, Fish, Fowl, &c. and 3 Fairs annually. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 8 Furl. beyond Fakenham, the Right acute 2. 3 Furl. beyond Hilboro the Left acute. 3. 2’2. Short of Brandon Ferry the R. acute. 4. 2’3. Beyond Berton the left acute.
The Road from LONDON to WIYMOUTH com̄. DORSE. By JOHN OGJLBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer. — Containing 135. Miles 4. Furlongs vizt. From LONDON to Basingstoke com Hant in the Lands-end Road 149 m. 6. f. to Sutton, 22’6. to Stockbridg 8.4 to Bronghton 3.6. to Dunketon. 11. m. 4. f. to Cramborn 11.4. to Blandford. 22.2. to Forch ester 16’6. & to Weymouth 8.5.
The Road from London to Weymouth, In DORSETSHIRE. Commencing at Basingstoke in Hampsh. in the Lands-End Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. N. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 119 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 104 M. 4. The Dimensuration 132’1. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Basingstoke 39 39 48’1 48’1 Sutton 10 49 13’7 62’0 Stockbridg 06 55 07’3 69’3 Broughton 03 58 03’6 73’1 Downton 09 67 11’2 84’3 to Cranborn 09 76 11’2 95’5 Blandford 09 85 11’5 107’2 Dorchester 12 97 16’4 123’6 Weymouth 07 104 08’3 132’1   104   132’1   Midlesex, Surrey, Hampshire, Wiltshire, and Dorsetshire are the Counties past through; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. and the Brent, Thames, Ditsford, Test, Avon, Stour, Piddle, and Froom are the Principal Rivers crost over: Affording in general a good and well beaten Road, Quality of the Way. and every where replenisht with fitting Entertainment to Accomodate Travellers. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 49’6. the Right to the Downes. At 54’2. the Left to WINCHESTER. At 56’6. the Left acute. At 57’3. the Right to Barton. At 61’7. the Left in Sutton to WIN∣CHESTER. At 69’2. the Left in Stockbridg to South∣ampton. At 70’5. the Right to SALISBURY. At 74’2 & 4. the Left to Bossington and Hampton. At 78’0. the Left to Rumsey. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 85’5. the Left acute. At 88’5. the Right acute. At 101’4. the Right acute. At 102’0. the Left acute. At 102’7. the Left acute. At 108’5. the Right to Whatcomb. At 122’4 the Left to Froom. At 128’0. the Right to Upway. At 130’1. the Right acute. FRom LONDON to Basingstoke We have Illustrated in LONDON to the Lands-End pag. 49. Basingstoke. W. [51’3. S. W. b W.] Whence an indirect and partly Woody Road by Altham Church on the Right half a Mile, brings you at 58’e3. to a descent of 4 Furlongs; then at 60’6. passing through Cramborn a small Village, Cramborn 60’6. Sutton 62 m. and crossing a Brook you as∣cend 3 Furlongs, entring Sutton at 61’7. in Extent near 3 Furlongs; from whence little occurs but the crossing of several Roads that lead from Southampton and WIN∣CHESTER to Andover, &c. till at 67’2. you pass through a Vale, and at 68’2. Stockbridg 69’3. de∣scend 4 Furlongs, a quarter of a Mile farther entring Stockbridg a Corporation, sen∣ding Burgesses to Parliament; Affordeth very good Accomodation to Travellers: Enjoying formerly a Market, which is now disus'd. At 70 Miles you come to an ascent of 2 Furl. seconded with a like descent, and at 73 Miles you pass through Broughton in Extent 3 Furlongs, Broughton. 73’1. a place of good Accomo∣dation, and 3 Furlongs farther ascending 2 Furlongs, you presently descend again 4 Fur∣longs; then at 75’3. a small descent leads you through West-Tytherley a little Village, West-Tytherly 75’7. East. Dean 77’6. and a Mile and half farther through East-Dean a scattering Village where you enter Wilt∣shire. Hence crossing the Roads between Southampton and SALISBURY, you at 80’4. Dunketon 84’3. as∣cend 3 Furl. and 7 Furlongs beyond descend 4 Furlongs, and at 84’1. enter Dunketon or Dounton of 3 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Avon, a Corporation of great Antiquity, sending Burgesses to Parliament; of Note formerly for being the Habitation of the Famous Beavois of Southampton, and at present Enjoys a small Market on Fridays.
At the end of Dounton you cross the foresaid Avon, [85 m. N. W. b W.] and pass through discontinued Buildings, [88’4. S. W b. W.] Tipput 91’6. [92 m. S. W. b S.] Cranborn 95’5. ascending a small Hill at 85’5. then at 91’3. descending a Hill of 2 Fur∣longs you pass through Tipput a small Village, and a Furl. farther enter Dorsetsh. whence ascending at 92’6. 3 Furlongs, 2 repeated descents convey you at 95’3. to Cranborn an antient Town where Alward an English Saxon built a Monastery, it is seated very Pleasantly, and hath a small Market on Wednsdays. From Cranborn an indirect way by St. Gile's 2 Furlongs on the Left, [96 m. W b N.] Allhallows Wimborn 97’5. S. W. b W. leads you at 97’5. through Allhallows Wimborn a discontinued Village; thence a straight way conveys you by Knolton on the Left 4 Furlongs, and Lower Gusset on the same hand one Furlong, Midle Gusset 100’1. then at 100 Miles you enter Midle Gusset of 2 Furlongs in length, at the end of which passing a small ascent you after leave Up-Churchill on the Left and Chettle on the Right, and at 101’4. ascend 3 Furlongs, and two Furlongs farther descend again, Tarrant Monkton 103’4. Blandford 107’2. then at 103 Miles a small descent leads you into Tarrant Monkton a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs Extent, and passing over several small Hills you enter Blandford at 107 Miles seated on the Stour; Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs with Aldermen, &c. and hath a well provided Market on Saturdays, a place affording no mean Entertainment to Travellers. Leaving the Town you cross the Stour aforesaid and ascend a small Hill, whence over two large Valleys and by some stragling Houses, [115 m. W. b S.] Milford 115’3. at 113’6. you ascend 2 Fur∣longs, and after 2 repeated descents convey you through Milford a small Village; whence at 117’1. you descend into another large Vale, and at the top of the ascent descend again, Walterstow 119’4. and at 119’4. pass through Walterstow a scattering Village, whence ascending a Hill of 3 Furlongs, you pass by a Wood on the Right, and at 121’4. as∣cend again 2 Furlongs, and at 123’3. crossing the Frome enter Dorchester: A fair large and well frequented Corporation, Market, and Shire-Town, Extending 5 Furlongs on the Road. Dorchester 123.’6. S. b W. [The account of which vid. in EXETER to Dorchester pag. 187.] Leaving Dorchester you pass between Monketon Church on the Right, and Herring∣ston House on the Left each distant 2 Furlongs, then at 125’6. ascending 3 Fur∣longs, and at 126’7. descending 4 Furlongs; omitting the forward way on the Left, which unites again at 129 Miles, you pass by several scattering Houses, and after by a Sweep-Well on the Left, Weymouth 132’1. and a Wind-Mill on the Right entring Mel∣comb Regis at 131’7. joyn'd to Weymouth by a Bridg of Wood, they are seated on an arm of the Sea, formerly 2 Corporations, but by their unwearied Suits were by Act of Parliament Tempore Eliz. Incorporated in one by the Name of a Mayor, Alder∣men, &c. both Towns had very small beginning till of late by the convenience of their Harbor they are arrived to a greater Splendor, each place sending 2 Burgesses to Parliament; in Weymouth the Chapel standeth on a Rock that is so steep that they ascend to it by 60 steps; they have 2 Markets Weekly, viz. Tuesdays and Fridays, and Enjoy an indifferent good Trade to France, New-found Land, &c. Southerly from Weymouth lieth the Isle of Portland, taking its Name from one Port a Saxon, the Island is about 7 Miles in Circumference, is well Fortifi'd both by Art and Nature; and gives Title to the Right Honorable Tho. Weston Earl of Portland, &c. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1’7. beyond Melcomb Regis, the Right to Sutton. 2. 4 Miles short of Dorchester, the Left to Upway. 3. In Dorchester the Left acute. 4. 7 Furlongs beyond Dorchester, the Right to Stinsborow. 5. 7 Furlongs beyond Walterstow, the Left to Develish. 6. 1 M. 5 Furl. short of Milford, the Right to Burston. 7. 2 M. 7 Furl. beyond Milford, the Left to Whatcomb. 8. A Furl. beyond Allhallows Wimborn, the Right to St. Giles. 9. 2 Furl. short of Cranborn, the Right to Edmundsham. 10. 2 M. 6 Furl. beyond Tipput, the Left forward. 11. 5 Furlongs beyond Dunckton, the Left to SALISBURY. 12. At the end of Broughton, the Left to SALISBURY. 13. 2 Furlongs beyond Sutton, the Left to Newbury.
The Road From LONDON to YARMOUTH com. Norf. By JOHN OGJLBY Esqr. His Ma.tie Cosmographer. Containing 222. Mile 5 Furlongs viz. From ye. Standard in Cornhil LONDON to Colchester. In ye Harnrich Road 50.0 thee to Stratford 7.0 to Ipswich n. to Woodbridg .3. to Saxmundham. u. 4 to Blyborough 10.2. to Beles 104. to Hadsko 5. 2. and to Yarmoth. 9.6.
The Road from London to Yarmouth, In NORFOLK. Commencing at Colchester in Essex in the Harwich Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 97 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 92 M. 4. The Dimensuration 122’5 From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Colchester 43 43 50’0 50’0 Stratford 05 48 07’0 57’0 Ipswich 07 55 11’0 68’0 Woodbridg 07 62 07’3 75’3 Saxmundham 08 70 11’4 86’7 to Blyborough 06 76 10’2 097’1 Beccles 07 83 10’4 107’5 Hadsko 03 86 05’2 112’7 Yarmouth 06 92 09’6 122’5   92   122’5   Midlesex, Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk Include the Road, and the Lea, Rodon, Chelmer, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Blackwater, Coln, Stour, Gipping, Waveney and Yare are the Principal Rivers crost over; is a well beaten, well frequented and well Accomodated Road: Quality of the Way. Being one of the 6 Prime Post-Roads, corresponding thrice a week, but to Colchester dayly; and by them accounted 104 Miles, Thus: to Burntwood 16. to Witham 18. to Colchester 12. to Ipswich 16. to Saxmundham 16. to Beccles 16. and to Yarmouth 10. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 50’6. the Right to Harwich. At 56’4. the Right forward. At 57’1. the Left to Sudbury. At 57’4. the Left to Hadley. At 76’6. the Left acute. At 91’2. the Right acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 92’3. the Right acute. At 93’4. the Right acute. At 101’5. the Left forward. At 107’3. the Left forward. FRom LONDON to Colchester you have the account in the Harwich Road p. 37. Colchester N. E b E. thence at 53’3. through Ardley-Oak a small Village, leaving Ardley Church on the Right 6 Furlongs, you pass by several scattering Houses on the Road, and at 56’1. descend, leaving Langham on the Right, and a little after Dedham on the same hand 4 Furlongs, and Boxsted on the Left 2 Furlongs; Stratford Street 57 m. crossing the Stour you pass through Stratford-Street a small Vill. and by the Church on the Right at 57’5 and Brant∣ham at 58’2 on the same hand, then you pass through a hollow way call'd Wenham, lea∣ving the Church 4 Furlongs on the Left; at 61’6. [61’6. E.] you have Capel Church a small di∣stance on the Left, passing by the White-Horse Inn on the Left and a Coppice on the Right, and at 63’3. through White-Elm a small Village, Copdock 64 m. and 5 Furlongs farther by Cop∣dock on the Right; thence an indifferent straight way crossing Hanford Bridg over the Gippe or Orwel conveys you to Ipswich at 67’4. Whereof having in Succeeding Plates farther occasion to Discourse, We shall here thus briefly Illustrate. Ipswich, in Saxon Gyppwic and Gypes-wic, perchance from the River Gippe or Gypping, Ipswich 68 m. and that from Geap incurvus, Flexuosus, alluding to its winding Course; It Extends from St. Mathews to St. Helens along the Road near a Mile, and as much from North to South, and is pleasantly seated, gently descending Southwards, upon the foresaid Ri∣ver, over which it hath a Bridg leading to that part of the Town call'd Stoke: A place of great Antiquity, once Fenc'd about with a Wall or Rampire, the Vestigia whereof are yet here and there to be Trac'd: It Numbered 800 Burgesses in the Con∣fessor's Time, at present is divided into 4 Wards, reckons 12 Parish Churches be∣sides some Chapels yet standing, and 7 or 8 other Churches and Chapels long since Ruin'd, being a large Compact, Beautiful and well frequented Corporation, Enjoying several Privileges, sending Burgesses to Parliament, holding Pleas for all Actions, &c. Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 10 Portmen, 24 Common-Council, 2 Chamberlains, a Recorder, Town-Clerk, &c. Enjoys a good Maritin Trade, hath 6 Markets Weekly
for Flesh and Fish, &c. and accounted heretofore 6 or 7 Religious Houses; has seve∣ral Goals both for Felons and Debtors; the Quarter Sessions for Ipswich Division are here Held, and the Town is Noted for the Birth of Cardinal Wolsey; shewing 2 fair Houses one of the Viscount Hereford's, another built be J. Sackvil sometime Ma∣ster of Requests, has a fair Guild-Hall, 2 Hospitals, a Free-School with a fair Library, several Alms-Houses, and a convenient Key and Custom-House. From Ipswich your way is generall Heathy, whence at 70’1. you leave Rushmere Church on the Left 4 Furlongs, Kesgrave 71’1. E. N. E. [73 m. N N. E.] Mertlesham 74’1. [74’6. N. E. b E.] and at 71’1. pass by Kesgrave on the Right, then by a Beacon and Saxford Hall on the Left, at 74’1. through Mertlesham a small Vil∣lage with an Inn or two in it, you enter Woodbridg at 75’2. Extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, of which take this short account. Woodbridg a large Town Extending near a Mile on the Road, Woodbridg 75’3. seated on the Ri∣ver Deben about 6 Miles from its Influx into the Ocean: Drives a good Trade ha∣ving several Ships of Burthen, Pinks, Hoys, &c. belonging to it; Their chiefest Co∣modities being Butter, Cheefe, Sackcloth, Plank, &c. which they Transport to seve∣ral Countries: Is the place where the Quarter Sessions for the Liberty of St. Etheldred and Audry are Held, hath a considerable Market on Wednsdays, especially for Hemp. From Woodbridg you at 76’5. Milton-street 76’5. pass through Milton-Street leaving the Church a lit∣tle distant on the Right, then by Ufford Church 2 Furlongs on the Right, you at 78’1. Ʋfford-street 78’1. Wickham 79’7. pass through Ufford-Street, thence a straight way conveys you by Pestrie Church on the Left, and at 79’7. to Wickham alias Market-Wickham an indifferent large Town of good Accomodation, though not Enjoying a Market it being lost by its Neighbor∣hood to Woodbridg, yet is of Note for having the General and Spiritual Courts Held here by the Arch-Deacon of Suffolk for the Eastern part of the County, and for its Spire being a Sea-Mark to Sailers. At 80’4. Parham-Ash 80’6. Marlsford 82’4. you cross Wickham Bridg, 2 Furlongs farther passing through Parham-Ash a small Village, and at 82’4. through Marlsford another small Village, then through Little Glenham at 83’1. Glenham 83’1. N. [84’2. N. E.] [85’4. N.] Saxmundham 86’7. [89’7. N. E. b E.] leaving the Church and Hall on the Right, and at 84 Miles pass by Stradford Church on the Left, and after by Farnham and Strenfield on the Right and Benham on the Left, you enter Saxmundham alias Saxlingham at 86’6. of 3 Furlongs Extent, and good Entertainment, having a Market on Thursdays. Then by several scattering Houses, Yoxford 91’3. Henton-street 94’6. Blyborough 97’1. N. [100 m. N. W. b N.] [101’5. N. b E.] [107’3. E. N. E.] leaving Helsale Church on the Right, at 91’4. you pass through Yoxford, leave Darsham Hall, Park and Church on the Left, and through Brussel-Green at 93’4. and Henton-Street at 94’6. enter Blyborough at 97 Miles, seated on the Blyth of 4 Furlongs Extent; formerly a Market Town, and still affording some good Inns for Reception; Hence by Henham Hall and Park adjacent on the Right, and Uggeshal, Brampton and Stanfield on the same hand, at 103’7. passing by a Sun-Dial on the Left, Beckles 107’5. and after between Weston Church and Hall you enter Beckles at 107’4 of 3 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Waveney, whence they pass by water to Yarmouth, a large Town with a good Market on Saturdays, and the place where the Quarter Sessions for the Division of Beccles are Held. At the end of the Town you cross the River Waveney aforesaid enter Norfolk, and pas∣sing by Gillingham House on the Right, Hadsko 112’7. [115’2 E.] and St. Maries and All-Saints Churches on the Left come to Hadsko at 112’7. a small Village with a very good Inn, where the Road from Norwich to Yarmouth falls in on the Left; whence over Hadsko Dam and re-passing the Wa∣veney at 115’3. St. Olaves 115’5. Fritton 116’3. [117’1. N. E.] [119’7. N. b E.] Gorleston 120’5. re-enter Suffolk and come at 115’5. to St. Olaves, at 116’4. to Fritton, and at 120’6. to Gorleston small Villages, and at 121’6. to Little Yarmouth according as 'tis design'd, crossing the Yare at 122’4. and at once entring Norfolk and Great Yarmouth, a large strong and well-built Corporation, Market and Sea-Port Town, well Inhabi∣ted and frequented, Enjoys several Privileges and Immunities; has a great Fishing Trade, Yarmouth 122’5. and yields a ready Passage to Holland. [As in Lyn to Yarmouth pag. 151.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. Against Bradwel, the Right and Left acute. 2. 9 Furl. beyond Beccles, the Right to Halesworth the Left acute. 3. A Furlong beyond Blyborough the Left acute. 4. At the end of Ipswich, the Right to Norwich 5. 3 Furl. short of Stretford, the Right to Hadley.
The Road from BRISTOL cō Glouc: to ANBURY com̄ Oxō By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r H Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 74 Miles  furlongs vizt. to Chipping-Sodbury 12. les to Tetbury 23’2 fur: to Cirencester 20’2 to Burfo 26’3 to South Newton 27 to Banbury 6 Miles.
HITHERTO We have Illustrated the Direct Roads, un∣der the Title of Independants and Dependants; We come next to the Cross Roads, which having Distinguisht in∣to Principal and Accidental; We begin with the Princi∣pal Cross Roads, and therein Prosecuting Alphabetical Order from the Initial Town of each Road, We Exhibit in the First place. The Road from Bristol to Banbury, In Oxfordshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing E.N.E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 66 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 55 M. 4. The Dimensuration 74’7. From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Sodbury 10 10 12’0 12’0 Tetbury 09 19 13’2 25’2 Cirencester 07 26 10’2 35’4 to Burford 12 38 16’3 51’7 South-Newton 12 50 17’0 68’7 Banbury 05 55 06’0 74’7 Glocestershire and Oxfordshire Contain the whole Road, and the Froom, Churn, Coln, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Leach, Windrush and Evenlode are the Principal Rivers crost over; The quality of the way. affording generally good way, and reasonable Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At the end of BRISTOL, the Right to LONDON. At 1’6. the Right to Kings Wood Chace. At 4’2. the Left to GLOCESTER. At 5’2. In Hanborow, the Left to GLO∣CESTER. At 24’7. the Right forward At 31’0. the Right to Kemble. At 36’0. the Right to LONDON. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 39’2 the Left to Barnesley. At 52 M. at the end of Burford, the Left to Stow. At 68’6. at the entring South Newton, the Right forward. At 71’4. the Left to Wigginton. FRom the High-Cross in BRISTOL you take your way through Castle Gate and Laufords Gate, where omitting the forward way to LONDON, BRISTOL N.E. b N. you bear to the Left, and at 2’2. cross a Stone-bridg of 2 Arches over the Froom, and 4 Furl. farther pass through Stapleton a small Village, yet of good Accomodation; Stapleton 2’7. then by Sr. Maurice Berkley's House on the Left, at 5’3. pass through Hambrook, Hanborow 5’2. re-passing the Froom; whence over several small Rills, and at 9’1. passing through May's Hill, May's Hill 9’1. [9’2. E. N. E.] Wiblet 9’5. Yate 11’1. Chipping Sodbury 12 m. and 4 Furlongs farther Wiblet 2 small Villages, you leave Westerley and Wapleigh Churches on the Right, and at 11’1. pass through Yate another small Village. At 11’6, you enter Sodbury alias Chipping Sodbury Extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, seated in a bottom; an Antient Borough-Town, Enjoying a great Market for Corn, Cheese, &c. on Thursdays: Whence at 15’1. you ascend a small Hill, and at 17’3. pass by Badminton Park, the Marquess of Worcesters on the Right, cross a small Vale, and
at 19’3. Didmerton 19’3. pass through Didmerton a scattering Village of 3 Furlongs, just upon the Edg of the County. At 21’6. you pass over a Vale, leaving Burton and Weston on the Right, and at 25’1 enter Tetbury Extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, Tetbury 25’2. and as much transverse, seated near the Confines of Wiltshire, an indifferent large Town; Govern'd by a Bailiff, &c. Drives a Considerable Trade, and its Market on Wednsdays, is well Provided with Corn. Cattel, Cheese, Malt, &c. Whence at 32 Miles you come to a small ascent, and 4 Furlongs farther crossing a Vale a straight way leads you at 35’3. into Ciren∣cester vulgo Cisseter, Cirencester 35’4. by the Saxons Cirenceaster, by the Britans Caer-Cori as situate on the River Churn; a place of great Antiquity, being a City of good account in the Time of the Romans: Its Walls 2 Miles in Circumference, strengthn'd with a Castle now Ruinous,, and here the Roman Port or Foss way's met; it is at present a good Town, sending Burgesses to Parliament, and Enjoys 2 Markets weekly, on Mundays and Fri∣days; well Provided with Corn, Wooll, Yarn, &c. At the end of Cirencester you cross the Churn aforesaid, which rising on Cotswold Hills near Crekelade falls into the Thames, at 37 Miles you leave Holyrood-Amney on the Right, where you ascend a small Hill seconded by 2 descents, and at 38’6. ascen∣ding easily again, you leave Bransley Church a little on the Left, crossing the great Road that leads from LONDON to GLOCESTER at 39’7. then at 40’6. you descend a little, Bywel 42’2. and at 42’2. pass through Bywel or Bybury a small Village, where you cross the Coln. At 44’6. [45’6. E.] you cross the Leach in a Valley, and 3 Furlongs beyond descend a small Hill, and leave Aulsworth Church a little on the Left; then at 47’7. you come to the 3 Shire-Stones, where you enter Oxfordshire (an Included part of Barkshire ly∣ing between the 2 Counties on the Left) at 48’3. [48’2. E.N.E.] Burford 51’7. N. E. b N. you leave Weston Church on the Right, and at 51’6. you come to Burford a well frequented Corporation and Mar∣ket Town, seated on the River Windrush which you Cross at 52 Miles. [vid. SA∣LISBURY to Campden pag. 169.] You leave the Town altogether on the Right, pass by Fulbrook on the Left, at 54’4. descend 4 Furlongs, and at 56’2. leaving Shipton Underwood a little on the Right, and Bruern Abby on the Left, cross the Evenlode; thence a reasonable direct way, [63’5. E.N E.] crossing the great Road from LONDON to WORCESTER at 63 Miles conveys you at 66’2. to a small descent, by Swarford and afterwards Wigginton and Swack∣ling Churches on the Left, South-Newton 68’7. and at 68’6. to South-Newton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent. Hence by Milcomb Church on the Left, Bloxham 71’1. N.b E. at 71’1. you pass through Bloxham a Vil∣lage Extending 2 Furlongs on the Road; whence by Wickham on the Left, at 74’3. you enter Banbury, Banbury 74’7. the account of which you have in LONDON to Buckingham pag. 23. Adding this that it Enjoys several Privileges and Immunities, sends one Burgess to Parliament, has Privilege of Keeping Courts for the Tryal of all Actions under 40 l. Is Dignifi'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Edward Knowles Earl of Banbury, &c. has a fair large Church which with the Town not long since Suffer'd much by Fire; this Town is of Note for being the place where Kenric King of the West Saxons put the Britains to flight, and for a Battel here Fought between the Houses of York and Lan∣caster, in which the Lancastrians had the better, there taking King Edward the 4th Prisoner. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. A Furlong beyond Banbury, the Left to LONDON. 2. 3 Furl. beyond Bloxham, the Right for∣ward. 3. In South-Newton the forward to Wiginton. 4. 4 Furl. short of the great Worcester Road, the Right acute. 5. 1 M. 3 Furl. beyond the said Road, the Left to Chalbury. 6. 2 Furl. beyond Evenlode Fluv. the Right to Milton. 7. At the entring Burford, the Left up the Town to Lechlade. 8. 3 Furlongs short of Bybury, the Left acute. 9. 3 Furlongs beyond Bybury, the Right acute. 10. Against Barnsley, the Left forward. 11. 7 Furl. short of Hambrook, the Right to Winterborn. 12. A Furlong beyond Hambrook, the Left to Henshaw.
The Road from BRISTOL com. Glo to West CHESTER By IOHN OGILBY Esqr His Maties Cosmographer Containing 245 mile 5 Furlongs viz.t From the high cross in BRISTOL to Aust Ferry 12 to Chepstow including ye: edth of ye: Riuer 6 mile to MONMOVTH 13:7: to HEREFORD 18:6 to Leomin∣ster 14:3:to Ludlow to 6 to HESTER 69 m 7 Furl:
The Road from Bristol to West-Chester. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 112 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 102 M. 4. The Dimensuration 145’5. From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Aust-Ferry 10 10 12’0 12’0 Chepstow 05 15 06’0 18’0 Monmouth 10 25 13’7 31’7 HEREFORD 12 37 18’6 50’5 Leominster 10 47 14’3 65’0 to Ludlow 08 55 10’6 75’6 Church Stretton 10 65 15’4 91’2 Shrewsbury 09 74 13’7 105’1 Whitchurch 14 88 20’0 125’1 CHESTER 14 102 20’4 145’5 Glocestershire, Monmouthshire, Herefordshire, Counties past through. Shropshire and Cheshire Include the whole Road; and the Froom, Seavern, Wye, Trothy, Monow, Arrow, Lugg, Temd, Corue, Oney, Mele, Rivers crost over. Roddon and Dee are the Principal Rivers crost over: Quality of the Way. Affording no pleasant way to Mon∣mouth nor indeed throughout, being generally rough hard and uneasie even to the very end, yet somewhat recompenc't by the goodness of the Towns past through, though not for their frequency. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1 Mile the Right to Ridland. At 16’4. The forward to Micheldean. At 17’4. The Right to Covert at Chepstow-Bridg. At 18’2. The forward to Newport at the end of Chepstow. At 24’2. The Left to Ragland. At 28’3. The Left acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 31’5. The Left in Monmouth to Abergeveny At 32’1. The Right to Coverd. At 36’4. The Left to Treworgan. At 46’5. The Left acute. At 51’3. The Left to Peon vulgo Pewn. At 67’7. At the end of Lyston, the Left acute. FRom BRISTOL through St. BRISTOL W.N.W. [1’5. N. b W.] Westbury. 3’2. Compton 6’7. John's Gate and over Froom Bridg you go up a steep ascent, leaving the Gallows on your Right, passing by several scattering Houses, and at 3 Miles descending into Westbury a small Village, you ascend again, whence an Inclos'd way by several stragling Houses leads you at 7 Miles to Comp∣ton a scattering Village; then over Swansey Common, leaving Knowl House and Auns∣bury Church 6 Furlongs on the Right, an open way over several Dikes, and by se∣veral repeated Houses brings you at 10’3. to Aylberton, Aylberton 10’3. and at 12 Miles to Aust-Ferry (where on your Right are 2 Houses for Entertainment of Passengers when the Boats are not ready) a Passage near three Miles over, Batesley 14’7. conveying you cross to Batesley vulgo Beachley a small Village with 2 very good Inns in it. Hence between the Seavern and Wye at 16’4. [16’4. W. N. W.] [17’4. S. W. b W.] you omit the forward way to Micheldean, and bearing to the Left pass by several scattering Houses, then at 17’2. you descend, and at 17’6. cross the Wye over a large Wooden Bridg and at once enter Monmouthshire; and Chepstow, in Brittish Castle-Went, Chepstow 18 m. an Antient Townsaid to be Rais'd out of the Ruins of Venta silurum: It is seated in a botton on the Bank of the said Wye near it's Confluence with the Seavern; was formerly Wall'd, [18’2. N. W. b W.] is at present Fortifi'd with a Castle and Garrison, has a Market on Saturdays (formerly very Considerable, but now with the Town much Decay'd) and 3 Fairs annually, Friday in Whitson Week, first of August, and Friday afore St. Luke. The aforesaid Wye rises on Plinillimon Hill in Montgomerysh. passes by Ryadergowye, Bealth, Hay, Hereford, Ross, Monmouth and this place, and by Batesley falls into the Seavern Sea, receiving into it 1st. the Darwen, 2d. the Clarwen and therein the Clarthy and Eland, 3d. the Ithon and therewith the Comaron, Clawedok and Hawye, 4th. the Weverny, 5th. the Irvon, and therein the Dilas, Camarch and Delas, 6th. the Edwie, 7th. the Machwie, 8th. the Lleveny 9th. the Dulas, 10th. the Lug and therewith the Somergil, Wadels, Oney, Arro and Frome, 11th. the Garra and therein the Gamer, 12th. the Monow and therewith the Escle, Olcon, Hothny and Doier, Lastly, the Trothy.
Where at the end of the Town you omit the forward Way to Newport, [19’4. N. N. W.] and bearing to the Right ascend 4 Furlongs, and at 20 Miles pass by St. Ann's Ash on the Left, and 2 Furlongs beyond ascend again 4 Furlongs, then at 21’6. you descend 6 Furlongs, and over Tintern Bridg, leave the Iron Mills on the Right; thence through Part of Wise Wood, Trelagh Grange, 23’3. [24’2 N.] Trelagh, 25’6. at 23’3. you pass through Trelagh Grange a scattering Village, and by several separated Houses, and an open Way on the Right, come at 25’5. to Trelagh of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence a Hilly and for the most part open Way, leaving the Gogheker on the Left, and Lediard House on the Right, where you descend 8 Furlongs, brings you to a Stone-Bridg in the Bottom over the River Trothy, leaving Troy House on the Right about 2 Furlongs. At 31’1. [31’5. E.] Monmouth, 31’7. [32’1. N. by E.] 34’2. N. by W.] you enter Monmouth extending a Mile on the Road, [for which vid. LONDON to St. Davids, pag. 31.] Whence at 33 Miles you pass by the Gal∣lows on the Left, and a Mile farther by Buccol Wood on the same Hand: enter He∣refordshire, and at 36 Miles leave Welsh-Newton Church on the Right, and Lady-well on the Left; at 37 Miles you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 39 Miles pass by Trepen∣bennet House on the Right and cross the Garran, passing at 40 Miles between Triago House and St. Wannerds Church; and at 41’2. by Hendry House on the Right, a straight Way bringing you to Lyson Hill an Ascent of 2 Furlongs; whence by Grove House on the Left at 42’5. Callow House on the Left at 46’5. and Callow Hill and Aconbury Hill on the Right, and Callow Church on the Left at 47 Miles; you come to Red Hill on the Left at 48’6. and at 50’1. enter the City of HEREFORD by the Way of Wye-Bridg Gate. HEREFORD, HEREFORD, 50’7. rais'd out of the Ruins of the antient Ariconium, seated on the Wye, had formerly a strong Castle now Ruinous, hath several good Buildings both Publick and Private; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 5 Justices, 26 Com∣mon-Councel; sends Burgesses to Parliament; Gives Title to the Right Honorable Leicester d'Evereux Viscount Hereford, &c. Has 3 good Markets Weekly, viz. Wedns∣days Fridays and Saturdays, and 3 Fairs yearly, [whereof vid. more in GLOCESTER to Montgomery, pag. 141.] At the End of HEREFORD you pass by Mr. Conisby's Hospital on the Right, and at 52’6. by Holmers Church on the Left, and a little farther have Brundles Oak in the Road; [58’4. N. by E.] at 53’6. you leave Pipe Church on the Right, and at 55 Miles pass by Morton upon Lug on the same Hand; whence between Wellington and Marden, each distant about 6 Furlongs: at 58 Miles you come to the Foot of Dinmore Hill, ascending 5 Furlongs and descending again 7 Furlongs; whence by Hope Church and Hampton Court on the Right, you touch upon the Banks of the Lug, and come to Wharton a small Village at 61’2. Wharton, 61’2. N.N.W and leaving Mr. Whitehal's House on the Right, at 62’1. Evington, 62’1. Lemster, 65’0. N.b.E. pass through Evington another small Village, and 2 Furlongs farther cross the Arrow, and at 64’3. enter Leominster, vulgo Lemster, extending a Mile on the Road, [for which vid. LONDON to Aberistwith, pag. 5.] From Lemster crossing the Lug at the End of the Town, you at 67’2. enter Lys∣ton of 4 Furlongs Extent; Lyston, 67’4. at 70 Miles leave Orleton on the Right 3 Furlongs, and by the Maidenhead Inn and some other Houses contiguous on the Left, [73’1. N.E.] and Richard's Castle and Church 4 Furlongs distant on the same Hand; at 73’2. pass by More House, and afterwards Overton, Hitchbarn and Charlton Orchard successively on the Right; Ludlow, 75’6. and at 75’3. entring Shropshire, crossing the Temd and arriving at Ludlow, a large, strong and well-inhabited Corporation and Market-Town, as in the next Plate. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furl. beyond Moor House the Left. 2. 4 Furl. short of Ladywel the left to Ross 3. 3 Furlongs beyond Monmouth the Left to Troy House. 4. 2 Furlongs beyond Trothy Bridg, the Right to Michel Troy. 5. At the entring Trelagh the Right to Ragland. 6. At the end of Aylberton the Left to Tuckington. 7. 2 Miles short of Westbury the Right to Shire-Hampton.
The Continuation of he Road from BRISTOL to CHESTER Commencing at LVDW com̄ SHREWS and extending CHESTER By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 69 mile  Furlongs vizt. From Lvdlow to Church Stretton 15 m 4 Furl: to Shrews bvry 13:7 to Whithvrch 20: to Chester 20:
The Continuation of the Road From BRISTOL to West-CHESTER. PLATE II. Commencing at Ludlow in Shropshire, and Extending to West-CHESTER aforesaid. Containing 69 Miles 7 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At the end of Ludlow, the Right to Henley and Sutton. At 76’4. The Left to Lady Chaulton. At 77’4. The Right to GLOCESTER, the Left to Bromfield. At 79’1. The Left to Watton. At 83’4. The Left to Bishops Castle. At 96’2. The Right to Longnor. At 110’2. The Right to Astley. At 118’6 & 7. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The Right to Stanford Hall and Newport. At 125’4. At the end of Whitchurch, the Right to Hinton Hall. At 128 M. the Right to Willowmore. At 135 M. the Left acute. At 137 M. the Left to Thouley. At 142’5. The Left acute. At 143’0. The Right acute. VVE brought you to Ludlow in Plate the 1st. Ludlow N. W. which We here thus briefly Describe: Ludlow seated on the Banks of the Temd and Corve, a large well built, well Inhabited and frequented Corporation and Market Town; contain∣ing 4 Wards, viz. Castle-Street, Broad-Street, Old-Street, and Garford and Corve-Street: Enjoying several Privileges as sending Burgesses to Parliament, being the place where the Court for the Marches of Wales is Kept; and having Liberty of Hanging and Drawing within themselves distinct from the County; Is Fortifi'd with a Wall having 7 Gates, viz. Garford-Gate, Corve-Gate, Liney-Gate, Dinam-Gate, Mill-Gate, Broad-Gate and Old-Gate, and a strong Castle, is beautifi'd with a fair large Church former∣ly Collegiate, hath an Alms-House for 30 Poor People: Is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, a Recorder, 12 Aldermen, 25 Common-Council, &c. hath a grand Market on Mun∣days, and 3 petty, Wednsdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, with 4 Fairs annually, Wednsday in Whitson Week, 10th. of August, 17th. of September and 25th. of November. Leaving Ludlow you cross the Corve and pass by Stanton-Lacy on the Right and Bromfield on the Left, and through Onibury at 80’5. then by Stoak Church, [79 m. W. b N.] Onibury 80’5. N.W. b N. Nowton 83’4. N. Castle and Park on the Left, and through Newton at 83’4. whence at 84’1. you pass by the Red-Lyon Inn on the Right, and crossing the Ony at 84’6. [86’6. N. N. E.] you are convey'd at 85’3. by Wistanstow Church on the same hand; then by a Wood on the Left and some scattering Houses on the Road, a straight way leads you at 89’5. Little Stretton 89’5. through Little Stretton, (several great Hills accompaning you on your Right and Left) and at 91 Miles to the entrance of Church Stretton which Extends 4 Furlongs on the Road, Church Stretton 91’2. and Enjoys a good Market for Corn, &c. on Thursdays. At the end of the Town you leave Sr. George Norton's House on the Left, All-Stretton 92’3. [94. m. N. b W.] Leborwood 94’7. and at 92’3. pass through All-Stretton a small Village, thence at 94’3. you pass through Leborwood a Village most on the Right, and in it cross the small River Quenny; at 96’3. you leave Sr. R. Corbet's House on the Right, Dedington 98 m. [99 m. N.] and at 98 Miles you pass through Dedington a small Village; then by Stapleton Church on the Left, and over Puley Common, at 103’3. you cross the River Mele near its Conjunction with the Sea∣vern, leaving Bracemeal Church on the Left, and are convey'd at 104’5. to Shrewsbury Extending this way 10 Furlongs on the Road, but more transverse; Is a large well built Corporation Market and Shire-Town, the account of which you have in LON∣DON to Shrewsbury pag. 46. Adding that it was of Note formerly for its Stately Abby, that and the Castle being built by Roger Earl of Montgomery: Is well Forti∣fi'd both by Art and Nature, having a strong Wall and Bulwark, with Gates, Towers and Barrs; Is well Inhabited both by English and Welsh, and drives a great Trade in Cottons, Frizes, Cloths, &c. which from hence are sent to LONDON. Leaving Shrewsbury you have Battlefield at 108’4. Hadnal at 110’2. Acton Rynol, Shrewsbury 105’3.
Sr. [112’6. N. N. E.] Vincent Corbet's at 112’6. and Lee at 115’2. all on your Left, little else occurring, but passing over Hadnal Heath and by Bosford Wood at some distance on the same hand, [118’4. N. b W. till at 115’2. aforesaid you cross the River Roddon which rising on the edg of Flintshire where it joyns to this County, passes by Wem, Morton Corbet and Charlton Castle and receiving the Tern and several other smaller waters, near Accham falls into the Seavern. At 115’4. you have a Road on the Left to Wem a Market Town about 2 M. distant, Prees 120’1. whence over Prees Heath at 120’1. you pass through part of Prees, the main body of the Town lying on the Right; thence by Prees Lodg on the Right also, Whitchurch 125’3. at 125’2. you enter Whitchurch of 2 Furlongs Extent, seated near the Con∣fines of the County, and Enjoys a good Market on Fridays; whence at 126’7. you cross Crinsley Bridg over a Brook and enter Cheshire, and passing by some scattering Houses you have Mr. Dod of Bellow-Hill his House on the Left, and the Bell Inn on the Right. At 129 Miles you ascend Callow Hill, and pass by Masson and Birch Houses on the Left, [131 m. N. N. E.] and leave Coffir Hill on the Right, and at 131’3. have Hampton Post on the Right and the Black Griffon Inn on the Left; [134 m. N.] then by Varne and Butterton Hills on the Right, and Mr. Bird and Mr. Dod of Broxon their Houses on the Left, at 136 Miles you have Puck House on the Left, and 4 Furlongs farther crossing Thouley Green, you leave the Plum of Feathers Inn on the Right and Thouley Oak on the Left. At 138’1. [141 m, N. W.] you have Hanley Church on the Right, then over Milton Green, Gol∣born Bridg, Hatton Heath, and by Routon a Village on the Left, and Glass-house Inn on the same hand, you fall in with the Road from LONDON at 144’6. and 2 Furlongs farther enter the Suburbs of the City of CHESTER, CHESTER 145’4. and 4 Furlongs beyond the City it self, which we have Illustrated in LONDON to Holyhead pag. 46. Adding this that it is Commodiously seated on the River Dee or Deva, over which it hath a fair large Stone-bridg Sustein'd by 7 Arches, at each end of the said Bridg is a Gate, the chief of which is call'd Water-Gate, to which Veslels of Considerable Burthen did formerly Arrive; but since the Choaking up of the Chanel, it will scarce∣ly carry small Boats, which occasions the Ships to come no farther than New-Key, a place about 6 Miles distant: Besides its 4 Gates it hath 3 Posterns, and on the Wall several Watch Towers and Battelments for the placing of Ordinance; The Cathedral was Founded by Leofricus an Officiary Count in these Parts, who Dedi∣cated it to St. Wereberg, Repair'd and Beautifi'd by Hugh Lupus; This City was made a County Corporate by King Henry the 7th.: And in the days of King Edgar was in good Esteem, when 7 Kings of the Scots and Britans (in Paying him Homage) Row'd his Barge from St. John's to his Palace, Himself as Supream Lord holding the Helm. Not far from this City is the Famous Forest of Delamere, in which Edelsted the Re∣nown'd Mercian Lady built a small City, long since Reduc'd to Ruin; the Place is now call'd by the Inhabitants the Chamber in the Forest. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furl. from CHESTER the Right acute, the Left to Namptwich, &c. 2. A Mile beyond Glashouse Inn, the Left to Warton. 3. Against Thouley Oak, the L. to Tatton Hall. 4. 10 Furlongs short of the Way-Post, the Left to Nantwich. 5. Against the Black Griffon Inn, the Left acute, and a Furlong farther the Right to Malpas. 6. 4 Furl. short of Birch House, the Right to Malpas. 7. Against Birch House, the Left acute. 8. 6 Furlongs short of Crinsley Bridg, the Right to CHESTER a different way. 9. The Left in Whitchurch to Eightfield. 10. A Furl. beyond Whitchurch, the Right to Wrexham. 11. 3 Furl. beyond Whitchurch, the Left to Ash. 12. At Prees the Left to Drayton. 13. 2 Furl. short of Roddon Fluv. the Right to Wem. 14. Against Sr. Vincent Corbet's House, the Left to Shobury. 15. Against Hadnal Chapel, the Left to Hadnal Green. 16. At Ony Fluv. the Right to Wigmore. 17. In Onibury the Right acute.
The Road from BRISTOL Com̄ Soms. to EXETER Com̄ Devō. By IOHN OGILBY Es His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 78, Miles 4 furlongs vizt From BRISTOL to Bishps Chue 7’1 to WELLS 11’7 to Glastonbury 5’6 to einton 6’5 to Lyng 8’2 to Taunton 8’2 to Wengton 7’1 to Welland 10’1 to Bradinch 5 miles and to EXETER 8 m 6 furl
The Road from Bristol to Exeter. 1. THe Point of Bearing S.W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 63 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 60 M. 4. The Dimensuration 78’4. From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Bishops-Chue 6 06 07’1 07’1 WELLS 9 15 11’7 19’0 Glastonbury 4 19 05’6 24’6 Greinton 5 24 06’5 31’3 Lyng 7 31 08’2 39’5 to Taunton 6 37 08’0 47’5 Wellington 5 42 07’1 54’6 Welland 8 50 10’0 64’6 Bradinch 4 54 05’0 69’6 EXETER 6 60 08’6 78’4 Somersetshire and Devonshire contain the whole Road, and the Avon, Chue, Parret, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Tone and Columb are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording in general no ill Road, being indifferent well frequented, Quality of the Way. and every where Accomodated with fitting En∣tertainment for Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 10’7. the Left to West-Hartry. At 13’1. the Right to Priddy. At 19 M. in WELLS, the Right to Hunt∣spil. At 24’6. the Right in Glastonbury to Bridg∣water. At 25 M. the Left at the end of Glastonbury to Pennard. At 25’4. the Left acute. At 26’4. the Left in Streat to Somerton. At 31’3. the Right in Greinton to Shapwick. At 35’7. the Right to Bridgwater. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 37’6. the Left to Langport. At 42’6. the Left to Charlton. At 44’1. the Right acute. At 48’3. the Left to Blackdon. At 57’6. the Right at the end of Whithal to Thurlston. At 58’7. The Left to Columb-Stoak. At 62’0. the Right to Samford. At 68’0. the Right acute. SEtting forward from the High-Cross in BRISTOL, you pass the Bridg, BRISTOL S.W. b S. and bearing to the Right down Redclif-Street leave the Suburbs at 1 Mile; Bedminster 1’4. where you cross a Brook, and 4 Furlongs farther pass through Bedmister a Village well frequented by the Neighboring Citizens; whence at 3’2. Bisport 3’2. [5 m. S. b E.] you pass through Bisport a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and at 4’3. you ascend 4 Furlongs and leave Dundry Church on the Right, seated on an Eminence; crossing a Vale leave Winford on the Left, then at 6’3. you descend 4 Furlongs, Bishops-Chue 7’1. and at the bottom enter Bishops-Chue of 4 Furlongs Extent, seated on the small River Chue a Village affording good Acco∣modation. Leaving the Town at 8’1. you ascend 3 Furlongs, [9’2. S.W.] pass by West-Hartry Church on the Left, and at 11’6. ascend a Hill of 7 Furlongs height, [13 m. S.] seconded with a small descent; whence little occurs but passing over Mendip Downs, and by the Lead Mines till at 16’7. you descend a Hill of 12 Furlongs, at the bottom whereof you enter the City of WELLS, which We have Illustrated in LONDON to BATH and WELLS pag. 70. WELLS 19 m. S. W At the end of the City you cross a Brook and pass by the Gallows on the Right, thence over Cockley Bridg and Cranley Bridg both of Stone, at 22 M. you pass through Polsham a small Village, Polsham 22 m. S. and entring on a Causeway you have Cranwel Moor on the Right and Sedg Moor on the Left, where you cross Hartley Bridg of Stone over a small River. Leaving the Moors at 23’4. you presently ascend 4 Furlongs and pass by the Tor on the Left, 2 Furlongs farther entring Glastonbury Extending 6 Furlongs on the Road; Glastonbury 24’6. In Times past the Isle of Avalon, so call'd from the British Word Afel i. e. Pomum, by the Saxons Glastn-ey i. e. Insula Vitrea; of Note formerly for its Antient Abby, in which (as suppos'd) was Interr'd the Body of Joseph of Arimathea, King Arthur and King Edgar; and next for its Tor near adjoyning, which is so highly seated that it
may be seen several Miles distant round the Country: The Town at present is large and well-built, Containing 2 Parish Churches, has a good Market on Tuesdays, and 2 Fairs annually, the 8th. of September and Michaelmas-Day; The chief Comodities then sold are Horses and Fat Cattel. From Glastonbury ascending you omit the forward way on the Left to Pennard, and bear to the Right, Northover 25’7. Streat 26’5. [27’1. W.] presently descending you pass through Northover a small Vil∣lage, and cross 2 Stone-bridges entring Streat at 26’3. a Village Extending 5 Fur∣longs on the Road; at the end of which you bear to the Right, and at 28’2. pass through Walton a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; Walton 28’2. then crossing the Road between Bruton and Bridgwater, you pass at 30’5. through a small Village, and 6 Furlongs farther through Greinton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Greinton 31’3. S.W. Middlesey 35’1. and at 35’1. through Middlesey a Village of 4 Furlongs long, and leave Andre Church on the Left. Hence at 37’5. you cross the River Parret, and leave St. Michaels-burrow Church on the Left, Lying 39’5. [40’7. W. b S] seated on an Eminence; and at 39’5. pass through Lying alias Lyng Ex∣tending 3 Furlongs on the Road, thence by several scattering Houses you come to Durston a small Village at 42 Miles, Darston 42 m. [44’1. S. W.] where you have a House of the Lord Hawley's on the Left, then a small descent by several scattering Houses on the Road, Monk∣ton Church on the Right, and by Bar-Pool, conveys you at 47 Miles to the entrance of Taunton or Thonton from its situation on the River Tone or Thone, Taunton 47’5. a large well built, well Inhabited and frequented Market-Town, (Extending a Mile on the Road) Containing 2 Parish Churches, was formerly strengthn'd by a Castle, now Ruinous; Is Govern'd by a Bailiff, &c. Drives a great Trade in Serges, it the best Town in the County, and hath 2 Markets Weekly Wednsdays and Saturdays, which are well Furnisht with all sorts of Provisions. Leaving Taunton you descend a small Hill, and at 50’3. pass through Ramwel a little Village where you descend again; whence by the Black-Lyon Inn and Buck∣land Church both on the Left, pass through Chesson at 53’3. where a small descent conveys you at 54’2. Wellington 54’6. into Wellington, seated on the aforemention'd Tone; the Town Extends 6 Furlongs on the Road, and hath a small Market on Thursdays: Hence 2 repeated descents convey you at 57’4. to the entring Devonshire, 2 Furlongs far∣ther you pass through Whitbal a small Village; Whitbal 57’6. S.W. b S. thence little occurs but passing 2 descents, and by Burloscomb Church on the Right, till at 64’4. you enter Welland a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent. From Welland you descend a small Hill, Welland 64’6. Columpton 67 m. and pass through Five-Bridges a small Village, and at 66’6. enter Columpton alias Colehampton Extending 4 Furlongs on the Road; seated near the Columb, and has a Market on Saturdays: Leaving Columpton you ascend a Hill, Bradinch 69’6. and at 69’3. pass over a Vale, and a Furlong beyond enter Bradinuch of 5 Furlongs Extent, seated likewise on the Columb, which before its Devastation by Fire Enjoy'd a Market which is now dis-us'd: At 70’6. you again cross a Vale, and at 71 Miles descend a small Hill, and a Mile farther cross the aforesaid Columb; passing through Kelleton at 72’7. Kelleton 72’7. a Village of 2 Furlongs length, whence by Broadclist Church on the Left, you ascend a small Hill at 75’5. and descend again at 76’4. entring the City of EXETER at 78’2. EXETER 78’4. the account of which you have in LONDON to the Lands-End pag. 54. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At Columb Fluv. the Left to Columb John. 2. At the end of Bradinch, the Left acute. 3. In Columbton the Right acute. 4. 2 Furlongs beyond, the Left to Hal∣berton. 5. In Welland the Right to Ufcolumb. 6. 2’2. beyond Welland, the Left to Ash∣ford. 7. 6 Furl. farther the Right to Ufcolumb. 8. 4 Furl. beyond Wellington, the Left to Minhead. 9. 2 Furlongs from Taunton, the Right to Langport. 10. Opposite to Monkton Church, the Left acute. 11. At the end of Glastonbury, the Right acute. 12. 3 Miles beyond the Lead Mines, the Right to West-Hartry.
The Road From — BRISTOLL to WORCESTER. By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Matie. Cosmographer Containing 62 miles viz.t. From Bristoll to Acton 9. m. 4. Furlongs — to Dursley 22. m. 6. to Whitmister. 7 m. 2. Fur to Glocester 7. m. to ewksbury 10. m. 2. to Severnstoake 3. to orcester 7. m. 2.
The Road from Bristol to Worcester. 1. THe Point of Bearing N.N.E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 51 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 50 M. 4. The Dimensuration 62 M. From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Acton 08 08 09’4 09’4 Dursley 10 18 12’6 22’2 Whitmister 06 24 07’2 29’4 GLOCESTER 06 30 07’0 36’4 to Tewksbury 8 38 10’2 46’6 Severnstoke 6 44 08’0 54’6 WORCESTER 6 50 07’2 62’0   50   62’0   Glocestershire and Worcestershire contain the whole Road; and the Frome, Stroud, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Swilyate and Avon, are the principal RIvers crost over; affording in general no ve∣ry good Road, yet furnish't with handsom Towns and fitting Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At the End of BRISTOL the Right to LONDON. 2 Miles The Right to Westerley, Puckle-Church, &c. 4’6. The Left, the direct Road to GLOCESTER. 6’0. The Right to Sodbury. At 9’5. The Right in Acton to Sodbury. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. 22’6. The Left to Stinchcomb and Cam∣bridg the Hill-way. 36’5. The forward in GLOCESTER to Cheltenham. 46’7. The R. in Tewksbury to Evesholm, 48’4. The forward to Ashchurch. SEtting forward from the High-Cross in BRISTOL, BRISTOL, N.E. you take your Way through Castle-Gate and Laufords-Gate, and at 7 Furlongs omitting the forward Way to LONDON, you bear to the Left, pass by some scattering Houses, and at 2’1. over a Stone-Bridg of 2 Arches cross the Frome, ascend 3 Furlongs, and at the Top pass through Stapleton a small Village; then by Sr. Stapleton, 3’1. Maurice Berkley's House on the Left, through Hamborough a scattering Village at 5’4. Hamborough, 5.4. omitting the Road on the Right to Sodbury at 6 Miles, you bear to the Left, Winterborn, 6’6. and 6 Furlongs farther come to Winterborn a small Village, then by Frampton Church on the Right, you are con∣vey'd to Acton at 9’3. a disunited Village of 3 Furlongs Extent, Acton, 9’4. N. b. E. with an Inn of good Reception. Leaving Acton, you pass through several disperst Houses on the Road, and at 11’3. through Rangeworth a discontinued Village; then again by several reiterated Houses, and crossing 2 small Brooks, Crumhal, 14’1. [16 Miles, N.E.] [19 Miles, E. by N.] you pass through Crumhal a small Village at 14’1. then at 14’5. you ascend 3 Furlongs, and have Tortworth Park accompany∣ing you on the Left for near a Mile; at 15’7. you descend 4 Furlongs, and at 17’1. in a Vale, over a Wood-Bridg you cross a small River, and leave a Fulling-Mill on the Right. Hence a very irregular Road through a large Wood Part of Micklewood Chace, and by some disperst Houses, conveys you at 20 Miles to Part of Tortworth, Tortworth, 20 Miles. and 2 Furl. farther to an Ascent of above a Mile in Height, on which Ascent you pass through a Village call'd Stinchcomb-Bottom; then by Nibley Park on the Right, and the Beacon on the Left, through a Wood, and descending an Hill, you enter Dursley at 22’1. an indifferent large Town, beautify'd with a large Church, Dursley, 22’2. N. b. E. in the Church-yard arises a Spring call'd New Elm, that drives a Mill within half a Furlong: The Town is Govern'd by a Bailiff and Under-Bailiff, enjoys a Market every Thursday, and 2 Fairs annually, St. Mark's Day, and St. Clements; is chiefly inhabited by Clothiers, who drive a considerable Trade. Leaving the Town, you at 22’6. descend 3 Furlongs, Cam. 23’4. and enter Cam a discon∣tinued Village, extending above a Mile on the Road, and in it over a Wooden-Bridg cross a small River, a Branch of the Severn; whence at 26’4. you pass
through Cambridg a small Village of good Accomodation, Cambridg, 36’4. N. E. b. N. and here falls in the Road from BRISTOL which issued out on the Left at 4’6. At 27’3. over a Wooden-Bridg you cross a Brook, and at 28’7. over another Wooden-Bridg cross the River Stroud (not far from its Confluence with the Severn) and leave Easting∣ton-House 4 Furlongs on the Right, Whitmister, 29’4. Putley, 30’6. Parkin, 31’2. passing through Whitmister a small Village at 29’4. of good Accomodation; then through Putley and Parkin both small Villages with Inns in them; crossing a Stone-Bridg and Brook at 31’6. and by Hardwich Church on the Left, Quodgley, 33’4. you are convey'd at 33’4. through Quodgley Green a disconti∣nued Village, the Church lying on the Left; then crossing a Wooden-Bridg and Brook at 34’3. and a Stone-Bridg and Brook at 36 Miles, you enter the City of GLOCESTER, GLOCESTER, 36’4. which here extends a Mile on your Road, the Account of which you have in LONDON to St. David's pag. 29. Leaving GLOCESTER, Kingsholm, 37’4. you pass through Kingsholm a small Village, and at 38 Miles through Longford a discontinued Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; Longford, 38 Miles. then cross∣ing some small Waters or Rills, Twigworth 39’1. [39’4. N. b. E.] [40’4. N. E. b. N.] [44 M. N. by W.] you enter Twigworth at 39 Miles, a Village of 3 Furlongs length; whence by Bishops Norton on the Right, and Lye on the Left, and by several disperst Houses on the Road, you are convey'd by Tredington Church and a great House both on the Right, at 46’3. to a Stone-Bridg over the small River Swilyate, Tewksoury, 46’6. and 2 Furlongs farther, to the Entrance of Tewksbury, a Market-Town, extending 4 Furlongs on the Road and as much transverse; by the Saxons Theocsbury, the Town or Temple of Theoc a religious Hermit, of Note formerly for its Monastery Founded by Dodo the Mercian, Anno 715. and for a bloody Battel here fought between the Houses of York and Lancaster, where the Lancastrians receiv∣ed a total Overthrow, and Prince Edward the onely Son of King Henry the 6th. be∣ing about 12 years of Age, had his Brains dasht out: It is a large Town Corpo∣rate, with one great Church in it Dedicated to St. Mary; contains about 500 Hou∣ses, is seated upon the Navigable Severn where the Avon and Swilyate empties them∣selves into it: The Town enjoys several Privileges, sends Burgesses to Parliament, is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 24 Chamber-Men, and 24 Assistants; hath 2 Markets weekly, on Wednsdays and Saturdays, well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions, and 5 Fairs annually, St. Mathias Day, the 3d. of May, St. Barnaby, St. Bartholomew, and St. Michael; drives a considerable Trade in Clothing, and is Noted for its Mustard-balls. From Tewksbury you first cross the Avon over 2 Stone-bridges, the one of 3 the other of 2 Arches; whence the Severn accompanies your Road on the Left to WORCESTER: At 49’4. over a Stone-bridg you cross a Brook and enter Wor∣cestershire, Riple, 50’5. and at 50’5. pass through Riple alias Rippel, a small Village; then leav∣ing Upton a Market Town on the Left, seated on the other side the Severn; you pass by several disunited Houses on the Road, and at 54’2. have a Seat of the Lord Coventry's on the Left, Severnstoke, 54’6. 4 Furlongs farther you pass through Severnstoke a small Village; Kemsey, 58 Miles. whence several repeated Houses conveys you at 58 Miles to Kemsey a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, little else occuring till at 61’3. WORCESTER, 62 M. you enter the Suburbs of the City of WORCESTER, which We have Il∣lustrated in LONDON to Aberistwith, pag. 3. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. In WORCESTER the forward to LONDON by Pershore. 2. A Mile beyond Pershore the Left to Pirton 3. In Kemsey the Right to the Severn and the Left to Draycot. 4. 2 Furlongs beyond Severnstoke the left to Pershore. 5. 1’5. Beyond Severnstoke the Right to Upton. 6. 2 Furlongs beyond Tewksbury the Right to Southwick. 7. 1’6. Beyond Tewksbury the Left to Cheltenham. 8. A Mile short of Parkin the Left to Stan∣dish. 9. At the End of Putley the Left to Hares∣field. 10. In Cambridg the Right being the direct Road to BRISTOL. 11. In Dursley the forward Way to Vley. 12. At the entring Tortworth the Left to Wooton Under-edg. 13. At the End of Tortworth the Left to Kingswood. 15. 10 Furlongs short of Tortworth Park the Left to Tedworth.
The Road from BRISTOL to WEYMOVTH com Dorset By IOHN OGILBY Esq His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 74 miles 4. Furlong vizt: From ye: high Cross in BRTOL to Bishops Chve 7 to Wells 12 to Glastonbury 5 6 to Somerton 8 to Martock 7 to Crokeom: 7:3: to South-Parret 24 to Frampton 127 & to Weymouth 12.
The Road from Bristol to Weymouth, In Com. Dorset. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 56 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 57 M. 4. The Dimensuration 74’4. From BRISTOL Comp. Measure. to Bishops Chue 06 06 07’0 07’0 WELLS 09 15 12’0 19’0 Glastonbury 04 19 05’6 24’6 Somerton 06 25 08’0 32’6 Martock 05 30 07’0 39’6 to Crookhorn 05 35 07’3 47’1 South Parret 02 37 02’4 49’5 Frampton 10 47 12’7 62’4 Weymouth 10 57 12’0 74’4   57   74’4   Somersetshire and Dorsetshire are the Counties past through; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Parret and South Froom are the principal Rivers crost over; it's an indifferent well-frequented Road, as leading from the Seavern or North Sea to the South Sea, yet a great part of it is a bad, deep Way, but is something recompenc'd by the reiterated good Towns and Places of Accomodation through which you pass. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 22 Miles the Right to Ashton At In WELLS the Right to Huntspil. At 24’6. The forward Way in Glastonbury to Bridgwater. At 33’0. At the End of Somerton the Right to Langport. At 35’1. The forward Way on the Right to Langport. At 40’0. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At the End of Martock the forward Way to Petherton. At 41’2. The Right to Petherton Bridg. At 50’6. The Left acute. At 50’7. The Left to North Parret. At 51’1. The Right to Chedington. At 66’4. The Left to Bradford. COmmencing at the High-Cross in BRISTOL you take your Way over the Bridg and along Redcliff-street, and at 1 Mile leave the Suburbs; then through Bedminster at 1’4. Bisport at 3’1. Bishops Chue at 7 Miles, as in BRISTOL to EX∣ETER, pag. 115. you are convey'd to the City of WELLS at 19 Miles, the Account of which you have in LONDON to BATH and WELLS, pag. 69. Adding, that it is an Episcopal See, under whose Jurisdiction is also that of BATH, its Cathethedral is a most beautiful Structure with 3 Towers, said to be Built by Ina King of the West Saxons, circa Ann. 704. besides which, it hath several grace∣ful Buildings both Publick and Private, as the Bishops Palace Wall'd and Moted, the Deans House, with the Houses of the Prebendaries; the Chapter consists of 50 Prebends, 8 Canons, 14 Singing Men and 6 Boys, with a Dean, Chaunter, Chan∣cellor, and 3 Arch-Deacons, viz. of BATH, WELLS and Taunton. Leaving WELLS, you pass through Polsham at 22 Miles, Glastonbury at 24’6. and Streat at 26’4. the Account of all which you have in the foremention'd Road from BRI∣STOL to EXETER pag. 115. In Streat omitting the acute Way on the Right to Taunton, &c. and at the End of it, the great Road on the Right to Bridgwater, &c. you proceed, and leave the Wind-Mill 2 Furlongs on the Left; then after 2 little Ascents, seconded with a Descent of 3 Furlongs, you are convey'd at 29’3. to Compton Dundo a small Village, where you leave the Beacon 6 Furlongs on the R. Compton Dundo, 29’3. Littleton, 30’7. Somerton, 32’6. and at 30’7. pass through Littleton another small Village, and after a little Ascent, you cross a Vale, and at 32’3. enter Somerton of 5 Furlongs Extent, seated on a Branch of the Parret, a Town formerly of good Note, and whence the County took its Name, it is now a large, but poor Town, yet enjoys a well-furnisht Mar∣ket on Mondays, once a fortnight, especially for lean Cattel, when it seemeth rather a Fair than a Market.
At 34’4. Long Sutton, 35’3. you pass by a Wind-Mill on the Right, and at 35’2. enter Long Sutton a Village of 2 Furlongs-Extent, lying most on the Right, but the Church on the Left; Longlode, 36’7. [37’3. S. S. E.] Martock; 39’6. whence at 36’4. crossing the Yeovel about 3 Miles below Ilchester, you enter Longlode of 6 Furl. Extent and some Accomodation; at 38’2. you pass through a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs, and at 39 Miles enter Martock, which with Bewer a Village adjoyning, extends 12 Furlongs on the Road, but most on the Right: It is a Town of good Reception, seated on a Branch of the adjacent Parret, and opposite to it appears Hampden a Noted Hill a Mile on the Left. Leaving the Town, you pass between Norton and Chisselborow on the Left, and South Petherton a Market-Town on the other side the Parret, on the Right; and at 43’6. West Chinock, 43’6. S. by W. pass through West Chinock a discontinued Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; thence over Bow-Bridg crossing a Branch of the Parret, by Meryot beyond the River on the Right; Crookhorn, 47’1. S. b. E whence ascending 4 Furlongs and equally descending, at 46’6. you enter Crookhorn or Crockhern of 3 Furlongs Extent and as much transverse; a well-frequent∣ed Market-Town, as seated on the great Western Road, to which We refer you, pag. 52. Leaving the Town you pass by several scattering Houses on the Road, and cross∣ing the Parret at 48’2. South Parret, 49’5. S. S. E. half a Mile beyond enter Dorsetshire, and after a little As∣cent, at 49’5. South Parret a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; a little beyond which, ascending a large Hill of 11 Furlongs Height, you leave the Long Ash on the Left, and a straight Course conducts you by Cross-Comb Church 4 Furlongs on the Left, and Esq Penney's Park contiguous on the Right, by the Three Sisters at 54’4. cer∣tain Trees so call'd; [55 M. S. by W.] [57’6. S. E. by S.] Maiden Newton, 66 M. whence little occurs, till at 59 Miles you descend 4 Furlongs, and at 59’6. enter Maiden Newton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent. At 61’4. Crokeway, 71’4. Frampton, 62’4. S. by W. you pass through Crokeway a small Village, and 6 Furlongs beyond, en∣ter Framton or Frampton of 4 Furlongs Extent, seated pleasantly on the Banks of the Frome, a River well stor'd with Trouts and other Fish; and the Town enjoys a small Market on Thursdays; at the End of the Town you cross the Frome aforesaid, and ascend a Hill of 4 Furlongs; [66 Miles S. by E.] Stepleton, 66’7. then crossing a Valley at 65’4. you are convey'd at 66’7. through Stepleton a small Village, where you ascend a Hill of 5 Furlongs, seconded with a small Descent; at 68’2. you ascend 3 Furlongs, equally descend∣ing; whence by Frier Waddon on the Right, and several discontinued Houses on the Road, an indifferent straight Way leads you at 73’7. to Melcomb Regis, and at 74’3. into Weymouth, Weymouth, 74’4. united and incorporated together, equally florishing and frequented, [the Account of both which you have in LONDON to Weymouth pag. 105.] They are situate on the Southermost Point of the County near Portland Isle, and are se∣cur'd by San'sfoot and Portland Castles: This Island contains but one Church, which standeth so near the Sea, that to preserve it, the Inhabitants have been forc'd to raise a Wall about it of a great Height: It produces good Corn and Pasturage, but above all, that excellent white Stone so much us'd in the City of LONDON and elsewhere; and hath several good Springs, but little or no Wood. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2’6. Beyond Melcomb Regis the Right to Dorchester. 2. 1’5. Beyond that, the Left to Waddon the upper Way. 3. The Right in Maiden Newton to Ever∣sholt. 4. A Furlong beyond South Parret the Left acute. 5. 6 Furlongs short of Crookhorn the Left acute. 6. In West-Chinock the Right to Hasel∣mere. 7. 4 Furlongs short of Bower the Right to Ilchester. 8. In Martock the Right-Hand Ways to Evil and Ilchester. 9. 2 Furlongs beyond Long Sutton the Right to Kingston. 10. 4 Furlongs short of Compton Dundo the Left to Bridgwater. 11. 4 Furlongs beyond Cumpton Dundo the Left acute. 12. At the End of Glastonbury the Right acute.
The Road from Cambridg to Coventry. 1. THe Point of Bearing W.N.W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 63 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 54 M. 4. The Dimensuration 80’6. From Cambridg Comp. Measure. to Elsley 8 08 11’5 11’5 St. Neot's 4 12 05’4 17’1 Great Stoughton 3 15 05’3 22’4 Higham-Ferries 7 22 12’0 34’4 to Northampton 10 32 15’1 49’5 Watford 08 40 11’5 61’2 Rugby 06 46 07’7 69’1 COVENTRY 08 54 11’5 80’6 Cambridgshire, Huntingdonsh. Bedfordsh. Northamptonsh. and Warwicksh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. are the Coun∣ties through which you pass; and the Cam, Owse, Nine, Avon and Sow, the chief Rivers crost over; affording in general a deep and unpleasant Way, which is in part recompenc'd by reiterated good Towns and publick Inns of Accomodation. Forward Turnings to be avoided. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At the End of Cambridg the Left to Bark∣way, &c. At 17’5. The Left to Bedford. At 34’5. The Left acute at the End of Higham-Ferries. At 39’1. The Right to Wellingborough. At 43’5. The Left acute. At 50’3. At the End of Northampton the Left acute. At 53’2. The Right acute. At 59’2. The Left to Daventre. At 62’4. At Watford Gap the R. to Shrews∣bury the Watling-street Way. At 67’0. At the End of Hilmorton the Left to Dunchurch. At 69’1. In Rugby the Left to Dun-Church. CAMBRIDG We Illustrated in LONDON to Lyn, pag. 86. Cambridg, N.W.b.W. whence leav∣ing the forward Way on the Left to Barkway, &c. and passing through Com∣mon Fields, at 2’1. you ascend 3 Furlongs, and leave Morebarn's House on the R. [3 Miles W. by N.] and Cotton Church on the Left, and at 3’4. pass by Madingley Church and Hall on the Right, and a Mile farther Hardwick Church on the Left; at 6’5. you leave Burn Church a Mile on the Left, and at 9’2. Caxton 4 Furlongs on the same Hand, and 2 Furlongs farther cross the great Road that leads from LONDON to YORK, &c. At 10’4. you leave Boxworth Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, Elsley, 11’5. and a Mile be∣yond pass through Elsley a small Village; then at 12’7. you leave Croxton Church on the Left, and 5 Furlongs farther enter Huntingdonshire, and passing by Weald at 14’2. a scattering Village of a Furlong distant on the Left; 6 Furlongs beyond you pass by Wentringham House a little distance on the same Hand, and at 16’7. St. Neots, 17’1. [17’5. N. W. b. W.] enter St. Neots a Market Town of 4 Furlongs Extent; [the Account of which you have in LONDON to St. Neots, pag. 89.] Leaving the Town, over a Stone-bridg you cross the Owse and enter Bedforshire, 7 furl. farther crossing the Road that leads from LONDON to LINCOLN, YORK, [21 Miles W. by N.] &c. Re-entring Huntingdonshire at 19’7. where you leave Weston Church 2 Fur∣longs on the Right; thence your Way is most open, till at 21’2. over a Stone-Bridg you cross a Brook, and pass through Great Stoughton, Great Stoughton, 22’4. a Village of good Ac∣comodation; and after crossing another Brook, pass between the Church and Hall, [25 M. N.W. by W.] leaving Little Stoughton at 24’4. half a Mile on the Left. At 25’3. you Re-enter Bedfordshire, Portenhil, 26 Miles. and at 26 Miles pass through Portenhil a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; then over a small Ascent succeeded by a like Descent, [30’3. W.N.W.] conveys you at 27’2. to the Entring of Huntingdonshire again; then leaving Swinhead Church 3 Furlongs on the Right, at 28 Miles you ascend 2 Furlongs, and a quar∣ter of a Mile beyond, descend 3 Furlongs, again entring Bedfordshire; you leave Milchborn Church on the Left 2 Furlongs; whence at 30’3. descending a small Hill,
you leave Yelding Church and Hall on the Right, and at 31’3. Newton Church on the Left, and ascending a Furlong, enter Northamptonshire. At 32’5. Higham-Ferries, 34’4 W. by S. you descend 3 Furlongs, and pass between Cheston and Rushdown, and at 34’2. enter Higham-Ferries, or Higham-Ferrers; seated on the Nine, of 3 Furlongs Extent; an ancient Corporation; sends one Burgess to Parliament; was formerly strengthned with a Castle now ruinous; has at present an Alms-House for 12 Men and one Woman, and a good Free-School: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 7 Aldermen, 13 Capital Burgesses, &c. Hath a Petty Market on Thursdays, and a Grand one on Saturdays, with 6 Fairs anually, viz. St. Mathias, Tuesday before May Day, St. Buttolph's, Tuesday before St. James Day, Michaelmas Day, and St. Ka∣therine's Day. Whence at 36’1. you ascend, and presently descend again, and at 37’5. pass by an Endship of Axchester on your Right; [38’2. W.] and at 39 Miles you cross the Nine and the Road that leads from LONDON to Oakham, and leave Wellingboro a Market Town on the Right; then at 39’7. you ascend 3 Furlongs, and after cross a Val∣ley, leaving Wilby Church on the Right, and Dorrington on the Left, and at 43’1. pass over another Vale, and 7 Furlongs farther leave Ecken Church and the World's End an Inn on the Left, presently ascending you cross a Valley, and leave Billing Church on the same Hand. Hence at 45’6. you ascend a small Hill, and pass by Weston Church and Hall on the Left, and after by Abbington Church and Hall on the same Hand, entring Northampton at 49 Miles, Northampton, 49’5. W. N. W. a large and well-built Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, which this way extends above a Mile on the Road, [the Account whereof you have in the Road from LONDON to Derby, pag. 79.] Leaving Northampton you have Kings-thorp and Dallington Churches on the Right, and Duston on the Left, descending a small Hill at 52 Miles, and crossing a Vale at 53 Miles; Halstone, 53’6. 6 Furlongs farther passing through Halstone a small Village; then at 55 Miles you have Althrop Park and House on the Right; [57’6. N.W.] 6 Furlongs beyond ascend∣ing a small Hill, where at some distance you leave Holmby House on the Right, and Brington Church on the Left; [61 Miles W.N.W.] Watford, 61’2. then descending 2 Furlongs, at 57’7. you ascend again 2 Furlongs, and a Mile beyond leave Long Buckby Church and Hall on the Right, a Mile farther you ascend again, and at 61’2. pass through Watford a small Vil∣lage. From Watford by the side of a Park on the Left, ascending easily at 62 Miles, you 5 Furlongs farther cross the Watling-street Way that leads from LONDON to Shrews∣bury, Rilsby, 64’1. and pass by Watford Gap a House on the Left; then you pass through Rilsby a small Village, and enter Warwickshire at 66 Miles; whence an Ascent brings you at 66’6. Hilmorton, 66’7. Rugby, 69’1. to Hilmorton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, entring Rugby at 69 Miles, ex∣tending this Way near 3 Furlongs but more transverse, an indifferent large Town, has a Free-School and 4 Alms-Houses; enjoys a good Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annually, on Lammas Day and St. Martin's. From Rugby you pass by Newbold, Church Lawford, and Long Lawford on the Right, and Bilton on the Left; Bredford, 74’2. at 72’6. descending 2 Furlongs, and at 74’1. crossing the Avon you enter Bredford of 2 Furlongs Extent, leaving Brinklow half a Mile on the Right; at 77 Miles you have Comb Park on the Right, and 6 Furlongs farther Bing∣ley on the same Hand, crossing the Sow at 78’2. you presently ascend 2 Furlongs, and 5 Furlongs beyond pass through Stoke a Village of 2 Furlongs; Stoke, 79’3. COVENTRY, 80’6. whence a Cause∣way conveys you to the City of COVENTRY, which We have Illustrated in LONDON to Holyhead, pag. 43. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of COVENTRY the Left to Lutterworth. 2. Against Comb-Park the Right acute. 3. At the End of Bredford the Right acute. 4. 2 Furl. beyond Hilmorton the Left acute. 5. At Watford Gap the Right to LONDON the Watling-street Way. 6. 2 furl. beyond Watford the left to West Had∣don. 7. At the crossing the Owse against Welling∣borough, the Right to Newport, &c. 8. Beyond the entring Bedfordshire the Left forward. 9. Against Weston Church the Left acute. 10. A Furl. beyond Elsley the Right to Cax∣ton and the Left to St. Ives.
The Road from CARLLE com̄. Cumbr. to BARWICK upon Twd com̄. Northumbr. — By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r O Ma.ties Cosmographer: — Containing 80 Miles  Fur. viz.t To Brakehill 9. 4 to ye entrance into Sand 9.2. to Caitleto 5.6. to Iedbrough 12 to Kelso 10.6. to ye re-entrance into England  to Cornill 4.1. to Wesell. 3.m. 3. f. & to Barwick 20. mil 2 furl. Gr. King Lichen Surveyor.
The Road from Carlisle to Barwick, In Northumberland. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 69 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 55 M. 4. The Dimensuration 80’4. From CARLISLE Comp. Measure. to Brakenhil 06 06 09’4 09’4 the entring Scotland 06 12 09’2 18’6 Castleton 04 16 05’6 24’4 Jedborough 16 32 22’0 46’4 Kelso 07 39 10’6 57’2 to the re-entring England 4 43 05’4 62’6 Cornhil 3 46 04’1 66’7 Wesel 2 48 03’3 70’2 Barwick 7 55 10’2 80’4 Cumberland, Part of Scotland and Northumberland include the Road; and the Eden, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Leven, Kirsop, Liddale, Jed, Tweed, Reddinburn and Till are the principal Rivers crost over; yielding very rarely an inclos'd Way, or any Entertainment for a Tra∣veller, except in Jedborough and Kelso, both in Scotland; being chiefly Mountainous and infrequented, yet not to be better'd, unless doubling the length of the Journey you go by New-Castle. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 10’4. The Right to Whitclose. At 38’2. The acute on the Right to Wolly. At 51’2. The Left acute. At 56’7. The acute Way on the Right at the Entring Kelso. At 64’6. The Right to Etal. At 69’3. The acute way on the R. to Heaton. At 69’5. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The acute Way on the Right to Tilmouth. At 71’6. The acute Way on the Right to New-Biggins. At 75’2. The acute Way on the Right to Thornton. SEtting forward from Moor-Hall in the City of CARLISLE, [the Account of which We have given you in LONDON to CARLISLE, pag. 76.] you pass through Rickard or Scotch-Gate, and cross the Ituna or Eden, which Rising in West∣merland on the Confines of Yorkshire, passes by Kirkby-Steven and Appleby, receiving the Below, Troutbek and Livennant next the Ulles; and therein the Glenkwen and Gle∣roden by Penrith, then the Irthing alias Irt, from the Borders of Northumberland and Scotland, and therein the Gelt, Gambek, Potrose and Troutbek; after this, the Bruscath; and lastly, the Petterel and Canda abovesaid; and so with the great River Esk, from Eskdale in Scotland, and the little River Sark falling into the Itunian Bay, whereon We find situate the Burgh, or Burgh upon Sands, suppos'd to be the old Castra Explora∣torum, and Boulness or Blatum Bulgium, near the End of the Picts Wall, another Roman Station mention'd in the Itineraries. But to return to 1’0. passing by Stanix, alias Stanwicks Church on the Right, [1’0. W. b. N.] an enclos'd Road brings you at 2’6. to Blakeford a small Village on the Left: At 3’4. [3’4. N. E.] passing by New-Town a Village a little distant on the Left; you leave the Lane and enter open Way, and such indeed is generally the whole Remainder of the Road: At 3’7. you pass by Garriston a Village on the Left, [4’0. N. by W.] [4’4. N. N. E.] Leven fluv. 7’3. and about 5 Miles have an in∣clos'd Way for 6 Furlongs; at 7’3. you pass over Leven alias Line fluv. falling into the Esk aforesaid, and giving Denomination to Kirk Leventon on the Right, and West Leventon a Mile behind on the Left; at 8’3. passing by some Houses on the Right, you come to Brackneth, alias Brackenhil, a Village at 9’4. on the Left; at 10’2. [9’0. N.] ascend an Hill of 2 Furlongs, and by the Skirts of others, come at 12’1. to an Ascent of 3 Furlongs call'd Netherhurst; whence at 15’6. [14’2. N.E.] passing by Kingsfield a Village to the Left about 3 Furlongs, and at 16’4. Lethel a Village likewise on the Left.
At 18’1. you leave Stonegarth, alias Stangartick, a little to the Right, and at Kir∣sop fluv. which you cross at 18’6. enter Scotland: Then leaving Kirkby Hill, some Houses so call'd, Liddale fluv. 21’2. on the Right; at 21’2. cross Liddale fluv. falling into the Kirsop a little below, and both into the Esk aforemention'd: At 23’4. appears Castleton Kirk 4 Furlongs to the Left, Castleton, 24’4. and a Mile farther you pass through Castleton it self, a small Village; at 25’6. leave Dunley-bire, a House so call'd, on the Left; and at 29’6. re-pass Liddale fluv. and ascend a small Hill, a little farther ascending and de∣scending alike; [31’6. N by W.] [32’2. N. N. E.] [34’2. N.] [38’0. N.E. by N.] [46’3. E. by S] Jedborough, 46’3. thus by repeated Ascents and Descents, with sometimes more, some∣times less interpos'd Distance: At 38’2. you pass by the House of Sr. Gilbert Elliot, to the Right about 3 Furlongs, call'd Wootly; and prosecuting a Road like the for∣mer, you arrive at Jedborough, situate on the River Jodd, which having receiv'd 8 lesser Streams bearing Names; is one of the 10 principal Ones that falls into the Tiot or Tiviot, and that again is one of the 21 prime Branches that constitute the Tweed, so deservedly Eminent among the Brittish Rivers. The Town is 3 Furlongs long, [47’0. N. E.] and wants not Conveniency of Entertainment, being a handsome Town, as Towns go hereabouts, and enjoys a small Market: Leaving the River and Town at 46’6. you pass by Cralin or Crelin on the Right at 50’2. a Village so call'd, of 3 Furlongs Extent, and cross a small Water at 51 M. and by Kirk-Eckford alias Sackford, on the same Hand a 52’6. passing through that Part of Scotland call'd Tividale; from the River Tiot or Tiviot before mention'd, which so plentifully waters it. At 54’5. Highton, 54’5. [55 M. N. N. E.] [56’6. N. N. W.] Cailso, 57 Miles. through Highton or Hilton, a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; then at 56’7. you come to Part of Kelso alias Kailso, at 57 Miles cross the foresaid Tweed by a Ferry, not much below the Place where it recieves the Tiviot, and enter the Town of Kailso, a well-built and well-inhabited Market-Town, and plea∣santly seated on the North Side of the Tweed, scarce subscribing to any in the South Part of Scotland, affording good Accomodation, and extending 4 Furlongs in length on the Road, and as much upon the River. Hence by Sharpitlaw on the Left, and Sprouston 3 Furlongs distant from 59’2. on the Right, [61’6. N.] you re-pass the Tweed at 60’5. and come to Ridam alias Reddin at 62 Miles, on the Left, a Village so denominated from Reddingburn fluv. which you cross at 62’6. where you re-enter England, about a Mile from its Influx into Tweed, which afterwards is the Limits of the two Kingdoms; [63’2. E.] dividing Scotland from that Province of England call'd Northumberland. At 63’3. Carrhoom, 63’3. you pass through Carrhoom alias Carram Castle, a Village so call'd; and leaving Wark Castle on the Left between you and the River, [66’2. N. E. by N.] which at a Miles di∣stance more or less accompanies you to Barwick; you come at 66’7. to Cornil alias Cornwel, and between Tillmouth on the Right and Tillisly Hall on the Left; at 70 Miles you cross the River Till, which watering this North Part of Northumberland, passes by Woller a Market-Town, and having receiv'd the Bowbenny, Hetterborn and Boanish, a little below this Place falls into the Tweed: presently after passing by We∣sel on the Left, and Grimdon a Village to the Right about 4 Furlongs from 71’2. you come to an inclos'd Way between 73’4. and 75’2. where at the Cross-Road Thornton appears to the Right about 4 Furlongs, [. E. N. E.] [ N. E. by N.] Orde, 78 Miles. [79 Miles E. by N.] and at 76’2. Lingridg House some∣what nearer on the Left; whence entring Orde a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and near the Banks of the Tweed. At 79’2. you fall in with the great LONDON Road, and at 80 Miles crossing the Tweed over a fair long Bridg, Barwick. 80 Miles. enter Barwick a Town and County of it self, [as in LON∣DON to Barwick pag. 18.] adding this, That in the Discords between the 2 Kingdoms, before the Union, its Possession was very vigorously strove for by the opposite Party, was won by the Kings Forces from the invading Scots, and 25’000 of their numerous Army slain, Ann. 24 E. 1st. but since temp. E. 14th. constantly possest by the English; it Elects Parliament Men. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 6 Furl. from Barwick the Left, being the great Road to YORK LONDON, &c. 2. Against Thornton the Right acute. 3. Against Grimdon, the Right to the Borders of Scotland. 4. 6 Furlongs short of Brakenhil the Right to the Mole.
The Road from CHESTER to Cardiff Com̄. Glamorgan by Iohn Ogily Esq.r his Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 14 5 mile o Furlongs (viz) From Chester to Wrexhm 11:4. to Sellattyn 13:6. to Llansylen 5:6. to Llavelling 8.2. to Lantair 11.0 to Tregun̄on 6:0. to Newtown 5. & to Llanbader-Vunneth 9:4. Thence to Cardiff in Plate ye 2d 74.0.
The Road from Chester to Cardiff In Glamorganshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. b. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 108 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 110 M. 4. The Dimensuration 145 M. From CHESTER Comp. Measure. to Wrexham 09 09 11’4 11’4 Sallatyn 10 19 13’6 25’2 Llansylen 04 23 05’6 31’0 Llanvelling 06 29 08’2 39’2 Llantair 08 37 11’0 50’2 Tregunnon 04 41 06’0 56’2 to New-Town 04 045 05’2 061’4 Llanbeder-vunneth 07 052 09’4 071’0 Llanbeder-vaur 08 060 10’0 081’0 Bealth 08 068 10’6 091’6 Brecknock 12 080 16’0 107’6 Cardiff 30 110 37’6 145’4 Cheshire, Flintsh. Denbighsh. Shropsh. and Montgomerysh. are the Counties past through; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Tagidog, Gwenuro, Clavedock, Christioneth, Dee, Keriog, Kenlet, Tavot, Vurn∣way, Rue, Bechan, Severn, Ithon, Clowdock, Dulas, Wye, Howthy, Usk and Tavy, are the principal Rivers crost over; which in general is a very Hilly, rough Way, affording little Accomodation or Entertainment to Travellers. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting in two Plates, the First ending at Llanbeder-vunneth, and the Second at Cardiff aforesaid: We begin with Plate the First: Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 1’3. The R. to Harden and the L. acute. At 5’4. The Right to Burton Green. At 17’3. The forward to the Ford. At 20’4. The forward to Oswestree. At 22’2. The Right to the Hills. At 22’6. The two forward, one to Trebont, the other to Chirck Castle. At 26’6. The Right to Llanhangal. At 32’6. The Right to Llanriod. At 35’0. The Right acute. At 36’3. The Left to Oswastree. At 39’4. The Left to Llanlleas. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 41’3. The Left to Llansanfraid. At 43’7. The Left to the Hills. At 45’4. The Left to the Mill. At 47’0. The forward, being a By-way. At 48’2. The Left to Trolagh. At 50’2. The Right to Llanvelling. At 50’4. The Right to Lleanog. At 58’7. The Left to Bettus. At 64’3. The Left to Carey House. At 65’2. The Right to Llanidlos. SEtting forward from CHESTER, you first cross Dee Bridg, CHESTER, S. and leave the Suburbs at 1’3. Pulford, 5’2. and at 5 Miles enter Pulford a Village of about 4 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment: At the End whereof you enter Flintshire, and passing through Rosset and Merford, two small Villages, Rosset, 6’1. Merford, 7’6. come at 8 Miles to cross the River Tagidog and enter Denbighshire; then leaving Gressford Church and a Pound, a little on the Right, and Pentioken and Acton Houses on the Left, are brought at 11’2. to Wrexham of 4 Furlongs Extent, a Market-Town, Wrexham, 11’4. S. S. W. [as in Shrewsbury to Holywel, pag. 195.] Thence, passing over Preston Bridg you cross the Gwenurow, and at 14’1. [14’3. S.] Ruabon, 16’6. cross the Clawedock over a small Stone-Bridg, at 16’5. you pass through Ruabon a small Village; at the End of which you cross the River Christioneth, and a Mile farther pass through another small Village, call'd Trasenatree; Trasenatree, 17’6. whence a direct Road con∣veys you at 19’1. in a Vale over New-Bridg to cross the foresaid River Dee, and leave a Smith's Shop on the Left; then ascending, you pass by Sr. Thomas Midleton's Hall on the Right, and at 21’2. ascend 2 Furlongs, on the Top of which you leave the two Right-Hand Roads, and descend 3 Furlongs; then leaving Chirck Church about 3 Furlongs on the Left, are brought at 22’6. to cross the River
Keriog, and enter Shropshire; whence three repeated Ascents, seconded with a De∣scent, Selatyn, 25’2. S.S.W. leads you through Selatyn a small Village. Leaving Sellatyn, you pass 2 Ascents, and cross Offa's Ditch or Dike, and re∣enter Denbyshire, and cross a Vale, and at 28’3. ascend 5 Furlongs, which is se∣conded with a Descent of 3 Furlongs, where you cross the River Kenlet and ascend 3 Furlongs, Llansylen, 31 M. S. presently making the like Descent, and at 30’4. pass through Llansylen a small Village; thence presently you descend 3 Furlongs and cross a Brook, and at 32’3. cross another, and pass through a small Village and ascend 3 Furlongs, equally descending; [36’2. W. S. W.] 38’4. S.] then by Llangedwin Church a Furlong distant on the Right, you cross the River Tavot at 34’3. and enter Montgomeryshire, leaving a few Houses close on the Right; Llanvelling, 39’2. you have a small Ascent seconded with a Descent of 8 Furlongs, and after 2 other Descents, are convey'd at 39’1. through Llanvelling of about two Furlongs Extent. Leaving the Town, you at 40’2. ascend near 4 Furlongs, presently your Road inclines much to the Left, and again to the Right; where you leave a few Houses close on the Right, and ascend 3 Furlongs, equally descending, and pass by Evan ap Powel's Well near the Road on the Right, and Myvet House on the Left, and cross Vurn-way River at 45’6. over Pont-Matheravale Bridg; then leaving a Church close on the Left, you pass a little Ascent, on the Top of which you leave the forward Road and bear to the Left, and a little beyond again to the Right, and leaving Llangunnue Church close on the Right; after 2 Descents are lead at 50’2. through Llantair a small Village of about a Furlong Extent; Llantair, 50’2. thence after several small Ascents and Descents, at 54’2. you pass over an indifferent large Vale, in which you cross the River Rue, and after the Bechan at 55’7. whence by some scattering Houses and Tregunnon Church at 56’2. Tregunnon, 56’2. situate a little out of the Road on the Right, the Road continues very indirect, in which passing several Ascents, you at 58 Miles descend about 5 Furlongs; then crossing a small Water, you make the like Ascent, New-Town, 61’4. and at 61’3. cross the Severn and enter New-Town or Trenevith, of near 3 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; It was formerly a Corporation, and at present enjoys a Market on Tuesdays. Leaving New-Town, a Mile beyond you ascend Clay Hill, on the Top of which you have a House on the Right, and another on the Left, which is seconded with the like Ascent; whence you cross a large Vale, and come at the Top to a Bea∣con near the Road on the Right; thence passing an indifferent direct Road, after two or three Descents and a little Ascent, are brought at 71 Miles to the Entrance of Llanbader-Vunneth, Llanbader-Vunneth, 71 Miles. a Village of two Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 14 Furlongs beyond Llanbader the Right. 2. 14 Furlongs beyond New-Town the Right to Aberdeon. 3. In Tregunnon the Right to Welshpool, after you cross the River Bechan. 4. 7 Furlongs beyond the River Rue, the Right to Welshpool. 5. Near the End of Llantair, the Left to Llanvelling. 6. 3 Furlongs beyond Llangunnue the forward to Pont-tucoad. 7. 6 Furlongs beyond the River Vurn∣way the Right to Myvot. 8. 12 Furlongs beyond Myvot House the Right to Llansanfraid. 9. 10 Furlongs beyond Llangedwin House the Left to Terhules. 10. At Llansylen Towns End, the Left to Terhules. 11. 6 Furlongs beyond Wrexham the Left to CHESTER.
The Continuation of the Road from CHESTER to CARDIFF com̄. Glamorgan By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Plate 2.d Comencing at Llanbeder-Vunneth & Extending to CARDIFF. Containing 74 Miles 4 Furlongs. vizt. From Llanbeder-Vunneth to Llanbeder-Vaur to mile to Bealt 20’6. to Brecknek 16 m. to Pont-Stucketh where Enter Glamorgansh: to 2. to CARDIFF 25’4
The Continuation of the extended Road From CHESTER to CARDIFF in Glamorgansh. PLATE II. Commencing at Llanbeder-Vunneth in Radnorshire, and Extending to Cardiff aforesaid. Containing 74 Miles 4 Furlongs. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 72’7. the Right to Llanano. At 74’5. the Right to Pont-Llanbister. At 76’1. the Left to Knighton. At 77’6. The Right to Treviot. At 79’6. The Left to Kineton. At 80’6. the Right to Riadergowy. At 81’1. the Left acute. At 82 Miles the Left to Bettus. At 92’2. the Left to the Hay. At 97 Miles the Left to Llangoid. At 105’6. The Left to Llandooe. At 110’7. The Left to Abergaveny. At 118’1. The Right to Tavow. At 120 M. The Right to the Houses. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 121’1. the Left to Fair-Waine. At 121’2. the Right to Mortertidvil. At 125’2. the Right to Llanvabor. At 127’5. the Right to Llanvabor. At 131’0. the Left to Kethlegwain. At 131’2. The Left to Llanvabor. At 135’4. the Left to Thevan. At 138’7. The Left to the Coal Works. At 139’5. The Right to the Iron Works. At 141’2. The Right to Landaff. At 142’2. The Right to Whitchurch. At 142’7. The Right to Llandaff. TO Llanbader-Vunneth We brought you in Plate the 1st. whence little occurs, Llanbader-Vunneth S. but passing Up and Down-Hill, and by some Houses at 72’6. Llanbister 74’2. [77’2. S. W. b S.] Llandewy 77’5. where the acute Way on the Right leads to Llanano; and passing through Llanbister at 74’2. till at 77’5. you pass through Llandewy, and 3 Furlongs farther cross the Ithon; at 78’6. you cross the Road that leads from Prestain to Riadergowy, and 2 Furlongs farther cross the Clowdock, a Mile beyond you descend a Hill, Llanbeder-Vaur 80’6. [83 m. S. b W.] passing through Llanbader-Vaur at 80’5. and 2 Furlongs farther crossing the Dulas; whence an indirect Way by some disperst Houses brings you at 86’1. to cross the Ithon again, then again by some scattering Houses, continuing your Way Up Hill and Down-Hill, and through a Woody Country, are brought at 90’7. by Llanelway on the Left, and 5 Furlongs farther to cross the Wye over a Wooden-bridg, where you at once enter Brecknock∣shire and the Town of Bealth alias Bealt, a small Town seated amonst Woods, con∣tains about 80 Houses; hath a Grand Market on Mondays for Live Cattel, and 2 Petty, on Thursdays and Saturdays for Provisions, with 3 Fairs yearly, viz. the 16th. of June, the 21th. of September and St. Katherin's Day. Leaving Bealth you ascend 3 Furlongs, and 2 Furlongs farther descend 4 Furlongs, Bealth 91.5. and at 93’3. pass by Llanthewy-Coomb Church on the Left; whence at 94’6. you ascend a Hill of 8 Furlongs, on which you leave Capel Cunoke Church on the Left, and crossing a Vale come at 97’4. to a Hill of 11 Furlongs height, and at 100 Miles to descend a Hill of 12 Furlongs; then by a House on the Right, and a Wood on the Left, are convey'd at 102’3. by Llanihangel-Vechan Church and some Houses on the Right, and a Furlong farther crossing the Howthy you pass through a great Wood, and after a small descent at 104’6. Brecknock 107’3. pass through Llandivilog a little Village and enter Brecknock at 107’0. seated at the Confluence of the Usk and Hondy, call'd by the Britains Aberhondy; It is a large Town-Corporate, containing 3 Parish Churches, viz. St. Maries, St. John Evangelist and the College: And is Divided into 11 Wards, was formerly Strengthned with a Wall and Castle, is at present the Re∣sidence of the Bishop of St. Davids: And is Govern'd by a Bailiff, 2 Aldermen and 12 Common-Council, hath the Privilege of sending a Burgess to Parliament, and enjoys 3 Markets Weekly, on Wednsdays, Fridays and Saturdays, and 3 Fairs annually, viz. Midsomer Day, 29th. of August and the 5th. of November; Is Honor'd by Giving Title of Earl to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, &c. and hath several good Inns, as the Deer, Ragged-Staff, Kings-Head, &c.
Passing through Brecknock you cross the aforesaid Hondy and Usk, and at the end of the Town ascend a Hill of 6 Furlongs, [110’6. S. W. b S.] and after the descent of 2 small ones you cross the Tavy, and ascend Bullavan a large Mountain in ascent above 2 Miles, and at the Top descend again 6 Furlongs, [115 m. S. b E.] and re-cross the aforesaid Tavy, which ac∣companies you on the Left, your Road lying between a Ridg of Hills or Mountains; whence by some Houses on the Left, and after a small ascent and descent you pass by Capel Tevechan Church on your Right, and crossing a brook at 119 Miles as∣cend 5 Furlongs, and crossing another Brook you after a small descent again cross the Tavy over Pont-Stucketh Bridg and enter Glamorganshire, and 2 Furlongs farther ascend 4 Furlongs, then at 121’2. you pass through a small Village on the Road, and leave the Ruins of Morlesh Castle on your Right about 4 Furlongs, and 5 Fur∣longs farther descend, crossing the Tavy again; whence little occurs but passing over several great Hills and large Vales, and by several disperst Houses, crossing some Waters till at 138 Miles you leave Carfilly Castle on your Left about 3 Fur∣longs. Cardiff, 145’5. At 138’2. you ascend 5 Furlongs and descend again 3 Furlongs, which is se∣conded at 139’5. with a descent of a large Hill of 10 Furlongs, on which is several Mines where they Dig their Iron Ore, and is likewise well clothed with Wood; at 142’3. you have the Tavy accompaning you on the Right, till at 145’3. you en∣ter Cardiff a Town-Corporate, for which vid. LONDON to St. David's pag. 33. The Town is seated on the River Taff or Tave-Vaur, which arises at Monuchdowy Hill in Brecknockshire, and passes by Llandaff and this place; and about 3 Miles be∣low falls into the Seavern Sea: Receiving into it, 1st. The Taff-vachan, 2d. The Cun∣non, and lastly the Avon. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1’6. beyond Cardiff the Right acute. 2. 6 Furl. beyond the Left to Newport. 3. 5 Furlongs short of the Iron Mines, the Right to Carfilly. 4. Near Carfilly Castle the Right to Carfilly. 5. 7’7. short of the entrance into Breck∣nockshire, the Left to Merther. 6. Against Capel Tevechan the Right to Llane∣thee. 7. 2 Furlongs beyond Brecknock the Right acute. 8. 1’3. from Brecknock the Left to Pont-Aberuskel. 9. 10 Furl. short of Capel Cunoke the Left to Llannivechan. 10. Against Llanthewy-Comb Church the Left acute. 11. 4 Furl. beyond Bealth the Right to Ria∣dergowy. 12. 3 Miles from Bealth the Right to Kine∣ton. 13. 1’5. Beyond the Right to Kineton. 14. 3 Furl. beyond Llanbedor-Vaur, the R. acute. 15. 1’1. Short of Clowdock-Flu. the Left acute.
The Road from Dartmouth in Com̄ Devon. to Minhead in Com̄ Somerset. By IOHN OGILBY Esq His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 71 miles 2 furlongs vizt. From Dartmouth to Newton Bushel 16. to Kenford 10’.7. to ye City of EXETER 4’.4. to Silverton 7’.5. to Teverton 7 miles to Bampton 7’.2. to Berry 4. to Embercum 20’.4 to Minhead 3 m 4 fur.
The Road from Dartmouth in Devonshire, To Minhead in Somersetshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. N. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 60 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 52 M. 4. The Dimensuration 71’2. From Dartmouth Comp. Measure. to Newton Bushel 12 12 16’0 16’0 Kenford 08 20 10’7 26’7 EXETER 02 22 04’4 31’3 Silverton 06 28 07’5 39’0 Teverton 06 34 07’0 46’0 to Bampton 05 39 07’2 53’2 Berry 03 42 04’0 57’2 Embercomb 08 50 10’4 67’6 Minhead 02 52 03’4 71’2   52   71’2   Devonshire and Somersetshire include the whole Road; and the Ting, Ex, Colomb, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Burn, Loman and Bampton are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general no very good Way, as being exceeding Hilly, but every where replenisht with Inns &c. for entertaining and accommodating Travellers; a well-frequented Road, as being the ready way from Dartmouth a Port-Town on the South Sea, to the City of EXETER; and from thence to Minhead a Port-Town on the North Sea. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 3’2. The Right to Lyfton. 9’6. The Right to Kings Keswel. 16’1. The Left to Ashburton. 17 M. The Left to Tingrace. 17’3. The Right to Tingmouth. 23 M. The Right to Powderham. 31’5. The Right in EXETER to LONDON. 40’7. The Left to Bickley. At 47’1. The Right to Chettescomb, Acute Turnings to be avoided. and the Left to Boldham. 53’3. The Left acute. 54’2. The Right to Langford. 55’2. The Right to Skilgate, and a Fur∣long farther the Left to Dulverton. 61’6. The Right to Luxborow. 66 M. The Left to Woton Courtnay. 67’6. and 68’1. The Right to Dunstar. BEFORE We proceed to the particulars of the Road, Dartmouth, N. N. E. take this short View of the Initial Town: Dartmouth or Dertmouth seated at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Dert, a large, well-built, well-inhabited and frequented Port-Town, which is occasion'd by it's safe and commodious Harbor; drives a considerable Trade at Sea and is well-provided with Shipping, its an ancient Corporation, contains 3 Pa∣rish-Churches, enjoying several Immunities, as sending Burgesses to Parliament, &c. and is Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. and hath a well-furnish'd Market on Fridays. Leaving the Town, you Ferry over the Dert (which is here three Furlongs) and on the other side pass through 2 Village of about 2 Furlongs Extent, [3 Miles N. N. W.] then at 2 Miles you pass by Crupland House on the Left; at 4’1. descend 5 Furlongs, and at the Bottom leave Cherston Church 2 Furlongs on the Right; whence an indirect Way by Wayton House on the Left conveys you at 8’6. to a small Descent, 3 Fur∣longs farther ascending again, you presently descend 4 Furlongs, and on the De∣scent leave Marldon Church on the Left. At 10’7. you pass through Come a scattering Village, Come, 10’7. and then by some stragling Houses on the Road, descend a small Hill at 13’3. and leave Abbots Keswel Church on the Left; thence ascending 3 Furlongs 2 repeated Descents by Olber Church on the Right, leads you at 15’5. Newton Bushel, 16 M. into Newton-Bushel or Newton Abbots of 5 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Leman a Branch of the Ting or Teing, a Town of good Ac∣commodation, and has a well-provided Market on Wednsdays for Cattle, Corn, &c. about 5 Miles below this Town is Tingmouth or Teingmouth, of Note for being the Place where the Danes first Landed. From Newton Bushel you ascend a small Hill, and presently descend again, [17 Miles N. by E.] leav∣ing
Hewyk Church on the Left 2 Furlongs; at 17’2. you cross the Ting aforesaid, which rising on the Edg of Dartmore near a small Village call'd Gydlay, passes by Chidlay and at Tingmouth aforesaid falls into the Sea: then leaving King's Stainton 6 Furlongs on the Right, and Tingrace 4 Furlongs on the Left; at 18’2. passing by Tom the Trumpeter's on the Right, and 2 Furlongs farther by the Red Lyon on the Left, both Inns of Accomodation, you ascend a large Hill of 6 Furlongs; whence over several Ascents and Descents at 24 Miles passing over a large Vale, and at 24’5. descending Haldon Hill of 7 Furlongs, brings you at 26’6. to cross the small River Ken (which about 4 Miles below falls into the Ex) where ascending you en∣ter Kenford of 2 Furlongs Extent; Kenford, 26’7. thence 2 repeated Descents passing through a scattering Village, and leaving Falmouth House 2 Furlongs on the Left, leads you at 28’4. over a Vale. At 29’4. Affington, 29’4. EXETER, 31’3. you pass through Affington a scattering Village, and at 30’2. enter the Suburbs of EXETER, and over the Bridg enter the City which We have Il∣lustrated in preceding Plates; at the leaving the City you omit the great Road that leads to LONDON, &c. and bear to the Left through a Suburb of 4 Furl. Extent. At 32’7. crossing a Rill you ascend Stoke Hill of 5 Furlongs, and by some scatter∣ing Houses at 34 Miles, a Descent of a Mile conveys you to a Stone-Bridg of 9 Arches over the River Columb just at its confluence with the Ex; 2 Furlongs farther you pass through Stoke a small Village, Stoke, 35’3. Rew, 36’4. and leave Brampford Church on the Right 4 Furlongs; and at 36’4. through Rew a scattering Village; then at 38’1. you as∣cend a small Hill, Silverton, 39 Miles. and at 38’6. enter Silverton a good Town of Accomodation, 3 Furlongs in Extent; Govern'd by a Portreeve, and hath 2 Fairs annually, Midsomer Day, and St. Bartholemew. At the End of the Town you ascend Silverton Hill which is a Mile and half on the Road, descending it again at 41’2. 8 Furlongs, and at the Bottom cross the Burn a small Brook, [43’1. N. W. by N.] then at 43 Miles by some Houses on the Right, and at 44 Miles ascending, you come upon Long Causeway of a Mile Extent well Pav'd; then after a small Descent at 45’5. Teverton, 46 Miles N. by W. you enter Teverton or Twerton, q. d. Twyford-Town, as being seated at the Confluence of the Leman with the Ex, a large Town, contain∣ing above 500 Houses, and hath much suffered by Fire; it at present drives a con∣siderable Trade in Clothing, enjoying several Privileges, as sending Burgesses to Parliament, hath 2 good Free-Schools and 3 Alms-houses; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Elders, and 12 Assistants; hath a considerable Market on Tuesdays, and 2 Fairs annually, the Tuesday sevenight after Whitsunday, and Michaelmas Day. From Teverton you pass over a large Valley, [49 Miles N.N.E.] [51’6. N. W. by W.] Bampton, 53’2. and after 3 repeated Descents are convey'd at 53 Miles to Bath-Hampton vulgo Bampton or Baunton, of 4 Furlongs Ex∣tent, seated on a Branch of the Ex, and in a Bottom environ'd with Hills; it num∣bers above 100 Houses, and hath a large Church where are intomb'd several of the Family of the Earls of Bath; it's Govern'd by a Portreeve, and had formerly 2 Mar∣kets Weekly, Wednsdays and Saturdays, but now only one and that on Mundays, with 2 Fairs yearly, Whitson Tuesday and St. Lukes Day. At 54 Miles you descend a small Hill, [54’5. N. N. W.] Murbath, 55’2. Gilberts, 55’7. and at 55’2. pass through Murbath a small Vill. and presently a Descent of 3 Furl. (by Gilberts on the Right) is seconded by an Ascent of 8 Furl. at the Top of which you enter Somersetsh. and presently descending a steep Hill at 57’2. Berry, 57’2. [62 Miles N. by E.] pass through Berry a small Vill. whence over 2 large Ascents call'd Brunnam Hill be∣ing generally open, Heathy, and Furse Ground, little occurs but passing by Brumpton Regis a Mile on the Right, till at 64’3. you descend 4 Furl. and leave Cutcomb Church on the Left. Then at 65’7. you pass by some Lime-Kilns on the Left, and at 66’7. descending a large Hill, Timbercomb, 67’6. N. by W. Minhead, 71’2. you pass through Embercum or Timbercomb a Vill. of good Accomodation; whence ascending 7 Furl. through open way, at 70’6. you enter Minhead a Borough and Port-town, whose convenient Harbor occasions an indifferent Trade to Ireland, &c. It Elects Parlia∣ment Men, and hath a small Market on Wednsdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furl. from Minhead the R. to Selworthy. 2. 2’6. beyond Embercum the L. to Taunton. 3. 5 Furl. beyond Murbath the R. to Exbridg 4. At the End of Bampton the Left acute. 5. At the end of Teverton the L. to London, &c. 6. 3 Furl. beyond Silverton the R. to Uphick. 7. At the Bridg at EXETER, the forward to Truro, &c. 8. 2 Furl. short of Kenford the L. to Mamhead 9. At the Top of Haldon Hill the Left acute. 10. 2 Furl. short of Crupland House the Left to Booth.
The Road from St. DAVIDS com PENBROKE to HOLYWELL com FLINT By IOHN OGILBY Eqr His Ma.ties Cosmographr. Containing: 156 miles: 4: Furl: vizt. From St: Davids: to: Fisrd: 16: m: 1: Furl: to: Newport: 6.7: to: Cardig an: to: 4 to L march to Llanrushed. u.. 18: 1: to: Llanbader  vaur near Aberistwh: 8:4: to: Talabont: 6: 7: thence to Holywel by Ba 8 Ruthm in Plate ye. 2•. 7 8:
The Road from St. Davids Com. Pembroke, To Holywel Com. Flint. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. E. by E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 118 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 112 M. 4. The Dimensuration 156’4. From St. Davids Comp. Measure. to Fiscard 12 12 16’1 16’1 Newport 05 17 06’7 23’0 Cardigan 07 24 10’4 33’4 Llanarch 14 38 18’1 51’5 Llanrusted 08 46 11’3 63’0 Llanbadarn-vaur 06 52 08’4 71’4 Talabont 05 57 06’7 78’3 to Machenleth 07 064 10’7 089’2 Aberangel 07 071 10’3 099’5 Llanum-mowthy 05 076 07’5 107’2 Balla 10 086 13’4 120’6 Bettus 07 093 10’2 131’0 Ruthyn 07 100 10’2 141’2 Holywel 12 112 15’2 156’4 Pembrokeshire, Cardigansh. Montgomerysh. Merionethsh. Denbighsh. and Flintsh. Counties past through Rivers crost over. are the Counties including the whole Road; and the Gwyn, Nevern, Tivy, Aaron, Arth, Weray, Istwith, Ridal, Salck, Lerry, Cletter, Kinver, Llevenant, Dovy, Angel, Garist, Dee, Tavor, Gyrow, Alwen and Clwyd, are the principal Rivers crost over, The quality of the Way. affording in general a very Hilly and Mountainous Way, where you seldom meet with that Entertainment as in other Roads, except in Cardigan, Holywel, &c. THUS much in general for the whole Road consisting of 2 Plates, the First ending at Talabont in Cardiganshire, the Second at Holywel aforesaid; We be∣gin with Plate the First containing 78 Miles 3 Furlongs, wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 3’1. The Left to Tranuny. At 6’4. The Right to Haverford West. At 10’6. The Right to Cardigan a different Way. At 16’5. The Right to Carmarthen. At 23’0. The Left acute. At 26’0. The Left to Trewethel. At 27’5. The Left to Molgrove. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 49’0. The Right acute. At 55’4. The Right to Tregaron. At 57’0. The Left acute. At 59’1. The Right to Llanbeder-veagh. At 64’2. The Right to Llanyler. At 73’4. The Right to Coggerthan. Setting forward from St. St. Davids, N. Davids (the Account of which you have in LONDON to St. Davids pag. 34.) at 1’6. you cross Gorid Bridg over a Brook, [3’1. E. by N.] and after pass by Gorld Chapel on the Left; whence an indirect Way by some stragling Houses on the Road leads you at 5 Miles to an Ascent of 6 Furlongs, then an easie Descent at 6’2. conveys you at 7’6. to a Descent of 6 Furlongs; half a Mile farther ascending a∣gain, Merth, 10 Miles. [10’3. N. E. by N.] a Descent caries you at 10 Miles through Merth alias Moithry a small Vil∣lage; whence crossing a Vale having on the Top a Prospect to the Sea about a Mile on the Left, you cross another Vale at 12’3. then at 13’3. an easie Descent succeeded by a more unlevel Way at 15’5. 2 Furlongs farther leads you into Fis∣card, q. d. Fish-guard, extending 3 Furlongs on the Road; Fiscard, 16’1. E. b. N. by the Britains Aber∣gwain, as seated on the small River Gwyn near its Confluence with the Sea; is a Market-Town Govern'd by a Mayor, Bailiffs, &c. and hath a good Harbor for Ships. At the End of the Town you cross the Gwyn aforesaid, whence 2 repeated A∣scents seconded by a larger Descent conveys you over 2 Valleys, where at 22 Miles having a Prospect to the Sea you descend 5 Furlongs, Newport; 23 Miles. and enter Newport of 3 Furlongs Extent, seated near the Nevern where it empties it self into the Ocean, and where they have a Wear for Fishing; a Market-Town Govern'd by a Portreeve, Bailiff, &c. At 23’6. you cross the small River Nevern aforesaid, and after a little Ascent
leave Eglois-nowith Church on the Left about 3 Furlongs, then descending 4 Fur∣longs, Velindra 26 Miles. [26’2. N. E.] at 26 Miles you pass through Velindra a small Village; whence 2 repeated Ascents lead you at 28’4. to the Brink of a large Valley; then at 31’4. descend∣ing a large Hill of 12 Furlongs, passing by St. Dogmel's on the Left, you at the Bottom over a fair Stone-bridg cross the Tivy, which Rising in Cardiganshire near the Confines of Radnorshire, receives successively the Wyryk, Brenyg, Mathern, Det∣tor, Kery and Keach, and about 4 Miles below this Place falls into the Sea. Here at once you enter Cardiganshire and Cardigan, Cardigan, 33’4. E. b. N. by the Britains Aber-tivij, (i. e. Ostium Fluminis Tivij) and Caer-Decan, (i. e. Urbs Decani;) is the Shire-Town, and the Place where the Assizes are Held and the County Goal kept, indifferent large and well-built, containing 3 Wards yet but one Church; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 13 Aldermen, 13 Common-Councel, &c. sends one Burgess to Parliament; has a good Market on Saturdays, and 5 Fairs yearly, viz. on 5 of the Lady Days. From Cardigan you pass over 3 repeated Ascents seconded by a large Descent, and at the Bottom of which, viz. at 37 Miles, omitting the Way on the Right which unites again at 38’5. over a small Rill ascend 4 Furlongs, then at 39 Miles you leave Blainport a small Village on the Left, and 6 Furlongs farther ascend 3 Furlongs; thence at 45’5. a small Ascent conveys you through 5 repeated Valleys, and by the Four Boroughs or Tumuli, [49’2. N. N. E.] Llanarch, 51’4. [56 Miles N. E. b. E.] and at 46’2. again prosecuting your Road o∣ver several Mountains: at 51’4. you pass through Llanarch a small Village, then descending and ascending at 54’3. you pass by Hevennyw Chapel on the Left; whence an Ascent seconded by a larger Descent leads you at 55’4. to the small River Ayron just at its Influx with the Sea, which crossing you pass through a small Village; the Sea accompanying you on the Left several Miles: At 57 Miles you omit the acute Way on the Left that leads over the Beach a different Way to Llan∣rusted, Llandowhee Aberath, 57’1. and pass through Llandowhee Aberath a small Village where you cross the lit∣tle River Arth, then ascending 7 Furlongs you descend again 8 Furlongs, and at the Bottom crossing a Brook at 60 Miles pass through Molinamore a small Village, Molinamore, 60 M. and 3 Furlongs farther leave Llansanfraid Church on the Right. At 62’6. Llanrusted, 62’7. you cross the small River Weray, and enter Llanrusted a scattering Vil∣lage extending 2 Furlongs on the Road, and after by a great House on the Right, where the Road between Cardigan and Aberistwith falls in; at 64 Miles you ascend 6 Furlongs leave Llanyler Church on the Right 4 Furlongs, and at 65’5. pass by 2 erected Stones plac'd on a small Hill distant about 2 Furlongs, and at 67’6. 2 re∣peated Descents brings you at 69’1. to cross the River Istwith or Wustwith, not far from its conjunction with the Sea, then ascending you leave Llanachairn Church on the Left, and pass over a Valley where after an easie Descent of 2 Furlongs, at 71 Miles cross the River Ridal, which (with the Wye and Severn) rising about the Top of Plinillimon Hill, passes by Aberistwith at near a Miles distance and falls into the Sea: Llanbadern-vaur, 71’4. 2 Furlongs farther you enter Llanbadern-vaur, extending 2 Furlongs on the Road but more transverse, a Village of good Accomodation, and leave Aber∣istwith on the Left half a Mile, [for which vid. LONDON to Aberistwith, pag. 5.] Prosecuting your Road over an Ascent of 6 Furlongs, which is seconded by two repeated Descents, where you cross the little River Salck at 75’4. leaving Ruddy∣pene House on the Right, you cross the little River Lerry, passing by Llanyhangle Castle Qualter on the Left; then at 76’6. you descend 4 Furlongs, and at 78’2. in the Bottom enter Talabont a scattering Village extending 2 Furlongs on the Road, Talabont, 78’3. therein crossing the Cletter a Branch of the Dowy. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At Salck fluv. the Right to Aberistwith. 2. 4 Furlongs beyond Istwith fluv. the Left to Tregaron. 3. 6 Furlongs short of Llanrusted, the Left to Cardigan a different Way. 4. 4 Furl. beyond Molinamore the Right. 5. A Furlong beyond Blainport the Right to Mountebrey. 6. 13 Furl. short of Velindra the Right to Newport Passage. 7. A Furl. beyond Velindra the Left to Ha∣verford West. 8. 5 Furl. beyond Velindra the right forward 9. 2’1. Short of Gorid Chapel the Left to Ulford.
The Continuation of the Road from St. DAVIDS to OLYWELL. By JOHN OGILBY Esq is Ma:ties Cosmographer Plate: 2d. containing  le: 1: Furlong vizt: From Talahom com Cardig to Machenllet i10. m 7. fu to Aberangel to 3 to Llanum-owthy 7:5: to Balla 13 4 to Bettus to:2:to Ruthyn to  Holywell: 15:2.
The Continuation of the Road from St. DAVIDS in Pembrokeshire, to HOLYWEL in Flintsh. PLATE. II. & Last. Commencing at Talabont Com. Cardigan, and Extending to Holywel aforesaid. Containing 78 Miles 1 Furlong. Wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 80’4. & 81’1. The Right to Machenleth a different Way. At 89’2. The Right acute. At 90’4. The forward to Dolgelbe. At 103’3. The Left into the Bottom. At 109’6. The forward to Llanwothen. At 112’3. The R. to Balla the worst Way. At 113’1. The Right to the Mountains. At 120’0. The Right to Llanrillo. At 123’5. The Right to Llanvorval. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 124’6. The Left acute. At 126’3. The Right to Wrexham. At 132’3. The Right acute. At 134’0. The Right to the Hills. At 135’0. The Right to Eglois-Tarrow. At 145’6. The Right to Bulla Franck. At 154’1. The Right to CHESTER. At 154’5. The Right to Northop. TO Talabont We brought you in Plate the First, Talabont, N. whence you pass by the Sil∣ver Mines on the Left, and after a Descent of 4 Furlongs having a conti∣nued Ridg of Mountains on the Right for several Miles: At 80’1. [79’2. N. N. E.] you come to Sr. Richard Price's Park, which accompanies you on the Left for above a Mile. At 83 Miles you cross the Kinver another Branch of the Dowy, Llanihangle, 83 M. and pass through Llanihangle a small Village, leaving a Silver Mill on the Left; then descending for 2 Furlongs, crossing Eynon fluv. a Branch of the Dowy likewise: At 84’4. you leave Garrick seated on the Banks of the foresaid Dowy on the Left, and 6 Furlongs far∣ther cross the River Levenant falling into the Dowy, and enter Montgomeryshire; whence an indirect Way over several Hills and another small Rill brings you at 89 Miles to the Entrance of Mahunleh alias Machenleth of 2 Furl. Extent on the Road, Mahunleh, 89’1. and about as much transverse, seated on the foremention'd Dowy, call'd Maglona by the Romans, where once they had a Garison; at present a small Town but enjoying a Market on Tuesdays. Four Furlongs beyond the Town you cross the Dowy, which rising about the Foot of Bullagrois Hill in Merionethshire, on the Confines of Montgomeryshire, directs its Course South-west, and receiving 12 several lesser Streames, most of which are crost in this Road, here divides Merionethshire from Montgomeryshire, as it does below from Cardiganshire, embracing the Sea at Aberdowy. [90’6. E. N. E.] About 2 Miles from Mahunleh is Caven-Caer or the Ridg of a City, where the Ruins of a Wall in form Circular, and the Roman Coyns there dig'd up, speak its Antiquity. At 90’4. you pass the small River Dulnas, where omitting the forward Way to Dolgethe; at 92’6. you pass through Aber-suddon a small Village, Abersuddon, 92’6. and cross the Ke∣ryg falling into the adjacent Dowy; whence repeated Mountains accompany you on the Left, as doth the foresaid Dowy on the Right; 6 Furlongs farther you pass through Llanvoring a small Village, Llanvoring, 93’5. and at 95 Miles leave Mathavern House on the Left. A quarter of a Mile beyond you ascend for 6 Furlongs, [96’5. N. by E.] and descend again for two, and leave Remis Church a Furlong on the other side the River Dowy: At 98 Miles you pass through Abertwydo a small Village, and at 99’2. Abertwido, 98 Miles. Aberangel, 99’3. enter Aberangel a scattering Village extending 3 Furlongs on the Road; whence crossing the Angel just at its Influx into the Dowy, you enter Merionethshire. At 101’4. you leave Malloyd alias Manlloyd 4 Furlongs on the other side the Do∣wye; and at 102’6. pass through Dinas-Mouthy a small Village, Dinas Mouthy, 102’6 and after cross the Garist; whence over several Ascents and Descents, at 107’1. [102’7. N. E.] Llanum Mouthy, 107’1. N.N.E. you pass through Lla∣num-Mouthy another small Village, and at 107’6. re-pass the Dowy, having from
Machenleth hither accompany'd you close on the Right; then ascending Bulla-grois, a great Mountain of 2 Miles Height, [110’2. N.N.W.] [115’2. N.E. b. N.] you descend again for 7 Furlongs, whence your Road holds level for 2 Miles, having the Mountains on the Right and the River on the Left, a Descent bringing you at 114’3. to Pont-Ravan-Vauhan or Bi∣chan, a Bridg over a small Rill, the Mountains still continuing on the Right, and the River Dee on the Left, which at 116 Miles falls into the adjacent Lake or Llyn Tegidd alias Pemble Meer, into which fall also the Rivers Llue and Llavern: Of this Lake 'tis reported that the River Dee running through it mixeth not therewith; Salmons being never found in the Lake, nor the Fish Gwyniaid a kind of Whiting, in the River. Your Road continues along the side of the Lake for 4 Miles compleat, Llanover, 117’5. passing through Llangower alias Llanover a small Village at 117’5. and crossing the Dee at 120 Miles just at its issuing out of the Lake, Bala, 120’6. and bringing you at 120’5. to Bala extending 2 Furlongs on the Road; a small Town Corporate, enjoying several Pri∣vileges; is Govern'd by Bailiffs, &c. and hath a Market on Saturdays. At 121 Miles you cross the River Trowerin, rising out of a Lake of that Name, and having receiv'd the Kelyn and Monauch-dowr, Llanvor, 121’6. falls into the Dee a little below: At 121’6. you pass through Llanvaier alias Llanvor, a scattering Village; and 6 Fur∣longs farther cross the Tavor, [128’4. N.] from whence little occurs but a very Mountainous Way, till crossing the Gyrow at 128’7. over Pont-Mairthree Bridg you enter Den∣bighshire. At 130’5. you cross the Alwen, which having receiv'd the foresaid Gyrow a lit∣tle lower falls into the Dee: Re-entring Merionethshire, and at the same time en∣tring Bettus a scattering Village, Bettus, 130’6. [132’2. N.E. b. N.] and at 132’1. again enter Denbighshire, crossing the River Cluyd, and prosecuting a Mountainous Road like the former, you leave Clocanog Church a Mile on the Left; Llanvarog, 140’4. Ruthyn, 141 Miles. and passing through a small Wood at 139 Miles you come to Llanvarog at 140’4. a small Village contiguous to Ruthyn which you presently enter; a large and well-frequented Town-Corporate, seated on the foresaid Cluyd, which passes by St. Asaphs; is Govern'd by 2 Aldermen, &c. and has a very good Market for Corn, &c. on Mondays; had formerly a large Ca∣stle, now ruinous; and at present enjoys an Hospital and Free-School, Founded and Endow'd by Doctor Goodman, temp. Eliz. From Ruthyn, [144 M.N.W. b. W.] an indirect Road having the Cluyd on the Left, leaving Llangan∣haval on the Right, brings you at 147 Miles to Llangwiven Church on the Left, from whence you ascend a great Mountain of 2 Miles in Height, [146’7. N.N.W.] [151’1. N.E. b. N.] 154’5. N.W.] at the Top of which you enter Flintshire, and descend 11 Furlongs, crossing the great Holyhead Road in the Bottom, and leaving Skiviog Church a Mile on your Right, and a little farther Caerwis or Cajerwis a small Market-Town on your Left half a Mile; then at 156 Miles by the Lead Mines on the Left, you descend 4 Furlongs, and enter Holywel a small Town or Village, Holywel, 156’3. so call'd from St. Winefrid's Well, lying somewhat lower on the North-East Side of it; a Place much resorted unto, as well by those that for their Health's sake come to bath therein, as by Pilgrims for De∣votion sake, in Commemoration of the Christian Virgin Winefrid, (the Name sig∣nifying a Winner or Gainer of Peace) who being beautiful was Courted by a young Prince to gain her Virginity, which not obtaining, he at last surpriz'd and Ravish'd her, and afterwards slew her and cut off her Head, which rolling down hither from the adjacent Hill, gave Rise to the foresaid Well; the Spring is cold, and has a fair Chapel built over it upon Pillars, in the Windows whereof is pourtray'd the History of St. Winefrid; It gusheth forth in that Quantity and with that Vio∣lence, that it presently turns a Mill, emptying it self into the Sea about a Mile and half below; and the Moss growing in the Well of a sweet and pleasant Scent, they take to be St. Winefrids Hair. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 1’2. beyond Holywel the R. to St. Asaph. 2. Against Caierwis Church the Left to Ski∣viog and the Right to Llanelloyd. 3. 5 Furl. short of Ruthyn the Left to Llan∣rathee. 4. 2 Furl. beyond Ruthyn the Right to Bala a different Way. 5. 3’5. short of Bettus the Right to Erma∣neth. 6. At the End of Llanwaier the Right to Llanroost. 7. 11 Furl. beyond Llangower the Left. 8. A Mile beyond Abersuddon the Left to Mahunleth a different Way.
The Road From EXETER to Bastable & Thence to Ilfarcomb tō: Devon By Iohn Ogilby Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 49 miles furlongs vizt. From the City of Exeter to Crediton 8 mfurlongs. to Chimleigh 13’5. to Barnstable 17’0. & to Ilfarcomb 20’4 Continued from Ilfarcomb to Bediford & thence to Torington cō: Devon 23 miles 7 furl: vizt. to Beiford 10’7. & to Torington 7’0
The Road from Exeter to Barnstable, Continued to Ilfarcomb in Devonshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. N. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 38. M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 40 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 49’1. From EXETER Comp. Measure. to Crediton 07 07 08’0 08’0 Chimleigh 11 18 13’5 21’5 to Barnstable 14 32 17’0 38’5 Ilfarcomb 08 40 10’4 49’1 Extended to Torrington in Devonshire, thus: From Ilfarcomb Comp. Measure. to Bediford 12 12 16’7 16’7 Torrington 05 17 07’0 23’7 The County of Devon. contains the whole Road; and the Ex, Forton, Moul, Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Taw and Towridg, the principal Rivers crost over; being generally a rough, hard Way, yet wants not a fitting Reception for Travellers. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 6’5. the R. a different way to Kerton. At 7’7. The Left to Weston. At 12’6. The Right to Morchard. At 14’7. The Left acute. At 18’3. The Right forward. At 24’6. The Right forward. At 28’2. The Right to South Moulton. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 31’2. The Left to Athrington. At 34’3. The Left to Touton. At 38’1. The Right to Lankey. At 40’7. The Left to Branton. At 41’2. The Right to Raley. In the Continuation to Torrington. At 3 Furl. the Right to Morthay. At 1’4. The Left acute. At 1’7. The Right acute. At 3’7. The Left to Barnstable. At 7’3. The Right acute. At 13’7. The Right to Northam. At 18’0. The Left to South Moulton. At 20’1. The Left to EXETER. FRom EXETER, first passing 2 or 3 small Rills, you cross the Ex at 1’6. EXETER, N. [3’2. N.W.] Syar-Newton, 4’3. having a little above receiv'd the Credy, and passing another Rill, you touch upon the foresaid Credy, crossing 2 Rills more, and at 4’3. pass through Syar-New∣ton, alias Newton-Syres, a small Village near the Banks of the Credy; whence over 3 other Rills, and by Dunsum House on the Left, you at last cross the Forton and at 7’3. enter Crediton vulgo Kerton, Kerton, 8 Miles. seated on the West of the Credy at a little di∣stance, near its Conjunction with the Forton; a large Town, extending 5 Furlongs on the Road, divided into the East and West Towns; hath a great Market on Saturdays, a good Trade for Serges, shews a fair Church, formerly the Bishops See, with an incorporated Free-School; and is of Note for giving Birth to Winifred the Apostle of the Hussians, &c. in Germany. At the End of the Town you pass over a small Hill, and crossing 2 Rills at 10’3 ascend an Hill of 6 Furlongs, New Buidings, 11’1. on the Top of which you pass through New Buiding a small Village, presently descending for half a Mile; whence an unlevel Way, succeeded by a more fertile Vale, wherein you cross 2 or 3 Branches of the Taw, brings, you by the Beacon on the Right, to Chawley at 19’2. Chamley, 19’5. a discontinued Village of 4 Furlongs; whence crossing a Valley, and therein a Branch of the Taw; on the Top of the Ascent at 21’2. you enter Chimleigh or Chulmleigh, Chimleigh, 21’5. a small Market-Town of 2 Furl. Length, seated at the Confluence of the foresaid Water with the Taw.
At 22’5. in a Valley you cross another Branch of the foresaid Taw, ascending 4 Furlongs, [24’4. W. by N.] [26’1. N. N. W.] and passing by Chington House on the Left at 25 Miles; thence descend∣ing easily to 26 Miles, you have a more eminent Rise for near a Mile, which car∣ries you at 27’2. Chiddingford, 27’2. through Chidingford a small Village: Thus leaving Wortley 3 Fur∣longs on the Left, [31’4. N.W. by N.] you cross a small Rill, by Beatford House contiguous on the Left descend 4 Furlongs, pass another Rill at 30’1. and leaving Chetelhampton Church a small distance on the Right: Bathing, 35’5. At 30’6. cross 2 small Rills, pass through Bathing at 35’5. Ronson, 37 Miles. and Ronson at 37 Miles, both small Villages. At 37’2. Newport, 37’4. you enter Newport of 4 Furlongs Extent, where you fall in with the Road from Bridgwater, Barnstable, 38’5. N. by W. 3 Furlongs beyond which you enter Barstable or Barnstaple at 38’1. a large and well-frequented Corporation and Market-Town, [for which see LONDON to Barnstable, pag. 65.] The main Body of the Town lies upon the Right, extending only 3 Furlongs upon this Road; 4 Furlongs beyond which, (first crossing 2 small Rills, Pilton, 39’1. Bradford, 39’4. Branches of the adjacent Taw) you pass through Pilton, and 3 Furlongs farther Bradford, both small Villages. At 40 Miles you ascend for 6 Furlongs, worthy, 42’3. pass through Prickworthy a small Village, and crossing a Valley at 42 Miles, leave Bittaden 3 Furlongs on the Right, passing by Stoford at the Bottom of another Ascent of 5 Furlongs, descending at 48 Miles for 4 Furlongs, Ilfarcomb, 49 Miles. and at 48’7. entring into Ilfarcomb, vulgo Ilfracomb, a good Mar∣ket-Town, situate on the Shoar of the Severn Sea, almost opposite to Swanzey in Glamorganshire, enjoying a safe Harbor for Ships. The Continuation to Torrington aforesaid. FROM Ilfarcomb beginning a new Our Computation, Ilfarcomb, S. W. you first cross a small Rill at 1 Mile, ascending for 5 Furlongs, passing 2 other Rills and over a small Vale, Stracum, 5 Miles. Ham, 6’6. Ford, 7’6. S. and coming at 5 Miles to Stracum a small Village, seated on a Ri∣vulet in a Bottom: At 6 Miles a Descent of 6 Furlongs leads you into Ham of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence through Ford a small Village at the Bottom of an Ascent, and by Santon Court on the Left, [13 Miles, S-W. b. S. on the other side of the Hill you come at 11’4. to St. Ann's Chapel on the Right, and 3 Furlongs farther by a Ferry of above a M. cross the Taw at its Conjunction with the Towridg. At 14’6. Northam, 14’6. you go through Northam of 3 Furlongs Extent, seated on the Banks of the Towridg; Bediford, 16’7. whence crossing several little Waters, at 16’4. you enter Bediford or Bytheford, seated on the foresaid Towridg, over which it hath a large Stone-Bridg of 24 Arches, so high that Ships of 60 Tun may pass under; a large and florishing Town, well inhabited and frequented, enjoying a good Trade, with a well-pro∣vided Market on Tuesdays. From Bediford you take your Way over the Bridg, Bediford, E. [20’1. S. by E.] an irregular Road, ascending at 17’5. for 3 Furlongs, and at 18’5. for 5 Furlongs, bringing you to a Descent at 20’5. of 5 Furlongs; whence by repeated Ascents and Descents, over 2 or 3 Rills, a hard stony Way conveys you at 23’7. Torrington, 23’7. to Torrington magna, a large Market-Town, seated on the foresaid Towridg, [for which vid. LONDON to Barnstable, pag. 65.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. In the Continuation from Torrington. 1. 3’5. From Torrington the Right to Barnstable. 2. In Northam the Left to Appledore. 3. The Left in Ham. 4. 2 Mile short of Ilfarcomb the Left and Right acute. In the Road from Ilfarcomb towards EXETER. 1. At the End of Newport the Left to Southmoulton. 2. 2 Mile beyond Roundsham the Left to Touting. 3. 1’7. Short of Chimleigh the Left to Moulton. 4. 2 Furlongs short of Crediton the Right to Weston Town.
The Road From EXETER to TRUROE, in Com̄ Corn̄. By JOHN OGJSBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 79. Miles 4. Furlongs viz.t — From Exeter to Dunfford 7. m. 5. to Chegford 7. 3 fur. to Tavistoke 28. 2 to Liscard 6 6 to Listithiell 8 m 6. to Grampond 13.7. to Truroe 7. 7.—
The Road from Exeter to Truro, In CORNWAL. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. b S. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 75 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 57 M. 4. The Dimensuration 79’4. From EXETER Comp. Measure. to Dunsford 05 05 07’5 07’5 Chegford 05 10 07’3 15’0 Tavistoke 12 22 18’2 33’2 Liscard 12 32 15’5 48’7 to Listwithiel 07 41 08’7 57’6 Grampond 10 51 13’7 71’5 Truro 06 57 07’7 79’4   75   79’4   Devonshire and Cornwal are the Counties which Include the whole Road, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. and the Ex, Dart, Tavy, Tamer and Foy are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording an in∣different good Road to Chegford though Hilly, but after over Dart Moor to Tavi∣stoke exceeding bad, being Hilly, Boggy and Stony, without any Accomodation; but thence to Truro indifferent good again, being every where (except on Dartmoor) Fur∣nisht with good Inns of Accomodation. Forward Turnings to be Avoided. At 4’2. the Left to Chidley. At 7’6. the Left to Morton. At 11’0. the Left to Morton. At 15’1. at the end of Chegford, the Right acute. At 16’0. the Right to the Moors. At 17’4. the Right acute. At 25’4. the Left to Plimouth. At 38’1. the Left forward. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 42’5. the Left acute. At 43’1. the Right to Launceston. At 49’0. the Right acute. At 57’6. the Right in Listwithiel. At 62’4. the Right acute. At 64’5. the Right to Bodman. FRom the Great Conduit in EXETER you take your way to the West-Gate, EXETER W. S. W. where over a fair Stone-bridg you cross the Navigable River Ex, which rising in Exmore, passes by Teverton and this place; receiving into it 1st. The Dunsbrook and therein the Barle. 2d. The Leman. 3d. The Columb and therewith the Wever. 4th. The Credy and therein the Forton. 5th. The Clyst. and 6th. The Ken, [7 Furl. W.] falling into the Sea at Exmouth; at the end of the Bridg you enter St. Thomas a Suburb of EXETER, Extending 4 Furlongs on the Road; whence at 2 Miles you cross a Brook in a Vale, Pocon 2 m. Longdown-End 3’7. Crew 5’1. Reddey 7’1. Dunsford 7’5 W. b S. where you pass by some Houses call'd Pocon, and enter on Longdown Heath; at 3’7. you leave the Heath and pass through a Village call'd Longdown-End, and at 4’4. de∣scend 5 Furlongs, passing in the bottom through a little Village call'd Crew. Hence at 7 Miles you cross a Vale and leave Reddey a Village contiguous on the Left, and at 7’5. through Dunsford a long scattering Village, at 8’3. you descend 3 Furlongs and pass through a large Vale, ascending at 10’1. 6 Furlongs, then at 11’5. you ascend and presently 2 repeated descents convey you through a Valley; and at 14’4. you descend a Hill on which is seated Chegford formerly a Market-Town, Chegford 15 m. now dis-us'd; it at present contains about 80 Houses, and is Grac'd with a fair Church in which are the Tombs of Sr. William Whiddon and James Prouz Esquire; about 3 Miles distant on the Left is Morton or Morton Hampsteed, which Enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Leaving Chegford you cross a Brook in a Vale, and enter on Dartmoor at 17’3. [16 m. S. S. W.] whence little occurs but bad way, at 19 Miles you have a Stone for Direction on the Right call'd Heath-Stone, and at 20’4. you cross Turn-about Brook, [20’4. S. W.] and 2 Furlongs farther you have a Stone on the Left call'd Merrey Pit, and 5 Furl. beyond that a House on the Right of the same Name; then at 21’7. you cross a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches call'd
Post-bridg over a Brook, and at 23’4. [25’3. W. N. W.] you cross another Stone-bridg over Cherrey Brook; thence passing by Crockham Tor on the Right, a Hill of Rocks so call'd, at 25’3. over a Stone-bridg you cross the Dart, and at 27’2. pass by the last Direction Stone on the Right call'd Roundle. At 29’2. [30’3. W. b S.] in a Vale over a Stone-bridg of 2 Arches you cross a Brook, and 2 Fur∣longs farther pass by 2 or 3 Houses on the Left call'd Merryvil, again crossing a Brook at 30’3. Tavistock 33’2. where you descend a Hill of 3 Furlongs and leave the Moor; whence over a Stone-bridg of 5 Arches you cross the Tavy or Teave, enter Tavistock Extending 4 Fur∣longs on the Road, but more transverse: Its a large well-inhabited and frequented Borough-Town, formerly of great account for its Abby, which is now divided into Tenements; it Enjoys several Immunities as sending Burgesses to Parliament, &c. hath 2 Alms-Houses, is well water'd, for through each Street runs a small Brook: It is Govern'd by a Portreeve, and 8 Magistrates, has a great Market on Fridays, and 5 Fairs annually; the Earl of Bedford being Lord of the Town. Leaving Tavistock you cross a Stone-bridg of 2 Arches over a Brook at 34’7. [35’3. S. W.] and ascend a Hill of 7 Furlongs, at 36’4. in a Vale you cross New-bridg of Stone consi∣sting of 6 Fair Arches over the River Tamer, Denson 37’4. [38’1. W. b S.] and enter the County of Cornwal, 7 Furlongs beyond you pass by Denson a small Village contiguous on the Right, then passing over Henshaw Down, at 40’6. you descend 6 Furlongs, and at 42’6. descend again, and crossing a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches, over a Brook you ascend a Hill of a Mile in height; whence an easie descent by St. Ives Church on the Right conveys you at 45’7. Combrow 46’3. to a descent of 3 Furlongs, at the bottom whereof you pass through Combrow a small Village. A Furlong beyond you cross Combrow-Water a small River and ascend 4 Furlongs, Merrymeet 47 m. Liscard 48’7. and at the top pass through Merrymeet a small Village, 7 Furlongs farther you cross another small River, whence an easie ascent conveys you to Liscard or Liskerd, Ex∣tending 3 Furlongs on the Road, but more transverse; it is situate in a Level, and had formerly a Castle, now Ruinous; is an indifferent large Town-Corporate, driving a Considerable Trade in Yarn, which is Vended at EXETER, &c. it Enjoys se∣veral Immunities as sending Burgesses to Parliament, &c. has a good Free-School; Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 6 Magistrates, &c. has a good Market on Satur∣days, and 5 Fairs annually. From Liscard you pass over several ascents and descents, and cross several small Waters or Rills, and by the Eastern Middle and Western Tap-Houses; leaving Broddock Church on the Left and Lestormy Castle on the Right which is now Ruinous, Listwithiel 57’6. but was formerly the Seat of the Dukes of Cornwal, and Commanded Listwithiel near adjoyning; then passing through Polsco a small Village at 56’7. you 7 Furlongs farther over a Stone∣bridg of 9 Arches cross the Foy and enter Listwithiel, in Cornish Lest-Vthiel, by Ptolomy Vzella, formerly seated on a Hill, but now in a Bottom; and was of greater account then now it is, the River being Choak'd up; it is at present a Town-Corporate, Enjoying several Privileges as sending Burgesses to Parliament, hath a share in the Coynage of the Tin, is the only place where the Goal and Courts for the Stannery are Kept: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, St. Blais 61’4. Tregorrick 66 m. Polebooth 67’1. W. b N Grampond 71’5. &c. Enjoying a good Market on Fridays. From Listwithiel you again cross several Hills and Waters, and pass through St. Blais at 61’4. Tregorrick at 66 Miles, and Polebooth at 67’1. all small Villages; whence you enter Grampond or Grampont at 72’3. seated on the small River Valle: A Town-Cor∣porate, sends Burgesses to Parliament; is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder and 8 Ma∣gistrates, Sorne 72’7. Probus 74 m. Tresillon 75’5. Truro 79’4. it contains about 100 Houses, is in the Parish of Creed, has a Market on Tuesdays, and 2 Fairs yearly. Whence passing through Sorne at 72’7. Probus at 74 Miles, and Tresillon at 75’5. all small Villages, you enter Truro at 78’7. a large and well frequented Corporation and Market-Town. [As in LONDON to Barnstable, pag. 67.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 7 Furlongs beyond Tresillon, the Left forward to St. Earn. 2. 2 Miles beyond Grampond, the Right to Tregny. 3. At the entring Tregorrick, the Left to St. Austle. 4. 1 M. 2 Furl. beyond St. Blais, the Left to Lanlivery. 5. 6 Furl. short of Chegford, the Left to Barnstable. 6. 7 Furlongs beyond Longdown-End, the Right to Avington.
The Road from. GI. OCESTER to COVENTREY By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r His Ma:ties Cosmographer. Containing 58 miles a furlongs vizt. From GLOCESTER. to Celtenham 9 miles 4 to Winchcomb 7 m. to Campden 11’4 to Stratford 11’3. to WARWICK 8’3. to COVENTREY. 10’4.
The Road from Glocester to Coventry. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 47 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 41 M. 4. The Dimensuration 58’2. From GLOCESTER Comp. Measure. to Cheltenham 7 07 09’4 09’4 Winchcomb 5 12 07’0 16’4 Campden 7 19 11’4 28’0 to Stratford 8 27 11’3 39’3 Warwick 6 33 08’3 47’6 COVENTRY 8 41 10’4 58’2 Glocestershire and Warwicksh. contain the whole Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Stour and Avon are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general no very good Way, but is e∣very where accomodated with good Towns and publick Places for Entertainment of Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 7’7. The Left to Hatherley. At 8’1. The Left to Winchcomb a different Way. At 9’5. The forward in Cheltenham to Charl∣ton Regis. At 13’4. The Left to Southam. At 17 Miles the Right at the End of Winch∣comb to Campden the Hill Way. At 18’5. At Hales Cross the Left to Brad∣way. At 20 Miles, Acute Turnings to be avoided. By Stanway Church the Left to Staunton. At 31’3. At the End of Mickleton the R. to Capton. At 39’2. At Stratford-Bridg the forward up Stratford Town. At 48 Miles at the End of Warwick the R. to Rugby. At 49’2. The Left to Kenelworth. At 51’3. The Left to Kenelworth. SEtting forward from GLOCESTER (the Account of which you have in LON∣DON to St. Davids pag. 29.) you leave the Suburbs at 1 Mile; GLOCESTER, N. E. by E. whence at 2’3. crossing a Stone-Bridg over a Brook, [3 Miles N. N. E.] you after leave Chursdon Church about 6 Furlongs on the Right, seated on an Eminence; and at 4 Miles cross another Stone-Bridg and Brook, and a Mile farther pass over a Wooden-bridg and Brook; [7’4. E. S. E.] then at 7’3. you cross a Stone-Bridg and Rill, Bedlam, 7’7. Cheltenham, 9’4. N.E. and 4 Furlongsbeyond pass by some Houses on the Road call'd Bedlam; and at 9 Miles enter Cheltenham in Extent 6 Furlongs; it numbers near 200 Houses; hath a fair Church; a good Market on Thursdays and 2 Fairs annually, Holy Thursday and St. James's Day. In the Town you bear to the Left, and at 11 Miles enter Prestbury, Prestbury, 11’2. a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; whence by an irregular Way over a Hill a Mile in Height, by a Beacon on the Left, leaving Postlip on the Right at 14’4. a Descent of 4 Furlongs conveys you at 16’1. to Winchcomb, A. S. Winchcomb, 16’4. Wincel-comb, it extends 6 Furlongs on the Road, seated near Sudeley-Castle, [16’7. E. by N.] of Note formerly for its Abby Built by Kenulph King of the Mercians; the same Day he Hal∣lowed it he releas'd his Prisoner Edbricht King of Kent: Is a large Town contain∣ing about 300 Houses; a Place well-known, for at this Place and Cheltenham, the People are much given to Plant Tobacco, though they are supprest by Authority; is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs and 10 Burgesses; has a good Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, the 25th. of April and 17th. of July. From Winchcomb your Way is for the most part open, Didbrook. 19’3. N.E. passing by Hales Cross at 18’5. Didbrook at 19’3. Stanway at 20 Miles; and over some small Waters you are convey'd at 21’1. to an Ascent of 6 Furlongs, where you have Lidcomb Wood on your Right; then at 22 Miles you descend, and at the Bottom ascend again, [22’2. E by N.] Snowshil, 22’7. [23’7. N. E. by N.] and pass through Snowshil a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence over Broadway Downs; crossing the great Road that leads from LONDON to WORCESTER at 25’2. and descending at 26’7. a Hill of 4 Furlongs, you pass through Wessington, Wessington, 27’3. where
you fall in with the Road that leads from the 4 Shire-stone to Montgomery, and cros∣sing a Brook enter Campden at 27’6. Campden 28. m. an indifferent large Market-Town. [The account of which vid. in LONDON to Montgomery pag. 87. and Succeeding Plates.] Leaving Campden you ascend a Hill of 3 Furlongs, whence your way is for the most part open again, Mickleton 31’3. passing through Mickleton at 31 Miles, and after by Whineton or Quenton Church on the Right; then at 32’2. you pass by Clifford a Village con∣tiguous on the Right, and 3 Furlongs farther over a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches cross the Stour, near its Conjunction with the Avon, and enter Warwickshire; at 39’2. pas∣sing through a part of Stretford you presently cross a large Stone-bridg of 13 great and 6 smaller Arches over the River Avon, Stratford 39’3. N. b W. leaving the main Town of Stretford on the Left. Hence again your way is most part open, little occurring but crossing some small Waters, [43’5. N. E.] and by a Post on the Right; till at 43’1. you come to Clopton Park on the Right, which accompanies your Road for above a Mile together, then crossing a Brook at 45’2. and passing through Longbridg, at 46 Miles you cross another Brook, and at 47’1. enter Warwick, Extending this way a Mile on the Road, and as much trans∣verse, of which take this general account. Warwick by the Saxons Warryngwic, Warwick 47’6. by the Britains Care-Guarwic, by Mr. Cam∣den suppos'd to be the Presidium of the Romans, where they kept a Band of Dalmatians; a place of great Antiquity, said to be built by Gurstungus about 375 years before the Birth of Christ; 'Tis pleasantly seated on the River Avon, all the passages into the Town being over a Water, up a Hill and through a Cut Rock, was Fortifi'd with a Wall, now Ruinous; has a strong and stately Castle, the Seat of the Right Honorable Ro∣bert Grevil Baron Brook of Beauchamp Court, &c. It's a large Corporation and Shire-Town, contains 2 Parish Churches (besides some that are Demolisht) that of St. Maries having several Stately and Beautiful Tombs in it of divers Persons of Worth and Honor; its Houses well built, its Streets Spacious and well order'd, is well In∣habited and Enjoys a good Trade, is the place where the Assizes and general Quar∣ter Sessions for the County are Held; it hath a good Free-School and stately Mar∣ket-House, with a Noted Hospital call'd St. James's, Founded by the Earl of Leicester for 12 Decay'd Gentlemen, with an Allowance to each of above 20 l. per Annum, and 50 l. per Annum to a Chaplain; it Enjoys several Immunities as sending Burgesses to Parliament, &c. Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 12 Aldermen and 12 Assistant Burgesses, has a grand Market on Saturdays and 2 petty ones Tuesdays and Fridays, with 5 Fairs annually, viz. the day after the 1st. Sunday in Lent, May-day, Midsomer∣day, St. Bartholomew-day and St. Simon and Jude. At the end of Warwick you omit the forward way on the Right that leads to Rug∣by, 52 m. N. b E.] &c. and bear to the Left; whence the River Avon accompanies your Road on the Right for 4 or 5 Miles together, at 53 Miles you have Stoneley Church on the Right 3 Furlongs, Stichel 56’4. COVENTRY 58’2. and at 54’5. crossing a Brook you leave Bagginton Church on the same hand 6 Furlongs, then crossing a Rill you pass through Stivichal vulgo Stichel a scattering Village, and at 57’6. enter the City of COVENTRY, [Which We have Illustrated in LONDON to Holyhead pag. 43.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 Furlongs from COVENTRY, the Right to Kenelmworth. 2. At the end of Stichel, the Right to Ke∣nelmworth. 3. In Long-Bridg the Left to Sherborn. 4. Against Clopton Park, the Right to Aul∣cester. 5. At Stretford Bridg the forward to Ban∣bury. 6. 2 Furl. beyond Stower Bridg the Right to GLOCESTER a different way. 7. In Campden the Right forward. 8. 5 Furlongs from Wessington, the Left to Stow. 9. 6 Furlongs short of Snowshil, the Left to Winchcomb the Hill way. 10. At the Beacon beyond Winchcomb, the Right to Swindon. 11. 4 Furlongs beyond the Beacon, the Left to Burford. 12. At Bedlam the Right to Haw, the Left to Arle.
The Road from GLOCESTER to Montgomery North Wales. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr.  Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 70 Mes 3 furlongs vizt. From GLOCESTER Huntley 66 to Ross 8.9 to Mich Birch 7.’5. to Herrd 5.’5. to Pembridg 12.’7. to Prestaine 6’.5. to Knighn 4’.3. to Clumn 5’.7. to Montgory 12.’2.
The Road from Glocester to Montgomery North-Wales. 1. THE Point of Bearing N.E. b N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 60 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 55 M. 4. The Dimensuration 70’3. From GLOCESTER Comp. Measure. to Huntley 04 04 06’6 06’6 Ross 06 10 08’4 15’2 Much-Birch 06 16 07’5 22’7 HEREFORD 04 20 05’5 28’4 Pembridg 10 30 12’7 41’3 to Prestaine 05 35 06’5 48’0 Knighton 03 38 04’3 52’3 Clunn 04 42 05’7 58’2 Montgomery 08 50 12’7 70’3   50   70’3   Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Radnorshire, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Shropshire and Montgomeryshire are the Counties past through, and the Severn, Wye, Arrow, Wadels, Lug, Temd and Onk are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording in general a hard Way though Hilly, yet not that con∣venient Entertainment as you meet with in forward Roads. Forward Turnings to be Avoided. At 2’0. the Right to Newent, and the Left to Newnham. At 7’3. the Left forwards. At 15’2. the Right in Ross to Lidbury. At 15’7. the Right in Wilton to Day-Church. At 16’1. the Left to Monmouth. At 20’4. the Left to Monmouth. At 29’0. the Right to Lemster. At 30’3. the Left to Huntingdon. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 43’3. the Left to Keinton. At 44’3. the Right forward. At 48’2. in Prestaine the forward to Radnor. At 49’7. the Left to the Forest. At 52’7. the Left to Skipora. At 56’6. the Left acute. At 67’3. the Left acute. PRoceeding from the City of GLOCESTER you first cross the Seavern, GLOCETER, W.N.W Over, 1’1. S.W.b.W. Huntley, 6’6. [9’4. W.N.W.] then pass through Over and Huntley as in LONDON to St. Davids pag. 29. Whence bearing to the Left you presently bear again to the Right, cross a Vale and leave the Church on the Right; then you pass through Durley Cross and Lea Line both small Villages, and by several Disperst Houses on the Road, are convey'd at 11 Miles to Lea a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation, seated on a small Hill; Lea, 11’2. [12’6. W.] at 11’5. you enter Herefordshire, and passing by Weston Church and Esquire Nurse's House both on the Left, Ross, 15’2. come at 15 Miles to Ross of 4 Furlongs Extent and as much transverse seated on the River Wye, a fair large Borough-Town containing about 300 Houses; hath a well frequented Market on Thursdays, which is well provided with Corn, Cattel, &c. and 4 Fairs annually, viz. Ascention Day, Corpus Christi, St. Margarets, and St. Andrews. Leaving the Town, you at 15’6. over a Stone-Bridg of 6 Arches cross the Wye, and enter a Village call'd Wilton of 2 Furlongs Extent; Wilton, 15’7. [16’1. N.W. by W. passing through Peterstone at 17’4. then over Pitchers Common, and by Selock-Hentland Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, and Harwood a Village at 21’3. most on the same Hand; Harwood, 21’3. and by some dis∣united Houses come at 22’6. to Much-Birch a Village of 2 Furl. Much-Birch, 22’7. [25 Miles N. b. E.] HEREFORD, 28’4. N.N.W. Extent and good Accomodation; thence at 24’2. you leave Dewchurch a Furl. on the Left, and again pass by several scattering Houses, and come to the Suburbs of the City of HEREFORD at 27’7. and 2 Furlongs farther over a Stone-Bridg of 8 Arches cross the River Wye, and enter the City it self, [the Account of which, vid. in BRISTOL to CHES∣TER, pag. 113.] Adding, That it contain'd 6 Parish-Churches besides the Cathe∣dral, two of which were Demolisht in the late War; the Cathedral was first built by King Milfride, and destroy'd by Cruffith Prince of South-Wales, and Algar an En∣glish-Man, in their Rebellion against King Edward the Confessor: was re-built by Bi∣shop Remelin and his Predecessors; to which now belong a Bishop, Dean, Chan∣cellor,
6 Canons, 27 Prebends, a Chaunter, Tresurer, 12 Vicars Coral, with Deacons, Quiristers, &c. This City drives a great Trade in Gloves, which are from hence sent to LONDON; and besides, hath several well endow'd Hospitals for the Poor. Leaving the City at 28’7. a Furlong farther you cross a Brook, and leave Hol∣mer Church 5 Furlongs on the Right; thence by several discontinued Houses, and over some small Waters or Rills, by Kings Peon Church on the Left, through Knappers Green, Knappers Green, 37 M. [39’3. E.] Pembridg, 41’3. and by Berley Church 2 Furlongs on the Right; you at 38’7. over a Stone-Bridg of 4 Arches, call'd Stratford-Bridg, cross a Brook, at which Place is a good Inn of Accomodation; whence you enter Pembridg at 41’2. of 3 Fur∣longs Extent; a small Town seated on the Arrow, and hath a little Market on Tuesdays. At the End of the Town over a Wooden-Bridg of 7 Arches you cross the fore∣said Arrow, [43’3. N. by E.] [44’4. E. by N.] and 2 Furlongs farther cross a Brook over a Wood-Bridg, your Road be∣ing Indirect, little occurs; but passing by Shirley Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, till at 46 Miles you come to Comb a small Village, Comb, 46 Miles. and in it, over a Wooden-Bridg cross the Wadels and enter Radnorshire; Prestain, 48 Miles N whence a direct Road conducts you to Prestain at 47’6. of 6 Furlongs Extent, [as in LONDON to Aberistwith, pag. 5.] Leaving the Town at 48’4. you 2 Furlongs farther cross the Lug over a Wood-Bridg, and pass by Fulbrook House on the Left, Norton, 49’6. and through Norton a small discon∣tinued Village at 49’5. whence 3 Furlongs farther you ascend 5 Furlongs, and at 51 Miles ascend 3 Furlongs, Knighton, 52’3. equally descending, and enter Knighton at 52’1. of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; is seated on the Temd, a well-built Town, containing above 100 Houses, hath a well-provided Market on Thursdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, on the 6th. of May and the 23d. of September; nigh unto this Town is that noted Ditch call'd Offa's Dike. At the End of the Town you cross the Temd and enter Shropshire; at 53 Miles you ascend a Hill of 6 Furlongs, and at 55’1. descend 2 Furlongs, cross a Brook, and pass by the Rose and Crown Inn on the Right, where you ascend a Hill of 8 Furlongs height, and 3 Furlongs beyond equally descend; and at the Bottom en∣ter Clun a Village of good Accomodation and of 2 Furlongs Extent, Clun, 58’2. in which, over a Stone-Bridg of 4 Arches you cross the River Onk; [60’1. N.N.W.] Blyn, 61’1. and at the End of the Town leave a demolisht Castle on the Left: at 59’2. you ascend 3 Furlongs and pass by Blyn a little Village on the Right; whence some disperst Houses conveys you at 62 Miles to cross a Brook, where you ascend 6 Furlongs and leave Bishops Castle a Mile on the Right; at 63’7. you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 64’2. leave the Bishops Mott on the Right, a small Hill so call'd, and enter Montgomeryshire. Thence 2 repeated Descents, by several scattering Houses, leads you at 66’5. through a Village call'd Red-Court; Red-Court, 66’5. Montgomery, 70’3. then by Cherstock Church a Mile on the Right, and by the Lord Herbert's Park on the same Hand, you come to Montgomery at 70’1. seated on a small Ascent, taking its Name from Roger de Montgomery who first Built it; formerly of more Note than now it is, having had a strong Wall and Ca∣stle now Ruinous, it at present contains not 100 Houses, yet is the Shire-Town, sends a Burgess to Parliament, gives Title to the Right Honorable Phillip Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery; is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, a Recorder, &c. hath a Market on Thursdays and 4 Fairs annually, the 15th. of March, the 17th. of May, St. Bartholomews Day, and All Saints. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Montgomery the Left to Bridgnorth. 2. At the Entrance of Shropshire the Left to Bishops Castle. 3. 7 Furl. beyond Blyn the Left to Ludlow. 4. 10 Furl. beyond Clun the Right acute. 5. At the Rose and Crown Inn the Left acute 6. In Knighton the Right. 7. A Furlong from Knighton the Right. 8. 2 Furl. from Prestain the Right to Kineton 9. In Comb the Right to Kineton. 10. 1’3. Beyond Comb the Left to Lemster. 11. 1’6. Short of Pembridg the Right to Stanton. 12. 1’4. Short of HEREFORD the Right to Eygn Gate. 13. 2 Miles short of Much-Birch the Right to Easton Bridg. 13. In Ross the Right to Monmouth. 14. 2 Furl. short of Huntley the R. acute.
The Road from HEREFORD to LEICESTER By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r His Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing .86. mile 6. Furlongs viz.t From the City of HEREFORD to Fromeshill 11 7 to the City of WORCESTER .12.5. to Droitwich .6.1. to Bromsgroe .6.4. to Allchurch .4.7. to Soli hull 9 to Meriden .6.4 to the City of LOVENTRY. 6.2 to Woolvey .9. t. to Sharnford. 4.4. to LICESTER aforesaid 20.3.
The Road from Hereford to Leicester. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. N. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 71 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 67 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 86’6. From HEREFORD Comp. Measure. to Fromshil 10 10 11’7 11’7 WORCESTER 10 20 12’5 24’4 Droitwich 05 25 06’1 30’5 Bromsgrove 05 30 05’4 36’1 Alchurch 03 33 04’7 41’0 Solihul 07 40 09’0 50’0 to Meriden 05 45 06’4 56’4 COVENTRY 05 50 06’2 62’6 Woolvey 07 57 09’1 71’7 Sharnford 03 60 04’4 76’3 Leicester 07 67 10’3 86’6   67   86’6   Herefordshire, Worcestersh. Warwicksh. and Leicestersh. include the whole Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Lug, Loadon, Frome, Temd, Severn, Salwarp, Arrow, Blossomfield, Blith, Sherborn, Sow and Sour, are the principal Rivers crost over; affording but a bad Way to WORCESTER, thence to COVENTRY indifferent, and bad again to Leicester, yet recompenc'd with the several good Towns and other Places of Accomodation you pass through. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1’4. The Left to Shelwick. At 2’1. & 2’2. The Left to Bromyard. At 9’4. The Right to Espach. At 15’6. The Left to Suckley. At 25’6. The Left to Shrewsbury. At 36’4. The Right to LONDON. At 36’7. The Left to Birmingham. At 38’1. The Right to LONDON At 50’1. The Right to Warwick. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 53’6. The Right in Hampton on the Hill. At 64’3. The Left to Nuneaton. At 65’3. The Left to Hinkley. At 65’7. The Right to Rugby. At 72’3. The Left to Hinkley. At 74’2. The Right to LONDON the Watling-street Way. SEtting forward from the Town-Hall in HEREFORD, HEREFORD, N. E. b. N. [1’5. E.] you pass out at By∣strers-Gate, and leave the City at 5 Furlongs; whence at 1’7. over a Stone-Bridg of 3 Arches you cross the River Lug, and leave Lugwardine Church 4 Fur∣longs on the Right; then by several disperst Houses and Wethington Church on the Left, you are convey'd at 5 Miles through Shecknal a long discontinued Village, Shecknal, 5 Miles. and at 7’5. over a Stone-Bridg to cross the small River Loadon, and pass through Lower Ingleton a disunited Village; Lower Ingleton, 7’6. thence again you pass by several scattering Hou∣ses on the Road, and are brought at 10’3. over a Wooden-bridg to cross the Ri∣ver Frome, and 3 Furlongs farther, to ascend a Hill of 6 Furlongs Height, and after by some Houses call'd Frome's Hill, you descend again 5 Furlongs, Fromes-Hill, 11’7. and at the Bottom, cross a small Rill. At 14 Miles crossing a small Rill you enter Worcestershire; whence by several dis∣perst Houses, and 2 repeated Descents, [18 Miles E. N. E.] you are convey'd by Ausrick Church on the Right, and Esq Sands House on the Left, through a Wood, Sinton, 19’2. Braunsford, 20’7. and by a Park on the Right; at 19’2. to Sinton a small Village, and at 20’7. to Braunsford a dis∣continued Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; then at 21’6. over Braunsford-Bridg of Wood you cross the River Temd, which arising in Radnorshire, passes by Knighton, Ludlow and Tenbury, and about 2 Miles below this Place falls into the Severn, re∣ceiving into it first the Bradfield; 2d. the Clune, and therein the Onk; 3d. the Ony, and therewith the Warren and Stradbrook; 4th. the Corve; 5th. the Ledwick, and 6th. the Rea. At 24 Miles you enter St. John's, WORCESSER, 24’4 N. N. E. or Part of the Suburbs of the City of WOR∣CESTER, and 4 Furlongs farther, over a Stone-Bridg cross the Severn, and en∣ter the City it self, which we have Illustrated in LONDON to Aberistwith, pag. 3.
At 25 Miles you leave the Suburbs call'd Forestreet, and at 25’5. over a Stone-Bridg cross a small River; thence by several repeated Houses on the Road, you are brought at 27’6. Fennal Green, 27’6. to Fennal Green a discontinued Village, where you have Hen∣lip House, the Seat of Esq Abbinton, about 3 Furlongs on the Right; then through Part of Marton, Droitwich. 30’5. a straight Way leads you at 30’4. to Droitwich alias Durtwich, Saline perchance a coenoso Situ; seated on the Salwarp; a Town-Corporate, Noted for it's excellent White-Salt here made; it contains about 400 Houses, and 4 Churches, St. Peter's, St. Nicholas, St. Andrew's, and Dodderhil; hath Privilege to Arrest for any Sum; is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs and 4 Justices; has a Market on Fridays, and 3 Fairs annually, viz. St. Thomas Day, Good Friday, and St. Simon and Jude. At 31’3. over a Wooden-Bridg you cross the River Salwarp, and at 33 Miles pass through Upton or Henbrook a discontinued Village, Ʋpton, 33 Miles. and after leave the Church on the Left; then by Grafton Park on the same Hand you re-pass the Salwarp over a Stone-Bridg, Bromsgrove, 36’1. and a Furlong beyond enter Bromsgrove a Market-Town of 6 Fur∣longs Extent, [37’4. E. N. E.] [for which vid. LONDON to Buckingham, &c. pag. 25.] In the Town you again cross the foresaid Salwarp; thence through Burcote a small Village at 37’7. Burcote, 37’7. Alchurch, 41 Miles. an indifferent straight Way leads you at 41’0. to Alchurch of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment, which hath a Fair each St. Lawrence Day: At the End of the Town you cross the Arrow, Witho, 43’2. and at 43’2. pass through Witho a small Village. Hence over Witho Heath at 45’2. you enter Warwickshire; then over Dickens Heath and Shirley Heath, Solihul, 50 Miles. and by several disperst Houses, you come at 49’6. to Solihul, a Town of 2 Furlongs Extent, formerly enjoying a Market, which was dis-us'd by occasion of a great Sickness; it enjoys at present a Fair each Lammas Day: then again by several scattering Houses, Hampton, 53’6. through Hampton on the Hill at 53’6. crossing the Blith at 55’5. Meriden, 56’4. E. Ausley, 60 Miles. COVENTRY, 62’6. N. E. [64’3. E. N. E.] Forkshul, 65’2. Woolvey, 71’7. [73’7. E.] Smockinton, 74’1. [74’6. N. E.] you come at 56’2. to Meriden a discontinued Village of good Accomodation: hence over some small Ascents and Descents, through Ausley at 60 Miles, and COVENTRY at 62’6. as in LONDON to Holyhead, pag. 43. From COVENTRY at 65’2. you pass through Forkshul, and cross the Sow, and at 69 Miles leave Sheldon a little on the Right; then through Woolvey at 71’7. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and over Woolvey Warren, you come at 74 Miles to the Watling-street Way that leads from LONDON to Shrewsbury, and pass through Smockinton a little Village, yet affording very good accomodation, where you enter Leicestershire; then by Troutsworth on the Right and Aston on the Left, pass through Sharnford at 76’3. Sharnford, 76’3. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, where you cross the Sour, which accompanies your Road on the Right to Leicester. Hence you pass by Sapcoat and Croft on the Left, and over several small Waters, and by Narboro and Elson on the Right; you come at 86 Miles to a Stone-Bridg of 4 Arches, Leicester, 86’6. where you cross the foresaid Sour, and enter Leicester a Corporation, Market, and Shire-Town, [as in LONDON to Darby, pag. 79.] Adding this, That it is a Place of more Antiquity than Beauty, said to be Built by King Leir 844 years before the Birth of Christ, and call'd Caer-Lerion, where he likewise built a Temple of Janus, and plac'd therein a Flamin or High Priest, according to Jeoffry ap Arthur; but certain it is, that it was in Request in the time of the Romans, and was made an Episcopal See Anno 680. by Ethelred King of the Mercians, re-edify'd and encompast with a Wall by the Lady Edelfled, Anno 914. which with it's Castle are long since Destroy'd. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 4 Furl. short of Smockinton the Left to Little Wilston. 2. 2 Furl. beyond Smockinton the Right to Shrewsbury the Watling-street Way. 3. At the End of Hampton the R. to Coleshil. 4. 10 furl. beyond Hampton the R. to Coleshil 5. At the end of Solibul the R. to Birmingham 6. In Alchuch the Right to Kederminster. 7. 2 Furlongs beyond Burcote the Right to Kederminster. 8. In Droitwich the Right to Kederminster. 9. In WORCESTER the forward to LONDON. 10. In St. John's the Right to Bromyard, the Left to Lidbury. 11. In Braunsford the Right to Lye. 12. 8 Furlongs from Sinton, the Right to Lulsey. 13. 5 Furl. short of the entring Herefordsh. the Left to Lidbury.
The Road From HUNTINGDON to IPSWICH cō: Suffe By IOHN OGILBY Esq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 71 Illiles 6 furlongs viz.t From Huntingdon to St. Ives 5 mile 6 furlongs— to Erith 6’4. to Sutton 4’4. to ELY 6 m. 5 fur: to Soham 5’3. to Bury 18’ to Wulpit 8 mile— to Ipwich 12 mile
The Road from Huntingdon to Ipswich, In SƲFFOLK. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. S. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 58 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 54 M. 4. The Dimensuration 71’6. From Huntingdon Comp. Measure. to St. Ives 05 05 05’6 05’6 Erith 05 10 06’4 12’2 Sutton 03 13 04’4 16’6 ELY 05 18 06’5 23’3 Soham 04 22 05’3 28’6 to Bury 14 36 18’0 46’6 Wulpit 05 41 08’0 54’6 Needham 06 47 08’0 62’6 Ipswich 07 54 09’0 71’6   54   71’6   Huntingdonshire, Cambridgshire and Suffolk include the Road; Counties pust through. Rivers crostover. and the Owse and Orwel are the principal Rivers crost over; The quality of the way. and though the Way be in some Part Fenny, and generally deep and dirty, yet the repetition of good Thorough-fares renders it not altogether uneasie or unpleasant to the Traveller. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1 Mile the forward Way in Godmanchester to LONDON. At 5’4. Entring St. Ives the Right to Cam∣bridg. At 6 Miles the forward Way at the End of St. Ives. At 6’6. The Left to Houghton. At 13 Miles the Left to Cambridg. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 32’4. The Right. At 47’3. The Left acute. At 52’1. The Right to Drenkston. At 54’2. The Left. At 60’5. The Right in Comesford. At 62’6. In Needham the Left to Codnam. FROM Huntingdon, Huntingdon, S. E. the Account of which is given in the Road from LON∣DON to Barwick, pag. 9. you cross the Owse, and 2 Furlongs after enter Godmanchester, an antient Corporation of 6 Furlongs Extent and good Reception, Godmanchester, 1. M. E. by N. in which turning short on the Left, and leaving it at 1’2. an open way leads you through a small Village call'd Hemingsford-Abot, the Church on the Right; Hemingsford-Abot, 3’3. [3’5. N. N. E.] Hemingsford-Grey, 4’. St. Ives, 5’6. and 5 Furlongs farther through Hemingsford-Grey, the Church on the Left. At 5’2. re-passing the River Owse over a fair Stone-bridg, you enter St. Ive's, so call'd from one Ivo a Persian Bishop; a large and well-frequented Town, and hath a very great Market on Mondays, for Cattel, Provisions, &c. Hence over open Arable you leave Holywel on the Left upon the Banks of the River, giving Denomination to the adjacent Fen, and at 8’2. [6’6. E. N. E.] Needenworth, 8’2. pass through Need∣enworth a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; from whence a straight open Way, Arable and Common, brings you to some Houses on the Left call'd Parsonage End, and after by Erith Church on the Right; whence over Arable and Fenny Ground, Part of Holywel Fen aforesaid: At 12’0. Erith. 12’2. you enter Erith a large Town of 3 Furlongs Extent, and affording 2 or 3 Inns for Entertainment, but not enjoying the Benefit of a Market. At 12’6. you pass the first great Cut or Drain, and at 13’0. the Second; [13’1. N. N. E.] where you enter Cambridgshire, and leaving the River, bear to the Left along the Side of the Drain upon Erith Causey, at 14’6. [16’2. E.] leaving the Drain and passing over Sutton Fen, you come to a Rill at 16 Miles, where you ascend Ward Hill of 3 Furlongs, Sutton, 16’6. and enter Sutton somewhat scattering, but near a Mile in Length, with several Cherry-Gardens: Leaving Sutton at 17 Miles, Wentworth, 10’2. Wichford, 20’6. E. N. E. ELY, 2’3. S. S. E. a straight and open Way by Whicham on the Left brings you at 19 Miles to Wentworth, alias Wingford, 2 Furlongs long; at 20’5. to Wichford, 3 Furlongs; and at 22’7. to the City of ELY, the Account of which is related briefly in the Road from LONDON to Lyn, pag. 85. Add to which, that it is said to be Built by Ethelreda, Aldreth or Audrey first Wife to
one Tombret a Prince of this Province; after, of Egfride King of the Northumbers: It suffer'd much by the Danes, but was soon Re-built by Ethelwold Bishop of WIN∣CHESTER, and planted with Monks; made a Bishops See temp. H. 1. whose Bishops, till temp. H. 8. had the Rights of a County Palatine, and still in part enjoy the same: The Diocess (formerly Part of LINCOLN) contains the County of Cam∣bridg and Isle of Ely only, it numbers to the present 41 Bishops; and the Cathe∣dral Dedicated to St. Ethelred, is a stately Structure, shewing a curious lofty Lant∣horn or Turret; yet is it a City of no great Splendor or frequency of Inhabitants. From ELY, over the Draw-Bridg you cross the foresaid Owse, having Ely Com∣mon on the Left, and Ely-Bridg Fen on the Right; whence through Part of Stont∣ney, Soham, 28’6. S. E. leaving the Hall and Chapel on the Left, you come to Dulbridg at 26’4. o∣ver a Drain, and so over Soham-Common Fen, arriving at 28’4. at Soham, a large Town of 5 Furlongs Extent, very dirty, but affording one good Inn. Hence by Soham Mere of about 1000 Acres on the Right, and over a small Brook, you enter open Arable; at 32’3. crossing Fordham Bridg, you leave Fordham Church on the Left, and passing through open Way, consisting indifferently of A∣rable and Pasture; at 32’4. cross another Brook, and by Red-house an Inn on the Left; at 36’2. come to the Grange Water, where you enter Suffolk; whence by Kennet and Kenford at some distance on the Right; [40’3. E. S. E.] at 39 Miles you ascend 3 Fur∣longs, pass over Sheep Downs, where you have a fair Prospect of Croxton high Trees Eastward; and at 41’3. descend 3 Furlongs, crossing in the Valley Barrow-Bridg o∣ver a small Rill; Bury, 46’6. whence by Saxham and Westley at some distance on the Right; at 45’5. you pass by the Spittle on the same Hand, and enter St. Edmonds Bury at 46’1. of 6 Furlongs Length this Way, a large, pleasant and well-frequented Corporation and Market-Town, paralell'd to Montpelier in France, as in LONDON to Bury, &c. pag. 103. In the Town you first pass through Rusby-Gate, and at the End of the Town East-Gate, where you cross the small River, which rising a little higher Southward, passes by Midenhal, &c. Hence prosecuting an open Way, you pass between Berton and Rushbrook, Beighton Bulls, 52 M. enter a Lane at 50’4. and between Rowham Church and Place; at 52’0. pass through Beighton Bulls a Village of 2 Furlongs; leaving Beighton half a Mile on the Right; whence by Tostock Hall and Church on the Left, at 54’2. pas∣sing through Wulpit Water, Walpit, 54’6. 2 Furlongs farther you enter Wulpit, i. e. Luporum Puteus, from a Pit they us'd to bury Wolves in; a large and fair Town, extending 4 Fur∣longs on the Road. At 55’6. [55’7. S. by E.] you ascend 4 Furlongs, where you have a fair Prospect round the Country; descending 2 Furlongs, and over the Warren by Hayley Park contiguous to the Road, accompanying you 7 Furlongs; you come at 57’4. to Hayley Newstreet a small Village, Stow-Market, 59’6. leaving Hayley near a Mile on the Left: At 59’5. enter Stow-Mar∣ket, seated at the Conjunction of the Gipping and Orwel; a large Town, hath a well∣frequented Market on Thursdays, and a Fair on St. Peter's Day; their chiefest Trade is making of Tammeys, and the Town affords several good Inns for Entertainment. At 60’2. Comesford, 60’5. S. E. by E. Needham, 62’6. you cross the Gipping, first pass through Comesford a small Village at 60’5. and by West Creting Hall and Church on the Left; over Badley Bridges enter Needham at 62’4. a poor Town of 3 Furl. Extent, seated on the Orwel, hath a small Market on Wednsdays, and drives a small Trade in making Blues and Broad-Cloth, &c. At the End of the Town re-passing the Orwel, you leave Codenham Beacon on the Left, Codnam, 65’1. and at 65’1. pass through Codenham or Codnam, a Village of 3 Furlongs, and 10 Furlongs farther, Barham, 66’4. [67’1. E.] Claydon, 67’5. through Barham a small Village: At 67’1. you pass over Claydon Bridg, and 3 Furlongs farther enter Claydon of 3 Furlongs in Extent, with one fair Inn, and another or two of less Account; whence by Claydon Hall on the Right, a direct Way leads you to Ipswich, Ipswich, 71’6. which you enter at 71’2. an antient, large, plea∣sant and well-frequented Corporation and Market-Town, [as in LONDON to Yarmouth, pag. 107. and other succeeding Plates. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Claydon the R. to NORWICH 2. At Comesford the Left. 3. At the End of Hayley New-Street the Right. 4. 4 Furl. short of Barow-Bridg, the Left to New-Market. 5. The Right forward in St. Ives. 6. At the end of St. Ives, the L. to St. Neots.
The Road from IPSWICH com̄. Suffolk to NORWICH and thence to Cromer o the Sea Coast com̄ Norff By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Maties Cosmographer Containing 66 Miles 4 Furlongs vizt. From the Corn-hill in Ipswich to Claydon 4 m. 2 furl to Thwait 12 m. to Osmonston 7’4 to Long-Stratton 9 m to the City of NORWICH  m. to Alesham 12 m. 2 furl and to Crer 10 m 4.
The Road from Ipswich in Suffolk, to Norwich. Continued to Cromer on the Sea-Coast in Norfolk. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 49 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 46 M. 4. The Dimensuration 66’4. From Ipswich Comp. Measure. to Claydon 03 03 04’2 04’2 Thwait 08 11 12’0 16’2 Osmondston 05 16 07’4 23’6 Long Stratton 06 22 09’0 32’6 to NORWICH 08 30 11’0 43’6 Alesham 09 39 12’2 56’0 Cromer 07 46 10’4 66’4   46   66’4   Suffolk and Norfolk contain the whole Road; and the Waveney and Yare are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general a very good Road, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. except between Codnam and Thwait; and every where replenish'd with fitting Entertainment to ac∣comodate Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 0’5. The Left to Colchester. At 4’4. At the End of Claydon the Left to Bury. At 7’2. The Left to Needham. At 11’2. The Left forward. At 16’7. The Right acute. At 22’1. The Right to Aye. At 46’2. The Left to Caston. At 57’5. The Left to Holt. At 58’6. The Left acute. FROM Ipswich you take your Way through (Goal-Gate or) Bar-Gate; whence a straight Road passing at 3 Miles by some Houses on the Left, Ipswich, W. by N. and after by Claydon Hall on the same Hand, and through Claydon at 4’3. a Village of 2 Fur∣longs Extent; 5 Furlongs farther you leave Barham Church on the Right; Claydon, 4’3. whence by several scattering Houses, and a Wood and Ridg of Hills on the Right, on which stands Codenham Beacon; you crossing a small Brook at 7’6. leave Codenham vulgo Codnam Church a little on the Left. Hitherto you have had a good Way, which for the next 8 Miles is less com∣mendable, for passing by several scattering Houses on the Road, and crossing a small Brook, at 9 Miles you enter the Woods, and come into that Part of the Way known by the Name of the Pye Road; whence between Earl's Stonham and Apsol Stonham, and by repeated Houses on the Road; at 11’2. [11’2. N. by W.] you have the Pye Inn on the Left, and Little Stonham a quarter of a Mile on the same Hand; where omitting the forward Way, you bear to the Right, and an indifferent straight Way, but very Woody for several Miles, by some scattering Houses on the Road, leaving Mendlesham a Market-Town at 14’6. a Mile on the Left, and Debenham an∣other Market-Town 2 or 3 Miles to the Right, brings you at 15’5. to Thwait, Thwait, 15’5. leaving the Church and Hall on the Left, 6 Furl. farther passing through Thwait∣street. Thwait Street, 16’2. Hence by the Queen's Head Inn on the Right, and some Woods on the Left, [17’2. N. by E.] crossing a little Brook at 17’1. you take Leave of your Pye Road and dirty Way, pass by Stoke Church and Hall a little distant on the Right, and come at 18’1. to the White Horse in the Road directing the 4 Ways; whence having some Woods on your Right and Left, and passing through Yaxley Street at 19’6. Yaxley Street, 19’6. you after leave Yaxley Church and Beacon on the Right, and Broom Hall at 22’1. a Mile on the same Hand; whence you have a Road on the Right to Aye or Eye, an ancient Market-Town about 3 Miles distant. At 22’4. you cross the Waveney, and at once enter the County of Norfolk and Schole, alias Osmondston, a small Thorough-fare of 3 Furlongs Extent, but affording
one good Inn, the White Hart, Noted for abundance of fine Carv'd Work; and here you cross the Road from Bury to Yarmouth, and leave Diss a Market-Town a∣bout 2 Miles on the Left: Hence between Dickleburrow Church and Hall, a straight Way through a Wood by Titshal Mary Church on the Left, conveys you over a Com∣mon of a Mile, at 29 Miles to a small Brook, and through another Wood you a∣gain cross a little Brook at 30’4. whence through a third Wood by Pulham Church 6 Furlongs on the Right, Long-Stretton, 32’6. you come at 32’6. to Long-Stratton a Village of near 2 Furlongs Extent. At 34 Miles you pass through a small Village, and 4 Furlongs farther cross Strat∣ton Bridges of Stone over the Wentfar, and 3 Furlongs beyond pass through Tas∣boro a small Village, Tasboro, 34’7. leaving the Church on the Left; whence descending at 36 Miles you cross Newton Bridg of Stone re-passing the Wentfar, and presently come to Newton a scatering Village, Newton, 36’5. [39’2. N.W. by N.] where you ascend a small Hill and leave Newton Church 3 Furlongs distance on the Left; then by Swensthorp on the Left, Dunston and Castor on the Right; ascending and descending, and passing over a Heath which you enter'd at 39’1. you come to Hartford Bridges at 40’7. and at 43’1. unite with the Road from LONDON, and cross the Yare; enter the City of NOR∣WICH at St. Stephen's Gate, and leave it at St. Austin's Gate, extending a Mile on the Road [The Account thereof you have in LONDON to NORWICH, pag. 91.] From NORWICH your Road proceeds over the foresaid Heath, extending this way almost to Hemingham, but Westward in a manner to Lyn, computed 100 Miles Circumference; passing by a great Stone on the Right at 45’6. and by Catton Church on the same Hand near a Mile distant, opposite to the branching out of the Road to Caston or Causton; St. Faith's, 47’6. whence at 47’4. you come to St. Faith's, a scattering Village of 4 Furlongs Extent, having a very great Fair towards the later End of the year: Leaving the Church on the Left at 49 Miles you pass by St. St. Faith's Newton, 49 Miles. Faith's Newton, a Village contiguous on the Right, then by a Copice on the same Hand, you cross a Brook at 50’1. and after leave Stratton House and Church on the Right, the first near, the other more remote from the Road. At 51’2. [53’2. N.W.] you have a Pond on the Left, and 2 Furlongs farther cross a Brick Bridg over a small Brook, and passing through a small Village at 52 Miles leave the Heath, and by Hemingham on the Right; Masham, 53’6. at 53’6. pass through Masham a small Village, and a little be∣yond cross a small Rill or two: At 55 Miles you have a very good Prospect Eastward to the Sea and North-Walsham, and at 55’4. you have an acute Road on the Right leading to North-Walsham seated near the Sea, having a good Market on Thursdays; 2 Furlongs far∣ther you enter Alesham of 3 Furlongs Extent but more transverse, Alesham, 56 Miles. a poor Town, chiefly inhabited by Knitters, [56’6. N.] but enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Leaving Alesham you pass through a small Village at 56’4. 2 Furl. farther pass a small Brook, and 3 Furl. beyond that, over Ingworth Bridg cross the Bure that falls into the Yare at Yarmouth; at 57’5. you omit the acute Way on the Left to Holt and bearing to the Right, leave Ingworth and Erpingham Churches on the Left; where entring open Arable, a fair Prospect opens to the West; whence your Road generally open, passing by Suffield Church and Gunton Hall on the Right, and at 61’5. by Thorpmarket Church on the Right, and Hanworth Cross close on the Left, Routon, 62’4 brings you a Mile farther to Routon a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent. At 64 Miles you pass through North-Reps a discontinued Village of near 4 Furlongs Ex∣tent, North-Reps, 64 M. [65’2. N. W.] and at 65 Miles by some Houses on the Left, you 2 Furlongs farther descend a large Hill, Cromer, 66’4. and at 66’1. enter Cromer seated near the Sea, formerly a larger Town than now it is, containing 2 Parish Churches, one of which with several of its Houses are wash'd in∣to the Sea, yet it is at present an indifferent Market-Town, well frequented by Fisher∣men, &c. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Cromer the Left to Yarmouth along the Beach. 2. 5 Furl. short of Erpingham Church, the Left acute. 3. Against Erpingham Church the Left acute 4. Against Ingworth Church the Left to North-Walsham. 5. 2 Furl. beyond Alesham Church, the Left to Yarmouth. 6. 3 Furlongs short of St. Faith's the Left acute. 7. At the end of NORWICH the Right to LONDON, the Left acute. 8. 2 Furlongs short of Newton Bridg the Right acute. 9. 5 Furlongs beyond Stratton Bridg the Left acute.
The Road from. KING'S LYN cō Norf to ARWICH cō Essex By JOHN OGILBY Esqr His Maties Cosmographer Containing 76 miles 1 Furlong vizt. From LYN to Swasham: 15: m to Stanford 9. to Thetford 7.5 to: Icksworth: 9:4:to: Stow-Market 11: to: Ipswich: 12: m and to HARWICH including ye: Ferry: 12.
The Road from King's-Lyn in Norfolk To Harwich in Essex. 1. THe Point of Bearing S. E. b S. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 59 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 59 M. 4. The Dimensuration 76’1. From Lyn Comp. Measure. to Swaffham 12 12 15’0 15’0 Stanford 07 19 09’0 24’0 Thetford 06 25 07’5 31’5 Icksworth 07 32 09’4 41’1 to Stow-Market 08 40 11’0 52’1 Ipswich 09 49 12’0 64’1 Harwich 10 59 12’0 76’1   59   76’1   Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex Include the whole Road, and the Ouse-Parva, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. Orwel and Stour are the Principal Rivers crost over: Affording generally a hard Gravelly way, and a good Road, the Lanes here and there a little washy, Quality of the Way. but not incomoding the Traveller, who meets all along with good Entertainment, and oftentimes very pleasant Prospects. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1’4. the Right acute to Downham, &c. At 10’5. the Left acute at the entring Norfolk. At 14’7. in Swaffham the Left to Fakenham At 19’2. the Left acute. At 24’2. the Right to Brandon at the end of Stanford. At 31’5. the forward way in Thetford. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 40’2. the Left acute. At 51 Miles in Comefford, the Right acute. At 55’1. the Left in Needham to Cod∣nam. At 65’6. at Bone Bridg the forward way to Colchester. KIng's-Lyn We have Illustrated in LONDON to Lyn pag. 85. King's-Lyn S. b. E. Concerning which We may here farther advise, that the distinction of King's-Lyn was added in Commemoration of their Loyalty Temp. K. Joh. and Henr. 3. By the first of which it was Incorporated, and by the latter its Privileges Augmented: It Enjoys at present a good Maritin Trade, being well frequented by Merchants and Tradesmen. We begin our Computation at the Market-Place, whence taking your way through the South Gate, and passing on a Causeway you proceed through Hardwick at 1’5. Hardwick 1’5. [4 m. E. S. E.] a small Village, then leaving Runton Church on the Right and Middleton Hall on the Left, you pass through Middleton at 4’2. another small Village, Middleton 4’2. East Winch 5’2. and by an old Castle on the Left, through East-Winch at 5’2. another little Village; whence a straight open way brings you at 7’1. to a Stone-bridg over a Brook, and presently after leads you through Bilney a small Village. Bilney 7’3. At 9’2. crossing 2 small Rills you leave Nerboro Church 3 Furlongs on the Right, and at 10’3. come to Long-bridg over the River, [10’3. S. E.] Nerford 10’6. which falling into the Owse at Lyn aforesaid, bears the Name of the Town; 2 Furlongs farther you pass through Ner∣ford a small Village, and at 12 Miles ascend 3 Furlongs, thence over a Vale a straight way conveys you at 14’6. to Swaffham a good Market Town, in Extent 3 Furlongs. Swaffnam 15 m. [16’1. S.] [For which vid. LONDON to Wells and Bury pag. 103.] From Swaffham 3 repeated descents bring you at 18 Miles to an ascent of 3 Furlongs, where you leave Cley Church a Mile on the Right, and at 19’2. [20’5. S. E.] Great Kirsingham near as much on the Left; then at 21 Miles you pass by Hilboro Church and Hall a little distant on the Left, and at 22’2. Bedney a Mile on the same hand on the other side of the Rill, and after by Langforth Church and Hall a small distance on the Right, at 23 M. you cross a brook or Rill, a branch of the Owse uniting with it above Downham, and at 24’1. come to Stanford a small Village with one good Inn in it. Stanford 24 m. Hence a straight and open way by Toftes Church about 4 Furlongs on the Right, after by a ridg of Hills and Croxton Park on the same hand leads you at 29’7. through
Croxton a Village of 2 Furlongs, Croxton 29’7. where you leave Croxton high Trees on the Right, (which yield a very fine Prospect especially towards Lyn) and Lylverston Church on the Left, Thetford 31’5. S. and by Clays Lodg on the same hand enter Thetford at 31’3. an Antient Borough and Market Town, seated on the little Owse, which having Discourst in LONDON to NORWICH pag. 91. We have only this more to say of it; That in the Confessor's Time it Numbr'd 947 Burgesses, and in the Conqueror's Time 720 Mansions, the chief Magistrate being a Consul: It still shows an high Mount which has been Wall'd about and Fenc'd with a double Rampire, and has at this day the Keeping of the Lent Assizes for the County. In the Town you turn short on the Left and cross the said little Owse, which with the Waveny rising near one another about 10 Miles East of this place, seperate the Coun∣ties of Norfolk and Suffolk which last you here Enter; whence at 33’6. crossing a Brook, and at 34’3. leaving Barnham a small Village on the Left, you pass by a Pond on the Right, at 36 Miles leave Euston Church and Hall, the Earl of Arlington's a Mile on the Left, and at 38’2 Hinnyton on the Right and Froyston on the Left, each 4 Furlongs distant, passing through Icksworth-Thorp a small Village, Icksworth Thorp 39’2 at 39’2. opposite to which is Euston Church without a Steeple 2 Furlongs on the Right; whence at 40’5. you pass by some Houses contiguous on the Left, Icksworth 41’1. and 3 Furlongs farther enter Icksworth alias Ixworth a very good Town, Extending this way not much, lying principally South-West on the transverse Road between Bury and Yarmouth, an Antient Place suppos'd by the Name to Comemorate somewhat of the Iceni; It Enjoys an indifferent Market on Fridays, and shews the Reliques of an Antient Priory; and within these few years Roman Coyns have been here dig'd up. Leaving Icksworth you pass by Fackenham Church and Hall on the Right, [44’5. S. E.] the one a Mile, the other about half a Mile distant, and at 46’7. through a small Village part of Stow Langtoft, the Church 4 Furlongs on the Left, then at 43’7. you leave Litlow House on the Right, and at 45 Miles Neton Church 4 Furlongs on the Left, after passing be∣tween Wulpit a Market Town near a Mile on the Right, and Emswel Church almost ad∣jacent on the Left. Hence by some scattering Houses on the Road, Wetherden 48’4. [48’5. S. b E.] Haley Newstreet 49’1. Stow Market 52 m. at 48’4. you pass through Wetherden a small Village, and 5 Furlongs farther Haley-Newstreet another Village of 2 Furlongs Ex∣tent; at the Entrance into which the Road from Bury falls in on your Right, thence an indifferent straight Road conveys you at 51’7. to Stow Market Extending 4 Furlongs on the Road; a well frequented Market-Town. [As in Huntingdon to Ipswich pag. 145.] Whence crossing the Orwel you pass Comesford at 53 Miles, Comesford 53 m. S. E. b E. Needham 55’1. Codnam 57’5. Barham 58’7. Cleydon 60 m. Needham at 55’1. Codnam at 57’5. Barham at 58’7. and Cleydon at 60 Miles, the account of all which you have in the foresaid Road from Huntingdon to Ipswich pag. 145. At the Entrance into Claydon the Road from NORWICH falls in on your Left, from which (leaving Claydon Hall a little on the Right) a direct way altogether Enclos'd as this last part of the Road has likewise been, Ipswich 64.1. brings you at 63’5. to Ipswich, at the Entrance into which you fall in with the Road from Colchester on the Right, and upon that Road being part of LONDON to Yarmouth, We have already Treated of it pag. 107. From the Corn-Hill in Ipswich, down King's-street, you come at 64’5. to Stoke Bridg, over the Gippe or Orwel, pass through that part of the Town call'd Stoke, and by St. George's Chapel now Ruinous, and some Alms-Houses on the Left, at 65’2. come to the Bank of the River, Bone Bridg 65’5. S. E. b S. and 3 Furl. farther to Bone Bridg, where Ends the Liberty of the Corporation; and bearing to the Left along the Bank of the River, pass by Freston, leaving the River at 67’1. and Entring the Lanes on the Right, an Included way conveys you by a Turret about 2 Furlongs distant on the Left, and Chempton about 6 Furlongs on the same hand, and a small Gravel-Pit at 70’6. Thus by Averton Hall and Park a small distance on the Right, you come at 73’7. to a part of Shotley, the Church lying half a Mile to the Left; and at 74’4. (by the Beacon on the Right) to the Ferry House: Here you Ferry over the River, which at this place is about a Mile broad, Harwich 76’1. but upon a South-East Line to Harwich a Mile and half; a well For∣tifi'd Sea-Port and Market Town. [As in LONDON to Harwich pag. 37.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 9 Furl. beyond Averton Park, the Right acute. 2. In Cleydon the Right to Norwich. 3. At the end of Hawley Newstreet, the Left to St. Edmonds-Bury. 4. In Thetford the forward way.
The Road from — KINGS-LYN to NORWICH. Continued to YARMOUTH in Norf. By JOHN, OGISBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmograph Containing 69 Miles.  Furlongs. vizt. — From the Market Place ings Lyn to Gayton. 7.3. to Mileham 12.6 to Billing, ford 6.2. to the City of NORWICH 15.6. to Hasko, 17.5. to Yarmouth. 9.6.
The Road from King's-Lyn to Norwich, Continued to Yarmouth in Norfolk. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. by S. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 48 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 48 M. 4. The Dimensuration 69’4. From King's-Lyn Comp. Measure. to Gayton 05 05 07’3 07’3 Mileham 09 14 12’6 20’1 Billingford 04 18 06’2 26’3 to NORWICH 12 30 15’6 42’1 Hadsko 12 42 17’5 59’6 Yarmouth 06 48 09’6 69’4 Norfolk and a Part of Suffolk are the Counties which contain the Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Winsdor, Yare and Waveney are the Rivers crost over; affording a very good Way, (much open and Heathy) as indeed the whole County generally does, which makes it re∣ported that King James once pleasantly said, He would have all Norfolk cut out into Roads, to supply the rest of the Kingdom. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 7’6. The Left to Massingham. At 9’3. The Left acute. At 17’2. The Left acute. At 19’1. The Left to Stanfeld. At 19’4. The Left acute. At 20’4. The Left acute. At 25’5. The Left to Billingford. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 29’5. The Left acute. At 37’4. The Right to Helsdon. At 40’2. The Right acute. At 47’3. The Left to Carleton. At 50’6. The Right to Thurston. FROM King's-Lyn, Commencing at the Tuesday Market-Place, King's-Lyn, E. and proceeding through East-Gate; at 1’1. you pass by Maudlin's Alms-house on the Right, and 3 Furlongs farther, through Gaywood of 2 Furlongs Extent; Gaywood, 1’4. whence over a large Heath which you enter at 2’2. leaving Bawsey on the Left; at 5 Miles you pass by Lesiat Chapel, and at 6’2. by Grimston Church, both on the Left a small distance; crossing a Rill and passing through some part of Gayton at 6’6. Gayton, 7’3. and the Remainder of it at 7’2. Hence little occurs, but ascending a Hill of 2 Furlongs at 10’1. by Ruffam Lodg on the Left at 14 Miles, you come to a small Ascent at 14’2. and your Way continuing Heathy; and leaving West Lexham Church on the Right, and Great Lexham Church on the Left, each distant about 3 Furlongs from the Road, brings you at 17’2. to Part of Lucheham alias Lycham, Lycham, 17’5. and 2 Furlongs farther through Lycham a quarter of a Mile long, formerly a Market-Town, but since its Devasta∣tion by Fire about 30 years ago, dis-us'd. At 19 Miles you cross a Brook, and 4 Furlongs farther pass through Part of Mileham, 3 Furlongs beyond entring Mileham of near 3 Furlongs Extent; Mileham, 20’1. from hence an indifferent straight Way by Stanfeld, Brisley, Elmhalm Park and Church all on the Left, brings you at 26’2. [25’5. E. N. E.] Billingford, 26’3. [29 Miles S. S. E.] (having first crost the Winsdor a little above its Con∣junction with the Yare) to Billingford of 4 Furlongs Length, and by Beck-Hall and Baudswick on the Left: At 29 Miles you come to Spurham Corner, where bearing suddenly to the Right, and passing through a small Village at 31’2. over Leonard Bridg pass the River; and by Tyes Hall on the Right at 32’4. pass through Mar∣ton, alias Marton super Montem, Marton, 32’4. Attlebridg, 33’2. and 6 Furlongs farther (repassing the River) through Attlebridg, both small Villages. At 35’1. ascending a Hill of 3 Furlongs, leaving Taverham on the Left, you pass through Drayton at 37’3. from whence ascending a Hill at 38 Miles, [34’6. E. S. E.] Drayton, 37’3. and lea∣ving Drayton Lodg on the Right, you pass over a Heath, and by a Stone-Cross on the Left, at 41’4. through St. Martin's Gate enter the City of NORWICH, NORWICH, 42’1. whereof having in general Terms discours'd in the Road from LONDON to
NORWICH, pag. 91. Take here this farther Supplement, first, That it suffer'd Extreamly by Sword, and Famine in the Confessor's Time; and in opposing the Con∣queror: Harrass'd by the Earl of Flanders and Hugh Bigod Anno 1174. and by King John for yielding to Lewis the French King Anno 1216. and by the Dis-Inherited Ba∣rons Anno 1266. Lastly, besides the Plague afore mentioned, it suffer'd much by Fire Anno 1508. and by that Arch Rebel Ket, who pitch'd his Camp at Muswel Hill adjoyning, but being Subdu'd, was at last Hang'd on his own Oak of Refor∣mation. Add to its chief Buildings the Market-House, Cross and House of Correcti∣on; and amongst other Observables an Hospital for 100 Poor Men and Women; The Diocess was formerly that of the East Angles, first Divided into the Bishop∣ricks of Norfolk and Suffolk, keeping their Sees at Elmhalm and Dunwich, united again after 100 years Vacancy, and after 100 years more Translated to NORWICH. Five Furlongs from NORWICH you pass through a small Village, [43 m. S. E.] crossing the Wentfar at 44’2. Trowse 44’3. and entring Trowse of 2 Furlongs Extent; and leaving Bixley and Kirby on the Right, at 47 Miles by a Smiths Shop on the Right, whence by Carleton on the Left, and some Houses on the Road at 49 Miles, you afterwards pass be∣tween Ashby and Hellington, Thurston 51’2. and at 51 Miles enter Thurston of 3 Furlongs in length; from whence by Chedgrave Church on the Right, [53’3. E.] and Hales contiguous on the Left, at 55’4. you leave Hocklingham Church 2 Furlongs on the Left, and at 57 Miles Nor∣ton Church and Beacon as much on the Right, 4 Furlongs farther passing through Thurlston a Village Extending 2 Furlongs on the Road. Thurlston 57’4. At 59’6. [59 m. S. E. b S.] Hadsko 59’6. N. E. b E. St. Olaves 62’2. Fritton-Street 63 m. Gorlston 66’7. having before left Thorp on the Left you come to Hadsko, where you fall in with the way from LONDON; whence over Hadsko Dam, crossing the Waveny where you Enter Suffolk, you pass through St. Olaves at 62’1. Fritton-street at 63 Miles, and by Belton Chapel and Bradwel on the Left come to Gorlston at 66’7. and at 68’3. enter Little Yarmouth, or rather the Design of Little Yarmouth, being at present only a few Houses about the Bridg, but in Project of being Extended thus far. At 69’2 you cross the Yare, Yarmouth 69’4. which a little above receives the Waveny and Bure, to∣gether Re-entring Norfolk and arriving at Great Yarmouth; Antiently Garmuth and Jiermuth i. e. Garienis Ostium, being seated within a Mile of the River Yare's Influx into the Sea; a place of great strength, Esteem'd the Key of the Coast: Incorpora∣ted under 2 Bailiffs by King Henr. 3d. and in the 15th. year of his Reign Wall'd about, and since well Fortifi'd; Is large and well built, Composed of an infinite Num∣ber of Narrow Rows or Passages, and some fair Streets; a Corporation sending Bur∣gesses to Parliament, well Inhabited and frequented, especially by Maritine People; an Antient Member of the Cinque-Ports: Enjoys a Considerable Trade by their great Herring and Mackerel Fishing, and its Market on Saturdays is very considerable for Corn, Flesh, Fish, &c. It has only one Church, but fair large and Capacious enough for two Ministers, Founded by Bishop Herbert in King Rufus's days; and though they have no Possessions, as most Corporations have, yet they maintain a Peer a∣gainst the Sea at the yearly Charge, of (formerly but 500 l.) now quadruple that Sum yearly. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 7 Furl. beyond Gorlston the Left acute. 2. 1 M. 6 Furl. short of Fritton Street, the Left acute. 3. In Hadsko the forward to LONDON. 4. 5 Furl. beyond Hadsko, the Left acute. 5. In Thurlston the Right acute. 6. 3 Furl. short of Hales Church the Left. 7. 3 Furl. beyond Thurston, the Right to Ashby. 8. 2 M. beyond Ipswich, the Left acute. 6. At Spurham Corner, the Right to Bawd∣swick. 10. A Mile beyond Billingford, the Right. 11. Against Dunham Church the Left. 12. Against Ruffham Church, the Left acute. 13. 1 Mile 7 Furl. short of Gayton, the Left acute.
The Road from MONMOUTH to LLANBEDER in Cardigansh South Wales By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 68. miles 4. Furlongs vizt. From ye. Market Place in Moouth to Uandilo Cruseny 8. m. . f. thence to Abergevey 7.1 to Crecowel 5.7. to Brecknock 12 7 to Redbrae 8 m. to animdory 10.7. and to Llanbeder 25 Miles. 4. fur.
The Road from Monmouth to Llanbeder, In Cardiganshire, South-Wales. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. W. by W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 61 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 48 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 68’4. From Monmouth Comp. Measure. to Llandilo-Crusseny 7 07 08’2 08’2 Abergaveny 5 12 07’1 15’3 Crecowel 4 16 05’7 21’2 Brecknock 8 24 12’7 34’1 to Redbrue 06 30 08’0 42’1 Llanimdofry 08 38 10’7 53’0 Llanbeder 10 48 15’4 68’4   48   68’4   Monmouthshire, Brecknocksh. Carmarthensh. and Cardigansh. contain the whole Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. and the Monnow, Trothy, Kenvey, Grannay, Usk, Towy and Tivy, are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording but a bad Way to Abergaveny, from thence to Llanimdo∣fry indifferent, and after to Llanbeder very Hilly; hath several Inns on the Road between Monmouth and Llanimdofry, but from thence no Accomodation till you come to Llanbeder. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 4 Furl. the Left to Ragland. At 2’2. The Right acute. At 5’6. The Left to Ragland. At 8’3. The Right to Whit-Castle. At 10’7. The Left to Usk. At 15’5. The Right to HEREFORD. At 25’0. The Left to Llangonider. At 26’0. The Right acute. At 34’7. The Left acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 37’0. The Right to Riadergowy. At 42’0. The Left to Devinok. At 50’4. The Left to Llangadock. At 52’3. The Right to Llanbrane. At 53’3. The Left to Carmarthen. At 59’4. The Left to Langadock. At 61’3. The Left to Llandilovawr. SEtting forward from Monmouth, Monmouth N. W. b N [the Account whereof you have in LONDON to St. David's pag. 29.] you leave the Town at 4 Furlongs, Rockfield 2’3. W. Llangadock 4’2. then crossing the Monnow, you at 2’3. pass through Rockfield a discontinued Village, and at 4’2. through Part of Llangadock; whence an inclos'd Way over some small Hills and 5 repeated wooden Bridges and small Brooks, leaving Llanihangle Estraglewis Church 4 Furlongs on the Left, leads you at 8’2. Llandilo Crusseny 8’2. through Llandilo-Crusseny a disunited Vil∣lage with an Inn in it. Hence a direct Way brings you to Llanvapley at 10’4. Llanvapley 10’4. first descending a small Hill and crossing the Trothy over a Stone-Bridg; then omitting the forward Way on the Left to Usk, a straight Road leads you by Llanthewerytherch Church on the Left, cross a small Vale and over a small Ascent at 13’6. to Kevenbedagor Hill, a De∣scent of 8 Furlongs. At 15 Miles you cross the small River Kenvey or Geveny over Ponter-Cwyn Bridg, and enter Abergaveny vulgo Abergeny, formerly Gobannium, Abergaveny 19’3. seated at the Confluence of the Rivers Usk and Geveny; a large and well-built Town, numbring about 500 Houses, consisting in 2 Parishes, St. Mary's and St. John's, and 8 Wards, viz. High∣street, Crow-street, Butcher-Row and Rother-street, within; Frog-more, Tider, Monk-street and Mill-street, without; is of good Strength, being fortify'd with a Wall, and an antient Castle built by Cadwalader; is Govern'd by a Bailiff, Recorder, 12 superior and 15 inferior Burgesses; whose Markets are well stor'd on Tuesdays and Fridays, and hath 3 Fairs yearly, the 3d. of May, Tuesday after Trinity Sunday, and the 14th of September; hath several good Inns of Accomodation, as the Golden Lyon, Crown, George, &c. and hath a large Bridg over the Usk, consisting of 15 Arches. From Abergaveny you first cross Kebbey Brook, and at 17’1. pass through Part of Llanwenarth, the Usk accompanying your Road on the Left; then at 18’2. Llanwenarth 17’1 o∣ver
a Stone-bridg you cross a Brook, and at 19’2. enter Brecknockshire, and 2 Furlongs farther passing through a Village call'd Llangrenay where over a Wooden-bridg you cross the River Granay, Crecowel 21’2. and 11 Furlongs farther enter Crecowel seated on the Usk, a small Town, yet hath for its Government a Bailiff and 2 Burgesses; Enjoys a small Market on Mundays and 3 Fairs annually, viz. May-Day, St. Thomas and St. Laurence, Numbers about 100 Houses, and hath an indifferent Inn, the White-Lyon. At 22’7. you pass by some scattering Houses on the Road, cross some small Wa∣ters and leave Llanihangle-Ycombdy Church on the Right, and by some Houses on the Road belonging to it, Tretowre 22’7. [24’3. W. S. W.] Bwlch 25’6. W. N. W. call'd Tretowre; at 25’6. pass through a dis-united Village seated on an Eminence call'd Bwlch in which is the Portcullice-Inn of good Accomo∣dation; Llansanfraid 27’4. Castro 28’5. Llanhamich 30’4. [31 m. W.] Brecknock 34’1. whence a straight way leads you over some small Waters or Rills, through Llansanfraid at 27’4. Castro at 28’5. and Llanhamich at 30’4. all small Villages, hence little occurs but crossing 2 small Waters till at 33’6. you arrive at Brecknock the Shire-Town, Extending 5 Furlongs on the Road and as much transverse. At the end of the Town over a Stone-bridg of 7 Arches you cross the River Usk which now accompanies your Road on the Right, as it has done from Abergeveny hither on the Left, and pass by several discontinued Houses leaving St. Davids Church on the Left; Llanspetheid 36’3. [41’4. W. S. W.] Redbrue 42’1. at 36’3. you pass through Llanspetheid a small Village, and after by se∣veral dis-united Houses are convey'd at 42 Miles to a Stone-bridg of 5 Arches over the foresaid Usk, where you enter Redbrue a small Village, and leave Devinok Church about a Mile on the Left, then at 43’1. you a 3d. time cross the Usk, and cross it a∣gain at 44’4. Trecastle 44’4. W. by N. where you pass through Trecastle a small Village with an Inn in it; then ascending Castle Flugh Hill which is a Mile on the Road, a straight and open way brings you at 48 Miles to the entrance of Carmarthenshire; whence an indirect way leads you cross a large Vale and to a descent at 51’3. of 6 Furlongs, at the bottom where∣of you cross the small River Gwddig. At 52’5. Llanimdofry 53 m. [53’3. N. W.] you enter Llanimdofry (wherein you cross the Brane and the Bawddwr) the name signifies a Town in the Water; It is situate in the Parish of Llandingad, and Govern'd by a Bailiff and 12 Capital Burgesses, all the Free-Holders being inferior Burgesses; it consists of about 100 Houses meanly built, yet hath 2 considerable Markets on Wednsdays and Saturdays, and 3 Fairs yearly, viz. 17th. December, Whitson-Tuesday and St. George's-Day, and for Inns the George, Bear and Lyon; whence at 53’3. you cross the fair River Towy, leaving Llandingad Church and the forward way to Carmarthen on your Left, then ascending and descending several great Hills, crossing several small Waters or Rills, Kayo 59’3. and passing by some Houses you leave Kayo Church a little on your Right at 59’3. and bear to the Left, 3 Furlongs farther bearing again to the Right, and crossing 2 small Waters you are convey'd at 60’6. through Pinsant a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent. Pinsant 60’6. At 62 Miles having a small River on your Right, you ascend a great Hill for 2 Miles, and at 64’7. descend the like quantity, meeting with little else considerable till at 67’6. you pass a Wood-bridg and Brook, and 2 Furlongs beyond over a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches cross the River Tivy and enter Cardiganshire, whence at 68’3 you enter Llanbeder or Llanbedor Pont Steffan, Llanbeder 68’4. a small Town Govern'd by a Portreeve, Steward, 2 Constables, &c. hath a Market on Tuesdays and 3 Fairs yearly, viz. Whitson-Wednsday, St. Peter's and 8th. of October; is meanly built consisting in about 50 Houses, yet affords one very good Inn the Castle. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 5 Furlongs from Llanbeder, the Right to Llandilovawr. 2. 3 M. 4 Furl. beyond Llanbeder, the Right to Llandilovawr. 3. 2 M. 2. Furl. beyond Kayo, the Left to Bealth. 4. The Left at the entring Llanimdofry to Bealth. 5. 2 Furl. beyond Llanhamich, the Left to Llangusty. 6. In Crecowel the Right to Llangattock. 7. At the end of Crecowel, the Left to Llan∣geny. 8. At the end of Llangrenay, the Left to Comyo. 9. 3 Furl. short of Abergeveny, the Right to Cardiff, &e. 10. In Abergeveny the Right to Usk. 11. At the entring Llanvapley, the Right to Usk. 12. 1 M. 4 Furl. short of Llangadock, the Right to Ragland.
The Road from NOTTINGHAM to GRIMSBY in the Count of Lincolne. By JOHN OGJLBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmographr. Containing 67 les 2 furl. vizt. From Nottingham to N Wark. 17.1. to the City of Lincolne 14.6. to Wilton .4. to Markit Raisin 9.4 to Stanton: in the He 5.5. to Briggesley 7.4. And to:  Grimsby 5.4.
The Road from Nottingham to Grimsby, In Lincolnshire. 1. THe Point of Bearing N. E. b E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 56 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 50 M. 4. The Dimensuration 67’2. From NOTTINGHAM Comp. Measure. to Newark 12 12 17’1 17’1 LINCOLN 12 24 14’6 31’7 Walton 05 29 06’7 38’6 Market Raising 07 36 09’7 48’5 to Stanton 04 40 05’5 54’2 Briggesley 06 46 07’4 61’6 Grimsby 04 50 05’4 67’2     50   67’2 Nottinghamshire and Lincolnshire Contain the whole Road, and the Derbick, Trent, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Snite, Witham and Ankham are the Principal Rivers crost over; which in general ad∣mits of no pleasant way, it being in many places deep and Clayey, not affording altogether that conveniency of Entertainment as you have in the direct and more frequented Roads. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 2’5. the Left at the end of Charlton to Godling. At 5’2. the Left at the end of Burton to Thurgarton. At 14 Miles the Right in Stoak to Gran∣tham. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 28’1. the Right to Canwick. At 53’2. the Right to Kirmond in the Mire. Nottingham, a large and fair Corporation Market and Shire-Town, Nottingham N. E b E. We have Illustrated in LONDON to Oakham pag. 95. Whence at 7 Furlongs you as∣cend a Hill of 3 Furlongs and leave a Beacon on the Left, and at 1’7. descending 4 Furlongs pass through Charlton a small Village; then at 3’1. Charlton 2’4. you cross a Stone∣bridg over a Brook, and passing by several Hills on the Left are convey'd through Burton Goose at 5’1. a small Vill. Burton Goose 5’1. [5’5. E.] where you enter open way and have the River Trent accompaning you close on the Right several Miles. Next leaving Shelford Church, the Lord Stanhop's House and Bridgford Church all on your Right; and on the other side the Trent, at 7 Miles you come to Huntspil-Bridg, and at 7’5. Gunthorp a Village almost contiguous on the Left, Gunthorp 7’5. [8 m. N. E.] crossing the small River Derbeck at 9’2. where it discharges it self into the Trent; at 9’7. you leave Horningham-Ferry House on the Left, and a little farther Reeton Church on the Right, on the other side the River likewise; whence at 11’4. you come to Bleasby Ferry where you cross the Trent, which now keeps on your Left to Newark; Stoak 14 m. and at 13’2. ascending 3 Furlongs enter Stoak a large Country-Town Extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, and affording good Accomodation. At the end of Stoak you leave Rowleston Church 6 Furlongs on the Left over the River, and at 15 Miles Thorp a Village and Hawton Church a good distance on the Right, and Farindon between you and the River on the Left; then at 16’3. you pass Marham Bridg of Wood over the small River Snite a little above its Confluence with the Trent, and 4 Furlongs farther enter Newark seated on the Trent, Newark 17’1. a large well built Corporation and Market-Town Extending 5 Furlongs on the Road but more transverse, the account of which you have in LONDON to Barwick pag. 11. And here We shall give you an account of the Trent as being the Last Place touch't upon, it rises near Mowcop Hill in Staffordshire and passes by Stone-Burton, Nottingham, Newark, Littleburgh, Ganesburgh and Burton, and falls into Humber Haven near Ankburrow, receiving into it 1st. the Sow and therein the Penk, 2d. the Blith, 3d. the Tame and therewith the Rea, Cole, Bourn, Anker and Mese, 4th. the Dove and therein the Mani∣fold, Churnet and Tayne, 5th. the Sore and therewith the Wreak, 6th. the Darwent and therein the Now, Burbrook, Wye and Amber, 7th. the Erewash, 8th. the Derbeck, 9th. the Snite and therewith the Dean, 10th. the Flete, 11th. the Fosdike, 12th. the Hockdike, 13th. the Mardike, 14th. the Dun and therein the Idle and Whitwater.
At 18’4. you ascend 2 Furlongs and presently descend, leaving Winthorp Church 3 Furlongs on the Left near the Banks of the Trent; whence you have an indifferent straight way partly Lanes and part open to LINCOLN, first entring Lincolnshire at 20’4. and ascending a small Hill at 22’1. then passing by a Wood on the Left at 25 Miles, and 6 Furlongs farther leaving Wisby Church half a Mile on the Left, and at 27 Miles North Hikeham on the Right a like distance upon the Banks of the Witham; at 28 Miles you pass by a great Stone on the Right, and at 29’3. Boultham Church on the same hand, 2 Furlongs farther crossing the Witham over a Stone-bridge entring Brace-bridg a Village so call'd. Brace-bridg 29’6. N. Hence by 2 Posts on the Right you fall in with the Way from LONDON at 30’3. LINCOLN 31’7. and at Goat-Bridg re-passing the Witham enter the City of LINCOLN Ex∣tending this way about 2 Miles on the Road, but not near so much transverse, which We Treated of in LONDON to Flamborough pag. 83. Adding this that it is a City of great Antiquity, was formerly much larger than now it is, being said to contain 50 Parish Churches, now reduc'd to 15 besides the Cathedral; it was of much Note in the Time of the Britains, and (in Dooms-day Book) it accounted 1070. Man∣sions and 900 Burgesses, with 12 Lage-men having Sac and Soc, it was reckon'd in the Normans Time to be one of the best Peopl'd Cities in the Island; driving a great Trade both by Sea and Land, and here Vortimer the Valiant Captain of the Britains was Interr'd. Leaving the City you presently enter a large Heath crossing a small Rill at 35’1. and 4 Furlongs farther pass by Netilham Church on the Right; [37’6. E. N. E.] Walton 38’6. thence proceeding, the said Heath conveys you at 38’4. to Walton a Village of 3 Furl. Extent, opposite to which appears Dunham House on the Right near a Mile, your Way being open Arable on the Left and Enclos'd on the Right, 6 Furlongs farther you pass by Ri∣land a small Village contiguous on the Right, Riland 39.5. [41’3. N. E.] and at 41’3. come to a Wood-bridg over a Branch of the Witham, 2 Furlongs farther you come to Snarford Park on the Left, where you leave the Hall and Church on the same hand, the Park accompaning you on the Road a Mile together. At 43’7. [44’4. N.] [45’4. E. b N.] Market Raising 48’5. you pass between Lissingtou Church on the Right and Foldingworth on the Left; whence an indirect Road (leaving Middle Raising 4 Furl. on the Left) conveys you at 48’3. to the River Ankham just at your Entrance into Market Raising or Rasen in Extent 4 Furlongs; Enjoying a good Market on Tuesdays for Corn, &c. Leaving the Town you enter on a Moor, and at 50 Miles leave Hamlinton Hill a distance on the Left. At 51’4. Tevelby 51’6. N. E. b N. you cross a small Brook and enter Tevelby a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent, at the end of the Town you ascend 2 Furlongs and come upon the Woulds and pass over a large Vale, whence descending at 53’6. near the bottom you pass through Stanton in the Hole a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, Stanton in the Hole 54’2. leaving Kirmond in the Mire a Mile on the Right; be∣ing come to the top of the ascent at 55 Miles a straight Way by Croxby Church 4 Furlongs to the Left brings you at 56’6. to another descent of 6 Furlongs, and near the bottom to Thurganby a small Village, Thurganby 57.3. Ramdale 60’1. whence ascending 4 Furlongs, and crossing another Vale at 60’1. you have Ravendale vulgo Ramdale a Village contiguous on the Left, seated also in a bottom. Hence at 60’5. Briggesley 61’6. Waltham 63’2. Starth 65’2. leaving the Woulds you descend 4 Furlongs, and pass by Asbye a Village on the Right, 2 Furlongs farther crossing a Brook you enter Briggesley a Village in Extent 2 Furlongs and as much transverse; and at 63’2. pass through Waltham a Village of 2 Fur∣longs Extent, then at 65’2. through open Arable you come to Starth another Village of the same Extent, entring Grimsby at 66’5. Grimsby 67’2. Grimsby or Grimsby Magna a large Town seated near the Sea, where it formerly had a Castle to secure its now almost Choak'd up Harbor, yet it is still a Corporation and Port-Town, Enjoying several Immunities as Keeping Courts, sending Burgesses to Parlia∣ment, &c. Is Govern'd by a Mayor, 2 Bailiffs, a Recorder, 12 Aldermen, &c. Keeping different Courts, the Mayors on Tuesdays and the Bailiffs on Fridays, hath 2 Markets week∣ly Wednsdays and Saturdays, and hath one Fair annually on St, Bartholomew-Day. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the end of Thurganby, the Right to Croxby. 2. In Market Raising, the Right to Middle Raising. 3. At the end of LINCOLN, the Left to LONDON. 4. 11 Furl. beyond Bracebridg, the Right to Wisby. 5. The Left in Stoak to Nottingham a different Way.
The Road from OXFORD to BRISTOL By JOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Ma:ties Csmograph:r Containing  8 mile vizt: From OXFORD to Fisell 8:6: to Faringdon: 9:m to Hiworth 6: to Purtor 8: m. Malmsbury: 10: 2 to Luckington: 7:m:2: to Puckle: Church: to:6 and to BRITOLL 8:
The Road from Oxford to Bristol. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. by S. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 62 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 48 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 68 M. From OXFORD Comp. Measure. to Fifield 6 06 08’6 08’6 Faringdon 6 12 09’0 17’6 Hiworth 4 16 06’0 23’6 Purton 6 22 08’0 31’6 to Malmsbury 8 30 10’2 42’0 Luckington 5 35 07’2 49’2 Puckle-Church 8 43 10’6 60’0 BRISTOL 5 48 08’0 68’0 Oxfordshire, Barksh. Wiltsh. and Glocestersh. contain the whole Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Thames, Rea and Avon are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general no very good Way, but yet is well accomodated with Inns, &c. for Reception of Travellers. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 2’3. The Left to Abington. At 9’6. The Right to Longworth. At 17’5. The Right to Lechlade. At 18’1. The Left to Sennan. At 23’4. The Left to Swinden. At 24’2. The Right to Creeklade. At 30’4. The R. to Tetbury and Cirencester. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 31’5. The Left to Marlborough. At 42’4. The Left to Castlecomb. At 49’2. The Right to Sodbury. At 60’0. The Right to Aust. At 60’5. The Left to Doynton. BEFORE We proceed take this general Account of the Famous City and U∣niversity of OXFORD, which with her Sister Cambridg, OXFORD, S. b. E. are the only Acade∣mies of this Kingdom; a Place of great Antiquity; Re-edify'd by King Alfred; said to be Consecrated to Literature by the Old Britains; but whether translated hither from Creeklade in Wiltshire; as also whether the Etymology be from Vadum Isidos, Ouse∣ford; or Vadum Bovum, Ox-ford, We dispute not. It suffered much by the Saxons and Danes, little remaining save the Monument of St. Frideswid's Virgin Conquest, till King Elfred built 3 Colleges, for Divinity, Philosophy and other Liberal Sciences; sending thither his Son Ethelward, thereby drawing to it the young Nobility from all Parts of the Kingdom; when it began to florish gradually, as at present, it is a fair and stately City, Adorn'd with well-built Houses, 16 Colleges and 8 Halls, a cu∣rious Library and stately Theater, with a large Cathedral; made an Episcopal See by King H. 8th. Ann. 1541. numbring 10 Bishops to this present; the Chapter con∣sists of a Dean, 8 Prebends, and 1 Arch-Deacon of OXFORD: It contains 14 Parishes besides its Cathedral: Is Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. enjoys ample Immu∣nities, as keeping Courts for all Actions without Limitation; Elects 4 Burgesses to Parliament, 2 for the University and 2 for the City; has weekly 2 Markets, on Wedns∣days and Saturdays, well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions, &c. drives a great Trade in Mault, which is convey'd to LONDON in Barges; to sum up all, For stateli∣ness of Schools, Theater and Publick Library, for Bravery and Beauty of particular Colleges and Halls, all of fair polisht Stone; for liberal Endowments thereof, and notable Encouragements of Industry and Learning in the Salary of the several Pro∣fessors, &c. for Number of Students and Oeconomy thereof, it is not to be paralell'd in the Christian World; It is dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Aubrey Vere Earl of Oxford. From Cairfax in OXFORD you pass out at the South-Gate, and at 1’4. [1’3. S. W. b. S] over a Stone-Bridg of 2 Arches cross a Part of the Thames and enter Barkshire; [4 M. S. S. E.] then you pass by Ilsey Church on the Left and Hinksey on the Right, and after through Bag∣ley Wood; whence little occurs till at 7’3. [5’6. S. S. W.] you fall in with the Road from LON∣DON, and at 8’6. pass through Fifield a small Village with an Inn or two in it; Fifield, 8’6. and a Mile farther through Part of Kingston Baptist; Kingston Baptist, 9’6. S. W. by W. [12 Miles W. by S.] then an indifferent straight Road by Longworth and Buckland Churches on the Right conveys you at 17’3. to a De∣scent,
at the Bottom whereof you enter Faringdon of 5 Furlongs Extent, Faringdon, 17’6. S. W. by W. [for which vid. LONDON to St. David's, pag. 29.] From Faringdon at 21’4. Colesel, 21’4. you pass through Colesel a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, where you have the Lady Prat's House on the Left, and enter Wiltshire at 21’6. then at 23 Miles you ascend and pass through Esthorp a discontinued Village of 4 Furl. Esthorp, 23’2. Hiworth, 23’6. and at the End enter Hiworth, extending 5 Furlongs on the Road, so call'd from its high Situation; is Govern'd by a Mayor and an Alderman; has a Market on Wednsdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, on Lammas Day and Michaelmas Day. Thence you pass by Hannington and Bury Blunsdon Churches, and Sr. John Earle's House, [29’2. W. N. W.] all on the Right, and after by several scattering Houses on the Left; at 294. over a Stone-Bridg of 2 Arches you cross the Ray; [30’4. S. S. W.] and at 30’4. leaving the Road to Tedbury and Cirencester on the Right, Purton, 31’6. W. S. W you bear to the Left, and pass over Purton Green, and at 31’6. [36 Miles W.] through Purton it self, a Place of good Accomodation; then over Purton Common you cross a Brook and pass through Braden Forest, and at 38’1. through Guersden Green, Guersden, 39’4. and through Guersden Village at 39’4. where is the Lady Washington's House and Park on the Left. At 40’6. Milborn, 40’6. you pass through Milborn Green, a discontinued Village, and at 41’2. descend 3 Furlongs, where at the Bottom over a Stone-Bridg you cross the River Avon and enter Malmsbury, Malmsbury, 42 M. extending 6 Furlongs on the Road, an ancient Borough-Town, formerly strengthned by a Castle now ruin'd; sends Burgesses to Parlia∣ment; is Govern'd by a Justice (who is call'd Alderman, and is chosen every year as a Mayor is) and 12 Burgesses; hath an Alms-House given by Mr. Genner: for 4 Men and 4 Women, 2 Shillings a Week and 2 Quarters of Coal a year to each; the Lord Norris is Lord of the Town: It enjoys a good Market on Saturdays, and hath 5 Fairs annually, the 17th. of April, the 17th. of March, the 25th. of May, [42’4. S. W.] Foxley, 44’7. W. b. S. the 25th. of July, and the 17th. of October. From Malmsbury a straight enclos'd Way brings you at 44’6. to Foxley a Village extending 2 Furl. at the End of which you have Esq Rollaston's House and Park on the Right; Luckington, 49’2. S. W whence by Sherston Church on the Right, at 49’1. you enter Luckington a Village affording good Accomodation to Travellers, and hath a Noted Well in the midle of the Way: At 51 Miles you enter Glocestersh. and at 51’6. pass through a Village belonging to Tormanton, Tormanton, 51’6. [54’7. S. S. W.] [55’6. W.] Hinton, 58 Miles. and over Tormanton Warren leaving the Church and Town on the Right; hence an open Way brings you at 57’3. to descend an Hill of 5 Furlongs, on which is a scattering Village call'd Hinton, with an Inn in it for Entertainment. Whence ascending a little, Puckle Church, 60 M. at 56’6. you enter Pulcher, alias Puckle-Church, of a Furlongs Extent, having several good Inns for Accomodation of Travellers; from whence an inclos'd Way by several scattering Houses on the Road, brings you at 62’2. Mangersfield, 62’2. [64’1. S. W. by W.] BRISTOL, 68 Miles. to Mangersfield a small Village, near which are several Coal-pits; 3 Furlongs beyond you enter the Forest of Kings-wood, Noted for its Coal, &c. with which BRISTOL and the Parts adjacent are supply'd; then by a Pond on the Left, and Stapleton on the Right, you fall in with the Road from GLOCESTER at 66 M. and at 67 Miles enter the Suburbs of BRISTOL, [The Account of which you have in LONDON to BRISTOL, pag. 22.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of BRISTOL the Right to LONDON. 2. A Mile beyond BRISTOL the Left to Stapleton. 3. 1’7. Short of Mangersfield the Left to Sodbury. 4. 4 Furlongs short of Puckle-Church, the Right to Marshfield. 5. At the End of Puckle-Church the R. to Apson. 6. At the End of Hinton the Right to Marshfield. 7. And 3 Furlongs farther the Right to Marshfield. 8. 4 Furlongs short of Purton the Left acute. 9. 2’2. Beyond Ray fluv. the Right to Marlborough. 10. At the End of Kingston Baptist the Right to Abington.
The Road From OXFORD to CAMBRIDGE By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmographer Containing 80. miles . Furlongs (vizt) From Oxford to Burcester 13.0. to Buckingham 11.6. to Newport Painel 13.7. to Bedford 13.3. to Gamlinghay 13.0. & to Cambridge 15.0.
The Road from Oxford to Cambridg. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. N. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 57 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 52 M. 4. The Dimensuration 80 M. From OXFORD Comp. Measure. to Burcester 10 10 13’0 13’0 Buckingham 09 19 11’6 24’6 Newport-Painel 08 27 13’7 38’5 to Bedford 07 34 13’3 52’0 Gamlinghay 09 43 13’0 65’0 Cambridg 09 52 15’0 80’0 Oxfordshire, Buckinghamsh. Northamptonsh. Bedfordsh. and Cambridgsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. include the whole Road; and the Charwel, Owse and Cam are the principal Rivers crost over; this is the chiefest Road between the two Universities, which in general is a very bad, deep Way, but is very much recompenc'd by the re-iterated good Towns and publick Places of Accomodation through which you pass. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 3’2. The Left to Banbury. At 8’2. The Left to Weston. At 11’2. The Right forward. At 12’5. The Left acute. At 13 M. The Right in Burcester. At 13’4. The Left to Banbury. At 24’3. The R. Acute Turnings to be avoided. at the entring Buckingham At 36’6. The Right acute. At 41’2. The Right to Ampthil. At 56’2. The Left to St. Neots. At 60’7. The Right to Potton. At 64’3. The Right acute. FROM Cairfax in OXFORD (the Account of which you have in OXFORD to BRISTOL, pag. 157.) OXFORD, N. by E. you pass through the North-Gate and leave the City at 5 Furlongs; whence a straight Road leads you at 4’3. to Lowse-Hall, a Noted House on the Left, so call'd by the OXFORD-Scholars; [8 Miles N. E.] and 2 Furlongs farther you pass through a scattering Village, at the End of which you cross the Char∣wel over Gosford-Bridg of Stone; proceeding on open Way, you leave Islip Church a Mile on the Right, and at 6’5. cross the great Road that leads from LONDON to WORCESTER; thence you pass between Weston Church and Park, and through Wendlebury a small Village; whence at 12’7. you enter Burcester vulgo Bisceter, Wendlebury, 10’1. ex∣tending 3 Furlongs on the Road, a small Town, yet enjoys an indifferent good Market on Fridays. From Burcester, omitting the forward Way on the Left to Banbury, Burcester, 13 Miles. you bear to the Right, and pass by Casfield House on the Left, and at 16 Miles you pass through Stretton-Audley a small Village, Stretton-Audley, 16. M. and at the End thereof cross the Road from LON∣DON to Banbury; whence a straight Way brings you at 18’2. to the Entrance of Buckinghamshire; then between Newton-Pursel and Chickwood, and through Tingewick Woods, and by Tingewick Church on the Left, and a Pond on the Right, enter Gaynat at 22’5. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and at 24’4. Buckingham, Gaynat, 22’6. Buckingham, 24’6. where over a fair Stone-Bridg you cross the Owse) a Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, the Account whereof you have in the Road from LONDON to Bucking∣ham, pag. 23. adding this, That it hath 2 Hospitals, a Free-School and 4 Incorpo∣rated Companies, viz. the Mercers, Butchers, Taylers and Tanners; and is the Ho∣norary Title of His Grace George Villers Duke of Bucks. &c. and hath one fair Church Dedicated to St. Peter. Leaving Buckingham you have the River Owse accompanying your Road on the Right for several Miles, a straight Way conveys you by Borton a Village, and Thorn∣ton Church both on the Right, and on the other side of the Owse; and Morton, Foscot and Leckhampsted on the Left, entring Northamptonshire at 28’7. then by Beck∣hampton Church on the Right, you re-enter Buckinghamshire at 30’6. where you cross the foresaid Owse; whence by Passingham and Wulverton Churches on the Left, and Leighton on the Right; and crossing the great Road that leads from LONDON to
CHESTER and Holyhead, &c. you are convey'd at 34’6. to a Descent of 2 Fur∣longs, at the Bottom wherof over Stanton-Bridg you cross a Brook, and leave Ha∣versham vulgo Hasome Church on the Left, and after Stanton Church and Hall on the same Hand; then a small Descent by Great Linford on the Right, and Little Linford on the left, Newport-Painel, 38’5 leads you at 38’3. to the Entrance into Newport-Painel or Paignel of 3 Furlongs Extent, and as much transverse; the Town is indifferent large, and enjoy∣eth a good Market on Saturdays; the poor People here make great store of Bone-Lace, &c. Leaving the Town you have Moulso and Chichley Churches on the Right, Lathbury and Hardmere on the Left; Astwood, 44’5. [45’3. E. by N.] Stagsden, 47 Miles. Bedford, 52 Miles. then at 44’5. you pass through Astwood a small Village, and enter Bedfordshire at 45’3. passing through Stagsden at 47 Miles, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; and re-crossing the Owse at 49’1. then by Biddenham Church and Fordend House on the Right, and Brumham Church on the Left; you enter Bedford at 51’3. a Corporation, Market, and Shire-Town, [for the Illustration whereof, vid. LONDON to Oakham pag. 93.] adding this, That not far from the Bridg, on the Banks of the River Owse, formerly stood a small Chapel, wherein (as re∣ported) Offa the Mercian King was Interr'd, whose Monument remain'd a long time, till the over-flowing of the River wash'd it away: The Town hath been a great Sharer in Calamities; first, by the Danes; next, in the Civil Wars by the Barons; and lastly, by King Henry the Third, its Castle was laid level to the Ground, and in the Place thereof, is a very gallant Bowling-Green, much resorted unto by the Gentry of the Country. Leaving Bedford, [56’2. E. by S.] you pass by Cardington and Cuphul Churches on the Right, and Willington Church, Park and Hall on the Left; and at 58 Miles you pass through Morehanger a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Morehanger, 58 M. [60’7. N. E. by E.] then by Blunham on the Left, and San∣dy on the Right; and at 60’7. omitting the forward Way on the Right to Potton, you bear to the Left, and pass by Everdon Church on the same Hand; whence at 63’0. you enter Cambridgshire, at its Conjunction with Huntingdonsh. and Bedfordsh. and then pass by Woodberry House and Gamlinghay Park on the Left, and at 64’6. enter Gamlinghay, Gamlinghay, 65 M. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, affording good Accomodation to Travellers; [68 Miles E. by N.] Stow, 69’4. whence an indirect Road and something Woody, by Stow on the Right and Little Gransden on the Left, brings you at 69’4. to Stow a small Village conti∣guous on the Left. At 70’2. you cross the great Road that leads from LONDON to YORK, Barwick, &c. and passing through some Woods, and descending 2 small Hills, leave Kingston Church on the Right, and Cawcote on the Left, at equal distance from the Road; Tofts, 73’4. thence you are convey'd, first crossing a small Brook, at 73’4. through Tofts, a Village extending 2 Furlongs on the Road; Comberton, 75 Miles. and 10 Furlongs farther through Com∣berton a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation: Whence by Cotton on the Left, Cambridg, 80 Miles. an indirect Road leads you at 79’6. to Cambridg, (a little beyond which you fall in with the Road from LONDON) an University, Corporation, Market and Shire-Town [the Account of which you have in LONDON to Lyn, pag. 15.] Southward from Cambridg are Gogmagog Hills, which are of great Eminency, for∣merly a Station of the Danes, on the Top of which is to be seen a Rampeir strength∣ned with a three-fold Trench, held a Place impregnable; of which Hills the Coun∣try-people relate many fabulous Stories. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 3 Furl. from Cambridg the Left forward. 2. 2’5. Short of Comberton the Left forward 3. 1’6. Short of Comberton the R. to Cotton. 4. A M. short of Comberton the Left acute. 5. A Furl. beyond Stow the Left acute. 6. At the end of Morehanger the Left acute. 7. 1’4. Short of Bedford the Left acute. 8. A Furlong beyond Owse fluv. the Right to Wellingborough. 9. 2’2. Short of Newport-Painel the Left to Wooburn. 10. A Furlong beyond Newport-Painel the Right acute. 11. 1’3. Short of the Entring Northamp∣tonshire the Right acute. 12. At the Entring Buckingham the Right forward. 13. At the End of Buckingham the Left for∣ward. 14. A Mile beyond Buckingham the Left to Padbury. 15. A Furl. short of Burcester the Left acute 16. The Left in Burcester. 17. 2 Furlongs beyond Burcester the Left acute.
The Road From OXFORD to CHICHESTER By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 80. Miles 7. Furlongs viz.t From the City of Oxford to Abington 6.4. to East-Hsley. 20.5. to Newbury 9.3. to Kings Cleer 7.2. to Basinstoke 9.2. to Alton 20.5. to Petersfield 22.5. & to the City. of Chichester 24.7.
The Road from Oxford to Chichester. 1. THe Point of Bearing S. by E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 63 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 60 M. 4. The Dimensuration 80 M. From OXFORD Comp. Measure. to Abington 05 05 06’4 06’4 East Ilsley 08 13 10’5 17’1 Newbury 07 20 09’3 26’4 Kings Cleer 05 25 07’1 33’5 to Basingstoke 07 32 09’1 42’6 Alton 08 40 10’5 53’3 Petersfield 10 50 12’5 66’0 CHICHESTER 10 60 14’7 80’0 Oxfordshire, Berkshire, Hampshire and Sussex, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. are the Counties through which you pass; and the Thames, Ock, Kennet and Auborn, are the Principal Rivers Crost over; affording in general an indifferent good Road, which is every where furnish'd with good Towns of Accomodation. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 2’3. The Right to Faringdon. At 15 Miles the Left acute. At 25’1. The Left acute. At 26’3. In Newbury the R. and Left acute. At 33’4. In Kings Cleer the Right to Andover At 40’4. The Right to SALISBURY. At 43 M. In Basingstoke the Right to Andover. At 43’4. The Right to Andover. At 45’6. The Right to Preston. At 47’0. The Right acute. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 47’6. The Left to Odiam. At 49’2. The Right and Left acute. At 53’7. The Right to WINCHESTER. At 59’5. The Right to Froxfield. At 63’6. The Right acute. At 70’1. The Right and Left acute. At 74’4. The Left acute. At 78’5. The Left acute. SEtting forward from Cairfax Cross in OXFORD, you pass out at South Gate, OXFORD, S. b. E. and crossing the Thames or Isis, enter Barkshire, and leave Hinksey Church on the Right, and Ilsley on the Left, and ascending a small Hill, and crossing a small Vale, pass through Bagley Wood; and then leaving Norket Church on the Right, and Rodeley on the Left, come to Abington at 6’3. Abington, 6’4. extending this Way three Fur∣longs, but more transverse; It is a large Corporation and Market-Town, [as in LONDON to St. Davids, pag. 27. and succeeding Plates.] At the End of Abington you cross the Ock, and leave Draton Day Church on the Right, and Cullum and Sutton on the Left. At 9’4. you cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook, Miston, 9’6. [12 Miles, S. E.] and pass through Miston a disperst Village, and ascending an Hill, leave Harwell and Chilton Churches on the Left, and a Beacon on the Right, and cross the Vale of White Horse, or Berkshire Vale; then you ascend and descend again, and at 17 Miles enter East Ilsley, East Ilsley, 17’1. of 2 Furlongs Ex∣tent and good Entertainment, Seated in a pleasant Vale, and enjoys a good Mar∣ket on Wednsdays. Leaving East Ilsley you ascend a small Hill, and at 19’4. [18’2. S.] Biddon, 19’4. pass through Biddon a small Village: Hence your Way is generally Woody, [21 Miles S. S. E] passing by Cleveley Church and Donington Castle on the Right, Fryers Court, Harlington House, and Shaw Church on the Left, enter Spinham Land, and presently Newbury, Newbury, 26’4. a Town pleasantly Seat∣ed on the Kennet; Govern'd by a Mayor, six Aldermen, Twenty Four Burgesses, &c. Is eminent for Clothing, whereby Jack of Newberry, Temp. H. 8. got so fair an Estate, and Noted also for Crayfish: It has a great Market on Thursdays, and two lesser on Tuesdays and Saturdays, with 4 Fairs annually, viz. Holy Thursday, Midsomer Day, St. Bartholomews Day, and St. Simon and Jude: It hath likewise a Free-School, three Alms-Houses, and an Hospital well Endow'd. Here, in Sep∣tember, 1643. the King's Army, after several former Successes, Gain'd a conside∣rable Victory over the Numerous Parliament Forces, Commanded by the Earl of Essex; and in October, 1644. Returning Victorious from the West, again Encoun∣ter'd them and their New City Forces, but with less Success.
From Newbury, a straight Road leads you at 29’7. over Great and Little Knight-Bridg, where you enter Hampshire; then by Benham Court, and Stottery Church on the Right, Kings Cleer, 33’5. S. E. b. E. come at 33’3. to Kings Cleer, a Town of 4 Furlongs Extent and as much transverse; is Seated in the Woodlands, and hath the Benefit of a Market on Tuesdays. Leaving Kings Cleer, you descend an ascend Pettum Hill, and pass by an Hill on the Right, whereon is Seated Willoughsby Lodg; then descending, you leave Wool∣verton Church on the Left, [37’2. S. S. E.] and at 37’2. ascend a small Hill, which, at 38 Miles is seconded with such another; thence by Tangeir House, Wooton Church, and a Wood all on the Right, crossing Rooks Down, and passing by Park Privet Warren on the Left, Basingstoke, 42’6. and Holy Ghost Chapel on the same Hand, come at 42’3. to Basingstoke, a Market and Post-Town, [as in LONDON to the Lands-End, pag. 49.] Leaving Basingstoke, you omit the forward Way on the Right to Andover, and bear to the Left, and at 44’4. pass by Harwood Hall contiguous on the Right, and 2 Furlongs farther, Wensted Church on the same Hand; then by Harcote Church and Weston Hall on the Left, [47 M. S. E. b. S] Alton, 53’5. S. S. W. and through a scattering Village, an indirect Way by some disperst Houses, brings you at 53’1. to Alton, a Market-Town of 4 Furlongs Ex∣tent, [as in LONDON to Southampton, pag. 101.] Whence you pass through Chawton a disperst Village, Chawton, 54’5. and leave Sr. Richard Knight's House on the Left, Faringdon Street, 56’2 [59’6. S. E.] and at 56’2. pass through Faringdon Street a discontinued Vil∣lage: Hence, you have Newton Wood, and Ruthersick Park, accompanying your Road on the Right, and East Tysted and Colmere Churches on the Left, an indirect Way by several disperst Houses, and by Steep Church on the Left, conveys you at 65’6. Petersfield, 66 Miles. to Petersfield, a Market-Town of 3 Furlongs Extent, [as in LONDON to Portsmouth, pag. 59.] At 67’4. [67’2. S. b. W.] [69’3. S. E.] over a Stone-Bridg you cross a small River and enter Sussex, and at 69’1. ascend St. Richard Hill, which is seconded with another at 70’3. where leav∣ing East Harting Church on the Left, you descend 3 Furlongs, and pass by Harting Hills on the Left; then by North Merden Church on the Right, and a Wood on the Left, come at 73’2. to a Descent of 2 Furlongs, where you pass by several great Hills on the Right, [74’4. S. b. E.] and Chilgrove House on the Left: Hence, you have Crow∣shal House, and West Lavant a small Village on the Right, Binderton House, Midle and East Lavant Churches, Rairmare House, and the Alms-houses, successively on the Left, CHICHESTER, 80 M. and at 80’5. enter the City of CHICHESTER at the North Gate, the Description of which you have in LONDON to Arundel, pag. 7. and succeeding Plates. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 5 Furl. from CHICHESTER the Right to LONDON. 2. 7 Furlongs short of Crowshal House, the Right to Binderton. 3. Against North Merden Church, the Right to Traford. 4. 2’5. Beyond, the Right acute. 5. At the End of Petersfield the Right to Steep. 6. 2 Furl. beyond Petersfield, the Left to WINCHESTER. 7. 4 Miles beyond Petersfield, the Right to Alton a different Way. 8. 1’5. Short of East Tysted, the Left acute 9. In Alton the Right to LONDON. 10. 2 Miles short of Horcote the Right to Basingstoke a different Way. 11. Against Wensted the Right acute. 12. In Basingstoke, the Right forward to LONDON. 13. 6 Furl beyond Basingstoke, the Right to Reding. 14. In Kings Cleer the Right to Reding. 15. At Knightbridg the Right acute. 16. In Newbury the Left to Hungerford. 17. A Mile beyond Newbury the Left to Wantage.
The Road From OXFORD to COVENTRY Continued to Darby— By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 86 miles 6 Furlongs (vizt.) From OXFORD to Kidlington 5.0’ to Dedington 11.4’ to Banbury 6.4’ to Southam 14.1’ to Princethorp 6.3’ to ye City of COVENTRY 7.1’ to Nuneaton 7.7’ to Atherst 4.2’ to Ashby 11.3’ to Swoson. 7.7’ to Darby. 5.0’
The Road from Oxford to Coventry, Continued to Derby. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 77 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 68 M. 4. The Dimensuration 87 M. From OXFORD Comp. Measure. to Kidlington 04 04 05’0 05’0 Dedington 09 13 11’4 16’4 Banbury 05 18 06’4 23’0 Southam 10 28 14’1 37’1 Princethorp 05 33 06’3 43’4 COVENTRY 06 39 07’1 50’5 to Nuneaton 7 46 07’7 58’4 Atherston 3 49 04’2 62’6 Ashby de la zouch 9 58 11’3 74’1 Swarkston 6 64 07’7 82’0 Derby 4 68 05’0 87’0   68   87’0   Oxfordshire, Warwickshire, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Leicestershire and Derbyshire are the Counties through which you pass, and the Avon, Sow, Ancker and Trent are the Principal Rivers crost over; which in general is no very good Road, yet every where replenisht with good Towns and fitting Entertainment for Travellers. Forward Turnings to be Avoided. At the end of OXFORD the Left to Wood∣stock. At 3 M. the Right to Water Eaton, Cambridg, &c. At 6’2. The Left to Woodstock. At the end of Banbury the Left to Stratford. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At In COVENTRY the Left to LICH∣FIELD. At 60’4. The Left to Hartsel. At 78’3. The Left to Ticknel. FRom Cairfax-Cross in OXFORD you proceed to the North-Gate leaving the City at 4 Furlongs, whence your Road is generally open, OXFORD N. [3’1. N.W.] indifferently Arable and Pa∣sture; leaving Woolvercote Church 6 Furlongs on the Left, Kidlington Green 5 m. [6’3. N.] and passing through Kid∣lington Green a small scattering Village at 5 Miles, and leave the Church 6 Furlongs on the Right, and at 6’2. omit the acute way on the Left to Woodstock, you bear to the Right; from which place a straight open way (crossing the great Road from LON∣DON to WORCESTER at 85) conveys you by Tuckley, Rounsham and Steple-Aston Churches successively on the Right, and Dunsto on the Left. At 15 Miles you descend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, and at the bottom cross a Stone∣bridg of 2 Arches over a Brook, and 4 Furlongs farther ascending 2 Furlongs you enter Dedington; an Antient Town Govern'd by a Bailiff, Dedington 16’4. has an indifferent good Mar∣ket on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs annually, on St. Laurence and St. Martin the Bishop: At which place was lately found a Medicinal Spring. Leaving the Town you pass on open Arable and descend 5 Furlongs, at the bot∣tom whereof over a Stone-bridg you cross a Brook; whence an indifferent Way conveys you at 19’7. through Adderbury a Village of good Accomodation; Adderbury 19’7. in which are the Seats of the Lord Rochester and Sr. Thomas Cobbs, then at 21’3. you come to Weeping-Cross a Noted Place where 4 Ways meet, leave Boddicot Church on the Left, and at 22’7. enter Banbury, Banbury 23 m. [The account of which you have in LONDON to Buckingham pag. 23.] Leaving Banbury, a straight Way crossing a Brook at 24’3. conveys you by Great and Little Broughton and Cropdry Churches on the Right, Hanwel Church and Hall, and Soteswel and Mollington Churches all on the Left; then at 28 Miles you enter Warwickshire, and 1 M. 3 Furl. beyond pass, between Claydon and Farmborrow, and at 31’3 descend 3 Furlongs; thence by Wormleighton Church on the Right, and Water-Gall House on the Left, come at 34’7. to descend a small Hill, and at 35’4. Lydbrook 35’4. to pass through Lidbrook a small Village, and 1 Mile 2 Furlongs farther to Southam, which
Extends 5 Furlongs on the Road; [36 m. N. b E.] is a place of good Accomodation, enjoys a con∣siderable Market on Mondays, and a Fair on St. Peter's Day. From Southam your Road is indifferent straight, Southam 37’1. [37’4. N. W. b N.] Long Itchington 39’6. Mersom 42’3. Princethorp 43’4. descending a Hill at 38’5. and passing through Long-Itchington at 39’6. whence you descend again at 41’4. and pass through Mersom a little Village at 42’3. and a Mile farther through Princethorp a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; in which you cross the Road that leads from YORK to BRISTOL; thence over an ascent, and cross Duns∣moor Heath, by Rinton Church on the Right, you are convey'd at 47’6. to Winford Bridg of Stone; Wynald 48’1. [48’6. N.] whence you cross the River Avon, then passing through Wynald a small Village, crossing the Sow and leaving Whitley Hall on the Left, you enter the City of COVENTRY which Extends a Mile on your Road; and is Illustrated [In LONDON to Holyhead pag. 43.] From COVENTRY an indirect way leads you by Forksel on the Right, COVENTRY 50’5. and at 52’7. Longford 52’7. Bedworth 55’3. Cotton 57’6. Nuneaton 58’4. N. W. b N. through Longford a scattering Village; whence at 55’3. you pass by Bed∣worth a Village contiguous on the Right, and through Griffey at 56’4. and Cotton at 57’6. both small Villages, entring Nuneaton at 58’1. seated near the Anker and on a Branch of it, Extending 5 Furlongs on the Road: It affords very good Accomo∣dation; was of Note formerly for its Abby, has at present a good Free-School well Endow'd, a Market on Saturdays, and a Fair yearly on the 3d. of May. At the end of the Town you have the Abby on the Left, and 2 Furlongs be∣yond Barr-Pool on the same Hand; whence at 60 Miles you descend 3 Furlongs, and at 62’1. Mancester 62’1. pass through Mancester a small though Antient Place, said to be Rais'd out of the Ruins of the Antient Mandussedum; Atherston 62’6. 4 Furlongs beyond you enter Ather∣ston seated likewise near the Anker of 3 Furlongs Extent and more transverse, [63’3. N. b E.] is in the Parish of Mancester aforesaid; the Town is indifferent large and well-built, and has a Chapel of Ease, a Free-School, a Market on Tuesdays, and 4 Fairs annually, viz. 8th. September, 4th. December, 27th. of March, and the 7th. of July. Leaving the Town you at 63’4. cross a Stone-bridg of 6 Arches over the River Anker and enter Leicestershire, Shepy 64’4. Twycross 66’4. Snareston 69’1. a Mile farther passing through Shepy a long discon∣tinued Village, and at 66’4. through Twycross a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; then between Gopshil Hall and Hogs-Norton Church come at 69’1. to Snareston a small Village, whence by Mesham Church on the Left, an indifferent straight and open Way brings you at 73’7. Ashby de lazouch 74’1. to Ashby de la zouch a Town of good Accomodation, Exten∣ding 3 Furlongs on the Road but more transverse; has a good Free-School, a well frequented Market on Saturdays, and 4 Fairs annually, viz. Easter-Tuesday, Whitson-Tuesday, St. Bartholomew's Day, and St. Simon and Jude. At the end of the Town you pass by Cales a Village contiguous on the Left, Cales 74’4. and enter Derbyshire at 75’4. where you leave Smethsby Church on the Left, and a M. farther descend Pistern Hill, on which is several Coal-Pits; whence little occurs but passing by Ticknel Church on the Left, [81’1. N. b W.] till at 81’2. you enter on a large Stone-bridg of 39 Arches, seconded with another of 9 over the River Trent, at the end of the Bridg you enter Swarkston a Village of 2 Furl. Swarkston 82 m. Extent and some Accomodation; whence over Synfold Moor, Derby 87. m. where you cross a Stone-bridg of 3 Arches over a Brook, you are convey'd at 86.4. to Derby, the account of which [vid. in LONDON to Der∣by pag. 79.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. In Derby the Left to LONDON. 2. At the end of Swarkston-Bridg the Left to Leicester and Loubrough. 3. In Twycross the Left to LONDON. 4. In Nuneaton the Left to Hinckley. 5. In COVENTRY the Left to LONDON. 6. At Weeping-Cross the Left to LONDON. 7. At the end of Dedington the L. to Alisbury.
The Road from OXFORD to SALISBURY Com̄. WILTS Continued to POOL Com̄. DORSET. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 87 Miles 3 Furlongs vizt From the City of OXFORD to Abington 7. Miles 2. furlongs to Shelford 16’.6. to Hungerford 5. m. to North Tudworth 14’.4. & to the City of SALISBURY 14’.2. thence to Cranborn 12’.5. to Winborn 10’.5. and to the Toun and County of Pool 6’
The Road from Oxford to Salisbury, Continued to Pool in Dorsetshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing S. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 76 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 61 M. 4. The Dimensuration 87’3. From OXFORD Comp. Measure. to Abington 05 05 07’2 07’2 Shelford 12 17 16’6 24’0 Hungerford 04 21 05’0 29’0 North Tudworth 10 31 14’4 43’4 to SALISBURY 10 41 14’2 57’6 Cranborn 09 50 12’5 70’3 Winborn 07 57 10’5 81’0 Pool 04 61 06’3 87’3 Oxfordshire, Barksh. Wiltsh. and Dorsetsh. are the Counties through which you pass; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Thames, Ock, Kennet, Avon and Stour are the principal Rivers crost over; affording no very good Road to Hungerford, but thence to Pool indifferent, and in all Places accomodated with fitting Entertainment for Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 2’2. The Left to Abington a different Way. 4’6. The Right to Wantage. 9’6. The Right to Wantage. 11’0. The Right to Wantage. 12’5. The Left to Newbury. 17’2. The Left to Farnborough. 27’7. The R. to Lamborn in Great Shelford At 24 M. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The Left forward in Great Shelford 28’6. The Right to BRISTOL. 29’4. The Left to WINCHESTER. 31’7. The Left to WINCHESTER. 50’3. The Right to SALISBURY. 58’2. & 3. The Left to Fording Bridg. 58’5. The Right to Harnham and Wilton. 87’1. The Left acute. SEtting forward from Cairfax in OXFORD, OXFORD, S. b. E. [1’4. S. W.] you pass through the South-Gate and come upon a Causeway, and at 1’4. cross a Branch of the Thames and enter Barkshire; whence an indirect Road passing between Hinksey and Elsey Churches, [4’6. S. E. b. S.] and over 4 mutual Ascents, and a Descent of 3 Furlongs at 3’5. omitting the for∣ward Way to Wantage at 4’6. and bearing to the Left, brings you at 6’7. Abington, 7’2. S. to Ab∣ington, a Corporation and Market-Town, [the Account of which vid. LONDON to St. Davids, pag. 29.] Adding, That it florish'd in times past, and had a Magnificent Abby which was destroy'd by the Danes, and after Beautify'd by King Edgar; is the Shire-Town, and the Place where the Assizes are often kept; has 3 Hospitals for poor People, and a Free-School. In the Town you bear to the Right, and at the End of it (6 Furlongs from your Entrance) omitting the great Western Road to GLOCESTER, &c. you bear to the Left, cross the River Ock, and leaving Sutton and Cullum each a Mile distant on the Left; at 9’1. come to a scattering Village contiguous on the Left, Drayton, 9’2. Steventon, 11 M. call'd Dray∣ton; then at 11 Miles you pass through Steventon another small and disunited Village, where you ascend a small Hill: At 12’5. you pass over 2 repeated Ascents, cross a Vale, and leave Harwel Church on the Left about a Mile, and West Hendred on the Right somewhat more; whence over several Ascents and Descents (the Left-hand Ways leading generally to Reding, and the Right to Wantage) by Farnborough Church a little on the Left; at 18’4. down 3 repeated Descents, a reasonable direct Road brings you at 23’6. to Great Shelford, a Village seated on a Branch of the Kennet, Great Shelford, 24 M. which you cross at the Entrance into it. Here omitting the directer Way on the Right to Lamborn, you bear to the Left, and presently to the Right again, and at 24’3. ascend an Hill of 2 Furlongs, and pass by a Wood on the Right, descending again at 25’6. 2 Furlongs, and passing by several Houses on the Left; whence 2 repeated Descents lead you at 28’5. in∣to Charnham-street, through which passes the LONDON Road to BRISTOL,
where crossing the Kennet, at 29 Miles you enter Hungerford, extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, pleasantly seated on the Banks of the foresaid Kennet, in which, as it is said, are taken the best Trouts and Cray-fish in England; It had several Privileges Granted by John of Gant; hath at present several good Inns of Accomodation, a Market on Wednsdays, and a Fair each St. Lawrence Day. Leaving Hungerford you pass by Major Goddard's House on the Right, [31’3. S.S.W.] and Sha∣born Church on the Left, and enter Wiltshire at 33’4. whence over several small Ascents and Descents; [37’ 3. S.] through a Wood, and by Collingborn Church 6 Furlongs di∣stant on the Right, and Lurgishal about a Mile on the Left; at 42’2. you descend for a quarter of a Mile, North Tudworth, 43’4 and at 43’2. enter North Tudworth a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent, and some Accomodation. At 44’1. you enter Hampshire, and 3 Furlongs farther pass through South Tud∣worth, South Tudworth, 44’5. [46 Miles S.S.W.] a Village extending 2 Furlongs on the Road; then by Shipton Church a small distance on your Left; at 46’2. you ascend a small Hill and re-enter Wiltshire; then passing again over several Ascents and Descents, [52 Miles S.] Ford, 55’2. and crossing part of Salisbury Plain, by Winterborn Church on the Left, you come at 55’2. to Ford a small Vil∣lage; whence by Brightford Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, at 57’4. you enter the City of SALISBURY, SALISBƲRY, 57’6. (which is treated of in the Road from LONDON to the Lands-End, pag. 51.) and other succeeding Plates. Leaving SALISBURY you pass by Harnham Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, [58’3. S.W.] and Odstoke a Mile on the Left, Huntington, 61 M. cross Huntington Bridg, and a Furlong farther, viz. at 60’7. you pass through Huntington a small Village; then over another part of Salisbury Plain, and by Tweed Farm on the Right, and Black Warren Lodges on the Left; Tipput, 66’3. a straight Way conveys you at 66’3. to Tippot a little Village, and about a Mile farther to the entring of Dorsetshire; then passing by the Lady Hooper's House on the Left; Cranborn, 70’3. at 70’1. you enter Cranborn, i.e. Amnis Gruum, a Market-Town of 6 Furlongs Extent, (the Description of which see in the Road from LONDON to Weymouth, [76’6. S.] pag. 105.) From Cranborn leaving Yonsome Church on the Left, Wimborn, 81 Miles. and Winborn St. Giles's Church and the Earl of Shaftbury's House on the Right; and at 76 Miles Chabury House on the Left, and Hinton Marten Church on the same Hand: At 78 Miles you pass by Ashton Farm on the Left, and 2 Furlongs farther Stanbridg Chapel on the same Hand also; whence by Wilsford Court on the Right, at 80’3. you cross a Branch of the Stour, and at 80’6. enter Wimborn or Wimborn Minster, anciently Vindogladia, in Brit∣tish Windugledy, denoting a Town situate between two Brooks; an indifferent large Place, seated on the Stour, and hath a very considerable Market on Fridays, and a more eminent one on Good Friday for Cattel, continuing 7 Weeks: The Town was of Note formerly for its Nunnery Built in the Year 712. by Lutle Burga Sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, who suing a Divorce from her Husband, King of the Northumbers, betook her self to this Monastery; upon the Dissolution whereof, a large Collegiate Church with a fair Spire-Steeple was erected in the Place. At 81’7. you cross the Stour over Canford Bridg; whence an indifferent straight Way by Hickford House on the Left, conveys you at 87’2. to the Entrance of Pool, Pool, 87’3. a Town and County of it self, encompass'd with the Sea except on the North Side, is Wall'd about, and enjoys a safe Harbor; sends Burgesses to Parliament, is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, &c. and hath 2 Markets Weekly, Mondays and Thursdays, vid. more in LONDON to Pool, pag. 193. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 5 Furl. short of Stanbridg Chapel the Left acute. 2. In Cranborn the Right acute. 3. At the end of Cranborn the Left forward. 4. In Huntington the Left to Odstoke. 5. 4 Furl. short of Ford the Right to Andover and Stockbridg. 6. 1 Furl. beyond Ford the Right acute, and Left to Amesbury. 7. 2’1. beyond Ford the Right to Gamelton. 8. In North Tudworth the Left to Collingborn. 9. At the End of North Tudworth the Right to Lurgshal. 10. A Furl. short of the entring Barkshire, the Right to Shaborn. 11. 1’3. Beyond Farnborough, the Right to Reding. 12. A Mile short of Steventon the Right to Abington a different Way. 13. At the entring Abington the left forward. 14. In Abington the Right forward to LON∣DON.
The Road From PRESTAINE in Com̄. Radnor to CARMARTHEN BY IOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 61 miles (vizt) From Prestaine to New Radnors 5 miles 4 fun: to Beallh to. 2’ to Idlovvaugh 12. to Llanimdofry 7. to Abernnarlis 6.2’ to Rue Raddor 8. to Carmar then 12 miles
The Road from Prestain to Carmarthen. 1. THE Point of Bearing E. N. E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 60 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 46 M. 4. The Dimensuration 61 M. From Prestain Comp. Measure. to New Radnor 4 04 05’4 05’4 Bealth 8 12 10’2 15’6 Ludlowvaugh 9 21 12’0 27’6 Llanimdofry 5 26 07’0 34’6 to Abermarlis 5 31 06’2 41’0 Rue-Raddor 6 37 08’0 49’0 Carmarthen 9 46 12’0 61’0   46   61’0   Radnorshire, Brecknocksh. and Carmarthensh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. are the Counties that include the whole Road; and the Somergil, Edway, Wye, Vervar, Brane, Towy, Dulas, Cothy and Gwilly, the principal Rivers crost over; affording but an indifferent Way to Llanimdofry, yet thence to Carmarthen very good; hath several Inns on the Road to accomodate Tra∣vellers, besides those in the Towns past through. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 3 Furl. the Right to Riadergowy. At 3’6. At the End of Kinerton the Left to Kineton. At 7’2. The Left to Llanihangle-nant-Melon. At 7’6. The Left to HEREFORD. At 8 M. the Right forward. At 17’5. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. at the End of Cavenabeth the Right to Llanavan. At 35 M. the Right to Cardigan. At 41’1. The Left to Llangadock. At 45’6. The Left to Llandilovawr. At 50’0. The Left to the Golden Grove. PRoceeding from the Town-Hall in Prestain, Prestain, W. by N. at 3 Furlongs you omit the acute or forward Way on the Right that leads to Riadergowy and bear to the Left, 3 Miles S. W. b. W.] and at 1’1. descend a Hill of 6 Furlongs, at the Bottom whereof you leave Beg∣gars Bush on your Right, a Noted Place so call'd; whence at 3’4. you pass through a small Village call'd Kinerton; and at 4’3. by some scattering Houses on the Road, Kinerton, 3’4. you are convey'd at 5’3. to New Radnor extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, New Radnor, 5’4. is the Shire-Town, formerly enjoy'd a Market, and was Govern'd by a Bailiff and 25 Burgesses, enjoying large Immunities, is at present a poor Town consisting in about 40 Houses, yet hath 3 Fairs annually, viz. Trinity Tuesday, St. Lukes Day, and the 3d. of August; and one good Inn of Accomodation; sending one Burgess to Parlia∣ment: about a Furlong to the Right stood the Castle now quite ruin'd; and about a Mile to the Left Old Radnor, in British Maiseveth-hean, and from its eminent situ∣ation Pen-crag, conceiv'd to be the Magnos or Magnim in Antonine; and to give De∣nomination to the Massegetes, Inhabitants of this Tract. From Radnor you cross several small Waters, and at 7’1. ascend an Hill of a Mile in Height, where you leave Llanihangle-nant-Melon Church a little on the Left, and at the Top you descend again a Mile; whence by some scattering Houses, and crossing the Edway, you are convey'd at 12’5. by an Inn call'd Matt's on the Left, a Place of good Accomodation; thence at 15’1. Llanelvaugh, 15’1. you pass through Llanelvaugh a small Village, and at 15’5. crossing the River Wye over a Wooden-Bridg, Bealth, 15’6. S. W. you at once enter Brecknockshire and the Town of Bealth alias Bealt, a small Market-Town of 3 Furlongs, as in CHESTER to Cardiff, pag. 127. At 16’3. over a Wood-Bridg you cross the River Vervar, and at 17’5. pass through Cavenabeth a small Village; whence by several disperst Houses, and by Mr. Cavenabeth, 17’5. Prices's House on the Right, you come at 19’6. to Llanavar another small Village, Llanaver, 19’6. and at 21 Miles to a Wooden-Bridg call'd Ponteridgley over a Brook; then passing again by some Houses, at 22 Miles you descend 3 Furlongs, [22 Miles S.W. b. S.] and at 23 Miles leave Mr. Lloyd's House on the Right, and crossing 2 or 3 small Brooks, by some Hou∣ses on the Left, ascend a Hill of 9 Furlongs; whence a straight open Way sprink∣led
with Houses, brings you at 27’6. to a House on the Right call'd Ludlowvaugh, where you enter Carmarthenshire. At 28’7. you descend an Hill of 12 Furlongs, and at the Bottom pass by seve∣ral discontinued Houses on the Road; [31’2. S.W. b. W.] whence at 31’3. you come to Mr. Gwynn's Park on the Left, which accompanies your Road a Mile together, and a little after his House on your Right call'd Llanbrain; whence sprinkled Houses conveys you at 33’3. to the small River Brane; and at 34’2. to Llanvararbryn a small Village, and 3 Furlongs farther Llanimdofry a small Market-Town, Llanimdofry, 34’6. S. S. W. but an eminent Thorough-fare, as in Monmouth to Llanbeder, pag. 153. At the End of the Town, omitting the acute Way on the Right to Cardigan, you cross the Towy, and leave Llandingad Church on the Left, and proceeding by several disperst Houses, touch upon the Banks of the Towy on the Left at 38 Miles; whence crossing several small Waters or Rills, your Way being indifferent straight, brings you at 40’2. to a Wood-Bridg over a Brook, and 3 Furlongs farther to an Inn on your Left call'd Mas Goodwin, affording very good Entertainment, 2 Furlongs be∣yond which you cross a Part of the Dulas, Abermarlos, 41 M. leaving Abermarlos Sr. Francis Cornwallis's House on the Right; then by some scattering Houses and over a small Brook, you ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and pass through a scattering Village call'd Caven-Glossen: At 43’3. Caven Glossen, 42 M. Cowen Gathbury, 14’3 you descend 3 Furlongs and pass by some Houses on the Road, and 4 Furlongs beyond through a small Village call'd Cowen Gathbury. At 45 Miles you cross another Branch of the Dulas over a Wood-bridg, and at 46 Miles ascend a Hill of 5 Furlongs, and descend again 2 Furlongs; then at 47’3 you pass by some Houses on the Right call'd Vare Lloyd; Vare Lloyd, 47’3. and after by several scat∣tering Houses on the Road come to Rue Raddor a small Village, Rue Raddor, 49 Miles W. S. W. where you cross another Part of the Dulas also over a Wooden-Bridg, and ascending a small Hill, again pass by some discontinued Houses on the Road; [50’5. S. W.] and at 50’2. leave Aber-glas∣seny House on the Left 2 Furlongs; whence again your Road is sprinkled with Hou∣ses: crossing a Brook at 53’2. over a Wood-bridg, you enter on a Pav'd Cause∣way continuing about 6 Furlongs; then at 55 Miles you pass by some scattering Houses, and cross the Cothy over a Bridg of Wood. At 58 Miles you pass by the White Mill, a Ridg of Hills accompanying your Road on the Right, Aberguilly, 59’4. and the Towy on the Left; whence at 59’4. you enter Aberguilly, an indifferent larrge Village, chiefly inhabited by Fisher-Men, in which is Aberguilly House a Seat of the Bishop of St. David's: At 59’6. you cross a Part of the Guilly over a Bridg of Wood, and 2 Furlongs farther the other Branch of it over a Stone-Bridg of 4 Arches, Carmarthen, 61 M. and enter Carmarthen or Caer-marden at 60’4. by the Britains Caer-Firdhin, by Ptolomy Maridunum, by Antonine Muridunum: Is the Shire-Town, large, well-built, and well-inhabited; seated on the Navigable Towy, over which it hath a large Stone-Bridg, and a Key to which small Vessels arrive to unlade their Goods, &c. is said to have given Birth to Merlin the British Prophet or South-Sayer; has had its Share in Calamities, was once fortify'd with a Wall and strong Castle now ruinous; it was made by the English Princes the Chancery and Exchequer of South-Wales; it is at present a Town and County incorporate; enjoys ample Immuities, as keeping of Courts, Electing a Parliament Man, and being the Place where the As∣sizes are Held, &c. Is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, 2 Sheriffs, 16 Aldermen cloth'd in Scarlet, &c. hath 2 Markets Weekly, on Wednsdays and Saturdays, well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions, and 4 Fairs annually, viz. Lammas Day, the 23d. of August, Michaelmas Eve, and Alhallon Day. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 5 Furl. short of Aberguilly the Left for∣ward to Castle Biggeth. 2. Against the White Mill the Left. 3. 3 Furl. beyond the Pav'd Causeway the Right to the Golden Grove. 4. In Rue Raddor the Right to Llandilovawr. 5. In Llanimdofry the R. forward to Brecknock 6. 1 Furl. beyond Llanimdofry the Left to Killcomb. 7. At the entring Bealth the Left acute. 8. At the end of Bealth the R. to the Hay. 9. 6 Furl. beyond Edway Brook, the Right to Keinton, and the Left acute. 10. 5 Furl. short of Llanihangle-nant-Melon, the Left to Llanidlos. 11. 3 Furl. short of Beggars Bush the Left to Knighton.
The Road from the City of SALISBVRY com̄: Wilts to CAMPDEN com̄: Gloc By JOHN OGJL BY Esq:r His Ma:ties Cosmographr: Containing 76 m vizt: From ye Counsel house in SALISBVRY to Everly 15:6 to Burbich 5:6 to Marlborough 5:6 to Hiworth 16:3 to Lechlade 5:5 to Burford 8:3 to Stow ony.e old to: and to Campden 8:3
The Road from Salisbury to Campden, In Glocestershire. 1. THE Point of Bearing N. by E. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 63 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 56 M. 4. The Dimensuration 76 M. From SALISBURY Comp. Measure. to Everley 12 12 15’6 15’6 Burbich 04 16 05’6 21’4 Marlborough 04 20 05’6 27’2 Hiworth 12 32 16’3 43’5 to Lechlade 04 36 05’5 49’2 Burford 06 42 08’3 57’5 Stow 07 49 10’0 67’5 Campden 07 56 08’3 76’0 Wiltshire, Barksh. Oxfordsh. and Glocestersh. include the whole Road; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Ken∣net, Thames, Leech and Windrush are the principal Rivers past over; affording a good Road over Salisbury Plain, but less pleasant through Savernake Forest to Marlborough, which yet is recompenc'd by the goodness of the Way to Campden, and the conve∣nience of Entertainment, which you meet with in most Places. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1’7. The Left acute. At 13’0. The Right acute. At 15’4. The Left acute. At 20’4. The Left to Westgate. At 27’5. The Left to BATH. At 31’2. The Right to Ramsbury. At 31’4. The Left to Wootton-Basset. At 32’2. The Right to Wantage. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 38’7. The Right to Highworth a different Way. At 39’2. The Left to Stratton. At 47’2. The Left to Inglesham Church. At 57’7. The Right to Shipton. At 74’0. The Left to WORCESTER. FROM the Councel-House in SALISBURY, you turn first on the Left, SALISBƲRT, N. b. W and then on the Right, and at 5 Furlongs leave the City, [the Description of which you have in the Road from LONDON to the Lands-End, pag. 51. [1’6. N. by E.] [7’5. N. N. W.] and other succeed∣ing Plates.] and enter upon Salisbury Plain, and pass at 1’6. by some Part of Old Sarum on the Right; whence little offers it self, but Cross-ways leading to the ad∣jacent Towns, as the Winterborns, WINCHESTER, Idmerston, &c. on the Right, Everley, 15’6. N. N. E. Stretford, Amesbury, Normanton, &c. on the Left; till at 15’6. you pass by Everley on the Left, where is a small Inn or two for the Refreshment of Travellers after their Journey over the Plain. From Everley your Way is through open Arable, [18’5. N.] and by False-Stone on your Left at 18 Miles, brings you at 21’1. to Burbich a long but discontinued Village, Burbich, 21’4. where you have an indifferent good Inn or two for Entertainment. At 22’3. you enter Savernake Forest, and at 24’4. pass by a noted Tree on the Right, call'd Fair-bough; then at 26’2. descending, you leave the Forest; Marlborough. [27’2. N. E. b. N.] and 6 Furlongs farther enter Marl∣borough, [for the Account of which; vid. LONDON to BRISTOL, pag. 21.] From Marlborough, you omit the forward Way leading to BATH, BRISTOL, &c. Ogborn-Massey, 29’5. Ogborn St. George, 31 Miles N. and at 29’5. pass through Ogborn-Massey a small Village, and at 30’5. leave Ogborn St. Andrew a little on the Left, entring Ogborn St. George at 31’1. a long but discon∣tinued Village, extending 7 Furlongs on the Road, where is one small Inn for Ac∣comodation: whence a straight open Way conducts you at 35’2. by Chisseldon, 4 Furl. on the Left; and entring a Lane at 35’6. you leave Badbury, a Village 2 Furlongs on the Right, and at 37 Miles Wanborough at some distance on the same Hand. At 38 Miles you pass over part of Wanborough Common, and at 40’4. [38’3. N. W.] Marsham, 40’4. N. by W. Hiworth, 43’5. through Marsham a small scattering Village; whence for the most part open Way brings you at 43’3. to the entring of Hiworth extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, [for which vid. OXFORD to BRISTOL pag. 157.] Thence you descend for 3 Furlongs, your Way being open Arable, and enter a Lane at 45’3. and at 46’3. pass through Inglesham a scattering Village, Inglesham, 46’3. at 47
Miles you cross a Stone-Bridg over a Brook, and enter Barkshire, and at 48’3. you cross St. [47’2 N. E.] [48’2. N. N. W.] Lechlade, 49’2. John's Bridg of 4 Arches over the Thames, and enter Glocestershire, a little a-fore meeting the Road that leads from LONDON to GLOCESTER, &c. t 48’7. you enter Lechlade a Market-Town, extending 2 Furlongs on the Road, [for which vid. LONDON to St. Davids, pag. 29.] At 50’2. you cross the Leech over a Wooden-Bridg, and re-enter Barkshire, leav∣ing Little Faringdon on your Right, Little Faringdon, 50’4. N. by E. Filkin, 52’2. and passing over Faringdon Common, at 51’3. enter Oxfordshire, and 5 Furlongs farther, Filkin a Village extending 4 Furlongs on the Road, and hath a good Inn for Reception of Travellers: Whence your Way is through open Arable and Pasture indifferently, and through Bradwel Grove which leads you at 55’4. to a Descent of 4 Furlongs, where you pass by a small Vil∣lage, Burford, 57’5. N.N.W. and Sinat Elm on the Left; then at 57’4. you enter Burford, extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, seated on the side of a Hill; a Town Corporate, Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 24 Burgesses, &c. hath a good Market on Saturdays, and 2 Fairs an∣nually, viz. Midsomer Day, and 14 Days after St. Michael. At the End of the Town you cross the River Windrush over a Stone-Bridg of 4 Arches, and at 59’2. pass by a Stone on the Left, and over Black Heath, leav∣ing Fifield, Edbury, Westcote and Iccomb Churches successively on the Right, and Bar∣rington and Rissington Churches and Rissington Beacon on the Left, re-entring Gloce∣stershire at 62’4. [65 Miles N.] Stow, 67’5. then at 65 Miles you descend 4 Furlongs, and ascend again a Mile, entring Stow alias Stow on the Would at 67’3. seated on a bleak Hill, a large though poor Town, containing about 200 Houses; there is neither Wood nor Wa∣ter belonging to the Town, nor has the Inhabitants the Privilege to make advantage of setting Stalls before their own Doors at the Fairs; John Chamberlain Esq is Lord of the Town: It is at present Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, (though they have lost their Charter) has a Market on Thursdays, and 2 Fairs yearly, May Day, and 14 Days after St. Michael. [68’2. N. W. b. N.] From Stow an open Way leads you by Lower Swell and Upper Swell Churches on the Left, [74 Miles N.] Wessington, 75’4. Campden, 76 Miles. and Longborow Church, Sr. William Juxson's House, and Blockley Church on the Right; over Broad-way Hill or Downs, to a Conduit at 75’2. and 2 Furlongs farther to Wessington a small Village, and at 75’6. to Campden a Market-Town, [as in GLOCESTER to COVENTRY, pag. 139.] Adding this, That there is a well-built Alms-House Founded by Sr. Baptist Hicks, for 6 aged Men and 6 Wo∣men; their Allowance is three Shillings four Pence a-Week, and a Gown, Hat, and Tun of Coals a-year to each of them: There are two curious Tombs in the Church, the one of the said Sr. Baptist Hicks, and the other of Edward Nowel, Vis∣count Campden, &c. The Town is of great Antiquity, the Danes being suppos'd to have their Camps near it, and from thence it's Name to be deriv'd. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Campden the Left to Broad Campden. 2. 5 Miles short of Stow, the Left to Burton on the Hill. 3. 1’6. Short of Stow, the Right to Upper Swell. 4. 4 Furlongs short of Stow, the Left to Denynton. 5. 10 Furlongs beyond Burford, the left to Auster. 6. At Little Faringdon, the Left to Kemps∣cot. 7. The forward in Lechlade to Fairford. 8. 5 Furlongs beyond Lechlade the Left to Faringdon. 9. 1’5. Beyond Marsham, the forward to Wanborough. 10. At the End of Burbich the Left to Andover. 11. 2’3. Beyond Burbich, the Left to Collingborn. 12. At the End of Everley the Right acute. 13. On Salisbury Plain the Left to Porton. 14. In Savernake Forest the Right to Por∣ton and Winterslow.
The Road from Tinmouth in Northumberld. to the City of CARLJSLE in Cumberld. By JOHN OGJLBY Esq. his Ma.ties Cosmographr. Containing 69 Miles 5 Furlongs, viz. From Tinmouth to Neweastle 9 Miles 2 Furl: to Ovingham 11’7. to Hexham 10’4. to Haltwesel. 14’7. to Chapelbourn 8’2. to Corbey 9’6. & to CARLJSLE 5’1
The Road from Tinmouth in Northum. to Carlisle In Cumberland. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 59 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 50 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 69’5. From Tinmouth Comp. Measure. to New-Castle 07 07 09’2 09’2 Ovingham 08 15 11’7 21’1 Hexam 08 23 10’4 31’5 Haltwesel 10 33 14’7 46’4 to Chapelbourn 06 39 08’2 54’6 Corby 07 46 09’6 64’4 CARLISLE 04 50 05’1 69’5   50   69’5   Northumberland and Cumberland include the whole Road; and the Tine, Allen, South-Tine, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Rippal, Irthing, Eden and Petterel, are the principal Rivers crost over; afford∣ing in general but a bad Hilly Road, where you seldom meet with that frequen∣cy of Entertainment as in other Roads. Forward Turnings to be Avoided. At the End of Tinmouth, the Left to Shields. At 7 Furlongs the Right acute. At 3’6. The Right acute. At 13 Miles the Right to Denton. At 22’1. The Left to Biwel. At 31 Miles, the Right to Butsworth and CARLISLE a different Way. At 41’5. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At the end of Mellis the Right to Narford. At 46’2. The Right in Haltwesel to Branton. At 51’7. The Right and Left acute. At 64’6. The Left acute. At 66’7. The Left to Codby. At 67’6. The Left to Boteherby. SEtting forward from Tinmouth, you cross a Brook at 6 Furlongs, Tinmouth, W. by N. and have North and South Shields on the Left, and the Church on the Right; at 2’1. Chillington, 2’1. [4 Miles W. by S.] you pass by Chillington on the Left, and 3 Furlongs farther, Chirtons on the Right, both small Villages; and descending a Hill of 3 Furlongs, pass by some Houses, and cross a Vale at 4’4. then by Pikewell Hall on the Left; and at 7 Miles, by Biker a Village on the same Hand, you cross a large Vale, where you pass through Useburn a disperst Village, and at 8’6. enter New-Castle or New-Castle upon Tine, Ʋseburn, 8 Miles. New-Castle, 9’2. a large, well-built Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, [as in LONDON to Barwick, pag. 13.] Leaving New-Castle, you ascend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, and crossing a large Vale, [11’2. W. N. W.] West Denton, 13’2. W. S. W. Pigshal, 13’6. Newborn, 14’6. pass by Denton Hall on the Right, and near the Top of the Hill, West Denton a Vil∣lage on the Left; and on the Top, pass through Pigshal a small Village, where you descend a Hill of 8 Furlongs, and at the Bottom pass through Newborn a Vil∣lage of 2 Furlongs Extent; then you have the Tine on the Left, and Righton Church on the other side of it, and at 16’7. crossing a Wood-Bridg and Brook, and as∣cending a small Hill, you in a Vale pass through Wilam a little Village, Wilam, 19 Miles W. and then descend another small Hill, and cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook. At 20’7. you have Prudor Castle at some distance on the Left, the River Tine passing between your Road and it; Ovingham, 21’1. and 3 Furlongs farther you pass through Oving∣ham a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; at the End whereof you cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook: then at 22’2. ascending an Hill of 9 Furlongs Height, you on it, pass through Ovington a small Village; and at 24’4. cross a Vale, Ovington, 22’4. and leave Newton Church on the Right, and passing over another Vale, you come at 27 Miles to a Descent of 7 Furlongs, Gorebridg, 27’5. and through Gorebridg alias Cerbridg a Village of 2 Fur∣longs Extent; thence by a Water-Mill on the Right (where part of the River Tine runs in the Road) and Sandy a Village at some distance on the same Hand, come at 29 Miles to Bestrick a little Village.
Hence by Anwick Grange and Anwick on the Hill, both on the Right, you are brought at 31’1. Hexham, 31’5. to the River Tine which you pass through, and 3 Furlongs far∣ther enter Hexam or Hexham, of above 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; call'd by Beda, Hangustald; by the Romans, Alexodunum; and by Sonmer, Hagulstaldesham: a Town of great Acount in former Time, being dignify'd with an Episcopal See, it's Cathedral a most stately Structure, was Built by St. Wilfred, it enjoy'd 10 Bi∣shops, and being spoil'd by the Danes, the See was remov'd to that of YORK; It is at present a well-built Bailiwick Town, seated on the River Tine, and has an indifferent Market for Corn, &c. on Tuesdays: This Town boasted formerly of its Abby and Church, the one of which is now decay'd, and the other a great Part of it pull'd down by the Scots. Leaving Hexham, [36’6. W. by S.] you ascend an Hill of 10 Furlongs Height, and enter on a Moor, and cross 2 Vales, in the later whereof, over Hadon Bridg you cross the South-Tine, Hadon, 37’7. and pass through Hadon, leaving the Church some distance on the Right; then by Sapwood a small Village on the Right, Sapwood, 39 Miles. Mellis, 41’4. Stow-house, 42’5. cross over 3 Vales; and at 41 Miles descend 5 Furlongs, and pass through Mellis a small Village, and at 42’5. through Slow-house another small Village, and leave Woodhil a little Village on the Left, and pass through Milcriche at 44’4. then at 45’2. ascending, you cross 2 Vales, and come to Haltwesel of 5 Furl. Haltwesel, 46’4. Extent, a Town indifferent well-built and affording good Entertainment; thence at 48’2. you pass through Redbath a small Village, and leave Hole-hovse on the Left. Whence through a Wood, [48’2. W. N. W.] and by Blenkensop Castle on the Right, Goomholt a small Village at 50’3. Thirlwal Castle at 50’6. Longbuyer Castle at 51 Miles, and Furley a small Village at 51’3. all successively on the Right; then by Belton and Crook both small Villages on the Left, come at 52’2. to cross the small River Pol∣trose and enter Cumberland, where you ascend an Hill of 5 Furlongs and touch upon a Part of the Picts Wall on the Right; thence by Dearington a little Village conti∣guous on the Right, Chapelbourn, 54’6. pass through a small Wood, and through Chapelbourn a Vil∣lage at 54’6. and cross a large Vale; at 58’7. you descend a small Hill, where you cross a Wooden-Bridg and Brook, and leave Milton a Village a little on the Right. At 60’2. [60’6. W.S. by W.] you ascend 4 Furlongs, and presently descend a Mile, where you have a Park accompanying your Road on the Right; whence crossing some small Wa∣ters or Rills, Corbey, 64’2. you come at 64’2. to Corbey a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; at the End whereof you cross Warwick Bridg of Stone over the River Eden, and ascend∣ing an Hill, Warwick, 65’1. W. pass through Warwick a small Village; then leaving Eglionbury a little Village on the Right, Wheelborough-hall, 56’6. through Wheelborough-Hall, a small Village so call'd at 56’6. and crossing the Petterel at 68’1. you fall in with the Road from LONDON, and arrive at Bother-street a Suburb of the City of CARLISLE at 68’7. and four Furlongs after enter the City of CARLISLE it self, CARLISLE, 69’5. a Place of great An∣tiquity and Strength, Fortify'd with a Castle, Wall and Bulwarks; is well Built and well Water'd, and much resorted unto by reason of its nearness to Scotland, by which means it enjoys ample Immunities and Privileges; [the Account whereof We have given you in LONDON to CARLISLE, pag. 75. and succeeding Plates.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs from CARLISLE the Right to Penrith, Lancaster, &c. 2. 2 Furlongs short of Stow House, the Left to Narford. 3. 7 Furlongs beyond Hadon Bridg, the Left acute. 4. 1’5. Short of Chillington, the Right to Shields.
The Road From WELSHPOOL Com̄ Montgomery to CARNARVAN in North Wales By IOHN OGHBY Eq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographer Containing 82. miles 2 furlongs (viz.t) From Welshpool to Llanvair 8.2. to Dinas-mouthy 18.3’ to Dolge the 9.4’ to Llandura 11.6. to Harlech 6.2. to Dolbenmer 12.4’ & to Carnarvan 15.5
The Road from Welshpool to Carnarvan. 1. THE Point of Bearing N.W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 59 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 64 M. 4. The Dimensuration 82’2. From Welshpool Comp. Measure. to Llanvair 06 06 08’2 08’2 Dinas-Mowthy 14 20 18’3 26’5 Dolgethe 08 28 09’4 36’1 Llandura 09 37 11’6 47’7 to Harlech 05 42 06’2 54’1 Dolbenmer 10 52 12’4 66’5 Carnarvan 12 64 15’5 82’2   64   82’2   Montgomeryshire, Merionethsh. and Carnarvansh. are the Counties past through; Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Lleding, Dovy, Llanbeder, Lleveney, Garway and Saint, are the principal Rivers crost over; which in general is no good Road, nor well frequented, and thereby not having that Convenience of Entertainment as you meet with in some other more frequented Roads. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1 Furlong, the forward in Welshpool. At 7 Furlongs the Right to Myvot. At 8’3. The Right to Llanvelling. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 15’2. The Right the New Way. SEtting forward from Welshpool, you leave Powis Castle on the Left; Welshpool, W. and at the End of the Town ascend a small Hill, and at 2’5. cross over Golway Moun∣tain, and pass the Lleding at 3’6. Dolarthin, 4’4. and by Dollarthin a Village contiguous on the Left at 4’4. whence ascending 2 small Hills, you enter on open Way, [6’4. W.N.W.] which you leave at 6’6. and pass over a small Hill, a straight Way conducting you by Pinfold House on the Left, at 8’2. to the Entrance of Llanvair, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent: Then an indirect Way something Woody, over Derreta-tege an Hill or Mountain so call'd, conveys you at 13’4. by the Lord Herbert's Park on the Right; at 15 M. you turn short on the Right, by Cannons Office a noted House on the Left, [19’1. W.] 2 Fur∣longs farther you omit the New Way on the Right, and leave Llangadwan Church on the Left, and at 17’4. where the Ways meet again, pass by Garth-pibo vulgo Garthabio Church on the Right; at 19 Miles crossing a River, you pass by How∣hews House on the Left, and after cross over Bullfagedwel Mountain, and enter Me∣rionethshire at 21’3. where you cross a Brook over Nant-tede-godh Bridg. Hence, passing by some scattering Woods and Hills, you are convey'd at 23’4. to some Houses on the Road call'd Digodh; then through some Woods again, Digodh, 23’4. [25’2. N.W. b. N. Dinas Mowthy, 26’5. and by Maltwith Hall at 25’2. about 2 Furlongs on the Left, crossing the Dovy over Pontrusk Bridg, you 5 Furlongs farther pass through Dinas-Mowthy a Village in Ex∣tent 2 Furlongs; whence little occurs, but passing in an open Way between Hills, [28 M. W. b. N.] till crossing a Bridg at 33’2. you pass by some Houses on the Road, a Mile far∣ther descending, and ascending of Urronseth Hill, Dolgeth, 36’1. N.W. you after leave Clum a great House about 2 Furlongs on the Right, and enter Dolgeth at 36’1. of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; It is Seated on the Avon, and hath an indifferent good Market on Tuesday, for Provisions, &c. and drives some Trade in Cotton. Leaving the Town, you ascend an Hill, and half a Mile farther, pass by Del∣lachowgrid Hall on the Right, and at 37’6. pass through Llanyltyd, Llanyltid, 37’6. W. and 3 Fur∣longs farther, Masgarna, both small Villages, leaving Peat Moor on your Left; [44’3. N.W. b. N.] [46’5. W.N.W.] at 41 Miles you pass between Rocks, the Way being Woody; you cross over a Stone-Bridg, and leave a Mill on your Right, after several Ascents and Descents, are brought at 47’7. to Tarapont Bridg, where you cross a Brook, and pass through Llandura a scattering Village. Llandura, 47’7. N. b. W. Hence you pass by several scattering Houses on the Road, and Llanenthowin Church on the Left about 4 Furlongs, and at 51’2. over a Stone-Bridg cross the Llanbeder, and pass by Llanbeder Church on the Right, and a Mile four Furlongs farther, by
Llanvaier Church on the same Hand, [52’5. N.N.E.] Harlech, 54’1. and ascending a small Hill, are brought at 54 Miles to enter Harley alias Harlech or Harlegh, Seated near the Sea-shore, and on a Rock; a small Market-Town, Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. sends one Burgess to Parliament, is the Place where the Assizes are kept for the County of Merioneth, had in former time a strong Castle Built by King Edward the First, so highly Seat∣ed, that it Commanded both the Sea and Land adjoyning to it, Wall'd with a double Bulwark, the Constable of the Castle is by Patent always Mayor of the Town; this Castle was a Garrison for His Late Majesty, Commanded by Colonel William Owen, and Held-out the longest against the Assaults of the Rebels who Dis∣mantled it. Near this Town are two In-lets of the Sea, call'd Traeth Bicah and Traeth Mawr. At 55’4. you pass through a Village built most on the Right, and at 57’2. by Llanihangle-ytrath Church about 3 Furlongs on the Left, [58’4. N.N.W.] and enter on the Sands 4 Furlongs farther, [61 m. W.N.W.] where you cross a small Water, and at 60’3. pass through a small Village, and again go on the Sands, and on them enter Carnarvanshire; then by a Ridg of high Rocks and Mountains on your Right, you at 63’4. enter Pen∣morvay of 3 Furlongs Extent; Penmorvay, 63’5. [64’3. N.N.W.] Dalbenmer, 66’5. at 65’2. you cross two small Waters, and two Fur∣longs farther, leave Clenunay House about half a Mile on the Right, and at 66’4. crossing over a Bridg, you enter Dalbenmer, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; whence by several Rocks on the Right, and at 68’2. by some scattering Houses call'd Tygarn, distant near 2 Furlongs from the Road, come at 70 Miles to cross a Water, and ascend a great Hill, [70’4. N. b. W.] leaving Bodichen on the Left. At 72’4. you ascend a small Hill, and 9 Furlongs farther, pass by Llanllavenay Church on the Left, where you cross the River Lleveney, at 78’3. by Llanunda Church on the same Hand, and 4 Furlongs farther by Dinas, and a little beyond, by Mr. Lewes House, all on the Left, crossing the Garway over Pont-Newed or New-Bridg at 79’3. whence ascending and descending, you at 81’6. cross the River Saint, Carnarvan, 82’2. leaving the Gallows on the Left, and at 82 Miles enter Carnarvan or Caer∣narvon, so call'd from it's being situate opposite to Mone or the Isle of Anglesey; It is call'd by the Britains, Caer-arnon; was Rais'd out of the antient City Segontium, menti∣on'd by Antonine; the Town is commodiously Seated on the Bank of the Sea, and is of Note for the Burial of Constantius Father of Constantine the Great, and the Birth-Place of Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales, and for being the Place where the Chancery and Exchequer for the Princes of North-Wales was kept; It is well Fortify'd both by Art and Nature; is well Inhabited, though not large, and is Dig∣nify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvan, &c. It sendeth a Burgess to Parliament, Is Govern'd by the Constable of the Castle, who by Patent is always Mayor, who hath for Assistants, an Alderman, two Bai∣liffs, &c. the Town enjoys a good Market on Saturdays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. 2 Furlongs from Carnarvan the Left acute. 2. At the End of Llandura the Right to the Ferry. 3. 2 Furlongs beyond Dinas-Mowthay, the Right to Aberangle. 4. Against Maltwith Hall the Right acute 5. At Nantaradith Bridg, the Left to Llanterhedth. 6. At Garth-pibo Church, the Left be∣ing the New Way. 7. 10 Furlongs beyond the Lord Her∣berts Park, the Right acute.
The Road from YORK to LANCASTER By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r his Maties Cosmographr. Containing 88 Miles. 6 Furlongs (vizt.) From the City of YORK to Alerton 13.1. to Knasbrough 4.7. to Ripley 5.0. to Boulton 15.6. to Skipton 6.2. to Coniston 7.0. to Settle 8.2. to Clapham 7.3. to Hornby 11.1. and to LANCASTER 10. m.
The Road from York to Lancaster. 1. THe Point of Bearing W. N. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 68 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 68 M. 4. The Dimensuration 88’7. From YORK Comp. Measure. to Allerton 10 10 13’1 13’1 Knaresburgh 04 14 04’7 18’0 Ripley 04 18 05’0 23’0 Boulton 12 30 15’7 38’7 Skipton 05 35 06’1 45’0 to Coniston 05 40 07’0 52’0 Settle 06 46 08’2 60’2 Greenby 07 53 08’6 69’0 Hornby 08 61 10’0 79’0 Lancaster 07 68 09’7 88’7 Yorkshire and Lancashire include the whole Road; and the Owse, Nyd, Wharf, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Are, Wenning and Hartlebeck, are the principal Rivers crost over; the Road in ge∣neral is but bad, yet it is in part recompenc'd by the Goodness of the Towns and Entertainment you meet with in most Places. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At the End of YORK the Left to LON∣DON. At 9’4. The Right to Boroughbriggs. At 13’2. The Right forward. At 13’7. The Right to Boroughbriggs. At 23’0. In Ripley the Right to Rippon. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 25’4. The Left to Leeds. At 42’0. The Right to Eastby. At 76’4. The Right acute. SEtting forward from YORK, you omit the direct Way to LONDON, YORK, W. b. N. [1’5. N. W.] [12’4. N. b. W.] and bearing to the Right, pass by Ackham, Knapton, Rufford, Heslow, and Moor-Monkton, Villages, and Woolstrap Hall on the Left, Popleton, Overton, Nun-Monk∣ton Chapel and Hall on the Right; and at 8’4. over Skip Bridg cross the River Nyd; and then pass by Kirk-Hamerton, Cuthall and Hopperton on the Left, and Green Hamer∣ton on the Right, where you omit the Road on the Right to Boroughbriggs, &c. and come at 13’1. to Allerton, a Village of some Accomodation; Allerton, 13’1. [13’7. W.] Flasky, 14’4. where you fall in with the LONDON Road to Barwick, &c. and bearing to the Left, you pass through Flaskey a little Village at 14’4. and leave Goulsburgh Church and Hall on the Left, and at 17’5. arrive at Knaresburgh vulgo Knasbrough, of above 3 Furlongs Extent, Knaresburgh, 18 M. N. W. Seated on the River Nyd and on a Rock; It is strengthned with a Castle, Is a Corporation sending Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a good Market for Corn, &c. on Wednsdays. From Knasbrough, you have the River Nyd accompanying you near the Road on the Left, for several Miles together, and passing by Beeton Hall on the Left, Skooton a Village, and Nid Church and Hall on the Right, and by some Lime-pits, are brought at 22’6. to Ripley, of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, Ripley, 23 M. S.W.b.W. Seated likewise on the Nyd, and enjoys a Market on Fridays. Leaving Ripley, you pass by Clynte a Village on the Right, and at 24’6. over Hansworth Bridg cross the aforesaid Nyd, Hamsworth, 25’2. and 2 Furlongs farther enter Hempsthwate or Hamsworth, a long disperst Village; at the End whereof you come upon Grafes Plain Moor, having several discontinued Houses on the Right and Left, [27’6. W.] and passing over Keskin Moor, you leave East-End Houses and Straling both Villages on the Left, and two long Posts on the Right. Hence, descending and ascending, you pass by Foyston Church, Swinsley Hall, and Bluborrow Houses on the Left, come at 32’1. to cross the River Washburn, your Road continuing over Keskin Moor, little offering it self but an Hilly Way, and and a Pole on the Left, till at 36’4. you pass through Somer-Scales, Somerscales, 36’4. Hessel, 37’3. and 7 Fur∣longs farther, Hessel, both small Villages, your Way continuing Hilly, you pass by Sturry a Village, and some Alms-Houses on the Right, Derriston a Village, Beamsley
Hall and Hoober Hill Beacon on the Left, Boulton, 38’7. are brought at 38’6. to Boulton a small Village, yet affording Entertainment to Travellers; where you cross the River Wharf; then ascending some Hills, you leave Haughton a Village on the Right, and at 42’5. pass through Skybeden a discontinued Village; Skybden, 42’5. where ascending an Hill, you have Haugh Park the Countess of Pembrokes, accompanying your Road for a Mile toge∣ther on the Right, Skipton, 45 M. N. W. and at 44’6. enter Skipton in Craven, a Market-Town, [as in LONDON to Oakham, pag. 97.] At the End of Skipton you ascend an Hill, and presently cross a Vale, and then descend 4 Furlongs; Sturton, 46’5. Tholby, 47 Miles. at the Bottom whereof you pass through Sturton, and 2 Fur∣longs farther, Tholby, both small Villages; an indifferent straight Way conveying you by Elston-Cragg Hill on the Right, Conyston, 52 M.W.b.N. and Gargrave Church on the Left, over an Ascent and Descent, at 52 Miles to Coniston a Village of 4 Furlongs Extent, in which, over a Stone-Bridg you cross the River Are; thence ascending and descend∣ing, Hellifield-Pele, 55’2. N.W.b.N. you pass through Hellifield Pele at 55’2. and a Chapel and 8 Alms-Houses on the Right at 56’5. and 3 Furlongs farther, crossing a Stone-Bridg and Brook, you enter Long Preston, Long Preston, 57’4. a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; at the End whereof you enter a Moor, and ascend an Hill of 10 Furlongs height, and presently descend again 8 Furlongs, Settle, 60’2. at the Bottom of which you enter Settle, a Town of good Accomodation, enjoying a Market on Tuesdays. At the End where∣of, Gigleswick, 61 M. over a Stone-Bridg you cross the Ribble, and enter Gigleswick, a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment; of Note formerly for several small Springs here found, that Ebb and Flow almost every quarter of an Hour. Leaving Gigleswick, you ascend an Hill of 8 Furlongs, and descend again 4 Furl. and pass by a Village, and Lakeland Hall on the Left, Yokeland and Austwick, Villages on the Right, and crossing a Brook, you ascend and descend, and at 67’5. pass through Clapham a small Village, Clapham, 67’5. W.b.N Greenby, 69 Miles. where crossing a Brook and Rill, you ascend an Hill, and at 69 Miles leave Greenby a Village contiguous on the Right, and enter on a Moor; [75 M. W. S. W.] Wennington, 75’5. Tatham, 76 Miles. Hence, at 75 Miles you descend an Hill and enter Lancashire, and pass through Wennington and Tatham, both Villages; leaving Tatham Hall on the Left, and the Church on the Right, and pass through the Lord Morley's Park, and enter Hornby, Hornby, 79 Miles. a Town of 4 Furlongs, Seated on the Wenning, a Branch of the Lune: It hath the Ruines of a decay'd Castle, and an indifferent good Market on Mondays. Leaving Hornby, Farlton, 80’2. Claughton, 81 M. Caton, 83’4. you pass through Farlton a small Village, and ascending and des∣cending enter Claughton a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent, leaving the Hall on the Left; then you pass by a part of Caton, and descending an Hill, leave the Church on the Left, [85’6. S. b. W.] and over a Stone-Bridg crossing the Hartlebek, pass through another Part of Caton, and by a Wood on the Left, ascend and descend, and pass through a small Park, Book, 86’2. Lancaster, 88’7. and by Book a Village on the Right, are convey'd at 88’4. to Lancaster, a Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, [as in LONDON to CARLISLE, pag. 73.] Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. At the End of Hornby the Left to Kirby Launsdale. 2. A Furlong from Hellifield Pele the Left acute. 3. 2 Furlongs from Skipton, the Left forward. 4. Against Bluborrow Houses the forward to Pateley Briggs. 5. 2 Furlongs from Ripley, the Right to Leeds. 6. At the End of Allerton, the Right forward to Wetherby.
The Road from YORK to West-CHESTER By JOHN OGISBY Esq His Ma.ties Cosmographer. Containing 106. Miles 4. Furl: vizt. From YORK to Tadcaster 9 Miles 6 Furl: to Thorner 8’1. to Leeds 7’1 to Burstall 7’0 to Ealand 8’2 to Rochedale 14’6 to Manchester 12’6 to Eccles 45 & to Warrington Ending Plate ye 1st. 13’7. with a branch From Manchester to Derby Terminating Plate the Second 55’4
The Road from York to West-Chester. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. S. W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 86 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 74 M. 4. The Dimensuration 106 M. From YORK Comp. Measure. to Tadcaster 08 08 09’6 09’6 Thorner 06 14 08’1 17’7 Leeds 06 20 07’1 25’0 Burstal 05 25 07’0 32’0 Ealand 05 30 08’2 40’2 Rochdale 10 40 14’6 55’0 to Manchester 08 48 12’6 067’6 Eccles 04 52 04’5 072’3 Warrington 10 62 13’7 086’2 Frodsham 06 68 09’4 095’6 CHESTER 06 74 10’6 106’4   74   106’4   From Manchester Comp. Measure. to Stopford 05 05 06’4 06’4 Shaucrass 08 13 11’0 17’4 Buckston 05 18 05’5 23’1 to Brassington 12 30 16’3 39’4 Weston-Underwood 06 36 09’4 49’0 Derby 04 40 06’4 55’4 Yorkshire, Lancash. and Chesh. contain the Road, and Lancashire, Chesh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. and Der∣bysh. the Branch; and the Owse, Wharf, Are, Calder, Roch, Irk, Irwel, Mersey, We∣ver, Medlock and Lathkel, are the chief Rivers crost over; which in general is no good Road, yet is in part recompenc'd by the good Entertainment you meet with in the Towns you pass through. THUS much in general for the whole Road, which consisting in two Plates, the First ending at Warrington, and the Second at CHESTER: We begin with Plate the First; wherein you are to avoid these following Turnings. At 6 Furlongs the Right to Barwick. 1’1. The Right to Green Hamerton. 7 M. The Right the Street-way to Tad∣caster. 10’4. The Left, the Road to LONDON At 14’2. The Left forward. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 24’6. The Right forward in Leeds. 55’3. The Left to Oldam. 67’3. The Left to Ashton. 70’0. The Right forward to Bolton. FRom YORK to Tadcaster, you have the Account [in LONDON to Barwick, YORK, S. W. Tadcaster, 9’6. W. pag. 13.] where crossing the Wharf, you omit the forward Way to LONDON, and bearing to the Right, leave Newton and Bramham and some Woods on the same Hand, and come at 17’4. to Thorner a long discontinued Village, Thorner, 17’7. S.W. b. S. and pass by Kid Hall on the Left; then you pass over Winmoor, and leave Red Hall the Seat of Sr. John Savil on the Right, and at 21’1. Secroft, 21’1. W.S.W. pass through Secroft a scattering Village with an Inn or two in it; thence by some Coal-Pits, Kirk-gate-Lees, 24 M. Leeds, 25 Miles. and the White Horse Inn on the Right, are brought at 24 Miles to Kirk-gate-Lees a small Village, and 4 Furlongs farther descending Worril Hill, you enter Leeds, extending a Mile on the Road, It is Seated on the Are; is a well-built and well-inhabited Town Corporate, Govern'd by a Mayor, Aldermen, &c. hath Privilege of sending Burgesses to Parliament, and enjoys two Markets weekly, on Tuesdays and Saturdays, which are well furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions and great quantities of Cloth. Leaving Leeds, you pass by Humlet Hall on the Left, and Holbeck alias Hunslet, a Village, and Beeston Chapel and Hall on the Right, Cheruhil, 27’7. and by several disperst Houses are brough at 27’7. to Cheruhil a small Village; then by Morley Church and Hall on the Left, Gilderson a Village, and the Quakers Sepulture on the Right, Bruncliff, 29’5. come at 29’5. to Bruncliff another small Village; whence descending Holdenclough Hill, you leave some Coal-Pits and Atherton a Village on the Right, Burstal, 32 Miles. Heton Green, 33’5. and at 32 Miles pass through Burstal a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Gumersel at 32’4. Heton Green at 33’5. both small Villages, leaving Little Gumersel and Long Leversage on the Left,
and crossing Herchet Moor, Clifton, 36’4. S.S.W. you pass through Clifton a little Village at 36’4. and at 37’3. over Brighurst Bridg you cross the River Calder. Hence, Rastrick, 38’2. [38’4. W.] Ealand, 40’2. by Toothil on the Left, and Rastrick a Village contiguous on the same Hand, leaving Cromwel Hall on the Right, come at 39 Miles to descend Ealand or Yellen Edg, and at 40 Miles pass through Ealand vulgo Yellen, a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment, [42’4. W. S. W.] where leaving the Hall on the Left, you a Mile farther cross Gretland Bridg, and by several disperst Houses, leave Gretland and Bra∣dle Houses, and Barsand a Village on the Left, and Sorby a Village on the Right, crossing a Moor you descend Barsand Bank, Ripponden, 44’3. and at 44’3. pass through Riponden a small Village: Hence your Way is very Hilly, little occuring but passing by Thrum Hall and Battings Inn on the Left, till at 47’2. you ascend Blackstone Edg a great Eminence, at the Top whereof you enter Lancashire, and descend again 14 Fur∣longs your Way continuing Hilly, you cross Windy Bank. At 51’4. Littleborough. 51’4. you pass through Littleborough a small Village, and leave Colderman, Star∣ing, Wardle, Hulsted, Great Clay, Hamer and Wadleworth Houses all successively on the Right; Howard Hall, Studshaw a Village, Short and Belford Houses on the Left; and at 54’6. Rochdale, 55 Miles. S. W. b. S. enter Rochdale of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; It is Seated on the River Roch, and hath a good Market on Tuesdays for all sorts of Provisions. Leaving Rochdale, you descend an Hill and pass by Gold Lane House and Castleton Hall on the Left, cross Sudden Bridg and Castleton Moor, and at 57’6. have Smithi∣ford a little Village contiguous on the Right; then by Stanrucly House, Hopway Hall and Hebers a small Village on the Right, Midleton, 66’4. are brought at 60’4. to Midleton a Village, where you have a House of Sr. Robert Ashtons on the Left. Hence, the River Irk accompanies your Road on the Left for several Miles to∣gether, leaving Ockinton House, and Blackley Chapel on the other side the River, Smedly a Village, Henton, 63’5. and Collyhurst Hall on this side, and pass through Henton a small Village at 63’5. [64’1. S.] leaving the Hall on the Right, and passing by Chetham Green, leave Dr. Prideock's House on the same Hand; then descending an Hill, you cross the foresaid Irk and enter Manchester, Manchester, 67’6. W. b. S. commodiously seated between the Irk and Irwel; It is a Town of great Antiquity, was a Station of the Romans, and call'd by Anto∣nine the Emperor, Mancunium; It is at present a large, well-built and well-inhabited Town, enjoying a considerable Trade, is Beautify'd with a fair College, Market-Place, and Collegiat Church; Is Dignify'd with the Title of an Earldom, in the Person of the Right Honorable Robert Montague Earl of Manchester, &c. and its Mar∣ket which is on Saturdays is very considerable. Leaving Manchester, Pendleton, 70’4. Eccles, 72’3. S.W.b.W. you pass through Oldfield, Lane-Houses, Pendleton Green, Pen∣dleton and Brewer-Lane, all small Villages, and come at 72’2. to Eccles a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment. From Eccles, you have first the Irwel, and second the Mersey accompanying your Road on the Left to Warrington; Caddished, 78’4. W. first passing through Erlow, Erlow Green, Caddishead, Hollin Green and Fistleton Green, all small Villages; leaving Mixby Hall Mr. Lee's House, Chat-Moss, Ouson-Moss, Ouson Hall and Birch Hall, all successively on the Right; Barton, Barton Hall, Benclows, Flixton, Raxon and Mascrats, all on the Left, and passing through Church-Street, Warrington, 86’2. are brought at 86 Miles to Warrington, a large and well-built Town, Seated on the River Mersey, drives an indifferent good Trade, and hath a well-furnish'd Market on Wednsdays for Corn, Cattel, Linnen-Cloth, &c. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. In Erlow Green the Right acute. 2. 6 Furlongs short of Eccles the Left to Bolton. 3. 2 Furlongs from Chetham Green the Right acute. 4. In Burstal the Left to Bradforth. 5. At the End of Thorner the Left to Wetherby. 6. 6 Furlongs short of Ring-Houses the Right to Bishops Thorp.
The Continuation of the Road From YORK to West-CHESTER By JOHN OGJLBY Esq, His Ma.ties Cosmographr. Plate ye 2d. and last Commencing at Warrington in LANCASH: and Extending to CHESTER aforesd. 20. Mil: 2. Furl: viz. From Warrington to Frodsham 9’4. thence to ye City of CHESTER 20’6 Complcated by the Branch from Manchester to Derby 55’4 viz From Manchester to Stockport 6’2. to Disley Deyn 6’4. to Buxton 10’3 to Lathkel fluv. 6’7. to Brassinton 9’4 to Weston Underwood 9’4 & to Derby 6’4.
The Continuation of the Road From YORK to West-CHESTER. PLATE. II & Last. Commencing at Warrington in Lancashire, and Extending to CHESTER aforesaid. Containing 20 Miles 2 Furlongs. Compleated by a Branch from Manchester to Derby. Wherein these following Turnings are to be avoided. At 87’3. The Left to LONDON. At 89 Miles the Right to Norton. At 91’7. In Stockham the Left to Dutton Hall. At 92’7. The Left acute. At 99’3. The Right acute. At 100’5. The Left acute. At 103’3. The Left to Mickle Traford. In the Branch between Manchester and Derby. At 6 Furlongs the Right to Didsbury. At 2’2. The Left acute. At 7 Miles the Right to Bramer Hall. At 8’2. The Left acute At 9’6. The Right acute At 16’3. The Left to Chapel Frith. At 22’6. The Left acute. At 25’4. The Left to Chelmerton. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 26’0. The Right acute. At 28’0. The Right acute. At 45’0. The Left to Nether Biggin. At 45’5. The Left to Turnich. At 50’4. The Left to Little Ireton. At 54’6. The Right to Little Ore. IN Plate the First We brought you to Warrington, at the End whereof, Warington, S. b. E. over a Stone-Bridg you cross the Mersey and enter Cheshire, 5 Furlongs beyond which, [87’3. S. W.] you omit the forward Way to LONDON, and bear to the Right, and at 88 M. Lower Walton, 88 M. leaving Grapnee a small Village on the Left, you pass through Lower Walton a little Village, and at the End over a Stone-Bridg cross a Brook, Higher Walton, 88’6. and leave Walton Hall on the Left; then at 88’6. you pass through Higher Walton, and a Furlong beyond cross Fenners Brook, and leaving Walton a Village on the Left, Hollanedg House, Moor and Kegwick 2 Villages on the Right, cross Thurshaugh Brook, and at 90’6. Daresbury, 90’6. pass through Daresbury a small Village, and descending a little Hill, leave Norton a small Village on the Right, and Newton, and Hallow Hall on the Left. At 91’6. you enter Stockham a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Stockham, 91’7. W.SW. at the End where∣of you descend a small Hill, and 4 Furlongs farther another, leaving Haulton Ca∣stle some distance on the Right; then by the Sarazens-Head Inn on the Right, Sutton, 93’7. and Rock-Savage a House at some distance on the same Hand, pass through Sutton a dis∣perst Village; and leaving Ashton Hall on the Left, Frodsham, 95’6. come at 95 Miles to cross the Wever over a Bridg, and 4 Furlongs farther to enter Frodsham alias Froddesham of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; an indifferent good Town, strengthned with a Castle, and enjoying a Market on Wednsdays. Leaving Frodsham, you pass by the Castle on the Left, and at 96’3. Netherton, 96’4. enter Ne∣therton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; and passing by Gods Croft House, Helshy and Wimble Staffod two small Villages, all on the Right; Woodhouses, Aulney and Dunham on the Mount, three Villages, and Morley Hall, all on the Left; Traford, 102’1. and crossing Haps∣ford Bridg, come at 102 Miles to Traford a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation; at the End whereof you cross a Bridg and small River, and pass by Picton and Newton 2 Villages, and Cosbrook Hall, all on the Right; Pleinstow Church, Mickle Traford and Howe, two Villages on the Left, CHESTER, 106’4. and are convey'd at 106’1. to the City of West-CHESTER, [the Description whereof you have in LON∣DON to Holyhead, pag. 45.]
In the Road between Manchester and Derby. SEtting forward from Manchester, Manchester, S. b. E. you first cross a Brook and ascend Bank Top, an Hill so call'd; then over a Bridg cross Medlock fluv. and passing over Hard∣wick Green, leave Ancots Hall on the Left, and at two Miles pass through Grim∣low a small Village; Grimlow, 2 Miles. whence crossing several small Waters or Rills, you pass by Slead Hall on the Right, and Gorton Chapel, and Reddish Hall, both on the Left; and at 4’2. Blakebrook, 4’2. Heaton, 5 Miles. Stopford, 6’4. you pass through Blakebrook, and 6 Furlongs farther Heaton, both small Villages, and leave Bradstone Hall on the Left; then ascending and descending Man∣chester Hill, you enter Stokfort alias Stopford, a Town of 5 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; Seated on the Mersey, where you enter Cheshire; It enjoyeth a considerable Market for Corn, &c. on Fridays. Leaving Stopford, [9’6. E. b. S.] you pass by Swetmans, Miles-End, and Besmore Halls, and Bul∣locks Smithy Inn on the Left, and Brewers Green on the Right, and come at 10’4. to Hessel Grave a small Village; Hessel Grave, 10’4. Disley Dean, 12’6. S. S. E. then by a Wood, and Lime Hall on the Right, ascending a small Hill, are brought at 12’6. to Disley Dean a little Village; thence you ascend an Hill at 13’3. which is seconded 5 Furl. farther with another call'd Long Side Hill; and passing by Mr. Jodrel's House, and Erdley Hall on the Left, descending a small Hill at 15’1. you 4 Furlongs farther pass through Wheley-Lane Head a small Village, and at 16’3. come to cross the River Goyte over a Stone-Bridg, where you enter Derbyshire. Hence crossing a Brook, Shaucras, 17’4. you pass by Taxhal a Village, and Shaucras Hall and Church, all on the Right, Buckston, 23’1. and ascending an Hill, pass by several great Rocks, and come at 23 Miles to Buckston of 2 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment, at the Entrance whereof on the Right Hand, under a fair Stone Building, ariseth 9 Springs out of a Rock, within the compass of 8 Yards, 8 of which are Warm, and the other very Cold; these, about 60 Paces from their Rise receive another hot Spring, and a little farther another very Cold, which Waters are accounted very good for the Stomach and Sinews: Leaving Buckston, you pass by Taxal Hall and Hurdlow a Village on the Right, Fairfield and Chelmerton Churches, and Flag-Houses a Village, all on the Left, and over a small Hill, come at 30 Miles to cross the River Lathkel. Hence, [39 Miles S.] you pass by Moneash Church, Pikeham and Pipers Inn, all on the Left, and by a long Wall on the Right, and over repeated Ascents, are brought at 39 Miles to a Descent, Brassington, 39’4. at the Bottom whereof you enter Brassington, a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment: Leaving which, you have Carston a Vil∣lage at some distance on the Left; Hognaston, 42’3. S. S. E. and passing over Hognaston Winne, an Hill so call'd, you are lead through a Village of the same Name: At the End whereof you descend again, and crossing a Brook, pass 3 repeated Ascents, and leave Hol∣land a Village, and Mugginton Church on the Right, and Upper Biggin, Neather Big∣gin and Turndich, all small Villages on the Left, and come at 49 Miles to Weston Underwood, Weston Ʋnderwood, 49 Miles. Kedleston, 51’6. a little Village with an Inn or two in it; thence by Mircaston a Village on the Right, are convey'd through Kedleston at 51’6. a Village of 2 Furlongs Ex∣tent; at the End whereof you have Sr. John Curson's House on the Right, and a Park on the Left: Hence you pass by Maikworth on the Right, Quarn Chapel and Allestry on the Left, Derby, 55’4. and at 55 Miles enter Derby, a Corporation, Market and Shire-Town, [as in LONDON to Derby, pag. 79.] Backward Turnings to be avoided between Derby and Manchester. 1. A Mile beyond Weston Underwood the Left acute. 2. 1’1. Beyond Hognaston the R. to Carston. 3. At the entring Shaucrass the Left acute. 4. In Heaton the Right to Bradstone Hall. Between CHESTER and Warrington. 1. In Frodsham the Right acute. 2. A Furl. beyond Stockham the L. forward.
The Roads from CARMARTHEN to CARDIGAN CARDIGAN to LLANBEDER & in Com̄ Cardigan LLANBEDER to ABERISTWITH in Com̄ Cardigan By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r his Maties Cosmograph.r The st Containing 26 Miles. 0. Furlongs (viz) From Carmarthen to Killrah-Killreaden 14. 0. & to Cardigan 12. 0 The 2d Containing 27 Miles 7 Furlongs (viz) From Cardigan to Tredrair. 10. 0. to Red: Owen. 8. 1. & to Llanbeder 9. 6. The 3d Containing 23 Miles 4 Furlongs (viz) From Llanbeder to Tallasavern 7 2 to Llanrisse 8. 5. & to Aberist: with 7. 5.
IN the Preceding Part, having Illustrated the Direct Roads under the Title of Independants and Dependants, and the Cross Roads which fell under the Title of Principal or Cross Inde∣pendants: We come now to to the later Part of the Cross Roads, which We call Accidentals, that is, such Roads that are not in Direct Line, but Comprize either Two or Three Horizontal Bearings, of which, in Alphabetical Order, We first Present you with The Roads from Carmarthen to Cardigan, Cardigan to Llanbeder, and Llanbeder to Aberistwith, in Cardiganshire.   Cardigan. Llanbeder. Aberistwith. 1. THE Points of Bearing N.W. b. N. E. N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 21 M. 23 M. 18 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 18 M. 20 M. 15 M. 4. The Dimensurations 26 M. 27’7. 23’4. Table of Computation and Dimensuration. From Carmarthen Comp. Measure. to Killvah-Killreaden 10 10 14 14 Cardigan 08 18 12 26 From Cardigan Comp. Measure. to Tredraier 08 08 10’0 10’0 Red Owen 06 14 08’1 18’1 to Lanbeder 08 20 09’6 27’7   20   27’7   From Llanbeder Comp. Measure. to Tallasavern 5 05 07’2 07’2 Llanrusted 5 10 08’5 15’7 to Aberistwith 5 15 07’5 23’4   15   23’4   Carmarthenshire and Cardigansh. contain the Roads; and the Tivy, Kerry, Dittor, Avon, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Wustwith and Ridal, are the principal Rivers crost over; the Road to Cardigan being Boggy and Mountainous, to Llanbeder something better; thence to Aberistwith bad a∣gain, and not affording any Accomodation except at Carmarthen, Cardigan, Llanbeder, and Aberistwith, the Roads between those Places scarcely admitting of the Least Re∣freshment to Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided between Carmarthen and Cardigan. At the end of Carmarthen the Left to Haver∣ford West. At 9’4. The Right to New-Castle in Emlyn. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 22’7. The Left to St. Dagmels. Between Cardigan and Llanbeder. At 7 Furl. the Right to New-Castle in Emlyn. At 11’3. The Left to Aberistwith. At 17’2. The Right to Llandissel. At 20’4. The Right to Llanwennock. Between Llanbeder and Aberistwith. At 5 Furlongs the Left to Silian. At 2’7. The Right to Tregaron. At 3’2. The Right to Tregaron. At 16’5. The Right to Llanyler.
SEtting forward from Carmarthen, Carmarthen, N.N.W. [3’3. N. W. b. W.] [the Account of which you have in Prestain to Carmar∣then, pag. 167.] you omit the forward Way on the Left to Haverford West, and bear∣ing to the Right, ascend at 5 Furlongs, and cross a Vale and 2 Rills, then you again ascend and cross another Vale, and in the Bottom a Rill, your Way being generally open, indiffe∣rently Arable and Pasture; at 3’5. you ascend an Hill of 4 Furlongs, and leave Llanell∣with Church some distance on the Left; [9’4. W.] at 6 Miles you cross a Brook in a Vale, whence your Road is generally Heathy, Boggy and Hilly; little else occurring, but crossing some small Waters or Rills, till at 12’6. you come to a Cross-Road leading from Haverford West to Newcastle in Emlyn, where at a long Stone you enter Pembrokeshire. Hence crossing 2 Rills you come at 14 M. Killvah-Killreaden 14 m N.W. Velindra, 16’3. to Killvah-Killreaden a small Village, and at 16’3. in a large Vale cross a Brook, and pass through Velindra a little disperst Village, at 18 M. you descend 4 Furlongs, your Way being generally open Arable, and crossing 5 small Waters or Rills, [23 M. N.N.W.] are brought at 23 M. to Bridel, where you omit the forward Way on the Left to St. Dogmel, and bearing to the Right, presently bear again to the Left, omitting the forward Way on the Right to Kilgaron; and having a great Hill or Mountain accompany∣ing your Road on the Left for 2 M. together, brings you at 25’4. to a Descent, at the Bot∣tom whereof, over a fair Stone-bridg you cross the Tivy, and at once enter Cardiganshire, and the Town of Cardigan, [the Account of which you have in the Road from St. Davids to Holy∣wel, pag. 131.] In the Road from Cardigan to Llanbeder. FRom Cardigan you have the River Tivy accompanying your Road for a Mile together on the Right, Cardigan, E. N. E. [5’4. E. b. S.] at 1’2. you have Penneralt Church on the same Hand; then by some disperst Houses, are brought at 3 M. to cross a Brook in a Vale, your Way being generally open Arable, at 5’4. you descend 3 Furl. and crossing 3 small Waters or Rills, come at 8’6 to Ponterodin, Tredraier, 10 Miles. the Seat of Esq Lewis, on the Right, and descending an Hill, pass through Tredrair at 10 Miles a little Village, where you ascend 5 Furlongs. At 13 Miles, [13’2. N.E. b. N. you in a Vale cross a Brook, and at 15’4. in another Vale cross a part of the Dettor, and crossing a 3d. Vale, come at 17’4. to Ponter-David, a House or two on the Left so call'd, Red-Owen, 18’1. and at 38’1. to Red-Owen, another House or two on the Left; where, over a Stone-bridg you cross the other Part of the Dettor; whence an open Way brings you to descend an Hill of 7 Furlongs, [21 Miles, E. N. E.] where you leave Llanwennock Church on the Right, and cro∣ssing 2 Brooks, 24’4. E. b. S.] leave Llanunnen Church at 25 M. a little distant on the Left, and again cro∣ssing several small Waters, by a Stone, and Mr. Evans House on the Right, and some dis∣perst Houses, Llanbeder, 27’7. come at 27’5. to the Entrance of Llanbeder or Llanbeder-Pont-Steffan, a Mar∣ket-town, [as in Monmouth to Llanbeder, pag. 153.] In the Road from Llanbeder to Aberistwith. PRoceeding from the Market-place in Llanbeder, Llanbeder, N.N.E. you omit the forward Way on the R. to Llannimdofry, [1’7. N.N.W.] &c. and bearing to the Left, pass by Sr. Francis Lloyd's House on the Right, 4’5. W.N.W.] and a Forest on the Left; then omitting the forward Way on the Right to Tregaron, you bear again to the Left, and passing by several disperst Houses on the Road, come at 2’3 to an Ascent of 5 Furl. which is seconded with a Descent of 14 Furl. at 6 Miles you pass through Llanleir a small Village, Llanleir, 6 Miles. [6’4. N.] Velindra, 7’2. and 6 Furlongs farther over a Wooden-bridg crossing the Aron, you pass through Trevilan or Velindra, along disperst Village. At 7’7. [13 Miles N.N.W.] you ascend an Hill of 11 Furl. and descend again 9 Furl. and passing by several scatter'd Houses, and crossing some small Waters or Rills, your Way being generally Hea∣thy and Hilly, Llanrusted, 15’7. N. b. E. conveys you at 16 M. by Llanrusted Church, and Esq Herbert's House on the Left, where you ascend an Hill of 2 M. in height, and pass by Llanyler Church on the Right; at 19’1. you descend 19 Furl. and at 22’4. cross the Wustwith, and 6 Furl. farther over a Stone-Bridg of 8 Arches cross the River Ridal, and enter Aberistwith a Market and Port-Town, Aberistwith, 23’4. [as in LONDON to Aberistwith pag. 5.] Backward Turnings to be avoided between Aberistwith and Llanbeder. 1. At the End of Aberistwith over the Bridg, the Left to Rosefair. 2. A Furl. short of Esq Herbert's the Right to Llanrusted and Cardigan. Between Llanbeder and Cardigan. 1. 2 Furl. from Lanbeder the Right acute. 2. 12 Furl. beyond Llanbeder to Llanumbether Between Cardigan and Carmarthen. 1. At the End of Cardigan the Left to Haver∣ford West. 2. 1’4. Short of Velindra the Left to Capel Eavan.
The Roads from CHELMSFORD in ESSEX to St. EDMONDS-BURY in SUEFOLK & to SAFFRON-WALDEN in ESSEX By IOHN OGILBY Esqr. His Ma.ties Cosmographer the First Containing 43 mile 3 Furlongs vizt. From Chelmsford to Braintry. 11. to Sudbury. 14.2 to Lancham. 6.4. and to Sedmonds Bury. 11.5 the 2d Containing. 27. mile. 3. Furlongs vizt From Chelmsford to Dunmow. 12.6. to Thaxsted. 7. and to Saffron Walden. 7.5.
The Roads from Chelmsford in Essex To St. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk, and Saffron-Waldon in Essex.   Bury. Walden. 1. THE Points of Bearing N. N.W.b.N. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 35 M. 25 M. 3. The vulgar Computations 35 M. 22 M. 4. The Dimensurations 43’3. 27’3. From Chelmsford Comp. Measure. to Braintry 09 09 11’0 11’0 Sudbury 12 21 14’2 25’2 to Lavenham 05 26 06’4 31’6 St. Edmondsbury 09 35 11’5 43’3 From Chelmsford Comp. Measure. to Dunmow 10 10 12’6 12’6 Thaxted 06 16 07’0 19’6 Saffron-Walden 06 22 07’5 27’3 Essex and Suffolk contain the Roads; and the Chelmer, Blackwater, Coln and Stour, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general an indifferent good Road, and in most Places convenient Towns for Entertainment of Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided between Chelmsford and St. Edmonds-Bury. At 4 Furl. the Left to the Roodings. At 4’1. The Left to Dunmow. At 13’5. The Left to Gosfield. At 18’2. The Left to the Maplesteds. At 22’7. The Left forward. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 29’1. The Right acute. At 37’0. The Left forward. At 40’2. The Left acute. Between Chelmsford and Saffron-Walden. At 4 Furl. the Left to the Roodings. At 4 M. The Right to Braintry. At 5’7. The Right to Braintry. At 7’3. The Right acute. At 15’4. The Right acute. At 16’1. The Left acute. At 16’4. The Right to Stebbing. At 17’3. The Right to Lynsey. At 19’7. The Left acute. At 20’1. The Right to Hempsted. At 24’4. The Left acute. At 24’6. The Right to Wimbush. SEtting forward from Chelmsford, Chelmsford, W.N.W. [4 Furl. N.] you omit the forward Way on the Left to Rooding, and bearing to the Right, have a Branch of the Chelmer accompany∣ing your Road for several Miles together on the Right; and passing by Brumfeld Church on the Left, cross the said Branch at 4’2. [4’1. N. E.] and leave Little Waltham Church on the Right; then by a Wood on the same Hand, crossing two Rills, you leave Great Leighs and St. Ann's on the Right, and Little Leighs on the Left; and passing through a Wood at 8’3. come at 10’6. to Braintry, Braintry, 11 Miles. a Town extending six Fur∣longs on the Road; Is Seated on the Blackwater, and enjoys a good Market for Corn and Provisions on Wednsdays. Leaving Braintry, you cross the Blackwater aforesaid, and passing through some Woods, come at 16’5. to Halsted, a Town of six Furlongs Extent, Halsted, 17 Miles. Seated on the Coln, which divides it in the Midst; It hath a good Market on Fridays for Corn, &c. At the End of Halsted you have Boy's Hall on the Right; whence you pass through a Village at 20 Miles, and by a Wood on the Right at 20’6. and another on the Left at 22’4. Then crossing Bulmer Green, you pass by a Wood, [21’3. N.] [22’7. N. E.] and Bulmer Church on the Left, descending an Hill at 24’2. at the Bottom whereof you
enter Ballington Street, where crossing the Stour, you at once enter the County of Suffolk and Town of Sudbury; Sudbury, 25’2. N. It is an Antient Town, and suppos'd to have been formerly the Shire-Town, being still one of the Arch-Deaconries; It is indifferent large, well Built and well Inhabited, containing three Parish-Churches, It drives a considerable Trade in Sayes, and is Govern'd by a Mayor, Recorder, seven Al∣dermen, a Bailiff, Twenty four Burgesses, &c. Sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a well provided Market on Saturdays: It was formerly of Note for It's Priory of Black Monks. Proceeding from Sudbury, [28’4. N.N.E.] you pass by Chilton Park, and Great and Little Walling∣field Churches on the Right, and Acton on the Left, and by several disperst Houses, are convey'd at 31’6. Lavenham, 31’6. to Lavenham or Levenham, an indifferent large Town, Seated on a Branch of the Bretton: It hath a fair Church and Steeple, and a good Mar∣ket on Thursdays. Leaving the Town, you again pass by several disperst Houses, your Road being very Woody, [37 Miles N. E.] crossing several small Waters or Brooks, are convey'd by Cockfield and Felsham Churches on the Right, and Pepper's House on the Left; at 37’4. to Bradfield a little Village; Bradfield, 37’4. [39’2. N.] then by Monk Bradfield, and Little Waltham on the Right, a Chapel without a Steeple, an old ruin'd Priory, Great Waltham, and Nowton Churches on the Left, and by several scattering Houses, and a Stream running in the Road, are brought at 42’6. St. Edmonds-Bury, 43’3. to Bury or St. Edmonds Bury, a large Corporation and Market Town, [as in LONDON to Wells and Bury, pag. 103.] In the Road from Chelmsford to Saffron-Walden. BEginning at Chelmsford, Chelmsford, W. N. W. [4 Furl. N.] you proceed the first four Miles as you did in the Road to St. Edmonds-Bury; whence bearing to the Left, you pass by Langley's House on the Right, [4 Miles N. N. W.] [7’3. N. W.] Dunmow, 12’6. and Great Waltham Church on the Left, an irregular Road leads you by a little Park, and Black Chapel on the Right, and crossing several Rills, and pass∣ing by several disunited Houses, are brought at 12’4. to Dunmow or Dunmawg, q. d. Collis foecundus, of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation; Is an antient and large Town, pleasantly and commodiously Seated on an easie Ascent; was of Note formerly for It's Priory, and hath at present a good Market for Corn, &c. on Saturdays. Leaving Dunmow, [16 Miles N.] Thaxted, 19’6. N. W. b. N. you pass by Great Easton Church and Hall on the Left, and crossing a Rill, come at 19’3. to Thaxted, extending near 6 Furlongs on the Road; is a large Mayor-Town, and enjoys a small Market on Fridays. Whence little occurs, but passing through a small Wood, till at 27’1. you enter Walden alias Saffron-Walden, Saffron-Walden, 27’3. Seated on an Ascent amongst delightful Fields of Saffron; It is a large, well-built, and well Inhabited Town-Corporate, enjoying several Immunities, and is Govern'd by a Treasurer, two Chamberlains, and the Com∣monnalty; and hath a very great Market on Saturdays, well-furnish'd with all sorts of Provisions; It was of Note formerly for it's famous Castle and Abby Built by the Magnavilles. Backward Turnings to be avoided between Saffron-Waldon and Chelmsford. 1. At the End of Saffron-Walden the Left to Ashdon. 2. 3 Furlongs beyond the Left to Ashdon. 3. 2’2. Beyond Saffron-Waldon the Left to Wimbish. 4. 3 M. Short of Thaxted, the Right acute. 5. At the end of Thaxted the L. to Bradfield. 6. 9 Furlongs beyond Black Chapel the Right to Plesley. 7. 3 Furlongs short of Great Waltham the Right forward. 8. 2 Furlongs short of Chelmsford the Right forward. Between St. Edmonds-Bury and Chelmsford. 1. 2 Furl. from St. Edmonds-Bury the Left to Ipswich. 2. At the End of Bulmer Green, the Right to Henningham. 3. 1’7. Beyond Bulmer Green, the Right to Pedmarsh. 4. 1’4. Beyond Halsted the Left to Stysted. 5. In Braintry, The Right to Dunmow. 6. At the End of Braintry, the Left to Wi∣tham. 7. Against Little Waltham the Right to Dun∣mow.
The Roads from CHELMSFORD in Essex to MALDON RALEIGH in Essex GRAVESEND in Kent By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographr. The 1st. Containing 9. Miles 5. Furl: The 2d. Containing 13. Miles. The 3d. Containing 2. M. 4. F. vizt. From Chelmsford to Billericay 8’0. & to Gravesend 13’6. With the branch from CANTERBURY to Deal by Sandwich 18’5. thence to Dover 8’3.
The Roads from Chelmsford to Malden And Raleigh in Essex: And Gravesend in Kent.   Malden. Raleigh Gravesend. 1. THE Points of Bearing E. b. N. S. E. S. b. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 08 M. 09 M. 20 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 08 M. 10 M. 20 M. 4. The Dimensurations 09’5. 13 M. 23’4. From Chelmsford Comp. Measure. to Malden 8 8 09’5. 09’5. From Chelmsford Comp. Measure. to Raleigh 10 10 13’0 13’0. From Chelmsford Comp. Measure. to Billericay 07 07 08’6 08’6 Gravesend 13 20 14’6 23’4 Compleated with a Branch from CANTERBURY by Sandwich and Deal to Dover. From CANTERBURY Comp. Measure. to Sandwich 10 10 13’5 13’5 Deal 04 14 05’0 18’5 Dover 06 26 08’3 27’0 The Counties of Essex and Kent contain the Roads; and the Chelmer, Crowch, Counties past through, Rivers crost over, The quality of the way. Thames and Stour, are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording in general a very good Road and handsom Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be avoided between Chelmsford and Malden. At 1’3. The Right to Raleigh. At 4’4. The Left to Graces. Acute Turnings to be avoided. Between Chelmsford and Raleigh. At 1’3. The Left to Danbury. 10’3. The Left forward. Between Chelmsford and Gravesend. At 1’1. The Right to Ingatstone. At 4’7. The Left acute. At 16’5. The Left to Stanford le hope. 19’5. The Left to West Tilbury. Between CANTERBURY and Dover. At 6’3. The Right to Godmersham. At 8’6. The Left to Preston. At 14’1. The Right to Pattle Marsh. At 17’2. The Left to Sandown. PRoceeding from Chelmsford, you first cross the Chelmer and enter Moulsham, Chelmsford, S.E.b.E. where o∣mitting the forward Way to LONDON, you bear to the Left, and at 1’4. come to Great Baddow a small Vill. Great Baddow, 1’4 E Danbury, 4’6. whence by Sandown Church and Danbury Place and Park on the Right, you are convey'd by an Ascent to Danbury a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Entertainment, a Place affording the best Prospect, not only into the County, but to Sea also; then you cross Danbury Common, pass through Ronsel a Hamlet at 5’7. Malden, 9’5. and leave Woodam Water Church and Place on the Left, and come to Malden at 9’4. an indiffe∣rent large Town, seated on an Arm of the Sea, was antiently call'd Camulodunum; it was Ras'd to the Ground by Queen Bodicia, and 70’000 Romans by her slain in the time of Nero the Emperor: It is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, 6 Aldermen, 18 Brethren, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a well-provided Market on Saturdays. In the Road to Rawleigh. FRom Chelmsford you take your Way as afore, and at 1’3. Chelmsford, S.E.b E. omitting the forward Way to Danbury, you bear to the Right, Great Baddow, 1’5. [3’3. S. by E.] [4’4. S. E. by S. and pass through Great Baddow a discontinued Vil∣lage of 2 Furl. Extent; whence an Irregular Road by a small Wood, South Hanningfield
and Rattenden Churches on the Right, and East Haningfield on the Left, conveys you at 9’3. [11’1. E. S. E.] Raleigh, 13 Miles. over Bale's Bridg to cross the River Crowch, and after by Rawreth Church on the R. and a small Wood on the Left, brings you to Raleigh at 12’7. a small, yet antient Town, enjoying a Market on Saturdays. In the Branch to Gravesend. SEtting forward from Chelmsford, Chelmsford, S. W. you keep the forward Way, and at 6 Furlongs leave the Lord Fitz-Walter's Alms-House on your Right, [1’1. S.] and Moulsham Hall on your Left; then at 1’1. you omit the Road on the Right to Ingatstone, and bearing to the Left, pass by Baxfield, [4 Miles S.W.b.S.] Stock, 5’5. Sr. Richard Langley's House on the Right, and over Gallyway Common, through a Wood, and over Stock Common, come to Stock at 5’4. a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and of Note for the great store of Earthen-ware here made; whence an indifferent straight Way by Flint House on the Right, Billericay, 8’6. S. brings you to Billericay at 8’3. of 5 Furlongs ex∣tent and good Accomodation, and hath a well-provided Market on Tuesdays for Corn, &c. Leaving Billericay, you pass by Great Bursted on the Left, and Little Bursted on the Right, and at 11’1. cross Noke's Bridg over a Rill; then at 13’4. you ascend Langdon Hill of 4 Furlongs height, on the Top of which is a Beacon on the Left, and Langdon Church on the Right, Horndon, 16’1. and descend again 6 Furlongs; whence a little Ascent brings you to Horndon or Horndon on the Hill, seated on a Branch of the Thames, and enjoys a small Market on Satur∣days; [18 Miles S.W.b.S.] little else occuring, but crossing How-Ford and leaving Chadwel Church on the Right, till at 20’1. you descend a small Hill, and by West Tilbury Church on the Left, cross over Tilbury Marsh, and at 21’6. come to Tilbury Fort, a Place very well Fortify'd, and Built by His Present Majesty for the Security of the River Thames, which you here Ferry-over, and on the opposite side enter Gravesend, Gravesend, 23’4. an indifferent large and well-frequented Town, af∣fording very good Accomodation, having several Inns and Taverns, as the Fleece, Horn, &c. It's a Corporation Govern'd by a Mayor, Jurats, &c. and hath 2 well-provided Markets weekly, on Wednsdays and Saturdays; near unto the Town, and opposite to Tilbury Fort is a Block-house where a continual Guard is kept likewise for the Security of the Thames. In the Branch to Sandwich, Deal and Dover. BEginning at the City of CANTERBURY, CANTERBƲRY, S.E. [1’6. E. by S.] Gramlyn Street, 6’3. E. by N. Wingahm, 7’3. Ash, 10’5. Sandwich, 13’5. you first pass through a Wood, and at 4’7. through a small Vill. and crossing a Rivulet, are convey'd at 6’3. through Gamlyn Street, and a Mile farther to Wingham a Village of 3 Furl. extent and some Enter∣tainment; then at 10’5. you pass through Ash a Village of the same Extent and Acco∣modation, and arrive at Sandwich at 13’2. which extends 6 Furlongs on the Road; It is one of the Cinque-Ports, Fortify'd with Walls, Ditches and Rampiers; yet the Discom∣modiousness of the Harbor is a great occasion of it's not being well-frequented; It en∣joys several Immunities, as sending Burgesses to Parliament, &c. and hath 2 Markets week∣ly, on Wednsdays and Saturdays, and is of Note for being the Place where Ethelstone younger Son to King Egber, gave the Danes an Overthrow. From Sandwich little occurs, [16 Miles E. S. E.] Deal, 18’5. S.W. but passing by a Wind-mill, and Sandown Castle on the L. till at 18’3. you enter Deal which extends 4 Furl. on the Road; is a Town of good Strength and of Note for being the Place where JULIUS CAESAR first Landed, and is a Member of the Port of Sandwich; whence you pass by Deal and Walmer Castle on the Left, and through Walmer a Village of 3 Furl. Walmer, 20’3. extent, and after by Ringsole on the Right, and St. Mar∣garet's on the Left, Dover, 27 Miles. a straight Road conveys you to Dover, the Account of which you have in LONDON to Dover, pag. 35. Backward Turnings to be avoided between Deal and CANTERBURY. 1. 6 Furl. short of Ash the Right to Brook. 2. 5 Furl. beyond Brook the R. to Stourmouth. Between Gravesend and Chelmsford. 1. 1’6. Beyond Tilbury Fort the L. forward. 2. At the entring Stock the L. to Ingatstone. Between Raleigh and Chelmsford. 1. 1’7. Beyond Raleigh the L. to Billerecay. 2. A Mile beyond that, the L. to Rawreth. Between Malden and Chelmsford. 1. A Furl. beyond Malden the Left to Wood∣ham Mortimer. 2. 4 Furlongs short of Chelmsford the Left forward.
The Roads from EXETER com̄: Devon̄ to DORCHESTER And from PLIMOUTH to DARTMOUTH com̄ Devon̄ By IOHN OGILBY Esqr His Ma.ties Cosmographer the first Containing 51 miles 6 furlongs vizt: From EXETER to Bishops-Clyst 3 m: 5. to Newton-Popler 7’3. to Cullyford 10’2 to Lime 6’6. to Chidiok 6’5. to Bridport 2’3. and to Dorchester 19 m 6 surl the second Containing 30 miles vizt: From Plimouth to Modbury 14’2 to Holwell 8’5. to Dartmouth 7’1.
The Roads from Exeter to Dorchester, And Plymouth to Dartmouth, in Devonshire.   Dorchester. Dartmouth. 1. THE Points of Bearing E. by S. S. S. E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 45 M. 27 M. 3. The vulgar Computations 40 M. 22 M. 4. The Dimensurations 51’6. 30 M. From EXETER Comp. Measure. to Bishops-Clyst 03 03 03’5 03’5 Newton-Popler 06 09 07’3 11’0 Cullyford 08 17 10’2 21’2 Lime 05 22 06’6 28’0 to Chiddiok 05 27 06’5 34’5 Bridport 02 29 02’3 37’0 Dorchester 11 40 14’6 51’6   40   51’6   From Plymouth Comp. Measure. to Modbury 10 10 14’2 14’2 Holwel 07 17 08’5 22’7 Dartmouth 05 22 07’1 30’0 Devonshire and Dorsetshire contain both the Roads; and the Clyst, Autre, Counties past through Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. Ax and Yalm, are the Chief Rivers crost over; the Road in most Places, though something Hilly, affords an indifferent good Way, and handsome Entertainment in the Towns and other Places you pass through. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 2’1. The Left to Honiton. At 10’5. The Right to Collaton. At 27’1. The Left to Bridport. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 49 M. The Right to Martinstown. In the Road to Dartmouth. At 1’3. The Left to Lipso. At 6’5. The Right acute. At 14’4. The Right to Kingsbridg. At 14’5. The Left acute. At 17’7. The Left acute. At 26’4. The Left forward. SEtting forward from the City of EXETER, EXETER, E. the Account of which you have in the Road from LONDON to the Lands-End, pag. 53. At 1’1. you pass through Hevitre a small Village, and by some scattering Houses, Hevitre, 1’1. [2’1. E.S.E.] Bishops Clyst, 3’5. and a small Ascent and Descent, are brought at 3’5. to Bishops-Clyst, first crossing the River Clyst, which leaving, you ascend a small Hill, and pass by St. Mary Clyst on the Right; then again by several disperst Houses, and crossing several small Waters or Rills, and by an Ascent and two Descents, are brought at 10’6. to Newton-Popler, Newton Popler, 11 M. a long but discontinued Village of 5 Furlongs Extent; at the End whereof you cross the Autre, and leave Hauford Church on the Left; then ascending and crossing a Rill, you are convey'd at 13’4. through a small Village call'd Sidford, Sidford, 13’4. [14’6. N. E.] [16’5. E.] Culliford, 21’2. a little be∣yond which you ascend 2 Furlongs, and at 14’6. bear to the Left, little present∣ing it self till at 20’4. you descend 3 Furlongs, and crossing a Rill, enter Cullyford a disunited Village of 5 Furlongs Extent; at the End of which you cross three se∣parated Branches of the Ax, not far from it's Influx into the Sea, [22’2. S.E.b.E.] and pass within one Mile of Axmouth a small Port-Town on the Right, and Scuttum House some distance on the same Hand. Hence an Irregular Road over 2 Ascents brings you at 27 Miles to a Descent of 6 Furlongs, at the Bottom whereof you cross a small River, [24’2. E. by N.] and at once enter Dorsetshire and Lime or Lime Regis, Lime, 28 Miles. a large and well-built Town extending 5 Furl∣longs
on the Road, is seated near the Sea and on a good and well-known Haven; It's a Corporation and Market-Town, Govern'd by a Mayor, &c. Sends Burgesses to Parliament, and is a Place of good Traffique, it's Privileges being Granted by Edward the Third. Whence the Sea accompanies you near the Road on the Right for several Miles together, Shaderson, 30’3. and bearing to the Left, are brought at 30 Miles to enter Shaderson a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; [33 Miles E. S. E.] and 3 Furlongs beyond the Town, leaving the Church on the Left, to cross Steymag Bridg over a small River; then by Stanton Gabriel Church on the Right, and some disperst Houses on the Road, come at 34’5. to Chiddiok a Village of 3 Furlongs; and at 36’7. (first leaving Sinsborow Church on the Left) to Bridport alias Birtport or Bruteport, Bridport, 37 M.E.b.S. a Place not large, yet Seated be∣tween 2 small Rivers near their Influx into the Sea: It's a Corporation and Mar∣ket-Town, sending Burgesses to Parliament, and is Govern'd by two Bailiffs, &c. and was formerly the only Place for the Twisting of Cordage for the Navy-Royal of England. At the End of Bridport you cross Allington Bridg; whence an indifferent straight Way by Waldich and Lytton Churches on the Right, and Long Lother and Askatham on the Left, brings you at 46’7. to a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; little else oc∣curring till at 51’5. Dorchester, 51’6. you enter Dorchester, a Town of great Antiquity, being a Sta∣tion of the Romans; is pleasantly seated on the Froom and on the Foss-Way; is the Chief Town in the County, large and well-built, containing 3 Parish-Churches; Is a Corporation Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, a Recorder, 8 Aldermen, &c. Sends Bur∣gesses to Parliament, and as being the Shire-Town, is the Place where the Assizes are kept for the County; It hath a good Free-School and an Alms-House; and is Dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Henry Pierpoint Marquess of Dor∣chester, &c. and it's Market which is on Saturdays is well stor'd with all sorts of Provisions. In the Road to Dartmouth. FRom Plymouth [the Particulars of which are treated in LONDON to the Lands-End, Plymouth, E.N.E. [3’6. E. by S.] [6’2. S. E.] pag. 53.] you pass 2 Ascents and Descents, and at 3 Miles pass through Buckland Craltree a small Village, where you cross Fera Bridg over a Brook, and after by Sultrum, Plimpton (which sendeth Burgesses to Parliament, and hath a small Market on Saturdays) and Plimstock Churches all on the Right, and Burrowton House on the Left, and at 6’5. cross a Vale; thence passing by some Houses on the Road call'd Brixton and Eford, Efford, 8 Miles. [9’4. E. S. E.] [13 Miles E. by N.] Modbury, 14’2. you at 9’5. over Yalm Bridg cross the Yalm, and passing by Adsum House on the Right, and Armington Church some distance on the Left, at 12’6. you ascend an Hill of 2 Furlongs, and at 14’1. enter Modbury a Town of 4 Furlongs Extent, Seated between 2 Hills in a Bottom, and hath an indifferent Market on Saturdays. Hence by Shilston and Yarncomb Houses some distance on the Left, Luckbridg, 18’4. and several disperst Houses on the Road, through Luckbridg a small Village at 18’4. and through a Wood, Holwel, 22’7. E. b. S. cross Gary Bridg, and leave the Church on the Right; and ascending 3 Furl. pass by Morley Church on the Right at 21’6. and through Holwel a Village at 22’7. Seated in a large Vale: whence an irregular Road brings you at 29’3. to a Descent, Dartmouth, 30 Miles at the Bottom whereof you enter Dartmouth, a Market and Port-Town, [the Account whereof you have in the Road from Dartmouth to Minhead, pag. 129.] Backward Turnings to be avoided between Dartmouth and Plymouth. 1. 4 Furl. beyond Dartmouth the Right to Dytesham. 2. 3’4. Short of Holwel the Right to Totness 3. At the end of Holwel the Right to Brent. 4. At the end of Modbury the Right and Left acute. Between Dorchester and EXETER. 1. 3’2. From Dorchester the Right to Axmin∣ster. 2. 3’7. Beyond Dorchester the Left to Abbots∣bury. 3. 4’5. short of Askatham the Left to Tong∣brudy. 4. 4’5. Beyond Chidiok the R. to Whitchurch. 5. At the End of Shaderton the Right to Ax∣mister. 6. 5 Furlongs beyond Lime the Right to Axmister. 7. 2 Furlongs beyond Callyford the Left to Seaton.
The Road from FERRYBRIDGE to BOROVGHBRIDGE Continued to BARNARD CASTLE in Com̄ Ebor By JOHN OGJLBY Esq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographer — Containing 76 Miles o. Furlongs (viz) From Ferrybridge to Abyforth 20.3. to Wetherby 7.5. To Boroughbridge 12.3. to Rippon 6.. to Lemyng 13.4. To RICHMOND 12.4. and to Baznard casale 13.9. Compleated with the branch from Fexeybridge to Wakesield. n..
The Road from Ferrybridg to Boroughbridg Continued to Barnard Castle in Yorkshire. 1. THE Point of Bearing N.N.W. 2. The direct Horizontal Distance 56 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 57 M. 4. The Dimensuration. 75’2. From Ferrybridg Comp. Measure. to Aberford 08 08 10’3 10’3 Wetherby 05 13 07’3 17’6 Boroughbridg 09 22 12’3 30’1 Rippon 05 27 06’7 36’2 to Lemyng 10 37 13’4 49’6 Richmond 10 47 12’4 62’2 Barnard Castle 10 57 13’0 75’2   57   75’2     Comp. Measure. With the Branch from Ferrybridg to Wakefield 8 11’5. Yorkshire and the Bishoprick of Durham Contain the whole Road, and the Are, Warf, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Myd, Your and Swail are the Principal Rivers crost over; affording in general an indiffe∣rent good Road, and every where Accomodated with good Towns of Entertainment. Forward Turnings to be Avoided. At 3’5. the Left to Leeds. At 31’6. the Right to Lemyng. At 36’6. the Left to Castleton. At 68’4. the Left to Dolston. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 69’7. the Left to Newsham. At 72’3. the Left acute. FRom Ferrybridg you first cross the River Are over a Stone-bridg, Ferrybridg N. which accompanies you on the Left about 2 Miles, and leave Ferryfarnton Church and Village both on the Left, and on the other side of the River, where you pass through Brotherton at 1’4. Brotherton 1’4. Farbourn 2’6. and Farbourn at 2’6. both Villages of about 3 Furlongs Extent; at 5’4. you ascend 5 Furlongs and pass by Ledstone Hall 1 Furlong on the Left; and at 6’5. Micklefield 8 m. N. N. W. by a Beacon of like distance on the same hand, then crossing a Vale you enter Michelfield a Village of near 4 Furlongs Extent; and passing between some Hills you at 9 Miles ascend gently, and presently descend 5 Furlongs at the bottom whereof you enter Aberford or Abyforth of a Miles Ex∣tent, a Town indifferent well built, affording good Accomodation; Aberford 10’3. N. by E. enjoys a Market on Wednsdays and 2 Fairs annually, viz. St. George's Eve's Eve, and St. Mathew's Eve's Eve. Leaving the Town you ascend and enter Bramum Moor, and at 13’4. [13’4. N. W. b N.] Bramum 14’2. cross a Vale and leave the Moor, then you descend 4 Furlongs, and on the descent pass through Bramum a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; whence passing over Clifford Moor, [16’6. N. N. E.] you by a Wood on the Right are convey'd to Wetherby at 17’4. Wetherby 17’6. of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomo∣dation, seated on the River Warf or Wherfe; It enjoys a Market on Thursdays, and a Fair each St. Jame's Day. Proceeding from Wetherby, at 19’3. you pass by South-Dighton on the Left, [20’6. N. N. W.] then passing a Moor you cross the River Myd over a Stone-bridg, and a Furlong farther pass through Welsford a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, where you enter a Moor which you leave at 23’6. and pass by an Inn on the Left; and at 25’0. [25’4. N.] you have Alerton Park Accompany∣ing your Road on the Right near a Mile, and at 28’6. descending 4 Furlongs, Boroughbridg 30’1. a straight Road convey's you at 30 Miles to the Entrance of Boroughbridg of 3 Furlongs Extent and more transverse, a Corporation Market and Post-Town, [As in LONDON to Barwick pag. 13. Leaving the Town you pass by a Mill on the Left, Kirby on the Hill 31’4 W. N. W. and over a Stone-bridg cross the Your, and 4 Furlongs farther ascend a Hill of 4 Furlongs, and at the Top enter Kirby on the Hill of 4 Furlongs Extent; at the end of the Town you omit the forward Way on the Right that leads to Lemyng Lane a different Way, and bearing to the Left pass through open Arable, and at 34’2. by Hewick a Vill. contiguous on the Right, and 4 Furl. Hewick 34’2. farther over a Wooden-bridg repass the Your, which afore accompany'd your Road on the Left
as it doth now on the Right; Rippon 36’2. N. b E. whence at 36 Miles you enter Rippon, a large Town Cor∣porate of 6 Furlongs Extent and good Entertainment; is seated on the River Your afore∣said, a place of good Antiquity, and of much Fame for its Religious Houses: It is at pre∣sent a well-built and well Inhabited Town, Govern'd by a Mayor, Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, is Beautifi'd with a very fine Cathedral Church which hath 3 lofty Spires, the Town enjoying a well furnisht Market on Thursdays. Leaving Rippon you pass over a Stone-bridg of a Furl. long and again cross the Your, which now keeps on your Left for some Miles, at 37’2. you ascend 2 Furlongs and pass through a Village call'd Huton at 38’6. Huton 38’6. Witham 41 m. then by North-Hall on the Left come to Wath of 4 Furlongs Extent; whence over a Wood-bridg you cross a Brook, at 42 Miles you pass by Middleton on the Left a Village almost contiguous, [43’3. N. b W.] then by Kinthinton 2 Furlongs on the same hand, and Pickhal 3 Furlongs on the Right, cross a Stone-bridg and small Brook, and pass by Burniston 4 Furlongs on the Left, and at 47’4. by the Bull Inn on the Right, are brought to Lemyng at 49’4. Lemyng 49’6. N. W. b W. of 4 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation. Leaving the Town you cross a Stone-bridg and Brook, whence a straight Way for the most part conveys you by Fencote a Village on the Right at 52’3. Fencote 52’3. Catterick 56’6. and cross a Wood-bridg and Brook at 56’5. where you enter Catterick a Village of 2 Furlongs Length; then a di∣rect Way brings you at 58’1. to Catterick Bridg of Stone over the River Swail, which ac∣companies you on the Left, Brunton 58’7. at 58’7. you pass through Brunton upon Swail a Village of 2 Furlongs Length, and after cross a Brook over a Stone-bridg and passing by Sandbeck a Village on the Right, are convey'd after a little ascent to re-cross the River Swail and enter Richmond of 7 Furlongs Extent; Richmond N. N. W. a well-built Corporation and Market-Town, [As in LONDON to Oakham pag. 97.] At the end of Richmond you ascend 4 Furlongs and cross 2 Vales, your Road being somewhat Woody, at 65’7. you ascend 5 Furlongs, and on the Top leave Weston a Vil∣lage a Furlong on the Right, and Ravenworth Castle 3 Furlongs on the same hand; whence you pass through Kirby on the Hill a small Village, Kirkby 66’5. Gailes 67’5. [68’3. N. b E.] [70’3. N. W.] Greatabridg 72 m. and descend 5 Furlongs leav∣ing Gailes a Village close on the Left, and Dolston a Village at 69’2. 1 Furlong on the same hand; crossing several Brooks or Rills you pass through Greatabridg at 72 Miles of 2 Furlongs Extent; then by Roughby a Village close on the Right at 72’5. and Eaglestonby on the Left at 73’7. whence the Tees accompanies you on the Right till at 75’6. you cross it, Barnard Castle 72’2. and at once enter the Bishoprick of Durham and Barnard Castle, an indifferent good Town driving a great Trade in Stockings, and enjoys a small Market on Wednsdays. The Branch from Ferrybridg to Wakefield. FRom Ferrybridg an open way conveys you at 2 Miles to Pontfret or Pontfract vulgo Pomfret q. d. Pons-Fractus, Ferrybridg W. S. W. Pontfract 2’5. N. W. b W. seated in a dry Tract of Ground and on a Branch of the Are: It is a large and well-built Town Corporate Extending a Mile on the Road, had once a strong and stately Castle Ruin'd in the Late Wars; It is Govern'd by a Mayor, Re∣corder, Aldermen, &c. sends Burgesses to Parliament, and has a well-furnisht Market on Saturdays for Corn, Cattel, &c. Whence little occurs but passing by Warnfield a Village about a Mile distance on the Right, [6 m. W. S. W.] Horse-Race End 9’2 N. W. b W. till at 9’2. you pass by Horse-Race End a Village contiguous on the Left, and de∣scend a Hill of 5 Furlongs, where you leave Sr. William Doddlestone's House on the Right, and at the bottom cross a Stone-bridg and Brook; then by Sandal 4 Furlongs on the Left, Wakefield 11’5. are convey'd at 10’7. over a Stone-bridg to cross the Colder and enter Wakefield, a large and well-built Town, where King Edward the 4th. Built a Splendid Chapel in Re∣membrance of those who lost their Lives in Battel; It is a Town well known for its Clothing, and hath two good Markets on Thursdays and Fridays. Backward Turnings to be avoided. 1. In Roughby the Left acute. 2. 12 Furl. beyond Greatabridg the Left to Cartrack-bridg 3. 4 Furl. farther the Right to Newsham. 4. 2 Miles short of Fencote the Right to Bedol. 5. 3 Furl. beyond the white Lyon Inn the Left to Boroughbridg a different way. 6. In Rippon the Right forward. 7. 7 Furlongs beyond Wetherby the Right to Tadcaster. 8. In Abyforth the Right to Leeds.
The Roads from KENDAL in Westmerl.d to COCKERMOUTH EGREMOND to the City of CARLISLE—in Cumberld. By JOHN OGJSBY Esq.r his Ma.ties Cosmographr. The First Containing 43. Miles 7. Furl: vizt. From Kendal to Stanley 5. M. 3. F. to Ambleside 8’0. to Keswick 16’2. and to Cookermouth 14. m. 2. f. The Second Containing 39 Miles 4. Furl. vizt. From Egremond to Winnick 6’3. to Cockermouth 7’6. to Boland 6’7. to Fearsby 12’4 & to ye City of CARLJSE 6’0.
The Roads from Kendal to Cockermouth, And Egrimond to CARLISLE.   Cockermouth. CARLISLE 1. THE Points of Bearing N.W. by N. N. E. by E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 32 M. 35 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 32 M. 29 M. 4. The Dimensurations 43’7. 39’4. From Kendal Comp. Measure. to Stanley 4 04 05’3 05’3 Ambleside 6 10 08’0 13’3 to Keswick 12 22 16’2 29’5 Cockermouth 10 32 14’2 43’7 From Egrimond Comp. Measure. to Winnick 5 05 06’3 06’3 Cockermouth 5 10 07’6 14’1 Bodel 5 15 06’7 21’0 to Thursby 9 24 12’4 33’4 CARLISLE 5 29 06’0 39’4   29   39’4   Westmorland and Cumberland Include the Road, and the Thurle, Darwen, Coker, Eln, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Wampul and Cauda are the chief Rivers crost over; which is in General as bad a Road as any in England, being very Hilly, Stony and Moorish, where you seldom meet with that Enter∣tainment as in the more Frequented Roads in the Midle of the Kingdom. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 1’7. the Left acute. At 7’5. the Left acute. At 31 Miles the Right to Melbeak. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 35’3. The Right to Skiddow. In the Road to CARLISLE. At the end of Egrimond the Left to Whitha∣ven. At 5’1. the Right acute. At 6’1. the Right to Keswick. At 7’3. the Right acute. At 8’2. the Left acute. At 15’3. the Left to Bridkirk. At 16’6. the Right acute. At 22’6. the Left to Blin-Rosset. At 31’2. the Left acute. SEtting forward from Kendal you ascend a small Hill, and at 2’6. Kendal N. b W. leave Barnside a Vil∣lage on the Right, [2’4. N. W, b N.] Stanlay 5’3. Caston 6’1. where bearing to the Left you ascend and presently descend again; and at 5 Miles enter Stanlay a Village of 5 Furlongs Extent and some Entertain∣ment, whence at 6’1. you have Caston a little Village on the Right, and 5 Furlongs far∣ther Chapel on the Inges on the same hand, then you pass between Grass-Gate and Broad-Gate 2 small Villages; and at 7’5. ascend a Hill of 7 Furlongs heigth, which is seconded with a descent of 3 Furlongs, at the bottom whereof you have a small Wood on the Left. At 9’5. you pass through Winandermere a little Village, Winandermere 9’5. N. N. W. where you descend a Hill call'd St. Kathern's Brow, and at the bottom over a Stone-bridg cross a Brook, and have Winan∣dermere Water or Lake accompaning your Road on the Left, which Lake is the biggest in all England, and is plentifully supply'd with Fish; whence crossing a Stone-bridg and Brook, and by a Wood on the Right and some disperst Houses, are convey'd at 13’2. to Ambleside of 4 Furlongs Extent and good Accomodation, seated near Winandermere Water, Ambleside 13’3. W. N. W. and hath the benefit of a Market on Wednsdays, which is indifferently well Provided with most Necessaries. Leaving Ambleside you have several great Hills on your Right and Left accompaning your Road for several Miles together, Ridale 14’7. [15’6. N. b W.] passing through Ridal Park and crossing a Bridg and Brook, and leave Ridal Hall on the Right, the Seat of Daniel Fleming Esq then at 14’7. you pass through Ridal a small Village, and after ascend and presently descend
again, and leave Gresmere Church on the Left, and crossing some small Waters or Rills, ascend a Hill of 8 Furlongs where you have Gresmere Hill a great Eminence on the Left; thence at 19’6. you cross a Stone-bridg and Brook and enter the County of Cumberland, where on your Left is a great heap of Stones call'd Dunmaile Raise Stones, which were (as suppos'd) cast up by Dunmaile King of Cumberland for the Bounds of his Kingdom. Hence you pass by Wyburn Chapel, Thurlspot 23’6. and Thurlspot a Village on the Right, and Wyburn Water on the Left; and at 25 Miles cross Smathods Bridg of Stone over the River Thurle∣mire and leave the Hills on the Right, which yet accompanies your Road on the Left to 27’2. Cust 28’2. W. N. W. Cartherit 29 m. Keswick 29’5. where crossing a Rill you presently ascend a Hill, and at 28’2. pass through Cust a small Village, then descending you pass through Cartherit a little Village, and at 29’4. enter Keswick which Extends this way about 2 Furlongs on the Road, but more trans∣verse; seated on the Thurlemire aforesaid at its Influx into the Darwen: It was a Town of good account in former Time, which at present is much gone to decay, yet it enjoys a Market on Saturdays. Leaving Keswick you over a Wooden-bridg cross the aforesaid Thurlemire, and again have several great Hills accompaning your Road on the Right and Left; the River Der∣wen Runing between the Road and the Hills on your Left, proceeding you have Cros∣thwate Church on the Left, and Milbeck Hall on the Right, and at 33’1. pass through Little Crosthwate a small Village, Little Crosthwate 33’1 [37 m. S. W. b W.] and after pass by Basin-Thwate a Village on the Left, and the Chapel on the Right; at 37 Miles you bear to the Left, and leave Colebeck and Arman∣thwate both on the Right, and at 38 Miles over a Wooden-bridg cross the aforesaid Dar∣wen; Lawbereus 38’6. Lawfield 39’2. at 38’4. you pass through Lawbercus, and at 39’2. Lawfield both small Villages, where ascending a Hill of a Mile in heigth, you presently descend 5 Furlongs, and at 43’4. Cockermouth 43’7. enter Cockermouth, seated on the Rivers Derwen and Coker: It is a place of good ac∣count, having a fair Church and strong Castle, and as a Borough-Town has the Election of Parliament Men, and enjoys a good Market on Mondays, and 2 Fairs yearly. In the Road to CARLISLE. BEfore We proceed, Egrimond N. Take this short account of the Initial Town, Egrimond a Borough-Town, seated near the Sea, is Fortifi'd with a strong Castle, and enjoys a good Market on Saturdays: Whence passing by Clint Hill on the Left, you cross 2 Waters and come at 1’6. Cleater 1’7. N.E. b N. Winnick 6’3. [8 m. N. E. b E.] to Cleater a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; then crossing several Hills, and by several disperst Houses, leaving the Fells on the Right, and Winick a Village, and Lampley Hall on the same hand, at 7’5. ascend 3 Furlongs, and cross a Vale where you have a Lake on your Right; and at 9 Miles Eglesfield a Village on the same hand, and at 10 M. Bridgham a Village on the Left; thence a straight open way conveys you by the River Coker on the Right, Cockermouth 14’1. N. E. b N. [20’2. N. by E.] at 14 Miles to Cockermouth a Market-Town as before. Leaving Cockermouth you ascend a small Hill at 16’2. which is seconded with another; whence you cross a large Vale, and at 20’2. descend a Mile, near the bottom of which you pass through Boland a small Village; Bodel 21 m. [22’4. N. E.] hence you pass by Overgate, Strutland-Guard, lawood-Nook on the Right, and Courtland-Guard on the Left, and at 23 Miles cross a Stone∣bridg and Brook and leave Adderskip, White-Hall and Thurlmillgate all on the Left; then you ascend a Hill and cross 5 several Vales, and the River Eln, and have Bolton, Croshil and Gromhil Villages, and the Ruins of Old CARLISLE all on the Left, and the Red-Dial and Somer Villages on the Right. At 30’4. you descend and cross a Rill, and at 31’6. leaving Warside a Village on the Left, Thuresby 33’4. and Roseley Fell on the Right; descend a Hill, and at the bottom over a Stone-bridg cross the Wample and leave Croston a Village, How-Hill and Turkin-Hill on the Left, and en∣ter Thuresby at 33’3. a Village of 3 Furlongs Extent; thence by Nealople and Brook both on the Left, CARLISLE 39’4. a straight way over a Moor conveys you at 38’6. to CARLISLE, [As in LONDON to CARLISLE pag. 75.] Backward Turnings to be avoided between CARLISLE and Egrimond. 1. 3 F. from CARLISLE the R. to Brook. 2. In Thuresby the Left to Rosedel. 3. At Lawood Nook the Left to Torpenny. 4. A Furl. beyond Cleater the Right acute. Between Cockermouth and Kendal. 1. 3 F. from Cockermouth the Left to Ireby. 2. Against a part of Basinthwate the L. acute 3. In Keswick the Right to Burden. 3. A Mile beyond Cust the Left to St. John's.
The Road from LONDON to POOL in the Count Dorset: By JOHN OGJLBY Esqr. his Maties Cosmograph: Containing 110 Miles. 3 furl. viz. From the Standard in Cornhill LONDON to Alresford in the Southampton road 59.4. to Winchester 7.4. to Rumsey u. 3. to Castle Malwood 7.5. to Ringwood 10.2. to Knaston 8. to Pool. 6. Compleated by the Branch From Pool to Limington: and Southampton to Winchester The First contaming 22 miles 0 furl. viz. From Pool to Ch-Church to 4 to Limington  2 The Second containing 12.2.
The Road from London to Pool, In Dorsetshire. Commencing at Alresford in the Southampton Road. 1. THE Point of Bearing W. S. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 98 M. 3. The vulgar Computation 88 M. 4. The Dimensuration 110’5. From LONDON Comp. Measure. to Alresford 47 47 59’7 59’7 WINCHESTER 07 54 07’4 67’3 Rumsey 09 63 11’3 78’6 Castle-Malwood 06 69 07’5 86’3 to Ringwood 08 77 10’2 096’5 Knaston 06 83 08’0 104’5 Pool 05 88 06’0 110’5   88   110’5   In the Branch from Pool to Limington. From Pool Comp. Measure. to Christ-Church 9 09 10’4 10’4 Limington 9 18 11’4 22’0   Comp. Measure. In the Branch from Southampton to WINCHESTER. 10’0. 12’2. Midlesex, Surrey, Hampshire and Dorsetshire, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. are the Counties through which you pass; and the Brent, Thames, Wey, Test and Avon, the principal Rivers crost over; affording in most Parts a good Road, and plentifully supply'd with fitting Enter∣tainment for Travellers. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 63’6, The Left acute. At 67’5. The Right at the end of WIN∣CHESTER to SALISBURY. At 74’5. The Right acute. At 75’0. The Left to Baddesley. At 71’6. The Right to Rumsey a different Way. At 79’3 & 79’6. Acute Turnings to be avoided. The Right to White-parish and Fording-Bridg. At 82’1. The Right acute. At 88’3. The Right acute. At 97’1. The Right to Wimborn. At 101’4. The Right to Wimborn. At 101’7. The Left acute. In the Branch to Limington. At 3 Furlongs the Left to Wimborn. At 7’1. The Right to Pokesdown. At 11’4. The Right to Hurst Castle. At 16’0. The Right to Hordel. At 17’5. The Right to Burton. In the Branch to Southampton. At 6 Furlongs the Right to Botley. At 2’4. The Right to Botley. FRom LONDON to Alresford you have the Account in LONDON to Southamp∣ton, Alresford, S. S. W. [63’6. S. W. by W.] &c. whence for the most part an open Way, crossing Sewers Bridge at 60’7. and passing by Magdalen House on the Right, conveys you at 67’4. to a Descent of 2 Furl. where you enter the City of WINCHESTER, a Place of great Antiquity, WINCHESTER, 67’3. [as in LONDON to CHICHESTER &c. pag. 77.] adding this, that it is a fair City adorn'd with good Build∣ings, both Publick and Private, and its Cathedral Dedicated to the Holy Trinity, is a large and stately Structure, wherein have been Interr'd several of the Kings and Queens of En∣gland, other Buildings of Note are the Prebends Houses, the Bishops Palace call'd Woolvey House, and the Hall where the Assizes and Sessions are kept, and where King Arthurs Round Table is kept for a Monument, in the Suburbs is Winchester College well-endow'd,
which is Govern'd by a Warden, Master, and Usher; the Bishops of Winchester are Chan∣cellors to the See of Canterbury, and successively Prelates of the Noble Order of the Garter, whose Bishoprick is accounted the best in the Kingdom; the Diocess contains the Coun∣ties of Hant. and Surrey, with the Isles of Wight, Jarsey and Garnsey. Leaving WINCHESTER, Pitt, 69’4. [71’3. S.] Hursley, 72’4. [72’7. S. S W.] Enfield, 75’2. Rumsey, 78’6. you ascend a small Hill, and at 69’4. pass through Pit, and at 72’4. Hursley, both small Villages; then by Hursley Lodg on the Right, through Enfield a little Village at 75’2. and by a Pond on the Right at 76’7. come at 78’5. to Rumsey a Corporation and Market-Town of 4 Furl. Extent, [as in LONDON to South∣ampton, pag. 101.] At the end of the Town, over a Stone-Bridg you cross the Test, and at 79’4. ascend 2 Furl. where you omit the Way on the R. to Fording-Bridg, White-Parish, &c. cross Oux-bridg at 81’7. and enter New Forest at 84’6. formerly Ytene, it is about 30 M. in Circum∣ference, which Tract William the Conqueror (to make it a Harbor for wild Beasts) caus'd 36 Parish-Churches, with all the Houses thereto belonging, to to be demolisht; which thing did not go unpunish'd, for his Son Richard was Blasted, and Rufus shot through with an Arrow, and Henry his Grand-Child hang'd amongst the Boughs. The Forest at present af∣fords great variety of Game, where His Majesty often diverts himself. In the Forest you pass by Ragged-Row on the Right, Ragged-Row, 85 M. [86’2. W. S. W.] Malwood, 86’4. [87’6. S. W.] Bonner, 95’3. Ringwood, 96’5. S.b.W. and at 86’4. through Castle-Malwood a small Vill. seated on an Hill, and leaving Minsted on the Left, descend a large Hill at 88’4 and ascend again at 89’4. and 90’4. thence by Bonner a Vill. on the Left, at 95’7. where you leave the Forest; you 7 Furl. farther come to Ringwood of 4 Furl. Extent, It was of good Acount in the time of the Saxons, is seated near the Sea, and enjoys a good Market on Wednsdays for Cattel, [101 Miles S.W.b.W.] Corn, &c. Leaving the Town you cross 2 small Waters or Rills, and at 98’7. descend a small Hill, and over Palmer's-Bridg cross the Avon at 100’7. then by Preston Church on the Right, Longham, 104’1. you come to Long Ham at 104’1. a discontinued Village, where you enter Dorsetsh. and over Ham-Bridg cross a Brook: at 104’6. you pass through Knaston a small Vill. Knaston, 104’6. Pool, 110’5. where an irregular Road by Hickford House on the right, conveys you to Pool at 110’3. [as in OXFORD to SALISBURY, pag. 165.] adding this, That in King Edw. 3d's Time, it from a small parcel of Fishermen's Houses, came to be a Market; H. 6. Granted it the Privilege of a Haven, with Liberty to the Mayor to Wall it in: then the In∣habitants abounded in Wealth, who to free themselves from Subjection to the County, Purchas'd the Privilege of a County; and so from a mean Hamlet, became a Town and County incorporate, which at present is gone much to decay. In the Branch from Pool to Lemington. SEtting forward from Pool, Pool, N. you omit the forward Way on the Left to SALISBURY, Wimborn, [1 Mile E.] Ifford, 8’5. [9 Miles S. E.] Christ-Church, 10’4. N. E. by E. &c. and bear to the Right; whence an Ascent, follow'd with 2 Descents, brings you at 5’1. to the entring Hampsh.; then through Ifford a Vill. at 8’5. come at 10’2. to Christ Church of 3 Furl. Extent, seated on the Avon; was formerly strengthned with a Castle, now ruinous; yet it enjoys a Market, and sends Burgesses to Parliament. At the end of the Town you cross the Avon aforesaid, which arising on the Edg of Se∣vernake Forest in Wiltsh. passes by Amesbury, SALISBURY, Dunkton, Ringwood, and this Place, falls into the Sea a M. below; receiving into it, first, the Willy, and therein the Nader and Dyver; 2d. the Bourn; 3d. the Stour, and therewith, the Lydden, Dulish, and Allen. At 11’3. Somerford, 14’7. Milton, 15’3. Evilton, 20’1. Lemington, 22 Miles. you pass through a Vill. of 3 Furl. Extent, and at 14’7. through Somerford, and 4 Furl. beyond, Milton, both small Villages; thence an irregular Road by discontinued Houses, and namely Evilton and Efford, brings you at 21’6. to Lemington a Market-Town, seated near the Sea, of good Accomodation, and hath privilege to Elect Parliament-Men. In the Branch to WINCHESTER. FRom Southampton an indirect Way by several disperst Houses, Southampton, N. b. E. St. Crosse's, 11 Miles WINCHESTER, 12 Miles. conveys through St. Cross's a Village at 11 M. to the City of WINCHESTER at 11’5. which is treated on before. Backward turnings to be avoided between Limington and Pool. 1. At the end of Limington the R. to Southamp. 2. 1’5. Short of Milton the Right to Ringwood. 3. 5. Furl. short of Milton the Left to Hordel. 4. At the end of Christ-church the R. to Ringw. From Pool to LONDON. 1. At ye entring Knaston the R. to Christchurch. 2. At the end of Long Ham the L. to Canford. 3. In Ringwood the Right to Christ-Church. 4. 9 Furl. short of Malwood the L. to Salisbury.
The Roads from SHREWSBVRY and CHESTER to HOLYWEL com: FLINT. By JOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Ma.ties Cosmographer The First Containing: 52: mile: 4: Furl: vizt: From Shrewbvry to Ellesmere 16 miles to Wrexham 124 to Mould 13 m to Holywell 11 mile The Second containing: 17: miles: 4: Furl: vizt: From CHESTER to Flint 12: 4: and to Holywell: 5 m
The Road from Shrewsbury to Holywel In Flintshire. 1. THe Point of Bearing N. N. W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 41 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 39 M. 4. The Dimensuration 52’4. From Shrewsbury Comp. Measure. to Ellesmere 12 12 16’0 16’0 Wrexham 09 21 12’4 28’4 to Mould 10 31 13’0 41’4 Holywel 08 39 11’0 52’4 With the Branch from CHESTER to Holywel, thus, From CHESTER Comp. Measure. to Flint 08 08 12’4 12’4 Holywel 04 12 05’0 17’4 Shropshire, Denbighsh. and Flintsh. contain the Road, and Cheshire and Flintsh. Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. the Branch; and the Dee, Gwenurow, Tagidog and Allen, are the chief Rivers crost over; the first part of the Road being indifferent good Way, and the Remainder of it, even through Wales, not so difficult or Mountainous as some of the Neigh∣boring Roads are; and for Entertainment, it corresponds the Road; which in Wales and the Borders is seldom plentiful or delicate, comparatively to the more frequent∣ed Roads of the Midle of the Kingdom. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 4’7. the Left acute. At 5’4. The Right to Wem. At 16’2. The Right acute. At 23’0. The Left to Ruabon. At 42’5. The Right to Northop. Acute turnings to be a∣voided. At 44’1. The Left to Rhydy-mone. At 45’1. The Left to Caris. At 45’4. The Right to Hammerton. In the Branch from CHESTER to Holywel. At the End of CHESTER the Left to Wrexham. At 12’5. The Left to Northop. At 14’6. The left to Holywel a different way. SEtting forward from Shrewsbury, at 4 Furlongs you leave the Town, Shrewsbury, N. N. W. [1 Mile N. by E.] [3 Miles N. by W.] [6’1. N. W.] and at 2’4. leave Battlefield Church on the Right; and 6 Furlongs farther, Everton Chapel on the same Hand, and Esq Ireland's House on the Left; thence a Ridg of Hills on the Left, over Harmon Common, and by Prinhill Wood on the Left, brings you to Harmon Hill, an Ascent of 4 Furlongs; at the Top whereof, you leave Newton on the Right, and at 7’6. Midle-Church on the Left; at 9’3. you pass through Burlleton a little Village, Cookshot, 12 Miles. and at 12 Miles through Cookshot a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, leaving the Chapel and Coolmere on the Right. At 14 Miles you have Ly-Mere on the Left, and at 15 Miles Oatly Park on the Right, and Birch-Hall the Seat of Mr. Leeds on the Left; at 16 Miles you pass through Elsmere a small Village, leaving the Mear on the Right, and at 18’4. Elsmere, 16’1. [16’6. N.] by Crench Church without a Steeple on the Left, then you pass over Diddleston Green, and at 20’5. through Ortney a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, Ortney, 20’5. leaving the Church on the Right; whence an indirect Road conveys you at 22’6. over the River Dee, where you enter Denbighshire. Hence a straight Road leads you at 24’2. by the Lyon Inn on the Right, and 5 Furlongs farther, over Pont-Castoger Bridg, and a Mile beyond that, over Pont∣froud Bridg; then you pass by Markwel Church on the Right; whence little occurs, till at 28’3. crossing the Gwenurow, Wrexham, 28’4. you enter Wrexham extending 3 Furlongs on the Road, a Place of good Accomodation, seated on the foresaid Gwenurow, a Branch
of the Dee, and in a Part of the Country that is call'd by the Welch Mailor-Gimraig, i.e. Bromfield, which affords Plenty of Lead, the Town is large, well-built, and well inhabited, is beautify'd with a fair large Church, and enjoys 2 Markets Week∣ly, on Mondays and Thursdays. Leaving Wrexham. you pass by Stanty and Place-Coch on the Right, and at 30’2. by the Crispin Inn on the Left, and Mr. Folies House at 32 Miles on the same Hand; at 33 Miles you cross Pont-Kenuthyen Bridg over the small River Tagidog, [33 Miles N. N. W.] near it's Confluence with the Allen, and enter Flintshire; whence a ridg of Hills accompa∣nies you for several Miles on the Left, Queenhope, 34’3. passing at 34’3. through Queen-hope a small Village, leaving the Church on the Right, and Cargurel's Castle on the Left, then at 36’2. you leave Sr. John Trevor's House on the same Hand; a straight Road conveying you by Leeswood Mr. Etton's House on the Left, and after between Pentre-hebol House and Mr. Winn's; at 41’1. by a Bowling-Green on the Right, to Mould at 41’3. Mould, 41’4. a small Village, yet affording Accomodation to Travellers. At 42’3. you pass over Cotfid Bridg, and cross the River Allen, which arising near Broyngloys in Denbighshire, receives the Allen-Vachan and Tagidog, and falls into the Dee near Almere: here you have a Lead Furnace on your Right, and a Mill on the Left, and a little after Gwysanna House on the Right; whence you pass by Parch-Buchan a Ridg of Hills on the Right, and by Pryn-Callon-Diggry House on the same Hand; then over Rossormor Common, from which Place a continued Ridg of Hills or Mountains call'd Holchen and Peny-Billen Mountains, accompanies your Road on the Left to the entring Holywel; little else occurring till at 49’2. you pass by Mr. Williams House on the Right, near which on the same Hand you have a steep crag∣gy Rock with a Wind-Mill on it, and at 50 Miles by Mr. Mosten's on the same Hand, Holywel, 52’4. and a Mile farther by Peny-Pulle House on the Left, and a Tree on the Right call'd Derwin-Holbert; hence at 52’2. you enter Holywel, which We have Illustrat∣ed in St. David's to Holywel, pag. 131. In the Branch from CHESTER to Holywel. SEtting forward from CHESTER you first cross the River Dee, CHESTER, S. [5 Furl. W.] which arises at Funnoudoverduwy in Denbighshire, passes through Llyn-tigid or Tegit, by Bala and this Place, where it empties it self into the Ocean, receiving into it; first, the Llue, 2d. the Llavern, 3d. the Troweryn, and therein the Kely and Monock-dour, 4th. the Ruedock, 5th. the Cleton, 6th. the Alwen, and therewith the Gyrow, 7th. the Christioneth, 8th. the Keryog, and therein the Morlas, 9th. the Clawedock, and therewith the Gwen∣urow, 10th. the Allen, and therein the Allen-Vachan, and Tagidog: Then at 1 Mile you descend a Hill of 5 Furl. whence an Arm of the Sea accompanies your Road to Holywel; at 5’4. you have a Post of Direction set in the Road; then passing by a Castle, Harnden Church, and the Star-Chamber Alehouse, all on the Left, an irre∣gular Way conveys you at 12’3. to the entrance of Flint, of 3 Furl. Extent, of which take this general Account: Flint, Flint, 12’4. commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea, of Note formerly for its Castle now ruinous; Founded by H. 2d. and finish'd by Edw. 1. which not long after gave Entertainment to that Noble but unfortunate Prince R. 2d. when he came from Ire∣land, who, whilst he kept within it's Walls, was a free and absolute Prince, but as soon he quitted it, he was taken Prisoner by Henry Bullingbrook Duke of Lancaster, who put an end to his Liberty and Life. The Town enjoys several Immunities, sends one Burgess to Parliament, and as being the Shire-Town, is the Place where the Assizes are kept, yet it hath not the Accomodation of a Market. Leaving the Town, you have little of Note, but passing by some Coal-Pits, and by several scattering Houses, till at 16’3. you cross the River that comes from Holywel, Holywel, 17’4. and bear to the Left, entring the Town at 17’3. The Ac∣count whereof, vid. in St. David's to Holywel, as before. Backward Turnings to be avoided between Holywel and CHESTER. 1. A Mile beyond Flint, the Left to CHES∣TER, the best way when the Tide is out. 2. At the Entring CHESTER the Right to Wrexham. Between Holywel and Shrewsbury. 1. Against Mr. Mostens House the Left to Wrexham, a different Way. 2. Against Gwysanna House the Left acute. 3. 2 Furl. beyond Queen-hope the l. to Harden. 4. 7 Furl. beyond Wrexham the Left to Pen∣trevelin.
The Road from Whithy in Com̄. Ebor: to DURHAM. By IOHN OGILBY Esqr: His Ma:ties Cosmographer Containing 56 miles 6 surlongs vizt. From Whitby to Skallingdam 11’7. to Gisbourgh 10’0. to Marton 6’7 to Norton 8’4. to Sedgfield 8’1. to DURHAM 11’3. Thence Continued to Tinmouth in Com Northumb'r. 22’4. vizt. From DURHAM to Sunderland. 13. to Tinmouth 9’
The Road from Whitby in Yorkshire to Durham. 1. THe Point of Bearing N. W. by W. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distance 38 M. 3. The Vulgar Computation 42 M. 4. The Dimensuration 56’6. From Whitby Comp. Measure. to Skellingdam 9 09 11’7 11’7 Gisbrough 8 17 10’0 21’7 Marton 5 22 06’7 28’6 to Norton 6 28 08’4 37’2 Sedgfield 6 34 08’1 45’3 DURHAM 8 42 11’3 56’6 Thence continued to Tinmouth Com. Northumb. 22’4. viz. From DURHAM Comp. Measure. to Sunderland 10 10 13’0 13’0 Tinmouth 07 17 09’4 22’4 Yorkshire, Bishoprick of Durham and Northumberland, are the Counties past through; Counties past through Rivers crost over. The quality of the way. and the Tees, Skern, Wear and Tine, are the principal Rivers crost over; affording in general an indifferent good Road and some Towns of Accomodation. Forward Turnings to be avoided. At 7 Furlongs the Left acute. 12’5. the Right to Leverton Chapel. 35’0. At the End of Stockdon the Left to Darlington. At 38’2. The Left to Charlton. Acute Turnings to be avoided. 45’3. The Left to Darlington. 45’7. The Right to Fishbourn. In the Continuation to Tinmouth. At 4 Miles the Left acute. At 19’5. The Left acute. SEtting forward from Whithy, Whitby, N. W. where you enter that Part of Yorkshire call'd Cleave∣land, you leave the Town at 4 Furlongs, and at 1’7. [2 Miles W. N. W.] have the Sea accompany∣ing you on the Right, and a Ridg of Hills on the Left, till at 3’3. you bear to the Left and leave them; where you ascend an Hill of 7 Furlongs, and at the Top enter Lythe a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Lythe, 4’5. thence an open direct Way conveys you presently over an Ascent of 8 Furlongs, on the Top whereof is a Beacon on the Right, where you descend the like quantity, and crossing a Moor ascend an Hill of 5 Furlongs, seconded with a Descent of 9 Furlongs, where you cross a Rill, [9’3. N. W. b. N.] and presently ascend again, equally descending, where you cross another Rill, and at 11’7. come to a small Village call'd Skalingdam; Sllingdam, 11’7. then crossing some small Waters or Rills, and passing over several considerable Ascents and Descents, [20’6. W. N. W.] a∣mong which, on your Left is one more Eminent call'd Freborgh Hill: Hence over 4 several Rills you come to an Ascent of 2 Furlongs, on the Top whereof is an Allom-Mine on the Right; then you equally descend, and crossing 2 Brooks, enter Gisburgh alias Gisborough, at 21’6. of 4 Furl. Extent and good Accomodation, Gisborough, 21’7. is Seated near the Tees; was formerly of Note for it's Abby, and at present enjoys a good Market on Mondays, and 2 Fairs yearly. Leaving the Town, you pass by an Hill near a Mile on the Left call'd Rosemary or Rosebery Toping, an high Eminence which serves as a Land-Mark to Saylors: Then by Sr. William Chatnew's House 2 Furlongs on the Right at 23’3. and Upshar Hall equidistant on the same Hand at 25 Miles; whence you ascend 6 Furlongs, which is seconded by a Descent of 4 Furlongs, where you leave Hamlington Hills on the Right, and an House on the Left call'd Mauburn, a straight Way conveying you at 28’4. to Marton a Village of near 5 Furlongs Extent: Marton, 28’6. Then an indifferent straight Way, crossing 3 or 4 small Rills, brings you at 37’7. [34 m. N.] Stockton 34’6. to the Ferry where you cross the Tees and Enter the Bishoprick of Durham, and 3 Furlongs beyond, Stockton of 3 Furlongs Extent, Noted for it's Good Ale with which it Serves the City of
DURHAM: It is a Town-Corporate, Govern'd by a Mayor, 6 Aldermen, &c. is well Inhabited and Traded to, and enjoys a Market on Wednsdays. Thence at 36’2. you pass over Norton Stone-Bridg and Brook, and enter Norton at 37 Miles near 3 Furlongs Long, Norton 37’2. W. b N. and bearing to the Left, cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook at 38’4. [39’4. N.W. b N.] then you descend an Hill of 3 Furlongs, on which the Lady Davis's House is Scituate, and at the Bottom cross a Wood-Bridg and Brook by a Mill on the Left; whence an open and direct Road leads you at 40 Miles by a scattering Village call'd Grindon, Layton 42’7. Sedgfield 45’3. by a Wood, and Layton Chapel all on the Right, and at 43 Miles pass through Layton a small Village, and enter Sedgfield at 45 Miles, a Village of near 5 Furlongs Length; [49’2. W. N. W.] then after a small Descent at 47 Miles, in the Bottom over a Stone-Bridg you cross the Skern, ascending and descending con∣tinually for 7 Miles, by Coxwel Hall near 3 Furlongs on the Right, and over se∣veral Stone-Bridges and Brooks in the Bottom, and by an House or two call'd Sunderland close on the Right, Sunderland 51’4. [52’2. N. b W.] Shinkley 54’3. N. W. are convey'd through Skinkley a Village near 3 Fur∣longs long, having Heughwel Hall on the Left: At 55 Miles you cross a Stone-Bridg over the Wear, and leave Old Durham 3 Furlongs on the Right; whence by an easie Ascent, DƲRHAM 56’0. equally descending, you enter the Suburbs of the City of DUR∣HAM, and at 66’4. over a Stone-Bridg again crossing the Wear, you enter the City it self, [the Account of which you have in LONDON to Barwick, pag. 15.] In the Continuation to Tinmouth, thus: PRoceeding from the City of DURHAM, DƲRHAM N.E. [4 m. N. b. E.] at 1 Mile you leave the City, and at 4’2. pass by a little Village call'd Rainton near the Road on the Left, and ascend 4 Furlongs, East Raynton 5’2. and 4 Furlongs farther pass by East Rainton a small Vil∣lage close on the Right, where you descend 4 Furlongs, and in the Bottom cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook, Hetton 6’5. [7 m. N. E.] and at 6’5. pass through Helton a small Village, and as∣cend an Hill of 3 Furlongs, and presently descend the like Quantity, where you have a scattering Village call'd Newbottle 2 Furlongs on the Left; then at 8’6. you pass between 2 little Villages, Harrington 8’6. that on the Right call'd East Harrington; the other, Midle Harrington: At 10’2. ascend 3 Furlongs, and presently descend 5 Furlongs, at the Bottom whereof you have Barns a scattering Village near the Road, on the Left, and 2 high Rocks about 6 Furlongs on the Right; then at 11’7. you cross a Stone-Bridg and Brook, Weremouth 12’2. Sunderland 13 m. N. and pass through Weremouth at 12’2. a Village of 2 Fur∣longs Extent, and through Sunderland at 13 Miles, of 3 Furlongs Extent, Seated on the Wear near it's Influx into the Sea; it drives a considerable Trade in Sea-Coal, and hath the Benefit of a Market on Fridays, and is Dignify'd by giving Title to the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Sunderland, &c. Leaving the Town, you by a Ferry cross the Wear, and 2 Furlongs farther pass through Munkwermouth a Village of 2 Furlongs length; Munkwermouth 13’6. Fulwel 14’6. then by Fulwel a Village close on the Left at 14’6. and after by Whitburn Church 4 Furlongs on the Right, come at 16’6. Cleydon 16’7. to Cleydon a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation, and at 18’7. Harton 18’6. Weston 19’5. South Shealds 21 m. pass by Harton a Village on the Right, and 6 Furlongs farther by Weston a Village on the same Hand; come at 21 M. to South Sheald a Village of good Account, extending about half a Mile along the River Tine, which River arises on the Edg of the County near Scotland, and passing by Hexham and New-Castle, a little below this Place falls into the Sea, receiving into it 1st. the Sheble, 2d. the Read and there∣in the Chetlop and Pelop; 3d. the Worksborn and therewith the Midleborn; 4th. the Rose∣born; 5th. the South Tine, and therein the Vent, Aln, Giderdale, Hartley, Rippal, East Allen and West Allen; and lastly the Derwen; which River you here cross by a Ferry, and presently pass through North Shields, North Sheilds 21’3. N. E. b N. Tinmouth 22’4. and crossing a small Brook pass by a Light-House on the Right, and come at 22’1. to Tinmouth, a Town indifferent large and of some Note, being Fortify'd with a strong Castle. Backward Turnings to be avoided between Tinmouth and DURHAM. 1. In Tinmouth the Right to New-Castle. 2. 5 Furl. beyond Rainton the L. to Hartlepool Between DURHAM and Whitby. 1. In DURHAM the Forward to Old Durham, and the Right to LONDON. 2. 5 Furlongs beyond Sunderland Village, the Right to Thornford. 3. 1’2. Beyond Skelingdam the Left to Rousby.
The Roads from YORK to WHITBY and SCARBOROVGH in Yorkshi: By JOHN OGILBY Esqr. his Ma.ties Cosmographer The first Containing 50. Miles 2 Fursongs (viz) From YORK to Whitwel. 13.5. to New Malton. 5. 6 To Pickering. 8.7. and to Whitby. 22.0 The second Containing 43 Mises furlong (viz) From YORK to New Malton in ye Whitby Road 19.3. to Rollington 5.2 To Sherborn. 6.6. to Seamore 7.3. & to Scarborough. 4.3
The Roads from York to VVhitby & Scarborough in Yorksh.   Whitby. Scarborough. 1. THE Points of Bearing N. E. by N. N. E. by E. 2. The Direct Horizontal Distances 38 M. 34 M. 3. The Vulgar Computations 35 M. 31 M. 4. The Dimensurations 50’2. 43’1. From YORK Comp. Measure. to Whitwel 10 10 13’5 13’5 New Malton 04 14 05’6 19’3 to Pickering 06 20 08’7 28’2 Whitby 15 35 22’0 50’2 In the Road to Scarborough. From YORK Comp. Measure. to New Malton 14 14 19’3 19’3 Rollington 04 18 05’2 24’5 Sherborn 05 23 06’6 31’3 to Seamor 5 28 07’3 38’6 Scarborough 3 31 04’3 43’1   31   43’1   The County of York Contains the whole Road, and the Foss, Derwent, Rye, Counties past through. Rivers crost over. The quality of the Way. Esk and Harford are the Principal Rivers crost over; which Road is indifferent well Fre∣quented and Furnisht with good Towns and Publick Houses of Entertainment, yet it is in general a Hilly and bad Way. Forward Turnings to be avoided between YORK and Whitby. At 19’3. in New Malton the R. to Scarborough At 42 Miles the Left to Slate. At 48’2. the Right forward. Acute Turnings to be avoided. At 48’6. the Left forward. Between YORK and Scarborough. At 19’3. in New Malton the Left to Whitby, being the former Road. At 34’4. the Left to Benington. At 35’3. the Left acute. PRoceeding from YORK, you first over a Stone-bridg cross the Foss, and at 2’7. YORK N.E. b N. re-cross it again over a Wooden-bridg, whence your way is generally open, Stockton 4’7. which brings you at 4’6. to Stockton on the Moor a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent and some Accomodation: Hence little occurs but passing over Stockton Moor, which is near 4 Miles in length, at the end whereof you enter a Lane, and at 10’4. enter on another Moor, and at the end of it over Spittle Bridg you cross a Rill; and at 12’5. Whitwel 13’5. ascend a Hill of 7 Furlongs heigth, on the top whereof you have a Prospect to YORK Minster; then leaving Whitwel a Village contiguous on the Right, you pass over 2 Vales, in the first whereof over a Stone-bridg you cross a Brook. Hence 2 repeated Descents convey you at 19 Miles to Malton alias New Malton, New Malton 19’3. which Extends 4 Furlongs on the Road and more transverse; an indifferent good Town divided into Old and New Malton, in both which are Contain'd 3 Parish Churches, it is seated on the River Derwent; Is a Borough-Town Electing Parlia∣ment Men, hath 2 Markets weekly on Tuesdays and Saturdays; that on Saturdays is accounted as good as any in the County for Horses, Live Cattel, Provision, &c. the Lords of this Mannor keep a Market every Saturday by Prescription. At the end of New Malton you have a House of the Lord Ewers on the Right, whence at 20’3. you come to Old Malton, which Extends 3 Furlongs on the Road, Old Malton 20’5. N. where bearing to the Left you pass through Home-Hors a small Village; and at 23 M. over a Wooden-bridg cross the River Rye, Pickering 28’2. N. E. b N. an open way indifferently Arable and Pasture conveying you to Pickering, which you enter at 28’2. a pretty good Town
call'd the Honour of Pickering, belonging to the Dutchy of Lancaster; hath yet the Ruins of a Famous Old Castle, and hath Privilege of Keeping Courts for all Actions Under 40 s. Commenc'd within the said Honour, which is call'd Pickering Lith; and enjoys a well Provided Market on Mondays for Corn, &c. Leaving Pickering you pass 2 large Ascents (by Yarworth a Village on the Left) which is seconded with a descent of above a Mile and half, at the bottom where∣of you have Lockton a Village about 2 Furlongs on the Left; then you ascend a small Hill and cross 4 repeated Vales, and pass by Sothergate a little Village con∣tiguous on the Right; whence a descent of 5 Furlongs brings you at 47 Miles to Sneton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent; Sneton, 47 Miles. at 48 Miles you cross a small River and en∣ter Rushworth a Village Extending 3 Furlongs on the Road. Rushworth, 48 Miles. From Rushworth an Irregular way brings you at 49’7. Whitby, 50’2. to the Entrance of Whitby or Whiteby i. e. Oppidum Album, A. S. Streanesheale i. e. Sinus Phari, formerly of great account for its Abby: It is at present a well-built Town seated on the River Esk near its Influx into the Sea; it Drives a considerable Trade, having about 100 Vessels belonging to it, with a convenient Custom-House; and its Market which is on Saturdays is well stor'd with all Provisions of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, &c. In the Road to Scarborough. From YORK to New Malton, New Malton, E. b. N. as in YORK to Whitby, where crossing a Stone∣bridg over the Derwent, you pass through Norton a Village of 3 Furlongs Ex∣tent, Old Malton, 20 M. in which is the Seat of Esq Ellet on the Right; then leaving Old Malton on the Left, Scaklethorp, 23’2. N. E. b. E. you cross 2 Rills, and at 23’2. have Scaklethorp a Village contiguous on the Left, thence you cross a Rill, and have the Wold or great high Hills accompanying your Road several Miles on the Right, Rollington, 24’5. and pass through Rollington at 24’5. a Vil∣lage of near 2 Furlongs length; where you leave Thorp Basset Chapel on the Right and Wintringham Church on the same hand. At 26 Miles you cross 2 Rills, Knapton, 26’5. East Haselton, 29’5. Sherborn, 31’3. and leave Kaneston and Knapton 2 little Villages both on the Left; and at 29’5. pass through East Haselton a Village of 2 Furlongs Extent, and come to Sherborn at 31’3. a Village Extending most on the Left; then you cross a Brook and leave Browlton a little Village on the Right, and arrive at Garton at 33’5. Garton, 33’5. Staxton, 35’7. and at Staxton at 35’7. leaving Willorby Church on the Left, where you likewise leave the Hills or Wolds and Flixton a Village on the Right; then you cross Great and Little Harford Bridges over the River Harford, and at 38’4. enter Semere a Village of 4 Furlongss Extent and some Entertainment; Semere, 38’6. descending a Hill at 40’2. Scarborough, 43’1. you pass by a Lake on the Right call'd Byards Water and enter Scarborough at 42’6. by the Saxons Scearburgh, a strong well-built and well-inhabited Town Corporate, Encompast almost with the Sea, it sends Burgesses to Parliament; Is Govern'd by 2 Bailiffs, Common-Council, &c. hath 2 Markets Weekly on Thursdays and Saturdays, Drives a good Trade, and is much resorted unto for its Famous Spaw. Backward Turnings to be avoided between Scarborough and YORK. 1. 4 Furl. from Scarborough the Right to Falsgrave. 2. At the end of Staxton the Left to Beverley. 3. Against Knapton the Left to Wintringham. Between Whitby and YORK. 1. 6 Furl. short of Pickering the Left to Kinthorp. 2. In New Malton the Right to Newcastle.
A Table directing to the Cities, Principal Corporation and Market-Towns, Treated of in this Volume, with the Road and Plate to which they belong. [For Example:] Are You to go to WORCESTER, look for WORCESTER in the first Co∣lume under Cities and Towns? in the Next, under Roads, you have Aberistwith; under Plate, you find 002. under Page, 004. So that WORCESTER is Graven and Discourst of in the Road to Aberistwith, Plate the 2d. Page 4. And if it be again Mention'd, you will be there Referr'd, as in Page 4. you are directed to the Road to Montgomery; Page 87. And so of the Rest. Cities and Towns. Roads. Plate. Page. A ABeravon. St. Davids. 016 032 Aberconway. Holyhead. 024 047 Abergaveney. Llanbeder. 077 153 Aberistwith. Aberistwith. 003 006 Aberford. Borough-bridg. 095 189 Abington. St. Davids. 014 028 Ailsford. Hith. 020 040 St. Albans. Holyhead. 021 041 Alesbury. Buckingham. 012 024 Almondbury. Oakham. 049 097 Alnwick. Barwick. 009 018 Alton. Southampton. 051 101 Alresford. Southampton. 051 102 Ambleside. Cockermouth 096 191 Amesbury. Barstable. 032 064 Amersham. Buckingham. 012 023 Andover. Lands-End. 025 050 Arundel. Arundel. 004 008 Ashburton. Lands-End. 027 054 Ashby de-la-zouch. COVENTRY. 082 164 Ashford. Hith. 020 040 Atherston. COVENTRY. 082 164 Attleborough. NORWICH. 046 092 Axbridg. BRISTOL. 011 022 Axminster. Lands-End. 027 053 B Bala. Holywel. 067 134 Baldock. St. Neots. 045 089 Bampton. Minhead. 065 130 Banbury. Buckingham. 012 024 BATH. BATH. 035 069 Barkway. Lyn. 043 085 Barnard-Castle. Borough-bridg. 095 190 Barnet. Holyhead. 021 042 Barnsley. Oakham. 048 096 Barstable. Barstable. 033 066 Barton. Flamborough. 042 083 Barwick. Barwick. 009 018 Basingstoke. Lands-End. 025 050 Bautre. Barwick. 007 013 Beaconsfield. Aberistwith. 002 004 Beaumaris. Holyhead. 024 048 Beccles. Yarmouth. 053 108 Bedford. Oakham. 047 094 Bediford. Barstable. 068 136 Bermingham. Shrewsbury. 050 099 Beverley. Flamborough. 042 084 Biggleswade. St. Neots. 045 090 Billericay. Malden. 092 184 Bishops-Castle. Montgomery. 044 098 Bliborough. Yarmouth. 054 108 Boston. Boston. 036 072 Borough-bridg. Barwick. 008 015 Bourn. Flamborough. 041 081 Bradinch. EXETER. 058 116 Braintre. Bury. 092 183 Bramyard. Aberistwith. 003 005 Brandon. Wells. 052 103 Brecknock. Llanbeder. 077 154 Brent. Lands-End. 027 054 Brentford. BRISTOL. 010 019 Bridgnorth. Shrewsbury. 050 100 Bridgwater. Barstable. 032 064 Bridlington. Flamborough. 042 084 Bridport. Dorchester. 094 188 Brighthelmeston. Newhaven. 029 058 BRISTOL. BRISTOL. 011 022 Bromley. Rye. 031 061 Bromsgrove. Buckingham. 013 026 Bruton. Barstable. 032 064 Buckingham. Buckingham. 012 024 Buntingford. Barwick. 005 010 Burcester. Cambridg. 080 159 Burford. Banbury. 055 110 Burton. CARLISLE. 038 075 Burntwood. Harwich. 019 037 Bury. Bury. 052 104 C Cailsoe. Barwick. 062 124 Caln. BRISTOL. 011 021 Cambridg. Lyn. 043 085 Camelford. Barstable. 034 067 Campden. Montgomery. 044 087 CANTERBURY. Dover. 018 036 Cardiff. St. Davids. 016 032 Cardigan. Holywel. 066 132 CARLISLE. CARLISLE. 038 076 Carmarthen. Carmarthen. 084 168 Carnarvon. Carnarvon. 087 174 Caxton. Barwick. 005 010 Chegford. Truro. 069 137 Chelmsford. Harwich. 019 037 Cheltenham. COVENTRY. 070 139 Chepstow. CHESTER. 056 111 CHESTER. Holyhead. 024 048 CHICHESTER. CHICHESTER 039 078
Chidleigh. Lands-End. 027 053 Chimleigh. Barstable. 068 136 Chipenham. BRISTOL. 011 021 Christ-Church. Pool. 097 194 Church-Stretton. CHESTER. 057 193 Cirencester. Banbury. 055 110 Cockermouth. Cockermouth. 096 192 Colchester. Harwich. 019 038 Colebrook. BRISTOL. 010 019 Coleshil. Holyhead. 022 044 St. Columb. Barstable. 034 068 Columpton. EXETER. 058 116 COVENTRY. Holyhead. 022 043 Coverd. St. Davids. 015 030 Cowbridg. St. Davids. 016 032 Cranborn. Weymouth. 053 106 Crecowel. Llanbeder. 077 153 Cromer. NORWICH. 074 148 Crookhorn. Lands-End. 026 052 Crowland. Boston. 036 072 Croydon. Newhaven. 029 057 D Dartford. Dover. 018 035 Darking. Arundel. 004 007 Darlington. Barwick. 008 016 Daventry. Holyhead. 022 043 St. Davids. St. Davids. 017 034 Dedington. COVENTRY. 082 163 Denbigh. Holyhead. 024 047 Derby. Derby. 040 080 Devizes. BATH & WELLS. 035 070 Dolgeth. Carnarvon. 087 173 Doncaster. Barwick. 007 013 Dorchester. Weymouth. 053 106 Dover. Dover. 018 036 Downham. Lyn. 043 086 Droitwich. Leicester. 072 144 Dudley. Shrewsbury. 050 099 Dulverton. Barstable. 033 065 Dunkton. Weymouth. 053 106 Dunmow. Bury. 092 184 Dunstable. Holyhead. 021 042 DURHAM. Barwick. 008 016 Dursley. WORCESTER. 060 119 E Egrimond. Cockermouth. 096 192 ELY. Lyn. 043 086 Evesholm. Montgomery. 044 087 Evil. Lands-End. 026 052 Ewel. Arundel. 004 007 EXETER. Lands-End. 027 053 F Fakenham. Wells and Bury. 052 104 Faringdon. St. Davids. 015 029 Farnham. Southampton. 051 101 Flint. Holywel. 098 196 Fiscard. Holywel. 066 131 Foy. Lands-End. 028 055 Frampton. Weymouth. 060 120 Frodsham. CHESTER. 089 177 G Garstang. CARLISLE. 038 075 Gisborough. DURHAM. 099 197 Glamford-Bridges. Flamborough. 042 083 Glastonbury. EXETER. 058 115 GLOCESTER. St. Davids. 015 029 Godalmin. Portsmouth. 030 060 Grampond. Truro. 069 138 Gravesend. Malden. 093 186 Grantham. Barwick. 006 012 East-Grimsted. New-haven. 029 058 Grimsby. Grimsby. 078 156 Guilford. Portsmouth. 030 060 H Halifax, Oakham. 049 097 Halstead. Bury. 092 183 Hatfield. St. Neots. 045 089 Hatherley. Barstable. 033 066 Harding. Holyhead. 024 047 Harlech. Carnarvon. 087 174 Harwich. Harwich. 019 038 Haverborough. Derby. 040 080 Haverford-West. St. Davids. 017 034 Henley. St. Davids. 014 028 HEREFORD. Montgomery. 071 141 Hexham. CARLISLE. 086 172 Higham-Ferries. COVENTRY. 061 122 Hith. Hith. 020 040 Hiworth. BRISTOL. 079 158 Hodsdon. Barwick. 005 010 Holyhead. Holyhead. 024 048 Holywel. Holywel. 067 134 Honiton. Lands-End. 027 053 Hornby. Lancaster. 088 176 Horndon. Maldon. 093 196 Hull. Flamborough. 042 083 Hungerford. BRISTOL. 010 020 Huntingdon. Barwick. 005 010 I Jedborough. Barwick. 062 124 Ilfarcomb. Barstable. 068 136 East-Ilsley. CHICHESTER. 081 161 Ipswich. Yarmouth. 054 107 St. Ives. Ipswich. 073 145 Ixworth. Harwich. 075 150 K Kederminster. Buckingham. 013 026 Kendal. CARLISLE. 038 075 Kerton. Barstable. 068 134 Keswick. Cockermouth. 096 192 Kidwelly. Lands-End. 017 033 Kilham. Flamborough. 042 084 Kingsclear. CHICHESTER. 081 162
Kingston. Portsmouth. 030 059 Knaresborough. Lancaster. 088 175 Knighton. Montgomery. 071 142 L Lancaster. CARLISLE. 037 073 Lavenham. Bury. 092 184 Launceston. Barstable. 034 067 Lechlade. St. Davids. 015 029 Leeds. CHESTER. 089 177 Leicester. Derby. 040 080 Lemington. Pool. 097 194 Lewis. Newhaven. 029 058 Leominster. Aberistwith. 003 005 LICHFIELD. Holyhead. 022 044 Lime. Dorchester. 094 187 LINCOLN. Flamborough. 041 082 Littleport. Lyn. 043 086 Liscard. Truro. 069 138 Listwithiel. Truro. 069 138 Llacharn. St. Davids. 017 034 Llanbeder. Llanbeder. 077 154 Llanelthy. St. Davids. 017 033 Llanimdofry. Llanbeder. 077 154 Llanelthy. St. Davids. 017 033 Loughborough. Derby. 040 080 Looe. Lands-End. 028 055 Ludlow. CHESTER. 057 113 Luton. Oakham. 047 093 Lycham. NORWICH. 076 151 Lyn. Lyn. 043 086 M Mahunleh. Holywel. 067 133 Maiden-Bradley. Barstable. 032 064 Maidenhead. BRISTOL. 010 020 Maidstone. Hith. 020 040 Maldon. Maldon. 093 185 Malmsbury. BRISTOL. 079 158 Manchester. CHESTER. 089 177 Maningtre. Harwich. 019 038 Mansfield. Oakham. 048 096 Market-Jew. Lands-End. 028 056 Marlborough. BRISTOL. 010 020 Marshfield. BRISTOL. 011 021 Melcomb-Regis. Weymouth. 053 106 St. Michael. Barstable. 034 068 Michel-Dean. St. Davids. 015 030 Midhurst. CHICHESTER. 039 078 Midlam. Oakham. 049 098 Milborn-Port. Lands-End. 026 052 Milton-Mowbray. Oakham. 048 095 Minhead. Minhead. 065 130 Modbury. Dorchester. 094 188 Monmouth. St. Davids. 016 031 Montgomery. Montgomery. 044 088 Montsorel. Derby. 040 080 Morton-Henmarsh. Aberistwith. 002 003 Morpeth. Barwick. 009 017 South-Moulton. Barstable. 033 065 N Namptwich. Holyhead. 023 046 Needham. Ipswich. 073 146 St. Neots. St. Neots. 045 089 Newark. Barwick. 006 012 Newbury. BRISTOL. 010 020 New-Castle L. CARLISLE. 037 073 New-Castle T. Barwick. 009 017 Newhaven. Newhaven. 029 058 New-Malton. Whitby. 100 199 New-Market. NORWICH. 046 091 Newport. St. Davids. 016 031 Newport-Painel. Cambridg. 080 160 New-Radnor. Carmarthen. 084 167 New-Shoreham. Newhaven. 029 058 Newton. CARLISLE. 037 074 Newton-Bushel. Minhead. 065 129 New-Town. Cardiff. 063 125 Northallerton. Barwick. 008 016 Northampton. Derby. 040 079 Northfleet. Dover. 018 036 NORWICH. NORWICH. 046 092 Nottingham. Oakham. 048 095 Nuneaton. COVENTRY. 082 164 O Oakham. Oakham. 047 094 OXFORD. BRISTOL. 079 157 P Padstow. Barstable. 034 068 Pembridg. Montgomery. 071 142 Penrith. CARLISLE. 038 076 Pensance. Lands-End. 028 056 PETERBOROVGH. Boston. 036 071 Petersfield. Portsmouth. 030 060 Pershore. Aberistwith. 002 004 Phillips-Norton. BATH & WELLS. 035 070 Pickering. Whitby. 100 199 Plimouth. Lands-End. 027 054 Pontefract. Borough-bridg. 095 190 Pool. Pool. 097 194 Portsmouth. Portsmouth. 030 060 Prestain. Aberistwith. 003 005 Preston. CARLISLE. 037 074 R Ralegh. Maldon. 093 186 Reding. BRISTOL. 010 020 Riadergowy. Aberistwith. 003 006 Richmond. Oakham. 049 098 Ringwood. Pool. 097 194 Ripley. Lancaster. 088 175 Rippon. Borough-bridg. 095 190 Rochdale. CHESTER. 089 178 Rochester. Dover. 018 036 Ross. Montgomery. 071 141 Rotheram. Oakham. 048 096 Royston. Barwick. 005 010
Rugby. COVENTRY. 061 122 Rugeley. Holyhead. 023 045 Rumford. Harwich. 019 037 Rumsey. Southampton. 051 102 Ruthyn. Holywel. 067 134 Rye. Rye. 031 062 S Saffron-Walden. Bury. 092 184 SALISBURY. Lands-End. 026 051 Sandwich. Malden. 093 186 Saxmundham. Yarmouth. 054 108 Scarborough. Whitby. 100 200 Seeching. Lyn. 043 086 Sevenoke. Rye. 031 061 Settle. Lancaster. 088 176 Shaftsbury. Lands-End. 026 051 Sherborn. Lands-End. 026 052 Shrewsbury. Shrewsbury. 050 100 Silverton. Minhead. 065 129 Sittingborn. Dover. 018 036 Skipton. Oakham. 049 098 Sleaford. Flamborough. 041 082 Sodbury. Banbury. 055 109 Solihul. Leicester. 072 144 Somerton. Weymouth. 060 119 Southam. COVENTRY. 082 163 Southampton. Southampton. 051 102 Spalding. Boston. 036 072 Stamford. Barwick. 006 011 Stanes. Lands-End. 025 049 Stevenage. St. Neots. 045 089 Stockbridg. Pool. 097 194 Stockton. DURHAM. 099 097 Stone. Holyhead. 023 045 Stony-Stratford. Holyhead. 021 042 Stopford. CHESTER. 090 180 Stow. Campden. 085 170 Stow-Market. Ipswich. 073 146 Stratford. Buckingham. 013 025 Stretham. Lyn. 043 086 Sudbury. Bury. 092 184 Sunderland. DURHAM. 099 198 Swaffham. Wells and Bury. 052 104 Swanzey. St. Davids. 017 033 T Tadcaster. Barwick. 007 013 Tavistoke. Truro. 069 038 Taunton. EXETER. 058 116 Tenbury. Montgomery. 044 088 Tetbury. Banbury. 055 110 Teverton. Minhead. 065 130 Teuksbury. WORCESTER. 059 117 Thaxted. Bury. 092 184 Thetford. Harwich. 075 150 Torrington. Barstable. 033 166 Tosceter. Holyhead. 021 042 Tregony. Lands-End. 028 055 Troubridg. BATH & WELLS. 035 070 Truro. Truro. 069 138 Tunbridg. Rye. 031 062 Tuxford. Barwick. 006 012 W Wakefield. Borough-bridg. 095 190 Walsingham. Wells and Bury. 052 104 Ware. Barwick. 005 010 Warrington. CARLISLE. 037 074 Warmister. Barstable. 032 064 Warwick. COVENTRY. 070 140 Wellingborough. Oakham. 047 094 Wellington. EXETER. 058 116 WELLS. BATH & WELLS. 035 070 Welshpool. Shrewsbury. 050 100 Wendover. Buckingham. 012 024 Wenlock. Shrewsbury. 050 100 Wetherby. Borough-bridg. 095 189 Weymouth. Weymouth. 053 106 Whitby. Whitby. 100 200 Whitchurch. Lands-End. 025 050 Whitchurch. CHESTER. 057 114 High-Wickham. Aberistwith. 001 002 Market-Wickham. Yarmouth. 054 108 Wiggan. CARLISLE. 037 074 Wimborn. SALISBURY. 083 166 WINCHESTER. Pool. 097 193 Winchcomb. COVENTRY. 070 139 Witham. Harwich. 019 039 Windham. NORWICH. 046 092 Woodbridg. Yarmouth. 054 108 WORCESTER. Aberistwith. 002 004 Wrexham. Holywel. 098 195 Wrotham. Hith. 020 040 Wulpit. Ipswich. 073 146 Y Yarmouth. Yarmouth. 054 108 Yaxley. Boston. 036 071 YORK. Barwick. 007 014 FINIS.
