P1165 10759198 45700
THE Everlasting Gospel OF Our Lord Jesus Christ: AND The Blessed effects thereof Testified to by experience. WITH A few words To ENGLAND My Native Country. By ISAAC PENINGTON. The darkness is past, and the true light now shineth, 1 Joh. 2. 8. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; for behold, the darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross dark∣ness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee, Isai. 1. 2. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory, Psal. 102. 16. (indeed he doth so.) Printed in the Year, 1678.
The Everlasting Gospel of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, and the Blessed effects thereof, Testified to from Experience. THe blessed message, which the Apostles (who were sent by Christ to preach the Gospel,) heard of Christ, and were to declare to others, was; That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, 1 Joh. 1. 5. The end of Christs sending them with this Message, was, that thereby (preaching it in the evidence and demonstra∣tion of Gods Spirit) they might Open mens eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and inhe∣ritance among them that are Sanctified by Faith that is in him, Act. 26. 18. Now the eye of the Mind being opened, and the Mind turned from the Darkness within, to the Light within; and from Satans power to the power of God, which is revealed in the Light: The Soul in the Light comes to see (over the Darkness and Satan who darkned it) the things of God and his Kingdom, as they are revealed in the Light, which makes them manifest. As First, It sees him who is the Rock, the Holy Foun∣dation of God, the Holy Foundation of Life in the Soul; the living Stone, by which all the other living Stones are made alive, and they are taught of God to come to him as to a living Stone, and so are Built upon him, and become Gods Building and new Creation in him, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 17. And here, in this Light none can miss of the true coming, hearing the voice of the Father, and being drawn, and taught by him to the Son, Joh. 6. 44, 45. 2ly. Here the true Jews state the state of the inward Jew, and the inward Circumcision, and the true Worship
(even the Worship of the Father in Spirit and Truth) is known. For the Jew Inward is a Child of Light, begotten in the Light, redeemed out of Darkness, and Dwells and Walks in the Light, as God is in the Light, 1 Joh. 1. 7. And the Circumcision is not a Fleshly Act; but the cutting off of that which is Fleshly from the mind, by the Spirit and Power of Christ. And the Gospel-worship, or the Worship of the Jew Inward, is the Worshipping of God in the new∣ness of the Life of his Son. 3dly. Here is the true Repentance from the dead Nature and Dead Works, which no man can attain to of himself, but is Gods Gift through his Son, whom God hath appoin∣ted to be a Prince and a Saviour to give Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins, Act. 5. 31. I say, here that Repentance is known, waited for and received. For not to men in the Darkness, and loving the Darkness, is the true Repentance given; but to them that are turned towards the Light, to them is Repentance given unto Life, Act. 11. 18. compared with chap. 26. 17, 18. 4thly. Here the true Faith, the precious Gift of Faith is received, whereby men believe in him who gives Life, and receive Life from him. And this is the Faith which gives ac∣cess to God, and gives victory over the World; and that which is contrary to God: The Faith which is given in the Light, doth so; but the Faith which men have in the Darkness, doth not so. 5thly. Here the Cross of Christ is known, which is an in∣ward living Spiritual thing, effectually Crucifying that man, that takes it up and dayly bears it, to all that is earthly and sinful; and then the pure Seed and Life of Christ springs up in his Earth, over the World and every Worldly thing, Gal. 6. 14. 6thly. Here the pure love springs in the Heart, both to him that begets, and to him that is begotten. In the Light there is nothing but Love; but in the Darkness there is no
true Love to be found, but the very Love that is found there is of the nature of Enmity. It is the Light or Truth that purifieth the Heart to the Love unfeigned, 1 Pet. 1. 22. Deut. 30. 6. 7thly. Here the Lambs patience and meekness is experi∣enced, and the Soul adorned with it. The Lamb is the Light of the World; and they that are made Lambs by him, partake of his sweet and meek Nature, learning of him to be meek and lowly in heart; and so have that patience and meekness from him, which no other can attain to, Mat. 11. 29. 8thly. In the Light the precious Promises are fulfilled and partook of, which make them who partake of them, and in whom they are fulfilled partakers of the Divine Na∣ture: For the Divine Nature is not partook of in the Dark∣ness, but in him who is Light: Man, (who is Darkness) can∣not partake of the Promises which belong to the Children of Light: But, when by the operation of Gods power, his State and Nature is changed, and he is now no more Dark∣ness, but light in the Lord; then the Promises which were made to the Children of Light, he cometh to have a share in, Eph. 5. 8. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Lastly, In the Light the Holy anointing is received, the voice of Christ heard, and the new everlasting Covenant, even the sure Mercies of David made with the Soul, Isa. 55. 3. The Law of the new Covenant (even the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus) writ in the Mind, and the holy fear of the New Covenant, which cleanseth and keepeth clean, put in the heart; and the blessed Spirit of the Fa∣ther given and received, which gives to those that receive it, power to become Sons of God, causing them to walk in his wayes and to keep his Statutes and Judgments, and do them. O blessed Dispensation of Life and holy Power, which the Lord hath caused to break forth, among a de∣spised people in these latter dayes! O that the Sons of men would hear and understand this precious loving kindness
of the Lord, and put their trust under the shadow of his wings, and know what it is to be satisfied with the fatness of his Spiritual-Gospel-house, and to drink of the River of his pleasures, and in his Light to see Light, Psal. 36, 7, 8. 9. This opened in me this Morning, in Love and Compassi∣on towards the Papists. My Bowels have often rowled over them, and been pained concerning them, to see how they are closed and shut up, as to the true sense and under∣standing of things of this Nature. O that they would prize the day of their Visitation; that they might hear the sound of Life, both from others, and also in their own hearts, and the saving Arm of the Lord might be inwardly Revealed to them, and they effectually Redeemed thereby! I am no disdainer of Papists, or any sort of Protestants; nay not of Turks or Jews, but a Mourner because of their several Mistakes, and a breather to God of my Life for ten∣der Mercy towards them all. Astrop 13. of 7 Mon. 1678. Poscript. ANd in this Light, the true Church, the Gospel-Church, the New Testament Church is known, which is a Church of the Children of Light, a building built in the Light, which Church is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thess. 1. 1. In whom they are built together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Eph. 2. 22. Yea in whom all the building fitly framed together, groweth unto an Holy Temple in the Lord, v. 21. (for the Lord fram∣eth them fitly together into a Spiritual and Holy building.) And all that are here, gathered out of the Darkness into the Light, who walk in the Light, and abide in the Light, are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner, v. 20. And are no more Strangers and Forreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, v. 19.
The Gospel-Church is the Spiritual house of Jacob, which walk in the Light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. who go up to the mountain of the Lord (to that which is revealed to be the mountain of God, in the last dayes, even Spiritual Mount Zion, Heb. 12. 22.) to the house of the God of Jacob, where he teacheth his Spiritual people, the inward Jews of his wayes, and they learn to walk in his Paths: For out of this Zion shall go forth the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus (in the dayes of the Gospel) and the word of the Lord from this Jerusalem, v. 2, 3. For Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of all the Children which are born of Gods Spirit, Gal. 4. 26. Joh. 3. 6. And she being the Mother of them all, nourisheth them all with the word of Life, which goeth forth from her; and all her Chil∣dren know and justify her their Mother, Matt. 11. 19. O that all, both Papists and Protestants knew this true Mother-Church, this Mother of all the living, of whom none but the living are born; and who nourisheth all the living, and none else, with the Law and word of Eternal life! And if they knew the true Church, the Church is of the true Jews the Church of the first born, whose names are written in Heaven, and did live and walk in the Light of the Lamb, and follow the leader, the Shepheard of Is∣rael, and faithful Bishop of the Soul, who overseeth and taketh care of the Soul, they would learn and come to know and experience these things following. First, The dwelling places of Mount Zion, and her as∣semblies, and Gods creating upon every of them a cloud and smoak by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, which is the defence upon all the Glory that the Lord bring∣eth forth among his Spiritual Church and people, Isa. 4. v. 5. 2dly. They would know the Land of the inward Jews, the Spiritual Judah, and the Song sung therein, because of the strong City which the Lord builds there, and the Sal∣vation which he appoints for Walls and Bulwarks about it:
And would see and know how none but the inward Jews, the inwardly Circumcised and sanctified, even the righteous Nation that keepeth the Truth, can enter by the Gates into that City, Isa. 26. 1, 2. And they that dwell in that City, whose minds are stayed on the Lord, and who trust in him, the Lord will keep in perfect peace, v. 3. Then Jerusalem is a quiet habitation indeed, and the resting and feeding places in it are sure, Isa. 32. 18. and ch. 33. v. 15. and v. 20. 3dly. They could know the Feast of Fat things, which the Lord of Hosts makes to all people that are here, to all people that come up to and dwell on his Holy Mountain, and serve and Worship him in Spirit and Truth. The Lord of Hosts maketh such a Feast, as no eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man toconceive what it is, but only by the Spirit of God; even a Feast of Fat things, even a Feast of Spiritual Fat things; a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of Fat things full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined, Isa. 25. 6. They that are turned to the Light, and follow Christ the Light, shall not abide in Darkness, but have the Light of Life, Job. 8. 12. Shall be translated out of the Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of the dear Son, and there shall Sup with Christ and he with them, and both together Drink of the Fruit of the Vine of Life, new in the Fathers Kingdom. 4thly. They shall infallibly know, here in this Light, which shines on Gods Holy Mountain, the destroying or swallowing up of the face of the Covering cast over all people, and the Vail spread over all Nati∣ons, Isa. 25. 7. For the Vail is cast over and spread in the Darkness: But is done away and swallowed up in Christ the Light: for the Vail is done away in him, 2 Cor. 3 14. And all that are in Christ, in his Spi∣rit, in the Light and liberty thereof, behold as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, by the Lord the Spirit, v. 17. 18. Lastly, Here the King of Righteousness his high way is known, even the way of Holiness, which the unclean cannot pass over, but the sancti∣fied in the Light do walk in, and the wayfaring men here though fools, do not erre in, Isa. 35. 8. For they that are taught of God in the New Covenant, and follow the leadings of his blessed Spirit do not erre. O that the true Church were known, which is now come and coming out of the Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved, who led and leads her out thence, into her own land of Life and Glory, where her Light shines, and she ariseth and standeth upon her feet before the Lord, and the Glory of the Lord shines upon her and covers her! Happy is the eye that seeth this, and the Soul that hath a share in it.
A few words to England my Native Country. O Land of my Nativity, O my dear Country-men. THe pure power of the Lord is upon me, and the Springs of Life open in me; And among many other Things, I am melted in Love and Desires after your welfare: and this is in my Heart to say to you. If I now testifie to you in Truth, of a Pearl, a heavenly Pearl, an everlasting Pearl; will ye not hear me? If I tell you, your Heart is the Field, or Earth, wherein it is hid; will ye not consider of it? If the everlasting Gospel be preached again, which contains true Tidings of Redemption from sin, will ye not listen after it? If the Kingdom of God, and Righte∣ousness of Christ, be to be revealed within; would ye not willingly learn to wait for it there? and beg of God that the Eye may be opened in you, which alone can see it, when it doth appear? Indeed God's Visitation is upon this Na∣tion, in an especial manner; his Light and Power is break∣ing forth in it against the Darkness and Power of the Spirit of Satan, which hath captivated, and still captivateth many. Ye desire outward liberty, and the enjoyment of your out∣ward rights; would ye not be free inwardly? Free from the base earthly, selfish nature and spirit, which man fallen from God, and the Glory wherein he created him, is de∣generated into? Oh, is not the Power of God, and the Life of Christable to restore man to this? He that created man at first so glorious, in his own Image; is he not able to create him anew? Oh hear, my dear Countrymen; the Power is revealed, which createth anew; and they that
receive it, and are as Clay in the Hands of the great Potter, given up to be formed by it, are dayly created (by the Ope∣ration of it) anew, into an Holy, Heavenly, Innocent Liv∣ing, Tender, Righteous Frame Day by Day; and are made willing, daily more and more to be the Lord's, in this Day of his Power; and do receive Power to become Sons, and strength against their Souls Enemies: And the glori∣ous work of Redemption, which God hath begun in them, the Arm of his strength mightily carrieth on in them, to their Comfort, and his everlasting Praise. There is a Spi∣ritual Egypt and Sodom, as well as there was an outward; and there is a spiritual Wilderness, and Canaan also. And the Arm of God's Power Inwardly and Spiritually hath been revealed in this Spiritual Egypt, Wilderness and Canaan, as really as ever it was in the outward. Do ye not read of a Jew-inward, and a Circumcision inward, and the Leaven-inward, and keeping the Feast of Unleavened Bread, even of Bread that is not leavened with sin? And he that eats of this unleavened Bread, it unleavens him of sin, and leavens him with Life and Holiness: For it is an Holy Bread, and a Living Bread. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, which they that feed upon, Live, and they that Live feed upon it. And though they be many, yet feeding upon this Bread, they become one Bread one living Body. Consisting of a living Head, and living Members; for the same Life, and pure Heavenly nature, which is in the head, is communicated by him to the members. But how shall we find this, may some say? I will tell you how We found it, and how none can miss of it, that sweep the House and make a diligent and faithful search after it. That in the heart of man, which turns against sin, discovers sin, draws from sin, wherein Gods Ministry help against sin, That is It. That is the
Pearl hid, that is the Kingdom hid, in that is the Righ∣teousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith, in all that receive and give up to this Holy Leaven. This is of the Nature of God and Christ, this is a measure of his Light, of his pure Life, this is the Law and Commandment ever∣lasting, which God writes in the Hearts of the Spiritual Israel. For the inward Jew hath inward Tables, where the inward Law is writ, for the inward Eye to read. O how nigh is God inwardly, to the inward people, in this our day! O the pure Glory is broke forth! But, alas, men are in their several sorts of Dreams, and take no notice of it. What shall the Lord do to awaken this Nation? In what way shall his Power appear, to bring down Unrighteous∣ness, and to bring up Righteousness in the Spirits of Peo∣ple? Do ye not think the Lord hath been at work, and is still at work? How could deceit be so wasted Inwardly, and Truth so grown Inwardly, and overspread more and more, and gain ground in the Nation, if the hand of the Power of the Lord were not with it, blessing it. O take notice of the handy-work of the Lord, ye Children of men, and wait to feel Truth near, and to partake of the living Virtue and power of it; that you may feel your hearts creating anew, and the old Heavens and Earth may inwardly pass away, wherein dwells Unrighteousness; and the new Heavens and the new Earth may be inwardly witnessed, wherein dwells Righte∣ousness. O that this Nation might become a Paradise of God! O that every one might be sensible of his Presence, and Power, and Kingdom, and Righteous Government inwardly in the Heart, from the King that sits on the Throne, to the Begger on the Dunghil. Surely man was not made for himself! surely he was not made such a Creature as now he is! but in the Holy Image of God, with love in his heart to God above all, and to his Neighbour as to himself. O what are Religions and Professions of several sorts, where this Love is not found! The Lord is restoring his Image,
and bringing forth  true, pure Religion again. The Pearl, the Truth contains and comprends it. O buy the Pearl, O buy the precious Truth, sell all that is contrary to it for it; take up the Cross to all that is evil in thee, as the Light in thee, as the Light in thee maketh it manifest, and thou shalt have the free Possession of it in thy heart, and feel it a root of Life, a Treasure of Life, a Well of Life, out of which the Living Water will be daily springing up in thee, unto Life everlasting, Amen. THE END. BOOKS Lately Printed by the same Author for a General Service. ISaac Pennington's Naked Truth; or Truth Nakedly manifesting it self in several particulars, for the removing hindrances out of the way of the Simple hearted. —The Flesh and Blood of Christ, both in the Mystery, and in the Outward, Testified to. —To the Jews Natural, and to the Jews Spiritual, with some sensible Queries concerning some things necessary to be experienced in the True Christian State. The Principles of True Christian Divinity Asserted, by Rob. Barcley. —Universal Love Considered, and Established upon its Right Foundation, by R. B.
