P1255 13048413 96948
A brief Account of the Province of Pennsylvania, Lately Granted by the KING, Under the GREAT Seal of England, TO WILLIAM PENN AND HIS Heirs and Assigns. SInce (by the good Providence of God, and the Favour of the King) a Country in America is fallen to my Lot, I thought it not less my Duty, then my Honest Interest, to give some publick notice of it to the World, that those of our own or other Nations, that are inclin'd to Transport Themselves or Families beyond the Seas, may find ano∣ther Country added to their Choice; that if they shall happen to like the Place, Conditions, and Government, (so far as the present Infancy of things will allow us any prospect) they may, if they please, fix with me in the Pro∣vince, hereafter described. I. The KING'S Title to this Country before he granted it. It is the Jus Gentium, or Law of Nations, that what ever Waste, or uncul∣ted Country, is the Discovery of any Prince, it is the right of that Prince that was at the Charge of the Discovery: Now this Province is a Member of that part of America, which the King of Englands Ancestors have been at the Charge of Discovering, and which they and he have taken great care to preserve and Improve.
A Map of Some of the South and east bounds of PENNSYLVANIA in America being parly Inhabited. Sold by John Thornton at the Signe of England Scotland and Ireland in the Minories, and by John Setler at his Shop in Popes head Alley in Cornhill LONDON.
II. William Penn's Title from the KING. An Abstract of the Patent GRANTED BY THE KING, To VVilliam Penn. &c. The Fourth of March, 1681. I. VVE do Give and Grant (upon divers considerations) to William Penn his) Heirs and Assigns for ever all that Tract of Land in America with all Islands thereunto be∣longing That is to say from the beginning of the fortieth degree of North Latitude unto the forty third Degree (of North Latitude whose Eastern bounds from Twelve English Miles above New-Castle (alias Delaware Town) runs all along upon the side of Delaware River. II. Free and undisturb'd use and passage into and out of all Harbours Bays Waters Rivers Isles and Inlets belonging to or leading to the same Together with the Soyl Fields Woods Vnderwoods Moun∣tains Hills Fenns Isles Lake & Rivers Waters Rivulets Bays and Inlets Scituate in or belonging unto the Limits and Bounds aforesaid Together with all sorts of Fish Mines Mettles, &c. To have and to hold to the only behoof of the said William Penn his Heirs and As∣signs for ever To be holden of us as of our Castle of Windsor in free and common soccage paying only two Beaver skins yearly. III. And of our further Grace we have thought it fit to erect and we do hereby erect the aforesaid Countrey and Islands into a Province and Seigniory and do call it Pennsilvania and so from henceforth we will have it call'd. IV. That reposing special confidence in the wisdom and justice of the said William Penn we do grant to him and his Heirs and their De∣puties for the good and happy Government thereof to ordain and e∣nact and under his and their seals to publish any Laws whatever for the publick uses of the said Province by and with the Advice and Appro∣bation of the Free-holders of the said Countrey or their delegates so as they be not repugnant to the Law of this Realm and to the Faith and Allegiance due unto us by the legal Government thereof. V. Full power to the said William Penn, &c. to appoint Iudges Leiutenants Iustices Magistrates and Officers for what causes soever and with what Power and in such Form as to him seems convenient also to be able to Pardon and Abolish Crimes and Offences and to do all and every other thing that to the compleat Establishment of Iustice un∣to Courts and Tribunals forms of Iudicature and manner of proceed∣ings
do belong and our pleasure is and so we enjoyn and require that such Laws and Proceedings shall be most absolute and available in Law and that all the Leige People of us our Heirs and Successors inviolably keep the same in those parts saving to us smal appeals. VI. That the Laws for regulating Property as well for the discent of Lands as enjoyment of Goods and Chattels and likewise as to Fe∣lonies shall be the same there as here in England until they shall be al∣tered by the said William Penn his Heirs or Assigns and by the Free∣men of the said Province or their Delegates or Deputies or the grea∣ter part of them. VII. Furthermore that this new Colony may the more happily en∣crease by the multitude of People resorting thither therefore we for us our Heirs and Successors do hereby grant License to all the Leige Peo∣ple present and future of us, &c. (excepting such as shall be specially forbidden) to Transport themselves and Families into the said Country there to Inhabit and Plant for the publick and their private Good. VIII. Liberty to Transport what Goods or Commodities are not forbidden paying here the Legal Customs due to us, &c. IX. Power to divide the Countey into Counties Hundreds and Towns to Incorporate Towns into Burroughs and Burroughs into Cities to make Fairs and Markets with convenient Priviledges ac∣cording to the merit of the Inhabitants or the fitness of the place And to do all other thing or things touching the premises which to the said William Penn his Heirs or Assigns shall seem meet and requisite albeit they be such as of their own nature might otherwise require a more special commandment and warrant then in those presents is express'd. X. Liberty to Import the Growth or Manufactures of that Province into England paying here the Legal duty. XI. Power to erect Ports Harbours Creeks Havens Keys and o∣ther places for Merchandizes with such Iurisdiction and Priviledges as to the said William Penn, &c. shall seem expedient. XII. Not to break the Acts of Navigation neither Governour nor Inhabitants upon the penaltys contained in the said Acts. XIII. Not to be in League with any Prince or Country that is in War against us our Heirs and Successors. XIV. Power of safety and defence in such way and manner as to the said William Penn, &c. seems meet. XV. Full power to Assign Alien Grant Demise or Enfeoff of the premises so many and such parts and parcels to those that are willing to purchase the same as the said William Penn thinks fit to have and to hold to them the said Persons their Heirs or Successors in fee Simple or fee Tail or for term of Life or Lives or years to be held of the said William Penn, &c. as of the said Seigniory of Windsor by such Servi∣ces Customs and Rents as shall seem fit to the said William Penn his Heirs and Assigns and not immediately of us our Heirs or Successors and that the said Persons may take the premisses or any Parcel there∣of of the said William Penn, &c. and the same hold to themselves their Heirs and Assigns the Statute Quia emptores Terrarum in any wise notwithstanding.
XVI. We give and grant License to any of those Persons to whom the said William Penn, &c. has granted any Estate of Inheritance as aforesaid with the consent of the said William Penn to erect any parcel of Lands within the said Province into Mannors to hold Courts Bar∣ron and view of Francke-pledge, &c. by Themselves or Stewards. XVII. Power to those Persons to Grant to others the same Te∣nures in fee simple or otherwise to be held of the said Mannors re∣spectively and upon all further Alienations the Land to be held of the Mannor that it held of before the Alienation. XVIII. We do Covenant and Grant to and with the said William Penn his Heirs and Assigns that we will not set or make any Custom or other Taxation upon the Inhabitants of the said Province upon Lands Houses Goods Chattels or Merchandizes except with the consent of the Inhabitants and Governour. XIX. A charge that no Officers nor Ministers of us our Heirs and Successors do presume at any time to attempt any thing to the con∣trary of the premises or in any sort withstand the same but that they be at all times aiding to the said William Penn and his Heirs and to the Inhabitants and Merchants their Factors and Assigns in the full use and benefit of this our Charter. XX. And if any doubts or questions shall hereafter arise about the true sense or meaning of any Word Clause or Sentence contained in this our Charter We will Ordain and Command that at all times and in all things such Interpretation be made thereof and allowed in any of our Courts whatsoever as shall be adjudged most advantageous and favourable unto the said William Penn his Heirs and Assigns so as it be not against the Faith and Allegiance due to us our Heirs and Successors. In Witness whereof we have caused our Letters to be made Patents. Witness our self at Westminster, &c. The KING's Declaration TO The Inhabitants and Planters of the Province of PENNSYLVANIA. CHARLES R. VVHereas His Majesty in consideration of the great merit and faithful services of Sir William Penn deceased, and for divers other good Causes Him thereunto moving, hath been Graciously pleased by Letters Patents bearing Date the Fourth day of March last past, to Give and Grant unto William Penn Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir William Penn, all that Tract of Land in
America, called by the Name of Pennsylvania, as the same is Bound∣ed on the East by Delaware River, from Twelve miles distance North∣wards of New-Castle Town, unto the three and fourtieth Degree of Northern Latitude, if the said River doth extend so far Northwards, and if the said River shall not extend so far North-ward, then by the said River so far as it doth extend: And from the Head of the said River, the Eastern Bounds to be determined by a Meridian Line to be drawn from the Head of the said River, unto the said Three and fourtieth Degree, the said Province to extend Westward Five Degrees in Longitude, to be Computed from the said Eastern Bounds, and to be Bounded on the North, by the Beginning of the Three and four∣tieth Degree of Northern Latitude, and on the South, by a Circle Drawn at Twelve Miles distance from New-Castle North∣wards, and Westwards unto the Beginning of the Fourtieth De∣gree of Northern Latitude, and then by a straight Line Westwards to the limit of Longitude above mentioned, together with all Powers, Preheminencies, and Iurisdictions necessary for the Government of the said Province, as by the said Letters Patents, Reference being thereunto had, doth more at large appear. His Majesty doth therefore hereby Publish and Declare his Royal Will and Pleasure, That all persons Setled or Inhabiting within the Limits of the said Province, do yield all Due Obedience to the said William Penn, His Heirs and Assigns, as absolute Proprieta∣ries and Governours thereof, as also to the Deputy or Deputies, Agents or Lieutenants, Lawfully Commissionated by him or them, according to the Powers and Authorities Granted by the said Let∣ters Patents; Wherewith His Majesty Expects and Requires a ready Complyance from all Persons whom it may concern as they tender his Majesties Displeasure. Given at the Court at Whitehall the Second day of April, 1681. In the Three and thirtieth year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, CONWAY. III. The Reason of the Grant. The reason and ground of this Grant from the King, to Him and his Heirs, &c. Was his Petition to the King, in which he set forth. His Fathers Services, his own Sufferings and Losses, in relation to his Fathers Estate; And lastly. His long and costly Attendance without success: In right, and consideration of which, the King was graciously pleased to make the aforesaid Grant; to which Title, the said William Penn adds that of the Natives by purchase from them. IV. Of the Country, and its Produce. It lies 600. Miles South of the Latitude of England; and as it is of the same side of the Line, so it is about the same degree with Mompellier in France, or Naples in Italy: The Air is generally clear and sweet, the Summer is longer and Hotter, and Winter shorter, and sometimes Colder than in England: The Soil is said to be as good as any in those parts. It commonly produceth Oak, Cedar, Mulbery, Chesnut, Walnut, Firr, Cyprus, Ash, Beech, Popaler, Saxafras, Medaler, Plumbs, Grapes, Peaches, Strawberries, Huckleberries, Cranberries,
Hopps, &c. English Fruit takes kindly, and produceth suddainly and plenti∣fully: The Woods are furnished with Store of Wild Fowl, as Turkeys, Phea∣sants, Heath-Cocks, Patridges, Pidgeons, &c. The Earth well Watered with Springs and Rivers, and the Rivers stored with Fish, as Sturgion, Sheepsheads, Drums, Cat-fish, Shads, Ecles, and abundance more: With Fowl, as Swans, Gray and White Geese, Duck, Mallard, &c. The Corn of the Country used by the In∣dians, produceth four hundred sold, is Good and Hearty, both in Milk, and made into Bread; the price two Shillings six pence the Bushel: There is also good English Corn, as Wheat, Barly, Rye, and Oates; Wheat under four Shil∣lings the Bushel, Barly and Rye, under three Shillings the Bushel, Oates about two Shillings the Bushel: There are also very good Pease, and Beans of seve∣ral sorts. The Beef is good, but Pork is very Sweet: The Beef at three pence, the Pork at two pence half-penny the pound; Batter at six pence a pound, Peaches to Eat, or make Drink of, at eight pence the Bushel; a Cow and Calf about the Spring of the Year, at five pounds, a pair of Oxen at ten pounds, a good Breeding Sow at thirty Shillings, a Young good Breeding Mare, at eight pounds.☞ But it is to be Noted, that these foregoing prises and sums, are to be paid with one half of the Value in English Goods, at the Rates they are bought at in England; for example, four pounds English paies for the Breeding Mare, that is Rated at eight pounds, the like with the rest. The Country also abounds with several sorts of Wild Creatures, as Elkes, Deer, Beavers, Racoons, Mincks, Martins, Wild Catts, Otters, &c. some of which are good Food, and Cheap, as a Fat Buck at two Shillings, English Goods, others of them considerable for their Furs: The way of Traffique, is to send to the Southren Plantations, Corn, Beef, Pork, Fish, Sider, and Pipe∣staves; the Skins and Furs for England. The Conveniency that belongs to the Province in point of Navigation, is two fold; the one through Chesapeak Bay, and the other Delaware Bay, by which Ships of great Burthen may come and Trade to the said Province. V. Of the present Inhabitants. That part of the Country which is at all Inhabited, is at the head of Chesa∣peak Bay, and on the West side of Delaware River, they are by Nation, Sweeds, Dutch, English, who are capable of giving Entertainment to New Commers, till they can provide for themselves. VI. What the Country is believed capable of. It is thought by several knowing Persons, that have Travelled those parts of America, and have been well acquainted with places in Europe of the same de∣gree, that there may be Silke, and Wine, if not Oyle; and for Flax, Hemp, Woad, Madder, Liquorish, Pot-ashes, and Iron, there needs to be no que∣stion. VII. Of the Government. 1st. The Governour and Free-holders, have the power of making Laws, so that no Law can be made; nor Money raised, But by the Peoples consent. 2ly. That the Rights of the People of England are in force there. 3ly. That making no Law against Allegiance, they may make all Laws re∣quisite for the Prosperity, and Security of the said Province. VIII. Of the Conditions. The Province is cast at a penny an Acre; But he sets apart several parcels, which he calls Shares; these he sells; saving a Quit-rent, necessary for to se∣cure the Title and Tenure: That is, whereas 5000. Acres (which makes a Share) comes (at a penny an Acre) to 20. l. 16. s. 8. d. yearly, for 100▪ l. down, he sells off the yearly Rent of 18. l. 6. s. 8. d. and reserves but 50. s. which may be reduc'd as the purchaser pleases, but something must be reserved for the Security of the Title: To which, the Royalties proper to Mannors in England, as Hunting, Fowling, Fishing, with all common Mines, Minerals, and a Propor∣tion of Royal Mines also (if sound within any ones propriety) is affixed by the general Concessions. And that such as are not able to purchase, yet willing to go, and capable
to pay their Passage, and their Servants, may not be excluded. It is hereby Declared, that every such Person, for himself, and Wife, and every Child, Male or Female, if sixteen Years of Age, shall have right to take up at 1. d. per Acre, Fifty Acres by the Head, to him and his Heirs for ever, in lieu of Purchasing, which shall be by the Surveyor of the Country set out so soon as the said person comes to take it up: And to encourage such Children and Ser∣vants to serve their Parents, Masters, or Mistresses, the full time for which they are Engaged, Diligently and Faithfully; Every such Child or Servant, shall have Right to take up 50. Acres at but two Shillings Quit-Rent for ever, which makes him a Free-holder of the Country. IX. Persons fittest for Plantations. Those persons that Providence seems to have fitted for Plantations, are In∣dustrious Husbandmen, Laborious Handicrafts: As Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Rope∣makers, Smiths, Brick-makers, Weavers, Taylors, Tanners, Coopers, Mill-wrights, Joyners, Shooe-makers, Turners, Potters, such as dress Flax, Hemp, and Wool; With many others. It seems also a fit place for Younger Brothers, and Men of small Estates, who with the Industry of a few Servants, may in two or three years time, be plen∣tifully accommodated; Also all Ingenious Men, that are lovers of Planting, Gardening, and the like quiet, and useful Imployments. A Plantation seems a fit place for those Ingenious Spirits, that being Low in the World, are much clog'd and oppressed about a Lively-hood; for the means of Subsisting being easy there, they may have time, and opportunity to Gratify their Inclinations; and thereby improve Science, and help Nurseries of People. There are an other sort of Persons, not only fit for, but necessary in Plan∣tations; and that is, Men of Universal Spirits, that have an Eye to the good of Posterity; and that both understand, and delight to promote good Discipline, and Just Government among a Plain and Well intending People: Such Persons may find room in Colonies, for their good Counsil and Contrivance, who are shut out from being of much use or service to great Nations, under settled Customs. But they that go, must wisely count the Cost, For they must either work themselves, or be able to imploy others. A Winter goes before a Summer, and the first work will be Countrey Labour, to clear Ground, and raise Provision; other things by degrees. X. What is fit for the Journey, and first to be done there. 1st. The Passage for Men and Women is Five Pounds a head, for Children under Ten Years, Fifty Shillings, Sucking Children Nothing, for Freight of Goods. Forty Shilling per Tun; but one Chest to every Passenger Free. 2ly. The Goods fit to take with them for use or sale; are all Utensils for Husbandary and Building, and House-hold-stuff; Also all sorts of things for Ap∣parrel, as Cloath, Stuffes, Linnen, &c. Wherein all that desire, may be more particularly Informed, by Philip Ford, at the Hood and Scarf in Bow-lane in London. Lastly, Being by the Mercy of God safely Arrived; be it in October, Two Men may clear as much Ground for Corn, as usually brings by the following Harvest about Twenty-Quarters; In the mean time they must buy Corn, which they may have as aforesaid; and if they buy them two Cows, and two Breed∣ing Sows; with what the Indians for a small matter will bring in, of Fowl, Fish, and Venison (which is incredibly Cheap, as a Eat Buck for Two Shillings) that, and their industry will supply them. It is Apprehended, that Fifteen Pounds stock for each Man (who is first well in Cloaths, and provided with fit wor∣king Tools for himself) will (by the Blessing of God) carry him thither, and keep him, till his own Plantation will Accommodate him. But all are most seriously cautioned, how they proceed in the disposal of themselves; 'Tis true, The Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof; and it seems to many, to be the time wherein those desolate Western parts of the World are to be Planted,
and have their Day, as Asia, Africa, and Europe have had (of which the are divers Prophesies extant) yet let all have a Reverend regard o God's Pro∣vidence in their Removal, and be serious in it, rather seeking the Comforts of retirement, and a sufficiency for Life (like the Blessed Patriarke of Old) th Ease, Fulness, and Wealth. And it is further Advised, that all such as go, would at least get the Per∣mission, if not the good Likeing of their near Relations; for that is both Na∣tural, and a Duty incumbent upon all: And by this means will natural Af∣fection be Preserved, and a Friendly and Profitable Correspondence main∣tained between them. In all which, God Almighty (who is the Salvation of the Ends of the Earth) Direct us, that His Blessings may attend our Honest Indeavours; and then the Consequence of all our Undertakings, will be to the Glory of His Great Name, and the true Happiness of Us, and our Po∣sterity. Amen. William Penn. POSTSCRIPT. WHoever are desirous to be concern'd in this Province, they may be treated with, and further Satisfied, at Philip Fords in Bow-lane in Cheap-side, and at Thomas Rudyards, or Benjamin Clarks in George-yard in Lombard-street, London. There is likewise Printed a Map of Pennsylvania, together with a Descrip∣tion at the End of it; and some Proposals. THE END. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-yard in Lom-bard-street. 1681.
