P2712 R35113 15020457 103055
A POEM UPON His Majeyst's Happy Return FROM IRELAND. WElcome Victorious Prince, once more From Conquer'd Ireland, to the British Shoar. How soon has thy Illustrious Name Eclips'd the vaunting Caesar's Fame? For thou art only He That went, and view'd, and overcame. Fresh Laurels here attend The Nations Sov'raign, and the Nation's Friend, Rewafted once again, Endanger'd England from her fears to free. The wary Schombergh fought by Rule and Art, And cautiously spun out the time; But when Heroick WILLIAM came to act his Part, Success seem'd only lodg'd in Him; And all Pretence of Right, From the belov'd of Heav'n took speedy flight. One would have thought, That Richard would have Henry fought: He that so oft had given out What he would do in person, more than Castor stout. But his amazing Guilt Before decided, did the Issue dread; And to preserve Anointed Head, In Consternation from the Danger fled. Danger, That Princely WILLIAM seem'd to Court, And She by chance approach'd; But having once in View Th' undaunted Awe that sat upon his Brow, Danger it self with-drew, and only touch'd The Daring Venturer, Heav'ns kind pow'r to show. Then say no more, That Fortune rules the World, or that Her Pow'r To Royal Thrones extends: She has no share In the Success of doubtful War; Nor is it on Her frowns That the Repose of Rule depends. Long, though her Champions in her weak Defence, 'Gainst Heav'n have brandish'd Human Eloquence; They need not Imp their Icarus wings From soaring Flight to fall Upon the Rocks of Learned Ignorance. Trace but Heav'nsConduct, they shall find, It was not Chance, Or any Change that Fortune sends, That hasten'd James's sudden fall, Or Potent WILLIAM did advance, To Soveraign State, and Dignity of Kings. Let 'em to fresh Remembrance call, How oft with Shields of Angels covered o'er, In dismal Fight he stood 'Midd'st Peals of Thunder, and in show'rs of Blood.
How but of late The hasty Bullets lost their Sulphur'd Heat, And tamely tumbl'd at his Horses Feet. How disappointed Treachery combind By Pious Plots, and Holy Undermines Of those that take, ne'er swallow Oaths, To ruin all his Great Designs, And blast the Labours of his pondering Mind: But disappointed still, to show They moyle in vain, that muse his Overthrow. Hard Case howe'er, to be betray'd at home By the black Tools of FRANCE and ROME, While he was forc'd abroad, the Stygian Boggs to cleanse, And free the Passage to assist his Friends: As if 'twere still the noblest Hero's Fate, That they must visit Hell Before they can be Great. All these Reflections might convince Th' unthinking Jacobites unruly Sense, That still the great unfinish'd Work goes on; Not to Perfection to be brought, But by the Princely WILLIAM's Hand alone, Th' Imperial Eagle his long wisht for Leisure waits, And all the late afflicted States, And wronged Princes send to him for Aid, To wreck their just Revenge On him that on their fair Dominions prey'd. All this the Gallick Diomed That has so long his Horses fed With Human Blood, and Orphans Bread, With Terror does behold, And throws about his ill-got Gold To tempt unwary Fools. Affrighted Lewis dreads the Storm To see the Mettl'd English Arm, And maugre all his feigned Ironies, Quits distant Conquests and unites his Force. Thus the Alarum'd Blood doth change it's Course, And to the Heart, when once distemper'd, flies. And now, what can we less portend But that those Lawrels, fresh and green, Planted by our victorious Monarchs Hand, In his Auspicious Reign will grow To Cedar Heighth, and bear New Trophies every Year? His Lawrels are not common; yet if such Scorn the Celestial Thunders touch, When prepared for his Brow; We must not then allow, That France's Thunder more than Heav'ns can do. May then each Year of his long Reign, Still be Crown'd, With Successes far and near; And every day be still renown'd With some splendid Act of Glory, To enlarge our Monarchs Story; For Years, the chiefest in Renown, Live by the Princes Fame, and not their own. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane, 1690.
