P3830 R35130 15032657 103073
THE Protestant-Dissenters Case: OR, The Statute of the 23 of Eliz. Ca. 1. Inflicting the Penalty of 20 l. per Month for Not coming to Church, Explained. SInce 'tis a Rule in our Law, that Ignorance of the Law excuses no man, 'tis fit every man should be furnisht as far as may be with means to under∣stand each Law that concerns him; and seeing the Sta∣tute of the 23 Eliz. after many years Dormancy, begins in some places to be put in Execution upon Protestauts, it cannot I humbly conceive, be any Crime or Offence, to offer (with all Modesty and Submission) such rea∣sonable Considerations as may tend towards the Ex∣planation and Understanding the true scope, mean∣ing, and extent of that Law: which for more plain∣ness, shall be done by way of stating a Case; Thus, Suppose an Indictment brought against A. B. set∣ting forth—That the said A. B. for a year last past, was an Inhabitant within the Town of C. and a Pa∣rishioner of the same Town, and by the whole time aforesaid, was of the Age of sixteen years and up∣wards. And that the said A. B. from the 10th of August, Anno 34 Car. 2. until the 11th of Sept. in the year, viz. by the space of a Month next following after the said 10th day of August, did not repair to the Pa∣rish-Church of C. aforesaid, nor to any other Church, Chappel, or usual place of Common-Prayer and Divine Service, any Lords day or other dayes or∣dained or used to be kept as Holy-dayes, happening between the said 10th day of August, and the said 11th day of Sept. but voluntarily and obstinately hath forborn the same by the said space of a Month, the said A. B: not having any Lawful or reasonable Excuse or Impediment to be absent: Contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit. & provis. in Contempt. dicti Domini Regis, nec non contra pacem, &c. The Defendant Pleads Non Culp. that is to say, Not Guilty. The matter coming on to Trial, if the Defendant (or his Councel) moves, that the Prosecutor may be called; (for 'tis said, there is a Rule of Court, that on the Pro∣secutors not appearing, the Defendant is to be acquit∣ted. However, be there such a Rule or not, upon the Reasonableness of the Ground thereof, I conceive) if the Prosecutor do not appear, the Defendant may move for his Acquirtal, and ought to be Discharged. Obj. If it be Objected, that the Proof lies on the Defendants part, and that he ought to prove his being at Church: Answ. It may be Answered, that the Defendant as to all parts of the Indictment (other and except only so much thereof as concerneth going to any Pa∣rish Church other than his own, and his having a law∣ful Impediment) denies the said Allegation, and is not bound to make any such Proof. For tho the Proof may not be expected on the Pro∣secutors part, of the Defendants not going to other Churches, &c. because of the multitude of them, and the impossibility of making such a Proof; yet the Clause that the Defendant was not at his Parish Church, is a matter of Fact, and a matter of Fact (which over and above the Proof of the Defendants being a Pari∣shioner all the Months laid in the Indictmnt, and a∣bove sixteen years, which is likewise necessary) ought to be proved, and for default thereof the Defendant to be Acquitted. And therefore the Defendant may insist and stand upon it, and that for these Reasons. 1. For that the being or not being of the Defendant at his Parish Church, doth or may lie in the Knowledge of the Prosecutor, and without such Knowledge a whole Town, or any great number of Persons (if such a Pra∣ctice should be allowed) may be Indicted and put to needless Trouble and Charge; any, and perhaps Con∣victed too wrongfully; for questionless a man going to do a lawful Act, at a lawful place, is not bound to carry Witnesses with him. 2. Because, touching not coming to Church there are three Statutes, viz. 1 Eliz. 23 Eliz. and 3 Ja∣cobi. Now this Indictment is grounded on the two first; not coming to his Parish Church being against 1 Eliz. and not coming to some Church, or any Church against 23 Eliz. which also referrs to 1 Eliz. for it saith, He that shall not come, contrary to the Statute of 1 Eliz. now 3 Jacobi saith — If any one resort not, &c. and hear Divine Service, &c. according to the Statute made 1 Eliz. He may within a Month after the Offence done, if he cannot make. some good Excuse for his Absence, be Convicted before one Justice, [Note the manner how, not for want of Proof on his part of his being at Church, but] upon his own Confession, or the Oath of one Witness: Note again, It saith not, If he cannot prove he was at Church, but if he cannot make Excuse; the Proof of the Impediment lies on him, if he alleadge any, but his not being at his Parish Church must be proved at least by one Witness: So this In∣dictment being grounded on 1 Eliz. as well as 23 Eliz. for that by the 3 Jac. a Conviction for 12 d. cannot be without Confession of the Party, or Oath of one Witness; it cannot be imagined that a Conviction for 20 l. should be on less Evidence, or no Evidence at all, or that less proof should serve in the one Case than in the other. 3. For that the Law allows of a Plea of Non Culp. (not Guilty) to these Indictments, and where that Plea is allow'd, the Proof lies on the other side, unless it be otherwise Enacted and specially Provided: As for Landing-Goods, Custom not being paid, by the Sta∣tute Omnis probandi, is expresly laid on his part that claims the Goods; which shews or plainly implies it lay not on his part before, for then that Clause of the Act had been needless; but in this Case there is no such Provision: And Query, If the Proof lay on the De∣fendants
part, whether Not Guilty would have been a good Plea? 4. For that, the Law presumes no man to be an Offender till proved such, and is more prone to Ac∣quit than Condemn, therefore there being no Evi∣dence to the contrary, it is to be presumed rather that the Defendant did his Duty and went to Church, than without Evidence to presume the contrary. 5. For that the Jury are sworn to try the Issue join∣ed, viz. whether Guilty or Not Guilty, according to their Evidence; so not as a matter of Form, rash∣ly, by Implicit Faith, or in Complemental Obedience, nor upon trust, belief or presumptions; but upon Evi∣dence, that is, a sufficiency of Sworn Witnesses, and other Proofs to a Jury for finding an Issue, and so call∣ed, because thereby the point in Issue is to be made Evidnt to the Jury — Probationes dbent esse Evi∣dentes, & luce clariores. Obj. It may be Objected, that not going to his Pa∣rish Church is a Negative. Ans. But it is such a Negative as may be proved, and to make a man an offender, it must, for the Rea∣sons above, be proved. Obj. If it should be pretended, that the Grand Ju∣ries finding it, is a sufficient Evidence for the other Jury. Ans. It is to be answered, that it neither is so, nor hath been so taken; nor their Verdicts, or finding of∣fered as Evidence to the other Jury. Nothing being more common, than when a man is Indicted, thô the Bill found by the grand Inquest, yet if no Evidence come against him at his Tryal, for the Court to direct the petty Jury to acquit him. Obj. It may in this Case be alleadged, that the De∣fendant is reputed a Phanatick, one that is reported not to go to Church, and so it is to be presumed he goes not. Ans. Indictments are to be found on credible Wit∣nesses, plain and direct proof, and not probabilities or In∣ferences, neither upon Hearsay's, Reports or the like. Neither in such a Case as this, on any of the Jurors own Information, unless they were constantly during the Month all Sundays and Holy-days at the Church, and do know, and did take Notice that the Defendant was not there. These Arguments and Reasons carry such weight, that I conceive the Defendant must thereupon be dis∣charg'd for want of Evidence, or at least may move to have it specially found, and let the Jury referr it to the Law, viz. If the matter and Evidence be sufficient in Law to maintain this Issue, then they find it, other∣wise not. If any Witnesses appear against the Defendant, he may Examine them: 1. How they know A. B. lived in the Town that month, and in what house, and how they know him∣to be above sixteen years of Age? 2. Whether the Witness himself were constantly at Church every Sunday, Holy-day and time when Divine service was said there all that month, &c? And then the Defendant hath this further to answer, that he is a Protestant, professing the Protestant Reli∣gion, and no Papist or Popish Recusant, and so not within the Acts made against Papists and Popish Re∣cusants, consequently not Guilty as to any Indictment founded upon them. prove himself a Protestant, and no Popish Recusant, the defence seems very strong for these rea∣sons, which Evince Protestants not to be within those Acts; As 1. For that another Act is made against dissenting Protestants, and a severe one too, viz. 35 Eliz. in which Papists and Popish Recusants are not included, but exempted. And if Protestants be also in 23 Eliz. then the Laws are more severe against them than Pa∣pists, and they are in a worser Case, which (in those times, there being so many Popish Plots against the Queen) is not reasonably to be presumed. 2. The Preamble of this Act of 23 Eliz. and the former part thereof, shews it made against Popish Re∣cusants: See also Sir Simon Diggs Journal of all the Parliaments in that Queens Reign. 3. The Act of 7 Jac. Cap. 6. saith, If a married Woman (being Lawfully convicted as a Popish Re∣cusant for not coming to Church) shall not, &c. which shews that Convictions on 23 Eliz. are Convictions of parties as Popish Recusants; therefore the Defen∣dant being no Papist, cannot be Convicted on that Act. And as to this point too, the Defendant (if he see cause) may move to have it specially sound, and if Over-ruled, tender a Bill of Exceptions. Lastly; The Defendant may insist upon this, That he doth go to Church, and so Conform, and if he prove this, it seems sufficient for his Acquittal. Obj. If it be objected, that he ought to prove he went to Church during the Month in the Indictment, and that his going since is not sufficient. Ans. I do conceive in this Case his going since be∣ing proved, is sufficient. For, 1. Before Prosecution the Defendant might not be so exact to take Witnesses as he is now, and it may puz∣zle many a very good Church-man to prove upon Oath his being at Church in February last. But from the Defendants going now, it is to be presumed he went before—Justitia semper sequitur mitiorem partem. Ju∣stice always makes the most favourable Construction. 2. The Act of 23 Eliz. saith, Every person Guil∣ty of any offence against the Act (except Treason) who shall be thereof Indicted, or at his Arraign∣ment or TRIAL before Judgment Submit and Conform himself before the Bishop of the Diocess, &c. or be∣fore the Justices where he shall be Indicted, Arraigned or Tryed (having not before made Submission, &c.) shall upon his Recognition of such Submission, in open Assizes or Sessions of the County where such person shall be Resident, be discharged of all and every the said Offences against that Act (except Treasonable) and of all pains and Forfeitures for the same. Now, the Defendants going to Church (by him proved) is an Actual Submission, or as much as per∣formance of a Submission, and so more than a Promise, and is an Evidence of his going before. And especi∣ally if no proof to the Contrary, a good Evidence for his Acquittal. Lex plus Laudatur quando Ratione probatur. London, Printed for Tho. Knowles in Tower-street, 1682.
