R1101 R220737 99832129 36600
A REPRESENTATION Of the ADVANTAGES, that would arise to this KINGDOM, by the erecting and improving OF MANUFACTORIES: But more especially, by that of WOOLLEN-CLOATH. With an ANSWER to the OBJECTIONS against this last; and an Account of the present State, and Successe of the Manufactory at NEW-MILNES, for Woollen-Cloath, Serges, Silk and Worsted-stockings; and of the Rules and Methodes observed by the ƲNDERTA∣KERS in the managing of it, With PROPOSALS to such as shall be willing to join in that Work. EDINBƲRGH, Printed in the Year 1683.
The ADVANTAGES OF MANUFACTORIES To this KINGDOM, But more particularly of CLOATH. Objections against it answered, with an Account of the present State of that at New-milns, and of the Rules and Methods observed in the managing thereof; With an Offer of Conditions to such as will joyn therein. HOW great inclinations our Kings have had ever since the year 1581. to encourage Manufactories in this Kingdom, may appear by the several Acts of Parliament, and Council, since that time; some whereof are narrated in the 40th Act of the first Parliament Sess. 1. Charles II. And in no Age did the zeal of the Nation appear more for erecting of Manufa∣ctories and Societies, than since his Majesties happie Restauration: As is evident by the foresaid 40th and the 42.43.45.46.47. and 48. Acts of that Session of his Majesties first Parl. and by the 20th Act of the third Sess. of the same Parl. In which not only many considerable Encouragements are given, both to Natives and Fo∣cieties for Fishings, &c. but also considerable Privileges and Immunities granted to them, and Prohibitions made against
Export and Import, which might be prejudicial to such Under∣takings, and many sumptuary Laws established. But the ef∣fectual, and serious prosecution of these former Laws, was reserved for the years of his ROYAL HIGHNES'S Commission, who not only procured that Act for encouraging Trade and Manufactories to be passed in the 3. Parl. of Char. the II. and 12 Act thereof, (which has hitherto been more effectually observed than any former Acts of that nature,) but also His ROYAL HIGHNES'S own, and his Familie's Example, in observing the sumptuary Laws, his Encouragements, his frequent Commonings, and Discourses with such, as he understood to be inclined to the promoting of Ma∣nufactories, did perswade several Persons, seriously, to go about the erecting Manufactories of Woollen-cloath. We need not insist upon the Advantages arising to a Nation from Manufactories. It is generally known, that those Nations where they flourish most, are proportionally to their Territories, the richest & most potent: and where Manufactories are most despised & neglected, these, notwithstanding of the great advantage of lar∣ge Territories, and native Product, are neverthelesse much inferior in Riches, Splendor, and Power. Nor can it be otherwise: or if the Riches, and outward Happiness of a Kingdom, or State, consist in the having plenty and aboundance of all things, necessary for the confortable Subsistance of all its Inhabitants, even of the lowest & meanest Quality; then is it Manufactories that contribute chie∣flie to the same. These make a litle Spot of ground, viz. Holland, no greater than the Lothians, mantain many Millions richlie, and plentifully. These, if once they were established here, would make every Tenent and Coatter, (who ar under Noblemen, and Gentle∣men,) their Wives, Servants, and Children, who formerly were not able to pay their Rents, and get but a miserable mantainance; live confortably, and by their Handiwork, pay their Rents, pleasantly, and punctuallie. These would strengthen this Kingdom, not only by increasing the Riches thereof, but the number of its Subjects.
And these would not only prevent the exporting of many thou∣sand Pounds sterl. out of this Kingdom: but in a little time, the Ex∣port of Goods would not only enrich the private Merchants, Ex∣porters; but the Kingdom it self, and cause in it plentie of Money. And being by his ROYAL HIGHNESS, upon these considera∣tions, invited & encouraged to enter ourselves in a Companie and Societie of Cloathiers, warranted by the Laws of the Kingdom; that due Honour may be returned to his ROYAL HIGHNESS, who did first set us awork, & to the Lords of his Majestie's Privie-Council, who have been very careful to encourage us, by pre∣serving, and making effectual to us, the Privileges and Immunities granted to Manufactories, by the Laws of the Kingdom, and par∣ticularly those against the Import of foraign Cloath: and that others, by our example, may be incited & stirred up, either to joyn with us, or set up particular Manufactories of their own; and that the Nation, in general, may be encouraged to the prosecution of such Manufactories, as their Inclination, and prospect of Advan∣tage shall determine them in; and that Posterity may reap bene∣fit and profit by our example: we conceived it our Dutey, in gratefull acknowledgment of our Obligation to his ROYAL HIGHNESS, to give this Account of our Undertaking, and our Successe therein hitherto. The Woollen-Manufactories are of very great and universal use and consumption all the World over, and the Flemings who first brought them to perfection in Europe, had truely that Gol∣den-Fleece, which hath given to the King of Spain, in his Right of Brabant and Flanders, that noble and honourable Order, so designed, rather than his Peruvian Gold. And since the English, by the instruction of the Walloones and Flemings, came to im∣prove their native Wooll, and to erect Woollen-Manufactories, which is about 200. years ago; they have become Masters of great Riches and Force, of great Reputation and Strength at Sea,
able to assert their Dominion in the narrow Seas, and to secure their Trade in all parts of the known and habitable World: and to maintain, by that only Manufactory, above 100000 Persons, and from the Port of London, to export yearly of broad-Cloaths, and other woollen-Manufactries, to the value of above 400000 Lib. Sterling. What is made of Wooll, is either made use of in the Kingdom, or exported: and is either made of our own Country Wooll, or Foraign. If made use of within the Kingdom, and that it be of our own Wooll; every Pound, suppose of the coursest Wooll, which is not worth 5 d. the Pound, (reckoning 16 Ounces to the pound) comes to yield, when made in Fingrams (the coursest of our Product) dy'd and dress'd 12 d. the eln, and affoords a main∣tainance to Carders, Spinners, Weavers, Dyers and Dressers. And whereas, within these 20. or 24. years several thowsand Pounds Sterl. have been exported to England yearly, and bestowed upon such Serges, as are now sold for 12 or 13 d. the eln here, but then cost 16 or 18 d. the yard at London; there is not only none imported, but many thowsand Pounds Sterl. worth, sent yearly to Holland, and Money brought here in specie for them: many sent to the Plantations abroad, yea many caried into England itself, by stealth, (whence we were formerly furnished,) and sold there to good profit. And though this sort is made of the coursest of Wooll, and is almost the coursest of woollen Stuffs made in the Kingdom; yet much benefit arises from the same, not only by saving the Export of so much Money, formerly bestowed on such; but also by occasioning the import of so much Money to the Kingdom. And the benefit and advantage will be much more, when time is imployed in making finer Stuffs or Serges: as can be made appear by the making of that sort of Serges cal∣led Stirling Serges, where one Pound of our own Wooll, (not worth 8 sh. Scots the Trone pound,) shall yield 2 elns of Serge or there∣by; which when dy'd and dress'd in cloath Colours, is sold here in
Retail with profite for 24 shil. the eln: and within these eight years, were wholly imported from England, and cost there, albeit not finer than this, alwayes 2 sh. 2 Pence and 2 sh. 4 Pence Sterl. the yarde. And as more People are imployed in making of these Searges, requiring more time in Spinning and Weaving; so when made, being double the value and price of the former, they do now not only save a great Summe of Money, which was yearly exported and bestowed on the like in England, but within these three years, good quantities have been exported to Holland, Ham∣burgh, Spain, the West-Indies, and other Places, (as can be made appear) and thereby Money brought into the Kingdom; and it is but eight or ten years at most, since any Quantities of them were begun to be made here. To ascend yet higher to mixt Searges, Cloath-Searges, and these called in France Searge de Nismes, which can be made of the same Wooll with the former, or not two shillings Scots the Pound dearer, and yet do yield double or triple the price; with∣in these two years our people are come to a great perfection in them, in so much that several Pieces are made as fine, as any ordinarly made in France or England, whereby also in a short time, a great Summe of Money formerly exported for buying these Goods, will be saved and keeped in the Countrey, and Money gained by Export, and many thousands get a Lively-hood who formerly lived idle in misery and want. But the most artificial and beneficial Commodity made of Wool is Cloath, and the finer the Cloath be, the more Persons are imployed about it, and the Benefite of it the greater. This Ma∣nufactory of Cloath enricheth England and Holland. Nay there are many more people imployed, and much more Profite made, and Money imported by this Manufactory alone, than by all the other Manufactories in England joyned togither; it being almost incredible what vast Quantities of Cloathes they make, what vast
Summes of money (besides Goods) the Return of the Cloathes they yearly export to Turky, the Straits, Spain, Holland, Portugal, France, Hamburgh, the West-Indies, and many other places produce; and it is evident how immensly benefi∣cial it is: for were it not so, it had not continued so long amongst them, nor had such endeavours been used to monopolize it to their Nation, and such strict Laws made and execute against the Importers of Cloath and Woollen-Stuffe from foraign Countries into England. But although their example alone may sufficiently demonstrate the great Profite, that may arise to this Kingdom from making of Cloath above all other Woollen Manufactories, it is evident of it self: FOR if that Manufactory be most profitable to any Nation and consequently to this, that prevents the greatest Export and occasions the greatest Import of Money, and which with least expence of Money bestowed upon foraign Materials, doth im∣ploy and give a confortable Lively-hood to vast numbers of peo∣ple and affoardeth Profite to all; it is manifest, the Manufactory of Cloath hath these Advantages above all other. For first, that the making of Cloath in the Kingdom, would save the greatest Export of Money of any Manufactory, can be demonstrat from the Custome-books, and Books of Merchants, and that when Cloath was imported, the value thereof was not only much more than any other particular species of Goods, but of more value than all Silk Goods. And if Flowred Silks, Silver and Gold Laces, White Laces and other superfluous Goods now prohibited, be not reckoned, the value of Cloath yearly imported exceeds all the other Goods together: Seing many thousands use Cloath that make use of litle or no other foraign Goods; and most of these make use of it once or twice a year. Secondly, that the Cloath-work in Scotland in Process of time, if followed and improven, may and will occasion the greatest
port of money, is evident from the example of our neighbour Nation: and that even Scotland may send abroad and sell as cheap as England, seing the value of all Cloath consists chiefly in the Workmanship, and these that can live cheapest, can work chea∣pest, and these that can work cheapest, can make the cheapest Cloath; and so export and under-sell others: as already is evi∣dent, we have done within these ten years in our Searges: and is neither impossible nor improbable to be attained (in few years) in Cloath. For if any should have affirmed ten or twelve years ago, that Scotland should have exported Searges and undersold En∣gland; or any have affirmed 200 years ago. that England should have exported and undersold Flanders and Holland for Cloath and Searges, it would have been thought as improbable if not more. For the third and last Branch proving its advantages, That upon small expences of money bestowed upon foraigne Mate∣rials, it will imploy, and give a confortable Lively-hood to vast numbers of people and affoord profit to all, appeareth thus. If the very best superfine Spanish Cloath that can be made, re∣quire a very small Summe of money to be bestowed upon foraign Materials, and will affoord a Lively-hood and profite to many people; then the cheapest Cloath which can be made wholly of our own Wool, and the midle Cloath, nay all below the super∣fine, which require but a mixture of foraign Wool, will require far less export of money out of the Kingdom; and affoord a Live∣ly-hood to many. But so it is that the best superfine Spanish Cloath when dressed, weyghs but one Pound two Ounces or one Pound four ounces at most per Ell, and doth not require of Spa∣nish Wool underssed, scribled or washed, two pounds and a half, which doth stand usually twenty four shilling Scots the pound, is five shillings Sterling; and there is not any other foraign Materials made use of in these but Oyl and Dyeing-stuff, which to a yard of Cloath will extend to three shill Scots or four at most: so that
for the best Cloath that can be made, for which we pay 17, 18 or 19 shill. Sterl. per yarde abroad, there is no more money exported for making it than five shil. and four pence, the rest, being twelve shillings Sterling per Ell remains in the Countrey: and in midle Cloath, the charge of money for fo∣raign Materials will not be two shillings six Pence Sterling the Ell: in the coursest, nothing but for Dying-stuffe and Oyle which will not be above four Pence. The nixt thing to be proven, is the vast number of poor people, and others imployed in this Work, and the profit arising to each; which is evident, seing we have already 726 imployed, who have daylie wages, and still in the way of grouth. Nor doth this Manufactory furnish advantage only to the im∣mediat Servants of this Imploy, but it giveth profit to Wrights, Reed-makers, Card-makers, Dyers, and others: for to the Manufactory of Card-makers alone, we have pay'd the last year fifty Pounds Sterling, besides what we have had from abroad. Considering then, that the erecting, following and impro∣ving of Manufactories for Cloath in this Kingdom, would save the export of much money, and may in some few years occasion the import of more; and that a small Summe of money will fur∣nish all foraign Materials necessary thereunto, and that it would give a confortable living and maintainance to such a vast number of people, and profit to them: It is hoped that all ingenious Spirits and Well-wishers to the Countrey and to the poor and the publick good, will not only observe the Laws made for encourag∣ing thereof, but also promote, and contribute to erect Cloath Manufactories themselves. But some object and obtrude against this our so probable and profitable Endeavours, first, that it is a Novelty. Secondly, that we will never be able to make it so good, or bring it to that perfection as it is in England. Thirdly, that we will never make
it so cheap, for what is now sold is extravagantly dear. Fourth∣ly, that we will never be able to furnish the Countrey. Fifthly, that in the mean time people cannot get Cloath. Sixthly, that it can never be hindred to be imported, and that the Laws against its import will not be put to Execution. To the first, if Novelty be a good Argument against a good and profitable work, then there must be no Reformation from lazienes and ignorance, no new invention of, nor improve∣ment of Arts and Sciences. Secondly, it cannot be imagined, what should or can hinder our coming to perfection in making of Cloath, except the pri∣vat interest of some (whose subsistence hitherto in a great mea∣sure depended upon the vending of foraign Cloath) obstruct or retard it; who by their discourses discourage people to make or undertake, and bring malicious Reports upon any that is made here, and by stealth bring in foraign Cloath to hinder the sale of what we make. For, it cannot be deny'd, but the capacities and ingine of our people, are as good as these of any other Nation; and what ever Trade or Science we have apply'd our mindes to, we have been as eminent in the knowledge and practice of it, as the generality of any other Nation: and perfection in any Science of Art is not attained suddenly; time and practice bring men to perfection in Arts, even frequently the most dull for Sciences, will by time and practice become perfect in Trade: and this is not so difficult, but that in two years practice, our common people are come to a considerable perfection, so that already they make some Cloath that would cost 16 shill. Sterl. the ell in England, And are now upon making the finest Kinds; And people must be brought to perfection by degrees: for the Spin∣ners who receaved the former year 5 d. receave now 9 d. and 12 d., and Weavers who receaved the last year but 30, have now 45 and 50 shillings Sterl. the piece, by reason of the improvement of both. So that to affirme we shall never come to perfection,
as it is a malicious and unjust reflection against our Countrey, without any ground, unworthy of any Country-man to affirme,  Experience hath in all other Arts, and a litle time will even in is demonstrat its falshood. To the Third, that we will never be able to make so cheap as  England, and that what Cloath is now sold, is extravagantly ear; it is answered, that albeit in the beginning the Undertakers ust be at a great Expence to set up, pay great Sallaries, Fees and Wages for encouraging people to work: (Our Country people eing very backward to any new thing or strange, and not easilie rawn from their old way of living, though the new be more onfortable and better) yet beyond all doubt, where the price and alue of any Commodity consist in the Workmanship, and not in he Materialls of which it is made, (as all Cloath doth, as is made evident before) then where it can be cheapest made, it can be heapest sold, and where they who make it, can live and mantain hemselves cheapest, they can make it cheapest: and in few Na∣ions of the World can work-people live cheaper, nor do any live  cheap as in this. And so beyond all peradventure, we may be ble to sell not only as cheap, but in a shorter time cheaper than any other Nation: and the Undertakers at New-milnes doubt not but in two years more, to be able to sell as cheap as any for∣merly made in England. But when all Prentices, and work-people now learning and working there, shall come to disperse them∣selves through the Country, and work by themselves, and the knowledge of it become more general; These doing then for themselves, will certainly work cheaper than any publick work can, and will be undoubtedly able to sell cheaper than our Nigh∣bours. And as to the disadvantage the Country hath by the Re∣straint, That what Cloath is sold, is extravagantly dear, and the Liedges exacted upon: We answer, that this Complaint is either made of foraign Cloath imported through stealth, or of the Cloath made in the Kingdom. For the dearth of foraign Cloath,
although wee justifie not the Exactors, yet to the Buyers it is but too small a punishment, for such whose Prodigality, Pride or va∣nitie, will prompt them to thwart and cross so publick and Nati∣onall a Good, and by their Practice encourage the breach of the publick Laws; And as the Tempter is more guiltie than the temp∣ted; So those who knowingly and willingly buy foraign Cloath, are the only Occasion of the breach of the Law, and discouragers of the publick Good: and a little of that now spent upon Extrava∣gancies, and which they pay beyond the worth of foraign Cloath, would (if rightly imployed) quicklie bring the Nation to a perfection, to make as good as what they pay too dearly for. But for the extravagant dearth of what Cloath is made in this Kingdom, It is a malicious Calumnie, raised by these, whose private Advantage is crossed by the Law, who like Demetrius will rather raise the City in an Uproar, than be disappoynted of their gain, and who make it their bussiness to crush it, and their ordinary Talk to declaim against it; though the difference betwixt Cloath made in  anufactory and sold in Retaile by Mer∣chants be very litle, if any thing more than what the same sort of Cloath was sold for before, as can be made appear. Yet in a few years, we will undertake to sel it cheaper than ever it was sold in Scotland. And although as has been said, it may be sold hereafter as cheap and cheaper than in England, yet it cannot be expected so in the beginning, when we have all Provisions to make, a great Stock of money to be∣stow upon Loomes, and all other Materials, great Sallaries to pay to foraign Servants to instruct our own people, good Fees and wages to give to our own people to cause them leave their former imployments and follow this, (which at the beginning they were very averse from) with many other losses and inconve∣niences attending beginners, and the Undertakers of any new, though never so beneficiall imployments. These things consi∣dered, as it is no wonder that it is a litle deare, so considering the
advantage that in a litle time will accrew to the Kingdom thereby, and that it is evident by the former reasons, that they will be able to sell as cheap and cheaper than others hereafter; It is expected that if at present it should be sold a little dearer, as it is but very litle (if at all) yet it may be very well dispensed with, seing the advantage doth accresce to the Kingdom and not to the Under∣takers: Who being most part Merchants who formerly sold foraign Cloath, cannot by their greatest enemies to the work, be supposed to gaine by the 6th part so much upon their Stocks in the Manufactorie, as they did formerly upon the Cloath which they imported. Fourthly, whereas it is pretended, That the Work at New-milnes will never be able to furnish the Country. It is answered, that it is most true, That the Work  New-milnes cannot for present furnish the Country, yet to that length they are come in two years, That from two Looms set up in October, 1681. They have now twenty five at work for Cloath, and two for Searges, and have ordered Ten more to be set up for Cloath; and will undertake to make of course, midle, fine and super∣fine Cloaths eight piece every Week of the year, each peace containing 27, 28, or 29 Ells of dressed Cloath, will amount to above 12000 Ells in the year, and some few more such, with privat industry would furnish the Kingdom. Nor was it ever in∣tended by the Undertakers to serve the whole Kingdom, but principally to be a good Example to others in so good and profit∣able a Work to the Nation. And the Act of Parliament and Act of Council intended not the benefite of publict Lawes, and Re∣striction upon foraign Cloath, for the advantage of any one Ma∣nufactory; but to encourage the upsetting of many. And it is exceedingly to be regrated as a disgrace to our Nation, That so great Encouragement being given, so few publick Spirits should be found to promote so good a Work, which would prove so beneficial to the Kingdom and themselves.
And if after so clear Demonstrations of the advantages of Ma∣nufactories in general, and of woollen-Manufactories in parti∣cular, especially these for Cloath, there should be none found to contribute to promote and advance the same. Yet it is hum∣bly conceaved, that if his Sacred Majesty, Royal Highness, and Publict Ministers under them, will (from the same principle of goodness and love to this Kingdoms advantage, which prompted them to encourage the erecting of Manufactories, and to the making of such Lawes for their advantage) countenance the vigorous and punctual Execution of the Laws made, and not suffer transgressors to passe unpunished, nor the Lawes by not observance to passe in deswetude: but on the contrary by their own wearing and Example strengthen them. And when Persons privat intrest, pride and curiosity shall find and invent new Me∣thods to evade the force of the Law, and frustrat the good design and end thereof, that they will by additional new Laws and vi∣gorous execution of the old, discourage and punish such selfish Persones and Obstructors of a National Good: If his Sacred Ma∣jesty, Royal Highness, and Publick Ministers shall continue this their goodness but seven Years, (as we have no reason to doubt their continuance of them for ever.) It is not to be doubted, but even in that time there will be so many Persons of all Ranks, by practice and teaching acquainted with all the several parts of the Imploy, and so many Prentices past their time and perfected, who will set up for themselves; that in few years this Manufacto∣ry alone, and these instructed by it, will be able to furnish the Kingdom; although it be wished for, and hoped that others will by such reasons and Example, be incited to erect others of the same Kind, and so prevent such delay. And Fifthly, whereas it is alledged, that in the mean time people generally want Cloath, and cannot be supplyed. We answer, that although by the publict Restraint, some may want Cloath, and some cannot presently get such fine Cloath, as for∣merly
they have used, yet there is not any that need want cloath∣ing, even of Woolen-stuff, Cloath or Searge, and that finer (although we want English Cloath,) than the generality of peo∣ple in most places of the world do wear. For, most Kingdoms of the World even France it self for Cloath especially, are sup∣ply'd from England, and the Low-countries, And in these Nati∣ons, it is only the Nobility, some of the Gentry, and chiefest Bur∣gesses that use such; the rest being forced to content themselves with as course cloathing and courser, than what our Country af∣foords. And in truth, it is not our fine cloathing that will either add to our Worth, Riches, Virtue, or Reputation in the world, but the imploying our poor and commons in Manufactories would indeed add exceedingly to all. How were we supply'd 200 years ago before the making of Cloath was come to any perfection in England? How was England supplyed when all foraign Cloath was ordained to be burnt, and none suffered to be imported? And as it is evident, that that argument would then have been ridiculous and impertinent, to have obstructed so good a Law for promoving such a Work; So now such an argument deserves not only to be exploded; but every person who for pride or vanity (which this Country may very well dispense with) will needs use foraign Cloath, and send for a sute of Cloathes from a∣broad, of purpose to satisfie their pride, rather then use what is made at home; is an enemy to the poor and to his Country, to say no worse: especially seing the Country is already come to so great a length in so short a time, and will in a litle more come to a greater, if not to an equal length with our nighbours. The 6th objection is, That the import of forraign Cloath will never be gotten full obstructed, and that the Lawes against Im∣porters will never be fully execute. To this we answer, let every Objector & Compleaner, conforme themselves to so good a Law, & there will be few Transgressors: but whilst the Objectors are Transgressors & bad Example to others, no
wonder it be difficult to hinder the import. Secondly, why may not the import of Cloath from England to any Kingdom be aswell obstructed, as they obstruct the import of this Woollen Goods from this. Thirdly, if people will be so perverse, and act so contrary to the interest of the Nation, and especially of the poor in it, as to con∣traveen the Lawes by bringing in some litle by stealth; yet if the Lawes be execute punctually and severely against the greatest or but the one half of the transgressors, (which may easily be done,) the punishment of these will prove such a terrour to the rest, & their benefit will be so small, (considering the great charges and trou∣ble they are put to in stealling,) that it is not to be doubted but they will be forced to give over: especially Considering that the Ma∣nufactorie in a very litle time, will be able to sell cheaper than they can bring it in, although they had nothing to pay but the dutie. Fourthly, as to their bold and presumptuous assertion, that the Laws will never be execute; as it is derogatory to that veneration we ought to have to these Lawes, So the contrarie may with much more probabilitie be hoped and asserted: Seing these were made upon such solide and honourable grounds for the Kingdomes advantage and wellfaire, as the same is de∣monstrat and made plain from the foregoing reasons and the proceedings of the Undertakers. And in that the first motion of the undertaking proceeded from his Royal Highness; and that it was at his desire this Manufactorie was erected, and that 24 of us have ventured a considerable part of our Stocks upon it, trusting to and relying upon the execution of these Lawes; And have now brought our undertaking to a considerable length, His Majestie will not suffer such good Laws to passe un-execute or to run in deswetude, To the great loss and disadvantage of the Kingdom, to dissappointment of his ROYAL HIGHNES'S good intenti∣ons towards it and ruin of the Undertakers.
It may be yet objected, that former Works of this Nature were erected, as at New milnes, Aire and Boningtown, which were all left off and given over. But to this we have these answers. First, That none of the Undertakers of these works were Retailers of Cloath themselves, and so although they could make Cloath, seing they could not sell it, they could not furnish money to carie on their work. Secondly. Their Stock was too small. Thridly, the same Me∣thods were not taken that are taken in this. As for instance in the matter of Servants, they had theirs on dayes wages, where∣by they were cheated and exacted upon, whereas we have Ser∣vants upon certaintie conforme to their work, the Scriblers and Spinners conforme to the Pound, and the Weavers and Dressers so much upon the ell and piece. Fourthly, all the Undertakers were wholly unacquainted in the affaire, and lastlie they wanted the great Encouragement of the Prohibition of foraign Cloath; which clearly shewes the great Difference betwixt these erected then, and now: and yet that at New-milnes preceeding 1650. was in a thriving condition till Dundee was stormed, when their Cloath was taken, and the troubles forced it to cease. There cannot be suggested any other Objection against Manu∣factories in general, or the woollen-Manufactories in parti∣cular. It remains therefore, that we give account how great a length we have brought the Work set up by us at New-milnes, & upon what rational grounds we proceed, and by what rules we walk, that his Majesty, Royal Highness, and Government may see, how ready the Undertakers are to contribute to the publick Good, and that the Kingdom may be convinced, both of the advantage of our Undertaking and Probability of its Successe, and that not only others may be incited by our Example to Contribute to the like, but also may be instructed, how to proceed and learn from our Experience, (a cheap and easie way) how to
prosecute Designes of this Nature to the greatest advan∣tage. When his Royal Highness out of a love to the Kingdoms advantage, did consider how many improvements this Na∣tion could make, and how all those were neglected, and the Country and all Ranks of people likely to be ruined, by the Mer∣chants importing ten times more of Goods in value, than they did export, and all peopls general Profuseness and Prodigality, whereby not only all the Money in the Kingdom was like to be exported in specie, but that in process of time a great part of the Lands of the Kingdom behooved of necessity to become the Pro∣pertie and Possession of Strangers and Foraigners: because Gent∣lemen not having Money to pay the Merchants, would be forced to morgage their Lands to them, and Merchants not having to pay Foraigners, they must of necessity for their secu∣rity and Satisfaction, take a right to the Merchants morgages; and that this must necessarly have followed is evident, in that the Kingdom begun to be drayn'd of all Money, so that the English money was not to be had under 6 or 7 per Cent, scarse any any rate, and Exchange rose up betwixt London and this place to 12 or 15 per Cent: our four Merk∣pieces the best Coyn of this Kingdom were almost wholly ex∣ported, and above 20000 Pounds Sterling, was exported in Dollers, in anno 1680. His Royal Highnes considering these things appointed a Committee of Trade, where himself pre∣sided, and where to prevent so certain a ruine, it was enacted, that all expensive, superfluous Goods should be discharged to be worn, and that all Goods made of Wool or Flax, which might be made in this Kingdom, as cheap as any where else, should be discharged to be imported. Which Law, although a perfect Remedie to our distemper, and Prevention of our ruine, witness the alteration since, of the Ex∣change from 12 or 15, to 2 and 3 per Cent betwixt this and
England, and that although the Merchants were due to Fo∣raigners at the making of the Law vast Summes of Money, which are not yet all payed; yet English Money which could not formerly be had at any rate, hath come into the Kingdom this year, and is now currant Money for Money: yet if no persons had undertaken the crecting of Manufactories, the good Design of the Law had been wholly frustrat. Wherefore his Royal Highnes was not only pleased to endea∣vour and procure the making of the Law, but called some of us privatly, and with the force of reason, and consideration of the publick good, perswaded us (although considerable to our privat losse) to contribute to the upsetting of this Cloath-Manu∣factory, which we have made our busieness since to prosecute. Whereupon having received from Sir James Standfield, the generous and noble offer of his Walk-mills and all his Office-houses which are many great and spacious, And that not only at a small rent, but which rent is not to be payed him, but out of the free profit arising from our Stocks after the rent of our money is payed to us. We did upon the 10th of May 1681 each sub∣scribe for the Summes we were to advance. In July 1681 we wrote for a Master to the Work, and six Servants only, who came here in August 1681. When he came, he altered the former Methods in this Ma∣nufactory of paying Servants by dayes Wages, to a certaine price, conform to their Work; and doth indeed Mannage all to the utmost advantage. We begun at first with two Loomes only, there after in March 182. eight Looms, in October 1682. 14 Loomes, and now we have 25 Loomes constantly imployed, and have ordered the setting up 10 more. As we begun with few and proceeded to more, so having all People to instruct, except the Master and 5 or 6 Sheer-men, we be∣gan
to make the coursest of white Cloaths at first, wherein we continued to October 1682; then we turned part of our people to course mixt Cloath, and so gradually on to finer, and now we are upon superfine Cloaths, and have brought the Spinners and the rest of the Work-people that length, that we hope against May next to have superfine Cloaths als good as generally are made in England. We have entred in a mutual Contract, whereby we have bound our selves to such Rules and Methodes, as in probability the undertaking cannot fail, except in case of publick and universal Calamity. To give a full Accompt of all, would be too tedious; only these more general for information and in∣struction. The whole Members are to meet four times in the year, or oftner as Occasion calls, to examine Accompts, and order all affairs by the plurality of voices, which the rest bind them to observe. The orders at every meeting are to be subscribed by the Praeses. At the general meeting in May they nominat five Persons to be Mannagers for the succeeding year: whereof three are to be a Quorum; who are to Mannage all affairs, conform to the Rules of the Company. Which Mannagers are to meet once every week at least or oftner as Occasion calls: and each of which five Mannagers are obliged to accept and discharge the said Office or pay 20 pound Sterl. to the common Stock. At every new election, two of the old Mannagers are to continue, and three new to be chosen. Each mans interest in the Company is to belong to his Heirs and Assigneys; if female, to the eldest without division; if minors, one of their Tutors or Curators, only are to have voice in the mee∣tings of the Company. For the first three years no Person has power to lift any part of his Stock or interest, but what profit is made in that time
is to be added to the common Stock, after three years every man is to have the rent of his first Stock put in by him, and what profit is made more for the 4th. 5th, and 6th years, is to be added to the Stock, and after that time, the general meeting shall deter∣mine how much of the profit shall be uplifted, and that none shall have power to call for his first Stock without consent of the general meeting or their Plurality. That all the Cloathes made in, and brought from the Manu∣factory, shall be first brought to the Chamber and Ware-house of the Company keept at Edinburgh, where the Quorum of the Mannagers is to price the same, adding two pence per shil∣ling Sterling, upon what the Master of the Work declares it stands in making; which Goods so priced, each Person is bound to receave, and pay present money for, conform to their lots: Which Cloath or Goods so falling to their lot, in case they do not take out, within 14 dayes next after it comes to the Cham∣ber, it is to be publickly rouped. And if at the Roupe, they shall be sold at less then it is Valued at; then the loss is to be charged to their account to whom it did belong by lot, and they are not to receave any part of their Rent, profit or Stock, untill the loss be payed: And if such shares shall be rouped at more then it was valued at, the advantage is to accresce to the common Stock. Our Cloathes are divided in four Prices, viz. the first lot is at 7 shillings Sterl. per Ell, or under: the second from 7 to 10, inclusivè: the third from 10 to 13 inclusivè, and the fourth sort all above 13 shillings. Each Member drawes a lot for every 100 Pound he Stocks in, which lots are recorded in the books of the Com∣pany, and as the Cloaths of these Prices comes in, he gets in course according to his lot. At the Roup every Person before he Offer, consignes two
shillings Sterling upon every Pound value of the Goods to be rouped; and if after the Roup is declared, he take not out the Goods within 24 houres after he forfeits his consignation to the use of the Company, and the Cloath is to be rouped of new And that the Work may at no time stand for want of Mate∣rials, it is appointed that there be allwayes 6 months Provi∣sion or 4 at least of Wool, Yairn, Dyeing-stuffes, Raw∣cloaths, &c. That none of the Work-people may want Work: and therefore the Master from time to time is to give Notice of what he will want, four months before to the Clerk, and the Clerk to the Mannagers, that it may be provided; and in case it be neglected through any of their defaults, the faulty Person is to pay the Damnage. And although we judge, it would tend more to the Kingdoms Advantage, that other Manufactories should be erected, and that these were diffused in several parts of the Kingdom. And although we have been at great pains and trouble, and run se∣veral hazards in the erecting, establishing and bringing our Manufactory this length; And have made very profitable Contracts, (which we might justly Appropriat to our selves) yet to manifest our Concerne for the publick Good, we are willing (although to the prejudice of our privat Interest) to admit of any to joyn with us, who shall desire the same, before the first day of March nixt, and to communicat the benefites accrescing to us upon these conditions. First. that every Person admitted, must presently pay at least 100 Pound Sterling with the Interest thereof, since the respective times that we pay'd the same. Secondly, that they subscribe to the several Contracts and Rules of the Companie, and bear their hazard of bypast as well as future loss or gaine. FOR our Silk-stocking Work we need give no other De∣monstration
of the advance of it, the  we offer to fur∣nish all the Merchants in Scotland, Silk Stockins of all colours and sorts, as cheap and good as they are bought at London; And upon Advertisement to furnish them, conform to the sorts, Quantities and colours desired. This Representation of the state and condition of the Cloath Manufactorie, begun to be set up by us within these two years and some few Months, with the special Allowance of his Majesties Privie Council, we have thought fit to pu∣blish, sincerely professing and declaring, that what is herein offered in relation to the said Manufactory, and the probabi∣lity of its Success (the Laws made for our Encouragement alwayes continuing, As hitherto they have, to be put in execution) is trueth, and what we find by Experience; and that we apprehend no difficulty therein, but what may arise from among our selves, and particularly by the Merchants Importers: who if they would be pleased either to enter in to Societies by themselves, (in order whereunto, we have can∣didly imparted our methods and Rules, to invite them thereto, and shall with all cheerful readiness, when any number of them shall call to us, and crave our assistance, fully impart, and conceal no part of what we know, or have learned by our practice) or joyn with us in the terms offered, and for∣bear and desist secretly and privatly to import foraign Cloath. And that these of the higher Rank and Qualitie, would for an Example to others, punctually observe the Sumptuary Law, and make use of the product of what is made in the Kingdom only, and no other, for some few years; and wear Cloathes of our making: Which we affirm and offer to Tryal, to be truely and Loyally made in Colour, finess, and good work, suteable to the rates. And if these of inferior rankes, who spend most of their time in the Couney, would condescend for some few years, to make use of Stuffs,
Droggat, Searge De Nismes, and the like, (in which the Nation hath already arrived to a considerable perfection, and can affoord plentie) we nothing doubt by the blessing of God, assistance of Authoritie and industrie, in a short time to see the Nation flourish by that Manufactory, and not only be sufficient∣ly served within its self for its own Consumption; but able to export with advantage, and keep a great many poor at work. And thereby keep and preserve a considerable stock of money in the Kingdom, which went out for importing Cloath, and to bring in Money, by what we shall export. And being assured, that this Nation affoords many Noble∣men, Gentlemen and Merchants of publict Spirits: and that for the Manufactory of woollen-Cloaths and Stuffs, There are many places in the Kingdom, very proper and convenient: Particularly the Town of Aire; where houses, Milnes and other conveniences are already built; and Aberdeen, about which place, the Commons are verie ingenious, and can live very cheap. And considering what advantage may arise to the Kingdom, by Linning Manufactories, no Nation Spinning bet∣ter and cheaper, We do earnestly intreat all who love the Ho∣nour, prosperitie and wealth of the Kingdom, cordially and speedily to set about the erecting of Manufactories for Cloath, Stuffs, Linnen & others. And we who have already begun, expect all Encouragements from the Merchants Retailers; And that the small profit and interest of a prohibit Trade, mannaged with the great hazard of discovery, will not prevail with them against the Good of their Nation, and their own particular Advantage, if duelie Considered: especially where we chear∣fullie offer to them a share and interest in our Manufactory in the terms above represented. FINIS.
